
      
         
            
            
            A NOTABLE HIStorie
of the Saracens.
            
            Briefly and faithfully deſcrybing
the originall beginning, continuaunce
and ſucceſſe aſwell of the Saracens, as alſo
of Turkes, Souldans, Mamalukes, Aſſaſſines,
Tartarians and Sophians. With a diſcourſe
of their Affaires and Actes from the
byrthe of Mahomet their firſt
péeuiſh Prophet and founder
for 700 yéeres
ſpace.
            
            
               VVherunto is annexed a Compendious
Chronycle of all their yeerely exploytes,
from the ſayde Mahomets time
tyll this preſent yeere of
grace. 1575.
            Drawen out of Augustine Curio
and ſundry other good Authours
by Thomas
Newton.
            
            
               Imprinted at London by William
How, for Abraham Veale.
1575.
         
         
            
            
               
                  HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE
               
            
         
         
            
            ¶To the Ryghte honorable
the Lorde Charles Howarde,
Baron of Effyngham, and
Knight of the moſt Noble Order
of the Garter.
            
               
                  RYghte Honorable:
Callinge to remembrance
what ſtreict accoumpt euerie
Man particularlie at
the laſt generall Audite,
is enioygned to yeeld for time here beſtowed,
I haue ſomewhat in diſcharge of my duty
that waye, according to the rate and meaſure
of my ſmall Talent, traueiled to
bringe to light for the benefite of my Cuntreymen
this hiſtoricall Diſcourſe of Saracens,
Turks and other Reprobates of the
ſame ſtampe and Lyuerey, in hope that the
ſame to your Honour and others of rype
iudgement thyrſtinge after ſuch needefull
knowledge, shall bee deemed labour and time
not all together yll ſpent. Which matter although
it required the cunninge hande of a
ſkilfuller Woorkeman, for the better poliſshing
and bringing thereof into good frame

and order, yet the dilygent endeuoure of
ſuche as doe their vttermoſte ſeemeth (in
the meane whyle) not to bee reiected. For
God beſtoweth his Gifts and Benefites diuerſelye
(ſome haue more and ſome leſſe)
whiche although by Arythmeticall proportion
they ſeeme very vnequall, yet beinge
Geometricallye examyned, reſpected and
waighed, they iumpe in a moſt euen equalyty.
Herein as in a Myrrour is ſet down, how,
when & by whom, this peſtilent Generation
was firſt ſet abroche, what ſucceſſe in their
Affaires euer ſynce they haue had, and if
wee wyllnot by others harmes take warning,
what curteſye is to bee looked for at their
hands, whē and whereſoeuer they can eſpye
any occaſiō or oportunitie to put in practiſe
their bloudy tyranny. They were (in deede)
at the firſt very far of from our Clyme &
Region, and therefore the leſſe to be feared,
but now they are euen at our doores and
ready to come into our Houſes, yf our penitent
heartes doe not the ſooner procure at
the mercifull handes of God, an vnytie,

peace and concord among the Princes, Potentates
and People of that litle porcion of
Chryſtendome yet left, which through diuiſion,
diſcord and ciuile diſſention hath from
time to time enticed and brought this Babylonian
Nabugadnezar and turkish Pharao
ſo neere vnder our noſes. The pitifull ſtate
wherof although your L. is not now to learn
yet for others ſake, not ſo rype in Turkishe
garboyles, I know your Honour according
to the wonted generoſitie of your noble nature
wil at my hands cherefully accept, as an
earneſt peny of my loyal heart to your L.
moſt addicted: whō I beſech God with
that moſte vertuous and honorable
Ladie your wife to bleſſe with
all ſpirituall benedictions,
proſperous health and
daylye increaſe of
much Honour.
            
               At London the xii. of May. 1575.
               
               Your good Lordſhips
moſt humble at Commaundment.
Thomas Newton.
            
         
         
            
            
            The Authours
Preface.
            
               
                  MAny a time and often,
conſidering and debating with
my felfe, the acwarde courſe of
this changeable world, among
other things I haue bene greatly deſyrous
to know, what the very & chief cauſe ſhould
be, of the ſubuerſion and ruyne, from time to
time, of al mightie kyngdomes: And againe
of the ſetting vp and aduancement of manie
obſcure perſones of baſe degree and parentage
to moſt high honors and dignities. For
when I throughly conſider and call to remembrance
the alteration and decay of the
Romane Empire, and the manifolde calamities
that haue happened to noble▪ and
puyſſaunt Kingdomes in times paſt, I well
ſee, that diſſolute life, ambitiō and diſcord of
Rulers amonge themſelues hath from time
to time bene the chief & originall cauſe therof.
Inſomuch that by reading out of olde
Monumentes and Hiſtories, thinges long
agone atchieued and done, I perceaue many
Empires haue ben planted and conſtituted,
many Nations ſubdued, many Kingdomes
with long continuance firmlye eſtabliſhed
and moſt aſſured peare and tranquillytie
among the Communaltie conſerued by
temperaunce and ſobrietie, but chiefly and

ſpecially by ciuill concord and mutuall amytie.
Wherfore, both reaſon, & dayly examples
enforce me to think, that Wealth, Ritches,
ſtrength and ſkilfull pollicie in warlyke affayres
without concord and goodwyl of the
people hurteth many times, but profiteth
almoſt neuer. Whereas concord and beneuolence
(euen without wealth and rycheſſe)
be of great force and of themſelues able to
doo very mutch. Therefore, they which
neglected the ſauegard, quietneſſe and commoditie
of their ſubiectes (whereby, goodwyll
is both purchaſed and alſo nouriſhed,)
and wholy yeelded themſelues to Ambition
and deſire of ſouereignty (beſtowing al their
ſtudies and cogitations onely to enrich and
bring themſelues to hye eſtate among their
owne People, deſiring rather to be feared of
them then of their enemies) were in the end
vnprofitable to themſelues and pernicious
to their countrey. Contrarywiſe, they
that ſo arme themſelues with the vnfayned
loue and goodwyll of their owne people and
ſubiectes, that they might both be tenderly
and intirelye beloued of them, and alſo bee
terrible and dreadfull to the enemy abroad:
thoſe (I ſay) were thei, which notably benefited
both themſelues and their common
wealth. And if we would peruſe and rip
vp th
                  •
                auncient beginnings of al Kingdoms,
and throughly conſider their fyrſt originall,

wee ſhall finde that ſo many of them as long
floriſhed, were by moſt honeſt Artes and
wayes at the fyrſt gotten, and by the beſt orders
of gouerment conſtituted. For it is wel
inough knowne, that at the beginning, the
name of a king (which alwaies was a name
moſte holie and venerable) was geuen and
attributed to thoſe that had done beſt ſeruice
and been moſt meritorious to their cuntrie,
whom the people for their common profite
and vtilytie created Kinges and Soueraignes
ouer them. For when as the ſacred
worde of God was not yet amonge men acknowledged,
no religyon reuerenced, nor any
ciuill order regarded, when no man tooke
any reſpect to lawfull matrymonie, or to any
certaine procreation of Children, and the
due adminiſtratiō of iuſtice and lawes with
the profites therof not once heard of, much
leſſe executed: when men after a brutiſhe
ſorte lyued abroad in the woods and open
fieldes, wholy drowned in errour and blind
ignorance, abuſing their ſtrength and power
onely to the ſatiſfyinge of their owne ſenſuall
affections and beaſtlye luſtes: what
mans power was ſo great, or who was able
with al the ſtrength he had to gathertogether
theſe ſauage and rude perſones lurking
in woods & cabines abrod, into one felowſhip?
& to perſwade thē to be obedient &
conformable to his cōmandements? Certes

wee muſte needes confeſſe, that this reducing
of them from their fyrſte vnmannerly
rudeneſſe, to honeſte order and comelineſſe,
was not brought to paſſe by force and violence,
but by wiſedome, equity, iuſtice, curteous
dealyng and liberall benefites beſtowed
vpon them all generallye, whereby the
hartes of the people were rauiſhed and as it
were with a certain bond of beneuolence allured
to haue them in admiration, and to
beare vnto them an earneſte zeale of dutyfull
good wyll. And although at the fyrſte,
thei ſemed after a ſort (becauſe of the ſtrangneſſe
thereof) to be halfe vnwyllynge, yet at
length by meanes of benefits receaued, and
other liberal curteſies, together with an vpright
equitie in euery reſpect obſerued, they
brought them into order and ready to conſent
vnto euerye thinge that ſeemed honeſt
and profitable. By theſe politique meanes,
Saturne the aunciente
                  ••
                founder of Rome
reigned firſte in Armenia, and eſcaped the
conſpiracye and force of the mightieſt kings
of Babilon by nothinge ſo much, as by his
iuſtice aud equitie and the aſſured good wils
of his owne people, and by their onely help,
fleeing the furie and crueltie of Iupiter, obtayned
and wanne a new kingdome in Italy.
By this way, Romulus the other founder
of Rome, of a poore and beggarly ſheapherd,
was aduanced to the degree of a king.

In lyke manner were Numa and Tarquinius
Priſcus of ſtraungers and priuate perſons,
made Kinges in the ſame place. By
ſuch good will and affection of his Souldiers,
Alexander the Great conquered all the
Eaſt. By concorde, the Greeques victoriouſlye
augmented and enlarged their dominions:
by concord, the common wealth of the
Carthaginians grewe to bee moſte mightye:
the ſame concorde made the Romanes,
Lordes ouer al Lands, and conquerours of
al forraine nations. In this bond of concord
the Sarracens a weake and ſlender rable of
Peyzants at the fyrſt, being ioyned and linked
together, ouercame and poſſeſſed verye
many prouinces belōging to ye Romane empire:
& by this meanes ye power of the Turks
at the fyrſt & euer ſince hath increaſed. But
Inſolency, Ambition and Diſcord hath ben
the ſubuerſion of all Kingdomes, mightye
Empires and populous common wealthes.
For when princes (neglecting and forſaking
thoſe trades and waies by which their king
domes were at the fyrſt conſtituted) thinke
Money and wealth, to be the chief defence,
and as it were the Sinewes and ſtayes of
their kingdomes, when any ſecret hatred
and harte burninge enkindleth betweene
them and their people, then do they hazard
and endaunger both themſelues their Royalmes
and ſubiectes to the ſpoyle of the enemy.

For nature hath thus ordayned, that as
we feele & perceaue others to be affected towards
vs, we alſo ar affected towards thē: &
Plato his ſaying is well known concerning y•
ſame matter who writeth yt as the princes &
rulers in a common welth are, ſuch commonlye
bee the people and Citizens of the ſame.
Therefore no man ought to marueile, why
thoſe Princes which ſet more by their own
priuate lucre and gayne then by the publique
commodytie of their Realme, are many
times but ſlenderlye beloued of their ſubiectes:
and that all their Officers vnder
them by their euyll example, are more carefull
to enriche their owne Coffers then to
further the common wealth of their countrey.
Thus mens harts being diuerſly bent
and their good wils alieuated one from an
other, the common wealth conſequently goeth
to wracke & confuſion. Theſe were the
cauſes, why the Empyre was firſt tranſlated
from the Chaldayes to the Aſsyrians, from
the Aſsyrians to the Medians, from the Medians
to the Perſians and laſt of all from the Perſians
to the Macedonians. Diſcord was the ouerthrow
and diſparcling of that famous and
large Monarchy left by Alexander the Great,
while his ſucceſſours (not cōtent euery man
with his owne Territory) quarelled among
themſelues for the whole Monarchy. Diſcorde
abated and tamed the whole power

and common wealthe of the Greeques: by
diſcorde and ciuill warres, the Romane
ſtate was deſtroyed and brought almoſte
to nothing: and agayne the ciuill diuiſion
of the Greeques amonge themſelues was
the only cauſe that the flouriſhing empire of
Conſtantinople was brought vnder the miſerable
yoke and ſlauerye of a Nation moſte
barbarous. Diſcord was the vtter vndooyng
and defacyng of the Sarracens Empire, as
in this Hiſtory it ſhall playnly appeare: and
the ſame plague doth at this day ſo infeſt
and trouble all Chriſtendome that I feare
(and I beſeech God my feare may be without
effect) leaſt wee ſhall to late rue and lament
either the vtter ſubuerſion or at leaſt,
the miſerable oppreſſion thereof. What do
wee meane therfore? ſeeyng Ambition and
her daughter Diſcorde haue euer bene the
cauſes of ſo great calamyties and miſchieues,
why doo we thus runne headlong
vpon the Swordes poinct, and cut one anothers
throat? why haue we ſuch delyght
in ciuill warres and domeſticall murder?
why doo wee not (alas for pitie that our
mindes ſhould be ſomuch blinded and bewitched)
lay aſyde all priuate grudges and
controuerſies which ought rather to be decided
by equitie and the infallible lawe of
God, then with war and effuſion of Chriſtian
bloud? why doo wee not rather bende

all our force and power againſt the profeſſed
enemies of Chriſtianitie, ye cōtemners &
deſtroyers of all humanitye, relygion and
learning? Theſe warres (I ſay) which are
deuided into many partes and factions among
vs, one conſpiringe an others bane
and thyrſting after his brothers bloud, wil
in the end bring all Chriſtendome to vtter
ruine and wofull deſolation. Which if they
would ioyne in one and liue together in
Chriſtian league, no doubte, Conſtantinople
might be agayn recouered and annexed to
the Romane Empire, Grecia and a great
nnmber of Chriſtiā cuntries now lyuyng in
perpetual moorning, & pitiful ſlauery might
bee deliuered out of the thraldome of vnſufferable
tyraunts, that Sathanical crew
of Turkiſh lurdens might be expulſed and
driuen to trudge out of all Europa, and the
ſincere profeſſion of chriſtian religion there
eftſones planted and truely acknowledged.
Paraduenture ſome wyll caſt doubtes and
obiect, that this our mortal foe is not neere
hand, but muſt be ſought out (as aforetime)
in farre countryes, that they muſt paſſe ſundry
aduentures ouer many perilous Seas,
that they muſt goe a great way beyonde all
Europa, and ſet foote into ASIA and Syria
by daungerous places, vnknowne waies
ſuſpect countreies and fierce people. But beholde,
euen at our dores and ready to come

into our houſes, we haue this arrogant and
bragging helhound, triumphyng ouer vs,
laughyng at our miſfortunes, reioycinge to
ſee vs thus to lye together by the eares, and
gapyng in hope ſhort lye to enioy our goods
and Scigniories. O dolefull and daungerous
times. O corrupt and wylfull maners.
In times paſt, one Peter an Heremite beyng
but a poore ſeely ſoule, was able with exhortyng
wordes and orations to perſwade
three hundreth thouſand men to put on armur
againſt the Sarracens, and to procure innumerable
Gentlemen & Potentates with
all the power they were able to make, to
march againſt them, & to bring them as far
as into Afia, where they valiantly conquered
and wanne from the Sarracens many of their
Kingdomes and Prouinces. For the people
in thoſe daies were of themſelues ſo willing
to adueuture their liues in Chriſtes quarell
againſt the blaſphemers of his name, that
without any ſtipend or wages (godly zeale
ſo pricked them forwarde) they tooke in
hand ſuch long Expeditions and weary viages:
and while Kinges and Rulers were
geuen either to reſt and riotte, or els buſyed
with ciuill and domeſticall warres, they caried
their weapons into farre Regions to
fight againſt the Infidels and miſcreaunt
people. But now whereas our moſt mightye
and the ſame moſt vnmercifull Enemye the

great Turke is ready euery day to ſpyll out
bloud and to work our confuſion, poſſeſſing
& hauing alredy vnder his iuriſdiction many
of ye Chriſtian Prouinces, to ſome others laiyng
batterye and ſiege: and hopyng ere it be
long, to ſpoyle & ouerrunne the reſt, and albeit
that Chriſtendome hath Maximilian an
Emperour moſte prudent and wyſe, yet
neuertheleſſe, by the ſiniſter perſwaſions,
and deuiliſh counſailes of ſome ſedicious perſonnes
w
                  •
               ſlea and kill one an other. Which
thing I conſidering, and greatly lamentyng
the ſtate wherein Chriſtendome preſentlye
ſtandeth, albeit that I being but one man,
and ſuch a one, that lackyng both ſtrength &
health, am able in perſon to doe no good in
the exploites of martiall affaires: yet to the
intent I might ſtirre vp and kindle a deſire
and go dwyl in many others which are better
hable, to repulſe this our common daunger,
by ſuch examples as are in Hiſtories regiſtred
and writen, I haue heere taken vppon
mee orderlye to deſcribe and ſet out the
Actes of the Sarracens and Turkes, buried almoſt
in the ruſt ye dongeon of cankard oblyuyon:
that we ſeeyng by what meanes and
ſleightes they haue increaſed, and by what
folies and ouerſightes our power hath diminiſhed,
may now at length decline and eſchue
the lyke. This whole Hiſtorye breeflye
compryſinge the whole Diſcourſe of their

raignes and conqueſtes, collected aſwell out
of many Greeque, Conſtantinopolitan, and
Latine Authours, as out of the Chronicles
of the Arabians & Moores, is deuided into three
Bookes. The firſte containeth the natiuitie,
education, raigne and continuaunce of
dotynge Mahomet and the beginning of the
Saracens, with the ſucceſſe and increaſe of their
Empire euen tyll it was at the higheſt, for
two hundreth yeeres ſpace. The ſeconde is
contynued from the fyrſt inclynation tyll the
beginning of the deſtruction and laſte ende
thereof, contayninge alſo the ſpace of two
hundreth yeeres. The third breefly comprehendeth
the finall end of it, and the original
beginning of the Turkiſhe Empire, (which
ſucceeded the Saracenical Domination) till
Othoman the firſt Emperour of Turks which
intreateth of their acts, for the ſpace of three
hundreth yeeres. So that this Hiſtorye taketh
his beginning at the byrth of Mahomet,
which was fiue hundred & ſixty yeeres after
the incarnation of our Sauiour Chriſt, and
reacheth vnto ye yeere one thouſand & three
hundreth. As for the ſeueral Acts of Othoman
and other Emperours that ſucceeded hym,
we haue heere omitted, becauſe they be ſeuerally
written and deſcribed by many others.
But of that argument which wee in
theſe three Books declare and comprehend,

there is none, neither amonge the Latines
nor yet the Greeques (that I know) which
hath compiled and made any ſeuerall Hiſtorye.
Which labour of mine, if I may vnderſtand
to be well lyked and allowed, by the
iudgment of the honeſt and learned ſorte, I
wyll heerafter aduenture to take in hande
other matters of greater waight and importaunce.
         
      
      
         
            
            ¶The firſt Booke.
            Wherin is contained their firſt beginning and originall,
with the ſucceſſe and encreaſing of theyr
Empire.
            
               
                  I Am purpoſed to write
an Hiſtorie concernyng the
Actes of the Saracens, atchieued
aſwel in the Eaſt as in the
Weſt partes of the world: firſt
becauſe they were greate and
renoumed ouer the face of the
whole Earth and brought all
things out of good ſtate into tumultuous
broyle and confuſe diſorder, and alſo becauſe
this power of theirs encreaſed, through the diſcorde and
diſſention of the Chriſtians: that we thereby taking example,
may plainely perceiue and learne what boldnes
and ſtrength, our ciuill warring and inward variance among
our ſelues giueth to the aduerſaries and foes of
Chriſtianitie. And that we no longer in this ſorte offer
our throates willingly to be cut by them, which deſire nothing
more then our blood and deſtruction. For firſt of al,
this is well ynough knowen, that the Romane Empyre
(which throughe concorde temperance and valiauntnes
ſurmounted and grew to ſuch high Maieſtie and eſtate,
that all nacions almoſt in the world were obedienciaries
and ſubiect vnto it) when the Citizens being once lulled
in to much eaſe, and dronken with ſuperfluitie of riches
and wealth began to addict themſelues to riot and ambition
(the verie cauſes that ouerthrew it, when it once began
to decline with his owne ſway and bigneſſe, and
many ſtriued for title of the Crowne) receiued at the
handes of none, ſuch annoyance and calamitie as of the

               Saracens. For although the Gothes moſt vnmercifully
and beaſtly deſtroying and making hauocke of the auncient
Monumentes of the Romane valiaunce and worthineſſe,
were the firſt that triumphed ouer them, being the
people which earſt had vanquiſhed and conquered all other
nations: Although Attila King of the Hunnes, like a
moſt raging ſwifte ſtreame ſpoyled, ouerrunne and deſtroyed
all where euer he came, from the Riphaean to
the Pyrene Mountaines: Although the Lumbards occupyed
and forcibly enioyed a great portion of Italy, as the
Frankes breaking out of Germanie into Gallia alſo did:
yet their raignes and dominations in ſtraunge Countryes
either continued not long, or elſe at leaſt wiſe, lyuing
vnder a more gentle and reaſonable Clime, chaunged
their former conditions, acknowledged religion and
the Auguſt Empyre of the ſoueraigne Caeſars. But the
Saracens becauſe they woulde ſéeme to be ſubduers and
ouerthrowers both of the Romane Empire and of all
Chriſtian religion alſo, violently breaking and iſſuyng
out of Arabia, deſpoyled and waſted the moſt noble parts
of Aſia, which in ſo many ſharpe ſtormes and troubleſome
garboyles of moſt fierce people euer before remained
frée and vntouched, quite aboliſhing in the ſame al the
ſtudies of good letters and liberall Sciences and (whiche
is moſt of all) vtterly defacing and inhibiting the true
worſhipping of God and Chriſtian religion. And not only
infected the Prouinces of Aſia but alſo almoſte all
Affrica and the moſte parte of Spaine with barbarous
rites, myſtie errours, blinde ignorance, and with a moſt
deueliſh, abſurde and deteſtable religion of their owne.
And from thēce making ſundry Roads into Italy, Greece
and Fraunce lamentably afflicted and laid waſt the ſame,
and by continuance & ſufferance haue planted ſuch a huge
Empyre, yt at this day (beyng in Anno. 1575. that is to
ſay .900. yéeres and aboue ſince it firſt beganne, it dayly

threateneth our confuſion and is dreadfull to all Chriſtendome.
For the Turkes who nowe enioy all their
dominions, haue receiued from them as next heires vnto
them, both their Religion and Kingdomes: and yet to
this day in Affrica, ſome of the mere lyne of the Saracens
be of great power and authoritie. But before we go any
further to the declaration & diſcouerie of their Acts & gouernment,
we muſt firſte a little ſpeake of the originall
Pedagrew of the firſt founder and authour of their damnable
Secte.Arabie. All Arabie is deuided into thrée partes,
wherof one is called Petreia, hauing his name of an olde
auncient town in it, called Petra, the ſecond is called Deſerta,
and the thirde Faelix or Sabaea. Petreia hath on the
Weſt ſide Aegipt and is ſeparated from it, firſte by the
Mount Caſius and then by waſt wilderneſſe: on the
North, it hath Iurie and Paleſtina: on the Eaſt, Arabia,
Deſerta: and on the South the innermoſt part or arme
of the Arabian Goulph called Sinus Arabieus. Deſerta,
wherin the Citie Scene (otherwiſe called Scenitis) ſtoode,
boundeth on the South vpon the Mountaines of Arabia
Faelix, on the North, it hath Meſopotamia, and on the
Eaſt the Riuer Euphrates. Arabia Faelix runneth a long
betwéene the two boſomes of the Sea, the Arabian and
the Perſian, being almoſt on euerie ſide enuironed wyth
water like an Iland.; It hath on the North Petreia and
Deſerta, on the Weſt of the Arabian Gulphe, on the Eaſt
the Perſian Gulphe, and on the South the redde Sea. I
finde that theſe Regions were inhabited by foure kindes
of people, that is, to wit, by the auncient Arabians, which
were deſcended from Arabus, Sabus and Petreius the
ſonnes of Cures and the Nephewes of Cham, of whom
the thrée Arabies had their names as Arabia Deſerta of
Arabus, Arabia, Sabaea (which is alſo called Faelix) of Sabus
and Petreia of Petreius (as witneſſeth Beroſus Chaldaeus.
               
                  Arabians are the ofſpring of Iſmael.
               ) Then of the Iſmaelites, which were deſcended

from Iſmaell the Sonne of Abraham by his handmayde
Agar, of whom a parte of the Countrey, called Agarena
and the Town Agarenum (which in Strabo are corruptly
read Ararena and Agranum) had their firſt beginning
and denomination: as that part called Petreia was called
Nabathaea of Nabath, & the people Caedrei of Caedar
the Sonnes of the ſame, Iſmael. The thirde people came
and deſcended of the Sonnes of Ketura, Abrahams ſecond
wife, which poſſeſſed a great part of Arabia Foelix,
ſpecially that portion which lyeth toward the redde Sea.
They alſo made Colonies and vnder Cities in Lybia,
and peopled the ſame with inhabitauntes of their owne
linage and nation, where vpon after ward (as Ioſephus
witneſſeth) the Cuntrie was called Affrica,
               Affrica. of Ophre the
Sonne of Mandanes, and Nephew to Abraham by his
wife Ketura. The fourth kinde, tooke their originall beginning
of Eſau the Sonne of Iſaac,
               
                  Eſau inhabited part of Arabie.
                who inhabited the
partes of Arabia Petreia next vnto Iurie, and of him the
people in Arabia Petreia, are of Plinie and Ptolomaeus
called by ye name of Saracens. For Iſaac, Eſau his father,
was the Sonne of Abraham by his wife Sara. And they
were called Saracens, both becauſe they might thereby
ſhew and teſtifie, that they were deſcended of the lyne of
Sara, who was Myſtreſſe, and not of Agar the handmaid
as the Iſmaelites were: and alſo that they might be diſcerned
and knowen from the Iewes, who alſo had the verie
ſame parentes and were procéeded out of the ſame
ſtocke and Progenie. Among al theſe, the people Scenitae
which inhabited Arabia Deſerta, were moſt valiaunt
and warlike, hauing no habitation nor houſes to dwelin,
but wandred abroade & lay in Tentes in the open fieldes.
Theſe inſolently bragged and made their auaunt, that
they were of moſt auncientie, and contended with all others
for the nobilitie of their race. There aide and helpe,
the Romane Emperours in their warres oftentymes

vſed. The Arabians euer had many ordinaunces and
Rites, ſuch as the Hebrewes had, and do yet to this day
retaine and kéepe the ſame: for (as Herodotus and Diodorus
two auncient Hiſtoriographers affirme) they euer
vſed circumciſiō, and kept the ſame order of their Tribes
and families that the Iewes did: and accompt it a heynous
offence that a woman ſhould be maried to a man of
any other Tribe and familie then ſhée her ſelfe is, and
likewiſe for a man to take to wife a woman of another
linage. They inuiolablie kéepe the nobilitie of their race
and Pedagrew, ſo that none but of the nobleſt ſort ſhould
raigne ouer them. Neither hath one the regiment and
gouernaunce ouer all, but euerie Tribe to haue their proper
King, after whom, his owne ſonne ſhoulde not ſuccéede
in the kingdome, but the firſt that was borne of the
ſéede of a right noble man and woman, after he were ſaluted
King, was kept and brought vp as heyre apparaunt
to the Crowne. A people naturally and generally geuen
to thefte and robberie, as all others commonly are which
dwell in hoate Countries. Many kindes of religion was
vſed among them: for ſome worſhipped Chriſt, of whoſe
nature, deitie, & omnipotencie at that time, whence this
our Hiſtorie taketh his beginning (as in all other places
at that time alſo) there were diuerſe ſectes and opinions.
Some obſerued the Rites and Ceremonies of the Iewes:
ſome honoured the Sunne and Moone, ſome certain trées,
ſome Serpentes, ſome a Towre called Alcaba, which
they beléeued and thought was builded by Iſmael, ſome
one thing and ſome another. In the time of theſe ſo great
garboyles and diuerſities in religions, and among ſuche
blockiſhe and rude people,Mahomet. was Mahomet borne at Itraripe
a towne of Arabia Deſerta, belonging to Mecca, being
by his fathers ſide of the auncient line of Corah the
ſonne of Eſau, or (as ſome ſay) of Caedar the ſonne of Iſmael,
in the moneth of Februarie, and in the yéere after

the incarnation of Chriſt (as they ſay) 560. whoſe father
was named Abedela & his mother Emma a Iew borne,
both poore folkes and of baſe parentage. By meanes
whereof (his father beyng an Iſmaelite and his mother
a Iew) he was in his tender age by them inſtructed and
taught both the rites of the Hebrewes and the manner of
worſhipping that the Gentiles vſed. His Parentes dyed
while he was but yet a tender and younge ladde, ſo that
then he was committed to the charge and cuſtodie of one
Salutelib, his vncle by the fathers ſyde. And whē he came
to mans ſtature he was taken priſoner of the Scenites,
which were (as before was ſhewed) the fierceſt and warlickeſt
people in all that Countrey, and lyued altogether
by robberies, and by them was he ſolde to a ryche Cobbe
one Abdimoneples, an Iſmaelite. Who quickly perceiuing
his prompt wit and throughly vnderſtanding his
impudent nature thought him to bée a fit inſtrument to
make his factour into other Cuntries about his traffique
of merchandize, and ſo vſed oftentimes to ſend him out of
Paleſtina where he dwelte, into Egipt. Which trade of
life, Mahomet the ſpace of many yeeres exerciſing, gotte
great acquaintance and crepte highly in fauour with the
Hebrews, Chriſtians and Gentiles. This Mahomet was
of a meane ſtature, bigge headded, ſomwhat broune complexioned,
chéerefully countenaunced and liuely coloured,
a long bearde, and yet not hoare: becauſe alwayes as it
beganne to waxe graye, with oyntmentes he altered it:
his viſage and looke was graue and portly, pretending a
kynde of Maieſtie ioyned wyth gentleneſſe and curteſie,
hys legges very well proportioned, his bodie in goyng
or mouyng pleaſaunt and gentle, and lyke (as they
terme it) to the courſe of a ſtyll runnyng Ryuer, in
talke verie curteous, in mynde and body both ſtoute,
ſtronge and venturous, quicke and prompte of witte, but
the ſame (as Saluſt writeth of Catiline) wicked and

diſpoſed to all miſchiefe, bolde, hardie, and ſuche a one
that cared for no perilles. 
                  〈◊〉
                Whereof hée gaue once a
manyfeſt example, for beyng mounted vppon a marueilous
fierce and vntamed Horſe (in the preſence and
ſight of ſundrie his friendes) he ſo ſpourred and galloped
him, that all the beholders, ſeeyng him in ſuche
great perill, earneſtly deſyred him to alyght. Vnto
whom wyth very amiable countenance and pleaſaunt
language, he aunſwered, that the Horſe was lyke vnto
the Sea, dooyng them thereby to vnderſtande, that he
tooke no leſſe pleaſure and delectation in that prauncing
then if hée were in a Shippe vppon the Sea. Alſo hée
was fickle mynded and double in all hys doynges, as
the infinite rable of Lawes one cleane contrarying an
other, by him made, doe manyfeſtly witneſſe: whiche
thyng cauſed great varietie and diuerſe ſortes of ſectes
in hys Religion: hée was alſo a déepe counterfeytor
and diſſembler in euerye matter, but by nature verie
eloquent withall.
            Hys ambicious and haultie mynde, gaped wythout
meaſure. after promocion and authoritie. In ſo
muche that conſydering in hys mynde this great varietie
of Sectes, hée was merueilouſly enflamed with
a deſyre to eſtabliſhe and make one manner of religion,
and to take vnto him as well the Soueraigntie of
Empyre, as alſo of diuine honour. Whereof he was
put in greate hope, by reaſon of the great ſedicion and
diſcorde of the Chriſtians, the corruption of manners,
and the want of warlicke diſcipline. Moreouer
hée was grealy anymated by the peruerſe and
Deuilyſhe Counſell of one Sergius a Monke, who
béeyng exiled and expulſed oute of Conſtantinople, for
mayntainyng the Hereſie of the Arrians fled into Arabie,
and vſed oftentimes to come to the houſe of Abdimoneples,

Mahomets maiſter, and entirely loued Mahomet
for the ſingular dexteritie that he conceyued to bée in
his wit and towardnes. Therefore aſſoone as his maiſter
Abdimoneples was dead, leauing behind him no Children,
his wife Hadigia, beyng then wedow, a woman
of fyftie yéeres of age, and lefte ſole heyre of all her huſbandes
Landes, Goods and Cattells, tooke her ſeruaunt
Mahomet to huſband. Now, beyng in poſſeſſion of the
wedow and all her ſubſtance & by meanes therof growen
to great wealth, he often fell grouelong on the ground, foming
and froathing at the mouth (for he had the fallyng
ſicknes) and laye in a horrible extaſie or diſtraction of
minde, which his wife tooke very heauily and curſed her
fortune, in that ſhée had ſo lothſomely matched her ſelfe.
Hée therfore to appeaſe her griefe and to make her from
great agonie to leape to ſodaine ioye, tolde her that the
ſame happened vnto him by the operation of the Spirite
of God himſelfe, who appeared vnto him and reuealed
certaine things, which he ſhould pronounce and ſhewe to
the people, touching the law of Moſes and of Chriſt. For
(quod he) our mortall bodyes beyng ſubiect to corruption
are not hable to ſuſtaine and abyde the glorious and glittering
ſight of God, whereby his bodie was in a manner
at ſuch times bereft and ſeperated from his mind. Which
wordes the olde trotte beléeuing, as ſhe that tenderly loued
him for his luſtie corage and beautifull age, begann
                  •
               
now not to loue him as a huſband, but to worſhip and reuerence
him as a holy man and a diuine Prophete highly
in Gods fauour, and to blaze his holines abroad among
her Companions and Goſſippes. In ſo much that when
ſhe dyed, ſhe not onely left him wealthie in goods and poſſeſſions
(for ſhe made him heyre of all) but alſo in great
veneration and credite among the common people for an
opinion of ſanctitie which was thought to be in him. For
which cauſe, Buback the chiefeſt and in greateſt authoritie

among all of that parte of Arabie, and of the ſame
Tribe that Mahomet was, gaue his daughter Aiſſa to
him in mariage, when he was but yet thirtie yéeres of
age. Puffed vp with pryde becauſe of this new affinitie,
and for the great abundance of wealth left vnto him by
his other wife, he openly profeſſed himſelfe to be the meſſanger
of God and a Prophete, and to teach the people a
new kind of religion, patched and gathered together out
of the erronious Schiſmes and hereticall dreames of all
Sectes. For he taught and commaunded Circumciſion,
Baptiſme, and abſtinence from Swines fleſhe & wyne.
He inſtituted a generall faſt to bée kept one whole month
in the yéere, and that no meate for that ſpace ſhoulde bée
eaten in the day tyme, but onely in the night. He affirmed,
that there were but thrée Prophetes, that is to wit,
himſelf, Moſes and Chriſt, and that Chriſt was not God,
with an innumerable rable of moſt blaſphemous opinions
contained in his filthie Alcorane.
               
                  Alcorane is a Booke conteyning Mahomettes Law. Which aſſertions
and opinions were of many at the firſt deryded & flouted
at, in ſo much that they accoūpted him no better thē lunatique
and diſtraught of his right wittes. But when that
he had perſuaded and allured all his Allyantes and the familie
of Buback which bore great ſway and authoritie,
yea and many of the common people alſo to credite and
leane to his Secte, the Magiſtrates of Mecca, perceiuing
that this new dotage and commotion would bréede a ſcab
in the common wealth, if the inconuenience like to enſue
therby, were not ſpéedily preuented, and the impudencie
of the man by rigour repreſſed, (for he ſlaunderouſly
would inueigh and openly raile vpon Princes) determined
with them ſelues, to lay handes vpon him and to put
him to death. Mahomet hauing vnderſtanding of their
intentes and mindes, fled out of Mecca: whom many of
his Kinſfolkes, Alies, Friends and Clientes, (who were
throughly perſuaded that he was ſuch a one in déede, as

he had profeſſed and woulde ſéeme to bée) folowed. And
from this yéere, which was after the Natiuitie of our
Lorde and Sauiour Chriſt. 593. yéeres, the Arabians
do recken their yéeres: calling this, the yéere of Legira,
which is to ſay the yéere of flight or tranſmigration. Mahomet
therefore ſeeyng ſuch a great multitude to fauour
and ſticke to him, putting more truſt in his power then
he did before, made vnto them an Oration, in effect as foloweth.
            
               How earneſt I haue béene and what deſire I haue
alwayes had to proclaime,Oration of Mahomet.
                   aduance and publiſhe that law
which hath béen vnto me reuealed by the Archangell and
Meſſanger of Almightie God Gabriel, with commaundement
to teach the ſame to all mortall wyghtes, both God
himſelfe knoweth and you moſt deare friendes can witneſſe.
For I neuer ſpared any labour, neuer refuſed any
daunger, neuer any miſeries or perillous extremitie,
where I thought my painfull trauaile might be auaileable
or redound to the benefite and ſoules health of all people,
and where without diſturbaunce and moleſtation I
might conueniently execute the charge and office to mée
committed and enioyned from the mouthe of God. All
which I haue done to this ende, that I myght reclayme
and call home the people runnyng a ſtray from their wicked
wayes, to a holy & ſyncere integritie of life: and out of
the dongeon of Hell, (whither they runne headlonge,)
bring them backe into the ioyes of the celeſtiall Kingdome:
following herein the ſteppes and bountifulnes of
God him ſelfe, whoſe meſſage and miniſterie we in earth
do execute. Who when as all mankinde through Adams
tranſgreſſion and faulte, was forfeyted and fallen into
the handes of the Deuill, yet of his méere mercy voucheſafed
to deliuer and ſaue his people, as before he had promiſed
to our father Abraham: that is to wit, by appoynting
vnto them a law, whereby they might obtaine euerlaſting

lyfe and ſaluation. And therfore firſt he ſent Moſes,
to lay the firſt foundations and beginnynges of this
doctrine, and to call them for feare of euerlaſtyng payne
and damnation, to a newneſſe and amendment of lyfe.
But when the Lawe of Moſes little profyted that way,
he ſent Ieſus Chriſt, by gentler wayes and meanes to
allure and wynne them, and to perſuade them to lyue in
the ſeruice and obedience of God. Now, mankind béeyng
againe ſo much depraued and gone a ſtraie, that there is
no certaine nor conſtant Religion among them, no diſcipline,
no order nor honeſt maners, but all out of ſquare
and forlorne: he hath enioyned me (whom euen from the
beginning of the world he had made choyſe of and predeſtinated
for that purpoſe) to this office and function, that
I ſhould recure extréeme euilles with extreme remedies,
and with fire and ſword cut of, all iniquitie and make hauocke
of all them that once ſhould dare to againe ſay or opē
their mouth againſt this law: & that I ſhould enlarge the
kingdome of God & conſtitute a more ſacred & a more imperiall
cōmon wealth on earth, then euer any hath heretofore
béen, for who is ſo blind, which ſéeth not, that vnleſſe
we (whō God hath appointed to yt office) do ſet to our helping
handes to redreſſe theſe ſo great miſchiefes, all mankind
ſhall ſhortly periſhe? for mans nature withoute a
Lawe (which in ſo great varietie and licenciouſnes of life
can be none nor ſtand in any force) muſt néedes moſt greuouſly
ſinne and offende. But howe ſhall wée make
and conſtitute any holeſome Lawe to them that are vnwilling
to lyue vnder any, and deſpiſe all godly order?
What ſpightfull reproches and ſlaunderous reportes,
wée that are carefull and diligent to accompliſhe thys
Commiſſion and commaundemente of Almightie God,
do ſuſtayne at theyr hands, you moſt louing friendes and
companions haue ſéene, and howe they purſue after vs
as after wylde Beaſtes to haue our innocent bloud.
            
            
               
               But happie are you and bleſſed, whom God hath choſen
to bée as miniſters and helpers vnto me in the exploite
and atchieuing of theſe ſo great myſteries and affayres,
whoſe diuine will it is, that you ſhould not only be partakers
& Coheires with mée of eternal felicitie in the lyfe
to come, but alſo héere in this world ſhoulde bee enriched
with great wealth & poſſeſſions, the which vndoubtedly if
you ſhew your ſelues men and conſtantly perſiſt in faith
you ſhall ſhortly enioy, by ſubduing innumerable Nations
and conquering moſt wealthie Countries. For (vndoubtedly)
it is the good will and pleaſure of God, that all
thoſe Countries and heapes of wealth, ſhall be yours,
which now wicked men, enemies and aduerſaries to
this law doe wrongfully poſſeſſe. That all theſe things
ſhall thus happely ſuccéede, both the wickedneſſe of our
aduerſaries, which God will not ſuffer any longer to eſcape
vnpuniſhed, and your truſtie ayde and valiauntnes
(moſt worthy friendes and felowes) yea and the moſt infallible
oracles of Almightie God do put vs in hope moſt
aſſured. Therefore if you deſire to bée partakers of the
kingdome of Heauen, and of ſo great rycheſſe and glory
vpon Earth, it is méete and expedient that you all ſweare
and do homage vnto me, that muſt be your Captaine and
Ringleader.
            
            When he had thus made an ende, the chiefe Princes
and Rulers of the people and namely Zaid the
Sonne of Zuzara, Aomar and all the reſt one after an other
with their ſwordes drawen, promiſed by a ſolemne
Oth to allow of none other law, but that which Mahomet
ſhould make: in the defence and ſetting out wherof, they
then and there proteſted, at all aſſayes when néede ſhould
require, to ſpend their life and bloud. This ended, Mahomet
againe commaunding them to kéepe ſilence, knéeled
down on his knées a pretie while, as though he had pattered
ouer ſom mumbling meditatiōs, & afterwards with a

loude voyce vttered theſe wordes folowing.
            
               Now (moſt couragious champions) make your ſelues
readie to battaile looke that you want neither weapons
nor ſtomacke to wynne our purpoſe withall, wée
haue the victorie moſt ſure alreadie in our handes. Behold
the things which you haue often deſired and wyſhed
for, Richeſſe, Glorie, Renowne and perpetual felicitie are
before our eyes. God hath ſet thē before you as rewardes
for your valiant and victorious ſeruice: your owne valiaunce,
the excellencie of the cauſe, and all the things aboue
named ought more to ſtirre vp your hartes and pricke
you forward then any Oration that I can make.
            
            After he had thus ſpoken, he appointed tenne Capitaines
ouer the people, choſen out of the nobleſt in byrth
and chiefeſt in dignitie among the reſt, and ſuch as were
allyed vnto him by mariage, and them did he appoint into
Enſignes and Bands. The names of which capitaines
were theſe: Vbequar, Omar, Ozmen, Alifre, Talaus,
Azubeir, Zadin, Zaedine & Abuobeid, & ſo he marched
in battail aray toward ye Citie of Mecca. The Magiſtrates
of the Citie vnderſtanding thereof, made out a power
againſt him, which encoūtring with Mahomet his Hoſt,
diſcomfited and put them all to flight. Wherefore for the
ſpace of foure yéeres after, Mahomet neuer durſt make
any profer to beſiege that Citie any more. Notwithſtanding,
he ceaſſed not continually with Orations in ye open
fieldes and Countrey villages, to mooue and ſtirre vp
the people to ſedition, by meanes whereof he alſo cauſed
certain vprores and tumultes among the Scenites, which
acknowledged for their Lordes and Soueraignes the
Romane Emperours. Then once againe he marched
with a freſhe ſupply of moe Souldiours againſt Mecca,
where he was againe repulſed and myſſed his purpoſe:
and two yéeres after he againe the thirde time attempted
the ſame and ſped as he had done twiſe before. In this

meane while, Heraclius the Emperour perceiuing the
youthfull ſort of the Scenites to begin mutyne & ſeditiō,
for ye better quieting therof, diſpatched & ſent a great nū
               ber
of thē (vnder the coulour of warfare) into far Countries.
There raigned at yt time in Perſia a King named
Coſdroes, who had maried ye daughter of Maurice ye Emperour
called Marie, at whoſe inſtāce & perſuaſiō he was
contented to be Baptized: and ſo long as his father in law
liued, vſed himſelf moſt friendly toward all ye Chriſtians
& was vnto them very curteous & liberall. But after that
he was traiterouſly ſlaine by Phocas, who ſuccéeded hym
in the Empire, Coſdroes deteſting ye diſloyal treacherie &
falſehod of them which had elected ſuch a wicked man,
as Phocas, polluted with the bloudie murther of his liege
Lorde and Soueraigne to be their Prince, reputing them
as Acceſſaries to the ſame horrible acte and conſpiracie,
prepared a great armie at the inſtigation and procurement
of his wife to reuenge the death of his ſaid father in
Law. And the more was he emboldened ſo to do, becauſe
he wel ynough perceiued Heraclius (for Phocas was ſlain
within a while after) to bée altogether lulled in ſecuritie
and to lye quietly at home without attempting any thing
againſt the Barbarous Nations which with fire, & ſword
on euery ſide deſpoiled Italie and the Romane Empyre.
Wherevpon with a huige and populous armie he enuaded
the frontiers of the Empyre, and ſubduyng by fyne
force all the South partes of Aſia, entred into Aegipt and
tooke Alexandria: and yet not contented, went further
and conquered Carthage, withall Affrica. And when he
had taken good order for the fortefying of that Countrey
with ſtrong garriſons, he retyred backe to Alexandria,
waſting Syria and Iurie. Heraclius being not a litle netteled
with theſe iniurious dealings of Coſdroes, ſent vnto
him for peace: which when he coulde not obtaine at his
handes, rather enforced and driuen by neceſſitie, then

drawne to it by any goodwyl in himſelfe leuied an army,
in which he alſo had retayned the Arabian Scenites, with
whom ſome ſay that Mahomet was, and that in a battell
wherein Coſdroes ſide was diſcomfited, he was ſore
wounded by a common Souldier named Turcus. And
when Heraclius had many times ioyned battell with
Coſdroes, and in diuers conflictes put him to the foyle, at
length he ſo much cruſhed his power yt he was glad to fly
beyonde the riuer Tigranes, where he proclaymed his
yonger ſonne called Medarſes, Succeſſour and heyer apparaunt
to his Crowne, diſhereting and not regardinge
his elder ſonne Sirochis, a younge Gentleman of great
hope and towardneſſe. Whoſe heart not paciently brookyng
this contumelious and vnnaturall dealyng, ſecretlye
conſpyred with Heraclius, to betray both his Father and
his Brother Medarſes, (whom his father had ſo vnkindly
preferred before him) with al their richeſſe and princelye
furniture. And promiſed further, to diſcampe and remooue
out of all the Romane Prouinces ſuch Garriſons
as his Father had placed there, conditionallye that hee
might enioye the Kingdome of Perſia, and a firme peace
infringiblie to be kept betwéene both Empires. In this
poyncte, Heraclius beynge a Chriſtian Prince was nomore
aſhamed to delyuer the Kingdome of Perſia to a
wicked and rank rebellious perſon, Traytor to his owne
Father, and Brother (being now throughlye weakned
with the loſſes of ſo many vnluckye battailes, and now
moſt certainly in his own hands, ſpecially the King himſelf
truſting to his leggs and fléeing, if he could haue vſed
his good fortune & victory when it was offred vnto him)
and to buy a diſhonorable cowardly peace, by conſenting
to ſuch a wicked déede: then yt wicked Barbarian & diſloyal
yonker was, by ſuch vndue & deteſtable meanes to pul
ye kingdom frō thē to himſelf. Such deſire of principalitie
reigned in ye one, & ſo great loue ſlouthful idlenes in the
other.
            
               
               Coſdroes therfore and Medarſes with their wiues being
aprehended and brought backe from whence they were
fledde, were caſt into priſon, and within awhile after, by
the commaundement of Syrochis, both put to death. In
whom appeared a cruell example of Fortunes variableneſſe.Horrible and vnnaturable murther.
A goodly preſident and warning for Princes, to
marke and conſider vpon, in nominating their Succeſſoure,
that they at no hand reiectinge the ſtout and valyaunt,
elect and chooſe tender weaklynges and effiminate
Meycokes. For nothing ſo ſoone moueth a noble and firce
heart to furious impacience and indignation, as (beyng
ſtout and couragious) to be reiected and not accompted of,
among his owne friends. All things in Perſia by means
of this League appeaſed and ſet in order, and Syria and
Ieruſalem with the other Prouinces reſtored to the Romane
Empire, Mahomet accompanied with a pompous
traine, met with Heraclius in his returne whomwarde
from theſe warres, and of hym deſired ſome Countrye
for hym, and his Souldiers to inhabite in, which ſute and
requeſt at the Emperours hands he obtayned. Not long
after, it happened that when the Souldiours were paide
their wages, the Arabians repyned, and founde themſelues
agréeued, that they were defrauded and cut ſhorte
of their due ſtipende and ordinarie allowance. Whiche
comming to the eares of the chiefe Paymaſter, he more
raſhly and arrogantly, then wiſely and conſideratly anſwered,
that there was ſkantlie innough to pay the Roman
and Gréeque ſouldiours,Firſt cauſe of grudge between the Chriſtians and Saracens
                much leſſe for ſuch a raſcal
company of Dogs as they were. Which words within
awhile after, were almoſt the ſubuerſion and ruine of
all Chriſtendome, inſomuch that euen tyll this day they
beare a grudge of reuengment for this iniurie in their
mindes againſt vs. Such a heape of miſchieues many
times doth the ouerthwartinge wilfulneſſe of one raſhe
perſon bréede, ſpeciallie when ſtout and warlyke fellows

ſhynk themſelues apparantly iniuried. For the Arabians
ſwellyng with anger, and incenſed with fell diſdaine
for this reprochfull and open contumelye, departed into
Syria, and ioyned themſelues to Machomettes traine and
faction. Wherat Mahomet glad to ſee his power thus increaſed,
went the fourth time againſt Mecca, determining
with might and maine to beſiege it. The Magiſtrats
of Mecca perceiued well ynough his purpoſe and
what he pretended, wherefore with greater preparation
and ſtronger power then before, ye whole body almoſt of
the Citie bent themſelues to repulſe his inuaſion. Betwéene
whome there was at the riuer of Bredine a ſore
and terrible conflict, wherein Mahomet got the victory,
and ſlue of the nobilytie and chief Citizens of Mecca (beſide
a very great number of the Communalty) thrée hundred
perſons:
                  Mahomet beginneth to ruffle. in ſomuch that at this battell the whole nobillytie
of Mecca were in maner all ſlayne. And ſo Mahomet
like a triumphant Conquerour entred, and tooke
poſſeſſion of the faire Citie of Mecca, fortefiyng the ſame
with a garriſon of his owne appoyntment, & after, departyng
with his army thence, he layd ſéege to Hunaimum,
and wanne it, deuidinge the ſpoyle thereof (which was
very great) among his Souldiers. After that, he beſieged
Tarſus, which Citie after he had all in vaine battred the
ſpace of a whole month, he rayſed his ſéege, and retourned
into the maigne Countrye of Arabia and tooke firſte
Itraripe otherwiſe called Ietripe, and after that Medina
a Mart towne well peopled with wealthy Iewes. And
grauntyng the ſpoyle thereof to his Souldiours, he ranſcaked
and made hauocke of the towne: but as for all the
Iewes which partly in ye citie and partly in other places of
Arabi (becauſe they being ſkilfull in ye diuine law greatly
withſtood his attempts & procedings) he hated deadly, & in
the ende in.xi. battailes them vtterlye vanquiſhed, and
deſtroyed. Thence retourninge to Itraripe, he appointed

               Azeib his Lieutenant of Mecca, who entred into the Citie
with a great route of Arabians or Saracens. For Mecca
then was and yet is, as well becauſe of an opinion of
great auncientie (for it is thought to be builded by Iſmael
or elſe by Abraham himſelfe) as alſo for, the bigneſſe of
the Citie and reſorte of people moſt noble and famous.
Then againe within the ſame yéere, diſcharging the ſaid
Azeib of his office, he appointed Moad the Sonne of Gadel
Lieutenant of the ſame Citie in his roume: with this
commaūdement, that after Mahomet his death he ſhould
deſend and maintayne his lawe, and diligently looke that
the ſame ſhould of the people be reuerently obſerued, and
ſo in the meane ſeaſon to miniſter iudgement and execution
of his lawes to the Mecchyans. Al things in this ſort
beyng ſet in good frame and order, he remooued to Tambicum,
and there buylded a Temple, which is to be ſéene
at this day. Thence he ſent an armye vnder the conducte
of Zalid and Malid two of his chiefe Captaines agaynſt
Alozaid the Sonne of Almathaliph, King of Aliendel,
whom by force of armes they ouercame, and made tributarie.
And thus all Arabia being brought in ſubiection, he
commaunded Eubocar with parte of his Hoſte to go to
Mecca (he himſelf lying ſtill at Itraripe) and charged him
that he ſhould leaue neuer a mothers Sonne a liue in it,
nor ſuffer any forrayner to enter ſauing only ſuch as willingly
would obey his Law and beléeue his doctrine. For
his meaning and entent was, (as afterwarde he brought
it to paſſe) that Mecca ſhould be the Metropolitane Citie
of his religiō and Empire. And thus within a ſhort ſpace,
Mecca was repleniſhed wyth none but Mahometanes.
And not onely Mecca but all Arabia beſides (as they are
people by nature lyght of beléefe and newfangled) embraced
his peſtilent errours. And from that tyme, all they
whych yelded themſelues to that Secte, were called by
the name of Saracens, both becauſe that errour ſprong vp

and was firſt begonne by the Saracens, and alſo for that,
Mahomet perſuaded them that all the promyſes, in the
Scriptures promyſed to the Séede of Abraham, belonged
& appertayned to them. Beyng puffed vp with arrogance
by reaſon of thys good ſucceſſe in hys affayres, he ſent
Ambaſſades to Kinges and Princes néere adioyning,
aduiſyng them to embrace his Religion, and vnto them
addreſſed hys letters, ſealed wyth a Signet of Syluer,
wherein were engrauen theſe woordes: Mahomet the
meſſanger of God: namely to the Emperour of Conſtatinople,
to the King of Perſia, the King of Egypte and
to other Princes. Afterwarde he created ſoure Tribunes
or chiefe Capitaynes in warres commonly called
Admyralles, whyche had euerie one vnder them many
Peticapitaines and Centurions: and theſe foure hee
woulde commonly vſe to call the ſharpe Swordes of
God, and them he commaunded to goe into the foure
partes of the worlde, euerie one by him ſelfe a ſeuerall
waye, and to kyll all ſuche as repugned hys Law.
There names were, Ebubezer, Omar, Ozmen and
Ali the Sonne of his vncle Salutelib, vnto whom he alſo
ioyned in mariage Fatema, hys daughter in Lawe by
hys firſt wife.
            Of theſe foure, Ebubezer, called of ſome Vbequar
and of ſome other Buback or Eubocar, father in Law
to Mahomet tooke hys voyage to Paleſtina, and there
layde Siege to a certayne towne called Muchea, the
Capitayne whereof was one Theodorus Begarius who
had the rule of the towne in the behalfe and name of Caeſar.
Who gathering together his power, ſodainly ſet vppon
the Saracens with ſuch valiaunt courage and force,
that many of them beyng ſlayne, the reſidue lyke tall
fellowes ranne away. At which time, 
                  〈◊〉
                thirde Ides of
March, Mahomet dyed, in the yeere of our ſaluation .637.

when he had raigned tenne yéeres, in the houſe of Aiſſa
his wife, in the Citie Medina, and in the very ſame bedde
wherein he was wont to ſléepe and take his reſt. His bodie
without any Princely furniture or ceremonial ſolemnitie,
was ſhrined and lapped in a white Shéete thrée
tymes double, and ſo beyng cheſted in an yron coffin, was
after a homely ſort buried: where afterwarde his kinſfolkes
and Allyes edified a ſumptuous and magnificall
Temple of bricke worke, and arched the ſame wyth a
vault ſo pargetted with Lodeſtones (whoſe nature is to
draw yron vnto it) that the yron Coffyn wherein Mahomet
his body was incloſed, was drawen vp, euen vnto
the toppe of the Churche and there hangeth. For which
cauſe that place is yet with great deuocion and Pylgrymage
worſhipped of all the Eaſt. They ſay that while he
was baniſhed his Countrey, going once on Pylgrimage
into Mauritania Tingintana, he croſſed the Seas ouer
into Spaine. But when he vndeſtoode that Biſhop Iſidore
laide waite to haue caught him, he immediatly ſhifted
thence and conueyed himſelfe away. Vpon his death bed,
he appointed Ali his ſonne in lawe to bée his Succeſſour
and the Caliph (that is to ſaye the chiefe Prelate) of hys
Secte and vnto him togither with his daughter, he committed
the whole charge of his body. But Eubocar his father
in law ſtopped them a tyde, in that matter, alledging
that for as much as Mahomet deceaſſed in his houſe, and
by his only meanes had ſtepped vp to ſuch credite, welth,
eſtimation and gouernment, as being bolſtered, mainteyned
and preferred by his countenance and fréendſhip,
none other by good reaſon was fitter to ſuccéede then he
that had béene his chiefe ſupporter. Againſt whom Ali
durſt not once open his mouth to reply, becauſe Eubocar
himſelfe was a 
                  •
               an of great power and alſo his kinſmen
Omar and Ozmen tooke part with him, whiche were
men valiaunt and factious, whoſe wordes would be heard

and whoſe commaundements before his, would be obeyed.
Who foraſmuch as by good right they iudged the
kingdome to appertayne vnto them, being Coadiutours
to Mahomet in the exployte of all his affaires, had leifer
haue Eubocar ſuccéede, beinge olde & their nere Kinſman
then Ali being young and in his luſty yéeres, who might
perchaunce raigne ſo long, that no hope euer to enioy the
Kingdome by the order and courſe of nature ſhoulde be
left to them, and alſo for that he was nothinge of kin vnto
any of them. Wherefore Eubocar was made high Biſſhoppe
of Mahomet his Sect: who immediatly after his
creation, departinge out of his owne Territories with a
great Armye, diſcomfited the Roman Garriſons, and
retourning into Arabie with victorye, dyed, not without
ſome ſuſpition of poyſon, when he had raigned not fullye
three yéeres, and without any princely funeralles buried
néere to Mahomet. After him ſuccéeded Homar, who (as
we before ſhewed) was his Kinſman. Heſubdued Boſra
the chief citie of all Arabie with many mo, and conquered
all the country as farre as Gabata. At which ſucceſſe of
the Saracens, the Emperour Heraclius greatly ſtorming
ſent his Brother Theodorus with a great army againſt
them. Who encountring in a bloody battell with Homar,
was ouercome and fledto Emeſſa. Heraclius hearing tydings
of this heauy chaunce, furniſhed out Baanes with a
greater power againſt them, who incamped himſelf nere
Emeſſa. Where the Saracens ſettinge vpon hym with
great force and violence, were by hym vanquiſhed, inſomuch
that they were fayne to trudge into the borders of
Damaſco, and lodging their campe by the banke ſide of
the riuer Bardanes made ſuch outragious roades and incurſions
into the Countraye adioynynge, that no man
was hable to repreſſe their furye nor withſtand their invaſion.
Wherefore Heraclius miſtruſtinge any good
ſucceſſe in the purſute of further warres, and hauynge

great diffidence in his owne power, fearynge alſo his
owne lyfe and ſafetie if hée ſhould any longer ſtay within
that Prouince and Countrey (for hee was at that
time in Hieruſalem, out of which, ſince the League and
compoſition made with Perſia hee had not departed)
tooke awaye with hym all the precious Shrines and
ſnmptuous Ornamentes of the Temple of Hieruſalem,
leaſt the barbarous Enemies ſhould deſpoyle them, and
retourned agayne to Conſtantinople.
            
            The next yéere, the Saracenes layde ſiege to the Citie
Damaſco, wherewith Baanes (who defended the Citie
with the ſayd Emperours Garriſons) being greatly moued,
deſired Theodorus Sacellarius (Lieutenaunt for
the Emperours Maieſtie in Aſſyria) to come to ayde
and aſſiſt hym. Which hee making haſt to doe, was by
the way ſurpriſed by the Saracenes and diſcomfited.
            The Souldiers vnder Baanes, not willing to ſerue vnder
a Capitayne of ſmall credit and countenaunce, but rather
deſirous to haue a Gouernour of moſt high power
and aucthorytie, ſaluted hym their Emperour. But
they which came with Sacellarius and eſcaped the handes
of the Saracenes in their laſte bickeringe, willynge to
kéep their true allegiaunce to Heraclius, departed thence,
and would not in any wyſe conſent to the depriuation
and depoſing of their lawful Prince and Emperour. The
number of Baanes his Souldiours was 4000. And
Sacellarius had almoſte as many.
            The Saracenes hauing intelligence of this variance and
deuiſion among the Romane Souldiers, diſcamped from
the place where they were lodged, and ſet vppon them.
The bickering was ſore on both ſides for a while, but
(the Wind blowyng ful in the faces of the Roman Hoſt
which in that drye and ſandye Countrey rayſed vp the
duſt) they neither could ſée their Enemies, nor ſkantly

fetch their breath. Which oportunytie the Saracenes
not neglectinge, but takeyng the ſame to their moſt aduantage
and commoditie, put the Emperials to flyght, in
which chaſe, they fléeinge through thicke and thinne by
daungerous wayes and ſleepe places did almoſt all periſhe
and were drowned in the Riuer Ermeta.
            
            Which luckie victory ſo puffed vp the haultie mindes
of the proude Saracenes that they aduaunced theyr Armye
agaynſte Damaſco,
               Damaſens wonne by Saracenes
                and wynnynge that Cittie,
ſubdued and brought al Phoenicia vnder their ſubiection.
Then they made preparation to goe into Egipte,
whiche hearynge the Romanes, who were Lordes and
poſſeſſours of that Prouince, appoynted Cyrus Byſſhoppe
of Alexandria to be Chieuetayne: who ſendyng
a ſolemne Ambaſſade to the Saracenes for peace, obtayned
it vppon condition that he ſhould pay vnto them
yéerely a Tribute of .200000. Crounes. And ſo for
the ſpace of thrée yéeres they were quiet and receiued no
kind of moleſtation at their handes.
            But the Emperour Heraclius vnderſtandyng this
geare and thinkyng this compoſition greatly ſounded to
his diſhonour, ſent for Cyrus home agayne to Conſtantinople,
and in his ſtéede made Emanuel an Armenian, ruler
ouer EGYPT, who flatlye and playnelye denyed
the payment of anye money, before by Cyrus promyſed
to the Saracenes.
            
            Wherefore in great diſpleaſure they inuaded Egipt
with a buyge power, and Emanuel with a ſmall
compaignie for his ſauetie wente to Alexandria.
But Heraclius to late now, and to hys coſte beynge
taught, that promyſe and faith oughte to be kepte and
perfourmed euen to the Enemies, when hée well
ſawe that hée had not ſtrength ynough, to match in battayle
againſt ſuch mighty foes, ſent Cyrus agayne to the

                  〈2 pages missing〉
               
               
common ſupplications ſhould bée made during the whole
moneth of September, and after the ſame ended, the
whole volume of Mahomet hys lawe ſhoulde be openly
redde to the people.
            He was tall of ſtature, broune coloured, balde headed,
thinne bearded and the ſame ſom what enclining to whitenes,
and was buryed néere to Mahomet. But before he
dyed, feeling himſelfe ſo ſore wounded that he deſpaired
of recouerie, he appoynted for his Succeſſour Ozmen:
who alſo had béen a great furtherer and fauourer to Mahomet
in all matters, and had twyſe beene his Sonne in
Lawe. For he maryed his two daughters, which both
deceaſſed wythout children, in the life time of Mahomet,
which dignitie he chiefely attained through giftes and briberie.
For receyuing at the handes of Homars Treaſurer
all hys money and goodes, hée frankely diſtributed
bothe it and all that hée himſelfe had lefte vnto him by
his Parentes among his Souldiours.
            
               Ozmen therefore béeyng inueſted the thyrde Biſhop
after Mahomet, ſente the nexte yéere following a huyge
armye vnder the conducte of Hucba into Affrica, agaynſt
the Lorde Gregorie, chiefe and ſupreme gouernour
of all that Prouince. He béeyng ouercome in battayle,
and Carthage alſo ſubuerted, he vnyted all that
Prouince to hys other Saracenicall Dominions. But
fearyng to bée ſurpriſed and taken nappyng wyth ſome
ſodayne Alarum out of Europa, if they ſhoulde lye long
in Carthage, they diſlodged thence and remooued to Tunice,
a Citie ſtanding within the Baye of Golet, and
there rouſting themſelues for a ſeaſon, greatly enlarged
the ſame.
            But afterwarde receyuing a commaundement from
Ozmen that they ſhoulde not dwell in any Port towne
or other places vppon the Sea Coaſte, (becauſe he had
taken ſuche agréement and order wyth the Emperour,

they departed ſixe and thirtie myles from the Sea and
aboute a hundreth from Tunice where they buylded
themſelues a Citie called Cairoan.
            
            After this, in the thirde yéere of thys mans raygne,
Muauias (who was wée ſhewed before was Lieutenant
of Egypte) wyth a Nauie of a thouſande and ſeauen
hundreth (or as ſome ſaye) wyth ſeauen hundreth
Shippes onely, arryued in Cypres, and takyng by force
the noble Citie Conſtantia, ſpoyled the whole Iſlande.
But béeyng certefyed that Carcozir one of the Emperour
Conſtans hys Capitaynes, was commyng agaynſt
hym with a greate fléete, for feare of further harme, he
departed thence and planted hys Siege before another
Citie in the ſame Iſlande named Aradum, where he nothynge
preuayled. Séeynge therefore hys purpoſe to
quayle, hée broughte backe hys Hoaſte to Winter
in Damaſco.
            
            In the meane whyle Ozmen cauſed the odde papers
and Schedules of Mahomet (before by Homars
procurement collected together) to bée brought into a
better order and to bée deuided into Chapters, makyng
of them a Booke whiche is called the Alcorane, wherin
all the opinions and Inſtitutions of Mahomettes
Sect are contained and at large ſpecifyed.
            The nexte Spring after, Muauias with a greater
Nauie then before, arryued in Cypres, and aſſaulted the
Citie of Aradum, which at length after many battryes
he wanne: and permitting the Inhabitantes to go whither
they woulde wythout hurte or bodely harme, he
raſed the Citie to the grounde and layde all the Iſlande
waſte and left it diſpeopled. At the ſame tyme alſo, an
other army of Saracens vnder the conducte of Buſurre,
inuaded Iſauria and ſpoyled the whole Countrey wyth
fyre and ſworde, and retourned home from thence with
fiue thouſand Priſoners.
            
               
After theſe ſo many ouerthrowes and miſerable diſcomfitures
receaued, Conſtance Caeſar deſired a truce for .ij.
yéeres of Muauias: which beinge not obtayned, while
Muauias prepared a great Nauye at Tripolis a Citie of
Syria, to inuade the Prouinces and Territories belonging
to the Romane Empire, his purpoſe by the worthyneſſe
and valyaunt demeanure of two Brothers was for
a litle while fruſtrate.A valaunt enterpriſe. Who breaking open the priſons,
wherein a great number of Chriſtians were, ſet them al
at lybertye: inſomuch that they ſodenly geuing an onſet
on the Saracens, killed a maruelous number of them, and
putting the reſt to flight, with victorye ran to their ſhips,
and takeing ſo many of them as woulde ſerue to tranſport
them, they ſet the reſte on fire, and came ſaue into
Thracia.
            
            But Muauias nothing diſmayed with this miſchance
and ouerthrow,A lamentable ſlaughter. prepared a greater na
                  •
               y, and furniſhed
the ſame with all habilimentes and Municions neceſſarye,
with whom he landed at Phoenice a Hauen of
Lycia, where Conſtance with his Nauy laye: and geuing
the charge vpon him, made ſuch a ſlaughter of the
Romanes, that the Sea was red with the bloud of them
that were ſlayne. Conſtance diſguiſing himſelfe in the
habite and apparrell of a poore man, fled in a Small ſhip
with a fewe others in his company to Conſtantinople:
Which victory ſet Muauias in ſuch a hoygh and conceipt,
that he thought nothing inuincible, or able to withſtande
hym. Where vpon he tooke Rhodes, and pulled downe
the huge Image of the Sun called Coloſſus Solis, which
Chares was in making (as Plinie ſayth).xij. yéeres,Of our engliſh money that Sum a mounteth to, 40000 li. and
the charges thereof drewe to thrée hundreth Talentes.
The braſſe of this Image beyng bought by a certen Iew
of Emeſſa, was ſomuch as nine hundred Camels coulde
carie
            The Saracenes caryed away thence not onely this Image

which was in height .70. Cubites: but innumerable
others. For Plinie writeth that in that Ile there
were beſide this Coloſſe of the Sunne .73 thouſand Statues
or Images, and a hundreth leſſe Coloſſes. Hauinge
ſpoyled Rhodes, they cut their courſe alonge by the Sea
Agaeum, and plagued the Cyclades with lyke calamitie.
At this time alſo laid Generall of an other army of Saracenes,
entred into the borders of Armenia, and waſted
al, farre and neere tyll he came to Mount Caucaſus.
            
            And Muauias retourning from Rhodes, furniſhed a Nauye
with all thinges neceſſary to inuade Sicile, which
waſted and ruynated the Countrie with Sword and fire
without mercy, tyll Olimpius the Exarche of Italy (for ſo
was he that had the gouernaunce ouer Italy at yt time for
the Emperour of Conſtantinople called) encountringe
with them in a bloudye Conflicte, with much effuſion of
Chriſtian bloud diſcomfited and expelled them. In
which battell he ſo eagrely fought, & was ſo fore wearied
that he tell ſicke and ſhortly after dyed.
            
               Muauias himſelfe leuying an Armye by land, conducted
them into Cappadocia to beſiege Coeſarea the head
Citie of that Prouince. But before he could atchieue any
notable exploite worthy to be remembred, hearinge
that Ozmen the Caliph was dead, in hope to be his Succeſſour,
retyered with his Hoſt back agayne. This Ozmene
in ye twelfth yéere of his Pontificall dignytie being
in his owne houſe beſet and beſieged with a company of
Saracenes which would haue had Ali to be Caliph, ſlue
hymſelfe, becauſe he would not fall into their handes. He
by chaunce loſt the Ring of Mahomet, which all the Caliphes
before hym wore: and cauſed an other to be made
of Siluer, wherein by his commaundement were ingrauen
theſe wordes: O PERTINACES, O POENITENTES.
He was white of coulour, graue and curteous
of viſage, a long Beard and of a meane ſtature highlye

and dearelye beloued was he of the common people,
both before and after he embraced this Secte, and gotte
very great wealth by Marchaundize.
            Notwithſtandyng he was alwayes verye lyberall, yea
rather magnificent and honourable, and (as we haue
ſhewed) diſburſed and gaue bribes largelye to the Souldiours
that hee might obtayne the Pontificate. He lyued
.lxxxvij. yeeres and was buryed in the night without
any Funerall pompe becauſe he ſlue himſelfe.
            Therefore after hys death there aroſe great contention
amonge the Saracenes, aboute the election of a
newe Byſſhoppe. Some woulde haue Ali to ſuccéede
hym, ſome Muamad ſonne to Ozmen, and ſome Muauias.
But Ali rayſed warres againſte Muamad,
and preuayled agaynſte hym, ſo that he was inſtalled
and made Byſſhoppe by all mens conſent: ſauynge
onelye Muauias. Who repoſinge greate truſte and
confidence in the Aegiptian and Aſſyrian Souldiours,
(whoſe proweſſe and magnanymytie he had ſufficientlye
tryed aforetime in ſo manye Battayles) made
ſharpe warres agaynſt hym, colourablye pretendynge
that hée tooke the ſame in hande onely to reuenge the
death of Ozmen.
            
            When both the Armyes were come to the Riuer
Euphrates, Muauias hauynge more ſkyll in warlyke
pollices, and alſo hauinge olde beaten Souldiours vnder
hym, ſo fortyfied and entrenched hys Campe néere
to the Riuer ſide, and the Citie Babylon, that neyther
coulde he be inforced by hys aduerſarye to fight vnleſſe
he would hymſelfe, and alſo hys Armye ſhoulde not be
deſtitute of water, (whereof in that Region there is
great ſcarſitye) nor yet be vnprouided of victayles, and
moreouer néeded not to feare anye Alarmes behynde
at their backes. Whereas in the meane whyle Ali
               
his Armye, was extremely pinched for lacke of water.
And ſo for the ſpace of eleuen Monthes keeping his Souldiours
within the Trenches of hys Campe, he weryed
hys Enemye and lyngered the tyme onely now and
then with Skirmiſhes, tyll at length by the interceſſion
of certayne Prieſtes and others ſkilfull in the Lawe of
Mahomet, order was taken betwéene them, that the
whole cauſe ſhoulde be decided by the iudgement and awarde
of two olde men.
            On Ali his ſide was choſen Alaſcates, and for Muauias
parte Alaſcius. Theſe two comminge to a Towne
called Algendel, to ſit vpon this waightie matter of both
their tytles, the one thought it neceſſarye that Ali ſhould
be diſgraded and depoſed from his pontificall dignitie, and
the other ſtiflye helde opinion that he was a man moſte
worthy for the office. Thus pleading to and froe, neyther
abſolutely determyninge nor fully concludinge any
attonement, Ali and Muauias retourned agayne either
of them to his owne Campe. And neuer ceaſed with
often Skirmiſhing to moleſt and kill one an other, ſpoylynge
and waſtynge one an others Countries till at
length Ali in a certayne Temple néere Cufa a Citie of
Arabie was by the inſidious driftes and Ambuſhes of
Muauias ſlayne, and in the ſame buried, for which cauſe
the place at this daye is called Maſſadale which is as
much to ſaye, as the houſe of Ali. In his Ringe hee
had this inſcription: Corde ſyncero Deum Dominum
veneror. Hee was ſhorte and lowe of Stature, his
Bearde was ſide and longe, his Armes and Legges
full of haire, and in his goynge neuer lyfted vp hys
Eyes.
            After Ali was dead, the Citizens of Cufa and Aratha
created Alhaccem (his eldeſt Sonne by his wife
Fatema, the Daughter of Mahomet) Byſſhope: a
man in all poynctes of bodelye feacture and comelye

ſhape, reſembling his Graundfather Mahomet. He with
an armie, marched againſt Muauias, but when both the
Hoſtes were ordered in battaile araie readie to geue the
onſet, and the voward of the one ſtanding full againſt the
fronte of the other, whether it were becauſe he feared the
doubtfull hazard of battaile or elſe (as ſome do write) that
he was ouercome with the goodnes and integrite of nature,
vnwilling that ſo great effuſion of bloud and deſtruction
of men ſhoulde be made for his ſake, he voluntarilie
went and ſubmitted himſelfe to Muauias, acknowledging
him to be his Superiour. Beyng thus reconciled one to
the other, they went both together to Cufa, and there finding
great ſtore of money and treaſure, they departed
thence to Ietrib, where Muauias with his owne handes
crowned Alhaccem with the royall Diademe and called
him King, becauſe he well knew that he ſhoulde not liue
long. For within ſixe monethes after his Coronation he
dyed beyng poyſoned by the ſame Muauias. His Poeſie
engrauen in his Signet was: Solus Deus potens eſt.
Thus Muauias hauing now diſpatched and ridde out of
the way all his aduerſaries, raigned alone. Hauing thus
ſet his affaires in order, he inuaded the frontiers of ye 
               Romane
Empire. But Conſtantius ſendyng vnto him for
peace, had the ſame graunted, condicionally that Conſtantius
ſhould pay vnto him euerie day ten poundes of gold,Peace dearly bought.
and a Slaue with a Horſe. At this time Damaſcus was
the chiefe Seate and Metropolitane Citie of the Saracenicall
Empyre. But in this their ſo great ſucceſſe and felicitie,
there aroſe diſſenſions among themſelues for theyr
religion, by reaſon of the varietie and repugnance of Mahomettes
ſcrowles and Schedules. The Perſians, béeyng
(as we haue ſhewed) now made Saracens, helde opinions
muche differing from them that folowed Homars Alcorane
in Syria. Wherefore Muauias with his power ſpéeding
him into Perſia, ſuppreſſed that Sect and eſtabliſhed

his owne faction, which bore al the ſwaie in Syria, and appointed
an order,Luſtie allowāce, only to allure men to his Sect. Ambitious Traytor. that the Souldiours of his Secte ſhould
haue allowance of two hundreth pence by the day, wheras
the Perſians had but only thirtie. Then inuading Cilicia,
he ſpoyled all the Countrey with ſword and fire.
            And when he was retourned to Damaſcus, Sapor Pretor
of all ſuche places in Perſia as yet acknowledged the
Romane Empire, now traiterouſly reuolting from the
Emperour, ſent vnto Muauias, one Sergius maſter of the
horſemen, with requeſt, that he woulde ayde him to the
Empyre of Conſtantinople. Who beyng nowe come to
Muauias his preſence and ſhewing the effect of his Commiſſion
for which he was ſent, beholde, there came alſo an
Ambaſſadour from the Emperour to Muauias, whoſe
name was Andrew, promiſing vnto him in Caeſars behalfe
large and ample rewardes, ſo that he would not aide
nor further the procéedinges of Sapor. Muauias hearing
both their errandes and their offers, aunſwered: that foras
much as he accompted both of them for no better then
his enemies,He yt hath moſt money ſhall haue moſt friendſhippe. he would ayde and take part with him that
would geue moſt. And ſo Sergius geuing more then Andrew
woulde, Muauias entered into a league with him.
Andrew taking hys leaue, in hys waye homewarde intercepted
Sergius as he was retourning into Perſia and
hanged him on a gybet: hoping and perſuading himſelfe,
that now the partie to whō the promiſe was made beyng
ridde out of the way, Muauias with a ſafe conſcience (retaining
& kéeping ſtill the rewardes alreadie to him giuē)
might and would dodge & finde cauillations with Sapor yt
he was diſcharged of his promiſe. But there was more
conſtancie & faithfulnes in the barbarous Infidel, then the
Greekes wit could conceiue or forſée. For Muauias, meaning
to kéepe touch and promiſe inuiolably, ſent a bande
of Arabians to ayde hym vnder the conducte of Fadala,
who being kylled by a fall from his horſe, he appoynted

in his ſtéede his Sonne Iazid Capitaine for that expedition:
by which power and armie, Chalcedonia was miſerablie
afflicted and Armaria a Citie of Phrygia taken:
and leauyng in it a garryſon of fyue thouſand Saracens
(becauſe Winter approched) they retourned with
their Hoſte into Syria.
            
            In this meane ſeaſon the Emperour althoughe Winter
were now at hand and all places couered with Snow
ſent Andrew with a ſmall crew of Souldiours to expulſe
the garryſons of the Saracens and to recouer Armaria.
The Greeques therfore ſodainely ſkaled the walles and
brake into the Citie without any reſiſtaunce, and to reuenge
their many ouerthrowes and diſcomfitures before
time receyued ſlew all the Saracens within, who ſuſpecting
no ſuche thing, kepte within their houſes, cowring
ouer the fire in that extreme colde weather. After thys
victorie gotten by the Imperialles, Conſtantius béeyng
now come into Italie out of Grecia, tooke his progreſſe
ſtraight towarde Rome, where he taking a diligent view
of all thinges, fell to the ſpoyle, and caryed away wyth
him all ſuch auncient monumentes and workes as were
of Marble or braſſe,
                  Rome ſpoiled. and generally whatſoeuer myght delyght
and content the eye, and lading his Shippes therewith,
ſent it firſte vnto Naples and from thence to the
Citie Syracuſe in Sicilie. So that he tooke awaye from
the Citie more ornamentes in ſeuen dayes ſpace, then ſo
many barbarous Nations had done in .CClviij. yéeres
before, for there were ſo many ſince the firſt inclinatiō of
the Romane Empyre. During his abode there, leadyng
his life effeminately & libidinouſly and looking to receiue
the ſubſidie and tribute that he had with much rigour and
crueltie exacted and aſſeſſed the Cities and Iſlandes of
Italie to pay,Emperour murthered. in ſo much that many were ſpoyled not only
of their goods but alſo of their wiues and children, he was
by his owne people ſlaine and murthered. After whō ſuccéeded

in the Empyre his Sonne Conſtantine, whom the
Saracens perceiuing to be a Coward and vnwarlike perſon,
priuily made preparation for a nauie to inuade Thracia
and Greece, if any tumult or ſeditious vprore ſhould
fortune to kindle in Conſtātinople. But becauſe al things
were there quiet, they ſayled into Sicilie, wherin the late
ſpoyles of Rome and of all Italy were laid and hoorded vp:
and with ſodaine force tooke the citie Syracuſe which was
not defended nor kept with any garriſon. And when they
could not rouſt there in ſafetie by reaſon of the néerenes of
Italie, they ſhipped all the ornamentes and treaſure that
was in Syracuſe, and with incredible richeſſe retourned
into Egypt. Albeit there be ſome which write that Conſtantine
hearing of the deathe and murther of his father
Conſtanoius, ſayled into Sycilie and caryed the Spoyles
from thence with him to Conſtantinople.
            
            After this, an other populous armie of Saracens entring
into Affrica, had ſuche ſucceſſe that they deſtroyed
and waſted all the Countrey néere the Sea coaſtes (for a
great part of the maine land and middle ſoyle was alreadie
in their ſubiection) and haryed away with them into
ſlauerie and thraldome .800000. Priſoners. And on an
other ſide Muauias furniſhed out a huige Hoſt vnder the
conduct of Muamades and Caiſes, whiche ſubdued Lydia
and Cilicia two other of the Romane Prouinces. And
within a while after, to thintent he might conquere & ſubiugate
Conſtantinople, he ſent another armie after the other,
wherof Saeuus was General, which being ioyned to
y• other, marched both directly toward ye citie Conſtātinople
& girded it about with a terrible ſtege.
                  Conſtantinople beſſeged ſeuen yeeres. And for there
more ſtrēgth, he appointed a nauie to help thē, which ſtopped
all the paſſages and places frō the Weſt promontorie
of Hebdomum to Cyglobium. With al this force they
oftentimes gaue terrible aſſaultes to the citie, but their attempts
were all in vaine. This ſiege laſted from ye month
of Aprill till September.
            
               
                  〈2 pages missing〉
               
               
fléete left, which then vexed Crete, vnder the guydaunce
and conduct of Fadall and Cadall. Through theſe good fortunes
and proſperous ſucceſſes, the Maieſtie of the Romane
Empire ſéemed eftſones to flouriſh, and ſomewhat
to reuiue and recouer his priſtinate glory. But Muauias
hauynge thus concluded a peace and league, which to the
Chriſtians was moſt pernicious (becauſe the Saracens
beinge nowe weake and without force mighte haue
bene vtterly oppreſſed and eaſly vanquiſhed if Caeſar had
not more delighted in preſent Idleneſſe and quiet reſte
then ſtudying for the long tranquillytie of his Common
wealth, which by no meanes is made more longer of continuaunce
and ſafer with barbarous nations then by perfect
victory) tourned his power & made his quarell againſt
the Mardaites, and diſpoſſeſſing them from their high deſcrying
places in ye Mountaines which before they enioyed,
he ſtudyed and bent his mind to appeaſe certayne controuerſies
and Sectes newly ſprong vp about his religion.
Therfore he called a generall Counſell or Synode
of his ſect, vnto whom by publique proclamation he commaunded
all the learned men of his Empire, and ſuch as
had any wryting or Schedule either of Mahomet or of any
his predeceſſours, Biſhoppes before hym, to come and
bring the ſame writinges with them. This Tartarical
Synode was holden and celebrated at Damaſco, where
(when as nothyng coulde be determyned by reaſon of the
contrarietie of repugnaunt ſentences) hee commaunded
ſixe of the wiſeſt in ye company by the common conſent of
them al to be picked out, & ſo there were choſen Mulcine,
Boari, Buor, Anoeci, Atermind & Dauid. Theſe ſix being
ſhut vp together into one houſe, wt all ſuch writinges as
were thither brought, hee gaue ſtraight charge that they
ſhould lay their heades together & out of theſe writinges
gather into one volume ſuch actes & ſayings of Mahomet
as ſhuld ſome to haue ani likelihod of truth. And whē they

had made ſixe volumes, ye reſidue of the writings be cauſed
to be throwne into a riuer, which were ſo many that
200. Camels were laden with the cariage of them away.
Then he apoincted by a law a greuous paine & puniſhement
to as many as in thought,By whome Alcoran was clouted together. word or déede beléeued otherwiſe
then in thoſe ſixe Alcoranes was preſcribed. Of
the which ſix volumes, afterward procéeded and ſpronge
vp ſoure Sectes of Saracens: which are called Melicians;
Aſafians, Alambelians & Buanifians. The Aphrycans
were Melicians: the Arabians and Damaſcenes, Aſafians:
the Armenians and Perſians, Alambelians: the Alexandrians
& Aſſyrians were Buanifians. In Cayre the
greateſt Citie of Egypt, all theſe Sectes (no man agaynſaying)
are vſed and embraced. When Muauias had finiſhed
& taken this order in his matters at Damaſco which
was ye head ſeat of his Empire, he died and was there buried.
He was the firſt of the Saracen Capitaines yt with
Ozmen (during Homars raigne) entred into the Roman
prouinces wt an hoſt, and was the firſt yt enlarged & amplyfied
the limites of the Saracenicall Empire as far as
Aegipt and Aphrica weſtward, into Meſopotamia Eaſtward,
and into Aſia northward, and was the firſt yt conſtituted
a certen ſeate royall at Damaſco: which citie for the
fertilitie of the ſoyle and pleaſantnes of the ayre far excelleth
any other. He vſed firſte of his race, to haue Slaues
and Eunuches after a princely ſtate & guiſe to ſtand bare
headed before hym: for he was a man altogether marcial
and warlike, and in the atchiuing of his deuiſes prudent
and wiſe. His coulour was white, his face pleaſaunt and
graue, his eyes of diuers coulours, his ſtature meane,
his Bearde alwayes blacke, for euer as it beganne to
waxe graye, hee dyed it and conſerued it in his former
ſtate. He lyued lxxvij. yeares, and raigned twenty and
foure. His Signet which he caryed about with hym, had
in it this Poſie engrauen: O Deus ignoſce mihi.
            
            
               
Of learnyng he was altogether ignoraunt, in ſo muche
that he could not write his own name: whereas otherwiſe
he had by nature a verie profound witte. Wherfore it is
reported that Mahomet on a time, making his prayers
at a banquet in preſēce of many (as his cuſtome was) ſaid
theſe wordes: O God teach Muauias to write & to number,
and defend him from all daungers. By which words,
that craftie Pſeudoprophete who knewe the nature of
Muauias to be fierce and prompt withall, ſhewed and ſignified
two things. Firſt, that he, if he had the ayde of any
learning, might greatly helpe and furder his Secte. For
they which can write, can alſo reade and thereby become
wyſer. Then becauſe he ſaw him to be of ſuche a fierce
courage that he was lyke to aduenture and obiect himſelf
to many perilles and hazardes, he deſired of God to teach
him the Arte of numbring, wherby he might ſkanne and
obſerue due times and tempeſtiuities, and to haue the ſkil
to take the occaſions that ſhoulde be fitteſt for the exployting
of his affayres when they fell: and for the ſame cauſe
he deſired of God to protect & deliuer him from all daungers.
But he being a man craftie ynough of himſelfe and
naturally geuen to pollicie néeded not theſe helpes.
            After that Muauias was dead, immediately his ſonne
Iezid was ſaluted Biſhop and King, who atchieued no
notable acte in his time worthie of remembraunce. For
he was a man altogether giuen to ſlouth, idlenes and riot,
and moreouer was ſickly and of a body nothing luſtie: ſauing
that he put many of the nobilitie of Arabie to death.
He loued his owne Siſter lividinouſly, and was greatly
delited in learning and Poetrie, and made many verſes, a
moſt ſpightfull contemner of Mahomets Law and euerie
other Religion. During this mans raigne, Mutar
whom he had made Preſident ouer the Prouince of Perſia,
perceiuing his drowſie ſluggiſhnes and deſire of eaſ
                  •
               
openly proteſted himſelfe to be a Prophete, & practiſed tyrannie

therin: and of the line of this Mutar, the Kinges
of Perſia which at this day are called Sophi, are deſcēded.
Iezid his Poeſie was: DEVS EST MEVS DOMINVS.
He raigned thrée yéeres, and dyed at Arrane, being
of the age of fortie yéeres, when the Citizens of Cufa
had called home Hocem the Sonne of Ali, entending to
create hym Byſhoppe: but Abdalam the Sonne of Iezid
in the fieldes of Carball néere Cufa, treacherouſly lying in
waite, ſlue him, and there was he buried. In remembrāce
of which thing, there was at his graue and Sepulchre afterwarde
builded a Citie called Carbala, called ſo of the
name of the field wherin the fact was done. Hocem lefte
twelue Sonnes behind him when he dyed, that is to ſay,
Zeinal Abadine, Zeinal Muamedes, Baguer Muamedes,
Giafar Cadeneg, Giafar Muſa, Cazine Muſa, Hali Muceratius,
Alle, Muamedes Taguin, Muamedes Halinaguin,
Alle Haceme Aſquerine, Haceme Muamedes
Mahadine: which were in diuers places buryed, that is
to wit, ſome néere to their great Graundfathers father
Mahomet, ſome at Bagadat, & ſome at Herine: but as for
Muamedes Mahadine,
               Doting beliefe of Perſians.
                the Perſians do affirme not to bée
yet dead, & do hold opinion, that he ſhall come mounted on
horſebacke to declare and ſhewe the law to all Nations,
and ſhall conuert all people, and that all this ſhall firſt
begin in the citie of Maſſadale where ye body of his graūdfather
Ali lyeth buried. And therfore they haue alwayes
in that citie a horſe ready to receiue him, whom, after the
ende of their praiers and oriſons, they lead with Torche
light to the Church: and vpō one certaine day which is among
them kept moſt feſtiuall and ſolemne they bryng
thys horſe to the Temple where Ali is buryed wyth as
muche pompe as maye bee, beſeechyng and making petition
vnto the ſame Ali, that he would as ſpéedily as may
bée, ſend vnto them this his Nephew whom they looke
for. Vnto the which feaſt, there is reſort of people from di-

                  〈2 pages missing〉
               
               
together with the opinion that was conceiued of
hym and his Sect, ſo incenſed and ſwelled his ambitious
mind, that he firſt of all others tooke vpon hym the name
of a Miralmumine, which worde in the Arabian language
ſignifieth the Prince of all beléeuers: which name
afterwards our Hiſtoriographers depraued & corruptly
called Miramuline. He alſo builded the large and moſt e
noble citie of Marocco néere to the foote of Mounte Atlas,
               
                  Marocco builded.
and appointed it to be the chiefe Keye and Metropolytane
Citie of all his Kingdome: Notwithſtandinge many doo
affirme that it was built by Ioſippus the Sonne of Teſfine,
and ſome ſay by an other. Againſt them Abdimelick
(partlye for that he ſawe him to procure no hurt nor
attempt any hinderaunce to his procéedinges) and partly
becauſe he was wrapped in heapes of troubles elſewhere
and had moe yrons in the fire then he coulde wel temper,
attempted nothing. For although he had ſupplanted Dadack
with all his faction and adherentes and with victory
retourned to Damaſcus, yet could he not long enioy that
victory nor brooke it quietlye, becauſe there began ſuch a
plague and peſtilenciall mortalytie that had almoſt quite
deſtroyed all the Saracenicall Nation.
            Beſide this plague, the people were greatly pinched
with famine in all his Countries. And the Mardaites
gettyng agayne the poſſeſſion of Mount Libanus, enlarged
their limites as farre as Hieruſalem: and morouer
the principalytie of Perſia, vſurped by Mutar, much diſquieted
his troubled minde. Abdimelick weltringe in
the ſurges of this froward Fortune, and fearing to bee ouerwhelmed
with ſome greater miſchaunce, ſent a ſolemne
Ambaſſade to Iuſtinian then Emperour, beyng of
the age of ſixtéene yéeres, for a confirmation of the peace
and League that Muauias ſtrake with Conſtantine, and
farther to requeſt hym that the Mardaites might bee diſpoſſeſſed
and driuen out of Libanus, which thinge if the

rour would graunt, he promyſed that he would euery day
geue vnto the Romanes in the name of a Tribute, ten
poundes of Golde, a Slaue and a goodly faire Horſe. And
moreouer in conſideration of the confirmation of this
peace which he ſo earneſtly deſired,Tribute of Saracenes
                (to thend that Caeſar
might the better expulſe and rid the Mardaites which
nowe were not aboue .xij. thouſand in number out of Libanus)
he gaue and graunted vnto him the one halfe of his
yéerely Tributes of Cyprus, Armenia and Iberia. This
peace beyng confirmed and he deliuered out of the feare of
the Mardaites (a fierce and outragious people) he ſent Ciafa
with a great Armye againſte Mutar, who vnder the
pretext and coloure of Religion practized tyranny and extort
regiment in Perſia. Which expedition and voyage
had very vnluckie end: for Mutar with an Hoſt marching
to méete him, vanquiſhed him and diſcomfited al his power,
whereby he wanne a greater eſtimation and credite
then euer he had before.
            
               Abdimelick to th'intent he might from a néerer place
ſurueigh and beholde how matters proſpered in Perſia,
goeth into Meſopotamia: where he was againe wt many
calamities & aduerſe bruntes ſore cruſhed. For ye Emperour
Iuſtinian (ye 
               Sclauoys partli yéelding themſelues vnto
his mercy and partly tamed by dent of Sword) picking
out of the ſtouteſt Gallantes in all that Nation, a crewe
of.30000. or there aboute, muſtred and tooke vp Souldiours
apace for his warres: and ſo truſtinge to their valyaunt
ſeruice, brake the League lately made: makyng
for the coulour of his quarel, ye the money payable for his
yéerely Tribute had not the Roman ſtamp, but was of a
new Arabian coigne. Sending therfore his Lieutenaunt
Leontius wt this new leuied army into Aſia, ſubdued and
brought vnder his ſubiection Iberia, Abania, Hircania
and Media, which Regions were vnder the Saracenes
Empyre.
            
               
At the ſame time alſo one Said reiſed ſedition and rebelled
againſt Abdimelick: againſt whom Abdimelick
ſpéedyng hymſelfe with an Army, ſo diſmayd and terrified
hym, that he fel downe on his Marybones and craued
forgeueneſſe. Whom Abdimelick with diſſimuling
countenaunce pardoned and ſéemed to forgeue: but within
awhile after he commaunded hym priuelie to be ſlain.
At this ſame time alſo there aroſe an other tyrantie among
the Saracenes, named Abdala Zubir, who ſent his
Brother Muſub into Perſia againſt Mutar: and of hym
Mutar was both vanquiſhed and ſlayne: albeit he enioyed
not the fruite of his victory long. For Abdimelick withall
his power igoynge againſte hym, ouercame and diſcomfited
him and all his Hoaſt: and from thence holding
on his way into Perſia, brought all that Prouince vnder
his ſubiection. Abdalaſ Zubir diſcouraged with the good
ſucceſſe of his aduerſarie, fled vnto Mecca, after whome,
Abdimelick ſent Cagian with a great Armye to purſue
and take hym, who by force winning the Citie Mecca,
ſlue Zubir, and ſet the auntienteſt Idole of that citie with
the Temple alſo on fire.
            And thus, Abdimelick hauinge recouered Perſia, and
diſpatched out of the way his aduerſaries, and being alone
in poſſeſſion of the Saracenicall Soueraigntie, (after hee
had oftentimes in vaine, beſought the Romane Emperor
that he would not infringe the League betwéene them
concluded,) at length bent all his power againſte the
Greeques which inferred warre vpon hym againſte the
Lawes both of God and man, and ouer his army he appoynted
for Generall one Muamates. Who findinge the
Greeques at Sebaſtonople, hanged the Tables of the
League vpon a Speare poynt, and cauſed the ſame to bee
borne before him like an Enſigne. And calling vpon God
to reuenge the breaking and violation therof (which were
ſo ſolēnelie made and confirmed by taking his holy name

               
                  •
               o witneſſe) he in good order of battell gave the charge vpon
them. Albeit firſt he had corrupted the Sclauoy
                     •
                  
                with
money. Of whom aſſoone as the battell was once begun
néerehand xx.M. reuolted from the Emperour & went
to the Saracenes: which thinge ſo appauled the Greeques,
that they were eaſely ouercome and put to flight, and in
the chaſe were kylled almoſt euery mothers ſonne. The
Emperour Iuſtinian (for he was preſent himſelfe at this
conflict) diſhonorably and ſhamfully by flight ſauing himſelfe
wt a few others in his company,Chriſtians inſtly plaged. aſſoone as he came to
Leucas, cauſed all the remnaunt of ye new band of sclauonoys
to be put to death and their dead carkeſſes to bee caſt
into the Sea, Whervpon, the saracenes afterward, without
any damage not only recouered their owne Territories
before loſt, but alſo inuaded the reſidue of the Roman
Prouinces. Sabatius alſo a noble Senatour, and Pretor
of Armenia, vnderſtanding of the wrecks and ouerthrows
of the Romans, reuolted to the Saracens and betraied into
their hands the whole countrie of Armenia. Nether did
they yet ceaſe to ouerrun the whole Eaſt, and to leade away the chriſtians into ſeruitude: for y• part alſo of Perſia,
which yet acknowledged the Roman Empire was ſubdued
by Cagian, and Muamates, wt helpe of thoſe Sclauonoy
tourning to his ſide, and entring into the Prouince of
Thracia, ſpoyled it wt Sweard and fire pitifully: the Roman
Empire being in the meane ſeaſon wt ciuile diſcords
and inteſtine hatred ſo diſſeuered and torne aſunder, that
no man durſt ſet in foote to withſtande this outrage.
            The Lord Leoutius hauing exiled Iuſtinian into ye Ile
Cherſon, vſurped ye empire: and ſtraitwaies ſent a Lord
of his countrie named Iohn, with a nauie to inhibite and
ſtop the violent irruption of the Aphricane saracenes,
which not content with the midle lande yt was graunted
vnto them by league for their habitation, inuaded a freſh
the Countrie néere about the Sea Coaſtes.
            
               
This man vanquiſhing the Saracenes in battaile, draue
them out of the Romane Territories. But for as muche
as their power and wealth was dreadfull and terrible in
Syria and all the Eaſt, and newes brought by ſundry rumours
that there was more ayde comming from Abdimelik,
to the ayde of theſe Saracens in Affrica, Iohn thinking
his power vnable to defend and kéepe the poſſeſſion
of ye prouince, went to Conſtantinople to fetch more ayde
from Leontius, leauing his hoaſt behind him in Affrica.
But while theſe things were to ſlowly purueighed and
prepared by Leontius, Abdimelik vnderſtanding ye ſtate
of his ſubiectes in Affrica, and ſore mooued wyth the late
loſſe by them there ſuſtained, furniſhed out a great Nauie
to recouer the Prouince againe. With whō the Romane
fléete (thinking themſelues not hable to make their part
good) departed thence, into Crete. Where ye Chieuetaines
and Princes conſulting together, thought it much ſoūded
to their ſhame & diſhonour to returne home, hauing thus
loſt Affrica and left the ſame open to their enemies: and
partly moved with diſpleaſure towarde the Emperour
which did ſo dreamingly prouide for the furniture & ſupply
of warlicke affaires, egged the Mariners to reuolte,
and to ſalute Abſimar Emperour,The Emperoure ſhamefully abuſed by his owne ſubiectes. whom they alſo called
Tybarius. He in all haſt ſpeeding himſelf toward Conſtā
                  tinople
with an armie, and finding Leontius vnprouided,
without any ſtop wanne the Citie, and taking Leontius,
cut of his noſe and caſt him into priſon. The Saracens forciblie
enioyed all Affrica, and draue out all the Romane
garriſons. The moſt part of them that then inhabited
the places of Affrica néere the Sea, were of the Gothes
lyne.
            This Tyberius immediatly after he was enthronyzed
and made Emperour, ſent his brother Heraclius with
a huige armie into Aſia againſt the Saracenes. Who inuading
Syria pearced into the countrey as farre as Samoſata
               
and waſting al the places néere therabout, ſlue néerehand
of them two hundreth thouſande,Slaughter of Saracens.
                and taking there
many priſoners and great booties, brought all the Countrey
in great feare of him. And at the ſame time the
Princes of Armenia, in a ſedition killed all the Saracenes,
which were in Armenia: and ſending Ambaſſadours to
Abſimar, receiued the Romanes againe into their Prouince.
Muamates netteled with theſe dealinges, with a
great power ſet vpon them, brought them againe vnder
the Saracenicall obeyſaunce, and burned the chi
                  •
               fe Princes
and leaders of the people alyue. Then he alſo inuaded
Cilicia, ſpoyling and ruynating it euerie where piteouſlie
but he eſcaped not himſelfe ſcotfree. For Heraclius encountring
with him, diſcomfited a great part of his hoaſt
and tooke the reſt priſoners, whom he ſent bound to Conſtantinople
to the Emperour. At which time Abdimelik
dyed, in the .xxi. yéere of his raigne. We ſhewed before,
that one Abedramon (deſcended of the Mauronion ſtock)
conueyed himſelfe into Mauritania in the beginning of
Abdimelik his Pontificate, and was there in ſuche eſtimacion
among his people and Sectaries, that all the Saracens
dwelling in that Prouince reuerenced him as an
other Caliph or rather as one greater then a Caliph, but
for as muche as he entermedled not with any bellicall inſurrections
and alſo was farre of, Abdimelik did not perſecute
him ſo as he did others. But yet notwithſtanding
his name was great in Arabia. He dying, left a ſonne behind
him, named Vlite, who ſuccéeded Abdimelik in the
Pontificate, & was called the Muralmumine, in the yéere
after the incarnatiō of Chriſt .708. During whoſe raigne
Armenia was once againe brought vnder the Romane
ſubiectiō, and the Saracens thēce expulſed. The Arabians
making an irruption into ye 
               Romane Prouinces, tooke by
force ye citie Miſta with many Caſtles & fortified townes
and with great booties and prayes returned home. Then

againe vnder the conduct of Abatius they inuaded Galatia
and ſacked it miſerably: and the Emperour Iuſtinian being
againe reſtored to the Empyre by Trebellius king of
Bulgaria, the Saracens taking occaſion by reaſon of theſe
new tumultes & commotions, iſſued out of Aegipt with a
greater preparatiō & power thē they did before, and debellad
all Lybia to the Ocean Sea. I call it now Lybia, becauſe
I haue alreadie ſhewed yt
               Affrica was before by thē
takē, which is a part of Lybia: to thende you may vnderſtand
yt I do not ſpeake of a part only, which was already
conquered, but of ye whole region. For wheras Lybia or ye
whole coūtrey of Affrica being almoſt on euery ſide compaſſed
about with water like an Iſland, is on ye North enuironed
with our Sea, on the Weſt and South with the
Atlantique Ocean, on ye Eaſt with the Eaſt, red & Arabian
Sea, and is ioyned to Aſia by a little narow part of
dry land lying betwene the vttermoſt end of the. Arabiā
Gulph & our Sea: yet Egypt (which Prouince extendeth
frō the Cataractes and fludgates of the riuer Nilus to the
mouth of the ſame) together with Aethiopia (which lieth aboue
it) of many old writers, yea of late Authours alſo, is
not reckened into Affrica. And as ye riuer Nilus parteth
the Eaſt part of this halfe Iſle, that is to wit, Aegypt & Aethiopia,
where the large & mightie dominions of Presbiter
Iohn lye: ſo ye riuer Nigir, ſpringing (as many write)
from the ſame fountain, and hauing (as the other hath his
courſe from the South into the North) ſo this frō the Eaſt
into the Weaſt, and falling into the Athlantique Ocean,
parteth and ſeparateth the moſt wealthie Kingdomes of
the Nigrites from it, So that, the Lybia which we here
meane, is contained within the boūdes of Nilus and Nigir
the Athlantique Ocean and our Sea. All which as farre
as it ſtretcheth from the Weaſt into the Eaſt, the buyge
Mount Athlas cutteth and ſeuereth a ſunder: béeyng at
this daye diuided into three partes, Barbaria, Numidia
               
and Lybia. Lybia which in the Arabian tongue is called
Sarra, that is to ſay Deſert, is bound on the Southe wyth
the kingdomes of the Nigrites, on the North with ye moūt
Athlas, on the Eaſt wt the riuer Nilus & on the weſt with
the Oceā. Numidia called in ye 
               Arabiā
                tongue Biledulgerid,
(which is to ſay, a Countrey wherein groweth great
ſtore of dates) ſtretching frō the borders of Aegypt to the
Oceā, lyeth South frō the moūtain Athlas. Barbarie from
the Eaſt to ye Weſt (cōtained within ye ſame limittes and
borders) comprehēdeth all yt which lyeth betwene Athlas
and our Sea. And this is alſo diuided into foure Prouinces:
Mauritania Tingintana, which containeth the Kingdomes
of Marrocco & Feze: Caeſarienſis, wherin is ye king
dome of Telenſine: & ye .iii. part both in thold time & now
is properly called Affrica, wherin in aunciēt time ye 
               Carthaginians
flouriſhed, conteining now at this day ye Citie
Affrica, Tunice and Tripolis. After this foloweth Cirenes,
which is cōprehended in ye kingdome of Bugia. At the
firſt inuaſiō and irruptiō made into this Prouince during
the raigne of Ozmen, ye 
               Saracens ſwarming out of Aegypt
wan Cyrenaica & Affrica. But making peace afterward
with ye Emperour, they were cōmaūded to depart from al
the places néere to the Sea coaſtes, and ſo they remooued
further into the Confines of Numidia and Lybia, and in
the raigne of Muauias they againe entring into ye Territories
of ye 
               Carthaginians, ſubdued the coūtrey of Affrica,
all about the Sea coaſtes. And nowe auauncing forward
their Standards they inuaded both ye 
               Mauritaines, & appointed
for ye limites of their Empire the Oceā
                & the riuer
Nigir. Ouer which prouince Vlite thē chief Biſhop of the
Mahumetane ſect, made Mucas high deputée, & appointed
vnto him a ſtrōg power. But yet ye part of Tingintana
that lyeth toward the ſtraictes of Marrocke was vnder
the rule of Roderike Viſigotte king of Spaine. For the
Gothes expulſing all the Romane garriſons were lordes

of the whole countrye of spaine, from 300. yéeres almoſt
paſſed, acknowledgyng for their King none but this Rodericke:
who was not onely King of both the Spaynes,
the néerer and furthér, but alſo poſſeſſed all that laye toward
the ſtraict Sea in Mauritania Tingintana. The
Straictes in Affrica, hath thrée Promontories, makyng
two Bayes or Elbowes into the landwarde: and in
Spaine as many Promontories with ſo many boſomes
or Elbowes of the Sea. The famous and noble Cities
by the Sea, in Spayne, were Carteia ſituate by the Promontorie
Calpe, which afterwarde was called Tarifa: in
Aphrica, Tingis, of whom Mauritania Tingintana hath
his name, ſtandyng by the Promontorie Abyle: and Cepta,
called of Ptolomaeus, Eſſiliſſa.
            
            The Romanes deuided all Spayne into two Prouinces,
and ſent into them two Proconſulles, or Propretors:
whereof the one gouerned the néerer and the other
the furder. But theſe partes were not alwayes of one
greatneſſe: for when as they had not yet the whole poſſeſſion
of all Spayne, the hyther Spaine was contayned
within the riuer Iberus and the Pyrenee Mountaynes:
and all beyond Iberus was of the further Spayne, which
belonged to the Carthaginians. But after that they had
driuen out the Punique Garryſons out of euery quarter
of the Countraie, and had got the poſſeſſion of all Spayne,
they called that which on the Eaſt and ſouth is enuironed
almoſt Ilandwiſe wtour Sea, on the Weſt with the Athlantique
Ocean, on ye North with the Sea Cantabricum
and the Pyrenee Mountaynes (exceptinge Luſitania and
Betica) by the name of the néerer Spaine: and thoſe partes
which be deuided by the riuer Anas and compaſſed about
wt the Ocean as far as to ye 
               Aſturians, thei called ye further
Spaine, callyng yt which marcheth vpon ye ſtraicts, Betica,
which now contayneth Vandaluſia & the Kingdome of
Granado, & ye which extendeth from ye riuer Anas to the

riuer Duria they called Luſitanie and al the hyther part,
Tarraconenſis. Which tripartite diuiſion Geographers
in their deſcriptions haue obſerued. Ouer theſe thrée
Prouinces and alſo ouer the Aſturians and Cantabrians
which be on this ſide the Pyrenees, by the North ocean,
and alſo ouer the Prouince called Narbonenſis ſo farre as
the Riuer of Rhone, which was then called Gallia Gottica,
this Roderike Viſigot was (as we haue ſayd king &
gouernour at that time, when the Saracenes extended the
limits of their Dominyon in Aphrica to the ocean, which
was in the yéere of our Lorde .712.
            This Rodericke made Iuliane Earle of Cepta (deſcended
of the bloud of Viſigottes, a man of great power and
wealth in Spayne and chief ruler ouer a certayne Ilande
now called Viridis, lying in the narow Sea, and many other
places aſwell in Spayne as in Tingintana) his high
Deputie and warden in Betica and all other ſuch places
as were vnder his rule in Tingintana. Vnto hym hee
committed the whole charge, to defend Spayne on that
ſide from the inuaſions of the Saracenes,
               Beautye of a Woman. cauſeth much miſchief. and to kepe the
narow Seas. This Iulyan had a Daughter named Caba,
a beautyfull young Ladye, inſomuch that for her parſonage
ſhe was no leſſe pernitious to Spayne, then faire
Helena was to the Troyanes. For Rodericke fallynge
in loue with her, whether it were by force or by fraud (for
it is reported both waies) made a breach into her virgynitie.
Which vnprincely trick ſhe (as ſoone as ſhe conueniently
could) vttered and diſcouered vnto her Father.
Who diſſimuling as though he had knowne nothyng of
this iniurie done to him in his Daughter, and kéepyng to
hymſelfe the deſire of iuſt reuenge till a tyme for his purpoſe
conuenient, deſired leaue of the Kinge to departe the
Courtand to go to Cepta, becauſe being there (as he ſaid)
he could much better defeat the Saracens entended enterpriſes.
Which requeſt obtayned, he truſſed vp al his furniture

of houſhold & wt his wife went to Cepta. When he
was come thither, fayning an excuſe yt his wife was ſore
ſicke, he deſired ye king to geue Caba, his doughter leaue to
come home and ſée her languiſhing mother, who was neuer
like to ſée her any more. For Caba with other Princes
and Lordes daughters (as the manner was) at that
time waited in the Court. Hauing by this meanes receiued
home his Daughter, he went to Mucas who was
(as before we ſhewed) the head ruler of all Lybya vnder
Vlite, and vnto hym he opened from poynt to poynt the
whole cauſe of his comming away from the Court, and
promyſing to make hym Lord of all Spayne if he woulde
geue the aduenture & take the enterpriſe in hand. Mucas
ſhewed the whole matter vnto Vlite, becauſe he durſte
not deale in ſuch a waightye caſe, withoute his will
and pleaſure firſt knowne. Of whom he receaued this
anſwer, that the matter propounded was of great importaunce
and difficultie, and that it were not beſt in ſuch
a doubtfull matter to geue raſhe credite to a ſubtyle perſone,
and one altogether eſtraunged from their Religion.
Notwithſtandinge, to trye the truſt and faithfulneſſe of
the Earle, he was reſolued, that the matter might be beſt
aſſayed, by deliuering vnto hym a ſmall crewe of Souldiours
at the firſt: and if he ſped well and had good ſucceſſe
at the beginning, afterward more ayde and greater power
might be ſent. Mucas although he were throughlye
perſwaded by the Earles talke and motion, that althings
would ſort to good effect, yet durſt he not paſſe nor goe beyond
the contents of his Commiſſiō, preſcribed by vlite.
Wherefore he delyuered vnto Iulyan, one of his Capitaynes
named Tarife Auenzarca with a hundred Horſmen
& 400. footemē. Who were all tranſported in foure
Ships, into a litle Ile lyinge in that Elbow of Sea that
the Promontorie Calpe maketh, which Ile was afterward
of this Capitayne Tarife, called Gelriza Tarif.
               
Vnto this place Iulyan called and by gentle meanes allured
all his friendes, and kinſfolkes, recomptinge vnto
them from poynct to poynt the commodities and pleſures
which by his labour, induſtrie and perilles the King had
receaued, for recompence whereof, he forgat not to tell
them the Kinges vngratitude, and the ſpightfull diſhonor
doone vnto hys houſe by the rauiſhing and deflowryng of
his Daughter, telling them further, that the King did vniuſtly
vſurp that kingdome, whiche by rightfull ſucceſſion
of inheritaunce belonged to the Sonnes of Vitiza. For
which cauſes he deſired their helpynge handes in this ſo
good and iuſt quarell to aſſiſte hym, tellyng them that the
next yéere he would come with a conuenient army to performe
aſmuch as he then ſpake. He ſo much perſwaded
them with theſe and ſuch lyke wordes, that they promyſed
hym when time ſhoulde ſerue their beſt ſeruice and
furtheraunce: and there vpon retourned home euery man
to his owne houſe. Iulian becauſe he would make a beginning
of his purpoſed warre, inuaded the Ile Gades liing
in the vtter part of the ocean, néere to the narrow ſea,
whiche Ile was afterwarde named Alzira Dalfrada:
which with Sword and fire he ſpoyled, caryinge the Inhabitantes
awaye with hym Priſoners, and after that
ſhewed the lyke curteſie to Luſitania and Betica, and beyng
laden with aboundaunce of ſpoyles and booties returned
into Aphrica.
            
            
               Mucas ſéeing this good ſucceſſe and thinkyng it a beginninge
good ynough, delyuered vnto hym twelue thowſande
Saracenes beſide them before, vnder the conducte
of the ſame Tarife. With whome hee arriued at the
foote of the Promontorie Calpe, which Mountayne was
thereof afterward called Gabel Traife, which is as much
to ſay as the Mount of Traif, and now it is called Gibel,
and ſetting his Souldiers on land, tooke by force the citie
Carceia, which afterwarde euen till our time was called
Tarifa.
            
            
               
The rumour of this great cōmotion being ſpred throughout
all Spaine, the kinſfolkes of Earle Iulian gathering
together all the power that they were able, and feigning
that they went to repulſe this Saracenicall inuaſiō, went
ſtraight wayes thither and ioyned themſelues with him.
And ſo all their powers being linked in one, they waſted
and haryed al the coaſt about the Riuer Betis now named
Guadolouir, and commonly called Andaluſia or of the
Vandales, Vandaluſia. Roderike in the meane ſeaſon,
with as much ſpéede as he coulde, gathered a very great
Armie, and appointing his Coſen Germaine Ignicus to
be Chieuetaine thereof, ſent him againſt his enemyes.
Who making many conflictes and ſkirmiſhes with them
was at length with all his Armie diſcomfited and ouerthrowne.
The Saracens hauing made great pyllage & deſolation
in the Countrey, and laden with foyſon of many
booties, and carying a great multitude of Priſoners with
them returned into Affrica. At which time, Vlite beyng
in Aſia, and making preparation to warre with Conſtantinople,
dyed, after whom Zulciminie the Sonne of
Abdimelik was made high Biſhop, during whoſe raigne
the Saracens the ſeconde time beſieged Conſtantinople.
For immediatly after his creation, he ſent Malſana with
an armie by lande, and Aumar with an other by Sea
againſt Conſtantinople, and he himſelfe with a great power
folowed after. But this his ſtrong and terrible purpoſe
was for a while defeated by Leo the Praetor of Armenia:
whō they (ſéeking meanes to entrap and deceiue)
were themſelues by him entrapped and deceaued: for he
ſtopping the paſſages & conuenient places through which
they muſt néedes goe, hindered their reckening.
            Whileſt theſe thinges were in doyng, Mucas comming
out of Affrica, to congratulate and doe his duetie to
Zulciminie the new Byſhop, declareth vnto him the ſtate
of their affaires in Spaine: wherevpon he being meruelous

deſirous to enlarge the limittes of his Empire, gaue
him in commaundement, to ſend Tarife againe into that
Prouince with a mightier armie then any he had before.
Mucas therfore retourning into Affrica, the next yeere
folowing tranſfreted with a buige armie into Spayne,
kéeping with him as a pledge or hoſtage, Richila Counte
of Tingis, and coſen to Iulian, whom he halfe miſtruſted.
Which armie being once landed on the next coaſt, Roderike
ſpeedely gathered the powers of the Prouinces néere
about. And ſo with ye ayde of ye people of Gottalonia (now
called Catalonia and in tholde time Lacetani) the inhabitauntes
of Iberia now called Tarracon or Aragon:) the
Cantabrians béeyng at this day in the Kingdome of Nauarre:
and the people of Gallia Gottica, wherein are the
Cities Toloſa & Nimes vnto the Ryuer Rhone, he ſodainly
and vnlooked for, encountred with them at the Ryuer
Bedalaces whiche of tholde wryters was called Betis,
néere to a towne called xerez. The Saracenes at
that tyme had encamped them ſelues on that ſide of the
Ryuer where Andaluſia ſtandeth: and the King wyth
hys battaile on the other ſide, wherein the Kingdome of
Caſtile is. For the Ryuer Betis ſpringing out of mount
Ortoſpeda in the borders of Aragon, and runnyng
into the Ocean nexte to the Streightes, diuideth Andaluſia
and the Kyngdome of Granado from Caſtile: and
runneth through the myddle of Betica, which is bounded
wyth the ryuer Anas, ſprynging oute of the ſame
Mountaine. Luſitanie lying Weſt from Tarracon, by
a ſtraight courſe reacheth from the mouth or entraunce
of Anas foorth right to the ryuer Duria: and the ryuer
Piſguerra ſeperateth the Caſtulonians from the Aſturians.
In this place, the .iij. of September being Sunday, in
the yéere after the incarnation. 714. he aduaunced hys
Standerd and cōmitted his fortune good or bad, to the hazard
of battail. The fight was moſt fierce & deadly for the

paſſage of the Riuer, whileſt the one part woulde néedes
paſſe ouer, and the other wold not ſuffer them. This continued
a good whyle in ſuch equall match, that hard it was
to diſcerne to whether partie the victorie would encline:
which was much to be merueiled at, conſidering how ſore
Spaine had for two yéeres laſt afore, béene afflicted with
dearth of victualles and the Peſtilential plague. Wherby
the ſouldiours had not the ſtrength and courage that they
had before, and the men, who in a hundreth & fiftie yeeres
ſpace had not bene trained vp in any warres, cockered and
effeminated with eaſe, had loſt in a manner all warlike
diſcipline and right vſe of handling their weapons, & were
moreouer withoute harnyſſe armour or habilimentes
méete for the warres: becauſe Vitiza, Roderike his Predeceſſour,
a moſt cruell and bloudie Tyraunt, had cauſed
all weapons to be taken away from the people and to bée
broken.A moſt blodie battaile continuing a whole weeke. This battaile continued not onely that day, but
during all the whole wéeke till the Sundaie folowing,
there were dayly ſharpe and terrible conflictes. And on
the eyght daye which was the .xi. of September the two
Sonnes of King Vitiza hauing the night before indented
and conſpired wyth Tarife, (who promyſed them
their fathers Kingdome,) drew backe and priuely conueighed
themſelues with their retinue out of the battaile,
by meanes whereof Mucas with litle a doe brought al his
armie ouer the Ryuer, and then was the Gothes araye
quickly broken and they themſelues vanquiſhed. Roderike
the firſt day of the battayle, obſeruing the auncient
guiſe of his countrey,How kings in thoſe daies came into ye field, with what apparell, & for what cauſe. came into the fielde, apparailled in a
gowne of beaten Golde, hauing alſo on his head a Crown
of gold and golden Shoes, and all his other apparaile ſet
with rich pearles & precious ſtones, ryding in a horſelitter
of Iuorie drawē by two goodly horſes. Which order the
Gothes vſed alwayes in battailes for this conſideration, ye
the Souldiours well knowing their king could not eſcape

away by flight from them, ſhuld be aſſured that there was
none other way, but either to die togither in that place or
elſe to winne the victorie. For it had bene a thing moſt
ſhamefull and reprochfull to forſake their Prince and anoynted
Soueraigne. Which cuſtome and maner, many
frée confederate cities of Italie folowing, trimmed and adorned
for the warres, a certaine Chayre of eſtate, called
Carocio) wherin were ſet the Penons and Enſignes of
all the confederates. This Chayre in battaile was drawē
by many Oxen, wherby the whole hoaſt was giuen to vnderſtand,
ye they could not with any honeſtie flie, by reaſon
of the ſlow pace and vnweldineſſe of thoſe heauie Beaſts.
In this ſort was king Roderike pompouſly caried in hys
horſelitter during the battailes foughten in ſeuen dayes
ſpace. But on the eight day, ſéeing things brought to the
laſt puſhe and to ſtand vpō ſixe and ſeuen, of or on, he him
ſelfe with others determined to fight it out valiantly: and
therfore moūted vpō an excellent couragious courſer, called
Orell, and animating his Souldiours with a moſt vehement
and pithie Oration boldly gaue the charge vppon
his enemies. But when he ſaw the fronte of his battaile
to ſhrinke, he departed aſide vnto a little hill harde by and
ſtripped himſelf out of all his royal Robes: and frō thence
beholding the mercileſſe ſlaughter of his men on euerye
ſide, moued with repentance, becauſe he knew himſelf to
be the cauſe & occaſioner of all this miſhap, chaunged himſelfe
into another wéede and fled into a deſerte of Luſitanie,
where he found a certaine holy man, lyuing ſolitarie,
with whom he paſſed the reſt of his life.
            Nowe wheras it is reported and written that he folowed
a Starre or a meſſanger of God which conducted and
guided him in his way: it may be ſo, and the ſame hath
alſo happened to others. But it may aſwell alſo be vnderſtoode
of a certaine ſecrete Starre mouing and directing
his will.
            
               
And whereas they ſay he was put by that holy man into
a Caue or hoale and a Serpent with hym that had two
heads, which in two dayes ſpace gnawed al the fleſh of his
body from the bones this beyng ſimplie taken and vnderſtāded,
hath no likelihood of any truth. For what ſanctity,
what Religyon, or what pietie, commaundeth to kyll a
penitent perſon, and one that ſéeketh comfort of his afflicted
mynd by amendent of life, with ſuch horrible tormēts
and ſtraunge puniſhment? Wherefore I woulde rather
thinke it to be ſpoken myſticallye, and that the Serpent
with two heads ſignifieth his ſinful and gylty conſcience,
which tormenteth & diſquieteth thoſe that haue perpetrated
any heynous offence, as though it were the Furies
of hell, as the Poetes haue feygned of Oreſtes and others.
There therfore in that place he died, and certaine yéeres
after, his Sepulcher or Tombe was founde at Viſeo in
Portugall with this Epitaph or ſuperſcription vpon it.
            
               HEre lyes the Corps of Roderick, late King
               Of Gothes, accurſt and fraught with furie dire▪
               
               Whoſe ſenſuall raigne brought dule and deadly ſting
               To Spanish ſoyle: becauſe of Iulians yre,
               Which would not be appeaſde till he had wrought
               The Toyle of ſtrife, and brought all thinges to nought.
            
            
               All mad with rage and ſpightfull rancours moode
               By deuilish fate incenſde, Gods heaſtes deſpiſde,
               His faith renounced, religion eke withſtoode,
               A foe to frindes, his Countries wracke deuiſde:
               Vnto his Lorde an arrant traytrous Elfe,
               A murthrous wight, and cruell toward hymſelfe.
            
            
               Embrued with guylt, for ſheading Chriſten bloud
               Which by his driftes were brought to fatall end,
               
                  
An Homycide, of mangling Butchers broode
               Did ruyne to his natiue ſoyle pretend.
               His memorie shall dye with men for aye,
               His name ſhall rotte, as doth his Corps in clay.
            
            In this battayle all the men of Armes and Gentlemen
of the Gothes were ſlayne and the whole power of
Spayne vtterlie ouerthrowne. Of the Gothicall Army
there ſlayne, the number was infinite, but of the
Saracenes onely twenty thouſande: which happened becauſe
the factious rout of Iulian which had al the Armour
and defence of the Realme of Spayne tooke parte with
them. And the multytude of them was very great: but
they which fought on the Kinges ſide were in a manner
all vnarmed and naked men. A few eſcaping by flyght
ranne whither fortune lead them and ſaued themſelues.
They which were comming out of forreine prouinces to
ayde the King, hearyng of this lamentable diſcomfiture,
ioyned ſydes with them that were fled to Egicia, and embattayling
themſelues againſte the Saracenes which followed
the chaſe, and purſued the poore vanquiſhed fléers,
ſet vpon them with a fierce recharge: fighting (lyke eigre
Lyons robbed and bereft of their whelps) & manfully diſcomfited
the vauntgard of their Enemies Armye. But
beynge not hable to ſuſtayne the force of Iulians battayle
which were ſtrong men and wel armed, they were faine
to retyre into the Citie. Tarife encampinge hymſelfe
there, where now at this daye the Well of Tarif is, and
thence géeuing aſſault to the Citie, with litle a do wanne
it. Which done, by the counſell of Iulian, he deuided his
hoſt into many braunches, aſſignynge vnto euery parte
ſuch Capitaines as he thought fitteſt: ymagining yea not
doubtyng but the Chriſtians before they coulde take any
counſell what way were beſt to follow or be able to gather
anye more power, might be oppreſſed and all at

once diſpercled wherſoeuer they could be founde. They
Sonnes of Vitiza and Byſhoppe Opaſius were appointed
Capitaynes ouer them. One Hoaſt addreſſed themſelues
toward the conqueſt of Malacca (now called Malega)
a Port or hauen of Betica by the midland ſea, which
to be ſpéedely taken, was much for their behoofe & aduantage.
An other marched to ſack Corduba, ouer whom was
Chieuetaine, a certayne chriſtian hauing a litle before renounced
his Chriſtianitie and Saracenyzed, whoſe name
was Mageitar. And the third was conducted by Tarife
himſelfe, which tooke the way to the Citie Menteſia, adioyning
to that part of Aquitania, which lyeth hard by the
Pyrenees and is called Guienne or Gaſcoigne. And ſubuertyng
that Citie (which choſe rather to be vtterly ruynated
then to be come vaſſall vnder Saracenicall ſlauerie,
he diſcamped to Toledo, wanne it, and after that, Gaudalagiar
& Medina Almeide, which Citie was ſo named of
a pretie big Table made all of one gréene precious ſtone
like an Emeraulde, found in it. Then he tooke the ſtrong
citie of Amaia, wherin was kept at ye treſure for ye wars.
            After this he inuaded the Region called Gottici Campi,
tooke by ſurrendrie the Cities Aſturica & Gigion (wherof
Mugnuza a Gothian was Captaine) and ſubiugated
Gatalonia, being ayded by Mugnoces Prince of Cerdania,
who alſo was a Gothian borne. Wherefore the Saracenes
made him Ruler of all the places confininge to
Cerdania. An other Army, hauinge wonne Granado,
marched to ſubdue Nurtia and Horihuela, where there
was a bloudy battaile foughten betwéene the Chriſtians
and the Saracenes in the plaine Fields which are to this
day thereof called sangonarij: in which conflict (the Saracenes
gettinge the vpperhand) the citie yéelded. After
this, the ſame hoaſt remoued to Valentia, and diſcomfiting
ye 
               Valentians yſſuing out of the towne to fight when
they ſaw the citie ſtrongly fortefied & rampiered wt wals

and diches they tooke it by ſurrendrie, with this condicion,
that the Chriſtians ſhould be permitted to haue in it one
Temple to inhabit, which was Saint Baſil his Colledge,
now at this day called Sainct Barptolomewes. All the
reſt they dedicated to that Idolatrous verlet, their Prophet
Mahomet, ſauing onely that Temple, whiche ſtoode
in the Figge market, where holie Vincent was martyred,
which was afterward an Hoſpital of chriſtians. The
citie was peſtered & peopled with Moores, albeit the Iews
were ſuffred to remayne ſtill in it, and a few chriſtians,
which dwelt in S. Baſilles colledge. Which ye inhabitants
of Puigum, a towne of Eneſa, hearing, wher ther was an
other colledge of S. Baſill, left their homes & fled, burying
their great Bell & a certaine Marble Image in yt churche
in hope one day of a returne. Whither the saracenes ſent
people of their owne to inhabit vnder the conduct of Cebola:
wherof the ſame towne Puigum was afterwarde called
Cebole: who alſo builded an other litle towne of the
ſame name. And thus Valentia, Sogorbes, Tortoſa, Lerida,
Barcinon & Sarragoza with al Spayne, was brought
vnder the power and iuriſdiction of the Saracenes. But
Tarracon becauſe it long reſiſted & ſtoutlye ſtoode at defiance
wt them, they vtterly ſubuerted & raſed, which was
afterward new builded by Bernhard Metropolytane of
Toledo, at ye cōmandement of Vrban ye ſecond of ye name
pope of Rome, in ye yéere 1090. By this meanes, al spaine
in ye ſpace of .xiiij Monthes was ſubdued:All Spayne conquered by Saracenes.
                which was a
thing eaſie to be doone, conſidering yt ye people wer cleane
without armour, weapon, munition or Capitaine, & Opaſius
Metropolitane of Syuile euer exhortinge them to
yéeld, promyſing vnto them ye they ſhould quietly enioye
their religion & lawes as they had before doone, whiche
promiſe was not obſerued, nor kept ſauing in a few places,
as at Valencia, Siuile, and Toledo, in which they left
certaine temples for the Chriſtians to inhabite.
            
               
Wherevpon yet to this daye, in the chiefeſt Cathedrall
Church of the Citie, the Rites and diuine ſeruice among
them celebrated, is Mozarabicall, that is to ſay, mingled
with Arabian: which was allowed and confirmed by the
Biſhops of that time, according to the order and inſtitution
of Saint Leandre.
            
            After theſe victories, the number of the Saracens dayly
encreaſed in Spaine, in ſo much that the Spanyardes
then chaunged not onely their religion and maners, but
corrupted their language, and the names of their Cyties,
Townes, Hilles, Ryuers and all other places were likewiſe
altered. Albeit many of them fled into Fraunce,
England, Italie and Grecia, to craue ayde of other Chriſtian
Princes. Some others planted themſelues in that
part of the Pyrenees that lyeth out into Aſturia and reacheth
within the Aquitanicall Ocean. And they whiche
remained ſtill with the Saracens, had in euerie place, their
Prelates and Paſtours, mē deuout and holy. But the firſt
recouerie and helpe of Spaine, ſprang vp among ye 
               Aſturians.
Which Countrey not only remayned ſafe and vndemnified
of that Barbarous Nation, but alſo was the
firſt that ſtopped their lewde inuaſions, and there was the
auncient and natiue language of Spayne conſerued.
Which thing that it maye the better bée vnderſtoode by
what meanes it happened, we muſt briefely deſcribe the
whole tracte and ſituation of the Pyrenees. Wée ſaid before
that Spayne was in forme of a Cherroneſe or almoſt
as a Iſlande. enuironed with Sea on euery ſide,
ſauyng onely in one place. The Northe parte whereof,
ioyneth to Fraunce by a narowe porcion of lande that
lyeth betwéene two Seas, and the Pyrenee Mountaines
lying a long from the Sunne riſing in Winter, to the ſetting
of the ſame in Sōmer, enuiron it about lyke a wall.
The bredth of the Iſthmos or narow trench of land lying
betwene the two Seas, being one diſtant but a litle from

the other is about CClxx. Myles. But the Pyrenee moū
               taines
ſtretch in length a great way further. For when
they come to the angle and as it were into a Baye of the
Cantabrique Ocean, which lyeth on the Northe ſyde of
Spayne, they ſtretch out in length a great waye into the
Equinoctiall Weſt: and kéeping of the Sea Cantabricum
from the Northe part of Spayne, ſtretcheth euen into
the plaine Ocean, that hemmeth in all the Weſt parte
of Spaine. That part of theſe Mountaines that lyeth toward
Fraunce, is altogether barraine and vnfruitful: but
that part which is next Spayne, is full of trees, and well
peopled wyth many townes and villages. We will therfore
beginne our deſcription of them, at the Ocean, where
they ioyne in Spayne to the region called Guipuzque,
but in Fraunce they border vpon the confines of the Vaſconians.
On the ſide of Spayne there is Stephans vallay,
aboue the which are Beſaca and Guciutha, townes of the
Vardulians, confinyng vpon the region of Nauarre & containeth
Cantabria and Aſturia: then are there other ſmaller
hilles lying out from the Pyrenees, within which are
conteined Baſſe and Squa, which doe make the vallayes
Rocida or Ronus: on Fraunce ſide, néere to the confines of
the Vaſconians, is Iean Pedeportesburie, a ſtrong & well
fortefied place. Néere to the valley Rocida, ye arme which
before wée talked of, is from them let into the Ocean,
reaching and extending to the mayne Sea through Gallicia
or the Gallecians & the Aſturians. But from the valley
of Rocida, Eaſtwarde, they make ye valley called Salazar,
wherein ſtandeth a towne called Ociogauia: then
Ronceuall wherein is Iſaua: and the frontiers of the King
domes of Tarraconenſis & Nauarre which was once called
Nagiera. Next Fraunce are ye townes of Bierne. Now
foloweth the hill of Camfrank: wherevnto in Fraunce is
néere ioyning the countrey of Peiraner & Vrdos, in Spain
Villa noua, an auncient & noble Citie, Iaca, Saint Chriſtinsburie,
               
and Iean Pigniasburie: and in the ſame tract,
lower is ye Mount Aragon. Hoſca, and frō them, the Occetanes
and Caeſarauguſta now at this day called Saragoza.
Out of the Mount that lieth ouer Saint Chriſtines
ſpringeth the Ryuer Aragon: and becauſe out of the moū
               taines
of Ronceuall there ſpringeth an other little Ryuer
of the ſame name, called the leſſe Aragon or Subordam,
therefore thys is called the greater Aragon: and the
whole region lying betwéene them, was of them called
Aragonia. There followeth in the Pyrenees a hill named
Gauas, abutting on Fraunce ſyde, vppon Larount a countrey
of the Bigorians, and on Spaynes ſyde, on the countrey
of Tenia. In which Countrey are the townes Salent,
Saint Helens, and Bieſca. Out of the hill Gauas,
ſpringeth a Ryuer named Gallecus, whiche hauing hys
courſe through the valley Tenia, falleth into Iber néere
to the Citie Saragoza. Then is there nexte, the Cragge
of Horca, the ſtiepeſt and rougheſt of them all, on which,
on Fraunce ſyde confyneth the Countrey of Arne, and
on that ſide towarde Spaine the ſame valley Tenia, then
the Cliues of Tarla, from whom ſpringeth the riuer Ara,
which afterwarde runneth into the ryuer Cinca néere to
the towne Iuza, hauing on Spaines ſide the valleyes of
Brote, and on Fraunce Voteia a valley of Guyenne. In
the valley of Brote are theſe towns folowing: Torla, Brotum,
Oto, Linares, Faulum, Breſſe, Sarbiſe, Aierue, Lareſitalla,
Scartinum and Giaſa. Then foloweth the craggie
mount of Bielſa, from which a part of the Ryuer Cinca
ſpryngeth, and the valley of Bio: and belowe, in this
ſame very tract is the region Sobarbria: then in the Pyrenees,
the vale Giſtau, out of whoſe Hilles ſpringeth an
other Braunche of the ryuer Cinca, whiche hauing hys
courſe through Sobarbria, is augmented by receauing into
it the ryuer Segre néere to a towne called Scarpe, and
then falleth into Iber néere Meſchinentz.
            
            
               
The chiefeſt townes of fame in the valley Giſtau are
theſe: Giſtaine, Senias, Serbetum, Iean Carauelsburie,
Plannium, Poma, Giſtaina, Cerquetum, Lamian, Catalauigna,
Badaine. Then is there moreouer in the Pyrenees
the valley Bonaſia, and the longe region of Ribagorge:
wherein are Gabaleria, Grauſium, Benauarre,
Peralt and Paniello. Then are the Hilles of Caſtrum
Leonis, vnder whome is the valley Aran or Fiſcalia,
which hath in it theſe townes: Biolla in Fiſcalia, Lardies,
Voraſtrium, Saint Iuſtus, Ligarre, Aretiza, Sciabierre,
Saint Olalia, Acortum, Tricaſe, Abeſe, Planiell, Saint
Foelix, Saſon, Silues, Spierle, Aſcaſe, and beneath it, is
the valley named Solana. Agayne in the Pyrenees,
there followe Petrae Blaniae, Altalauaccae, where there
is a paſſage throughe, the Hylles of Torre, and of the
Countie Pimorent and Pallaſium. Vnder theſe, is the
valley of Henui, wherein ſtandeth the Citie Valentia,
and Palaſia: then the Clyues of Andoria, where there
is a paſſage oute of Spaine, into Fraunce, wyth a valley
of the ſame name, ouer agaynſt which, in Fraunce
is Arachſium in Aquitanie. Hitherto the places of
Nauarre.
            
            Then a long Cerdania is the Mount Bellamir, the
valley Bibeſia, the Mount Liuia and the pitche of Perſa.
Then they enter within the Countrey of Rocilion,
ouer againſt the townes of Puigiualed, Caudieſe, Arotonie,
Galamij Fanum, Perapertuza, Eitor and Leocata,
where theyr precinctes & boundes end by the Mediterranean
Sea. In the end wherof, in Spain there ſtandeth
Salſes a Caſtle impregnable, hauyng wt in it a moſt
plentifull fountaine: where in tymespaſte ſtoode the Citie
Gerunda or Girona, & ouer againſt it, in Fraunce is
Tēplū Veneris now called Cap de Creux. Directly on ye
other ſide in Gottalonia, other hilles do aunſwere vnto
it, which may be called ye leſſe Pyrenees or Antipyrenees.
            
            
               
                  〈2 pages missing〉
               
               
throw of Rodericke, and what haſt the Saracenes vſed in
the purſuite of their victory, tooke his Siſter with hym
and departed to Gigion, ſuppoſing yt place to be ſurer for
his ſecurytie. But when Mugnuza duke of Gigion, contrarie
to his hope & expectation had entred into league and
was aſſiſtaunt to the Saracenes in their exploytes, Pelagius
diſſimulyng what he inwardly thought, and for the
time bearyng two faces vnder one hood, remayned ſtyll
with the ſame Duke, vntyll Mugnuza fallyng ſore in
loue with his ſayde Siſter, and deuiſinge whiche way to
frame his plat to enioy his deſired luſt, ſent her Brother
Pelagius to Corduba, to conſult & entreat about certaine
affaires with the Saracen Princes. In whoſe abſence,
(bearyng her in hand that he would mary her) he had the
ſpoyle of her maydenhead. Whereof Pelagius at his retourne
beynge by his Siſter certefied, departed thence
with her, into the higher Country til a time fitter to bring
that to paſſe which he purpoſed.
            
               Mugnuza greatly mooued with his departure, tolde
Tarifa that Pelagius intended ſomwhat againſt the Maieſtie
of the Saracenicall Empire.The great daungers and aduentures of Pelagius.
                Wherefore Tarifa
ſent one of his Captaines with a band of Souldiours (if
it were poſſible) to apprehend Pelagius. And now the
Souldiours were come to Brette, (in which towne Pelagius
was then reſiaunt) who being priuelie aduertiſed by
a Chriſtian, (one that was with them and knew all their
counſailes) tooke his Horſe, and ridinge all vpon the
Spurre tyll he came to the great riuer Pionia, tooke the
water and ſwamme ouer. Whiche they that purſued
hym, not daryng to doo for dread of drownyng, hee eſcaped
their clutches, and came with heauy cheere into the
Vale of Canica. Where by the prouidence of God hee
mette with the Magiſtrates and Péeres of many Cities
of Cantabria and Aſturia, whiche were goyng to ſurrender
and yéelde themſelues and their Cities to the Saracenes.
               
And when hee vnderſtoode the errand and cauſe
of their iourney, it is reported that he made vnto them
an oration in theſe words followyng.
            
               Truely I cannot but greatly bewayle the calamitie
of theſe times:His pithye Oration to his Countreymen. & if it were not vngodly ſo to do, I would
extreemly poure out heapes of accuſations againſte the
ſates and deſtynies, which haue differred my natyuytie
tyll theſe dayes, thus to ſée ſuch ſlaughter and lamentable
manquellyng of my deare Countreymen and (which is
more) ſuch deſpight and contempt of God and his deuine
Lawes. For of whom Gods honoure and glory is now
adayes more contempned and deryded, I cannot eaſelye
iudge: whether of yonder barbarous Helhoundes the
Saracenes, who lyuinge in the foggie miſtes of diuelyſhe
darkneſſe, (caſte before the eyes of their mindes by that
damned ſoule Mahomet) not knowyng the true God nor
the honoure due to his holy name, doo prophane the holie
Temples. Wherein his praiſe and kacred worde was
wont to be preached, trayning vp yonge Babes and Infantes
whome Chriſte commaunded to be brought vnto
him, with their impious rites and diabolicall relygion:
and nouſelyng them in the filthye ſuddes of their deteſtable
traditions: doo perforce rauiſh and lyke deuilles pollute
infinite Chriſtian Women and Virgins yt acknowledge
the true & ſincere relygion of the 
                     •
                  mnipotent God.
Oppreſſing ſo many as they may once get into their h
                     •
                  ds
with moſt horrible and vnſpeakable ſlauerye, diſp
                     •
                  ylyng
them not only of their temperal goodes, wyues and Children,
but alſo takyng away from them their faith the rock
of their ſaluation, & finally dimme the glory of God with
a patched doctrine of moſt Idolatrous blaſphemy, bringgynge
them to euerlaſtinge perdition both of bodye and
ſoule. Or els rather maye I iudge the ſame of you,
who (deſpayringe of the goodneſſe and mightye

power of God, whom you know to haue ſhedde his moſt
precious bloud for your redemption, by whom you know
that eternall ſaluation is puchaſed and freely geuen to you
and through whoſe bounteous gift you haue ſo many ſure
helpes at your moſt néede, putting you in an vndoubted
hope of victorie ouer your blaſphemous enemies (yet will
ſéeme thus ſhamefully and daſtardly vnaſked and of your
owne accord to put your neckes into the halter, as though
there were no more hope of helpe and better fortune, as
thoughe you had no God of whome redreſſe and ayde in
aduerſitie were to be hoped and craued, or as though you
had no fortefied townes and ſtrong places of defence to repulſe
this preſent hoſtilitie. As though it were not a great
deale better (valiauntly fighting in Gods quarell vnder
the banner of Chriſtian faith) to chaunge this ſhorte and
tranſitorie life with an euerlaſting & glorious life, then
to ſuffer theſe things before recited. And now behold, you
which ſometime were hable to encounter with the Romanes
being Lords and Conquerours of the whole earth
you which could not be vanquiſhed and ſubdued by them
that were the warlickeſt and ſtouteſt men in the worlde
to whom Germanie, Britayne, Fraunce, Spaine, Grecia,
yea Italie alſo the Quéene and maiſtreſſe of all the world,
all Europa, all Affrica and Aſia obeyed: you which in no
wiſe coulde be brought to liue vnder the lawes and iuriſdi
                     •
                  tion
of that very well gouerned Empire: you who alone
remayned vnconquered of the Gothes, the fierceſt
waſters and cruſhers of the ſame Empyre: you I ſay (the
power of all Europa being yet whole, and nothing thereof
loſt but the open places of Spaine onely, which alſo myſcaryed
partly by treaſon and partly by the fooliſhe wilfulnes
of King Roderike, whoſe ſiniſtre fate brought him to
a deſtruction and end agréeable to his vicious life, who not
tarying for that ayde which was comming hable to haue
ſcourged and diſcomfited thoſe that were the enemyes of

our Countrey vnaduiſedly ioyned battaile with his foes,
and being diſloyally circumuented by his own traiterous
ſubiectes, receiued the reward and hyre due for ſuch raſhnes
and wickednes, which wilfull dealing of him beyng
the head, muſt néedes redound to the generall harme of al
the inferiour members of the common wealth) will now
wilfully enthrall and make your ſelues bonde ſlaues to
beare the intollerable yoke a people of al others moſt vyle,
moſt abiect, moſt daſtardly and wicked. If God for our
manifolde ſinnes and offences were ſo highly diſpleaſed
and ſo much tourned away from vs, that he woulde not
admitte our humble prayers and requeſtes (which I will
neuer be perſuaded to beleue: for he is wont neuer to forſake
ſuch as be vnfeinedly penitent, and tourne vnto hym
with true contrition of heart and newneſſe of life.) Or if
all the reſt of the whole world were obedient to the Saracens
Lawes, and that wee had no ſure places or walled
townes for refuge and ſuccour left to reſorte vnto: yet
were it much better valiauntly to die vppon them then to
ſée and ſuffer thoſe thinges, which perforce we ſhould ſuffer
at their handes. Brute Creatures and ſauage Beaſts,
if their whelpes be taken from them, moſt egerly and impotuouſly
flie in the faces of them that haue taken them:
whom if they may finde and ouertake, they obiect themſelues
into the extremitie of any perill, contemnyng the
ſharpe edges of naked Swordes, yea death it ſelfe, for the
reſcue of their ſely young ones. And you which are men,
to whom nature hath geuen not onely the procreation of
children and a care to bring them vp, which ſhe hath geuē
to other Creatures aſwell as to you, but alſo hath entirely
committed to your charge a ſpeciall regard to their education,
who ought ſo to inſtruct & traine them in the true
feare & honour of Almighty God, yt they may be enfraunchyſed
and made heyres of life euerlaſting in the Kingdome
of heauen, will nowe (alas the while) humble and

ſubiect your ſelues willingly and wilfully vnto the obeyſaunce
of them which ere it bée long will ſeduce and violently
pull away your Babes and children from you and
plucke the feare of God cleane out of their hearts. Where
is now that auncient faith, godly zeale and deuout religion
that was wont to bée, when younge children not yet paſſing
the age of .xvj. yeeres, and holy Virgins had leifer to
ſuffer all kinde of Martirdome and puniſhment then to
worſhippe thoſe falſe putatiue Goddes, whom (notwithſtanding)
moſt ſtoute and wyſe nations worſhipped and
reuerenced? Where be they, which haue aduentured their
liues in ſo manye mayne battayles for their libertie and
fréedome? Hoat ſourneſſes, glowing Plates, terrible Rackings,
ſharpe Swordes, bloudie Axes, al the ſortes of tortures
& paines that could be deuiſed, in times paſſed were
not able to terrefie and turne Children from the true religion
and worſhipping of God, to Idoles and other phantaſticall
trumperies of Sathans inuention: and now men
of growen and rype yéeres, men of all others moſt ſtoute
and valiaunt, yea the chiefe Princes of cities, vpon whom
the lyght of the ſacred Goſpell of Ieſus Chriſt hath ſhyned
and béene opened, tremble and ſhake for feare of a
louſie rable of Saracenes, and are goyng to ſubmit and
proſtrate themſelues before them, wythout eyther hearyng
or ſéeyng any weapon, or receyuing ſommonce of
any warre. But peraduenture you hope to ſpéede the better,
and that they will ſhewe more clemencie to you if
you voluntarily yelde your ſelues, and that all your Religion
and Lawes ſhall remayne ſafe and in ſuche force as
they did before, and that your Wyues and Children ſhall
not bée conſtuprated, harmed nor vncurteouſly handled.
For wyth ſuche fayre gloſing promyſes theſe cutthroates
and villanous Traitours to theyr Countrey vſe commonlye
to deceyue and enueigle the ſimple people: as
thoughe there could bée any faithe in them which haue betrayed

their Lordes, their Countrey, their friendes, and
kinſfolkes, yea God himſelfe their Lorde and maker.
Did not Valentia a moſt ſtrong, maritimall, and famous
Citie ye
                     •
                  elde vnto them vppon this promyſe? and yet as
ſoone as they were entred and had poſſeſſion of the ſame,
they eyther caſt out all the inhabitauntes, or kylled them,
or elſe by compulſion enforced them vnto their Secte. Did
not Toledo the verye ſame, and Siuyle and a greate
manye of other noble Cities, which being deceiued with
this hope and bewitched with theſe flattering charmes
yéelded themſelues vnto them? Theſe domeſticall examples
are ſufficient to teache you, that it is a great deale
better, valiauntly to dye together like men, and ſo
much the more, for that as yet thinges are not ſo farre
ſpent but that they maye bée recured and holpen. You
haue hyghe Craggie Mountaines for refuge, and in them
ſome places inacceſſible, you haue ſome Townes moſte
ſtrongly fortefied, vppon truſt wherof many times a ſmal
number hath diſcomfited populous armies. And you are a
ſort of tall men, whom the nature of the heauen and earth
hath made ſtoute and valiaunt, acquainted with labours,
and hitherto inuincible. Alſo there lyue a great ſortevnder
the Saracenes, whiche (I put you out of all doubt)
will come from all partes and ioyne them ſelues to you
if they once ſawe you péepe vp and auaunce your ſelues
in this your ſo iuſt quarell. Behynde at our backes is
Fraunce, a Region at this daye moſt flouriſhing bothe
in Chyualrie and ſkilfull Capitaynes, from whence (no
doubte) wée ſhall haue ayde and ſuccour. For the
Frenche will not any longer ſuffer this cowardly nation
whiche hathe alreadie encroched as farre as the
Mediterranean Sea beyonde the Pyrenees, ſo ſaucely
and malapertly to plaie theſe cruell Pageauntes and furious
prankes againſt the borders of their Kingdome, in
ſuche ſorte as they haue done to others.
            
            
               
               And God hymſelfe (if we wyll tourne vnto hym with amendement
of lyfe) wyllayde and ſtrengthen vs, who
being on our ſide, euerye one of vs néedeth not to feare a
hundred thouſand of theſe blaſphemous Grynneagods
and lewde vyllaynes.
            
            This oration ſank ſo déepely into their braines that
beyng perſwaded with the pithy force therof (for Pelagius
was vehement and verye earneſte in his matter, and
for his wiſedome and ſanctytie of lyfe highlie eſtéemed among
thoſe people) they returned euery man to his home
and callyng their neighbours together, tolde vnto them
the cauſes of their retourne: to wytte, how that Pelagius
(whoſe vertue and vnſpotted lyfe was well knowne vnto
them all, becauſe as before we haue ſhewed, he dwelled
long among them, myraculouſlye delyuered out of the
cruell handes of bloudy tyrants) met them as though hee
had bene ſome meſſanger ſent downe from heauen, who
ſhewed vnto them what an heynous offence they ſhoulde
commit, and what a pernicious acte they had purpoſed to
doe. Wherfore not ceaſſing as well in open Sermons,
as in priuat talke to perſwade the people to conſtancye
and godlyneſſe, he was by common aſſent of all the people
created King of Cantabria and Aſturia in the yéere
after Chriſt. 717 Which done, they all got them to mou
                  •
               
               Anseua. When the fame of this matter was blaſet
                  •
               -broad
and knowne throughoute Spayne, all the Gothes
that could any way ſcape or by any meanes ſhyft themſelues
out of the handes of that barbarous nacion, conceying
great hope of lyberty & good luck, tooke them to their
Weapons and ioyned ſide with hym, and ſuch as coulde
not do the ſame out of hande, with all care and dillygence
ſought oportunitie and occaſion how to flée to hym.
            
               Tarifa ſent againſt hym Abraem Alcamack wt a great
Army, and with him Byſhop Opaſius Sonne of the king

of Egica, and Metropolitane of Syuyle, who (as before
hath bene tolde) adhered to the faction of Iulian and other
traitours of their Coūtrey. Pelagius hearing what great
preparatiō was made againſt him, & ſéeing himſelfe not
of equall power to repulſe ſo great a multitude, entred wt
a few of his companie (but of the valiaunteſt among his
whole bande) into a certain Denne within ye Mount Anſeua,
appointing the reſt to defend ye narow paſſages and
Streight wayes. Whither whē ye 
               Saracens were come,
Opaſius wēt about wt many gloſing termes to perſuade
them that kepte the Streictes, to yelde them ſelues vnto
the Moores, but when he ſawe his labour was all in
vaine, there beganne a cruell and a bloudie bickering.
The Saracenes ſhotte ſo many Arrowes and Dartes into
the denne, that they ſéemed to rayne from Heauen
as faſte as droppes of water in a ſtormie ſhower, and to
light among them as thicke as Haileſtones. But God
myraculouſly making their dartes to rebutte againſt the
ſame perſons that ſhotte them,A miracle of God in deliuering yt Chriſtians. there were ſo many of
them either ſlaine or wounded that they were forced to
recule and geue back. Then the Chriſtians vndoubtedly
knowing ye God was with them & fought for thē, yéelded
moſt hartie thankes vpō their knées vnto his diuine
Maieſtie, yt it had pleaſed him, thus to relieue & viſit his
poore afflicted people: which done, they boldly iſſued out, &
vtterly repulſed all ye reſidue. There were ſlaine of ye 
               Saracens
in this cōflict about .xx. M. & of the Chriſtiās very
few or none at all: for writers make no mention thereof.
Thoſe Saracens which eſcaped from the battaile, fled into
ye top of the hill: which by diuine miracle being ſhaken wt
a terrible earthquake, and falling downe into the Riuer
Iua, running by the foote of the ſame hill, they were
all caſt awaye and periſhed.Traitours cānot proſper long. 
               Opaſius and Mugnuza
two Archtraitours, as they were fléeing (for they went
not vp with their felowes vnto the hill) were taken: and

               Mugnuza in a place called Olaglias was ſtraightwayes
by the Aſturians put to death, and the Citie Gigion vtterly
ruynated to the perpetuall ignominie and ſhamefull
reproche of the ſaid Mugnuza Prince therof. What was
done with Opaſius, Authors make no mention.
            When Mucas heard hereof, ſuſpecting that Iulian & others
of the ſame conſpiracie, were priuie to the counſells
of Pelagius, he ſtraightwayes commaunded Iulian and
Siſibertus and Ebaſius the ſonnes of king Vitiza to be put
to death, and thus in the ende they receiued a iuſt reward
of their treaſon. Which example ſo terrefied many of Iulians
retinue and faction, that they reuolted from Mucas
and went to the Aſturians: and thoſe whiche liued vnder
the tyrannie of the Saracens, dayly by ſtelth and priuily
flying to Pelagius, his power within ſhorte ſpace was ſo
encreaſed, that they which a little before were ſcantly able
to defende their owne, now recouered many of thoſe Regions
and Cities which the Saracens before had brought
vnder their ſubiection. For the Citie Legio (at this daye
called Leon) was immediatly to them ſurrendred: ſo alſo
was Rota, Manſilia, Canicas (commonly called Cangas)
Tineum and many other townes of that Countrey.
         
         
            
            ¶The Second Booke.
            ¶Conteining the declination of the
Saracenicall Empyre, till the beginning
of the Turkes.
            
               THe Saracens in the Eaſt being in a great
phrenſie that their Siege certaine yéeres
paſſed layd to Conſtantinople was fruſtrate,
                  Conſtantinople again beſeiged.
and hearing that (Leo by whoſe only
meanes their attempte was repelled)
was now Emperour, leuyed a mighty armie
againe and deuiding the ſame into two parties tooke
in hand the ſame enterpriſe afreſhe, purpoſing then or neuer
to bring their deſires to a finall effect and concluſion.
Malſamas the Generall of thone armie, tranſfreting with
his cōpanie into Thracia, ſpoyled a great part of that Prouince
and geuing a ſharpe aſſault vnto the chiefe citie and
Imperiall Seat therof, encamped himſelf on ye Weſt ſide
of ye ſame Citie néere to ye walles, where there is an Iſthmos
or narow portiō of land hauing Sea on either ſyde, &
on that part he laid battrie. Zulciminie the chiefe Biſhop,
laye before the citie on the Sea with a nauie of three thouſand
Sayle, as many do affirme. For the citie Conſtantinople
being both very huige and beautifull and aſwel by
nature as Arte moſt ſtrong and impregnable, ſtandeth at
the mouth of the Thracian Sea Boſphorus, (where Aſia
and Europa do almoſt ioyne together, hauing no more but
one ſmall ſtreit Sea to part them) by which it is emptyed
& hath iſſue into ye Sea Propontis: where there ſtretcheth
out a little Cape or elbow of Sea full of wyndings & turnings
in, as though they were Hauens. For which cauſe
the place is called by the name of a Horne, becauſe by reaſon
of the ſeuen hilles of the Citie hanging out into it, it

hath as it were many boughes or braūches like ye hornes
of a Hart. Along betwene this Cape and Propontis, there
runneth a certaine hill, in forme like a Cherroneſe or half
Ile, beyng on euery ſide almoſt enuironed with water,
contayning in length from the weſt into the Eaſt aboute
thyrty furlonges, howbeit it riſeth not greatly in anye
height, but the ridges and clyues thereof do runne ſtyll a
long Propontis. On the North ſide, where his forme
is lyke a Horne (which a litle before we tearmed a Cape
or Elbow) it hath ſeauen Hylles annexed vnto it, of the
which foure, do hang out into the Cape, and that which is
waſhed with Boſphorus, is the greateſt and maketh the
baſe of a Triangle: for the forme of this Citie and countrey
beyng almoſt a perfect Ile is thrée cornerde. This
hath two Promontories, one lyinge towarde Propontis,
weſt of Hebdomum, the other Northward, which defendeth
the mouth of the Baye from the iniurie of wyndes,
and is called Chryſoceras. From whiche if a ſtreigth
lyne be drawen to the ſeauenth and innermoſt Hyll of
all (which alſo defendeth the Bay from the weſt wynde)
you muſt néeds include ye plaine champaine of Pera (now
called Galata) within the compaſſe of the Arche, made by
reaſon of the continuall ridge and cliffe of the Cherroneſe.
The length of that Cape or Bay is about lx. furlonges in
the innermoſt part whereof, are the mouthes of the Riuers
Cydrus and Barbyſa: the latitude or bredth thereof
is diuers and not in all places alyke: where it is moſte, it
paſſeth not ſixe furlonges, and where it is leſt, not aboue
thrée. The ſtreicts of it ar very narrow. For on the north
part, wherin the towne Pera ſtandeth, there hangeth out
a Promontory into the South named Metopicum and
Cyclobium: and lykewiſe an other on Aſia ſide, direct lye
abutting vpon the middle Streictes of the Baye, named
Damalicum. This Cherroneſe on the weſt ſide, where

the mayne Land of Thracia lyeth, doth ſeperate this Elbow
or Bay from Propontis with a narowe porcion of
land lying betwéene the two Seas.
            The bredth of that ſame Iſthmos or narrowe ſhare of
Land, where it toucheth the ſeauenth Hill and inner corner
of the Citie, is fifty paces: and further beyonde,
it is greater. Thus in this plot of ground beyng a perfect
Ile on all ſides ſauing one, is ſituate the noble Citie
of Conſtantinople, once called Bizantium, ouer againſte
whom, on the other ſhore ſide of the Streict, ſtandeth the
towne Pera, once called Galata, whichalſo maketh promō
               tories
into ye Horned Bay. And in Aſia there is directly ouer
againſt it, the Citie Chalcedon. The entries of this
Créeke or Hauen in the naroweſt places are encloſed and
faſt ſhut vp with a great Cheyne, which reachynge from
the Tower Pharea to the Promontorie Chryſoceras is
extended and drawn in length ouer to the Metopique
Promontorie of Galata, where there is alſo an other
ſtrong fortreſſe or Blockhouſe. The Citie it ſelfe is
fenced and fortyfied with thrée ſtrong walles, two verye
broad and déepe ditches, and many Towers and Bullwarkes
beſide. It hath on euery ſide a playne proſpect.
The middle part of the Citie ryſeth vp a litle in height,
                  Conſtantinople is in compaſſe xiii. miles.
by reaſon of the Hylles whereon it ſtandeth. The whole
circuite or compaſſe of the Citie is about xiii. myles.
            This ſo noble, and floriſhing Citie, Conſtantine in the
place where before Byzantium ſtoode (vnaduiſedly ynough
as the ſequele proued) buylded, and tranſlated the
Imperiall Seat with all the riche Ornamentes of the
Citie of Rome thither. For although the ſoyle where it
ſtādeth ſéemed to be a place moſt fit for an Imperial citie,
yet ye diſpoſition of the ayre and deſtenie would not ſuffer
this citie to be ye head ſeate & keye of the Romane empire.
For as not only euery Country but alſo euery citie haue
their proper fates, maners, faſhions and rites: ſo they

may not ſafelye be tranſlated or remooued into an other
place, no although the verye ſame perſons and Lawes
bee tranſlated and remooued thither with them.
            For the diſpoſition and temperature of the ayre altereth
mens manners, which being altered their deſtinies and
Fortunes are alſo chaunged. Which to be true, the ende
proued apparantlie. For the Empire being tranſlated almoſt
into the borders of Aſia, the Emperors themſelues
and the Romane Legions were afterwarde choſen out of
that Prouince, who being infected with their Gréekiſhe
lightneſſe and ambition, ſeditiouſly practized ſundry factions
amonge themſelues, and effeminated with the nyce
wantonneſſe of Aſia, were not of power to repel the incurſions
of foraine Barbaryans: when as in ye meane ſeaſon,
Italie and Rome, the Maiſtreſſe and Caſtle of the
whole earth, lacking a head and hauyng loſt the right vſe
of warlyke diſcipline was made an open pray for all nations
to inuade. And thus that Empyre which (lyke a
good trée) in his owne ſoyle bare very good fruict, beynge
tranſplanted into a ſtrange aire and ground, within ſhort
time periſhed and came to ruyne.
            But to retourne agayne to our purpoſed narration.
Malſamas aduaunced his power to beſiege by lande, that
part which we ſayde ſtoode in the Iſthmos or ſtreict péece
of grounde, betwéene the Horne and Propontis, whiche
could be oppugned none other way but onely by land. He
becauſe his purpoſe was, vtterlye to diſapoynt the Citizens
that no victuall ſhoulde be conueighed vnto them,
and for that his deſire was to encroche as néere to the
walles as could be, ſo politiquely lodged his Garriſons &
Hoſt on euery ſide that the fronte of his Armye, was as
though it had bene a Horhe next to ye walles, & thence as
the Féelds farder of from the narrow land, ſtretch out in
breadth & ſcope, raught out along about the Cape or Bay
vnto the mouthes of the riuers which we ſayd had their

yſſu es & fallynge into the ſame. For this Hoſt was merueilous
populous, and formydable, and therfore required
greatground & elbow roome. From thence making many
roades into the country adioigning, he lamentably diſtreſſed
the ſame, and threatning vtter ſubuerſion to the Citie
laide battrye and ſiege to it with Mynes, Baſtiles and all
kinde of Engynes that might any way further his pretence.
On thother ſide, Zulciminie with his Nauye on
the Sea enuironed the whole Citie, on that ſide towarde
Propontis and Boſphorus from the narowe lande to the
Promontorye Metopick, inſomuche that to them that
looked out of the Citie, ye Seas Propontis and Boſphorus
ſéemed all ouer to be couered with wodde lyke a Foreſt.
He ſlept no more in his buſineſſe then Malſamas dyd: but
with ſea ſkalyng ladders and ſuch Gunnes as then were
in vſe, aſſaulted the citie and moſt fiercely ſhooke it.
            But the beſieged Citizens were ſo vigilaunt and ſo
hardy withal, that all their attemptes and deuoyres were
wholy fruſtrate. Wherfore ſeing they could not this way
preuaile, they thought to win their purpoſe by long ſiege
and tract of time. But Zulciminie in ye meane ſeaſon died
in his owne Campe, whereby there aroſe a ſeditious tumult
among the Saracenes for the choſinge of a new byſſhop,
and for that cauſe the ſiege was for a time intermitted.
At length Aumar the ſonne of Abdimazid was created
Byſhoppe in the dead mans place, in the yéere 721.
The wynter was then ſo extréemly colde, that all the riuers
were hard froſen ouer with yce. And alſo they had
victuall dayly brought into their Campe out of Egipt, yet
becauſe the number of the men and Beaſtes was excéedyng
great and the winter extreamely colde, a great ſorte
of them dyed, ſome with colde, ſome for famyne and ſome
of diſeaſes, & a great rablement of them thinking to get
ſome booty abroad, yſſued out of their owne Campes and
made incurſions into the frontiers of Bulgaria, where

they were of the Bulgarians incountred withall, and in
manner all ſlayne, as they were about their pyllage. At
which time, there were (as ſome affirme) of them ſlaine
xxx. thouſand. Leo the Emperour alſo was with them to
bring, by an artificiall deuiſe of fireworke, wrought by a
Glaſſe,Burning Glaſſes. as Archymedes of Syracuſe aforetime did. By
meanes of which Glaſſe he ſet on fire the fléete of the Saracenes
and ſo ſpoyled them that few of them eſcaped vnburnt
and they which eſcaped were takē of the Greekes,
by reaſon that the Captaines of them for feare of the fire,
yelded themſelues & fledde for ſuccour vnto the Gréekes.
This fine inuention 
                  •
               ounde out by a certaine cunning
Architect, merueilouſly appauled their ſpirites: for ye verie
Sea about the Shippes ſéemed to be al on a light fire.
Such another kind of burning glaſſe as this, wée reads
was at Alexandria in Aegypt in the watche Tower named
Pharus, wherewith the inhabitauntes when they
lyſted, holding the ſame ful againſt the Sunne Beames,
ſet the Shippes of their enemies on fire a great way of.
            During this while, Mucas & Tarifa hauing ſubdued
Spaine, began to bée had in ſuſpicion by Aumar. Whervpon
they came both together to ſalute their new Biſhop
and to cleare themſelues from all ſuſpicious crymes that
coulde be obiected againſt them. Where Tarifa accuſed
Mucas of extortion and layde to his charge that hée had
purloyned the Princes treaſure during his regiment in
Spaine: of which crime he being attainted and found giltie
againſt the high Biſhop, tooke ſuch inward griefe that
he dyed. In whoſe place, Aumar preferred Gizid to the
Lieutenauntſhip of Affrica, and Tarifa he appointed Regent
of all Spaine. Wherefore Gizid with a well appoynted
Nauie of thrée hundreth and ſixtie Saile, wyth
the ſupplie of the other Legions and victuall, made hys
courſe directly toward Conſtantinople: but hearing by
the way tidings, how the Conſtantinopolitanes had conſumed

the moſt part of the Saracenes Ships with fire, he
durſte not aduenture any further, but ſtayed vpon the
coaſtes of Bithynia, robbyng and makinge ſpoyle of the
Country round about: In which place he had but a colde
welcome géeuen hym by the Romane Legions beynge
there in Garriſons, who ſetting fiercely vpon hym, kylled
many of his people and ſo ſkarred ye reſidue that they
were glad to retire. Yet neuertheles the terreſtrial army
vnder the conduct of Malſamas,
               Lothſome famyne amonge Saracenes
                deſiſted not their Siege
before the Citie, and yet they were ſo ſore pinched with
famine and hungre, that they were fayne to eate the dead
Carion of any maner of Beaſte: yea they eat dryed ordure
and dung, and are reported alſo, to be ſo nere driuen
that for very néede they eate their owne fellowes fleſhe
being dead, ſuch an excéeding deſire had they to conquere
that Imperiall Seate and Citie royall of all the Romane
Empire orientall.
            
               Conſtantinople in the meane ſeaſon eſcaped not frée,Great plague in Conſtantinople.
               
but was plagued with as great mortalytie an other way.
For the peſtilentiall plague conſumed wel néere . CCC.
thouſand perſons. When tydinges of theſe ſo great and ſo
many ouerthrowes and infortunate calamyties was
brought to Aumar, he was therewith ſo diſmayd that hée
immediatly addreſſed his letters to Malſamas, with commaundement
foorthwith vpon the receipt thereof to retourne
home with all his Army left aliue. Wherevpon
Malſamas ſhipped his Souldiours and departed. But
there ſodenlye aroſe ſuch a vehement tempeſt and boyſterous
wynd,Shipwreck that all their Shippes (ſauing onely tenne)
periſhed in the Sea, whereof fiue were taken by the Romanes,
the reſidue retourned home to bringe newes of
this their heauy chaunce & myſfortune. But Abdeluzite
the Nephieu of Mucas, whome Mucas at his departure
out of Spaine appointed his Deputie, marying ye Quéene
Egilona late wife of Rodericke, by her counſell proclaymed,

himſelfe king of Syuyle. Whereat the Saracenes
greatly fumyng & chafyng, kylled both him and his wife,
and in his roome ſubſtituted an other of Mucas his kinſmen
named Aiub, tyll ſuch time as their high Byſhoppe
ſhould take order for lendinge ſome other. This Aiub repayred
and reedified the Citie Bilbilis (wherein the noble
Poet Martiall was long before borne) ruinated and
much defaced durying thoſe warres, and many other Cities
in Spaigne: and named it by his owne name Calataiub,
which is now called Calacaiud. But he coulde not
perfourme his purpoſe ſo fullye aboute the reſt, becauſe
there was diuers in ſundrye partes of Spaine, whiche
(vſurpyng the Kingdome) were obſtacles in his waye.
For whereas Corduba was the head Citie and Seats
royall of all Spayne, and the Captainſhippes or gouernaunce
of al the other Cities and Prouinces were diſtributed
and beſtowed vpon the noble men of the Countrey,
euery one imitating the fact of Abdeluzite, called themſelues
Kinges of thoſe places where their auctoritie and
Iuriſdiction laye. Whereby Spayne was deuided into
many Kingdomes, as the Kingdome of Syuyle, Granado
Giaen, Murtia. Denia, Sciatiua (whiche was once called
Setaba) Valentia, Tortoſia, Lerida, Fraga, Saragoza and
mani other les places not of ſo great fame as theſe. which
Kinges ſo long as they agréed among themſelues, oftentimes
afflicted Chriſtendome with great ouerthrowes
and oppreſſions: but after that they fell at diſcord and inteſtine
variaunce among themſelues, they gaue occaſion
to the Chriſtians, to recouer Spaine againe into their
owne rightfull poſſeſſion. Which thing was firſt attempted
(as before we haue ſhewed) by Pelagius, who vſinge
his valiauntneſſe, wiſedome and myracles to his beſt
commoditie, and happelye takyng occaſion by this diſſention
and diſcorde of his Enemies amonge themſelues,

wanne agayne many cities and deliuered ſundry townes
out of the miſerable thraldome of their tyrannie. With
hym did Alphonſus the ſonne of Peter Duke of Calabria
ioyne and take parte, being deſcended of the ancient line
of Richared King of Gothes, vnto whome Pelagius gaue
his Daughter Oriſmunda in mariage: and they two atchiued
many notable victories ouer the Miſcreaunte
Moores.
            
            In the Eaſt, after the diſceaſe of Aumar the Caliph,
Gizide the Sonne of Abdimelik ſuccéeded and was inſtalled
in the pontificate in the yéere of our Lorde 722. In
whoſe raigne, there ſtepped vp an other Caliph and Gizid
in Perſia, whoſe name was Moalabs. Againſt whom
was ſent with a great army Maſabnak, who vanquiſhed
hym in battayle and ſubdued all Perſia: and thus Gizid
the ſonne of Abdimelick, was the onely Caliph of
all the Saracenes, who raigned thrée yéeres and then died.
After whom, his Sonne Euelide was created Caliph,
who entred the Romane Prouinces in Aſia and Europa
with a huge power: but within a ſhort while, without
perpetrating any notable exployte worthy of remembraunce,
he gaue hymſelfe altogether to ydleneſſe, ſlouth
and voluptuouſneſſe. Notwithſtanding, in the ſeconde
yéere of his Empire he ſent Malſamas with an Hoaſt againe
into Cappadocia, who tooke the Citie Caeſarea and
Euelite he ſent by an other way into Thracia, who hauing
waſted and ſpoyled it, retourned into Syria.
            
            About this time néere the Sea coaſtes of the leſſe Aſia,
the earth in the bottom of the ſea burned, in ſuch ſort,
that at the firſt there appeared nothynge but ſmoke, but
within awhile after ſuch incredible ſtore of hoat burning
Pumiſe ſtones (as though they had bene litle hilles in the
Sea) ſwam aboue water, that with the ſame Pumyſes,
al the ſhoares of leſſe Aſia, Leſbos, Abydos and Macedonia
were full, and ye Sea it ſelf ſemed all couered ouer, & a

certaine Iſland at that time appeared and was diſcouered
néere the holy Iſle. After this, Euelide ſent one Muauias
and Amer with an Hoaſte of .90000. Saracenes
to beſiege Nicaea a Citie of Bithynia: which being moſt
fiercely and ſtrongly with all arte and pollicie by them aſſayled,
the Chriſtians moſt valiauntly defending, and
beating them alwayes back with great ſlaughter and effuſion
of bloude, at length they raiſed their Siege and returned
home without any harme doing, ſauing yt in their
retourne they tooke a little Towne called Ateum. Afterward
ye Prince of Gazaria, ſonne to Cagan king of Bulgaria,
warred vpon the Saracens in the borders of Armenia:
and (Gradack the Pretor of Armenia & Media a Saracene
borne, being in battaile vanquiſhed and ſlaine,) he
brought thoſe two Prouinces againe vnder the ſubiection
of the Romane Empire. And in the yéere. 730. Malſamas
with a huige power entred into the Streightes of
Caucaſus, and gaue battayle vnto the Turkes (who at
thoſe dayes were called the Hunnes Teutazites which is
to ſaie, Gentile) a fierre & terrible people dwelling within
thoſe Mountaynes. This blouddy battaile continued a
whole day, and many ſlaine on both ſides, till night came
and brake of their fight, vncertaine as yet to whether ſide
the victorie woulde incline. But Malſamas retired into
Armenia, for he had now concluded a peace with ye ſonne
of King Cagan.
            
            During all this while, Pelagius hauing good ſucceſſe
in his Spaniſhe affaires againſt the Saracenes, the Tarraconians
liuing in the mountaines, by the example of
the Aſturians created Garcias Scimenecius their King in
the denne of Iean Pignia, called Panouio. And within a
while after Pelagius when he had raigned .xiiij. yéeres
dyed, in the yéere of our Lord. 732. After whom his ſonne
Fafila ſuccéeded, who in the ſecōd yéere of his raigne was
in a wodde deuoured of wilde Beares, leauing no childrē
               
behind him. Theſe kings appointed the chiefe Citie of
their Kingdome at Legio which is now called Leon,
               The Armes of the kingdome of Lyon. and
bare in their Coate Armour, a Lyon purple in a Shielde
Argent. Not becauſe of the name of the citie where their
Seate royall was, whiche hath his name not of a Lyon
but of a Legion of Souldiours whiche Cocceius Nerua
placed there: but becauſe they fought ſo couragiouſly and
eigrely for the ſauegard and libertie of their countrey, as
though they had béene moſt fierce Lyons. In the raigne
of this Fafila, the Saracenes paſſed into Fraunce by that
part of the Pyrenees that was in their poſſeſſion by the
Mediterranean Sea. Fraunce was then poſſeſſed of the
Frankes a people of Germanie, who about 400. yéeres
after the incarnation, departing out of their natiue Countrey
to ſéeke ſome other place where to plant thēſelues,
had that part of high Bourgoyne next to Germanie geuen
vnto them to inhabite, by Aetius a Romane Senatour
who then was Pretor of the Prouince of Gaule, becauſe
he would haue ſome ſtrong garriſon and defence againſt
the Hunnes (who were then iſſued in great plumpes out
of their owne Countrey, and vnder the conduct of Attila,
ſpoyled and waſted Europa) if they ſhoulde fortune to inuade
Gaule, which Realme is yet of their name called
Fraunce.
               How Fraūce was firſt named. For the Frankes were the warlikeſt & ſtouteſt
people in all Germanie, inhabiting (as I thinke) that region
or portion thereof which is yet called Franconia or
Frankland: who afterward by little and little enlarging
their dition, obtained at length the regiment and Empire
of all Fraunce, in ſo muche that the name of the Frankes
extended very farre. But when the Franke or Frenche
Kings addicted themſelues to an ydle and voluptuous life
and degenerated from the former ſtoutnes and valiaunce
of their Progenitours, not executing the adminiſtration
of their affaires in their owne proper perſons but exployted
the ſame by vnder officers of their Court and Graund

maiſters of their Houſhold, Pipine the firſt of that name
Sonne of Arnolph Duke of Bauaria firſt attained this
honour and dignitie by ſubduing and getting the vpperhand
of ye Lieutenaūts and Captaines of the kings Prouinces,
who ſéeing the King to bée a weake and vnwarlike
man, tyrannically ruled the Countrey according to
their own ſenſual luſtes & for their priuate commodities.
            Then in the raigne of Theodoricus the ſecond, the excellent
dexteritie and worthy vertue of Charles Martellus
ſecond Sonne to this Pipine was in that office very
conſpicuous and renoumed throughout all the lande of
Fraunce, in ſo much that he was accompted and taken as
the Prince of all the people. At the ſame time, was King
of Aquitanie (thē called Gallia Gottica) one Eudo a Gothian
borne, whom king Roderik made ruler of ye Prouince,
but hearing of ye diſcomfiture of ye King his Liege
Lord, he made himſelfe king thereof. This Eudo whyle
Charles Martellus was buſied wt other warres in Germanie,
began to ſurmiſe certaine quarelles, which brake
out into open warre with the French Capitaines of the
places néere adioyning to the limittes of his Territories,
whom (going about to defend their titles & rightes)
he afflicted with many ouerthrowes. Wherfore Martellus
tooke the matter in hande and warred againſt him.
And at the ſame time the Saracens paſſing the Pyrenees,
had taken Narbon, and in it ſhewed all kind of outragious
crueltie, becauſe they woulde by that example make
the countrey afraide any more to withſtande thē. Wherfore
Eudo conſidering with himſelfe that he was vnable
to warre at one time both with ye 
               Frankes & the Saracens,
and for ye 
               Mugnoces a man in great fauour and eſtimation
with ye 
               Saracens was his Sonne in law, he thought it
better for him to make a league & amitie with ye 
               Saracens
thē with ye Chriſtians. Which after he had by Mugnoces
meanes and friendſhip brought to paſſe, looking big vpon

the matter and bearing himſelfe ſtoute by reaſon of the
aide and ſuccour, which they ſent to him, he inferred much
harme to the Franke Nation. But when he perceaued,
that the Saracens fortified with their owne garriſons, and
kept to their owne vſes, al ſuch Cities & townes as they
entred into, he begā when it was to late to beſhrew himſelfe
and wiſhe that he had neuer attempted any ſuch enterpriſe.
For they kept Nimes, Mountpelier, & Auinion
with all the places thereabout in their owne poſſeſſion.
Wherevpon Eudo gathering all his power together to
profligate and driue them out, gaue vnto them battayle,
wherin he was diſcomfited. Mugnoces by whoſe meanes
and procurement the league and amitie was concluded,
greatly complayned of the iniurious dealing of Eudo in
falſefying his faith & infringing his promiſe accordingly
as he had vndertakē for him. Whervpō 
               Abderama king
of Gottalonia marching with an hoaſt againſt him, beſieged
him in ye Caſtle of Cerdania: out wherof, Mugnoces
for ſcarcitie of water eſcaping, & fléeing into thickets and
hilliſh places, fell into ye hands of another cōpany of Saracens,
who tooke him priſoner & beaſtly ſlew him and ſent
his head & his wiues (ye daughter of Eudo) to Abderama:
and thus all ye traitours of their Countrey within ſhorte
ſpace, came to a miſerable end and confuſion. Then Abderama
hauing diſpatched and ridde out of ye way all enemies
yt were to be feared on his back, returned into Fraū
                  ce,
paſſed the riuer of Rhone, and deſtroyed many places
yt belonged to the Chriſtians: and made ſuch a ſlaughter
at Arle, that a heape then made of the bones of the deade
carkaſſes remaineth there yet to this day in a place called
Alies Campi. Thē went he with his army againſt Eudo
who began again to gather more ſtrength & make a new
commociō. He beſieged Toloſe the chiefe Citie of Gallia
Gottica:
               
                  Fraunce inuaded by Saracens.
                in which ſiege, (for that the citie was very well
rampyered and fortified with Ditches & walles, and alſo

well ſtored with Engins and munitions of war and with
all ſorts of weapons beſide a conuenient Garriſon of ſouldiours
with all other thinges neceſſarye the
                  •
               e planted
for defence) the Saracenes receiued great loſſe and were
well payde home, eſpecially by meanes of certayne Engyns,
deuiſed by ſkylfull arte of ingenious Architectes
and by diuers other Stratagemes of warlyke pollicie.
Notwithſtanding, Burdeaux was then taken and ſacked
of the Saracenes, and all the Inhabitauntes therein
both man woman and childe vnmercifully ſlayne and
manquelled,
                  Burdeaux taken and diuers other Cities and Townes. and the Temples razed and laide euen with
the ground. Thence by the confines of Perigot beyonde
the ryuer Geronde, they made inroades into the Country
of Xantongue and deſtroyed Angoliſme and Blaye:
From thence through Limoſin and Poytiers they ruſſhed
into the Countrey of Tours, Where they ſpoyled the
Churche of Sainct Martine, wherein was great foyſon
and plenty of gyftes and offeringes that had bene geuen
and bequeathed vnto it, and afterward ſet it on fire.
            
               Eudo being ſore afflicted with theſe vnmanerly dealyngs,
and driuen to great extremytie by the Saracenes,
entred into league with Marcellus, and they two (with
both their powers ioyned in one) gaue battayle vnto Abderama
before the Citie of Tours,
               Great ſlaughter. wherein they diſcomfited
hym and all his hoſt. In this battayle there were
ſlayne CCC. lxxv thouſand Saracenes, and of the French
no moe but .xv C. And if the night had not come vppon
them ere the battayle was fully ended, the whole route
of the Saracenes had bene at that time vtterly deſtroyed.
For Abderama in the night ſeaſon, perceiuinge how the
game went, and what a mortall ouerthrow he had receiued,
had no luſt to tarye and expect the hazard of the next
daye: but trudged as faſt as he could, by long iourneyes,
with thoſe fewe of his companye that were left and hable
to folow him, to the Pyrenees, entendinge from thence to

retourne into Spaine, leauing behinde hym in his Tents
all his carriage and ſtuffe for a praye to his Enemies.
But the Nauarrians hauyng ſtopped the ſtreight paſſages
where their iourney laye, killed them euery one. The
next day aſſoone as the Sonne was vp, Martellus in good
order marſhalled his army and tooke the Féeld, awaiting
the commyng of his enemies. But when he perfectlye
vnderſtoode that they were fled, his Souldiours fell to the
ſpoyle, which they found in the Saracenes Campe moſt aboundant
and plentifull.
            After the death of Eudo, Martellus added that parte of
Eudo his Kingdome, to his Empyre. For which cauſe
Hunold and Vaifar the ſonnes of Eudo, incenſinge that
part of Gaule called Narbonenſis Prouincia (containing
the Countrys of Sauoye, Dolphinie, Prouance and Languedock)
to take parte with them, renewed the warre afreſh
with Martellus. And paſſinge ouer the riuer of
Rhone, with moſt barbarus cruelty deſtroyed, burnt and
killed man and beaſt, makynge hauock of all Townes,
Villages, & Féelds yt was in their way, without ſparing
either age or Sexe. The chief burnt of which lamentable
ſtorme and furious immanitie, that part of the Allobroges
(now called Dolphinie) ſpecially felt, before Martellus
could prouide or prepare ſufficient power to go againſt
them. But when he was come, Viſigot departed into
the waſt deſert and wilderneſſe whiche hee hymſelfe had
ſo made, and concluding a league with ye 
               Saracenes more
aduiſedly and warely then Eudo before had done, that is
to wit, by geuing and receiuing hoſtages on both parties,
he eftſoones procured them to come agayne into Fraunce:
who now not with an Hoſt of bolde & tymorous, warlike
and vnwarlyke, armed and naked perſones, one mingled
with an other as before, but with army of luſtye Seruitors
and picked Souldiours throughly tryed by Sea
and Land, well appointed and furniſhed with victuall and

all thinges neceſſary for ſuch an enterpriſe wherfore was
cheife Captaine one Atine, entred into the Prouince.
And taking Auignion by treaſon of Maurice Capitayne
thereof, they appoynted that Citie and Narbon to be the
principall holdes and fortreſſes of their martiall procéedings.
Whom as they were boldly ſwarming & ſtraying
abroad ye Country, as men fearing no daunger, Childebrand
(ſent for that purpoſe by Martellus with a great
power againſt them) immediatly at his firſte commynge
compelled to kéepe within the walles of Auignion.
Auignion is a Citie ſtandinge by the riuer Rhone, and
was at that time ſtronglye walled, and well fortyfied
with many Bulwarkes, Caſtles and Pyles, inſomuche
that Atine valyauntly and polytiquely defendinge it,Two balyaunt & ſailfull Capytaynes compared together, Atine the saracen and Martellus ye 
                  French.
                (as
he was a man both couragious and ſtout and alſo ſkilfull
in the arte of Cheualrye) thought it to be inexpugnable
and not able to be wonne. For he had placed his Garriſons
on euery ſide where he thought moſt expedient,
and had planted the walles, Bulwarks and Caſtles full
of weapons, Dartes and Engins to throwe ſtones into
the throng of his Enemyes, beſide wyld fire and matches
to kindle Torches and brands to caſt in their faces when
ſo euer they ſhould aſſay to enter. He had alſo manned the
ſame wt hardy Souldiours, & ſaw ſure watch & warde to
be kept at the Gates, neither lackyng ſtoare of victuall
nor any thing els that for the defence therof was néedfull
and requiſite. Euery Capitayne, Centurion and decurion
had their places and offices appoynted vnto them accordingly.
He himſelfe in perſon went about and viewed
the watches, for feare leaſt any thing by negligence or ouerſight
of his officers were amiſſe, a man that coulde
well away with laboure, watching and hunger, and ſuch
a one as kept his ſouldiours in due order and dutie by his
owne example, rather then for feare of puniſhment, anymatyng
and encouraging them valyaunt enterpriſes,

and martiall aduentures. Childebrand lodging his camp
néerer to the citie, gaue aſſault therevnto: whom Atine
not onely repulſed but alſo enforced to diſcampe & remoue
his Armye furder of.
            But when Martellus with his retinue and traine was
come & both the hoſts ioyned in one, after he had ſurueied
and taken view of ye ſituation and ſtrength of the citie and
throughly vnderſtood of ye valiaunt courage of ye defenders
within, he ſpéedely & with vndaunted courage ſetting forward
his matters, not only draue thē as they iſſued out of
the towne within the walles againe, but alſo wan to the
place where his army had before pight, & there ſtronglye
encamped he himſelfe. For Martellus being a man ſingulerly
wel ſkilled in warlike affaires, had vnder him in his
army ſuch capitaines and ſouldiours as had bene in many
bloudy battailes experienced & in ſundry warres vnder
him practiſed: furthermore very preciſe obſeruers of martiall
diſcipline wherin he himſelf had trained & inſtructed
them. Who whether ye Army were to be lodged and embattailed
or ye camp to be remoued, or themſelues to be rā
               ked
& ſet in array redy for ye fight, knewe euery man hys
office, place & ſeruice only wt a beck or a ſigne geuen them
by their Generall. When their camp ſhould be fortified
for feare of being ſodenly ſurpriſed by ye enemy, immediatly
a man ſhould haue ſéene ſome, wt al dillygence buſied
in peruſing & ſurueiyng ye place ye their General had aſſigned,
ſome to ſée ſouldiours in good order, ſome to entrench
the camp, ſome to pitch their tentes, ſome to place ye watch
and aſſigne them their ſtandinges, ſome redy marſhalled
without the Trench ready to repulſe the Enemy if he
ſhoulde make any ſodaine irruption vpon the labourers.
If caſe ſtoode, for the Campe to be remoued, euery man
ſemblablye knewe his office and dutye. If they marched
out to fight, euery one knewe at his Fingers ende,
where and in what Ranke or place hee ſhoulde

ſtande ſo that the forme and faſhion were tolde them by
their Chieuetane, how he would haue the battayle ordered
and appointed, and looke where they ſtoode and ſet
their foote in the fight, there would they rather haue dyed
then to haue left it or ſhronke one foote backe, ſo deſirous
were they to wynne praiſe and glorie. If they ſhould beſiege
any towne, ſome brought the ſcaling ladders, ſome
Turrettes, ſome Baſtyles and clymling bridges ſurmounting
the height of the Towne walles, ſtriuing who
ſhould firſt goe vp and mount vpon the walles. When
they had got the Towne, they neuer brake their aray for
any pyllage or ſpoyle, nor for any gréedines of bootie and
praie, they neuer ceaſſed to occupie their blades and lay
about them with their falchions, till they had throughly
ouercome all ſuch of their enemyes as would not deliuer
their weapons.
            With ſuch a goodly trained hoſt, Martellus aduauncing
his Standard and approching his enemies, while the anger
of his Souldiours was hoate and the courage of their
mindes yet freſhe & vnappaulled, as one that well knew
the nature of his Countreymen, who at the firſt brunt as
long as an iniurie is freſh in memorie and their mindes
with venturous anymoſitie and hope of victorie, googled
are moſt fierce and hardie: but within a ſhorte while if
the warre continue any thing long, their former hoat forwardnes
will be ſtraightwayes abated and tourned into
ſuch keye colde quietnes that whereas aſore they ſéemed
Lyons, then woulde they bée as méeke and tractable as
Lambes, geuing therefore no time of reſt to his Souldiours,
but onely ſo much as néedes muſt be had to refreſhe
their bodies, with meate, drinke and ſléepe, he ſoū
               ded
the bloudie blaſt to the battaile, and gaue them a ſigne
couragiouſly to giue the onſet but firſt he whetted them
and ſtirred vp their ſtomackes with this Oration folowing.
            
               
               If your valiaunt hearts (moſt louing Souldiours and
felowes in Armes) were not ſufficiently already to mée
knowen by the manifold aduentures and perilles in my
companie to your perpetuall praiſe exployted,A pleaſante and comfortable Oration of Martellus to his Souldiors. or if our
enemie were vnto vs ſtraunge & vnknowen then would
I go about with many wordes to incenſe and pricke you
forward: but ſithens I haue experimented and tryed you
in ſo many battayles inuincible, & that of late yéeres you
eaſely vanquiſhed this very ſame enemie, (few of them
left a liue) at what time they inuaded the whole Realme
of Fraunce with a farre greater armie then they haue
now, in hope to haue enioyed the Empyre & Dominion
thereof to themſelues: I well ſée that I haue no néede to
ſtande long in putting you in hope of victorie, which I
perfectly know to be alreadie moſt certain in your hāds,
whereof the manifold examples of ſo many famous battailes
happily and victoriouſly vnder our leading & conduct
by you atchieued, may put you in an vndoubted aſſuraunce.
Vnleſſe peraduenture ſome will thinke it to be
a harder matter for vs nowe to ouercome theſe fewe
(which like fearefull Hares) hyde and include themſelues
within walles: then it was for vs heretofore in the
Countrey of Tours, to diſcomfite the whole power almoſt
of all the Orient. Or as though Walles were of
more force in Warres, then foure hundreth thouſande
fighting men, whoſe ſwordes and armour if they had
beene layd together in one heape, had béene hable to haue
compaſſed this Citie about wyth a hygher and thicker
bulwarke then theſe Walles which you ſée are. Men
(beléeue mée) ſéeke their defence not in Walles but in
theyr weapons. Whereas they which put their truſt
in Walles, when they be dryuen to that puſhe that they
ſée themſelues ouercome, their heartes fayle them, they
runne away lyke the fearefull Deere, eyther caſting
downe their weapons, or elſe ſtand ſtone ſtill diſmaide

and amazed lyke ſheepe. Addreſſe your ſelues therefore
to the aſſaulte lyke men, aſſuring your ſelues to fynde
ſuche great plentie of ſpoyle therein, that you ſhall fare
the better all the dayes of your liues. Daunt and oppreſſe
yonder odious and vile generatiō ye are included in hoales
& dennes like birdes in a cage. Take your former vigour
and accuſtomed ſtomacks vnto you, and know ye ye I am
he, which (ouer & beſide their ſhare and bootie of ye ſpoyle)
will amply wt my owne hands reward all them yt in this
aſſault ſhal behaue thēſelues valiauntly. I my ſelfe will
not ſtart one foote frō you, but will helpe you not only wt
my aduiſe and pollicie, but alſo wt doughtie blowes giuen
with mine owne arme as I am wont alwayes at a pinch
to do where I ſée néede. I wil be (I ſay) both the witneſſe
bearer and the Iudge of your valiaūce on euery ſide, and
wil ſée you to ſuffer no worſe extremitie, and wrong, thē
I my ſelf wil be content to participate with you. Auaūce
I ſay once againe, mount vp liuely vppon yonder wall,
(which done) you ſhalbe ſure to be celebrated and renowmed
of all men, as they that twyſe, haue deliuered and
protected their Countrey of Fraunce out of thraldome
of a blaſphemous True of curſed Sathaniſtes.
            
            When he had made an ende, the Souldiours al together
gaue a great ſhoute, and then began the aſſault, the
walles were couragiouſly ſhaken and battered, ladders,
turreties & bridges ſet vp, the aſſault geuē in thrée ſeuerall
places & the whole army diuided into iij parts, wherof
one was lead by Childebrād, another by Charlemaine
the ſonne of Martellus, & the third by Martellus himſelf.
The Saracens rowlling downe great ſtones which they
had for the ſame purpoſe prepared, tumbled downe ye ſcaling
ladders & brake them a ſunder, ſhot arrowes among
the Aſſaylaunts as faſt as haile, & threw pots of ſcalding
pitch vpō them that approched any thing néere, finally no
kind of weapō was vnoccupied. Atine himſelfe goyng about
euery corner, chéering vp his Souldiours on euery

ſide, & diligently looking ye nothing were amiſſe, played ye
part both of a ſkilfull Captaine & alſo of a valiaunt ſouldiour:
many, which of a high and hautie courage firſt ſkaled
the walles, felt ye ſmart & reward of venturous audacitie,
and were ſlaine. Martellus ſeing that his ſcaling ladders
were partly by his enemies & partly by the waight of his
owne ſouldiours climming vp thick and thréefold broken
almoſt all in péeces, purpoſing to detrude and driue ye defendauntes
frō ſome part of the wall, erected a Tower of
wood, out of which, he ſhot wt certaine deuiſed Engynes,
great waighty ſtones at thē that ſtoode vpon the wall and
in it he had placed a great ſort of Archers, which with arows
kept ye Oppidanes ſo ſtreict, yt they durſt not ſtād to
their tacklings, nor abide vpō the walles. This Turret
had a bridge which wt a certain deuiſe in it, might both be
hoiſed vp on high & let downe low, vp into the which none
could aſcend yt ſtoode on the groūd. This Engine was couered
all ouer with raw Oxe hides & leather, that no fire
could do it hurt. This being wt ſtrength of mē ſet hard by
the walles (for it went vpō whéeles) ye Bridge was ſet to
the top of ye walles, and ſo within a little while, the wall
was ful on yt ſide with French ſouldiours. Thē the bickering
being ſo ſore & terrible on both parts, yt it was harde
to decerne who ſhuld haue the victorie, at length fine force
and puiſſaunt māhod of the Frankes got the better & preuailed,
who making a great ſhout, wēt throughſtitch with
their enterpriſe, ſome aſcēding & mounting vpō ye walles
by ladders, which couered & ſaued themſelues frō harme
by holding their Targets cloſe ouer their heades, till they
were gottē vp, killing or els throwing downe the defendaūts,
that reſiſted. The reſt being without all hope of remedie
& victorie, priuely ſhifted euery man for himſelfe.
Atine wt the head men & chief officers of his cōpany, embarked
thēſelues in Shippes readie in the ryuer Rhone
for ye ſame intent, & ſayled away wt the ſtreame in ſafety.

Many of them were ſlaine in the chaſe, many cruſhed to
death with fallyng one vppon an other, and many ſwimmyng
after the Shippes that were now departynge and
goynge awaye, were drowned and ouerwhelmed with
ſourges. Atine with his Shippes takyng the ſea, made
his courſe directly to Narbon, a wealthy Citie and well
fortified, ſtandyng very commodiouſlie to receiue into it
ayde from the Sea, wherein was planted an other Gariſon
of Saracenes. Whereof hearynge Martellus went
alſo to oppugne and beſiege it. So that now there was no
leſſe bickering & contention on both parties for the oppugnation
and propugnation of Narbon: the one ſide meanyng
to win the citie, the other not intendyng ſo tolooſe it.
            At whiche time Amorreus, an other Saracen Kinge
bringynge a bande of newe ayde to ſuccour the beſiéeged
Narbonians, was encountred by Martellus, at the ryuer
Illiberis. Where betwene them was fought a ſharp and
bloudy battayle: but in the end the victorye fell to Martellus,
and Amorreus valiantly fightyng in the vawarde
was ſlayne with all his company, inſomuch that not one
was left aliue to carye any newes home of their vniuerſall
miſhappe and calamytie. When Atine vnderſtoode
of this diſcomfiture, he and as many as were with hym
at Narbon ſhipped themſelues and departed out of the
French Prouince and Countrey.
            At this time, when the Moores were thus dryuen
out of all Aquitanie, nyne of the chiefe Péeres of
Martellus his Hoſt, valyaunt men and hardye, warred
vpon the Saracenes in Gotalonia: and Martellus dyed in
whoſe roome his ſecond Son Pipine ſuccéeded. In the
orient Malſamas ſpoylyng and depopulating ye borders of
Thracia (which now is called Romania) tooke a ſtronge
Towne of Cappadocia named Curſianum. From thence
making an other viage with an Army vnto the Streicts
of Caucaſus, found the ſame ſo wel defended and fortified

by the Vnnes or Turkes, that not daring to meddle with
them, he retyred back agayne. And two yéeres after, an other
army of Saracenes whereof was Generall one Euelit
the Sonne of Maunias inauaded againe the Borders of
Thracia, where after he had made great ſpoyle, he retourned
againe into Syria. In which Prouince many thouſands
of Saracenes dyed of ſundry diſeaſes. Neuertheleſſe
they abſtained nothing the more from making inuaſions
into the Territoryes yt belonged to the Romane Empire.
For Zulciminie with a huyge power the thyrd time pilfered
and haryed Armenia and Thracia and tooke the
towne called Syderonium: afterward he went into Cappadocia
wt 60000. men, and at the very ſame time Melike
and Batal with a hundreth thouſand Saracens brake
the fourth time into Thracia. But Leo then Emperour,
marchyng with an Hoſt againſt them that waſted Thracia,
deſtroyed and ſlew them almoſt euery one. About
this time died Euelid, in whoſe place was created Byſſhop
Gizit the ſeconde, in the yéere of our Lorde 744.
Who for that he ſaw the Romane Empire to be deuided
intofactions, becauſe Conſtantine Copronymus ye Son of
Leo contended with Artabaſdus for the Garland, addicted
and bent his whole mind to diſpoſe and ſet order in the
Saracenicall Empire. And becauſe ye Ile of Ciprus beyng
then well peopled, brued ſeditious motions and ruflynge
diſturbaunces, he ſent the whole people thereof into Syria
and left the Iland without Inhabitantes. And when
he had raigned one yéere, he deceaſed. After him, Ices obtayned
the pontificate, who alſo dying within leſſe then a
yéere, Maruane was inſtalled and made high Biſhoppe.
            
               Pipine the ſecond bearing all theſway and rulynge all
the roſt in the Realme of Fraunce, the Saracenes eftſoones
paſſinge the Pyrenees were by him ſurpryſed and taken
tardy, and payde ſo dearely for their luſtineſſe, that ſo long
as he lyued, the neuer durſte any more attempt any inuaſion

or pillage towarde hys land, Territory or domynion,
for which valyance and magnanimitie, the Frenchmē,
by the aſſent of Zacharie then Pope of Rome depoſed
Childerick to whome the crowne of Fraunce by lineall
deſcent of inheritaunce belonged, and made Pipine their
King: and with him annoynted as heyre Apparaunt to
the Crowne, his Sonne Charles, who was after ſurnamed
the Great. Whom (afterward doyng many things
of his owne proper will and authoritie contrarye to his
Fathers minde and contentment,Charles as though he had bene
already very Kinge and in reall poſſeſſion of the Regall
Diademe) King Pipine his Father exiled out of his ſight
and commaunded to departe out of all the limytes and
boundes of his Domynion and kingdome. Wherefore he
not darynge to diſobey the kinge his Fathers decrée and
iudgement, tooke with hym many of the French Nobilytie
which folowed hym, and went to Galaſie Kinge
of Toledo, a Saracene borne. Whiche Galaſie vſed his
helpe, aduiſe and ayde in the warre whiche then he had againſt
Marſilius Kinge of Saragoza, a Saracene alſo as
well as he. In which warres Charles, being Chieuetayne
of all the King of Toledo his armye, behaued hym
ſelfe like a worthy Knight, and many waies endamaged
King Marſilius.
            
            Afterwarde fallynge in loue with Galiana Daughter
to the king his Maſter, aduentured and atchieued many
worthy enterpriſes & notorious Actes for her ſake, namely
againſt Bramantes, an other Saracen King. Who becauſe
he would haue had Galiana to his wife, maugre her
Parentes good wyl, beſieged Toledo, and diſcomfited the
Souldiours both French & Saracene which ſerued vnder
the king of Toledo, tyll Charles yſſuing out to recharge
vpon hym, coaped with him and ſlew him with hys own
handes. This hoat loue continewinge for a time, at
length brake out ſo far, yt vpon a certen time as yt damſel

for her diſport and ſolace was walkyng in the gardens or
baynes by the bankſide of the riuer Tagus without the
walles of the citie Toledo (whiche are at this day called
the Palaces of Galiana) Charles no longer hable to qualefye
his amorous paſſion, ſtole her away and fled with her
to Burdeaux, wher he buylded for her a ſumpteus palace,
as lyke in all poyntes to the paterne and ſituation of the
princely Court of Toledo, as he could geſſe, which palace
is yet extant, and called alſo by the name of Galiana her
Palace.
            
               Maruane ruling in Syria, many ſedicious mutines and
factious partakings chaunced among the Saracenes, & many
Tyraunts rebelliouſly reuoulted, pretendynge title to
the pontificate. Whoſe names were Tebid, Dadack,
and Zulciminie. Whom Maruane as traytours to him
purſued, & toke Tebid and put hym to death: Zulciminie
hauing an ouerthrow, fled into Perſia. But fortune ſmiled
& fauored Dadack better then ether of ye other twaine,
for he ioyning battayle wt the Sonne of Maruane, vanquiſhed
hym and diſcomfited his whole Hoaſt. Albeit
he could not long enioy the fruicts of this victory, for wtin
awhile after, encountring wt 
               Maruane, himſelfe in a cruell
battell was ouercome and ſlaine. Conſtantine Copronymus
taking occaſion and conceyuing hope of future good
lucke by meanes of ye 
               Saracens domeſtical ſedition, inferred
warre vpon Syria, & wanne a great part of that Prouince.
Wherfore Maruane hauinge now already gotten
the vpperhand of Dadack with al his Adherentes: tourned
his conquerous Armes to regayne Syria, and it recouered
to ye great ſlaughter & ſmart of ye Chriſtians. The
ſame yéere, a litle before ye Chriſtians receiued this great
ouerthrow and diſcomfiture at the hands of Maruane, the
Countrey Syria, Paleſtina, almoſt al Aſia, Thracia, Grecia
and Italie with many other Regions were terriblye
ſhaken with a dreadfull Earthquake.
            
               
After this, more ruffling and commotion kindled in
Perſia. For Aſmuline Prince and kingleader of yt Sect
(firſt reiſed and excited by Mutar, of whom we haue before
made mention who affirmed Ali to be greater then
Mahomet) dwelling and liuing among the Coraſenes, a
people of Perſia, through ye counſaile & inſtinct of one Cataban,
incenſed and mooued all the Slaues and Peyzants
of the Countrey either priuely or apertly, by ſecrete conſpiracie
or by open force, to quell and murther their Maiſters.
With whoſe wealth, the Slaues being enriched
and made of great power, were diuided into two factions,
whereof th' one were called the Caiſmores, and th' other the
Lamonites. Now, Aſmuline being Captaine of the Lamonites,
ſubdued and cleane diſpercled the Caiſmores.
Then beyng accompanyed with his Lamonites and hys
Counſellour Cataban, marched forth into Perſia: ouer
which Prouince was Lieutenaunt for Maruane one Ibline,
who with an hoaſt of one C. thouſand good fighting
men and well appointed, reſiſted and gaue to Aſmuline
battayle. In which conflict, the Lamonites although they
were a great deale fewer in number, yet hauing an indubitate
confidence in the promiſes of Aſmuline and in
Cataban, whom they eſtéemed as men holy and repleniſhed
with Propheticall inſpiration, fought moſt valiantly,
in ſo much that they diſcomfited Ibline and put hym
to flight. Beyng then animated with ſo many victories,
gloriouſly and happely atchieued, they were not afrayde
to offer battayle vnto Maruane who had in his army iij.
hundreth thouſand fighting Souldiours ready appointed
in the fielde, néere to the Ryuer Zaban, whom alſo with
all his army they diſcomfited. Maruane with foure thouſand
only of his company fled into Aegypt, cutting downe
the bridge where he paſſed ouer, that his enemies ſhould
not purſue and chaſe after him. But Saline the Sonne of
Aſmuline perſecuted and folowed after him at his héeles

and in Aegypt in a blouddy battaile ouercame him, and
thus was all the Maraunian Lynage and Pedagrew expulſed.
The remnauntes of whoſe lyne and Progenie
which had flouriſhed and reigned ſo many yéeres were
diſperſed and ſcattered abroade, ſome fledde into Mauritania
where being wearied, they planted themſelues, and
ſome went into Spaine. From this Aſmuline afterward
that houſe and family which now at this day raigneth in
Perſia, called Sophi is lineally deſcended.
            After the death of Aſmuline and Cataban, one Abubalan
ſurnamed Muamat was Prince of Syria and Perſia:
and Saline of Aegypt: and héere began the firſt Empyre
of the Sultanes or Souldanes of Aegypt, which haue
their imperiall Seate at Cayre. For by that name the Aegiptian
Caliphes would be called: which name (Sultan)
by interpretatiō ſignifieth ye higheſt Soueraigne Prince
and King of Kings.
            About the ſame time, dyed Pipine King of Fraunce,
and Charles his ſonne beganne his raigne in his fathers
ſteede. And among the Aſturians, Alphonſus the ſonne
in Law of Pelagius, and ſurnamed Catholicus ſuccéeded
Fafila. This King recouered from the Saracenes in Gallicia,
Lucus, Tui and Aſturica, in the Countrey called
Campi, all that lyeth within the Ryuers Stola, Carrion,
Piſquerra, and Duerro: in Caſtulonia, Simancas,
Duengas, Amaia, Caniciares, Aleſanium, Tranſinera,
Supuerta and Carracia: in Luſitanie, Bracha,
Viſeum and Portum, (of whom & Gallicians compounded
together, whiche are a people of the ſame Prouince)
all Luſitanie is at this day called Portugall. Hée
fortefied many places, as Alaba, Ordugina, in Cantabria,
whych Countrey is nowe called Biskaie: in
Nauarra, Rueonia, Sarracecaſium and diuerſe other
places as farre as the Pyrence Mountaines. And
when he had raigned eyghtéene 
                  •
               eeres he dyed, after

whom his Sonne Froila was ſaluted and crowned king.
This man gaue an ouerthrow to the Saracens which had
inuaded Gallicia, wherein he ſlew their Captaine Omar
with fiftie thouſand others of his company, and compelled
Ioſeph king of Corduba to flée: and brought al the region
of Gallicia into his owne rule and iuriſdiction. He beyng
afterward by his owne Subiectes murthered, Aurelius
his brothers ſonne obtained the kingdome, of whom we
reade no notable exploite done againſt the Saracens, and
he alſo dying within ſhort ſpace after his Coronation, his
brother Silo was made king. Againſt him the Gallicians
rebelled, wherfore becauſe he might ye better ſubdue and
bring thē to reaſonable conformitie, he concluded a peace
with the Saracens. He raigned eight yéeres and thē dyed.
After whō, ſuccéeded Alphonſus the ſecond, ſonne of Froila,
ſurnamed Caſtus, which was in the yéere of our Lord
God .780. Againſt him, by the counſaile and perſuaſiō of
his vncle Mauregate, the Saracens made warre. Thys
Mauregate had promiſed vnto them, that if he myght by
their meanes and helpe obtayne the Kingdome of Lyon,
which hys Predeceſſours and Aunceſtours before hym
had enioyed, he would paye vnto them yeerely in the
name of a tribute fyftie perſons of noble race, and as
many Virgins of baſer birthe, with many other execrable
and impious things. Wherevpon, by the ayde of the
Saracenes whiche furthered his pretence and quarell,
with all their myght and power, he forciblie got Lyon
with the whole Kingdome thereof and it intruſiuely vſurped
by the ſpace of fyue yéeres. After whoſe deathe,
Vermudeces, Sonne to hys brother Vimaran ſuccéeded:
who after two yéeres, voluntarily and of his owne fréewyll
reſtored the Kingdome to Alphonſus. Whych
when the Saracenes vnderſtoode, they ſent a great armye
agaynſt hym, vnder the leadyng of Mucas: betwéene
whom, néere to a Towne named Lutum or

               Ledum was fought a terrible and ſharpe battayle, but
in the ende the Saracenes were ouercome, and of them
were ſlaine .lxx. thouſande, beſide a great number which
were taken Priſoners.
            While theſe garboyles were in doyng in Spaine, the
Saracenes in the Orient were deuided among themſelues
by inteſtine ſedicion and ciuill tumulte. For Abubalan
ruling in Syria, many commotions and vprores
were reyſed againſt hym in Arabia, by the faction
of deade Maruane, affirmyng and proclayming
abroade that Maruane was not yet deade, and that
therefore they put on Armour to reſtore him againe
into hys rightfull eſtate and regall dignitie. By reaſon
of which rebellious ſtirre, many were ſlayne on
both ſydes, and great depopulation committed.
            After the deathe of Abubalan, his brother Abedela
ſuccéeded, who was traiterouſly and inſidiouſlye
murthered by an other Abedela, which aſpyred to the
Byſhopprike, hopyng to enioye it after hys deceaſe
as hee dyd in déede. During whoſe Raigne and Empyre,
the Turkiſhe broode and Nation breaking cat
of the Streictes of Caucaſus about the yéere of oure
Lorde .800. made roades and incurſions into Armenia,
and when they had piteouſly ſpoyled and ſacked it, they
retourned into their owne Countrey. And the yeere
folowing, they yſſued oute in great Plumpes, and
fought with the Saracenes ſo long, till manie béeing
ſlaine on bothe parties, the nyght made them to ſurceaſſe
and make an ende of their battaile. Abedela the ſeconde
of that name, in the eightenth yéere of his raygne dyed,
in whoſe place ſuccéeded hys Sonne Madi. Who
without any notable thing in al his tyme atchiued, dyed,
when he had raigned ix. yéeres, leauyng behind him
for his Heyre and ſucceſſour, his ſonne Moyſes. Who in
the ſecond yéere of his raigne dyed: and in his roome was

               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
created Caliph one Aaron. But now to retourne to the
affaires of the Occident.
            
               Ibnabala King of Saragoza, being expulſed and dryuen
out of his Countrey by the other Princes of the Saracenes
in Spayne,
               
                  Charles the Great. came into Fraunce to King Charles,
to implore and deſire ayd of hym, to reuenge the iniurie
vnto hym done: and at the ſame time alſo, Ambaſſadors
came to the ſame Charles from Alphonſus ſurnamed
Caſtus, King of Aſturians, to incenſe and mooue hym to
warre vpon the Saracenes in Spaine and to ſet the Country
in good order, and by his proweſſe to deliuer it out of
the clutches of Tyrannicall vſurpers. Charles therefore
gathering together not only the power of his owne kingdome
but alſo hauinge a ſupplye of forraine aide, among
whome were certaine younge Gentlemen of the Danes
(which profered their ſeruice to accompaignie him, partlie
for a deſire that they had to bellicall affaires, and partlie
to ſhewe their proweſſe and couragious ſtomackes)
with an Hoſt not very huyge and populous in number,
but yet competent inough and ſuch as were ſkilful Souldiours
and expert Capitaines, paſſed ouer the Pyrenees
by Ronceuall without reſiſtaunce or ſtoppe of any man.
And entring within the frontiers and borders of Nauarre,
pight his Pauilions before Pompelon, the head Citie
of the Kingdome of the Cantabrians. Which Citie the
saracenes had ſtrongly fortified with a mighty Garriſon.
And for that they had béene alredy ſufficiently ſchooled in
the auncient tricks and feates of Spayne, they would no
more commit the euent of their good or ill Fortune to
ye hazard of one entire battaile as they had before done, but
determined to protract and lynger out the warre with delayes,
tergiuerſacions and ſKirmiſhes where they might
eſpie their beſt aduauntage. Charles diſpatched and ſent
an Herauld at armes to ſommon the Towne, & to know
whether they would yelde or els abide ye doubtfull hazard

of war. They firſt, aſked a time to conſult among themſelues
what were beſt to doo, ere they woulde reſolutelye
anſwere to ye Sōmaunce. Vnto whom was granted the
ſpace of one day, wherein they demaunded and entreated
that thei might haue ſpace graunted to ſend to their kings
Frends and Confederates, and geue them to vnderſtand
of their diſtreſſe, ſo that if they were not reſcued and the
ſiege reyſed within xv. dayes, then they would wyllingly
yéelde themſelues and their Citie into his hands. Alleadgyng,
that it ſhould be much for the auaile and commodytie
of ye 
               French, to conquere and wyn the Citie, being vnperyſhed
and neither by the Conquerour in his ragynge
moode defaced, nor by the conquered defendaunt, through
deſperation blemiſhed and diſfigured. Neither that
this taryaunce ſhould in any poyncte hinder his Procéedinges,
but rather be greatly beneficiall for hym. For
why, though he bent all the force he was able to make againſt
the Citie, yet was it able to holde hym out for ſo
many dayes as they craued. And furthermore that the
French, if their Fortune were to get the vpperhande in
fight of their Fréendes that came to ſuccour them, ſhould
with a worde onely commaunde the Porteculleſſes and
ſtrong grated Gates of ye Citie to be broken downe & opēned
for them quietly to enter, whiche ſhoulde be much
for the honour, Dignitie, and profite of both parties: leaſt
otherwiſe, thoſe innocent Cities that haue committed no
fault, for whoſe deliuerie and regaignynge the French
proteſted themſelues to be come, ſhould ſuffer ſuch ruthfull
and iniurious examples of warre on both ſides, as
the nature and inſolencie of a Siege neceſſarilye
bringeth.
            
               Charles prudently perceiuing all theſe proteſtations
and ſurmiſes of the Saracenes to be ſubtilly and craftelye
deuiſed for none other entent, but onely to abate the heat
and courage of his Souldiours (being now moſt ſharply

ſet to haue their purpoſe) by protracting the time and geuyng
longer day, would in no wiſe agrée to graunt them
any reſpite to make any further preperation and purueighaunce
for war, which mighte peraduenture tourne
hym to greater inconuenience afterwarde, but immediatlye
ſendeth defiaunce againſt them, and commaundeth
hys Souldiours to prouide and make ready ſuch thinges
as to the battrie and ſiege of the Citie were requiſite.
            The Siege of this Citie continued many dayes, and diuers
aſſaultes fiercely geuen. The Aſſaylauntes were
not ſo buſie without, but the Defendaunts were as dylygent
within many times yſſuinge out of their Gates, not
after the Arabian guyſe, but accordinge to the Spanish
manner, armed with Sword and fire, quick, ſwift, nymble
and ſodaine, deluding their enemyes, with many ſtratagemes
and ſubtyll pollicies, facinge and ſhifting from
place to place, pretermittinge no occaſion that made for
their purpoſe, dealynge euery where and at all times ſo
deceiueablye, that when the other partye thought themſelues
ſureſt of their purpoſe, they were fardeſt of, and
when their deſires were likeſt (as thei thought) to ſorte to
effect, then were they ſooneſt beguiled and lykely themſelues
to fall into the lapps of their enemies: ſo ſecret and
ſpéedy, that they were many times in the middeſt of their
enemies flaſhing among them before any man ſuſpected
their cōming, killing them and ſetting fire in their tentes
and gone againe out of ſight, ere any reſiſtaunce could be
made or any time to go againſt them. They ſkirmiſhed &
ruffled wt their enemies, in a maner within their owne
tents. And although there was a band apointed at ye gates
of the Citie to kéepe them from comminge out, yet (notwithſtanding)
they could not be ſo pent in, nor debarred
from their purpoſes, but with lyke bouldeneſſe as afore,
they would often ſet vpon them, and by no meanes wolde
be brought to kepe wtin ye wals of the citie, til ye ſame wer
throughly entrenched and rampired, and all their works

within, finiſhed to their minde. Thē did they ſtand at defiaunce
valiauntly, not as men defending their manhood
with walles, but kéepyng & defending their walles with
manhood. This Siege contynuing ſomwhat longe, the other
kings which were daily looked for to reyſe the ſiege,
came in deed, albeit furniſhed with any hoaſt, able to fight
a maine battaile, but euer as they eſpied any aduauntage
or occaſion, they would make out Dimilaunces and light
Horſemen by knowen pathes and waies, to annoy King
Charles. Which Horſemen oftener by night then by day
alitle diſquieted his Campe, and made ſome diſturbance
and Outcries therein. An other crewe of them killyng the
watchmē & perforce making way through their enemies
Bulwarkes and Fortifications, entred the citie, & greatlye
relieued them within, whereby thei conceiued great
hope of future ſucceſſe. Charles wt a courage vnappauled
and inuincible exhorting his men, tolde them that the victory
was to be obtained with paines taking & vigilancie,
that martiall proweſſe appeareth not only in the encountrie
and conflict, but a great deale rather in good diſcipline
and obſeruance of martiall orders, not to be lulled in eaſe
and ſecurytie, beſtowing the greateſt part of the night in
ſléepe and bodely reſt, but in ſtudie and deuiſe for the atchiueaunce
of their waightye buſineſſe, & in the day time
inceſſantly to be buſied, abſtaining from riot & libidinous
luſtes & euermore abandoning werines and lingering of
time. Geuing them further to vnderſtand, yt ye cages and
walles wherin thoſe Sathaniſtes had encloſed themſelues
for their ſauegard, muſt ether perforce be brokē in péeces
& beaten downe about their eares, or els ye enemies thē
               ſelues
to be tamed and brought vnder awfull obedience.
Wherfore he had them to aduance their ſtandards & with
banners diſplaid, to march againſt thē, & not ſuffer them
to reſt. Then was ther made fortificatiōs & habiliments,
to ſerue ech way and on euery ſide, wherby their Camp
was kept both before, behind and on either ſide.
            
               
Then they that fiſked and raunged out as thei did before,
were faine to hyde their heades within their Fortreſſe, or
els were ſhamfully compelled to retire, and ſo the matter
was brought to a perfect Siege. Then beganne there a
ſharpe and terrible battrye whiche contynued day and
night without intermiſſion, freſh Souldiours euer comming
in the places of ye weary, and fighting by courſe one
after an other rounde aboute, with all kinde of deuiſes
Engins, Ordinaunce, Ladders, Bridges, pollicie and valyauntnes,
in ſomuch that ye 
               Saracenes courage being wel
cooled, were now diſmaid & at their wits end, not hable to
hold out ani longer, but on euery ſide (do what they could)
were by the valyant French Aſſaylaunts throwen downe
from the walles or els ſlayne out of hand. Within the
Citie alſo there was a great ſlaughter of them, vntyll the
King had made proclamation that as many as were vnarmed
and without weapon ſhould be ſpared.
            Then lo, the Saracenes, euer before that time, chooſing
and accuſtomed rather to die then to yéeld as long as they
had weapon & Armure,Kinge Charles cooled the saracens courage threwe downe their weapons,
and vpon their knées holdyng vp their vnarmed hands be
ſought pardon. Then were the walles raſed and the citie
ſacked. From thence the Campe remooued and went to
Saragoza the head Citie of the Prouince Taraconenſis:
which beinge terryfied and feared by the example afore,
ſtraightway condiſcended and agréed to accept the offers
and conditions propounded vnto them, whiche was
that they ſhoulde admitte and receaue into their Citie
ſuch as preached the glad tydinges of the Goſpell of God,
and receaue againe Ibnabala their King, and hym to acknowledg
and obey as their Soueraigne Lorde. After
this, he went into Gottalonia, & compelled the two kings
of ye Prouince (which were accuſed to haue expulſed Ibnabala
but of his kingdome) Abu
                     •
                  am & Deui
                     •
                  feze to come
into his Paullion with Giftes and Preſents, & condiſcend

to become Tributaries. Thus his name was had in feare
and awe throughout all Spaine. But when he was returned
home agayne into Fraunce, ſome write that there
came out of Aphrica, one Aigoland, ſent from the high
Duke of the Aphrican Saracens, who kept his Seat royall
at Marrocco) with a mighty army, to recouer all ſuch
Townes and places as Charles had taken in Spaine:
with whom there were many other Princes, Potentats
and valyaunt perſonages. And that Charles (after many
combates, darraigned and foughten with hym hand to
hand beinge thereunto by hym chalenged and prouoked)
fought a bloudy battayle with hym at Baion, a Citie of
Vaſconia, wherein were ſlayne 400000. Chriſtians,
and among them Myles Anglere Father to Rouland, a
ſtout Gentleman and a hardy, who had the leadinge and
was Generall of the whole Army. Notwithſtanding, all
was regained by the puyſſance and proweſſe of Charles,
and other freſh ayd that then came euen in the nicke out
of Italy to ſuccour the Frenchman in that diſtreſſe. Inſomuch
that Aegoland priuyly fled and conueighed himſelfe
away.
            But not long after, hauinge repaired his army with
a ſupplie of moe Souldiours, Aegoland againe prouoked
Charles into Vaſconia, and beſieged the Citie Gennum
now called Baion the ſpace of ſeuen Monthes, and departing
thence was in the borders of Xantongue in a cruell
battel ouerthrowen, after which diſcomfiture he fled back
againe into Spaine. And how that Charles (becauſe he
would at length bring his Spaniſh warres to an end) wt
a greater army then any afore, entred into Spaine, where
after many light ſkirmiſhes, he ſlew Aegolād in a notable
battell: after which victorie he brought vnder his ſubiection
and rule almoſt all Spaine: with many moe forged
reportes and mere fables of ſome aduoutched, all which,
for the vntruth and vnlykelyhood therof we do heare pretermit.

But if any be deſirous to ſée them, let them reade
Turpine Byſhoppe of Rhemes, to whom alſo I do referre
you, for the trueth of this which wee haue here
laſt recited. For we doe not fynde in any of thoſe credible
and approued wryters whych wée folowe, that
Charles made any moe voyages againſt the Saracenes
into Spaine but one, nor that they euer entred into
Fraunce during his Raigne. But this is manifeſt, that
Alphonſus Kyng of Aſturia, mooued with the famous
renowne of his noble Actes and inuincible valiaunce,
and for the common weale of his Kingdome and Subiectes,
becauſe he had no Children of his owne, and ſaw
that the power of that onely Region was farre vnhable
ſo beare out and maintaine continuall warres wyth the
Saracens, offered vnto him ſecretely by truſtie Meſſengers
and Ambaſſadours the Kingdome of Lyon, ſo
that he would ayde hym againſt the King of Corduba,
with whom he had then waged Warre. Charles accepting
this offer and condition, ſent ayde vnto hym.
Which compoſition when the Nobles and Péeres of the
Realme of Lyon vnderſtoode, they were ſoore diſpleaſed
and tooke the matter greuouſly, ſpighting (as commonly
in like caſes it falleth out) to haue a Nation hard vnder
theyr noſes to bée rulers ouer them, and therevpon
they compelled theyr King to ſtarte from his Bargaine
and vndoe his League. And not ſo contented to leaue,
purpoſed alſo and deuiſed which way to diſpatch and deſtroye
King Charles and all his Army: fearing, leaſt he
ſéeing himſelfe thus deluded and mocked would, reuenge
this iniurie done vnto him. Therefore gathering and
aſſembling all the power of the Aſturians and Cantabrians
together, and ſendyng alſo for ayde to the Saracenes
(in ſecrete wiſe preuenting Charles) tooke and kept
the narow Streights of the Mountaines where the paſſage
& way lyeth into Spaine by Ronceuall. For Charles
               
was retourned into Fraunce, and was now againe in his
way going into Spaine, to reuenge this wrongfull dealing.
The Armie of King Charles was thē at the foote of
the Pyrence Mountaines on that ſide next Fraunce, in
the valley (yet called Hoſpita) when there came newes
vnto them, that the Spaniardes were comming in warlike
maner againſt him along by the valley called at this
day Charles Valley, which was a faire plaine Chāpaine.
Therfore diuiding his hoaſt into thrée Battailes, by the
fraudulent & traiterous coūſaile of Galerō
                (or as ſome cal
him Gane) whō the enemies had corrupted with money,
he appointed Rouland his Nephew by his Siſter, (commonly
called of ye vulgar ſort Orland) Duke of little Britaine,
a valiaunt Gentlemā and a hardy, to leade ye Vauwarde,
wherein he placed al the noble States & Péeres of
Fraūce: in ye ſecond battaile, he placed innumerable Gentlemē
and noble Perſonages: and he himſelf with ye third
(wherin was the traitour Galerō
               ) taried ſtil in ye campe,
commaunding Orland with the vauntgard to aduaunce
himſelf forward. The Spanish army was embattailed in
Ronceuall, expecting their cōming. Vpon, whō the fronte
of the French hoaſt geuing the onſet, was at ye firſt brunt
ſo handled (for the Spanyardes had gottē the vpper groūd
and al ye ſtrait paſſages) yt they were in worſe caſe which
eſcaped their hands, thē they which were ſlain outright in
fighting: for they dyed & were quickly out of pain, but the
other 
                  •
               léeing through thicke & thinne among ye ſtones and
craggy Cliues & falling down frō high Rockes, had their
limmes brokē, & ſo continued for a lōger ſeaſō in extreme
tormente and agonies. Thus, Rouland & all his traine
being wearied, what with climing vp the hill, and what
with the waight of their armour were eaſely killed and
brought to confuſiō.xii. Peeres of Fraunce. After the ſame maner alſo was ye ſecond
battaile hādled, wherin were ye. 12. Péeres of Fraūce,
in whoſe power it is to create the king & decide al waightie
cauſes of the Realme.
            
               
               Charles ſtill abode in the Valleye, which for this cauſe is
to this day called Charles Valley, whyther he had remoued
his Campe out of Hoſpita. Who vnderſtandinge of
the great ouerthrow and loſſe of his Men, retyred with al
ſpéede againe into Fraunce. Alphonſus excuſed himſelfe
by Ambaſſadours vnto him, that all theſe thinges were
attempted and done without his conſent and knowledge,
with whome Charles renewed the former amytie and
league betwene them ſtroken and concluded. Then deuiſinge
in his minde to procure an atonement and vniuerſall
peace to the whole world, ſent his Ambaſſadours into
Syria and Aegypt, to conclude an amytie and peace with ye
Princes and Chiefe Rulers of the Infideles, to the ende
that they ſhould the better vſe and entreate ye Chriſtians
liuing vnder their ſubiection. Which he obteined, inſomuch
that Aaron the high Caliph of Perſia and Arabia)
who not longe afore, rufflingly inuadyng the Prouinces
of Aſia that were vnder the Conſtantinopolitane Empire
with CCC.M. men, had enforced and by compulſion
dryuen Nicephorus the emperour to redéeme and (as
it were) to fer
                  ••
               e peace at his hands, by paying yéerely an
annuall fée in gold) from thenceforth not onely not infeſted
and vexed ye Chriſtians, but alſo gaue yéerely a great
Maſſe and ſumme of moneye to the reliefe of thoſe poore
Captiues that liued vnder his rule, and alſo ſent his Ambaſſadours
with great rewardes to King Charles. For
when Aaron had with many ouerthrowes and pillages
miſerably afflicted and fruſſhed the Romane empyre, ſurpryzed
and taken Tyana where he erected and dedicated
a temple vnto Mahomet & an infinite numbre of townes
moe: Nicephorus ſéeinge his matters goe to wrecke,
and diſtruſtinge any better fortune, ſent his Letters to
the Arabian to obteyne and requeſt a peace accordinge to
the tenour folowinge.
            
               Why tho
                     •
                   ſhouldeſt thus vniuſtlie warre againſte

me and my dominions ſythens I haue not wronged nor
offended thée, or who they be that counſaile thee therunto
I know not, neither do I ſe any cauſe reaſonable to moue
thée, vnles it be peraduenture, becauſe thou haſt a delight
and pleaſure in murther, robberie and rapine. For that
thou doeſt it for religion ſake, thou canſt not pretend a
ny excuſe, ſithens Machomet thy high Prophet, commaū
                  deth
you to vſe and accoumpt al Chriſtians as Brothers.
Doeſt thou thinke that Almightie God the creatour of all
thinges and the ſtaie of both the People, whome he hath
created and made after his owne ſimilitude and lykenes,
is delighted with effuſion and ſhéeding of innocent bloud?
God forbid. For your Prophet Mahomet did not commaund
you to offre vnto him any ſuch ſacrifice or ſatiſfactorie
exp
                     •
                  ation. Or elſe perchaunce doeſt thou inuade ye
territories and prouinces belonginge to other men, for
ſome néede and want of Syluer, Golde and ſuch other
thinges? But alas, there is no ſuch ſtore of theſe thinges
with vs? yea all precious iewelles and wares that are
rare and hard to be gotten, are among you in great plentie.
But if there be any thinge in our Countreys yt may
do thee pleaſure, why doeſt thou not aſke it fréendly, and
we will beſtow the ſame vpon the without delaye moſte
louingly. If thou care not for man nor any force ye mortall
man can annoye thee with all, yet know thou that
there is a God, which ſéeth and remembreth right and
wronge. For ſythens we be mortall, it is not comely nor
fitte for vs to beare immortall grudge and endleſſe enemitie
one toward an other, & in that poinct to reſemble &
imitate the Diuell, which euer ſpighteth at mans felicity
and ſoulehealth and is at perpetuall warre with all mankinde.
            
            With theſe lettres, ſent not without rewardes and
ſumptuous preſentes Aaron being appeaſed, ſent agayn
many preſentes and gyftes to Nicephorus, & concluded a

peace with hym vpon a condition, that the Emperour
ſhould pay yéerely vnto hym xxx .M. Crownes, and thrée
for his owne head, and as many for his Sonne and that
he ſhould not reedifie nor repayre ſuch Townes as were
raſed and waſted by the saracenes. But in the perfourmance
of this agreement, there was les faith in ye 
               Greke
then in the Barbarian. For Nicephorus after the departure
of the Saracenes out of thoſe townes, immediatly reedified
and fortyfied them. Which dealyng when Aaron
vnderſtood, he furniſhed out an other Armye into Grecia,
which tooke Thebes: and ſendinge a Nauy into Cyprus,
ſubuerted the Churches and expulſed the Cyprians. And
when Aaron had raigned xxiij. yéeres he payed his debte
to Nature, after whom ſuccéeded in the Pontificate his
Sonne Muamat. Who fallynge at mortall debate with
his Brother Halad, and with him coapynge in conflicte
wherein his ſide went to wrack (Fortune more fauoring
his Brothers part) grew to a compoſition wt hym, yt they
twaine ſhould ioyntly wt egal authoryty (hauing both one
and the ſame tytle or ſtyle) enioy the Empire. Then ther
were created foure Tyrauntes whereof one had for his
ſhare Spayne, an other Aphrica, the third Aegipt and
the fourth Syria and Paleſtina. Wherevpon, the Saracenical
power began to decline, & for awhile ye affayres of ye
Orient were indyfferently quiete among the Saracenes.
And Muamat the Caliph of Syria woulde not now haue
his imperiall Seat at Damaſco, but buylded a newe citie
néere where olde Babilon once ſtoode, and called it Bagadat,
and it conſtituted the Pontificall Sea of Syria and all
the Orient: For the Perſians were yet vnder his rule &
iuriſdiction. The Aegiptian kept his reſidence at his Metropolitane
Citie of Cayre: whiche was (as before wee
haue ſhewed) buylded néere the place where olde Memphis
earſt ſtood. Which after the Sea royall was in it appoyncted

and kepte, ſo encreaſed, that at this daye it is
thought to be one of the greateſt Cities in the whole
Worlde: the chiefe Sea of Aphrica was accounted
by Elagleb to be at Caioran, whiche Citie was builte
in Affrica when Ottmen had the regiment and gouernaunce
of the Empyre, and is diſtaunte from the Citie
of Tunice about an hundreth Myles, and from the Sea
thyrtie and ſixe.
            
               Spaigne although it obeyed & had in it many kings, yet
they all acknowledged the Byſhop of Marrocco for their
Dioceſan: whiche is a Citie of Mauritanie Tingitana.
He that gouourned Aſsyria was called the Caliph,
whiche name ſignyfieth a ſucceſſoure: becauſe he boaſted
and bragged himſelf to be the Succeſſoure of Mahomet.
The Aegiptian Byſhoppe was called the Sultane, and
hee of Caioran, (lyke as the Aſſyrian dyd) named himſelfe
a Caliph: and hee of Marrocco by the auncient
name of the Founder and buylder of that Citie, was
named a Miralmumine. Vnder theſe, there alſo
aroſe certayne other leſſe Kingdomes in Affrica: as the
Kyngdome of Tunice, of Tripolis, of Algeria, of
Oran, of Feſs: and an innumerable ſorte moe, leſſe then
theſe. For as euerye one was Ruler ouer anye Citie
or Prouince. So he called hymſelfe Kinge of the ſame,
and poſſeſſinge the Stile and name thereof, as due by inheritaunce,
lefte and delyuered the ſame as it were by
hand to his Succeſſion and poſterytie.
            But yet notwithſtandinge all theſe Kinges agnized
and acknowledged ſome of theſe forenamed Byſhops:
and as euerie one fauoured thys Byſhoppe or that, ſo
in hys quarrell dyd he make Warre with the Kings
of the other faction. Which ſedicious diſcordes and multitude
of Tyrantes ſo appaired & weakened the power
of the Saracenes that after the regiment of the aforeſayde
Byſhoppes, they ſo decreaſed and theyr force ſo

was enféebled, that at length the name of Saracenes
gaue place and was almoſt cleane eatē vp of the Turkes:
and the ſtate of their Empyre was at this time through
the perturbation and burlyburly about the ſoueraigntie,
ſo obſcured and vnknowen, that no certaintie in the ſucceſſion
of their Empyre can be had, no not among
their owne writers. Neuertheleſſe, wee obſeruing the
due order of tymes, will as briefely as may be, comprehende
all ſuch thinges as are confuſedly written by diuerſe
Authors, concerning the actes and geſtes by them
atchieued.
            In the tyme that this Muamat the Sonne of Aaron
ruled Aſſyria, and Michael the Sonne in law of Nicephorus
(expulſer of Leo out of Armenia) was Emperour
of Conſtantinople, one Thomas brued a great garboyle
and commotion.
                  Thomas a ranke ſedicious traitor and filthy villain. Of whom the report and fame is
tolde after two wayes. Some ſaye he came of a very
poore and baſe Parentage, and that he lyued long tyme
in much pouertie and indigence, faine to get his lyuing
with his handie labour, and ſometyme with ſeruile drudgerie.
Afterward, abandoning his natiue Countrey and
comming to Conſtantinople, was retained in the ſeruice
of an Alderman of the Citie where the graceleſſe
verlet ſo much abuſed himſelfe with carnall luſt and vicious
life, that he committed adultrie with his Miſtreſſe,
and dubbed the Alderman his maiſter, Knight of the
common Hall. Which lewde pranke being detected and
come to light, Thomas partly for ſtarke ſhame and ignominie
and partly for feare of the paynes and puniſhment
appoynted by Law for ſuche as he was, fledde to
the Saracenes: for whoſe Diueliſhe deuiſes he was as
fit an Organe and Inſtrument as any in the worlde:
with whom, he was had in a great credite, ſpeciallye
after that his conuerſation and behauiour a long tyme
contynued and ſhewed among them (for he had nowe

dwelled among them .xxv. yéeres) had geuen ſufficient
teſtimonie & put them in an aſſured opiniō of his fidelitie
towarde them. Inſomuch that renouncing and apoſtating
his Chriſtianitie and abiuring the holy Religion
of the Chriſtians, he embraced the horrible doctrine of
Mahometicall Religion. And beyng by them appoynted
Capitane of a competent Crew of warlike Souldiours
was ſent againſt the Chriſtians. For he had promiſed
vnto them, that if they would furniſhe him out with ſome
competent power, he woulde vndertake to ſubdue the
Romane Empyre into their handes. And leaſt the Chriſtians
ſhould haue any miſtruſt & diffidence in him thus
working and contriuing the Toyle of their confuſion, or
peraduenture taking him as a ſtraunger & forayner giue
no credite to his wordes, he named himſelf Conſtantine,
the ſonne of Irene. Which Conſtantine in very déede (for
his crabbed nature and peruerſe maners) his mother lōg
before had bereft of both his eyes and of the Empire alſo,
and was then dead.
            Some others there be, which do affirme that this Thomas
was whilome in the houſe of one Bardanius ſurnamed
Turcus, together with Michael and Leo. At what
time ſoiourning at a place called Philomelium, & ſeeking
by all meanes how to make himſelfe Emperour, he diſcouered
his counſaile and opened the very bottome of his
ſtomacke to a certaine Monke ſkilfull in the prediction of
fortunes and things to come, to which deuiſe and plat he
made Leo Armenus priuie. Vnto whome the Monke
tolde, that if he firſt aſpired to the Empyre, he ſhould looſe
both hys eyes and his worldly dignitie: but of them,
that brought hym his horſe, the firſt and ſecond ſhould
enioy the Diademe, and the thirde ſhould bee proclaymed
Emperour: but not hable to compaſſe and throughly
bring about, his deſired purpoſe, he ſhould ſhortly periſhe
and be brought to confuſion.
            
               
The firſt was Leo, the ſecond Michael, and the third this
Thomas whom Leo the Emperour made Colonell ouer
the Band of his Confederates. Which Leo, when Thomas
vnderſtoode to bée ſlaine by Michael, he partly to
reuenge the death of him through whoſe beneuolence &
goodwill he had bene promoted to diuerſe dignities, and
partlie to eaſe his owne Stomacke and bringe about the
effect of his malicious mynde (for Michael and he coulde
neuer agrée but maligned one an other euen from their
Adoleſcencie) rayſed warre agaynſt Michael, and firſt
found the meanes to inueigle and rayſe vp the Orientall
power (among whom he lyued) to take part wyth hym.
Thus he gathered together an armye not of weaklings
and vnexpert Souldiours, or of a fewe in number, but
huyge, Populous and hardie, of Saracenes, Moores,
Indians, Medes, Perſians, Aſſyrians, Armenians,
Chaldees, Iberians, Zigians, Cabirians and diuerſe
other Nations. Of whom, ſome by compulſion accompanied
hym in that Warre, ſome for good will, ſome
in hope of ſpoyle, and ſome for a rooted malice and hatred
againſt Michael, who for his froward nature and
peruerſe manners was generally hated of all men. For
Thomas although he was lame on one of his féete, and a
Barbarian borne, yet for his gray heares and auncient
age he was reputed among them venerable and worſhipfull,
in famylier talke and conference very curteous
and affable (whych are the thinges that moſt of
all wynneth the heartes of Souldiours) and for bodely
ſtrength not inferiour to any.
            He thus furniſhed with an armie of Saracenes, to
whom he had promyſed the Conſtantinopolitane Empyre,
and alſo with a great power of Chriſtians which
ventured life limme and goods with him, violently inuaded
and forcibly got the poſſeſſiō of the Orient. And bringing
vnder his obedience the exacters of publique tributes

with great ſtatelyneſſe of minde, folowed the chaſe of good
fortune now ſeruing his turne and ſmyling vppon hym,
Within a while, of a low Haſkerd became a great Ruler
and of a weake mungrell Pezaunt a mighty Potentate,
by whom all Aſia was with ſpoiling and pillage miſerably
afflicted. Some Cities for feare ioygned ſyde with
him, and conformed themſelues to his humour. Some
becauſe they would not reuolte from theyr true Liege
the Emperour, were ſpoyled and the inhabitauntes
caryed awaye Captyue. So that there were none in
all Aſia but only the Opſicians and Armenians which
continued in their true allegiance. For which gratuitie &
conſtant obedience, the Emperour releaſed and frankly
remitted vnto thē their publique tribute called Fumariū.
But Thomas was ſo puffed vp wt this ſucceſſe, yt he preſumptuouſly
tooke vpō him ye name of Emperour: & was
crowned with ye Diademe at Antioche, by Iob Paſtour
or Biſhop at that time of the Antiochene Congregatiō:
whom he (to requite one good turne for another) adopted
for his Sonne, and made as his fellowe and Coadiutour
in the adminiſtration of the Empyre, and then chaunging
his owne name called himſelfe Conſtantine the
Sonne of Irene the Empreſſe.
            The Emperour knowing of this new ſtirre and commotion
made preparation for warre: and ſent one of his
Lordes with an Army nothing equall (God wot) nor of
power to match and encounter with his enemies: which
was by Thomas diſcomfited and cleane ouerthrowē. After
this, méeting with the Romane Fléete, tooke ye ſame,
and with .lxxx.M. men tooke his way to Abydus, which
is a Citie of Aſia the leſſe, ſtanding vpon the Sea ſyde,
ſpoyling and deſtroying all where he went, & burning to
aſhes not only poore vplādiſh villages, but goodly towns
and ſtronge Cities. And from thence in a very darke
nyghte tranſfreted into Thracia, where many of the

Emperours Souldiours reuoulted and fled dayly vnto
hym. He put to flight and draue downe all the Emperors
power ſent againſt hym. Wherof were chief Capitaines
Olbian and Catacella, and (lyke a ragyng Streame, violently
runnyng downe from a Hyll) profligated both by
Sea and Land and bore downe before him, an other wel
apoynted Nauy, manned out lykewiſe by ye emperour againſt
him. He burſt aſunder the yron chayne that went
ouerthwart the Hauen & ſo layd ſiege to the citie both by
Sea and land. But preuailyng nothing that way, he determyned
to winne his purpoſe by long ſiege, and fortifiyng
his Campe in very good order, ſent parte of his army
to ſubdue ye Townes lying by ye Coaſt of Euxine. This
doone, with the reſt of his power (which was very great)
he on euery ſide beclipped the citie with a mighty oppugnation
and gaue thereto a terrible battery. But by the
valyaunt courage of the Defendauntes, all his attemptes
were fruſtrate. And his Nauy on ye Sea by force of tempeſt
was diſperſed and diſſeuered, ſo that he was fayne to
brynge his hoaſt back agayne into Aſia tyll the wynter
were paſſed.
            The Spring folowyng, he agayne retourned to the
ſame ſiege: but Michael being now better furniſhed and
prouided then hee was before both with a Nauy of tall
Shippes to ſcowre the Coaſtes and kéepe the Seas, and
alſo with an army of luſty ſouldiours by land, firſt aſſaied
by diuers ſlights to vndermine Thomas his ſouldiours &
to ſollicite them to renownce and forſake their Capitaine
but al was in vayne. Wherfore ſetting all the Gates of ye
citie open, he ſodenly with all his company iſſued out and
ſet vpon Thomas ſuſpectyng no ſuch pretence and matter,
and him there diſcomfited, and his whole Fléete on
the Sea alſo.
            There was one Gregory, Coſen to Leo late Emperor,
who with a crew of good fighting Souldiours ayded Thomas,
               
but now ſéeinge the worlde thus tourned, ſeparated
foorthwith his Souldiours aparte from the reſidue, in
hope thereby to wynne the Emperours fauour and ſet
vpon Thomas behinde. Whiche when Thomas eſpyed,
beyng nothing therewith diſcouraged, nor yet therefore
remoouing his ſtronglye lodged Campe from the Citie,
ſet vpon Gregorie with parte of hys Army and him diſcomfited,
who for his ſauegard flying away, he caught in
the chaſe and put to death. Then ſpéeding himſelfe into
his Camp agayne, he addreſſed his letters abroad into all
quarters, vntruly makyng report that he had gotten the
vpperhand againſt Michael in battayle: and ſent for the
Nauy that lay at Berytum, wherein were of Gallayes
and Hulkes to the number of CCC.L. Sayle, with all
expedition to come vnto him, as though the matter ſhould
foorthwith be tryed likewiſe by Sea. Which drifte and
commaundement when the Admyralles and Capitaines
of the Romane Nauy vnderſtoode and knew, they ſet vppon
them at vnwares by night in the roade, when they
lay at Anker, and with their ſodayne comming, ſo ſcarred
and affrayed the Mariners that they were at their wittes
ende and knewe not how vpon ſuch a ſodayne to defend
themſelues: ſo yt there many of them were by ye Imperials
taken, and many burnt, and very few eſcaped, which
beyng quicke of ſayle gott away and ioyned themſelues
to the other Army that was on the land.
            While this terreſtriall army lay before Conſtantinople,
without any notable battayle ſauing only manylight
ſkirmiſhes, and ſmall bickeringes, wherein ſomtimes
Fortune ſmyled and ſomtime frowned vpon either part,
the ſame and reporte thereof was ſpread and bruted
throughout the Worlde. In ſomuche that Mortago
King of Bulgarie, (notwithſtandinge the Emperoure
for gréedineſſe and miſerable ſparing of his money as he

was by nature moſt couetous and a néere Prince, thankyng
hym for his good wyll, had before refuſed his ayde
offeryng to aſſiſt him, ſaying that he had no néede therof)
partlye becauſe hee was deſirous of Warre and ſpoyle
of his enemies, and partly to confirme the former thrée
yeeres League made with Leo Armenus, marched with
an Armye agaynſte Thomas, and him in a place called
Cedocto, not farre from Conſtantinople where the two
armyes met, in Battayle ouercame & vanquiſhed, wherin
many a man was ſlayne, and after the ende thereof
retourned home with many Priſoners and rich Booties.
            When the Nauye that Thomas had left at the Siege
heard of this notable diſcomfiture and ouerthrowe, they
all reuoulted from Thomas and ſubmitted themſelues to
the Emperour. Thomas gatheringe together the remnaunt
of his Armye that eſcaped vnkylled at the laſt conflict
with Mortago, conducted them into a playne Féelde
called Diabaſis, diſtaunt certayne Furlonges from the
Citie, a place verye commodious and fit for excurſions,
and for plentie of water very profitable. Where hee anew
encamped. From thence makinge vagaries and
roades, he waſted and deſpoyled al the Emperours ſumptuous
buyldings and banqueting houſes of pleaſure ſtanding
in the Suburbes of the Citie. The Emperoure hauinge
his Armye euery daye more and more encreaſed,
ſtrake vp Alarme and gaue the charge vpon him in thrée
ſeuerall parts, whereby he throughly put al Thomas his
Armye to flight. For Thomas before had geuen commaundemente
to his men, that at the firſte onſette, they
ſhould retyre and make a ſhewe as though they fled, and
afterward vpon the ſodayne tourne agayne and recharge
vpon their enemies. After this diſcomfiture many of his
men fledde to the Emperour. Thomas with a few of his
adherents came in ſafetie to Adrianople and his adoptiue
Son Anaſtaſius eſcaping alſo by flight, tooke for his ſauegarde

the Caſtel of Byzia. After whom the Emperour
without delay making purſuite, went firſte to Adrianople
where Thomas was. And leaſt the Scythians dwellyng
thereabout, ſhould learne the knowledge of ſuch engyns
and Arrtyllerie as ſerue for Battery and oppugnation
of Cities, he determyned by famine to driue them to
ſurrender and yéelde, and ſo beclipped it rounde aboute
with a ſtrong Siege.
            The Citie was well walled and beſide that, ſurely entrenched
and fortefied with Bulwarkes. But they were
ſo pinched with Famine, that all their victualles beinge
ſpent, they ſecretly had conference with Michael and being
at a poyncte and compoſition with him for pardon of
this their rebellyous conſpiracie, deliuered Thomas into
his handes. The Emperour now hauinge in his poſſeſſion
his deadly enemie,Ende of Traytours obſeruing ye auntient cuſtome of other
Emperors in lyke caſes, firſt made him to proſtrate
himſelfe vpon the Pauement and Stones, whiche done,
he ſet his féete vpon his necke, and trodde vpon hym.
            Then he cauſed his Féete and handes to be cutte of, and
ſo ſetting him vpon an Aſſe, cōmaunded him to be caryed
about the Campe, for euery man to wonder at. Whereat
the miſerable caytife ſaid in howling ſort theſe words:
Haue mercie & compaſſion vpon me yu yt art ye true King.
And when he was about, vpon ye Emperours interrogatories
& motions to haue bewraied & accuſed certen of his
famyliers, as pryuie and of counſel with him in this ruffling
rebellion, the Emperour being aduiſed by Exambulius
one of his Nobles, that no credite ought in ſuch caſes
to be geuen to a profeſſed enemie, accuſing the approued
fréendes of his Maieſtie, would not heare him. And
ſo geuing order for his execution, cauſed him, (longe languiſhing
in terrible forments) to be put to death.
            They that fled to Byzia, folowing the example of the
Adrianopolitanes, tooke Anaſtaſius and deliuered hym

bounde to the Emperour, who alſo was put to execution.
This end had Thomas, whoſe hiſtorie (although he were
no Saracen) we thought good not héere to omit, becauſe
he chiefely atchieued and perpetrated the ſame by the aide
and power of the Saracens, inſomuch that he might right
well ſéeme to haue bene the Emperour and Ringleader
of the Saracens.
            
            While theſe things were in doing in the Orient, the
Saracens in Spaine, moſt arrogantly by their Ambaſſadours
demaunded of Ramire King of Aſturians (who ſuccéeded
Alphonſus Caſtus) ye Tribute which king Mauregat
was wont to pay. Vnto whom Ramire by the aduiſe
of his priuie Counſell aunſwered, that he had leifer
dye a hundreth deathes then ſo to doe. And forthwith leuying
an armie marched againſt them waſting and deſtroying
their Territories and Countreyes, as farre as
Nagiera. Betwene whom and the Saracens was fought
at Aluelda a ſore battayle, and ſorer had bene if the night
had not made an ende of the ſame for that daye, wherein
foraſmuch as the Saracenes were lyker to haue the victorie:
Ramire by night with his companie retyred vnto
a certaine hill néere Clauigium: and there greatly fearing
the doome of Fortune the next day, and what woulde befyde
on him and his, after ſo vnluckie a beginning, ſought
his onely refuge at Gods handes, beſtowing (both he and
all his retinue) the whole night almoſt in watching and
prayer to Almightie God for his aſſiſtaunce in that theyr
gréeuous extremitie. Then and there (as ſome do ſaye)
Saint Iames the Apoſtle ſéemed perſonally to appeare
vnto him, promyſing him his helpe and furtheraunce,
wherevpon Ramire the next day comming into the field
in good aray of battaile, againſt his enemies, with an aſſured
confidence of Diuine helpe and aſſiſtance, the ſayde
holy Apoſtle Saint Iames was ſene in the battayle, ſitting
vpon a white horſe and bearing in his hande a redde

Croſſe, and that in the ſame Battaile were ſlayne of Saracenes.
lxx. thouſand. Then were Albaida, Clauigium,
Calagurra, and many other townes thereabout regained
by the Chriſtians: In token and remembrance of which
victorie by the Diuine aſſiſtance of Celeſtiall preſence
atchieued,By whom & whervpon ye Knightes of ye order of S. Iames were firſt inſtituted. the Noble order of the Knightes of Saincte
Iames was by the King inſtituted.
            The Saracenes inhabyting the Weſt parte of Spayne
where Valentia ſtandeth, peſtred with multitude of people,
and conſidering that ye Countrey which was vnto thē
for their habitation allotted, was neither fruitfull nor
wealthye, deſired their highe Prince of Marrocco in
Mauritania Tingitania whoſe name was Amerumen,
to permit and lycenſe them to ſéeke ſome other place of
dwelling, where they might more commodiouſly rouſte:
and whyther they might cary theyr people, and famylie
and plant themſelues more to their cōtentacions. Whoſe
requeſtes their Prince, as one deſirous of new alterations
and chaunges of the world graunted: and furniſhing
them out of hande wyth a Hauie of Brigandines
and Gallayes, partlye becauſe he woulde ſtaunch their
gréedie appetites wyth other mennes goods, and partly
becauſe he woulde by this meanes trie and ſéeke out
whether there were any fruitefull Soyle and fertile
Iſland, whereinto he might conueniently deryue a
Colonie of his owne people, ſent them to the Iſles of
the Orient. They landed firſt in Corſica, but thence
they were repulſed and dryuen awaye by Abdemar,
whom Pipine the Sonne of Charles the Great Kyng
of Italie, had ſent wyth the Genaway fléete agaynſt
them. In which conflicte, Abdemar moſt valiauntly
and manfully fighting was ſlayne. From thence ſaylyng
to the Iſles of Grecia (whych were ſpoyled and
diſfurniſhed of the Hauie appoynted to kéepe them,
through the meanes of the Garriſon that tooke parte

with Thomas) they ſacked and robbed almoſt euerye
one of them vnmercifully. Among all the reſt, lyking
Creta beſt, both for fertilitie of the Countrey, and holeſomenes
of Ayre, they laded theyr Shippes with pillage
and retourned for that yéere home againe, and in
the Springe folowing, with .xl. tall Shippes well manned
and appoynted for the Warres, they hauyng
a proſperous gale of wynde came ſtraight agayne to
Creta. And ſetting theyr men on lande at a Promontorie
called euer after Carax, ſet theyr Shippes on
fire, and there pitching their Tentes, ſtrongly entrenched
them ſelues, callyng the place by the name of Caudax.
Againſt whom, the Emperour with all expedicion
ſent a power vnder the conduct of Photinus Liuetenaunt
of the Orient, and one Damianus who in a certaine ſkirmiſh
againſt them, was ſlaine, whoſe death ſo much, aſtonned
and diſcouraged the reſidue, that they truſted to
then legges and ranne awaye. Then there came vnto
them a certaine Monke out of the mountaines of that
Iſland, who tolde them that the place which they had choſen
to builde a Citie vpon, was nothing fit for ſuch a
purpoſe: and withall, ſhewed vnto them a place, named
Candaces, in all poinctes farre more commodious.
            Where they builded a Citie, which ſhould be as the Caſtle
and fortreſſe of the whole Iſle, and called it Candie.
Out of which they made Roades and inuaſions into
the whole Iſle, inſomuch that within a ſhorte ſpace
they brought the ſame wholly into theyr ſubiection,
diſpoſſeſſing the inhabitauntes and carying the Citizens
away into Captiuitie. At which time, Cyrillus Biſhop of
Gortyne, ſuffred Martirdome for the profeſſion and teſtimony
of Ieſus Chriſt, our only Sauiour. An other nauie
of thē about the ſame time, attempted once againe ye winning
of Sardinia & Corſica: the which was encoūtred and
vanquiſhed about Sardinia by the power of Charles, the

brother of Pipine, being vnder ye conduct of the Countie
Bucharede, & v. M. of the saracens ſlaine, & all the reſt of
them afterward by him cleane driuen out of Corſica.
            
            
               Pipine hauing warres with the Venetians, the Saracens
in Spaine, taking occaſiō by the diſcorde and diſſenſions
of the Chriſtians to bring their own matters to deſired
effect, ſodainly inuaded Sardinia, from whence not
long afore, they had bene repulſed with a notable ſlaughter
& loſſe of their people. But ſtaying not lōg there, they
ſodainely departed thence: cutting their courſe directly to
Corſica. And ſacking ye Citie Aleria, beſide ye Biſhop and
a few other old mē, all the other multitude & commō ſort
they caried thence away wt them. The Emperour Michael,
ſent out another Nauie wherof was Captain Craterus
the Lieutenant of Cyberetes, againſt the Saracenes
which rouſted & neſtled in Crete. Who with .lxx. Sayle
of his owne and an infinite number of Galleys of other
Iſlandes, well manned & appointed, couragiouſly landed
in Crete: where he found the Saracens neuer a whit abaſhed
of his arriuall, neither refuſing by dent of ſword and
ſtroke of battaile to darraigne their quarell. Whervpon,
they mette together in a place méete for ſuch a purpoſe:
where betwene thē was fought a ſharpe and cruell Battaile,
laſting from the dawning of the day till Noone, in
ſuch doubtfull fortune that hard it was to iudge, whether
part in th'end would cary away the victory. But at length
toward Euening the Saracens were ouercome and fled:
wherof many were ſlain in the fielde but moe, throwing
away their weapons were taken: inſomuch that yt daye
theyr Citie was lyke to haue beene taken and wonne,
if it had not béene ſo néere nighte. Which night and
victorie was the deſtruction and ouerthrow of ye 
               Greekes
as afterward ſhall appéere. For being now in their iolitie
and pryde, hopyng the next day folowing wt ſmall labour
or none at all, to bring thoſe fewe of theyr enemyes

yet left a liue into their power) gaue themſelues to bi
                  •
               
               ynge,
ryot and bellychere as though they had not bene
in their enemies precincte and daunger but at home in
their own houſes, taking no regard to ſet heir watch kept,
or any other expedient order obſerued: Inſomuch that
minding no other thing but ſléepe, eaſe and ſtouth (the vtter
ouerthrowers of al goodnes) they were ſet vpon in the
dead time of the night,Dronkenes the cauſe of a generall miſhap and ſlaughter. ſnortinge with their dronken
nowles, by the Saracenes (who eſpyed the aduantage and
oportunytie) and were ſlayne euery Mothers ſonne, not
ſomuch as a Meſſenger left aliue to carry home newes of
their yll ſpéede. Onely Craterus the Captaine, embarkinge
himſelfe in a Marchauntes Craer, ſought to ſaue
his life. But when the Chieuetayne of the Saracenicall
Armye after longe ſéekinge and tumblinge among the
dead Carkaſſes and Priſoners could not finde him, knowing
him then to be eſcaped and fled, ſent in all poſt haſt to
purſue and hunt him out. Who being taken and apprehended
in the Ile of Coo, was hanged vpon a Gibbet.
            The Emperour Michael hearing theſe newes commanded
Orypha a wiſeman and verie ſkilfull in Martiall
affaires to gather together the Praetorian Legion
(which becauſe euery ſouldiour of that Legion had for his
wages xl. Crownes was then called Quadragenaria)
and with them he ſpedde himſelfe againſt the saracenes,
whome he greatly endamaged, ſomtimes killinge them
as they raunged licentiouſly and excurſiuely abroad into
other Ilandes for ſpoyle, partly breaking out vpon them
out of Stales and Ambuſhes, layd for the nonce to intrap
them; and partly by open conflictes & pitched battailes. He
alſo cooled the courage and abated the pride, & 
                  ••
               moderate
audacitie of them that vſurped the Countrey of Crete.
            
            At this time, there was one Euphemius, Capitayne
of a certayne Band of Souldiours in Sicilie who not hable
to maſter the laſciuious paſſions of inordinate loue,

perforce tooke a virgin out of the Cloyſter wher ſhe was
profeſſed Nun, and had vowed chaſtytie from her tender
age,Inferiours take example of their Superiors and her by the example of his Lorde and Maiſter the
emperour (who alſo had aforetime perpetrated ye lyke enormity)
rauiſhed and carnally knew againſt her conſent
and wyll. For whiche impyous acte, her Brothers made
complaynt to the Emperour with humble requeſt ye this
deteſtable exāple might not eſcape ye penalty & puniſhmēt
due for ſuch a villanye. Whereupon the Emperour ſent
Commaundement to the Regent of Sicilie, that if this
were true) he ſhould ſlitte and cut of Euphemius his noſe.
Euphemius vnderſtanding what ſentence and iudgment
the emperour had geuē againſt him, entred into a conſpiracie
with his owne Souldiours and other Capitaynes
beſides, and they altogether fled to Ambulak Byſſhop of
the Saracenes in Mauritania. Promyſing vnto him that
if he might by his help and meanes be proclaymed Emperour
of Romanes, he would delyuer and bring all Sycile
in ſubiection vnder him, and woulde moreouer paye
vnto hym a great Tribute. Whiche offer and condition
Ambulak not refuſing, inueſted hym with the tytle of
Romane Emperour, and furniſhed him with a great Armye,
by meanes whereof he wan the poſſeſſion of Sicile:
but Euphemius making his progreſſe and walkes about
Sicile in the habit and ſtately geſture of Emperour, was
at the Citie of Syracuſe ſlaine.
            Then began the Saracens to ſet foote into Calabria and
diuers other partes of Italye, making therin great hauock
and ſpoyle: of whom, one Nauy periſhed and was caſt away
about the Coaſtes of Sardinia, the other (for there
were two ſent out) in fléeinge wyſe retourned home.
Whiche cauſed Ambulak to conclude a peace with the
french Kinge.
            But within a while after, Bernard the Sonne of

               Pipine raigning in Italy, ye 
               Saracens deſpiſing and reiecting
the peace that Ambulak had made, inuaded Corſica:
who in their returne homwarde beinge laden and full
fraught with booties and great ſtore of Pyllage, were in
the mayne Sea encountred by one Ermengarius, a man
of great power in ye greater of ye 
               Baleare Ilands, & to ye behoofe
of ye king of Italy maintained a gariſon ther, by whoſ
proweſſe the Saracenes at the firſt onſet were cleane diſcomfited
and put to flight, and diuers of their Shipes intercepced
and taken, beſide 500. Chriſtian Priſoners in
them, which were reſcued and ſaued. Notwithſtandinge
all this miſfortune and diſcomfiture, the Saracens would
reſt, but coaſting about Italie with their Fléet ſodaynely
landed and ſurpriſed a towne, in the Coaſt of Hetruria,
named Centumcel, whiche nowe is called the olde Citie.
Which being ſo taken, they ſacked and with Sword and
Fire defaced moſt rufully. From thence holding on their
vioage toward Narbon they deſtroyed, haryed and ſpoyled
the Country al about, and that doone inuaded Sardinia
where they practiſed all kinde of waſt and robbery. But
as they fetched their vagaries and licencious roades, Ermengarius
agayne with the power of the Ile by hym
aſſembled, vpon a ſodayne gaue the charge vpon them,
put them to flight, and with great ſlaughter on their ſide,
draue them to the Sea, where for haſt as they thicke and
thréefolde ſtriued, who might firſt get a boorde they were
killed downe right at the pleaſure and full deſire of their
Enemies. Being thus gréeuouſly afflicted and hauynge
loſt a great part of their Nauy, they waighed vp their
Ankers and ſayled into Africa. And they which were in
Sycile, hearinge that the Venetians (to gratyfie the Conſtantinopolitan
Emperoure) vnto whom that Ile was
ſubiect) purpoſed to ſend a Nauy againſt them, filled their
Bagges and ſtuffed their powches with ſuch ſpoyle and
pray as they lyked and went their way.
            
               
After this, Haido whom Lewes Kinge of Fraunce and
the Emperour had made Ruler of Aquitanie by treacherye
and guylefull dealinge ſurpryſed and ruffled the
Citie Auſonia, and becauſe he was not of power hymſelfe
to keepe the ſame, he procured ayde from the Spaniſh
Saracens, by whoſe helpe he ſpoyled farre and néere
both Aquitanie and the hither part of Spayne. Whoſe
purpoſe and pretence, Lewes within ſhorte ſpace repreſſed.
And Alphonſis ſurnamed Magnus, Kinge of Aſturia
and Lyon, néere to the riuer Duerro vanquiſhed
two Armies of the Saracenicall King of Toleto, whiche
were thyther ſent to beſiege and oppugne the Citie of
Lyon. Moreouer hee rayſed the Siege that the Saracenes
had bent agaynſte Coimbra, and ſet the ſame frée from
their dreadfull oppugnation.
            And when hee was in buyldinge the Citie of Zamorra,
the ſame Saracenes vnder the conducte and leadinge of a
Prophet of theirs, named Alchama, came agaynſt hym,
whom he vanquiſhed, and of them ſlew a great number,
and among the reſt their Capitayne Alchama: and tooke
Abboaline priſoner,A Churche buylt with the money ye a Saracen payde for his raunſome. a Capitayne of great fame ann eſtimation
among them, who raunſomed himſelfe for two
C.M. Ducates and ſo was delyuered. With which money
the Kinge newe buylded the famous Temple of S.
Iames in Ouiedo of Marble, whiche was before but of
Bricke.
            But in Italie the Saracens had taken Palermo the moſt
famous and noble Citie in all Sicile, neyther was there
any man that woulde take vppon him to reſiſte their furious
attemptes or once goe about to preuent or repreſſe
their malycious deuoyres, ſauynge onely Boniface
Countée of Corſica, who accompaignied with his Brother
Beatrius and a fewe other of the Barons and Lords
of Hetruria ſayled into Aphrica and landynge betwéene
Vtica and Carthage ſlewe ſo manye of his Enemyes

in foure cruell Battayles, that like as the Carthaginians
whilome were enforced to call home Anniball out of Italie,
ſo the Saracenes were faine to call home their people
that were then in Sicile: and ſo Sicile was deliuered from
the peſtiferous oppreſſion and extreme daunger of Saracenicall
Hoſtilitie. After which victories gloriouſly by
Boniface atchieued, he with great foyſon and plenty of
pray and riche booties retourned home with his victorious
Nauie out of Africa. But the Saracens could not in
any ſauce abyde to be long quiet, but within a while, wt a
greater power and puyſſaunce then at any time before,
they inuaded Italie, and againe tooke the Citie Centumcell.
               
                  Rome ſpoyled by the Saracens.
               
From thence in poſt haſt with a running Campe
they ſpedde them toward Rome, and with little labour
got the poſſeſſion of Vaticanum, and after they had ſpoyled
the goodly Church of S. Peter (which ſtandeth in that
place) and takē away the Doores of Syluer which it had,
of price and valew ineſtimable, they prophaned it with
fire and ſworde moſt ſacrilegiouſly. And tarying there
certaine dayes they were fully bent to haue layd Siege to
the Citie, but hearing that an armie was leuyed and in
comming againſt them out of Lumbardie they departed
and ruthfully waſted al the Suburbes and villages néere
the Citie that laye betwéene the two wayes Appia and
Latina. They ſpoyled and robbed the Cathedral Church
of S. Paule in the way called Via Oſtienſis, and conſumed
the moſt part of it with fire: from thence turning into
Latina Via, they ſpoylingly ruſhed into the precincte
and Chaſe of Caſsinum, and robbed the Temple of Caſsinum
of all the holy Ornamentes, Veſtures, Reliques,
and Gyftes whereof it had marueilous great ſtore, and
vtterly ruynated a great part therof. Then kéeping their
way by the right ſide of the riuer Leire, they ſpedde them
apace toward the Sea, in ſuch populous Plumpes, that
they were like vnto a violent ſwifte ſtorme or terrible

whirlewinde: and fraughting their Shippes with their
ſpoyles and booties, which lay there ready, they hoyſed
vp theyr Sailes and launched into the maine Sea.
            And in Hiſpaine, Abduramen King of Corduba entring
into the borders of Biſkaye, fought moſt valiauntly
and fiercely the ſpace of a whole day with the Armies and
power of Ordonius King of Lyon and Gartias & Ignigenius
of Biskaye: and fortune ſéeming for that daye to
diſpoſe and enclyne the victorie to neither party, departed
the Battaile. Ordonius meaning to requite & pay home
Abduramen, entred into his Countrey, and ſubuerted
the Towne of Cintilia, which is now called Santiliana.
But in Aſia, Imprael ye 
               Caliph of Syria, ſuccéeding Muamat,
with a huige power brake into the confines and limittes
of the Romane Empyre. Againſt whom, the Emperour
Theophilus marched with his royall Army, and
hauing in his company two moſt valiaunt Capitaynes
Theophobus and Manuel, in whoſe proweſſe and dexteritie
in armes he repoſed his whole truſt and confidence,
was fully reſolued and determined to giue vnto him battayle:
of whoſe approche and comming, Imprael béeyng
certefied whether he did it vpon an arrogance & diſdaine,
or that he feared the euent and fortune of Battayle, leauing
behinde him one Abuzachar with .lxxx. thouſande
good fighting and well appointed men to try the quarell
by ſtroke of mortall conflicte, departed and went hys
way with part of hys Armye. The battayle béeyng
ioyned and claſped together, and the Saracenes getting
the vpperhande, Theophilus wyth his Praetorian
bande and two .M. Perſians and Theophobus, eſcaped
and attayned into the toppe of a little Hill, which being
fiercely aſſayled and beſet wyth Saracenes, whoſe
onely deſire was to take the Romane Emperour Priſoner,
the Romane Souldiours moſt valiauntly fighting
for the ſauegarde and incolumitie of theyr Lorde

and Maiſter the Emperours ſacred Maieſtie, defended.
The conflicte continued, ſharpely and deſperately foughten
on both ſides tyll the Euening. But as ſoone as night
was come, Theophobus by a pretie fleight and Stratageme
deluded the Saracenes and brought themſelues
out of that preſent daunger and extremitie. For he commaunded
his Souldiours, as loude as they coulde to
ſhoute and make a noyſe, and to ſounde theyr Trumpettes
and play vpon their Harpes and muſicall Inſtrumentes,
as thoughe there had come ſome freſhe ayde
and ſuccour to releeue and reſcue them at that preſent
pynche of diſtreſſe. Which deuiſe fell out accordyng to
his firſt imaginacion. For the Saracenes ſurely thinking
that more ayde was come, and fearing leaſte they
ſhould bée entrapped and on euery ſyde encloſed by their
enemyes, diſcamped and remooued ſixe Myles further
of, and ſo the Emperour with all hys retinewe
and Hoaſt being delyuered out of daunger, came ſafe
to the reſidue of hys Armye, whiche ſaued themſelues
by flight at the laſt conflicte. For which politique Stratageme
and wyſe ſhifte, the Emperour made Theophobus
chiefe Generall and Lieutenaunt of the whole
Armie. And the yeere folowing, makyng another
voyage and expedition againſt the Saracenes, vanquiſhed
them in a notable Battayle at Charſianum, and
ſo wyth twentie and fiue thouſande Priſoners he retourned
home.
            Agayne, the thyrde yeere he leuyed his power and
marched againſt them and ioyning Battayle with them
was ſo circumuented and beſet with his enemyes that
he had almoſt fallen into theyr handes. Which daunger
of the Emperour, Manuel chiefe Capitaine of the Army
vnder him perceyuing, encouraged and incenſed the
mindes of his Souldiours with a vehement Oration

and made a way perforce to the place where the Emperour
was diſtreſſed,A pitifull ſtate. and hym (béeyng nowe wearied
and vtterly diſpayring of any eſcape or remedie, yet
mynding to abyde the vttermoſt hazarde, rather then
he woulde diſmaye and leaue his Souldiours comfortleſſe
through hys departure, ſaying that he woulde
not by flight betray the lyues of his poore vaſſalles into
the mercyleſſe talauntes of that wicked generation)
deliuered and brought out of that daunger, not without,
threates and menaces that he woulde kill him vnleſſe
he woulde conſent to folow him openyng the way
and paſſage for him to eſcape. And the fourthe tyme,
both the Armyes wyth all theyr powers comming into
the fielde without any notable thing done worthie
of remembraunce, retourned home. The fifte yeere,
Theophilus leadyng his Armye farre within Syria,
waſting and ſpoyling all the Countrey in hys waie,
wanne and Conquered Zozopetra the Countrey and
Seate of Impraell, which ſo nettled and chaufed Imprael,
that he aſſembled all the power hee was hable to
make wyth intent to inuade Amorium the Countrey
of Theophilus. His Armye mette all together at
Tharſus: whither when Imprael himſelfe was come,
he ſent hys Sonne with parte of his Armye before,
to ſkirmiſhe and dallye (as it were in the waye of
an aſſaye) with the Romane Hoaſte, whiche was
lodged and emcaped at Dorylaeum thrée dayes iourney
from Amorium. And vnto hym he appoynted tenne
thouſande Turkes and all the power of Armenia.
Who beyng thus furniſhed and appoynted wyth men
and armour and encamped at Drazymenum, Theophilus
went againſt him and lodged his Hoaſte in a
place called Auzin, purpoſing before he woulde ioyne
anye Battayle to eſpie and diſcouer the multitude and
number of his enemyes.
            
               
                  〈2 pages missing〉
               
               
Armye (for that the Saracenes as though they had bene afrayde,
kept their heades within the walles of their citie)
was lulled in ſecuritie, geuynge no regarde to orderly
behauiour, nor to the good keeping of their watch, the Saracenes
all in armure vppon the thirde day after the Siege
was planted, whē al ye 
               Romane Souldiours were aſſembled
& congregated together to héere diuine ſeruice (for it
was vppon a Sundaye) ſetting open their Gates and iſſuing
out ſodaynlye, kylled and manquelled the Romans
on euery ſide: inſomuch that the Emperoure himſelfe had
much a doo to eſcape, looſing and leauyng behinde him all
his carriage and prouiſion. And agayne within two
yéeres next after, the Saracenes entred within the di
                  •
               ion
and lymites of the Romane Empire with xxx.M. men,
wherefore Michael meaning to wynne his Spurres againe
& to be euen wt the saracens for ye foyle lately taken
at their handes, leuied an Army of xlv.M. Thracians and
Macedonians, and marched againſt them. Which when
they knew, by daungerous iourneyes and compendious
pathes they preuented his purpoſe, ſettinge vpon him ſodaynly
and at vnawares being in his iournay and out of
order. Wherby he was diſcomfited and compelled to flée.
And at that time, they ſaye that Michael had fallen into
the handes of his Enemies, if Manuel had not venturouſly
entred and violentlye broken into the breaſt of the
Enemies Armye and diſturbinge their araie delyuered
him from daunger.
            Two yéeres after this, Mamume the Son of Imprael
beinge Caliph of Syria, the Saracenes with an Armye
of xl. thouſand men ſpoyled and ouerrunne Armenia
and all the Sea coaſtes cruelly. At whiche time, the Caliph
is reported to haue done as Xerxes longe afore did,
commaunding the Sea to be whipped and beaten with
Scourges, becauſe it ſtopped his intent, that he could not

haue his will to go any further. Michael who could not
with pacient minde brooke and digeſt theſe iniuries, ſent
his Vncle Petrona (Lieutenaunt of Thracia) with a
great power againſt Mamume. Who encamped hymſelfe
in a certayne place called Lalacaeon, and ſettinge
Stales and Ambuſhes on euery ſide to ſurpriſe and entrappe
his foes when aduantage ſhould be offered, prouoked
Mamume to the encountrie and battayle. Mamume
being thus beſet, and on euery ſide circumuented by
his Enemies, lyke vnto a Byrd in a Cage, or a Déere in
a Buckſtall, was at his wittes ende, not knowynge how
to eſcape or ſhift hymſelfe out of that imminent perill.
And demaunding of one of the Romane captiues (whom
he had taken Priſoner) the name of that Countrey and
place wherein he had pight his Pauilyons and Campe,
and by what name the riuer there harde by, was called,
anſwere was made by the Pryſoner, that the Countrey
was called Lalacaeon, the place Ptoſon, and the riuer
Gyris.
            
            Whereby he preſaged and by the appellacions of
the ſame places (for hee was a man well ſéene in the
Greeque and Latyne Tongues, and earneſtlye geuen
to ye ſtudy of Philoſophy) immediatly coniectured ye thoſe
names portended his confuſion and ſome notable ouerthrowe
of his people, and ſignified that hee and his retynew
ſhould be on euery ſide beſet and caught lyke Fiſhes
in a Net by the Romanes. Notwithſtandinge, he
encouraged his men not to quayle and deſpayre, but to
ſtande luſtelie to their tackelynge and to determyne
with themſelues to withſtand their Enemies.
            Therfore the next morning, as ſoone as the day appeared,
well perceiuing himſelfe to be hemmed in on euery ſide,
he determined to ſéeke a way and egreſſe by that part and
place which Petrona guarded, and therevpon geuing vnto

his men a watchword and token to geue aloude ſhout
                  •
               
all at once,A Saracen Prince and all his hoſt ſlayne. there ſet vpon his enemies. But ſéeing his attempt
and purpoſe to be all in vayne, he a litle retyred, &
after a ſmall breathing, gaue a ſharpe and freſhe onſet agayne,
and vſing this order ſundry tymes by ſtartes geuyng
a blow and away agayne, at length deſperatly with
a vehement violence and force ruſhed into the middes of
his enemyes, and was there ſlayne, both he and all his
Hoaſt vtterly.
            His Sonne whom he had ſent on rouing and ſpoyling
with parte of his Armye, hearinge of his Fathers death
and confuſion, retyred in haſt to Melitena. But he was
purſued and taken by ye Capitaine of ye 
               Charſian ſtreicts,
and preſented to Petrona. This Mamume was ſurerly
a man garniſhed and endued with many excelent qualities
and notable vertues.An example of great loue and liberalitie toward learninge in a saracene. For beyng himſelfe ſingulerlie
well learned, he cheriſed and entyerlye loued all them
that were learned, eſtéemyng and entertayning them very
honorable, as by that example following ſhal appeare,
which for the worthyneſſe and commendacion thereof, I
haue thought good héere to diſciphere.
            There was in Conſtantinople (ſomtime called Byzance)
a certayne Philoſopher named Leo, ſomtime byſhoppe
of Theſalonica, and now depriued from the Pr
                  •
               
               lacie
and Byſſhoprich therof by reaſon of a deuiſion and
controuerſ
                  •
               e touching the hauyng and worſhipping of Images,
which at that time merueilouſlye fruſhed and diſturbed
the Latine and the Greeke Church. Beinge for
this cauſe thence exiled, hee came to Conſtantinople,
where he hyered a poore Cotage, and ſet vp a Schole, profeſſing
to traine and inſtructe ſuch Scholers as reſorted
to him, in what Arte ſoeuer euery one was beſt diſpoſed
to learne. Inſomuch that out of his pryuate Schoole ther
came many notable Clarkes, very ſkilfull in the ſtudies
of Artes and Philoſophy, and among the reſt, it ſo chaunced

about this time that a certayne young man one of his
Scholers, hauinge by his Maiſters induſtrious labour
and diligence attayned to an exact knowledge and ſkyll of
Geometrie, was taken Priſoner in the warres by the
Saracens, & chaunced into ye ſeruice or rather ſeruitude of a
noble man of great eſtemacion and name amonge them.
Whom Mamume by report and common bruite hearing
to be well ſéene in the Mathematicall Diſciplines commaunded
to be brought before him. And cauſinge hym
in a diſputation to be throughly appoſed, found, that he ſo
farre paſſed & ſurmounted the Arabian Geometricians,
that of thoſe thinges whereof they alone thought themſelues
to haue the vſe and experience, he was well hable
to alledge and bringe the proper reaſons and cauſes.
            
               Mamume greatly wondring at his preciſe and profound
knowledge (for he had thought that no nacion had had the
ſkill of that Arte but the Arabians onely) aſked him of
whom he had learned his Arte, and whether his maiſter
were yet liuing. The younge man aunſwered, that his
Maiſters name was Leo, a poore man, and as yet vnluckie
to the worldly goodes of Fortunes giftes and diſpoſicion,
but geuen altogether to his Booke and Studie.
Wherevpon Mamume ſtraightwaies addreſſed his Letters
to Leo in effect as foloweth.
            
               Euen as the Trée is knowne by his fruict, ſo we by
the Scholer doo well know the exelencie of the Maiſter.
Theſe therefore ſhalbe to requeſte thée, that (foraſmuche
as God hath bleſſed thée with a gyft ſo incomperable, and
ſithence thou lyueſt there in poore eſtate, vnknowne
or at leaſt vnregarded of thy Citezens and Countreymen,
reapyng no fruicte of thy rare wiſedome and ſupernaturall
ſpeculation) thou wouldeſt daigne to come vnto
vs, and make vs pertakers of thy admirable learninge.
This doing, make thy ſure accoumpt, that all the Saracenicall
nacion ſhall ſubmit themſelues vnto thée and be

readie at thy heſt and commaundement, and thou ſhalt
bée enryched with ſuch rewardes, rycheſſe and reuenues,
as neuer yet any man hath béene. Theſe letters
he delyuered vnto the young man to carie to Conſtantinople,
ſetting him frée at libertie and rewarding hym
moſt honorably.
            
            When Leo had receiued theſe letters, he opened and
tolde the whole matter to certayne of the Emperours
familiers. And by this meanes bee became knowne to
the Emperour, who appointing vnto him a competent
ſtipend and pencion commaunded him to teache publikly.
Mamume diſpairing of Leo his comming, ſent vnto him
certayne Geometricall and Aſtronomicall queſtions
and ſome of the other Sciences, deſiring him therein to
haue his reſolution. The which beyng cunningly by Leo
aſſoyled he ſent backe againe to Mamume, wherevnto
he had alſo annexed certaine tokens and Signes touching
the prediction of future thinges. Which Letters
when Mamume had read, it is ſayde, that he was rauiſhed
with ſuche an ardent deſire and zeale toward Leo,
that he exclaymed in thys ſort: O happie and thriſe happie
are they I ſaye, (O Diuine Leo) which haue the
compaignie and fruition of thy preſence. Then foorthwith
he ſent a ſolemne Ambaſſade with great rewardes
and ryche preſentes vnto the Emperour, and wrate hys
Letters alſo vnto him as foloweth: I was fully determyned
(as it becommeth an vnfeigned friende) to haue
come my ſelfe vnto thée: but ſithens the waightie affaires
of our Empyre and the gouernaunce of a moſt fierce
and wylde people, by God committed vnto my charge
(from whom all power and ſuperioritie floweth) wil not
ſo permitte: I am faine in my ſtéede to ſende vnto thée
my Ambaſſadours with requeſt, that it may pleaſe thée
to ſende vnto mée Leo, a man endued wyth great ſingularitie
in the knowledge of Philoſophie and other

Sciences, ſoiourning and makyng his abode wythin
thy Citie of Conſtantinople. That he dwelling a while
wyth mée, may geue mee inſtructions and make me partaker
of his doctrine, 
                     〈…〉
                   feruently enamoured
and as it were 
                     〈…〉
                  . Doe not (I
pray thée) deferre the 
                     〈…〉
                   my requeſt
becauſe of any diuerſitie 
                     〈…〉
                   or for any vnkinde
dealings between 
                     〈…〉
                   deale with me
herein like a friende. For 
                     〈…〉
                   and curteſie wée
will giue vnto thée a.M. It in 
                     〈…〉
                   and wil enter into an
infringible league and perpetuall amitie with thée and al
thy Dominions.
            
            Which requeſt the Emperour would not graunt, leaſt
the Sciences (for which the Romanes were renowmed
and had in admiration among al Nations) ſhould be communicated
& diſcouered to the Barbarous people. Wherin
he being a Greeque and a Chriſtian, might full well
haue learned at the handes of a barbarous perſon and Idolatrous
Infidel to reuerence and condignely eſtéeme verrue:
which thing would God, Princes and noble men in
this age, admoniſhed by this goodly example would doe.
For euer afterward, he had Leo in great honour, and promoted
him to great wealth and dignitie, and reſtored him
againe to his See and Byſhopprike of Theſſalonica,
where he was highly honoured and of al men reuerenced
for that through his forecaſting wyt & ſurpaſſing knowledge
he conuerted and brought the land and grounde of
Theſſalonica from barainneſſe & ſterilitie, to fruitfulnes
and fertilitie. But nowe it is time for vs to retourne to
diſcourſe of Occidentall matters.
            The Saracenes of Mauritania, tranſfreting out of
Sicile (wherein they had taken and of longe tyme
vſurped manye Townes) into Italie, vnder the guyding
and conducte of Saba, beſieged Taren
                     •
                  o.
            
            The Greeke and Venetian Nauies ioyning in one, arriued

in Calabria, to reiſe the Siege and to reſcew the Citie.
Wherefore hearing Saba, ſeyning as though he had
beene afraide, to th'intent he might the rather allure and
prouoke the enemie to coape with him, reyſed his Siege
and diſcamped, and like as though he had bene loath to
meddle, retyred into the region of Crotona: where béeing
afterward aſſayled and ſet vpon, at the firſt brunt he diſcomfited
and put to flight the Greekes,
               Victory of ſaracens, ouer the Greekes and Venetians.
                and thē the whole
puyſſaunce of the Saracens was all bent & turned againſt
the Venetians fighting and defending themſelues manfully:
and a few of them in number being by a Nauie ſo
ſtrong and mightie circumuēted, were partly ſlain, partly
drowned, but the Venetians in that conflict periſhed and
were brought to confuſion euerichone, which victory ſet
Saba ſo a flote & ingenerated in him ſuch haultineſſe and
pride, that ſpedely coaſting ouer the Ionian Sea, he arriued
in the coaſt of Illyria, practiſing therin along the prouinciall
borders great pillage and robberie, and hearing
that the Venetian fléete was retourning homeward, laden
with Wares out of Syria, be brought about his Nauie
with all expedicion into the Bay of Trieſte, and from
thence inſidiouſly and ſodainly ſetting vpon them, ſpoyled
and killed the Marchauntes and Mariners, and all the
Rowers, their rooted hatred and ſpightfull rancour toward
ye 
               Venetiā
                name was ſo vnappeaſeable. Lewſing
thence, he cut his courſe toward Aucon a noble Citie of
Picene, where there is a goodly hauē, and it forcibly tooke
and being taken, ſacked and laſt of all conſumed it wyth
fire, and a few of the Oppidanes or Towneſmen which
taried ſtill, were taken. For the reſt being brought into
ſodaine feare and amazednes through this violent irruption
were fledde almoſt all into the mayne land and mediterranean
region.
            Within a litle while after, an other Nauie of Saracens
landed in the coaſt of Hetruria, with purpoſe and full intent

to beſiege and take the Citie of Rome. Whoſe ſodayne
arriuall and terrible approche filled all the Citie
with terrour and dread. Wherfore Pope Leo the fourth
of that name aſſembled the people together, and vnto thē
made this Oration folowing.
            
               What is the matter my Children whereof you are
ſomuch affraide?Oration of Pope Leo the fourthe, to encorage his Romans againſt the saracens.
                   or why are your mindes thus troubled
and appaulled? Certes there happeneth nothing vnto vs
without the prouidence and wyll of the almightye God,
neither is it ſent vnto vs vndeſeruedlye on our partes.
Then ought we to feare & dread their tyrannie, whē we
fall at ciuill ſtrife and goe together by the eares amonge
our ſelues, when one Brother conſpireth his Brothers
death and deſtruction. For all they whiche do beléeue and
confeſſe Chriſte to be their Sauiour and Redéemer, are
Brothers. Then I ſay when the Brands of theſe miſchiefes
are kindled amonge vs, we ought to feare, leaſte
God being highly diſpleaſed with vs therfore, ſhould ſend
theſe or rather worſe plagues vppon vs. For if you think
that theſe impious and barbarous people are ſent vnto
vs without the will and pleaſure of almighty God, you
are far deceiued. For holy Scriptures do in many places
teſtif
                     •
                  e & dayly examples euery where teache & confirme
the ſame. God ſaying by his owne mouth, that he wyll
vſe the wicked blaſphemers and the enemies of his ſacred
name as whippes to ſcourge, and meanes to purſue hys
vnfaithfull, wylfull and diſobedient Children. And we
do know, that the ciuile diſcord and flagitious diſſolutenes
of the Greekes gaue firſt occaſion to this peſtiferous and
diabolicall nacion, to extend their rage and practiſe their
firſt cruell inuaſion vpon the Chriſtians. Did not the
lewde lying of the Gothes and Kinge Rodirick, allure
them to ſet foote into Hiſpaine. Whome although theſe
belliſh
Impes diſcomfited and condinglye puniſhed, yet
when they once conuerted their force and moued warre

againſte good and godlye men, they were repulſed, put to
flight and ſlaigne euen of a few. What? do we feare this
moſt daſtardly rable and lowſ
                     •
                  e nacion more then we do
Almightye God? for we doubt not awhit, euery howre
and euerye mynute of an howre to offend his Diuine
Maieſtie, to prouoke his wrath and anger againſte
vs, to reuile and blaſpheme his holy name: to ſhewe our
ſelues wilfull, diſobedient and ſtubbourne to the lore of
his ſwéet word and commaundment and by our owne
phantaſticall deuiſes to heape vnto ouer ſelues the greeuous
ſentence of his heauy diſpleaſure: but at the onely
hearinge of this reprobate generation, wee tremble and
quake for feare, as though humane force and mortall
Armes were more to be feared, then euerlaſting paynes
and eternal damnation. Wher is the auncient puyſſance
and knightly prowes that was wont to be in the vndaunted
Romanes? What is become of their valiauntnes,
paynfulneſſe, trauaile and courage that in all extremytie
and aduerſitie was euer inuincible? Our Aunceſtors
and forefathers, before Chriſtianitie was embraced, or
Chriſt to the world notyfied and beleeued on, beyng yet
blinded and noſeled in Idolatrye and ſuperſticious Religion,
feared no force, no violence, no multytude of Enemies,
but oftentimes with a ſmall handfull and power,
vanquiſhed the mightie & populous armies of their Enemies.
The Gaules & French, being a people and nacion
moſt fierce and at that time by reaſon of the huygenes of
their bodies formidable and dreadfull (the limytes of the
Romane Empire being yet but ſtreict and narrow, & the
Citie nothing ſo great as now it is, mens courages alſo
through the ſodayne irruption and coming of ſuch a firce
and big nacion marueilouſlie abbaſhed) tooke in déede (I
cannot deny) this Citie, hauing in it at that time no forte
of defence nor cōmodius place made by art for reſiſtance:
but yet the Capitoll, they were neuer hable to take. And

not ſuffered long there to rouſt, were by the valiaunce of
one baniſhed Romane thence repulſed and driuen away
with notable ſlaughter of a great maigny of their people.
And beholde, the Romane empire was not of ſuch power
and ſtrength at that time as it is now. For the limytes
of ye empyre extended no further but to the Romane Terrytory.
Now whereas the greateſt part of Italy is ſubiect
to the Romane State, and the Citie with people well
repleniſhed, hauing now not the Capitoll onely for your
fortreſſe, but a whole Towne alſo by our induſtrie and
procurement annexed and vnited to your Citie, fortyfied
and ſtrengthened with all maner of Artificiall deuiſe and
pollicie, hauyng (I ſay) ſo many noble Perſonages and
approued Capitaines both for ſkill & courage renowmed,
and the Sea of the moſt Catholique Relygion héere reſiaunt,
you now ſtand in dread and feare not of the Gaules,
which be a worthy and noble nacion not of the huyge and
populous armyes of the Gothes, nor yet of the Hunnes
the Subuerters and deſtroyers of many moſte flouriſhyng
and noble cities: but of the moſt cowardly and rogiſh
nacion of all Aſia, a pilfring rable of Mauritanian, thieues
and Vagarantes. The Mannes head that was founde
in the ground where the Capitoll ſtandeth, gaue ſuch a
deſtinie and fate thervnto, that no nacion ſhoulde be hable
by conqueſt and force to take it. Doo you think that ye Capitoll
was earſt more ſafe and holie▪ beinge the Seate of
Saturn, then it is now, being employed to a Caſtle of ſincere
and true religion? Beléeue me, beléeue mee, neyther
the Saracenes nor anye other wicked Nacion whiche are
the profeſſed Enemies of Chriſtes name and Relygion
ſhall euer buylde their Bowre & plant themſelues in this
Citie. Rome was buylded vnder ſuch a lucky Conſtellacion,
that the Empyre thereof ſhall neuer quayle but
continue perpetuallye: and vnder this ſame deſtenie is
this Towne therevnto annexed and adioyned that it

ſhould be the See of Religion, which thing the moſt emperiall
and Cathedrall Church of him that is chiefe of the
Apoſtles aſſuredly promiſeth. But peraduenture you
thinke, that God béeing prouoked and mooued to wrathe
by reaſon of our manyfold ſinnes & offences, hath gyuen
them leaue thus to extend and ſhew their villanous rage
againſt vs. I graunt, we haue demerited theſe and farre
greater Plagues, and that this ruffling ſtirre is ſent vpon
vs not without the ſpeciall foreſight and prouidence of
God, that taking warning and occaſion by theſe aduerſities
and oppreſſions, to amende our naughtie liues, wee
may the better renounce our former haunt of licentious
luſtes, and with penitent hearts turne vnto him. And ſo
long ſhall they haue power ouer vs, as we perſiſt & wilfully
wallow in the ſtinking puddle of our vngratious
wayes. But if we truely repent and implore his mercy,
this wicked Nation ſhall ſtraightwayes geue place and
flee before vs lyke ſhéepe, whom wee ſhall kill and flea
down right before vs, and reuenge the iniuries that they
the yéeres paſſed haue done vnto vs and vnto the Maieſty
of Almighty God, whoſe Tēples and conſecrated houſes,
they haue wickedly polluted and moſt horriblie prophaned.
Hereof may you make your full accoumpt, vnleſſe
peraduenture you thinke that the Aſturians, the Cantabrians
and French (who haue oftentimes vanquiſhed and
with notorious calamities diſcomfited them) to haue béen
better and more valiaunter mē then you your ſelues be.
But they were not (beléeue me) and God is no leſſe mercifull
to the preſent ſtate and inward mindes of mē nowadayes,
then he was in the age and life paſſed. For at the
godly Sermons and zealous admonitions of Pelagius
and other holy men, they renounced their vic
                     •
                  ous wayes
and turning vnto God beſought his helpe to aſſiſt and deliuer
them out of thraldome. He is ſo mercifull, and ſo
readie to heare the peticions of the faithfull that he neuer

forſaketh nor leaueth deſtitute and comfortleſſe them,
that vnfeignedly and hartely craue ayde at his handes.
Amende your lyues therefore, and well thinke with
your ſelues that you muſt wyth tooth and nayle, ſo endeuour
your ſelues, that you may not in any wiſe for godlynes
and faith geue place to any Nation in the worlde.
Call to memory the priſtiuate valiaunce, of the Romane
name, couragiouſly aduaunce forward, handle your weapons
manfully and deale your puyſſaunt blowes doughtily
among yonder miſcreaunt people, I my ſelfe will be
your Capitaine and goe before you, and participate wyth
you what euent ſoeuer Fortune ſendeth. I doe aſſure
you, the victorie is moſt certainely in your handes, if
you will doe as before I haue directed you. They whoſe
chaunce ſhall be to dye in this moſt godly quarrell and
Battayle, ſhall not onely wynne in this worlde, a glorious
fame & renoumed praiſe, but ſhalbe afterward tranſported
into the Kingdome of euerlaſting lyfe and haue
theyr names regiſtred in the Booke, of lyfe among the
electe of God for euer.;]
            
            After he had made an ende, as many as were hable
and fitte for warfare, tooke weapon in hande, and folowed
hym to Oſtia. There meanyng to receyue at
puſhe of the Pyke, the enemie, ſo ſoone as he ſhoulde ſet
any foote on lande. When they euidently deſcryed the
enemyes approche, and in ſight peruſed their order, the
Byſhoppe eftſoones commaunding his Souldiours to
bowe the knees of their heartes and earneſtly to pray
vnto God, implored the diuine aſſiſtaunce and mercyfull
ayde of hym that is the geuer of all victorye,
whoſe woordes and Prayer were in effecte as foloweth.
            
               O almightie and moſt mercifull father which againſt
the victorye vnto Gedeon wyth a ſmall number ouer
the huyge multitude of hys enemyes,A prayer. then which neuer yet
               
                  〈1… pages missing〉
               
               
But perceuing that the ſame was not poſſible to be taken
but by long Siege, he thence diſcamped and paſſed the ryuer
Euphrates by a bridge of Shippes. And ſpoyling the
the Countrey and places there aboutes, aſſaultynge and
battering many ſtrong holdes, whereof ſome he tooke by
ſurrender, he retourned againe to ye citie. Wher he reſted
not long, but agayne making a warlyke voyage & expedition
into Siria agaynſt the Saracens, bent his whole force
to winne Germanicia and wanne it. From thence he remooued
to the Citie Adata, which he fiercely beſieged and
burnt the Suburbes. Whiche Citie albeit the Citizenes
and Inhabitantes defended very ſlackly and negligently,
yet could not he wynne and take it. Baſilius wondring to
ſée them ſo ſecure and negligent in ſuch iminent danger,
demaunded of them the cauſe thereof, vnto whom an ancient
man of the Citie aunſwered: that it was decréed by
deſtynie that he ſhould neuer winne their Citie maugre
all his force and battary, notwithſtandinge there ſhoulde
come one of his lygne and race called Conſtantine which
ſhould obtayne the ſame by conqueſt, but it ſhould not be
his Sonne Conſtantine, who was with him in his camp
at that preſent.
            At whiche aunſwere Baſilius ſo ſtormed and fumed
that he gaue the aſſault farre more fiercely, and violently
then at any time before he had done. But when he ſaw
he could nothing preuaile, he rayſed his Siege and went
his way, but before his departure, he commaunded all his
Priſoners to be ſlayne, leaſt they ſhould ſtir vp ſome diſturbaunce
and commotion & alſo becauſe he would be out
of feare and not néede to appoynte kéepers vnto them.
Shortlye after, the Saracens of Tharſus infeſting the Romane
Prouinces, he ſent one Andrew ſurnamed Scytha
againſt them, who acquiting & behauing himſelfe againſt
them very honorably & knightlie, their courage was alaid
and their malicious attempts well bridled. Whereat the

King of Tharſus ſo ſtamped and ſtared, that in moſt horrible
and blaſphemous tearmes he belched out words full
of threates and ſpightfull contumelies againſte God,A reuilinge Blaſphemer. in
his Letters addreſſed and ſent vnto Andrew: Wherein
be wrate, ye if he had inuaded and come in perſon againſt
hym, it was not the Sonne of Mary that ſhould haue holpen
or deliuered him.
            But it was not long before he felt the deſerued ſmarte
and due guerdon of his odible myſcreauncye. For comming
himſelfe with more ayde to his Hoaſt, Andrew on
the other ſide in good order marſhalled his Campe and
gaue vnto him battayle: Where betwéene them was
fought a cruell conflict, but in th'end the Saracenes tourned
theis backes and fled, in which Chaſe, moſt of them
were ſlayne, and among the reſt the Kinge himſelfe, was
there bereft of lyfe and limme.
            It chaunced within awhile after, that by the ſiniſter
meanes and enuious rancour of ſome backfrindes which
ſpighted at his good ſucceſſe and valyaunt proweſſe, this
Andrew was accuſed to the Emperour his maiſter, that
when he well might, he woulde not take and wynne the
Citie of Tharſus: vnto whiche ſurmiſed accuſation, ſuch
credit was geuen, that Audrew was diſcharged of his generalſhippe,
and one Stypiota placed in his Roome The
Saracens which forſ
                  •
               owed no time nor ocaſion that might
further their Affayres and procéedings, perceiuing & vnderſtanding
ye through this priuie gruge & new chaunge,
the watch was nothing at al looked vnto, in the night time
ſet vppon them and ſlew of them very many, and the reſt
put to flight. On the other ſide, the Affricane Saracens
beſieging Raguſium (whiche is a Citie ſtandinge in the
borders and coaſtes of Illyria) and the Raguſines ſending
to the Emperour for ayde and reſcue, Baſilius furniſhed
out a hundreth tall Shippes of Warre for their reliefe
and ſauetie. Whereof the Saracenes hauing intelligence,

reyſed their Siege and tooke their iourney into Italy, and
takyng the Citie of Barry, moſt lamentably afflicted and
in a maner vniuerſallie deſtroyed with fier murther and
rapine the Calabrians, Apuliana Lucanes and Salentines.
And being now in minde to deuide Rome and the Empire
of all Italy, ſhare and ſhare lyke among themſelues,
beholde Pope Iohn, greatly mooued with pitie and compaſſion
to ſée his Countreye in ſuch extreeme perill, imployed
ayde and beſought Alberick (whoſe power was
greate in all Hetruria) to aſſiſt and ioyne ſide with hym,
for the repulſe of this daungerous inuaſion. Whiche
Alberick with a mighty armie that he had leuied in his
owne Countrey and partly alſo muſtered and taken vp
in and about Rome,
               
                  Italians diſcomfired the Saracenes.
                encountred them, after they had ſet
foote within the Romane Terrytorie: and at the firſte not
far from the Citie, in Battaile them vanquiſhed: but afterwards
at the riuer of Leyre about the Citie Minturne
he ſo notably diſcomfited them, that they were now reſolued,
and fully purpoſed altogether to depart quight out of
Italy. Wherfore burning all alonge the Sea coaſte as
they went, they departed into Apulia, and buyldinge a
Caſtle vpon Mount Gargan. and vnder the rydge of the
ſame Mount a Towne ſtrongly fenced and fortyfied for
the warres, they continued there for many yéeres, ſore
infeſting and ſpoyling Italye. Then they tooke Beneuent
and it ranſacked and after fiered. Whiche terrible example
ſo amazed and aſtonned the other cities adioining, that
without reſiſtaunce, they receiued the Garriſons of that
nacion within their walles. But ayde beinge ſent by the
Pope, the barbarous Mawmettes doynge all rather with
pyllage and robberie, then with any iuſt war, departed
without any battaile out of the Romane limits and dominions.
And an other fléete of the ſame nacion comminge
out of Affrica, after long and cruell Siege tooke the citie
of Geane, and at their firſt entree ſlue all the defendants,

but the Maydenes, Damoſelles, Matrones and younge
boyes they ſhipped and caried away with them into Africa.
But Dandulus Venetus writeth, ye al of the Male ſexe
retourned afterwarde home againe into their Countrey,
but how and by what meanes that came to paſſe, is by
none declared nor written. Geane was wonne and taken
in the yeare after the incarnacion 935. And the Saracenes
being firſt diſpoſſeſſed of the Caſtle of Mount Gargan by
the Dalmatians,
               
                  Geane take
                     •
                  
                and afterwards in many ouerthrowes
weakened and vanquiſhed by the Pannonians, were laſtlye
by Otho Emperour of Germaines in the yéere of our
Lorde 969. quight expulſed and driuen out of Italy. The
Greekes, doo héere make their auaunt, that Italy was deliuered
and rid out of the ſeruitude and dreadfull oppreſſion
of ye 
               Saracens through the aide and helpe of their Conſtantinopolytane
Emperoure, in that the French ſuccoured
and relieued them, for the good wyl and friendſhippe
that they bare to their Emperoure. For they ſay, that the
Italyans hearinge Rhaguſium to bee reſcued and deliuered
from the Siege by the Greekish Nauy, ſubmitted
themſelues vnder the obeiſaunce of the Empyre, and requeſted
ayd alſo for themſelues. Whervpon, Baſilius by
his Letters directed & addreſſed vnto ye 
               Frenth King, treated
with him to aide them, and by him was the Sultane
taken and brought to Capua: who afterwarde by the fauorable
meanes of the Commons of Capua (with whom
he had conſpired againſt the) King was ſet at liberty, and
the King being thence expulſed, he inferred warre vpon
the Capuans, but by the ayde of the Greekes which came
againſt him, he packed and went away. This French
King of whom they ſurmiſe this talke and Hiſtorye, I
thinke ſhould be Carolus Craſsus the fifte Emperoure of
Germaines, but for the trueth thereof, I referre you to
my Authours the Greekes, whom I wyl, ſhall ſhifte for
themſeues touching the credit of the premiſſes.
            
               
                  〈2 pages missing〉
               
               
a moſt noble victorye. He waſted and ſubuerted Berraea
al ſauing the Caſtle, where he found great ſtore of riches
and treaſure, and taking innumerable of them priſoners
deliuered many Chriſtians out of thraldome Afterward
this Nicephorus Phocas being aduaūced to the Empire,
Duke Manuel, the Baſtard ſonne of Leo, was ſent with
a mighty Nauie againſt the Saracens into Sicile, where
through negligence & want of ſkill he with all his hoaſt
was ſlaine. And at the very ſame time, Iohn Zimiſca (afterward
Emperour) being ſent into Cilicia, had the vpperhand
of the Saracens at ye Citie of Adana. Thē 
               Nicephorus
himſelf in perſō, with a great power entred into
Cilicia and tooke Anabarza, Roſa and Adana thrée proper
Cities of that Prouince, with many other ſtronge
holdes and Caſtles: which done, he returned into Cappadocia
and there wintered. In the beginning of the nexte
Spring he went thither againe, and ſent his brother Leo
with a part of his army to Tharſus, & himſelfe laid ſiege
to Mopſiheſtia, through the middle wherof, there ranne
a riuer named Sarus. While the Emperour layde harde
ſiege and ſore diſtreſſed the one ſide thereof, the Saracens
ſeeing no remedie ſet fire in that part, and departed vnto
the other part, which being alſo conquered and wonne he
ſlew of them euery man. When the Tharſians hearde
thereof, they ſubmitted themſelues to the Emperoures
grace. And within thrée daies after, a Nauie was ſent out
of Aegypt to ayde the Tharſians, which could not attaine
to land, and in their returne homeward, what with force
of weather and bluſtering windes, and what with incurſions
of the Romane Gallayes, they were for the moſt
parte all loſt and caſt away. When the Emperour was
retourned home to Conſtantinople, he cauſed the braſen
gates which he had brought frō the winning of Tharſus
& Mopſiheſtia, of excellent workmanſhip & curious art,
to be ſet on the Eaſt & Weſt ſide of the Caſtle wt other

new ornaments & garniſhments of his owne coſt added
therto. Then he inuaded Syria and hauing partly beaten
downe and partly waſted the Cities about Libanus & the
Sea coaſt, he came before Antioch, which Citie ſtandeth
vpon the riuer Orontes. But the Antiochians ſtanding
at reſiſtaunce, and alſo victual in his Camp waxing very
ſcant beſide ſuch continuall raine, that the ground was all
ouerflowen & couered with water, he was faine to builde
a Baſtyle on the Mount Taurus, which is at this day is
called Maurus, leauing there behind him to infeſt & ſkirmiſh
with ye 
               Antiochians, Michael Burze whom he had
aduaūced to be one of his chief Nobilitie, & inueſted with
the tytle of the Capitaine of Mount Taurus. And appointed
one of his Eunuches named Peter, a valiant, conſtant
& ſkilful warriour, maſter of his Tentes and Pauilions
to ſée order taken & prouided for the wintering of hs hoſt
in Cilicia, after which order 
                  •
               o takē, he returned to Conſtantinople.
Burzes with many venturous R
                  •
               ades & excurſions
laid ſore to the charge of the Antiochian Saracens,
and them greatly moleſted, ſtudying by all meanes
to wynne honour and glorie by déedes of Armes and to
take the Citie. Vppon a time he priuily meaſured out
the altitude and height of the Tower of the ſame, and
preparing ſcaling Ladders equall in height therewyth,
in a very darke and ſnowye Winter nyght, he came ſecretely
and without making any noyſe vnder the walles
of the Citie:
                  Antioche taken. where ſetting vp his Ladders, with. CCC.
men that he had brought thyther with him for the ſame
purpoſe, he mounted vp, and kylled the watchmen and
keepers of the Tower and as manye as hee could méete
withall: and ſtraightwayes diſpatched a Currour to
the Maiſter of the Tentes and Pauilions to aduertyze
him, how the caſe ſtoode and what he purpoſed to do,
willing him ſpéedily to come with more power to ayde
him and be partaker of that glorious & noble enterpriſe.
            
               
The Antiochians knowing their chiefe Tower to be taken,
ranne couragiouſlye to repell and diſpoſſeſſe the Romanes
out of the ſame.
            Now the Maiſter of the Tentes had in charge from
the Emperour, that he ſhould not in ani wiſe inuade Antioch,
becauſe the common brute went, that the captiuitie
of that Citie did portende within awhile after, the
Emperours confuſion, whiche bred in him ſuch doubtfull
cares, that he knew not what to doo in that caſe, nor
which way to take. Neuertheleſſe loath, that ſo manye
valiaunt men ſhould through his default peryſh, & thinkyng
it no poynt of humanytie to ſée them thus fall into
the lapſe for want of a ſmall ayde, marched with all his
power and inuaded Antioche: at whoſe comming the Saracenes
were ſo diſmayde that their hartes fainted and
their ſtomackes immediatly quayled. Burzes & his company
which before diſpayred of any help or remedye, looking
for nothing but preſent death, tooke new hart agrace
and were reuiued, and burſting open the Gates with his
battayle Axe, made frée paſſage and ingreſſe for the ma
                  •
               
               ſter
of the Tentes and his traine to enter.
            Thus was Antioche one of the nobleſt Cities in the
world, brought into the power of the Romanes, whiche
ſhortly after, in the time of the Emperoure Iohn Zimiſca,
the Saracenes with all their ioynt powers and forces
both of the Orient and occident attempted to recouer. And
ſo vnder the conduct of the Caliph of Cairoan in Affrica,
(becauſe the power of the Caliph of Syria was now ſore
weakened and brought to a lowe ebbe) they planted their
Siege about it. Whoſe inuaſions and malyce the Citezins
and Inhabitauntes manfullye and conſtantlye
withſtoode, tyll the Emperour might hereof be certyfied.
Who hauing intelligence of this generall conſpiracie of
the Gentiles, commaunded his Prouoſt of Meſopotamia
to ayde his beſieged Fréendes and Subiectes. Who

according to his charge and cōmiſſion in a pitched battaile
(wherein the Saracenes were in number farre moe then
the Romanes) them diſparcled, chaſed and diſcomfited.
            Now becauſe I ſée the empire of the Saracens to draw
apace towarde an ende and finall ruyne, we muſt before
we procéede any further, briefelye and compendiouſlie
wryte of the remnauntes and reliques of them that yet
lurked in Africa and Spayne: and firſte wee wyll ſpeak
of Spayne, then afterward of Africa.
            
            In Spayne therefore Ramire Kinge of Lyon in the
yéere of our Sauiour Chriſt 901. making war vpon the
Saracenes, deſtroyed a Towne of theirs named Madrite
and put them to flight néere vnto Oſma and made Benaiam
King of Saragoza Tributary vnto hym. Whom (afterward
rebelliouſlye ioyninge in league with Abduramen
King of Corduba and tourning to his olde vomyt agayne)
Ramire eftſoones vanquiſhed and tooke Priſoner
in battayle néere to a Towne called Syn
                     •
                  ncas, wherein
there were ſlayne of the Saracenes thyrtye thouſande, and
many other annoyances and harmes did hee vnto them:
Afterwarde lying at the Siege of Talau
                     •
                  ra, he ouercame
the Toletane Saracenes whiche came to reyſe the Siege
and to reſcue the Citie, of whom. vii.M. were taken and
xii.M. ſlayne. After this Sancius kinge of Lyon beinge
depriued and driuen out of his kingdome by his owne
people came to Abduramen king of Corduba to be cured
of a certayne diſeaſe by the help of his Phiſicions, whom
for conning and knowledge he had heard to be the experteſt
and ſkilfulleſt that were then in al the world. Whom
the king of Corduba did not onely cauſe to be healed, but
alſo with his power and help (maugre all his foes) reſtored
him to his Roome and dignitie. But after that hee
was dead, the Saracenes wanne Symancas, Duengas Sepulueda
and Gormas, Townes belonginge to the kingdome
of Lyon and raſed Zamorra. And within awhile

after, deſtroyed and euerted Portugall the head of all Luſitanie
and Compoſtella. After the death of Abduramen,
Alliagib his Succeſſoure in that kingdome, naming him
ſelfe Almanſor (which is as much to ſay) as the Protectoure
of king Manſor his Lorde and maiſter, becauſe bee
hoped therby ye rather to allure the peoples goodwils, and
vnder that coloure to inſinuate himſelfe into their fauoures
(for at that time Manſor raigned at Marrocco.
Which Citie (as we haue afore ſhewed) was the Seate
royall of all the Saracenes Empire Occidentall, vnder
whoſe iuriſdiction and rule all the inferiour kinges of the
Saracenicall nacion in Spayne lyued) gathered a mighty
power and inuaded the Territories of the Caſtulonians,
Lyon and B
                     ••
                  kaye.
            
            The Citie of Lyon he almoſt vtterly defaced, the Towers
and Bulwarkes thereof, which were all of Marble,
he raſed and heat downe to the grownde, leauinge onelye
one, vntouched and vnblemiſhed, to the intent that the
memorye of the beautye and gorgeouſnes of that Citie
might appeare and remayne to poſterytie. He tooke Aſturia
and Coiaca which is now called Valen
                     •
                  ja (not that
Valentia which ſtandeth vpon the midland Sea, but an
other in the kingdome of Leon by the Pyrenes) and Sanſagnium
with many other Townes. And in the Precinct
of the Caſtulonians, he deſtroyed Oſma, Alcobetla,
Berlanga and Atienza: and of the Gallycian Townes,
he tooke S. Iames, and commaunded the Belles to bee
caryed away thence to Corduba, where he vſed them in
ſtéede of Lampes in his prophane Temples, & in this
ſorte he continued outraging and kéeping ſharpe warres
for the ſpace of twelue yeares. Tyll at length Bermudes
King of Lyon with the powers of the Caſtulonians, the
Byſkayes and his owne bad vnto hym battayle in a place
called Calataicor. This battayle was fiercely foughten
on both ſides for the ſpace of a whole daye, where were

ſlayne of the Saracenes many thouſandes, and in th'end
Almanſor with all his retinew and Adherents fled and
ſhortly after died for ſorow of his ouerthrow. The Spaniardes
ruffling and ſpoiling their camp, found therin great
booties & prayes which they at their flight had left behind
them. Abdimelick greatly mooued wt his fathers miſfortune,
and purpoſing to recouer and haue amendes for the
ſame, was alſo vanquiſhed. But afterward in the reigne
of Alphonſus the Son of Bermudes, ye 
               Saracenes agayne
inuading ye borders & frontiers of ye 
               Caſtulonians, deſtroied
Auila & tooke Ormetum with any other townes. And
Alphonſus reedifled the citie of Lyon. After al this, there
ſprang vp ciuile warres among the Spaniſh Saracenicall
Kinges and Princes, whereby the power of the Chriſtians
in that prouince dayly encreaſed,
                  Granado wonne from the Saracenes & Infideles by King Ferdinando Granfather to Charles the fift Anno D. 1492. inſomuch that Mahomet
Enaſ
                     •
                  r Biſhop of Marrocco being vanquiſhed in
Gottalonia néere to Valentia and ix.M. Saracenes ſlaine
with him in the yéere of our redémption 1150. the Chriſtians
within xxx. yéeres folowing, recouered Valentia,
Deuia, Alicante, Muria, new Carthage, Corduba, Syuile,
Iaen and Vbeda, and ye 
               Saracenes had no more in their
poſſeſſion but onely the Kingdome of Granado, from
whence at length they were vtterlye expulſed and driuen
out by Ferdinando the laſt king of the Tarracomans, (or
Aragon) Grandfather by the Mothers ſide to Charles the
fift late Emperour.
            In Africa a newe Prophet vaunting himſelf to be one
of ye right ligne & race of Mahomet whoſe name was E
                     •
                  
                  mahelis,
a man both borne & brought vp in ye Mountains,
about the yéere of our Lord 1000 brued a new broyle and
ſet abroch certayne quaynte faſhions about Religion. He
expulſed out of their Kingdomes, the high Biſhop of
Cairoan (which Citie before we ſhewed was not farre of
from Carthage, & was ye head Citie in the mayne land of
Africa) l alſo Abraem ye king of Marocco: which done, he

ſubdued both the Mauritanies, all Africa, all Numidia,
and Lybia vnto the borders of the Negroes and Aegypt,
conſtituting his royall and Pontificall Seate at Marocco.
The King of Marocco, fléeing from Habdulmumen
who purſued after him with part of Elmahelis Army, arriued
and came to Oranum, a Citie ſituate vpon the midland
Sea in Mauritania Caeſarienſis. But the Citizens
not receiuing him, the poore wretched King being comfortleſſe
and without all hope of better fortune,A miſerable king depoſed frō his kingdome, by deſperation brake his owne necke and his wyues. with hys
wife, who for want of better ſtore roade behind him (both
on one horſe) went vp into the toppe of a very high mountaine
lying into the Sea and there daſhing the Spurres
into the horſe ſides, caſt himſelf, his wife and horſe down
headlong from a Eraggie rocke, and ſo al thrée dyed together
at one inſtant, and were found in the Shore all bruiſed
and diſmembred. And Habdulmumen retourning
back to Marocco, found Elmahelis dead, and was creafed
King and Byſhop in his place. Whoſe poſteritie and
Succeſſours, that is to wit Ioſippus his Sonne, Manſor
his Nephieu and Machomet Enaſir, of whom we made
mencion before, his Nephieus ſonne, enioyed & poſſeſſed
that Kingdome. But when the tenne Sonnes after the
death of Mahomet their father, cōtended and bickered among
themſelues for the Garlande, the houſe of the Marines
popped into the Kingdome of Feſs, and the Habduluadean
familie inuaded the Kingdome of Telenſine,
and diſplacing there the Tunetane Magiſtrate, created
and made there a King. And all the other Kings & Princes
of Africa renounced their homage and reuolted from
the Kings of Maroco: wherby the power of the Saracens
decreaſed in Africa aſwell as in other places and the
name of their Empyre vtterly extinct.
         
         
            
            ¶The Thirde Booke.
            Wherein is expreſſed and plainly declared
the euerſion of the Saracenicall Empire and
the originall beginning, continuaunce & increaſe
of the Turkishe domination, till the firſt yeere of
the raigne of Ottomanne, from whom, louius and
diuerſe others both Greeke and Latine Turcographers
begin their Hiſtories: alſo the firſt originall
of the Tartarians, Mamalukes, Aſſaſsines,
and Sophians: Containing a true and perfect diſcourſe
of Turkishe Affaires for three hundreth
yeeres ſpace before Ottomanne, for pleaſure and
varietie very delectable.
            
               BVt now muſt I procéede in a newe
kind of order,
                  Saracenes were as the right childrē of Mahomet and Turkes in compariſon but Baſtardes. and diſcourſe vpō matters
moſt worthy to be remembred:
for we haue already ſo orderly & ſucceſſiuely
treated of Saracenicall affayres,
that now we be come by order
of Hiſtorie, to ſpeake of thoſe
times, wherin (the auncient and true Saracene Empire
decaying and as it were the lawfull Stocke and ofſpring
of Mahomet excluded and diſpoſſeſſed) Baſtards and vpſtartes
of an other ligne ſtepped in and vſurped the principalitie,
A people (I ſaye) ſhuffling in for the beſt game,
and bearing themſelues, not (as the other) vnder a painled
ſhewe and coulorable gloſe of gaie Religion and holines,
but planted themſelues in a more firme and harde
Empyre, mainteining and amplifying the ſame by force
of Armes and violence. Whoſe State differeth as much
from the former Empire, as the hardneſſe of Yron from
the ſoftneſſe of Leade. For albeit the huygenes of the Saracenicall
               
dominion were great and mighty, (inſomuch
that vnder the patched cloake and pretēce of falſe doctrine
and diabolicall Religion, it ouerflowed and almoſt drowned
the whole world) yet the violent rage therof was by
the valiaunt encountrie of couragious Souldiours and
Martiall knightes from time to time either brydled and
repreſſed, or at leaſt, brought vnder ſuch awe, that many
times they were faine to kéepe bill vnder wing, and to be
pent within narrower roome then they were before. Yea
many times, ſuch flames of ciuil diſcord among thēſelues
burſt out, that ye ſame being diſperſed into ſundry partes,
& farre diſſeuered from the fire where it was firſt forged
about Babilon and Arabie, waxed in proceſſe of time ſo
keyecold & froſtbittē, ye they were not able to wagge & beſtirre
themſelues as they did before.
            And ſo béeyng diſtract and pulled from the whole Maſſe,
and conſequently made weaker, were either cleane vaniſhed
and buryed in the pit of Obliuion, or elſe wyth an
other Fire in ſome other place newly kindled, were cōſumed
and quite burnt euen with their owne flame: which
thing hapned vnto this aforenamed Forge, till ſuch time
that new and ſtronger Smithes tooke yt office in hand, &
forged a harder mettall vppon the Anuill, to harden and
ſtrēgthē ye ſoftnes of this Leade, & throughly to beare out
ye dignitie of ye Shop. For although (as it euidētly appeareth
by ye which hath bene alredy declared in the two firſt
Bookes) our Aunceſtors & Predeceſſors haue continually
warred wt the Saracens welnigh 400 yéeres ſpace, with
diuers fortune and doubtfull victorye, in ſo much that
although their power euen from their firſte beginning
were very mightie and great, and Chriſtendome all
that tyme neuer quiet, but continually floted in ciuil diſcorde,
beſide the often incurſions of Barbarous Nations,
the Emperours of Conſtantinople ſhewing themſelues
(that while) no better then Meycockes & effeminate perſons:

yet dyd they oftentymes plague them with manye
great ouerthrowes, and recouered out of theyr poſſeſſions
ſometyme Syria, ſometyme Armenia, nowe a part
of Perſia and nowe ſome other Prouinces: but yet alwayes
and ſtyll they kept in their poſſeſſion all Europa,
ſauyng a peece of Spayne onely, Aſia the leſſe, Media,
and the Kingdomes of Parthia Bithynia and Cappadocia
with many other Realmes and Kingdomes. But the
power of the Turkes encroching and wynning vpon vs
now almoſt for the ſpace of .600. yéeres, they neuer could
repreſſe, neyther hinder the courſe and procéeding of their
Empyre, neither yet expel and driue them out of ſuch places
as they had once gotten. Of ſuch force is warlike diſcipline
and ſo much differeth the fiercenes of the Northrē
people from the tendernes and effeminacie of the Southren.
How, wherof and by what occaſiō, they brake out,
we ſhall now declare.
            
               Baſilius Porphyrogenitus being Emperour of Conſtantinople
about the yéere of our Lord 1000. many Tyrannes
wreſtled for ye Garlād and diuided among them,
the Empire of Saracens, as before in the laſt Booke was
ſhewed, wherof foure alwayes contending for ye Supremacie,
& kéeping deadly warres one wt another for ye tryal
of their titles, there began great diuiſion & hartburning
betwene Mahomet Prince of Perſians, Coraſmiorians &
of diuerſe other people on the one part, and the Caliph of
Syria whoſe royall Seate & Metropolitane Sea was at
Bagadet.
               
                  Antioche taken. In which wars, Mahomet being put to ye wors
and by ye 
               Babilonian (through helpe and ayde of Sclerus
and ye 
               Roman captiues) vanquiſhed, ſent to ye Turks for
aide, whoſe helpe and furtheraunce at a pinche (as afore
hath beene ſpecified, the Saracenes for certayne yeeres
paſſed were accuſtomed in theyr Warres too vſe
and ioygne vnto them, and the rather becauſe they
profeſſed and embraced euen at the firſte eruptions,

                  〈2 pages missing〉
               
               
ſwaded that they were begotten and dyd come of the
wylde Faunes.
            
            But the Turkes and Tuſsagetes diſcendynge of
their race and inhabityng the Northſide of Mount Caucaſus
as before wee haue ſhewed, differed muche
from them as well in lyfe, as manners and Lawes:
beinge (notwithſtandynge) ſo lyke amonge themſelues
and ſo lynked together in League one with an
other, that they were taken and accompted for one
People, and peraduenture they were all one, and were
ſo called and named (as prophane Perſones) by the Armenians
their Neighbours, from whome they receiued
their Rites, and whiche were called Sagae (as
muche to ſaye) as holie. For this worde Teutazites
(as in the Seconde Booke was ſhewed) ſignifyeth
in their language Gentiles or a prophane People.
For theſe names are of many Writers ſo mingled
and taken together, that the one ſeemeth to be
theyr name, the other their Surname.
            
               Procopius ſaieth, theſe People were nothing néere
to the other Hunnes, neyther had any thinge to doo
with them: but that they brodered vppon the Northe
partes of Perſia, that is to witte Armenia. For
Armenia was euer lyghtlye ſubiect to the Crowne of
Perſia. Neyther were they Wanderers from place
to place, (as hauynge no habitation ſauynge there,
where their Cattayle ſtayed and grazed, as the other
Hunnes or Scythians were): but had in their Poſſeſſion
and inhabyted the beſte Plottes and moſte fertil
                  •
               
Regyon that was amonge the Dounes and Mountaynes
rounde aboute, and amonge the Hunnes, they
onely were white of complexion and coloure, and not ſo
ouglye nor ſo ſterne viſaged, neyther lyuing ſo ſauagelye
and beaſtlye as the others dyd: but lyke true Subiectes
liued orderly in due obedience and humble ſubiection vnder

one Prince, whome they accepted as their head and
King: hauing alſo a well ordered Common wealth,
with due execution and imbracynge of Iuſtice and other
politicall Lawes, both at home amonge themſelues,
and abroade with other forraine Nacions borderynge
vppon them, as the Greeques, Romanes and dyuers
other ciuile and well gouerned Nacions dyd
alſo.
            The chiefe Citie of all their Kingdome was called
Gorga. The nobleſt ſorte and wealthyeſt perſones
amonge them, had contynuallye ſeiourninge at
their Houſes as Geſtes, twenty or moe of their famylier
Fréendes, accordinglye as their Subſtaunce and
Rycheſſe extended, with whom, both wealth, authoritie
and power was in common: as the ſame Procopius
ſheweth, and as their inſtitution and manner of
lyuinge to this day witneſſeth.
            Some there be, whiche referre the firſte originall of
the Turkes, to thoſe tenne Tribes of Iſraell: whiche
(as wee reade in Ioſephus) were tranſlated into
Media. For proofe and Teſtimonye whereof, they
alledge the likeneſſe and ſimilitude of their maners
and conuerſation.
            Some referre their pedagrew to Gog and Magog, of
whome there is mencion made in the holie Scriptures:
from whom, we rather be of opynion that the Tartarians
yea and peraduenture alſo the Gothes be lineallye deſcended.
And ſome there bee whiche doo deriue the ofſpringe
and Progenie of them: from the auncient Troians.
Whoſe ſeuerall opinions by waye of Argument,
either to confirme and allowe or confute and diſprooue,
is no parte of our purpoſe and intent in this
place, ſythince our onely meanyng is not to reaſon vppon
probabilities, but to bringe ſuch certainelye knowen

truthes, as are in the hiſtories and Chronologies of auncient
writers aſwell of Greekes and Thracians as of the
Turkes themſelues and other Nations confining vnto
them, publiſhed and mencioned which is euen ſo as before
we haue declared.
            
               Muchumet therfore deſired ayde of their Prince in his
warres againſt the Caliph of Babilon, throughe whoſe
helpe and valiaunce (ſent vnto him vnder the conducte of
Tangrolipix Mucalet,) he encountred with Piſaſire the
Babylonian Caliph, and him with litle labour and leſſe
daunger diſcomfited, by reaſon that the Arabians were
not hable to abyde the thicke ſhotte of the Turkishe Arrowes.
Beyng from this warre retourned home wyth
victorie, he mynded alſo to vſe the ayde of ye ſame Turkes
in his Warres againſt the Indians. At which ſeaſon the
Turkes weary of that ſeruice, deſired leaue of Muchumet,
not onely to retourne home, but alſo that a garr
                  •
               
               ſon
might be appointed to wafte them in ſafetie ouer 
                  ••
               e
bridge that ſtoode vppon the Riuer Araxes. Which requeſt
he tooke in ſuche diſdaine and impacience yt with
frowning looke he charged them from thenceforth not to
vrge him any more with that ſute. The Turkes had no
other way in their retourne homeward, but muſt néedes
paſſe the ſaid Riuer Araxes, which is ye limite and Border
of the kingdome of Perſia: ouer the which there was
no other Bridge but onely this, which was on bothe ſides
merueylous ſtrongly garded and fortified with Blockehouſes,
Turrettes and Garriſons. The Turkes dreading
further daūger priuily ſhranke away & as cloſely as
they could, departed into the deſert of Carbonitis. For
conſidering their number was not aboue three thouſande
men, they durſt not aduenture to fight and buckle wyth
ſuch a great multitude. Béeyng in thoſe deſertes, they
made many vagaries into the Saracenes Territories,
and waſted theyr Countrey terriblye. Whereat Muchumet
               
merueilouſly ſtomacking and ſtorming, ſent an
Armye of 30000. men againſt them, committing the
charge and conducting of the whole Armie vnto tenne
Tribunes of ye nobleſt, ſtouteſt and wiſeſt in his traine.
They beyng come néere to their enemies, would not aduenture
to enter into the deſert, for feare they ſhould be
diſtreſſed for lacke of water and victuall, but encamped
themſelues euen in the verye entraunce into the ſame
deſert.
            The Captaine of the Turkes, hauing intelligēce by his
Eſpialles, of the Perſians approch, called his Souldiours
together, and making them priuie to his deuiſe, purpoſed
ſodainly to ſet vpon them and vnawares to ſurpriſe, both
the Saracenes and Perſians, while they were yet ſecure
and miſtruſted nothing. And ſpéeding apace toward them
by great iournayes, within two dayes was come néere
vnto them, The thirde night he ſet vppon them beyng in
their Tentes careleſſe and quiet, ſuſpecting nothing leſſe
then any ſuch matter: whom he put to flight euen at the
firſt onſet. After this diſcomfiture of his enemies, hee
fell to ſpoyle and ranſacke their Tentes, where finding
great ſtore of Wagons, Horſes, and Money, lyued no
longer by Robbery and Thefte lyke a Vagabonde or fugitiue
(as afore) but from thence forthe pitched hys
Tentes and encamped himſelfe abroade in the open
playne. When the report of his victorie and good fortune
was blowen abroade, there reſorted vnto him from
all quarters thereaboute, all ſuche Cutthroates and
Villaines as for their vngracious demerites feared
puniſhment, wyth a great route of Slaues and pylfering
Roges lyuing of the ſpoyle of others, inſomuch that
within a whyle hys Armye grewe to the number of
50000.Tyrānye of Muchumet toward his owne men. men. Muchumet ſtormyng marueilouſlye at
this ouerthrowe and diſcomfiture of hys Hoaſte, cauſed
the eyes of thoſe tenne whom he had appoynted Capitaines

to bée pulled out, and threatened the reſt of the
Souldiours which fledde out of the Battaile, that ſo ſoone
as he had vanquiſhed his fees, he woulde cloathe them
all, in womans apparell, and leade them as gazing
ſtockes in Triumph before him. This done he himſelfe
in perſon marcheth againſt his Enemies. His men, who
before had bene vanquiſhed of the Turkes, conſidering
the threates and ſhamefull handling that was ment towarde
them, reuolted from Muchumet and fledde to
Tangrolipix. Who now hauing his Armie encreaſed
with ſuch a warlike Crewe of freſhe Souldiours, with
all his whole power together, came againſt Muchumet,
by dinte of mortall battaile to trie and finally determine
the cauſe of controuerſie betwene them.
            
               Muchumet with hys power of Saracenes, Perſians,
Arabians and Cabirians well appoynted and armed, to
the number of fyue hundreth thouſande, and a hundreth
Elephantes wyth Towers on theyr backes, mette his
Enemye at a place called Aſpacha: where betweene
them was fought a cruell and bloudie Battayle and
many ſlayne on bothe partes. In this conflicte, Muchumet,
as hee rode vnheedely from ranke to ranke,
chéeryng his Souldiours and exhorting them to doe
valiauntly, by meanes of the foltering and ſtumbling of
hys horſe, fell downe and brake his necke. He béeyng
once deade, his Armye fell to a Parley and compoſition
wyth the Turkes, and ſo wyth one conſente and
wyll of all ſides, Tangrolipix was proclaymed King
of Perſians. Who immediately opened a waye and
paſſage for his people into Perſia. Of whom a great
multitude went thyther, and oppreſſing the Perſians
and Saracenes,
               What a Souldane ſignifieth. perforce poſſeſſed all the Countrey of
Perſia. They alſo honoured Tangrolipix by the ſtile
or tytle of Sultane, whiche is aſmuch to ſaye as a

moſt Soueraigne Emperour or Kyng of Kinges. He
diſplaced the Inhabitauntes of the Countrey out of theyr
Offices, Roomes and Dignities, and placed his owne
Nation and people in the ſame, and amonge them
(empoueriſhing and vtterly oppreſſing the Countrey
borne perſons) diuided and parted the whole Region
of Perſia.
            
            Alſo Daber, Prince of Aegypt, béeyng in League
and amitie wyth the Romanes, falſefyed hys othe and
promiſe whiche before hee had condiſcended vnto, and
deſtroyed the Temple at Hieruſalem wherein was
the Sepulchre of our Sauiour Chryſt, and all the other
holie places in the ſame. For Hieruſalem at that
tyme was vnder hys obedience and dominion. And
wythin a whyle after, hee ſent a Nauie into the Iſles
called Cyclades to trie ſome maiſtries there: which Nauie
was encountred and mette wythall, by the Duke
of Samos, who tooke .xii. of them as Pryzes with all the
men and Capitaines therein, and the reſt to hys hyghe
laude and glory diſperſed and ſcattered.
            After this, Argyropylus béeyng Emperour of Conſtantinople,
the Arabians wanne all ſuche Cities as
Nicephorus and Iohn Zimiſca had taken in Syria
and ſlewe the Garryſons that were lefte to keepe
them. And the Prynce of Chalep wyth continuall
incurſions infeſted Antioche and dyuerſe other Cities
and Countreyes confyning vppon Syria, that were
ſubiecte to the Romane Empyre. By whom alſo the
Capitayne of Antioche (Conſtantine béeyng yet alyue)
was ſhamefullye vanquiſhed, and hardly eſcaped
wyth the loſſe of manye of hys men. In whoſe
office and roome the Emperour appoyntyng another,
went himſelfe wyth a competent number of well furniſhed
Souldiours to ſnaffle the pretenced outrage and
inſolent demeanure of the ſame Prince of Chalep.
            
            
               
The Chalepians hauing vnderſtanding of his approche,
ſent Ambaſſadours with giftes and rewardes to meete
him on the way and to deſire pardon for their former temerytie
and vndutifull behauiours towardes him, offering
agayne to ſubmit themſelues and from thencefoorth
to become his true Vaſſalles and liege people. Whiche
ſubmiſſion and peace, although manye of his Lordes and
Capitaines exhorted him to accepte, yet hee hoping
eaſely to ſubdue the Saracenes and thereby to purchaſe
vnto himſelfe a great name and glory, would néeds
march on, and continue his voyage into Syria. And when
he had ſtrongly encamped himſelfe néere to Chalep, the
Arabians beinge bolde and nimble fellowes, and naked,
with good ſwift Horſes vnder them, lyke Dimylaunces,
planted themſelues in euery corner in Ambuſhes. So yt
if any of their enemies went out on forraging or to fetch
water they ſodenly brake out and either ſlew or tooke thē
priſoners. By reaſon whereof both the Souldiours and
their Horſes fainted for thirſte and were not hable to doe
any ſeruice.
            Thus they being better acquainted and enured with
theſe incurſions and ſkirmiſhes tooke heart a grace, accuſing
the Romanes of Slouth and cowardyſe, and ſheweing
themſelues in great plumpes, deſcēding ſodenly from
the Hylles with great ſhoutes and cryes, ſo terryfied and
diſmayed the Romane Hoaſt,Emperoure in great danger. that they tourned their
backs & fled. The emperour himſelf being there in great
danger of his lyfe and forſaken of his Pretorian Souldiours
which for feare ſhifted for themſelues and left hym
alone, had fallē in the Lapſe and bene taken Priſoner, yf
one of his company had not ſet him vpon his Horſe and
aduiſed him to ſaue him ſelfe by flight. The Saracenes
ſuppoſinge this their fléeinge to be done but for a pollicie
and for the nonce purſued not the chaſe, but entred into
the Emperours Tentes, where taking a few noble perſonages

and ſpoylinge his rych Pauilion wherein was
great foyſon of Treaſure and princely furniture, departed
thence and retyred back lading their Horſes with as
much as they could cary away.
            In their retourne back they ouercame the countrey
of Meſopotamia. And ye 
               Aegiptian Fléet waſted the coaſt
of Illyricum, but they could not goe cleare away. For the
Greekish Fleet encountered with them and burnt many
of them, the reſt which eſcaped by flight, by tempeſt were
drowned in the Sicillian Sea. Alſo an other Nauy of a
thouſand Sayle or there about, being ſent out of Aphrica,
ſpoyled many Iſlandes and places bordering vpon the
ſea Coaſtes. But the Romane gallayes chaunceing vpon
them tooke certayne, ſonke many, and ſent 500. of them
priſoners to the Emperour. And George Maniaces, prouoſt
of all the Cities along the Riuer Euphrates, lying at
Samoſata, conquered and raſed a citie called Edeſsa, wher
he finding an Epiſtle of our Sauiour Ieſus Chriſt written
with his owne hande, he ſent the ſame vnto the Emperoure.
This Citie afterwarde in the Empyre and
raigne of Michael Paphlagon was beſieged by the Arabians,
and had bene wonne if Conſtantine Capitaine of
Antioch, and Brother to the Emperour had not ſuccoured
and relieued the poore Defendauntes that were
within it.
            After that the Prince of Aegypt was dead, the Quéene
his wyfe being a Chriſtian and her ſon concluded a truce
with the Romanes, to endure for xxx. yéeres, and cauſed
the Temple and other holie places at Ieruſalem to be reſtored
and newe reedified. About this time two Brothers
both Saracenes, iounctlie and with equall authorytie
raigning in Sycilie, fell at diſcorde and variaunce betwéene
themſelues, wherevppon the one of them deſired
ayde and aſſiſtance of the Emperoure. Who immediatlie

ſent George Maniaces a noble Counſaillour and expert
Warriour with a tall companye of Men to ayde
hym.
            But before he could come into Sycile, the two Brothers
were reconcyled and made Fréendes and ioyninge bothe
their powers together to repulſe, Maniaces from landing
in the Iſlandes, ſent alſo for ayde to Carthage. But
when both the armies were claſped together in battayle,
the victorie fell vnto the Romanes, who gaue vnto the
Saracenes a notable ouerthrow and ſlew of them a great
number. Which done, the Generall raſed and deſtroyed
xiii Cities: and from thence marching ſtyll forwarde,
recouered and reſtored againe all Sycile to the Romane
Empyre.
            But in the Orient, it was a fayre hap, that the Citie of
Edeſsa had not bene ſurpriſed by the Saracenes.
               A pollicie of the Saracens to haue taken the citie Edeſsa▪
                  
                For
twelue of the chiefe Princes or Nobles of them brought
fiue hundreth Camelles to Edeſsa, euery one laden with
two Cheſtes a péece, and in euery Cheſt an armed ſouldiour,
pretending and ſaying that their comming was, to
preſent the Emperoure with certaine rewardes and
giftes. Their intent was, if they might haue bene let
in, the next night with their armed Souldiours in the
Cheſtes to haue taken the Citie. But their ſubtile ſtratageme
and crafty conueighance miſſed of hoped effect by
this meanes.
            There was a certayne Begger,A Begger ſaued the Citie. an Armenian borne,
whiche could well vnderſtande and ſpeake the Arabian
language. This poore Armenian begging the charitable
almes of the Arabians which lodged abroad without the
Citie, chaunced to heare one of them in the Cheſtes aſking
an other of his fellowes where they were, and immediatlye
departinge from them went into the Citie,
and diſcouered this trecherous traine to the Prouoſte.

Who by this meanes hauing ynckeling and intelligence
thereof, left the Princes of the Arabians banquetynge
and making good chéere in the Citie, and with a conuenient
number of Citezens iſſued out of the Gates, and
openinge the Cheſtes, kylled all the armed men in the
ſame. And comming back againe into the Citie, killed
alſo all the Princes and Capitaines of them, ſauing
onely one, whoſe two handes he chopped off, and curtaylyng
his noſe and eares, ſent him away packinge with a
Flea in his eare, to carry news home of their good ſpéede
and aduenture.
            On the other ſide, when the Caliph of Cairoan in
Aphrica vnderſtoode of the loſſe and deſtruction of his
Armies, he went himſelfe in perſon with a greater Armye
into Sycile. Againſt whom, Maniaces came with a
maine power, commaunding the Admyrall of his Nauy
dilygently to looke to his charge and ſo narowly to ſcoure
the Coaſtes and kéepe the Sea, that the vanquiſhed Carthaginians
ſhould by no meanes eſcape. And then both
the Armies grapeled together in a terrible and moſte
ſharpe conflicte, wherein were ſlaine ſo many of the Saracenes,
that they could by no meanes be numbred. But
their Prince eſcaping out of the Féelde, embarked himſelfe
with all ſpéede poſſible in a Brigandine and retourned
home in ſafetie.
            Now, Tangrolipix Kinge of Perſia hauynge ſet
all the affaires of his Kingdome in good ſtaye and order,
made Warre vppon Piſaſirye chiefe Gouernour of Babilon
and ouercame him in many battayles and laſt of al
flewe him.
            And ſo the Babylonians being ſubdued and annexed
to his Domynions, he ſent Cutlume his Nepheu with
an Armye againſte Carbeſe Kinge of Arabie.
            
            
               
Of whom Cutlume being ouercome, deſired by his Ambaſſadours
of Stephan Regent of Media (which countrey
is now called Baas Prachan) to geue him leaue with hys
people to paſſe throughe the borders of his Countrey
and iuriſdiction. Which requeſt, Stephan did not onely
flatly denie, but alſo armed himſelfe and went againſte
him. Notwithſtanding he left many of his men, and was
himſelfe taken Priſoner. And ſo Cutlume retourning
home to Tangrolipix, recompted vnto him his ſucceſſe in
the Median warre, and highly extolled the fertilitie and
fruitfulnes of that region, affyrming that the ſame was
verie eaſie to be wonne. But Tangrolipix being ſore offended
with him for his late diſcomfiture, went himſelfe
againſt the Arabians. Cutlume for feare fled away with
his company, and taking a Citie of the Choraſmiorians
named Paſar, reuolted from the Sultan. But the Sultane
winking at this matter and letting it ſlippe for a whyle,
helde on his voyage with his whole Hoaſt againſt the Arabians,
by whom he alſo was put to flight, and ſo comming
home with more loſſe then gaine, with the greateſt
part of his Hoaſt beſieged Cutlume. But Cutlume repoſing
great truſt and aſſuraunce in the naturall ſituation
and ſtrength of the place, long time reſiſted him. In the
meane ſeaſō, Tangrolipix ſent Aſan his other Nephew
ſurnamed Surdus with .xx. M. wel appointed Souldiours
into Media.
               
                  Turkes goe to wrake. Who ruſhing with his inuaſiue power into
the Prouince, and ioyning Battaile with the Romanes
was with his whole Hoaſt (excepting a very few) ſlaine.
The Sultan vnderſtanding therof, and minding to winne
his honour againe for ſo notable a loſſe and ouerthrowe,
ſent one Alim Abramie with a hundreth thouſand fighting
men into the ſame Prouince againe. The Regent
of the Countrey ſent to the Emperour for aide, & thought
it beſt for him not to fight with the Turkes till Liparites,
Prouoſt of a part of Iberia were come with his Iberians
               
to ayde him. The Romanes kept thēſelues within theyr
fortes & ſtrong Holdes, wherfore Alim, ſéeing that they
minded not to trie matter with him by force of battaile,
aſſaulted a ſmall vnwalled village called Arzen, where
innumerable wealthy Merchauntes dwelled, ſuppoſing
the ſame would haue bene got and ſurrendred vnto hym
at the firſt brunt, & in a maner without reſiſtance. But it
happened not altogether according to his expectatiō. For
the Townesmen ſtopped his wayes and paſſages, with
great Timber logges & threw dartes and other weapons
at them from the toppes of their houſes, and ſlew many
of them. Alim after that he had giuen the aſſaulte vnto it
by ye ſpace of ſixe continual dayes, & ſaw the ſtoute hearts
of the Citizens in defending, and yt he could not conueniently
lye any longer at the Siege therof, threw wilde fire
into the houſes, which flamed, and in euery place ſo raged
that the Inhabitants to laue their liues, fled. And by this
meanes the Turkes wanne the village, wherein they
found much Gold and ſtore of rycheſſe which the fire had
not conſumed. From thence they diſcamped & ſped them
toward the Romane Armye, vnto whoſe ayde Liparites
was now come with the power of Iberia.
            
            Both the Battayles ioygnyng together a lyttle before
nyghte, the Turkes were diſcomfited and put to
flight, whom the Romanes chaſed and purſued till farre
in the nyght. Albeit in this conflicte Liparites (who
ledde the one wing of the Battayle) was taken Priſoner
and brought to the Sultan. For whoſe raunſome and
redeliuerie the Emperour ſent a great maſſe of money
and other rewardes to the Sultan, deſiring him alſo
that a peace and league might bée concluded betwéene
them.
            But the Sultan ſending backe all the money and
Giftes, frankely delyuered Liparites without any panie:
aduiſing him after that tyme, neuer to beare armour

againſt the Turkes. And beſide this, hee ſent an
Ambaſſadour vnto the Emperour, one of the worthyeſt
in degree in all his Courte called Seriphes: which Dignitie
is ſo high among them, that after the deathe of the
Caliph, the Seriphes ſuccéedeth in his roome. For the
Turkes euen at the firſte, embracing the doctrine of
Mahomet, reuerenced and had in great honour and eſtimation
their Caliphas as Prieſtes and Byſhoppes of
their Lawe: notwithſtanding they debarred them from
wearing the Imperiall Crowne or entermedling with
any iuridicall power in prophane matters within their
Empyre. This ſtately Ambaſſadour, comming to Conſtantinople
was brought before the Emperour, before
whom he proudely ſhewed his Commiſſion, which was,
to demaunde a Tribute to bée payde by the Emperour
to the Sultane. But he was fayne to retourne without
ſpéeding hys errand. Wherefore the Sultane takyng
Pepper in the Noſe, made Warre and went himſelfe
agaynſt the Romanes. And when hee was come as
farre as Comium a Citie of Iberia, becauſe the Inhabitauntes
of the Countrey had included themſelues and
theyr goodes wyth all thinges neceſſarie in Holdes and
Caſtles (whereof the number at that tyme in Iberia
was great) and hearing that the Romanes muſtered
and aſſembled a great power about Caeſarea, to come agaynſt
him, hee retyred without doyng any notable exployte,
worthy of remembraunce backe agayne into
Media: where lykewyſe fynding all places walled and
Bulwarked, hys full determination was to wynne his
purpoſe by Siege.
            And firſt of all hee attempted the wynning of Mantzichierte,
a Citie ſtandyng in the playne champion
Countrey, vaumured and ſtrengthened wyth three
ſtronge Walles, hauing wythin it many Fountaynes

and lyuely Springes of Water, whiche Citie by the
foreſight and prouiſion of the Towneſmen was verye
well victualled. And encampyng hymſelfe néere to
the Walles, gaue an aſſaulte vnto the ſame .xxx. continuall
dayes without any ceaſſing, with all kynde of
Engynes and Warlike Inſtrumentes. But in the end,
perceyuing hys attempte to bée in vayne, and hauyng
no hope of better ſucceſſe, rayſed hys Siege and departed
wyth the loſſe of many of his people. Then he purſued
his Nephewe Abramie, who was nowe confederate
and tooke parte wyth his Coſen Cutlume, and
him in Battayle néere to the Citie of Paſaris ouercame
and ſlew.
            But Cutlume wyth ſire thouſande in his companye,
(among whom was Melech the Sonne of Abramie,
ſaued himſelfe by flighte, and by hys Ambaſſadours
ſued to the Emperour Conſtantine Ducas to bee receiued
into his fauour and protection, and that a League
myght bee confyrmed betweene them: ſtaying for an
aunſwere in Perſarmenia at the Citie Charſe. But
becauſe the Sultane folowyng at hys heeles, was commyng
wyth a power into Iberia, Cutlume fledde into
Arabia Foelix. The Sultane ſpoyled and waſted all
as hee went in Iberia: but hearyng that Michael was
commyng wyth an Armye agaynſt hym, and thinking
it muche diſhonorable for him to deale wyth the
Emperours Seruaunt, retyred agayne into his owne
Territories, leauyng behinde hym, one of his Captaynes
named Samuch, a man of baſe parentage and
lowe hyrthe, but in Martiall affaires a ryght excellent
Capitayne. This Samuch remayning ſtyll hehynde,
with 3000. men, coaſted and ſtrayed about the
playne Countrey of the greater Armenia, and wyth
many ſodayne incurſions infeſted the frontiers of the
Romane Empyr
                  •
               .
            
               
After this Diogenes being Romane Emperour the Sultan
againe with a great power entred within ye precinct
and limytes of the Romane dominions: But the Emperour
comming with an Army againſt hym, hes retyred
backe: and deuiding his Hoaſt into two partes, ſent
the one into South Aſia & ye other into north Aſia, which
ſpoyled all as they went, and ſodaynly ſurpriſing the citie
of new Ceſaria: ſacked it and being full laden with bootie
and pray departed thence. But the Emperoure when
he heard of it, takinge with him a Bande of luſtier and
nimbeler Souldiours, coaſting the néereſt way ouer hill
and dale, through thick and thinne, to get betwéene his
enemies and home, ſo vigoriouſlye and ſodaynly ſet vpon
them and therewitall ſo teryfied and diſmayed them
that they truſtinge to their Legges, lea
                  •
               t all their
pray and cariage behinde them. Notwithſtanding their
was no great number of them flaine, becauſe the Romanes
(being with their long iournaie weared) were not
hable to folowe the chaſe farre, but they reſcued and delyuered
manye Priſoners whiche before had bene taken.
From thence making his voyage into Syria, where hee
ſent out part of his Army to Melitena, he brought home
from Chalep great Booties both of men and beaſtes, and
tooke Hierapolis in Syria by ſurrendrie.
            After this, the Emperour (lying at Hierapolis) hearing
newes yt the Turkes had vanquiſhed part of the Romane
Armies, ſped himſelfe thitherward in all haſt to ſuccoure
his diſtreſſed Souldiours and afflicted Subiectes. The
Capitayne of Chalep, hearing of this ouerthrowe geuen
to the Romanes, renounced his allegiaunce and fled with
all his trayne to the Turkes. And when the Enemies
had enuironed the Romane Campe round about, the emperoure
without geuing any knowledge to them that hee
woulde fight, brought ought his Armie and without the
ſounde either of Trumpet or other manyfeſt token, gaue

the charge and onſet vpon them, and put them to flight
ere they had warning or time to reſiſt. Then he buylte
and erected a Caſtle at Hierapolis, and after he had taken
many other Townes, he came to Alexandria a citie
of Cilicia. And takinge order for the winteringe of his
Hoaſt, where they ſhoulde not be pynched with famyne
nor ſcarcitie of victuall retourned home to Conſtantinople.
            
            In the beginning of ye next ſpring, ye Emperour making
an other voyage to Caeſarea, was certaynly enformed yt a
great company of Turkes forraged and ſpoyled that prouince:
whom after he had either ſlayne or taken, hee tooke
his iournay to Euphrates: and there leauing parte of his
Army, vnder the conduct of Philaretus, he himſelfe went
northward. The Turkes putting Philaretus his Souldyours
in great feare & ieoperdie, got all their trinketes and
cariage, and marching forwarde into Cappadocia (waſting
and making hauocke as they went) came to Iconium.
a Citie at that time moſte flouriſhinge and renowmed.
            The Emperoure hauinge intelligence hereof at Sebaſtia,
ſpedde him thitherward. But hearing by the way,
that his Enemies had deſtroyed and raſed the Citie, and
vpon the brute and report of his coming and approche to
be departed, he delyuered parte of the Romane Legions
to Cathagurio Capitaine of Antioch, commaunding
him foorthwith to repayre to Mopſiheſtia, where the
Turkes ſhoulde paſſe, and there to ſet vpon them. But
ere they could come ſo farre, the Turkes were bidde to a
colde breakefaſt by the Armenians in the plaine of Tharſus,
and diſtruſſed in a manner of all they had: & hearing
further that the Romanes were planted at Mopſiheſtia
to receiue them, if they paſſed that way, fledde by night.
            After this, in the beginning of the Spring, the Turks
               
                  •
               ftſoones inuadinge and infeſtinge the Romane Prouinces,

were vaunted and ouercome by Mychael Comnenus,
Generall and Chieftaine for the Emperoure: and
within awhile after, the ſame Michael being ſent by the
Emperoure into Syria with a leſſe power, for certayne
ſpight and hartburning borne agaynſt hym, was vanquiſhed
and taken of the Turkes. After this the Emperoure
in perſon with a great power went into the orientall
Prouinces, and entamping at a place called Criapega,
in a battayle whiche hee fought with his Enemies
(wher the Scythians that were in his Army forſoke him
and fled to the Turkes) moſt manfully fightinge was taken
and brought before the Sultane whoſe name then
was Axan,
               Emperour taken Priſoner. for Tangrolipix was now dead. This Axan
as he was a moſt preciſe man and of great moderation
and prudence, when hee certainlye knew that it was
ye Emperour (for he would not beléeue it was he, till the
Ambaſſadours, (vnto him before ſent,) affirmed it was
he indéede, and certayne Greeke Capitaines whiche hee
had in Priſon (being brought before him) fel downe and
proſtrated themſelues at his féete) curteouſly lifted hym
vp from the ground, lying proſtrate and knée lynge at his
Feete, as the cuſtome and manner is for them that acknowledge
themſelues vanquiſhed:Great cur
                  
                     •
                  eſſe of the Sultane.
                and ſo louinglye embraced
him as though he had bene his owne Brother,
ſpeakinge vnto hym theſe comfortable wordes folowyng.
            
               I would not wiſh you (moſte noble Emperour) to lament
and ſorow for this your preſent chaunce and miſerie.
For ſuch is the ſtate and courſe of this worlde, that
the fortune of Warre ſometime allotteth victorie to one,
ſometime to an other, humbleth one and aduaunceth an
other. Your Maieſtie hath moſte puiſſauntlye quitte
your ſelfe in many notable Battayles, your valiaunt
courage and inuincible proweſſe in warlyke affaires

ſhall euer be renowmed and ſpoken of, yf you now ſhew
your ſelfe to be no leſſe pacient and ſtoute in aduerſitie
then you were prudent and wiſe in proſperitie. Albeit
at my handes you ſhall not be vſed as a Captiue and priſoner,
but lyke an Emperour and as is moſt ſitting for
one of your eſtate.
            
            And immediatly he apointed vnto him a moſt Princelye
and rych Tabernacle, with ſeruauntes to await and
geue attendaunce vppon his Perſon, and all other furniture
méete for an Emperour. And cauſed him to ſit at his
owne table next vnto himſelfe, & for his ſake ſet at lybertie
as many Priſoners as he would demaunde. Which
Princely curteſie argued that he had regarde to humane
mutabilitie and fickle ſtate, conſidering the ſame miſſehappe
might as well haue happened vnto hym. Thus
theſe two mighty Princes keping company famylyerly
together for certayne dayes, & talking moſt fréendly one
to an other, at laſt eſtabliſhed and concluded a perpetuall
and infringible peace for euer to continue betwene them,
and vpon promiſe of affinitie by Mariage betwéene their
Children to be ſolempniſed, hee franklie delyuered and
fréely diſmiſſed Diogenes with a great traine of honorable
Perſonages awaighting vppon him, and gaue vnto
hym a riche ſute of Princelye Apparaile.
            But after that Diogenes was at Conſtantinople
murthered by his owne People, Axan the Sultane
hearinge thereof and greatlie lamentinge his death, for
reuenge thereof ſent out his Armies, not now to pylfer
and robbe as before, but to ſubdue and vtterlie to reduce
the ſame vnder his ſubiection. Againſt whom, Michael
Ducas the Emperour, ſent Iſaac Comnenus with a great
power, who was ouercome and taken of the Turkes
and payde a great Summe of Money for his Raunſome.
After this, Cutlume Nepheiu to Tangrolipix
(as before hath béene declared) leuyinge agreat Power

                  〈2 pages missing〉
               
               
ſome the Citie of Hieruſalem and ſome with muche labour
and effuſion of bloude regained other Cities and
there conſtituted a Chriſtian Kingdome. Nowe, this
while, the Emperour of Conſtantinople was in league
with the other Sultan of the Turkes, was Lord of ye
Prouinces confyning and bordering next vnto Conſtantinople:
for wée ſhewed before, howe that thoſe Prouinces
were alotted and geuen to Cutlume, the which hys
Heires after him enioyed, and Tangrolipix his Succeſſours
had the regiment ouer the Perſians and Babylonians:
and in Aegypt there were yet remayning the remnauntes
and reſidue of the Saracenes.
            
            But after the death of Cutlume and his Sonne (Sultanes
of the Occident and Lordes of all Cappadocia) one
Taniſmanye ſuccéeded. Of theſe Chriſtian Capitaines
when they were arryued in ſafetie in Aſia, the Turkes
gaue a great ouerthrowe vnto Raymund, watching him
at a vauntage, when he was entred into the Countrey
about Nice vnaduiſedly without ſearche, and hym compelled
to flie vnto a poore deſert towne called Exorgum:
where after he had bin a certain ſpace beſieged & throughly
wearied, with a ſewe others yelded to his enemyes.
The reſt which would not yelde and ſubmit themſelues,
after long Siege, were partly conſumed in ſkirmiſhes
and partly periſhed by famyne: and ſuch as were taken
alyue, were ſlaine euerie one. So many as were leſte,
departed firſt to Nicomedia, and from thence remooued
to Nice a Citie of Bithynia. Whiche Citie while they
fiercely aſſaulted, Taniſmany or Solyman with . lx. thouſande
Turkes, yſſued out and bent his full force agaynſt
that part of the Chriſtian Campe which was ledde by ye
Byſhoppe of Podie: but the Frenche, ſtoode ſo ſtoutly
at the receipt, that the enemyes were eaſely repulſed, and
ſo at length the Citie of Nice was taken. After this there
was a ſharpe bickering and conflict with Solyman, at the

fourth Tent pitch from Nicaea. For he had gathered together
the power of the whole Orient, and had procured
as much aide from elſe where as he could. Thē
               
                  
                     •
                  conium
a Citie ſtanding by Mount Taurus, the Seate Royall
and Metropolitane Citie of Solyman, (which at this day
is called Cogni) and the Pallace of the Princes of Phrygia
(now called Caramania) and Heraclea were wonne.
Afterwarde Baldwyne diuiding hys Armye into two
partes tourned into Cilicia, and tooke Tharſus, Edeſſa
and Manuſſa: the greater Hoaſte wynning Armenia,
delyuered the regiment and rule thereof to Palmurus an
Armenian.
            
            After this good ſucceſſe, they tooke Cappadocia, Caeſarea
Sororgia and Sura in the Straicts of Mount Taurus.
When they had paſſed the Mount Taurus, ye Turkes aduaunced
themſelues in a faire plaine, but they were eaſely
and with litle adoe diſcomfited and put to flight by the
Latines, and from thence marched ſtraight to Antioch, a
noble and ſtrong Citie in Phaenicia, by which the riuer
Orontes runneth (for there is another of the ſame name
in Pamphilia, néere vnto Seleucia) and tooke the ſame by
ſurrendre, by reaſon that the Turkes were afore vanquiſhed
in battaile and yelded themſelues. In which battaile
were ſlaine of the Tu
                  •
               ks a hundreth thouſand, and
xv.M. Camelles taken.
            During theſe broyles, the Venetian Fleete beynge
CC. ſayle and ſent to ayde the Latynes, wanne a Citie
in the Coaſt of Ionia called Smyrna: and the Latines after
they had taken Antioch, wanne Rugia and Albaria
and there Wintered.
            In the Spryng folowing, departyng thence, they
layde Siege fyrſt to Tortoſa and Tripolis. The king of
Tripolis ſubmitting himſelfe was receiued vnder Protection,
but Tortoſa was verye ſtoutely defended by the

Inhabitants. Wherfore rayſing their Siege and paſſing
ouer the Riuers of Zebul, Zabar and Brai, they came by
priuie wayes and vnhaunted places before Berytus a
Citie ſtanding vpon the Sea coaſt, and from Berytus to
Sagitta, and from thence the tenth day after, they came to
Caeſarea, afterward to Rama and ſo at length they pitched
their Tentes and planted their Siege before the noble
Citie of Hieruſalem, whiche with moſt cruell bloudſheading
and incredible labour was wonne, about ye yéere of
our redemption one thouſand and one hundreth, & Godfroye
crowned King therof. The ſtreates in this aſſault
ſtood full of congeled bloude ye thicknes of a foote. But the
Turkes & Aegiptiās leuying a freſh power, renued warre.
Againſt whom, Godfrey with his Chriſtian army marched,
and finding them encamped at Aſcalon, gaue them
battaile and ſlew of them 100000 (or as ſome ſay) 50000
and diſcomfited all the reſt. But before that Hieruſalem
was taken, the Venetian Nauy coaſtinge alonge
Lycia,, Pamphylia, Cilicia and Syria, lay at Road in the
Hauen of Ioppa, being then in the French Hoaſtes ſubiection,
becauſe thei might helpe the Chriſtians with
victual and neceſſary prouiſion: & waighing vp their Ankers
they departed thence, & tooke Aſcalon, Porphyria (a
Citie néere to Ptolemai
                     •
                   
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   Tyberias, Cities ſtanding
vpon the Sea ſide.
            After the death of Godfroye who departed this lyfe
within the Citie of Hieruſalem, his Brother Baldwine
was made King, and the reſt of the Princes retourned
home. He through the aide and helpe of the Venetians,
Genoways and Boemund King of Antioch tooke Ptolemais,
with Sydon and Bery
                     •
                  us cities of Phaenicla. But
when that Boemund was dead and Tancrede his Brother
ſucéeded in the Crowne and Kingdome of Antioch,
(the Turkes & Aegyptians againe inuading the frontiers
of the Ieroſolymitane Kingdome, Balwine ſente for

               Tancrede ſo come and ayde hym, and then gaue vnto
them battayle, but the Turkes diſcomfited him and all
his Hoaſt, wherevpon with great loſſe of his men he retyred
to Hieruſalem and Tancrede to Antioch: and the
Turkes got into their handes the poſſeſſion of Mount Sinai.
Within a while after Baldwine dyed, and in his
ſteade an other Baldwine ſurnamed Burgenſis was
made King.
            Afterward in the raigne and Empire of Alexius Emperour
of Conſtantinople,
               An other voyage to Ieruſalem.
                becauſe Baldwine the ſeconde,
ſent for ayde to the Latines to withſtand the malignaunt
enterprices of the Turkish Rakehelles, an other voyage
was made into Syria. Therein went VVylliam duke
of Aquitanye, Hugh the Great, Brother to Philip the
French King, Stephen Earle of Chartiers (lately retourned
home from ye other expedition before) Stephen earle
of Burgundie, and Tholouſe. The Venetians alſo ſent
thither a great Nauye. The Chriſtian Champions and
Latine Capitaines with their Hoaſt after many afflictions,
labours and ſharp ſtormes ſuſtayned by the miſcreaunts,
inſomuche that they were almoſt diſpearſed and
ſcattered, came at length to Hieruſalem. But Baldwine
inconſideratelie fightinge with the Turkes before the
comming of the other chriſtians, was taken priſoner, his
Hoſt diſcomfited, and he himſelfe brought to Carras, and
after a time, payinge his Raunſome was deliuered and
ſet at lybertie.
            But the Venetian Nauye encountringe with 700.
Sayle that belonged to the Caliph of Aegipt, whiche laye
at the Siege of Ioppa, ouercame them & tooke the Citie
of Tyre. During the time that they lay before that Citie
geuing ſundrie Battries and aſſaultes there vnto, there
was a Doue ſéene, flyinge ouer their Campe and
Tentes (for the Venetians had ſet parte of their men on
ſhore) carying the Letters of the King of Damaſco tyed

aboute her neck, the contentes wherof was, that he with
a great power, would ſhortlye come to reſcue them. The
Souldiours ſéeing her flying ouer their heades towards
the Citie,Polycie. at one inſtant all together, ſhowted and cryed,
which ſhout ſo deuided & cut the Ayre, that the Doue fell
downe to the ground. Then ye 
               Venetian Capitaynes peruſing
and reading ouer the letters, forged others, like vnto
them in preportion and wrighting, but cleane contrary
in effect and meaninge, the tenor whereof was, that the
beſieged parties ſhould ſhift for their ſauegarde as well
as they coulde, and onely truſt to themſelues: for of him
the could haue no ayde nor reſcue. Wherevpon they immediatelye
ſurrendered themſelues and their Citie to the
Chriſtians.
            At this time,The firſte beginninge of the Aſſaſſines.
                there raigned among the Saracenes or
Turks a certaine kind or Sect of men called Aſſaſſines:
which killing whōſoeuer they lifted (lyke théeues & Murtherers)
wrought much ſkath and harme to the Chriſtians
in Syria. And hereof it came, that afterwarde among
ye 
               Italians, al théeues & murtherers were called by ye name
Aſſaſſines. Which Sect firſt ſprong vp (as it is reported)
in this ſort. One Aloadine a Saraceniſt raigned in that
parte of Perſia, whiche lyeth nexte the Riuer Indus, not
farre from the borders of the Prouince of Arriana, vnder
the Mount Caucaſus (which Region at this day is called
Mulehet. In the which in times paſt the Aſacenes inhabited,
of whom Arrianus ſpeaketh in his hiſtorie of the
Actes of Alexander the great, placing them betwéene the
riuers of Cophe and Indus: which Cophe (as I think) is
that, whiche is called of Ioſephus in his Iudaicall Antiquities
Cuthus, & that into this Region thoſe ten Tribes
of Iſrael were tranſlated.
            This Aloadine hauing an intent to inueigle and perſwade
his people, that hee was hable to bringe all ſuch to

the fruition of a bleſſed lyfe, as obſerued and kept his
Lawes and commandements, had trimmed and planted
in a right pleaſant valley betwéene two very high Hils
moſte goodlye Gardaines of ſolace, replenniſhed with
all kinde of fragraunt Floures and beautiful Trées yéelding
ſmel & fruite moſt delectable, which gardains, were
moſt finely contriued, and on euery ſide enuironed with
notable gorgeous buildinges, garniſhed with Golde and
other colours, and ſtored with precious furniture and
rich houſeholde ſtuffe of value ineſtimable. In diuers
places of the ſame, were Fountaines and riuers of Milk,
Honey, Wyne and ſwéet waters. Within the ſame,
alſo were fine Damoſelles and beautifull Pucelles,
which with Melodies, Songes, muſicall Inſtrumentes,
mincing daunces, and all other allurementes of Femynine
flattereies, delighted and fed the tender eares of ſuch
as were brought thither. Moreouer there were other ſhe
Seruantes and houſewifelie Trulles, which being kept
cloſe within dores, dreſſed all thinges yt could be deuiſed
or thought neceſſarie aſwel for meate & drinke as for the
pleaſure and delectacion of the Gheſtes and Straungers
therein. All the place without was moſt curiouſly ſtrengthened
both by nature and arte. When this delightfull
Gardaine of pleaſure was fully ended and made perfect,
Aloadine preached and profeſſed himſelfe to thoſe downiſh
people to be the felow and Mate of Mahomet, and
that he had power geuen vnto him, to diſpoſe and beſtow
the benefit and fruition of Paradice and bleſſed lyfe vpon
ſuch as ſhould be to his lawes and heſtes obeyſaunt. And
of them he choſe out certayne yong Stripelinges aboute
the age of twelue or fouretéene yéeres, ſuch as ſéemed to
be of the beſt towardneſſe and diſpoſition for Warres
in time to come, whome he brought vp in his Hall or
Courte.
            
               
And becauſe they ſhould with the more willing myndes
obey his commaundementes and ſtirre at his becke, his
faſhion was with ſome cōfectioned Potion to bring them
into a dead ſléepe: which done, his cuſtome was then to
tranſport & carye them into ye place or Gardaine: where
being awaked, they ſolaced themſelues and had the fruicion
of all kynd of pleaſures for two or thrée dayes ſpace,
and then agayne beyng with the ſame drinkes brought
on ſléepe, (as before they had bene) were caryed out,
themſelues knowing nothing at all thereof. And by this
meanes it came to paſſe, that afterward they refuſed neither
perils nor Daungers to fulfill his mynde and commaundemetes,
but were willing and ready to ſlea and kil
whom he would commaunde, yea thoughe they dwelled
in places diſtant farre of. And the number of them which
he had there, were about lx. thouſand. Wherby his power
and his Succeſſours after him (called Sexmountes)
grew and in ſuch ſorte encreaſed, that he inſtituted the
ſame order alſo in Syria, and had a Lieutenaunt vnder
him at Damaſco. For there was of them as it were a
certaine order of Knightes, whereof the chiefe Preſident
and Maiſter was called Sexmount, and had diuerſe officers
of the order of this Knighthode in ſundry other places.
The Caſtle wherein theſe Gardaines were, was
named Tigad.
            
            Theſe Cutthroate Souldiours, with murthers and
robberies, made euery place in Aſia daungerous and vnpaſſable
to the Chriſtians. But this Caſtle being afterward
aſſaulted and beſieged ful ſeuen yéeres ſpace by the
Tartarians, was in th'end by them taken, and they within
vtterly deſtroyed. This is the Hiſtorie of them, whom
ſome by miſtaking do call Eſſenes, and ſome Arſacidas,
as we haue found in the moſt credible and approued Authours.
            After the death of Taniſmanye, the Occidentall Turkiſhe

Empyre began to be diuided. For one Muchumet
ſuccéeded Taniſmanye, betwene whō and Maſute Preſident
of Iconium, was kindled certaine diſpleaſure and
priuie heartburning. But the Emperour Iohn Comnenus
entred into league and linked in amitie with Maſute,
whoſe both powers ioyned together went agaynſt
Muchumet. At length for ſpight borne to the Emperour
there was meanes found for a reconciliation and agreement
betwene the two Turkiſhe Potentates, Maſute,
and Muchumet: which béeing brought about and concluded,
Maſute abiured his former league and reuolted frō
the Emperour. Notwithſtanding, the Emperour raſed
two noble Cities of Pontus in the Turkes poſſeſſion, the
one called Caſtamon and the other Gangre. But within
a while after, Muchumet recouered them again, and ſubdued
Iberia alſo, with ſundrye places in Meſopotamia.
And Maſute wanne Iconium with other places in Syria.
But making an enroade into Thracia, hee was talked
wythall to hys coſte, and put to flight by Manuel Comnenus.
The Emperour glad aboue meaſure for this
victorie, layde Siege to Iconium, but the Turkes ſet
theyr Stales ſo couertly, and brake out of an Ambuſhe
ſo ſodainely, that they diſcomfited his Hoaſt, and he hymfelfe
eſcaped very hardly.
            The Chriſtians in Hieruſalem béeyng ſore diſtreſſed
by the Miſcreauntes,A thirde voyage toward the holy land. there was a thyrde Voyage
and expedition made thyther, whereof was chiefe Captayne
and leader Conrade Duke of Franconia, who with
a great Armie of Germanes, Italians and Frenchmen relieued
thē: and méeting wyth the Turkes (wyth whom
the Greeques had alſo conſpired) néere by the Ryuer
Meander gaue vnto them Battayle. In which terrible
conflicte there was a merueylous greate ſlaughter of
Turkes.
            After that Maſute was deade, his thrée Sonnes parted

the Kingdome among them, and afterward Iagupaſanes
and the Sultane of Iconium fell together by the eares for
their moyties. In th'ende Iagupaſanes got the victorie,
and the Sultane fledde for ſuccour to the Emperour, who
caryed him to Conſtantinople with him, for a Triumph.
And heere by the waye, I may not omyt to declare a pretie
Ieſt of a Sarracene Icarus.
               One yt: toke vpon him to flie in the aire. This merie felow, attending
vpon the Sultane, and bearing the countenaunce
of a Iuggeler, at a certaine ſolemne Iuſtes or Tyltrunnyng,
voluntarily went vp to the toppe of a Turret ſtandyng
in the Tyltyeard at Conſtantinople, vnder ye which
Turret was the Tylte it ſelfe, where the Horſe
                  •
                tooke
their races and courſes, and aboue, were thoſe foure couragious
and praūſing gilt Courſers which now ſtand on
the toppe of the Church of S. Marke in Venice, directly
oppoſite, & ſtandyng ful but one againſt another. He ſtanding
on the toppe of this Turret craked and bragged that
he would flie in the Ayre ye ſpace of a furlong. And hauing
on, a large white garmēt, down to his foote, ful of plaites,
knotted and gathered round to hoouer in the ayre withall,
he ſtoode fluttering for winde with his handes in ſteede
of winges, and hauing (as he thought) ſored long ynough,
at length committed his body to the curteſie of the wind,
but falling downe headlong on the grounde, hee bruiſed
and brake all his bones wyth the fall, and there lyke a
vaine Cockſcombe yelded vp the Ghoſt and dyed.
            Nowe, Manuel to th'intent he would bee reputed
and thought of the Sultane to be a Prince liberall, magnificent
and mightie, diſmiſſed and ſent him away not
wythout honourable rewardes, beſyde a huyge Maſſe of
money and other moſt precious Wares: vppon condition,
that hee ſhoulde redeliuer and reſtore vnto him the
Citie of Sebaſtia, wyth the Suburbes of the ſame. But
when the Sultane was retourned to Iconium wyth

hys money he retourned to hys former vomite,What truſt is in ye promiſe of a Turke. ſpoyling
Sebaſtia and all the places neere aboute it, and
tooke vppon hym the chiefe Soueraigntie and preheminence
of all that Territorie: and dryuing hys other
brother Dadune out of the Countrey, and getting by
force the Citie of Caeſarea, he went about alſo to ſupplant
and ouerthrow Iagupaſan.
            
            
               Dadune got into hys poſſeſſion the Countrey of Amaſia
béeyng wythout any poſſeſſour: but it was not
long ere he was agayne expulſed and dryuen oute by
Clizaſtlan the Sultane, who bore all the ſwaye in Cappadocia.
               A good Childe.
This Clizaſtlan albeit he called the Empeperour,
father: yet he euer incroched vppon his Prouinces
and ſpoyled hys Countreyes. Wherevppon,
within a whyle after, a newe garboyle and hatred was
kindled betweene them: for that the Sultane likewiſe
charged the Emperour with breache of promyſe, in
ſundrye Articles and couenauntes before condiſcended
vnto.
            The Emperour purpoſing with all hys myght to
bée auenged of his Aduerſaries, and alreadye conceyuing
in his mynde the deſtruction and vtter ſubuertion
of the Turkiſhe Nation, leuyed together al his olde
beaten Souldiours, muſtered newe Legions, and procured
all the forayne ayde that hee coulde from any place,
made a firme League with Baldwine King of Hieruſalem,
and retained in wages the Scythians confyning vpon
the Ryuer Iſter, and thus hauing a mightie and populous
Army, wyth all thinges in good order and readines
decently purueighed, (after he had made hys prayers to
Almightie God the gyuer of all victorye for his diuine
aſſiſtaunce) marched foorth in good order againſt them:
His iourney lay through Phrigia and Laodicaea Chonas
S. Archangel, Lampis and Celenas where the head
Spring of the great Meander is, into whiche the Riuer

                  〈2 pages missing〉
               
               
raſhlie then aduiſedlie, chopped hardilye into the ſame
ſtreicts hauing his battel apointed in this order folowing.
The Voward was led by the two Suns of Angelus
Conſtantine whoſe names were Iohn and Andronicus,
with Macroduca Conſtantine and Lapardus Andronicus,
with their Enſignes and Bands, and was marſhalled
in Lunare ranks or Mooned araye. The right wing
                  •
               
was led by Baldwine King of Hieruſalem, and the lefte
by Maurozomes Theodorus. After them folowed the
Drudges, Skullions, Woodcarters, Cartes and all the
other bagage and Trinketrie of the Hoaſt. After them
came the Emperoure himſelfe with the maine Battaile,
where in was a valyaunt Crew of choſen fellowes. The
Rerewarde was conducted by Andronicus Contoſtephanus.
            
            Aſſoone as they were entred within the Streights,
where there was no ſtarting hoales nor yet elbowroome
for the Hoaſt, and the Bandes of Angelus Macroduca,
and Lapard ordering themſelues into a thrée ſquare battaile,
(ſmall before and thick behinde like vnto a wedge)
gaue the charge vpon the barbarous Turkes and by fine
force draue them backe from the Hilles and higher places
where they fought, into the Mountaines, and ſo perforce,A lamentable ſlaughter of Chriſtians by negligence.
made for themſelues a through paſſage without ani
hurt or daunger. But the reſidue of the Legions, folowed
after them nothing couragiouſlie: neither did they ſet
their Archers in the flankes of their Battayle to gall
and kéepe of the Turkish force as they ſhould haue done,
neither held they their Targetts cloſe together ouer their
heades like a vault, to beare of their ſhotte and blowes.
Wherefore the Turkes in thick plumps and with great
violence brake out on euery ſide vpon them from the higher
places into the lower grounde and from the bankes
where before they ſought, into the plaine, and boldely encroched,

ſtill more and more vpon the Romanes till they
had pearced and broken their araye. And firſte put
                  •
               inge
Baldwine his winge to flight, wounded and flew many.
Which when Baldwine perceued, with an intent to reſcue
and ayde his men in that diſtreſſe, taking with hym
a picked Troupe of expert Horſemen, ruſhed in amonge
the thickeſt of his Enemies. Of whom he was ſo beſet
and on euery ſide circumuented that hee himſelfe was
there ſlaine, and all his men moſt valyauntlye fightynge,
likewiſe there dyed. This good ſucceſſe ſet the Turkes
on ſuch a glorious hoigh, that they ſtopped all the wayes
where the Romanes ſhould paſſe, meaning that day ſo to
plague the Chriſtians, that they ſhould neuer after he hable
to attempt the lyke enterpriſe againſt them: for now
being encloſed in thoſe perillous Streightes, and one hindring
an other, they wer not hable to endamage nor hurt
their Enemies by any kinde of meanes, but rather hindred
and diſturbed one an other, and were cauſe of one an
others ſlaughter and lamentable deſtruction. So extreemely
cooped in and pounded were they, that they neither
could haue any help of the Emperoure neither yet
of the Rerewarde, neyther coulde they goe backe or decline
on any ſyde, becauſe the Cartes and carriage that
were placed in the middle like a Bulwarke or Rampire,
letted them. Their Horſes and men were kylled lyke
Shéepe, and with Turkes Falchions gored and foyned
through. The Vallayes laye full of dead Corſes, the
wayes ſtenched with griſly ſightes of ſlaine perſons, the
Downes couered ouer with diſmembred bodies, the waters
of the Riuers were coloured and ranne with bloude
of Men and Beaſtes mingled together: and to be ſhorte,
ſuch lachrimable ſlaughter was in this place made vpon
the poore Chriſtians, that the wofulneſſe thereof cannot
with Penne accordinglye be expreſſed.
            
               
And beſide all other outrages and vnſpeakeable calamities,
the Turkes pitched the head of Andronicus Bataza
the Emperours Nephew (which had leuied an Army out
of Paphlagonia and Heraclea Pontica and was ſent againſt
the Amaſene Turkes in Amaſia) vpon a Speare
poynt, and caryed it before them for a mockage in deriſion.
Which heauie ſpectacle and daūgerous plight ſo vexed
and inwardly gréeued Manuel, that his minde was
wonderfully perplexed, inſomuch that he was euē at his
wittes ende and wiſt not what to doe nor which waye to
tourne him.
            But the Romane Legions in the Voward, (as before
was declared) hauing paſſed thoſe pykes & deadly trappes
helde themſelues cloſe together and for their ſauegarde
ſenced in their Campe, vpon the toppe of a little Hill very
conuenient and commodious (as the time then fell out) for
their purpoſe. The Turkes with might and maine ſtriued
to ouerrunne and beare downe the Emperours battaile,
becauſe it they mighte once throughly diſperſe and
ſubdue the greateſt and ſtrongeſt part of the Army, they
thought the reſidue would eaſely and with ſmall adoe bée
vanquiſhed, like as a Serpent when the head is bruyſed
and cruſhed to powder, all the other partes of the bodye
(which before by themſelues mooued, being cleane cut of)
do ſtraightwayes die. The Emperour fought valiauntly
that day and oftentimes aſſayled the Turkes fiercely to
driue them out of the Staightes and to open the waye for
his men to paſſe through, but perceiuing the power and
force of the Turkes (which fought frō the higher ground)
ſtill to encreaſe, and making his full accoumpt, that whether
he taried or went forwarde, there was none other
way for him and his company but preſent death, he exhorted
his men firſt of all to repoſe all their hope in Almightie,
God and next in their weapons and handes, and
that they ſhould either ſaue their lyues by hardy blowes

and valiaunt déedes or elſe by honeſt and glorious death
wynne to themſelues perpetuall fame and renoume: for
he plainely tolde them that he ſaw none other way for thē
to eſcape cleare and harmeleſſe, but by ſuch a famous aduenture.
And ye God would not vtterly forſake nor leaue
ſuccourleſſe them that beare armour and fight in the quarel
of his holy Catholique Religion, for ye aduauncement
of his glorious name, againſt the impious contemners
and blaſphemers of all religion, godlines, vertue and honeſtie,
ſo that they would proſtrate thēſelues before hym
and with deuoute mindes (crauing his diuine aſſiſtance)
valiantly vſe ye courage and power which his diuine Maieſtie
gaue, & inſpired into their ſtomackes. And although
their chaunce were then to be ſlaine, yet ſhould they (hauing
a moſt iuſt cauſe and quarel) for this their ſhort and
tranſitorie life, gaine and winne a double life: ye one, euerlaſting
and moſt bleſſed in the heauenly kingdome, promiſed
and prepared by our Lord and Sauiour Chriſt for
all ſuch true Chriſtians as ſincerely worſhip and vnfeynedly
beléeue on his name, but namely and ſpecially for
ſuch as ſpend their bloude and life for the loue of his holy
word and ſetting forth of his glory. And y• other is, a perpetuall
fame and a worthye memoriall in this worlde among
all poſteritie, which would moſt aſſuredly for euer
extoll & celebrate this their proweſſe and conſtancy. But
ſuch as threw away their weapons, ſhould for euer be ill
reported of and reuiled in the mouthes and ſpeaches of al
men, as fugitiues, forſakers, & Traitours, of their Liege
Emperour & as villaines vnthankfull & vnmyndfull of
God his benefites, and which is more, ſhould by God his
own mouth be accurſt and adiudged to endleſſe paines &
ſempiternal tortures. Wherfore he aduiſed thē to plucke
vp their heartes, and by his example, euery one to make
for himſelf a way & paſſage with his ſword. Whē he had
finiſhed theſe his ſpéeches with thoſe few that he had left,

be made ſtreyght into the middeſt of his enemies, and after
many woundes geuen and taken on either ſide,Valiauntnes of the Emperour. breaking
through the Turkes araie, and being ſo ſlaſhed and
hewen in all his body that thirtie Arrowes or the rabout,
ſtacke faſt in his Target, and not able to take vp his own
Baſſenet or headpéece that was ſtroken of, yet (maugre
their heades) hee eſcaped and went throughe the thickeſt
crowde of them. The other Legions were on euery ſide
ſlaine and brought to their bane, and troden down one of
another. Such as eſcaped alyue and were paſſed theſe perillous
Streictes in ſafetie, were neuertheleſſe ſlayne
and quelled by their enemies in the other vallay, beyond.
For the paſſage in that place was diuided into .vij. déepe
vallayes néere one to another: and beyng at the firſt entraunce
ſomewhat broade and roumye, was (the further
a mā went in) ſtreicter and narrower. All which places ye
Turkes had fortified & planted with their Ambuſhmētes
and garriſons. Moreouer, there ſodainely aroſe ſuch a terrible
gale of bluſterous and tempeſtuous windes, which
toſſed & raiſed vp ſuch habundance of Sand (wherof thoſe
places are full) yt both the Armies moſt fiercely claſping
together, bickered in the darke, as though it had bene at
midnight, and killed all ſuch as came in their reach without
any reſpect whether they were friendes or foes. And
in ye ſame place, (were they Turkes or Romanes, horſes
or other cattel) it ſkilled not, for they dyed in heapes together
one with another. And ye valley where this cōflicte
was, ſéemed to bee nothing elſe but a common & a large
Sepulchre or buriall place for them all.
            But yet at this time, there died moe of ye 
               Romanes thē
of the Turkes, & ſpecially of ye nobler ſort & ſuch as were
the Emperours néere Coſens & kinſmen. And many being
there left halfe aliue, lay ſo buried & couered ouer wt
heapes of dead Carkaſſes ye they were not hable by any
meanes by ſtrugling to get themſelues out: neither was

there any at hand to help them, for euery one had ynough
adoe to labour & ſweate for his owne life and ſaluetie. In
this ougly ſort, they long languiſhing in that kind of horrible
& lothſome torment, wer in th'end enforced there to
geue vp ye Ghoſt by a death moſt ſtinking, lothſome and
lamentable. The Emperour himſelf panting and out of
breath, was got al alone vnder a wilde Peare trée to take
aire & recouer his faint powers, hauing with him neither
Page, Henxmā, yeman of his Gard nor kéeper. Whom
a poore cōmon Souldiour or horſemā of his owne troupe
(being likewiſe thither eſcaped out of the battaile) finding
in ſuch miſerable plight, breathleſſe and comfortleſſe, dutifully
pitied and bewailed: and offering in yt his calamitie,A freend at neede.
to miniſter vnto his Maieſtie the beſt ſeruice that hée
was able, raught him vp his Helmet & buckeled on hys
other Armour yt lay héere and there dangling about him.
Which while he was in doing, a certaine Turke ranne
haſtely vnto him, & ſéeing no man there to defend nor reſcue
him, tooke ye Emperours horſe by ye bridle, meaning
likewiſe to haue caried away ye Emperor himſelf as priſoner.
Whom the Emperour with a péece of his broken
Speare yt he had yet left, ſo bleſſed and humbaſted about
the pate, yt he laid him there on the ground to ſléepe. Then
ranne the other Turkes fiercely vpō him, to haue taken
him aliue. Which he ſéeing, tooke the ſame horſemans
Speare of whō before we ſpake, and wt the ſame run one
of his enemies cleane through: while ye ſaid Souldiour wt
his naked ſword, dubbed another of thē ſhorter by ye head,
and ſo repulſed & kept thē of, at ye ſwordes point, till tenne
other of ye 
               Roman ſouldiors came running to aſſiſt them.
Then was he very deſirous to haue ioyned himſelfe to ye
other Legions, and moſt coragiouſly gaue the aduēture
through his enemies: but the heapes aſwel of dead Carkaſſes
as of Turkes encountring wt him in euery corner
as he went, much hindered and preiudiced his pretence.

                  〈2 pages missing〉
               
               
Horſe in ſuche a pace as hee was hable. Him had fifty
Turkes eſpied, and on ech ſide encloſed to haue taken,
but he no more ſtirred nor amended his pace for them,
then if no man at all had purſued him. When they were
cluſtered about him, he drew his ſword, aud ſlyced one of
them ſo cleane in the middle, from the head downe to his
backe, together with the Sadle of the Horſe alſo, that the
reſidue for feare to be ſerued with the ſame ſauce kept aloofe
and durſt not meddle.
                  Friderick drowned. And after that this Frederick
was drowned in a riuer, the Germaines retourned home
agayne.
            About this time there ſprong vp great diſcord and ſedition
among the Turkes. For Clizaſtlan the mightie Sultan
of Iconium, when he dyed, left foure Sonnes behind
him, Maſute, Coppatine, Rucratine and Chaichoſroes.
Vnto Maſute he bequeathed the principalitie of Amaſia,
Ancira, Dorylaeum and certaine other cities of Pontus.
Vnto Coppatine, hee gaue Melitene, Caeſarea and the
Colonie nowe called Taxara. Vnto Rucratine, hee
allotted Amiſa, Docea and the other Cities vpon the ſea
Coaſtes. Chaichoſroes poſſeſſed Iconium, the regall ſeat
of the Sultans, and with it Lycaonia and Pamphylia and
all as far as Cottyanium. Coppatine being dead, Rucratine
and Maſute fell together by the eares and ſtroue for
his Segniorie and enheritance. But Rucratine for that
he was a wittie and ſkilfull man in martial affaires, got
the victorie and wyped Maſute his noſe cleane from all ye
principalitie of Coppatine their late Brother. And being
now all in his iolytie and ruffe for this his good ſucceſſe &
victorie, & hauing a monthes mind to catch into his hands
Iconium alſo, denounced open warre and ſent his deffaunce
vnto his Brother Chaichoſroes whoſe Mother
was a Chriſtian, vnleſſe he woulde reſigne his Crowne
& geue place vnto him ouer all his Soueraigntie. Whervpon
Chaichoſroes fled for his refuge and ayd to the emperoure

               Alexius Angelus as his father had done before
him, albeit not with ſo good Fortune and ſpéede as his father,
for hee was ſent home agayne thence without his
purpoſe. He was ſcantly come to Iconium, but hee was
expulſed by Rucratine and driuen to flie to Lebune king
of Armenia: of whom he was freendlie receiued and courteouſlie
entertayned: but as for reléefe and ayde he gotte
none, wherefore hee retourned to Conſtantinople and
there in poore eſtate paſſed out the reſt of his dayes.
            During the Empyre of this Alexius Angelus, the Venetians
tooke Conſtantinople and Angelus being thence
diſthronyzed, the Greekes in Aſia created Theodorus
Laſcaris his Sonne in Law, Emperoure, who had vnder
his Empire and obedience not onely Bythinia and the
Regions along the Sea,Emperonte depoſed by his Sonne in law. but alſo extended the Lymittes
of his Dominions very farre into the maine Lande, and
had vnder him all from Caria and the riuer Meander
Southwarde, to the Sea Galaticum and Cappadocia
Northward, and cōſtituted his Imperial Seate at Nice.
Which ſo tickeled and fretted Alexius, that he paſſing the
Sea Aegaeum entred into Aſia, and priuily went to Iathine
the Sonne of Rucratine (being now Sultane) in pitifull
plight & poore rayment: before whō he in ſuppliant
words opened his ſtate & fortune, & humbly beſought him
of aide & ſuccor to reſtore him to his lawful Empyre and
Crowne, vniuſtly by an vſurper detained & withholden:
not forgetting to put him in remembrance of the former
frendſhip which afore time he had ſhewed & horne to him
while he was in proſperitie, and further promiſed hym
great Summes of money. Inſomuch that Iathine taking
compaſſion vpon him and mooued greatly with his large
promiſes, forth wt diſpatched Ambaſſadours to Theodorus,
threatning warre and deſtruction vnto him, vnleſſe
he gaue place to his father in law & ſuffred him quietly to
enioy his rightfull Diademe and Imperiall authoritie.
            
               
                  〈2 pages missing〉
               
               
them out of that poore plot and beggerly region, which affronteth
Perſia and the Caſpiā
                Sea (almoſt Iſlandwiſe)
and is enuironed on ech ſide with the Scythian Ocean,
and ioyneth vnto Aſia by one onely Iſthmus or narrow
porcion of land lying betwene the two Seas, the which is
compaſſed and encloſed with the highe and inacceſſible
Mountaines called Riphaei as it were with a Wall or
Rampier: the waues of the Sea (ſayeth Hayton the Armenian)
going backe, and making way for them to paſſe
betwene the Mountaines and the Sea. And therfore all
thoſe Scythians afterward, of yt Tribe wherof their firſt
Emperor was deſcended, were called Tartarians: whoſe
auncient deſcēt and beginning many (as before we haue
ſayde of the Turkes) doe referre vnto the tenne Tribes
of Iſraell, whoſe opinion I doe not ſee howe it ſtandeth
with reaſon nor wherevpon it is grounded. This am I
perſuaded and this ſéemeth vnto me moſt like and probable,
that the Scythians be deſcended of Magog the ſonne
of Iapetus, of whom the Scripture in many places maketh
mention: and that thoſe tenne Tribes were by the
King of Perſia tranſlated not into Scythia but into Media.
But howſoeuer the matter goeth, the Tartarians in
ſuch ſort as we haue declared, yſſuyng and in great companyes
departyng from the Hyperboreans vnder the
conduct of Cangio, (whom for honours ſake they called
Cham, which is as muche to ſay as a moſt high and Soueraigne
Emperour) tooke their way downe along to the
Sea Caſpium.
            
            In the meane ſeaſon, Cangio the Cham departing
this lyfe, his Sonne Hoccota ſuccéeded in his place, a
man ryght wyſe and valiaunt, and the eldeſt of twelue
brothers. Hée ſendyng out Gebeſabada with a huyge power
to ſubdue and conquere the regions of the Occident,
and himſelfe in perſon paſſing the Caſpian Streictes,

               Sogdiana, Bactrian, Oxo and the ryuer Sogdus (whiche
is encreaſed wyth many and the ſame great Springes
flowing and running into it) wyntered at the foote of
Mount Taurus, ſolacing himſelfe and enioying the
fruictfulneſſe of that region and ſuche bootie as he had before
taken. This Mount Taurus is the greateſt Mountaine
in all the world, whoſe ridge & top hanging ſtill together
without any particion, hath his beginning Weſtward
néere the Sea Aegaeum and ſtretching a long to the
Ocean Orientall, diuideth all Aſia into two parts. This
Hill is alſo called Caucaſus. The next Spring when the
groūd was new clothed & decked with the freſh attyre of
greene graſſe & pleaſant floures, they diſcamped from ye
foote of Caucaſus, & like an innumerable ſort of Sheepe,
mounted to the toppe of the Mountaines, inuading the
Countreyes vnderneth them: and after they had there,
made great pillage and taken their pleaſure, they pearced
into India, all about the Bankes of the noble ryuer Indus
on either ſide:
                  Cambalu a noble citie of India.
                conſtituting the Ocean, for the limitte of
their Empyre. And there building a Princely Citie called
Cambalu moſt beautifull ſumptuous and large, and
for all pleaſure of man the moſt delectable and pleaſaunteſt
Citie in all Aſia, appointed it to be their chiefe Pallace
and Seate Royal. Afterward, exployting his warres
by Deputies and Lieutenauntes whom he made Chieftaines
and Generalles ouer hys Armyes, chooſing therto
ſuch as were eyther hys brothers or elſe of the bloude
Royall: ſome of them went Northwarde, ſome Weſtwarde,
and ſome Southwarde: and after they had ſubdued
the Arachoſians Caramanians & ſundry other Nations,
wonne Perſia and thence expulſed the Turkes: they
then came to the Chaldees and Arabians. From thence
they marched agaynſt the Babylonians, and Aſſyrians
and conquering Meſopotamia, brought vnder their ſubiection
the Perſians, Parthians and Medians.
            
            
               
After this, going vp by the greater Armenia, wt incredible
celeritie they ouercame Colchis northward, and Iberia
that confineth hard vpon it, inſomuch that their ſtate
ſurmounted, and flouriſhed in ſame and honor excéedinglye.
Now, this mightie Tartarian Prince was purpoſed
to make the Sea on euery ſide the limits and bounds
of his Empire, but the pleaſaunt delicacies and amyable
ſoyle of the Countrey of India, ſo mollified and effeminated
his mind, that beinge loath to departe thence, he ſetled
& ſtaied there, and diſtributed the Prouinces, Cities,
Houſes, fat Farmes and Tenements amonge his ſouldiours
and people, and receiued the Rites, Ceremonies
and Cuſtomes of the Aſſyrians, Perſians and Chaldees.
            
            Therefore as ſoone as theſe Tartarians hauinge paſſed
the Caſpian Mountaines, had ſodainly and forciblie ſurpriſed
Alexandria, a citie ſtanding néere ye Streicts now
called the Yron Gates: the Imperiall Sultane of the
Turkes greatly terrified and diſmayd with this ſodayne
irruption of a new and moſt fierce people and fearing leſt
if he ſhould be driuen and enforced to enter into Warres
with the Tartarians, his olde Enemies the Romanes
would be readie to ſet on him behind at his backe, ſent his
Ambaſſadours with full authoritie and commiſſion to the
Emperour, to confirme and ſtrike an vnitie and peace betwéene
them: which thing the Emperoure as being encoumbred
with Europian Warres) was very glad of,
and willinglye therevnto condeſcended, becauſe the
Turks ſhould be as a ſtrong Rampier and Wall in Aſia
for him, againſt the inuaſion of the Tartarians. This
League therfore with the Turkes was of al handes gladlie
embraced, and to the Greekish Empire moſt conducible.
For whereas men (being ſo long time afflicted wt the
lamentable calamyties of long Warres) bad neither occupied
tillage, nor bred vp Cattayle, it fell out in th'end

(as néedes muſt) that great dearth and ſcarſitie was in
all the countrey, and their Treaſuries alſo with the charges
and coſtes of ſo long continuance were in maner emtied
and cleane exhauſted.
            Whereſore beinge now by this newe attonement and
League ridde out of the ſame and brought to quietneſſe,Peace bringeth plentie.
he bent his whole minde an other while to the feats of
peace, the ſwéet Nource and Storehouſe of plentifulneſſe
and aboundaunce. And becauſe he would by his example
prouoke and ſtirre vp the reſt of his ſubiectes to doe ſemblablit,
he (like a good Houſeholder & one fit to be a Prince
among ye people) vndertooke to procure & cauſe ſo much of
the vnhuſbanded ground as was neither fit to beare corne
nor good to plant Vines, to be tourned vp and tylled: and
manured ſo much thereof, as he thought woulde be ſufficient
for the expences of his owne Table, & for the maintainance
of all them whom of his méere liberalitie and
bountifull goodneſſe he had retayned and taken into hys
charge to kéepe and ſée cheriſhed, that is to witt, the poore,
diſeaſed, & impotent people, vnto whom he aſſigned houſes
and Hoſpitalles, and appointed alſo certaine Granaters
and ouerſeeers ſuch as were trained vp & had the ſkil
of Tillage and Vine planting.The good example of the Prince doth muche good in a Realme. Which officers layed vp
yéerely in his Storehouſes and Graners great prouiſion
and ſtore of the ouerplus of the corne. He alſo had aboundantly
ſtore himſelfe with Oxen, Kyne, Horſes, Shéep
Swine and with diuers kindes of ſame Byrdes, by
whom he yéerely receiued great encreaſe and profyte.
This not onely did he himſelfe, but alſo by his example,
occaſioned others of the Péeres and Nobilyty, his Coſins
and Allyes to doe the lyke, ſo that euery one, hauinge of
his owne competentlie whereon to liue, the Communaltie
ſhould not be oppreſſed, nor the inferiour ſort by ſorce
and extortion of the richer impoueriſhed, with any intollerable
Tributes, Aſſeſſements and Paymentes.
            
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
By this means, the Romane weale publique was ſcowred
and cleane purged from all notable exactions, and bribing
pyllages inſomuch that within fewe yéeres ſpace, euerye
man had his Barnes and Cellers full ſtored and
ſtuffed with Corne and Wine: and ſuch encreaſe of cattel
Hens and other homiſh Foules, that the high waies and
ſtrets, Stables and Shéepe cotes, Houſes and Gardens
were vneth hable to holde them.
            This golden ſtate and bleſſed felicitie was héereby alſo
the more augmented,A bleſſed plentie of al things cauſed through peace and good gouerment. for that the Turkes were within
themſelues merueilouſlie pinched and afflicted with
great hunger, dearth and penurie of Corne, whereby it
came to paſſe, that all their Golde, Syluer, Iuelles and
precious Wares through this godlye forcaſte and diuine
wiſedome of the Emperour, came into the hands and poſſeſſion
of the Romanes, for then might a man haue ſéene
them faine to choppe and chaunge their rich Wares for a
litle bread Corne, to ſuſtaine themſelues withall: and euery
Byrde, Oxe, Cow or Kidde was ſolde at an exceſſiue
price. All the wayes were peſtered full of Turkyſh
Women and Children of the Turkiſh Nacion cōminge
to and going from the Romane Prouinces.
            The Empreſſe alſo of the ouerplus of Hennes egges
(for they were not poſſible to be all ſpent in her houſe and
Famylie) at that time ſolde at a very high price daylye to
the Turks,I Crowne Imperiall for the Empreſſe boght with the money that was had of the Turks for Egges in the time of dearth. had got together in ſhort ſpace ſuch an incredible
Maſſe of Money as was ſufficyent to pay for a moſt
rych Crowne of Goulde ſet full of orient Pearles and
precious Stones, whiche for that cauſe the Emperours
called and tearmed Ouata, becauſe it was bought with
Egge Money & ſo in ſhort time the Emperour enriched
himſelf and all his Subiectes with Wealth excéedinglie.
            During this while, the Tartarians vnder the leadinge
of their Capitaine Baydo, marching and making impreſſions
into the frountiers of the Turkiſhe countries, the

               Sultan of Iconium, leuying as great a power as hee was
able of all Nacions (for he had then with him of Greekes
and Latines, that is to wit, of Italians, Germaines and
Frenchmen, two Cohortes or Bands. Ouer the Gréekiſh
band was Capitaine one Iohn Liuitnada a Cyprian
borne (or as ſome ſay, one Paleologus) who earſt had reuolted
from the Emperoure: and ouer the Latines was
Boniface Moline one of the nobilitie of Venice) euerie
man being braue in apparell & well apointed wt Penons
and flages of their owne Armes. With theſe couragious
perſonages, marching againſt the Tartarians, he met wt
them in a place neere to the Citie Arſcor in the great Armenia
called Coſdrach. The Tartarians ſo ſone as the eſpied
this ſtraung Army apparailed contrarie to the guiſe
and faſhion of that countrey, ſuppoſing ſome greater ayd
and ſuccour had bene ſent vnto them, were merueilouſly
diſmayd & aſtonied, and if one of ye 
               Sultane his Kinſmen,
for an olde gruge, had not in the beginning of the battaile
fled vnto their ſide wt a great crew of pertakers, thei wold
haue tourned their backes and fled, But the occaſion therof
was the cauſe at that time of the Turkes ruyne and ouerthrow,
& afterward almoſt brought al their kingdom
& principalytie in ſubiection to ye 
               Tartarians. For ye 
               Tartarians
obtaining the vpperhand & victorie in this conflict,
neglected not the oportunitie & good chaunce that Fortune
now offered them, but paſſed ye riuer Euphrates and ſubdued
Syria as far as Paleſtina & Arabia. Wher after thei
had aſſeſſed yéerely tributes vpon ye remnaunts of ye 
               Syrians,
Arabians, & Phaenicians, they laded themſelues wt
many rich booties & ſpoyles, & returned againe into ye orient.
But the next yéere folowing, thei paſſing Euphrates
againe tooke their way Northwarde into Cappadocia,
& went as far as the riuer Thermodoon: and taking Iconium
the chiefe Citie that belenged to the Turkes,
Azatine the Sultane beynge baniſhed with his Brother

               Melecke fled for ſuccour to the Emperour Michael Paleologus,
whom not long before (in like caſe and reſpect
fléeing vnto him for comforte and aide) he had pleaſured
honorably and entertained with all poinctes of princely
curteſie. And putting him in remembraunce of his former
fréendſhip ſhewed vnto him in his néede & diſtreſſe,
and vnfolding before him the pitifull plight of thys hys
preſent ſtate and calamitie, inſtantly requeſted him, eyther
to ayde him againſt his Capitall foes the Tartarians,
or elſe to aſſigne him ſome péece of ground or odde
corner (as it were a colonie) where he & his people might
repoſe themſelues in ſome more eaſe and ſecuritie: for
he had brought with him his Wyues and Children and
many Seruauntes, with much wealth and Richeſſe. The
Emperour, for that he was on euery ſide encombred and
wrapped in Warres, would in no wiſe diminiſhe anye
part of his own power,Pollice in Princes. and as for the aſſignement of any
part of his Countrey, to ſuch a great Potentate as had
beene a mightie Monarch and Prince ouer many Prouinces,
and alſo from his tender age euer brought vp in
Princely pompe and ſtately preheminence, he iudged a
thing very daungerous. For he conſidered, and wyſely
imagined that the Lordes and nobilitie which were vnder
his rule and authoritie, would ſéeke their Lorde and
Maiſter where euer he ſhould be, and that his people being
ſcattered and diſperſed in diuers places, like the wandring
Planetes in the night, would flocke together and
concurre to him that goeth before them with a Linke and
leadeth the way. So would they come running to theyr
King, and ſo perchaunce in th'ende, worke vnto the Romanes
ſome myckle woe and diſturbaunce. And therfore

                  •
               ooding him out with faire wordes and noſeling hym in
good hope, he kept him at a doubtfull ſtaie, without geuing
any reſolute aunſwere to his requeſtes. Azatine,
for that his Parentes were Chriſtians and he himſelfe

alſo Chriſtened & waſhed in the Sacramēt of holy Baptiſme
in his infancie, reſorted dayly with the Emperour
to Sermons and hard ye holy Scriptures, dayly preached
and remained ſo long with the Emperour, till at length
by the meanes & helpe of the Europiā Scythians, he made
an eſcape and fled with his Sun Melecke out of ye towne
Aenum and paſſed the ryuer Iſter and within a while after
dyed, and Melecke by Sea paſſed into Aſia to ye 
               Tartarians,
and of them obtained the Kingdome of the Turkiſh
Nation, as his fathers enheritance. But a certayne
Duke named Amurie with a Warlike power him encountred
and ouerthrew, ſo that he was faine to flie vnto
Heraclea, a Citie of Pontus: and wtin a while after again
returning to his natiue Cuntry & recouering his fathers
kingdome, wtin ſhort ſpace was trayterouſly murthered.
            Thus was the Turkiſhe Empire ſubuerted and
brought to finall ruyne, and from a State of well ordered
diſcipline and magnificence, fell to vtter decay and
extreeme confuſion: the cauſe whereof was, for that,
not onely the Nobilitie and higher Powers dyuided the
Kingdome into many ſections and partes, but many
alſo of baſer degrée and obſcurer Parentage, (aſſociatyng
vnto them the raſcall Peazauntes and vulgar ſort) practiſed
pylfering and robberie, carying nothing with thē but
their Bowe and Quiuer of Arrowes: and taking vp their
Rowſt in the Streictes of the Mountaines, made many
roades into the Countreys about, and the Cities belonging
to the Romane Empire. For it happened a little before,
that the garriſons defending the Caſtles & fortreſſes
of the Empyre, for want of payment of their féees, & yéerely
ſtipendes at the Emperours handes, woulde ſerue no
longer but departed thence, whych being at the firſt (as a
thing of ſmall waight and moment) neglected, was in the
ende the cauſe, that the Romane Empyre ſuſtained and
incurred moſt gréeuous daungers and calamities. For

when the Turkes were diſplaced and expulſed by the
Tartarians, they diſplaced and expulſed the Greekes, and
looke howe weake they were in compariſon of the Tartarians,
ſo ſtronge were they againſt the Greekes: inſomuch
that at length the matter was decided with open
warre and dent of Sworde. For the Emperour vnderſtanding
that a great power of Turkes were vp in Paphlagonia,
leuyed a very competent Armye, to repreſſe
and (as much as might he) to inhibite their violent inſolencie,
leaſt if they ſhoulde bee ſtill ſuffered impunely to
raunge & ſpoyle without reſiſtaunce, it might breede further
daunger and inconuenience. And therfore when bee
had aſſembled his power together, he ſent the ſame being
wel appointed againſt them, who encountring ye Turks,
had of them the victory. But whileſt they diſorderly and
ouerfarre in chaſe beyond the ryuer purſued them, they
fell into the bandes of an Ambuſhe which the Turkes ye
night before had there layd for them. By meanes wherof
they being on th'one ſide beſet with an Haoſt of freſhe
Souldiours well appointed in battle aray, and on th'other
ſide pent in and encloſed with the ryuer, they were ſlaine
almoſt euery man. The Turkes triumphing for thys
ſucceſſe and victorie, enroaded afterward within the Roman
Territories, and came as farre as the ryuer Sangarius,
and ſubiugated vnder their obeſaunce., all from the
Pontique Sea and Galatia to the Sea Lycium and Carium
and the ryuer of Eurymedon.
            
            At this time alſo,Mamalukea. the Mamalukes (which worde by interpretation
ſignifieth Seruauntes or Slaues) obtained
the Kingdome in Aegypt, and aduaunced the limittes of
theyr Empyre into Aphrica & Lybia as farre as Gades:
and ſubdued Phaenicia and Syria and all the Countrey
ioyning vpon the Sea coaſtes.
            Nowe, how this came to paſſe, we wyll declare. The

               Caliphes and all the Saracenes, lulled in caſe and noſeled
in effeminate nyceneſſe, (engendred by the delicious and
tender allurementes of that pleaſaunt Clime and region)
became ſo ſlouthfull, that althoughe they poſſeſſed a
moſt wealthy and fertile kingdome, yet were they eaſie
to bée vanquiſhed and ſubdued by any: and the Caliphes
béeyng all geuen to luſt, Senſualitie and pleaſures, tooke
no care to any thing, neyther attempted any enterpryſes
themſelues, but executed and adminiſtred all their Affaires
by a Vicegerente which was called an Admyrall.
Therefore when as Baldwine King of Hieruſalem had
made ye Kingdome of Aegypt tributarie vnto him (which
tribute Almericke his brother and Succeſſour claymed
as due and payable vnto him, and the Aegyptians flatly
denying the ſame:) Almericke with an Army entred into
Aegype and in the deſerie vanquiſhed in battayle Dargan
the Admirall of the Kingdome wyth all his power,
and compelled him to flye for his ſauegarde into the Citie
Bilbis. This was about that time of the yéere, whē the
ryuer Nile, by courſe had his yéerely incremente and ouerflowed
his Bankes, whoſe Dammes and Scluſes ye
               Aegyptians of purpoſe brake downe, becauſe they would
ſtoppe Almericke from further purſuite and victoryewherefore
laden wyth ſpoyle and ryche boofyes of hys
enemyes hée retyred backe agayne into hys owne
Countrey and Kingdome, for feare leaſt hee wyth hys
whole Hoaſt if they had longer raryed, ſhould haue bene
drowned and ſwallowed by with the mercyleſſe water.
            Thys ouerthrow and aduerſe fortune of Dargan,
gaue occaſion to Sanar (whom the ſame Dargan a lyttle
before perforce had diſplaced and put out of the office and
dignitie of Admyrallſhip, and cauſed to flye for ſuccour to
the Arabians, hys Tribe fellowes) to go to Norandine
the Sonne of Sanguin ye moſt mighty King of Damaſco,
by him to be ſhrowded from the malice of hys aduerſary.

                  〈2 pages missing〉
               
               
that Realme and Countrey, eftſoones inuaded Aegipt and
tooke by force the Citie Bilbis, ſhewinge much crueltie
with fire and Sword to all ſortes of people, ſparing neyther
age nor Sex. Wherfore Sanar deſired ayd of Norandme,
& vpon promiſe of great Summes of money, ſo
long ſtaied and repreſſed the impetuous courſe of Almerick
his victory, till ſuch time that his ayde came, of whoſe
comming when Almerick had vnderſtandinge, he raiſed
his Campe and departed out of Egipt. Therfore Syracon
who had the leading and conduct of Norandines men
finding Egipt without any foraine ayde or ſuccour marched
ſtraight to Cayr the chéefe & royal Citie of the whole
realme, 
                  •
               nd ſlew Sanar comming out to parle and confer
with him. And when he had got the poſſeſſion of the Citie
he went to do his dutie and exhibit honour to the Caliph,
of whom hee was created Admirall of the Lande,
which dignitie he enioyed a yéere and then died: leauing
                  •
               
behinde him for his Succeſſoure Saladine his Brothers
Sonne, a man of a ſurpaſſing and polytique wit, ſtoute,
valyaunt,Egipt when it firſt came into the poſſeſſion of the Turkes.
                and of nature moſt franck and lyberall. Who
immediatlie murthered the Caliph with all his bloud
                  •
               
and Progenie, to th'intent he might alone haue both the
Authorities and roomes. Thus was that moſt wealthye
Kingdome brought vnder the obedience of the Turkes in
the yeere of our Lorde. 1150.
            Afterward Saladine (as he was a man verye prudent
and wiſe) perceiuing how tenderlie and effeminately the
Egiptians liued, inſomuch that when any invaſion of foreyne
hoſtelitie approched or were like to grow, ye kings
were euer glad and faine to craue foreygne ayde to ſupport
and helpe them, determined with himſelfe to inſtitute
ſome kinde or order of warfare and to trayne vp a
troupe of ſuch Souldiours as ſhould be hable at al brunts
and aſſayes to be as a rampire, or ſtronge Bulwarke to

the whole kingdome. Perceiuing therfore that the people
bred and borne in the Northren quarters were both a pter
and alſo ſtouter for the Warres then the Southerne
borne were, entred into League with certayne
people inhabiting about Maeotis and Pontus, called Circaſſians
(of Plinie and olde writers, Zigians) and bartered
with them for an entercourſe of Merchaindize betwéene
them & him, namely that they ſhould ſerue him of Boyes
and young Striplinges at a certaine price. Who beynge
brought into Egipt and from their youth trayned vp in
feates of chieualrie and warlyke diſcipline, ſhould do nothing
but handſomely practiſe the handeling of their wepons
and artilery, & when time required ſerue in warres
and ſhould haue the ordering of all honours and dignities
bellicall. For the Zigians are a people of nature verye
fierce, accuſtomed euen from the Cradle to abide all maner
of labour, hardnes and trauell, inhabitinge that parts
of Pontus and Meotis which is about the riuer Phaſis
which riuer is the bounder and méere of Colchis, and the
mouth of Tanais, which Countrey or region containeth
welnéere 500. myles.
            Theſe people dwell not in Cities and Townes,Theſe people were after called Mamalukes.
                but
wander and are diſpearced héere and there without any
certayne habitation from Village to Village. Chriſtians
they are by their profeſſion and religion, albeit they
vſe many rites vnlyke vnto ours: their Infants as ſoone
as they are borne (yea though it he in the middeſt of winter)
they cary vnto a riuer and there waſhe them. They
are for the moſte part faire of complexion and of comely
ſtature, the countrey is fenny and full of réedes, whereof
they doo make Houelles and Cotages to dwell in, they
be at continuall Warres with the Tartarians and other
Nacions aboute them.
            The Nobles and Gentlemen amonge them neuer goe
but in Armour and Coates of Fence, and alwayes ryde

               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
                  〈2 pages missing〉
               
               
Lieuetenaunt and chiefe Captaine vnder the Emperour
of Tartarians hym ouercame and tooke Priſoner in the
yeere of our Lorde God. 1258. and cauſed Muſtacene
Munibila (who at that tyme had that office and dignitie,
among the huyge and ineſtimable heapes of treaſure and
ryches which he had hoorded vp and miſerably ſcraped
together) to bée famyſhed. After this, almoſt for. 200.
yeeres ſpace the Saracenes had no high Byſhoppe, till at
length in Perſia the lynage and ofſpringe of Mahomet
beganne againe to raygne in the yeere. 1480. whyche
how and by what ſort it came to paſſe, reſteth heere to be
ſhewed and deſcribed.
            There was a certayne Prynce among the Perſians,
Lorde of a Towne called Ardenel, and his name was
Sophi who greatly gloried, and bore himſelfe very loftie
and high for that he was as he ſaide deſcended of the rac
                  •
               
and Pedagrewe of Ali the Sonne in lawe of Mahomet
by Muſa Cazine hys Nephewe, of whom we ſpake in
the firſt Booke. This felowe nowe ſéeyng the Babylonian
Caliphe to bée ſlayne, and the contrarie faction
which the Turkes maynteyned and kept to bée depreſſed
and tryumphed ouer by the Tartarians, beganne
frankely and boldly to vtter hys mynde and opynion
concernyng Religion. And becauſe Hoceme the Sonne
of Ali from whom he made his auaunt to bée lineally
deſcended, had .xij. Sonnes, therefore he willing to geue
ſome difference and token wherby his Sectaries might
be diſcerned and knowen from all others, commaunded
and ordeyned that ſo many as woulde embrace and
folowe hys Lore and Doctrine ſhoulde weare a purple
Rybon or Labell hanging downe from theyr wreathed
Veyle which all Turkes weare aſwel as they vpon
their heades, called Tulibante, and the ſame in the middle
to bée reyſed vp into .xij. toppes or heightes wythoute
the Tulibante.
            
            
               
After he was deade, his ſonne Guines ſuccéeded in
hys roume, who for learnyng and ſanctitie gotte ſuche
eſtimation and fame throughout the whole Orient, that
the moſt mightie Emperoure of the Parthians, named
Tamburlane (euen he which tooke Ba
                     •
                  azete the King of
Turkes Pryſoner) leading his Army & paſſing through
Perſia, daygned to tourne out of his way and to viſite as
a man of moſt holy life and vnſpotted ſanctitie. At the requeſt
of which Guines, the ſame Tamburlane fréely deliuered
out of hys captiuitie .xxx. M. Priſoners which he
had taken in hys Warres and as then had with him in
his Campe: whom afterward Guines inſtructed and trained
vp in hys Sect and diſcipline, whoſeſeruice and helpe
Secaidar his Sonne in his warres afterward vſed. For
he after ye death of his father Guines, repoſing his ſpeciall
truſt & chiefe ſtrength in them, warred vppon the
Georgians a people of Scythia beyng Chriſtians bordering
vpon his Countreyes, and by their help afflicted and
put them to many foyles, ouerthrowes, and diſtreſſes.
            There raygned in Perſia a certayne Turke named
Mirza Geunda, who warred wyth Hacembecke
(whom ſome doe call Aſſambey) Kyng of the greater
Armenia which is of them called Diarbeck, béeyng
alſo a Turke aſwell as hée: in whiche Warres Acembeck
gotte the vpperhande, and ſtewe hys enemye
Mirza in Battayle, and hauyng wonne Perſia,
becauſe hée was but of a baſe ſtocke and obſcure
familie and wythout Kinſmen and Allies, hee meant
to make and eſtabliſhe the ſtate of hys Kyngdome the
ſurer by linking in affinylie with ſome puyſſaunt houſe
and thereuppon gaue hys daughter whych he begat vppon
hys wife the Emperour of Trapezunte hys daughter
(who was a Chriſtian) in mariage vnto Secaidar.
               
                  Beg in the Turkiſhe language ſignifieth a Lorde.
After the deathe of Hacembeck, ſucceeded Iacob Beg,
whyche worde ſignifyeth a Lorde.
            
               
This Iacob fearinge the great power of his Brother in
lawe Secaidar (partlye gotten by his new Sect, and partlye
by his Warres with the Georgians) priuely ſent ayd
to his Enemies, and cauſed him to be ſlaine. But his two
ſonnes Iſmahel and Solyman, he committed in charge
to one of his famylyer and aſſured Fréendes to carye
and conueyghe a farre of, vnto Manſor Deporna, Conſtable
of the Citie of Siracia: willing and ſtreightlie charging
him to kéepe them in ſure warde and cuſtodie within
the ſtrong Caſtell of Zalgah, which ſtandeth vppon a
high and inacceſſible Rock, till ſuch time as by expreſſe
certificate he ſhould otherwiſe countremaunde him. But
Manſor taking remorſe and pitie on them, for the honor
of Ali (of whoſe auncient bloud they were deriued) kepte
them like Princes and vſed them moſt honourablie, cauſing
them to be trained vp and inſtructed in learninge
with his owne Children.
            And after certaine yéeres,An example of pitie toward them that were fatherleſſe. falling into a gréeuous ſickneſſe
and maladie, inſomuch that he ſaw himſelfe not like
any longer to liue, and fearing leaſt his Sonne Caceme
beinge a younge man, woulde after the death of him,
deliuer theſe young Orphans and fatherleſſe Children to
Rocene (which raigned after his Father Iacob) furniſhed
them with money, Horſe and Guides néedfull for their
iourney, and ſent them home againe to their Mother and
Kinſfolkes.
            Theſe Orphans being enformed of their ſtate and noble
byrth, and by what meanes they had béene preſerued
(which thing before that preſent thei knew nothinge of)
their Kinſmen, Adherents and fauorers, for their fathers
ſake flocking in from euery part vnto them. Iſmael the
elder of the twaine, whoſe wit was both more pregnant
and déeper then his Brothers, (drawne therto by deſtiny
& naturall zeale) openlie before his fréends proteſted that
he would neuer reſt, till he had reuenged the murder and

death of his father, and after he had made certaine roades
into the Marches and Precinctes of the Georgians (his
power alſo daylie encreaſing) he named himſelfe Protectoure
of Ali his doctrine and defendour of all his authorities;
and therwithall denounced open Warre vpon Rocene
King of Perſia and all his pertakers. And becauſe he
had xij Brothers, which contended with him for the ſucceſſion
of the Crowne, he flew him and al the reſt, ſauing
only Marabeck.
            
            This Marabeck fledde to Solyman Prince of Turks,
and requeſted his ayde, wherupon enſued much trouble
and great Warres betwéene the Othomannians and
Sophians. But before he had obtained any ayde of the
Turkes to ſuccour him, Iſmael had wonne not onely
al Perſia, but alſo atchieued and won many notable victories
of the Tartarians.
               The kinges of Perſia be right saracenes.
                And thus the Saracenes expulſing
the Turks, began agayne to raigne in Perſia, in the
yéere after the natiuitie of our Sauiour Chriſte 1500. and
there do raigne tyll this day.
            And the Turkes with all their powers together hauing
conquered all the Romane Prouinces in Aſia as
farre as the Sea, diſtributed and caſt lottes for the ſame
among themſelues, in which diſtribution and Lotterie,
the maigne countrey of Phrygia as far as Philadelphia,
and néere to Antioch (ſituate vpon the riuer Meander)
fell vnto Carman Aliſure, whereof the Countrie was afterwarde
named Caramania. All from thence to Smyrna
and the inner Coaſt of Ionia, happened vnto one Sarcane.
            
            
               Magneſia, Priene and Epheſus were allotted vnto Saſan.
From Lydya and Aetolia to Myſia ſituate by Helleſpont,
Calames and his Sonne Ceraſus enioyed. From
the riuer Sangar to Paphlagonia, the Sonnes of Armurius
parted among them. All within Olympus and the
whole Countrey of Bythinia, fell vnto Atman, otherwiſe

named Othoman, (of whoſe race the Emperours of
Turkes which euer ſince and now at this day raigne in
Turkye and lineally deſcended) in the yéere of our ſaluation
1300. Albert the firſte of that name, deſcended of
the houſe of Auſtrich being then Caeſar and Emperour
of Germanie. And from this Othoman,
Laonicus Chalcondyla an Athenian, Paulus
Iouius and other both Gréeke and
Latine Turcographers doo beginne
their Hiſtories: wherfore to auoyd
tediouſnes, leaſt after Homere,
wee ſhoulde ſeeme to write
an other Ilias, héere we
make an ende.
            FINIS.
         
         
            
            ¶A Summarie or breefe Chronicle
of Saracens and Turkes,
continued from the birthe of Mahomet,
their firſt péeuiſh Prophet and
Founder, till this preſent yeere.
1575
            
               
                  MAhomet the Sonne of Abedela and Emma,
of the ligne of Iſmael, was borne at 
               Itraripe in Arabia, in the time that Maurice
was Emperoure and Gregory the
firſt, Pope of Rome.
            
            
               Mahomet patched together his Alcorane, (a Booke containing 
his peſtilēt doctrine & groſſe opinions) through ye
inſtinction and procurement of two hereticall Monkes.
Iohn of Antioch and Sergius of Italy. And therewith ſeducing
the light brayned Arabians and other fickle minded
people of Aſia, called them Saracens.
            At the age of xl. yéeres he dyed, and was burried in Mecha
               
a Citie of Perſia.
            
            
               Hieruſalem after it had bene beſteged by the Saracens
the full ſpace of two yéeres, was taken and ſpoyled.
            
            All Syria ouerrunne and waſted by the Saracenes.
            
            The Saracenes reuolted from the Emperoure of
Romanes.
               
            
            
               Antioch deſtroyed by Saracenes, Damaſcus taken,
               Phaenicia inuaded, and Egipt ſubdued.
            The Saracenes wanne the greateſt part of Africa
and layed it to their Empyre.
            
            The moſte Noble Ile of Rhodes inuaded by the
Saracenes and taken: out of whiche they caryed awaye 
with them great abundaunce of Golde, and a
Noble Image of the Sunne, called a Coloſſe, whiche

was in height. 110. foote. The Braſſe therof being ſolde to
the Iewes, was as much as 900 Camelles coulde carye
away.
            
            They practyzed outragious Pyracie on ye 
               Aegean Sea,
and did much harme to the Iſles called Cyclades.
            
            The Saracens diſcomfited Olympius the Exarch of Italy
                with all his Hoaſt in Sicilie.
            
            
               
               Conſtantine the fourth, entred into league with Muchamed
King of Saracens vpon condition that the Saracens
ſhuld pay a great Summe of Gold to the Romanes,
with a goodly Horſe and a Childe of noble byrth.
            
                The Saracens ruſhed into Sicilie, and after they had taken
Syracuſe and waſted the whole Countrey, they returned
backe to Alexandria.
            
            
               
               Conſtantinople was beſieged by the Saracens, vnto
which, they gaue ſundry aſſaultes but al in vaine: wherefore
they ſhipped themſelues entending to haue returned
home, but the greater part of them through Shipwracke
periſhed by the way.
            
                The Romanes ouercame the Saracens, and ſlewe of
them. 30000.
            Peace the ſecond time was made betwene ye 
               Romanes
                and the Saracens for xxx. yéeres, vpon condition, that the
Saracens ſhould pay yéerely to the Romanes. 3000. li. of
Gold, 50. noble Priſoners and as many Horſes.
            
                The Saracens in the reigne of their King Ammirath,
inuaded Africa and Lybia, & caryed away many ſpoiles.
            
                After the death of Conſtantine, the Emperour Iuſtinian
entred into league with the Saracens vpon theſe conditions,
that they ſhoulde reſtore vnto the Empyre,
Africa and Lybia, and pay euery day for the ſpace of ten
yéeres, a thouſande Crownes, a Horſe, and a Childe of
noble byrthe, in the name of a Tribute.
            
               
               Iuſtinian breaking this League, and ioyning battayle
with the Saracens, receyued at theyr handes much harme

and great ouerthrowes.
            The Saracens putting the Romanes to flight, greatly 
enhaunced their name and authoritie: contrariwiſe, the
dignitie of the Romanes therby greatly decayed.
            
               Abimelech King of Saracens, inuading Africa, enioyed 
not his victory there long.
            The Romans ſpoyling Syria, diſcomfited. 200000. Saracenes.
            
            While Iuſtinian and Leontius were ſtriuing for the
Empire, the Saracens againe inuader 
                  〈◊〉
               
               
            
            The Saracens ſayling out of Lybia, thus yéere ſet firſt 
foote into Spaine, waſting Aragon, Betica and Luſitanie.
            
            The Saracens of Aſia, landed at Conſtantinople with 
300. Saile, and fiercely beſieged the ſame both by Sea and
lande. The ſame yéere in Bulgaria there were ſlaine.
22000. Saracens.
            
               Zulcemō
                King of Saracens, dyed in his Camp before 
               Conſtantinople, in whoſe place ſuccéeded Amirath.
            
            During this Siege of Conſtantinople, many of ye Saracens 
dyed of famyne, plague and colde. They that remained
alyue meaning to retourne home, by tempeſt on
the Sea and Lightening, periſhed, being partly cōſumed
by fire and partly drowned in the waters: inſomuch that
of their whole fléete which was. 3000. Shippes more and
leſſe, there eſcaped but only fiue. This Siege laſted fully
two yeeres. The ſame yeere the Saracens thinking to
recouer ſome of theyr former loſſes, wyth a huyge Army
entred into Spayne, and ſpoyled all the Countrey ſauing
onely Gallicia.
            
            
               Abidimar Capitaine of the Saracens in Africa, ſacked 
and ſpoyled Burdeaux a Citie of Fraunce, and remoouing
thence to Poytiers, was mette withall and repreſſed
by Charles Martellus. Their Captaine and Prince Abidimar
being ſlaine, the Saracens for a while were quiet
and medled not with any moe warres.
            
               
                The Saracenes bringyng wyth them theyr wyues,
Children and whole Houſeholde, entred a freſhe into
Fraunce, as thoughe they had meant there continuallye
to haue dwelled, and planted themſelues for euer.
Wyth them, Charles the Great ioyned Battayle, hauyng
the ayde of the Frenche Nation, and ſlewe of
them. 380000. and loſte of his owne men onely 1500
Souldiours.
            
               
               Charles King of Fraunce, by hys valiaunt Knyghthood
delyuered out of the handes of the Saracens, the
noble Citie of Auinion, whyche they had before guilefully
ſurprized.
            
               
               Charles reſtored many other Cityes to peace and libertie,
expulſing out the Saracens: ſlaying Amorrheus
one of their Captaines, & putting Athine another of their
Guydes to flight.
            
                The ſame Charles by helpe of Luitprand Kinge of
Lumbardie, draue and expulſed all the Saracens out of
Fraunce.
            
               
                   Conſtantinus Copronymus Emperour of Conſtantinople
furniſhed out a Nauie againſt the Saracenes in
Aegypt.
            
            
                The Saracens in the Eaſt were euer wynning ſomewhat
that belonged to the Romans and layed it to theyr
owne Empyre, by meanes that the Romanes diſagreed
among themſelues, and bent themſelues only againſt the
French Kings.
            
               
               Charles the Great, had a noble victorie agaynſt the Saracenes
in Spaine. Rowlande in combate ouercame a
Saracen that often chalenged the Chriſtians. Through
which Victorie and vpperhande, he made the waye the
eaſyer for the reſt of his fréendes and Countreymen to
wynne the victorie.
            
               
               Leo the fourthe Emperour made a voyage againſt the
Saracens in Syria.
            
            
               
               Aaron Prince of Saracens wyth 300000 lyght Horſemen 
inuaded Nicephorus Emperour of Conſtantinople,
and made hym glad to become Tributarie, and to
accepte ſuch offers as greatly miſlyked and diſeaſed hym,
but there was no remedy.
            
               Sardinia and Corſica two Iſlandes, were ſpoited by the 
Saracens.
            The Saracens wanne the Ile of Crete, and ouercame 
the Gréekes in two Battayles.
            The Saracens of Aſia ruſhed into Paleſtina, and they 
of Africa into Sicilie.
            
            
               Boniface Countee of Corſica, hauing no helpe of the 
Chryſtians ſauyng onely the Hetrurians, ſayled into
Africa: and in foure Battayles, betweene Carthage
and Vtica, had of them the Victorie and vpperhand,
and ſo feared the Saracenes wyth the terrour of his onely
name, that they were faine to depart out of Sicilie, and
get them home to defend theyr owne.
            Many Countreyes receyued greate damage at the
handes of the Saracenes, and manye Cyties for feare,
in euery quarter fledde and ſubmitted themſelues vnto
them.
            
               Saba Kynge of Moores and Capitayne of the Saracenes
waſted Sicilie and all the Countrey about Crotona,
               
and tooke Tarento: agaynſt whom, Theophilus
the Emperour and the Venetian fleete ſtoode at reſiſtſtaunce,
but all in vaine.
            The Saracenes inuadyng Hetruria and Latium,
               
ſpoyled and ſacked Rome: but before theyr retourne
home, the greateſt parte of them periſhed by Shypwrecke.
            Hauyng waſted Illyrium and Dalmatia, they coaſted 
alonge the Adrian Sea, and burned Ancona a
Citie of Picene, after they had taken the ſpoyle thereof.
            
               
                Leo the fourth, Pope of Rome, compelled the reſidue of
the Saracens to packe oute of the Hauen of Oſtia, and
ſtrengthened all the Countrey beyonde Tyber againſte
them.
            The Saracens agayne (onely for bootie and ſpoyle)
 brake into Italie, and waſted with fire and ſword all the
Countrey aboute Beneuent by the Samnytes. But by
King Ludouick and Kinge Lotharius they were put to
flight.
            
                The Saracens renewed Warres with the Perſians:
The Perſians through the help of the Turkish Souldyours
(at that time the Turkes inhabited Mount Caucaſus
and were called Tartarians) ouercame them. Euer
after from that time, the Turkes neuer left Aſia, and not
onely encroched vpon the Domynions of the Saracens,
but alſo were called by the ſame name as they were.
            
                After the Saracenes had enioyed Sicilie xlvii. yéeres,
they were thence cleane expulſed.
            
               
               Charles ſurnamed the Thicke, repulſed the Saracens
breaking into Italy.
            
            
               
               Nicetes one of the Capitaines of the Conſtantinopolitane
Emperoure, had a notable victorie ouer the Saracens
            
                The Saracens inuaded Puell and Calabria.
            
            
                At Lyris a riuer of Campania, the Saracens as they
were ſpoylynge the Cities belonginge to the Romans,
were ouercome.
            
                The Saracens breaking out of Fraxinete, came as far
as Aquiſgrane where encountringe with the Inhabytantes,
they were vtterly deſtroyed and Sagitus theyr
Capitaine ſlayne.
            
                The Saracens ſpoyled Geane a Citie of Liguria, and
with great booties retourned into Afryca.
            
            
                Hugh King of Italie wanne Fraxinete, and burned the
Nauie of the Saracens.
            
               
               Ramyre King of Gallyce, diſcomfited a great Armye 
of Saracenes in Spayne.
            
            The Saracenes committing many murthers and firyngs
in Calabria, Puell and Lucania, by the Knightlye 
proweſſe of Alberick Marqueſſe of Hetruria were repreſſed,
and néere to Minturne in Campania by the Ryuer
Lyris vanquiſhed. There intentes were to haue
come to Rome.
            
            The Saracenes by force kéeping the Mount Garganus
made out of it many Roades into the Countrey néere adioyninge,
and burned Beneuent.
            
            
               Otho the firſt, Emperour of Germanes, draue the Saracenes 
out of Italie, and diſpoſſeſſed them cleane out of
their holde in Mount Garganus.
            
            The Saracenes recouered Conſentia, out of the which 
a litle before they were throwen out by the Hungarians.
            
            The Ile of Crete taken from the Saracenes.
            
            
               Otho the ſeconde, receiued a great ouerthrowe at the 
handes of the Saracenes, in a battayle fought with them
in Calabria the Ides of Iulie, with whom the Greekes
had ſtricken a League and ioyned powers. His ſtouteſt
ſouldiours and Capitaines being in this conflict ſlaine, he
himſelfe had much a doo by flight to ſaue himſelfe.
            
               Alphonſus King of Spaine, beſiedging a ſtronge holde 
of the Saracens called Viſeum, was wounded with an
Arrowe and therof dyed.
            The Saracens deuidinge their hoaſt into two partes,
landed in Italie, tooke Capua and beſieged Barum.
            
            The Saracenes of Aſia tooke Hieruſalem.
               
            
            Henry the ſecond Emperour of Germanes, draue the 
Saracens out of Capua, and perſecuted with gréeuous
Warre certayne Capitaines which fauored their ſide.
            The Egiptian Caliph, through ye ayd of an army of Saracens 
and Turks (which then ruled all the roaſt in Perſia)
ſpoyled the Temple of our Lord at Hieruſalem.
            
            
               
                  〈2 pages missing〉
               
               
               
               Baldwyne after .xviij. monthes Impriſonment, deceyued
his kéepers and eſcaping out of Priſon, retourned to
his owne people.
            
               
               Dominicus Michael Duke of Venice with a well furniſhed
Nauie, greatly annoyed the Saracenes in Syria.
To the Venetians for their worthy ſeruice and valiauntnes
were graunted ſundry great Priuiledges.
            
                An Army of 400000 men ſet vpon the Chriſtians and
were encountred withall by 3000. Chriſtians: who thorow
the goodnes of God, ſlew of their Enemies with the
ſworde 7000, and 5000 drowned, ſo that the victorye fell
to the Chriſtians.
            
                In Syria the Chriſtians diſcomfited the Saracens in
two notable ouerthrowes: in ye firſt conflict 2500 of them
were ſlaine. In the other, although both Armies were afflicted,
yet the Chriſtians obteined the victory.
            
                The king of Aſcalon was by Baldwine repreſſed,
and the king of Damaſcus in thrée battailes ouercome.
            
                After the death of Baldwine the third king of Hieruſalem,
Fulco was made the fourth king.
            
                The Erle of Tripolis by treaſon was ſlaine, king Fulco
was put to flight by his Enemies and condiſcended to
very hard conditions, to be clearely deliuered from ſiege.
            
                The Chriſtians coaped in fight with the Egyptians and
were ſuperiours.
            
               
               Aſcalon was recouered by the Chriſtians.
            
               
               Fulco the fourth king of Hieruſalē
                in hunting ye Hare
and ryding faſt after the game, through a fall from hys
horſe dyed: after whom ſuccéeded his Sonne Baldwine
who was the fift king.
            
                The Citie Edeſsa and almoſt all Meſopotamia was
wonne by the Saracens & Alaph Captaine of ye Turks,
which now were of great name and power in the Eaſt:
where they kylled without all mercy a wonderfull number
of Chriſtiās, rauiſhing mens wiues in the Church of

Saint Iohn Baptiſte, & in deſpight of Chriſtianitie euen
vpon the Alter.
            
               Baldwine the thirde of that name, and the fifte king of 
               Hieruſalem, conquered Gaza and Aſcalon and caſt out al
the Saracens. And at Hierico he ouercame and put to
flight Norandine Maiſter of the Chiualry of Damaſcus
and ſlue 5000. of his enemyes.
            
               Manuel Emperour of Conſtantinople with muche 
ouerſight and negligence led through daungerous wayes
and deſert places his Chriſtian Hoſtes againſt the Saracens,
inſomuch that for ſcarcitie of vittayles and other neceſſaries,
they could atchiue no notable enterpriſe againſt
the myſcreaunt people.
            
               Roger King of Sicilie and Normannes, made the Africane
               
Saracens tributarie to him for .xxx. yéeres, and tooke
their king Priſoner.
            This yéere Conrade the ſecond, Emperour, leuyed a 
great power againſt the Saracens, againſt whom he had
in battaile but ill ſucceſſe.
            
               Lewys King of Fraunce, aſſembled a mightie Armie to
go againſt the Infideles.
            Out of England, Flaunders and Loraine were furniſhed 
out 200 ſaile againſt the Saracens.
            This yéere Conrade the Emperour paſſing ouer Boſphorus
without anye reſiſtaunce, came néere to his enemies:
but for want of victuals and (as ſome ſay) his corne
being corrupted and mingled with lyme and plaiſter, he
was glad to ſtay himſelfe and go no further and to bring
backe his Armye. The Saracens vnderſtanding hereof,
ſet vpon them behind and ſlue of them certain thouſands.
            The ſame yéere the French king came to the Emperour
to aide him: but by reaſon that his Army was greatly
diſtreſſed and pynched with famine, he could bring no
notable atchieuaunce to paſſe. The ſame time, the Venetians
with a well furniſhed Nauie went into Aſia, to aide

the Emperour againſt the Saracens.
            
                The Spanyardes expulſing the Saracens, recouered
Almaria and Tortoſa, two goodly embattailed Cities.
            The ſame yeere, Damaſcus was beſieged by the Syrians,
Frenchmen, and Hieroſolymitanes, and the Vamures
thereof defaced. And when they were euen at
the poynt to haue wonne the Citie and ſubdued the Saracenes,
the chiefe Princes and Capitaines diſagreyng
and fallyng out amonge themſelues, called theyr owne
Souldiours euery man together, and departed thence,
leauing the ſiege.
            
               
               Raymund King of Antioch with hys whole Hoaſt
was diſcomfyted by the Saracens, who ſpoyled all hys
Countrey. Antioch it ſelfe by the Kinge of Hieruſalem
was hardly reſcued and ſaued.
            
               
               Baldwine King of Hieruſalem, diſcomfited the Aegiptians
and Babilonians.
            
                The Saracenes draue the Spanyardes by force of
Armes out of Almaria.
            
            
               
               Baldwine ſet at libertie and reſtored many Cities, expulſing
thence the Saracens.
            
               
               Baldwine dyed, and in his ſtéede reigned hys brother
Almericke, the fixt king of Hieruſalem.
            
            
               
               Almericke in Aegypt obteined a noble victorie.
            
                The ſame king befieged Damiata: but in th'ende he agreed
to a peace vppon conditions neither honorable nor
profitable.
            The Saracenes of Africa made manye Roades into

               Spaine.
            
            
               
               Almericke King of Hieruſalem dyed of an Ague: And
his ſonne Baldwine was annoynted the ſeuenth king.
            
               
               Baldwine in two battailes vanquiſhed Saladine Kyng
of Aegypt, and brought much treaſure into Hieruſalem.
            
            
                The Daughter of the king of Saracens being maryed
to Prince Pagane, was taken priſoner on the Sea, by the

King of Sicilie, in hir voyage and iourney homewarde
to hir huſband.
            Thys yeere, the Chriſtians in Hieruſalem were ouercome.
            
               Mauſamunth king of the Saracens with great coſtes
and charges repayred Carthage.
               
            
            
               Baldwine the .vij. king of Hieruſalem, beyng infected 
with Leproſie dyed. His Nephew Baldwine, his Siſters
ſonne was elected king after him, but by frouning deſtenies
he was kepte backe from his dignitie. After whom
ſuccéeded the .viij. king Guye of Leſingham.
            
            Betweene this Guye kyng of Hieruſalem and Raymund
Earle of Tripolis, there aroſe diſſenſion and hartburning
whiche was the cauſe, that the Chriſtians were
brought into extreme daunger.
            The Chriſtians ioyning battayle with the Armye of
Saladine, had a lamentable ouerthrow. In this battayle 
were ſlaine 20500. Chriſtians. King Guye was taken
Priſoner, and the Erle of Tripolis, dyed ſodainly.
            
               Hieruſalem hauing now bene enioyed and poſſeſſed by
the Chriſtians .lxxxbiij. was this yéere by ſurrendrie deliuered 
vp to the king of Saracens, and ye Chriſtians there
expelled, the ſecond day of October.
            This yéere all Iurie was wonne from the Chriſtians
by the Saracens: the Cities of Tyre, Tripolis and Antioche
being with much a doe and hardly kept.
            
               Fridericke Emperour of Romans with his ſonne Fridericke,
               
               Philip king of Fraunce, Richarde king of England
with manye other Princes and Nobles, aſſembling
their Parliamentes, decreed & throughly determyned to
ayde the Chriſtians in Iurie. Great preparation was
made for this voyage. Fridericke leadyng hys Armie into
Syria, and wynning the leſſe Armenia, went in the
hoate time of Sommer, into the Riuer Selephus to bathe
& waſhe himſelfe, where by miſfortune he was drowned.

                  〈2 pages missing〉
               
            
            
               
                Lewes Kinge of Fraunce, went with an Armye toward
the holy Land, with entent, to ſupplant the Saracenes
and relieue the Chriſtians.
            
                The ſayd King Lewes, ioyning battayle with the Saracenes,
brought vnder his ſubiection Damiata a populous
citie and curiouſlye embatteyled.
            
                The ſame King Lewes, in a terible conflict at Faramia
was taken priſoner by the Saracens, with his two brethren
Charles and Alphonſe. Wherevpon Damiata was
redeliuered into the hands of the Saracens, whereby he
ſaued his owne lyfe and his fréendes, and was delyuered
out of Priſon. This kinge was taken the fifte day of
Aprill.
            
                The Saracens loſt the Ile called Baleares, which the
Duke of Aragon ſubdued.
            
                The kinges of Spaine fallynge at variaunce and diſcord,
the one brother fled into Fraunce to craue ayde, the
other into Africa to deſire aſſiſtaunce of the Saracens againſt
his owne brother, whereby they wrought much
ſcath both to themſelues and to their countrey.
            
                Deadly hatred and grudge fell betwéene the Venetians
and the Genoways, whereby the Chriſtians inhabyting
Ptolomais and Tyre were gréeuouſly afflicted.
            
                The Saracens draue the chriſtians cleane out of Siria.
            
            
               
               Antioch was ſacked by Bodegar the Sultane.
            
            
                Yet againe, Lewes the french kinge with his thrée
Sonnes ſayled into Africa againſt the Saracens with a
great power. Where by his knightly proweſſe he had the
victorie of them and beſieged Carthage: but by reaſon of
the vnholſome countrey and chaunge of ayre, the peſtilēce
infected his Hoaſt, wherof the king himſelf dyed, and his
ſonne Iohn alſo, and then brake vp the ſiege.
            
                The Armenians and Scythians at Gamala a citie of Iurie
were deſtroyed by the Saracens, with the citie alſo.
            
                The citie Tripolis was taken & fiered by the Sultan of
Aegipt, and the Chriſtians in moſt cruell wyſe ſlayne, or
els caryed away captiue.
            
               
The cities of Tyre, Sydon, Tripolis and Bericus, by 
the ſame Sultan, were fiered & raſed euen with ye ground.
Ptolomais alſo being afore a place of refuge for the diſpearſed
chriſtians, was taken without any reſiſtance and
deſtroyed, and the very foundations digged vp. The chriſtians
which fled away and for ſooke the citie, in their way
toward Crete periſhed by ſhipwrack and were drowned.
And thus were the Chriſtians vtterly chaſed out of syria
190 yéeres after they wan it vnder Godfrey of Bolleine.
            
            
               The kingdome of Turkes.
               
                  OThoman a man of obſcure byrth & very ambicious,
growing in great wealth & riches by ſpoyle and robberie,
was the firſt that tooke vpon him, ye name of Kinge
of Turks. He within x. yéeres ſpace ſubdued to his ſeigniorye
a great part of Bythinia & other countreis about
the Euxine Sea, whoſe generation ſince, hath wrought
much miſchiefe to Chriſtendome.
               The Ile of Rhodes was won frō ye Sar. by ye hoſpitelers.
               
               
                  Alphonſe King of Caſtile in a notable conflict ouercame 
the Saracens, and tooke two mighty cities.
               
                  Othoman king of Turks dyed and after him ſuccéeded
Orchanes his Sonne, the ſecond king of that Nacion.
               
               While Cantacuzen & Paleologus contended for the 
Empire of Conſtantinople, Orchanes by force wan the
moſt noble citie of Pruſia.
               
               
                  Orchanes in a battayle againſt the Tartarians (for ſo ar
 the Scythians called) loſt the féeld and was with many of
his army ſlaine. After him ſuccéeded Amurathes the third
kinge of Turkes.
               
                  Amurathes through the couetouſnes and treaſon of the
Genowais (lending their ſhips vnto him) paſſed ye ſtreicts
of Helleſpont to Abydus, where he conquered ye cities of 
                  Philippople and Hadrianople vnto his ſubiection.
               
                  
                   This Ammurathes inuaded Seruia and Bulgaria, conquered
them from the Chriſtians, and at the ſame tyme
tooke and ſlue Lazarus King of Seruia.
               
               
                  
                  Ammurathes inuading the higher Myſia, was thruſt
into the flanke with a Dagger, by one that was a faithful
ſeruaunt to the aboue named King Lazarus, (whoſe pretence
was to reuenge his maiſters death) of the whiche
wound he dyed. After Ammurathes thus ſlaine, Baiazeth
his ſonne, obteyned the kingdome, & was the fourth king
of Turkes, and ſlue his owne brother.
               
                  
                  Marke Cratenique king of Bulgaria, with all the nobilitie
of his realme, was vanquiſhed in battayle by Baiazeth.
               
               
                   He ſpoyled Boſna Croacia, Illyria, Albania and VValachia,
kyllyng many thouſandes of Chriſtians, being
partly ſlaine and partly caryed into captiuitie.
               
                  
                  Conſtantinople was afflicted and beſieged fully .viij.
yéeres by this vnmercifull Tyraunt the Turkiſh king.
               
                   The Lordes of England and Fraunce at the inſtance
of the Genowayes ioyning with them, made a voyage into
Africa againſt the Saracenes and compelled them to
reſtore and ſet at liberty the Chriſtian Priſoners liuing
among them, and to pay 10000 Crownes.
               
                   The Walachians craued ayde of the Turkes againſt
the Hungarians, whom (notwithſtanding) the Hungarians
vanquiſhed and put to flight.
               
                   The Chriſtians and the Turks mette and ioyned battayle
at Nicopolis, vpon the. 28 day of September. But
the victorie fell to Baiazeth who had there 300000. ſtoute
fighting men well appoynted, wherof 60000 were horſemen.
The Army of the Chriſtiās (being French & Hungarians)
was not aboue. lxxx. thouſande, among whom
there were about .xx. M. Horſemen. The French Capitaines
were in a maner all taken Priſoners, Sigiſmund
the king of Hungarie himſelfe eſcaped hardly by flight.

In this battaile were ſlaine of Chriſtians 20000. and of
Turkes 60000. This lamentable ouerthrowe happened
throughe the diſcorde of the Chriſtian Hoſt among themſelues,
by reaſon that one whyle the Frenche and another
while the Hungarians claimed the firſt onſet and the
leading of the Vauntgard. After this battaile the Turke
retyred backe to the ſiege of Conſtantinople.
               
               
                  Tamburlane Kyng of Scythia, a man of obſcure byrthe 
and Pedagrew, grew to ſuch power, that he maynteined
in his Court daily attending on him, a thouſand and CC,
Horſemen. This Prince inuadyng the Turkes dominions
in Aſia with an innumerable multitude of armed
Souldiours, in the confynes of Gallitia and Bithynia,
néere to Mount Stella, gaue to the Turke a ſore battaile,
in the which, he ſlew of them two hundreth thouſand. He
tooke Baiazeth the Great Turke Priſoner, and kepte
hym in a Cage, tyed and bounde wyth golden Chaynes.
When ſo euer hee tooke Horſe, he cauſed the ſayde Baiazeth
to be brought out of hys Cage, & vſed his necke as
a Styrrope: and in this ſorte caryed hym throughout all
Aſia in mockage and deryſion. He vanquiſhed the Perſians,
ouercame the Medians, ſubdued the Armenians,
and ſpoiled all Aegypt. He built a Citie and called it Marchantum,
wherein he kept all his Priſoners, and enriched
the ſame with the ſpoyles of all ſuch Cities as he conquered.
It is reported in Hiſtories, that in his hoaſt he had an
incredible nūber of thouſands, he vſed cōmōly to haue xij.
hundreth thouſand vnder him in Campe. When he cam
in ſight of his enemies, his cuſtome was to ſet vp thrée
ſortes of Pauylions or Tentes: the firſt, was white, ſignifying
therby to his Enemyes, that if at that ſhew, they
would yelde, there was hope of grace and mercye at hys
handes: the next was redde, whereby he ſignified bloude
and flame: & laſtly blacke, which betokened vtter ſubuerſion
& mercileſſe hauocke of all things for their contempt.
               
                  
The ſame yéere Walachia, Tranſyluania, Moldauia
and all the Region beyonde the ryuer of Danowe, by procurement
of Stephan Vaiuoda their Captaine, ſediciouſly
mutyned and ſtirred vprores, againſt Sigiſmund.
Whereby all men might perceiue and vnderſtande, that
the ſame Vaiuoda was the very Authour of the late diſcomfiture,
in procuring the Turkes to come thither.
               
                  
                  Cyriſcelebes (whom ſome do call Calepine) after yt the
Great Turke his father was takē priſoner and his Hoſt
vanquiſhed by Tamburlane the Scythian King, ſaued
himſelf by flight, & tooke vpon him to be king of Turkes,
being the fyſt from Othoman.
               
               
                   The Turkes (after their king was thus taken & their
power daunted) atchieued nothing worthy of any remē
                  braunce
vnder this Cyriſcelebes.
               
               
                  
                  Cyriſcelebes the kinge, this yéere dyed, leauing behind
him two Sonnes, Orcannes and Mahomet.
               
               
                  
                  Orcannes throughe the great fauour of the Nobles of
Thracia, was appointed Succeſſour to the Crowne, béeing
yet a very young man: but in a conflict at Gazar, not
farre from the ryuer Hebrus he was ſlaine chiefly by the
villanie of his owne vncle Moſes.
               
               
                  
                  Mahomet the ſixte Kyng of Turkes, when his brother
was thus rydde out of the way, enioyed the Crowne
alone.
               
                   This Mahomet ſubdued Seruia, Walachia, and a great
part of Sclauonie.
               
               
                  
                  Sigiſmund king of Hungarie, in a battaile againſt the
Turkes foughten in the fieldes of Salumbeze (whyche
were ſomtimes called Philadelphia) was put to ye worſe,
and fledde.
               
                  
                  Mahomet impoſed gréeuous and intollerable tributes
vpon the Walachians. He tranſlated the Seate royall or
chiefe Citie of his Empire out of Bythinia into Thracia,
and gaue prerogatiue to Adrianople, preferring it before

                  Pruſia. He was the firſt king of that race that paſſed
the ryuer of Danowe, he ſubdued Macedonie, and came
as farre as the Ionian Sea.
               
                  Ammurathes the ſeuenth King of Turkes, vanquiſhing 
                  Muſtapha ye ſonne of Baiazeth by force of Armes,
obteined his fathers kingdome.
               This Turke made his firſt voyage againſt George
the king of Seruia, otherwyſe called Raſcia, from whom 
after foure yeeres ſiege hee wanne Newmound and
Scopia, and myſerably afflicted Synderouia. The kinges
ij. ſonnes whom he tooke in battaile, he bereſt of their eyes
and cutte of their priuie members. But he maryed and
tooke to wife his daughter for her rare beautie and comely
perſonage.
               
                  Theſſalonica a famous Citie belonging to the Seigniorie 
of Venice was won by the Turkes, who left there
no kinde of villanie and ſpightfull dealing agaynſte the
Chriſtians vnpractyzed.
               
                  Amurathes beſieging Belgrade in Hungarie, loſte 
10000 of his men and was faine to retyre into his owne
Countrey after he had in vayne and to his great ſhame,
continued his ſiege vij. monthes.
               
                  
                  Iohn Huniades encountred with the Turkes ſpoyling
Hungarie, and them diſcomfited.
               
                  Ladiſlaus king of Polonie and Hungarie, ſending out 
a power againſt the Turkes vnder the guydaunce & leading
of the ſame Iohn Huniades had ouer thē a noble victorie
in the fieldes of Haemus, and draue ye Turke to ſuch
a ſtreict, that he was faine to condiſcend to a peace.
               This peace made with the Turke, (contrary to league 
and othe) was violated and broken by the vnabuiſed procurement
and exhortation of Pope Eugenius, whiche
breache to the Chryſtians was verye pernicious and
hurtful. For firſt, ye Chriſtians in the Streicts of Helleſpont
loſt lxx. Gallyes. Afterward in a battaile foughtē at

the féeld, aboue xxx. thouſand of them ſlaine, belīde a great
number drowned in the Bogges. In that battayle was
ſlayne Iulian Caeſarine a Cardinal & Legat for the pope,
who came thither to procure and incenſe the Princes to
violacion of their League and Oth, and warranted them
from daunger: ye king Vladiſlaus himſelf was ther ſlaine
who was merueilous deſirous to enterpriſe this War.
Huniades with much adoo eſcaped by flight and ſaued
himſelfe. The Turke could not haue brought his Nauy
through the Streictes of Boſphorus in Thracia to
do this miſchief, had not the couetous Genowayes winked
at the matter and ſuffered them, hauing in bribe and
rewarde, for euery Turke, a péece of Golde payed vnto
them.
               
                  
                  Ammurathes wanne the Iſthmos of Corynth, and vanquiſhed
the Gréekiſh Garryſons, together with the emperours
Brother of Conſtantinople, and ouercame with
pitifull ſpoyle all Peloponeſus.
               
               
                   The Kinge of Polonie encountred with the Turkes
as they inuaded Hungary, and obtayned the victory. The
Turkes deſirous of reuenge, aſſembled a huige power afreſh,
and renewed Warre. Wherin both parties were
lamentably damnyfied, looſing welnéere 800000 men betwéene
them. Notwithſtanding, the number of ye Turks
there ſlayne, was farre greater then of the Chriſtians.
But the Generall of the Chriſtian Armye was there
ſlayne and his head brought to the Kinge of Turkes.
In the ſame battayle alſo was ſlayne the ſonne of the
ſayd King of Turkes.
               
                   The Hungarians vnder the leadinge of Huniades to
the number of 600000 entred into the Turks Countries,
and ioyning battayle with them, at the firſte conflict,
they had the victorye: but in the ſeconde, they were
ſlayne in maner euery one, except 1000. or ther aboute
which by flight ſaued themſelues.
               
                  
The great Turke beſieged Croia a citie of Aemathia,
                  
many Monthes, but by the worthy proweſſe of Scanderbeg,
he was defeated from his purpoſe, and with loſſe of
many of his men was ſent away packing with a Flea in
his eare.
               
                  Amurathes Emperoure of Turkes dyed, bequeathing 
his Crowne and kingdome to Mahomet his Son, the 8.
King of Turkes. Who (leaſt his Father ſhould be buried
alone without company) ſlew at his firſt entraunce, his
owne Brother, and commaunded them to be buried both
in one graue.
               The firſt Warre that this Mahomet tooke in hande,
was againſt Scanderbeg. Beſieginge Croia with lxxx.
thouſand men, but he departed away without his purpoſe
to his great ſhame and reproche, leauing behinde him at
the ſayde Siege Ballabano one of his chiefe Baſſaes.
               
               The famous and renowmed Citie of Athens, the Vniuerſitie 
and Nurce of all worthy Artes & Diſciplines,
was conquered and raſed to the ground by this moſt cruel
Tyrant the Turk, who in ſome places therof digged vp
the very foundacions, for extreeme hatred that he bare to
learning. He threw all the Bookes and Monuments that
he could finde, into dyrtie Sinkes and filthieſt places in
the citie, and to be put to the vileſt vſes that could be. And
if any man ſéemed to lament it, the ſame partye was
ſtreight wayes put to death. The Caſtle of Pyruaem and
Munychia was alſo moſt furiouſly raſed to the grounde.
               This Tyraunt the xxix. day of May, after a continuall 
aſſault geuen thereto from the ix. of Aprill afore, that is to
ſay, 50. continual daies, by his innumerable multytude of
Turks, conquered the noble citie of Conſtantinople, to
the vnſpeakable hindraunce of all Chriſtendome and
high aduancement of the Turkes Domynion.
               At the taking of this citie, moſt horyble prophanacion of
the Temples was vſed. As for Imags which the Turks

themſelues cannot abyde, in great ſcorne and contempte
were throwne downe. Among others, Mahomet himſelf
laughing at the ſuperſticious Citezens, in great be ryſion
gaped and laughed at the Crucifix, and cauſed it in ſcornfull
maner to be caryed about the Stréetes with Trumpettes,
and wrat vpon the head of the ſaid Picture theſe
wordes Hic eſt Chriſtianorum Deus. This is the God
of the Chriſtians.
               Thrée dayes together he gaue leaue to his outragious
Souldiours, to kill ſpoyle and rauiſhe both Wyues,
Matrons and Maydes without any reuerence of nature.
The citizens ſome they murthered, ſome they roſted vppon
Spits, ſome they ſteyed the ſkinnes, and afterwarde
hanged them vp to conſume with fainyne, of others they
put Salt into their woundes the more to encreaſe theyr
payne, contending amonge themſelues who could deuiſe
moſt ſtraungeſt kind of new torment, inſomuch that the
Citie was no Citie, but rather a Slaughter Houſe or
Shambles of Chriſtian bodyes. The Emperoure hymſelfe
being there ſlayn, his head was pitched vpon a ſpeare
and caryed about. At euery dinner and Supper, ſome of
the Emperours Coſens and Nobles of the Countrey
were put to death, ſo longe as anye remayned of that
ligne. Of the inferior ſorte, no day paſſed wherein he cauſed
not to be put to execution aboue CCC. perſons, the
reſidue he gaue to his Sauldiours.
               The excéeding crueltie that they vſed at the winninge
of this Citie, towards al ſort
                     •
                   of Men, Women & Children,
and their ſpightfull demeanour towarde Chriſtian
religion, it would me any mans hart to heare or read of.
               
                  
                  Mahomet beſieged Belgrad (of ſome called Alba Greca)
with a hundred and fiftye thouſand men. The Chriſtians
aſſembling their powers together, at the exhortation
of Iohn Capiſtrane, Huniades their chiefe Capitaine
and Ringleader ſlue aboue xl. thouſande of his Enemies

and put to ſhamfull flight all the reſte of them, in whiche
encountre Mahomet himſelfe was wounded with an Arrowe.
This battaile was fought vpon the 22. day of Iuly.
               
               This Turke ioyninge battaile wt 
                  Aſſimbey kinge of
Perſia, whō they call by ye name of Vſuncaſſane (ſignifiing 
a worthy & drad prince) in ye firſt cōflict at Euphrates,
loſt x.M. men, but in ye ſecond he obtained the victorie.
               
                  Corynth was taken by Mahomet.
                  
               
               The Turke wan from the Chriſtians the Empyre of 
                  Trapezunce, beheading Dauid the Emperour therof and
beſide the ſayd Empire and Conſtantinople alſo, he tooke
from ye chriſtians xii. kingdomes & conquered 200. cities.
               The Ile of Malta conquered by Turkes.
                  
               
               The Venetians furniſhed out a great nauy well apointed
into Grecia, to recouer Corynth, but they retourned 
without bringing their purpoſe to paſſe.
               The ſame yéere the king of Hungarie recouered Geiſa
a citie of Boſnia, the which the Turk had now the ſecond
time beſieged, and hearing of the approche of the Chriſtians,
he caſt 4. great Gunnes or Cannons into the riuer
Drina, & fled truſting better to his legs then to his hands.
               
                  Mahomet requiringe the Prince of Myſia to come to
ſpeake with him vnder coulorable ſpeaches and pretence
of peace, when he had him within his daunger, he fleyed 
and pulled his ſkinne ouer his eares, and caryed his brother
and Siſter about with him in triumph.
               The Turke wan a very ſtrong holde in Epyre.
                  
               
               
                  George Caſtriot (otherwiſe ſurnamed Scanderbeg)
 king of Epyre, diſcomfited & put to notable foyles ye 
                  Turks
in ſundry ſkirmiſhes. It is teſtified of this Scanderbeg ye
being prouoked, he neuer denied to fight, and in fighting
neuer tourned his back, neither yet was he euer wounded
but once wt an Arrow in the foote, neither did he euer
ſet vpon ye 
                  Turks with moe then 6000 horſmen & 3000
footemen. He is cōſtantly ſaid to haue ſlayne wt his owne
handes of Turkes 2000 whome with ſuch violence

he ſtrake, that many of them he clefte a ſunder from the
head to the middle.
               
                  
                  Mahomet diſcomfited the Syrians and Aegyptians, tooke
the Cities of Narrantana & Scandolora and fiered them,
killing all the Inhabitantes moſt rufully, and throwing
downe the Nobles and Gentlemen from the toppes of
Turrettes and high places to breake their neckes.
               The ſame yeere he entred into League with Ciſime
King of India, to whō he gaue in mariage a noble Damſell,
out of his owne brothelhouſe or Nurſerie, with royal
giftes and noble magnificence.
               
                  
                  Mahomet was put to many afterdeales by the power
of King Vſuncaſſane.
               
               The ſame yéere Nicolas Canalis, Admyrall of the Vetian
fléete, gaue a mightie ouerthrow to Mahomet on the
Sea, and ſlue two thouſand Turkes.
               At the ſame time many Chriſtians were taken and led
into captiuitie by the Turkes out of diuerſe quarters.
               
                   The Turke ſent 400 Sayle and 120000 men into the
the Ile of Euboea vnder the leading of Omar one of hys
Baſſaes, in which enterpriſe and inuaſion he loſt almoſt
40000 of his men: notwithſtanding, after xxx. dayes he
tooke it, pytching the Italian Souldiours vpon Poales &
ſtakes, and ſhewing all kind of horrible crueltie and violent
rape vpon the Inhabitauntes.
               The ſame yéere the Turkes army entred into Hungarie
ſpoyling and robbing as farre as Zagabria, and caried
away with them. 10000. Priſoners.
               In the ſame yéere alſo they inuaded Dalmatia, Foriulij,
and Styria, and haried great booties of men and Cattell.
               
                   The King of Portugall, paſſing the Gaditane Sea, recouered
many Cities in the borders of Mauritania from
the Turke, and laid them to his owne dominions.
               
                   King Vſuncaſſane hauing the vpperhand of ye Turks,
wonne from them ſundry Cities, whereby he purchaſed

to himſelfe a perpetuall fame ouer all the Eaſt.
               
                  Nicholas Throne the ſame yéere ioyned the Venetian
fléete with the Armie of the Kyng of Parthia againſt the
Turke.
               
                  Vſuncaſſane in a ſkirmiſh vanquiſhed and put to flight
 3000 of the Turkes Army.
               The ſame yéere ye Turke entring into Hungarie with
a maine power, ſpoyled al the Cities néere the water ſide.
               The Perſian kyng and the Turke ioyning battayle
néere to the Ryuer Euphrates: the Turke had the victorie,
and tooke of his Enemyes 6800 of whom in his retourne
homewarde at euery ſtaying place and Tent pitching,
he commaunded euery day fiue hundreth to be cut
in peeces with a ſword, and then caſt them out (like dogs)
vnburied, filling all the Countrey of Armenia with thys
loathſome ſpectacle of dead Carkaſſes.
               In a part of the Countrey that lyeth by the ryuer Iſter
                   called Muldauia and Walachia, the Turks had an ouerthrow
and were ſlayne by Stephan the Palatine of Muldauia,
Foure Turkiſhe Baſſaes were heere taken and
xxxvj. Enſignes.
               
                  Matthias king of Hungarie, at the Ryuer of Saue wan 
a ſtrong Forte from the Turkes to his high praiſe and
commendation.
               The ſame yéere Capha, a Colonie of the Genowayes
in the coaſt of the Sea Euxine, was by treaſon delyuered
vp to the Turke.
               This yeere dyed Kyng Vſuncaſſane, who had vnder 
his gouernment the Perſians, Parthians, Medians and
almoſt all the Eaſt beſide. After whom, ſuccéeded his eldeſt
ſonne: who puttyng his other brothers to death, reigned
alone.
               The ſame yéere the Turkes practyzed much Pyracie
in Nicoſia, to the great blemiſhing and detriment of that
Citie.
               
                  
                   A great multitude of Turks were ouercome in Myſia.
               
               The Venetians made league with the Turke: Chalcis
was by force of Armes ſubdued, and Scodra by ſubtile
practyze gotten and perſuaded to yeelde. They promyſed
to paye hym, yeerely 8000 Crownes, condicionally
that their Nauigation and traffique ouer Pontus
myght bee open for their Marchauntes as before it had
bene.
               
                  
                  Mahomet ſent a great Nauie into Puell, and he himſelfe
went with an Armye into Hungarie, and brought
out of both places a great multitude of Chriſtian Priſoners.
And afterward by force ſubdued the Iles Leucadia,
Neritus, Cephalenia and Zacynth.
               
               
                  
                  Mahomet went with an Armie into Aegypt to cōquere
Alexandria and at home made preparation for all things
néedefull for his expedition to Rhodes, which he nowe
mindedout of hande to beſiege, and had framed his plat
which way to attempt it.
               
                   This Mahomet by Meſich his Generall (a Baſſa)
beſieged Rhodes, and beate the ſame with iiij. Nauyes
moſt terribly. But the ſame was ſo manfully defended,
that hee was fayne to his great reproche and ſhame to
departe and leaue his Siege, which he had there continued
lxxxix. dayes, in which while he loſte of his men
which were ſlaine out of hande ix. thouſande beſide .xv.
thouſande whiche were wounded. The Maiſter of the
Rhodes at this Siege for the Chriſtians was the valiaunt
Peter Dabuſon.
               
               The ſame yéere the Turke with a great Nauie inuaded
Puell and by Acomate one of his Capitaines, wanne
Otronto, a goodly large and populous Citie ſtandyng
vppon the Sea, and put all the Inhabitauntes to the
Sworde.
               In this yeere alſo 6000 Turkes were ſlaine at the
Citie Mantinea in the kingdome of Lacedemon.
               
               
                  
In this yeere alſo, this raging Helhounde Mahomet
the Great Turke, firſt of all others tooke vpon him the
name of Emperour. Hee wanne from the Chriſtians
two flouriſhing and Noble Empyres, Conſtantinople,
and Trapezunce, twelue Chriſtian Kingdomes, and
CC. cities. After which ſundry conqueſtes he yéelded vp
his blaſphemous ſoule, and payed his debt to nature, to the
great relaycing aſwell of his enemies as of his owne people,
becauſe of the horrible & vnſpeakeable iorueltie, without
reſpecte aſwell to fréendes as foes, moſt rigorouſlye
ſhewed.
               
                  Baiazeth the viij. Emperour of Turkes, appeaſing all 
ciuile diſſenſions and domeſticall diſcorde at home, chaſed
his brother Zizime out of all Turki
                     •
                  , and was himſelfe
enſtalled in the Empire.
               The ſame yeere Ferdinando King of Naples, ſent his
Sonne Alphonſe with an Armye, who recouered from
the Turkes the Citie Otronto, before wonne by Mahomet.
               
               Alſo this yéere Iohn Caſtriotte the Sonne of Scanderbeg
aſſembled a power and recouered his enheritaunce
that was by force taken from his father by Mahomet.
               
               The ſame yéere alſo Stephan Vamoda and King Matthias,
wanne from the Turke the higher coūtrey of Myſia,
which now is called Boſna.
               
               
                  Baiazeth often ioyning battaile with the Sultan of Aegypt
had the worſe, and in the ende was glad to make a 
league with him.
               The Turkes inuaded and wanne Walachia.
                  
               
               
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   Brother to this Baiazeth the Great Turke 
liuing an exile in (Rhodes whither he fled for ſcare of ye
ſayd Turke his brother,) was this yéere ſent to Rome
to Pope Innocent the viii. And after a certeyne time of
abode there, was poyſoned together with Alexander the
Pope his Sonne.
               
                  
                  
                  Ferdinando king of Spaine with x.M. Horſemen and
fifty thouſand footemen, wan from the Saracen Moores,
the kingdome of Granado, and chaſed them vtterly out of
that Countrey beyond the Sea.
               
                   This Turke Baiazeth with a great power both by
Sea and Land inuaded the Inhabitaunts of the Hils in
Greece called Ceraunij, and all the frée Corporacions
of Epyre, and them ſubdued to his Turkiſh Empyre.
               The ſame yéere Matthias Kinge of Hungary, conquered
a ſtrong Holde from the Turkes called Sabatrum,
whereby his Countrey lyued in more quietneſſe and
out of 
                     •
                  eare.
               
                   A mightye Armye was ſent into Hungarie vnder the
leading of Cadume Baſſa, by whom were ſlayne vii.M.
Hungarians: and for teſtimony of this ſpoyle and ouerthrow
géeuen to the Chriſtians, they ſent many Chriſtian
mens Heades with their noſes cut of and in lothſom
                     •
                  
wiſe diſfigured, to Conſtantinople.
               
               
                   The Turks ruſhing into Croacia, were put to flight by
Maximilian.
               
               
                   The Turke warred againſt the Venetians, ſpoylinge
with fire and Sword the Countrey Dalma
                        •
                     ia, 
                  
                     •
                   
                  
                     •
                  aryed
away wt him great prayes. In Foriulij alſo he cōmanded
aboue 4000. men to be beheaded, becauſe he coulde not
cary them away with him by reaſon of a great deluge of
the riuer there. The Citie of Venice for dread of hym
was in great perplexitie and feare.
               
                   The Turkes wanne this yéere, Modona and Corona,
two cities of Peloponeſe.
               
               
                   The Citie Methon was by the Turkes wonne from
the Venetians vpon S. Laurence daye. Baiazeth commaunded
the Byſhop of that place to be beheaded in hys
ſight, and killed the Towneſmen euery one, and for the
moſt part conſumed all the Houſes with fire. By lyke

miſfortune alſo, the ſayd Venetians loſt Naupactum and
Dyrrhachium.
               
               Certayne Kings & Princes of Chriſtendome, fréends 
and fauorers of the Venetian ſtate, ioyned their Nauye
with the Venetian Fléete (ouer the which Benedict Piſaure
was Admirall) and ſpoyled the Iles of Aegina and
Zacynth, inuaded Leucas and Cephalenia, tooke the Ile
of Neritus (at this day called Sainct Maures Ilande) and
reſkued Nauplia.
               
               The Turke greatly fearing his owne ſtate, by reaſon 
of the brute and rumour yt went vpō 
                  Elias the Prophet of
Perſia, commaunded aboue CC. Houſes in Conſtantinople
with all the Inhabitauntes therein to be burnte.
This Prophet was in ſuch credit and eſtimation among
the People, that aboue CL. thouſande men leaned to
his Sect and folowed after hym in Campe. His Tentes
were excéeding rich and gorgeous, and all thinges among
them were common.
               The ſame yéere, the Turke entred into League and
concluded peace with the king of Hungary and the Duke
of Venice.
               
               The King of Spaine in Mauritania Caeſarienſis, wan 
Mayneport from the Saracenes.
               The Sophie of Perſia, vanquiſhed, chaſed, and ſlew the 
                  Turkes in Aſia.
               
               
                  Grane a populous and wealthy citie of Africa this yere 
was wonne by the Spaniardes.
               
               The Spaniardes by force of Armes conquered Bugia
                   in Africa.
               
               
                  Zelime youngeſt Sonne to Baiazeth the great Turke
                   rebelliouſly and moſt vnnaturally lay in wayt to kill his
olde Father, expelled him out of his kingdome in his olde
dayes, with all his Brothers and Kinſmen. At length
he cauſed his Brothers and their Children to be ſtrangled

and by a certayne Iew, whom for that intent he had hyred,
he cauſed his ſayd father to be poyſoned.
               
                   This Zelime by the factious election of his diſordered
doultiours and affectionate Rakehelles, was choſen and
annoynted the ix. Emperoure of Turkes.
               
                  
                  Acomathes the brother of Zelime, being ayded by the
Perſians, warred againſt his Brother, but Fortune ſo
frowned on him, that he was ſtrangled.
               
                  
                  Zelime concluding a peace & renewinge League with
the Venetians and Hungarians, made ſharpe Warre vppon
Iſmael ye king of Perſia, & him neere to a towne called
Chalderan, vanquiſhed and put to flight: And tooke Taurum
the chiefe Citie of his kingdome (ſomtime called Artaxata)
without any reſiſtaunce or bloudſhed.
               
                   Hee waged freſh warres againſt Aladule Kinge of
Cappadocia, and taking his chiefe Capitaine in the chaſe,
cut him ſhorter by the head, and ſent his head to Venice
for a Trophée or ſigne of his victory.
               
                   This bloudy Zelime diſcomfited Campſor the Sultane
of Aegypt with all his power, and ſlue the Sultane hymſelfe
in the chaſe. And folowing his good fortune and proſperous
ſucceſſe in this battayle, conquered and annexed to
his Empyre, Alkaire, and Alexandria two goodly embatteled
Cities, and all Aegipt beſide. He alſo wanne Damaſcus,
the large and renowmed Citie of Syria.
               
               
                   Hee made a paſſage or a Brydge of Shippes ouer
the riuer Nilus, to the intent hee might purſue and coape
with Tomombey the new Sultan of Aegipt. Whom by
treaſon hee tooke and after all kindes of moſt cruell tormentes
and ſpightfull contumelies, commaunded hym
to be hanged.
               
                  
                  Charles Kinge of Spayne draue out of his Realme the
Marranes, which were a remnaunt of the Saracens and
ſlue welnéere of the Barbarians .40000.
               
                  
                  Zelime the Great Turke was this yéere (as he had

well deſerued) murthered in that place, where before he
had moſte vnnaturallye and rebelliouſlye perſecuted
hys Father. After him ſuccéeded his Sonne Solyman, the
xii. Emperour of Turkes.
               
               This Solyman conquered the Citie Belgrade, a moſte 
ſtrong Buttreſſe and Garriſon for Chriſtendome, and
wan diuers other Caſtles and ſtrong Holds in Hungary.
               
               He alſo beſieged the Ile of Rhodes with a Nauye of
foure hundreth Sayle and a mightie multytude of  men.
He beganne the ſiege in the later end of Iune, and tooke
it vpon Chriſtmas day next folowing to ye great ſhame &
diſhonour of al chriſtian Princes. The knights of ye ſame
Ile valyauntly a great while defended it, & often ſkirmiſſhed
with hym, but in th'ende after many notable ouerthrowes
for want of ayde and power they yéelded.
               Lewys Kinge of Hungarie deſired by his Ambaſſadours,
aid of the Princes of Germany, againſt the Turke
inuading his Countrey and Kingdome, whiche they appoynted
to ſende, but it came to late. For the Turke
was already come, wherefore king Lewys in his owne
perſon, leading his whole power againſt hym, encountered
with hym in battayle, wherein hes was ouercome,
and thinking to haue ſaued himſelfe by 
                     •
                  light, was drowned
in certayne Bogges or Fennes both Horſe and
Man. Many worthy Gentlemen in this Battayle were
ſlayne to the great weakeninge of that noble Kingdome.
The chiefe Citie of the Realme called Buda, was ſacked
and ſpoyled: and the noble Librarie, of Kinge Matthias
vtterly conſumed with fire.
               The Knights of the Rhodes planted thēſelues againſt
 the Turkes in the Ile of Malta.
               
               The ſame yéere Solyman came agayne into Hungary,
beſieged the ſecond time the ſtrong fortreſſe of Bude, but
ſéeing he could not according to his minde by force win it,
he perſwaded the Defendauntes by certayne offers and

conditions to yelde it into his handes. From thence he
marched to Vienna a noble Citie of Auſtrich, and vppon
the xxij day of September gyrded the ſame about with a
moſt terrible Siege, beate it with Ordinance and ſhooke
the walles with moſt hydeous noyſe of roaring Canons.
But through the courage of the defendauntes, he loſt many
of his Souldiours, and being brought into a vtter deſpaire
of any good ſucceſſe, he truſſed vp his trinkets and
in flying maner trudged away toward his owne Countrey
with all ſpéede that coulde be, fearing leaſt the Emperour
and other Princes had folowed at heeles after him.
During this ſiege, he haried great booties out of ye Countrey
thereabout, and caryed away many thouſande Pryſoners.
He caſt out young Virgins & auncient Matrones
ſtarke naked, and pitched little Children vpon ſtakes and
poales. In his Armie he had a hundreth and fortye thouſand
men: whereof (partly in this Siege of Vienna and
partly in their flight) periſhed for famine and colde, the
number of .lxxx. thouſand. The Citie was moſt valiantly
defended by Philip of Bauary Earle Palatine of the
Rhine brother to the Palſgraue; a young Gentleman in
yéeres but of noble courage, with the Lord William Rogendorf
and Nicolas Erle of Salme and with them onely
xx.M. Almeynes and two M. horſemen. In his iourney,
through Auſtrich, the Turke vſed vnſpeakeable crueltie,
of ſome he cut of their noſes, ſome he put out their eyes,
of ſome he cut of their priuy members, of women they
cut their pappes, Virgins they rauiſhed, and of women
great with childe they rypped their bellyes and brent the
children: beſide this, all along as they went, they brent
Corne, Trees, Houſes and all that was combuſtible, to
make the countrey deſolate.
               
                  
                  Solyman with CC.M. armed ſouldiours aſſaulted the
Caſtle of Guntz in Hungarie, geuing thereto .xii
                     •
                  . terririble
aſſaultes. Which Caſtle was valiauntly defended

by a noble Gentleman named Nicolas Iuryze. At length
it was ſurrēdred vnto him, not as wonne by force, but as
yeelded by compoſition. The great T
                     •
                  rke himſelfe hearing
that the Emperour Charles was comming agaynſt
him wyth. lxxx. thouſande footemen and .30000. well appoynted
horſemen, of Germaines, Italians and Spanyardes,
beſide the Horſemen of Hungarie, thought the
Countrey woulde bée too hoate for hym to ſtaye anye
longer, and therevppon fledde homewarde through the
Hilliſhe Downes of Norica and wyth great booties retourned
home, wythout dooyng any thing worthye of
memorie.
               
                  Solyman yet againe meant to haue an other flinge at 
                  Hungarie, and to ſcourge the Kingdomes of Africa.
Wherevppon he ſent one Corradine Barbaroſſa Capitayne
of his Nauie into Africa againſt the King of Tunice.
Whom he draue out of his Kingdome, and depoſed
from hys Crowne. And into Hungarie he ſent
Lewys Gritte, Baſtard ſonne of Andrew Grytte Duke
of Venyce, to expulſe and dryue out thence Vaiuode.
But Meilane Vaiuode wynninge the Cytie of Medeuiſch,
which the ſaide Lewys Grytte before had gotte
into hys poſſeſſion, ſlewe both hym and all his Armie:
And cutte hys Children into pieces, before theyr fathers
eyes.
               
                  Charles the fifte with a great Nauie ſailed into Africa,
                  
and reſtored the king of Tunice to his Crowne againe,
and deliuered out of miſerable captiuitie about the number
of .xx. thouſand Chriſtian Priſoners.
               The ſame yéere Taurus a Citie of Perſia was taken
by the Turke. Where the Turkiſhe Souldiours lyuing
in careleſſe ſecuritie, were ſodainly ſet vpon by Tahames
king of Perſia, and .xx. thouſande of them ſlayne. The
Perſians caryed thence manye ſpoyles and the Great

Turkes Concubines, to the great ſhame and reproche of
their Enemies.
               
                  
                  Solyman aſſembled out of the Countreyes of Pontus
& Propontis, C l. Gallyes. lxxx. Brigandines, & Foyſtes,
and CC. lxx other veſſelles of diuers ſortes wherwith he
inuaded Corſica an Ile belonging to the Seigniorie of
Venice, and it beſieged the ſpace of .x. dayes. Then ſetting
the Suburbes on fier, & making great ſpoyle of the countrey
beſide killing or elſe taking Priſoners, many of the
Inhabitauntes, he departed thence, and waſted the Ile of
Zacynth and Cythera. Hee conquered and layde euen
with the grounde, the Ile of Aegina, ſubdued Paros, and
make Naxos Tributarie. He ſent into Puell, the greater
and better part of his Nauie, which were in number ten
thouſand picked footemen and M M. of his ſtouteſt Horſemen,
which haryed and ſpoyled all the Coaſt of the Tyrrhene
Sea. The fléete of the Emperour, the Pope, and
Venetians ioyning together at the firſt, through diſcorde
and ambition of the Captaines among themſelues were
diſſeuered and ſcattered a ſunder.
               
                   Inuaſion and Roades were made into Styria by the
Martyloys, a rude ſort of Peyzauntly Lurdens, altogether
geuen to Pylfery and Theft: but by the valiantneſſe
of the Countrey Inhabitauntes they were repulſed.
               The ſame yéere throughe Treaſon of Duke Calcian
the Chriſtians had an ouerthrowe at the handes of the
Turkes in Sauia.
               
               
                   The Venetians entred a Truce with the Turke, by
paying vnto him thrée hundreth thouſand Crownes, and
yelding vp into his handes the Townes of Neapolis and
Maluaſia in the borders of Macedonia.
               
               
                   The Towne of Newcaſtle in Dalmatia (wherein
was a Garryſon of Spanyſhe and Germaine Souldiours)
was this yeere conquered and ſacked by the Turks
and all the Inhabitauntes and Souldiours therin (according

to their vſuall cuſtome) put to the Sword. The Venetians
all this while wynked at the matter, in whom it
lay to haue holpen this outrage.
               After the death of Iohn Vaiuoda, who committed the ouerſight
and tutorſhip of his young Sonne to his Coſen 
                  Georgius Monachus, it chaunced ye 
                  Ferdinando leuied an
Army to recouer his Landes & right in Hungarie. Whō
                  Monachus in the behalfe of the Infant reſiſted. At length
the matter betwéene them beyng brought to a Parle and
conuention, for the quieting of all ſtryfe, it happened among
Ferdinando his men, ſodainely a Dagge to be hard
goe of, which by the hea
                     •
                  e of the daie (as it is thoughte)
diſcharged of it owne accorde. But Monachus iudging
that it was ſhotte at him, charged Ferdinando with great
iniurie, ſaying that from that time, he woulde neuer beléeue
the promyſes of Chriſtians. And vppon thys raſhe
ſuſpicion, ſent to the Turke, deſiring hym to come into
Hungarie with hys power to ayde him, who glad to
haue this occaſion, came ſpéedely with a great Army and
diſcharging the Hoaſte of Ferdinando from the Siege
of Buda, ſeyzed the Cytie into hys owne handes and
to hys owne vſe, commaundyng the young Infant and
his mother to folowe after his Campe. Then entred he
himſelfe and tooke poſſeſſion of the Caſtle, and wanne
alſo Peſtum a Citye ryght ouer agaynſt Buda, well ſtored
wyth Ordinaunce and Munition. At the ſame time
he alſo won Stridon, and the Towne called Quinqueccleſiae
or Fynffenkyrken he raſed and made l
                     •
                  auell with
the grounde.
               At the wynnynge of Buda, two Enſignes yéeldinge
themſelues to the Turke vppon promyſe of lyfe and
limme, were firſt by him cōmaunded to put of their Armor,
thē to put it on again, & to ranke thēſelues in battaile
aray, after the Chriſtian faſhion which they readily accō
                  pliſhing
according to his cōmaūdment, & he riding about

the bankes to view and behold them, at length hadd them
put of their Armure againe: whiche done, certaine of the
talleſt and ſtrongeſt he picked out, the reſidue he cōmaunded
his Souldiours comminge behinde, to hew in péeces
with their Swordes. Of the other which he had choſen
out, ſome he ſet for Marks, or Buttes to be ſhott at: and
ſome he appointed to his two Sonnes to ſlaſhe with their
Falchions, and to trye their ſtrength, whether of them
coulde geue the déeper wounde, or (as they tearmed it)
ſtrike the fayrer blowe, that moſt bloud might flow and
guſh out of their bodies.
               
                  
                  Ioachim Marques of Brandeburge Prince Electour,
was appoynted with a great power to goe into Hungarie
to recouer Buda and other péeces from the Turke. At
the firſt, he ſéemed ſo forward and couragious, as though
he woulde haue conquered the whole World. But his
great heate in ſhorte ſpace ſo ſlaked that he was full glad
to be diſcharged of his office againe, before any wronge
were offered him, and with ſhame ynough retourned
home agayne. Whoſe cowardiſe the Turkes perceiuing,
thought to ſhew hym ſome caſt of their office before hys
departure, and ſet vpon the right Winge of his Armye,
and thence tooke 500. Duchmen priſoners. Whom in deriſion
they horriblye mangled and diſfigured: and ſo ſent
them through Grecia to bee witneſſes of their victorie.
The kinde of their puniſhment was this: firſt, they thruſt
them cleane through the right Arme, with an yron redde
hoat, to make them euer after vnhable to laboure and
warfare, ſecondly their heades were ſhauen to the verye
Sculles lyke Monkes or Friers, and thirdlye their pryuye
members were cut of, to make them vnfrutefull for
propagacion of Children. Notwithſtandinge Maurice
Duke of Saxonie in his expedition, ſhewed himſelfe a gentleman
of haultye courage and was lyke to haue bene
taken priſoner.
               
                  
This yéere the Emperoure Charles, ſpéeding hymſelfe 
ſomwhat late in ye yéere with a goodly Nauy into Mauritania
Caeſarienſis againſt Barbaroſſa to recouer Argiers,
& ſtaying (as ſome ſay) ſomwhat long at Luke, to cōferre
wt the Pope, by force of tempeſt & contrary Windes, ſuffred
a lamentable Shipwrack, and loſte a great number
of his goodly Shippes with the Ordinaunce and Habyliments
of Warre that were within them. The Emperoure
himſelfe by force of weather was caſt vpon the Baleare
Iſlands. In this expedition the Germaines valyantly
quitte themſelues in ſkirmyſh againſt the Barbarians
in the Emperours behalfe, but the Italyans recuyled and
fled back.
               Truce was for a certeyne time taken with the Turke
                   which to both parties with longe warres wearied, was
welcome and very acceptable.
               
                  Sigiſmund King of Poleland, by Breuitz one of his 
Capitaynes, conquered and raſed a ſtronge Fortreſſe
which the Turke had buylt néere to the Marches of his
Realme and Kingdome.
               
                  Muſtapha the Turkes eldeſt Sonne, thought he taryed 
too longe, if he ſhoulde be kept from the Crowne tyll
his father were dead, wherefore he incenſed the Egiptians
to take part with him, and ſtirred vp the Perſians to
make ſharpe Warre vpon Solyman his father.
               
                  Solyman the Turke with a huge army, marched againſt 
                  Tolcha▪
                   King of Perſia, where the Turke in battayle
had a great ouerthrow and loſt many of his men in
Perſia. The Tartarians which were comminge to ioyne
their powers with him for his defence, were ſlayne and
ſpoyled in the leſſe Armenia.
               
               The ſame yéere, one Curculey a Turkiſhe Pyrate
with twenty Galleyes and Foyſtes, contrarye to the
League and truce practized muche Pyracie and rouerye
about the Coaſtes of Sicilie and Campania, ſodaynlye

ſurpriſinge the Inhabytantes, and thence caryed away
incredible ſpoyle.
               
                   The ſame yéere the Saracenes in Barbaria bruynge
newe ſedicious vprores, were by the valyauntneſſe of
Seſtian and Albane two of the Emperours Capitaines
repreſſed: who alſo delyuered Portugall and Spaine
from their malicious inuaſion.
               
                   The Turke intending to make amendes for the late
ignomynie and foyle that he had receiued, leuyed a newe
Armye againſte the Perſians: and firſte, he inuyted hys
Souldiours by augmenting their wages, and afterward,
by his Ambaſſadours, inſinuated himſelfe to all his confederates
and confirmed ſuch Leagues as were betwéene
them. But he loſt of this is very well appoynted Armye
in this iourney by famine and plague a great multytude.
The plague alſo beinge very hoate and raiginge in Conſtantinople
(which Citie in his abſence, he had ſtrengthned
with a Garriſon of a hundreth Galleyes) conſumed
well néere lxx, thouſand perſons.
               
                   In the beginning of this yéere, (whiche was a yéere of
Iubylie) Solyman was reported (but vntruelye) to bee
dead: which mercileſſe Tyraunt ſore afflicted the people
of God, the ſpace of xxx. yéeres.
               The ſame yéere the Emperoure Charles the fifte, by
the Viceroy of Sicile, conquered and wan the Citie Affrica,
from whence he brought 8000 priſoners, and draue
out the Archpyrate Dragute, King therof, who fled to the
Turke.
               
               
                   The Turkes after they had in vaine for a time beſieged
the Caſ
                     •
                  le of Malta, tooke the Citie of Tripolis a
Porte of Barbarie.
               
               
                  
                  Solyman at this time cauſed his eldeſt Sonne Muſtapha
to be ſtrangled wt a Bowſtringe, by his dumbe men
miniſters of Murther a vizured, he himſelf being preſent
and looking on, for ſuſpition of treaſon layd to his charge.

And there was a truce taken betwéene hym and Ferdinando
king of Romanes.
               
               After which act committed, he woulde haue geuen to an
other of his ſonnes named Gianger, the Treaſure, horſe,
Armur Ornament and Prouince of his ſlayne Brother:
but Gianger for very ſorrowe of his Brothers death raging
againſt his Father, callyng hym wycked dog, traytoure
and murtherer, and bidding pby vpon him, refuſed
his offers and drawinge out his owne Dagger preſently
thruſt himſelfe through the body and dyed.
               The Turkes Army came into Styria, and wanne the 
townes of Coppa, Capeniſuar, and Baboza. And atempting
to winne Sigetum, they could not with all their power
bring it to paſſe. Wherevpon they departed homewarde,
but firſt, they fyered Baboza, Sanmartine, Geroſgall,
Selia, San Laurence and Caliange.
               
               Philip Kinge of Spaigne furniſhed out an Nauye to 
conquere Tripolis, or the Ile Gerbe: which Fléete aryuing
in Gerbe and ioyninge battaile with the Turkes,
was put to a ſhrewde afterdeale & ouerthrow. For there
were ſlaine of them out of hande to the number of xviii.
thouſande perſons. The Turkes in this conflicte tooke
xxvii. Galleyes, one Foyſt of force, and fouretene great
Hulkes.
               In the beginning of the ſame yéere the Turkes wanne
a ſtrong Holde in Hungary named Filech: and afterwarde
a Truce was taken betwene the Emperour Ferdinando
and Solyman the great Turke ſo long as Ferdinando
lyued.
               The great Turke, ſent his Ambaſſadour to Ferdinando,
who from the great Turke his Maiſter preſented vnto
the ſaid Emperour a goodly Ienet richlye trapped and
4. Camelles with ſundrye Chriſtian Priſoners.
               
                  Maximilyan now Emperoure, by the Lorde Lazarus 
Swendy his Generall, conquered & beat downe a ſtrong

holde & Fort called Tochay, belonging to Iohn Vaiuoda
which was eigerly defended by the Turkes.
               
                   King Philip ſent Garzias Captaine of his Gallyes and
Admyrall of thoſe Seas with a goodly. Nauie to wynne a
ſtronge Caſtle belonging to the Turkes called Del
Peuol di Velez, ſtanding vpon the coaſt of Africa, from
whence Turkiſh Pyrates were often wont to infeſt the
Spaniſhe Seas and take ſuche as traueiled that waye.
Which in .vj. 
                     •
                  ayes they tooke, for that ye Turkes defending
it, in the ſtill time of the night fled away.
               
                  
                  Solyman beſieged the Ile of Malta, wonne the Caſtle
of S. Helme, but not able to winne the reſt, he left all and
departed with great loſſe of his men.
               
                  
                  Solyman with a huige power entred into Hungarie,
and beſieged Sigeth and Iula. And there dyed, the iiij.
of September, leauing behinde him for Heyre to all his
dominions and Kingdomes, his ſonne Selyme, now Emperour
of Turkes. Whoſe tyrannie and rage God for his
mercyes ſake, inhibite and qualefie, that he vſe not his power
to the deſtruction and ouerthrowe of Chriſtendome,
which with ciuile diſcord within it ſelfe is at this preſent
piteouſly rent aſunder and moſt daungerouſly diſmembred.
In this Siege the rather to allure his Souldiours
to valiaunt enterpriſes, he made Proclamation, that whoſoeuer,
brought to him or to his Sonne in law Mechmet
Baſſa the head of a Sygethian Souldiour ſhould haue in
reward .x. Duckattes, and after that rate accordingly for
ſo many heades as they brought. Beſide diuerſe other
cauſes ye vehemently mooued him to conquere this ſtrong
Piece, this was one, & none of the leaſte, for one of the
Turkes Captaines named Begen comming out of Turkie
toward Fynfenkyrken or Quinqueccleſiae into Hungarie
with .1000. freſhe Horſemen, was encountred by
the Erle Seryne Captaine of Sygeth in the night, who
tooke from him 8 Camels 50 Moyles 60 Horſes,
and fire Wagons laden with Treaſure and alſo gotte

ij. redde Guydons, with a whole piece of riche clothe of
Golde, and a goodly Iewell. This Captaines Horſe was
betrapped moſt richly. The Pomell of the Sadle & backe
part was couered ouer with plate of fyne Arabicke work,
and the reſt of the ſadle beſide the ſitting place was plated
with Siluer and gylt. The Seate of the Sadle was couered
with purple Veluet, the Trappers and brydle beſet
with ſmall Turkeys and Rubyes. Which horſe and furniture,
was ſent by Earle Seryne to the Emperour to
Vienna. The Captaine Begen (although the Erle Serine
would faine haue ſaued him and taken him aliue, yet becauſe
the Ianitzaries fought ſo eigerly to deliuer him, he
was forced to kill both him and them. From this Begen,
the Erle got .xv. thouſand Turkiſhe & Hungariſh Duckates,
which ſhould haue payd the Turkiſhe Souldiours
in Fynfenkyrken.
               
               This valiaunt Gentleman at the Siege of this Fortreſſe
was ſlaine, whoſe death greatly diſcoraged all hys
company. The Turke himſelfe althoughe he dyed in the
Campe at this Siege, certaine dayes before the fortreſſe
were taken, yet by the ſubtyle pollicie and wonderfull ſilence
of Mechmet Baſſa his Sonne in lawe, his death
was kept ſecrete and vnknowen till the Hold was taken
for diſcoraging his Souldiours. Inſomuch that the ſayde
Mechmet Baſſa, priuely cauſed Solymans Doctor of
Phiſicke to be executed and put to death, leaſt he ſhoulde
haue blabbed out his death. At this Siege were ſlaine
thrée or foure Baſſaes & 18000. Turkes.
               The Arabians and certeyne other Countreyes began 
in the beginning of the raigne of this Selyme to rebell againſt
him, whom he quickely appeaſed & brought vnder
obedience. And made a league wyth the King of Perſia.
               After this, althoughe the Turke had entred in league 
with the Venetians, yet now laying title & chalenge to ye
Ile of Cypres, he ſent his Ambaſſadour to Venice ſtately

and malapertly to demaūd ſurrendry of the ſame vnto
him. Which ſaucy requeſt being not graunted, he cōtrary
to league, othe, & promyſe, firſt ſent out Hali Baſſa with
80 Gallyes thither to tranſport Souldiours, Munition,
freſhe victuall & other neceſſaryes. Then were appointed
as chiefe Generalles two Lordes of his Priuie Councell,
Muſtapha Baſſa, and Piali Baſſa, whiche with their
mayne power landing in Cypres firſt wonne the Citie
Nicoſia but not without greate ſlaughter and effuſion of
bloude on both partes.
               
                   The Citie Famagoſta was moſt terrible beſieged and
ſixe times cruelly aſſaulted and righte valiauntly by the
Chriſtians defended ſo long as their power, victuall, pouder
and Shot remayned. But the want of theſe thinges
& the ſtate of their Vaymures being by Canon ſhot beaten
downe & periſhed, cauſed the right valiaunt & honorable
Sig. Bragadino Lord Gouernor of the Citie & others
of ye 
                  Venetian Nobilitie there, to yeld vp thēſelues and ye
Citie vpon ſome honorable condicions. That is to wit,
that they might depart with their lyues Armour & goods,
fiue pieces of Ordinaunce, thrée of their beſt Horſes and
ſafe paſſage from thence to Candye with theyr own Gallyes:
and laſt of all that the Grecians inhabiting in that
Iſland, might dwell there quietly and enioy their goods
and poſſeſſions peaceably and ſtill reteyne their Chriſtian
Religion without either burt or contradiction. Al theſe
requeſts and Articles, Muſtapha the Turkiſh Generall
graunted and ſubſcribed vnto with his own hand, but the
curſed Caytif ſpake one thing with mouth & thought an
other in heart, for the 15 of Auguſt, the ſaid Sig. Bragadino
(vpon truſt of this Baſſa his promiſe) accompanyed with
ſundry other Lordes Gentlemen and Souldiours came
foorth of their Holde and went vnto the Pauilion of Muſtapha,
with the keyes of the Citie: of whom at the firſt
they were curteouſly enterteyned and cauſed to ſit downe

by him, diſcourſing with them of ſundrye matters and
drawing them frō one tale to another, till at lēgth picking
a ſurmyſed quarel and ſpecially to Sig. Bragadino ſodainly
commaunded them all to be pynyoned and to be layde
bounde one by one in the market place, and in hys preſence
there to be hewen in péeces. As for Sig. Bragadino,
he firſt commaunded his eares to be cut of, and moſt vilely
to be ſtretched a long vpon the grounde, while Muſtapha
talked and blaſphemouſly demaunded of him, where
his Chriſt was that he helped him no better. Then he led
him to all the breaches of the Citie, making him to carie
at once two baſkettes of rubbiſh and earth, th'one on hys
backe and th'other in his hand ſlauelyke to euery ſundry
battry, being enforced alſo and commaunded to kyſſe the
grounde as often as he paſſed by him. After this, he was
ledde to the Sea ſide where being ſet in a Chayre, he was
wynched vp and faſtened to the maineyard of a Galley,
and hoyſed vp with a Crane ſo high that al the Chriſtian
Souldiours and Slaues in the Hauen alreadye ſhipped
might behold, and was afterward let downe againe, and
vpon the Pyllorie in the market place moſt cruelly fleyed
quicke. After which moſt ſauage tyrānie, his ſkinne was
ſtuffed with Straw and hanged vpon the Bowſprit of a
foyſt to be caryed along the coaſtes of Syria, that al ye Port
townes might behold and vnderſtand who he was. The
Turkiſh Army at this Siege of all ſortes were in number
200 thouſande perſons. In 79 dayes (all which time
the Battry ſtill continued) 140 thouſande yron pellettes
were ſhot into the Citie, numbred and ſéene.
               
               The Chriſtian Nauy being in number 207 Gallyes,
6. Galeazes beſide a great nūber of Pynneſſes and other
Shippes, and 20. thouſande 
                     •
                  all Souldiours, of Spayne,
Italy and Germanie beſide the Labourers and Rowers,
wherof was chiefe General Don Iohn de Auſtria tooke
the Sea at Meſſana from thence ſayling to Coreyra, & ſo

to Cephalenia ſéeking the Turkes: where being out of
Candy enformed of the miſerable taking and cruell dealyng
at Famagoſta, were further geuen to vnderſtande,
that the Turks lay at Anker in the Gulph of Velapan̄t.
Spéeding themſelues thytherward, the Turkes were in
a ioly ruffe, marueilyng that the Chriſtians curſte ſo
fondly hazard themſelues vnto certayne death, and makyng
full reckenyng ſo to afflict and cruſh the Chriſtian
power at that time, that they ſhould neuer be able afterwarde
to withſtand thē more. But they reckened before
their Hoſt, and God gaue the victorie. For there were
taken, burnt, and ſunk of the Turkiſh Gallyes, Galiots
and Brygandines 230. There were ſlayne of the
Turkes 30. thouſand, beſide a great number taken priſoners:
and about xiiii. thouſand Chriſtians that had bene
kept in lothſome captyuitie, were ſet at libertie, breaking
their chaynes to be reuenged of their extréeme ſlauerie, to
helpe the Chriſtians when the Turkiſhe ſide began to
goe to wreck. The chiefe brunt of this conflict was vpon
the 6. day of October, and laſted foure houres, but the
ſlaughter and chaſe continued all day from morning tyll
night, inſomuch that the Sea ſéemed redd with bloud: for
none eſcaped thence aliue ſauing 40. Gallyes which fled
at the firſt beginning. The Chriſtians loſt ſeauen Gallyes
and were ſlayne betwéene the number of vi. or vii.
thouſande.
               The wind and Sunne was on the backs of the Chriſtians,
and full in the faces of the Turkes, whiche greatlye
helped them at this pinch, and furthermore the
Stemmes of the Turks Gallies were ſo high, that they
ouerſhotte our men, which made them to vaſten to grappling
& there beſide a great ſort of Ianyzaries and commō
Turkes, their Baſſa was ſlaine.
               
                   This yéere the ſeauenth of October, the noble and
valyaunt Prince Don Iohn De Auſtria with 105 Gallyes
and 40. great Shippes was ſent by Phylip King of

Spayne to take and ſet order in the kingdome of Tunice,
where was great ruffling and hurly burly for the State.
He therfore takyng Ship at Iauagnana, had the wynd ſo
fauorable, that by noone the next day he arryued at Goletta.
Afterward there folowed and came to him Marcellus
Auria with 29. well trimmed Foyſts, and the Duke
of Seſſia with 14. of the Popes gallyes. The Turkes
in Tunice for dread of his puiſſaunce (whom to their coſt
not long before they had tryed) fled out of Tunice, ſome
to Carauana and 400. of them to Biſana, ſometime called
Vtica: whom the Biſanes would not receiue nor ſuccour:
whervpon after many hoat wordes on either party, they
fell together by the eares among themſelues. The Biſanes
(to be the ſtronger in that byckeringe) vnclogged and
vnchayned 150. Chriſtian Priſoners whom the Turkes
had vſed for Gallye Slaues, and them furniſhed with
Weapon and armure. By whoſe help and meane ſpecially,
the Biſanes got the vpperhande and ſlue many of the
Turkes. Which done, Don Iohn (hauing the goodwyl of
the Towneſmen) ſent thither Sig. Salazara the Spaniarde,
to take poſſeſſion of the Towne, and to ſweare the
A
                     ••
                  habitauntes to be true obedient Subiectes to Kinge
Philip. Then landing his Army within foure miles of
Tunice, he ſent 2500. Footemen to the citie, where they
found no body to reſiſt them but onely 200 Moores in the
Caſtle, who ſayde that they kept the ſame to the vſe of
Amidas their Kinge. Whom Don Iohn ſent Priſoner
with his Wife and Children into Sicile, becauſe he had
bene cauſe of great diſcorde and faction in that Countrie,
and (diſpoſſeſſing the lawfull heyres thereof) had violentlye
vſurped the ſame and procured the Turkes to come
thither. In whoſe roome be appoynted young Muleaſſes,
who ſware to be true Vaſſall vnto Kinge Phylip and to
holde his Crowne of hym by Homage, whom the Citezins
with a goodly peale of Ordinaunce receiued & gladlye

ſéemed to admit for their Souereigne. Ouer the Caſtle
or chiefe Fort of the Citie he appoynted. Sig. Serbellane
Captaine.
               
                   The iiij. of February 200 footemen and 150 Horſemen
of the Garriſon of the ſayd Sig. Serbellan, ioyning alſo
vnto thē for helpe 4000 Moores, yſſued out of their. Fort
and encountred with 1500 Turkes and 3000 Arabians,
which robbed and ſpoyled the goods of the Tunicians and
gréeuouſly moleſted them. In which conflict, the falſe harted
Moores reuolting and refuſing to fight, there was taken
150 Chriſtians and two Gunnes.
               Still the Turkes ſtamping and ſtaring for rage to ſee
the Spanyardes beare rule and authoritie in thoſe quarters,
priuely in the night the 21 of Februarie ſurpryzed
Caniſum, killing therein and ſlaying aboue a thouſande
perſons, and after they had vtterly burnt the towne euen
to the Caſtle gate, they retyred backe whence they came.
The Garriſon in the Caſtle to their great griefe all thys
while beholding this outragious dealing, & durſt not once
aduenture to coape with them for frare of looſing all, becauſe
they were in number farre fewer their they.
               This yéere the Venetians entred into league with Selyme
the Great Turke, for confirmation whereof, they
ſent Sig. Franceſco Barbero to Conſtantinople, ye conditions
wherof were, yt eyther partie ſhould ſtil kéepe & enioy
ſo much as they had alredy in their ſeueral poſſeſſiōs,
ſauing that the Venetians promiſed the deliuery of Sapotum
and reſignation of all their tytle in the Forte of xemenicum
into the Turkes handes: and againe, ye Turke
reſigned and graunted vnto them, two miles euery way
about the Territory of Zara and other their Iuriſdictions
therabout, and that the Venetians for Dalmatia and certeyne
other péeces about Zara, ſhould yéerely anſwer on
certaine tribute to the ſaid Turke.
               
                  
In March this yéere the Moores whom Don Iohn
de Auſtria permitted vpon their humble ſute ſtill to inhabite
in Tunyce, by the egging and procurement of
Radamane Viceroy of Algiera, entred into conſpyracie
and deuiſe, how to ſurpriſe and winne the new Fort that
the Spaniardes had there lately made, againſt whom
Salazara was commaunded by Sig. Serbellane to go with
a thouſand footemen, which put the Moorish Drudges to
flight, and ſlue of them 1200.
               Thrée Shippes were ſent to Charles the ix. Kinge of
Fraunce, laden with great Horſes, Lyons, Lyberds, and
other Preſentes. Whiche colourable curteſie vnder the
cloake of gloſing flatterie, it is thought the Turke vſed,
the rather to obteyne the Kinges goodwyll and conſent
that he might winter his Gallyes in the Port Tolonenſis.
But hearing that the King was departed this lyfe before
their comming, one of them retourned to Conſtantinople
with ſpéede, to intimate to the Turke their Maiſter,
the French Kinges death, and further to know his
pleaſure what they ſhould doe.
               In Iune the Emperour and the Turke concluded a
peace for fiue yéeres to come.
               In Iul
                     •
                  e, 300 Turkes landing in Calabria to fetche 
freſh water and filch ſome other booties, were ſnatched
vp euery one and either ſlaine or taken.
               Vppon the Seas about Tunyce were ſeene 350 Saile
of the Turkes, whoſe intent and meaning was (as
very ſhortly after they brought it to paſſe) to recouer and
wynne the new Fort which Sarraglion builded, together
with Goletta and other Péeces there. With whom
alſo a mighty rablement of traiterous Moores about Algiera,
Tripolis & Zerbite ioyned ſide: which diſpoſſeſſed
thence the Spaniſh garriſons, to the great furtherance of
their deueliſh purpoſes a
                     •
                  d to the lamentable griefe of all
Chriſtendome, conſidering what a ſmall way they haue

from thence into Spaine & ſo into the reſt of other Chriſtian
Realmes, vnleſſe the good and gracious prouidence
of our God qualeſ
                     •
                  e and as with a Snaffle reine this
raging Beaſte and bloudy Tyraunt, the common
robber of all the world from further inuaſion,
which he graciouſly graunt for his mercye
ſake through the mediation of
his Sonne Chriſt our Lord
and onely Sauiour
Amen.
            
            FINIS.
         
      
      
         
            
               ❧ IMPRINTED AT
London by William How, for
               Abraham Veale, dwelling in
Paules Churchyard, at the ſigne
of the Lambe.
1575.
            
         
      
   