
      
         
            
            TO The Nobly minded and worthily disposed Gentleman IOHN TREFERY Esquire.
            
               SIR, the perticular fauours I haue often tasted as Arguments of a greater loue, then any seruice of mine can deserue; Chalenge from me a larger debt of duty and acknowledgement, then any endeuours of mine can by possibility acquite: yet to instance a gratitude somwhat aboue my fortunes or ability; I haue aduentured to tender an humble

thankfulnesse, in presenting to your iudicious view a Nouelty, which I presume will be as acceptable to your perticular knowledge, as it is to the Christian world ingenerall: being the Conuersion and Baptisme of a lew, written formerly in sundry Languages, lately in French, and now by me Translated into English, which taske falling within the compasse of my ablenesse to discharge, I haue made bold vnder your protection to expose to the publique view, and in all humblenesse offer to your Patronage: that it may be some liuing (though sleight) testimonie, of that loue & duty which hath, and euer shall publish me to the world as I am in heart:
            
               Your Seruant, and louer of your vertues, THOMAS DREWE.
               
            
         
      
      
         
            
            Daniel Ben Alexander, heretofore a Iew by Religion, but now a Disciple of IESVS CHRIST.
            
               To the dispierced IEWES.
            
            The Grace of God the Father, the Peace of Iesus Christ his Sonne, and the Charity of the holy Spirit, be amongst you all, now and euermore. AMEN.
            
               MY deere Father, Mother, Brothers, Sisters, Friends, and Allies, of the seede of Israel, according to the flesh: I professe truly vnto you, and that without dissimulation, my conscience and soule beareth witnesse with me, that I could say with the Apostle Saint Paul, I suffer for you so much affliction in soule, that I could almost desire to bee seperated from Christ for you my Brethren: for you I say, that are of the seed of Israel, you to whom hath beene sent and Prophesied, the glad tydings of the Blessed Messias, promised to our Fore-fathers, Abraham, Isaac, and Iacob, as also vnto holy Dauid, You Brethren of whom according to the flesh, is

borne Iesus Christ, which is God eternally blessed. Amen. Rom. 9.5.
            I doubt not but this my conuersion to the Christian Faith, doth much astonish and afflict you: But my deare Brethren, that you may vnderstand I haue done nothing lightly or without premeditation: But with carefull heede, constant faith, and assurednesse in soule, hauing built my foundation vpon Gods eternall word, which cannot faile; I haue this day manifested to you and the world, my confession of Faith, which if you shall please to reade, though you finde it briefe in regard of my scarsity of time, yet grounded vpon the proofe of the Prophets and Old Testament, verified in the History of the New. God assist you and mee, and may he be so pleased to hasten my returne amongst you my Brethren, that I there may manifest his great mercie and grace to me, and that I may likewise be a light and guide vnto you, to leade you out of that darknesse wherein you are; insomuch that you know not the right hand from the left.
            First, I would entreate you vnderstand, that though I haue vtterly abandoned the Iewish Religion, yet am not become enemie to their persons, nor to the name of Israel, which is now so much the more auaileable into mee, in regard I can call my selfe of the house of Israel, not onely according to the flesh, but principally according to the Spirit.
            Therefore dearely beloued, I thought it fit to giue you some testimony of my charity, thereby to make you partakers of that grace which God hath bestowed on me, plucking mee forth of darknesse and errour, to the light of his holy word, out of the way of death

and destruction, into the way of eternall saluation.
            I know for these things I shall be hated of you, and if it be in your power, persecuted; yet being in your blinde zeale transported, as the Apostle Saint Paul, before he was called to the knowledge of our Lord Iesus Christ, who persecuted those that beleeued in his name. But when that shall happen, may it please God so to strengthen me, that I may as a Christian appeare like one of his, and so suffer for him that suffered and was crucified for me, which I shall account exceeding great gaine.
            And thus farre vnderstand, that all worldly respect whatsoeuer, I cast beneath my feete, and doe vtterly renounce and disobey all Iniunctions which shall be contrary to his seruice, that hath made me of a Saul a Paul; of a Persecuter and Blasphemer of his name, a man readie (by his grace) couragiously to confesse him and his name; that of an enemie hath adopted me a child; for which I cannot sufficiently render thankes: And I beseech him to make you partakers of the same grace and mercie.
            Wherefore (beloued) wash your selues in cleane water, that ye may be cleane, and turne yet from your euils. Alas! how long will ye vexe God? stay for no other Messias then hee that is come, and shall againe vndoubtedly with glory come to iudge both the quick and the dead. Then those eyes shall see him that haue pierced him, and those that cried, Deliuer the Thiefe, and crucifie the iust: Then shall they cry to the hills to fall vpon them, and the mountaines to couer them, but it shall no whit auaile them.
            
               But howsoeuer you haue persecuted the Prince of life; and spilt his innocent blood; yet notwithstanding hee prayed for you, that it would please his Father to pardon you, in regard you knew not what you did: you may be yet restored by him, prouided you will acknowledge him, and leaue to blaspheme his name, and flye from misbeliefe: for God hath not forsaken his people whom hee formerly knew. Beare in minde the calling of the Gentiles, towards whom the Messias turned, being by you reiected, of whom he was borne, and to whom he was promised and sent: Woe be vnto you that are wise in your owne conceites, seeing many things, and taking heede to none; hearing much, and vnderstanding nothing.
            Thinke not (brethren) that I reproachfully write this vnto you, but in charity, and for it is the truth which I will alwayes witnesse vnto you as to my beloued brethren, and better it were that I reprooue you, then God should reproach you with this saying, The Oxe knowes his Owner, the Asse the Manger of his Master, but Israel hath no knowledge, my people hath no vnderstanding. Behold heere the eternall which knocketh at your doore, it is the voyce of the beloued that knockes, saying, Open my sister, my deare, my Doue: Seeke the eternall now when he may be found, call vpon him whilst he is neere: kisse the Sonne left he be angry, and ye perish in the way.
            Thinke with your selues, the dayes are fewe and euill: Redeeme the time, the day of the Lord is at hand, you know not at what houre hee will come, then shall wee not be able to open our mouthes against our Master,

the worke shall not dispute against him that made it.
            Wherefore (deere Brethren) search diligently the Scriptures, take in hand the key of the Kingdome of heauen, the Lord in his mercy will shew you the doore.
            Receiue this in good part and briefely, because of the shortnesse of time that I haue to soiourne here: but if it please God to graunt me the grace, to returne into this Country amongst my brother Christians, after hauing trauailed into mine owne Country, to see those of mine owne Nation, I shall (God assist me) take paines to doe something more amply for your benefit, and the aduancement of your soules health.
            You my Father and Mother, whom I loue equally with mine owne soule: I humbly beseech you in the bowels of Gods mercy, thinke with your selues that you must once come to iudgement, and render an account of all your proceedings, before the King of Kings, holy and blessed, stop not your eares, and be not voide of vnderstanding.
            God which is the Father of our Lord Iesus Christ, be pleased to open the eyes of your vnderstanding, and to manifest vnto you the knowledge of the Messia
                  •
                which hath suffered for our sinnes, and is risen againe for our iustification, and hauing giuen you this grace as vnto me, hee hath strengthened vs together in the same by his holy Spirit, to the end wee may perseuer constantly in the confession of his holy name in this life, and dying in his loue; we may be receiued into his peace, and made pertakers of euerlasting life which

hath beene deerely bought for vs, by the precious blood of our Sauiour Iesus Christ, to whom with the Father, and to the holy Spirit, one onely God eternally blessed, be all glory and praise throughout all worlds. Amen.
            
            
               
                  Your Sonne Daniel Ben Alexander, heretofore a Iew by Religion, but now a Disciple of Iesus Christ.
               
            
         
         
            
            
               In the Name of the Father, of the Sonne, and of the Holy Ghost, one onely GOD Eternally Blessed, AMEN.
            
               I 
               Daniell Sonne of Alexander, borne a IEW, and made Partaker of the Circumcision in the Flesh according to the same. Doe render thankes to GOD, which is the Father of our Lord IESVS CHRIST, that of his Mercy and Grace hee hath brought me to the knowledge, that heretofore I was in the way of Perdition and euerlasting Death, in not hauing knowne the Sauiour of the world IESVS CHRIST the Eternall Sonne of GOD; and now hauing reuealed vnto me by the vertue of his holy Spirit in the reading of his holy Word, that I could not attaine to euerlasting life, vnlesse I were made a Member of his Body, I beleeued that I ought in his Name, and for the health of mine owne soule, to receiue according to his Institution in his holy Church the holy Sacrament of Baptsime, of which, and of the Graces that doe accompany it; hath in diuers places of the Olde Testament beene Prophesied by significant Figures & spoken of in the New Testament in cleare and manifest termes: for Example, God speaking by Ezechiel in the 36. Chap. 25. Vers. saith: Thenwill I poure cleane water vpon you, and you shall bee cleane: yea from all your filthines and from all your Idols will I cleanse you.
            
            
               This figure of Baptisme, likewise is manifested in the 7.th of Genesis, alleadged by St. Peter, chap. 2. vers. 20.21. Which were in time passed, Disobedient, when the long suffering of God wayted in the dayes of Not, while the Arke was preparing, wherein fewe, that is, Eight-soules were saued in the water.
            Vers. 21. Whereof the Baptisme that now is, answering that Figure (which is not a putting away of the filth of the Flesh, but the answer of a good Conscience toward God) saueth vs now also, by the Resurrection of Iesus Christ.
            This very Figure in many other places is presented vnto vs, as Exod. 13.21. and the 14.22. of which the Apostle St. Paul makes mention in the 1. Cor. 10.2. And were all Baptized vnto Moses, in that Cloude, and in that Sea.
            
               Zacharie, in the Name of th' Eternall hath Prophesied of the graces of Baptisme, in the 13. Vers. 1. In that Day there shall bee a Fountaine opened to the house of Dauid, and to the Inhabitants of Ierusalem, for sinne and for vncleannesse.
            And this Fountaine was figured in the 1. of King. 7.3. By the Sea or great Caldron, which Salomon placed in the Temple of God in Ierusalem, which was borne vpon twelue Oxen, figuring the twelue Apostles, which should Preach the Baptisme of Repentance, of which they receiued the Commandement by our Lord IESVS CHRIST, which speakes to them in the 28.th of St. Mathew: Goe therefore, and teach all Nations, Baptizing them in the Name of the Father, and the Sonne, and the Holy Ghost.
            
            The vertue of which Baptisme I verily beleeue to be

powerfull to Saluation, since our Sauiour CHRIST himselfe saith, 16. of St. Marke. Hee that shall beleeue and bee Baptized shall be saued, but hee that shall not beleeue, shall be damned.
            
            And in St. Iohn, Chap. 3. Iesus answered, Verily, verily I say vnto thee, except that a man bee borne of Water and of the Spirit, hee cannot enter into the Kingdome of God.
            
            By these wordes it appeareth cleare, that the Figures in the Olde Testament, are fully accomplished in the New by the searching of Iesus Christ which is the true Lambe of God without any spot, that taketh away the Sinnes of the world. Being also the true promised Messias and Sonne of Dauid, of whom nothing hath beene spoken in the New Testament, which hath not formerly beene Prophesied by Moses and the Prophets. Neither ought wee to looke for any other then he that is ascended into Heauen, euen Iesus Christ, which shall come to Iudge the quicke and the Dead.
            And further examining the particulers of the Messias, touching his Person, Office, Natiuity, Doctrine, Sufferings, Death, Resurrection, and Ascenton, I haue found them all to belong and appertaine to Iesus Christ onely, who is the vndoubted Messias and Sonne of the Eternall God, as appeareth Psal. 22. Vers. 7. Thou art my Sonne this day haue I begotten thee. And it is of him also that is spoken in the 3. of Mathew, This is my beloued Son in whome I am well pleased.
            
            Touching the time of his Birth, and entrance into the world, it is Prophesied in the 49. Chap. of Genesis: The Scepter shall not depart from Iuda, nor a Law-giuer betweene his feete, vntill Shilo come, and the People shall bee gathered vnto him.
            
            
               And in the 24. of Nom. There shall come a Starre out of Iacob, and a Scepter shall rise out of Israell.
            
            Christ is the Sonne of Dauid according to the Flesh, he is the seed of the Woman, as is Prophesied in the 3. of Gen. The seede of the Woman shall bruise the head of the Sespent.
            
            The Messias ought to bee borne of a Virgin, Isaiah, 7. Behold a Virgin shall conceiue and beare a Sonne, and shee shall call his name Emanuell.
            Christ was borne of this Virgin, to whome the Angell speaking (that shee should bee Mother to the Sauiour of the world) said, his Name shall be IESVS. And the Euangelist St. Mathew saith, All this was done that it might bee fulfilled, which was spoken by the Prophet Isaih.
            
            This Messias is true Man, and so likewise true GOD, and beareth Name Iehouah th' Eternall. Ieremiah 23. and the 5. Behold, the dayes come, (saith the Lord) that I will raise vnto Dauid a righteous branch, and a King shall raigne and prosper, and shall execute Iudgement and Iustice in the Earth.
            This could haue relation to none but our Sauiour Christ, who is sprung from Dauid of the Tribe of Iuda, as it hath beene Prophesied.
            So then that the Messias ought to haue come from the Tribe of Iuda, and that at this present no Iew can distinguish the Tribes of Israel one from the other, since they were Captiues in Babilon, which is aboue 2. Thousand yeares, how can they now haue knowledge of the house of Dauid, and consequently their Messias which they looke for?
            This perswadeth mee verily to beleeue, that he that

was borne of the Virgin Mary, proceeded from the royall house of Dauid, as teacheth the holy history, the true Messias of the Tribe of Iuda.
            
            The Messias ought to haue beene borne in Bethelem, as foretold Micah: in the 5. Chap. 2. Vers. And thou Bethlem Ephrathah, art little to bee among the Thousands of Iuda, yet out of thee shall come forth vnto me, hee that shall be the ruler in Israel, whose goings forth haue beene from the Beginning and from Euerlasting.
            Now Bethelem is long since destroyed, and no marke or memory of it remaining; So then it followes, that hee that was borne in Bethelem, to wit, Iesus Christ must bee the true Messias, according to the Prophets.
            The Messias ought to come to Ierusalem in the time of the Second Temple, as spake Agge. 2.8. Zach. 9.9. Mala. 3.1. Iesus Christ came in the time of the second Temple, as the Gospell maketh mention, which assuredly perswadeth me, to beleeue him to bee the true Messias to vs promised.
            And now seeing that Ierusalem is destroyed, and the Temple likewise destroyed, so that no Stone remaineth vpon another.
            It is meere folly for the Iewes to looke for any other Messias aboue 1500. after the Destruction, then he that came at the time Prophesied and appointed, and which shall come againe to Iudge the quicke and the Dead, as it hath beene taught by the Apostles of our Lord IESVS CHRIST.
            Item the Messias ought to haue taught a Doctrine of Grace and Mercy, whereas Moses gaue the Law, and denounced a Curse against the transgressors thereof, this is that which Esa, Prophesied in the 
                  ••
               . Chap. Hee

hath sent mee to Preach good tidings vnto the poore, to binde vp the broken hearted, to Preach Liberty to the Captiues, &c.
            
            The Messias, ought to bee that great Prophet promised in the 18.th of Deut: I will raise them vp a Prophet from among their brethren like vnto thee, &c.
            
            The Messias ought to worke Miracles, as saith Isa: Chap. 35. Then shall the eyes of the Blinde bee lightned, and the eares of the Deafe bee opened, then shall the Lame man leape as an Hart. and the Dumbe mans tongue shall sing.
            
            The Messias ought to bee a high Priest, Psal. 110. vers. 4. The Lord sware and will not repent, thou art a Priest for euer, after the 
                     ••
                  der of Melchizedeck. And the Apostle St. Paul applies that, to our Sauiour Iesus Christ, in his Epistle to the Hebrewes.
            
            The Messias ought to suffer and Dye, as the Prophet Daniel teacheth vs in the 4. Chap. of his Prophesie, the 26. Vers. And after Three score and two weekes shall Messiah be slaine, &c. He ought then to haue Dyed but not for his sinne, for he was without sinne, and called by Daniel, the holy of holyes, he hath done wrong to no man, nor hath any deceit beene found in his mouth.
            The manner of his Death hath beene foretolde by Dauid, Psal. 22. They haue pierced my hands and my feete.
            
            And Zacha. 12.10. And they shall looke vpon mee whome they haue pierced, and they shall lament for him as one mourneth for his onely Sonne, and bee sory for him as one is sory for his first borne.
            
            And speaking of the Person of Iesus Christ in the Apocalips, it is said of him; That when hee shall come in the Clouds all eyes shall see him. Namely those that haue pierced him.
            The Messias ought to suffer for our Sinnes, to take

vpon him our infirmities and miseries, by his sicknesse to giue vs health, and to indure himselfe all reproach and disquiet to bring vs peace. As saith Isa. in the 53. Chap. very amply. Which is likewise aleadged by the Euangelists in diuers other places.
            The Messias ought to bee our high Priest, not that hee offered the Blood of Beeues and Rammes, but himselfe for the Sinnes of the people, as saith Isa. in the 53. Chap. Hee shall make his soule an Offehing for Sinne. And St. Paul to the Hebrews the 9.th Chap. saith. Neither by the blood of Goates and Calues, but by his owne Blood, entred hee once into the Holy place, and obtained Eternall redemption for vs.
            
            The Messias ought to bee an Intercessor for Sinners and transgressors, Isa. 53.12. So did our Sauiour Iesus Christ doe in the 23. of St. Luke, hee saith; (praying for his persecutors) Father pardon them they knowe not what they doe.
            
            The Messias after his Suffering ought not to remaine amongst the Dead, but to rise againe, Dauid fore-speaking of him, saith in the 16. Psal. For thou wilt not leaue my soule in the Graue, Neither wilt thou suffer thine holy one to see corruption: The time of his Resurrection was figured by Ionas, and our Sauiour doth apply it to himselfe, in St. Mathew, 12.40. For as Ionas was three dayes and three nights in the Whales belly; so shall the Sonne of man bee three dayes and three nights in the heart of the Earth.
            
            The Messias was not promised to bee a King or temporall Prince, or to haue an earthly Dominion, as the Iewes imagine, that thinke hee should come accompanyed with an Earthly glory. But his Kingdome was foretolde to bee Spirituall, and his comming into this

world full of humility, ignominy, and contempt.
            His eternall and spirituall Kingdome was foretold by Daniel, his Kingdome is an eternall Kingdome, and in the second of Daniel and the 44. And in the dayes of these Kings. shall the God of heauen set vp a Kingdome, which shall neuer be destroyed, and this Kingdome shall not be giuen to another people, but it shall breake and destroy all these Kingdomes, and it shall stand for euer. And the Angell Gabriell speaking to the holy Virgin Mother of our Sauiour Iesus Christ, saith, That hee shall raigne ouer the house of Iacob eternally, and there shall be no end of his raigne. Then this Iesus which is come in the fulnesse of time, is the Messias, which now raignes ouer a spirituall not temporall Kingdome, and there shines in glorie, who contrariwise in the earthly Kingdome was contemptible. First, hee was reputed borne from Parents of meane condition, foulded in cloutes, laid in a Manger, in a loathsome Stable, Luk. 2.7. For his familiar company poore Fishermen, knew no place where to lay his head, he was mock'd, iniur'd, persecuted strucken, they haue strucken the King of Israel vpon the cheeke with a Rod, then wisht they him to prophesie, Mathew 26.68. Prophesie vnto vs, O Christ, who is hee that smote thee. His defection was such that Isaiah saith of him, chap. 53. he hath neither forme nor beauty, when we shall see him there shall be no forme that we should desire him: and Dauid in the 22. Psalme, calleth him a worme and not a man, the shame of men, and the contempt of the people: And verse the 7. All they that see me haue mee in derision, they make a mowe and nod the head, which is likewise verified in the Gospell. Our Sauiour speaking of himselfe, saith, His Kingdome is not of this world,

which though it be to them a scandall yet it might suffice, the Iewes that hoped and yet doe vainely hope for a reestablishment of the temporall Kingdome of Israel: and which beleeue that the Messias should come for them only, and not for the Gentiles, altogether against that which Ezekiel speaketh, Chap. 37.22. I will make them one people in the land, vpon the mountaines of Israel, and one King shall be King to them all, and they shall be no more two peoples, neither be deuided henceforth any more into two Kingdomes. And our Sauiour Christ in Saint Iohn Chap. 10. calles them one Shepheard and one flocke. And the Apostle to the Ephe. 2. who saith, Christ Iesus hath made both one, and hath broken downe the pertition wall.
            Now Christ hauing finished and suffered all things, that we haue vnderstood to haue beene foretold to be done by the Messias: we assuredly beleeue, that hee is the true Messias, which not onely came in the flesh, and in that suffered death, but hath triumphed ouer death, and the paines and punishments due to our sinnes, and after his resurrection ascended into heauen, there to be a Mediator for vs, Rom. 8.33. Heb. 9.24. And Saint Iohn saith, If any man haue sinned, we haue an aduocate with the Father, namely Iesus Christ the iust 
                  〈◊〉
                hee that made the propitiation for our sinnes, and also of all the world.
            Applying my selfe then in the search 
                  〈◊〉
                reading of the Old Testament, I know that the 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  
                must be come long since, seeing that the Scepter hath been taken from Iuda many hundred yeeres past, as it was foretold in 49. Gen. seeing the 
                  〈◊〉
                ore and ten wee
                  ••
                of Daniel, which make foure hundred, 
                  〈◊◊〉
                yeares, be long since passed three times and better, seeing

the predictions of Messias doe iumpe with the time of our Sauiour Christ in the Gospell.
            I am bound to confesse from the bottome of my soule, as my conscience doth beare me witnesse, that Iesus the Sonne of the blessed Virgin Mary, is the true Messias promised to the Patriarchs, Abraham, Isaac, and Iacob, that he is come in the flesh, that hee is the true Sonne of God, true God, and true man, who died for our sinnes, and rose againe for our iustification, and that there is no saluation but through him.
            I receiue the Writings of the Euangelists and Apostles, and them, beleeue to be the true word of God, as are also those of Moyses and the Prophets, and that the doctrines of the one and the other, are to instruct men in the true faith, and consequently, to bring them by the grace of God, to the inheritance of the Kingdome bought and purchased by Iesus Christ, in whom hee that beleeues, shall be saued, as he himselfe teacheth in the 6. of Saint Iohn, He that beleeues in me shall haue euerlasting life: Now, for as much as the Christian Church is blemished with many Schismes and Heresies. I render hearty thankes to God, that of his mercy hee hath brought me to the resolution to demand my Baptisme, and ioyne me to the confession of the faith & doctrine of the Catholique, Apostolique, & reformed Church, which I beleeue onely to be of the Hierusalem, which is aboue, which is mother of vs all, Gal. 4.26.
            And in this place I thinke my selfe bound to manifest vnto you, the admirable meanes, though weake in appearance, by which it pleased God to draw mee out of the seruitude of Iudaisme.
            
               
               The manner how he came to be conuerted.
               SOme foure yeares since, or there abouts, being at Prague (the capitall Citie of the Kingdome of Bohemia) where there are many Iewes inhabitants,
               Walking vp and downe the Citie; a very poore Scholler altogether vnknowne to mee, makes vp towards me, and being met, with an earnest looke fixt in my face, hee demaunded of me some small charitable almes: at the first I refused to giue him any thing (and I now freely confesse) my reason was because he was a Christian, nor did onely denie him, but for that cause inwardly reuil'd him. Hee looking vpon me, and shaking his head, said, Master reuile mee not, but if your charity be cold, lintreate of you to buy this booke of me: at which time other Christians gathering about vs, and hearing me so churlish to him, began likewise to talke, for feare of whom I threw him some small 
                     〈◊〉
                  , and tooke his booke with an euill will, for I then said, I take no delight in any of the Christians Bookes; which he hearing, said, Curteously, Sir I pray you read it, and if you carefully reade it, it may shew you the way to your saluation: at which I smiling went ioy way, and comming home, as carelesly threw it into a Chest, not thinking further of it.
               But some twelue moneth after searching for something that was in that Chest, this Booke presents itselfe to my view, which at first I had vtterly forgot, nor could I call to minde whence or where I had it, but suddenly opening of it, and looking into it, (with no religious intent as then) I espied 
                     〈…〉
                  
                  
Prophets draue me into a curiosity and desire to reade. Then proceeding, I found it to be a New Testament, when comparing some places of it to others of the Old Testament, I was on the suddaine so sensibly toucht in soule, that I resolued to reade it through: and after a while reading, God I humbly thanke him by little and little opened the eyes of my vnderstanding, so that I began to doubt that I and those of my Nation were in some error: of which to be resolued, I addressed my selfe to some of the most learned amongst vs in Prague, desiring of them to expound vnto mee some of those places which I had read in the Prophets, still concealing that I had a New Testament: which had they knowne, I might haue beene rudely handled by them: Their answeres gaue me no satisfaction, but on the contrary bred in me more difficulties, and if I pressed them to any materiall point, they then answered me, Sthouma: that is, they are things conceal'd; but being desirous to know those things which were conceal'd to them and my selfe also, I departed from Prague, and tooke my way into Poland, hoping from those Rabbies there to haue had more instructions; but their answeres were all one: And moreouer, I was by them inioyned to silence. Then continuing my reading, and conferring the New and Old Testament together, neglecting the Talmud, wherein before I spent my time in vaine, I became resolued, vtterly to forsake the Iewish Religion, and to become Christian: for which cause I retired my selfe to Damsik, where Iewes are prohibited to liue, and from thence I embarked for Amsterdam, and so was resolued to goe for Rome, which Citty I had heard to be the Mother Church of Christendome, and that there

the Pope caused Sermons to be made weekely for the conuersion of Iewes. Thus to bring my soule to rest, I trauailed my body, and passing on, intending to take my course through France and so to Rome: My iourney was by accident stayed, God in his pitty not suffering me to fall from one euill into a worse: for by the way hauing a desire to conuerse with some religious man that could speake the high Dutch or low, and hoping by that meanes to get some letters of commendations, wherewith I might haue presumed of a welcome in Rome, and meeting with one by chance after Communication, and that I had directly made knowne what I was, as also what I desired to be, he forthwith gaue me counsell to be Baptized, which I with some time of pausing refused: but he desiring to know my reason, I gaue him this, that I would know my foundation ere I began to build, and likewise haue more sound knowledge in Christianity, ere I altogether forsooke that faith that I was bred in.
               He willing to doe me curtesie, conferred with mee touching many and mayne points of his Religion, which I could by no meanes beleeue: whereupon demaunding of him, if the Church of Rome taught the same Doctrine: he answered me, yes, it doth, I finding it disagreeing both to the New and Old Testament, could not imagine that to be the true Church which taught such false Doctrine.
               I then more troubled in minde, intended to finde out some Minister of the Reformed Church, whom hauing sought, I found (Gods name be blessed for it) the heauenly foode, the spirituall Manna, of which hee that feedeth, shall neuer more hunger.
               
                  And heere (beloued) giue mee leaue according to promise, to giue you my reasons for forsaking the Church of Rome.
               
               First, for that contrary to the expresse will of God in the second Commandement, Exod. 20. They make to themselues grauen Images, they prostrate themselues before them, and worship them, giuing them the glory belonging to God onely, who saith: I am the eternall, that is my name, I will not giue my glory to another, nor my praise to grauen Images.
               2. Because they doe adore and worship others then God, contrary to the saying of our Lord Iesus Christ, Math. 4.10. Thou shalt worship the Lord thy God, and him onely shalt thou serue.
               
               3. For that they beleeue that they may be saued by the name of other creatures, contrary to that, Acts 4. so spoken by Saint Peter, touching our Sauiour Christ. Neither is there saluation in any other: for among men there is giuen none other name vnder heauen, whereby wee must be saued.
               
               4. Because they take from the Merites of our Sauiour in his Death and Passion, and teach that men are iustified by their owne workes. Gal. 2, 21. For if righteousnes bee by the Law, then Christ dyed without cause. And in the 16. Knowe that a man is not Iustified by the workes of the Law, but by the Faith of Iesus Christ. And Ephas. 2.9. Not of workes, least any man should boast himselfe.
               5. Because in the Church of Rome, the men of the Church as they say, haue power to forgiue Sinnes, But God speakes, Isa. 43. I euen I am hee, that putteth away thine iniquitias for mine owne sake, and will not remember thy Sinnes.
               
               
                  6. Because the Church of Rome confesseth, with the Christian reformed Church, That our Sauiour tooke Flesh onely of the Virgin, and yet make they to themselues out of Bread, a Iesus Christ of Flesh as they say, to bee their dayly Sacrifice.
               7. Because the Church of Rome offendeth, in saying that they Sacrifice the Sonne of God for the sinnes of the Liuing and the Dead, against that which St. Paul saith to the Heb. 9.14. which through the Eternall spirit offered himselfe without spot to God.' And 10.14. For with one offring hath hee consecrated for euer, them that are Sanctified.
               
               8. Because in the Romish Church, they haue taken from the Sacrament of Baptisme, which is for the remission of Sinnes in Iesus Christ, and teach in the same Church a remission of Sinnes, by Fastings, Pilgrimages, and the like, which I neither beleeue nor finde warranted by any place of Scripture.
               9. Because in the Church of Rome, they holde some Meates (created good by God) for some certaine times poluted and vncleane, against the saying of St. Paul 1. Tim. 4.4. For euery Creature of God is good, and nothing ought to bee refused, if it bee receiued with Thankesgiuing.
               
               10. Because the Church of Rome prohibiteth people to Marry, which God hath not forbidden, and St. Paul cals that a Doctrine of Deuils▪ 1
                     •
                   
                  Tim. 4.3. Forbidding to Marry, and commanding to abstaine from Mea
                        •
                     es which God hath Created, &c.
               
               11. Because in the Church of Rome, they teach other Purgings then by the Blood of Iesus Christ, against that which is spoken, in 
                     •
                  . Heb. 12. By his owne Blood entred hee once into the Holy plac
                        •
                      and obtained Eternall

remission for vs. And Iohn. 1.7. The blood of Iesus Christ cleaseth vs from all Sinnes.
               
               12. Because I beleeue a man ought not to worship what hee Eateth, nor to eate that hee worshippeth, nor that any thing wee eate can bee God; This appeareth vnto mee not onely impious but horrible in the Church of Rome, which teacheth that a mortall Man eateth his Creator.
               These reasons with many more hindred my Iourney to Rome, or to take my Baptisme from that Church or Ministers thereof, who teach, thinges so repugnant to the worde of God.
               Neither would I ioyne my selfe to the Anabaptists, my reason was; Because they deny the true humane Body of our Sauiour Iesus Christ, saying, hee tooke no part of the Flesh of the Virgin Mary; But onely past through her Body as water through a conduit, without participating of any of the substance. And so consequently sinning against the Article of our Beliefe, which saith that hee was borue of the Virgin Mary, so that taking away his Humanity, they make him not alike vnto vs in all thinges, Sinne excepted: as the Apostle hath auerred him.
               I therefore vtterly renouncing all Impieties, and all Doctrines contrary to the word of God, imbrace the holy Christian Faith, to liue and dye according to Gods holy word, not the traditions of men. For which cause, I know I shall bee abandoned of Father, Mother, Brothers, Sisters, and hated of all my Nation for the Blessed name of Christ, who hath Prophesied, that the Father shall bee against the Sonne, and the Mother against the Daughter.
               
                  But that threatning of his doth astonish mee, when he saith; Hee that shall loue Father or Mother more then me, is not worthy of mee, and hee that shall deny me before men, I will deny him before my Father which is in Heauen.
               My soules desire is for those of my Nation, that it would please God in the bowels of his great mercy, to take from them the vale that hideth the Truth from them, to open their eyes, to change their blinde zeale which is without vnderstanding, and to bee as mercifull to them, as to me hee hath bin, to the end they bee not condemned before the Throne of his Maiesty, that they may cease to Blaspheme his holy Name! O redeeme them O Lord, that are the lost Sheepe of Israel, for thou hast not forsaken thy people for euer; There are amongst them many that haue not bended their knees to Baal.
               
               Wherefore O Lord conuert them, that are to be conuerted, not looking vpon them in thy Iustice, but in thy great Mercy, for thine owne sake, for thine owne promise, for thy Couenants sake, to the end thy Name may be euerlasting Blessed. Amen.
               
               Welbeloued Christians, whome I beleeue to be the assembly of the Faithfull, and of the house of God, I am heartily sorry that I cannot in your owne Tongue, make knowne to you this my Confession, I haue writ it in the Siriacke, and it is translated in my name into your Language. I protest, not onely before you, but before God, that knowes the secrets of all hearts, and heares this my protestation, that his Grace assisting me, I will liue and dye a Christian, and so bee it vnto me in his great day of Iudgement, as I beleeue what I confesse

before his holy Assembly, whome I humbly beseech that in Christian charity they would receiue me for a member of them, as one of the Disperced sheepe of the house of Israell, and that my name may bee written in your memories, as I verily beleeue God hath registered it, in his Booke of Eternall Life. Amen.
               
               
                  ROM. 11. Vers. 26.27.28.
                  26. And so all Israel shall bee saued, as it is written, The deliuerer shall come of Sion, and shall turne away the vngodlinesse from Iacob.
                  27. And this is my Couenants to them, when I shall take away their Sinnes.
                  28. As concerning the Gospell, they are enemies for your sakes: But as touching the Election, they are beloued for the Fathers sakes.
               
               This Confession being thus made, the said Daniel was Catechized by the Minister, who answered in his owne person, as followeth.
            
         
         
            
            A Catechisme.
            
               Question. 
               WHAT Demaund you in the Christian Church?
            
               Answer. I demaund the holy Baptisme for remission of Sinnes.
            
               Quest. In name of whome will you be Baptized?
            
               Answ. In the Name of the Father, and of the Sonne, and of the holy Ghost.
            
               Quest. Doe you Beleeue that IESVS CHRIST, is the Eternall Sonne of God, true God, and true Man?
            
               Answ. I doe beleeue he is.
            
               Quest. Beleeue you him to bee the Messias promised in the Olde Testament?
            
               Answ, Yes, I beleeue it.
            
               Quest. Doe you vnderstand the Confession of Faith in the Christian Church?
            
               Answ. Yes.
            
               Quest. Repeat it?
            
               Answ. I Beleeue in God the Father Almighty, &c.
            
               Quest. Doe you promise to remaine constant in this Confession all the Dayes of your life.
            
               Answ. Yes, the grace of God assisting me.
            
               Quest. Doe you renounce the Iewish Religion, their Ceremonies and errours as also all their heresies?
            
               
               Answ. I renounce them with all my heart.
            
               Quest. Doe you receiue the new Testament, as a fulfilling of the Olde, and the Doctrine of the Euangelists and Apostles for the worde of God, as also those of the Prophets?
            
               Answ. Yes, so I beleeue.
            
               Quest. Doe you renounce the World, the Flesh, and the Deuill?
            
               Answ. I doe.
            
               God of his Grace make you able to fulfill all this for his Glory, and your owne soules health, Amen.
            
               There is more Ioy in Heauen for one conuerted sinner; then for Ninety and nine, that neuer went astray.
            
            This Confession of Faith, was made in the presence of the Christian reformed Church of Roane, the 12.th day of Aprill. 1621. at Queuilly.
            
            Witnesses hereunto, wee whose Names are hereunder written, in whose presence it was done.
            
               
                  Samuel de Lecherpiere. Iohn Maximilian de Langle. Peeter Erondell. Ministers of the Worde of God in the Reformed Church of Roane.
               
            
            FINIS.
         
      
   