
      
         
            
            To the honorable Aſſembly of the Commons houſe in Parliament.
            The humble Petition of Dame Grace Darcie widow, mother, and one of the Committes of the body and lands of Edward Darcie Eſquire, his Maieſties Warde.
            Humbly ſhewing,
            THat whereas his Maieſtie by Indenture vnder the Seale of the Court of Wards, dated xxiij die Iunij Anno xvij Iac. Reg. Angl. did in expreſſe words grant vnto the Petitioner, and one George Wilmore Eſquire, the other Committee of the ſaid Ward (amongſt other lands) the Mannor of Sutton, in Com. Surr. and the Advowſon and next preſentation to the Parſonage thereunto belonging.
            Which Parſonage became voide in Auguſt 1621. and the Petitioner (ſo ſoone as ſhe could haue notice thereof) preſented a Clerke thereto, but the Ordinary could not admit him, for that the Church was full, by reaſon of the Lord Keepers preſenting of one Doctor Graunt vnto it, one of the Prebends of Weſtm. who was Examiner alſo in his Lordſhips houſe, who had cloſely got his Inſtitution, and his Induction alſo in the Church of Sutton aforeſaid; ſo the Petitioner was conſtrained to ſend to the Curſitor of Surrey for a Quare Impedit, her onely courſe to auoide this vſurpation of the ſaid Doctor; but the Curſitor refuſed to make the ſaid Writ, for that he had a Caueat vnder the Lord Keepers hand to ſtay the ſame.
            Whereupon the Petitioner preferred ſundry petitions to his Lordſhip to recall his direction, and to giue way to the Writ, but he ſtill denied the ſame; only in the time of the laſt Parliament (in anſwer to one of her petitions) he ſeemed willing to be certified by two of his Maieſties learned Councell, whether or no it belonged to her, and the other Committee in this caſe to preſent; which anſwer ſhe ſhewed to his Maieſties Attorney and Sollicitor generall, and made choice of them to conſider of the matter, and at length (though with great charge) by her Counſell ſo plainly inſtructed them, that they told her they conceiued it to be her right, and had ſignified as much to his Lordſhip, and were perſwaded his Lordſhip would in no wiſe long ſtay the ſaid Writ. But all this proued but to delay the Petitioner, till the diſſolution of the Parliament, and waſting of the ſix moneths, in which time only by the Common law (as his Lordſhip well knew) ſhe had time to preſent; yet before that time was quite ſpent, ſhe ſent againe to the Curſitor for the Writ, who anſwered, he had made it, and offered it to the ſeale, but ſtill his Lordſhip had reiected it.
            And further, ſhe being vnwilling to leaue any meanes vnattempted, whereby to preſerue the Wards right, in February following, in a wet and cold ſeaſon, to her further charge and neglect of her health, alſo iourneyed to Royſton, and by humble petition acquainted his Maieſtie with the extremitie of her caſe, and wrong done to her by his Lordſhip, who graciouſly accepted the ſame; and being moued therewith, gaue direction for the writing of a letter to his Lordſhip, with the petition incloſed, which was deliuered into his Lordſhips hands▪ howbeit hee deferred to anſwer the ſame.
            Now foraſmuch as the preſentation is ſo wrongfully wreſted from the Petitioner, and the very gate of Iuſtice (which ought to all, and alwayes be open) ſhut againſt her, by being denied the originall Writ of Quare Impedit in ſo iuſt a caſe, which Writ is free to all his Maieſties ſubiects to ſu
                  •
                out (haue they right or no right,) and ſeeing ſhe hath done her owne vtmoſt endeuor to haue procured the ſame in due time, but by the might of the Lord Keeper was hindred and oppoſed, and denied all benefit of the Common law, contrary to many the good and ancient lawes of this kingdome: ſo that now not only the Petitioner is preiudiced in her preſent preſentation, but the Ward alſo for euer in his Inheritance, for that he claimeth the ſame as by deſcent from his Grandfather, who was a purchaſer of the ſaid Mannor and Parſonage, and no auoidance ſithence happening, neither Quare Impedit, Aſſize of Darrain preſentment, nor writ of right of Advowſon will at any time hereafter lie.
            Wherefore her moſt humble ſuite to this Honorable Senate is, that their wiſedomes would fauorably be pleaſed to take notice of her cauſe, (conſidering it may be the caſe of many the Nobilitie and Gentrie of the Kingdome) and thereupon giue ſuch reliefe, as may be as well for the righting of her in her preſent preſentation, as the Ward in his Inheritance, as alſo make ſuch prouiſion for the generall ill conſequences growing thereby, as ſhall be moſt agreeable to honor, iuſtice, and that high truſt, which the whole Kingdome hath worthily repoſed in them.
            And ſeeing all thoſe that were heretofore of Councell with the Petitioner in this caſe, are now of this Honourable Houſe, ſhe deſireth that Sir Henry Yeluerton, and Maſter Stone of London, may be aſſigned to be of her Councell herein.
         
      
   