
      
         
            
            
            
               D. BANCROFTS RASHNES
INRAYLING
AGAINST THE CHVRCH
OF SCOTLAND, NOTED IN
AN ANSWERE TO A LETTER
of a worthy person of England, and
some reasons rendred, why the
answere thereunto hath
not hitherto come
foorth.
            By I. D. a brother of the sayd
Church of Scotland.
            EX MVLTIS PAVCA.
            AT EDINBVRGH
PRINTED BY ROBERT VVAL|
DE-GRAVE. ANNO. 1590.
         
      
      
         
            
            
            A PROOFE OF D. BANCROFTS
RASHNES AGAINST
THE CHVRCH
OF SCOTLAND.
            
               MEN of anie sound iudgemente
(good Sir) that
hard or read that declamation
made at Paules
Crosse the 9. of Februarie,
1588. in time of
Parlament, by RICHARD
BANCROFT, D. of Diuinity, and chaplaine,
&c, (as he will needs be styled) and
afterward enlarged by him, and set forth
in print, may easily perceiue that (small
regard had to godly edifiyng, by the right
cutting of that worthy text of Scripture.
Beleeue not euerie Spirit, &c. 1. IOHN. 4.
1. which then hee tooke to entreate) he
made the whol drift of his speach, to serue
his intended turne, for a bitter inuection
against the godlie brethren of Englande,
who vrge Reformation of that Churche,
and chiefly, the remoouing of that heauie

bondage of Antichristian gouernment by
loftie Lordes, wrongfully called Bishops,
(an hurtfull relicke of Romish confusion)
& restoring in the place thereof, the ioynt
administration of Christian Discipline by
the Ministers and Elders of the Churche,
which is most clearely prooued by them
and others, to be established by the word
of GOD, to continue to the comming of
the Lord Iesus Christ: whose godly endeuours,
when for a while he hath laboured
to improoue, after his maner, hee leaueth
the matter in question at last altogeather,
and setteth himself against theyr persons,
and trauaileth with tooth and naile (as
they say) to bring them into extreame hatred
with the supreme Magistrate, as men
who by this their new gouernment (so it
pleaseth him to speake of it) intend no les
matter then hie Treason and rebellion, by
ouerthrowing her Majesties authority in
Ecclesiasticall causes, and highly derogating
thereby, to her supreamacie in that
case, to the apparant indangering of her
person and state in the end, except good
order bee taken with the matter in time:
Then the which, what can bee more odiously
affirmed, and more woorthy of extreme

punishment, if it be true.
            But how doth he prooue all this geare
I pray you? euen from his owne feare forsooth,
which riseth vpon his falsly coniectured
suspicions, without al groundes of
truth, to wit, that as outlandish meanes &
practises haue bene traiterous and rebellious,
in erecting and establishing of this
new gouernement (as he speaketh) so hee
feareth, that they, who so exactly, and
with such hoat persuit, follow the outlandish
preceptes in this case, will fall to the
same meanes in England, pag. of his book
83. 84. and least his credite should come
in question, for abusing his auditors with
vntruthes in this matter, he wil not seeme
to speake any thing without his warrand:
and therefore finding nothing to charge
the good breethren at hoame withall in
this case: (such is the mercy of GOD toward
them, that the very aduersarie himselfe,
seeking matter of accusation against
them, can finde no hole in their coat, doe
his best, but by his vnwilling silence, is
compelled, in a manner, to iustifie their
dewtifull modestie, in seeking Reformation
hitherto.) Not being able then I say,
to finde any thing against the brethren of

Englande in this case (for otherwise they
shoulde haue heard of it, ye may bee sure)
he raungeth abroad, and as a stranger curious
in an other Commonweale, making
choise, especially of Scotland, hee setteth
vpon it with al his maine, assuring himself
of sure proof of his purpose from thence,
Pag. 72. In doing whereof, as he most outragiously
vpbraideth our whole Ministerie,
& Christian Discipline of our church,
with a cartful of calumneis, vtered against
them both: So he cannot refrain himselfe
from most reprochfull slaundering of the
K. Majestie himselfe, as after shal be seen,
and disdaineful contemning of the whole
inhabitants of the land. A perrilous practise
(whose Chaplaine so euer hee be) against
the happie amitie between the two
Realmes, especially now, in these daungerous
daies, wherein our common peace is
so highly indangered, aswel by the domesticque
male-contens and conspirators at
home, as by the forraine detected enemy
abroad: good men in the meane time pillers,
as it were, and chiefe intertainers
thereof, daily waxing fewer and fewer in
both the lands.
            Neuerthelesse, so egar is the man in the

matter, that before hee will not bring his
stick to the fire, he will not spare to speake
euil, euen, of those things which he knoweth
not, and verye boldelye, though most
rashly, builde vppe an vglie heape of most
slanderous accusations against our sayde
Church, and that vpon the false testimonies
of the friuelous reports of other mē,
and chiefly of two, the very bare naming
of whom, where they are knowne, is sufficient
ynough of it selfe, to discredit whatsoeuer
is alleadged in their names: For as
touching the former of them, corruptlie
and falslie called Bishop of S. Androis,P. Adamson it
is much better that the legend of his leud
life bee buried in eternall obliuion, then
that Christian eares should bee polluted
with the vnsauorie mention thereof. Although
it is not hard to gesse, the whole
course of his proceedings (as a Lyon may
bee knowen by his clawes) by one spe
               
                  •
               iall
action. For what will that man be ashamed
to doe, that durst father his owne
forgerie vppon the Lords lieuetenant the
K. Majestie himselfe, and that in a matter
of no lesse importance, then the declaration
of the meaning of some acts of Parliament,
which howbeit it was but his own

declaration (as his Majestie hath plainely
witnessed by his own hand writ yet extant
to be seene) and not the Kings. Yet durst
he bee bolde to giue it out in the Kinges
name, as though, hee had beene the verie
vndouted author therof: If this be not to
play the falsarie forger, & that in the hiest
degree, let the Chaplain himself be judge.
            But here hee will replie, that this is but
our Ministers affirmation (who saith hee,
page 75. dare say what they list.) Otherwise,
as the declaration is the Kings: so,
as for the King, he is not altered. Ictus piscator
sapit, &c. Whereby he will not only
haue that counterfeit and bastard declaration
bound on the Kinges backe, whether
he will or not: But before it shall not
be so, he dare be bold, in the same page aboue
cited, to charge his Majestie with
deepe dissimulation, while in effect, he affirmeth,
that howbeit the king by his writing,
speaking, and actions, would seeme
to approoue the present exercise of that
same discipline, which so flatly is condemned
in that foresaid declaration: yet hee
doth not approue it in hart, because (saith
the Chaplaine) hee is not altered, to wit,
from that thing which he would haue him

to haue set downe in that declaration, flat
contrary to his present practise, allowing
it after al the waies foresaid. In the which
saying, hee necessarily dooth implie deepe
dissimulation to be in his Majestie, while
hee will haue him to condemne that in
heart, which in deed so manifestly he doth
allow: let it be judged then, whether it be
our ministers that speak as they list, or he.
            It had become his person and place to
haue spoken & written, at the least, more
reuerently of his Majestie, how vncharitablie
so euer hee had judged of him in his
mind: yea, charitie would haue made him
thinke with himselfe (if there had beene a
sponke thereof within him) that nowe being
of perfect age, and yeres of discretion,
he is christianlie mooued in singlenesse of
hart, by his auctority to approue that christian
discipline, which nowe he cleerely seeth
to be so well warranted by the worde
of God, which perhaps in his minority &
none age (being misled by crafty men) he
did not so perfitly vnderstand. But let not
his maiestie, nor any prince, looke for any
better dealing at the handes of any of his
coat, when their honor, & these mens profites
come into their way to be ballanced.
            
               
But God be praised, it hath pleased his
maiestie, not to winke at this malapert calumny,
but to note it with a coale, to their
confusion that allowed of that lye, while
by his owne hande writ, set downe in the
margent of BANCROFTS book, page foresaid,
iust ouer aboue these his most impudent
assertions. For the K. he is not alte|
red: Ictus Piscator sapit. his crown & their
soueraignty will not agree together, most
plainely hee declareth the singlenes of his
hart in this behalf, flat cōtrary to these impudent
assertions in the words following.
            MY SPEAKING, VVRITING, AND
ACTIONS, VVERE AND ARE EVER
ONE, VVITHOVT DISSEMBLING,
OR BEARING VP AT ANY TIME,
VVHAT EVER I THOVGHT.
            Whereby, as he purgeth him selfe of al
dissembling in times past, so hee protesteth,
that his speaking, writing, and actions
in approuing the present exercise of Discipline,
are fully agreeing to his thought &
minde, and therefore hee concludeth in
these wordes following.
            
               Ergo CASTS THE LIBEL, nequid asperius.
            
            Which is as much to say, as, wherefore
the D. assertions are vntrue, to vse no

rougher tearmes, which after his accustomed
maner, is subscribed as followeth:
            I. R. That is, Iacobus Rex.
            
            Which wordes vttered in Scottish after
this sorte, if the Chaplaine shall goe about
to misconstrue, or wrangle from this his
true meaning, his M. hath faithfully promised
to giue him such a categoricke, and
simple answer by a plain lie in round english,
as shall make him, and al his maintainers
in this cause, to be ashamed that euer
they medled with this matter. Thus god
recompenseth the foolish, while hee maketh
deceite to returne into the harte of
them that forge euil.
            And touchinge that truthles TVRINVS,
of whome the Chaplain had the paterne
of this pagean: he is presently as far
out of his maiesties fauour (let the Bishopists
of England trust the intelligence giuen
by him to them of the contrary, so
much as they lift) as euer before he semed
to be in it. But whether he shal receaue the
like recompense in the end, that that his
predecessor did, at the the handes of that
worthy emperor Alexander Seuerus, while
being fastened to a stake, the cryer stoode
thus crying to the people, smoke he solde,

and with smoke he is punished, it resteth
to his maiesties discretion to consider.
            But yet I thinke that soe the Chaplaine
will not let goe his holde: but wil alledge
that in noe wise hee is to bee blamed for
building vppon the testimony of this his
author, in that declaration at least (what
euer the man be otherwise) seeing, so publickly
& vniuersally, in a maner, it was receiued
by many of his betters, for the K.
owne declaratiō, in so much, yt it was printed
again, & reprinted with a most odious
preface at London, without any controlement,
in so far as it cōcerned vs, red, & remarked
diligētly by many, & vigilantly insinuated
to the view of som chief personages
of the state, who were made so to like
of it, & to thinke it to be of truth, like to
som new gospel, that som, not of the most
inferior of such, whoe are called children
of the most high amonge them, haue not
spared, as we heare, to take boldnes therby
of late, in their publict Iudiciary trials
reprochfully, to vpbraid our countrimen,
in the persons of such as were tried before
them, comparing them to Scottish men,
who when the K. proclaimed a feast, wold
needes haue a fast, or contrariwise, when

the K. wold haue a feast, they proclaimed
a fast, alluding to that false narration, touching
the banketting of the French Ambassadour,
set downe in that counterfait
declaration. And last of al, for the perpetual
triumphing memory thereof against
vs, it was insert, worde for worde, in the
Chronicle of England, cōpiled by HOLINSHED,
and published to the posteritie in
print. To the which I answer, that as the
multitude of offenders authoriseth not
an errour: so he shoulde not haue followed
a multitude to doe euill, much lesse
shoulde hee haue added euil to euil, and
done worse then any that went before
him: but before the publishing of so
waighty a matter after such a maner, hee
should without partiality haue examined
the truthe of the thing to the bottome:
and not otherwise so impotentlye haue
suffered him selfe, to haue bene caryed away
through the apish Imitation of men,
perfitly knowne to him to be partially affected
in this case: yea, and to speake further,
howbeit the most part of the things
contained in that slanderous libel, after
due trial, had bin founde true, yet charity
would rather haue buried, euen, the multitude

of sins, then so bitterly haue blown
abroad some ouersights, to the reproch of
a whole reformed church. What could the
veriest Papist of them al haue done more?
            But what should be said to a bellie that
hath no eares, that poore DEMAS (if he
be no woorse) hunting appearandly for
promotion to some Prelacie (as the manner
is) is so incorporate with that companie
of climers to preferment (as they call
it) and imbracers of this present worlde,
that he is as corrupt, & partial in this case,
as the proudest of them: so that of one,
ye may learne all: Otherwise, if there had
bene but a sponke of sincere judgement in
him: as worthelie hee might haue suspected
that marueilous heape of most horrible
accusations, to haue bene incredible
in a Churche, namely, where so long the
truth hath beene sincerely preached and
professed: So, he needed not to thinke it any
strange or new thing, for crafty miscreants,
hauiug credit in Court, and church,
to finde the meanes many times, to abuse
the names of Princes and excellent men:
yea, and of God himselfe, as cloakes to
couer their diuelish, and naughty deuises.
Whereof, let these examples be witnesses,

to wit, of IOAB, IES ABEL, HAMAN,
GEHASI, the old Prophet of Bethel, and
all the false Prophets, false Apostles, and
false teachers that euer spake, or speak the
vision of their owne heart, and not out of
the mouth of the Lord: and who ran and
runne when the Lord hath not sent them.
            And last, touching the printing againe
and reprinting of that forged declaration
at London, and ioyning it to the chronicle
of England, where through some, whome
the Lorde hath called Gods, thinking all
cock sure, take occasion of vpbraiding the
Ministerie of our Countrie when it pleaseth
them: As these shall die ignominiously
like men, except they repent: So, what
honour those haue procured thereby to
their Country, & what credit to the chronicle
therof, let them brag of it, when the
vprightnes of our cause sufficiently cleared
by this and the like writings, shall iustifie
it selfe to their faces, and the true
storie thereof, that shall remaine registred
to all posterities, shall witnesse the honesty
and duetifull dealing of our Church in al
things, to their shame.
            Thus much then being spoken, touching
the former of the Chaplains two witnesses:

let vs nowe come to the other, his
inconstant Countrey-man (as hee describeth
him,R Browne for as for mee, hee shall bee no
woorse, then he himselfe maketh him) the
naming of whome, belike, might doe his
cause more harme, then his testimony can
doe it good, and therefore he contenteth
him self, with a very slender description of
him: so that not without a note of reproch
in the end he sendes him packing in these
wordes following. This mans opinion
heerein (saith he) I knowe wilbe greately
contemned, because I thinke hee hath bin
of an other judgement, &c. Howebeit let
him finde what fauour at their handes he
shall: I must indeede confesse, that if this
matter had onely depended vppon his report
or opinion: I would not at this time
haue made mention of him. Wherby you
see what a wethercock he maketh of him,
and howe rediculously he leaueth him, to
beg credite where hee may finde it, for he
can giue him none. Here I omitt to make
mention of the Iar, that is fallen out since
betweene our Chapleine, and his suborned
witnes, for that, that vpon no fair promise
of recompense, hee coulde procure
newe furniture at his hands, of some more

particular matter against the newe onset,
that with long preparation he hath intended
against vs: Seeing then, that no mans
pen nor tong can more discredite this his
second witnes, then he doth him self (partly
by the wordes aboue rehearsed, & partly
by the D. words following in his declamation,
where he flatly again maketh him
to be of a changeable humor.) If he drink
no better by his meanes, then hee hath
brewed, let him blame himself, vnderstanding
that euil aduise is worst to the aduiser:
I will not speake at this time of the
shameles falsehoode that is alleadged out
of the testimonye it selfe, which whensoeuer
it shalbe particularly examined, will
make the D. repent that euer hee cited
such a testimony, & specially, where most
impudently it is affirmed, that hee hath
knowne the Kinge in greate danger, and
feare of his life by their lordly Discipline,
the contrary whereof, as it is cleerely knowen
to al the worthie persons, Ambassadors
of England, who haue had their long
residence here amonge vs, and priuate intelligence
of al our affaires, after an other
manner, then euer his wandring witnesse
coulde attaine vnto: so is it many wayes

affirmed by the K. himselfe, and daylie
experience, God be praised, doth confirm
the same.
            Both the Chaplaines authors then, being
such prettie fellowes, as hath bin declared,
I trust it be not hard to bee seene,
how little credit is to bee giuen to his declamation,
grounded vppon their railing
reports (to leaue the demōstration of the
falshood of the matter vttered by them, to
the owne time and place.) For he should
haue considered, that of how little credit
soeuer he was himselfe, yet it behoued his
witnesses to be free of infamy, according
to the saying, a Proctor may be infamous,
but not a witnes. But it seemeth, that either
he was not greatly careful of his own
name, who would repose vppon the cracked
credits of such defamed persons, in so
waighty a matter, or els he thought (as
GYGES did, by means of his ring) to walke
inuisible, as in a cloud, that none could or
would espy his nakednes. But good man,
he is far deceiued, as by the answere to his
seuerall asseuerations (if neede be) more
throughly & sensibly he shall vnderstand.
            It is easie then to be seene, how far short
the Chaplaine hath come in probation of

the alleadged treasonable outlandish practises,
of men of the new gouernment (as
scoffingly he calleth the vrgers of Reformation)
whereof he would seeme to take
such feare, that except good order be taken
to preuent the like at hoame, thinges
will grow to some extremities, pag. of his
booke 83. And therefore I trust the Q. M.
and her honorable Councell, will see this
surmised proposition of danger of outlandish
practises, by the meanes of Christian
Discipline, to be somwhat better proued,
before they will feare any danger to insue
to their state through the same: yea, and I
thinke, if they knew, but euen so much, as
heere truly I haue set downe to you (Sir)
in this short discourse, touching this matter,
as the cause of christian disciplin shuld
euen be the better liked of them all, seing
it, & the fauorers of it, to be so shamefully
belied: So the D. patrons in this case, shuld
pride themselues but a little, of that slanderous
declamation, & thinke them and
their cause but smally beholden vnto it,
what euer hath bene their opinion thereof
before.
            For let any wise man iudge, if one eg can
be more like another, then the D. maner

of reasoning is to that forme: that REHVM
SHIMSHAI, & the rest of the mē bejond the
riuer, vsed in a letter to K. ART AHSHASHTE,
for hindering the building of Ierusalem,
EZ. 4. saue only, that the iudgemēt of
them beyond the riuer, was found to be in
the authentik bokes of the chronicles, according
as was alleadged by them: & our
chaplains argumēt leaneth only vpon the
counterfeit, & forged chartales of known
and confessed infamous persons, & a false
Chronical grounded thereupon. Wherefore,
if their authentike books of Chronicles,
did not truly conuince Ierusalem to
be a rebellious citie to kings and prouinces,
of what force should this Chaplaines
infamous libel be (I pray you) against the
good brethren of England, to proue that
they will be rebellious to their Princes, if
that christiā disciplin be admitted to haue
place within that land? For as Ierusalem
was not a rebellious citie to kings & prouinces
indeed, howbeit the books of their
Chronicles did beare so: So the exercisers
of christian discipline in Scotland, are not
necessarily to be accounted rebellious to
the K. for exercising of the same, howbeit,
the bookes of the register of the acts of

Scotland did containe the same. Howe
much lesse then, ought false surmised forgeries
of known infamous men haue credite
in that case?
            And if the enuy of the sect of the Nazarites
vrged by prophane TERTVLLVS, is
not sufficient to beare downe PAVLE, as a
seditious mouer of the people, because he
professed, preached, and followed Iesus of
Nazaret, whom the Iewes most iniustly &
wickedly slewe, as a seditious person, and
blasphemer, by the meanes of two subborned
false witnesses, Why should the
good brethren of England, that seeke reformation,
be charged with a mind hereafter
of sedition, by the meanes of Discipline,
because the Church of Scotland, in
respect of the same Discipline exercised in
it, is vniustlie, condemned of sedition, by
the hie Priests of our daies, two false witnesses
being alleaged for that purpose, by
their TERTVLLVS at Pauls Crosse? I see no
reason why they should. Let not the comparison
be odious, because, I compare not
the persons in themselues, but in the causes,
which haue their own likenes & agrement
in some proportion. I haue insisted
the more in this matter, bicaus, your cause

and ours, are most neer linked togeather.
For the aduersaries would terrifie her M.
frō admitting of christian discipline within
her realm, for fear of like inconueniences
to fal out therby to her quiet gouernmēt,
which are falsly alledged to haue fallē
out by the same, to our K. & state. How
be it, it be not good logicke, to charge the
good cause of discipline, with any infamy,
by reason of the faults of the Ministers &
fauourers thereof, yea, euen put case they
were sufficiently proued, seeing that is but
a sophisme from the person to the cause,
(as they say) How much lesse then, ought
it to be condemned, when the aduersaries
ar not able, do their best, to blot euen the
persons, by accusing of whom, they labor
to cōdemne the cause. But I perswade my
selfe, that all this their paralogizing, and
false maner of reasoning shal helpe them,
and hurt vs as little in the ende, as the sophistry
of REHVM and his companions beyond
the riuer, helped their cause, & hindred
the bulding of the Temple: & as the
smooth Rhetoricke of TERTVLLVS, preuailed
not against PAVLE, no more shall
their course alwaies preuaile against the
good cause in Englande. Wherefore, let

GAI and ZACHARIAS do their parts faithfully,
and without fainting, exhort al men
acording to their callings, to further this
holy building, not doubting, but God in
his time, shall mooue DARIVS fully to authorise
the building of Ierusalem: howbeit,
through the injury of these daies, men
may bee forced to leaue of building for a
season: And let PAVL stand stoutly to the
defence of his iust cause, saying confidently:
Neither can they prooue the thinges,
whereof now they accuse me. Act. 24. 13.
And TERTVLLVS, & his maintainers shall
finde themselues disappointed, and PAVL
by little, and litle, shal grow to some greater
liberty, and his cause shall preuaile in
the end.
            But nowe let vs come, accordinge to
your desire, to the causes why that declamation
of D. BANCROFTS, so far as concerning
Scotland, is not answered, wherein
howbeit I am not to prejudge the church
of Scotland, yet for your further satisfaction,
I haue thought good to set downe the
causes of the delay, so far as euer I coulde
learn or perceiue. And first you may be assured
that it was not for lacke of habilitie
in the meanest of a thousand in Scotlande

to haue confuted that calūnious chartale,
fraughted with as many lyes almost, as it
hath lines,I. W. that it was not answered: howsoeuer
it pleaseth som of your grand DD.
(very learned men,T. C. ye may be sure, if they
be not far deceued) reprochefully to point
out some of our wel approoued brethren,
and especially one, by the note, of like an
vnlearned, yea then, a very vnlerned Scot:
Whome yet notwithstanding they neuer
hard nor sawe, more then D. BANCROFTE
did heare and see the Church of Scotland,
and the things wherewith most rashly hee
doth charge it: But who is so bold, as they
say, as blind bayard. Yet if any ARISTARCHVS
among them, hath taken occasion
of the writing of anye brother here, so to
speake, let it bee judged by the learned,
what iust cause he had so to do: & I doubt
not, but he shalbe found to haue had litle
learning, and lesse conscience in so doing,
which is spoken, not so much for the Apology
of any man at this time: as to note
the disdainefull contempt of these hauty
persons. For he must be of very rare learning,
as not a few can beare me witnes, in
whom this sort (for I speake not of all) of
the generation of Bishopists will acknowledge

any learning to be, if once directlie
and seriously, he oppone himselfe to their
pride: For as there is nothing, wherin they
commonly boast them selues more, then
in the beard, & shew of learning: as thogh
who forsooth but they onely: So is there
no shaft that oftner flieth out of their bag
against others, then the boult of lack learning.
Howbeit, if it were not for auoiding
of vncomly, and vnchristian rendering of
reproch, for reproch, it were no hard mater
shortly to decipher the profound science
of those two especially, who were
chief authors of that reproch, & to let thē
vnderstand, of what form & classe among
the learned, learned men indeede, did
euer esteeme them to bee, notwithstanding,
all the windye volumes written by
them: For Scribimus indocti doctique, &c.
Howbeit, yet I deny not so much knowledge
vnto them otherwise, as shall bee a
witnes against them, if they vse it not better,
& as might profit the Church in some
measure, if they had grace to imploy it to
the right end.
            But to returne to our purpose, as the
answer was not delaied, for lacke of sufficient
qualified men amongest vs for that,

& for a greater purpose, God be praised,
if need be: so it was thought needles, & superfluous,
here amongst our selues, where
the truth of those things alledged in that
Pamphlet were so clearly known, as there
needed no other confutation of them,
then the shamelesse impudencie of themselues:
And as for the answere, in respect
of others, it was delaied first, as I take it,
for auoiding of vnhappy contention, that
is woont to arise vppon suche occasions,
wherby it might haue come to passe, that
daungerous alteration might haue bene
wrought betweene the two Realmes, as a
godly and wise man of yours, commending
the discretion of our mē in that case,
did not conceal, in a letter written to som
of good account in our Countrey, not
long ago. For the firebrand of selfeloue,
and great ardency of men, in defending
their owne sayings & doings whatsoeuer,
suffereth thē not many times, so much to
regard the truth and peace of the church,
as their own stincking estimation: whereof,
there is too great proofe in manifolde
lamentable examples, aswell of antiquity,
as of our own daies, both far and neer, to
the timely admonition of vs all, if aduisedly

we consider of the counsaile of gods
spirite, saying: The beginning of strife, is
as one that openeth the waters, therefore
or the contention be meddled with, leaue
off: Which howbeit more fitly, it may be
applied to the aduersaries (in this case)
the persuers then to our Church, yet no
man I trust, can blame the Ministerie of
Scotlande, to regard it greatly, so long as
there is any hope that the truth, and their
innocencie may be in faftie without their
answere: otherwise, they are not ignorant,
that, there is no les danger, alwais to keep
silence, then neuer, as HILARIE speaketh.
            Secondly, the answere was deferred, as
I take it, in hope of due redresse to be put
to that offence by the Q. M. and her
Honourable Counsaile, who our men
thought (as they thinke yet) esteemed so
of their friendship, that they wold not suffer
them to lie vnder any opprobrie vnremooued,
so farre as lay in them, neither
would suffer them to receiue any iniurie
vncorrected, at the hands of any whome
they might command: For there are not
many years past, since it plesed her M. not
without signification of a thankful mind,
by her letters, to acknowledge the Ministers

of Scotlād by name, to be hir most louing
& trusty frends in Christ (as yet God
be praised they cōtinue to this day, which
is not vnknown to her M. & faithful counsellers)
in regard whereof, they yet expect
the due amendement of that wrong, and
that so much the more, as they haue bene
put in hope thereof, from thence by writ,
purposly written to that effect, from some
great personages, who, howbeit nowe
they rest from their labours (to the no
small forewarning of the present state of
Englande, if the matter be well marked)
yet our men think, that they shal not lack
such fauour in that Counsaile, as shal procure
redresse of that iniury in due season,
in respect of the good opinion they vnderstande
(and that euen by writ of late)
her Majestie and Counsaile, yet retaine of
the Ministery of Scotland, & their christian
friendship toward them, & that estate.
            Thirdly and last, a secret bridle of God
(who ruleth the actions of men acording
to the dispensation of his prouidēce) staied
thē from answering, for causes known
onely to himselfe, as they so sensiblie in a
manner haue perceiued (especially they,
who were priuie to the matter) that the

knowledge thereof, may sufficiently satisfie
the minde of any modest man, who
wil acknowledge the prouident dispensation
of God to be such, as howsoeuer the
heart of man purposeth his waye, yet the
Lord doth direct his steps.
            This much I thought meet (good Sir)
to impart vnto you, touching the dangerous
rashnes of D. BANCROFT, in slandering
our whole Church so vnaduisedly, after
such a publicke manner, and that vppon
the naked reportes, of two such infamous
witnesses (partlye, by manifest demonstration
of trecherous dealing in one
of them, and partly by his owne confession,
touching the other) as are not to haue
credite against any particular Christian,
much les, against a whole Church, a King,
and a Realme: As also touching the causes
of the deferring of the answere therevnto,
so far as I vnderstand, which things,
if they were known to the D. and his complices,
(but euen as heere rudely they are
set downe) they might peraduenture let
them haue experience (which is a fooles,
though not a foolishe maister) that they
haue run to far headlong into these slanderous
and new deuises: and so hearafter

might learne more aduisedly and charitablie,
to deale with their neighbours and
brethren, who haue deserued no suche
things at their hands: Yea, it is very like,
if these same things were read, or summarily
and shortly reported in her Majesties
hearing, either by your selfe, or som other
good Christian, who hath credite and fauour
about her royall person (For alack
good princesse, the trew report of things,
especially in these & the like maters, commeth
seldome to her eares, a common calamitie
of princes, whoe commonly of all
others in the world, are most destitute of
faithful persons aboute them, trewlie and
without flattery to informe them of the
truth of matters as they are in deede.) If
these things, I say, were truly known to her
M. I surely perswade my selfe, that those
lordly brethren of DIOTREPHES, who rule
or rather tyrannise aboue their brethren
with violence & cruelty, should be quickly
charmed from authorising such rashe
libertie of publicke rayling, and defaming
of a whol neighbour church, which
alway hath so well deserued of the present
state of Englande, and their proude
hornes should be hastely hamered downe,

that they should not be able hereafter, to
thrust with side and shoulder, and push all
the weake with their hornes, til they haue
scattered them abroad, and to make such
hauocke of the Churche, by a disguised
persecution, as presently they doe: Yea
this much at least, I doubt not shoulde be
graunted, that (all bitter inuection and
persecuting of the good brethren of England,
that are of the same judgment with
vs,A louing chalenge of disputation, surceasing) the controuersie should
be decided by the word of God in a lawfull
assemblie, and brotherlie conference,
appointed by the supreme Magistrates to
that effect: Otherwise, if this come not to
passe (which God forbid) as we must not
cease to commend the troubled estate of
those our christian brethren, to GOD in
our priuate and publicke praiers, so must
we not leaue the iust defence of our honest
cause of Christian Discipline, which
(touching the substance thereof, whiche
chiefly is in controuersie) hath no les warrand
to be continued perpetually within
the Church, vnder this precept of Christ,
feede my sheepe, then hath the preaching
of the worde, and ministration of the Sacraments,
and so consequently floweth

no more from the authoritie of the Ciuill
Magistrate then they doe, whateuer formall
professours in worde, but not admitters
of the yoake of Christ on their
neks indeed, cry out to the contrary. This
much (good Sir) I thought good by writ
to answere to your letter, after this manner,
here before set downe, both to satisfie
you and others, touching this matter in
some measure, which if it shall seeme good
to you, ye, either by your selfe, or by some
other, may briefly impart vnto her
M. Farewell,
            
               from Edin.the
18. of September. 1590.
               
               Yours in the Lord. I. D.
               
            
            
         
      
   