
      
         
            
            
            To the most noble, famous, renowmed, inuincible and victorious Realme of England: Be all flourishing felicitie, happie prosperitie, and matchles tranquilitie longe to endure.
            
               TO manifest the poore good will & dutifull loue I owe thee (O famous and renowmed Englande). for that I perceiue thine extremities are dangerous, I haue presumed (though more presumptuous I confes then skilfull) to present thee with this potion, compounded of gentle persuasions and charitable exhortations, whiche although it be somewhat bitter and vnpleasant to thy taste, yet doubte I not (it being taken as it ought) but in operation



it will effect thine amendment, or at least expell (in some measure) the mischeeuous humors that causeth thy drowsinesse, and procureth thy danger. And that it may so doe: I will not cease to praie vnto him that neyther slumbreth nor sleepeth, but watcheth ouer thee vigilantlie for thy peace and safetie, who is al in al, and thy God for euer.
            
               He that is alwaies prest to die to shield thee from danger: Iohn Dauies:
            
         
      
      
         
            
            A priuate mans potion, for the health of England.
            
               NOwe Gallants to you, Iob, 22, 13 14, and 24, 1 2, 34, 19 Psalm, 10, 4, 13, & 14, 1, & 53. 1, & 73. 11. that saie in your hearts there is no God: and so consequentlie no Heauen, no hell, no resurrection, no iudgement. And why? because (say you) we haue the worlde at will: we giue our eies their desires, our bodies their appetites, and our lustes their delights, and yet we wallowe in all worldlie prosperitie, yea we florish like the lawrell, our leaues are alwaies Not to bee tempted & exercised wt afflictions, is rather an argumente of reprobacie, then a testimonie of Gods fauour. For the crosse of affliction is laid on all true beleeuers. Gen, 4 8. & 27, 41, & 37, 18 Exod. 2, 15 1 king. 19, 2, Matth. 10, 9 10, 16, & 24 9. Mark, 13, 9, 13. Luke. 14, 26 & 21, 17 Iohn, 15, 18 & 16, 2 Acts. 9, 14 Gal. 4, 26 1 Thes. 3, 3, 4 2 Timo, 3. 12 1 Pete, 4, 22 greene and fade not. We are not pinched by pouertie, crucified with cares, martyred with miseries, tormented with troubles & crossed with mishaps as are these precize liuers. What need we feare the vengeance & iudgments



of God so terriblie thundered foorth againste vs by our preachers or rather praters, when as our minds are quiet, our harts merrie, our thoughts plesant, and none of all those calamities befall vs nor ours. What reason haue wee then to feare their menacings, or beleeue their saiengs, when as they reare vp their voices aloft and saie the kingdome ofheauen is at hand, and the day of iudgement draweth neere. Tush so said the prophets and Apostles manie hundred yeares since, and yet hath no such matter come to passe, & therefore, those were nothing else but the imaginations of a vaine thing, their prophesies fantasies, their preaching leasings, and their religion moste ridiculous. Therefore wee will fill vp the measure of our earthlie happinesse, with all that may content our humors, and liue in al carnall libertie, for vpon earth alone is mans cheefe felicity. Oye Atheisticall reprobates, what maner of reasonings & obseruāces are these? What infernal furie bewitcheth you that you thus har



den your heartes to perseuere in your wickednes? knowe you whom ye pro uoke, by this your curssed conclusions? or know ye whom ye incense by these your rebellions? If you doo not, or at least will not: then know ye, & weet ye wel it is the holy one of Israel, from Exod 29. 45 Deut, 10, 15 Psalm. 148 whose bosom al beginnings took their beginning. It is a maiestie vnspeakeable, mighty in power, whose name is Iehouah: dreadfull, woonderfull, and Gen, 1 verie much to be feared. He it is that by his only word created heauen & erth, with all that is in them conteined, and with halfe a word can destroy the same againe. He whose breath shaketh the mountains Esaie, 66, 1 Matth, 8, 26 & 14, 32 & maketh the foundations of the earth to tremble and quake. He whose seat is in the glorious heauens, and whose foote stoole is the round world. He that stilleth the raging of the seas, & rebuketh the windes when they arise. Hee at whose presence the earth melteth like Dan, 7, 9, 10 waxe, as not beeing able to endure the brightnes of his countenance. He whose throne is a flame of fire, his cha



riots burning fire, from his face issueth a flame of fire, a thousand thousand do serue him and ten thousand hundred thousands doo assiste him. Hee that dwelleth in vnaccessible light, which 1 Tim, 6, 16 no mortall man can abide to beholde. He vnto the least sparke of whose glorious maiestie, the maiestie and glory of al the kings of the earth may not be compared. He whome angels praise, dominations adore, the powers doo tremble and the highest heauens togither with the Cherubins and Seraphins doo vncessantlie lawd & magnifie. a Iere, 23, 24 Ecclus. 16 vers, 17, 18 
               He whose power replenisheth heauen and earth, and from whose knowledge nothing can be concealed. 
               Mat, 19, 26 Luke, 18, 27 Mark, 10, 27 
               Hee with whome all thinges are possible, and whose power no violence is able to resist. 
               Deu. 32, 39 
               Hee that only afflicteth and healeth, that killeth and giuetl, life againe. 
               1 Kings. 18 ve. 36, 37, 38 
               Hee that sent fire to consume Eliahs sacrifice, to declare himselfe thereby to be the only God of gods, and Lord of lordes. 
               Isa. 4 2, 8 & 45, 23 
               He vnto whom al knees do bow both in heauen and earth, and vnto whom alone belongeth all honor and glorie. 
               2 Chro, 36 verse 23 Est. 16, 16 
               Hee that is the


               
               preseruer and guider of kings and kingdoms, and establisheth or subuerteth them at his good pleasure. He vpon whose vertue, Matt, 10, 26 Acts, 17, 18 power & prouidence all the creatures in heauen and earth doo wholelie depend, and by whome alone they liue, and haue their being, & without whō they would all vtterlie perish. Hee at whose commandement the sunne doo Gene. 1, 14 15, 16. 17, 18 arise to manifest the daie, the moone and stars doo lighten the night, & neuer faile nor be wearie in their watch. He from whome euerie good and perfect Genc. 33. 11 Iames. 1, 17 gift proceedeth, who is the father oflightes. He that ofhis meere loue Genes. 1, 26 and vnspeakeable good will, bestowed vpon thee thy creation, making thee of nothing, like vnto himselfe, brethed into thee a liuing soule, capable of imortalitie, & created all the creatures vnder heauen, besides for thy onlie vse and seruice, and putting them al vnder Mat. 27, 46 47, 48, 49 Romans. 5. 8 1 Cor. 15, 3 2 Cor, 5, 15 1 Peter, 3, 18 thy subiection. He yt of his vnutterable goodnes and meere mercie, laied the torments due to thee, vpon the shoulders of his deere and onlie son, which



were so great and greeuous, that the agonie thereof, constrained his blessed Exod, 14, 21 22, 23, 27, 28 29 bodie to sweate bloud and water, for thy sake: He that gaue the children of Israell passage through the red sea, as vpon drie land, and inclosed Pharao and all his host in the bowelles thereof. He that speaketh the worde and it Gen, 1 is done: and as he will so commeth euerie thing to passe. He that opened Gen, 6, 17, & 7, 10 the windows ofheauen and drowned the world, and preserued Noah with his family to replenish the same again: He that rebuketh kings, for the loue of Dan, 6, 16, & 14, 16, to 31 his chosen, making them to tread vpon the Lions without feare or danger. He that staied the sunne in the midst of the 
               Iosua, 10, 12 
               firmament at the desire of Iosuah, and gaue him victory ouer his enimies before the setting thereof. He on whome the eies of all liuing thinges do waite, and he giueth them food in due season. He at whose presence the verie angels do tremble, and al the powers ofheauen do praise vncessantly. He vnto whome the Cherubins and Seraphins continually doo



crie, holy, holy, holy, Lord God ofSabaoth. He in whose land the saintes euermore do sing, & whose onely sight is their vnconceiuable solace. He that confoundeth the deuises of the proud, Gen, 11, 9 & scattereth the imaginations of their heartes. He that bruseth his enimies Psal, 2, 9 with a rod ofIron, and breaketh them in peeces like a potters vessell. Hee whose outstretched arme turneth the wheele of prouidence, and keepeth all things in a wonderfull order. He that Exod, 8, 2. 3 4, 5, & 9, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, & 10, 5 6 Dan, 4, 3, 4 did many wonders in the land of Egipt and shewed many mercies in the land of promise. He that humbled Nabuchadnezar, for all his pride & plagued him right sore for all his tyrannie. He Gen, 19, 24 that rained downe fire and brimstone vpon Sodom and Gomor, and preserued Lot from the fierie storm. He that saith ofhimselfe I am Alpha and Omega, 
               Reuel, 1, 8, 11, 17, & 21, 6 1, Cor, 8, 6 Ephes, 4, 6 and hee that is father of all, aboue all, through all in all, yea all in all, and the same for euer. He: yea euen he it is (O earth & ashes) whome thou doest prouoke by thy lewd inuentions and incense



to wrath thy licentious liuing, and carelesse securitie. O crooked and peruerse generation! doo yee make the merciful forbearance of so great a maiesty, an occasion of sinne, will you for that hee is full of long suffering (and not as a mortall prince reuenge by death the least iniurie offred) more and more offend him. Will you for that the king prorogeth his greate session of parlement, for your onlye good and gaine (because hee woulde haue you repent and not die in your sinnes) conclude there shall be no such session, yes sure there shall or else the Matt. 24, 30 31, 39 sonne of God is a liar, which to thinke were in the highest degree, most blasphemous, &c. Therefore omitting all that, which might procure you to loue him, where is become the natural care you haue to auoid punishment, which might prouoke you to feare him, if not as children yet as seruants or subiects. Thinke you (O ye obdurate Libertines) that because GOD (if you thinke there is a God) is mercifull, hee



is not therfore iust, O know (ye athists) his iustice is as great as his mercy, and either of both as great as himselfe. For as soon can he cease to be God as cease to be iust, iustice and mercie are properties peculiar to him and deny them by your words, and denie him, as (to your greater damnation) you doo by your workes. If this be true (as moste damnable it were to doubte thereof) what furie then so bewitcheth you, that you can cast off all care, yea and yt natural feare, wherof the verie brute beastes are not depriued. And with such greedy appetites, from day to day seeke to fill vp the measure of your iniquity to the brim. As though indeed there were no God, or as though there were no future reckoning to be made. As though you could keep your transgressions from his knowlege, or as the eie maker, did not or could not se your abhominations: hee both knoweth them & seeth them (though with greef) and will in the daie that you so doubte of, & least suspect, pay you home with



a vengeance (if you preuent it not by your speedie repentance) which daie thoughe it hath pleased him to delaie for the triall of his chosen, yet for their Matt, 24, 22, sakes he will shorten it, and hee that is comming will come, and bring his reward with him: Moste ioyfull to the godly, but woful to the contrarie. And therfore ye wanton worldlings, whose eies doo as it were swell with fatnesse ofyour aboundance, and surfet with all worldly delight: call to mind your mortalitie: abandon your iniquitie: forsake your infidelitie, and so remember Gods mercie, that you forget not his iustice, being his propertie, which is a depth without bottom, it glorifies the godly, and confoundeth the wicked. Trust not vnto thy riches, and say not 
               Eccle, 5, 1, 3. 4, 6. 7, & 7. 3 
               I haue inough for my life, for it shall not help in the time of vengeance and indignation, and say not I haue sinned and what euil hath come vnto me? for the almightie is a patient rewarder, for he will not leaue thee vnpunished. Saie not the mercie of God is great, hee will forgiue my manifold sinnes, for mercie


               
and wrath come from him, and his indignation commeth downe vpon sinners, make no long tarrieng to turne vnto the Lord, and put not offfrom day to day, for suddenlie shall the wrath of the Lord breake foorthe, and in thy securitie thou shalte bee destroied, and thou shalt perish in time of vengeance. Sowe not vpon the furrowes of vnrighteousnes, leaste thou reape them seuen fold. Wisd. 2, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. 10.
            
            Saie not with your selues, our liues are short and tedious, and in the death of a man is no recouerie, neyther was any knowne that hath returned from the graue.
            For we are borne at all aduenture and wee shall be heerafter as though we had neuer bin: for the breath is a smoke in our nostrils, & the words as a sparke raised out of our harts.
            Which being extinguished the bodie is returned into ashes, and the spirit vanisheth as the soft aire.
            Our life shall passe awaie as the trace of a cloud, and come to naught as the mist that is driuen awaie with the beames os the sunne, and cast downe with the heate thereof. Our name also shall be forgotten in time, and no man shall haue our works in remembrance.
            

               
For our time is as a shadowe that passeth away, and after our end there is no returning for it is fast sealed so that no man commeth againe.
            Come therefore let vs enioye the pleasures that are present, and let vs cheerefullie vse the creatures as in youth.
            Let vsfill our selues with costlie wine and ointments, and let not the flower of youthe passe by vs.
            Let vs crowne our selues with rose buddes, afore they be withered.
            Let vs all be partakers of our wantonnesse, let vs leaue some token of our pleasure in euerie place, for that is our portion and this is our lot.
            Therefore let vs oppresse the poore that is righteous, let vs not spare the widow, nor reuerence the white heares of the aged. O debate not on this wise with your selues, but flie from euill and doo good: for God regardeth thee deeds of euerie man.
            Call to remembrance the perillous times wherein we liue, and the vncerteintie oflife. How neere Gods iudge ments (if not his generall iudgement)



approcheth vs. If we with a sound discretion consider it, we shall find great cause to feare it, and prepare our selues to preueut it. Our liues (as by hourlie experience wee proue) hangeth by a slender twine by reason of our mortalitie incident to al men generallie. But our liues hangeth by a weaker twine, incident to vs in England (as our case now standeth) especiallie. Which are compulsionsforcible inough to draw reasonable men to integrity of life and holy conuersation. Yet fareth it with vs as with senselesse pictures, that haue eies and see not, eares and heare not, heads and conceiue not, the iminent dangers hanging ouer our heads. We harden our harts with Pharao against the God of Israel, they are not touched with threates, nor terrified with torments, till they be inflicted vpon vs, as now they are too too neare vs.
            Now the xxxiii. Sunne most happily inuironeth in the firmament, since our blessed deliuerance out of the power and greeuous thraldom ofPharao



and Egypt. The gouernesse of this thrice happie lande (for so it may bee said in regard of such a gouernesse) being not only the instrument of our so happie deliuerance: but also the sole and absolute cause (vnder God) of this our matchlesse tranquilitie. Our God by hir as by one for whose sake we (beyond the measures of the graces of our brethren and the prosperous course of our fathers) inioy this peace and plenty, hath in the aboundance ofhis ineffable grace and mercy, continued and prospered the same vpon vs hitherto. And what other blessings he hath like the dew ofHermon distilled vpon our Sion (as that of the free passage of the gospell and infinite others) the whole world can witnesse, and we to our vnspeakeable consolation haue experienced. He hath not left vs an Anarchy, and hedlesse dissolution, as to the Canibals a most preposterous and mishapen gouernment, streming with blood, and smoking with the mist of palpable error and ignorance. Nor as to the



Antichristians, seared in the forehead with the mark of the image of the gret whoore of Babylon. Not a barbarous wast and heathenish estate, as to the Tartarian heards of curssed Cham and vnto the miserable inhabitantes of Meschech, or to the rauenous swarmes and turbulent hosts of Tubal-gog. But contrariwise hee hath by hir ledde vs foorth as a flocke of sheepe, and fed vs vpon the pastures of his owne Gosen, giuing vnto vs for warres, peace: for barbarous brutishnesse, humanity and gentlenesse: for grosse ignorance, pro found knowledge: for painted superstition, sincere religion: for scarsitie, plentie: for vnprouidence, ciuill policie: for iarring discord, vniformity & concord: making vs to dwell in safety vnder hir gratious gouernment as vnder the winges of his Almightie protection.
            In these hir blessed yeares hath been seene, the golden daies of hir father Dauid, & the no lesse prosperous then peaceable regiment of Salomon. The



earth hath yeelded hir fruitfulnes, the sea hir store, the clouds their drops, the heauens their orientall beautie, the sun his heat, the yeare his increase, the val lies couered with corne, the furrowes moistened, the woods and groues crowned with ioy. The mountaines singe with mirth, our folds replenished with cattell, our sonnes and daughters flourish like the ceadars of Libanus, our yoong men see visions, and our olde men prophesie. Whilst the sworde of the destroier hath smitten the neighbour nations, from the first borne sitting vpon the princes throne: vnto the slaue grinding at the handmill, whilest the firme landes adiacent haue beene ouerflowne by the rage of the seas, our Iland haue dwelt in peace, sente hir ships into Ophir for gold, and prepared hir Nauie against the enimy. This worthy instrument then of Gods goodnesse, and expresse image of his maiestie, haue been and yet is (as erst I said) the onlie organ and instrumental cause of al this our fore remembred felicity;



and who is also the very breath of our nostrils, the lighte of our eies, and the totall summe of our welfare. If then it pleased God in the seueritie of his iust conceiued displeasure against our sinnes, to call hir from this hir earthlie Monarchie, to raine with him in his heauenlie Hiarchie: what day I pray you might the daie ofhir departure be called? might it not be properlie saide to be a day ofiudgment? a day of dole, of wrath and of vengeance? It mighte well be so called, for the effects procee ding from it. For if our liues and liuings, and consequentlie all that here content or delight vs, depend vppon hirs (as truelie they doo) that pretious life (which I pray God long maintain) giuing place to nature, as once needs it must. For Death is the way of all fleshe. Tell mee I praie you, in what predicament were we, where were then our liues, our liuinges, our pleasures and contentments? where is then our tranquillitie, peace and plentie? where is the gouernment become, whereby the



nobles were kept within their compas and the cōmons slept in safetie. Where is then the feare of maiestracie and the regard of our prelacie. Where is beecome the due execution of wholesome lawes and statutes and the force of our statutes whereby the common-weale did flourish like a Palme and spred hir branches ouer the whole bodie of this realme. Where is the knowledge of mine and thine: and lastelie where is the due administration of Gods worde and sacraments whereby he was glorified and our consciences comforted: are they not all to bee feared (excepte God be now merciful then we deseru) last the violence of forraine inuasion, or the sword of domesticall dissention should cut them of, and quite subuert them. Wel wantons well, I feare your comicall progressions would be then changed into tragicall conclusions. For my own part so my wish might be with Gods good will) I would I might not liue to see that daie, though I am perswaded not onely my life but manie



thousands more would be euen determined with that day, that yet notwithstanding (with long desires) expect that daie. But foule befall (as dayly do befall) such wild bores of the forrest, that would so faine (if so they durst without danger) spoile this vinyard whiche Gods owne right hand hathe planted, confounded bee they and put to shame togither with as manie as haue euill wil vnto our peace. But how far these callamities are from our considerations, our perseuerant pride, and peruerse behauiours dayly do manifest which the more God blesseth vs with earthly benedictions, the more freelie we runne into our owne destructions. How true it is, our manifold rebellions against God & his annointed dayly do testifie: Such and so great is mans improuidence, that he is onely carried awaie with the prosperitie of the time present, but ye calamities of the time fu ture, he neuer thinketh vpō, vntil their sodaine approche, admitting no tyme for repentance) drowneth the simple



secure liuer in many seas of miseries: euen so were the daies ofNoah, & such were the wicked ones in those dayes, they did wallow in the mire of sin and iniquitie, as we doo now: they eat and drank and made merrie as we do now, they bought and solde, and chopt and changed as we do now, they had prosperitie, peace and plentie, as we haue now, they abused and mispended the same as wee doo now: they were vnthankfull for those benefites and blessinges as we are now: they prouoked God by their licencious liuing: as we do now, they were disobedient to hys word as we are now: they mocked his prophetes, and beleeued not their threatnings, as we do now: they hardned their heartes, to effect their misdeeds as we do now: they liued secure and carelesse as we do nowe, and all was husht as it is now: and Gods vengeance came vpon them vna wares, as it maie do now. O therfore think vpon these & such like exāples mentioned in the mirror of trueth, Gods blessed



booke and true chronicle, and so thinke vpon them, that we may profit by them: that is, to learne by their harmes to auoid the like: for though Gods plagues be long in comming (by reason ofhis great patience) yet when they come, they come with a witnesse, they come with a terror, they fal with a mighty & insupportable waight, yea with such a waight as on whom soeuer they light, they wil grind to powder.
            Much more might be here incerted, touching the seueritie of Gods iustice, and our sinfull carelessnesse. But what hope may I conceiue, that my perswasions (beeing a man as corrupt as the corruptest) shoulde preuaile with the wantons of this worlde, when neither the powerfull perswasions, sweet promises, sugred allurementes, nor thundring threates, which (with an heauēly eloquence) are written (by the spirit of truth) in the sacred bible, togither with so manie learned and godly treatises, all tending to this purpose now extant cannot preuaile: no not in the least



measure, with this froward generatiō: Howe be it though there bee nothing more common then bookes of suche importance, yet haue I thought it conuenient to publish this briefe, bearing my selfe in hand, it shall rather amend manie then offend anie: except suche as vnto whome Christ himselfe is become an offence. For suche as I couet not to please, so care I not to displease.
            A contemplation full of heauines of minde and anguish ofspirit it is, to cō
               sider the hugenesse of the iniquitie of this present age, the waight whereof makes the earth to grone as not being able to sustaine so intollerable a burden. It compelles euerie man regenerate and truely mortified to saie. O that my soule had winges like a doue, that I might flie awaie from this wicked and stiffnecked people, and escape the vengeance to come, this people of vncircumcised hearts and eares, whose consciences are seared with hot irons, Phil, 3, 19, whose God is their bellie, whose glory



is their shame, and whose endes are damnation. They do as it were oppose themselues against the Lord of hostes, and with might and maine persecute his saintes. They are so fraught with pride, lust, enuie, and gaullie bitternes, & so full of mischief, & diuelish practises, that they offer violence to their own soules, in effecting their abhominations, and stand at open defiance with heauen, the sempiternall seate of the highest. Their vineyard is the vinyard Deu. 32, 32, 33 ofSodomites, their grape is the grape of gall and their clusters of grapes are most bitter. Their wine is the gall of Dragons, and the poison of Cockatrices vncurable. They put their Esaie. 59, 4, 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. 10. 11 trust in thinges of nothing, and doo talke vanities, they conceiue labour and bring foorth iniquitie: they breake the egges of serpentes, and weaue the webbes of spiders: he that eateth their egges dieth the death, and that which is hatched thence is a Cockatrice: their webs make not cloth to couer them, for that their workes are al vnprofitable,



and the work of iniquitie in their handes. Their feete runne to euill, and they make haste to shedde innocent bloud, their thoughtes are wicked thoughtes, desolation and destruction is in their pathes.
            
            The waie of peace they knowe not, & there is none equitie in their goinges, they haue made them crooked pathes: whosoeuer goeth therein shall not know peace.
            Therefore is iudgement farre from vs, neither dooth iustice come neere vnto vs, wee wait for light but loe it is darkenes for bright nesse, but we walke in darkenes.
            We grope for the wall like the blind, & we grope as onewithouteies, we stumble at the noone day as in the twilight, we are in solitarie places as dead men.
            Weroare all like Beares and mourne like Doues, we lookefor equitie but there is none, for health but it is far from vs.
            But O sacred Souereigne, and my peereles Princesse, in whom, for whom and by whom wee enioy these blessed benefits of peace and plentie, with infinite others. Let it please thy Royall Maiestie, of thy superaboundant clemencie,



to take in good woorth these few aduisementes fent from the senter of a poore subiects heart, that reuerenceth thee (as it is moste bounden) in greater measure then wordes can posfibly expresse. And albeit the rare and admirable discretion, which is alwaies resident in thee (as in the locall place, where it of right ought to be) togither with the moste sound aduise of those prudent Senators, whiche are of the councell, can and doo foresee with great circumspection, the imminent dangers insuing thy absence and cut off (with such due regard as wel befeemeth them) al occasions that may preiudice thy sacred life, crowne, and dignitie: yet ô yet giue thy poore subiect leaue (with all humility prostrate vpon my face, I beseeche thee) to mind thee of that, whiche (in respect of earthly welfare is our summum bonum: namely, thy safetie whereon dependeth the safetie, liues, and liuinges of so manie thousandes. If then the head cannot perish, but the members must needes



come to naught, and that the losse of thy dear life, is the catastrophe of ours. It stādeth me in hand to the vttermost of my power, to practise by all possible indeuours (though conscience compell me not) all that might tend to the preseruatiō of the same. And therefore I beseech your maiestie, in the bowels of a dutiful and loyall heart, to restrain the accesse to your princely presence, of such as may anie waie be suspected of disloialtie, be they high or low, or of what conditiō soeuer. and althogh my request seem vnto your great wisedom needlesse in respect of your owne proper care, yet haue I some reason to minde you of this, for that it is well knowne you haue bene heeretofore (with your mercifull leaue bee it spoken) too too affable vnto the bloudthirstie, and ouerbold with suche as haue intended your destruction and ours, which although it be a gratious disposition in you: yet to vs your poore subiects it is no smal danger, & although ye innocēcie of your hart make it void of



feare and suspition, how beit in regard of our sinnes, and Gods iustice, be yet the more circumspect.
            And albeit (by reason of humaine ignorance) you cannot vnderstand the thoughtes of their heartes, that intend mischiefe, yet with heedefull regard (the power whiche haue hitherto preserued you pulling their maskes from their faces, and discouering their handes) you shall apparantly perceiue their trecherous countenances, and plainly descrie their butcherly handes imbrued with bloud, and all outragious villanie. Take heede therefore good Queene againe I saie, take heed, giue not the vnknowne or suspected opportunitie, least the Lorde in the heate of his wrathe now iustly kindled by reason of our sinnes, depriue vs of you, to the end he may be auenged on vs as on a people vnworthie of so praise-worthie a princesse, and so pay vs home with such insuiug plagues & calamities as since the calling home of our grand ancestors to humaino ciuilitie,



was neuer seen in our lād. Therfore ô sweete comfort of Israel, as muche as in you lieth, preuent these miseries if not so muche for your owne sake, yet for your poore subiectes, and the gospell sake, that wee may liue in safetie, and long inioy this thrice happie tranquilitie.
            ANd you Ladies of honour and others, that liue vnder hir obeysance, speake honourablie, and thinke reuerently of hir: for whose sake and by whose meanes you are so highlie honoured and reuerenced. Backbite hir not, no not in your priuie chambers: for the doore-cheekes of those clossets wil blab it abroad, to your perpetuall shame and deserued destruction. Please God and this renowmed Paragon, by your vnfained obedience: so shall you preuent these calamities, wee shall liue in safetie, and inioy this blessed peace and tranquilitie.
            ANd you ô (noble Lords of England)



let neither the cause of conscience, ambitious desire of honour and soueraign tie, cōceiued vnkindnesse or secret enuie, nor ought besides that may be imagined, falsifie the faith and allegeance you owe to hir maiestie, hir crowne and dignity, but preuent these calamities, in being honorably resolued to die in defence of hir, and your country, containing your selues within the lists of loialtie. So shall wee hir subiectes liue in safetie, and inioy this blessed peace, and matchlesse tranquilitie.
            YOu Lordes spirituall vnto whose vigilant regard our soules are cō
               mitted: see well to your charge, and as your callinges are, so let your conuersations be, instruct your flock'es as wel by workes as words, Plant sound and sincere doctrine, that it may fructifie and increase knowledge. Abandon slouth and couetousnesse from your houses. In steede whereof entertaine holy exercise and hospitalitie for their



reliefe and comfort that are in aduersitie. Suffer none (by any meanes) to enter the ministerie, but such as you shall find by the touchstone of trial, to be sufficient for so high a function, whose giftes may euery waie answere the sinceritie of their calling, and ifyou maie or can expell all those that are alreadie entred, whiche either are vngodly or vnlearned. Set your affections on thinges inuisible (for so it well beseemeth you) and not on thinges mortal: for so the heathen doo. And for that our merciful God manie times conuerteth the practises of the wicked, to the profit of the godly, and woulde that they should make the most of this profit. Imagine it pleased him (in his inscrutable wisdom) as knowing what is most behouefull for you, to suffer a pack of puritants (falsly so called) to reuile and slander you, yea and to put foorth libels against you, therby to awake you, and to make you attend the worke of your vocation more diligently and carefully. Now therefore, let this be to



you an aduantage make your profit heereof, and if you so doo, reioyce and bee glad, for great is your reward in heauen, for so slandered they the Prophetes and Apostles whiche were before you, and practise hencefoorth by preaching and praier to preuent these calamities, that wee and you may liue in safetie, and long inioy this peace and tranquilitie.
            
               OYe graue and learned Iudges of this land, peruert not the lawes for loue of lucre, let not the glorious glasse of golde, whiche is but painted earth, dazell the eies of your vnderstanding & corrupt the secret corners 
               Wild. 6. 2, 3. 4, 5. 7. 
               of your consciences. For Salomon the prince of prudence speaketh vnto you on this maner. Giue eare yee that rule the multitude, for the rule is giuen you of the Lord, and power by the most high, which will trie your workes and search out your imaginations, because that yee being officers of his people, haue not iudged aright, nor kept the law, nor walked after the will of God.
            

               
Horriblie and sodainly will he appeare vnto you: for an hard iudgement shall they haue which beare rule. For he that is Lord ouer all will spare no person, neither shall he feare anie greatnesse: for hee hath made the small and great, and careth for all alike.
            Take no bribes therfore, neyther by your selues nor by substitutes: for though by that sleight you can auoide a checke ofhir maiestie, you cannot escape his cursse that raines in eternitie. But measure your sentences by the line of equitie, suppresse vice without partialitie, and aduance vertue with al possible industrie. So shall you please God, and preuent ech callamitie. We shal be safe, and liue in peerelesse prosperitie, and long inioy this peace and matchlesse tranquilitie.
            YE knights, Squires, and Gentlemen ofEngland, O surcease your ciuill dissentions, whereby the greater number of our shieres are deuided and mightilie disquieted, to the vtter wracke and ruine of manie partakers,



and whereby also the most Honorable industrious, and worthie Lord Chancellor with others in authoritie (that else shoulde otherwise bee occupied) spend most of their time in appeasing of discords and making of concordes. Surcease I say, these vncharitable con tentions, embrace each others loue & friendship, ofreconciled foes become vnfained friends and in amities band. Knit all your powers togither, to repell and subdue the power and pride of the common enimies of vs all. So shall you by your charitable dispositions each to other, and byyour knightlie prowesse and manlie resolution, ech for other and each with other, preuent their purpose, that would procure this calamitie. So shall wee liue in peace and safetie, and long enioy this prosperous tranquilitie.
            YOu Landlordes of this lande, improue not your rents nor inhance your fines, but affoord your poore Tenants (that alwaies rests at your disposition)



a liuers bargaine: intreat them as neighbours, and not as villaines, extend not your power to oppresse them by might, but stretch out your handes to defend their right, that they maye heereby be enabled to paie your rent, maintaine their families and answere hir Maiesty such taxes and impositiōs as shall be laid vpon them, for the defence and preseruation of our safetie, that we may enioye this happie tranquilitie.
            YE Councellors and learned in the lawes of this land, be ye more industrious in dispatch of your poore clients causes, vse no procrastination painefull to them, though gainefull to you. If neither lawe nor conscience fauor their case (as many suche Cases shal come to your handlings and most commonlie prosecuted by the wealthy worldlings) O then flatter them not in their peruerse proceedings, but a duise them to cease their sutes and misdooings, yet for that many causes are so ho



nest and lawdable in appearance at the first, (though in truth they are nothing lesse) and therefore you cannot discerne the right from wrong, vntill by due course oflaw it be discussed. O yet when you shall perceiue (by exami nation of euery circumstance in particular) that you haue the weaker side, by reason of the weakenes and insufficiencie of the cause, ô then: euen then I say, aduance not the glorie of your wits in the maintenance of falshoode and dishonest actions. Thinke it not a discredit to giue place to truth, but rather a fowle impietie to oppose you against hir: wander not in the wildernes ofsophisticall sorceries, nor decke your speech with flowers of eloquence (compassed about with presumptions and shewes of probabilities) to inchant the iudge with such magicall trumperies. And although hereby your profit shall be somewhat lessened, yet your praise amongēst good men shall bee greatly augmented. So shall ye please God who will preuent these calamyties,



and euery man posses his own in safety, to inioy this moste ioyefull and gladsome tranquility.
            YOu Marchants, trades-men, and Citizens of London (for to you especially I direct my speech) ô carrie a conscience to speake the truth, much more to sweare the truth (though your oth ought to be but yea, yea, and naie, naie.) Make not fraud your broker to vtter your wares: but when true meaning cheapeneth them, let plaine dealing price them at a reasonable rate, & for a computent gaine. Imploie not your heapes of coine to vserie, no although it bee (as your fleshely reason iudgeth) for meane profit, and such as our statutes tollerateth: yet know the statutes of God, doo vtterlie disanull the ninth parte of a farthing to bee so taken, and pronounceth them accurssed, that setteth out their money for such considerations. But lende thy money to thy needie brother freely, & releeue his wants with thy necessaries



and God will repay it thee againe, in his high Exchequer of heauen. Nor vtter your wares and commodities to yong gentlemen (vpon statute Marchant assurance) for double and treble vallue; whose forwardnes many times to run into your debt and danger, to maintaine their prodigalitie and inordinate expences, is the cause of the ruine and vtter extirpation of them and their houses: & yet you think it iustifiable before god & man to make ye most of your wares in what sort soeuer. O deceiue not your selues by practizing to deceiue him that neither canne deceiue, nor bee deceiued, your thoughts are knowne vnto him, much more your deedes. In a word, GOD here with is greeuouslie offended, poor gentlemen and others greatly impouerished, and these calamities violent lie hastened. Therefore, if not for shame and conscience sake, yet for feare of Gods vengeance, forsake this manquelling mischeef, think not that well gained, that is euill gotten; and



thogh you could be content to offend your Prince and oppresse hir people for your priuate profit, yet greeue not God for any earthly benefit. Be sorie for what is past, and make amends by restitution. So shall they not need to feare executions, but inioyethis tranquility without molestation.
            YE Angel-like youths ofEngland, in whose beautifull formes the wōderful workmanship togither with the vnspeakeable glorie of the creator shineth: oh seeing he hath so richelie adorned you with the ornamentes of nature, doe nothing vndeacent or ill beseeming your comlines. But alas, it is to true (the more it is to be lamēted) that what God hath formed, you haue by your brutish behauiors and reckles insolence deformed, for what vngratiousnes is resident on earth, vnto which you are not inclined: yea and vnto what lewdnes maye the sons of Adam be inclined, but you in the fullest mea sure and highest degree are therto addicted,



bearing your selues on hande with a vaine perswasion, that all your faults are taken and imputed perfections, & al your bad properties are estemed as good qualities, if so they be (as I nothing doubte but so they are) it is with those whose faults are as great as your follies, whose affections are full fraught with all imperfections, and whose lusts are as lewd as your liues. And though thorough the corruption of this age, things that are not, are cal led and reputed as if they were, for ech proud man termed a proper man: ech murderous manqueller, a couragious cauilere: and each blasphemous swearer, a man of good demeanure: yet shal these trim titles falslie giuen nothinge auaile in the day of visitation, the naked truth of things, & not the painted shew of thinges shall then be in high est regard.
            My hearte (as being plunged in the deapth of dole) is ouer whelmed with waues of woe, yea and my soule is sore vexed and vnquiet within mee, when



I consider amongest the multitude of euill customes, wherewith this vngra tious age is polluted, the impious, odious and moste damnable custome of swearing, the wrong whereof the Sauiour of the world sustaines, in requital of his vnutterable good wil towards vnkind mankind: and art thou ô sacred sauiour, thus iniuriously delt withall in recompence of all the iniuries suffered in thy pretious passion? Naie haue I, wretche that I am, that presumeth nowe to reprehend others with suche monstrous impietie, so aquitted thy great kindnesse, than which none can bee greater: for greater loue can no man shew, than to suffer death, yea a moste odious, bitter, and reprochfull death to testifie his loue? then ô my soule, my ouersinfull soule, by whome (during the good pleasure of him thou so offendest) my bodie hath his motion and being, crucifie thy selfe with anguishe and sorrowe, and seeing thy power hath such dominiō in my wretched truncke, expresse thy sorrow by



sending to mine eies a fountaine of teares: wherewith I may wash awaie (in some measure) thy lothsome filthinesse, if thou doo it not, the verie steele & adamant, yea and stones of hardest temper shall rise against thee in iudgement. For had they reason they neyther would or could refraine frō teares, yea and that in great aboundance, to behold thy wilfull and outragious insolence.
            O Gentlemen and louing countrimen what furie so inchanteth me, and you, that we make no conscience of so great a sinne, that so greatly greeueth the holieghost: for though before I haue (in the vexation of my soule) reprehended in sorte the enormities of our time, yet no one before touched, in extremitie of euill, is to this iniquitie comparable. For here with the king of glorie is eftsoones tormented and crucified in heauen, as before he was by the cruell Iewes on earth, that heart, whiche before Longious speare wounded, is hereby again, violently rented.



The pretious bloud, wherewith miserable man was (from the misery whervnto he was fallen) redeemed is thorough our wilfulnesse in this respect, rigorously effused, the woundes pearsed againe, the face buffeted again, the body scourged againe, the head pricked againe: and in disdaining the rebuke of the godly whiche in the zeale of his soule, for this sinne of sinnes hee giueth, we spit on him againe and contemteously mock & deride him again. How commeth it to passe the deuill so preuaileth, that for euerie trifling occasion: we vomite vp such execrable othes against the harmlesse and innocent lambe of God, in whose precious bloud and holie woundes the sinnes of the whole world are coueted from the wrath of his father, alasse how happeneth it that that blessed bodie, whiche in the heauinesse and dolour of his spirite, swet the most vnkinde sweate of bloud and water for our health, is so vnkindly dealt withal by vs, we are (to our shame I speake it) wee are more



cruell then the Iewes against the Lord of glorie. For they crucified him but once, but wee euerie daie, (yea euerie houre of the daie) crucifie him againe and againe: hee sitteth at the right hand of his father, making intercession for vs in heauen: wee like vnnaturall paracydes teare and pull in peeces his blessed members on earth, yea and martir him in more despitefull maner then the vnbeleeuing Iewes. Hee blesseth while we banne, hee prayeth for vs earnestly while wee sweare, and dishonour him contemptiously: and finally wee requite al his sufferings with scoffings, his merites with mockes, his torments with tauntes, his loue with hate, and his humilitie with pride and all impietie, and in a word, his holie and vertuous liuing, with wilfull and horrible swearing: ô cruell tormentors, ô vnkind and pitilesse tyrants: how can we hope to haue the benefit of his death, that as muche as in vs lieth, daily put him to death? but farre is it from vs to



hurt one heare ofhis head, sauing that he is greeued to beholde our vngratiousnes, and much displeased with our vnthankfulnesse. We are forbidden in his gospell, to sweare by ought that god made, yea by the least heare of our hed, bicause (for so it yeeldeth ye reasō) we can make neither of them white or blacke, but what is forbidden vs that most willinglie we doo.
            The instruments, yea the curssed instruments, wherewith satan prouoketh vs to offer suche violence againste our Christ, Is cards and dice, which thogh for recreation they may in decent sort be vsed, yet a wiseman was of opinion that no wise man oughte to vse them, were it for ought or naught, bicause they are the verie elements and firste beginners of this blasphemie. For when the games will not frame in sort as we desire: and if the plaie that is offered vs, be not as square as the die, but through the one and the other we are without further triall of lawe, dispossessed of our proper right, then doo we



cursse and ban, sweare and stare, yea with varietie of othes (which are thundered forth with all asperitie) we blaspheme the blessed bodie and pretious bloud of our deare Sauiour, reputinge it but a sport or at least a pettie offense so to doo: and he that can moste terribly teare him, we haue in highest estimation, and without he can so doo, he is too too simple to be a gamester, naie if such a one loose (as commonly those that pertaines to Goddes election seldome winne, bicause by their losses he would weane them from it) it will be said he looseth for want of swearing, & with such words of contempt be openlie derided: As once I heard yt a gentleman in name though (otherwise in condition) the dice bereauing him of more money then stood with his patience to lose) should burst forth into a maruellous great outrage of swearing and impatiencie, amongst the reste of whose blasphemous othes, hee sware some fearful & vnacustomed oth which greatlie offended the eares of a kinsmā


               
of this, that reprooued him in this man ner: O cosin (saith he) what madnesse moueth thee so to blaspheme thy god, beyonde the measure of all that euer yet blasphemed him; be sorie for thy fault, & God forgiue thee: vnto which he replied, let him neuer forgiue mee, for I sware it willinglie. I wondered greatlie at his replie, but I woondered more, yt God in his iust & seuere iudge ment against sinne, (especiallie of so odious a nature) did not open the bowels of the earth to swallowe him vp quicke as he did Chore, Dathan, and Abiron. But wonderfull yea and vnspeakeable is the greatnes of thy mercie and long suffering O Lord, which dooest permit vile duste and ashes to abuse thy sacred Godhead and almigh tie Maiestie: how vnsearchable is the depth of thy patience, that canst endure so to be prouoked, and howe vnspeakeable is the brutish boldnesse of mans hart, that dare presume so to pro uoke thee. But O miserable man, thinkest thou that for bicause God prolon



geth his punishments (as earst I saide) thou shalt escape vnpunished? or thin kest thou that for bicause his lightning and feareful thunderbolts lighteth vpon trees, hearbs, stones, & other sence lesse creatures, which might more deseruedlie lighte vpon thee, that thou shalt auoid his finall iudgement? O no, it stands not with Gods iustice (if thou preuent it not by repentance) so to acquit thee. Excuse these faultes how thou canst, they are vtterly inexcuseable, wilt thou answer it as thou art woont? and saye it is good to haue the name of the Lord alwaies in mind and the bloud of Christ still in remem brance, or when thy brother charitably rebuketh thee for swearing by him wilt thou replie (as often thou dooest) what hast thou to doo with the man or the matter, I sweare by no friende of thine? if so thou wilt, thy will be doon; but heereof I can assure thee, that that wilfull will of thine, which is so repugnant to Gods holie will, will in conclusion procure thy damnation. It is



good indeed to haue the name of the Lord alwaies in mind (as thou saiest) and the blessed bloud of Christ euer in remembrance as thou alleagest, but it is not good to haue it in so euill a manner; naie farre better it were, that thou neuer name him or thinke vpon him, than so to name him or remember him.
            But remember thou the feareful example of Senacherib kinge of Ashur, mentioned in the xviii. and xix. chapters of the second booke of Kings, who for that he blasphemed the God of Israel, and with an hie hand & outstretched arme opposed himselfe againste him and against his seruant Hezekiah, king of Iuda, was first bereft of an hun dred foure sc ore and fiue thousand sol diars of his campe, by the visitation of an angell, at what time hee besieged Hezekiah and his cittie Ierusalem, and after murdered by Adramelech and Sharezer his owne sonnes, as hee was in the temple worshipping Nisroch his god. The great Antiochus, in like



sort, breathing out blasphemie in the pride of his heart against the Lord of hosts, was smitten with an incureable and inuincible plague, for euen with the fault, a remedilesse and peerelesse paine of the bowels, and sore tormēts of the inward parts came vpon him, & was throwne from his chariot in the swift course thereof in such sort, that al the members of his bodie were sore brused with the fall; whereof it followed that wormes came out of the bodie of this wicked blasphemer in great aboundance, and whilest hee was yet liuing, his fleshe fell from the bones, with paine and tormente, and all his armie was greeuouslie annoied with his smell: so that no man, nay he him selfe could not abide his owne stinke, that a little before thought he mighte reach to the starres of heauen, command the flouds of the sea, and weigh the high Mountaines in a ballance, so proud was hee, beyonde the common condition of man. Thus the blasphemer died a most miserable deathe in a



strange countrie amongest the mountaines.
            Nicanor, for his presumptuous blas phemie against the God of Israell was likewise in the battel which he fought against the Iewes (after fiue & thirtie thousand of his hoast were slaughtred) slaine himselfe, his hed, hand, & shoul der strooke off, and his blasphemous toong cut out, and deuided in small peeces and giuen to the fowles of the aire, as a iust recompence of his outragious madnesse.
            These with many thousandes more, wherof written verities maketh menhaue beene euen in this life plagued with strange torments & vnacspected deathes for their great wickednes in this behalfe, it haue brought the vengeance and iuste wrath of God vppon whole countries and nations: and for that no lawes are made to suppres and punish this offence on earth, God him selfe will punishe it with vengeance from heauen.
            But O deere father I beseech thee,



in the aboundance of that great mercie, which thou (the almightie creator ofheauen and earth) extendest toward vs the banishedbrats of Eue, at what time thou sentest into the worlde, the liuelye image of thy owne substance, euen thy word of promise, thy deere & only Sonne Christ Iesus, that hee by pouertie, humilitie, meekenes & charitie, by buffers, whippinges and torments, and finallie by the most cruell and shameful death of the crosse, shuld redeeme and ransome vnrighteous mankind, being in captiuitie (fast boūd with the chaines of sinne) vnder the great prince of darkenesse & of death, that it would please thee in the greatnesse of that mercy and goodnesse of thine, to spare this Realme of England from the punishmēt, which we (thrugh our wilfull periuries and odious blasphemies) worthilie deserue, and as it were with strong hand pull vppon vs: Spare vs good Lord, spare the English nation, and especiallie the supreame head and gratious gouernesse thereof.



Pardon our sinnes, and deferre thy ven geance, till thy wrathe be ouerpassed, and our penitencie purchase thy pardon. Consider ô almightie monarche of the celestiall world, how prone all mankinde is to sinne, by natural corruption, engraffed in their fleshe by Adams disobedience, therefore & for the innocencie of thy son Iesus (which by firme faithe is ours) grant vs grace leisure and respite, to arise out of the cradle ofsecuritie, in which we are by sinnes delectation rocked asleepe. Let thy great mercy exceed thy hie iustice to vs wards, and lette thy holy Spirite (which we beseech thee powre on vs aboundantly) so preuaile with vs, that henceforth wee refraine our toonges from blasphemous swering, & our lips frō leasing, that we may speake of thee reuerently as becōmeth christians, & thinke of thee religiouslie as becometh thy seruants. So shall it come to passe that liuing (as we ought) vertuouslie, we shall possesse this peacefull plentie & long inioy this peereles tranquility.
            

               
YE contentious wranglers, & restlesse busibodies, whiche vnder the shewe of simplicitie harboureth hypocritical dissimulation, and vnder pretence of plainnesse doe shroud much peruersenesse, prosecuting lawe for eche lawlesse occasion, deuising driftes, to deceiue eche other by guile and falshoode, bending the powers of your wealth and wittes, to effect your contentious cauillatiōs, regarding nei ther the dutie of christian loue & charitie, the admonitions ofholy writ, nor the comfort of neighbourly societie, but with inward delight, and outward cheerefull semblance, pursue your wilfull purposes, with such earnest desire of ech others downfall, that vntill your purses haue cast vp all their pence, no composition nor agreement will be had: and when beggerie hathe attached you by writ of want, then vntimely repentance strikes the stroke of agreement. Meane while the lawyers laughes, when you haue cause to weepe, they smile to see you sadde,



they solace themselues in your sorow: whose peeuishnesse haue occasioned your owne impouerishments, whose coyne haue caused their credite, and whose wealthe haue supplied their wants, yet to preuent ye sentēce of law, you thinke your selues happie if they discouer ought yt may procure delaie, whicha shallow studēt may easily doo, for though ye lawes in thēselues be perfect, yet hee that will bee contentious (hauing the golden engine, which is of force to wrest them awrie) may finde starting holes a number: for the galles of the laws are as bitter as worm wood, whiche to my paine I haue too lately prooued: for which (as for my greatest cause of griefe) al the Rubarbe in Alexandria, will scarse purge my melancholie.
            And therefore my good and louing countriman, attende that I shall (in a word) vnfold vnto thee. I speake by costly experience, to the end thou maiest eschue the like experimentes. Our Lawyers for the moste part will



more regard thy money then the matter, for after hee hath once set downe the circumstante of thy cause in his baneful booke of Mementos and therein entered thy name: take this of me as long as there it remaineth, thou shalt neuer thriue, till either neighbourlie concord crosse thee out, or beggerie blot thee out: for though the lawes ought to bee free for all the Queenes naturall subiects, yet neither sergiant, chancellor, or atturneie will vnderstand the cause without thy coine: for his case is best, that is best vnderlaid with wealth and worship, for though it be darke, the glittering shine of gold can illustrate the same, yea and though it be bad, yet if that soueraigne mettall be therto applied, it wil mend it much, and couer the defectes: for doubtlesse ye lawyers pleadings are most effectuall, and his proceedings most iudicial, when he findes the giftes to be moste liberall: then wil they with their painted eloquence, and rethoricall words ofslender substance, put such a glorious



glosse vpon thy matter, that the darke shall seeme light, and the wrong right.
            Heereof I aduise thee, that thou beware and be warnd by mee and other poore men that too late haue experienced the same, let it not grieue thee to loose a pennie, to spare a pound. Oppresse not eche other by riguor oflawe, and bee not auenged on euerie wrong, remembring that prouerbe which saith: He that will be auenged on euerie wrath, the longer hee liues the lesse he hath. Consume not thy goodes in suche vnhappinesse, expell those cotentious affections which wasteth thy substaunce, so shall the same be multiplied aboundantly, thou shalt haue Gods blessing, if thou liue in charitie, and haue a good report of all men generallie, and long enioy this peace and happie tranquilitie.
            YOu English Romanistes, you that plaie inordinately before the golden calfe, of your own inuentions, and



commit spiritual fornication with the great whore, who (like hir selfe) in censeth you to seeke, by sundrie practises, the ruine and subuersion of our gratious Queene, hir state and kingdome, ô seeing she hath dealt so mercifully with you (as had you not first attempted violence against hir sacred person) you might haue inioyed your liuinges and liberties, both of bodies and consciences. Surcease your treacheries & touch not the Lordes annointed, for Christ Iesus will suffer no violence, (as we to our great comfort haue seen and perceiued) to bee done vnto his deare spowse our Queene and gouernesse, but will manifest your conspiracies be they neuer so secret to your confusion and ignomies. But ifGod, for our deserued plague, shoulde suffer you to preuaile in your tyrannicall attempts, ô what are your hopes? or what shuld you gaine thereby. Thinke you not to participate with vs the insuing calamities? O yes no doubt, for those that makes no conscience to set you on



worke, to effect so damnable a villany will make no conscience to depriue you of liues and liuing for their owne commoditie. And therefore moste lamentable it is to see, howe fowly you are bewitched and misled, by the instistigations and hand leadinges of such vnholie holie ones, who seeke to plant religion with the sword (vtterly forbid den by God) and to moysten the same with thebloud ofhis deare saintes. O cast your eies vpō the miserable plight of your natiue countrie, that haue nourished, fed, and brought you vp, if your treasons should (but I hope neuer shal) take effect: what hauockes, what spoiles what ruines, what rapes, what mercilesse massacres, what consuming with fire, what cities laid waste, what townes ouerthrowne, what famine in our coasts, what miserie in our streetes, what lamentations on our walles, and finallie what calamitie is there on earth, that shall not in England then plentifully abound? Can you that seeme so holie, professing Christ



as we doo (though not as wee doo) for common humanitie sake, (if not for our sakes whome you hold heretickes, endure so ruthfull sight, or brooke such barbarous crueltie. If so you can, then dare I auouch there remaines in you, neither feare of God, saint, or deuill. But I know (as farre forth as man may know) some of you are better disposed thogh too many ofyou be traiterously minded, which better sorte, I beseech God, as in duetie and charitie I am bounde, in his good time to inlighten with his trueth, that the mist of error and ignorance, beeing taken from their eies, they may behold the bright sunne-shine of his sonnes glorious gospell, that we with them, and they with vs may, in vnitie osfaith, pray for the peace of lerusalem, all the daies of our liues: so shal God be pleased with vs & preserue vs from such calamities, that wee may liue in safetie, and inioy this peerelesse tranquilitie.
            ANd lastly let vs protestantes bee thankefull to God, for that it hath



pleased him in his vnrecountable largesse and good will towardes vs, by meanes of Elizabeth our Queene, his deare daughter, to prosper the passage ofhis sonnes sacred Gospell, and let ech of vs in our seuerall degrees, and callinges walke worthie of so blessed a benefit than which none can be more blessed, let vs expresse our faith as wel by deede as words (because our good Phil. 19. 10. 11 works setteth forth the glorie of God) 1. Pet, 2. 12. that by our vertuous conuersations, and charitable inclinations, wee may stop the mouthes of Christes enemies and ours, and by our good example of liuing, they may be allured to embrace the faith of Christ, not in varietie of kinde, but in vnitie and concord, that loue and charitie may hold vs all togither in band of peace, that the churche militant may florishe, and the churche triumphant reioyce, that soueraigne Elizabeth may ioy in our obedience, and we reioice in hir gratious gouernment, that the cloudie piller go not from vs by daie, nor the fierie flame



by night, that a sweete hermonie may be heard amongst vs, and disonnancte be vtterly banished from vs. That loue may inflame our heartes with desire of eche others good, and enuie excluded that would ech others harme. That the lion may be reconciled withthe lamb, and the wild asse pastured with the sillie kid. That the poole of grace maie flow ouer this realme, and the flames of our enemies furies bee quite extinguished. That the abhomination of desolation may be remooued from the holie temple, and the sonne of man exalted in his owne kingdome. That Babilon may put on Sion, and Egypt become our owne. That of wild oliues we may become ye true garden plants ofMiscreantes, Christians, of Ismael, Israel, ofheathenish Idolaters and Antichristian Romanistes, Euangelicall & sincere worshippers of God in spirit and veritie. That hee may blesse our Queene with a long and prosperous raigne for our sakes, and wee hir subiectes with peace and plentie, for hir



sake. That our soules may be fed with the heauenly Manna, and our bodies with the fatnesse of earthly aboundance. That neither cost bee spared, time ouerpassed, paines taking omitted, nor occasion neglected, to winne that is withholden, to bring home that is straied, to finde that is lost, to repaire that is decaied, to refreshe that is wearied, to heale that is wounded and to restore that is ruined. That we hereby may preuent these calamities, liue without feare of treason or treaherie, and long enioy this thrice happy tranquilitie.
            O that it would please God to honor me so much, as to giue power to the perswasions in this booke contained, to touch the heart but euen of any one whose conuersion might bee wished, and whose amendment might ensue, I should then thinke the hower of my birth as happie as my selfe, whose hap pinesse herein cannot be expressed. O that I had (to this end alone) the toong of an angell, that my words might bee



powerful, to bring them to knowledg, that their greatzeale might inuiolably be coupled therewith. O that I had the spirite of God in as great measure as had blessed Paule, that my exhortations might pearce their breasts and altar their minds to this resolution. So should my soule be rauished with ioy, and all my vaines replenished with vn speakeable consolation. But forsomuch as I am vnlearned, my wordes (I know) shall bee contemned, and for my presumption I shal be condemned and for that I am yong, I am the more vnfit to aduise the olde. And for that I am my selfe, beyond all measure sinfull, I doubt my perswasions will bee the lesse powerful, bicause I haue here tofore shaken handes with vanitie, I shall be deemed most vnmeet to deale with Diuinitie. But bee it as pleaseth God, who knoweth the care I haue of my Soueraignes safetie, the zeale I owe to my natiue countrie, the desire I haue of my brethrens conformitie, hath caused me to publishe this lyttle



treatie. Whiche although it bee not fraught with the entising wordes of mannes fleshlie wisedome, yet is it repleat with plaine perswasions, tending to good purpose. The argument wher of (being for reformation) then which nothing is more common, yet nothing more needfull (Quia mundus totus in maligno positus est) which although I maie wish it, yet can I not procure it, but to my power I will euer seeke it, though I cannot but confes, my selfe do greatlie need it.
            BVt by the waie, I deeme it verie conuenient to speake (though to very small purpose I doubte) of that wherin the diuel is so much delighted, and where withall the worlde at thys daie is so greeuouslie infected. Namelie, the impious, deadlie and damnable sinne of pride and vaine-glorie, which is the root of all vnrighteousnes, and the verie keye that openeth the gate which leadeth to eternall destruction: the least iot of whose venom if it once but touch the hart (except the pre



tious oile of Gods grace bee thereon speedilie powred) it will neuer cease swelling, till both bodie and soule bee brought to consusion. Howbeit the noblest harts are herewith bewitched, and with the poison thereof, euen as it were suffocated, pride is the confounder ofmeekenes and vertue, it subdueth the soules and bodies of manye, that otherwise are noblie minded, and causeth them many times to doo that, whereof ensueth their downefall and destruction. For true is the prouerbe proue it who shall, that at first or at last Pride will haue a fall. The first offendor in a sinne of this kind as the scriptures testifieth, was Lucifer; which not being contented with the glorie of the highest heauens, and the societie of Archangels, Cherubins and Seraphins, woulde yet presume to make himselfe equall with God his creator: for which his pride and ambition (as being well worthie) hee was throwne headlonge from the height of heauen, to the depth of the bottomlesse pit of hell, where now he



is damned perpetuallie, there to abide and endure the violent paines whiche God hath ordained for him and his damnable associates; and he that before shined in heauen as bright as the sunne in his highest beautie, is nowe through pride, transformed to a feend yea and that a most vglie and fearefull feend; whose horrible shape no mortall man can abide to looke vpon. Let a man haue wisdome, beauty, strength vertue, knowledge, honor and riches, and he shall vtterly obscure & eclipse the glorie of them all, by vaine glorious pride and statelinesse of mind. But this sinne generally hath more domination in women then men, whiche plainlie appeareth by their high looks, sumptuous ornaments, and fantastical attire, that it may truely be said, pride hath so infected them, that they be euen sicke of the fashions; whence it commeth that men are allured to lust that else might liue chast, the blazing beauty of women brightned by arte, so dazell the eies of their mindes and bodies,



that they are therevnto subdued and vnto wanton desires captiuated. As Holofernes ye proud Assirian, with the comelie shape and beautie of faire (yet chaste) Iudith, by whose feeble hands (God so preordaining) his hatefull head was deuided from his shoulders, so greatly was he ouercome with hir beautie.
            Cruell Iezabell (that Diuell incarnate) which through pride painted hir face, thereby to allure and betray Iehu with hir fairnesse (although it nothing auailed hir for God procured Iehu to abhorre hir) was for hir pride and tyranny, by Gods iust iudgment, thrown downe from an high window & dogs did deuoure hir, as he before had promised.
            Had not Bersabe in bathinge hir selfe negligentlie discouered hir beautie, Dauid had not cōmitted the foule offenses of murther and adulterie, and consequentlie Israell had not bin plagued with such calamitie.
            Therefore gaze not ouer greedilie



vpon the fraile beautie of a woman, least thine hart be intangled therwith, and so thou become a slaue vnto sin, & thy soule a subiecte vnto Satan, their shewes are but shadowes of a vaine substance, the rewarde of whose pride is eternall paine.
            Pride is a sinne of sinnes, fro whence (as branches from the tree) al and euery sinne proceedeth: it troubled the angels ofheauen, yea and Christs deer saints and holy disciples on earth. It offendeth the maiestie of God, and plungeth man in maine seas of sinne and waues of wickednesse. Happie is the man or woman, whom this vnthrif ty vice of pride and vaineglorie, hath not bewitched: & happie is he, whom titles of preheminence hath not ledde captiue to so odious a sinne, & earthly pompe that procureth pride is vnstable and subiect to sudden alteratiō, for when it is at the highest, it wil suddenly discend, as it fared with ye proud Babylonians, at what time they purposed to raise their tower to the toppe



ofheauen, that so they might preuent the purpose of the highest, who seeing their pride and ambition, brought vp on them such confusiō, that the whole world to this daie participateth thereof.
            O pride! thou damnable and infernall furie, bred in the deepest bottome of the lowest hell, fie on thy frailetie; that hast destroied so many kings and mighty potentates with thy poison, for wheresoeuer thou goest shame insueth. By thee is Lucifer damned in hell, and perpetuallye excluded from the presence of God. By thee al mankind endureth miserie, for that thou prouokedst Adam to desire the know ledge of good and euill; and so consequentlie to disobay the commandement ofhis creator, for which hee and all we his vnhappy ofspring are accurs sed, and (without faith in Christ) for euer damned.
            By thee, Nabuchadnezer was trans formed from his former fashion, vnto the shape of a brute beast.
            

               
By thee Agar aduansing hir selfe, for that she had conceiued, & cōtemning hir lady and mistresse, was sharpelie punished as she well deserued.
            By thee Moab, Holofernes, Hamon Nicanor, Pharao, Balthazar, Antiochus, Herod & many thousands more mentioned in the old and new Testaments, were brought to shame & vtter confusion.
            Thou bereauest men of their wisedomes, and women of their wittes, as nowe (to the great griefe of the godly) is daily experienced, for this part of the world, where Christ is and ought to be professed, seemeth rather to be the locall place ofhel, then a state of christianitie, so great is the superfluitie vsed in apparrell, and so monstrous are the fashions wherewith both men and women are now commonly attyred: and where before our fathers coueted garmentes onely to couer their nakednesse: now we rather desire such, wherin our nakednesse may be most discouered.
            

               
But no more of this, least this treatise bee therefore despised, for hardlie can it come to the hands of any, whose hearts surfet not with this sinne, whose eies are not blinded with this vanitie, and whose mindes are not addicted to this enormitie. But in a word, to shut vp all: if the tauerne be known by the luy bush, & an Inne by the signe: then verily a minde vnchaste, enclined to wantōnesse, is by no one thing better known then by the outward habit, for they whose garmentes are newfangled and sumptuous: most commonly their mindes are vnstaied and lasciuious. Frame thou thy communication (saith a wise philosopher) according to thy garmentes: but if men and women in these daies should followe his aduise, (beeing apparrelled as they are) they shoulde speake as if they were (as indeede too too manie are) depriued of their wittes, if their speache should be as fanaticall, as their garmentes are fantasticall, hardly should they be vnderstood without an interpretor: for as



there is no meane, nor measure in the one, so should there bee no rime nor reason in the other, but God end it or amend it, or els it will neuer be amended, till all be ended. And to returne where (by occasion of this vanitie) I left) Call to minde, gentle Reader, the tyrannicall persecutions, and cruell martyrdomes perpetrated in the bloudie and pitilesse raigne of Queene Marie, imagine withall thou seest (as then to the griefe of many thousandes was seene) the tormenting furnace of Nabuchadnezer glowing hote, scorching and consuming the fleshe and bones of Christes deere saintes and blessed martirs. For professing ye trueth ofhis Gospell. Imagine thou hearest and seest (though to thy small edification or profite) the administration of his blessed word and sacramentes in a toong to thee vnknown. Imagine thou seest deuine honour and spirituall adoration performed to stocks and stones, and other sencelesse shadowes, and thou (on paine of death) compelled to



performe the like. Imagine yet further thou seest thy Christ robbed and dispoiled ofhis honour to be geuen vnto saintes and other his creatures, & thou not onely to be in danger of life: but to be excommunicated and held accursed, if thou doo not participate of this blasphemous impietie, and when thou hast called to thy remembrance these, and thousandes such like extremities, then compare that time of tyrannie, with this sweete time of mercy: and thou wilt bee constrained to say. Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, for he hath visited and redeemed his people, & hath raised vs vp a Queene, by and vnder whose godly and gratious gouernment we may serue him without feare, in true holinesse and righteousnesse before him all the daies of our life. And therefore let all true Israelites praie for hir, from whome (as from the instrumentall cause) these manifolde benefites and irrecompensible blessinges, are deuolued to vs. Let vs not not with Isops frogs growe wearye of



hir gentlenesse, least Ioue in requitall of our great ingratitude, send the stork to deuoure vs. No man hath managed the charge of any one priuate household more duly & orderly then (since the beginning of hir reigne) she hath doone this populous kingdome.
            Therefore O England, let thy yoong men and maides, old men and babes, thy beasts and cattell, thy fish & foule, thy mountaines and hils, thy riuers & welles, thy plants and trees, thy corne and grasse, thy fieldes and meades, thy citties and townes, thy woodes and groues, thy downes and dales, each in their kinds laude and praise the Lord; for giuing vs such a Queene, in and by whom we are so happy; for & thrugh whome we are blessed, and in whom as in a streame of Maiestie and princely magnanimity, all the gifts and graces which God bestoweth vpon the children of men doo swim, and to his praise and hir perpetuall renown (with out fault or imperfection) doo superabound. O but some will saie (if so they



durst) Sir you are too too extreame in hir commendation: you infringe the bounds of trueth, whereby it seemeth you aime at hir fauour by the leuell of flatterie. Shee is not so endowed with giftes and graces as you vainlie and most vntruely affirme. Neither is she so faultlesse and praiseworthie, as you make hir. Indeed, did not hir deserts merite my praises, my flatterie were too too palpable, but beeing no more then hir proper right, the repetition thereof (I know) is vtterly repugnant to hir pleasure, and therefore they are deceiued, whiche imagine, that I (poore snake and contemptible worm) aime at so high a marke, with so grosse a shaft.
            But for that which first I did attribute vnto hir, besides hir zealous forwardnesse, in the execution of Gods will, and the matter of hir and our soules welfare, hir exact knowledge of the toongs, hir deepe sight in the sciences, hir quicke capacitie, hir swift vnderstanding, hir mercie to offenders, hir



care of hir subiectes and hir peaceable regiment, doo plainely manifest: All whiche and manie other such like, as inuincible arguments doo proue mine assertion.
            To the second, be it graunted, that she is not vtterly faultlesse, and therefore not vtterly blamelesse, I replie: she is (though a most gratious Queene as I said) a mortall creature, framed of the same substance that we be, and therefore subiect to those passions and infirmities that we are. But so was Dauid of whome GOD saide, I haue chosen a man according to mine own heart, euen Dauid my seruaunt, yet whether he were faultlesse or no, his owne wordes doo manifest, when hee saide. The woundes in my soule doo fester and stincke euen thorough my Psal, 38, 5, owne faultes, and offences, and againe. Turne thy face (O Lord,) awaie from my sinnes, and blot out all my misdeedes, and againe, My sinnes are more in number than the haires of Psal, 51. 3, mine head. And again I acknowledge



my faultes, and my sinnes are euer before me, and they thrust me down euen as an intollerable burden: but if thou wouldest know wherein he offended, the holy Ghost will resolue thee in the second booke of Samuel, and the 11. chapter. And letting passe all the holy kings and prophets mentioned in the old Testament, yt acknowledged their infirmities, and yet God tendered as the apple of his eye: come we to sainct Paul, who although he were no king, yet was he a blessed Apostle, and had the spirit of God in great measure, yet said he ofhimselfe, as his owne Epistle to the Romains testifieth. The good that I would doo, that doo I not. But the euil that 
               Rom, 7, 18, 19 
               I hate: that doo I. If then it appeareth by these and such like vndoubted testimo nies, that mankind vnder heauen are sold vnder sin, who can then be so malitious to entwite hir maiestywith that which is proper to all in generall? Neither can she be touched with any blot of infamie, other then that which is incident to the most vprightest liuers. If



this be true (as what man liueth, & findeth not the same so tobe.) O then ye priuie whisperers, and secret backebiters whose toongs are as the stinges of Scorpions full of deadly poyson, cease to sting hir, whom youshal neuer hurt, or haue power to defame, though like vnnaturall paracides, you seeke it with all greedinesse, and as by hir gratious gouernment you breath & haue your being, so acknowledge it, and be not such vngratefull monsters as to render hir euill for good, but requite hir louing kindnes, with thankfulnes, & hir princely beneficence, withall dutifull obedience. Think reuerently ofhir, for Gods sake, and in respect of the great perils she still sustaineth for our sakes: for the paines she taketh for our onelie profite, and for the waightie charge, imposed vppon hir, and if (as one wise man saith) the cares that attendeth a crown were duely considered, it is not worth the taking vp if wee found it in the streetes: then what a worthlesse iewell hath she ofhir crown, in respect



ofhir cares, no one can expresse them, saue shee that hath them, and for our sakes doo indure them. Therefore maligne hir not by worde nor thought, But wish hir well, and saie, Good lucke haue you (O gratious Queene) with your honor, according to the great renowme, wherewith the king ofkings hath ennobled you. Peace and prosperitie, be vnto them that loue you, but confusion of face, and horror of conscience be vnto al them that hate you. For your diuine giftes and graces all people doo praise you, and for the peace and plentie wee enioy by your meanes, wee will euer honour you. Wherby you shall highly please God, in accomplishing his will, who hath by the mouth ofhis Apostle commanded all men to praie for kinges and princes, and all that are in aucthoritie, to the end they may liue a godly and peaceable life vnder them. According to which commandement, let all that be truely English fall prostrate before Gods mercie seat, with al feruent deuotion, and say.
            

               
               
                  HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE. DIEV ET MON DROIT.
               
            
         
         
            
            The Praier.
            
               COme downe ô Lord, come with thousāds of thy Saintes, come downe I saye, O God of Iacob, and blesse Israell, yea come and blesse thy chosen and deare beloued seruant Elizabeth our Queene, whome thou hast set vp a mightie prince and mother ouer thy people and cittie Sion, and made the cheefe gouernor among the nations. O let Elizabeth liue and not die, neyther let hir Honour be any thinge diminished for our sinnes and offenses. Heare O Lorde the voice ofhir humble and daielie praiers, and lette hir continue a prince of



peace and Royall Ruler ouer thy people. Hir handes shall be good inough for hir, if thou helpe hyr still as thou hast doone against hir enimies. Right and light be with thy gratious handmaide, whome thou didst proue with great temptations and trial as thou diddest Io seph, before thou diddest annoint hir Queene, and whome hitherto thou hast preserued a pure and vndefiled virgine to promote thy glo rie, as thou didst thy seruant Dauid. She that in all hir manifolde afflictions, hath more esteemed the seruing of thee hir God, than sauing ofhir selfe, and loued not hir life so deere as shee loued thy lawe: yea that preferred thine obedience before sacrifice: O let hir our gratious Queene Elizabeth who hath thus doone hir dutie, be plentifully rewarded of thee from heauen with the perpetual crown



of glorie and palme ofvictorie.
            Shee, euen she hath taught Iacob thy iudgementes, and Israell thy lawe: She hath put incense be fore thy face, and the burnt offering vpon thine altar. Shee, euen sheO God, hath with Hezechias restored thy sincere religion, and worshippeth thee aright with eue rie one that is godly.
            Blesse therefore, O Lorde, hir substance and first fruits, & accept the workes ofhir handes. Smite through the loines of them that rise vp against hir, & of them that hate hir that they rise not againe. O let the beloued of the lord dwel euer in safetie, yea do thou ô lord, vouchsafe to bee hir vaile and defence all hir life longe, and dwell with hir heere in the church as hir beloued spouse, head and gouernour.
            Laie thy left hand, O Lord, vnder



hir hed, and let thy right hand embrace hir, that shee may finde continual comfort in thy presence
            O fountaine of the gardens: O well ofliuing waters: arise ô north and come ô south and blow vpon thy spouse, which is as a goodly & pleasant garden inclosed, and as a fountaine sealed vp for thy selfe, and water it with the springes of Lebanon, that it may grow great, and the sweete spices and smell thereof may flow out into thy nostrils, and thou eate of the pleasant fruit in hir.
            Kisse hir with the kisses of peace and righteousnes, and let hir two breasts satisfie thee, and bee like two yongroes that are twins feeding vpon the lillies.
            Let hir be a sure wall and foundation, wherevppon thou mayest build a golden pallace, and let hir breasts be as towres vnassaultable,



that she may be meet for thee hir spouse to dwell in and be in thyne eies, as she that findeth perpetuall peace and quietnesse.
            O God in whose sighte hir fathers did walke. Thou O GOD, which hast fed hir all hir life long vnto this daye, and deliuered hir hitherto from many treasons and dangers. Blesse hir still euen with the blessing of Abraham, Isaac, & Iacob, and all the patriarches, with all the blessings of thy mercies pro mised vnto hir father Dauid.
            In hir let Israell also bee blessed: in hir let thy graces so plentifullie and manifestly appeare, that the people may thense take a pattern ofblessing thee: and teache theyr posteritie to blesse and praise thee for thy goodnes and mercy, both towards hir and them.
            For she is to vs thy might, thy strength, thy noblenesse of dignitie,



and the excellencie of power. Shee as a Lionesse is laide downe and couched safelie, after the spoil Who shall stir hir vp? hir enimies doo all feare hir: and doo thou stil charge the daughters ofIerusalem that they stir not vp thy loue, nor awake hir by troubling hir quietnesse and peace, vntill she please. O let not the brethren of euill, the reuengers ofbloud, nor the instru ments of violence and crueltie be in hir court and habitation. O let not crueltie or falshood come into hir soule: into their secretes let not hir soule come, neyther let hir glorie bee ioyned or stained with the assemblye or damned crue of the wicked.
            Cursse them that cursse hir, and blesse them that blesse hir: deuide them in Iacob and scatter them in Israel, which shameleslie in theyr rage dare cruelly attempt any trecheries



or treasons against hir innocent and royall person: yea let them be condingly punished, who soeuer go about to troble the state or ouerthrowe hir kingdome.
            The time is now come that the blessings of God shewed vnto her father shall take effecte, and bee stronger in hir than the blessinges ofhir elders, vnto the vttermoste endes of the worlde, they shall all beblessings vpon the head of Elizabeth, and on the toppe of the head of hir that is separate from hir birthe, and consecrated from the wombe to dignitie and honor, farre aboue hir fellow virgines and made the annointed of the Lorde, to beare rule and to haue dominion ouer men.
            Hir beautie and glorie let it bee like the firste borne bullocke, and hir strength as the vnicorne, with the horn ofhir power let hir smite



the people togither, euen the tenne thousandes of Ephraim, and the tenne thousandes of Manasses.
            Blesse hir going out and comming in, and prosper her at home and abroad, in all hir affaires both by land and sea.
            Make hir glad ioyefull and willing to call thy people vnto thy holie hill of Sion, and there in thy Church to offer with them together, the offeringes of righteousnesse, that she and they may sucke of the aboundance of the sea, and the treasures hid in the earth.
            A lions whelpe let hir bee, to leape from Basan, and make hir stronge inough to defend hir selfe from Balaaks cursse, and againste all the treasons of Zimri and Achitophel.
            O satisfie hir with thy fauour, and fill hir with thy blessinges, let



hir possesse both the East, West, South and North partes of the earth.
            Blesse hir with people and make hir acceptable vnto hir brethren and sisters, and to dip hir feete in oile.
            Hir shooes let them be iron & brasse, and hir glorie health, welth and strength to continue as longe as the sunne.
            Who is like thee, O GOD of Israell, which though thou sit vpon the heauens, and ridest vppon the Cherubins, yet art thou our helpe and Sauiour, whose glory is in the clowdes and Celestiall places.
            The Eternall God bee still her refuge, who hath established her throne amongest the English nation, to his owne glorie and their vnspeakeable comfort.
            Thou hast restored againe, the



liberty of our countrie, and the sinceritie of doctrine with peace and tranquilitie. Thine, thine O Lord was the benefit, the meanes, the labour and seruice was hirs, a burthen too heauie, alas, for a wo mans shoulders, yet easie and tollerable by thy helping hand.
            Assiste hir therefore O Lorde, neither respect hir offences, or the deserts of hir parents, or the manifolde sinnes of vs her people, but thinke vpon thy wonted compassion, alwaies at hande to thy poore afflicted.
            That Israell as euen nowe at this present, may still dwell alone in safetie and the fountaine of Iacob bee plentifull in issue in the land of wheate and wine, and the heauens droppe the deawe of thy blessing plentifullie vppon hir and hir country.
            Happie and blessed art thou,



O Israell, that hast such a Queene, that is so honourable among women.
            Let not the Scepter depart out ofhir hand, nor kingdome be diminished: but let this thy moste wise lawe-giuer, our meeke Moises continue amongst vs with honor to iudge the people and gather them vnto thee long in reste and peace, euen vntill Silo our sauiour Iesus come, to crowne her in his euerlasting kingdome with honour and triumph.
            Blesse hir still O Lord, and giue power vnto thy Queene, that she may bestrong to keepe the feet of thy saints within the walles of thy Church, and cause the wicked for euer to keepe silence in darkenes: Amen, quoth Iohn Dauies.
            
         
         
            
            The Authors submission.
            
            
               WHen I considered the variable disposition of the sonnes of vanitie, to gither with the crosse constructions of the ouerthawart carpers of our time, I had wel neere withdrawne my purpose in publishing this treatie. But when I cald to mind, the causes that made me first take in hand this thankelesse task (which is expressed vpon the forefront thereof) it emboldened mee to prosecute what erst I had intended, and pre suming vpon mine innocencie in that whereofI may any way be suspected or malitiouslie misconstred, I haue (vn der the protection of my prince and countries fauour) published the same, to such end and purpose as in it is men tioned. Howbeit if I haue spoken any thing, vnfitting so vnlearned a clarke or contrarie to the truth & mine own experience (which are the soundest auerments)



I humblie submit my selfe, and refer my little booke to be refourmed and corrected (according to the rules of perfect pietie) by those of greter learning, & more approued iudge ment. But for that I cheeflie aimed at (namelie the securitie of my soueraign and the prosperity of my countrie) I hope God stirreth vp (by more worthy instruments) farre better meanes dayly for the continuance therof. This shall bee nothing preiudiciall, if it in that respect, proue not so behoouefull as God grant it may. The ch urch militant, wherof I hope I am a sillie mem ber, shall not hereby bee impaired, if not reedisied, the godlye offende d if not amended, nor the il disposed made worse if not bettered For mine owne part, if the least iot of any good yt may be imagined, proceed from my small paines heerein taken, to the Churche aforesaid or to the least member thereof I shall thinke my selfe, yea though I endure (as I know I shall) the taunts of euill toongs, and the bitter fcofs of the



scornefull: and if I doo endure them (as I am well contented so to doo) the world giues me no worse mesure, then it did the Sauiour of the worlde, whose holinesse and innocency oflife (which I vilde earth and ashes cannot imitate) could not shield him from wronges of like nature, but out it breathed all bitternesse against him, yea though hee came to redeeme it from the bitternesse of bondage, wherevnto it was by transgression worthily fallen, and therefore farre be it from me to grudge to drinke of Christ his cup, that grudged not to drinke of deathes dolefull cup for my misdeedes. So commending my countries protection to the power inscrutable, and my soueraigns safetie to the deitie vnutterable, I rest to hir and it, the same I seeme, or as I ought to be.
            
               Iohn Dauies.
            
         
         
            
            HAILE SACRED S
                  ••
               RAIGNE, THE COMFORT OF ISRAELL.
            
               IOie thee betide, O Englands Parragon,
               Whose grace preserues hir glorie vndefaced:
               Whose sacred heds the royall seate whereon
               Rich Conquests Crown, triūphantly is placed,
               Whose luckie life prolongs thy peerlesse peace,
               which God maintain with high renowms increse
            
            
               O England, England, ten times happie Isle,
               Reioyce thou maiest in this thy iemme ofioy,
               On whom the king of heauen in loue doth smile,
               And foiles hir foes that would thy peace destroy.
               Then sith a king and Queene thy state doth stay,
               O blesse them both, with condigne praise alwaie:
            
            
               And cast thine eyes vpon thy neighbours woes,
               Behold the plagues, wherwith ech land's opprest,
               With iudgement then cōpare thy state with those
               And thou alone wilt thinke thy selfe art blest,
               Blesse him therefore, that so hath blessed thee,
               And thou from age to age shalt blessed be.
            
            
               Compell thy peeres, to keepe obedience bounds,
               That they may loue their souer aign as they ought
               Pen vp thy pleasures in repentance pounds,
               

                  
oue that is good, abandon that is naught:
               And from thy coastes expell Hypocrisie.
               
               In steede whereof embrace synceritie.
            
            
               Beware of pride, eschew the sap of sinne,
               How sweete so ere it seeme vnto thy tast,
               With oile of grace, now let thy lampe begin,
               To giue a light to all the world at last,
               That such as are in darkenesse may thereby
               Attaine the light that lasts eternally.
            
            
               Vnto which light, thy light thou shalt extend,
               If in this light, thy light be not suppressed,
               Then with this light, let thy delight ascend,
               Vnto that light, which light alone is blessed,
               Thy light a loadstone leading to that light,
               Which light is light of lights, still shining bright.
            
            
               More bright (without cōpare) thē burnisht gold,
               More glittering gloriousthen the sparkling sun,
               So bright that mortall eies cannot behold,
               The light thereof, vntill their light be done:
               Vnto which light, as to our chiefest good,
               
               Bring thou vs al, that boughtst vs with thy blod.
            
            
               Iohn Dauies.
            
            
         
      
   