
      
         
            
            
            A TRVE NARRATION▪
OF THE STRANGE AND
GREVOVS VEXATION
BY THE DEVIL, OF 7. PERSONS IN LANCASHIRE,
AND VVILLIAM SOMERS
OF NOTTINGHAM. WHEREIN THE DOCTRINE OF POSSESSION AND
DISPOSSESSION OF DEMONIAKES OVT
of the word of God is particularly applyed
vnto Somers, and the reſt of the
perſons controuerted: togeather
with the vſe we are to
make of theſe workes
of God. BY IOHN DARRELL, MINISTER
of the word of God.
            He that is not with me, is againſt me: and he that gathereth
not with me, ſcattereth.
            Math. 12. 30.
            PRINTED 1600.
         
         
            
            
            
               
                  〈…〉
               
            
            We reade in the 11. of the Actes, that the Apoſtles and bretheren
that were in Iudea,
               verſe. 1. 
               hearing that the Gentles had alſo receiued
the word of God by the preaching of Peter, were offended with him
for preaching vnto them, and that when Peter was come vp to Hieruſalem
they contended againſt him, and rebuked him for the ſame: But Peter
beginninge and expounding the thing in order vnto them, and ſhewinge
that he was commaunded of god ſo to doe in a viſion, they held their
peace, and glorified god. Even ſo many of the miniſters and brethren in
England hauinge bene offended with me for ſayinge and ſtanding in
this, that William Somers, Thomas Darling, Katherine Wright, and 7. in
Lancaſhire were poſſeſſed with vncleane ſpirites, and diſpoſſeſſed of them
by prayer and faſtinge, will I truſt when they ſhall heare the matter in
order ſett downe in this treatiſe following, not onely ceaſe to be offended
with me, but acknowledging the workes of god, magnifie him
for them. True it is that the people of god are borne mightelye in
hand that theſe are counterfeites, and haue bene theirvnto ſcholed if
not all, yet ſome of them by me, and the better to perſwade this even
to the whole Church of England, theire hath bene a booke latelye
publiſhed by one S. H. entituled, A Diſcouerie of the fradulent practiſes
of IOHN Darrell: but how vntruly this is ſaide, and vnpoſſible to
be true appeareth at large by the Detection of that Diſcouery, and partly
by this treatiſe, and peece of the Detection here following. VVhich
beinge ſo, this ought no more to hinder vs from embracinge theſe
workes of god,Lohn. 9. then the gainſayinge of the Phariſes, ought to haue
kept backe the Iewes from beleiunge and acknowledginge the great
worke which Chriſt did, in giuinge ſight to the man which was borne
blind: or that blaſphemous ſpeach of theirs, he caſteth out deuils through
Beelzebub the prince of deuils,
               math. 11. 24. from confeſſing & iuſtifiyng that worke
of his: or that falſe, abſurd, and ridiculous reporte of the watchmen,
(wherevnto they were hired by the Hie Preiſtes and Elders) that
Chriſt his diſciples came by night and ſtole him away, while they ſlept,
from beleiuing the reſurrection of Chriſt.math. 28. 12. Let not any then be hereby
kept from giuinge eare vnto that which followeth, but rather prouoked
to examine throughly what is ſaide of both ſides: and then I
doubt not but whoſoeuer he be it ſhall be as eaſie vnto him to perceiue
on which ſide the truth is, as opening his eyes to diſcerne betwixt
light and darknes. And to the end the truth might appeare, &
not alwayes lye hid, and the falſhood be conuinced which hath hetherto
prevailed, I haue preſumed to publiſh theſe followinge lynes:
wherein I could not be wantinge, if there were any loue in me to the
truth, or feare or loue to the god of truth, ſeeing the truth ſo vniuer

ſally ſuppreſſed and troden as it were vnder the feete of men as mire
in the ſtreetes: and the falſhod raigne as a queene▪ what chriſtian hart
or louer of the truth could endure to behold this, and let this vſurper
alone, if in his hand there was any power to plucke her out of
her thrones we can not (ſaith the apoſtle) doe any thing againſt the truth,
but for the truth. If at all times then we are to contend for the truth,
by ſpeach,2. Cor. 13. 8. by writing, & by euery good way as their ſhall be cauſe,
yea to doe any thing for the truth, the manifeſtation and publiſhing of
it, and the inducing of men to receiue it: much more when the truth
is impugned▪ and this is our preſent caſe.
            And that it may be more manifeſt that heerin I haue performed
a neceſſarie dutie, ſuch as without ſinne againſt god I could not haue
omitted: we muſt remember that we are commaunded to publiſhe
the workes of god whereof any of vs be witneſſes, as appeareth by
Pſalme 105. 1. 2: and 107. 8. 21. 31. Mar, 5. 19 perſwaded thervnto
by reaſons or arguments, as appeareth by Pſalme. 78, and 111. 2. 3.
4. Math. 10. 32. It is commended vnto vs in the practiſe and example
of the ſervants of god: as appeareth by Pſalme. 9. 1. and 66. 5.
and 
                  •
               1. 17. & 78. 4. Luk. 2. 17. mar. 5. 20. Act. 12. 17. & 14. 27. we
are threatened if herein we faile as appeareth by exodus 20. 7. math.
10. 33. If now euery eye or eare witnes of the workes of god is to
publiſh and make knowne the ſame to others, much more the principall
witneſſes, and ſuch a one was I: and moſt of all they whom god
hath giuen and called to ſuffer for giuing teſtimonie to his workes,
                  
                     •
                  s 4. 20. as
he hath done me. Such aboue all others muſt with Peter & Iohn ſay:
we can not but ſpeake and publiſh the thinges which we haue ſeene and
heard. And if at all times we ought to teſtifie, make knowne, & iuſtifie
the great workes of god, much more then, when ſuch a worke is
not onely gainſaid, but an evill name and vile report brought vpon
it, and him whom the Lord vſed theirin: and this is our preſent eſtat
and condition.
            VVhen the holy ghoſt fell vpon the Apoſtles in viſible manner,
ſo as they begane to ſpeake with other tongs,
                  
                     ••
                  . 2. 11. as the ſpirit gaue them
vtterance: ſome mocked and ſaid, they are full of new wine. Againſt this
vile ſlaunder of the wonderfull worke of god, and his moſt righteous
ſervantes, Peter ſtoode vp and made an Apologie ſayinge: ye men of
Iudah theſe are not drunken,
               
                  
                     •
                  th. 9. 33. 34, 12. 22. 
               as yee ſuppoſe, ſince it is but the third houre of
the day. But this is that which was ſpoken by the prophet Ioell &c. as it followeth
their vntill verſe 37.
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   11. 14. In like ſorte dealt our bleſſed Sauiour in
this very worke we haue in hand. when he caſt the deuill out of ſome
which were poſſeſſed, the people in deede were a
                     ••
                  aſed therat, and
wondered ſaying, the lik
                     •
                   was neuer ſeene in Iſrael. But the Phariſes ſaid,

               he caſteth out deuils through Beelzebub the prince of deuils. Againſt this
blaſphemous ſpeach and report giuen out by the phariſes, againſt this
great worke, and Chriſt him ſelfe whom theirein they counted for a
coniurer, & bare the people ſo in hand, Chriſt Ieſus maketh a de
                  •
               ence
and in the ſame by ſundrie reaſons convinceth them: the which alſo is
writtē for our learning. And what are we to learne out of theſe ſcriptures?
ſurely by their examples & practiſe, to doe the like in the like
caſe, and when ſuch occaſion is offered. That is, whē any great worke
of god is wrought in our eyes, & that ſome ſhall goe about to mocke
at it: and bring vp an euill name of it: that then and in ſuch a caſe we
muſt not be ſilent, and content our ſelues with this, that we our ſelues
conceiue well of the worke, and profite by it: but we muſt open our
mouthes wide in the defence of it, labourīg to our vttermoſt to ſtope
the mouth of the gainſayer, & to wipe away the ſlaunder, leaſt others
alſo receiue hurt thereby, and that God may haue the glorie of his
work of allmē, if it be poſſible. And as all the beholders of ſuch a work
are vpō all occaſions to beare witnes therevnto, & to iuſtifie the ſame
when it is denyed or ſlaundered, as they are able as ſhall hereeafter
further appeare: ſo thoſe ſpecially vpon whom the worke hath bene
wrought, or haue bene principall witneſſes theirof If then I deſire to
walke in the ſteeps of S. Peter, yea of Chriſt Ieſus himſelfe, and to practiſe
that which the holy ghoſt in theire examples and practiſe in the
like caſe with ours, doth commend vnto vs: how could I doe otherwiſe
then make this Apologie? And if I ſhould haue abſtayned from
the publiſhing theirof, I ſee not but that theirin I ſhould haue failed
in the performance of a neceſſarie dewtie, and ſo ſinned againſt god:
& preferred my owne quiet before the glorie of god, and good of his
people. Neither let any mā thinke that it would have ſuffiſed to haue
done this inſpeach: for to ſpeake all that might be ſaid in a corner to
ſome few would not availe, ſeeing this vile ſlaunder and evill reporte
of the workes of god, & my ſelfe whom god vſed theirin, hath ſpread
it ſelfe farr and neare, even throughout the whole land to the obſcuring
and drakening yea annihilating of them, if it were poſſible▪ it was
neceſſarie therfore that that which ſhould be ſaid for the convincing
thereof and in iuſtificati
                  •
               n of theſe workes ſhould goe as far & wide,
which could not be without printinge. This I ſay conſidered it were
not ſufficient for me, or a ſufficient diſcharge of my dutye, to wyſper
that which followeth in the eare, or ſpeake of it in a corner: but rather
to ſpeake of that in the light, which I haue ſeene in darknes and what
I haue heard in the eare, and beheld in ſecret places, to preach on the
houſes.
            
               
Moreover, if it be ſo that the doctrine of poſſeſſion, and of diſpoſſeſſion,
and of the meanes thereof, etc doe lye in a manner hid & not
knowne nor acknowledged almoſt by any: Is it not high time it were
reuealed and brought to light? Is it not parte of the counſell of god,
to the reuelation of all which wee are debtors? And when can any
thinge be done more ſeaſonably then now to treat both of the generall
doctrine,act. 20, 27. and particular workes we ſpeake of▪ what can come in
better ſeaſon then even now a treatiſe concerninge William Somers
his poſſeſſion, when the eares of all men are opened, to heare what
can be ſaide as touching the ſaid Somers? how many are their not onlye
of the common ſorte, but of thoſe which are noble, wiſe, and
learned, which are verie deſierous to be informed in the truth of this
matter? and could this poſſiblie haue bene done but by this courſe I
haue taken? And by whom ſhould this latter be performed, but by
my ſelfe, conſidering I onely haue bene a cheife witnes of the poſſeſſion
and diſpoſſeſſion of all theſe perſons controverted, and called by
god therevnto? I ran not to any of my ſelfe: wherin, and in callinge
me to ſuffer for the ſame, the Lord ſeemeth to me to haue ſingled
me out though moſt vnworthy, and more vnfite then many others,
to this ſpeciall worke. It ſtoode me then vpon to performe this ſervice
whervnto god hath called & appoynted me, otherwiſe I ſhould
haue my reward with the vnprofitable ſervant: If either for feare or
ſlouthfulnes I had fayled theirin. Heerevnto I might add, that I ſee
many erring exceedinglye herein, and greatlie miſtakinge this matter
both in the generall and particular, and heereof I am moſt ſure, and
able alſo to make that evident vnto them. ſhould I then haue done
well to let them alone?
            And for aſmuch as many not onely of the irreligious, but of ſuch
as profeſſe the feare of god (as in experience I haue obſerued,) regard
not theſe workes of god: either receiuing the falſe report that is givē
out againſt them, or not earneſtly conſidering of them, to the ſtirring
vp of their owne hartes to prayſe god for the ſame, & make their vſe
of them: wherevpon it cometh that the beſt of theſe are vnable to de
fend and cleare theſe workes from that evill name of counterfeitinge
which is caſt vpon them, and ſtope the mouth of the aduerſarie: and
that non of them contendeth according to his place for them, & the
convincinge of the aduerſarie: that theſe (I ſay) may ſee their ſinne &
be prouoked with others to heare and conſider of that which followeth:
they muſt remember, that all the workes of the Lord are great, and
ought to be ſ
                     •
                  ught out of all them that loue them,
               
                  
                     •
                  al. 111. 2. and theirfore this: that
it is the propertie of a wiſe man to obſerue the workes of God, and
therefore of foo
                  •
               es to neglect or not regard them. VVhen the prophet

had throughout the 107. Pſalme made mention of the manifould
workes or the Lord, and often moued men to confeſſe before the
Lord his louing kindnes,
               ver. 8. 15. 21. 31 
               and his wonderfull works before the ſonnes of men,
he concludeth thus: who is wiſe that he may obſerue theſe thinges? In
the 77. Pſalme the prophet in the name of the Church ſaith: I remembred
the workes of the Lord: I did alſo meditate in all thy workes, and
did deuiſe of thine actes. And Dauid thus▪ I meditate in all thy workes,
I doe meditate the workes of thine handes. This is the end of the Lordes
great workes: He hath made his wonderfull workes to be had in remembrance.
VVhen the Lord then doth any great worke, we muſt remember
and obſerue it,v. 11. pſal. 143, 5. pſ. 111. 4 pſ, 91, 4 pſal. 105, 
                     •
                  
                yea meditate theirin, that ſo we may the better behold
the power, the wiſdome, the Iuſtice, and mercy of God, and
prayſe and magnifie him for the ſame. Thou Lord (ſaith the prophet.)
haſt made me glad by thy works, I will reioyce in the workes of thine hands.
O Lord, how glorious are thy workes? And againe: declare his workes amonge
the people: ſinge vnto him ſing prayſe vnto him, and talke of all his
wonderfull workes. And as thus we are to obſerue, meditate, and remember
the workes of God, and prayſe him for them: and not onely ſo, but to
others alſo talk
                     •
                   of his workes, & declare or publiſh them to his people:
ſo it is the duetie of all the Lords people to iuſtifie and defend them,
when there ſhall be a ſlaunder rayſed vpon them, as partly is touched
before. VVhen Chriſt had caſt the deuill out of one, and the phariſees
had ſlaundered that worke of his, (as is aforeſaid,) affirminge
that he did it by the deuill, he did not onely convince them: and ſhew
the haynouſnes of their ſinne, that theirin they had committed that
ſinne which ſhould neuer be pardoned, even the ſinne againſt the holye
ghoſt: but beſides admoniſh thoſe which by their ſilence did approue
that ſlaunder of the Phariſees, when they ſhould haue iuſtified
the worke, and defended Chriſtes innocencie. Of theſe he pronounceth,
that he accounteth them alſo among his aduerſaries,math. 12. 30. ſaying:
He that is not with me, is againſt me & he that gathereth not with me, ſcattereth.
He that is not with me, &c. that is, he who is not on my ſide▪
meaninge: he who defendeth me not againſt the aduerſaries: my
workes againſt the ſlaunders they giue of them, and my doctrines againſt
theire obiections, he is againſt me, that is, him I recken in the
number of my aduerſaries. VVherby we may learne, (to applye this
ſcripture more nearely) that it is not 
                  •
               nough, not to ſlaunder or impugne
the workes of God which haue bene wrought amonge vs, as
ſome doe: but that moreover we take heede that we approue not the
ſlaunder of counterfeiting giuen out againſt them by our ſilence, but open
our movthes in the defence and iuſtification of them. Otherwiſe
we ſhalbe reckened by Chriſt in the number of aduerſaries. And here

vnto tendeth that other ſayinge of our Sauiour: wiſdome is iuſtified o
her children. As this teacheth all of vs our dutie, and that we ought
to contend for theſe workes of god, iuſtifiyng them, to which purpoſe
I alledge it ſo particularlye my ſelfe, and hath (through the
grace of God) prouoked me to write the treatiſe following in iuſtification
of theſe works, and another treatiſe for the taking away
of that ſlaunder of counterfeiting, which Sathan hath rayſed
vp for the obſcuringe of them. The Lord giue thoſe
who profeſſe them ſelues to be frends of Chriſt, and
to be of his ſide, to ſhew it in taking parte
with him againſt his adverſaries.
            
               I. D.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            THE HISTORY OF THE 7. IN LANCASHIRE.
            At Cleworth in Lancaſhire within the pariſh of Leigh, ther dweleth one
Nicholas Starchie gentleman who having only two children it went
thus with them in the beginning of februari 1594 firſt Anne his daughter
being 9 Yeares olde, was taken with a dumpiſh and heauie countenaunce
and with a certaine fearefull ſtarting and pulling together of her
body▪ about a weeke after Iohn Starchie his ſonne of the age of 10 yeares,
as he was going to the ſchoole was compelled to ſhout, neither was able
to ſtaie himſelfe. after the waxed worſe and worſe, falling into often and
extreame fits, M Starchie ſeeking for remidy, after 9 or 10 weekes, heard
of one Edmund Hartlay a coniurer to whom he repaired, made knowne
his greife, & with large profers craued his helpe. Hartlay comes, and after
he had vſed certaine popiſh charmes and hearbs by degrees, the children
were at quiet, and ſo continued, ſeeming to be well almoſt a yeare and
halfe. all which time Hart. came often to viſit them. at length he fained as
thought he would haue gone into another country, but wether M Star.
might not know: when he begane to goe his way, Iohn fell of bleedinge,
then preſently he was ſent for again, who affirmed that if he had bene 40
rodes of, no man could hau ſtanched him. & thus it fell out at other tims
            
               M Starchie herevpon feareing leſt his children would be troubled in
his abſence, & he vncertaine where to find him, offered to giue him his
table to tarie with them, and ſo he did for a certaine ſpac
                  •
                but after couenaunted
with him to giue him an annuel penſion of 40s for his aſſiſtance
in time of neede: which penſion was aſſured him in writing, and began
at Michaels day 1598. wherwith Hartlaye not beinge ſatiſfed, deſiered
more, an houſe and ground: whervnto becauſe M Starchi would not accord,
he threatened in a fume (M Starchie being abſent but in the heareing
of diuers) that if he would not fulfil his minde, he would make ſuch
a ſhout as neuer was at Cleworth and ſo therwas indeed, not only vpon
the day and at the inſtant of there diſpoſſeſſion, but alſo the day before:
when 7. of them both the afternoone and in the euening, ſentforth ſuch
a ſtrange ſupernaturall, and fearfull noyſe or loud whupping, as the like
vndoubtedly was neuer hard at Cleworth, nor it I think in England. this
he ſaid in September 1596. & one the 17 day of Nouember folowing
they both began to be troubled againe after ſo long reſt.
            On a certaine time Hartlay went with M Starchy to his fathers houſe
in Whally pariſhe, where he was tormented ſore all night. The next day,
beinge recouered, he went into a little wood, not farr from the houſe
where he maide a circle about a yarde and halfe wyde, deuidingit into 4
partes, making a croſſe at every Diuiſion: and when he had finiſhed his
worke, he came to M Starchie and deſiered him to go and tread out the
circle, ſaying, I may not treade it out my ſelfe, and further, I will meete
with them that went about my death. when M starchie ſaw this wreched

The 1. or. 2. weeke of Lent Miſtres Starchie required them all. 5. to tell
her how they were handled, that certaine knowledge might be had
thereof to the preachers:this ſheweth that the deuill tranſformed himſelfe, and appeared vnto them like an angell of 
                     •
                  ight they all; anſwered, that an angell like a doue
was come from god, & that they muſt follow him to heauen, which
way ſoeuer he would lead them, though it were through neuer ſo litle
a hole, for he toulde them he coulde drawe them through, and ſoe
they ran vnder the beds, And Elizabeth Hardman was vnder a bedde
making a hole, and beinge aſked what ſhe did? ſhe ſaid that ſhe muſt
goe through the wall for ſhe on the one ſide, and her lad on the other
would ſoone make a hole. ſhe would (on a time) haue leaped out of
the caſement through the glaſſe windowe.
            About a fortnight or. 3. weekes before their deliuery, Elinor Hollande
and Elizabeth Hardman foretould how many fits they ſhoulde haue
before they ſlept. and to morrowe quoth El. Hol. in the forenoone I
muſt haue a fit of 3 howers long. when the tyme came ſhee bad
them ſet the hower glaſſe. they ſet it behind her out of her ſight, her
eys alſo was cloſed. ſhe was ſencleſſe, & ſpeachleſſe, ſaue the noting
of the time, which ſhe truly noted: ſaying, ther is a quareter, the halfe
hower, and as the glaſſe was runne out, ſhe ſayd turne the glaſſe, &
thus did ſhe 3. tymes or 3. howers. after comming to herſelfe ſhe ſaid
Ieſus bleſſe mee. which all of them vſually ſaid at the end of ther fites.
In like manner did El. Hard. for 2. howers, who beinge demaunded
how the knewe this, anſwered that a white Doue told them ſo.
            About the 19 of march the 4 youngeſt went on ther knees all morning
vntil afternoone, 
                  •
                the fleed from all the familye & neighbours
into other chambers, calling them deuils with hornes creeping vnder
the bed. when they had the vſe of theire feete, their tongues were
taken from them.
            when Maiſter Hopvvood a Iuſtice of peace came of purpoſe to take
their teſtimony againſt Edmond Hartley to Lancaſter Aſſiſes and had
them before him to that end, they were ſpeachleſſe, and that daye he
gott no anſwer of them, being called out of one chamber into an other,
they ſank down by the way ſpeachleſſe. when they ſpake they
complayned that Edmonde would not ſuffer them to ſpeake againſt
hym.
            At the ſame time Iane Aſhton a maid ſeruant in the houſe (the. 7. poſſeſſed
perſon of the age of. 30. yeares) began to bark and houle when
ſhe ſhold haue gon to bear witnes againſt Edmund Hartley. whervpon
one of them in her fit ſaid ah Edmond doſt thou trouble her nowe
when ſhe ſhold teſtify againſt thee? This was the ſecond time that ſhe
was troubled. Almoſt a yeare before, it firſt tooke her in her throat, as
if ſhe had a pyn ſticking there, whervpon ſhe ſtrayned her ſelfe ſo ſore

that ſhe got vp bloud, & for two dayes was very ſicke, Miſtirs starchie
ieſt gly ſaid, Iane is ſicke of the hooke, nay quoth Hartlay I aſſure you
it is no hooke for if your owne daughter or any other had bene in the
ſame place the had bene ſo ſerued. As I remember I hard them ſay that
Iane Aſhton had gone into Hartlays chamber & looked into his cheſt.
            About the 21. of March El. Hol. & El. Hard. for 3 daye & 3 nights to
gether could nether eate nor drinke, nor ſpeake to any except it were
on to another, & to ther lads. ſaue that their lads gaue them leaue (as
the ſaid) the one to eate a toaſt & drink, the other a ſower milk poſſet.
And it. notwiihſtanding that permiſſiō thei ſaid he was angry that thei
had eaten. & told them that thie ſhould not be quiet, vntil the had caſt
it vp a gaine ſo the vomited ſaying, take it to thee, here it is againe, for
thou gaueſt vs liſence to eate it, & nowe thou art angry. & if the went
about to ſwallow a litle drink the were ſo taken by the throat, that the
pict 
                  〈◊〉
                vp againe. The 3 night about 8 a cloke El H
                     •
                  l: being aſked when
ſhe would or could ſlepe, anſwred, that ther were 4 houers it to come.
before ſhe could ſlepe. about an houre & halfe of that time ſhe tooke
a diſtafe, & ſpane both faſter & finer then at any tym before. when ſhe
had done ſpinnīg ſhe ſaid vnto them, now ſhall I worke you all. and
thencforth was ſo extreamly handled, that tvo could ſcarcely rule &
hold her. at lengh reuerting ſhe ſaid I haue bene ſleeping 3 daies & 3
nights, and now I faint with hunger.
            About a weeke before there deliuerance ſome of the youngeſt vſed
theſe kind of ſpeaches: thou naughtie lad, thou makeſt vs ſicke. for
thou knoweſt the preachers will come ſhortly.
            This generally was obſerued in the 5 youngeſt, that when the gaue
themſelues to any ſporte, the had reſt & were pleaſaunt though the
time was longe. their parents report beyng at a playe in a neighbour
gentlemans houſe many houres together, the were quyet all the tyme
(Hartlay boeſted that he had kept them ſo longe quyet) but one the
contrary as ſoone as the went about any godly exerciſe the were trobled.
And thus much brifly touching thoſe 6 at Cleworth, & the ſtrange
accedents which fell out there, as alſo how in all probabilitie it came to
be ſo with them. now let vs returne to Marg Byrom of Salford, who
came to be vexed in like ſort, by the appoyntment of God, & by the
ſame mediat hand, the devil, and Hartlay the coniurer.
            The 10 of Ianuary (beyng the 4 day after her trouble begane) as ſhee
ſate by the kitchyne fyre, ſhee was throwne towardes the fire, lyinge
alonge hard by the chimneye barres as though ſhee ſhould haue
bene roſted. Thence the drwe her and hauinge continued a longe
tyme in the fitte and recouerynge, about halfe an houer after, as
ſ
                  •
               ee ſatte in a Chaire, ſhee was throwne headlonge vnder the boarde

but had no harme, and thus was ſhe ſuddenly and violently caſt ſundrie
times after.
            She being deſired to tel how her fits held her, ſaid that ſhe thought,
ſomthing rouled in her belly like a calfe and laye euer on her left ſide
& when it roſe vp from her belly towardes her hart, ſhe thought the
head and noſe therof had bene full of nailes, wherwith being pricked
ſhe was compelled to ſcrike aloud with veri paine and feare. when her
belly was ſwollē, it lift her vp, & ſo bounſed that it would picke of the
hand of him that held her downe, & ſomtyme the parti himſelfe that
held her farr of. when her belly ſlaked there went out of hir mouth a
coulde breath, (that made her mouth very coulde) which cauſed her
to barke and houle, then plumpte it downe into her body like a colde
longe whetſtone on her left ſide when her belly was ſmale, then was
the reſt of her body be numed with colde, wherwith ſhee ſo quaked,
that her teeth chattered in her head, and if ſhe went to warme her,
ſhe was preſenly pickt backward.
            About the end of Ianuary from M Starchies, hom ſhe wēt to Salford,
a towne adioyning to Mancheſter, accompanyed with Hartlay and on
other. the next morninge as Hartlay prayed ouer her in afite, came
one M Palmer a preacher of Mancheſter, who aſked him what he was
doinge: he anſweared prayinge thou pray, thou canſt not pray, quoth
he. what prayer canſt thou ſay, none ſaide he, but the Lordes prayer.
ſay it, quoth he the which as I remember he coulde not ſay. he then
as a priuat man examined him, and after had him before two Iuſtices
of peace: from whom he brought him by ther appointment to Marg.
Byr: to heare what ſhe could ſay againſt him: but as ſoone as ſhe ſaw
him ſhee ſtraightwaye became ſpeachleſſe, and was caſt downe backwardes,
and ſo did the 2 tyme. and 5. tymes was dumbe when Hartlay
came in her ſight, this morning as ſhe came to the fier, ſhe ſawe a
great blacke dogge, with a monſtrous taile, a long chaine open mouth
comming apace tawardes her, and running by her left ſide caſt her on
her face hard by the fier, houlding her tounge for halfe an hower, but
leavinge at libertie her eyes and handes. a litle after a bygg blacke catt
ſtaringe fearfully at her came runinge by her left ſide and threwe her
backward taking from her the vſe both of her eyes and handes, which
with yeſ king were euer loſed. about halfe hower after that fit: it came
like a bige mouſe and lept vpon her left knee, caſt her backward, took
a waye her tongue, eyes, and ſences, that ſhe lay as dead, and when ſhe
came to any feeling, it puft vp her bellye as a fore. theſe viſions and
fites ordinarely troubled her for 6 weeks every day on the day time as
is ſaid. & commōly everi night it ſat (as ſhe though) on her head very
heavi laying (as it ſemed to her) 4. great figers on her browes, that ſhe

was not able to opē her eies. otfē times ſhe cried to her mother, that
the ſhould ſit from of her Head, aſking who it was that held her 
                  •
               oe
ſtraight. & though ſhe could not ſter her head, it hir kerchefe was
pulled of her head thrice commōly, ſhe notwithſtandīg lying ſtill as
a ſtocke from 9 to 3 in the morning, about which time it departed
in departing ſomtimes gaue her a great thumpe, on the hinder parte
of her head, that it was verye ſore for 2 Dayes after.
            Sixe times within thoſe 6. weekes the ſperit would not ſuffer her to
eate or drincke, it tooke awaye alſo her ſtomake. if ſhee offered to
drincke (at the earneſt motion of others) it caſt her and the drincke
downe to gether. At other tymes ſhee did eate greedily, ſloſſinge vp
her meate like a greedy dogge, or hogge, that her mother and her
freindes, weare aſhamed of her. ſtyll ſhee was hungrye and cryed for
more, ſaying ſhee had nothing, though ſhe ſpared no kinde of meate:
allwas fiſh that cam to nett. After abundance of meate her belly ſemed
neuer the fuller, that ſhe marueiled which waye it went.
            The 10 of febuari it pulled her as ſhe thought in an hundred peeces.
ther came out of her mouth ſuch a ſtincking ſmoke, and breath that
ſhee could not endure it her ſelfe. her voyce and crying were quite
altered, and ſo continued till night. But her breath ſtank ſoe yll a day
and a nyght after, that her neighboures could not enduer to come
neare her.
            Often her ſences were taken a way, and ſhe maid as ſtyfe as iron, and
oft as dead even breathleſſe. it made her ſpeake ſharplye, haſtely,
and by ſnatches: ſomtimes it made a loud noyſe in her bellye, like that
in the bellye of a great troting horſe.
            The two next nights before the day of her examination concerning
Hartlay, appeared the deuill in the likneſſe of Hartlay requeſting her
to take heed what ſhe ſayd, and to ſpeake the truth, for the time was
come promiſſing her ſiiluer and gould. ſhe anſwered (thinking it to
be Hartlay) that the truth ſhe had ſpoken already, & that ſhe would
not favour him neither for ſiluer nor gold: the 2 night he departed ſaying
doe as thou wilt. the day before Hartlay his execution was a ſore
day vnto her, after which euery day ſhe went to morning prayer, &
was neuer troubled in the Church ſave the 1 day, wheron it took her
about the middeſt of the ſermon, in heaving vp her ſhoulders, depriuing
her of her ſences after the recouery of her ſences, it tooke away
the vſe of her leggs: and thus it moleſted her in the Church, to
the admvration of the people, about an hower and halfe.
            At the a
                  ••
               ices at Lancaſter was Hartlay condemned and hanged the
making of his circle was chefly his ouerthrowe which he denyed, but
breaking the rope he after confeſſed it.
            
               
After this time ſhe had more eaſe in the day then ſhe was wont, but
in the night ſhe lay ſtif and ſtark quaking and trembling, till the day
ſhe came to Cleworth.
            
            It going thus with the. 6. at Cleworth and the. 7 at. Salford, M. Starchye
according to the counſel before giuen him, procured firſt one preacher
then an other to ſee them: but they knew not well what to ſay
to their affliction. After hauing intelligence by D. Dee his butler
of the like greuous affliction of Thomas Darling his vncles ſon, an recouery
vpon the aduice giuen by my ſelf, he requeſted D. Dee his letter
vnto me (though vnacquainted) and obteyned it, wherwith he ſent
his owne alſo, which preuayled not with me.
            Thervppon he procured other letters wherof one was from a Iuſtice
of peace therby, and ſent the ſecond time vnto me. Then I crauinge
firſt the aduice of many of my brethren in the miniſtery, met togither
at an exerciſe: yealded to M. Starchyes requeſt, & about 3. wekes after
went thither.
            On the 16. of March. 96. M. George More paſtor of Cawlke in Dar byſhire,
and my ſelf, came to Cleworth. VVhither when we were come M
Starchy tould vs, that his ſonn had bene well, about a fortnight, and
his daughter 4. dayes: and ſurely to ſe to they were at that inſtant as
well and free from any poſſeſſion by Sathan, as any other: which we
ſuſpected to procede, from the ſubtilty of the diuel, & ſo it proued.
Shortly after our comming, as we ſat at dinner, came in Margaret
Hardman and hir ſiſter, & El: Holland on after another like players to
bid vs welcom: foraſmuch as no body ſent for me ſaid one of them,
I am come of my owne accord. And hauing thus ſpoken ſhee was
throwen backward on a forme, and ſo all 3. were frangely & greuoſly
tormented. Their faces (as I remember) were diſ
                  •
               igured, their bodyes
(I am ſure) greatly ſwelled, & ſuch a ſenſible ſtiring & rumbling
within their bodyes, as to ones ſight and feling they had ſome
quick thing within each of them: and not only ſo, but ſuch a violent
mouing there was alſo in their inward parts: (eſpecially in M. Hardman)
as was eaſily harde of vs that were preſent. I remember alſo
among the manifold pleaſant ſpeaches they vſed, one or moe of
ſpake iocondly conſcerning Edmond Hartlayes hanging, who was thē
newly executed, and it was to this effect. Do they thinke they coulde
hang the diuel? I wis no: they might hang Ed: but they conlde not
hang the diuel: no maruel though the rope brake: for they were two
Ed: and the diuel. By that which I hard of his fits (wherof wee haue
partly hard before) I for my part then thought, & doe ſo ſtill that in
the end he who had ſo ſweetly (by kiſſes forſooth) ſent the diuel into
ſo many, had by the iuſt iudgment of god, the diuell ſent into him.
            
               
Then harde we Iane Aſhton howling, and perceiueing it was ſupernaturall,
and hearing alſo other ſtrang things concerning her, eſpeciall
ye that which was new fallen out of the ſwellīg of her belly wherof
you ſhall heare: we affirmed that we thought that ſhe alſo was poſſeſſed,
which neither the family, nor the mayd her ſelfe miſtruſted or
feared. and it ther was cauſe. for beſides her firſt taking with the hoke
and the wordes Hartly vſed thervpon, and kiſſes before with promis
of mariag (which all were perhaps forgottē) ſhe was takē with barkīg
as the reſt were, when M Hopwoode cam to examine them. againe the
children ſaid no leſſe in their fits, for when ſhe cam in their ſight they
would ſay, come and helpe vs for thou art one of our company. And
though they neither knew nor ſpeake to any other, yet Iane they
knewe, and ſpeake to her onlye in theſe wordes, thou wilt ſhortlye
come in amongſt vs. And ſhe her ſelfe acknowledged that ſom times
as ſhecarien vp hot Ianoks, ſhe thought that ſhe could ihaue eatē vp
a Ianoke, & often did eat much by ſtealth, being paſſyng hungry like
M Byrom, and the children, who likwiſe were ſometymes exceedinglye
greedye of meate. This day alſo an hower or two before we
came, her belly began to ſwell greatly, ſo that ſhe compared her bellye
to a womans great with child. when it abated a little, a breath
came vp her throat, which cauſed yelling, after it fell downe into hir
body like a cold ſtone, as it did with M By. and as ſone as tydings
came that we were come, preſently her belly was fallne, and as litle
as in former time and ſo continued.
            Not long after our comming all 7. being had into a chamber, the one
of vs applyed his ſpeach according to the preſent occaſion: and then
behold all of them even Iane Aſhton, and M Starchies children were
preſently moſt greuiouſly tormented▪ Yea, Satan in Iohn Starchie exceeded
for crueltye.
            And thus they contynued all that afternoone. 3. or 4. of them gaue
themſelues to Scoffing and Blaſphemy, calling the holy Bible being
brought vp bible bable, bible bable. and thus they did a loud and often
All or moſt of them ioyned together in a ſtrang and ſupernatural
loud whupping that the houſe and ground did ſound therwith againe
by reaſon wherof we were dryven (as I maye ſay) out of the chamber
and keept out for that daye.
            This evening we did vſe ſome words of exhortation, for the ſanctefiyng
of our ſelues and the family, againſt the next dayes ſeruice: immediately
before which they all ſent forth as they had before) a ſupernaturall
loud whupping and yellyng, ſuch as would haue amaſed
one to haue gone into the roome wher they were, but as one of vs
opened his mouth they were preſentlye ſilent and ſo continued.
            
               
The next morning all 7. being had into a faire larg parlor, & laid theron
couches, M. More. M. Dickens (a preacher and their paſtor) and my
ſelf with about. 30. more aſſembled togither, ſpent that day in prayer
with faſting & hearing the word, all the parties afflicted remayninge
in their fits the ſaid whole day. Towards the end wherof, they all of
the ſudden began to be moſt extreamly tormēted, beting vp & downe
with their bodies being held by others, crying alſo (6 of them) aloud
in ſtrang and ſupernaturall manner, & after they lay as dead. wherewith
they which were preſent were ſo affected: that leuing that good
order which all the day had ben kept, confuſedly euery on with voice
and hands lifted vp, cryed vnto god for mercy in their behalf, and the
lord was pleaſed to heare vs, ſo as. 6. of them were ſhortly delyuered,
wherin we with them reioyced, & praiſed god for the ſame.
            The firſt that was diſpoſſeſed was M. Byrom, then all the reſidu (ſaue
Iane Aſhton) one ſhortly after an other, betwen. 5. and. 6. at night. ſhe
began to be vexed by ſathan about. 4, or. 5, in the morning and neuer
had reſt vntill her deliuerance. All that day ſhe hard only a humming
and a ſound but knewe nothing what was ſaid: ſhe could thus heare
but not ſee. Somtime ſhe ſawe & then marueyled what the company
did ther, and how ſhe got thither: howbeit ſhe heard euery idle word
that the children poſſeſſed had, ſhe was more extreamly handled
that daye then any before, though ſhe had had many ſore daies. She
was euer full of payne, and it ſemed to her as though her hart
would haue burſt▪ ſhe ſtrayned vpmuch fleamy and bloudy matter
Laſtly ſhe lay as dead for the ſpace of half an houre, taking no breath.
Then ſtart ſhe vp moſt ioyfully, magnifying god, with ſuch. a cherefull
countenance and voyce, that we all reioyced with her, but were
ſomwhat amazed at hir ſuddayn lauding of god, with ſuch freedome
& earneſtnes in ſpeach and geſture.
            
               Iohn Starchy the next was ſo miſerably rent that aboundance of blod
guſhed out both at his noſe and mouth. As the day before, ſo that day
he gnaſhed fearfully with his teeth, he alſo lay as dead about the like
time, ſoe that ſome ſaid to vs, he ſeemeth to be dead. Then ſtart he
vp likwiſe on the ſuddain, & prayſed god in moſt cherful & comfortable
manner. And ſo did the reſt, who alſo made ſundry tymes greate
ſhewe of vomyting and nowe and then vomyted indeede, ſomthing
like fleam thick ſpettle. Theis. 4. eſpecially. 3. of them vſed much light
behauinur and vayn geſtures, ſundry alſo filthy ſcurrilous ſpeaches,
but whiſpering then for the moſt part among themſelues, ſo as they
were no let to that holy exerciſe we then had in hand. Somtimes alſo
they ſpake blaſphemy calling the word preached, bible bable he will
neuer haue done prating, prittle prattle
            
            
               
M, Hardman why leſt M. More was praching vſed theſe wordes, I muſt
goe I muſt away: I cannot tarrie, whither ſhall I goe? I am hot, I am too
hot. I will not dye, iterating them all. which wordes did greatly incourage
vs.
            
            VVhen theſe 6 were deliuered, ſome deſired to know how they aſſuered
themſelues therof, and they anſwered as followeth. M Byr: ſaid
that ſhe felt it come vp from her bellye towardes her breſt, thence to
her throat:in like ſort William Somers had aſore throat after the departur of the ſpirit: when it left her throate it gaue her a ſore lug, and all this
whyle a darke miſt dazeled her eyes. Then ſhe felt it to go out of her
mouth, but it left behind it aſore throat & afilthy ſmel, that aweke after
her meate was vuſauary. It went out in the liknes of a crowes head
rounde, (as to her ſemed) and ſate in the corner of the parlor, with
darknes about it a whyle. Then went it with ſuch a flaſh of fyer out of
the windowe, that all the Parlor ſemed on fyre, to her onlye.
            
               Iohn Starchie: ſaid it went from hym lyke a man with a bulch on his
blacke very yll fauored. and preſently he returned to haue reentered,
but he withſtood hym ſtrong in faith. the ſame in effect ſaid M Hard.
Anne Starchy ſaid, he went like a foule vgly man, with a white beard
and a great bulch on his breſt as big as a mans head. and ſtraitway returned
to haue reentered, but ſhe faithfully reſiſted, Euen ſo ſaid El.
Hol. the whit beard excepted.
            
               El. Hard ſaid, it was like an vrchin, and went through a very litle
hole (as ſhe thought) out of the parler, but out of hand returned a
gaine in a very foule ſhape promiſing her golde, and whatſoeuer ſhee
would deſier, if ſhe would giue him leaue to enter againe, but ſhe
yealded not. then he threatened to caſt her into a pit, ſaying ſomtime
thou wilt go a lone. he ſaid alſo, he would caſt her into the fyre, and
breake her neck, but ſhe reſiſting he departed like an vrchine.
            And thus the firſt dayes worke was happily ended. But behold the
ſlight of the wyly ſerpent, for when we were all at reſt, the ſperits ſett
vpon the 5 little children, like ſo many wulues the ſeely Lambes. the
poore children being newly recouered, and ſuddenly inuaded, wereſo
frighted that they claſped faſt about their middles that lay with them
and hid their faces with ther bed clothes. M. Dickons was called down
who comming ſaw them reſiſting, and encouraged them to ſtandfaſt
neuer to yeald, but to pray and reſiſt with faith. & ſhortly they were
well and fell a ſlepe.
            The next day we inquired how the were aſſalted. M. By. ſaid it cam
to her like an vgly black man with ſhoulders higher then his head,
promyſing her enought if ſhe wold conſent, and that he would lye
ſtill when ſhe vtterly denyed him and prayed againſt him, he threatned
to caſt her into apitt as ſhe went home. But when ſhe reſiſted he

caſt her to the ground, and departed twiſe as byg, and foule as hee
came, with two flaſhes of fyer, one before & another after him, making
a noyſe like a great wynd among trees. She was not aſſaulted at
midnight with the 5 but after ſupper before ſhe went to bed.
            
               Iohn Starchy ſayd he came in the former likenes, making many large
proffers, baggs of gould &c. But when he ſawe he nothing preuayled
with ſugred wordes, he vſed terrible menaces, ſaying he wold breake
his neck &c. Anne Starchy ſaid he came in the former likenes.
            
               M. Hard. ſaid he came in the ſame forme he went out proffring golde
but ſhe refuſing, he threatned to breake her necke, caſt her into a pyt,
and drowne her and ſo departed.
            
               El. Hard. ſaid he came like a beare with fyer in his mouth wherwith
ſhe was ſo terrifyed that ſhe lept quite out of her bed, and rann from
him, ſhe wiſt not whither: but one of the company ſtayed her. Then
he deſyred her to open her mouth, as he opened his, ſhewing her two
bagges, one of ſiluer an other of gold, promiſing her 9 times as much
but not preuayling he ran away as a beare that breakes looſe from the
ſtake when ſhe was layd downe and prayed, he came agayn like an
ape, promiſing her golde &c, at her pleaſure. Then he menaced to caſt
her out of the windowe, and into the fyer if euer ſhe ſtood neare it,
and ſo departed: very foule & with an horrible ſcryke.
            
               El: Hol. ſaid he came like a great beare with open mouth vpon her, &
preſently turned it ſelfe into the ſimilytude of a white doue: but ſhee
reſiſted, and it departed.
            Thus we haue hard of the diſpoſſeſſion of 6. & what thinges fell out
therein, as alſo preſently after the ſame: it reſteth that we conuert our
ſpeach to Iane Aſhton the 7. Sathan vpon the aforeſaid day towardes
euening put her to extreame payne, and continued the ſame longe
very neare 2. houres after their deliuerance, intiſing her to ſay he was
gon and to make ſhew of welfare, promiſing that he would not moleſt
her at all. She to be at eaſe conſented, and pretended in wordes to
be as well as the reſt, but we thought otherwiſe, becauſe the ſignes of
diſpoſſeſſion were wanting. After ſhe had herein yelded to the diuell
(which ſhe concealed vntill after her deliuerance) ſhe was as free frō
any vexation by him as the reſt: notwithſtanding we prayed or ſhee
prayed: wheras before for 3. houres togither, her fyt beinge ended the
ſhorteſt prayer that might bee being vſed, ſhe wold be in an other
moſt greuous to beholde.
            All night ſhee was very well, the next morning alſo, vntill we 3. (who
were to be leaders that day alſo, in that holy action we had in hand▪
hauing ſhut our dore) had caſt doune our ſelues before the throne of
grace, to craue the direction & aſſiſtance of gods ſpirit in the worke

we were to enter vpon this) I ſay) we had no ſoner don, but behold
the chamber wher we were, yea the whol houſe did ring of her a
gaine, wherby we were not a litle comforted & incouraged, to enter
the ſecond tym into the feild. for therby we were aſſured, that we
were not deceiued, and that ſatan was certainly in her. after we can
downe into the parlor, whether many more reſorted that day then
the other to the number of about 50. we all being exerciſed as the
day aforeſaid. This morning ſhe was ſore tormented. ſhe often ſemed,
to vomyt vp all, and it got vp only alitle, fleame. and when ſhee
hanged downe her head to vomyt, often the ſperit would all to
ſhake her as an angrie maſtife a litle cur dogg, ſo that after her deliuery
ſhe was very hoarce & weake. About on of the clocke ſhe being
very extreamly tormēted, fel a wepīg that teares, trickled downe,
& after lay as dead alitle ſpace reuerting ſhe ſaid, he is gon, and gaue
thanks for her deliuerance. it went out like a great breath, vgly like a
toad, roūd like a ball & within an houer after it returned like a foule
big blacke man, but ſhe reſiſted, & it departed. when we ſaw clearly
that ſhe was diſpoſſeſſed, we aſked her why ſhe diſſemled the other
night. ſhe told vs that the ſaid euening it was com vp from her belly
to her breſt, thence to her throat, wher it held her as at her firſt takīg,
thence to her head. then ſhe ſaid, it deſired her to tell vs that he was
gon, & promiſed her not to moue or hurt her, & that ſhe ſhould lack
nothing, why ſaid we, would you harken to the deuill? becauſe (ſaid
ſhe) I was very ſore, and he promyſed me eaſe, but he hath deceaued
me. quoth M Dickons beleue the deuil againe. beware of lying, he
teacheth to lye, and you are taught for lying.
            This day & 2 or 3. following, the vncleane ſpirits returned euer &
anone in viſible formes vpon all 7. throwing ſome of them violently
downe before vs all, depriuing others for a little ſpace of the vſe of ſō
member of thir bodies, as arme or legg: ſekīg alſo both by godly promiſes,
of ſiluer, gold, ſilks, veluit, which they thought verily they ſaw)
& ſuch like, & fearful threats their conſents to reēter, without which
it ſhould ſeeme ſatan cannot reenter, though he cane firſt enter. But
from giuing ſuch conſēt and yealding vnto ſatan therin god in mercy
keept 6. of them: who ſince that tyme (prayſed be God therfore)
were neuer more nor leſſe, they nor any of them moleſted by ſatan
vntil this day, neyther it the 7 Iane Aſhton vntill a good ſpace after,
when ſhe leauing M Starchies houſe, went and dwelt in a place of ignorance
& among papiſts,Luke 11. 26. & became popiſh herſelfe, as I haue hard.
for which opertunitie & aduātag the deuill watching, & noe doubt
compaſing, he then recouered her, & now dwelleth their whoſe laſt
eſtat with Kat: wrights & Will. Somers, ſhall be worſe then their firſt.
            Here followeth, the story of William Somers.
         
         
            
            THE HISTORY OF SOMERS.
            
               William Somers of Nottingham. now about the age of 22.
yeares, ſonne in lawe to Robart Cowper of the ſaid towne, and
by trad of life a muſitian: about 8 or 9 yeares paſt, as he iournyed
from Bellyn in the countie of wigorn, (wher he then dwelt with one
M Anthonie Brackenberie to Bramſgroue, a market towne in that ſhire
accompanyed with an old woman dwelling in the ſaid Bellyn, found
an hat with a copper band. the woman requiering the ſame, he gaue
her the hat though vnwillingly, but the band he vtterly refuſed to
giue, ſuppoſſing it to be of gould. wher vpon ſhe threatning him ſaid
that it had bene as good for him to haue giuen it her. After this in the
night he ſaw a ſtrang light in the chamber wher he lay, which caſt him
into a great feare. and thus he continued frighted for a time. ſhortlye
after M. Brackenberic his maſter remoued to Holme, neare to Newark
vpon trēt in the countie of Nottingham being ther ſēt about his maſters
buſines vnto Newark in the way as he wēt thither, he was ſuddēly
throwne into adicth, ſom 8 yards diſtāt from the high way wher
in he wēt. after he had layen ther a certaine tim, he got vp & wēt forward
in his iourney, but by that he had gone a very little way further
he was taken agayne & caſt into a throne buſh about 60. yards diſtāt
from the high way: but how he cam into it, or the ditch he knew not.
in theſe two places he lay for the ſpace of ſom 4 houres, as he perceiued
after by the tyme of the day. notwithſtanding this let, to Newark
he went. when in his returne he drewe nere Holme he begane to be
ſicke. from ſicknes he came to carie himſelf after that ſtrang manner
by fyts, that his maſter ſuppoſed hym to playe the counterfeite, and
theirvpon he whypped him. But notwithſtanding all the whipping
was vſed (which he felt not at all) he continued after that ſame manner,
and was more ſtranglie handled euery daye then other. at length
it well appeared to be ſome ſtrang viſitation and hand of God whervpon
his maſter procured on in the miniſtrie to come to him, he being
for the ſpace of 3 weekes or ther abouts a continuall trouble, and
his maſter not knowing by what meaines to procure his amendment:
ſent him accompanyed with 3 perſones to Nottingham to his mother
being then a widowe. whilſte he was at Holme he hard ſomthinge ſay
vnto him, that vpon ſuch a day he would leaue him, & not com vnto
him (ſoe far as I remember he ſaid) vntill the end of 6 yeares. Now
after he had bene about 5 weekes at Nottingham afflicted after his
accuſtomed and ſtrang manner, and that the ſaid apoynted day was
come, he indeede amended in the iudgment of man, and ſoe continued:
inſomuch that ſhortly after he was bound prentiſe to one Thomas
Porter of Nottingham a weauer and muſition: who after gaue ouer his
trade of weavinge▪ and betooke himſelfe wholly to the other, from
whom the ſaid VVilliam Somers did twyſe rune awaye.
            
               
About the 20. day of March. 1596. his aforeſaid maiſter Thomas
Porter ſent him to Walton in Darbyſhire the now dwelling houſe of Sir
William Bowes to aſiſter of his wifes there named Mary Milwood. In
his going thither ther met him in Blakewell more at a deep colepit
hard by the high way ſide,by the manner of meeting the 2 time, and wordes vttered to him the 2 time, it ſhould ſeme rather to be the deuill in the liknes of an old woman an ould woman (as he thought) who aſked
him where he dwelt and whithor he was going, without any more
wordes. About a myle & half further (he hauing gon forward a iournying
pace without ſtay) * ſhe met him agavn, and paſſed by him with
out any words. The next day he retorning from Walton homewardes.
ſhe met him at the aforeſaid pyt, and aſked him how he did? ſaying further,
I muſt haue a penny of thee. he anſwered, that he had no monney,
Thou haſt (quoth ſhe) Mary Millwood gaue thee. 2. pence, I will haue a
penny of it or I will throwe thee into this pyt and breake thy neck. Herevpon
for feare ſhe giuing him 2 pence he gaue hir 3 pence which indeed
had ben giuen him by the ſaid Mary. After this ſhe put hir hand
to a bag ſhe had about hir, and taking thence a peece of bread with
butter ſpred on it, bad him eate it. He refuſing ſhe threatned hym againe,
to throwe him into the pyt, and breake his neck, if hee would
not eate it.This Kath Wright is a yong woman dwelling at a place called Bridgway lane not far diſtant from Blackwel more who about 14 yeres paſt being poſſeſed was by prayet deliuered but is ſince repoſſeſed whervpon (greatly againſt his wil and for feare) he did eat
it, and in the eating it ſemed to him as ſweet as any honney. She ſaid
moreouervnto hym Doeſt thou not knowe Katheryn Wright? no quoth
hee, ſhe is my neighbor (ſaid ſhe) and ſhee and I will come to Notingham
one of theis dayes, and ſee how thou doest. Then a catt (as the boy thought)
leapt vp into her boſome, the which ſhe imbraced, and with hir
armes claſpt it vnto hir, and thus they parted each from other.
About the begining of October. 1597. the ſaid Somers (being at Nottingham
in the houſe of his maiſter Thomas Porter did vſe ſuch ſtrang
and ydle. kinde of geſtures in laughing, dauncing & ſuch like lighte
behauiour, that he was ſuſpected to be madd: ſundry times he refuſed
all kynd of meate for a long ſpace togither, inſomuch as he did ſeeme
therby to pyne away, ſomtimes he ſhaked as if he had had an ague
there was hard a ſtrange noyſe or flapping from within his bodye
he was often ſeene to gather himſelf on a round heape vnder his bed-cloathes:
and being ſo gathered to bounſe vp a good height from the
bed, alſo to beate his head and other parts of his body againſt the
ground and bedſtead in ſuch earneſt manner and ſo violentlye that,
the beholders did feare that thereby he woulde haue ſpoyled hymſelfe,
if they had not by ſtrong hand reſtrayned hym: and yet thereby
receyued he no hurt at all. In moſt of his fitts he did ſwell in his body
and in ſome of them did ſo greatly exceede therein, as he ſeemed to
be twice ſo byg as his naturall body. Oft alſo was hee ſeene to haue a
certayne varyable ſwelling or lumpe to a greate bignes ſwiftlye running

vp and doune betwene the fleſh and ſkyn through all the parts
of his body: and many tymes when that ſwelling was, theis or the like
words were hard out of his mouth. I will go out at his eyes or eares or
toes at which ſpeaches the ſaid ſwelling euidently appearing in ſuch
partes, did ymediatly remoue and vaniſh away. This ſwelling did not
only run from eye to eye, from cheke to cheke, and vp & doune along
ſtill in the body: but beſides being now in the one leg preſently it wold
be in the other, and ſo of the armes in like manner: & looke in which
arme or leg it ſtayed (as often it did for a certain ſpace) the ſame member
was innexible and excedingly heauy as it had bene ſomuch iron.
Thus it went with him though not in al, yet in mani of his fits wherī
               ouer
and beſides theſe things, he was ſtrangely handled: for ſuddenlye
(if he were ſtanding when the fyt came) he wold be caſt he
                  •
               dlong
vpon the ground, or fall doune, drawing then his lips awry, gnaſhing
with his teeth, wallowing and foming. In ſundry of his ſits he did vtter
ſo ſtrang & fearfull ſcriking as cannot be vttered by mans power;
and was of ſuch ſtrength as ſometimes 4 or 5 men though they had
much aduantage againſt him by bynding of him to a chaire, yet could
they not rule him: and in ſhewing that ſtrength he was not perceyued
to pant or blowe, no more then if he had not ſtrayned his ſtrength,
nor ſtrugled at all. Sometimes he cryed extreamly, ſo as teares
came from him in great abundance: preſently after he would laughe
aloude & ſhrill, his mouth being ſhutt cloſe. And being demaunded
concerning thoſe accidentes, he proteſted he knewe of no ſuch mater,
neither felt he any payne. Moreouer, he was often times caſt into the
fyre ſome bare part of his body alſo lying in the fyer: and yet was not
burned, and ſomtimes caſt violently againſt the ground, & agaynſte
the wall or poaſtes of the houſe without any hurt of his body, & did
many wayes ſeeke to deſtroy himſelfe: by reaſon whereof they were
driuen to take away his knife, gyrdell, garters &c. yea with the ſheete
of his bed he had like to haue ſtrangled hīmſelfe. wherevpon as alſo
through the increaſing of his fits they were conſtreyned to watch hī
continually euen day & night. His behauiour generally towardes all
that came, was very pleaſant, moſt impudent alſo & ſhameleſſe with
much vncleannes. His ſpeaches were vſually vaine, deliuered in very
ſcoffing manner, and many times filthi and vncleane, yery vnfit once
to be named,
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   like in my owne hearing
                     •
                   did Kat. VVright 
                     •
                  eing poſſeſſed. or blaſphemous ſwearing moſt fearfully, vſing one blody
oath after other: ſometimes ſaying I am god & ſomtimes there is
no god. Being moued to ſay the lordes prayer, when he came to thes
wordes leade vs not into temptation. he would ſay leade vs into temptation:
diuers fond ſpeaches did he vſe to interrupt them that prayed
for him. Many ſtrange ſpeaches alſo were vttered by him, not in his

owne name, but as ſpoken by an euill ſpirit poſſeſſing him: vpon occation
of ſome queſtion or ſpeach vſed by ſome in ther ſimplicitie &
ignorance: as that his dame had ſent him, that his name was Lucye, that
he was king, that he was prince of darknes. you thinke I haue no power of
him, yet I can vſe his tongue, his teeth, lyppes, handes, legges, his bodye and
all partes of him. and as the ſpirit named each part, he vſed it. and this
ſpeache with the action was verye common. was I? (ſaid he to one
Iohn Wiggin) neuer in heauen? yea quoth he, but God for thy pryde
thrwe thee downe into hell there to remayne. One Iohn Sherwood
charging him to tell who ſent him thither, he anſweared a woman. he
charged him againe to tell wher ſhee dwelt: he anſweared in Worceſter
ſhire. whether is ſhee liuyng or dead? dead ſaid he. wherfore did ſhee
ſend thee? for a hatt and hat band. Then the boye when the fite was
done was queſtioned with, concernynge theſe thinges: wherevnto
he returned for anſweare that which is ſet downe in the beginnynge
of this ſtorye, which he had concealed vntyll that tyme. Herevnto
I myght add certayne direct anſweares he mayde in lattyn to thoſe
ſpeaches, which in lattin were vſed unto hym, a little greeke alſo he
ſpeake, beynge ignorant in thoſe Languages, altogether in the one,
and vnderſtandyng little or nothynge in the other.
            In goyng thus with the boye, I was importined in his behalfe, firſt
by two letteres, after by another from the Maior, and theirevpon I
went vnto hym. As when and about the tyme I condiſended to goe
(beynge 14. myles of hym) he ſpeake theirof to them which were
about hym: ſo when I was come to Nottingham, he inſtanſtlye tould
the ſame, and foretould my comminge vnto him when I drewe neare
the houſe, as he had alſo foretould M Aldridge (the preacher of the
towne) his comming at ſundrie times.
            Towardes that evening I came being the 5 of Nouember, he ſeemed
to be ſicke, and his ſicknes greatlye to increaſe vpon him, ſoe as they
feared he would haue dyed, or had bene dead, for he laye an hower
with his face and handes blacke, cold as ice, noe breath being perceiued
to come from him. whervpon I was noe ſoner light but tydinges
hereof was brought to me, by one of they neighbour women Ioahn
Pye by name, who came purpoſlye from hym to ſignifye the ſame
vnto me: to whom I anſweared, yt was the mere acte or operation
of the Deuyll, and that the boye was nothinge leſſe then either dead
or in daunger therof. Forthwith with her I went to hym, whom
wee Found verye liulye and in one of hys accuſtomed Fytes, manye
beyng preſent with hym.
            My ſpeach I caried for a ſeaſon doubtfullie▪ but after a while perceiuynge
how it was with hym, I dyd aſſure hym that he was Poſſeſſed,

and had in that bodye of his a deuill, and withall did ſoe frame the
wordes of my mouth, as might beſt ſerue to prepare and ſtir him vp
to a ſperituall fight againſt ſatan, or reſiſtance of him in faith. This
euen
                  •
               g he acted many ſines, by ſigns & geſturs moſt liuly repreſenting
and ſhawdoing them out vnto vs: as namlye brauling, quarriling
fighting, ſwaring, robbing by the high wayes, picking and cutting of
pur
                  ••
               es, burglarie, whordom, prid both in men and women, hypocriſie,
ſlugiſhnes in hearing of the word, drunckennes, glotinye, alſo
dauncing with the toyes thervnto belonging, the manner of antique
dances, the games of dicing and carding, the abuſe of the viole with
other inſtruments at the end of ſundrie of theſe he laughted excedingly,
diuers times clapping his handes on his thighes for ioye: and at
the end of ſome of them, as killing and ſtealing, he ſhewed how he
brought them to the gallowes, making aſigne therof. during this
time which continued about an houre, as he was altogether ſilent, ſo
was he moſt actiue, though his eyes were cloſed, and in many things
he did, ther was great and neceſſarie vſe of ſight. In a word, theſe
thinges were in ſuch liuly and orient coloures painted out (as I may
ſay) vnto vs that were preſent, being to the number of ſome 60. that
I for my owne part (and I am perſwaded the reſt of the beholders
are of my mynd) doe verily thinke, that it is not in the ſkile and power
of man to doe the like. whilſt we were recommending him and
his greuious eſtate to the Lord, and intreating his maieſtie in his behalfe,
he vttered theſe wordes, I muſt begonne.
            
            The next daye being the Lordes day I came not at him vntil about
3. a clocke in the afternoone, (finding company with him) at which
time I vſed ſome ſpeach, wherin I indeuored to prepare both him &
his maſters familye, as alſo his parents (whom that iudgment principallye
concerneth,) vnto the holye exerciſe the daye after to be
performed. Towardes evening much people reſorted to the houſe,
then ſome words of exhortation were vſed by my ſelfe, for the ſanctifiyng
of ſoe manye of vs, as whoſe ſpirites god ſhould ſtir vp, to
ioyne in that ſolemne ſeruice and worſhip of god to be performed on
the day following. as the night and day before he had litle or no reſt
from ſatan aff
                  •
               cting him: ſo this evening & all the night long he hand
led him more extreamly then before at this time amōg other things
the ſpirit retorted his tongue into his throat. and this he did often,
whervpō many loked with a candle into his mouth, wher the could ſe
no tongue nor part of it, only in his thoat they beheld the root therof.
he vttered often theſ words, for corne, for corne, with a fewe more
thervnto appertainīg, notīg the vnſatiable deſier of gaine or r
                  •
               ayſing
the price of corne in corne mē. this night was ſpēt by ſom well diſpoſed

people in reading & praying. this euening I requeſted the miniſter of
that congregatio M Aldridge & with him on M. Aldred & M. Halam
Paſtors of 2 ſeuera
                  •
               l towns neare adioyning vnto Nott. to ioyne with
me on the morrowe, in the miniſtratiō of the word and prayer, whervnto
the condiſcended. And this I did the rather, that therby I might
proclayme and make knowne vnto all men, that as I haue no ſpeciall
or greater guift herein then the reſt of my bretheren: ſo neither doe
I arrogate, or challenge any ſuch thing to my ſelfe.
            In the morning (being the 7 of Nouember) many of vs were aſſembled
together in the next conuenient and ſeemly roome to the place
of his abode. The boy was brought with ſtrang and fearfull ſcrikings
by. 6. or 7. ſtrong men, who had all of them inough adoe to bring him
and layd on a couch in the midſt of vs. M. Aldridg began and after
prayer proceded to the interpretation of the. 4. of Hoſ. the two f
                  •
               ſte
verſes. when he had finiſhed, my ſelf intreated of that ſtory ſet doune
in the. 9. of Marke, from verſe. 14, vntil the 30. wher the father bringing
his poſſeſſed child to chriſt to be cured, had him healed accordingly.
All this day he was continually vexed and tormented by Sathan,
hauing little or no reſt at all, ſo as the ſame for vexation by the ſpirit
far exceded any of the dayes before. His tormentes in his fittes were
moſt greuous and feareful to behould, wherein his body being ſwelled,
was toſſed vp and doune. In theis fits his ſtrength was very great
ſo as being held doune wi
                  •
               h 5. ſtrong men, he did notwithſtandinge
all their ſtrength againſt their wils, riſe and ſtand vpright of his feete.
He was alſo continually torne in very fearful manner. and diſfigured
in his face: wherein ſomtimes his lips were draune awry, now to the
one ſyde now to the other: ſomtimes his face and neck diſtorted, to
the right and to the left hand, yea ſomtimes writhen to his back: ſomtimes
he thruſt out his tongue very far and big, and ſomtimes turned
backwardes into his throat, gaping ſo wide that we might afar of perceiue
it: now he gnaſhed with his teeth: now he fomed like to the
horſe or boare, roping doune to his breſt, notwithſtanding there was
one purpoſely ſtanding by with a cloath euer and anon to wype it
away, not to ſay any thing of his fearfull ſtaring with his eyes, and incredible
gapinge:
            This daye notwithſtanding he was ſo held as is aforſaid, hee went
about to haue choaked and ſo deſtroyed himſelf: ſpeaches he vſed
non, ſaue once in a great voyce, corne, and when I applyed that ſpeach
of our Sauiour, all things are poſſible to him that beleeueth he vſed
theis words thow lyeſt. Diuers times he ſcriched or cryed aloude in aſtrange
and ſupernaturall manner: ſomtimes he roared fearfullye ly
                  •
               e
a beare, and cryed like a ſwyne.
            
               
Towardes the evening as I was treatyng of theſe wordes, then the ſpirit
cryed, rent him ſore, and came out, and he was as one dead, inſomuch
that manye ſayd he is dead, the boye was rent ſore indeede, cryed and
that a loud. Then they people which were preſent, as men aſtoniſhed
and with the greuyoues ſight and crye vnſpeakeable affected in the
boweles of compaſſion towardes hym, breakyng ther hitherto continued
ſilent, cryed out all at once: as it were with one voyce vnto the
Lord, to haue mercye vpon hym: and within a quarter of an hower
(they and he ſtill cryinge aloud) he held downe one a bed by 5 men,
and offering as though he would haue vomyted, was one the ſudden
violently caſt, & his body therwith turned, ſo as his face lay donwards
to the ground & at the beds fete, & his backe vpward with his fete on
the beds head, & thus he lay as if he had ben dead for a ſeaſō. Thus we
haue hard not only how it wēt with Som. in the tim of his poſſeſſion,
& at and a litle before his diſpoſſiō, but alſo how & by what meanes I
came vnto him, & being ther, caried my ſelfe in this preſent action.
            Accordinge now to that in the goſpell, when the vncleane ſpirit is gone
out of a man,
               Math. 21 43. 
               he ſayeth to himſelfe, I will returne into myne houſe from
whence I came, &c. it fell out here, for the vncleane ſpirit being gone
out of Someres, returned and ſought to enter againe into him. And as
for the compaſſing of his former habitation with the 7 in Lanchaſhire
he viſiblely appered vnto them, & for a ſeaſon moleſted them in thire
bodies: even ſo did the ſpirit with Somers. The ſame night he was diſpoſſeſſed,
as he lay in his bed, a thing like a rat patted one his mouth,
and after crept doune along on his body, vntill it came to his priuye
partes, from whence it vaniſhed away. Thus did the ſpirit many times
and ſundry wayes, and about a quarter of a yeare after, recouered him
and entered againe, as appereth by the ſignes of poſſeſſion, whervnto
ſome of the 17. witneſſes after mentioned haue depoſed, as appeareth
by the depoſitiones of diuers, if the tyme when the thinges wear
done which they depoſed be obſerued. After this ſatan drewe the boy
alſo vpon whom the worke was wrought, to confeſe and affirme that
he had diſſemled. And to bring this to paſſe (which paſſeth whatſoeeuer
elſe could be imagined, to perſwade the world that he counterfeited)
the old ſerpent ſo ordered the matter, that he was charged to
haue be witched on Sterland to death, & brought theirvpon into the
towns haul before the magiſtraits, by the meaines & procurement of
M. Freeman, Sterlands wife & ſom of her neighbors cam with an accuſatiō
of witchcraft agaīſt him, to wit, that vpō ſuch a day in Not. market
Som. ſhould tread on the hele of the ſaid Sterland whervpon he ſhould
preſently fall ſicke, and dyed 4 or 5 dayes after. Her neighbours they
witneſed, that Starland being dead, his heele locked blacke, or ſome
ſuch thing: Herevpon Som. was commited to priſon, but a litle after
bailed. Not long after this, theſe magiſtrats, (under couler to fyn
                  •
               e

out this counterfeting) tooke this witch (forſoth) & it percaſe a counterfeyte,
from his parents, and commited him to their houſe of correction,
called St. Iones, & their to the coſtody of 2 moſt leud fellows:
which no ſooner had him, but forthwith about thire worke the went:
the one Iohn Couper threatning to whyp him, the other Nich. Shepard
to pinch him with pincers, therby to drawe him (indeed) to confeſſe,
that he had counterfeited, as appeareth by thire depoſitions. beſides,
the aboue named Nott. magiſtrats promiſed him 10. l. and that he
ſhould ſet vp any trade, ſo that he wold confeſe his diſſemling, as M
Iakſon Alderman confeſſed in the towne haul before manye, but this
ſaid he, they did in policy. Laſtly the deuill himſelfe viſiblie appeared
vnto him (as experirence hath taught he doth vſually to thoſe that
he poſſeſſeth) promiſyng and threatning, and all to compaſe his confeſſion,
which by theſe meaines he effected.
            VVhen Som. had bene at St Iones vnder the cuſtodi of his ſaid kepers,
about 3 days, & all thoſe meanes you hereof vſed▪ for the compaſing
of a confeſſion of counterfeiting, he acknowledged that he had counterfeited,
& therwithall was freed from all vexatiō in his body by the
deuill, (then repoſſeſing him) which immediatly before and till then al
the tym of his repoſſeſſion he had taſted, and many others beheld.
            The caſe being thus, my ſelfe with others thought good, to procuer a
commiſſion from the Arch B. of York, for the examining of ſuch as had
ſene So. do or ſuffer, ſūdry things impoſſible to be counterfeted, for it
was thought, that the depoſitions of men would be auailable to ouerthrow
this wretched confeſſiō of his, whē percaſe the bare aſſertions of
men would not. to this end a comiſſiō was graunted & directed to Io.
Therrald eſquire (then) high ſherife of the counti
                  •
                of Nott. S. Iohn Byron
knight, Io Stanhop, Rob Markham, Rich. Perkins Eſquiers, Pet Clerk Mai
of the towne of Nott. M Walton A
                     •
                  chdeacon of Darbiſhire, Miles Leigh
officiall of Not. Io. Ireton, Io Browne, Rob. Evington, & Tho. B
                     •
                  ulton, miniſters
& preachers of God word. Theſe comiſioners vpon the 20. of
march 1597. examīed 17. euery of which depoſed more or les to ſom
thīg don or ſuffered by So. which nether natur nor art can compaſe▪ as
apeareth by ther depoſitiōs now in prīt. this don So. himſelfe was caled
before the comiſſioners, & he who for the ſpace of a moneth before,
even from the tym he ſaid he counterfeited vntil that preſent,who becauſe he was an aduerſari, was made a com
                     •
                  iſſione
                     •
                   &. with him 2 other, Pet. Clerk Ma
                     •
                  or, M
                     •
                  es Leigh officiall. had not
at all ben vexed by ſatā in his body, as if he had had no ſuch geſſe nor
inhabitāt no more then any other, (which cam frō the ſubtelty of the
diuil, was viol
                  •
               tli throwne doune, even as he was facing out his counterfeiting▪
& ſo oft & miſerably tormēted by the diuil, vntil both him
ſelfe to the comſſiōers acknowledged, that he had not counterfited &
the greateſt contēder for counterfeitīg, & enimy to the ſaid worke of
god, M Wal. Arch. of Dar. & a comiſſiōer, that it was the finger of god.
               
the diuers fits he had in the preſence of theſe comiſſioners, beſids the
great violence offered vnto him, he was in the firſt of them, thruſte
deepe into the hand & leg with pins, but ſtirred not therat, neyther
did any bloud iſſu at either of the places ſo pricked. The ſaid fit ended
being demaunded what he had done▪ as alſo what had bene don vnto
him? he knew not of any thing, more or leſſe. At this time alſo his two
kepers were enamyned, who for all their minſing acknowledged that
on of them threatned to whypp him, the other to pinch him with pincers,
which he called knipknaps. Thus the matter being manifeſt to the comiſſioners,
partly by the depoſitions of men, partly by that themſelues
ſawe and partly alſo by the confeſſion of Som. himſelf, they ſurceaſed
to examine any further, and ſhortly after togither with the
ſayd depoſitions, retorned to the Arch: B. of Yorke, no counterfeytīg.
Now was Som. taken from his aforeſaid kepers, & committed to the
cuſtody of one Edmond Garland where he was continually tormented
of the diuel, & that more fearefully then euer before: wherby his
repoſſeſſion & the lurking of the ſpirit was euident.
            Confeſſing now that he neuer counterfeyted, (which alſo was manifeſt
to thoſe that beheld his vexation by ſathan) & being thervpon
demaunded, why he had before affirmed the contrary? as in wordes
he rendred the reaſon thereof, ſo in writing himſelf ſet downe the
ſame in theſe wordes folowing: which vnder his owne hande is yet
to be ſeene.
            Being at Sainct Iones there came vnto me a thinge like vnto a dog, and
ſaid vnto me, and if I wold conſent vnto him and ſay that I was a counterfeite,
he wolde give mee a bag of gould,ſay I counter feited. and if peeces: and if I * woulde I
ſhould do any thing that I would tak in hand, and he wovld com to me lik
a mouſe, and helpe me. And then came to mee a thinge like an aſſe, & ſaid
that if I wold not ſay that I was a counterfeyt, he wold caſt me into the
well, and ſo went away, And Nicholas Shepheard ſaid and if I were in
a fitt againe, he wold fetch a paire of knipknaps and a rope, & he woulde
make me confeſe, or els hang me, & Iohn Cowper & Shepheard ſaid, and if
I wovld ſay that I was a counterfeyt, that Maiſter Maior & the Aldermen
would giue me tenne pounds & I ſhould ſet vp any trad that I would
and I had better ſay, that I was a counterfeyt and liue like a man, then to
haue nothinge: for if I ſhould ſay that I were not a counterſeyt, & goe into
the clergies hand, I ſhould hau
                  •
                nothinge.
            
               Somers being at Edm. Garlands was daylie in greuous manner tormē
               ted
by the diuel, oft caſt into the fyer, but not burnt: and to let his
other vexations go, was of extraordinary ſtrength and ſupernaturall
knowledge: wherwith was made manifeſt that he was repoſeſſed

notwithſtanding no ſuch thing had appeared for the ſpāce of a monneth
before. But by that he had bene about, 10. dais at Ed: Garlands
the Maior with ſome of the▪ 
               Aldermen & M, Will: Gregory the towne
clarke who at ſatans diſcouery before the, 12. commiſſioners were
greatly abaſhed and confounded in them ſelues gathered hart to
themſelues and incouraging one another, they ſent and procured that
whereby they gott Sommers into theire owne poſſeſſion agayne, and
this doubtles they did the more ſpeedily, for that (as I take it) they
hard that we were purpoſed now to haue vſed the meaines for his diſpoſſeſſion
publicklye in the Church, which they ſure feared would
haue turned to ther great ſhame, who had ſoe hotly and openly contended
for counterfeyting, They noe ſooner had him but he was at
quyet, as if he had bene a counterfeite indeed, and nothing leſſe then
a deuill within him. About a weeke after, (the aſſyſes being at Nott.)
before the Lord Anderſon, Somers was called, ſaid he had counterfted,
& being commaunded by my Lord Anderſon to do his tricks as ſome
call them, he thrwe himſelfe downe: and then the ſpirit trifled, and ſo
caried himſelfe, as might beſt make to perſwade thoſe preſent that he
counterfeited: and it ſo as theirin (through the ouerruling hand of
God, their was ſufficient to kepe man from that perſwaſion. for ſince
twife in open court at Lambeth, by two no mayne aduerſaries then
preſent, it hath bene ſaid, although to another end, that one of his
leggs were as heauie, as if it had bene irone. ſhortly after to London
he went, and dwelt with a barber in Eaſtſmithfeild, from whence he
went to the Biſhope of London: wher after he had bene about a month,
& my ſelfe ſomwhat longer in the Gathouſe for heriſie, he proceeded
further, & added this to his former iniquitie, that I had taught him
to counterfeit: which accuſatiō hath bene in ſuch ſort purſued againſt
me, as is ſhewed in the ſeuerall treatiſes publiſhed by ſome frendes to
the cauſe▪ the other charge of heriſie for which I was ſent to priſon
▪as appeareth by the warrant' lyinge in the duſt, neuer word beinge
ſpoken therof vntill this daye, no not ſo much as the heriſie or heriticall
opinion once named, that I ſhould hold and mayntayne.
            FINIS
         
         
            
            
            THE DOCTRIN OF THE POSSESSION AND DISPOSSESSION
OF DEMONIAKES OVT OF THE
VVORD OF GOD. PARTICVLERLY APPLIED VNTO SOMERS, AND THE REST OF THE
PERSONS CONTROVERTED TOGETHER.
with the vſe we are to make of the ſame.
            We haue hard in the former treatyſe of 8. Perſons that weare
vexed with euill ſpirits, viz. 7 in Lanchaſhire, and one at Nottinham:
and of diuers ſtrange actiones or paſſions done or ſuffered
by them. Now that the glory of God, & the edification of the chriſtian
reader, (which two thinges only I haue aymed at: in the publiſhing
of this ſtory,) may be the better furthered therby. I haue thought
it neceſſarie to treate of theſe 3 thinges. 1. that all thoſe perſons were
indeed poſſeſſed with vncleane ſpirits, and did not counterfeit apoſſeſſion,
as is affyrmed by ſome. 2. That they were all (vndoubtedly)
diſpoſſeſſed, and that by prayer and faſtinge, the meaines which God
hath thervnto apoynted. 3. what is the holy and right vſe we ſhould
all make of this rare and great worke of God: which euery on ſhould
ſpecially in the reading hereof ayme at, though it can not be attained,
without the certaine knowledge of the two former poyntes.
            
               1 That they did not counterfeite a poſſeſſion, but were
verily poſſeſſed with vncleane ſpirites.
               I doe not ſay with the poet, felix qui potuit rerum cognoſcere cauſas he
is a happie man, who can find out the cauſes of things: but this I affirme,
it is the parte of a wyſe man, to ſearch out the cauſe of a thing.
He therfore yea he onlye ſhall carrye hymſelfe wyſlye in the preſent
controverſie we haue in hand, and iudge aright therin, who ſhall laboure
to find out the true and proper cauſe of thoſe ſtrang accidents,
whereof a true reporte hath bene made in the former treatyſe. I wyll
not ſtand here to iterate and heape vp thoſe ſtrange things which are
before ſpecyfyed, all which may be referred either to ther extraordinary
and ſupernaturall ſtrength, or their ſupernaturally knowledgd, or
their extraordinary and ſupernaturall actions or paſſions of their bodyes:
only in the ſpirit of meeknes and with all humilitie,Such effects ac haue bine down by theſe parties poſſeſſed cannot proceed from the nature or ſkile of man I demaund
of them which deny and call in queſtion or doubt of their poſſeſion,
whence or from what cauſe the actions or paſſiones acted or ſuffered
by them came? can theire any naturall cauſe be giuen of them? or is
there any thing in nature that might ſend forth ſuch effects? verilye,
though yt myght be graunted of ſome of them, yet vndoubtedlye it
cannot truly be affirmed of all: but that ſome of them are not humian
* but it cam from ſom other thing then the nature or induſtri of man

And what ſhould that be but wicked ſpirits within them, according as
in times paſt it hath bene with others in the like caſe? except we will
be ſo groſſe as to imagine, either that God wrought them immediatly,
without the miniſtrie of any creature, or by the ſeruice of an elect
Angel: neither of which can poſſibly be, conſidering theire vanityes
toyes and fooleries, the diſtorting and diſſiguring of ther faces, with
other accidents of that kind, and the vncleane & blaſphemous ſpeaches
aboue mentioned. On the contararie ſide they all well be 
                     •
                  ee
                     •
                  e
the vncleane ſpirit, and ſute exelentlye with his nature, and therfore
make greatlye for confirmation of their poſſeſſion.
               If any graunting that theſe things were done by wicked ſpirits, ſhall
ſaye that it followeth not theirevpon that the ſpirites were in them
and ſo poſſeſſed them.how ſpirits being with out man do vexe him * I anſwere that a ſpirit without man may diuers
wayes greatly trouble and afflict him, as by ſightes and viſions,
yea even in his body, as he did Iob. So likewiſe after the deliuerance
of the aboue named perſons (as alſo of on Thomas Darling aboy not
long ſince diſpoſſeſed,Iob. 2. 7. dwelling in Burton vpon Trent, in the countye
of Stafford) they ſpirits in their returne to repoſſeſe them, did many
times and ſundry wayes (that by fearing, aſtoniſhing, and threatning
of them they might prevaile) mightily moleſt and trouble them.
               * But that the diuil beīg without mā,It is impoſſible for Satan being without man to haue the whole rule and diſpoſition of the body. can rule & diſpoſe of the whol
body of man, and euery part therof according to his pleaſure, as he
dyd with theſe, and doth with all thoſe he poſſeſeth, it is abſurde to
affirme. For what more can ſatan doe to the body of man, then rule
and torment it thus in the inward and outward partes, and in euery
parcell and member theiro
                     •
                   accordinge to his luſt and pleaſure? the
which if he could doe being without, he would neuer deſier nor ſeek
entrance into man to poſſeſ him the which no man will deny but he
doth. for what would his ſaid entrance advantag him to the hurting
or tormenting of man in his body, more then his being without him.
Secondly ſatan being without man, can not cauſe or ſend forth thoſe
effects (which are indeed ſignes of poſſeſſion) wherof we haue hard before,
& more ſhalbe ſpokē afterward, becauſe then god ſhould haue
left his church deſtitute of all meaines, wherby to diſcerne of poſſeſion
which can n
                     •
                  t be, the wiſdom of God conſidered on the on ſid,
and the neceſſitie of man to be directed herein, on the other. Againe
if it were true that the euill ſpirit could ſo torment a man on euerye
ſid being without him only, how could the common people among
the Iewes haue knowne when men were poſſeſed, as it is euident by
the * goſpell they did?math 15. 2 2. for it is certaine that by no other meaines but
the manner of their handling,mark 9. 22. or vexation by ſatan they knewe it, as
a
                     •
                   may partly appeare out of the 9.verſe 17. 18. 22. 
                  Cha
                        •
                     t. of Marke. now might not

this ſame obiection as well haue bene obiected vnto them: as it is againſt
vs at this preſent, The deuil by ſome outward operation can do all
that which leadeth you to thinke that ſuch and ſuch are poſeſed, you may
therfore erre and be deceiued in ſo thinking and affirming.
               
               But it hath bene obiected that theſe things came, though not frō nature,
yet from the corruption of nature,Againſt the filie ſhift of pretended counterfeiting. in that they were counterfeytes.
I anſwer, that he which well conſidereth of the ſtrange accidēts
whereof we haue harde, may eaſily perceaue that there are manye
particulers there mentioned, which can not poſſibly be donne by any
arte or ſkil of man▪ but that they far ſurpas his cunnīg & all humā power.
It can not be then that they counterfeyted. If any man ſhal doubt
that the hiſtory is not truly reported by me, lett him conſider that
there hath bene that courſe taken in theſe treatiſes, which hath bene
euer thought beſt, and moſt likely to procure credit to any ſtory. For
herein we haue obſerued all neceſſary circumſtances, the perſons which
were thus afflicted, the time when, the place where, and hereafter
ſundry of the witneſſes before whome theſe things fell out ſhalbe
produced. If I only had bene a witnes of theſe thinges▪ though I might
happely haue made report of them to ſome of my acquaintance
who knew me to be one that through gods mercy haue learned to
make conſcience of a lye: yet ſhould I haue bene afrayd to haue put
them in print, for ſo many to reade and vnto whom I am altogeather
vnknowne. But ſeing that theſe things haue not bene done in a corner,
but in places that are populous and famous inough, not beyonde
the ſeas, but in ſuch parts of our owne land as any man that is deſyrous
to ſearch out the truth in this matter, may either go to thē him
ſelfe, or receiue certaine intelligence from thence without any greate
trouble, before ſuch witneſſes of whom mani are well knowne to be of
ſuch integriti, as they wold not be corrupted, & of ſuch wiſdom as the
could not be deceiued, ſpecially vſing ſo many meanes as they did to
try and boult out the truth: further that not the witneſſes onely but
alſo the parties themſelues which were ſo poſſeſſed are aliue and laſtlie
that there are ſuch a cloud of witneſſes, euen hundreds, whereof ſōe
30. vpon their corporall oathes haue depoſed the impoſſible thinges
to be counterſeyted, which we haue reported of Somers: If any man
(notwithſtanding theſe helpes againſt his incredulity herein) ſhall ſtil
either deny or doubt whether this matter of fact hath bene trulie reported.
I ſee not why he may not as well deny or doubt, whither any
thing be true that is written in other ſtories: yea much better may on
call in queſtion almoſt any other human ſtory: conſidering that thoſ
parties whome hiſtories paſt conſcerne are deade, but theſe aliue, &
their hiſtories are not depoſed vnto, at leaſt by ſo many witneſſes as

                     〈6 pages missing〉
                   
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
and no maruell for they were poſſeſſed with a legion of diuels, and
this child with one only.
               The 14.14 ther fits they depriued of 
                        〈◊〉
                      ſences, 
                        •
                     h internall 
                        •
                     d externall. marke of one poſſeſſed is, that they are depriued of theire ſences,
internall and externall. The firſt is euident by this that the man
out of whome the diuels were departed is ſaide: to ſit at the feete of Ieſus
cloathed and in his right mynde: he was therefore out of his righte
mynde when he was poſſeſſed, which is further confirmed in that he
did weare no cloathes in that he did ſhun the ſociety of men abydinge
in no houſe,
                  
                     
                        •
                     a
                        •
                     k. 515. 
                        •
                     k. 8. 35. 
                  but in the graues, in that both night and day he cryed in the
mountaynes, and in the graues, as alſo by the ſpeaches which vpon the
ſight of Chriſt, he or rather they being two (as appereth by Mtthew)
vttered ſaying or crying with a loud voyce: what haue we to doe with
thee Ieſus the ſonne of god? I charge thee by god that thou torment mee not
which they would neuer haue ſayd,6. 27. had they had the vſe of their vnderſtandinge.
And leaſt we ſhold imagine that it was thus only with
theſe two poſeſſed with a legion,29. we muſt remember that theſe and
ſuch like ſpeaches or exclamations arguing a depriuation of vnderſtanding,7.
were vttered by ſome other alſo poſſeſſed, which for the ſāe
reaſon were likewiſe depriued of theire internall ſences. Euen ſo it
was with theſe perſons for had they in Lancaſhire bene in theire righte
myndes, they would neuer haue ſpoken ſo malepertly in theire fits as
vſually they did to thoſe that were then preſent, eſpecially to Maiſter
Starchy (whome commonly they called goodfellowe, all their ſpeaches
alſo in a manner ſuting with that tytle) and Miſtres Starchye whoſe
owne childe called her whoore: neither would they euer in the preſence
of ſo many, and euen then when the holy ſcriptures were in handling
haue ſpoken ſo filthily as it is a ſhame to name: or ſo blaſphemouſly
of the holy, byble, calling it often tymes and that aloude bible
bable, as they did: nor 3. or 4. of them in theire whiſpering ſpeaches
actions geſtures, and countenances, haue at that time and duringe
that holy action carryed themſelues ſo wonderfull vainly as they did
and Iohn Starchy ſometimes (as we haue heard) in byting, or ſnatching
at euery one that was neare him, throwing what came to hys
hand at whomſoeuer, ſhewed himſelfe therein for the preſent to be
mad. Heere we may remember to the ſame end, the monſtrous
blaſphemy of Somers and his ſtrange and vnnaturall vndeannes eſpecially
in acting the ſyn of whordome in that manner he did, and that
in the preſence of ſo many: alſo his filthy and abhomynable carriage
of himſelf with a bitch before diuers, which he did after his repoſſeſſion.
Hither alſo refer the vyolence he did to his owne body, and the
light behauiour he vſed in the begining of his poſſeſſion in dancinge
laughing &c: wherevp
                     •
                  n he was ſuſpected to bee out of his wittes.

Finally it is hereby euident that neither they, Darling, nor Katheryn
Wright had in theire fits their vnderſtanding, becauſe they knew not
what they ſaid or did, nor what was ſayd or done by others. Indeede
out of their 
                     •
                  its thoſe which are poſſeſſed haue the right vſe of theire
mindes, but in, and during the ſame they are altogither ordinarily de
priued thereof, as hath bene ſhewed. Yf it be ſaid that theſe actions &
ſpeches came from the diuels within them I anſwer that that is moſt
true: yet foraſmuch as it ſeemed to men otherwiſe, & ſo they ſeemed
to be out of their right myn
                        •
                     es thervpon they are ſaid ſo to be.
               The ſecond conſcerning the externall ſences,Mark. 5. 5. and namely that of feeling,
may be gathered likewiſe out of the aforeſaid ſcripture in that
t
                     •
                  e man which had an vncleane ſpirrit is reported to haue ſtroken himſelfe
with ſtones, which if he had had his 
                     •
                  ee
                     •
                  ng, he would neuer haue
done, eſpecially in that vyo
                     •
                  ent manner that he did, ſo it was with the
aboue named 10. 
                     〈◊〉
                  , and thereof tryall was oft made in Somers
and as otherwiſe, ſo by pricking of pyns, whereat he neuer ſtyrred
though a pyn being ſomewhat greate and crooked was thruſt vp to
the head: and in Th. Darling this was manifeſt aboue any, in that in
his fits his ſhoulder bones, and other bones o
                     •
                   his armes (to the ſight
and feeling of others) were thruſt out of their ioynets and in agayne,
he not complayning thereof. As touching the other outwarde ſences
ſeing hearing &c. it is not indede manifeſt by the ſcriptures, that they
which had vncleane ſpirits were in their fits depryued of them. yet
from thence it may well be coniectured ſo to haue bene: for ſeing ſom
were altogither blynd and deafe through the diuel within them, cauſing
the ſame, and generally were depriued of their inward ſences and
that outward of feeling: why may we not in all probability ymagine
that they were without thē vſe of theſe other ſences alſo? and as touching
our demoniaks, they in their fits nether heard nor ſaw (though
their eyes were open) as themſelues reported. Further and more certaine
knowledge herein we cannot haue, neither neede wee deſire
conſidering the number of perſons reporting this, alſo that ſundrye
of them were far diſtant one from another, dwelling in ſeuerall ſhires
and almoſt all of them children.15 They vtter ſuch ſpeachs as moſt fitlye agree to an euill ſpirit. & favour not of the ſpirit oſman
               
               The 15. ſigne of ſathans poſſeſſing is, when ſuch ſpeaches are vttered
by the mouth of one, as ſauoure not of the ſpirit of man, but moſte fitly
agree to a wicked ſpirit. Thus we reade in the goſpell, that the poſſeſſed
when they ſawe Chriſt began to cry out, ſaying: Ieſus the ſonne of
the mofl high god,
                  Math 829. 31. 
                  what haue wee to doe with thee? art thou come hither to
torment vs before the tyme?
                  Mark 
                        •
                     . 24 & 5. 7. 
                  art thou come to deflroy vs? I charge thee by
god that thou torment mee not. Hither apperteyneth that anſwer that
his name was legion,
                  Luk 8. 28 and that requeſt, that yf he caſt them out, he would
                  
                  ſuffer them to enter into the heard of ſwyne: for we cannot doubte but
that thoſe ſpeaches were vttered after the ſame manner the former
were, that is by the mouthes of the parties poſſeſſed, and it is playne
by Luke. 8. 30. After this maner M. Hardman. ſaid a little before the
ſpirits egreſſe, I am hott, I muſt goe, I muſt away, I cannot tarry, whither
ſhall I goe? I will not dye. In like manner Somers or rather the diuell in
him ſaid, that he was god, meaning percaſe the god of this world that
he was the prince of darknes, that he was ſometimes in heauen: and when
he cauſed that lump or ſwelling in his eye, or toe, I will goe out at his
eye, I'le goe out at his toe: and vpon ſaterday at night before his diſpoſſeſſion
in the time of prayer I muſt be gon: with many more ſpeaches
as appeareth before: the like hereto he did alſo vpon his repoſſeſſion
but ſpecially vpon the 20. day of February, 1597. which was about
4. dayes after he was repoſſeſſed) when lying in a trance he vttered
many ſententious ſpeaches of this kynde, which were written from
his mouth in the preſence of diuers perſons of good credit. For inſtance
and a taſte theſe: I bayted my hooke often, and at laſt I catcht him.
Heere I was before, and heere I am againe, and heere I muſt ſtay, though
it be but for a ſhort tyme.
                  The ſpeaches which Somers vttered after his repoſſeſſion or rather the deuill in him. 
                  I leade them to drinck, carouſe, and quafſe, I
make them to ſweare. I haue leaue giuen mee to doe what I will for a time.
What is wightier then a kinge in his owne land? A king I am in whome
I raigne, heere I am king for a time. In like ſort Darling vpon the day
of his diſpoſſeſſion vttered wordes of this kind with his mouth wide
open: Brother Radulphus I will goe to my maiſter Belz
                        •
                     bub, and he ſhal
double there tongues, and againe, let vs goe out of him, and enter into ſome
of theſe heere:
                  Darling his ſpeeches or the deuill in him. with diuers others as appeareth by the hiſtory of him in
print, many ſuch like ſpeaches alſo I well remember by Ka: Wright.
               
               The 16. ſigne of poſſeſſion is, when men offer vyolence to theyre owne
bodyes, ſo in the 5. of Marke: it is ſaide of the man which had an vncleane
ſpirit, that he did ſtrike himſelf with ſtones: the diuell indeede
was the ſtriker, and the man a meere patient, but becauſe it was done
by his owne hand,16 The offer violence to thire owne bodyes. and ſo ſeemed to doe it himſelf, therefore it is aſcribed
vnto him: and thus many times thoſe things are attributed to the
poſſeſſed, which were indeede done by ſathen the poſſeſſor. And in
like ſorte haue I my ſelfe often done in this treatiſe.
               According to this, we haue haerd before of Somers 'who howſoeuer
he did not ſtrike himſelfe with ſtones, yet did he beate his heade and
that with greate vyolence againſt the ground or floare of the houſe,
and againſt the bedſted and throwe himſelfe againſt the wals.
               The 17.17 Not hurt by all the
                        •
                      tormentes ſigne of one poſſeſſed is, that he is not hurt by all the vyolence
that the diuell doth to his body, nor all the torments that he putteth him
vnto, ſo as (notwithſtanding all his rage and crueltye) not a bone of

the poſſeſſed (as I may ſay) is broken. This appeareth by the 4. of
Luke. where when Chriſte had commaunded the dyuell to come out
of the man poſſeſſed, it is ſayd,Luke. 4. 3
                        •
                     
                   that then the dyuell throwing hym in
the middeſt of them, came out of him, and hurte him nothinge at all.
               
               It is aſmuch as if it had bene ſaide: the dyuell vppon Chriſtes commaundement
to goe forth of the man, caſt him violently and headlonge
among the people, and there rent him ſore and extreamely
                     •
                  
tormented hym, ſo as one woulde haue thought he had vtterly ſpoy
led the man, or at the leaſt greatlye hurte him, (which appeareth alſo
by the firſte of Marke, where the ſame ſtory beinge reported it is
ſayde that the vncleane ſpirit tare hym) but ſayth the Euangelyſte
Luke it proued not ſoe: for notwithſtandyng the dyuells rage & all
the torments he put him to, yet he hurte him nothing at all. Euen ſoe
it was with theſe: tormented they were moſte greuouſly, eſpecially
at, and a little before the egreſſeof the ſpirites: Somers alſo did offer
greate vyolence to his body, beatyng his heade and face (ſometimes
a quarter of an houre togither) to the grounde or bedſteade,
(as is before ſayde) ſo as one would haue thought he ſhoulde haue
bruiſed himſelfe greatly▪ and yet had he no hurte at all or any of th
                     •
                  
other by the like greuous torments they indured. The ſame is as true
of Kath: Wright and Tho: Darling, which latter had in his fitts his
armes and ſhoulder boanes thruſte out of their ioynctes, and ſet in
againe: and yet heereby was made 
                     •
                  euer a whit leſſe vnable to vſe
them then before. As ſtrange alſo is that which is depoſed concernyng
Somers that he was not burnt though ſome bare partes of his
bodye laye in the hott fyer.
               The reaſon hereof I take to be this, that ſathan hauīg leaue from god
to enter into man, hath not withall leaue, or is forbidden to hurt him:
for otherwyſe it were not poſſible his nature conſydered, but that he
ſhoulde greatlye harme hym: and yet notwythſtandinge this prohybytyon
of the lordes, he wyll be attemptynge to ſpoyle or hurte
thoſe he poſſeſſeth, though he cannot or dare not doe it, becauſe by
nature hee is inclyned therevnto. For euery creature (aſwell inuiſible
as viſible) is as it were vyolentlye carryed to doe accordinge to hys
owne nature and kynde. In the manifoulde vexations of ſathan there
fore and manner of vſynge them he poſſeſſeth, we maye as in a glaſſe
bebold: the mallice, rage, cruelty & vnſatiable deſire of the diuell (as
a roaring lyon) to deuoure and deſtroye mā: & in his reſtraint from
hurting or not performing it (notwithſtanding his great and manifold
offers that way,) we may ſe, as the power of god ouer thes principalities
and powers I meaine the diuils, and the awe and ſubiection they
are in vnto the Lord▪ as well as the leaſt or weakeſt of hys creatures

ſo lhe greate mercye of god towards man, remembring mercy euen

                     〈◊〉
                  . And here this is worthy the obſeruing, that howſoeuer
they which are poſſeſſed receiue no hurt at all by that which the ſpirit
doth, though it be neuer ſo much, and neuer ſo fearfull to behold
but are as well (notwithſtanding the ſame) after their fits as before:
yet if any man doe but wreſt or ſtrayne their little finger (which is as
nothinge in reſpect of that is done by the ſpirit) though for the preſent
they complayne not thereof,18 
                        〈…〉
                     . as being then without feeling yet
after the fit they 
                     •
                  oe & this was often ſeene in Somers.
               
               Herevnto we may add for the 18. ſigne of poſſeſſion, extraordinary
and ſupernaturall ſtrength. This is euident by the 5. of Marke, where
it is ſayd of one poſſeſſed, that no man could bynde him, noe not with
chaynes: that being often bound withfetters and chaynes, he plucked the
chaynes aſunder, and brake the fetters in peeces, neither could anye man

                        •
                     ame h
                        •
                     m.
                  verſes 3. 4. 
                        •
                     uk. 8. 29. And by the 19. of the Actes, where the man poſſeſſed ouer
came and wounded 7. men. After this manner it was with theſe wee
ſpeake of: their ſtrength was extraordinary and ſupernaturall, inſomuch
as two or three ſtrong men could ſcarcely hould one chyld of
the age of 10. or 11. yeares: but ſpeciallye this was ſeene in Sommers
who in ſundry of his fits did ſhewe ſuch ſtrength, as ſomtime, 3. 4. or
5. ſometimes 6. or 7. men, though they had greate aduantage of hī
(as bound to a chair, or lying vpon a bed could ſcarcely rule him &
though they labored hard that they ſwet therewith, yet he was not
perceyued to pant or blowe, no more then if he had not ſtrayned his
ſtrength nor ſtrugled at all, as is depoſed. The like ſtrength was perceyued
to be in Darling as is noted in the printed booke: who being
a boy of 13. yeares of age was of that ſtrength that 2. ſtronge men
could not hould him downe or rule him. Of ſuch extraordinary and
ſupernaturall ſtrength alſo was Kath: Wright. True it is that there is
greate difference betwixt his ſtrength mentioned Marke. 5. and the
ſtrength theſe ſhewed: and noe maruaile. For the man there mentioned
was poſſeſſed with a legion of diuils, theſe each of them with one
onlye as I ſuppoſe no maruell then though his ſtrength and his rage
and furye exceeded theirs. And hence I take it to be, that of all thoſe
mentioned in the goſpell to haue bene poſſeſſed, we reade not of on
that was of like ſtrength and rage,Math. 8. 28. with him or them poſſeſt with a
legion.19 The 
                        〈◊〉
                      of ſuper naturall knowledge. For beſides that already hath bene ſaide of their exceeding
greate ſtrength & vnrulynes, it is recorded by S. Mathew, that they
were very feirce, that no man might go by that way.
               
               The laſt ſigne of poſſeſſion that in the holy ſcriptures I obſerue is ex
traordinary and ſupernaturall knowledge: which appeareth by the
5. of S. Marke, where one that was poſſeſſed as ſone as he ſawe Ieſus
                  
a farr off,verſ. 6. 7. ſaid of him, that he was the ſonne of the moſt high God.
Now if we conſider that this man had neither heard of Ieſus, his doctrin,
miracles, nor ſeene hys perſon at any tyme before, as may appeare
by this, that he was not onlye, a Gadaren, but had beſides his
abidinge among the graues, and in the mountaines, and not amongſte
men,verſ. 3. 5. 
                        •
                     5. Luk 8. 27. and conſider alſo that he was not in his right minde: and 3. that
he had * had deuils a long time, as St. Luke noteth: we can not but ſee
and confeſe, that this knowledge or acknowledgment of our bleſſed
Sauiour was ſupernaturall. This is further confirmed by the 16. of
the Acts, wher it is not only ſaid of a certaine mayd of Philippi which
was poſſeſed, that ſhe followed Paul and Silas crying and ſayiug, theſe
men are the ſeruants of the moſt high God,
                  ver. 16. 17. 
                  which ſhew vnto us the way of
ſaluation: but that which for this purpoſe is much more, that ſhe had
a ſperit of diuination, ſo as ſhe could divine and foretell ſome thinges
to come, whereby ſhe got her maſter much vantage. Such ſupernaturall
knowledge (as well as ſtrength) haue all thoſe had, whom I affirme
to haue bene poſſeſed with vncleane ſpirites. For hence it came to
paſſe that thoſe in Lancaſhire foretold there fits, the number, manner
and continuance of them. Iohn star. could tell whether it was cleane
water they brought him, and two other of them, hauinge their eyes
cloſed and ther faces from the glaſe tould directly when the ſand in
the hower glaſſe was rune out: & thus hower after hower. as for Th.
Darling, his ſupernaturall knowledg plainlye appeared by the booke
written of him. and touching Kath. Wright, I ſaye this as in the preſence
of God, that ſhe tould me of diuers thinges which no earthlye
creature knewe beſids my ſelfe. Alſo I ſent Th. Wright her brother 2
miles of, to one M. Iohn Bereſford, and ſhe declared what he ſaid to the
ſaid meſſenger before he returned: and the daye after I going from
her with the ſaid gentleman, and leauing her with many about her,
at my returne ſhe tould ſome of the ſpeaches which had ſecretlye in
the feildes paſſed betwene vs. But this ſupernaturall knowledge was
moſt manifeſt in Somers, who tould of ſundrye thinges which were
done and ſpoken diuers miles of him, and that at or about the ſame
inſtant they fell out & to diueres ſtrangers comming vnto him he
made knowne ſuch ſecrets, as therat both they and others vpon the
acknowledgment of the truth the of wondred greatly. From hence
likwiſe it came that divinlike (ſaue that he intermingled one or two
errors) he continued his ſpeach in expounding the Creed for an howere
together,A Bridwell houſe. and ſometimes alſo ſpeake of other miſteris. Hence
alſo it was that he did divine and foretel things to come. For ſhortly
after his repoſſeſſion in a traunce he vttered theſe words: I muſt goe
to St. Iones, at St. Iones Darrell muſt not come nor neuer ablacke coate of

them all: it is as I would haue it, they are myne enimyes. At ſ
                        •
                     es I muſt be,
before the iudges, the iudges muſt * ſee. Somers 3. or 4. dayes after he
ſpake theſe thinges among many more (whereof ſome are ſet downe
before,Note this word, how fattlye the d
                        •
                     ill can ſpeake he tel
                        •
                     eth not what the Iudges ſhall ſee. which all were written from his mouth in the preſence of diuers
credible perſons) was accordingly * carryed from his fathers
houſe (where then he was) to S. Ioanes, whither neither my ſelfe nor
yet any in the miniſtery who wold haue rebuked him ſharply (when
once that was perceiued) might be admitted to come vnto him.This was done by the maior & Aldermen vnder Pretence to find out Somers counter fe
                        •
                     ing which 
                        •
                     s the 
                        〈◊〉
                      ſecret to themſelues ſo no man did euer dreame of any ſuch thing, vntil they going about it, it and appear
                        •
                     . And
at the Aſſiſes (which was about 7. weekes after) he was ſent for before
the Iudges: where my Lorde Anderſon: and the other Iudge did ſee
him indeede in a deluding fytt. Now it is almoſt an odyous thing to
dreame of any deceipt in theſe predictions of Somers conſiderynge
they were magiſtrates which had a cheif hand in theſe thinges, and
were the cauſes of them: for the two firſt of theſe, viz: the remouinge
of him to S. Iones (forcibly againſt his fathers will) and the denying of
the miniſters to come and ſee him: were done by the Maior & ſome
of the Aldermen of Nottingham: and the laſt by a Iudge of Aſſiſe.
               Heere wee muſt remember that as they which are poſſeſt are not
themſelues of any extraordinary and ſupernaturall ſtength, ſo neither
haue they themſelues any ſuch knowledge indeede, but only ſeeme ſo
to haue. For whatſoeuer they vtter tending thervnto, commeth meerly
from the ſpirits within them, vſing their inſtruments of ſpeach and
not at all from the parties poſſeſſed who when they are come to thē
                  ſelues
haue no ſuch knowledge, neither knowe any ſuch thinge as
before they vttered.
               Beſides theſe tokens or ſignes which holy ſcriptures giueth,certaine ſignes which my ſelfe haue obſerued in experience. whereby
wee may knowe and diſcerne of one poſſeſſed with the diuell, I haue
in experience ſeene theſe,1 
                        •
                     oſtfull ſights and 
                        〈◊〉
                      appa
                        •
                     t
                        •
                     ones. 1 that the diuell doth mightely moleſt and
afflict them whome he poſſeſſeth by ſights and viſions, (for the moſt
part fearfull) appearing in the likenes of a cat, beare, dog, dragon, lyon
flames of fyre, and ſuch like fearefull creatures whereof you may at
large reade both in the narration before, and in the hiſtory of Thomas
Darling. This was commō to all the 10. poſſeſſed perſons aboue named:
2. that they haue by fits on the ſuddaine a greate ſwelling in the
body and ſtirring or mouing of the intrals within the body.2 Sudden ſwelling This alſo
was ſeene in all thoſe 10. perſons. And this the King of Scots ſetteth
downe for one Symptome of the poſſeſſed▪ terming it very aptly the
boldning vp of the patients breſt and belly with an vnnaturall ſturring &
vehement agitation within them:
                  3 Inflexiblenes & waight of the body, or members therof king of Scots Demonoleg
                        •
                     e, booke: 3 chap. 4. 3. That in ſome fits the partes of the
body poſſeſſed, as arme or legg, now one, forthwith an other, & ſome
times the whole body are inflexible, and withall as heauy as ſomuch
yron. And this the King of Scots moſt excellently deſcribeth in theſe

words: an ironie hardnes of his ſinows ſo ſtiflye bended out, that it were not
poſſible to prick out as it were the ſkine of any other perſon ſo farr.
                  4 ſenſleſnes or want of feelin
                        •
                     
                   4. that
howſoeuer they are ſo miſſerablye vexed by Satan, as they beholderes
would iudge them to be, in moſt extreame and intollerable paynes, yet
they feele noe payne at all. yet I doubt not but that ſatan can ſoe order
the matter as that the poſſeſſed ſhall haue payne: when he ſhall ſee it
ſerue for hys purpoſe and this hath bene ſene in ſome of our Demoniakes:
for when the diuill in Iane Aſhton went about to make her lye by
pretendyng that ſhe was diſpoſſeſſed, to that end in her fits he put her
to extreame payne: and Marg. Byrom felt vſuallye very great paine. I
remember alſo that Somers ſhortly after his repoſſeſſion, and a little before
he made that curſſed and lyinge confeſſion of counterfeiting groned
moſt pittifully in ſundry fits, and when they were ended, & he com
to himſelfe, ſaid that in them he felt extreame payne. which it may be
the ſpirit therfore did, therby to drawe him to make the aforeſaid confeſſion,
which beinge made, his fits ended, and theirwith the greuyous
paines he had before indured. In like ſorte when one tooke in hand to
heale Darling, & applied ſomthing to his legges, he felt then a pricking
which put him to great paine.Thyreus de Do
                        •
                     
                     moniacis, chap. 3. ſect 2. et chap. 10. ſect. 6. Thus then it may be, ſomtimes & in ſōe
fits: but I take it that ordinarily he which is poſſeſt feleth noe paine in
his fits. Herevnto we maye add, the running ſwelling which was ſo often
ſene & felt in Som,
                  5 ſtrange Voyces which Thyreus the Ieſuit alſo witneſſeth to haue
bene ſeene in perſons poſſeſſed, 5. ſtrang & vnnaturall voices, like to a
bull,6 Diſfiguering of the face beare, ſwine, 6 the fearefull diſfigurīg of the face: which haue likwiſe
in experience bine obſerued in others that haue ben poſſeſt. 7 Alſo
the ſpeaking without the inſtruments of ſpeach,Thyreus de doemon. cap 3 ſect 2. et cap. 25 ſect. 2. 3. the mouth being wyd
open, as did both Som. & Darl▪
                   with ſundrie other ſuch ſtrang & ſupernaturall
accidents, wherof we haue hard before.
               Thus we haue ſene 1. how & after what māner the poſſeſed in the tim
of Chriſt Ieſus & his apoſtles,7 ſpeakinge the mouth beinge wide open even thos of whom the holy ghoſt ſaith
were poſſeſſed, were handled or vexed by ſathan. 2. theſe perſons we
ſpeake of, were hādled or vexed iuſt after the ſame māner: what leteth
thē that thes ſhould not be poſſeſed with diuils as well as they? for ſeīg
the like or the ſame effects were foūd in both, why ſhould not the like
or the ſame cauſe, from whēce thoſe ſtrāg effects (we haue hard of) proceded,
be in both? Imagine 2: ſicke perſons to be handled alike the one
hath ſuch a paine in his head, the other hath the like: the one complaineth
of a paine in his backe, the other of the very ſame in his: this is paī
                  ed
thus & thus in his belly, in his left ſide, in his armes, legs, feete, & the
other even ſo: they are within of an extreame heat like fire, & it either
of them outwardlye quakinge with cold: theire vrimes are alike, their
pulſes they beate a lyke. who wyll not ſaye, that thes two haue the ſame
diſeaſe? and that if it be certaine that the on of them hath ſuch aſicknes

there is no doubt but that the other hath alſo the ſame? becauſe it
cannot be, neyther was it euer ſeene, that in ſuch a conſent of effects
ſo many I meane, there ſhould be a diſſent in the cauſes: why then
ſhould it not be ſo heere? and why may we not infer and conclude
ſo in this our preſent caſe? Thoſe mentioned in the goſpell, on the
ſudden and by fits, were greuouſly vexed, cryed, gnaſhed there teeth
wallowed, fomed, were throwne into the fyre, were feirce and cruell,
offering much vyolence to themſelues and others, out of theire right
minds, vttering dyabolicall ſpeaches, of extraordinary & ſupernaturall
ſtrength, and of ſupernaturall knowledge: and after the ſame manner
were all the 10. perſons ſpoken of before handled, as hath bene ſhew
ed, and ſpecially William Somers: but the former were poſſeſſed with
the diuell: why then ſhall not we affirme that the latter were poſſeſſed
likewiſe? Touching the former it is certaine, that all the vexation
inward and outwarde, their crying, gnaſhing their teeth, foming, wallowing,
caſting into the fier, the dyabolicall ſpeaches they vtered. their
ſupernaturall ſtrength and knowledge, with the reſt of thoſe thinges
we haue heard of, came from the diuel, not being without but within
them: why now ſhould not we thinke that the crying or ſcriking gnaſhing,
foming, wallowing, caſting into the fyre, the diabolicall ſpeaches
ſupernaturall ſtrength and knowledge, which were in Somers and the
other perſons, came not only from the diuell, (whereof there is no
queſtion or doubt at all) but from him being within them? yea how
can we otherwiſe thinke. or how can it otherwiſe poſſibly be, except
theſe effects (all or moſt of them) might procede from ſome other
cauſe, the which I haue heretofore ſhewed cannot be?
               In naturall diſeaſes and in other caſes we reaſon from the effects to
the cauſe, and gather or conclude the cauſe by the effects: neyther
doth it at any time deceaue vs, though it may be ſōtimes we deceiue
our ſelues. The phiſitian if he perceiue in his patient that he hath a
cough, ſtich, and that his ſicknes began with an ague, knoweth thereby
as by ſignes or effects, that he hath the pluriſy. In caſe we ſee one euery
other day quiuering and ſhaking for cold, preſently and truly wee
ſay, he hath a tertian: and who is ſo ſimple that when he ſeeth ſmoake
aſcendynge vp out of a chymney, knoweth not that there is fyre?
why then ſhould we doubt when in the ſtrange handlīg & torments
of a man (ſuch as haue bene deſcribed) we ſe (as I may ſay) the ſmoake
of a ſpirit, that is, the operationes and effects of an euill ſpirit but
that there is in that man a wicked ſpirit? Is there any diſeaſe of the
body wherein men are ſo handled as theſe perſons were? muſt it
not needes then be ſome ſupernaturall diſeaſe? and other then this
it hath bene ſhewed (I truſt) in the begininge it can not be.
               
                  
Our Phiſitianes if the haue the pulſe, vrin, and ſome two or three
other ſignes of a diſeaſe, ſtraightwaies they affirme, it is ſuch a diſeaſe
and we beleue them, though they receiue their ſkill from the wrytings
of men, which are ſubiect to error. How much more ought we
to beleue that the aforeſaid 10. perſons were ſicke of the diſeaſe wee
treate of, to wit poſſeſt with diuels: ſeing we haue not 3. or 4. but ſo
many ſignes thereof, and thoſe not taken out of the bookes of men:
which may yea often do erre and deceiue, but out of the boke of god
the word of truth.
               And here this I affirme, that the ſpirit of god in deſcrihing at large the
manner of their handling and vexation by ſathan who were poſſeſſed
in Chriſt's time according to that we haue heard, doth not ſett it
downe only as a matter of fact, but in reporting the ſame did beſides
thereby purpoſe, (as I conceiue) to giue a rule and leaue a direction,
to his church, whereby to diſcerne of poſſeſſion in the time to come,
to the end of the world: implying therein thus much, that when wee
ſhall ſee one handled after the ſame manner. that thereby wee learne
and from thence gather, that the ſaid party is poſſeſſed with an vncleane
ſpirit. And for confirmation hereof ſerueth excellently the queſtion
of Chriſte to the father of the poſſeſſed child, after he had ſeene
his ſonne in one of his fits:Mark 9. 2
                        •
                     
                   
                  how long time is it ſince he hath bene thus? for
it is as if he had ſaid: Indeede thow ſaiſt true, thy child hath an euill
ſpirit in hym, for whoſoeuer is thus handled hath the diuel in hym
cauſing the ſame: but how long hath he bene poſſeſſed? where wee
ſee that inſtead of aſkynge the father how long time hys ſonne had bene
poſſeſſed he ſayth thus handled thereby ſecretly teaching vs that they
which are handled after that manner there mentioned, are poſſeſſed.
Againe if it be ſo that Chriſt Ieſus hath left a medicine for the cu
                     •
                  ing
of this ſupernaturall diſeaſe, that is a meanes for the caſting of ſathan
out of thoſe he poſſeſſeth, and the ſame perpetuall, as (I hope) is here
after made manifeſt, who can doubt but that the lorde Ieſus hath lefte
ſome direction for the diſcerning of this diſeaſe? now all men will confeſſe
he hath left none other: It muſt nedes thereforebe that he did it
in ſetting downe the manifould effects and operations of the diuell,
which being in men he ſendeth forth: from whence he would haue vs
(being reaſonable creatures) when we ſhall ſee the ſame effects in any
to gather and aſſure our ſelues that there is the very ſame cauſe, viz:
an vncleane ſpirit in the party ſo afflicted.
               That which many obiect heere, foraſmuch as Thyreus hath donne it
effectually as he ſuppoſeth: I will produce that which he ſaith inſtead
of all: who although I doubt not but if he vnderſtood how it was
with our Demonyacks: as well as the papiſts among vs doe, he would

ſay with them, that ther is no queſtion but they were poſſeſt: yet becauſe
in his booke of Demoniakes which he hath very ſatly ſet forth, &
is in the handes of many, he ſaith ſomthing againſt this firſt reaſon of
mine and the certainty and ſufficiency of the aforeſaid ſigns, which I
haue gathered out of the goſpell: I will therefor labour to anſwer him
and weaken that hee obiecteth, that ſo my aforeſaid reaſon may ſtyll
ſtand and remayne in his full ſtrength: And therewithall I will ſay ſomthing
of the ſignes which the papiſts principally rely vpon & truſt vn
to for the diſcerning of their poſſeſſed.
               His words be theſe followinge.
                  Thyreus de doemoniac
                        •
                     s, cap. 22. ſect. 15. Addo quod nec ipſa ſigna &c. I adde
that neither the very ſignes which are found in thoſe poſſeſſed of whom the
goſpell maketh mention, are certaine and ſufficient tokens of men poſſeſſed
Some of them were blynd, ſome deaſe, others dumbe, ſome of them were cruell
to themſelues, ſome to others. They ſeemed to be the workes of ſuch as wer
poſſeſſed, but they were not the ſignes of poſſeſſed perſons. vnleſſe per aduenture
we will haue all that be blynd, dumbe, and deafe, and alſo all feirce,
and cruell men to be poſſeſſed. And in the 25. Chap: hauing ſpoken newly
before of the excedinge greate ſtrength of poſſeſſed perſons, euen
ſuch as paſſeth all humane ſtrength,
                     
                        •
                     ect. 9. and of their caſting into the fye
and water: he ſaith of them that they be not certa et indubita ſigna: certaine
and vndoubtfull ſignes his reaſon is Quoniam non doemones tantum,
verum etiam praeter doemones, alios authores et cauſas habere
poſſunt. Becauſe theis things or ſignes may haue not only the dyuels, but al
ſo beſides the diuels ſome other authors and cauſes: which hee further cō
                  firmeth
by examples as of Maximinus the Emperor, and Iunius, whoe
were of extraordinary and ſupernaturall ſtrength, as he ſheweth there
at large: non tamen (ſaith he) pro obſeſſis habiti ſunt: and yet notwythſtanding
they were not held to be poſſeſſed. Thus we ſe Thyreus flatly denyeth
and argueth againſt that which hath bene ſomuch inſiſted vpon,
and preſſed by mee.
               To paſſe by that abſurdity of his,
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      appeareth by 
                        〈◊〉
                      26 chap 
                        •
                     ct. 11. where graunting theſe thinges to
be the workes of the poſſeſſed, that is of ſathan poſſeſſing, he yet deny
eth them to be ſignes thereof: as though the ſeuerall operations of ſathan
in any were not ſo many ſeuerall ſignes of his inhabyting the ſāe
perſon, or the proper effect was not alwayes a ſigne of the cauſe which
ſeemeth to be his firſt reaſon.
               To paſſe by that I ſay let vs cōe to the main reaſon he vſeth againſt
the ſignes mentioned in the goſpell, whervpon onlye as the foundation
my former reaſon wherby I indeuor to proue Somers the 7. in Lancaſhyre,
and the other two were poſſeſſed, reſteth and is buylt. Againſt
which argument of myne for proofe of theire poſſeſſion, thus out of
Thyreus it maye be Obiected. The Euangelicall ſignes wherevpon

I ground and infer the poſſeſſion I contend for, are not certaine ſufficient,
and vndoubted ſignes of men poſſeſſed with ſathan: and therfore
notwithſtanding the ſaid ſignes were ſeene and knowne to be in Somers
and the reſt: it may well be that they were not poſſeſſed. That the
Euangelicall ſignes are not ſuch Thyreus proueth thus: yf to be blynde
dumbe, deafe, to be feirce and cruell towardes himſelfe and others, to
gnaſh the teth, fome, to be of ſupernaturall ſtrength, & ſo of the other
ſignes, be certaine and ſufficient ſignes of ſathan his poſſeſſinge of 
                     •
                  n an
then all that be blynde dumbe, deafe, be feirce and cruell towards thē
                  ſelues
and others, or gnaſh the teeth, or foame, or be of ſupernaturall
ſtrength, and ſo of the other ſignes, are poſſeſſed with ſathan: but that
is moſt falce, therfore the other alſo.
               To the propoſition or firſt part of this reaſon I anſwer, that to be blynde,
or to be dumbe, or deafe, or to be feirce and cruell towards him
ſelfe and others, &c. without any further trouble or vexation, is no token
of poſſeſſion: but yf any of theſe meete with other ſignes of this
ſupernaturall diſeaſe, it greatly confirmeth the ſame vnto vs, and is a
good ſigne therof. As for inſtance of foming: when foming is alone &
ſeuered from other markes, it is no ſigne of one poſſeſſed: for in the
falling ſicknes a man fometh, and yet hath not an vncleane ſpirit in hī.
But let it meete in the ſame perſon with diuers other tokens of one
poſſeſſed, though not all: ſo as the ſame man which fometh, doe alſo
gnaſhe his teeth, wallowe, be caſte into the fyre be of ſupernaturall
ſtrength and knowledge, then and in ſuch caſe (I ſay) it is a very ſignificant
ſigne thereof. And this may be made playn by the like. An ague
cough, and ſtich, are the ſignes of a plurify: ſeauer theſe, ſo as a man
hath onely one of them, and that which of them ſoeuer it is, can giue
no aſſurance to the ſick perſon or phiſitian of the pluriſy: but let them
concure & mete togither, & they ſignifie that, & as it were proclayme
him to be ſick of the ſaide diſeaſe. Euen ſoe it is in this caſe: if Thyreus
had ſaid that no one of the ſignes mentioned in the goſpell, was a certaine
and ſufficient token or argument of poſſeſſion, I for my part woulde
haue ſubſcribed vnto him: but to ſay as he doth indefinittely and
in the plurall number, that the ſignes there ſpoken of are not certayne
and ſufficient ſignes of ſathan his poſſeſſinge, I hould it to be moſte
falſe▪ and derogating to the honor and high eſtimation and accounte
we ſhould haue of gods ſacred word. For ſhall the ſignes or any of the
ſignes giuen by men in their writings of this or that diſeaſe be certain
and ſufficient ſignes: and the ſignes giuen by the Lord himſelfe in his
holy writings of this ſupernaturall diſeaſe or of any other thinge, be
vncertaīe & inſufficient? or ſhall the ſigns giuen by you Papiſts of 
                     •
                  n
poſſeſt, forged out of your owne braine, & ſet downe in your bookes

be vndoubted, certain, and ſuffitient, as you affirme: and the ſigns giuen
by god himſelf thereof, and ſet downe in his booke, be vncertaine and
inſufficient?
                  Thyreus chap. 26. ſect. 4 & 9. O monſtrons impiety, Is not the Lord Ieſus (trowe we)
much beholding to this Ieſuite in this doctrin of poſſeſſion, as he is to
the reſt of that generation in all their other doctrins? who placeth the
ſignes which Chriſt Ieſus hath giuen in his holy word of one poſſeſſed,
among thoſe which are vncertaine and doubtfull ſignes, as appeareth
further by the title of his 22. Chap: yea among thoſe which are not true
ſignes, although they be ſo accounted by ſome? 
                  
                     •
                  or marke what his words
be in the begining of this ſaid chapter: Reijciemus hoc loco primum illa,
quae &c. we will firſt ſpeke in this place of thoſe which are not true ſignes of
men poſſeſt,
                  Thyreus chap. 22. 
                  although they be held for true ſignes of ſome: (in the concluſiō
of which chapter he vſeth the wordes before conſcerning the Euangelicall
ſignes) then afterward we wil aſigne thoſe which truly proue diuels to
be in men. But what are thoſe which are ſuch true and in
                        •
                     allable ſignes
wherwith the ſignes ſet downe in the goſpell are not to be compared?
forſoth theſe:Popiſh ſignes of poſſeſſion. Thyreus chap, 26. ſect. 1. 3. 
                  Yf they refuſe to call vpon the name of the lord, or any of the
ſaints, to pronounce the name of Ieſus, to rehearſe a pſalme or ſome godlye
prayer, or yf they tremble, and quake for feare, break forth into clamors, or
outcryes, become impatient, blaſpheame, and make ſhew to doe vyolence vnto
themſelues, when the reliques of ſaints are applyed vnto them, or an Agnis
Dei is applyed, or beſigned on the forchead with the ſigne of the croſſe,
or ſprinckled with holy water, or haue the most holy body of Chriſt gyuen
vnto them in the ſacrament of the Euchariſt, or ſhall haue thes words whiſpered
into their eare in a ſtrange tongue, which they vnderſtand not: Deum
qui te genuit derelinquiſti, et oblitus es Domini Creatoris tui, thou
haſt forſaken god which made thee, and haſt forſaken the lord thy creator.
Finally if they cannot abide the charges giuen in the exorciſmes, or at leaſt
moſt ympatiently indure them. Wherevnto after he addeth the touchyng
of holy men. His (ſaith the Ieſuite) et ſimilibus ſignis Demones prodi
dubium nullum eſt. That the diuels by theſe and ſuch like ſignes are deſcryed
or knowne to be in men, there is no doubt. And this he goeth about
to confirme partly by examples,
                     
                        •
                     hyrens cap. 26. ſect. 6. and partly by reaſon, which conſiſteth
of two partes. * This (quoth he) is manifeſt, if we conſider firſt, haec ipſis
inuiſa et moleſta eſſe, doemones illo ferre non poſſe: that theſe things ar
hatefull & greuous vnto the diuels, and that they are not able to abyd thē
                  
Secondly: non poſſe fieri &c: that it cannot be that either a chriſtian man
ſhould tremble, when theſe things are vſed, or ſhow himſelf troubled, yf he
be commaunded to vſe them religiouſly or to rehearſe certaine praiers.
                  ap. 26. ſect. 8. And
a little after vt vero homines haec horreant, quis credat? horrebit forſitan
chriſtianus homo, ſi pſalmum Miſerere, vel dicat, vel dici audiat
&c. That men ſhould be afrayd of theſe things, who can beleeue? will a

chriſtian man tremble, yf he either ſay the pſalme (called) Miſerere, or heare
it ſaid? yf he rehearſe the lords prayer, or any other that is godly? yf he ſee or
touch reliques of the ſaints?
                  ſect. 9. 
                  yf in his preſence exorciſmes be read? yf to the
diuel it be obiected, that he hath forſaken God his Creator, when therfore
the poſſeſſed tremble at thoſe things, when they reproue them of lyinge
which vſe and apply them: quis dubitabit (ſaith he) quin trepidatio, et
quae mox audiuntur blaſphemiae, latentes doemones prodant? who will
doubt but that the trembling and the blaſphemyes which are heard, do be
wray the dyuels lying hid in men? Hence it came that one Palin of Tom
worth in the county of Warwick a recuſant, came to Somers at Nottingham,
and laid in his hand, a purſe with an Agnis Dei and reliques in it
to diſcouer ſathan thereby (whereat indeed Somers began to be ſom
what troubled ſuch is the ſubtlety of ſathan to kepe the papiſts in their
blyndnes) whervpon this recuſant beinge apprehended confeſſed his
intent: who for the reliques found about him was indeed committed
by the magiſtrate to the ſherifs houſe: but after a fewe dayes the mat
ter was ſo ordered, that the papiſt went quietli home again or to thoſe
who had ſent him to doe that worthy ſeruice: wherin the diuel for his
parte was not wanting, ſo to entertayne and welcomme him, as mighte
make moſt for his aduantage.
               But to returne to Thyreus againſte whome and all papiſtes touchinge
theſe feigned ſignes of theirs I argue thus:That the Popiſh ſignes of poſſeſſion be not certaine and vndoubted ſignes but maye be counterfeited. Yf theſe be certaine and vndoubted
ſignes of poſſeſſion, then it is not poſſible but that all ſuch ſhal
be poſſeſt, in whomſoeuer all theſe ſignes may or ſhall be found: but
all theſe may be in one that is not poſſeſt: therefore are not certayne
and vndoubted ſignes of poſſeſſion. The propoſition or firſte parte of
this reaſon cannot be denyed: and the truth of the aſſumption (or ſecond
parte of this argument) appeareth by this: that all theſe ſignes of
theirs may be counterfeyted, and donne in diſſimulation by whomſoeuer
will feigne himſelf to be poſſeſt with the diuell as Somers ſaith he
hath done. For howſoeuer Somers could not eaſily by counterfeytinge
fome wallowe &c. eſpecially in ſo greate meaſure, and that manner we
haue heard, nor yet poſſibly be of ſuch extraordinary and ſupernaturall
ſtrength and knowledge, as he was: wherevpon we forbeare not to
ſay, but moſt confidently auoucg, that it is vmpoſſible for him to bee
a counterfeyte, and for the ſignes of poſſeſſion giuen vs by the holye
ghoſt in the goſpell, to be diſſembled or to be donne by arte of man,
or humane power yet we feare not to affirme, yea your ſelues will ſcarcely
deny but that he might feigne, and in deepe diſſimulation doe, all
thoſe you giue for certain and vndoubted ſignes of one poſſeſſed. For
who ſeeth not that it were no harde thinge for him or any other that
would attempte ſuch an impiety, but moſte eaſy, to abſtayne & refuſe

to inuocate the name of god, or ſome of the ſaints, to pronounce the name of
Ieſus, to rehearſe a pſalme, or ſome godly prayer, to ſhake and tremble as it
were for feare, to be ympatient (in ſhew), to blaſpheme, when reliques are
applyed vnto them, or an Agnis Dei, or be ſigned with the ſigne of the croſſ
or ſprinckled with holy water, and to ſhew or carry ones ſelf accordinge
to all the other ſignes wherof we haue heard? Seing then all theſe ſignes
may fall into a counterfeyt, who is one not poſſeſſed, but faininge
ſo to be: it followeth therfore neceſſarily that theſe ſignes of the papiſts
are not only vncertaine and doubtfull ſignes, but lying alſo & de
ceiuable ſignes, as like as may be to the authors of them.
               Againe yf theſe be certaine ſufficient & vndoubted ſignes of poſſeſſion,
then may one certainly diſcerne ſathan his poſſeſſing one, without
any helpe or direction from the ſcriptures, for none of theſe are
mentioned there, but without helpe and direction from the ſcriptures
we cannot certainly know when ſathan poſſeſſeth one: therfore theſe
are not ſuch ſignes as is affirmed. For who can aſſure vs that the diuel
is in ſuch a mā really, if the lord himſelf by his word doth it not? cannot
the diuell deceaue vs by his cunning and ſubtlety, and make vs
beleue that he is in man when he is without him, by moleſtinge him
by ſome externall operationof his, if the lord permit him ſo to doe?
or is any mortall man of himſelfe without any helpe and direction
from god (which he giueth in his worde) able to match the ſubtle ſerpent
ſo as he ſhall not be able to deceiue him? ſo it ſhoulde ſeeme by
the papiſts, and the ſignes they giue out of theire owne brayne. How
then is it ſaide that ſathan by his ſubtlety deceyueth all the world?
                  
                     
                        ••
                     uelation, 12. 9. And
who that hath an eye to ſee with, ſeeth not, how heerein the deceuour
deceaueth them mightely? making them beleue, that he cannot abide
but is tormented with their fooliſh, ridiculous▪ and ſuperſtitious toys
as theire conſecrated or hallowed thinges holy bread, holy water, hallowed
oyle, hallowed brimſtone burned in the fire, &c. holy reliques an agnis
dei. and aboue all the ſigning of them with the ſigne of the croſſe: wherby
the diuels are not only diſcouered, but alſo (which is more) caſte out of
men, as the Ieſuit teacheth his ſchollers at larg throughout his 24. ch:
whereof that is the tytle and argument. Yf the dyuell can ſo ill away
with a croſſe,
                  ſect. 7. to let the reſt goe, if as Thyreus ſaith and alleageth out of
ſome: Crux be timor doemonum: a croſſe be the feare of the diuels, and
that:
                  That the diuell is not afrayd at the ſigne of the croſſe. timor et tremor cadunt ſuper doemones cum ſignum crucis viderint,
that the diueles feare and tremble when they behould the ſigne of
the croſſe: yea quamuis nullo piaetatis ſtudio haec crucis arma &c. although,
this weapon of the croſſe be vſed with noe care of godlynes, yet notwithſtanding
it will vex the diuells, and geeatly torment them: How cometh
it to paſſe that Coniurers in their coniurations vſe & make croſſes

as appeareth by that is ſaid before of Edmund Hartlaye the coniurer,
who in his coniuring and raiſing vp of the diuell, deuided his circle in
to 4. partes, making a croſſe at euery deuiſion? and how falleth it out
that the diuels then ſhew them ſelues, and that they can abide and indure
to be there preſent, in the preſence & vew of ſo many croſſes: It
may be it is thus, that when the coniurers call vpon and inuocate the
diuels, hauing made firſt ſo many croſſes,Merigus in fug▪ Doemonum. the diuels dare not but cōe
& preſent themſelues, though alas in much feare & trembling, whence
cometh it alſo that coniurers haue aſwell good ſtore of croſſes in theire
bookes of cōiurations, as the papiſts in theire exorciſmes? Surelye by
that arte of theirs which they learne and get out of their ſaid bokes ſo
becroſſed they attaine by vertue & ſtore of the ſaid croſſes ſome power
and authority ouer the diuels, which they after exerciſe ouer them
ſo that the papiſts onli haue not power ouer the diuels, as they affirm
wherof you ſhall heare hereafter. Here we may behold the iuſt iudgmēt
of god vpon them: who becauſe they will not receiue & truſt to
the ſignes the lord hath giuen in his word, which are the only certaine
& ſufficient ſignes to ſignify ſathan his poſſeſſing of men: ſuch as who
ſoeuer truſteth vnto them, & will be directed by them cannot error
be deceiued herein: ſuch as in whomſoeuer they are, the ſame perſon
is for certainty poſſeſſed, and ſuch alſo as without which we can not
certainly knowe when ſathan poſſeſſeth man: therefore I ſay becauſe
they will not beleue and receiue theſe ſignes, the Lord ſendeth them
ſtrong deluſions, that they ſhould beleue lying, fooliſh, & ridiculous
ſigns, ſhewed forth or giuen by ſathan in all deceiuablenes.
               Thus haue I ſufficiently prooued out of the word of god the poſſeſſion
of the parties wee intreate of, and diſproued what is or may
be obiected againſt it. Ther are beſids ſome other reaſons which may
further confirme the ſame vnto vs: As firſt, in that they were deliuered
vppon the prayers and faſtes which were vſed for that purpoſe:
we may thereby bee the rather perſwaded that they had euill
ſpirits within them▪ where we muſt remember that it was not thus
once, but ſundry times, not with one perſon alone, but with diuers.
Now whence came it that ſuch certaine and preſent deliuerance came
to the aboue named partyes ſo afflicted as is aforeſaide, vpon the vſinge
of this ſaide meanes? Surely hence, becauſe they being ſicke,
of this ſupernaturall diſeaſe▪ I meane hauing vncleane ſpirits within
them, had the ſupernaturall meadycyne applyed vnto them, whych
God hymſelfe for the cureynge theireof hath lefte and ordeayned:
which beynge ſoe, it is noe marueyle though they were preſentlye
healed. For what meadicyne is ſoe ſoueraigne, as that which is of the
Lords owne appoyntment? had they bene ſicke of any other diſeaſe,

and namely had they bene vexed by ſome outward operation of ſathan,
as of neceſſity they muſt if they were not poſſeſt: they had not
vndoubtedly all of them bene ſo preſentlie deliuered as they were.
               For howſoeuer god hath appoynted vs to faſt when we are in any affliction
of body or mynd, neither ſhall it be done in vaine: yet he hath
no where promiſed that the ſame ſhall proſper to the deliuering of vs
from the ſaid affliction,math 17. 21. as he hath in this caſe of poſſeſſion, in particular
and by name. This kind (ſaith our ſauiour) goeth not out, but by prayer,
and faſting: therein ſecretly promiſing, that praier and faſting being
vſed, euill ſpirits doe and ſhall goe out. Againe how came it to paſſe
that we in our prayers inſtantly calling vpon god, that he woulde be
pleaſed to caſt ſathan forth of them whoe lay ſo miſerably vexed, by
the diuell before vs, (that their bodyes might not be receptacles for
the vncleane ſpirits, but temples for the holy ghoſt to dwell in) that
they were therevpon, and euen then deliuered according to our requeſts
and ſupplications ſo made, if they were not poſſeſſed?
               Theſe thinges conſidered, I ſe not how any can doubt or once call in
queſtion the poſſeſſion of theſe 7. in Lancaſhire & of Will: Somers of
Nottingham, as alſo of thoſe other two we haue ſpoken of by the way
to wit, Kath: Wright and Tho: Darling, vnleſſe he be either like vnto
Thomas, and with him ſay, except I had ſene theſe things that are here
reported, and had made tryall of them with my handes, I will not beleeue
them, or be of this iudgment, that men in theſe dayes cannot be
poſſeſſed. The former of theſe may remember for theire humblinge
that by the ſentence of our ſauiour himſelfe, this is to be faithleſſe: as
touching this worke of god, I meane and that it is a bleſſed thinge to
beleue that the truth we ſee not. 2. that before God and men they
ſhall be the more inexcuſable, becauſe theſe thinges haue bene donne
not beyond the ſeas, but heere at home in our owne countrye, & that
in diuers partes therof, and ſome of them in the middeſt of the kingdome,
ſo that we neede not goe farr either in our owne perſon, or by
our letters to inquire into the truth of this matter: neither haue they
bene done in a corner, and before ſome few only, but openly & in the
ſight of all thoſe that for ſundry wekes would come vnto thē, which
I dare be bould to ſay were for nomber (in a manner) innumerable
wherof diuers were very learned and wiſe, cheef men in the magiſtracy
and miniſtery, not eaſy to be abuſed, and about 30. alſo haue vpō
their oathes giuen teſtimony herevnto.
               As touching thoſe who therfore reiect that is ſaid,That ther are poſſions in theſe dayes and whatſoeuer
they heare conſcerning this matter, becauſe they iudg that none eyther
are or can be now poſſeſt, as I cannot but wonder that an
                     •
                   eſpecially
of the learned ſhould be of this iudgment, conſideringe there is

neither iot nor tytle in the ſcriptures for them, but much againſt them
nor yet in any writer ould or new that euer I red or heard of, ſo I demaund
of them how they dare affirme the ſame, for it is in effect all
one as yf they ſhould ſay, god can not now ſend diuells into men, or
god cannot in theſe dayes plague and correct men, by ſending ſathan
into them to vex them in their bodies, which I thinck they would be
loath to auouch:Titus 
                        •
                     . 2. 2 Tim. 2. 1
                        •
                     . for it is more then bouldnes to ſay of the almightye
that he cannot doe this or that, except it be ſuch as is eyther contrary
to his nature, or his reuealed will: which cannot be ſaide of this. To ſay
it is againſt his nature is moſt abſurde, and if we will haue it agaynſt
his will, we muſt ſhewe where that part of his will is reuealed, which
is a thing impoſible, for aſmuch as the contrary, that men may now be
poſſeſt, appeareth by daily experience which cannot fall out contrary
vnto the will of god, and by the word of god in Deut: 28. it is writtē,
If thou wilt not kepe (ſaith Moſes) and doe all the words of this law that
are written in this boke and feare this glorious and fearefull name the lord
thy god,
                  verſe 58 
                  then the Lord will make thy plagues wonderfull, and the plagues of
thy ſeede, euen great plagues and of longe continuance and euery ſicknes,
and euery plague which is not written in the boke of this lawe, will the lord
heap vpon thee vntil thou be deſtroied. Seing thē god threatneth to bring
vpon the diſobedient and ſinfull people wonderfull plagues of which
kinde this is one,Deut 29. 20. and euery plague or curſe he hath, whither it be ſuch
as is written (as is expreſly ſet doune in the chapter following) or not
written:
                  1 Tim 4. 1. 2 Tim 3. 1. 2. 2 Pet 3. 3. Iude. 18. vnder one of which kindes this curſe, to be poſſeſt with the
deuill muſt needes be comprehended: and that in theſe laſt dais there
ſhall be perilous and ſinfull times, wherein iniquity ſhall abound, ſoe as
the ſonne of man when he commeth, ſhall ſcarcely finde any fayth vp
on earth: Howe can it be denyed but that the lorde may ſmyte ſome
with this iudgment, yea and (as I conceaue of this ſcripture) will alſo,
which is more. And leſt we ſhould vnderſtand this of the Iewes only
and reſtraine it to the time of the lawe, (either of which is abſurd) we
muſt remember that we haue the ſame or like threate renewed vpon
vs by the ſpirit of god in the time of the goſpell, and expreſly agaynſt
euery man, aſwell Gentile as Iew, as all men will graunt. I proteſt (ſaith
the ſpirit) vnto euery man that heareth the wordes of the prophecy of this
booke,
                  Reu. 22. 18. 
                  that if any man ſhall add vnto theſe thinges, god ſhall add vnto him
the plagues that are wrytten in this booke, and yf any man ſhall diminiſhe
of the wordes of the booke of this prophecy &c Seing then that it cannot be
denied, but that there are in theſe laſt & euill dayes, both which add
to this boke, & dyminiſh from it, & that this plague of poſſeſſion by deuils
is written in the ſame: we muſt nedes acknowledg & cānot doubt
but that god may ſend this plague alſo in this laſt age of the worlde.

Againe ſeing poſſeſſion is a puniſhment or correction of the lord, laid
vp 
                     •
                  n a man by the miniſtery of ſathan for his ſinne: and that men are
now as greuous ſinners as euer,Iuſtin Ma
                        ••
                      I 
                        〈…〉
                      16 
                        〈…〉
                      Orig in 17 
                        〈◊〉
                      A 
                        〈…〉
                      Tertul ad Sea palam. et de co
                        •
                      M
                        •
                     . cap. 11. Capr. ad de me
                     
                        ••
                      
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     . Hieron in vita Hilar. Chriſoſtom 5. Homil. 4. de incomprehenſibili de
                        •
                     natura. Theodoret in hiſtoria ſancti patrum ſect. 13. in Maced. Auguſt. de v
                        ••
                     litate credendi, cap. 22. et liber de beati vita et liber 4 de ciuitate dei cap. 34 et lib 21. de ciu. dei cap. 18. Pet. Ma
                        •
                     tir com Io. part. 4. cap 9. ſect. 13 Philip. Melanct. lib epiſt. Chemnit de ſac
                        •
                     amento ordinis, parta 2. Beza Homi 26. in hiſtor Paſſionis. Vogellius in theſau. theologico pag 980. King of Scots in his Doemono logie lib 3. ca. 4 Chaſſ. lib 1 cap. 17 Demonijs cap 3. 6. 7. 8. 10. 11. 12. cap 8 Thyreus de doemoniacis. the lord alſo in like ſorte affected now
towardes ſinne and ſinners as heeretofore, as ready euerie way to chaſtice
men for ſinne in theſe dayes as in former: it cannot bee but that
men may bee poſſeſt now, yf the lorde thinke good that way to correct
them▪ yea euen as well and vſually as in former time.
               Laſtly it is to be remembred: that as all churchs, ſo al righter anciēt, &
latter, chriſtians and papiſts, which haue ſpoken more or leſſe of this
matter, giue theire full conſent heereto, and many examples from age
to age are giuen hereof. Here might be brought in, a multitude & greate
heape of teſtimonies, to proue that men maye be nowe poſſeſſed
but I will let them alone, and only coate them in the margent, becauſe
I thinke it a needeleſſe thing in ſo plaine and euident a matter to vſe
ſo many wordes, ſpecially ſeing hereafter I alleadge the moſt of theire
teſtimonyes, for the confirmation of diſpoſſeſſion ſince miracles ceaſed,
which is farr more doubtfull then this other of poſſeſſion, and cō
                  prehendeth
in it this alſo. For if men haue bene and may be now diſpoſſeſſed,
ergo poſſeſſed. Wierus in the begining of his 4. booke de preſtigijs
doemonum ſpeaketh of many that haue of late yeares bene poſſeſed with diuels: ſhewing at large their ſtrange, admirable, & moſt greuous
vexations by ſathan: and among others he maketh mention of
about 70 damſells which togither in one night 1555. in an houſe at
Roome where Orphanes were kept, became Demoniacks: whereof ſaith
he, not one of them was recouered two yeares after yea it may be not
at all, which ſure is more ſtrange then their poſſeſſion: conſidering the
great power and authority the Romaniſts haue ouer diuels, euen the
ſame with the Apoſtles if you will beleue them: as hereafter you ſhall
heare. Alſo of later time and nearer vs, euen at Amſterdam a greate
towne in Holland Anno 1566. there were as he declareth at large 30
children or thereabouts in 8. or 10. weekes poſſeſſed with diuels.
               But to let the dead and their writings goe, let vs inquire of the liuing:
Aſke of our trauailers what they haue ſeene & credibly heard in other
countries, beyond the ſeas, and you ſhall heare what they will ſay demaund
of the papiſts, and they with one conſent will tell you that mē
may be poſſeſt, & that among them ther daily are ſuch. Thyreus (a man
now liuing) in a booke lately written of this argument nameth a great
many that (long ſince miracles ceaſed) were poſſeſſed with diuels whereof
ſome were great and honorable perſonages, children to Emperours
and kings. Shall we ſay of them as it is ſaid of our poſſeſſed perſons
in England that they were counterfeyts? their calling of Exorciſts
alſo, and formes of Ezorciſme, proclaime their iudgment herein to

all the world, yea who knoweth not how they greatlye vaunt of the
power that in theire Church they haue to caſt out diuels? This brage
of theirs is anſwered by D. Fulk, and diuers others▪ but neither he nor
any other returneth in anſwer, that men cannot in theſe daies be poſſeſt,
which had it bene a truth they wold neuer haue omitted.
               But why doth it ſeeme ſo incredible and impoſſible vnto ſome, for
one to be nowe poſſeſt?Obiect. 
                  Becauſe myracles are ceaſed. It ſhoulde ſeeme
then to be poſſeſt with the diuell is a miracle, and not a diſeaſe ſometime
by miracle cured. For the ceaſing of miracles putteth an end only
to miracles, and not to the diſeaſes which miraculouſly were healed:
elſe we ſhould haue none ſick of feauers, palſyes, and other infinit
diſeaſes: none dumbe, deafe, blind, halt, or maimed. Notwithſtandīge
then that miracles are ended, poſſeſſion with diuels may remaine, ſeing
it is certaine it is no miracle,ver. 16. 18. but a ſicknes or ſupernaturall diſeaſe
which ſomtimes miraculouſly was healed by Chriſt and his Apoſtles,
as appeareth by the 17.ver. 42. of S. Mathew, where the father bringing his
poſſeſſed child, ſaith thus to Ieſus, I brought him to thy diſciples, and
they could not heale him: and preſently after it followeth: and Ieſus rebuked
the diuell and he went out of him: and the child was healed at that
houre.
                  math. 15 22 28. compared with mark. 7 25 29. verſ 25. Luke. 4. 36. In like manner it is ſaid in the 9. of S. Luke: that Ieſus rebuked the
vneleane ſpirit and healed the child, and deliuered him to his father And
for further profe hereof ſerueth excellently, that in the 8 of S. Luke:
verſe: 2. where it is ſaid, that certaine weomen were healed of euill ſpirits
and infirmityes,
                  How caſtinge out of the deuell is a miracle. 
                  as Mary which was called Magdalen, out of whome wēt
ſeauen diuels, where by the word healed, we may learne, that poſſeſſion
is a diſeaſe, to wit ſupernaturall, and that the miracle is when the dguell
by rebuke, that is, by a charge or comaundement to depart, is caſte
out, in which caſe the party is healed, or made whole of this vnnaturall
diſeaſe. For thus it is written in the 9. of S. Marke: when Ieſus &c.
he rebuked the vncleane ſpirit, ſaying vnto him thow dumbe & deafe ſpirit,
I charge thee come out of him. Then (it is ſaid) the diuell came out: the
very ſame we haue in the firſt of S. Marke verſe 25. and a little after
it followeth: verſe 27. he commaundeth the foule ſpirits with authority,
and they obey him. And in S. Luke, with authority & power he comaundeth
the foule ſpirits and they come out, In theſe caſes we all knowe Chriſte,
wrought a miracle: now what did he? he comaunded the dyuells
that were in men to come out of them, and they came forth.
               The myracle then is by aword, or commaunde to caſte the diuell
out, and this is ceaſed with other myracles, but to be poſſeſſed of the
diuell is noe myracle: no more then to be blynde, ſick, or lame: which
are iudgmentes of god vppon man for his ſynne: wherevppon poſſeſſyon
with dyuelles is often brought in amonge other plagues of god,

and namely in the 4. of Math: where it is ſaide: They brought vnto Ieſus
all ſick people that were taken with diuers diſeaſes and grypings, and them
that were poſſeſſed with diuels,
                  Math 8. 16. 17. Mark 1. 32. verſ 24. 
                  and thoſe which were lunatick, & thoſ that
had the pa
                        ••
                     y and he healed them. The like we reade in the 8. of Luke:
And at that time he 
                        •
                     ured many of their ſickneſſes, and plagues, and of euill
ſpirits,
                  verſ. 21. 
                  and vnto many blynd men he gaue ſight freety. Seing then it
is no miracle to be poſſeſt of the diuell, but a diſeaſe, as is the lunacye
palſy &c. the myracle conſiſting in caſting out the diuel by a worde:
notwithſtanding myracles are ceaſed, poſſeſſion may remayne: for as
notwithſtanding this miraculous healing heere ſpoken of is ceaſed &
gone, yet men ſtill are ſick, and taken with diuers diſeaſes, and ſome
are lunatick, ſome haue the palſy &c. ſo alſo ſome are or may be poſſeſſed
with diuels, and for my owne parte I will as ſone hould that mē
cannot now be ſick 
                     •
                  unatick, haue the palſy, be blind, deafe, lame, as
this other, that men in theſe dayes cannot be poſſeſt, which many mē
yea ſome otherwiſe of great learning haue preſumed to maintayne.
yea who is ſo ſimple that by theſe few wordes ſeeth not, that the ceaſing
of myracles proueth not the ceaſing of poſſeſſion by diuels? and
yet if you aſke theſe men who will haue no poſſeſſion in theſe dayes,
the reaſon thereof, forthwith they will tel you that myracles are ceaſed:
then which anſwer nothing can be more abſurde. And whereas
ſome affirme that men were poſſeſt,
                  Obie
                        •
                     t. 2. 
                  to the end that the diuinity of Chryſt
might appeare and ſhew it ſelf, ſo the caſting forth of the ſpirits, and the goſpell
be confirmed, and get the better entertaynement, by the eiectyon
performed by the apoſtles, and for no other cauſe, (for otherwiſe they
ſay nothing, as ſhall forthwith appeare) and therefore the deity and
goſpell of Chriſt being now ſufficiently confirmed, poſſeſſion with diuells
muſt needes ceaſe: I deſyre them to ſend me to ſome parte of
gods worde for my information therein. If they can not (whereof
there is no doubt) then they muſt needes confeſſe, that the reaſon is
becauſe heerein they knowe or vnderſtand not aright, howſoeuer otherwiſe
their knowledg may be greate. For ſo ſaith the holy ghoſte:
to the lawe and to the teſtimony: yf they ſpeake not according to this word,
                  Iſa. 8. 20.
                  it is becauſe there is no light in them. I maruaile at men eſpecially of vnderſtanding,
that they will open their mouthes to ſpeake where god
is ſylent: and that they will be ſo bould to render a cauſe or reaſon of
the lordes owne fact, where he himſelfe hath not donne it. You take
too much vppon you my brethren,1 Cor. 4. 6. Rom. 12. 3. Deut. 29. 29. in preſuming to vnderſtande aboue
that which is written, and meete for you to vnderſtand, and doe
not vnderſtand accordinge to ſobryety. Know you not that thinges
reuealed, belong only to vs and our children? why then will any take
vppon him to render this for the ſole reaſon or cauſe of poſſeſſyon

which god (we all know) hath not reueled: but in truth the contrary.
But what leadeth men to ſay that men were therefore poſſeſt that the
godhead of Chriſte and his almighty power might be ſeene in the caſtinge
out of diuells, and the doctrine of the goſpel be confirmed? Suerly this: becauſe,
it is euident that by their eiection theſe things were performd
By the ſame reaſon I may inferr, that men were therefore ſicke, had
the palſy, lunatick, lame, blynd, deafe, and dumbe, for the diuinity and
goſpell of Chriſt were confyrmed as well in the myraculous healynge
of the perſons ſoe afflicted, as in the diſpoſſeſſinge of diuells. And yet
not withſtāding no man is ſo abſurd as thence to gather and conclud,
that ther are or can be none ſick now, none hauing the palſy, none lunatycke,
blind, lame, &c. & yet I am ſure this followeth as neceſſarily,
and ineuuitablye of the former ground, as that of the ympoſſibility of
poſſeſſion in theſe dayes: wee ſee then that it being graunted that mē
were poſſeſt to that ende the deity and doctrine of Chriſte, I meane
the goſpell, might be confirmed by the healynge of thoſe which were
poſſeſſed, which I denye not: yet that letteth not but that men maye
be poſſeſt in theſe dayes.
               To ſpeake more playnlye therfore, as in the bodilye diſeaſes and infirmityes
of thoſe men which our Sauiour cured, a cauſe of the ſame
was, that in the curynge of them it might be euydent that he was the
Meſſias, as appeareth in general by math 8. 16. 17. in perticular by the
man that was borne blind: and yet notwithſtandinge there was ſome
other cauſe or cauſes therof, & namly ther ſine, as apeareth by chriſts
owne ſpeaches in the cureing of diuers, ſaying to ſuch, thy ſine are for
giuen thee, ſine no more leeſt a worſe thing come vnto thee: the which cauſe
remaining, the diſeaſes and other infirmities of mans bodye doe remayne:
ſo though of this ſupernaturall affliction in thoſe which were
diſpoſſeſſed by Chriſt a cauſe thereof was, that the divine power and
mercye of Ieſus Chriſt might appeare in their cureinge, as is playne
by the aforſaid place of mathew, yet that was not the alone cauſe, but
the ſinne alſo of the parties (as is euident by that aforeſayd) without
which they could neuer haue bine ſo miſerably vexed by ſatan as the
were:Iohn 9. 
                        •
                      Math 9. 2. Iohn 
                        •
                     . 1
                        •
                     . which ſinne in man remaininge, it is plaine that the ſayde diſeaſe
doth or maye remayne,cha
                        •
                      
                     
                        •
                     . 16. 
                        〈◊〉
                     
                   and ſhall or may ſo long as ſinne remaineth
in man. Indeed if for this cauſe only men had bine poſſeſt, that in the
expulſyon of the ſpirits by Chriſt and his Apoſtles the diuinitye and
goſpell of Chriſt might haue bene confirmed, it had bene ſomethinge,
yea very much they had ſaid, and I for my part woulde haue ioyned
with them therein: but for this cauſe only men were not poſſeſt, for
then there muſt neuer haue bene any poſſeſſed but ſuch as were by
Chriſt and his Apoſtles diſpoſſeſſed, or ſome other indewed with that

                  Apoſtolicall guift
                     •
                   the contrary whereto appeareth by Math: 12. 27. &
Act: 19. 13. The which as theſe two ſcriptures proue, ſo by them alſo
it is manifeſt to the aduiſed reader,That 
                        〈…〉
                     
                   that men were poſſeſſed before
Chriſts time, and vnder the lawe: yea this diſeaſe was common before
the incarnation of our bleſſed Sauiour, ſo as many were ſick thereof:
otherwiſe how could the rude and common people haue ſo readilye
and truly diſcerned thereof, as by the goſpell it is euident they coulde
and did? maiſter (ſaith one of the people to Ieſus) I haue brought my
ſonne vnto thee,
                  
                     
                        〈…〉
                     
                   
                  which hath a dumbe ſpirit: yea not only the men, but the
ſimple weomen alſo were acquainted with this diſeaſe:
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      15. 22. chap 7. 25. 
                  haue mercy on
mee Lord, ſaid a poore Canaanitiſh woman vnto Chriſt: my daughter is
miſerably vexed by the diuell. And leaſt we ſhould ymagine either that
this child was not poſſeſt, or that the mother knew not ſomuch Mark
ſaith plainly, this child had an vncleane ſpirit, and that this woman beſought
Chriſt that he would caſt the diuel out of her daughter: whereby
it appeareth that ſhe knew or at leaſt tooke it, and that rightly, that
the diuel was in her child: Seing then (I ſay) that the common people
were ſo well acquainted with this diſeaſe, and could ſo truly diſcerne
the ſame, it muſt needes be that both many were poſſeſt, and had ſoe
bene of long time: for otherwiſe the vulgar ſort (as we all in reaſon &
experience know) could not poſſibly haue attayned to that knowledg
Hence it followeth that many were poſſeſſed vnder the lawe & befor
Chriſt was manifeſted in the fleſh, into whome it cannot be that god
ſent vncleane ſpirits, to the end that the diuinity of Chriſt might appeare
in their myracalous eiection, but for ſome other cauſe or cauſes
beſt knowne vnto his maieſty:Gen 
                        •
                     2. 1. 
                        •
                     ob. 1, 11. & 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 
                        •
                     am 12. 3. 13. 1 pet 1: 6. 7: and 4 12. Reuel
                        •
                      3. 10. and namely to chaſtice them for
their ſinnes, (as is manifeſt by that wee haue alleadged before out of
Deut: 28. and 29.) which is the cauſe of all iudgments, though god
alwayes reſpect not that principally, but ſometimes (beſides his owne
glory Iohn: 9. 3.) ſome other thing beſt knowne to himſelf: as we ſee
in the example of Abraham, Iob, with others, and by ſundry teſtimonyes
of holy ſcripture.
               To returne therefore againe to ſpeake of thoſe parties we intreate of
Yf any obiect againſt this poſſeſſion that in all theſe thinges we were
deluded by ſathan,Obi. this which you would haue a poſſeſſion, was nothinge but an illuſion of ſatan. by whom our ſences were deceyued, ſo that wee
ſemed to ſee that which we did not ſee indeede: To ſuch I anſwer,
that if any ſuch thing were, then not our ſight alone but all our ſences
were deceiued, our taſting only excepted: for we did not only ſee &
looke vpon with our eyes ſtrange and impoſſible accidents, but heard
alſo with our eares, and handled with our handes, yea ſundry ſmells
there were, ſome times moſte ſwéete and delectable, at other tymes
moſt noyſome & ſtinking, no man knowīg from whence they came,

as is to be depoſed by many. Now it is hard that ſo many ſences ſhold
be deceaued. But what is more againſt ſence then to ymagine and obiect
that here? He fomed as white as the ſnowe, as thike as that which
commeth from the horſe or boare. About 150. of vs beheld this offt
and many times, and ſomtime for an hower together ropinge downe
along on his breaſt. It was to be felt. It was wiped awaye, & the cloth
wett therwith in the ſight of vs all. ſhall we now ſaye he ſeemed to
fome, but did not fome? he was of that ſtrength, that diuers times 4.
or 5. though they had great advantag of him could not rule him: what
is there more againſt common ſence, then to affirme that he ſeemed
onlye to be of ſuch ſtrength, but was not ſo? & which of their ſences I
praye you, & how manye of theire ſences were deceaued, which tried
their ſtrenght with his? & whither was there not ſomthing els deceiued
beſids ther outward ſences? If herein my ſences were deceiued,
I will truſt them the worſſe whylſt I haue them, yea I aſſure you
yf the caſe were ſo, I could not tell when or wherin to truſt them, leſt
they ſhold deceiue me, as they did then, all the witneſes herof (yf they
will ſpeake according to their knowledge and conſiene) and I doubt
not but are of the ſame Iudgment with me. Againe thus one might
haue obiected againſt the poſſeſſion of thoſe which had euill ſpirits in
them, whē Chriſt and his Apoſtles were vpon earth, as well, & with
as good colour & apparance of truth, as againſt the poſſeſſion of ſuch
as we ſpeake off. But if one ſhould haue done ſo, had he not ſpurned
againſt the truth, and by conſequence bene in great fault? yes verilye:
ſo ſuerlye doe they, and are no leſſe faultie which obiect this againſt
vs, and the poſſeſſion we ſtriue for. Take heed therfore good
chriſtian reader, I beſeech thee, leſt whileſt thou ſtand for the deluſion
of ſathan, he delude and deceaue thee. And
thus much for proofe of the poſſeſſion of
they perſones aboue named.
               The end of the Firſt Parte.
               HERE FOLLOVVETH THE
SECOND PARTE.
            
            
               
               The 2. part. That they were verily diſpoſſeſſed, and of the
meanes wherby the ſame was wrought.
               Hauinge ſufficiently proued euen by the teſtimony of holy ſcriptures
thoſe perſons we treate of, were verily poſſeſſed with the
diuell, with ſuch vnanſwerable reaſons, as may ſuffice any indifferent
man, that is not ouercarried with preiudice or partiallity againſte the
cauſe, ſo as it is altogither needeleſſe to ſpeake any thinge further for
proofe therof: now it followeth that we proue likewiſe with ſuch inuincible
arguments the diſpoſſeſſion of them: in handlinge of which
point we muſt remember, that whatſoeuer ſhall make for proofe of
their diſpoſſeſſion, the ſame alſo confirmeth further their poſſeſſion:
for how can a man be diſpoſſeſſed of the dyuell if he was neuer poſſeſſed
thereof?
               That this may the better appeare let vs looke into the diſpoſſeſſion
of thoſe mentioned in the goſpell and therewithall ſee what thence
may be gathered for confirmation of their diſpoſſeſſion we ſpeake of.Of the diſpoſſeſſion of Doemoniaks
In the aforenamed place of Marke it is ſaid,chap 9. 36. that Ieſus hauing charged
the vncleane ſpirit to come out of the childe, then the ſpirit cryed &c.
that is: ymediatly after the charge or commaundement giuen to the
ſpirit, and therevpon, the ſpirit cryed, rent him ſore, & came out, and
he was as one dead, inſomuch that many ſaid, he is dead. Nowe after this
very manner it went with the aforeſayde Doemonyakes at the inſtant
of their deliuerance or amendment.
               Firſt it is ſaid,Signes of diſpoſſeſſion. 
                  the ſpirit rent him ſore and came out: whereby is inſinuated,
the greatnes and extremity of the childes torments,1 rentinge ſore. ymediatly
before the egreſſe of the ſpirit, aboue that which is ordinary: for
before it is ſaid,vers 35. 
                  he tare him, here that he tare or rent him ſore, notinge
by this addition, an increaſe of paine. The like we reade Luke. 4. where
Chriſt commaunding the diuell to come out of a man, it followeth imediatly,
then the diuell throwing him in the midſt of them, came out of
him, and hur
                        •
                      him nothing at all. whereby it appeareth that the poſſeſſed
ſome little time before the egreſſe or going out of the ſpirit,Dan. quoeſt. 38 in Marc. 
                        •
                     ſod. lib 3 de Summo Bono cap. 5. are
excedingly tormented. As Danaeus noteth vpon this place of Marke:
when Chriſt commeth and approcheth neere vs (ſaith he) then doth the diuell
teare and torment vs more eagerly as he did that child at that time.
F
                        •
                     r (as Iſodorus writeth) then the diuell doth more cruelly rage agaynſt
him wh
                        •
                     me he poſſeſſeth, when he knoweth that by deuine vertue he is to
be expelled out of him. Surely they that were eye witneſſes of this matter
in conſcience muſt needes confeſſe they neuer beheld any in ſuch
torments as theis eight were a little before their deliuerance: what els
ment thoſe great and vnnaturall ſwellinges, ſuch ſtrong and violente
caſting vp and downe of their bodyes forwardes and backwards, ſuch

ſcriking or crying? It can not be denyed but that they were manifeſt
arguments of the horrible paſſions and torments which they incured
No doubt but the beholders were all of them greatly diſmayed & aſtoniſhed
thereat, as men at their wits end, not knowing what to doe,
nor which way to turne them. And heere I aſke not only of them at
Cleworth but thoſe alſo at Nottin. which were preſent the day of Som
ers his diſpoſſeſſion, whither by reaſon thereof, whereas all the daye
long before one had bene their mouth to god, they hauing that good
order, did not diſorderly and confuſedly all in common pray and cry
aloud vnto the lord, euery one according to that himſelf liked, as mē
not able to conteine themſelues: but muſt needes cry out vppon that
fearfull ſight. Yea I demaund further of M. Starchyes houſhould, and
W. Som. his maiſter, and the reſt of that famili, whither all the time 
                     •
                  o
theire and his poſſeſſion they euer ſawe them ſo greuouſly tormented
as he and they were a little before their deliuerance.
               Secondly where it is ſaid the ſpirit cryed and came out,
                  2 the ſpirit goyng out, crieth. and in the
firſt of Marke of another the vncleane ſpirit tare him, and cryed with a
loud voyce,
                  vers 26. vers 8. 
                  and came out of him: and in the 4. of Luke that the dyuelles
came out of many crying: yea in the 8. of the Actes indefinitly of thoſe
that were diſpoſſeſſed that the ſpirits crying with a loud voice came out
of many that were poſſeſſed. I report me to thoſe that were preſent whi
ther ymediatly before the diſpoſſeſſion of the aforeſaid perſons, they
heard not (for the ſpace of a quarter of an houre or thereabouts) the
moſt fearefull, ſtrange, vnnaturall, and loude cryes, that euer came to
their eares: and to them at Nottingham whither they euē then crying
out as men mightily aſtoniſhed at that they heard & ſawe, Somers was
not heard farr aboue them all, although they were in nomber ſome
150. Tormented they were in their fits all the tyme of their poſſeſſion,
more extreamly the day of their deliuerance, and moſt of all a
little before. In like manner cryes or ſcrikings they ſent out manye,
in the time of their poſſeſſion,3 after the torments & egreſſe of the ſpirit, the poſſeſſed lyeth as dead. but neuer of that loudnes & continuance,
to thoſe went from them at the inſtant the ſpirits went forth.
               Thirdly I demaund of the ſame perſons (which were to the nober
of ſome 40. at Cleworth: and 150. at Nottingham) whither according
to that is ſaid heere in S. Marke, they did not ymediatly after the end
of their torments and crying, ly as dead, and ſo continued for a good
ſpace. The reaſon hereof I take to be this for that the ſpirit, at his laſt
farewell (as I may ſay) tormenting the party to his vtmoſt: the body
after thoſe greuous torments lyeth at reſt, as it deſiereth and thus
lying, the party ſemeth to be as dead: wherein the cruelty & mallice
of ſathan doth notably appeare: who when hee ſeeth that he can not
continue in man to torment him ſtill after his accuſtomed manner

as he deſiereth, will yet do what he can to vexe him at his departure
or going out. Theſe 3. tokens or ſigns of diſpoſſeſſion were often ſene
and hard in K. Wright, who being not only poſſeſſed, but by her owne
defalt, in that the vcleane ſpirit returninge, found her empty, ſwept, &
garniſhed, and ſo prepared and ready to receiue & entertaine him, ſo
far was ſhe from reſiſting of him) repoſſeſſed, and that ſundry times,
at her ſeuerall diſpoſſeſſions, was euer extreamly tormented, ſchriched
fearefully or cryed out, and then laye as dead.
               Hence I collect the diſpoſſeſſion of theſe Demoniakes: for as when
we ſee one handled after the ſame manner as they weare, who in the
ſcriptures are ſaid to be poſſeſſed with ſathan, we muſt needs confeſe,
that the ſame party is verily poſſeſed, even ſo, when we ſee one ſo affected
and vſed as they were, who are ſaid in the ſcripture to be diſpoſſeſſed,
we cannot chouſe, but ſay that they alſo beinge ſo affected are
diſpoſſeſſed in like manner, for Deſimilibus idem ſit Iudicium. And no
doubt but the holy ghoſt, in the particuler deſcribinge of the manner
of poſſeſſion & diſpoſſeſſion, did leaue aſpeciall doctrine & direction
to the Church in ſucceſciue ages, how to diſcerne & to be aſſuered in
the like caſes. Thus doe I the rather Iudge, becauſe otherwiſe (yf the
partye now diſpoſſeſſed weare not ſo affected, as they were, who are
mentioned in the goſpell) when the people of God haue only praied,
or faſted & praied, a long time together, they cannot knowe that the
party is deliuered, although it be ſo: For the eaſe of the party will not
ſuffice, becauſe that is vſuall with Demoniaks, ſeing the diuill vexeth
them, but at certaine times only, being otherwiſe out of their fites, as
well as any other body. ſōe ſpeciall caſes excepted, wher the ſpirit mak
eth them blind, dumbe, deafe: or gathereth them all of a heape, ſo as
they goe * bowed together as we read in the goſpell,Luk. 13. 11. or lame (as in experience
hath bine ſene in Th. Dar, who was lame and depriued of the
vſe of his legs for 13. weekes together or their abouts) wherfore it is
evident that yf in the diſpoſſeſſing of a man, the ſpirit ſhould not crie
aloud, rent him ſore, & cauſe the party to lye as dead (which are the only
apparant ſigns of his egreſſe) then could not the party poſſeſſed be
diſcerned to be diſpoſſeſſed, and ſo God ſhold not haue that praiſe,
nor man receiue that profite by ſuch agreat worke, which othewiſe by
the certaine knowledg therof they ſhould. But now that God in his
infinite wiſdom, hath recorded theſe ſigns in his worde, and left them
for a direction vnto his Church herein, he hath prouided a remidi for
our weaknes, and furtherance of his owne glorye. furthermore I haue
in experiēce obſerued this ſigne alſo of Sathans goīg out of him whō
he poſſeſſeeth, to wit, whē the Demoniak doeth either ſe ſomethinge
going from him, or ſenſiblie fele ſomthing to come from within him.
               Thus Darl. ſaw ſomthing like a mouſe go out of him, as he ſuppoſed

& of thoſe in Lan.
                  4 Seeing or feelinge ſomthinge to go from them, on of them felt & ſaw ſomthīg go out of her (as ſhe
thought) lik an vrchin, another in this, & a 3 in that forme, & ſo of the
reſt, accordīg as it is ſet downe in the ſtori. W. Som. alſo though he ſaw
no viſible ſhape, at the egreſe of the ſpirit, it he felt ſomthīg com from
withī him, which he thought wold haue pluckt away his throat (as M
Byrom had before him) wherby he & thoſe in Lan. were fully perſwad
ed, that the diuil was gone out of them. which we muſt not ſo vnderſtand,
as though the ſpirits had bine & continued in them in ſuch bodies
aſſumed vnto them, or that the ſpirits could not come out of thē
but muſt nedes be felt, or it could poſſibly be felt or ſene: but that the
ſpirits by ther operation cauſed ſomthing which was felt & did appere
in ſom viſible forme or ſhap. All or moſt of which ſhaps we haue hard
were vgly, & no maruil cōfidering the were repreſented by the foule
ſpirit. Herevnto we may add the vomiting vſed by Som, at the very egres
of the ſpirit, and not long before (as it were foretelling the ſame) both
in thoſe in Lan. & Th. Darling. but the ſcriptures making no mētion of
theſe ſignes,5 vomyttinge they are to be regarded accordingly. Seeing then it is ſo,
that the outward notes & ſigns of deliuerance from Sathans poſſeſſi
on, precedent and ſubſequent, were found to be ſene in theſe perſons:
why ſhoud we doubt but that the thinge ſignified by thoſe ſignes was
alſo truly, though not to the eye performed? eſpecially conſideringe
that out of the aforeſaide ſigns accompanieth (as I may ſaye) the very
egreſſe or going out of the ſpirit, for the ſpirits criyng. goe out, and that
another is not vntil he be gone forth, for we read that when the ſpirit
was come out of the child, then he was as one dead.
               
               Againe we called vpō God: that it would pleaſe him to caſt the vncleane
ſpirits out of the perſons afflicted before vs, ſo as their bodyes
might be temples for the holy ghoſt to dwell in: & god hard our pray
ers vttered in ſuch tearmes, & to that end, and we viſibly did ſee the
worke accompliſhed after our deſiers. Furthermore we are to remē
ber: that howſoeuer Sathan in the time of theſe poſſeſſion, did vſually
in viſiblye ſhaps appeare vnto them, yet did he neuer ſeke to enter in
to them, vntil after that time thei were diſpoſſeſt, which then he eger
lye attempted both by promiſes and threats, and that with euery one
of them, which greatly confirmeth their diſpoſſeſſion. for the holy ſcripture telleth vs that
the vncleane ſpirit is caſt out of mā, before he ſeke to enter in againe. VVhen they vncleane
ſpirit (ſaithe our ſauiour) is gone out of a md̄, he walketh through drye places, ſeekinge reſt: and when
he findeth none,
                  Math 12. 43, Luk 11 24. 
                  he ſaith I will returne into mine houſe whence I came out &c. True it is that this
returne wee ſpeake of, & ſeeking of the ſpirits to enter againe into them we receiue by report
from the parties poſſeſſed, & that no other is privy to the ſame: but it conſider
                     •
                  nge it
hath bene ſo with all and euery of them, as they hauc witneſſed and that manye others (I
meane they which were preſent at the ſaid aſſalts of Sathan to enter into them, as the parties
afflicted aff
                     •
                  rme) though they neither ſaw Sathan nor hard him, it both ſaw and harde
them ſuddenly and ſtrangly diſquieted, & moſt eger in reſiſting the deuil, whervpon thoſe
which were preſent did alſo aſſiſt them theirin and that it was not ſo with any of them all
the time of their poſſeſſion in the apparitions of ſatan: the
                     •
                  e things (I ſay) conſidered, and
that they agre ſo with the ſcripture, I cannot ſe why any ſhould 
                     •
                  eiect and not credit that
is here ſaid of the vncleane ſpirits returninge, and ſeeking to repoſſeſſe them.
               
                  
Now this returne of Satan, and indeuoring to enter in againe, (recouering
ſome of them alſo) as it argueth both their poſſeſſion and diſpoſſeſſion,
ſo likewiſe their expulſion of the wicked ſpirits by the finger
of God, in his appointed meaines. Greatly therfore doe they for
get themſelues, and that which in holy ſcripture is written concerning
this matter who hereby are offended, taking hence occaſion to think
and to ſpeake, that Somers was not poſſeſſed, but that he was a verye
counterfeite, or that he was not diſpoſſeſſed, becauſe he cane doe the
ſame thinges againe. Knowe wee not that the deuill beinge gone out
of a man, if returninge (which he will certainly doe) he finde him emptye,
ſweept and garmſhed, it is impoſſible to keepe him out, but he will
enter in and dwell there, yea with more and worſe then himſelfe? or cane
we be ignorant hereof, that Som. is emptie, ſwept, and garniſhed, if we
conſider of his intollerable ingratitude, for that mercy of God receiued,
his abominable lyeing, ſlaundering, & obſtinacie therin, to ſpeake
nothing of thoſe lewd prankes he playd in the Biſhope of Londons houſe
viz. stealing, whoring, running awaye &c. as I haue bene credibly informed,
Seeing then that theſe thinges agree and fall out iuſt accordinge
to the ſcriptures, and that herein we ſe ſtill the ſcriptures fulfilled: why
are we not rather hereby confyrmed, then ſtumble therat as a rocke
of offence? neither is it to any purpoſe to obiect here as ſome do, that
this ſcripture is to be vnderſtod of aſperitual deliuerāce out of the po
wer of the deuill. For howſoeuer that is ſaide here, is moſt true being
vnderſtod ſpirituallye, I meane of the ſpritualll deliuerance from the
power of Sathan: yet it is certayne the Lord onlye ſpeaketh of a corporall
deliuerance, which is confirmed partlye by the occaſion and co
herence of this ſcripture, ariſing of the eiection of Sathan out of one
whom corporallye he had poſſeſſed, (and not ſperituallye more then
other men,Luk 11. 4 & 23) as is noted by Luke: but chiefly by the text it ſelfe: wher
in the vncleane ſpirit is ſayde to goe out of a man, ſecondly, to enter in againe:
                  vers 25.
both which ſpeaches are neuer vſed in the ſpirituall ſence: but
often, yea vſually in the other. And becauſe that is and hath bene ſaid
by me concerning Satan returne to repoſſeſſe the partie out of whom
he is caſt, is ſo vnſauerye vnto many, even as if there were noe ſuch
thinge reueiled, but was ſome conceit of myne. Let vs therfore add to
this ſcripture for further proofe therof, and confyrming of this truth,
that ſpeach of the Lord in the 9. of Marke: I charge thee, thou dumbe
and deafe ſpirit, come out of him, and enter no more into him. which charg
of entering no more into the child, our Sauiour would neuer haue giuen,
had not he knowne that Sathan would haue attempted it, and other
wiſe haue entered into him if he could: as beinge the propertie of the
diuill, to ſeeke to enter into them againe, out of whom he hath bene

caſt. And ſurelye how can it be otherwiſe conſideringe the nature of
Satan, and his extreame malice towards man, eſpecially towards ſuch
as haue bene taken out of his power: whervpon it is ſaide before, that
ſeekinge reſt, after he is caſt out one, that is, ſeekinge ot praye vpon
and ſpoyle men, for that onlye bringeth reſt and quyet vnto him. he
findeth none, that is, none doth pleaſe or ſatiſfie him, in reſpect of the
recouering that man out of whom he hath bene caſt, ſuch and ſo vnſatiable
is his malice towardes him he hath loſt, and hither doth it carye
him. VVe maye likwyſe obſerue for the further confirmatyon of the
former expoſition, that in this place of Marke, (wher we cannot deny
but that Chriſt ſpeaketh of diſpoſſeſſion, and coporall poſſeſſion) is
mention of the ſpirits goinge out, and entringe in, as in the forme: ſcripture:
and therefore the premiſes well wayed, and theſe ſayinge of the
Lord in Marke and Mathewe compared together, ther is great reaſon
we ſhould vnderſtand that of the vncleane ſpirits returne accordinge
to the letter. The *want of this returne of the ſpirits, doth among other
thinges induce me more then to ſuſpect the diſpoſſeſſions in the
Papacie,
                  Some papiſts hold quod ſemel &c. that ſpirits beinge once gone out of men, they cannot enter into the ſam men the ſecond time. Thyreus de Doem. cap. 50. ſect. 3. that the are not by the power of God, and ſo noe eiection or
expulſion of Satan, but a voluntary departure, for the further ſtrengtheninge
and confirming of them in their falſe worſhipe of God: but
of this more hereafter.
               Laſtly foraſmuch as all thoſe we haue ſpoken of (they excepted who
are repoſſeſt) are, and haue bene for ſo long time euen two yeares, altogither
free from that ſtrange and greuous manner of handlinge or
vexation in their bodies, wherof we haue heard at larg: why ſhold we
doubt of their diſpoſſeſſion? eſpecially ſeing the ſtrong man armed,
keepeth not their houſes: ſeing they carry not themſelues as he deſireth
(as Somers doth) during which time, and in which caſe only there
is peace.Luk 11. 21. If you requyre more time for confyrmation thereof, you
haue it in Th. Darling, who hath continued well and in his former &
priſtine eſtate, for the ſpace of fiue yeares and aboue, (bleſſed be god
therefore) and whoſe houſe it is manifeſt the ſtrong armed man doth
not keepe, ſeing god hath not only giuen him (with the reſt in his
condition) to confeſſe, declare, and beare witnes to the greate thinges
the Lord hath donne vnto him, and how he hath had compaſſion of
him, but alſo to ſuffer for the ſame.
               Here it will be obiected generally againſt all diſpoſſeſſions in theſe
daies,Oli
                        •
                     cton that to caſt out Sathan is a miracle, and therfore miracles being
ceaſed ther can be no diſpoſſeſſions at all.
               For anſweare herevnto we muſt knowe, that deuills are caſt out
two manner of wayes either by abſolute authority,anſwere. Math 10. 1 Luk. 10. 1. as by Chriſt being
God: or by *an authoritye committed and giuen of Chriſt to men: as

                     〈2 pages missing〉
                  
                  
Though Bel Zabub the prince of Diuelles, and with him Legions had
bene in him, yet had you caſt them out: for if you can beleue, nothing
ſhalbe vnpoſſible vnto you, howbeit this alſo you muſt know and vnderſtand
that the ſpirit wherwith this child was poſſeſſed, is on of the
worſt kind of ſpirits. becaus in the ordinarie meanes which my father
hath left to his church, he wil not be expelled by praier alon, without
faſting thervnto adioyned. Now your faith being weake, & the ſpirit
on of the worſt kīd, & therfor hardly to be remoued, what marvell is
it though you caſt hī not out, yea, how was that poſſible, I deny not,
but notwithſtanding the weaknes of your fayth, had you fallen vpon
another ſpirit on of that kind which in the ordinary meanes that is in
the church may be caſt forth by prayer (you might happely haue expelled
him: but take the caſe as it is, your faith weak and the ſpirit one
of the worſt, it could not poſſibly you ſhould haue remoued him. although
thē the lord attribut it) cheif
                     •
                  i to their vnbeleife, that the had
not caſt forth that diuil, yet he ſignifieth by thes words that their was
a cauſe or impediment, alſo in the ſpirit: ſo that the anſwere of chriſt, is
double, conſiſting of two partes, wherin he ſheweth his Diſciples that
for twoo cauſes they had not caſt the euil ſpirit out the one and cheif
was in them ſelues, to wit, their incredulitie, ſet downe in the 20. vers
the other in the ſpirit poſſeſſinge the childe, for that he was one of the
worſt kynd mentioned in 21 verſe Nowe this ſecond cauſe is not ſet
downe in plaine and expreſe wordes as is the firſte, but therby made
knowen to the Apoſtles, becauſe he was on of that kynd which in the
meanes that euer was and ſhall be in the church, would not be expelled
by ſole prayer, without faſting annexed therunto, and this is it that
Chriſt ment in makinge mention of prayer and faſtinge, and not that
the Apoſtles ſhould haue faſted and pra
                     •
                  ed to any end whatſoeuer.
               This beinge the true and natural ſence of this ſcripture. I further
affirme, that howſoeuer the ſcope and drift of Chriſt in theſe wordes
was to make knowen to his Apoſtles, that the vncleane ſpirite wherwith
the boye was poſſeſſed, was one of the worſt kinde of ſpirits foras
much as it was on that wold not be remoued: without the ſtrong
& cheife, of thoſe means, which were orcinarie and perpetual, to wit:
pra
                     •
                  er and faſtinge and that thence partely, it was that they did not
caſt him forth: yet hence we may gather and Chriſt Ieſus ſecretly giueth
vs to vnderſtād as much, that the worſt kind of deuils & therfore
much more others, may be diſpoſſeſſed by the meanes of faſting and
prayer: And from theſe wordes a man maye as well conclude, that
chriſt would haue prayer and faſting vſed as a meanes for the diſpoſſe
ſſing of Diuils, as one may gather that the ph
                     •
                  ſ
                     •
                  tion would haue phlebotomie
or letting of blud vſed for the cure of him that hath the pluriſie,

who affirmeth that a pluriſie can not be cured but by phlebotomi
this kind ſaieth (chriſt (goeth not out but by prayer and faſting, therfore
by praier & faſting it goeth out. which might be confirmed by a
thouſand ſuch like ſpeaches: one ſaith to a trauailer at Doncaſter iourneinge
towardes Yorke, you can not get to Yorke but by Feribridge: Is
ther any ſo ſimple that vnderſtande
                     •
                   not therby thus much, that by
that waye he may paſſe thither, though ſome other waye by reaſon of
the waters or ſome other 
                     •
                  ett, he can not paſſe: conſidringe then that
our Sauiour mentioneth this as an effectua
                     •
                   meanes for the caſting out
of Diuills, and that ther is neither ſcriptur. nor ſounde reaſon, which
appropriateth the vſe of this meaines vnto that age, or to the perſons
of the Apoſtls & others indeued with the myraculous gift, as ſhall be
ſhewed heare after. I can not ſee whye the ſame meanes ſhoulde not
ſtand and remaine at this day, & why faſting & praier ſhould not be
held the effectuall ordinance of chriſt for the caſtinge out of Diuils.
               That there weare certaine diſpoſſeſſed in chriſts time, beſids thoſe
which were diſpoſſeſſed by Chriſt himſelfe, his Apoſtes and others, in
dewed with the gifte to worke miracles, it is manefeſte by the 12. of
Math. & Acts 19, but how & by what meanes that was don, apeareth
only by this place of ſcriptur we haue in hand, which was either praier
alone or prayer and faſting according to the kind of ſpirit poſſeſſing
the party,vers 27. vers 13. which we do not ſo vnderſtande as though it weare requiſit
that they which dealte or at this daye do deale in the diſpoſſeſſinge
of ſatan by this meaines ſhould or dyd know with what kind of ſpirit
the partie poſſeſſed was vexed, which can not be: but that one being
poſſeſt and dealt with for their deliuery from Satan by this ordinary
and perpetuall meanes in the church, if by praier for an hower 23 or
more he be not deliuerd, vndoubtedly (that being perfourmed aright
becauſe of the kynd of ſpirit poſſeſſing: then let faſting therto be ioyned,
and that certaynlye (if the Lorde thinke good to bleſſe his ſayde
ordinance (ſhalbe mightie and effectual to the caſting out of the ſpirit
of what kind ſoeuer he be, indeed this courſ we did not take with the
aforſaid perſons but at the firſt proceded to faſtīg & praier, which we
therfor did, becaus we much deſired that our labour might not be in
vaine as touching their delyuerance, & thus alſo thought & beleued
that what kind of ſpirit ſoeuer were in them, we vſinge prayer & faſt
ing, the ſaid holy meanes would be effectuall, through the mercy of
God to expell and driue them out had they bene or were the ſpirite
of the worſt kind, much more thē others. ſaying that I dealt otherwiſ
with Kath Wright whoſe dſpoſſeſſion was by prayer with out faſtinge
beinge vpon the daye of her diſpoſſeſſion delyuerede by noone, and
no faſt not ſo much as intended eyther by her ſelf or any other in her

behalfe, or ſhee once aduiſed theirvnto.
               If any ſhall approue of the aforeſaide expoſition, ſo farr forth as it
doth or maye agree to they apoſtles, and otherwiſe reiect it, affirminge
that of they Apoſtles ſoely this ſcripture is to be vnderſtood, to
whom it was ſpoken, and ſome others which had the gift of miracles,
and ſo power to caſt forth Deuills: I anſwer, that to appropriate this
ſpeach and tie it to the perſons of they diſciples, as meerlye and peculiarlye
belonginge vnto them, is more then the text either in expreſſe
words, or by neceſſary conſequence will beare. and therfore conſidering
alſo theris no other ſcripture to helpe in this caſe) it is more then
any man can for certaintie affirme, and ſuch as we may as well deny,
as others confidently avouch. Yea certaine it is that it can not be vnderſtood
of the Apoſtles, as ment and directed to them (otherewiſe
then hath bene ſayd, thereby to ſignifie vnto them: that it was one of
the worſt kinde of Deuills wherwith the child was poſſeſſed, whence
partly it came to paſſe that they had not caſt him out) and others indewed
with the gift of myracles: for aſmuch as Chriſt ſpeaketh exper
ſlye and by name of an ordinarye meaynes to caſt forth Deuills, and
therfore in theſe words of ſuch as by they ſaid meanes: had▪ or ſhould
caſt them out: not of they Apoſtles theirfore and their diſpoſſeſſyng
of vncleane ſpirits, who not by any appoynted or ordinarye meaines
(in which caſe their can be no myracle) but without all meaynes, by
the power and gift they had to worke miracles, did caſt forth diuils.
               But it will be ſayd, that howſoeuer they Apoſtles indeed by vertue
of that gifte and power they had receiued from Chriſt to worke
miracles, could and did diſpoſſeſe wicked ſpirits without meaines, yet
this was not generally true of all ſpirits for that there were ſome kind
of Diuels (imagine the worſte) which for al the power they had receued
without prayer and faſting would not be expelled: and that this
is it that Chriſte meaneth when he ſayeth, theſe kynde can by no other
meanes come forth but by prayer and faſting, as if he had ſaid: your faith
is lyttle and wauering and thence partly it is that you haue not helped
the child but beſides you muſt knowe that theire is a kinde of eue
                     •
                  
ſpirits of which number is that wher with the childe was poſſeſſed
which without prayer and faſting can not be caſt out and therfore conſideringe
that meaines by you was not vſed it is no maruell thought
you diſpoſſeſſed not the diuill, yea it could not ſo be and of this mind
is traiterous Stapleton a popiſhe proſelite, though otherwyſe learned,
whoſe words of this ſcripture are theſe. nunc autem alam cauſam adſert
&c. Now he aleadgeth an other cauſe, why the Apoſtles could not caſt
out this Diul which had ſo longe time poſſeſſed the man euen from his inſancie:
for it was neceſſarie they ſhoulde haue praied and faſted: where we
ſee that howſoeuer he doth not appropriat this ſpeache to the Apoſtles

but acknowledgeth (as in the ſame place appeareth that praier and
faſtinge is now a meaines for the caſting forth of Diuells. yet he affirn
                     •
                  eth
that neceſſarily the Apoſtls ſhould haue prayed and faſted and
that for the want or neclect therof, it cam to paſſe that the diuill was
n
                     •
                  t caſte 
                     •
                  ut: and with him agreeth Thyreus: who writeth thus: hoc
genus Demonorum &c.
                  Thyreus de Demoniacis, cap. 51. ſect. 3. 
                  this kind of Diuels ſaieth Chriſt, is not caſt out but
by praier and faſting ſurely the Lord doth inſinuate that the Apoſtles neede
not faſting and praier to driue away other Diuils, but was ſufficiente to cal
vpon the name of Chriſt but here beſides they need them, meaninge faſtinge
and praier, becauſe this ſpirit is hardlyer expelled then others.
               
               
                  If this expoſition were true, then ther ſhould he a certaine ſort orkind
of divels which the Apoſts by al the faith they had, or could haue: wer
not able without further helpe to ſubdue. the which in ded Stapletone
further granteth and affirmeth, ſaying preſetly after the former words
thus, ſit fides quantum cunque feruens &c. let faith be neuer ſo feruent
as a graine of muſtarde ſeed, yet muſt praier and faſting be vſed, as a
moſt ſtronge meadicine to driue awaye Deuills of this kinde and this
he vnderſtādeth of the Apoſtls▪ as is plaine by theſe former words he
ſaith of them. neceſſarium quippe fuiſſe orare et idinare. for it was neceſarie
for the Apoſtls to haue praied and faſted. Now this ſemeth verye
ſtrang vnto me, & ſuch as nether can nor dare beleiue, and receiue for
truth. for when I conſider of the manifold & great ſignes & wonders
the apoſtls wrought wherof we read in the hiſtory of the Acts.
                  acts. 3. 12. 6. 16. & 4. 10. 30. of the
Apoſtls, & that (as Peter ſaith) thy did them not by their owne power
or godlines,math. 28. 18. but as they prayed for, & alſo profeſſed by the name or
power of Ieſus chriſt, (to whom all power was gyuē in heauen and in
earth) who had committed alſo & giuē part of his power & authority
vnto them: I ſe not how any infernall power could be able to reſiſt
& hold out agaīſt this divine power, euē the power of the Lord Ieſus
they cam in if their faith was ſtrōg, & ſo this power preſēt with them,
though they had no other helpe by praier or praier & faſting, foralbe
it the apoſtls ſomtims vſed praier in the miracles they wrought (thou
gh neuer faſtīg & praier that we read of) yet they nede not ſo to haue
done, I meaine their was no neceſſity theirof, their faith being ſtrong
muchleſſe to haue praied & faſted for then in all their miracles they
muſt & would haue vſed praier,acts. 9. 40. actes. 28. 8. which they did not. Yea very ſeldom
did they praye: only twyſſe as I take it: once * Peter in reſtoring Tabitha
to life againe, & an other tim “Paul in healing the father of Publius
of a feaver. which they did doubtles, either in regard of themſelues,
to ſtir vp & increaſe their fayth: or els becauſe of thoſe which
were preſent: that the beholding and heareing them to call vpon another,
when they were about to do the great worke they had in hand,
myght theireby knowe, that, that which they did, was not done by
their owne power, but by the power of him whom they did inuocat.

In whether now of theſe reſpects ſoeuer they Apoſtles vſed prayer in
the miracles they wrought whatſoeuer they were, it is cleare that ther
faith being ſtrong, much more being ſo ſtrong as might be, they need
not to haue vſed prayer. yf then the Apoſtles ſaith being great, they
neede not to haue prayed, as in the doinge of other miracles, ſo neither
in the caſting out of ſatan, but as they ſaw it profitable to others:
much leſſe nede they to haue vſed prayer and faſtynge. And if theire
faith beinge ſtrong, they could and did worke miracles, and namlye
caſt out diuels without any prayer at all, and ſome of the worſt kynd
in all liklihood, there were in that great number they caſt forth: much
more their faith beinge ſuch▪ they could and did worke miracles and
caſt out diuils of they worſt kynd without prayer and faſtyng. That
therfore, which Stapleton and Thyreus here affirme can not be true.
               Againe the wordes of our ſauiour are againſt this interpretation.math. 17. 20.
If (ſaith he) ye haue faith as a graene of muſ
                        •
                     ara ſeed, ye ſhall ſay vnto this
mountaine, remoue hence to yonder place, and it ſhall remoue: and nothing
ſhall be vnpoſſible vnto yow. except we will haue theſe wordes, how be it
this kind goeth not out: verſe 21. to containe in them: a perticular exception
out of the generall, which I take to be very vnſound, and con
trary to the meaninge of Chriſt. For vnder the worde nothinge, notwithſtanding
the words following ver 21. I would rather include ſpeciallye
and chieflye, that very worke they were queſtioned about, thē
becauſe of the words ve. 21. exclud the ſame. As if Chriſt had ſaid: yf
your faith be as agraine of muſtard ſeed: ye ſhall not onlye be able to
doe the ſame. that I now haue done, & yow through the want of faith
could not doe: but any thing els whatſoeuer, though it were as difficult
and impoſſible a thinge as it is to remoue a mountaine. They Apoſtles
then by vertue of their miraculous faith could doe any thing,
and therfore caſt out any diuill.
               Moreouer when we conſider of the power & authority that Chriſt
gaue they Apoſtls ouer vncleane ſpirits, to caſt them out, and how ac
cording to the ſame, they preuayled ſo mightelye agaynſt the deuils,
which were ſoe ſubdued vnto them, as that the cariynge of kerchefs or
handkerchefs from their bodyes, cauſed they euill ſpirites to goe out of
men: we cannot ſe how their faith not failyng them, Beelzebub ſhold
be able to withſtand theire liulye voyce and commaund giuen in the
name of Ieſus Chriſt, though no prayer & faſting were vſed by them.
Finally, we muſt remember that this power of they Apoſtles ouer vn
cleane ſpirits,Actes 19. 12. chap. 9. 1. was not thus bounded and limited by Chriſt who gaue
it them, but reached it ſelfe further, even to and ouer all euill ſpirites
whatſoeuer, as Luke witneſſeth ſayinge. then called he his twelue diſciples
together, and gaue them power and authority ouer all diuils, & to heale

diſeaſes: ſo that if he were adiuil they had power to 
                     ••
                  ſt him out. And
leſt this pretenſe ſhould be left vnto vs, that they had power ouer all
wicked ſpirits, in that by faſtynge and prayer (though not otherwiſe)
they were able to caſt out the worſt kind of ſpirits, as others without
that meanes: we muſt remember that with this power ouer diuils yea
all diuils, Chriſt ioyneth the healing of diſeaſes: as appeareth alſo by
the 10 of Math.
                  verſe 1. when it is ſaid that Ieſus calling his twelue diſciples vnto
hym, gaue them power againſt vncleane ſpirites to caſt them out, and to
heale euery ſicknes & euery diſeaſe. and in the 8. verſe following, Chriſt
ſaith vnto them: heale the ſicke, clenſe they l
                        •
                     apers, raiſe vp the dead, caſt
out the deuils. from whence we maye learne thus much, that as by ver
tue of the aforeſayd guifte and power, they were able and did with a
word, withont any more adoe, heale the ſicke, cleanſe they, leapers, re
ſtore ſight to they blynd, &c. even ſo by vertue of the ſame gift and
power, with their word or commaund in the name of Ieſus, (without
any further adoo by faſtinge and praying,) they were able to caſt out
all deuils, and did as occaſion offered, yf their faith failed not, which is
further confirmed out of Iohn 14.Iohn 14. 12. 
                  verily verily I ſay vnto you, he that be
leeueth in me, the workes that I do, he ſhall do alſo, and greater then theſe
ſhall he do. But this ſcripture is thus expounded and vnderſtoode by
many. that Chriſt hauing ſhewed his diſciples in they wordes before,
that it came through the defect and weaknes of their faith, that they
had not caſt forth the deuill, now telleth them how & by what 
                     •
                   eāes
their weake faith might haue receiued increaſe and ſtrength, even by
prayer and faſting, wherby their faith being ſtrengthened, they might
haue expelled Sathan.
               Herunto I anſwear, 1 that our ſauiour ſpeaketh of the miraculous
faith, as appeareth plainly by the text: if (ſaieth he (ye haue faith as is a
graine of mnstard ſeede & ſhall ſaye vnto this mount ayne remoue hence to
yonder place and it ſhall remoue, and nothing ſhall be vnpoſſible vnto you.
Now this kind of faith as it was giuen without meaynes to certea
                     •
                  ne
men, and God appoynted no meanes for they begetting of it: ſo neither
did he ordayne and eſtabliſhe any meaines for the increaſe of it.
which if any will contradict, I would knowe wher God ſan
                     ••
                  i ieth any
ordinary meaines to be vſed, for they increaſe of that he 
                     •
                  iueth with
out meaines. You will hapily ſaye, that Paul for they increaſe of thoſe
graces of the ſpirit which without mea
                     •
                  nes he receaued, vſed the ordinarye
meanes of ſtudye and meaditation. I graunt that Paul did vſe
ordinary meaines for the increaſe of grace receiued. And no maruile.
For as by meaynes of heareing, readinge, and meditation, he had receiued
diuers giftes of the ſpirit, ſo why ſhould he not by meanes 
                     •
                  eek
the increaſe of the ſame? be it alſo graunted that he vſed meaines for

                     〈4 pages missing〉
                  
                  
ſuſpect. then for the reaſon aforeſaid, I can not but diſſent from them
therin
               Thus we ſee that the former expoſitiones which are giuen of this
place of holy ſcripture can not ſtand, and that the truth will not beare
them out. that this ſcriptur can not be ſo ment, that the Apoſtls ſhould
haue faſted and praied, for then eyther it muſt haue bene that theare
was a kinde of ſpirits, which for al the power they had receiued wold
not be, caſt out by them, except beſ
                     •
                  des they vſed the meanes of pra
ier & faſting, which is directly againſt the ſcripture, as we haue heard
or els, that therby their weak faith ſhould haue ben ſtrengthened that
ſo they might haue caſt him forth, which al can not be as hath ben ſhe
wed. it remaineth then that the interpretation here giuen is ſond and
true, and therfore that it ought to be receaued, and ſuerly I doe not
ſee what ſhould let or hinder any ther from, ſeeing the occaſion coherence
and text or letter of this ſcrptur make al and euery of them for
it▪ and that it is not againſt the analogie of faith, what impieti or great
abſurditie is there in this, that praier and faſting is a meanes ordained
of Chriſt for the caſtinge out of Diuils: or what great danger is there
to the churche by imbracing it for a trueth beinge ſo in deed, and this
is all the euel fruite you can gather of the former expoſition.Iſa 22. 1
                        •
                     .
               
               He knoweth nothing in holy things which vnderſtandeth not this
that if on be now poſſeſt and by praier recouer not, praier and faſting
ought to be vſed. that in the ſayde iudgment God calleth him, who is
thus corected to this humblinge of himſelfe and afflicting of his ſoule
firſt and chefly,vers, 17. 18. then thoſe which are ſpetially and aboue others afflict

                     •
                  d in him, as the father in his child the huſband in his wyfe, ſo as they
ſinne if they faile therin ſecondly that praier and faſtinge beinge vſed
aright, wil certainly proſper eyther to the remouing, or ſanctifiing of
the ſaid iudgmēt. if now it ſo fal out (as it may as wel as otherwis that
the iudgmente thervpon be remoued, I meane the Diuill be caſt out
of the poſſeſſed, as it did with the former ten, and diuers others alſo
euen of late in our owne land, (yea when, by, and for whom hath this
medicine bene vſed, & the ſicke party not cured) it cannot be denyed,
but that prayer and faſtynge was the meanes therof.
               In the 20. of Geneſis it is ſaid, Abraham prayed vnto God, and God
healed Abimelech, and his wyfe, and women ſeruants, & they bare children.
VVho will deny but that as the ſinne of Abimelech (intaking Sarah,
Abrahams wife vnto him) had ſhut vp euery wombe of the houſe
of Abimlech,
                  Iudges. 20. ſo the prayer of Abraham was the meane, wherby they
were opened, and that iudgment taken away? and this, the 7 ve
                     •
                  s of
that Chapter, further confirmeth. The 11. Tribes about the monſtrous
whordome and Villanye committed in Gibeah of Beniamin, gathered

themſelues togeathere īn Armes, and did fight againſt Beniamin.
They Iſraelites weare diſcomfitted the Firſt, and the Second
tyme, and manye of them ſlayne, notwithſtandyng that after the firſt
ouerthrowe, they had ſought Earneſtlye vnto the Lord by Prayer.
Prayer alone not preuailynge ſo farr with the Lord as they deſiered,
they aſſembled themſelues in moſt ſolemne manner the ſecond time,
and ioyned faſtynge therevnto, and therein they ſpent a daye. After
goynge foreth againſt they Beniamites, the Lord deliuered them into
there handes: ſhall wee not ſaye that theire prayer and faſtynge was
the meaines, wherby they Iſraelites remoued the hand and iudgment
of God which was vpon them, (in ſmytynge them by Beniamin) and
and obtayned victorye againſt them? yes verilye.
               Even ſo it is in this caſe. Katherin Wright was poſſeſſed, and prayer
beynge vſed diſpoſſeſſed. Maye not one well ſaye, that prayer was
the meaines whereby Sathan was caſt out of her? prayer and faſtyng
beynge vſed for Thomas Darlinge one likewyſe poſſeſſed, he was there
vpon cured: maye it not be trulye ſayde, that the ſayd holy exercyſe
was the meaines theirof? The 7. in Lankaſhire beynge ſicke (as I may
ſaye) of this ſupernaturall diſeaſe, weare healed vpon the vſynge or
appliynge of this ſupernaturall meadicyne. VVhy may not I now as
ſaflye ſaye that this was the meaines of theire cureynge, and caſtyng
out of the ſpirites: as the phyſitian applyinge anaturall meadicyne, for
the healing of a naturall diſſeaſe, it hauyng alſo proſpered to the recouerye
of the parties health: ſay, that his ſaid medicine was the meanes
theirof? In like ſorte William Somers beynge poſſeſſed, and the ſoueraigne
meadicyne of faſtynge and prayer beynge vſed and applyed,
he alſo was healed. To what meanes now ſhall or can wee aſcribe this
health and diſpoſſeſſion of his▪ but to thys holy exercyſe? And thys
me thinketh ſhould ſomthinge perſwade and preuaile with vs herein,
in that God not once, or twice, but ſundrye times, not vpon the perſon
of on alone, or two, but diuers, hath from heauen put a ſeale here
to, ratifiyng and confirmyng this to be a meanes effectuall (through
his bleſſinge) to the caſtynge out of Sathan, in that he gaue health to
ſuch as were poſſeſt with the Deuill, vpon the vſynge and applyinge
of this medicyne. VVhen Saint Paull his Apoſtleſhipe was by reaſon
of the falſe Apoſtls among they Corinthians called into queſtion, hys
defence for himſelfe, or profe therof was this: that by him they were
converted,1 cor. 9. 1. 2. 3. and called or brought to the faith. are not yee (ſaith he)
my worke in the Lord? you are the ſeale of myne Apoſtl
                        •
                     ſhippe in the Lord,
as if he had ſaid:vers. 26. 30. in that ſome of vow by my miniſtrye haue bene call
ed to the felowſhipe of Chriſt Ieſus as he ſheweth Chap. 1. that, (vf I
had nothynge els to ſaye for my ſelfe) proueth me to be an Apoſtle

                  this (ſaith he) is my defence to them that examine me, & call into doubt
mine office. Even ſo I ſaye to them that denye or call into queſtion,
whether prayer and faſtynge be meanes to caſt forth Sathan: that the
diſpoſſeſſion of the ſeuerall perſons before ſpoken of (to paſe by others
which might be named) is a 
                     •
                  ea
                     •
                  e and confirmation therof.
               Admit then that theſe words (this kind can by no other meanes com
forth,
                  It is plaine that praie
                        •
                      & faſting 
                        •
                     e meanes &c. though no ſuch ordinance cold be proued out of the ſcriptures 
                  but by prayer & faſting:) doe not containe in them an ordinance
of Chriſt, for the healing of the poſſeſt by prayer, or prayer and faſting,
and that neither here nor els where in holy ſcripture, ther is any
ſuch ordinance mentioned: yet notwithſtanding the ſame may wellbe
(and indeed is) a meanes ordained of God to that end. For as the medicine applyed by the Phiſitian for the healynge of one ſicke of this
or that diſſeaſe, or the plaiſter of the Chirurgian for the healinge of a
wound, and proſpering to that end the are applyed, we all know that
the ſame are meaines appoynted of God thervnto: and when wee ſee
that the haue the ſame effect with many, that they are ordinary meaines
leading thervnto, all be it nothinge leſſe then ſuch meadicines or
perticular ordinances of God are mentyoned in the ſcriptures: even
ſo when we ſee that by prayer, and faſtynge and prayer: Sathan is caſt
out of ſome, and they therby deliuered from all theire vexations and
torments which before from him they had indured, and that not ſom
fewe but ſundry at this time, and many heretofore in former ages, as
in Turtullian, Criprian, Chriſoſtome, there times: we may hence gather
and aſſure our ſelues, that God hath appoynted prayer and faſtynge,
and prayer, as meanes (and that ordinarye) to caſt out the diuill of the
bodyes of men when he is in them, and as a ſupernaturall meadicine
to heale this ſupernaturall diſeaſe, whervnto the bodye of man is ſubiect
as well as to othere diſeaſes, although ther were in holy ſcripture
no mention of any ſuch ordinance. The thing it ſelfe then, (although
there were nothing ſaid as concerninge this matter in the holy ſcriptures)
I meane, the deliuerance of perſones thus affected by Sathan,
which in experience we ſee performed before our eyes and others before
vs, manifeſteth and proclamed to all men, this to be the ordināce
of God in his ſecret counſell, even as it doth in naturall diſeaſes, and
in infinite other caſes.
               
                  And what letteth that we ſhould not be perſwaded hereof,
                  Obiection 1 
                  and receiue it for a truth? if this, that we read not in the word of God of this
ordināce:
                  Anſ. 
                  beſids that we haue hard it is otherwiſe, that hindereth not,
becauſe many yea infinit things are decreed in the ſecret and eternall
counſell of God,
                  Obiection 2 
                  and knowne ſo to be man, which are not ſet downe
in his reueiled will. If this, that Chriſt and his Apoſtls when they caſt
out Diuils wrought miracles,
                  Anſ. 
                  and that miracles are ceaſed. we may remember

that ſoe likwiſe they healed feauers, palſies: & other diſeaſes
and infirmitie of mans body by miracle, and yet notwithſtanding together
with the diſeaſes,
                  Origen in 17 Math. Tertul. in apolo et ad ſcapulam, cap. 3. Cyprianus ad Demet
                        ••
                     anum
                        •
                      tract. 1. 
                  meanes remaine for the curing of them. And
why it may not likwiſe be ſo in this our caſe, in the healinge of this bodily
diſeaſe ſupernaturall by this ſupernaturall medicine, I deſier him
that is contrarye minded to ſhew. That common obiection therfore
taken from the ceaſing of miracles, maketh no more (indeed) againſt
the eiection of Sathan, and healynge of the 10. poſſeſſed perſons wee
ſpeake of done by an ordinary meanes, then it doth againſt they healing
of other diſeaſes: which diſeaſes were ſomtyme cured by myracle.
The different manner of curinge is wiſlye to be conſidered off. As all
curinge of naturall diſeaſes is not miraculous, although ſome be or rather
was even ſo all healing of this ſupernaturall diſeaſe or eiection of
Sathan is not by miracle, all be it ſome be, but of this more hereafter.
and here for the further confirmatiō, both of the general point, I now
intreat of, which is: that men in theſe laſt daies may be diſpoſſeſſed
of Diuills. which to ſundrie amonge vs ſeemeth very ſtraunge: and in
credible as alſo to ſhew the meanes which ſince miracles ceaſed, haue
by the moſt learned & godly, in the church of god from time to tim
bene vſed for the expellynge of Sathan out of ſuch as be poſſeſſed:
and is by theire example parctiſe and counſſell commended vnto us
in the like caſe to be uſed. to this end and purpoſe I ſaye: I will in this
place ſet downe certaine teſtimonies of ſome wryters, both in aun
                        •
                     ient
and lattet times teſtifinge the ſame: Origen writinge vpon the 17
of Math 1 21, howbe it this kinde goeth not out, but by praier and faſting
hath theſe wordes, ſi aliquando nos oportuerit circa curationem, if at any
time it ſhall behoue vs to deal a bout the curinge of them who ſuffer ſuch a
matter (uz. are poſſeſſed) we may not adiure them nor aſke them queſtions,
nor ſpeake any ſuch thinges, as to the vncleane ſpirit hearinge vs. but conti
nuing in prayer and faſtinge, we may obtaine helpe from god for the afflicted
and ſhall driue forth the wicked ſpirits by faſtinge and praier. Tertullian.
ſaieth, Daemones de hominibus expellimus ſicut plurimis notum eſt, wee
expell Diuils out of men as is knowen to many Cyprian. writing vnto, Domitian
vſeth theſe words, O ſi audire velles et videre vz. oh that thou wo
uldeſt heare and ſee. when the diuills are adiu
                     •
                  ed by vs. and tormented by
ſpirituall ſcourges, and by torments of wordes are caſt out of bodyes poſſeſſed,
come and know that theſe thinges be true which we affirme. Now how
ſoeuer I do not iuſtifie, Ciprian as touchynge his adiuringe of euill ſpi
rits: yet hereby it is manifeſt, and this vſe we may make of this ſpeach
of his, that men were not only poſſeſt and diſpoſſeſt of di ils in thoſe
dayes, when miracles were ceaſed,) but that the ſame was common &
vſuall then: for otherwiſe he would neuer haue vſed theſe words: come

and knowe theſe thinges to be true which we ſpeak therbye prouokinge
Demetrian Proconſell of Africk to make, trial of that he ſaide. the ſame
is alſo manyfeſt by Turtullian his wordes ſaying,
                  Chryſoſt. Tomo 50 
                        〈…〉
                      Dei 
                        〈◊〉
                      homil. 4. we daily expell Divels
out of men but moſt excellentlye doth this appeare by Chriſoſtom who
lived about 200 yeares after them his words be theſe hinc ita que ad
ſolitam veniamus admonitionem, therfore let vs come to our accuſtomed ad
monitian and what is that accuſtomed admonition? that we frequent the
worthy praier with a ſober and watchful mind, for when I ſpake of this ma
ter of lat I ſaw all of you willingly obaying, wherfore in truth I ſhold deale
very ill if I ſhould not blame you when you are necligent,
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      that is, poſſeſſed with the deuill, for ſo this phraſe or manner of ſpeach is vſed, math. 15 22. acts 5. 16., from whence no doubt this holy father did 
                        ••
                     ke it. or not comend
you whē you do well & accordīg to your deuti, this day therfor I will prais
you and thank you for that your obedience, but I wil then giue you thanks
when I ſhall firſt hauc taught you why that praier before al other was wont
to be made and why the Deacon doth commaund the men that are vexed
with the Diuill and moued with moſt cruell furie to be brought in at that
time and bowe downe their heads, for what cauſe it is done I will thus de
clare. the vexing of Diuills are bonds moſt wycked and greiuous, for they
are bonds, more ſtrong then iron, therfore as at the very inſtant, when the
Iudgge is wont to come forth and to ſit vpon the iudgment ſeat, the iaylor
brings forth all the priſoners and ſet them at the barre, before the ſeat
of iudgment,conſider how it went with our demoniaks the daies of ther diſpoſſeſſion, & we cannot but perceiue the time of diſpoſſeſ ſion to be ſuch and ſo fearefull as is here ſayde and the ſight, I. And hence it came that the daye of Soniers his diſpoſſeſſion, two made confeſſion of there ſines with many teares in the preſence of us all. I, and the ſight ſuch as may well terifie one. loathſome filthie, ouer growen with heaire & al too tuttred
with rages. ſo the fathers hanc appoynted, that when Chriſt was preſently
to ſit as it weare vpon his tribunal, and to appeare in the ſacraments, thoſe
men that were vexed with the diuill, as being fettered with certain bonds
ſhould be brought forth, not to be examined for the things which they ha
ue done, after the manner of pryſoners nor yet that they ſholde be punniſhed
but that the people and all the citie being preſent, publigue praiers might
be made for them, that al with one accorde might intreat the lord of all in
there behalfe and might ſtriue with ſtrong cries that the lord would haue
merci vpon them but as thē I was diſpleaſed with thoſ that neclected ſuch
a praier, and weare abroad at the time ſo nowe preſently I iudge, that I am
to be very ſharpe with thoſe which ſtaye within, not for that they tarry with
in, but that tariing in the place where they ought, they are nothinge better
affected, then they who gadd abroade, for they are talking amonge themſe
lues, (and eyther ieſt or cōfer about ther buſines in the moſt fearfull time, o
                     •
                  
mā what doeſt thou. whē thou ſeeſt thy brethrē preſent before thee in ſo mamany
bonds? thou talkeſt about things which nothing concerne thee, can not
the very ſight terrifie the ſufficiently, & drawe thee to ſom compaſſion and
pittie? thy brother is in chaines, and yet thou art drowſy, and carleſſe, how
canſt thou be pard
                     •
                  ned when thou art ſo harde harted ſo far from humani
tie ſo cruel? feareſt thou not leaſt whilſt thou talkeſt omiteſt thy dewtie and
art carles, ſome diuill leaping out from the poſſeſſed finding thy ſoule idle

and ſwept cleane ſhould conuaye himſelfe into it, and with great eaſineſſe
enter into the houſe thus ſet wide open? how wel doth it beſeme euery one at
that time,According
                        •
                      
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      that is ſaid 
                        〈◊〉
                      it was with th
                        •
                      people at 
                        〈◊〉
                      the day & time of S
                           •
                        mers, his diſpoſſeſſion, amonge whom (being about 150) therewas ſearcelye ſeene one drie face, 
                        〈◊〉
                      they which were preſent can witnes. to be ſwallowed vp of greife, to poure out riuers of tears, and none
but watered eyes, to be ſeene rounde about. and al the Whole congregation
to weepe, to ſighe and ſobbe. canſt thou not ſhed teares? what purginge can
theſe thy horrible ſinnes receiue? if thou wilt not lament the ſtate of thy bro
ther, yet at leaſt feare thou for thine owneſelfe and awake, if thou ſhalt ſee
thy neigbonrs houſe al on fier although that negbour be to thee very hatful
wilt thou not runne with as poſſible ſpeede to heelpe to quench it, leaſt that
the fyer creping by lyttle and litle, enter into thy houſe alſo? conſider thou
the ſame thing in thoſe which are poſſeſſed, with the diuil, the tormenting
of Diuils is a fier and a burning, and conſuminge flame take hede therfore
& cas further followeth there.
               Thvs wee ſee Chriſoſtome, in this pathetical homeli of his, ſheweth
the ordinarie cuſtome of the church in his time, for the diſpoſſeſſing
or caſtinge out of Sathan by the pulicke praiers of the churche. wher
in no doubt was vſuallye greate weepinge mourninge ſyghinge and
ſtronge cryinge vnto the Lorde by al the people preſente, beholding
the tormentes of the poſſeſſed, and their deliuerance, thoughe nowe
when Chriſoſtom ſpake theſe words, ſome of his people (by reaſon hap
pely they weare much accuſtomed to theſe diſpoſſeſſions, and thoſe
thinges which fell out in the ſame) failed to be after this manner affected.
wherupon he reprehended them for the ſam: which is ſo ſett
downe as if Chriſoſtome, had deſcribed that which hath fallen out in all
ſortes of beholders of theſe late diſpoſſeſſions, ſo much now in controuerſie
as they can witneſſe.
               Peter Marter in hys booke of common places,
                  Peter Martyr part 4. cap. 9. ſect 13. 
                  hath theſe wordes,
concerninge this matter, Quid ergo faciemus arreptitiis &c Therfore
what ſhall we do with thoſe that are poſſeſſed, when they are vexed with
wicked ſpirrits: ſhal we forſake them? they are in no caſe to be forſakē. yet
notwithſtanding▪ we will not by adiuerations commaund the vncleane ſpi
rit to goe forth, ſeeing we knowe: we are not indued with any ſuch gift, as
that wee ſhould by our commaundement caſt out diuils, wee will then vſe
faithfull prayers, I ſay prayers moſt vehement, and ſupplications, for their
recouery. In a word, this ſhould be the moſt laudable and wyſe courſe,
that exorciſmes at this daye be turned into prayers.
               
                  Chryſoſtomiet Proſperiaetate &c. In the time of Chryſoſtome and Proſper
(ſaith Chemniſius) they poſſeſſed were brought into the Church, and were
oft deliuered by the common ſupplicationes of the aſſembly.
                  Chimnitius de ſacram, ordinis And Philip
Melancton hauinge made mention of diuers which were poſſeſſed, & nam
lye of a Damſell in Marchia, who had bene healed of that diſeaſe, by the
prayers of the godly, of whom he ſaith, et adhuc viuit ſana, and it ſhe liueth
                  
                     〈2 pages missing〉
                  
                  
times liuinge and ioyninge with them therin, a miracle was wrought
if a miracle, miracles wear not ceaſed then, which all learned men knowe
to be falſe, 2 yf a miracle, who wroughte thoſe myracles? yf thoſe
auncient & learned fathers, why did others, yea oft times their wholl
congregations ioyne with them in thoſe miraculous workes, and not
themſelues without theire helpe, doe the ſame as did the Apoſtles and
others which had the guift of miracles: why did they not alſo by prai
er giue ſyghte to the blinde, heale the ſicke, and doe other myracles?
was ther euer any man hearde of, who indewed or guifted of God to
worke one only kinde of miracle, and had no guifte or power to effect
any other? yt is manefeſt thē that for aſmuch as thoſ fathers aſſiſt
ed with others, did by praier caſt diuills out of the bodies of men & it
ther in did no miracle: that expulſiō of ſatā by praier is not miraculus
or at leaſt that Sathan may be ſo expelled and no miracle wroughte.It is no miracle that is doue by meanes.
               
               Thirdly, the expulſion of Sathan by praier, or faſting and praier is
no miracle, becauſe it is brought to paſſe by meanes ordained to that
ende, euen the inſtant praiers of the ſeruantes of God. ſomtime long
continued in humiliation of faſting, for what ſoeuer is brought to paſſ
by meanes appoynted therunto is no miracle,Daneus opuſc. pag. 270. 1 c. though it be other wiſe
and in it ſelfe neuer ſo wonderfull. for this is one thing among others,
neceſſarily required in euery miracle,I ſay. 6. 7. 8. Rom. 10. 8: 14 17: 1 cor 1: 18: 21 Eph. 4. 11: 12: ſo as without the ſame it is non,
that it be done and brought to paſſe without any ſett and appoynted
means of God therunto, as that learned & reuerent Daneus teſtifieth
otherwiſe the number of miracles ſhould growe to an infinit number:
aboue thoſe that here tofore weare taken to be ſuch, and we ſhall haue
many miracles dayly and continually wrought before our eyes, which
all men will deny, for then ſhoulde the couerſion of a man be a miracle
(and ſo looke how many men weare conuerted, ſo many miracles
ſhoulde be wrought) for it is a wonderful worke and not only aboue
& beſids nature, but againſt nature euen as it is to ſee, the Wolfe dwell
with the Lambe and the Leoparde lye with the Kide, and the calfe and the
Lyon, and the fatt beaſte together, and a little childe to leade them, yet not
withſtanding foraſmuch as it is broughte to paſſe by an ordinarie me
anes that God hath thearunto appointed euen the preachinge of the
worde, it therfore ceaſeth to be a miracle, for admit there were a man
in Turkey or amonge the Pagans in the faith and that without al mean
es it is certain that that mans conuertion was miraculus: and yt when
one in the church is brought to the faith by the miniſtri of the word,
his conuerſion is not miraculus. That a child ſhould be conceaued &
ſo framed in the wombe of the mother as it is & after brought forth
aliuinge creature, indewed with reaſon and vnderſtandinge, is a thing
greatly to be wondred at, yet foraſmuch as the ſame is brought to paſ
by a meane ordained of God to that ende, no man counteth it a mi-racle

for then looke how many children weare borne, we ſhoulde haue ſo
many miracles. but imagin a childe conceaued without the knowledg
of man: as the conception of our Sauiour was, then euery on wil grant
ſuch conception to be miraculus. The like may be ſaide of the contin
uance of mans life, man taking that foode which God hath therunto
appoynted, if his life be continued and holde out from yeare to yeare
there is none that wondreth at it. But if it weare poſſible that ani one
ſhoulde liue without any ſuſtenance at all that weare miraculous. So
Moſes Elias & Chriſt liuing but 40 daies, without eatig & drinckīg ani
thing,Exodus 34 2
                        •
                      1 kinges 19. 8 Math 4: 2. it was by miracle. The corn that groweth in our feildes, wherin
of on grain cometh not onli mani, but alſo the eare & ſtalk, is an admirable
thing, yet no man counteth that miraculus: and why, becaus
god in nature hath ſo appointed it, that the meanes leading therunto
firſt being vſed, as plowing & ſowīg ther ſhould folow an harueſt or
increſe of corn but if we ſhold behold a feild repleniſhed with corne
wher no plow cam. nor ſeed was caſt, then wold the ſimpleſt plowmā
that is, ſay, behold a miracle: thus we ſe on & the ſam work miraculus
& not miraculus a miracle whē it is effected without meanes no mira
cle whē it is don bi meāes. euē ſo it is, in this our preſēt caſe. to caſt out
diuils without meāes, as chriſt & his apoſtls did, who onli ſpak & it was
don comāded & they obaied is a miracle,the 1 objection to prou
                        •
                      that miracles we e done by means but to caſt forth deuils by a
meāes ordaīed of god to that end as praier & faſtīg, is no miracle at al.
But it will be obiected that ſome outward thinges or actions, haue as
meanes bene vſed in the working of ſundry miracles. Elijah: & Eliſha
deuided Iorden, by ſmiting the waters with the Cloak of Eliiah. The
oyle was increaſed to the widow, by the meanes of the oyle in the pit
cher.mark. 7. 22: and 8: 23. 
                  Naaman was ſent to waſh himſelfe 7 times in Iorden, for the heal
ing of his leproſie. Yee Chriſt himſelfe ſomtimes vſed meanes in the
great works he did: in the healing of on that was dumbe & deafe, it is
ſaid of him: that he put his fingers in his eares, & did ſpitt, & touched his
tongue. and in the 9. of Iohn in giuing ſight to him that was borne blīd
it is written.
                     Anſ: 2: kings: 2: 8 14 20 21: & 3 15 & 4, 2: and 5 10 14. The outwarde things 
                        〈…〉
                      which 
                        〈…〉
                      were vſed 
                        〈◊〉
                      w
                        ••
                     king 
                        〈…〉
                     
                   that he annoynted his eyes with claye, and ſent him to waſh
them in the poole of Siloam. Hervnto I anſwer, that thes & ſuch lik were
vſed as ſigns: whervnto the Iewes were much acuſtomed: & happily
to trie their faith therby, or to imprint the worke wrought more deep
lie in the mynds of the beholders, & thoſe which were therby healed,
or for ſome other purpoſe beſt knowne to the lord, & as they which
vſed them ſaw them moſt profitable: & not as meanes ſeruing to the
worke they were about, in which caſe they muſt neceſſarily haue bene
vſed, ſo as without the ſame the miracle could not haue bene: for whē
the Lord apointeth a thinge to come to paſe by ſuch or ſuch meanes,
the ſame meanes muſt be vſed, otherwiſe that thynge ſhall neuer be.
Now I truſt wee are farr from thinkyng▪ that without theſe outward
things, the ſaid great works, could not haue bene effected or wrougt.

could not Eliſha, if he had pleaſed, as well haue healed, Naaman of his
leproſie, by his worde alone, as haue ſmitten, Gehazi his ſeruant ther
with? yes verilie,2 Kings. 5. 27. he enioyned him then that waſhingein Iorden not as
a meanes of curinge him, but therby to trie the faith of Naaman and
was it not ſo triede therby that it was ſhaken, ſo as had it not bene for
the counſell of his ſeruantes, he had gone into his cuntri backe againe
a leaper as he came? the ſame is to be ſaid much more of our Sauiour
Chriſte, and of the outwarde thinges he vſed in ſome of his miracles
in the 7 of Marke, a deafe man is broughte to our Sauiuur Chriſt to
be cur
                     •
                  de, wher it is ſaied that when he had taken him aſyde ſom the
multitude,vers, 
                        •
                     3. 
                  he put his fingers in his eares, and ſtraight waies his eares wear
opened, now it can not be denied, but that Chriſt coulde haue don that
cure, if he had pleaſed, though he had nor moued a finger, yea by his
very nod or beck, and admit that Chriſt in ſteade of puttinge his fing
ers into his eares, had only beckned vnto him, and that therby he had
receiued his hearinge, woulde we ſaye that Ieſus had vſed the ſaid becke
as a meanes to reſtore him his hearinge, or rather ther by to haue
made knowne to the partie & multitud, that his wil was, that he ſhold
heare, and be healed of that his deafnes.
               The like may be ſaid of the former blinde man, that our Sauiour
in anointing his eyes with clay, and ſending him to Siloam to waſh them
did not vſe the ſame as a meanes to giue him his ſight, and worke that
miracle. but therby to tempt him and trye his faith, for thus throgh in
fideliti he might haue reaſoned, in himſelfe, I thought he woulde pre
ſently haue giuen me my ſight, by his diuine power. but I now perceiu
it is otherwiſe as al his power, wherby it is ſaied he doth ſuche greate
workes, com to this? that mine eyes muſt be annointed and that with
clay, which if I had my ſight, would rather put it out then helpe to re
ſtore ſighte to the blinde? and muſt I waſhe alſo, and that in the poole
of Sil
                        •
                     am before I can ſee
                     •
                   what vertue hathe that water aboue other
waters? are not other waters, and is not the water of the poole of Beth
ſeda as good as that of Siloam? may I not waſh in ſome other water &
haue my ſight as well as in that of Siloam▪
                   I will not waſhe for this cauſe:
thus to proue his faith, and partly alſo therby to proue the faithe
of others, the Lord Ieſus in curinge him anointed his eyes with cla
                     •
                  e
and ſent him to Siloam, and did not this as a meanes effectual through
his beſſinge, to helpe him to his ſight to the ſame end he put his fingeers
into the eares of the deafe and vſed alſo ſomtimes ſpittle in reſtoringe
ſighte vnro the blynde and ſpeache to the dumbe,mark 7. 33. and 8. 23. for what in
reaſon, or in nature is more vnlikelie to effect ſo great a worke then a
little ſpit
                     •
                  le? moſt excellenttly therfore therby did Chriſt Ieſus try the
faith of men: and not vſe the ſame to the ende it ſhoulde be a meanes

to effect that he was workinge, and yet I knowe and forgett not, that
god can, and often doth bringe moſt mightie thinges to paſſe, by ſmal
                     •
                  
and weake meanes.Iohn. 11. 
                        •
                     1. 2 obiection. Chriſt and p
                        •
                     ter with others prai ed in doing myracles. Actes. 9 40.
               
               And wher it is ſaid that Chriſt prayed in the rayſing vp of Lazarus
and Peter in reſtoringe Tabitha to life, we are to vndrſtand that they
did not this, as a ſett and apointed meanes leadinge thervnto: (which
is alſo to be vnderſtood of others prayinge in the like caſe:) For then
without prayer the miracles could not haue bene wrought, which we
muſt be farr from imagining: but in regard of the people which were
preſent, as they ſaw it profitable for them and this is exprſlye noteed
by our Sauiour, for it is ſaid, that he prayed becauſe of the people that
ſtood by,
                  1 kings 18. 36. 37. & 2. 4: 33 Actes 28: 8: 
                  that they might beleue that his father had ſent him. Peter alſo by
his prayinge would haue the people more fully vnderſtand then they
could by the charge he commonly vſed, that that he did, was not by
his godlines or power, but by the power of him one whom he called.
It is to be obſerued alſo: that howſoeuer they vſed ſome ſhort prayer
before, to the end aforſayde, yet when they came to the doinge of the
worke, they did not ſupplycate: but commaund ſuch a thinge to be
done, as hauing power and ahthoritie thervnto. (the one from his father,
the other from chriſt.) Lazarus come forth: Tabitha ariſe: and it was
ſo. But in our caſe we continued ſtill in intrating and beſeechyng the
Lord: who in his good time was plaſed to doe accordyng to that wee
deſiered: whereby we witneſſed vnto men, that we haue receiued no
guift or power to caſt out diuils, as the Apoſtles had, and that we doe
no miracle, but only deſier Chriſt ſittinge at the right hand of his Father,
to haue compaſſion vpon the partie in miſſerie, and accordyng
to his promiſe to helpe him: which was neuer held for myracle in the
Church of God. The which if we had taken vpon vs to doe, then we
would not haue deſiered the aſſiſtance of any Miniſter, or priuat per
ſon therin, nether would we alwaies haue made interceſſion to chriſt,
in the the behalfe of the perſon afflicted: But if not at the firſt, yet at
length, whē it came to the point of deliuerance, we would haue charg
ed & commaunded the evill ſpirit in the name of Ieſus Chriſt to haue
gone out, which is ſo far from vs and our practiſe, that wee condemne
the ſame holdinge itvnlawful to be vſed of any in theſe dayes, except
God ſhould raiſe vp ſome extraordinarilie, which muſt be alſo in the
founding or planting of a church and not in a churche eſtabliſhed, and
ſuch as hath receved the ghoſpel as ours hath, for. howſoeuer the Lord
hath no where ſayd that ther ſhalbe no more miracles or miracle workers
and therfore is at libertie in this caſe. yet if we wel conſider of the
ende of miracles, and wh
                     •
                   the lorde added them to his worde, euen to
get intertainmente to his ghoſpel amonge the Gentiles▪ which otherwiſe

wiſe being fooliſh (not in it ſelfe▪ but in the corrupt iudgment of men)
would neuer haue bene receiued by them and withall remember that
which we wel knowe, that it is alredy beleued in, by the Gentills, we
may therby well coniecture: yea in a manner aſſure our ſelues, that mi
racles haue an ende, eſpetially in a church eſtabliſhed, wherin alſo we
are confirmed, by the long time in which for the reaſon afore ſaid they
haue bene wantinge.vers 13. obiection, 3. the apoſtles vſed oyle as ameanes in the 
                        •
                     ealinge of the ficke.
               
               In the 6 of Marke. it is ſaide that the Apoſtles anoynted many that
were ſick with oyle and healed them.
               
               I anſwer: and returne this vpon him that obiecteth it thus, yf in the
working of any miracles there were meanes vſed: then vndoubtedly
in the curing of thoſe ſicke perſons which by the Apoſtls were anoyn
ted by oyle and ſo healeed: for what was there vſed in miracles, which
in al reaſon was more likly to be a meanes then that oyle and the anoi
ting of the ſicke therwith? and yet all learned men againſt the papiſts
and their exſtreame vnction agree in this▪ that the ſame was onlye a
ſigne or ceremonie which the Apoſtles vſed in there miraculous healing
of men: none ſaye that it was a meanes to effect the ſaide worke
or cure, for then in truth it ſhonld haue bene no other then a medicin
and by conſequent their healing naturall and not miraculous: yf then
that oyle vſed by the Apoſtles in the doyng of ſome miracles, was no
meanes: but only a ſigne, by the conſent of al deuines: much leſſe was
the clay ſpittle or any ſuch like thinge vſed by Chriſt or the Prophets
in ſom of their miracles a means therof, but only a ſign wherunto that
people of the Iewes were much accuſtomed.
               But admit that herein I weare deceiued, & that this expelling of
ſatan by praier and faſting is a miracle. as well as that by word or com
maunde, performed by Chriſt and his Apoſtles. yet that maketh not
againſt me (my error herin excepted) nor the counſell I gaue or what
ſoeur I did,obiection, we ſe others are not cu
                        •
                     eed of the
                        •
                     e ſupernaturall di ſeaſes by prayer and faſtinge. ſo longe as it is certaine that the aforeſaide perſons weare
poſſeſſed or other wiſe afflicted: and that in eyther of thoſe caſes it is:
not only lawful to humble our ſelues by praier and faſting: but alſo
                     •
                  a
dewtie and worſhipe in ſuch caſe and time to be perfourmed to God
yf any demaund why we can not cure other ſupernaturall diſeaſes by
this ſpirtuall medicine as ſuch whome we ſave are bewitched,mark. 9. 29. that is af
licted in ther bodies through the mallice of a witch by her ſamilier ſpi
rit, I anſwere:The counſell I haue giuen to ſuch as I haue ſeene bewitched▪ and in their bodies greatlye afflicted by ſa
                     
                        ••
                     an beynge without them. that if we had the like ſcripture for the curinge of them
by praier and faſting, as we haue for the healing of thoſe Sathan poſſeſ
ſeth, then we would not doubt: but that they alſo by the ſaied meane
might be helped as wel as the other, yet notwithſtand
                     •
                  ng we counſel
all thus afflicted: to be often and dilligent in vſinge this holy exerciſe
for how ſhall we preuaile againſt Sathan and remoue that hand of his

wherwith God doth ſmite vs, but by earneſt prayer vnto God
                     •
                   Is
there any other meane or way to heale ſuch, as by Phiſicke
                     •
                   or helpe
to be had from any creature? no verily: except we will goe to the De
uill and requeſt him to ſpare vs now, and be good to our bodies for
the preſent, and vpon that condition be contented, that hereafter he
take his fill both of body and ſoule: as many (in effect) doe, ſeing then
eaſe to ſuch: can noe otherwiſe be had but by prayer, lett them in any
caſe praye, and neuer faint nor giue over, vntill they haue receiued
a comfortable anſwere from the Lord. and ſeing none for a tempo
rall iudgment haue more cauſe to be humbled then they, for aſmuch
as god hath ſent an euill ſpirit, that vile creature of his, moſt malitious
alſo and cruell towards man, to ſmitt & whyp them with: & that faſt
ing is a meane ordained of God to humble vs, and further the humb
ling & afflicting of mans ſoule.
                     
                        •
                     evit, 23. 29. 1 Kings, 21, 27 29. Iſa. 22, 5, 12, 1 Timo▪ 4, 5, who ſhould faſt if not theſe? by faſting
then and prayer, let theſe ſeeke the remouing of the heavie hand of
god which lyeth vpon them, & otherwiſe will not be remoued, but to
there further hurt. and if this they obtaine not therby, yet ther labour
& ſeruice they performed to god ſhall not be in vaine. for beſids they
receiue comfort theirby in the diſcharge of that deutye they owe to
God, who when he layeth affliction vpon any, doth therby call & as
it were ſummon them vnto weeping & mourning,
                  Iſa. 22. 5. 12. 1 Tim. 4. 5. 
                  to baldnes & girding
with ſackcloth: they ſhall alſo obtaine this therby, that the ſaid afflictiō
ſhalbe ſanctified vnto them, & made meanes of much good to their
ſoules: ſo as though in their outward man, I meane in their bodies, the
be ſtil afflicted, it in their inner man they ſhallbe renued daylie more
& more: which of the two benifits that com by the exerciſe of humili
atiō is the better, though we rather deſier the other, deliuerāce from
the preſent miſery, becauſe of the greſe it carieth with it. But ſuppoſe
that herein alſo I were deceiued, and that theris no ſuch ordinance of
chriſt as I affirme,heb, 12. 11, & that faſting & prayer is not a medicine appoynt
ed of god, & in mercy left to his church, for the healing of thos which
are poſſeſſed: yet ſeing we are commaunded to reſiſt the diuill, not only
his temptatiōs, but alſo his perſō. (for ſo did chriſt Ieſus our example.
auoide ſatan,
                  Iames 4▪ 7, math, 4, 10: 1 Peter. 5, 9. ſaith he) & ſo not only tempting, but alſo poſſeſſing:
& haue alſo a promis that we reſiſting, the diuill will or ſhall flee. ſeing
alſo (as Peter telleth vs) we muſt reſiſt ſtrong in the ſaith. for aſmuch as
the enimy is ſtrong,ephe, 1, 2
                        •
                     . euen a principality & power: & the way to ſtreng
thē & ſtabliſh our weake & wauering faith, is prayer & faſting: who
ſeeth not that ther was good & iuſt cauſe to take vp this ſaid holy ex
erciſe, & ſufficient in ſcripture to warrant the ſame? Indeed thes ſcrip
turs are directed to them that are ſet vpon by ſatan, but it that leteth
not but that others alſo in a fellow feelinge of their miſſeries, as being
members of the ſame body with them, might & ought by way of help
and aſſiſtance ioyne with them therin.

in the ſightinges we haue with our bodely enemies one brother wil be
ſure to fight with and for another, eſpecially if he ſee him ouermatch
ed, and in daunger to be hurte, and ſhall not brethren in Chriſte in
the ſpirituall ſight with the enemies of there ſoules and ſaluation do
as much in the like caſe? But be it further granted, not only that prayer
and faſting is no ſuch means as I affirme: but alſo that non of the
af
                     •
                  reſayd perſons were poſſeſſed. yet ther is notwithſtanding ſufficient
to iuſtifie the aduiſe I gaue, and the worke of our handes, becaus it is
euidente that they weare vexed by Satan, yf not with in them (as we
verely beleu and conſtantly affirme) yet by ſome externall operation
of his▪ or at leaſt weare otherwiſe afflicted, if not ſo, that the hande or
iudgmente of God (I ſaye) was one way or other vpon them, it cane
not be denied. Now when God ſendeth any iudgment therby he call
eth men,vers. 12. vers 14. and therin ſecretly commandeth them to faſt and praye as is
plaine by Iſa 22 and the 1 chap of Ioell pra
                     •
                  er alſo and faſtinge is the
only meanes to remoue the hand of god from of vs, if that ſhal ſeeme
good in the eies of the Lord,vers. 18. 19. 20. as apeareth by the 2 of Ioell, and by the
practiſe of the church in all ages, and the fruyt or ſucceſſe therof, for
the people of God in the daye of their affliction, contynually betoke
them ſelues therunto. and the ſame proſpered and preuailed mighteli
with God,Iudges. 20. 26. and 36. 1 ſamuell. 7. 6. 7. 10. 11. 2 chro. 20. 3. 15. 22. Ezi. 8. 23. Eſt. 3 13. &. 4. 3 16. and 5. 2. Ion. 3 4 5. 10. Neh. 1. 4. &. 2 6. as may appeare by the teſtimonies of ſcripture quoted in
the margente. Herupon it followeth that it was not only lawfnll for
the aforeſaied afflicted perſons, and vs alſo being requeſted and that
inſtantly in a ioynt-feling of their miſerie to take that courſe we did,
but alſo our bounden dewty (being eſpetially preſent with them) and
that wee coulde not but adviſe and doe as wee did if from the harte
we deſired their delyuerance from the ſaid iudgment of God. ſo that
this if ther wear nothinge els beſides, doth ſufficiently iuſtifie and wa
rant,Act. 12. 6. 7. 12. our councellinge of them to humble and caſt downe themſelues
before the Lord vnder his mighti hand, and to ſeeke reconciliation
and attonment with the almightie by prayer and faſtinge, who by this
ſtrange plague of his, did teſtifie to ther faces that he was angry with
them, and our ioyning with them in the ſaid exerciſe of humiliation.
               To conclude and inferr ſomthinge of the premiſes, and ſo to pro
cede to the 3 parte of this treatis. yf it be true not only that men in
theſe laſt dayes may be poſſeſſed with Deuills and dyſpoſſeſſed and
that praier and faſting be meanes appoynted by God, for the diſpoſſ
eſſing of them but alſo that the 7 in Lankaſheire and William Somers
with the other two viz. Darling & Katherin Wright were in deed poſſeſſed
and being ſo, diſpoſſeſſed by the finger of God: in that they wer
healed by the meanes which Chriſt Ieſus hath ſanctified to that end
as is made manefeſt by the pr
                     •
                  miſes▪ then iudge (good Chriſtian reader)

whether they in the generall doe not erre who hold that men can
not now be poſſeſſed: and thoſe alſo which grauntinge that: deny that
mē can now be diſpoſſeſſed. & whether they likwiſe be not faultie in
the particuler, which not only deny: but can not with any patience en
dur to heare of the poſſeſſion & diſpoſſeſſion of the perſons aforeſaid
& rather then that ſhalbe admitted, will by all means poſſible, contend
for a moſt vaine and impoſſible thing: I meane that Somers and Darling
and Kath, Wright were counterfeits, & I there Inſtructor: Therby
alſo intimating to all men, that the 7 in Lancaſhire were ſuch, & as
it were deſiring the world ſo to iudge of them. but yet they let them
alone, leaſt happely they ſhould, be ouerwhelmed by them, or rather
by the truth it ſelfe: well howſoeuer all men will not receiue this truth,
and acknowledging the worke of God, giue the Lorde the glorie and
prayſe which is due to him for the ſame, and endeuour to profitt and
make there right vſe of it, which is a thinge rather to be wiſhed, then
looked for: yet ſome few doe and wil for wiſdome ſhal be iuſtified of her
children.
               
               Heere followeth the thyrd Part.
            
            
               OF THFVSE THAT EVERY ONE IS TO
MAKE OF THESE WORKES OF GOD.
               Wee haue manifeſtly proued that theſe perſons we ſpeake of,
were poſſeſſed with deuils: and that they were diſpoſſeſſed
by prayer & faſting. Now leſt all this ſhould be to vs in vaine, (which
God forbid:) It remaineth that we conſider of the fruite, and profite
which we may and ought to make to our ſelues thereof. For as in the
ordinarie workes of God, yf we only looke and gaze vpon them with
out making any further vſe of the ſame, and doe not withall: behold
& conſider the inviſible things of God, as his power, wiſdom Iuſtice,
mercye, our beholding of them is in vaine to vs: and not onlye ſo, but
wee theirby alſo take the Lordes name in vaine:Roman
                        ••
                      1. 
                        〈◊〉
                     . even ſo ſhall it goe
with vs, yf in this extraordinarie worke of God, we looke onlye vpon
it, as ſome new and ſtrange thing, without any further proceeding
to profite theirby. Yea if we be bound by the lawe of God: to profite
and receiue good by euery ordinarie worke of the Lord, much more
by that which is extraordinarie: for an extraordinarie worke calleth
for an extraordinarie vſe, and it is adouble ſinne to faile therein.

The vſe we are to make of this extraordinarie worke either concern
                     •
                  th
the glorie of God and the ſtirring of vs vp to magnifie his great
name, or the benefit of man, and good he may receiue thereby
Firſt herein as in a glaſſe wee may beholde the iuſtice of god in pu
nniſhing or correctinge ſinne,This work 
                        〈◊〉
                      the glory of God and 
                        〈…〉
                      of the ſame for 
                        〈…〉
                      are to be 
                        〈◊〉
                      the 
                        〈◊〉
                      of God. wherby the Lorde teacheth vs to take
heed of ſinninge againſt him, leaſt either the ſame or a worſe thinge
come vnto vs.
               Secondly we ſee the omnipotencie and power of God 1 in the powere
and ſtrength of the deuil which God permitteth him to exerciſe a ga
inſt ſinners 2 in ſubduing thoſe principalities and powers Satan I mea
ne,the power of God. treading him vnder his feet: yea vnder the feet of his ſeruants. who
then that is wiſe, will ſerue the Lord in feare and trembling.
               Thirdly▪ the mercye of God is to be ſeene in this worke in deliuering
them,the mercy of God, and that at the humble intreatie of others in there behalfe,
they being diſabled by ſatan to ſupplicate for themſelues. This being
well conſidred magniſieth greatly the mercie and compaſſion of the
Lorde. vvho can chuſe but loue him becauſe of his mercies? and why
ſhould any diſpaire of his mercie ſeinge he is ſo ready to ſhew mercie
euen at the intreatie of others. How much more when man ſhall ſup
plycatt for himſelfe. This vſe Chriſt Ieſus him ſelfe maketh in ſaying
to the man whom he had diſpoſſeſſed:marke 3. 29, 
                  goe ſhew how the Lorde hath had
compaſſion on thee.
               
               Fourthly,the wiſdome, & immutabil
                        •
                     tie of God, acts 4. 13, 1 cor 1: 27: wee maye here beholde the wiſdom & immutabilite of God
as being the ſame who neuer changeth: In that (as he hath bene allwa
yes accuſtomed to doe) he brought this rare & great worke to paſſe
by ſmalle and weake meanes, baſe and contemptible men, yea ſuch as
be vile and odious in the eyes of the world. That thereby the power
of God might be the better ſeene: man in his wiſdom be confounded
and the name of God the better prayſed: In a word that he which re
ioyceth in the behalfe of this worke,the fidelitie of God, marke, 9, 29, might not reiovce in man but in
the Lord. To him therfore to whom of right it belongeth, be the
prayſe and glory of this worke aſcribed.
               Fiftly, The ſaitthfulneſſ of God in the performance of his promyſe
offereth it ſelfe here to our conſideration. Theſe wordes this kind goeth
not out, but by praier & faſting: ſecretly containe in them this promiſe,
that if any be poſſ
                     •
                  ſſed & we in the humiliti of our ſouls by faſt
ing, will intreate the Lord to caſt the ſperit out, he will doe it for vs
and deliuer the partie from beinge any further vexed by Satan, This
the Lord hath promiſed, the accompliſhmente wherof we haue ſeene
with our eies let vs▪ herby learne to truſt to the leaſt and moſt cloſe &
ſecret promiſe God 
                     •
                  ath made vs in his worde: and ſave in our harts,
and with our toungs: God is not as man that he ſhould lye & be vnfaithfull:

                  neither as the ſonne of man that he ſhould repent, and not performe
that he hath promiſed.Nomb. 23. 19. Rom 3, 3. 4. 
                  Hath he ſaid and ſhall he not doe it? and hath he
ſp
                        •
                     ken, and ſhall he not accompliſh it? Hath he promiſed and will he not
performe it? And thus much breifly concerning the glory of God de
cleared in this worke now followe the ſeuerall vſes concerning man,
and the profite he otherwiſe is to make hereof.1 It ſerueth to com
                        ••
                     ince the papiſts, touchinge of the power they only hau in there church to caſt forth de
                     
                        •
                     les.
               
               Firſt, this great and wonderfull worke of the lord ſerueth to conuince
and ſtope the mouthes of the papiſtes, who as they are alwayes boaſtinge
of their miracles, and vpbraiding vs with the ſame: ſo eſpetially with
this miracle of theirs, (as they terme it) of caſting out of diuils whervpon
it hath come to paſſe, that ſome of this bragging generation in
Staffordſhire in the time of Th. Darlinge his poſſeſſion, as alſo in Lanca
ſhire in the time of the poſſeſſion of thoſe 7. there, haue broken forth
into theſe and ſuch like wordes of challenge: Let vs ſee one of your miniſters
caſt out theſe diuils: If we might bring a preiſt, wee are ſure he could
doe it.
               
               And in a booke latelye written by one of their ſide, wherin ſome of there
exorciſts and preiſts pretend to haue diſpoſſeſſed 3. here in England, I read
theſe wordes: Now (ſaith the authour) let me ſee wether they proteſtants
can avouch any ſuch thing to be done in their congregations. And in another
place thus: they proteſtants haue ſmale meanes to make triall, whether
ther be any poſſeſſed among them or no: leſſe iudgment to diſcerne ther caſe,
and much leſſe remidie (yf any ſuch be found) other then to bind, beate, &
ſend them to Bedlem if the be poore,vpon mathew 17, 19. or to begg their liuings if they haue any.
And in theire annotationes of the Rhomes teſtament, vpon theſe
words of they diſciples to Chriſt, why could not wee caſt him out? they
gyue this note. Noe mareuill yf they exorciſtes of the Catholicke Church
which haue power to caſt out Deuiles, yet doe it not allwayes when they
will, and many times with much adoe: wheras they Apoſtles hauing receiu
ed this power before ouer vncleane ſpirites, yet here could not caſt them out.
But as for heritickes they can neuer doe it, nor any true myracle, to confirme
their falſe faith.
               Thus wee ſee they doe not only deny that Deuilles are ſo vſuallye
caſt out by vs, as it is with them: but which is more, moſt peremptorilye
they affirme, that wee (whom they terme heritickes) can
neuer doe it, ſpetiallye to confirme our falſe faith.
               To paſſe by the diſpoſſeſſiones of others: even of late veares, which
might fitly be here obiected againſt them: what ſay they to the 
                     〈◊〉
                  
ſſeſſion of Kath. Wright, of Tho, Darling, & finally of they other 
                     〈◊〉
                   perſons
wee haue ſo largly intreated off? That they were all 
                     〈…〉
                  
vncleane ſpirits, and that the ſame were caſt out of them, I 
                     〈…〉
                  
                  
die bene ſo evedentlye ſheewed and confirmed: by reaſon out of the
ſcriptures, that neither papiſt, nor athiſt, can without bluſhing gaynſay
the ſame. And that thoſe whom they call heritickes, were the inſtruments
the Lord vſed therin, it is alſo moſt manifeſt. How then ſay
they Rhemiſts, that heretickes can neuer caſt out diuils. But (to examine
the truth of this their annotation a li
                     •
                  tle further) be that granted which
they papiſtes ſo much contend for, viz. That their Exorciſts only haue
power to driue out diuils, & that we are to weake thervnto: yet why
doe they challenge an equall power herein with the Apoſtles, as is
plaine by this their gloſſe,Thyr. de Doem. 
                        ••
                     p. 33. ſect. 5 if it be well conſidered of? yet leaſt I ſhould
be thought to
                     •
                   miſtake or ſlaunder them, I will ſet downe Thyreus his
wordes concerning this poynt. Speaking of the power to caſt out diuils
which was giue by Chriſt, & to whom it was giuen, he ſaith thus:
Docent ſacrae literae omnibus fidelibus to. the holy ſcriptures teach, that
the power ouer vnclean ſpirits was comunicated to al bel
                        •
                     uers but yet cheif
ly to the Apoſtls and diſciples of chriſt,
                  
                     
                        •
                     ct. 8. Mark. 16. 17. 
                  and a litle after he adeth. this power
which was geuen to the Apoſtles died not with the Apoſtles but rema
                        •
                     ned
in the ages followinge, for it doth not appertaine to the Apoſtles onely, that
which is ſayd. theſe ſigns ſhal followe them which beleue. in my name they
ſhall caſt out diuills,
                  ſect. 10. cap. 35. ſect. 4. 
                  this ſpeache of Chriſt comprehendeth all beleuers, this
authoritie giuen by Chriſt ſhal continue ſo longe as ther ſhae be any which
profeſſe the faith of Chriſt. and againe in the ende of the ſame chapiter he
hath theſe wordes in our times alſo in tie church of Chriſt amouge the Cath

                        •
                     licks this power is, & the very ſame which at the firſt was giuen by chriſt
to his diſciples and cotinued in the ages followinge. And not much after he
ſaith: But Chriſts power ouer vncleane ſpitits, although in the beginning it
was communicated cheifly to the Apoſtles, yet notwithſtanding wholly to
all beleeuers: and ſuch only are they, if you will beleeue them.
               Truly it was not poſſible for them thus palpably to erre, yf the
god of this world had not blinded their eyes. They ſay, that in theire
church only, theris power to caſt forth diuils, and out of it non, which
if no other way, yet by experience is knowne to be falfe. But to lett
this paſſe, what can be more falſe and abſurd then that which this Ieſuiticall
Doctor addeth, that they haue the ſame power and authoritie ouer
wicked ſpirits that the Apoſtles had, that the ſame is committed and giuen
to them now by Chriſt, which ſomtimes he gaue to they Apoſtles? we haue
alreadie hard out of the holy ſcriptures, that Chriſt did giue and com
mit vnto his Apoſtls, ſuch authoritie ouer all diuils, as by vertue ther
of they no ſooner ſpake,
                     
                        •
                     , 19, 12. but they ſpirits went out of men: they noe
ſooner commaunded, but forthwith they departed: yea ſomtimes be
fore and without ſo much as their commaund, as by the kerchiſes and
handkercheifes: which were caried from Paules body.
               
               
                  
yf now the papiſts or there Exorciſts haue the ſame authoritie ouer
vndeane ſpirits with the Apoſtles how cometh it to paſſe that hauing
among them ſome daylie poſſeſſed: they ſhew not forth the ſame
power, and with a word cauſe the ſpirits immediatly to goe out: and
that the deuils are no more ſubdued vnto them? they commaund the
wicked ſpirits inde
                     •
                  d being in men to goe forth of them as the apoſtles
did, & therein take a litle too much vpon them: but they all of them
eyther doe or maye know that the deuil goeth out at his beſt leaſure
And hereof as they haue experience daylie among themſelues, ſo the
ſame was lately ſeene in ſome of there diſpoſſeſſiōs in England: as may
appear by the ſame booke lately written by a great clarke of their fact
ion and copied out by one M. Rober: Barens now priſoner in the Kings
Bench, for notwithſtanding there was one of there Ezor
                        •
                     iſtes buſied about
that worthy worke,the exorciſts conten
                        •
                     ed themſelues with theſe names as if without all doubt they we
                        •
                      ſo cal'ed iudce
                        •
                      and no maruil
                        •
                      they beinge of this mind as it ſ
                        •
                     ould 
                        〈◊〉
                     , that the p
                        •
                     rite
                        •
                      being 
                        〈◊〉
                      da
                        •
                     e 
                        •
                     ot he to them yf this 
                        〈◊〉
                      of ther
                        •
                      which is ſo carfully written from hand to hand were in the handes of all men I am perſwaded that nothing which the will of man could deuiſe, would make their exorciſing of ſpirits redicus lous & odious as it would. and to aſſiſt him 3 preiſts: and that they did
not onlye adiure and commaund the ſpirites in the name of Ieſus
as the Apoſtles alſo did (and namely amonge many other thinges) to
tell them how longe they had bene in the partie which was in one of
them, iuſt two
                        •
                      yeares, and how many there were of them which were
in the ſame perſon, iuſt two thouſand: likwiſe what were their names,
which were Hoberdi-Dance, Luſti Iolly-Ionkin, Luſti-Dicke, &
                        •
                     t. luſtie
companions I warant you euerye one, the like wherto wee read not
of the Apoſtles: but had beſids their ſacrifice of maſſe, their B. Sacra
ment of the aulter, with many other things applyed to they poſſeſſed
parties, giuyng them hallowed bread, drincke, ſiguinge them with the
ſigne of the croſſe, applyinge holy relickes, as the b
                     •
                  nes of S. Brian, S.
Campian, putting one the partie poſſeſſed holye garments (all which
are according to Thyr
                        •
                     us his direction) with more of this kind, which
they Apoſtles neuer vſed: yet notwithſtandinge all theſe helpes aboue
the Apoſtles, and their equall authoritie to theres, they commaunding
from day today, & from time to time, 
                     •
                  very ſtubbornly the diuil
diſobeyed them and their authoritie, and went out (happelie) at his
owne leaſure caryinge himſelfe in the meane ſeaſon very ſaucilie towards
them, beingmen of ſuch authoritie telling them that they were
traitors, &ct. as appeareth by their ſaid ſtorie.
               And leſt any ſhould take exception againſt the diſpoſſeſſion I
ſpeake of, we muſt knowe that by all their bookes written of this Argument,
and namlye Mengus his fuga Doemonum it doth plainlye appeare,
that vſually they are a day or rather daies,Mengur exorcizing, adiurige
charming, againe and againe, and performinge the worthy rites and
Ceremonies (wherof we ſhall by and by heare) before the deuill will
be pleaſed to g
                     •
                  e out. Yea this no papiſt, who herein vnderſtandeth
any thinge, can or will deny. which beinge ſo, it ſhould even hereby

ſeeme that they haue no ſuch authorytie ouer ſpirits as the Apoſtles
had, and that the Deuils are not in any ſuch ſubiection vnto them, as
they were to the Apoſtles. Agayne, yf they haue, eaudem illam poteſtatem,
the very ſame power ouer deuills which was by Chriſt giuen to his diſ
ciples, as they affirme wherby they worke this miracle dayly. how cometh
it to paſſe that they doe not ordinarilie (for extraordina
                     •
                  ilie as
they ſay ſo it may be they doe in their lyinge wonders, wrought by
the effectual workinge of Satan) as well worke other miracles as that▪
reſtore ſight to the blind: ſpeach to the dumb, heale the ſick and raiſe
vp the deade? For theſe were ioyned together in the ſame commiſſion,
as is expreſlye noted by 3 Euangeliſtes Ieſus (it is ſayd) called his
twelue diſciples vnto him,
                  2 theſſ▪ 2. 9, 
                  and gaue them power againſt vncleane ſpirites to
caſt them out,
                  m
                        •
                     th 10. 1. 8. mark 3. 15. 
                        •
                     uk. 9, 1▪
                   
                  and to heale euery ſickneſſe and euery diſeaſe. And againe
a litle after he ſaith vnto them: heale the ſicke, clens the leapers, raiſe vp the
dead, caſt out the deuils. wherby it appeareth that Chriſt hath coupled
and inſeperably ioyned theſe thinges together. ſo as whoſoeuer ſhall
haue the ſame power with the Apoſtles to caſt out deuils, that is with
a worde, ſhall alſo haue power with a worde to heale diſeaſes and raiſ
vp the dead. yea who can be ſo deuoide of reaſon as to doubt thereof
if withal he remember, that to caſt out deuils is of miracles the greateſt:
as appeareth by that ſpeach of the 70 Diſciples, Lorde, euen the De
uills are ſubdued vnto vs through thy name.
                  Luk. 10. 17. as if they had ſaide Lord by
vertue of that power which thou haſt giuen vs, wee haue not onlye
healed the ſicke made the blinde to ſee, raiſed vp the deade, and done
other great workes. but that alſo which is aboue and ſurpaſſeth them
all: wee haue caſt the Deuills out of men whereby we ſee that they are
ſubiect vnto vs. This conſydered, who ſeeth not, that foraſmuch as ne
ther their exorciſts, preiſts nor any other in the popiſh church, haue
the ſame power with the Apoſtles, by their anoyntinge to make the
ſicke whole, to make the halt to goe, the blinde to ſee, the deafe to heare
the dumbe to ſpeake to raiſe vp they dead &c, that therfore alſo
they haue not the ſame power, with them to caſt out Deuils.
               And where the Ieſuite▪
                   affirmeth that, al beleuers haue the ſame power
ouer wicked ſpirits with the Apoſtles, yf it be ſo: why doe not euery one
of ther beleuers exerciſ that power whē occaſiō: is offred, but only ther exor
ciſtes agayn,1 cor, 12, 29, were this ſo, all the faithful ſhold haue power alſo to work
othere miracls, as appeareth by the premiſes. Now I thinke Thyreus
will not ſaye,de Doemo, cap 33. ſect. 5. that euery beleuer hath power to worke miracles, conſidering
that of S Paule are all doers of miracle? haue all the giftes of heal
inge? The which if he graunt, then muſt he lykwiſe confeſſe, that all
beleeuers haue not the ſame power to caſt out deuills with the Apoſtles.
But ſaith he, ſacrae litera docent omnibus fidelibus t
                        •
                     . the holy ſcrip
                  
turs teach this, for it is written: Signa eos qui crediderint, haec ſequen
tur ct. theſe ſignes ſhal follow them which beleue, in my name they ſhall
caſt outdeuils. If this ſcripture comprehend al beleuers. and the power
here giuen ſhal continve, as long as there ſhal be any to profeſſe the faith of
chriſt as the Ieſuit affirmeth: then ſhall euery beleuer haue likwiſe the
gifte of tongues, and be able without ſtudie to vnderſtand & ſpeake
any language,marke 16. 17. and power alſo to worke miracles: for it is not only ſaid
of theſe beleuers, that in Chriſtes name they ſhal caſt out Deuills: but beſides,
that they ſhal ſpeake with newe tongus, and ſhal take away ſerpents
and if they ſhal drincke any deadly thinge, it ſhal not hurt them▪ they ſhall
laye there handes on the ſicke, and they ſhall recouer: but this latter is falſe
as the Ieſuit himſelfe muſt needs confeſſe, and is euidentalſo by the a
foreſaid place of ſcripture (doe al ſpeake with tongus?) and therfore the
firſt alſo. wee are not then to take thoſe wordes, them that beleue ſo ge
nerally: and to vnderſtand therby al them which haue fayth in Chriſt
as this Doctor doth, but more ſtrightly of thoſe only which were indewed
with the miraculous faith: which gift & number of beleuers cō
tinued in the church but for a time, vntill the goſpell and doctrine of
Chriſt crucified,act. 17. 18, 19 20. 32: 1 cor. 1, 23, which was to the Gentils both a new and fooliſh doctrine,
had got among them intertainment.
               But to returne to the Rhemiſts former gloſſe. It is there to be obſer
ued alſo, that they accounte there caſtinge forth of deuills for a miracle.
and why ſo I praye you, ſeeinge by their own confeſſion their Ex
                     
                        •
                     rciſts
caſt them out by the meane of faſting & praier,eyther in the ſame page, or in theire annotations vpon marke 9. beſides ſundrie
toyes & fooleries of their own coyning they add therunto. Are you
that ſtand ſo much vpon your miracles, building as it were your faith
and religion thereon, ignorante herein: that it is no miracle, be the
worke neuer ſo wonderfull, which is done by an ordinarie meanes ap
pointed of God therto? If hetherto you haue bene ignorant hereof,
diſdaine not to learne it nowe at the length, out of that hath bene ſaid
before in this behalfe
               Yf it ſhould be granted, that to diſpoſſeſſe deuills by the meanes
of praier and faſtinge is a miracle: and that you only haue power as
to worke other miracles, ſo to caſt forth deuils: yet why affirme you
ſo confidently, that hereticks can neuer doe any miracle (you meane I
am ſure ſuch as yours are) to confirme there falſe faith? is it not plain by
the 13 of Deut. that falſe Prophets may and ſhal worke miracles, and
that to the ende to bringe men from the true worſhipe of God to Idolatrie,
and therfore to confirme there falſe faith and religion? If there
ariſe among you (ſaith Moſes) a Prophet or a dreamer of dreams, and giue
thee a ſigne or wonder 2 and the ſign and the wonder which he hath told
thee com to paſſe, ſaing, let vs go after other Gods, which thou haſt not know

on & let vs ſerue them: 3 thou ſhalt not harken vnto the wordes of the Prophet
but that prophet or that dremer of dreams ſhalbe ſlaine, becauſe he
hath ſpoken (and giuen his ſignes and wonders) to turne you awaye from
the Lord your God, to thruſt thee out of the way, wherin the Lord thy God
commannded thee to walke. And Chriſt doth foretell vs, that before
his comming to iudgment, their ſhal ariſe falſe Chriſts, & falſe prophets
and ſhal ſhew ſignes and wonders,
                  marke, 13. 22. math, 7. 22, math, 24, 27, or as Mathew ſaith great ſigns & wonders.
And that they ſhould worke theſe miracles to cofirme ther falſe &
antichrſtian ſaith appeareth by the wordes following. to deceiue (ſaith
Chriſt) yf it were poſſible the very elect. As it he had ſaid: great miracles
ſhal falſe Chriſts and falſe prophets worke before the laſt day that ſo
they maye confirme their falſe and antichriſtian doctrine and make
ſemblance that they are true & of God, therby to perſwad men to be
leue the ſame, & ſo deceiue them, euen the very electe if it could be.
Yea in the 2 epiſtle to the Theſſaloniās it is ſett downe for a marke to
knowe & diſcerne Antichriſt by that his comminge is with all power,chap, 2, 
                        •
                     .
and ſignes and lying wonders: and that this he ſhould doe to confirme
his falſe faith appeareth by the wordes followinge. where it is ſayde
that he ſhould doe theſe miracles in al deceiuablenes of vnrighteouſnes:
and againe God ſhal ſend them ſtrong deluſions that they ſhould beleue lies
that is, lying & falſe doctrine. the very ſame with this we reade in the
13 of the reuel, where the beaſt which came out of the earth meaninge
antichriſt is ſaid to do great wonders ſo that he made fier to come downe
from heauen on the earth in the ſight of men & deceiued them that dwel
on the earth by the ſigns which were permitted him to doe. How then ſay

                     •
                  he Romaniſts and with what truth that hereticks to confirme their falſe
faith can neuer doe any miracle? that falſe prophets & falſe Chriſts are
heriticks, that I knowe you wil not denye: that Moſes in the law, and
Chriſt in the goſpell ſpeaketh of ſuch true miracles as you doe, & ſuch
it is cleare, you by theſe wordes meane, it is moſt ſure.
               And here by the waye what cauſe hath the church of Rome thus
to vaunt of the miracles wrought in her aledging the ſame as a migh
tie confirmation of the truth of her doctrine and ſome ſinguler priui
ledge beſtowed vpon her? ſurelv no more then the roge hath cauſe to
bragg of the hole in his eare, or the theife of his burnt hande. For as
theſe be certaine and infallible ſignes of a rogue and thefe: ſo miracles
wrought by ſatan and ſuch are the papiſts miracles) are a moſt certame
and infallible marke of the aduerſarie to Chriſt, whom wee call
Antichriſt. As he then is rather out of his witts, thē in his right mind,
that beinge for his theft burnt in the hande, will boaſt therof: ſo had
not Sathan bewytched that whore of Rome, and depriued her of her
iudgmente and vnderſtandinge, ſhee woulde neuer boaſt of her miracles:

conſidering they make much againſt her: euen to wytneſe that
their Pope is that Antichriſt which ſhoulde come, and their religion
falſe and Antichriſtian.Rhem. teſt, vpon marke. 9▪ 38. And where you intimate here, and els where
affirme, that howſoeuer hereticks may happely be able, to worke mira
cles to ſome other ende as to confirme ſome article of the faith, or truth
of God wherin they agree with you: yet not to confirme their falſe faith
therby, that you ſee will not availe you: conſideringe that the former
teſtimonies of ſcripture, directlye in expreſſe wordes (as wee haue
heard) affirme and teach the contrarye.
               Howſoeuer then heritickes can not proue their falſe and erronious
doctrines by the ſcriptures, yet they may worke miracles to confirme
the ſame. wherby it is euident, that whileſt they papiſtes ſtand
and contend for the priuiledg of diſpoſſeſſing of vncleane ſpirits, the
which they arrogate to themſelues as pecularly belonging vnto them,
and denye to all others: they ſhewe themſelues in the meane ſeaſon
to be poſſeſſed with a foule ſpirit of error.
               And how ſoeuer Thyerus hath likwiſe this aforſaide addition ſaying,
nunquam ab hominum corporibus 
                     •
                  t. heriticks ſhall neuer be able to
expell diuils out of the bodies of men, whenſoeuer and as often as euer they
ſhall aſſay it, to confirme their doctrine which they profeſſe: yet by the, argument
he preſently addeth, he ſeemeth to proue the generall without
any ſuch reſtraint.Thyreus de Doe mon. cap, 40, ſect. 4. For firſt ſaith he, Signa cos, qui crediderint ct.
Theſe ſigns ſhall followe them which beleue: In my name they ſhall
caſt out diuiles. But heriticks are not in the number of beleuers therfore
they are not able to driue awaye deuills, by any power of Chriſt
communicated vnto them. a ſecond argument is, we neuer read them
to haue expelled deuils. And a third is, It is reported in hiſtories that
they haue often bene deluded when they haue gone about to caſte
out deuills. wherby it is cleare that they denye to vs, all expulſion of
deuils to what end ſoeuer and meane that if at any time in our church
ſpirites be caſt out of ſome, it is by the power of Sathan: as appeareth
in the end of the ſaide chapter.
               Theſe thinges well conſidered, who ſeeth not that they mighttilye
freind the papiſtes, and ſtrengthen them in this groſſe error and
brage of theirs, which contend for the counterfeitinge of Somers, Dar
ling, K. Wright, & confidently deny the 7. in Lancaſhire, to haue bene
eyther diſpoſſeſt, or yet poſſeſt with deuils? doe not ſuch doe them
as great apleaſure theirin as poſible men can?de Doemon, cap 40. ſect. 6, and giue them occaſion
to ſport themſelues about our diſpoſſeſſion of deuils, as Thyreus doth
full ſwetly concerning Luthers dipoſſeſſing? may not they with ſome
face of honeſtie and truth, publiſhe in their writings, that our former
poſſeſſed perſons did meerlie counterfeite apoſſeſſion, and were not

poſſeſſed, much leſſe diſpoſſeſſed? ſeeing the ſame is openlye mayntained
amonge Vs, euen in our Courts, and that by great Prelats, one
of the perſones poſſeſſed (I meane Th. Darling) impr
                     ••
                  oned, and ſuch
as god vſed in the diſpoſſeſſing of them, ſuſpended, impriſoned along
time, theere alſo vſed more ſtrightlye then other pri
                     •
                  oners: then felons,
murtherers, trators in a worde ſo handled and dealt with as no
table deceiuers and malefactors. wheras on the other ſide, had wee
acknowledged this worke of God wrought diuers times, and vpon
ſundrie perſons amonge vs, and laboured withall to haue manifeſted
the truth therof, inſteade of obſcuring it, as in deutye we ought. then
would vndoubtedlie the papiſtes haue herein bene aſhamed and confounded
in themſelues, for the greate vauntes and arrogant bragges
they haue here about in many o
                     •
                   their books, giuen out & ſcatte
                     •
                  ed.
               But ſeeinge the Romaniſts glory ſo much in the diſpoſſeſſing of
deuils, let us a litle examine the ſame, and ſee whether it be altogether
with them, as they beare the world in hand it is. wher they muſt firſt
knowe that it is not denied or doubted off by vs, but graunted, that
by their exorciſts & exorciſing the poſſeſſed, among them haue eaſe
and deliuerance from the evill ſpirits formerlie vexing and poſſeſſing
them: but the doubt and queſtion is, whether the caſt and driue out
Sathan. For my owne parte I will not denye, but that a true deliuerance
of the poſſeſſed may in the papacie. For whē I conſider that
poſſeſſion with Deuiles is a temporall Iudgment, And that the humiliation
of Ahab an Idolater,1 king. 21, 29. a man alſo that had ſould himſelfe to
worke wickednes, preuailed ſo farr with the Lord, to ſpare him and his
ſonne concerninge the temporall Iudgment, which the Lord had be
fore threatned and pronounced by his prophet to bringe vpon him
and his poſteriſtie: I cannot ſee why the like humiliation performed
by a papiſtes an Idolater, may not obtaine the like, I meane a corporall
bleſſinge of the Lord, or the remouing of a temporall Iudgment.
Yet notwithſtanding, when on the other ſide I turne my eve to the
meanes they vſe, I cannot but thinke, that when their poſſeſſed are
helped, they ſpirites are not caſt out, but of themſelues goe forth, as
ſeruinge greatly for their owne advantage, and vpholdinge of there
kingdome of darknes amongſt them. But what are the meanes they
vſe in the diſpoſſeſſinge of euill ſpirites? even theſe as appeareth by
Thyreus.
                  Thyreus de Doe mon. cap, 41. 42 Firſt, the Inu
                        •
                     cation of the name of Ieſus: wherby he doth not
meaine Inuocation or pra
                     •
                  er, but the often mentioninge of the name
Chriſt, ſpecially Ieſus. which bare name is greuious to the diuil, and hath
great power in it ſaith he. 2. the vſe of holy r
                        •
                     licks. 3. vſing the ſigne of the
croſſe. 4. the vſe of conſecrat things, as holy water, hallowed ſalt, bread,
drinke ct. 5. exorciſmes. Now how can one imagine that theſe or any of

them ſhould be of force to expell Sathan, ſeeinge they are not onlye
ſuch as weare not appoynted of God theirvnto, but alſo in his worde
condemned, as offenſiue to his maieſtie, and vnlawfull at all to be vſed,
and are beſides in themſelues moſt vaine, and ſuch as in the vſinge
wherof the deuill cannot but take pleaſure, As touchinge the 4. Firſt
meaines here ſpecified, I doubt not but that all men of found Iudgment
will with one conſent and voice ſaye with me, that they cannot
poſſible be effectuall to driue out Sathan, howſoeuer they may (peraduenture)
ſerue to intiſe him out. The queſtion then is of the Fyſte,
their exorciſmes, which is alſo the cheife, & that which they moſt truſt
vnto, and relye vpon.
               To paſſe by the vnlawfulnes of their adiuringe the ſpirits, in that
they haue no ſuch giufte nor authoritie ouer vncleane ſpirites giuen
them, as the Apoſtles had, (from whom they fetch it,) as hath bene
ſhewed, and alſo the vnlawfulnes of the continual ſpeach or communication
which with the diuils they haue when they exorcize: contrarie
to the practiſe of the * holy Apoſtle,act. 16, 18. marke, 1. 25. Luk. 4. 35, 41. yea of Chriſt Ieſus himſelfe, who
when the diuill ſpeake, bad him * hold his peace, and com out of him. To
paſſe by theſe I ſay, and not to alledg them aginſt their exorcizinge:
I affirme that there exorciſmes are ſo palpable impious, vaine, fooliſh,
and ridiculous, that it cannot be imagined that theirby, the diuils are,
or cannot be compelled to goe out of men. And that euerye on may
be the better aſſured hereof, I will ſett downe the titles of ſundrie of
their adiurations in there Exorciſmes, euery of which conteineth the
ſumme or effect of the whole adiuration following and therfore muſt
nedes be ſutable to theſe, yea nothing but the ſame ſet downe at large
and in more wordes.Mengus fug
                        •
                      Do
                        •
                     monum 103. etc.
               
               Hic Exorciſta ponat manum ſacram ſuper caput vexati, ect.
               Hic aſpergatur aqua benedicta ſuper obſeſſum. etc.
               Here let the exorciſt lay his holy hand of the head of the poſſſſeed, and when
he hath tied the stole to the necke of the poſſeſſed with 3. knottes ſay, etc.
               Here let holy water be ſprinkled vpon the poſſeſſed.
               Here let him ſay certaine goſpelles, with his handes vpon the head of the
poſſeſſed.
               Here let the exorciſt commaund the diuils, that with their knees bowed, &
head, they worſhipe the holy trinitie, thrice, ſmiting the footſtoole or ground
with their head, without hurting the poſſeſſed. which beinge done, let him
begine to adiure them. And wherſoeuer in the exorciſmes he ſhall find the
ſigne of the croſſe he muſt alwayes ſigne the poſſeſſd in the forhead.
               Here let him aſke their proper names, ct. yf he will nor anſwere, or refuſe to
obay, let the exorciſt with very ſharpe wordes, commaund
                     •
                  ments, and adiurations
iterated, require obedience: threatninge to thruſt him downe into

hell, preſently vpon his goeing forth of the body.
               Here muſt the exorciſt anger the diuils as much as he can with reproches,
iniuries, all which with greife the indure.
               Here let the Exor. compell the diuils to goe out, but if they will not obay, let
him write their names, and their fellowes in alike ſcroule of paper, & burne
them in fier that is bleſſed, For theſe things are very greuous vnto them: becauſe
the are to their ſhame, and to put them in mind of hell fier.
               Here yf the ſpirit will not obay, take fier & brimſtone being both bleſſed &
halowed, and cauſe the poſſeſſed will he, nil he, to beheld in the ſmoake ouer
the ſaid fire & brimſtonc vntil he tell you the truth in all things which
are nedfull for the deliuerance of the poſſeſſed.
               Here let the Exor. goe about to knowe their names, and the properties of the
diuils which are in the body poſſeſſed.
               Here why or for what cauſe they doe not depart.
               Here demaund for what cauſe the did enter in.
               Here if they will not goeout, put rue into the noſtrels of the poſſeſſed.
               Here let the Exor. indeuour to get out the truth from the diuill poſſeſſing,
as well by an oath, as by ſeuere threats.
               Here let the Exor. learne of them, with what words they are moſt tormented,
that ſo he may the better knowe to apply fit remedies againſt them.
               Here let the Exor aſke the proper names of the diuils. yf ſo be that he can
not know them, let him giue them ſcornfull names, which are moſt greuous
to the diuils.
               Here mocke them with reuilinges,
                     
                        •
                     hey wil ſmoak 
                        •
                     he deuill forth, 
                        •
                     ut they will 
                        •
                     aue him out. Iniuries, and the remembrance of thire
ſaluation.
               Here demaund how the diuils may thence be expelled by the power of God.
and if they will not tell the truth, make a * ſmoake of ſtinking thinges.
               Here let him put ſalt into water in the forme of a croſſe, ſayinge.
               He that thinketh that by the aforeſaid rites and ceremonies ſatan
can be expelled: as by burning thir names in hallowed fier, by houlding
the poſſeſſed in the ſmok ouer fyer and brimſton b
                        •
                     ing bleſſed & the reſt
of thoſe we haue hearde, and ſuch others. He I ſay that thus thinketh
and is ſo ignorante and ſottiſhe or brutiſh in his vnderſtandinge, lett
him be ſo ſtill,
                     
                        •
                     e 2. vſe teach
                     
                        •
                     h vs, how wee 
                        •
                     ay know yf 
                        〈◊〉
                      be poſſeſſed. neither will any thinge auaile with him. and to the reſt
who ſee the vnſpeakable follye and vanitie of them, it is needleſſe to
ſay any thinge more. I will therfore leaue the Papiſts, and proceed to
ſome other vſe.
               For a ſeconde vſe, we haue here to informe our iudgment in the diſcerning
of the poſſeſſed If we deſier to knowe whether ſuch a on whom
we ſuſpecte to be poſſeſſed, be ſo or not: we haue before in the reporte
and handlinge of this worke, to ſatſfie vs therin. For giue me a man of
whoſe poſſeſſion you doubt, and if it be ſo with him that he is greuoſly

vexed, and often times and that on the ſudden, by fits, or at certain
times, and yet not hurt therby, thoughe he offer much violence vnto
himſelfe: and doe that which in reaſon and nature ſhould greatly hurt
him, but is as wel preſently after as before the fitt: ſpeaking in his ſaid
fytts (yf he vſe any ſpeache at all) he knoweth not what, nor can after
wards cal to minde, and vtteringe ſome times ſuch ſpeaches as ſauour
not of the ſpirit of man, but excellently ſute and agre with the nature
of a wicked ſpirite: who gnaſheth alſo ſometimes with his teeth, walloweth,
fometh, is oft caſt into fier, and water: and ſheweth in ſome of
his fits extraordinarie and ſupernatural ſtrength, and knowledg: then
in ſuch caſe you haue not ſo much man, as the ſcriptur & God him ſelf
who can not deceiue you, reſoluinge your doubte, and pronouncinge
him poſſeſſed with an vnclean ſpirit. But if it go not thus for the moſt
parte (though not altogether) with your ſuſpected partie, then iudge
you otherwiſe, and free him of the ſuſpition therof.
               Beſids if the parttie be troubled with ſtrange ſightes and viſions,
yf in his fits he haue in his belly very ſtrange and ſupernaturall ſwellings▪
yfſom times his armes and legs be as ſtiffe, inflexible & heauie
as iron. his body as heauie as ſo much leade: his mouth drawen awrye
to his eareth is tounge thruſt ſtrangly out: or retorted backward ſpeakinge
ſo, or at leaſt without that inſtrument of ſpeache or lippes, with
his mouth wide open. yf his eyes ſtare fearefully his face ſett behinde
his bones thruſt out and into their proper ioynts: yf he be depriued
of his ſences, now ſeinge now blynde. now hearinge nowe deaſe: yf he
be ordinary in his fits without feeling: alſo ſom times ſpeachleſſe ſom
times likewiſe eating and drinkinge vnſatiably, at other times takinge
no foode at all for certaine da
                     •
                  es together, and yf other ſuch ſtrange
accidents beſides and againſt nature fall out, wherof we haue heard
at large. Then foraſmuch as in experience theſe thinges haue bene
ſeene in thoſe which were poſſeſſed, you may therby be further confirmed
in his poſſeſſion.the 3. vſe to inſtructe vs, concerninge the meanes of diſpoſſeſſion.
               
               Thirdly out of the premiſes, we are to learne what to do in caſe we
ſeon poſſeſſed what counſell & aduiſe to giue when any ſuch thing ſhal
fall out, that for the curinge of this vnnaturall or rather ſupernaturall
diſeaſe: for it cometh not from nature, but ſomthinge els, euen aſuper
naturall power within on, I meane the diuill, no herbes, potions, or other
naturall medicins muſt be vſed or applied, which God hath appointed
for diſeaſes of another kind, but the ſupernatural medcine of
praier. and if that preuail not for the curinge of the partie thus diſeaſed,
we muſt tak another of the fam kind, but more ſoueraigne, which
is faſting & praier: and therby we doubt not but that the patient ſhall
be healed, yf God hath appoynted that the partie ſo diſeaſed ſhall recouer:

as certainly as one ſick of a natural diſeaſe by the applyinge of
the beſt medicine: Becauſe it is the meanes or medicyne which the
Lorde himſelfe the beſt phiſition hath ordayned therunto.
               Fourthly, The bates Satan ordinarily vſeth to catch men with, are here
to be obſerued by the way: which eyther are ſome fare promis, or feareful
ther at. To Evah he ſaid,
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      are here to make the 
                        〈◊〉
                      wherby the do
                     
                        ••••
                      vſually catcheth vs, that ſo wee may the better auoide them. gen. 3. 5. 
                        〈◊〉
                     . h, 4. 10. * eate, and your eys ſhall be opend, & yee ſhalbe
as gods, knowing good and euill. and hereby was Evah ſnared, as appear
eth by verſe 6. And to Chriſt he ſaid,” All theſe will I gine thee, if thou
wilt fall downe, and worſhipe me. One the other ſide to Cain he ſugeſted,
that his puniſhment was greater, then he could beare. And to Iudas,
that he had ſinned ſo greuiouſlye in betrayinge innocent bloud, that it
coulde not be pardoned, wherupon he went and * hanged himſelfe.
               
               Thus he delt with theſe poſſeſſed perſons, making them faire promiſes
of ſiluer,gen. 4. 13. math. 27. 4. 5. gould, &c. ſo that he might enter, and threatninge to
to deſtroy them yf they woulde not conſente: and after this manner
he dealeth with vs all in the temptatiōs wherwith he continually aſſalt
eth vs: ſomtimes yea vſually ſettinge before our eyes the pleaſure of
that ſinne he intiſeth vs vnto: yf that will not ſerue his turne, (as for
the moſt partit doth) then goeth he another waye to worke, by callinge
to our remembrance our ſinnes paſt, aggrauating them euerye
waye he poſſiblye can: as by the innumerable multitude of them,
the greatnes of them, in that thei haue bene committed againſt God
ſo greate and worthy a perſon. after knowledge. yea after ſome repentanc
and vowes made to God to the contrary, and by other ſuch
like circumſtances. of theſe baites let vs in the feare of God, and loue
of our owne ſoules take heede: for as theſe children yf they had giuē
their conſente vpon the perſwaſion of the ſpirits, vndoubtedly they
had entred into them, and poſſeſſed them corporally: ſo ſureli if Satan
thus aſſaltinge vs, we yeelde and giue aſſente vnto him, he then entereth
into vs and poſſeſſeth vs ſpiritually for marke what is ſayd of Iudas:
the Deuill put in the hart of Iudas to betraye Chriſt there is Sathans
ſuggeſtion,Iohn, 13. 2. and that this motion might the rather preuaille, together
withall (no doubt) he ſet before him (beinge couetous) the rewarde
woulde be gyuen him for the ſame: alſo, how acceptable a thing yet
woulde be to the ſcribes and Phariſees, who were the cheife amonge
the Iewes and there gouernors. and what great fauour and grace he
ſhoulde therby obtaine at thire hands: and the pleaſure of both theſe.
Iudas conſidered of theſe things, and in the ende (beinge alured by
theſe baites) reſolued to betrave Chriſt Ieſus. and there it is ſayd Satan
entred into him.
                  Iohn 13. 27. And th
                     •
                  s as it is a more common, ſo it is a worſſe
kinde of poſſeſſion, then this, of the childrens, and not ſo eaſely and
quicklie cured: Let vs therfore ſo much the more beware of it, and of

giuinge conſent to Satans tempting, wherby only it is compaſſed. for
let Satan tempt neuer ſo much and often, yet if we yelde not to his
temptations,math 4. 4. Iames, 4. 7 but as Chriſt did, by the word reſiſt them, he can not enter.
For beinge reſiſted as ſaith Iames * he will flee. This alſo is ſhadowed
out vnto vs, and to be ſeene in this worke of God. for the ſpirits
bejnge reſiſted and not conſented vnto, they after a while gaue place
and vaniſhed away.
               And here not vnfitly we may remember the lyinge and deceit of
the deuill.here is the ſubteltie of the deuill to be obſerued. he bare the aboue named poſſeſſed perſons in hande, a litle
after there diſpoſſeſſion, that if they would conſente vnto him in that
he deſired, he would giue them what they coulde deſire. ſiluer, gould,
&c. in abundanc: and made as it were a tender therof, vnto them. On
the other ſide, yf they denied him his requeſt, he woulde then ſurely
deſtroye them. Now who ſeeth not that Satan herein did but lye &
deceiue? for thoughe in appearance, yet in truth there was neyther
ſiluer nor gold ſilkes nor veluet, and hath a bone of any of them ſince
that time bene broken? or ſo much as an heare of, one of there heades
periſhed? no verely. Thus he Lyed vnto and cozened our Grandmother
Euah makinge her beleue,gen, 3. 4, 9 that * ſhee ſhould not die at all and that
if ſhe did eate of the forbidden fruite, ſhe ſhoulde be equall with god
and of as greate knowledge and vnderſtandinge as he. In like manner
he lyed to our bleſſed Sauiour, and would therby haue deceiued
him,Iohn, 14. 1
                        •
                      Luk, 4. 5. if it had layen in his power, but he had nought in him, VVhen he
had ſhewed I
                        •
                     ſus all the kingdomes of the worlde in the twinkeling of an
eye, he ſayd vnto him: all this power will I giue the, and the glori of theſ for
that is deliuered vnto me,
                  Iohn, 12. 13. 2 cor, 4. 4. 
                  and to whom ſoeuer I will, I giue it. If thou ther
fore wilt worſhip me they ſhall be all thine. wherin the Deuill lyed: for
though he be * priuce and ”God of this world,
                  eph. 2. 2. heb, 1. 2. 1 cor. 3, 22, 23. Tit. 3. 3. becaus the greateſt part
of this world, yea all the worlde, a lyttle flocke excepted, are ruled
by him, and as his ſubiects doe homage vnto him, being the children
of diſobedience: yet hath he not of his owne ſo much as a pile of graſſe
for Chriſt is * heire of the world. In lyke ſorte he dealeth conty
                     •
                  ually
with vs, alwayes lyinge and cogging vnto vs tellinge vs” this pleaſure
will come by this ſinne and this pleaſure by that ſinne, therby entiſing
vs to commit that ſinne, wherin he doth nothing but lye and deceiue
for oftentimes when a man hath comitted the ſinne, he is fruſtrated
and diſapoynted of the pleaſure he ſett before him, and wher by he
was drawen vnto that ſinne: as Abſolom went without the pleaſures

                     〈◊〉
                   a kingdom,Rom, 6. 21, 23. which Satan had tickled him with, and promiſed vpon

                     〈…〉
                   againſt his father. & all the theifes which vpon their

                     〈…〉
                   apprehended & han ed, but if he be not, yet the fruit
                  
                     〈…〉
                   
                  will be death. In that pleaſure the harte eyther is or

hath cauſe to be ſorowfull, becauſe *the end of that mirth is heauineſſe.
So that ſtil he dealeth craftely with vs and like a cozener and” deceauour
as he is,Prou. 14, 12, 13 Reuel, 12, 9. and 20, 23 Rom, 7. 11. S Paull ſaith of himſelfe. that * ſinne deceued him: & therby
ſlew him the ſame may be as fitly and truly ſaide of the Diuill, that
by his ſubtilti he deceiueth and enticeth vs to the commitinge of ſine
and therby ſlayeth vs. Seinge then it is ſo, let vs beware of Satan his
intiſments, and labour to ſpie out his deceite in the ſinne he perſwadeth
vs vnto, let vs neither be inticed with his vaine alurements, nor
terrified with his threats: ſo ſhall we together with the ſinne, eſcape
the deuouringe and deſtruction,Pet. 5, 8: he therin meerlye intendeth and
aymeth at.
               Fiftly, here is ſhadowed out vnto vs the greate diligence ſatan vſeth
to recouer ſuch as be once deliuered out of his power. ffor preſently a
                     •
                  ter
his eiection out of thoſe in Lancyſhire and their delyuerie out of his
handes,wee are to obſerue the great diligence ſatan vſeth to recouer vs beinge ſnatched our of his hands therby to ptouoke vs to vſe the like for our defence againſt him. he was ſo eger and buſie about them, that fot a time we (that
then lay in the howſe where they were) could neither eate without
interruption, nor ſcant take our reſt, and no dilligence day nor night,
(ſaue that he ſtayed ſome tims for his beſt oportunitie) nor yet meanes
was wantinge, vntill he had recoured Somers. The reaſon why he
did ſo for a litle ſeaſon only, and hath not continued his ſolycitinge
them in that manner vntill this day, and ſo forwarde: is not through
any ſlougthfulnes in him, or for wante of any will or deſire in him as
though he regarded not greatly the inhabitinge and vexinge of man
in his bodye ſpetially them out of whome he hath bene caſt, for the
contrary is euident by “holy ſcripture but becauſe the time of his returning
in that manner & ſencible moleſtinge of them out of whom
he hath bene caſt, is limmited and ſet downe vnto him, which he may
not paſſ, If Satan ſo diligent (all the time arotted vnto him) in compaſſinge
an entrance into the body: and will he vſe no diligence and
take no paines, for the winedinge of himſelfe into the ſoules of men?
yes verily, yea by howe much more he deſyreth the tormentinge of
the bodie and ſoule of man in hell for euer,
                     
                        •
                     ath 12: 43, then the vexinge of him
in his body in this preſent life for a litle ſeaſon, which is more then I
can expreſſe: by ſo much more deſyreth he the poſſeſſinge of mans
ſoule and continuance therin, which leadeth thervnto, aboue the corporall
poſſeſſion. how frequent then and dilligent, is he in temptinge
or mouinge of vs to euill al the time graunted vnto him of God to
that end which is duringe our lyfe? Can his dilligence and watchfulnes
be expreſſed,peter. or the manifold aſſaltes and times wher in he ſo
ſalteth vs be reckoned vp? no verly. And this the worde of God
leth vs a lytle more plainly, when it ſaith, *the Deuill our adu
                        •
                     
a roaringe Lyon walketh about, ſeeking whom he may deuour
                        •
                     
                  
                  
he walketh about vs, yea as the Lyon after his pray. The Lorde ſayd
ſomtime vnto Satan” whenc comeſt thou? from compaſſinge the earth (ſaid
he) to & fro,
                  Iob. 1, 7. 
                  and from walking in it. V
                     •
                  herſoeuer then we are whileſt
we remaine vpon earth, Satan compaſſeth vs, and beſetteth vs on eue
ry ſide, that he may wounde vs when and where he ſeeth vs naked
and vnarmed and as thus he doth with all men, ſo ſpetially with thoſe
he hath loſt, and haue bene taken out of his poſſeſſion, whether corpo
rall or ſpiritual: on them he rageth, & fometh, againſt them he is ſtark
mad, to recouer them he will brynge out al his packe of ſubtilties. Si
mon Simon ſaid our Sauiour Satan hath deſired you:
                  Iuke. 22. 31. 
                  to winowe you as
wheate. And we be once diſciples, eſpetially if we be of the Apoſtles
ſuceſſors, though not Apoſtles, then Satan putte
                     •
                  h vp his requeſt vnto
Gods that he may haue the ſiftinge of vs. Thus we ſee what the de
uill our aduerſarie doth for his parte what care what watchfulnes
what dilligence, what paines he taketh to bringe vs to deſtruction, &
will not we indeuour the like to preſerue our ſelues from the ſame? Is
Satan continually aſlalting vs (which is ſhadowed out vnto vs in this
worke of God) and will not we continoally reſiſt, seeinge * reſiſted he
will flie? when Peter telleth vs of the dilligence and nature of this our
aduarſarie,Iam, 4, 7. 1 pet. 5. 8: he therupon inferreth this, *be ſober the fore and watch. By
how much more malitious, ſtrong cruell, ſubtle, and watchfull to take
vs at advantage the enimy is: by ſo much the more had we neede to
be circumſpect and watchfull, that the enimy gett no advantage. All
men had need day and nikht to watch and praye,math, 26, 41, 
                        •
                     pet. 5. 9. 
                        •
                     ph, 4, 26, 27. act. 26, 18, 2 Tim 2, 26. leſt they enter into
tentation, *euer reſiſtinge ſtronge in the faith, and neuer conſenting,
no not in hart, for then *we giue place to the diuill but eſpetially and
aboue others, they who haue bene deliuered out of the power and
poſſeſſion of Sathan: and tranſlated into the kingdome of God, and
Chriſt Ieſus.
               Sixtly, Hereby we may perceiue whervnto they diuils are naturally
ginen:
                  6. we may hereby p
                        ••
                     tly know the nature of she 
                        〈◊〉
                      and therw
                        ••
                     h whether we be his children. 
                  or caried by the inſtinct of their nature now corrupted, euen to
blaſphemie againſt God, to ſwareyng, lyiuge, vncleannes, deceit, and
generally to all manner of iniquity: which accordeth excellently with
that is ſaid of them in holy ſcripture, and the titles giuen them their:
where they are tearmed blaſphemous ſpirits, *lying ſpirits, *vncleane
ſpirits,Reuel. 2. 9. Iohn 8, 4. math 12. 43. mark 5, 2. 8. 13, Re
                        •
                     el, 12. 9. and 20. 2, 3, 19. act 19, 12. 13. eph, 2, 2. *ſubtle ſpirits, (in that the deuil is called the old ſerpent) and
*wicked ſpirits. 1 And this, becauſe they are thervnto giuen, & whol

                     〈◊〉
                   caried of themſelues by there nature. 2. becauſe of the effect and
eration they worke in men, ſturringe vp and temptinge them to
and all other ſinnes continually, and bringing them daily forth

                     •
                  hildren of diſobedience. And hereby we may eaſilye knowe

                     •
                  e belonge, and whoſe children we are, whether we be the

ſonnes of God, or the children of the diuill. For doth not nature it
ſelfe teach vs, that theiris a certaine ſimilitude & liknes betwene the
the father and the child? and this is not onlye true of the naturall father
& child, but much more true of the ſpirituall father & his child,
as appeareth by the holy ſcripture. And therfore it is that this ſpeach
is ſo often vſed by the Lord himſelfe: * be yee holy for I am holy. And
that S. Iohn ſaith,
                  Lev. 11, 44, & 19. 2. & 20. 7. 1 pet, 1, 16. 1 Iohn. 1. 7. & 2. 29: & 4, 7: 8. 16: math 5, 44. 45. 48. * If ye knowe that he is righteous, knowe ye that he which
doth righteouſly, is borne of him. And again * God is light. If then we walk
in the light, as he is in the light, we haue felowſhip with the father, & with
his ſonne Ieſus Chriſt, and againe, * euery on that loueth, is borne of God, &
knoweth God. for God is loue. And Chriſt ſaith, * loue your enimies, doe
good to them that hate you, that ye may be the children of your father that
is in heuen: for he maketh his ſunne to wiſe on the euill, and the good, and
ſendeth raine on the iuſt and vniuſt. And preſently after, ye ſhalbe perfite
as your father which is in heven is perfite. And on ther ſide, concerninge
the other ſpirituall father. It was to this purpoſe to ſome of his children,
ſaid ſomtimes by our ſauiour Chriſt: ye doe the workes of your father:
ye are (therefore) of your father the diuil, and the luſt of your father
ye will doe,
                  Iohn 8. 41, 44. 1 Iohn, 3, 8. Iohn. 8: 38: becauſe alſo of this Iohn ſaith: * he that commiteth ſinne is of
the Deuill: and why? for the Deuill ſinneth from the beginning. Both
theſe our Saiour teacheth in twoo wordes: I ſpeake that which I haue
ſene with my father, and ye doe that which ye haue ſene with your father
intimatinge this for the reaſon therof, that ſo it is & otherwiſe can not
be:2 pet, 1. 41 Becaus the ſpirituall childe followeth and can not but followe the
diſpoſition of the ſpirituall father ſo as looke how the father is affected
and giuen, whether it be God or the Deuill, euen ſo is the childe
and muſt nedes be: becauſe beinge a childe he is partaker of his fathers
nature, whether it be diuine or diuiliſh? and otherewiſe he is no child:
and therefore beinge of the ſelfeſame nature, they muſt needes be affected
alike: ſo as what and whom the one loueth, hateth &c. the other
will doe ſo likwiſe. Here vpon it neceſſarily and ineuitably foloweth,
that as they are the ſonnes of God, who as God (infinitely) ſo
they (accordinge to there meaſure) are holy, righteous: in the lighte:
in loue, yea louinge there enemies, and doinge good to them which
hate them ct. ſtriuinge alſo dayly to be more holy, righteous ct, that
ſo they might be perfecte, as is there heauenly father: As ſuch I ſaye
which haue this image: ſimilitud and ſtampe of God ſet vpon them
and ſhininge in all there ſpeaches: actions and thoughts▪ are the ch
                     •••
                  dren
of God: yea all ſuch: and none but ſuch: becaus of his chil
                     •
                  
onl
                     •
                   he beſtoweth this ſpirit:Rom. 8: 14. Rom. 8. 1. 2. 5: 9 10: 11: 13. that is theſe gifts of the ſpirit: a
                     •
                  
to that of the Apoſtle * as many as are led by the ſpirit of 
                        〈…〉
                     
the ſonnes of God. ſo as they deceiue them ſelues: which 
                     〈◊〉
                  
                  
                  ſpirit of god and Chriſt to lead them into the holy and righteous waies
of God: are yet notwithſtandinge perſwaded that God is there father:
& they his children: euen ſo they who in there ſpeaches: actions
and thougths repreſent the diuil and haue his ſtompe orimage vpon
them, beinge together with him giuen to blaſphemie, ſwearinge: lyinge.
vncleannes: deceite in a worde to the commiting of ſine are the
children of the deuil:eph, 2, 
                        •
                     . & haue him for their father: & they doe greatly
deceiue themſeues which doinge the ſame works with the deuill. and
being ruied by his ſpirit: do neuertheles hope that god is their father.
               Let every on of vs then compare our ſelues with another, and
ſeriouſlie examine our ſelues and conſider whom wee are moſt like,
whom in our workes we moſt reſemble, God, or the diuill: for certain
lye to him we belong to whom we are likeſt, and he is our father.
               But here you muſt not ſo take me, as though I ment that whoſouer
maketh a lye, vſeth an oath, commiteth any vncleanes, at any time
deceiueth his neighbour in bargainning, is the child of the diuill. God
forbid. For Noah, Lot, Dauid, and Peter ſinned greuouſly againſt God
and yet were his children▪ and there are amongſt vs no doubte which
haue there ſ
                     ••
                  ppes, and falles, and yet are Gods children. It is not then
the commitinge of a ſinne, although it be a hainous ſinne, which argueth
the child of the Deuill: But the * ſcruing of ſinne and obaying it in
the luſts thereof.
                  Rom. 4, 14, 16, 2. pet: 2, 19, Rom 9. 12. when ſathan ſtirreth vp in man a luſt after lying, ſwearing,
adultery, deceipt, and other tranſgreſſions of the lawe: and hee
forthwith willingly and very readily falleth to put the ſame in practiſe
and thus not only once or twice, but vſually doth the workes of the diuel
ſuch a one ſaith chriſt, is of hi
                        •
                      father the diuell. And yet howſoeuer the
fallinge into ſome haynous tranſgreſſion, prooueth not one to be the
child of the diuill,Iohn 8, 41. yet ſuch ſlipe or fall giueth the child of God iuſt
cauſe not only of weeping, but with Peter * to weepe bitterly. In that he
after ſo great grace receiued. (even the ſpirit of God, I meane the ſpirit
of adoption, and ſanctification, *which God beſtoweth vpon his
children only) ſhall ſo highly offend him,Luk 22. 62▪ gal: 4 6. Rom. 8. 14. 15 who hath bene ſo good and
gratious vnto him: recompencing him with euill, for his vnſpeakable
good, and therby alſo greatly diſhoneringe God, and cauſinge his holy
name to be blaſphemed and euill ſpoken off.
               Neither muſt any ſo vnderſtand me as though I ment, that all
thoſe which are now the children, and vnder the power of the deuill,
ſhould certainly goe vnto the deuil, and haue the lake which burneth
with fire and brimſtone for their portion, and by conſequent all ſuch
as are before deſcribed: For he who is the diuils child, and captiue vnto
Sathan to day, may be to morrowe the ſonne of God, and deliuered
out of that ſprituall bondage: yea very ſure it is, that in his inwarde

and ſpirituall eſtate and condition this happie chaunge ſhall be, if he
chaunge and alter his conditions, and * be a newe creature, ſo as olde
thinges being paſſed away,
                  2 cor. 15, 17. 
                  all things become new with him: hauinge a
new minde, and a new hart, (which is when he hath new thoughtes &
new affection.) which will carry with them the body, & all the members
thereof: and make them newe likewiſe: ſo as hee ſhall haue newe
eyes: new eares: a new tongue: new hands &c: euery one of theſe and
the reſt of the members, according to his ſeueral office or duty performing
newe: that is other and better thinges then in former tymes hee
did: man chaunging or being thus changed: he is therwith tranſlated
from ſathan vnto God & from being his child to be adopted into the
nomber of the ſonnes of god: hauing * this priuiledge and dignity beſtowed
vppon him in Chriſt: whome by faith he hath receaued: or as
S. Paul ſaith he is turned from darknes into light & from the power of ſathan
(vnder which we are all by nature and vntil this turning be) vnto
god:
                  Iohn, 1, 12: act: 26. 18: 2: tum. 2. 26, and elſwhere to the ſame effect deliuered * out of the ſnare of the diuell
of whom wee are taken priſoners to do his will: into the glorious liberty
of the ſonnes of god. So as henceforward he is no more a bondeſlaue
vnto ſathan: & a ſtranger and forriner vnto god▪ & aliant from the
common wealth of Iſrael: but one of the houſhold of god: & a citizen with
the ſaincts: euen of the greate & holy City newe Ieruſalem: into the
which entreth none but theſe newe and holy creatures for whome
only god the builder & maker thereof hath prepared it.
               If any obiect: All the children of god ſhall certainly be ſaued accordig
to that ſcripture: If we be children we are alſo heires enen the heires of god
and heirs annexed with Chriſt: therefore whoſoeuer be the diuels children
(and ſo they before deſcribed to be ſuch) ſhall certainlye be damed
I anſwer:ephe. 2: 12, 19. Reuel. 21, 2 10. Reuel. 21: 5: 27: heb. 11: 10: 16: Rom. 8: 18. that if man being the child of the diuel, could not poſſibly
become the child of god, as he who is once the ſonne or daughter
of god, can neuer after be the child of the diuel: then the reaſon followed:
and whoſoeuer is the childe of the diuel ſhould be condemned:
but that being moſt falſe the other followeth not thereof at all. This
then I affirme: that whoſoeuer are the diuels children (which are all
they who are giuen to blaſphemy: ſwearing: lying: curſing: filthy comunication:
to ſpeake euill of them which are: in aucthority: to raylinge:
ſlaundering: to hatred eſpecially of the brethren: to adultery: fornication:
vncleannes: deceipt defrauding one an other in bargayning: and
other workes of the diuell: and continue therein: liuinge and dyinge
ſuch) ſhall indeede goe to the diuel their father: and with him inherite
hell fyer prepared for the diuel & his angels.herein we may behold how e
                     
                        •
                     till minded the deuill is towardes man.
               
               Furthermore in obſeruing the nature of the diuel we are to conſider
how he ſtandeth affected towards men. how in his nature he is who

ly carryed to hate man▪ (for when he hath loſt him▪ he is not at quye
                     •
                  
vntil he he haue recouered him if it be poſſible) to torment him and
to deſtroy him. Now who that is wiſe will not be afraid to fall into the
handes of ſuch as one or rather of god whoſe executioner the diuel is.
               If the diuel deale thus with man being ſent forth of god to chaſtice
him for his amendment: How wil he intreat him when be ſhall fall vpō
him to execute the vengeance to come? that is the puniſhment which
in iuſtice is due vnto man, and anſwerable to all the diſhonor he hath
donne vpon earth to the lord of glory. If in the former caſe he cauſe
ſuch crying, gnaſhing of teeth, and tormenting as we haue heard: what
crying, what gnaſhing of teeth, what tormenting ſhall there bee in the
latter?
               Thus we ſee what an agrement there is betwixt the word & worke
of god,hed. 10. 11: as comming both from the ſame author▪ and tendinge to the
ſame end, euen to make men afraid to fall into the hands of the liu
                     •
                  go
God. They both teach the ſame thing, the one more obſcurely, the other
more plainly. VVhy now will not wee rather take forth this and
ſuch like leſſons out of this work, and ſo make our vſe & profit therof:
then impugne and deny the worke, as many of vs doe? when the
lord knowing mans dulnes and backwardnes to learne, ſhall in regard
thereof be content to inſtruct him not only by his word, but alſo by
his worke (which ſometime preuayleth a little with man when his
word will not) and that man is ſo farr from being taught and inſtructed
thereby, that he reiecteth ſuch kind of inſtruction: wil the lorde or
can he poſſibly take that in good part?
               Seauenthly it ſerueth excellently to confound our athieſts,
                  This. worke is of ſingular vſe to confound the atheiſt. pſal. 14. 1. whoſe ſay
not only with the foole in their hart, that there is no god. but go ſomwhat
further, affirming with their blaſphemous mouthes out of that
vnſpeakable folly and brvtiſhnes of theirs, as Kinge Pharaoh their praedeceſſor
did:Exod. 5. 2
                        •
                     
                   
                  who is the lorde. that I ſhould obey him? Theſe luſty gallāts
who will haue no heauen, nor hell, no god, nor diuel what ſay they to
this work of that god whome they deny? That there is a diuel. howe
can they deny it ſeing the worke and effects of the diuell in and vpon
the bodye of Somers: (to let the 7. in Lancaſhire and other goe) the
running lumpes, his ſupernaturall ſtrength knowledge, wayght in his
body and members thereof, his ſpeaking without the inſtrumentes of
ſpeach, throwing into the fyer without beinge burnt, his lying as dead
could as yee, his face and hands blacke: no breath comming frō him,
and thus ſometime by the ſpace of an houre with many more of this
kynde, will infore them to confeſſe the worke of the diuel and by conſequent
that there is a diuell, conſidering that theſe things can not poſibly
come either from nature, or be donne by art, and that ſom cauſe

of theſe effects there muſt needes bee, when they haue donne what
they can, except they will leaue this matter vndecided: (wherevnto
the diuel and the corruption of their nature will be ready to perſwad
them) they muſt in the ende ſay will they, nill they, and others alſo
with them: that the ſaid ſtrange accidents and ympoſſible to be donne
by man, came and were donne by the dyuel: there being no other cauſe
to be found, and that Somers therein was a mere patient.
               For to deny the matter of fact, that theſe things were done or rather
ſuffered by Somers,
                  It is a moſt ſhamfull and odious thinge to the the matter eff
                        •
                     ct. is plaine engliſhe to ſay, that the 17 perſons
which haue depoſed the ſame are periuered. and not only they, but about
13 more depoſed after, in the whole about 30 wherof 7 be preachers:
the which if ſome ſhamles body ſhoulde not ſpare to affirme
yet that wil not helpe. ſeeinge there are hundreds more redy to auouche
the ſame vpon there othes, and to be ſo for ſworne as are the former.
remember alſo that I deliuered to the commiſſioners a bill of about
60 Perſons, who were redy to be depoſed A
                     •
                  udicient number
(I thinke) for the prouinge of any cauſe. concerninge eyther, God or
man. yf inoughe haue not witneſſed this matter vpon their oathes
there are yet good ſtore remaininge: yf they were but called therevnto:
and in the meane ſeaſon ſom credit would be giuen, to the bare affirmation
of chriſtians. or els it goeth amiſſe with all our hiſtoriographers,
and there bookes. yt is then a moſt ſhamfull & odious thing for
man to call the matter of facte into queſtion, eſpetially conſyderige
the ſame hath ben done in our own land & in the midſt of vs: ſo as we
need not goe beyonde the ſeaes for full inquirie into it, & the circumſtances
therof, as time, place, perſons poſſeſſed others dealing in ther
diſpoſſeſſion. and priuat chriſtians witneſſinge the ſame, the commiſſioners
alſo at. Nottīgham: with whom or ſom of them. who liſt when
he pleaſe may conferr: which are able to conſtraine a man to receiue
this for a truth-yf reaſon can preuaile with him. neither do I doubte
but that other nations and kingdoms about vs. wil not only giue credite
to the mater of facte, when they ſhall heare therof: and that the
ſame hath ben witneſſed vpon the othes of ſo many: but alſo receiue
the poſſeſſion and diſpoſſeſſion we ſo much gaynfaye. Bluſhe then O
England and be thou aſhamed of this thy incredulitie, which is ſuch
as the like therof hath not ben redd or hearde of before. for others
haue yet acknowledged the work which haue ben done in them. but
thou haſt not gone ſo farr, but denied the ſame.
               In theſe ſtraits whither wil the Athiſts turne him? muſt he not nedes
be cōfounded in himſelfe? or can it be otherwiſe but that the diuil
is entred into him and he ſpiritualy poſſeſſed with the deuil, if now
he perceiue not that there is a deuil? As herby we may ſentibly and

palpablie perceiue that there is a Deuill ſo as wee may in a manner
grope him:as this proueth there is a d
                        •
                     uill ſo th
                        •
                     t che
                        •
                     o is a pod ſtron 
                        〈◊〉
                      then he. euen ſo we may looke vpon and beholde the Lord himſelfe
in this worke, deliueringe the partie or parties from there moſt
greuous vexation, & torments by Satan, vpon requeſt firſt made vnto
him by his ſeruants, accordynge to his owne appoyntment in this
behalfe.
               VVhen that cruel decree of Haman was gone forth for the deſtroyinge
of the lewes. Mordecar giuinge Queene Heſter to vnderſtande
thereof. and withall vſinge dyuers reaſons to perſwade her to doe
what lay in her according to her place for the preſeruatiō of her people,
the church of God: Amongeſt and after others, vſeth one in theſe
wordes.Eſt. 4, 13. 1
                        •
                     
                   
                  who knoweth whether thou art com to the kyngdom for ſuch a time?
As yf he had ſayd, who knoweth whether the Lord hath therfore
lyfted the up ſo highe, euen into the throne and ſeate of the kingdom
that ſo thou might be a fitt meanes. for the deliuerance of the church
from the affliction & danger it is in at this time? And did not he geſſe
well as apeareth by the ſtories? yes verily. for therby it is euiden that
God had therfore, and for no other cauſe exalted her from baſe and
lowe degre. into the royall ſeate of A Queene. euen ſo ſaye I concerning
this our preſent caſe. who knoweth whether God hath therfore
ſent a euill ſpirits into ſundry Engliſh perſons to vexe them in ther bodyes,
that therby he might confounde the. Atheyſts in England? And
eyther make them more inexcuſable, or els brynge them to a better
minde? wherof in dede there is ſmall hope. For they whych can not be
led (as it were by the hande) from the creatures to the creator. which
will not heare neyther the workes of creation & adminiſtration. nor
yet Moſes the Prophets & Apoſtles tellinge them that there is a god
ſuerly neither wil they be perſwaded ther of,It is very liklie that in theſe dayes of athiſme, the lord hath
                        •
                     ent deuills into men thereby to comoun
                        •
                      ath
                        •
                     me. though a Deuill be ſente
from hell to preach the ſame vnto them. This I ſaye may well be that
which god principally reſpected herein. For ſom ſpetial thinge no doubt
there is mouynge the Lorde more at this tyme, then in former
times, to ſende deuils into men, yea into diuers▪ Is it not likely to? be
cauſe at this time him ſelfe is denyed, called into queſtion whether
he is,Luk. 16. 31. and hath any beinge: which in the time of our forefathers hath
not bene or at the leaſt not by ſo many, and with ſo high a hande as
euen now and at this daye, May we not well therefore ſay: who knoweth
whether God hath ſent this ſtrange iudgment for this time? that
is. the ſinne of this time? ther by himſelfe reprouing this ſinne (as ſuch
as he can not endure) when man holdeth his peace.The 8 vſe is, to commend vnto 
                        〈◊〉
                     : & faſt in g
                        •
                     , & 
                        •
                     e eby to 
                        〈…〉
                      therevnto.
               
               Eyghtly it commendeth the holy exerciſe of faſting & prayer, & ſe
                        •
                     
rueth to prouoke vs to a diligent practiſe thereof: Is prayer and faſtinge of
force to caſt out diuels: though they be principalityes and powers.

and ſhall not the ſame if it be vndertaken in the faith and obedyence
of god be auayleable, if not to remoue yet to ſanctify and bleſſe what
ſoeuer iudgment of god is vpon vs in generalty, or any of vs in parti
                     •
                  
culer?Lev. 23, 27. Iſa 22, 12. Toel. 1, 14. & 2. 15. 16, math. 6. 16, & 2. 16 If wee looke into the booke of god, beſides that weſt al finde
a neceſſity of faſting and prayinge to ly vppon vs, when any iudgmēt
of god is eyther preſent or imynent and ready to ouertake vs: in that
wee are then in ſuch a caſe commaunded to faſt and pray and humble
our ſoules: for our further incouragement to the performance of this
dvty and part of gods worſhip, wee ſhal there reade that not onlye
the people of god from time to time haue in al theire afflictions taken
this courſe and vſed this as a meanes for their good and deliuerance
alſo from theirs affliction if ſo it ſhould ſeeme good in the eyes
of the lorde: but alſo that the ſame hath vſualy preuayled ſo fair with
god, as that thereby they haue obteyned deliuerance from ther praeſent
affliction. The Philiſtims hauing entered the Iſraelytes coaſtes:
and inhabitinge the ſame:1 Sam. 7. 5, 6. 10. 13. 14. the children of Iſrael for remooual of that
iudgment and recouery of their citties through the counſel of Samuel
gathered themſelues to Mizpeh, and then faſted and prayed for a
day. The effect and fruit thereof was, that the lorde fought for them,
from heauen: for it is ſaid, that the lord thundred with a greate thunder
that day, vpon the Philiſtims, and ſcattered them: ſo as they were ſlayne before
Iſrael: and that the philiſtins were brought ſo vnder, that they came no
more agayne into the coaſts of Iſrael. In the 20. Chap. of the 2. booke
of Chron. we reade of a great multitude of the children of Moab. Amon,
and mount Seir, comminge againſt the Iſraelites with purpoſe (no doubt)
to haue ſpoyled and deſtroyed them therevpon Iehoſhaphat the
kinge proclaymed a faſt throughout all Iudah: which was ſo bleſſed vnto
them and praeuayled ſo mightely with god that euen in the ſame faſte
when they were all aſſembled togither, the lorde ſent his ſpirit vppon
one Iehazael to comfort and aſſure them of their ſafety & deliueranc
from their enemies, Thus ſaith the lord vnto you (ſaid he) feare you not
neyther be afraid, for this great multitude: for the battle is not youres but
gods. ye ſhall not neede to fight in this battle: ſtand ſtil moue not, neither be
afraid to morrowe goe out againſt them and the lord be with you. And ſo
it fel out after, for god ſent ſuch a ſpirit of diſcord amonge them, that
they ſlew one an other, ſo as none eſcaped. Yea further it is ſaide that the
feare of god was vpon all the kingdomes of the earth, when they had heard
that the lorde had fought againſt the enemyes of Iſrael, So the kingdome of
Iehoſhaphat was quiet, and his god gaue him reſt on euery ſ
                        •
                     de, Looke in
the 8. of Ezra and there you ſhal finde, that thoſe which retourned
from the captiuity in Babylon with Ezra, being in great danger leaſte
they, their wiuſs & children ſhould be deſtroyed of the enemy which

laye in wayte for them in theire way to Ieruſalem: did there vppon
betake themſelues to this exerciſe, as the onlye way and meanes for
their ſafety, as appeareth by the ſpeach of Ezra: At the riuer (ſaith he)
I proclaymed a faſt that we might humble our ſelues before our god,
                  Eſt. 3, 13. Eſt. 4. 3. 16. and 5. 2. 3. 4. & chap. 7. & 8 9. 
                  and
ſeeke of him a right way for vs and our children, and for all our ſubſtance:
for I was aſhamed to require of the king an armye and korſmen to helpe
vs against the enemy in the way▪
                   and ſo indeede it proued: and a ſafer
meanes then an army and horſmen: for it is ſaid, that this faſt beinge
proclaymed, they faſted and beſought their god for this: and he was intreted
of them. And in the 31. ver. it followeth, and the hand of our god was
vpon vs and deliuered vs from the hand of the enemy, and of ſuch as layde
wayte by the way. VVhen proude and enuious Hamman had obteyned
of Ahaſhueroſh that wicked decree, to kill deſtroy and roote out all the
Iewes vpon ſuch a day: it is ſaid that not only Eſther the Queene with
her maides did faſt: but that in euery prouince & place whither the kings
charge and commiſſion came, there was among the Iewes faſting wepinge,
and mourning: and many lay in ſack cloath & in aſhes which humily a
                     •
                  ion
of theirs preuailed ſo farr with the lord as that thereby they did not
only eſcape the execution of that bloudy decre. but alſo vpon the day
appoynted thereto, tooke vengeance themſelues vppon theire enemyes,
and had Hamman hanged with his 10. ſonnes. And that they
vſed faſting and prayer was the meanes of the reuerſing of that cruell
decree and preuentinge of that feareful iudgmente of god which was
ready to breake out againſt them it appeareth by the ſpeach of Eſ
                        •
                     her
Chap. 4. 16. The Niuiuites alſo we al knowe eſcaped the deſtruction
that was thteatned within 40. dayes to haue come vpon them,Ionah, 3
                        •
                      4. by the
true faſt they kept vnto the lord.
               And as thus the people of god in al ages haue in the day of theire
aduerſity aſſembled themſelues in prayer and faſtinge, and god hath
greatly bleſſed the faſtes which they haue in publique and in common
kept togither in their ſolemne and open aſſemblyes. So and in lyke
manner the ſeruants of of god haue in ſecret, and apart from others
faſted and pra
                     •
                  ed, & god hath likewiſe greatly bleſſed the ſame vnto
them: whither they humbled themſelues before his maieſty for and
becauſe of ſome common calamity, either preſent vpon the church or
imminent and hanging ouer it: or priuate affliction or want of ſome
good thinge publike or priuate: which alſo is a kinde of miſery. Thus
N
                        •
                     hemyah vnderſtan
                     •
                  ng that the lewes which were in Ieruſal
                        •
                     m &
in Iudah were in greate affliction and reproch and that the wall of Ieruſalem
was broken downe,
                  Nehe. 3, 4. 11. and 2. 4. 5. 
                  and the gates thereof burnt with fier: faſted and
prayed becauſe thereof▪ which was ſo bleſſed vnto him & that people
that by his meanes ſhortly after the walles and gates of Ieruſalem were

built vp and the Iewes deliuered from that great affliction & reproch
they were in.Dan. 9 3. 4. 20. I wil not ſtand here to ſpeake of Danyels afflictinge his
ſoule in prayer and faſting for himſelfe and his people, and to ſhewe
how that his humiliation was bleſſed of god vnto him farr aboue that
he deſired and expected: but refer you to the 9. of his prophecy, wher
that is ſet downe at large: Neither wil I vſe many wordes about Cornelius.
who praying and faſting had (as Danyel in the like caſe had before)
an angell ſent vnto him to aſſure him that his prayer was heard
and come vp into remembrance before god: and to direct him to ſuch a
one (Peter by name) who when he was come,act 10 30. 31 32 act. 11, 14. ſhould not only reſolue
him of that doubt he was in concerning the Meſſias, whether he were
come or no) as it ſhould ſeeme, and for which cauſe it is probable hee
then faſted: but alſo ſpeake ſuch wordes, as whereby both he & his houſe
ſhould be ſaued. Only this I wil giue an inſtance or example, (the better
to prouoke vs hereto) where prayer with faſting hath praeuayled
with god, when prayer without faſting would not priuaile: and it is in
the 20. of Iudges where we reade that when the children of Iſrael had
ſuſteyned an ouerthrowe by the Beniamytes 22. thouſand of them being
ſlayne, they aſſembled themſelues togither becauſe thereof in prayer:
and after that they ſet their battle in array againſt the Beniamites
the ſecond day, but had an other diſcomfiture and ouerthrowe euen
of 18. thouſand all valyant men, wherevppon they aſſembled then in
faſting and prayer: the fruite and ſucceſſe whereof was this, that goīg
out againſt Beniamyn the lord ſmote him before Iſraell: euen as he had
ſaid and promiſed them vpon the day of their faſt, that on the morrowe
he would deliuer them into their hands. That they faſted not on the firſt
day of their aſſemblyng in the houſe of god, as they did on the ſecond
day, may apeare by comparing the 23 verſe of the chapter with
verſe 26. for all that is ſaid in the 23. is that they went vp and wept before
the lorde vnto the eueninge, but in the 26. verſe ws reade thus: then
all the children of Iſraell went vp and all the people came alſo vnto the houſe
of god, and wept and ſate there before the lord, & faſted that day vnto
the euening. VVhere we ſee it is expreſly ſaid of the latter day, that the
faſted and not ſo of the former. Againe by the conferringe of theſe it
is playne, that the ſecond dayes aſſembly was farr more generall and
ſolemne and with longer contynuance then the other: and ſuch were
their aſſemblyes at faſts always: for firſt it is ſaid of the latter day that
all the children of Iſrael went vp: and againe that all the people came vp to
the houſe of god. 2. that they ſate then before the lord. whereby is noted,
there long continuance in that meetinge: neyther of which is ſayde
of the former day.
               Neither is there cauſe why we ſhould maruaile at this I meane that

the faſting and prayer of a faithful man or men, is ſo auayleable with
god,The reaſone
                        •
                      why prayer and faſtinge is ſo auaileable with god. the 1. reaſon. Iames 5. 16. the 2. that it wil as it were haue no nay: but euen then preuaile when
prayer without it cannot: conſidering it is written, that the prayer of the
righteous auayleth much, if it be feruent, and that faſting is a meanes to
bncreaſe and continue feruency of ſpirit. 2. Conſideringe the ſinguler
promiſe god hath made herevnto, which he doth inſinuate by the tytles
or names he giueth to the day of faſt, caling it a day of reconciliation,
a day of attonement,
                  Lev. 23. 27. 28. and 16. 29. 30. Iſa. 58. 5. 
                  the acceptable day of the Lorde. whereby the
Lord doth ſecretly ſignify and promiſe to ſo many of vs as ſhall exerciſe
our ſelues herein, that howſoeuer before for our tranſgreſſions he
hath bene angry and offended with vs, which alſo he hath teſtified to
our faces either by laying ſome iudgment vpon vs, or threatninge ſo
to doe, or by with holdinge ſome good thinge from vs, yet if heerein
we wil exerciſe our ſelues aright, and keepe a true faſt vnto the lorde
afflictinge our ſoules as well as our bodyes, rentinge not our garmentes,
but our hartes, with compunction and ſorrowe for our ſynnes
weeping and mourning and making great lamentation ouer all the in
iquities whereby we haue diſhonored god, and cauſed his holy name
to be euil ſpoken of, & iuſtly prouoked him againſt vs, and to auenge
himſelf vpon vs as he hath begonne: cryinge alſo vnto the Lorde in
the name of Chriſt Ieſus, for pardon and reconciliation: and withall
turne vnto the Lorde with all our hartes, forſaking our euill wayes,
and the wickednes that is in our handes: then and whenſoeuer this
we ſhall performe, notwithſtanding his anger be kindled and broken
out againſt vs, yet will he be reconciled, and at one with vs, accept of
vs, and receane vs into fauor, and giue vs that wee haue intreated
him for, yf not aboue the ſame. 3. It is to be remembred, that this holy
exerciſe ſemeth greatlye to humble vs,Ioel 2. 18. 19. the 3, reaſon. and to make vs thinke and
account vylie and baſely of our ſelues. as duſt and aſhes, and moſt vnworthye
of the leaſte of gods mercies: as partyle appeareth by that
which heere followeth of Ahab.
                  Lev, 16. 29, 31. and chap. 23. 27, 29. 32. nomb. 29. 8. and may alſo be gathered by that it
is ſo oft ſaide to the Iewes being aſſembled togither vpon the 10. day
of the 7. monueth, yee ſhall humble your ſoules, meaning thereby, that
vpon that day they ſhould faſt and pray: and againe euery perſon that
humbleth not himſelfe that ſame day, ſhall euen be cutt of from his people,
which ſpeech with the former being ſpoken not only to euery perſon
in particuler, but alſo to thoſe among them, who were to ſee this part
of gods worſhip duly kept, it is thereby playne that the Lord ment
by thoſe wordes, that euery one who ioyned not with the people of
god in faſtinge, ſhould be cut of from the people: for how they ſtood inwardly
affected, for either humble or proude ſpirit, men neither colde
nor yet were to iudge. Nowe why are theſe wordes of humhlinge our

ſoules vſed by the ſpirit of god inſteade of faſting, but becauſe the hū
                  bling
of our ſelues is both profeſſed, indeuored, and furthered by faſtinge?
And this is confirmed by that ſaying of Ezra, At the riuer by A
hana I proclaymed a faſt,
                  chap. 8, 21: 
                  that we might humble our ſelues before our god.
And heerevpon it is that a faſt is called (and that rightly) the exerciſe
of humiliation: not only becauſe we indeuor and profeſſe therein the
humbling & ſubmitting of our ſelues to god. and vnder his hand but
alſo for that it helpeth forwarde our humilyation. Seeinge nowe that
faſting helpeth to humble vs, and that this ſubiecting & baſe account
of our ſelues is a thing much pleaſing vnto god. and greatly mouinge
him to be gratious & fauorable vnto man: for ſaith the ſcripture god
reſiſteth the proude,
                  prou. 3, 34: Iam. 4, 6, 10. 1 pet, 5, 5, 6: 
                  and giueth grace vnto the humble, agayne: humble
your ſelu; vnder the mighty hand of god that he may exalt you in due tīe:
caſt downe your ſelues before the lorde, and he will lifte you vp, & agayne,
ſubmyt your ſelues to god, drawe neere to god and he will drawe neere to
you. As if it had bene ſaide, In humility and greate ſubmiſſion goe yee
vnto god and aſke that yee want and ſo god will come (as it were) vnto
you,Iam, 4, 7, 8, in giuing you that you deſire & lack: it is no maruaile though
the faſtes of gods people preuayled mightely with god, and obteyne
that or aboue that they deſire: yea this humbling of our ſelues vnder
the hande of god, is ſo pleaſing vnto his diuine maieſty, and of that
force with him: that the very ſhaddowe thereof euen a ſhrincking vnder
the ſame hande or caſting downe and humbling of the body with
out the truth therof in the ſoule, hath preuayled ſo farr with the lord
that it hath procured a temporall benefit both to ones ſelfe & his poſterity.the ſoule in this caſe is hu
                        •
                     led, but it is corrupt lye, as is ſhewed after. 1 king, 21. 21. 22, 24.
Thus Ahab hauing this iudgmente denounced againſte him
by Elyah that the lord would bring euil vpon him, and take away his poſterity,
and cutt of from Ahab him that piſſed againſte the wall, ſo as the
dogs ſhould eate him of Ahabs ſtock, that dyed in the citty: and him that
dyed in the feilds, ſhould the fowles of the ayre eate: though hee was a
moſt wicked man, one that ſould himſelf to worke wickednes, and therfore
could not humble himſelf aright before god: neither yett ioyne
to the outwarde and bodily exerciſe of faſtinge the inward and ſpiritual
of prayer, ſo as might be accepted of god and auaile with him for
the ſacrifice of the wicked is an abomination vnto the lord, and the prayer
of the righteous auaileth with him: yet notwithſtanding humbling him
ſelf by faſting,
                  prou. 15, 8. he obteyned thereby thus much, that that euil came
not vpon him nor yet of his ſonne Ahaziah,
                  ver, 27, 28, 29. for thus we reade when
Ahab heard the former wordes, he rent his cloathes and put ſackcloath vp
on him, and faſted, and lay in ſackcloath, and went ſoftly: wherevpon the
word of the lord came to Elyah ſaying, Seeſt thow how Ahab is humbled
before mee? becauſe hee ſubmitteth himſelfe before mee, I will not bringe

that euill in his dayes but in his ſonnes dayes will I bring euill vpon his
houſe: where we ſee this giuen by the lorde himſelf for the reaſon why
he would be good to Ahab.
                  1 tim, 4, 8. eccl. 4, 17. If then the bodily exerciſe of faſtinge,
which profiteth but little, alone without prayer (for there is no mentiō
of any prayer that Ahab made, and if he did it was but the ſacrifyce of
fooles which the wiſe god abhorreth) auaile with god: how much more
more wil the ſame preuaile with him when it it is nor onlye ioyned
with true but feruent prayer? And if the caſting downe and humbling
of the body or if of the ſoule, yet not for ſinne but ſome temporall puniſhment
of ſinne: the rentinge of the cloathes, the lyinge downe in
ſackcloath and aſhes, which is the faſt the lorde hath not choſen, bee of
force to paciſye the wrath of god at the leaſte for a time and in parte
and to procure ſome good to man:Iſa 58. 5, what will it doe when therevnto
is adioyned the caſting downe and humbling of the ſoule, the afflicting
& renting of it, with ſorrowe for ſinne? Shall it not then be much
more effectuall to pacify gods wrath though kindled or broken out
againſt vs, and moue him to be good and gratious vnto vs? Moreouer
if the performance of this outwarde and bodily ſeruice to god by
ſinners, his enemyes, be auayleable with the Lorde for theire good
much more ſhall the ſame preuaile when not only it, but alſo the inwarde
and ſpirituall worſhip is performed by the righteous, the frēds
and children of god: finally if theſe thinges apart, if the outward and
bodely ſeruice alone: if feruent prayer alone if the true humbling &
caſting downe of man vnder the hande of god alone, be of power to
preuayle with god: how much more ſhall theſe three when they doe
meete togither, as they doe in a true faſt, be of force to preuayle with
god to that end & purpoſe for which they are vſed?
               Thus we ſee that the faſting and prayer of the faithfull is mighty
with god:gen, 32, 24, 26, and that as it is ſaide of Iaacob wraſtling with god: that hee
would not let him goe vntil he had bleſſed him: ſo it may fitly and as trulie,
be ſaide hereof: that it wreſtling as it were with the Lorde will neuer
let him alone vntil ſuch time as he hath bleſſed the party or parties
for whome it is vſed. VVhich well and dulye conſidered, what
man is there fearinge god, and vnfeynedlye deſirous of the welfare of
himſelfe and the church of god, which will not apply himſelfe to the
practice thereof, when and as oft as god ſhall giue iuſte occaſion. Is
there any euill of ſinne or puniſhment, either vpon or towardes vs,
our huſbandes, wyues, children, parentes, or the church of god, either
doe we or it ſtande in neede of ſome good which we hunger & thirſt
after? then let vs humble our ſoules in faſtinge and prayer: for wee ſee
that the ſame hauing bene vſed in the like caſe by the people of god,
hath proſpered & preuayled mightely with the Lord. yea if we be deſirous

from the heart to be freed from the ſaide euil, or to obteyne the
good is lacking: how can we but take vp and vſe this holy exerciſe in
ſuch a caſe conſidering it is the beſt and ſureſt meanes that god himſelfe
hath ordeyned to ſuch ende and durpoſe. No maruayle then
though the hand of god lye and remayne vpon vs, or many of vs &
many bleſſings be wanting vnto vs: when we are wantinge and come
ſhort in the performance of this duty: for who knoweth not that as
the papiſts are too common and ſuper ſtitious herein on the one ſide
ſo we on the other are too ſhort and prophane: It ſauoreth of preciſenes,
and of the ſpirit, to be giuen much to faſting and prayer. Is not
this the faſting that god hath choſen to looſe the bandes of wickednes,Iſa 58, 6. 7,
to take of the heauy burthen, and to let the oppreſſed goe free?
Is there any better abſtinence then this? And is not this the true faſte?
(ſay ſome) to faſt from ſinne? why then require you any more? Againe
this faſting or preciſe abſtaining from all meate and drinck, and
other comfort of this life for a day (ſomuch vrged by ſome) was commaunded
to the Iewes and they indeede by vertue of that commaundement
were bound thereto: but it reacheth not it ſelf to vs in that
being ceremoniall, with other ceremonyes it was abrogated by Chriſt.
Thus farre we are (euen we that profeſſe ro worſhipe god aright, &
accordinge to his worde) from the practiſe of this parte of gods worſhipe,
that we diſpute and pleade againſt it. yea ſome ſtaye not there
but proceede further: to contemne, ſcorne, and reproache nor only
mens perſons, but the holy exerciſe it ſelfe. But what ſpirit poſſeſſeth
theſe men, trow we? Surely not that ſpirit that moued the people &
holy men of god before ſpoken of,act. 
                        •
                      9, & 10. 30 & 13. 2. & 14, 23, to the practile therof: nor that ſpirit
that moued the holy Apoſtles, & others after, to the practiſ of the
ſame, euen in the time of the goſpel & after that abrogation by Chriſt
they ſpeake of: nor the holy ſpirit of god, or the lord himſelfe by his
ſpirit, who of his mercie, and not for the merrit or deſert of the worke
hath ſo greatly bleſſed and rewarded them that haue exerciſed them
ſelues therein,math, 9, 14, 15 & 6, 16, 17, 18, and performed that ſeruice vnto him. Finally, not the
ſpirit of Chriſt, who 1 in foretellinge that his people ſhoulde faſt 2 in
directinge them touchinge the manner therof (in the outwarde carriage
of themſelues towardes men) 3 in promiſinge a reward to them
that ſhalbe obedient therein: doth therin and therby not only require
faſtinge of his. people as a dutie or ſeruice to be done to god, but alſo
(as beinge a ſinguler parte of gods, worſhipe. and makinge much to
his glorye and our good) laboureth to perſwade vs to the practyſe
therof. farre therfore is that ſpirit from the condemninge and reaſoning
againſt it, yea from the neclect of the ſame. yt remayneth then
that the vncleane ſpirit, poſſeſſe and rule them, at leaſt herin: who as

when he poſſeſed the bodies of them 7 in Lancaſhire did ſome time by
t
                     •
                  e howlings & outcryes he ſent forth, what lay in him, to hinder them
and vs from vſinge of praier and faſtinge, becauſe he well knew howe
it auaileth much with God for the expellinge of him both out of the
bodies and ſoules of men and maketh greatly for the ſubduinge and
ouerthrowe of his kingdome, and the kingdome or power of ſinne
ſo he poſſeſſinge the ſoules of theſe men, doth by there wits toungs,
and otherwiſe, to the vttermoſt of his power, keepe and hinder, not only
them whome he thus ruleth in all diſobedience (herin at the leaſt)
but many others alſo by there meanes from the practiſe hereof.
               VVel, as it is a fearfull thing for a man to vſe his witt, or tongue,
or both to the diſgrace of this holy exerciſe, for it is a ſigne that ſathan
poſſeſſeth his ſoule, which is much worſe then the corporall poſſeſſion
ſo it is an euil thinge to be negligent and careleſſe in the performance
of this dutie, as the moſt, yea almoſt all men are. For where is
he, euen of thoſe that profeſe the feare of God, that doth in any meaſure
ſo often perfourme this dutie and ſeruice to god as he ſhoulde?
that when the lorde ſmiteth him eyther in his ſoule or body, or thoſe
that be neare and deare vnto him, as his wife, child, parents, or the
church of god at hand or a far off or threatneth the ſame: or whē god
withdreweth and keepeth backe from him or any of the aforeſayd
ſome corporal benefit, or ſpirituall bleſſing: doth forthwith betake
him to faſtinge and prayer as to a dutie or ſeruice god therin calleth
him vnto and he is to performe and the beſt meanes to obtaine
that at the handes of god which he deſireth. There be ſome amongſt
vs (bleſſed be god therfore and the lorde increaſe the number) that
make concience of other partes of gods worſhip publique and private:
that be ſwift and readie to heare the worde, to receiue the ſacraments
as often as they be adminiſtred, to praye in church and
chamber no doubt? and yet thoſe euen thoſe I feare, (for the moſt
parte) are ſlowe and backwarde in the performance of this parte of
gods worſhipe. the which cometh to paſſe eyther through our ignorance
here in, for that we knowe not that God as well requireth
this ſeruice of vs, when he giueth occaſion thereof, as the other aboue
ſpecified and ſuch like: or through our inconſideration and
forgetfulnes of this dutie, if wee knowe it: or rather hence that we
are giuen too much to ſpare and pamper our bodies, and can not abide
to tame them, and bringe them into ſubiection by faſtinge
               
               If through ignorance we haue not donne this ſeruice vnto god hitherto
eyther not at all or more ſeldome then we ſhould as I truſt, ſo I
deſire the Chriſtian Reader that that which hath bene ſaide in this behalfe
may helpe a little to remoue that le
                     •
                  t, and further helpe, you

may haue, if you will take the paynes to peruſe the learned treatiſes
which euen in our mother tongue are written of this argument. If in
a ſelfe loue to our fleſhe and feare of weakening our bodyes to much
we haue heretofore bene kept and hindred from this ſoe neceſſarye
and profitable a deuty, let vs ſet before vs 1. the example of the holy
Apoſtle heerein, and ſtriue to walke in his ſteppes whoe knowinge
the pampering of the body to be an enemy to the health and ſaluation
of the ſoule as in effecte he affirmeth: ſayth of himſelfe that hee
did beate downe his body and bring it into ſubiection: the which was
not ſomuch donne by an abſtayninge from the more dainty meates,
                     
                        •
                      cor, 9. 27
or a ſober and moderate vſe of all kindes of meates, eyther of which
yea both which may be performed by one, without any greate takīg
downe of the body: but rather by his often faſting, the which whoſoeuer
ſhall vſe in that manner the ſcripture requireth and as Paule
did ſhall by his owne experience fynde that it is effectuall to beate
downe the body, and bringe it into ſubiection. 2. the examples of
the falſe Apoſtles and theire followers in times paſt and the papiſtes
in theſe dayes, not for our ymitation, in all thinges heerein: but
to provoake vs to the ſame in a better kinde. For is it not a ſhame
for vs that others in theire falſe and ydolatrous worſhyppe ſhall voluntarilye
and of theire owne accord, not ſpare theire bodies: and that
wee in the true worſhipe of God will not doe the like,col. 2. 23. though the
lorde himſelf require it of vs? yes verily. Let vs therefore hereafter
in obedyence to the lordes ordynance or commaundement heerein,
exerciſe our ſelues in prayer and faſtinge, publique and priuate, when
and as oft as god by giuinge iuſt occaſion ſhall call vs therevnto: and
bewaylinge our former ſynne and negligence therein, labour to recompence
the ſame (as much as in vs lyeth) with a future diligence.
And to this ende and purpoſe I beſeech, and that in the name of our
Lorde Ieſus Chriſt, the myniſters of Chriſt and diſpoſers of his miſteryes:
that they woulde be inſtant herein, and amongſt other of
theire doctrines intreate upon this of faſtinge, ſhewing both the neceſſity
thereof, as beinge commaunded of god, and a parte of his
worſhip, and the profit that commeth to thoſe which ſhall exercyſe
themſelues therein, whereof we haue heard: likewiſe the threatninge
denounced againſt the contemners of it, that ſuch the Lorde wil haue
cut of from his people: that ſuch he will deſtroy from amonge his people: &
that this iniquity ſhall not be purged: that by this ſtrong & threefoulde
coarde,Levit. 23. 29 30 
                        〈◊〉
                      
                     
                        •
                     3. 
                        •
                     4. the people of god though backward and vnwillinge, may be
drawne therevnto: for I thinck it meete to ſtire you vp my brethren
by puttinge you in remembrance heereof, though yee haue knowledge
farr aboue my ſelf, and be ſtabliſhed in this truth. And this I

doe ſomuch the rather for that (as I take it) the ſounde of this doctryne
is not hearde ſo much in many of our churches, as ſome other
of no greater truth, neceſſity, and vſe then it is: whence partlye it
commeth to paſſe, that many Chriſtians doe ſo ſeldome performe
this holy and ſpeciall ſeruice of God, and that amonge them ſome are
ſcarcely well acquainted with the ſame.
               Nynthly this rare and greate worke of god maketh greatly for the
conformatiou of the authority and truth of the holy ſcriptures:
                  9. It confirmeth the truth 
                        •
                     nd authoritie of the ſcriptures. this appeareth as by the 
                        •
                     lde teſtament ſo by infinit places of the newe. the ſcriptures
rell vs that there are wicked ſpirits called dyuels: and this wee
which were eye witneſſes haue as it were with our bodily eyes ſeene
for though we ſawe them not indeede, neither poſſibly coulde, becauſe
they are inuiſible creatures, yet we beheld them in theire operations
and effects.
               In the holy ſcriptures we reade that theſe ſpirits are giuen to blaſphemy
to lyinge, to deceipt, indeede not onelye becauſe by theire nature
they are carryed headlong therevnto (as to all manner of iniquity,
where vpon they are called wicked or 
                     
                        •
                     uyll ſpirits) but alſo for
that they moue and ſtirr vp men to the committinge of theſe ſynnes
nowe that the diuell is ſuch.Reu. 2. 9. Ioh, 8, 44. Reuel. 12. 9, & 20. 2. 3. 10. and that the ſcriptures herein ſaith true
we ſee by the former ſtory:act, 19. 12, 13 wherin wee haue hearde of the horrible
blaſphemyes, and vnſpeakeable deceipt of ſathan & might alſo haue
heard of infinite lyes. the lying ſpirits ſent forth.
               In the holy ſcriptures theſe ſpirits are often termed vnclean ſpirits part
lye, to noate their naturall inclination and diſpoſition to all vncleannes:math. 12, 43, marke 1, 23▪ 26 act. 5, 16 & 8, 7.
and partly in regard of the effect and operation they haue and
bring forth in the children of diſobedience. How the ſcripture hath
herein bene verifyed, to paſſe by ſome of thoſe in Lancaſhire who
the day of theire deliuerance in the preſence of many vttered moſte
filthy ſpeaches: the ſhamefull and vnnaturall vncleannes of W Somers
or rather of the ſpirit in him, doth beare witnes. who in the preſence
of many acted in moſt vncleane and vyle manner the ſinne of whore
dome: and after his repoſſeſſion when he had committed ſuch vncleannes,
firſt with a dog, then and ſpecially with a bitch, as is not fitt
once to be named, he then got the bitch into the bed with him, and
there would haue committed you may ymagine what abhomination:
& this alſo he did before diuers.mark 9. 17. with many others through out the goſpell, as hath 
                        〈◊〉
                      ſheweed before.
               
               The Scripture affirmeth that theſe ſpirits ſometimes enter into
men, that being in them, they miſerably vexe them in theire bodies,
and that often and on the ſuddayne, that the ſame notwithſtandinge
the poſſeſſed are not hurt at all, although by the vyolence they ſomtimes
offer vnto them, one would thinck they ſhould ſpoyle or greatly
harme them: that they cauſe them to wallowe, ſome, cry, 
                     •
                  naſh

with the teeth, throwe them into the fyer and water, and ſeeke to
deſtroy them or take away theire liues, that they make them dumb,
deafe, blynde, ſomtimes depriue them of the right vſe of their witts,
Finally that they ſhewe forth in the parties whome they poſſeſſe, extraordinary
and ſupernaturall ſtrength, and ſupernaturall knowledg:
nowe the moſt of theſe haue bene found true in the parties aboue named
but all & euery of them in W. Somers
               
               The ſcriptures ſay that when a ſtrong man armed keepeth his pallace
the thinges that he poſſeſſeth are in peace: but when a ſtronger then he commeth
vpon him,
                  Luk. 11. 21. then that peace being at an ende there beginneth war,
as I may ſay, for that ſemeth to be inſinuated. The truth of this hath
appeared in their extreame vexation, and continuance therein the
whole day of theire diſpoſſeſſion: at which time Chriſt Ieſus the ſtronger
came vpon the ſtrong armed man, ouercame him, tooke away his
armour, and deuided his ſpoyles. Secondly in Somers continuinge quyet
from ſathans vexation although he be in him, the reaſon whereof is
becauſe the ſtrong man armed keepeth the houſe, and hath quyet poſſeſſion,
all thinges being accordīg to his deſire: for the younge
man denyeth that he was poſſeſt, yea affirmeth that he counterfeited
and the world alſo ſaith the ſame: and thus lyes & falſhood are imbraced
for truth, almoſt of all men, and the truth indeede reiected,
and the louers thereof hated, ſcorned, deſpiſed, ſlandered, and ſome
of them worſe intreated: It going thus it is not againſt, but according
to the ſcriptures, yea herein the ſcripture is fulfilled in that Somers is
quyet and free from all moleſtation by ſathan, notwithſtandinge he
is in him, becauſe the ſtrong man armed ſaith the ſcripture keepinge
the houſe without reſiſtance, there is peace: but let Chriſt Ieſus the
ſtronger come vpon him in the meanes he hath ſanctified for the recouery
of this houſe to himſelfe the right owner, and the expellinge
of the vſurper, then vndoubtedly there will be an end of this vniuſte
peace,Iames, 4. 7. eph. 6. 17. 18. and therein likewiſe we ſhall ſee the ſcripture fulfilled.
               In the holy ſcriptures it is written that if we reſiſt the diuell, he will flye
vnderſtand this not only of ſathans temptations, but alſo of his perſon.
and then affirme I that this ſcripture hath bene fulfilled. In lyke
manner the ſcriptures tell vs, that the way to reſiſt Sathan ſo as wee
may put him to flight and ouercome, is to vſe prayer and the word
of god, which is the ſworde of the ſpirit. Vnderſtand this as the former,
& herein this ſcripture alſo hath bene verifyed.
               The holy ſcriptures ſhewe how that greate thinges euen incredible
hath bene brought to paſſe by prayer and faſtinge:this hath bene ſhewed before out of the 2. chr 20. & other pla
                     
                        ••
                      of ſcripture. more particulerly,
that euen diuels thereby haue bene and are to be caſte ovt
of men: herein the ſcripture likewiſe hath bene fulfilled.
               
                  
In the ſcriptures it is recorded, that when the deuil goeth out of
the man whome he poſſeſſeth, he renteth him ſore. c
                        •
                     yeth aloude the
poſſeſſed after lying as dead: nowe many of vs euen hundreds haue
ſeene with our eyes,mark. 1, 26. & 26. act. 8, 7. math. 12. 43. Luk. 11. 24. and hearde with our eares this ſcripture fulfilled
               In the holy ſcriptures we reade that when the vucleane ſpirit is gon
out of a man he will retorne ſeeking to reenter. Beſides the reports of all
and euery of the parties poſſeſſed, the ſudden & vnſpeakeable frights
and terrors which many of vs haue often beheld in the ſpirits aſſaites
to reenter, doe greatly confirme this retorne vpon our Demoniackes
all which was donne that the ſcripture herein might be fulfilled. The
ſcripture ſaith that if the diuelſ fynde the houſe empty ſwept and garniſhed
that is the partye out of whom he is come, prepared to receaue
him, which is when he is empty or voyd of the graces of the ſpirit,
and garniſhed or repleniſhed with iniquities: (for the furniture muſt
be ſutable to the gheſt, the vncleane ſpirit muſt be interteyned in
all vncleannes) that then he reentreth and recouereth his pray, as otherwiſe
although he would fayne yet he cannot. Nowe who ſeeth
not the caſe to be ſo with W. Somers for were he not empty. ſwepte,
and garniſhed he would neuer deny the work of god which hath benſhewed
on him? and giue forth to the great diſhonor of god, hurte
of many and danger of his owne ſoule, that he had counterfeyted:
not to ſpeake anything of his open and notorious lyinge and doublinge
with that falſe tongue of his, nor of his charging mee with the
inſtructing of him, neither of his fearefull periury ſomtimes betaking
himſelf bodye and ſoule to the diuell if he counterfeyted: at other
times proteſting as depely that he did counterfeyt: In the repoſſeſſion
then of Somers it is euident that this ſcripture is fulfilled: as on
the other ſide this ſcripture conſidered and his preſent eſtate & condition,
I meane that he is empty? howe can it otherwiſe be but that he
is repoſeſſed? further the ſcripture ſaith, that the vncleane ſpirit retorning
and reentering he doth it with 7. other worſe then himſelfe. Now
this hath bene found true in Kath: Wrights repoſſeſſion: & I doubt
not but that the truth thereof will one day appeare alſo in Somers whē
he ſhall come againe to be diſpoſſeſſed: if ſo be at any time it will be
graunted, that the meanes for the diſcouery of ſathan, and after for
the caſting of him out may be vſed.
               Finally in the holy ſcripture it is ſaid, that if the vncleane ſpirit retorning
finde the party out of whome he came, empty. ſwept, and garniſhed:
that he will not only enter in and take vp his lodging there: as it
were for a night as a ſtranger doth in an other mans houſe, and away
in the morninge, as he doth (as I may ſay) in his firſt poſſeſſion: but
will nowe as hauinge further intereſt there then he had before, make

                     〈2 pages missing〉
                  
                  
ſcriptures ſpeake truelye in and concerning the matter of poſſeſſion
diſpoſſeſſion, and repoſſeſſion. and not accordinge to the truth in other
things? wi
                     •
                   any be ſo abſurde, as to thinke and confeſſe that the
holy ſcriptures ſpeake moſt truely as touchinge the tormenting here
on eard
                     •
                  e of the bodyes of thoſe men the diuels enter into and will
they not as well beleue the ſame writinges tellinge them,pſal 11. 6. 
                        〈◊〉
                      3. 10. 12 & 25 
                        〈…〉
                     . 24, 14, that after
death and in an other world the diuels ſhall torment the workes of
iniquity in hell fyre, which neuer ſhall pe quenched, and of which
tormentes there will neuer be an ende. And ſeinge the ſubſtance of
this booke (I meane the holy byble) is ſpent in reportinge thinges
incredible to fleſh and bloud, ſuch as the reaſon of man re
                     •
                  ecteth, &
ſcorneth, among which theſe concerning diuels, their nature, power,
entrance into men &c. are ſome: and that this is it which letteth man
from imbracing it as a word of truth: and that ſundry of theſe incredible
& impoſſible thinges to reaſon, we euidently ſee with our eyes,
and our ſelues of our owne knowledge knowe to be moſt true, why
ſhould we not be fullye perſwaded or the deuine and certaine trueth
of the other incredible thiugs there reported? and that all thoſe alſo in
theire time we ſhall as certainely ſee fulfilled, as we haue alredy in part
ſenee theſe? Thus me thinketh the fulfillinge of many ſayinges in the
ſcriptures in this worke of god, ſhould be a mo
                     •
                  ue and inducement
to many, to giue that credit vnto them which percaſe be
                     •
                  ore they
did not: yea ſurely if man will but giue ea
                     •
                  e to 
                     •
                  is reaſon wherewith
god hath indued him, and diſcuſſe or debate hereof after this ſayde
manner it will perſwade him herevnto.
               I do not ſaye that this is effectuall or of Power, and ſent of god
to that ende, to worke ſauinge faith in man: ffor I knowe faith cometh
by hereinge and how ſhall they beleeue in him of whome they haue not
hearde?
                  Rom. 10. 14. 17. But this I meane, that he which before thought baſely and ga
ue no regarde or credit to the holy worde of god, by this rare work
of his and ſerious 
                     •
                  meditation thereof, may well be brought to thinke
more reuerently of the worde, and to be perſwaded of the truth therof,
where before he doubted, and ſo brought to the hiſtoricall faithe
as we call it, where beinge happely he will not reſte, but there by be
drawen to giue eare vnto the worde preached, and ſo be brought to
that faith,1. cor. 1. 18. 21. 1. peter. 1. 
                        •
                     . the end whereof will be the ſaluation of his ſoule: whereof
if this worke of god be an occaſion to any, oh howe will ſuch bleſſ
God for the ſame, and ioye in this that the ſounde there of came to
his eare.
               Thus we plainely ſee howe this worke of god ſarueth to confirme
the authority and truth of the holy ſcriptures I meane howe
it ſom what helpeth to perſwade vs incredulous men to beleue, or more

ſtedfaſtly to beleue that the are deuine and certainly true: in that
we ſee many thinges ſpoken of in them, and very incredible to fleſh
and blud, as well as others there mentioned, fulfilled before our eyes
and to be moſt true.
               Seinge then no hurte, but mnch good as we haue heard cometh
by this worke, why ſhoulde any be offended with vs, for bearinge
witneſſe to this work? and why doe any ſtand vp and ſett them ſelues
againſt this worke indeuoringe to annihilat the ſame? Certainly in fo
doing, they are not only iniurious to man, hindring him of the good.
fruite he might reape thereby: but alſo aduerſaries to god. and his
glory, prophaninge and not hallowinge or ſanctifiinge this his name
Chriſt Ieſus to ſuch as he cured was wont to ſay:math, 9. 2. 29. mark. 5. 34. Luke. 7, 50. Iohn, 5. 4. math, 8. 4. mark. 5. 43, & 36. & 8, 26, 3 math. 17: 19: mark. 8. 5, 19▪ Ink. 8. 39. 
                  be it vnto thee as
thou beleueſt: thy faith hath made thee whole: goe in peace: thyſinns are
forgiuen thee: ſynne no more, leaſt a worſe thinge come vnto thee: and to
many, ſee thou tell no man of this I haue donne vnto thee: yea ſomtimes
he ſtraightly charged others that they ſhould tell no man what was
doune. But to him out of whome he had caſt out the dyuell he ſaide
goeſhewe what greate thinges the Lorde hath donne vnto thee: and howe
hee hath compaſſion on thee. It is alſo to be obſerued, that we reade not
the ſame or like ſpeach to this,this worke is mongeſt and boue ſom otl workes of go to be publiſh the greateris there ſinne w
                        •
                      goe about to ſmother it. vſed to any beſides of all thoſe that
Ieſus healed: whereby it may ſeeme that the Lorde Ieſus woulde not
haue this worke in any caſe ſmothered and kept cloſe no not for a
time, but rather ſet as a candle in a candleſtick vpon the table that it
may giue ſuch light vnto men as we haue already ſeene: and no maruaile
conſidering the wordes followinge of our Sauiour: goe ſlew (ſaith
he) what great thinges the Lorde hath donne vnto thee. Are there greate
thinges to be looked vpon in this worke we ſpeake of: euen by the
teſtimony of Chriſt himſelfe? whoe then and where is he if Somers,
the 7. in Lancaſhire and the reſt were poſſeſſed, and diſpoſſeſſed, that
dare ſtand vp to darken and obſcure the ſaide worke, whereby the
people of god be kept from behouldinge the greate thinges of the lord
and ſo hindred from the greate good they might reape thereof, and
god from his glory? If it be euident that vpon theſe perſons this worke
of god hath bene wrought: who ſeeth not how contrary minded
ſuch are vnto Chriſt?
               Of the 70 deſciple whom Ieſus ſent forth by there preachinge &
miracles to prepare and make awaye for him ſelfe, and his miniſtrie,
it is ſayde: that when they had accompliſhed this worke, they returned
againe with ioye ſayinge,
                  Luke, 10. 1
                        •
                      18. 19. 
                  Lorde euen the deuils are ſubdued to vs through
thy name. In this ſubiection of the ſpirits vnto them, aboue all the greate

workes and miracles they wrought they reioyced: wherein how ſo
euer they exceeded, wherevpon Chriſt reproueth them ſayinge In
this reioyce not that the ſpirits are ſubdued vnto you,
                  
                     
                        〈…〉
                     
                   
                  but rather reioyce be
cauſe your names are written in heauen. yet marke that he doth it ſo as
that he denyeth not but that they might reioyce there in, but rather
indede aloweth and commendeth the ſame, ſo that we keepe a meaſure:
and make it not our cheife ioye, the which ſhoulde be that our
names are written in heauen. wherof the other giueth no aſſurance, for
aſmuch as it may fall into a reprobate.
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     , 7, 
                        〈◊〉
                     .
               
               And truely how can they which heare of the aforeſayde worke of
God but reioyce,
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      we ought, ſo 
                        •
                     e can not but ioce in this 
                        •
                     orke, if wee 
                        •
                     ill conſider of In great fault 
                        •
                     en are they 
                        •
                     ho malig
                        •
                     e it. when they ſee the Lorde Ieſus ſubduinge Satan vnto
men. when we ſee by praier and faſtinge deuylls caſt out of men:
whe: we ſee God perfourming his promiſe: the ſcripture before our
eyes fulfilled, and our chriſtian brethren alſo delyuered from the torments
of Satan. If wee turne our eye eyther to God, or man: can
wee chuſe but reioyce and bleſſe God for ſuch a worke? greatly then
are they to blame, and farre from that affection they ſhoulde haue,
who are diſquieted and offended here with: and moſt faultie of all
ſhall they be, who when the worke ſhall be made manefeſt to there
conciences, (as I truſt by this treatiſe it is,) ſhall yet notwithſtanding
lift vp there heele agaynſt it.
               
                  
Through the want both of a corrector and of the authour, their be very
many faultes in the printing (among which theſe following be ſome) 
                     〈◊〉
                  
with I deſire the reader with patience to beare.
               pag. 6, chaire open, for chai
                     •
                  e & open. p. 7. departed in for departed 8 
                     〈…〉
                  
for ſt
                     •
                  e caned. p. 10, fleamthicke for fle
                     •
                  n c & lhiere, p 13. 
                     〈…〉
                  
for her: p 1, 2 pence read 3 Pence, p, 33, the diuers for diuers: ib, wherwith 
                     〈…〉
                  
p 22: derelinquiſti for derellquiſtr, ibi fortaken for forgotten. p. 
                     •
                  5, 
                     〈…〉
                  
p, 49, learne for leave, p 51. continancy for continuance he had in: p 57 
                     〈…〉
                  
for with all poſſible p 60: who indued for who was indu
                     ••
                  . p 91. the 
                     〈◊〉
                   & prayer
for the faſting and prayer they vſed.
            
         
      
   