
      
         
            
            
            THE
WONDERFVLL
Combate (for Gods glorie
and Mans saluation) betweene
CHRIST and
Satan. Opened in seuen most excelent, learned
and zealous Sermons, vpon the
Temptations of CHRIST, in
the wildernes, &c.
            Seene and allowed.
            
               LONDON
Printed by Iohn Charlwood
for Richard Smith: and are to
be sold at his Shop, at the
West doore of Paules.
1592.
         
         
            
            
            ¶To the right honorable,
Sir Iohn Puckering,
Knight, Lord Keeper of the
great Seale of England, and one of her
Highnes most Honorable priuie Councell:
after all terrestriall blessings and
ioyes, the perfect possession of all celestiall
comforts hartely wished.
            
               IF the painefull labours
of the Learned
(right Honorable)
especially in
Gods cause, are generally aboue
all things reputed most
worthy acceptation: the lesse
then neede I feare (my good
Lord) the receipt of this smal
Volume, containing not so
manie leaues as most excellent
Lessons; nor so manie
lines, as sound assurances of

eternall life. The Tree from
whence this heauenlie fruite
was gathered, may well bee
discerned both by the beautie
and taste: the one not so
commendable in the shewe,
but the other ten times more
comfortable in substaunce.
And, as hee is a sweete sounding
Cimball, or rather a singuler
instrument in Gods
Church, for the propagation
of his Truth, and speciall
reliefe of hunger-pining
soules: euen so doo these seauen
Sermons beare witnes of
him: wading so weightely in
Gods cause, as by our Sauiors

absolute Conquest of the diuell
in all his Temptations:
our harts are cheered & consciences
prepared, to imitate
so good a guide, whensoeuer
our trialls happen. So fearing
least by needles circumstances,
I should seeme troublesome
to your Honour, when
the goodnes of the woorke
doth plainly declare it self: in
humble duetie I conclude,
praying for your Honours
long health and happines, as
also to encrease the number
that maye bee benefited by
these Sermons.
            
               
               
            
         
         
            
            To the Christian Reader.
            CHristian Reader, hauing sent vnto
mee by a Gentleman (a friend
of mine) certaine excellent Sermons,
with desire to haue them
published to the world: after perusing
them to my great comfort, I imparted
them to other my friendes of better
iudgement than my selfe: who did earnestly
encourage mee to the publishing of
them, which to my great cost I haue perfourmed:
Hoping the wel disposed wil be
thankefull to God for them. And because
they are such, as my best praise can no
way sufficiently commend, I leaue theyr
praise to thy selfe, when thou hast receiued
comfort by them. Finally, as the Author
to me is not certainly knowen, so am
I driuen to let them passe without name:
desiring you to suspend your iudgements
whose they are. Thus not doubting but
I haue done God good seruice, and pleased
manie that happily haue heard them
preached, I end.
         
         
            
            
            ¶Two most excellent
Praiers, which the Preacher
commonly vsed before his
Exercises.
            
               THat the name of
God may be glorified
by this our
assembly, and his
holie Woord blessed, to the
end he hath ordained it: let
vs in all humblenes, present
our selues before the mercie
seat of God the father, in the
name & mediation of Christ
Iesus his deer sonne, through

the sanctifying of his holy
spirit, with an vnfained humble
acknowledgement, both
of our owne vnworthines, to
receiue anie of his graces, and
vnablenes when we haue receiued
them, to make right
vse of them. And both these,
by reason of our manifolde
sundry sinnes and offences, among
the rest, of this one (as
a chiefe one) that wee diuers
times haue bin hearers of his
diuine and precious woord,
without care or cōscience to
become the better therby: let
vs beseech him in the obedience
of the life, & sacrifice of

the death of Christ Iesus his
deer sonne to receiue both vs
& this our humble confession:
to pardon both this and
the rest of our sinnes, and to
turne from vs the punishments
deseruedly due vnto
them all; especially that punishment,
which most vsualy
he doth exercise at such meetings
as this is, which is, the
receiuing of his sacred word
into a dead & dull hart: & so
departing with no more delight
to heare, nor desire to
practise, than we came with.
That so, throgh the gracious
assistance of his good Spirite

inward, adioined to the outward
ministerie of his word
at this present: the thinges
which shall bee spoken and
heard, may redound to some
glorie of his euerlasting blessed
name, and to some Christian
instruction & comfort
of our owne soules, thorow
Iesus Christ our onely Lord
and Sauiour.
            
               
               This praier ended, hee proceedeth
againe in this manner.
               
                  ANd as the Church of
Christ, wheresoeuer it
is at this present assembled,
& met together, is
mindfull of vs that be
here▪ 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   is it our parts and duties, in
our praiers to remember it, recommending
vnto the Maiestie of Almightie
God, the prosperous and florishing
Estate thereof: beseeching
God the Father, for Christ Iesus hys
sonnes sake, to bee mercifull to all his
seruaunts, euen his whole Militant
Church, scattred farre and wide ouer
the face of the whole earth: both preseruing
it in those trueths that it hath
recouered, from the sundrie grose and
superstitious errors of the former age,
and restoring it also vnto that vnitie
(in his good time) which it hath almost
lost, and daily looseth, through
the vnchristian and vnhappy contentions
of these dayes of ours.
               And in this Church, let vs be mindfull

of that part thereof, which most
especially & principally needeth our
remembrance: that is, the poore afflicted
members of Christ Iesus, in what
place, for what cause, or with what
crosse soeuer: that it would please
God to minister into our hearts the
same spirit of compassion and feruencie,
now in the time of their need, that
we would wish should be ministred
into theirs, in the time of our need, for
them to become suters for vs. And let
vs wish them al from the Lord (in his
good time) the same ioyfull deliuerance;
and till his good time bee, the
same measure of patience, that wee
would wish vnto our owne soules, or
would haue them intreate and praye
for at his hands for vs, if euer our case
shall be as theirs is at this present.
               And forasmuch as those Churches
or members of Churches, which enioy
the outward benefits of the Lord;
as of health, plentie, peace, and quyetnesse:
doo manie times as much▪
                  
and (for the most part) much more
neede the prayers of Christ his faithfull
Congregation, than those that
are vnder his hande in the House of
affliction: Let vs beseech him for
them also, that he will giue vnto each
and euerie of them, a thankfull receiuing
of those his benefites, a sober vsing
of them, and a Christian employing
of them, to his glorie that hath
sent them.
               And in these our prayers, let vs be
mindfull also of the Churche and
Countrey wherein we liue, yeelding
first and formost euer-more, our vnfained
and hartie thankes-giuings, for
all his mercies and gracious fauours
vouchsafed this Land of ours: and
namely for our last, no lesse gracious
than meruailous deliuerance from our
enemies, and for all those good signes
and tokens of his louing fauor which
euer since, and daylie he sheweth towards vs.
               
                  And together (withall) let vs beseech
him, that while these dayes of
our peace doo last, hee will open our
eies to see, & encline our harts to seek
after those things, which maye make
for the continuance, and establishing
of this peace long amongst vs.
               And (as by especiall dutie we all
stand bound) let vs commend vnto
his Maiestie, his chosen seruaunt Elizabeth
our Soueraigne, by his grace,
of England, France, & Ireland Queene,
Defendresse of the faith, and ouer all
estates and persons within these her
Dominions, (next and immediatelie
vnder God) supreame Gouernesse:
let vs beseech God (daylie more and
more) to perswade her Highnes hart,
that the aduauncement and flourishing
of this Kingdome of hers, consisteth
in the aduancement and flourishing
of the Kingdome of his Sonne
Christ within it; that it may be therfore
her Maiesties speciall care and
studie, that both her Highnes in that
great place wherein GOD hath set

her, and euerie one of vs in the seuerall
degrees wherein we stand, may be
as carefull to testifie vnto the whole
world, a speciall care and endeuour
that we haue, for the propagation of
the Gospell of his sonne: as Christ Iesus
hath shewen himselfe, by many arguments
both of olde and of late, (and
that of weight) that he hath caried &
still carieth a speciall care of the preseruation
and welfare of vs all.
               Let vs commend also vnto God, the
seuerall Estates of the Land, for the
right honorable of the Nobilitie, and
of her Highnes priuie Councell; that
they may be carefull (from the spirite
of the Lord) to deriue al their Councells;
that so God, which sendeth the
Councell, may send it good and happie
successe also, and maie confound
& cast out the councels of the enemy.
               For the estate of the Cleargie, the
right reuerend Fathers in GOD, in
whose hand the gouernment of the
Church is, and all other inferior Ministers;
that he will giue vnto each and

euerie of them, sufficiēt graces for the
discharge of their functions, & together
(with the graces) both a faithfull
and a fruitful employing of them.
               For the Estate of Magistracie, and
namely for the Gouernors of this honorable
Citie: that they together with
the rest, according to the trust that is
reposed in them, may be no lesse carefull
speedely, without delay; than incorruptly,
without partialitie, to administer
iustice to the people of God.
               For the Estate of the Commons,
that they all in a Christian obedience,
towardes each and euerie of their superiors,
and in a godly loue, with the
frutes and duties there of one towards
another, maye walke worthie of that
glorious calling whereunto they are
called. And that the blessings of the
Lord may not only be with vs for our
times, but successiuely also be deliuered
to our posterity: let vs beseech
God, that he will visit with the spirite
of his grace, the two Vniuersities,
Cambridge and Oxford, all Schooles of

learning, and places of education of
youth: that they being watered with
the deaw of his blessing, maye yeeld
foorth such plants, as may both serue
for a present supply of the Churches
need: and also in such sort furnish the
generations that are to come, that our
posteritie also may bee counted vnto
the Lord, for a holy seede, and a Christian
generation, as we our selues are.
               And thus recommending our selues vnto
the praiers of Christ his Church, as wee haue
commended Christ his whole Church by our
praiers vnto the Maiestie of Almightie God,
reposing our trust and confidence, neyther in
our owne prayers, nor in the Churches prayers,
but in the alone mediation of Christ Iesus
our Aduocate: Let vs vnto him, (as vnto our
sole Intercessor) offer vp these our supplications,
that hee maye present them to God his
Father, for the effectuall obtayning of these▪
and whatsoeuer graces else he knoweth needfull
for his whole Church, and for vs, calling
vppon him, as himselfe in his Gospell hath
taught vs.
               Our Father, &c.
            
         
         
            
            
            The Texts of these seuen
Sermons following, taken
out of the 4. chapter of
S. Mathewes Gospell, beginning
at the first verse,
and ending with the
eleuenth.
            THen was Iesus led aside of the Spirit
into the wildernesse, to be tempted of
the diuell.
            2 And when he had fasted fortie daies
& 40. nights, he was afterward hungry.
            3 Then came to him the Tempter, &
said, If thou be the Sonne of God, command
that these stones be made bread.
            4 But he answering said, It is written,
Man shal not liue by bread onely, but by
euerie word that proceedeth out of the
mouth of God.
            5 Then the diuell tooke him vp into

the holy Cittie, and set him on a pinacle of
the Temple▪
            
            6 And saide vnto him, If thou be the
Sonne of God, cast thy selfe downe: for it
is written, that he will giue his Angelles
charge ouer thee, and with their handes
they shall lift thee vp, least at any time
thou sholdst dash thy foot against a stone.
            7 Iesus said vnto him, It is written againe,
Thou shalt not tempt the Lord thy
God▪
            
            8 Againe the diuell tooke him into an
exceeding high Mountaine, and shewed
him all the kingdomes of the world, and
the glorie of them,
            9 And saide to him, All these will I
giue thee, if thou wilt fall down and worship
mee.
            10 Then said Iesus vnto him, Auoyde
Satan: for it is written, Thou shalt worship
the Lord thy God, and him onely
shalt thou serue.
            11 Then the diuel left him: & behold,
the Angels came, & ministred vnto him.
            These Texts are the Gospell, appoynted
to be read, the first Sunday in Lent.
         
      
      
         
            
            
            
            The first Sermon.
            
               
                  MATTHEVV Chap. 4. ver. 1. Then was Iesus led aside of the spirite
into the wildernes, to be tempted
of the diuell.
            
            
               OVr Sauiour Christ by
his Natiuitie took vppon
him the shape of
man; by his Circumcision,Gal. 4. 4.
he tooke vpon
him,Phil. 2. 7. and submitted himselfe to the
degree of a seruant: by the first, hee
made himselfe in case and able to performe
the worke of our redemption;
by the second, hee entred bound for
the performing of it. All was to this
end, that he might restore the worke

of God to his originall perfection. In
the bringing of which to passe, it was
decreed by God in the beginning (as a
thing necessarie) that the head of the
Serpent (by whose meanes it was violated
and defaced) should bee brused.1▪ Ioh. 3. 8
And For this cause (saith Saint Iohn)
appeared the Sonne of GOD, that hee
might loose the workes of the Diuell:
whereof this was the first. For in
Gen. 3. wee read, that his first worke
after his fall, was enuiously to tempt
our first parents, and thereby to ouerthrow
all man-kinde. And heere,
streight after our Sauiour was baptized,
hee with like enuie setteth on
him. Christ therefore first beginneth
with the ouercomming of that: and
for that purpose he is heere led forth
to be tempted, that so being tempted
he might ouercome.
            Our Sauiour makes this question,
Matth. 11. 7. vpon their going out to
see Iohn Baptist, What went yee out to
see? As if he should haue said, They
would haue neuer gone out into the

wildernesse, except it had been to see
some great and worthie matter: and
behold a greater and a worthier matter
heere. If there bee anie thing in
the wildernes worthie the going out
to behold, this is a matter much worthie
of it. Or if there bee any matter
worthy the hearing, it is worthy our
attention to heare; not Michael the
Archangel disputing about the body
of Moses with the diuell, Iude 9. but
our owne matter, argued by two such
cunning aduersaries; to see the combat
betwixt our grand enemie, who
goeth about like a roaring Lyon seeking
to deuour vs,1. Pet. 5. 8 & our Arch-duke:
for so he is called, Heb. 12. 2. to see our
King of olde, Psalm. 74. 12. the pawne
of our inheritance, and our Prince of
new, or Prince by vsurpation, the
Prince of this world, Ioh. 4. 30. enter
the lists together;Ioh. 3. 14 to see the wisdome
of the new Serpent, match the craftinesse
and subtiltie of the olde serpent,
Reu. 12. 9. to see the Lyon of the Tribe
of Iuda,
               Apo. 5. 5 combatting with the roaring

Lyon, 1. Pet. 5. 8. If any thing be worthie
the sight, it is this.
            Though there shuld come no profit
to vs by the victorie, yet were it worth
the sight, in this respect, onely to behold
how these Champions behaue
themselues; that so we may be warned
before hand, by seeing the strength of
our Aduersarie: and that also seeing
the manner of his fight, and of our Sauiours
defence, we may be instructed
how to arme our selues, and how to
ward accordingly. For let vs be sure,
that since the Diuell spared not to
tempt our Sauiour, he will bee much
more bold with vs: If he haue doone
this to the greene tree, what will become
of the drie? Luke 23. 31. If hee
haue sought our ouerthrow in Christ,
how much more will he doo it in our
selues? If our dayes heere bee but as
the daies of an hireling, Iob. 7. 1. & our
whole life be but as a continuall warfare,
2. Tim. 2. 4. then is it behoouefull
for vs, to haue some intelligence of our
enemies forces & drifts. It is said, his

darts are fierie, Eph. 6. 16. Heere wee
may see the manner of his casting
them, that so sathan should not circumuent
vs, 2. Cor. 2. 11. Let vs marke
how our Sauiour wardeth and defendeth
himselfe, that so we may bee armed
with the same minde, 1. Pet. 4. 1.
Let vs therefore goe out into the wildernes
to see it.
            
               Then Iesus. This is the description
of the entrie into the temptation, and
it containeth (as a weightie historie)
many circumstances importing great
matters, which may be reduced to 7.
braunches or heads. First, the two
champions 1. Christ, and 2. Sathan:
3. the leader of Iesus into the lists, who
is said to be the holy Ghost: 4. the end,
which was the conflict it selfe, that is,
to be tempted: 5. the day of the battell,
expressed vnder the word Then:
6. the lists themselues, that is, the wildernes:
7. Christ his preparation to it,
that is, his fasting▪
            
            
               
               I.
               First, for the partie defendaunt,
Christ, who (as God) giueth food to
euerie liuing creature, Psal. 136. 25. and
(as God and man) with fiue loaues &
two fishes fed 5000. besides women
and children, Matt. 14. 11. He that is
said to be the verie meate it self, wherby
we liue eternally, Ioh. 6. is here said
to be hungrie. He, before whom thousand
thousands are said to minister, &
10000. thousands are said to stand before
him, Dan. 7. 10. hath heere for his
companions the wilde beasts: for so
saith Mark. chapt. 1. 13. He, to whom
the Angels minister, vers. 11. is heere
assayled with diuels, which offer vnto
him matter of great indignitie; and
the indignitie which he suffered, leads
vs to the consideration of the greeuousnes
of our sinnes, & of the greatnes
of his loue, both which are measured
by the greatnes of those things
hee suffered for vs; as that hee was
cast out from among the company of

Angels (for so Marke cap. 1. vers. 12.
hath it) into the Desert, to be a companion
of beasts, and so led foorth to
bee tempted; where hee suffered in
his bodie hunger, in his soule temptation:
what is it else, but a proclayming
of his great loue toward vs? As
if hee should (exulting) say, What is
it that shall seperate mee from the
loue of men? Shall temptation? shall
solitarinesse? shall hunger? shall
wearisome labour and trauell? shall
watching? shall anguish of minde,
and bloudie sweate? shall mockes?
shall whippes? shall nayles? shall
speares? shall principalities? That
wee also might vse the same challenge
which Paule dooth in the 8.
Chapter of his Epistle to the Romanes
the 35. verse, What shall seperate
vs from the loue of Christ? shall
tribulation? shall anguish? or persecution?
These two profitable poynts
grow out of the consideration of the
person of the defendant.
            
            
               
               II.
               Secondly, the partie assailant is the
Diuell, who is so called, by reason of
his foule mouth in defaming: for so
dooth the word Diabolus import,
whereby we haue occasion to detest
the sinne of infamie: and it sheweth
what name they deserue, and how to
be esteemed of, in whom that quality
is found. S. Paule 2. Tim. 3. 3. foretold,
that in the latter daies there should be
men diuels, foule mouthed men, euill
speakers: and 1. Tim. 3. 11. he speaketh
of women diuels, because of their
calumnious speaches. In the tongue
wherein Christ spake these words,
namely the Syriack, the fittest woord
that he could finde to signifie the diuells
name, is a word that signifieth
Diuulgator: so that a publisher of infamous
reports, is good Syriacke for
the diuell; as when a man lightly conceaues
a reproach, either forging it
himselfe by misconstruction, or credulously
receiuing it vpon the report

of others, and then is not sorrie for his
brothers ill, Mat. 5. 22. but rather insulteth;
not considering▪ that he himselfe
may fall into the like temptations,
Galat. 6. 1. and so becomes puffed
vp, 1. Cor. 5. 2. and at last falls a blazing
his brothers imperfections, 3. Iohn. 10.
these come right to the diuells qualitie,
they take vpon them the abetting
of the diuels quarrell.
               It is the Diuells occupation to defame
vs first with God, as he did Iob, as
if he had been an hypocrite, and had
serued God onely for gaine, Iob. 1. 9.
and so stands he continually accusing
vs, Apoc. 12. 10. and he also defameth
God with vs, as if he were a God that
did enuie our good, Gen. 3. 1. and so he
here defameth God to Christ, as if he
were carelesse in prouiding for him,
in suffering him to be hungrie. And
from these two defamations proceeds
all euill whatsoeuer, aswell that which
the Diuines cal Malum poenae, as Iob
1. 12. accusing Iob, that he would curse
God if he handled him roughly, and

so got power ouer his goods: as that
which they call Malum culpae. For
his defaming God with vs, was the
cause of all sin: and euerie where still
we see hee laboureth to perswade vs,
that God is an vnkinde God; that so
we may burst forth into those termes,
This good did I get at Gods hand, 2. Ki.
6. 33. to wit, hunger. To this doth he
tempt Christ vers. 3. And as to desperation,
so sometimes to the contrarie,
presumption, as vers. 6. Cast thy selfe
downe, &c. by bringing vs to haue a
base conceit of God, defaming him as
if he were a God of cloutes, not to be
reckned of, as if he were a man to wait
vpon vs, and to take vs vp as oft as we
list to throw our selues down, that we
may say in our harts, as they that were
frozen in their dregs did, Sophon. 1. 12
He neither dooth good nor hurt, it is all
one to serue him, and not to serue him.
Hee tells vs (as verse. 9.) that hee will
giue vs all this, if wee will fall downe
and worship him, as though he were
verie liberall in rewards, & as though

God were vnkinde or vngratefull, not
once regarding vs for all our seruice,
but suffers vs euen to starue. Which
brought men to that passe, as to say,
Malach. 3. 14. that It is but in vaine to
serue God, what gaine is in his seruice?
If he cannot preuaile this way against
vs, then he will trie another way: for,
when (seeing that this temptation succeeded
not) the diuell left Christ, he
departed not for altogether, but went
to come againe (as appeareth in the
fourth of Luke, verse. 13. he departed
for a time. Christ was too cunning
for him in disputing; he meant therefore
to take another course: for as
Iames noteth, chapt. 1. vers. 14. there
bee two sorts of temptations, one by
inticement, as a Serpent; another by
violence, as a Lyon; if he cannot preuaile
as a Serpent, he wil play the Lyon.
Hee had also another hower at
Christ in the garden, the hower of
darknesse, Luc. 22. 53. there he brused
his heele.
            
            
               
               III.
               Thirdly, we are to consider the leader,
He was led by the spirite. In which
wee are to note fiue things: not making
any question, but that it was the
good Spirite, for so it appeareth in
Luke. 4. 1.
               First, that the state of a man regenerate
by Baptisme, is not a standing
still, Matt. 20. 6. He found others standing
idle in the market place, and he said
to them, Why stand ye idle all day? We
must not only haue a mortifying and
reuiuing, but a quickening and stirring
spirite. 1. Corin. 15. 45. which will
mooue vs, and cause vs to proceede:
wee must not lye still like lumpes of
flesh, laying all vppon Christs shoulders,
Phil. 3. 16. wee must walke forwards,
for the kingdom of God consists
not in words, but in power, 1. Corint.
4. 19.
               Secondly, as there must bee a stirring,
so this stirring must not be such,
as when a man is left to his owne voluntarie

or naturall motion: we must
goe according as we are lead. For hauing
giuen our selues to God, we are
no longer to be at our owne disposition
or direction: whereas before our
calling, we were Gentiles, and were
carried into errours, 1. Cor. 12. 2. wee
wandred vp & down as masterles or
carelesse, or else gaue heede to the doctrine
of diuels, 1. Tim. 1. 4. or else led
with diuers lusts, 2. Tim. 3. 6. But now
beeing become the children of God,
we must be led by the spirite of God:
for so manie as be the sonnes of God,
are led therby, Ro. 8. 14. We must not
be led by the spirite, whence the Reuelation
came Matth. 16. 22. from
whence reuelations of flesh and blood
doo arise: but by the spirite from
whence the voyce came, This is my
beloued sonne, in whom I am well pleased.
It came not by the spirite that ministreth
wise counsell, but by that
which came downe vpon them.
               Thirdly, the manner of leading, is
described to be such a kind of leading

as when a shippe is loosed from the
shoare, as Luke. chapter 8. verse. 22.
it is called launching forth: so in the
eighteenth chapter of the Acts, the
31. verse, Paule is said to haue sailed
foorth.
               The holy Ghost driuing vs, is compared
to a gale of wind, Ioh. 3. 8. which
teacheth vs, that as whē the wind bloweth,
we must be readie to hoyse vp
sayle: so must we make vs readie to be
led by the spirit. Our hope is compared
to an anchor, Hebr. 6. 19. which
must be haled vp to vs; and our faith
to the saile, wee are to beare as great a
sayle as we can. Wee must also looke
to the closenes of the vessell, which is
our conscience: for if wee haue not a
good conscience, wee may make shipwracke
of faith, religion, and all, 1. Timoth,
1. 19. And thus are wee to proceede
in our iourney towardes our
Countrey, the spirituall Ierusalem, as
it were sea-faring men. Actes. 20. 22.
Now behold I goe bound in spirite to Ierusalem:
to which iourney the loue of

Christ must constrayne vs. 2. Corinth.
5. 14,
               Fourthlie, that hee was led to bee
tempted. His temptation therefore
came not by chance, nor as Iob chapter
5. vers. 6. speaketh, out of the dust,
or out of the earth, nor from the deuill,
for hee had no power without
leaue, not onely ouer Iobs person, Iob.
1. 12. but not so much as ouer his
goods, verse 14. He had no power of
himselfe so much as ouer the hogs of
the Gergashites, who were prophane
men, Matth. 8. 31.
               Hence gather wee thys comfort,
that the Holie Ghost is not a
stander by (as a straunger) when
wee are tempted, Tanquam otiosus
spectator: but hee leades vs by the
hand, and standes by as a faythfull
Assistant, Esay chapter 4. vearse. 13.
Hee makes an issue out of all our
temptations, and will not suffer vs
to bee tempted aboue our strength,
1. Corinth. chapt. 10. vers. 13. And hee
turneth the worke of sinne, and of

the diuel too, vnto our good, Ro. 8. 28.
So that all these shall make vs more
warie after to resist them: and hell,
by fearing it, shall be an occasion vnto
vs, to auoyd that might bring vs to
it: and so they shall all be fellow-helpers
to our saluation. So that temptations,
whether they be (as the fathers
call them) rods to chasten vs for sinne
committed, or to trie and sift vs, Mat.
3. 12. and so to take away the chaffe,
the fanne is in the holie Ghosts hand:
or whether they bee sent to buffet vs
against the pricke of the flesh, 2. Cor.
12. 17. or whether they bee as matters
seruing for our experience, not onely
for our selues, that we may know our
owne strength, Rom. 5. 3. and to work
patience in vs: but to the diuell also,
that so his mouth may be stopped, as
in Iob. 2. 3. Hast thou marked my seruant
Iob, how vpright he is, and that in
all the world there is not such a one?
Howsoeuer they be, the Diuell hath
not the rodde or chayne in his hands,
but the holy Ghost to order them, as

may best serue for his glorie and our
good: and as for the diuell, he bindeth
him fast, Reuel. 20. 2.
               Fiftly, by the Greeke word heere
vsed, is set foorth the difference betweene
the temptations of the Saints,
and reprobates. In the Lords Prayer
one petition is, Lead vs not into temptation:
but there, the Word importeth
another manner of leading, than
is heere meant. Wee doo not there
pray against this manner of leading
heere, which is so to lead vs, as to be
with vs, and to bring vs backe againe,
Hebr. 13. 20. but we pray there, that he
would not cast or driue vs into temptations;
and when we are there, leaue
vs, by withdrawing his grace and holie
Spirit, as he doth from the reprobate
and forsaken.
            
            
               IIII.
               The fourth point, is the end, that is,
the Conflict, as it concerneth Christ,
insomuch that he was led to be tempted.
In which temptation Augustine,
                  
saith, Habemus & quod credentes veneremur,
& quod videntes imitamur:
There bee two things for faith to adore,
and two things for imitation to
practise.
               First for faith, that the temptations
of Christ, haue sanctified temptations
vnto vs: that whereas before
they were curses, like vnto hanging
on a tree; now, since Christ hath bin
both tempted and hanged on a tree,
they be no longer signes and pledges
of Gods wrath, but fauours. A man
may be the childe of GOD notwithstanding,
and therfore he is not to receyue
anie discouragement by anie of
them.
               Secondly, besides the sanctifying, it
is an abatement, so that now when we
are tempted, they haue not the force
they had before: for now the serpents
head is brused, so that he is now nothing
so strong (as he was) to cast his
darts. Also the head of his darts are
blunted, 1. Cor. 15. 55. Death, where is
thy sting? Hell, where is thy victorie?
                  
For as his death and resurrection had
a mortifying force against the olde
man, and a quickening force toward
the new man: so hath his temptation
a dulling force to the Diuell, and a
strengthning force to vs.
               For our life and imitation, there are
also two. First, Compassion: for
Christ knowing in what sort we were
tempted, as hauing felt by experience,
both how strong the assaylaunting
was, Psa. 118. 13. who thrust sore at
him that he might fall; & how feeble
our nature is to make resistaunce, benothing
but dust, Psalm. 103. 14. he is
mooued thereby to lay away seuerity,
and to put on the bowels of compassion.
So that Now we haue not a high
Priest which cannot be tempted with our
infirmities, but was tempted in like sort,
Heb. 4. 15. So we, (which were before
stonie Iudges, and too rough for phisitians)
ought in like sort (hauing bin
tempted our selues) to looke vpon others
defects with a more passionate
regard.
               
                  The second thing we are to imitate,
Christ is our fellow-helper in all our
necessities and temptations; who, as
hee sheweth vs his sleights and darts,
Eph. 4. 14. so he teacheth vs how to auoyd
them. This is no small comfort
to vs, when we consider that he is with
vs, and will bee till the ende of the
world, Matt. 28. 20. who hath ouercome
the world, Iohn. 16. 33. and the
diuell: If anie temptation happen,
that he will beare vs out, we may bee
of good cheere. This was it that did
so animate Iob, Doo thou but take my
part, and who shall touch me? Iob. 17. 3.
When as both Christ and wee drawe
together in one yoke, Matth, 11. 29.
what can hurt vs? Yet if we be afeard
for that we see the enemie comming;
let vs call for the help of our assistant,
and as it is said in Psal. 68. 1. we shall
see God will arise, and his enemies shall
be scattered: they shall vanish like smoke,
and melt like waxe. When they are
readie to attach vs, let vs say, Saue mee
O God, for the waters are entred euen

into my soule. Psalm. 69. 1. When wee
are feeble, then let vs say with Exekiel,
O Lord it hath oppressed mee, comfort
me, Ezek. 38. 14. Or though they
haue wounded vs, let vs say with Dauid,
Bring out thy speare, and stop the
way against them that persecute mee.
Psalm. 35. 3. Say yet to my soule, I am
thy saluation. So that wee haue not
onely an example, but a comfort too.
            
            
               V.
               The fift poynt, is the day and time
when this was done, in which we are
to note two things. The word Then
relateth as well to the ende of the
chapter next going before, as to the
present instant.
               First then, when as Christ was but
newly come out of the water of Baptisme,
and immediately after the heauens
had opened vnto him, and the
holy Ghost descended vppon him in
the likenes of a Doue, and while hee
was yet full of the holy Ghost; did
the Diuell set vppon him. When as

the voyce from heauen had pronounced,
This is my beloued sonne, in whom
I am well pleased; the diuell straight
addeth, In whom I am ill pleased: &
so addresseth himselfe agaynst him.
And it is Gods propertie to looke for
much at his hands, to whom hee hath
giuen much. When he giues a man a
large measure of grace, hee giues the
diuell withall a large patent. Our Sauiour
had great gifts, and the diuell
is like a theefe, that will venter most
for the greatest bootie.
               Secondly, in regard of the present,
wee are to note, that in 30. yeares the
diuell did nothing to our Sauiour:
but now when he goes about to gyrd
himselfe with our saluation, according
to Psalm. 45. 3. then doth the Diuell
gird on his sword also; that is as
much to say, as the better the worke
is, the more resistaunce it shall haue.
Ten repulses did the Israelites suffer,
before they could get possession of
the promised Land of Canaan: and
as manie did Dauid endure, before he

was inuested in the promised Kingdome.
Manie lets came before the
Temple was reedified, as is to bee
seene in Esdras and Nehemias. Yea?
(saith the diuell) Hath God annoynted
him with the oyle of gladnesse aboue
his fellowes? I will see if I can
annoynt him with the oyle of sadnes
aboue his fellowes. Hath hee beene
baptised of water and the holy ghost?
I will prouide another Baptisme for
him, namely of fire. Hath God sent
downe the holie Ghost vppon him in
likenes of a Doue? I will cause tribulation,
and a crowne of thornes to
light vpon his head. Hath a voyce
come downe from Heauen, saying,
This is my beloued Sonne? I will prouide
a voice for him, that shall ascend
from the foote, that shall say, If thou
bee the Sonne of God, come downe from
the Crosse.
               
            
            
               VI.
               The sixt is the place, the Lystes,
to wit, the Wildernesse, that so hee

might be alone, and that there might
be no fellow-worker with him in the
matter of our saluation, that he alone
might haue the treading of the wine-presse,
Esa. 63. 3. So in his Transfiguration
in the mount, he was found alone,
Luc. 9. 36. So in the garden in his
great agonie, he was in effect alone;
for his Disciples slept all the while,
Mat. 26. 40. that vnto him might bee
ascribed all the praise.
               Secondly, we will note heere, that
there is no place priuiledged from
tēptations, as ther be some that think
there be certain places to be exempt
from Gods presence, (as was noted in
the dreame of Iacob) so the Monkes
and Heremites thought, that by auoiding
companie, they should bee free
from temptations; which is not so.
For, although Christ were alone in
the wildernes, and fasting too, yet
was he tempted we see. And yet it is
true, that he that will liue well, must
shunne the companie of the wicked,
Gen. 19. 17.
               
                  When the Angells had brought Lot
& his familie out of the doores, they
charged him not to tarie, nor to stand
still, nor once to looke backe. So after
the Cocke had crowed, and put
Peter in minde of his fall; hee went
out of the doores and wept bitterly,
Matt. 26. 75. his solitarinesse was a
cause to make his repentaunce the
more earnest, and helped to increase
his teares: and companie is commonly
a hindrance to the receiuing of any
good grace, and to the exercising and
confirming vs in anie good purpose.
But as true it is, that temptations are,
and may as well be in the deserts, as in
publike places: not onely in the valleyes,
but in the mountaines, verse 8.
and not onely in the countrey, but euen
in the holie Citie, vers. 5. yea, and
sometimes ful, and sometimes fasting,
yea, in paradice and in heauen it self;
for thether dooth the diuell come and
accuse vs before God: wee are therefore
alwayes to stand vpon our gard.
For in the II. chap. of Luke verse. 24.

He is said to walke through drie places,
least happily some might be escaped
from him thither: and though
wee could goe whether hee could not
come, we should not be free: for wee
carrie euer a tempter about with vs.
And when wee pray to bee deliuered
from temptation, it is not onely from
the diuell, but from our selues, we carie
fire within vs. Nazianzen and Basil
were of that minde once, that by
change of the place a man might goe
from temptation: but afterward they
recanted it, affirming that it was impossible
to auoyde temptation, yea,
though he went out of the world, except
he left his hart behind him also.
            
         
         
            
            The second Sermon.
            
               
                  Matth Chap. 4. Ver. 2. And when he had fasted fortie
dayes and fortie nights, hee
was afterward hungrie.
            
            
               NOw come we to the 7.
and last circumstance.
It may seeme strange,
that beeing about to
present himselfe to the
world, as Prince, Priest, and Prophet,
that he would make his progresse into
the Wildernesse, and begin with a
fast: for this was cleane contrarie to
the course and fashion of the World,
which vseth when any great matter is
in hand, to make a Preface, or Praeludium
with some great solemnitie. As

when Salomon came first to his crown,
he went to the chiefe Citie, and gathered
a solemne conuent. So Christ
should rather first haue gone to 
                  
                     ••
                  rusalem
the holy Citie, and there should
haue been some solemne banquet. But
Christ from his Baptisme began his
calling, and fasted fortie dayes & fortie
nights. This his fast (by the new
Writers) is called the entraunce into
his calling: by the olde Writers, it
is called the entraunce into hi
                  •
                conflict.
            The manner of the Church hath
alwayes been, that at the first institution,
or vndertaking of anie great and
weightie matter, there hath been extraordinarie
fasting. So Moses (Deut.
9. 9.) when he entred into his calling,
at the receyuing of the Lawe, fasted
fortie dayes▪ So Elias (1. King. 19. 18.)
at the restoring of the same Law did
the like. And so when they went about
the reedifying of the Temple,
as appeareth Esdr. 8. 49. So in the
new Testament, at the seperation of

               Paule and Barnabas, Act. 13. 3. And
(as Ierome reporteth) Saint Iohn
would not vndertake to write the
the diuine woorke of his Gospell,
vntill the whole Church (by Fasting)
had recommended the same vnto
God.
            So likewise at the entraunce into
a conflict, for the obtayning of
some Victorie, as Iehoshaphat did
when hee ouercame the Amorites,
2. of the Chronicles chapter 20. the
3. verse. So did Hester when shee
went about the deliueraunce of the
Iewes, as in the fourth of Hester the
sixteenth verse. And Eusebius reporteth,
that when Peter was to enter
disputation with Simon Magus,
there was fasting of the whole Church
generally.
            Whether at the entraunce into
a calling, or to resist the Diuel,
Saint Peters rule mentioned in his
first Chapter and fifth verse, ought
to take place, we must vse prayer and
fasting.
            
               
And as at all times wee are to vse
watchfulnesse and carefulnesse: so
then especially, when wee looke that
the diuell will be most busie; and the
rather, for that in some cases, there is
no dealing without fasting, as Mar.
9. 29. there is a kinde of diuell that
will not bee cast out, without prayer
and fasting.
            As for the number of dayes wherein
he fasted, iust fortie, Curiositie may
finde it selfe worke enough: but it is
daungerous to make Conclusions,
when no certaintie appeareth.
            Some say, there is a correspondencie
betweene these fortie dayes, and
the fortie dayes wherein the World
was destroyed by the Deluge: but it
is better to say, As Moses fasted fortie
daies at the institution of the law,
and Elias fortie at the restauration: so
Christ heere. And because hee came
but in the shape of a seruaunt, hee
would not take vpon him aboue his
fellow-seruaunts: Contrarie to our
times, wherein a man is accounted no

bodie, except hee can haue a quirke
aboue his fellowes. But it is more materiall,
to see how it concerneth vs.
It is a thing rather to bee adored by
admiration, than to be followed by apish
imitation.
            This fast heere was not the fast of
a day, as that of Peter, and of Cornelius,
Act. 10. 9, 30. but such as Luke 4. 2.
describeth, he did eate nothing al that
time. Saint Iohn the Baptist (though
his life were verie strict) did eate Locusts
and wilde honnie, Matth. 3. 4.
Ours is not properly a fast, but a prouocation
of meates; and therefore
there can be no proportion betweene
them: but as it is, what is to be thought
of it?
            
               Socrates and Irenaeus record, that at
the first, the Church did vse to celebrate
but one day in remembrance of
Christes Fast; till after, the Montanists
(a certaine sect of heretikes, who
thereupon were called Eucratitae) raised
it to fourteene dayes; the zeale of

the Clergie after increased it to fortie,
after to fiftie, the Monkes brought it
to sixtie, the Friars to seuentie; and if
the Pope had not there staid it, they
would haue brought it to eightie, and
so haue doubled Christs fast.
            When the Primitiue Church sawe
the Heretikes (by this outward shew)
goe about to disgrace the Christians,
by this counterfet shew of holinesse;
they vsed it also: but (saith Augustine
and Chrisostome) they held it onely a
positiue law, which was in the church
to vse or take away, & not as any exercise
of godlines.
            Onely a doubt resteth now, because
of the hardnesse of mens harts, whether
it were better left or kept. Some
would haue abstinence vsed, and one
day kept for the Saboth, but left to euerie
mans libertie what time & day,
& tied to no certaintie: but that were
(vpon the matter) to haue none kept
at all.
            Notwithstanding, the reformed
Churches (as that of Fraunce) haue

vsed their libertie in remoouing of it,
for that they sawe an inclination in
their people to superstition, who
would thinke themselues holier for
such fasting; like the Pharisies, Luke
18. 12. The Church wherein we liue,
vseth her libertie in retayning it, and
that vpon good reasons: for sith God
hath created the fishes of the sea for
man, and giuen him an interest in
them also, Gen. 9. 2. as well as in the
beasts. Sith the death of fish was a
plague wherwith God plagued Pharaoh,
and so contrariwise the encrease
of fish is a blessing: God will haue
fish to bee vsed, so that hee may haue
praises as well for the sea as for the
land. Psalm. 104. 25.
            If wee looke into the ciuill reason,
we shall see great cause to obserue it.
See Numb. 11. 22. the abundaunce of
flesh that was consumed in one moneth.
The maintenance of store then
is of great importance, and therefore
order must be taken accordingly. Ierusalem
had fish daies, that Tyrus and

such like, liuing vppon Nauigation,
might haue vtterance for their commodities,
Nehem. 13. 16. (for Tyrus
was the maritine Citie, till after Alexander
annexed to it another Citie, and
made it drie.)
            The Tribe of Z
                     •
                  bulon liued by nauigation,
Gen. 49. 13. which is a thing
necessarie both for wealth, 2. Chron. 9.
20. which made Salomon richer than
anie other King, and also for munition,
as Esay 23. 4. that I rybe therefore
had neede of maintenaunce. And
therefore our Church and Commonwealth
haue taken order according
                  •
               y;
and the rather, for that our t
                  •
               mes require
it: (for the times that forbad mariage
and the abstinence of meates, 1.
Tim. 4 3. are past) wee rather liue in
the age of selfe-loue, intemperancie,
and filthie pleasure, 2. Tim. 3. 4. There
is more feare of a pottinger full of
gluttonie, than of a spoonefull of superstition.
This is no fast, but a change
of meate.
            
               
               Vers. 3. Then came to him the tempter,
&c.
            Before wee come to the particular
temptations, wee haue foure generall
poynts to bee considered. First, the
changing of the diuels name, from diuell
to Tempter: secondly, that it is
said, He came vnto him: thirdly, that
he came when he was fasting: fourthly,
the diuersitie & order of the temptations.
            
               I.
               First, in Iam. 1. 13. it is said, that
GOD tempteth no man; and yet in
Deu. 13. 3. it appeareth, that God doth
tempt some; we must then make difference
betweene temptations, betweene
Gods temptations, and the
diuels. The diuell indeede tempteth
vs, but God (as our English translation
hath it) trieth vs. The latter is to
commend vs, Rom. 3. 5. or rather that
our tribulation may bring forth patience,

and patience hope, Rom. 5. 3. It
makes vs knowe that to bee in our
selues, which before we knew not, as
we see in Iob. So the Lord proued the
Israelites, to see if they loued him or
no, Deut. 13. 3. The diuells temptation
is to knowe our corruption: for
knowing the innocencie of Adam, he
went about to corrupt him. It is lyke
the Israelites proouing of Manna, to
trie conclusions. Gods is like the triall
of golde, 1. Pet. 1. 7. which the oftner
it is tryed. the purer it Waxeth:
the diuels, like that of Manna, which
stinketh and corrupteth by triall.
Gods is like the triall of the fanne,
Matth. 3. 12. the diuells like that of
the siue, Luc. 22. 31. which lets go the
flower, and keepes the branne.
            
            
               II.
               Secondly, the Diuell hath two
shapes; in the one he tempteth and allureth,
(and in that came hee now to
our Sauiour): in the other, hee assayleth
vs, that is, by assault and violence,

                  Ephes. 6. 11. The first is the temptation
of hypocrites: Matth. 22. 18. Shall
we pay tribute to Caesar? The second, of
Iudas, who in the garden assaulted our
Sauiour, Iohn 6. 70. So sathan sets on
Christ by violence. Hee came vnto
Christ, by casting sparkes of fire into
him; for he was deuoyd of anie wicked
and vaine thoughts comming
foorth of him.
               Two waies may a man be tempted:
either by doubts arising in our hearts
out of vs, Lu. 24. 38. or by a sop entring
into vs. Ioh. 13. 27. Christ could not be
tempted the first way: for he was deuoyd
of any wicked & vain thoughts
comming forth of him. To vs the diuell
needes bring but a paire of bellowes,
for he shall finde fire within vs:
but to Christ hee was faine to bring
fire too.
            
            
               III.
               Thirdly, he then came to him when
he was fasting, which discouereth the
diuels desperate boldnesse, as also his

craftinesse, in that he waited his time▪
to stay till he was hungrie. Notwithstanding,
Christ was newly come frō
his Baptisme, and was full of the holie
Ghost, and euen now in his exercise
of mortification, yet had the diuell
courage to set vpon him. There
is no place so holie, nor exercise so
good, as can represse his courage, or
giue a stay to the boldnesse of his attempts,
as we see Mark. 4. 14. The
word is no sooner sowen, but Sathan
comes immediately, and takes it out
of their hearts: which must needes
be done in the Church, for the word
is out, before they bee out of the
Church: so that hee is not afraide of
hearing the word, but can abide it wel
enough, yea, better than manie. And
though they carie the word out of the
Church, he will waite on them home,
and choake the word with cares, and
riches, and voluptuous liuing, like the
seede that fell among thornes, Luke
8. 14.
               And no more doth the care for the

exercise of prayer: for euen then immediately
after the repetition of forgiuenes,
when wee haue made euen
with all the world, when GOD hath
forgiuen vs, and we others; then doth
the diuell giue vs occasion to say, Lead
vs not into temptation, as standing by
there readie to tempt vs.
               And as little cares he for the Sacraments:
for presently after they had receiued
the Sacrament, and sang the
hymne, Christ tells them they shall al
be offended in him that night Mat.
26. 31. Thus we see his courage serues
him at all times, nothing is able to
quaile it.
               As this ought not to discourage the
children of God, hauing so faithful an
assistant to take their part: so it giueth
them this caueat, that they bee at no
time secure, but alwayes to keepe a
sure gard. Saint Bernard in the midst
of a Sermon was sollicited to vaineglorie,
because he thought he pleased
his auditors and the thereupon brake off
his speech, and turned it to the diuell

saying; Non propter te hoc opus coeptum
est; nec propter te, nec in te finitur.
               
               And as hee is couragious, so is hee
subtile: for notwithstanding his eager
desire, he staid the fittest time, wherin
consisteth a chiefe poynt of wisdome.
So when he tempted Eue, hee stayed
till her husband was away, and till he
could shew her the fruite, which was
so pleasing to the eye. So when Dauid
lay with Bethsheba Vrias wife, hee
tempted him in the euening, and after
his sleepe, 2. Sam. 11. 12. a verie fit
time for the purpose. So when they
were a sleepe, the enemy sowed tares,
Matth. 13.
               And as hee is warie in choosing his
time, so is he as cunning in choosing
the meanes, obseruing the dispositions
of men. For wanton and voluptuous
men, he hath the daughters of
Moab, a bayte fit for their humours,
whereby to tempt them to idolatrie,
Numb. 15. 1. For men secure and carelesse,
hee hath a net that suffiseth to
throwe ouer them, (2. Tim. 2. 26.) &

snare them in. For others, that haue
more care to seeke and inquire into
things, he hath quills to blowe them
vp, as knowledge, which puffes vp, 1.
Cor. 8. 1. Yea, euen the best things can
he make serue for his purpose, and to
be occasions of temptations; so that
hee may finde better entertainment,
for the good exercises sake that come
with him. He will come sometimes
shrowded in the necessity of nature, as
heere; for when a man is hungrie, nature
requireth somwhat to asswage it.
               Prayer, no man doubteth to bee a
godly exercise: yet thereby he tempted
them that loued to pray in the Sinagogues,
and make much babbling,
and repetition, Matth. 6. 5. 7. In like
sort doth he abuse the name of good
counsell, as in Peter to Christ, Matt.
16. 22. who (as a frend) wished him to
spare himselfe, and liue out his time.
               Thus can he put on a faire shew, the
sooner to beguile: & for good reason,
for if hee should come vnmasked in
his owne likenesse▪ he would bee reiected;

as if Iehoram the king of Israel
had come himselfe without Iehoshaphat,
                  2 Kin. 3. 14
                  Elisha would not haue looked
on him▪ so by a good pretence▪ the tēptation
shrowdes & insinuates it selfe,
otherwise, it would not be looked on.
            
            
               IIII.
               Now we are to consider the diuersitie
and order of the temptations, &
then will we handle them particularly.
And first wee are to note, that
though there are but these three recorded,
yet he endured diuers others.
His whole life was full of temptations,
as may appeare by Luke, 22. 28.
It is said Luk. 4. 2. that hee was tempted
fortie dayes of the diuell, whereas
these three Temptations heere set
downe, were not till after the ende of
fortie daies. These onely are mentioned,
but there were other not written,
as diuers of his miracles are vnwritten,
Io
                        •
                     n 20. 25. Onely so much was
written, as was expedient.
               
               These three are a briefe abridgement
of all his Temptation▪ As it is

true that Paul saith, that Christ resembled
Adam, and was made a quickening
spirite, as Adam was a liuing
soule, 1. Cor. 15. 45. And the bringing
of the Children of Israel out of Egypt,
by being called out of Egypt, Matt. 2.
15. So may Christ and Adam be compared
in these three temptations. For
they both were tempted with concupiscence
of the flesh, concupiscence of
the eie, & pride of life, 1. Io. 2. 16. In Adam,
the diuel first broght him into a
conceipt, that God enuied his good,
and of purpose kept him hood-winked,
least he should see his good, as we
see Faulconers put hoods ouer hawks
eyes, to make them more quiet & ruly.
Secondly, he luls him on to a proud
conceipt of himselfe, by perswading
him, that by eating he should bee lyke
God. Thirdly he sheweth the fruite,
which was pleasant. So in Christs tēptation:
first, hee would haue brought
him to murmur against God: secondly
to presume: & thirdly to commit
Idolatrie,1 Cor. 10. 5. 6. 7. all which are set downe.
               
                  And vnder these three heads come all
temptations, Numb. 14. & 21. and
Exod. 32.
               To some of these extreames will
the diuell seeke to driue one. First, by
distrust hee will seeke to driue vs to
vse vnlawfull meanes, for the obtayning
of necessarie things, as bread is
when a man is hungrie. Or if we be
in no such want, that that temptation
cannot take place, then (through superfluitie)
he will tempt vs to wanton
and vnnecessarie desires, as to throwe
our selues down, that the Angels may
take vs vp: and hauing preuayled so
farre, then hee carieth vs to the diuell
and all. All this will I giue thee, there
is his All: Fall downe and worship me,
there is the Diuell with it: so (that in
this respect) may it well be sayd, that
The way of a Serpent is ouer a stone,
Prouerb. 30. 19. Hee goeth so slylie,
that a man seeth him in, before he can
tell what way, or how he got in. First
hee wrappes himselfe in necessitie,
and thereby wyndes himselfe in vnperceiued:

then he brings vs to make
riches our God.
               Now let vs see his Darts. The
first is, of making stones bread. This
may well be called the hungrie temptation.
The streame of the Doctors,
make Adams offence the sinne of
gluttonie: but Bucer thinkes, that this
temptation is rather to be referred to
distrust and despaire. There is small
likelihood, that one should sinne in
gluttonie by eating bread onely. The
diuels desire was onely, that the stones
might be turned into bread, and that
after so long a Fast: and then if the
temptation had beene to Gluttonie,
Christs answere had been nothing to
the purpose; the Diuell might well
haue replyed against the insufficiencie
of it. For gluttonie is to be answered
by a text willing sobrietie, whereas
this text which Christ answereth
by, containeth rather an assertion of
Gods prouidence: and therefore our
Sauiour should haue seemed verie

vnskilfull in defending himselfe. The
temptation therefore is to distrust.
               This standeth well with the diuels
cunning in fight: for by this he shooteth
first euen at the throate, and at
that which is the life of a Christian:
to wit his faith; as a man would say,
Iugulum petit, euen at that which ouercommeth
the world, 1. Iohn 5. 5. Hee
tempted him to such a distrust, as was
in the Israelites, Exod. 17 7. when they
asked if God were with them or no.
So he made Adam think, God cared
not for him: so heere the diuell premiseth
a doubt to shake his faith,
wherein Christ made no doubt, Si filius
Dei es.
               
               Indeed you heard a voyce say, you
were the beloued Sonne of God, but
are you so indeede? or was it not rather
a delusion? You see you are almost
starued for want of bread: wel,
would God haue suffered you so to
be▪ if you had been his Filius dilectus?
No, you are some hunger-starued
childe. So Luke 22. 31. Christ prayed

that Peters faith might not faile. It
was that the diuell shot at. Hee is a
roaring Lyon seeking to deuoure vs,
whom wee must resist by faith, 1. Pet.
5. 8.
               It is our faith that hee aymes at, 1.
Thessal. 3. 5. For hauing overthrowne
that, disobedience soone will followe.
Hauing abolished the stablisher of
the Law, Roman. 3. 31. the breach of
the Lawe must needes follow. Hee
hath then fit time to set vs a worke, about
making stones into bread, that
is, to get our liuing by vnlawfull
meanes. First, shipwracke of faith,
then of obedience.
               The Diuell heere seeing him in
great want and hunger, woulde
thereby bring in doubt, that he was
not the Sonne of GOD, which is
not a good argument. For whether
wee respect the naturall tokens of
Gods fauour, wee see they happen
not to the wisest and men of best
and greatest knowledge, as appeareth
in the ninth chap. of Eccl. vers. 11.

or the supernaturall fauour of GOD,
we shall see Abraham forced to flye
his Countrey into Egypt for famine,
Gen, 10. 12. so did Isaack, Gen. 26. 1. &
Iacob likewise was in the same distres,
Gen. 43. 1. Notwithstanding that God
was called The God of Abraham, Isaack
and Iacob; yet were they all three
like to be hunger-starued. Yea, not
only so, but for their faith, manie were
burned and stoned, of whom the world
was not worthie, Hebr. 11. 37. So fared
it with the Apostles, they were hungrie,
naked, and a thirst, 1. Cor. 4. 11.
But what doo we speake of the adopted
sonnes of God, when as his owne
naturall Sonne suffered as much, nay,
fa
                     ••
                  e more? Heere we see he was hungrie, also hee was wearied with trauaile▪
and faine to rest: Iohn. 4. 6. hee
had no house to hide his head in,
whereas foxes haue holes.
               If thou be the Sonne of God.
               The heathens haue obserued, that

in Rethoricke it is a poynt of chiefest
cunning, when you would out-face a
man, or importune him to do a thing,
to presse & vrge him with that, which
he will not, or cannot for shame denie
to be in himselfe: as by saying; If you
haue anie wit, then you will doo thus
and thus: if you be an honest man or
a good fellow, doo this. So heere the
diuell (not being to learne anie poynt
of subtiltie) comes to our Sauiour,
saying, If thou be the Sonne of God, (as
it may be doubted, you beeing in this
case) then, make these stones bread. No,
no, it followes not: a man may be the
sonne of God, and not shew it by anie
such arte. So when Pilate asked,
who accused Christ? they answered,
If hee had not been a malefactor, wee
would not haue brought him before thee,
Iohn 18. 30. They were iolly graue
men, it was a flat flatterie: and in Ioh.
21. 23. there is the like. This ought
to put vs in minde, when we are tempted
in like manner, that we take heed
we be not out-faced.
               
                  In the matter it selfe we are to consider
these poynts: First the diuel sets
it downe for a ground, that (followe
what will) bread must needes bee
had.
               Therefore Christ first closeth with
him, Admit he had bread, were hee
then safe? No, We liue not by bread only:
so that bread is not of absolute necessitie.
Well, what followes of that?
Bread you must needes haue, you see
your want, God hath left off to prouide
for you. Then comes the conclusion,
Therefore shift for your selfe as
well as you can. First he solliciteth vs
to a mutinous repining within our
selues,
as Hebr. 3. 8. Harden not your
hearts, as in the day of temptation, &c▪
                  
whereby he forceth vs to breake out
into such like conceipts, as Psalm. 116.
11. I sayd in my distresse, that all men
be lyars: and Psalm. 31. 22. I said in my
hast, I am cast off. Thus closely he distrusted
God, in saying, his Prophets
prophecie lyes, till at last, we euen open

our mouths against God himself,
and say, This euill commeth from the
Lord, shal I attend on the Lord any longer?
2. Booke of Kings, chapter 6. and
verse 33. Hunger and shame is all
wee shall get at Gods hands. And
so hauing cast off God, betake themselues
to some other Patrone, & then
the diuell is fittest for their turne. For
when we are fallen out with one, it is
best seruing his enemie, and to retaine
to the contrary faction. Then we seek
a familiar (with Saule) to answere vs,
1. Sam. 28. 7.
               But what did the diuel than tel him?
did he bring comfort with him? No,
he tells him, that to morrow he & his
sonnes should dye. So heere dooth
the Diuell bring a stone with him.
What Father (sayeth Christ) if his
Sonne aske him bread, would giue
him a stone? Matthew the seauenth
chapter and in the ninth verse: yet
the Diuell doth so; Christ was hungrye,
and the Diuell showes him
stones.
               
                  Heere is the Diuels comfort, here
bee stones for thee, if thou canst deuise
anie waye to make these stones
bread, thou art well; whereas we doo
not vse to make bread of stones, but
of wheate, to worke it with the sweate
of our browes. To get it so, we learne
Gen. 3. 19.
               By extortion and vsurie wee may
make stones into bread, that is the diuels
Alchymistrie: or happily we may
make bread of nothing, when a man
gets a thing by anothers ouersight,
Gen. 43. 12. Or els, what and if wee
can ouer-reach our brother in subtiltie,
and goe beyond him with a tricke
of wit or cunning? Let no man defraud
or oppresse his brother in anie matter:
for the Lord is auenged of all such,
1. Thessal. 4▪ 6. The one is called The
bread of violence and oppression, Prouerbs 4. 17.
The other, The bread of
deceipt.
               
               They are indeede both made of
stones, for they still retayne their former
propertie, as the euent will declare.

For though in the beginning
such bread be pleasant, Prouerb. 20. 17.
yet after his mouth is but filled with
grauell, Prouerb. 20. 17. After which
will consequently follow, gnashing of
teeth.
            
         
         
            
            
            The third Sermon.
            
               
                  Matt. 4. vers. 4. But he answering▪ sayd, It is written,
Man shall not liue by bread
onely, but by euerie word that
proceedeth out of the mouth of
God.
            
            
               IT was a good seruice
that Elisha (2. Reg. 6.
9.) did, to tell the king
of the traynes layd for
him, when they lay in
Ambush agaynst him. And euen
this is the first vse that wee haue
of our Sauiours Temptations.
            It warnes vs afore-hand of the

diuels comming, so that we may haue
time to prepare our selues accordingly.
For as at that time the diuel came
vppon Christ when hunger pinched
him: so where we are in any distres,
wee are to looke for temptations.
            This temptation hath two parts.
First comes (Si) a distrust: Secondly
followes vnlawfull meanes. Hauing
laid this foundation, that bread
is necessarie to bee had when one is
hungrie, he inferreth, that God helpeth
not, nor supplieth thy want:
therefore God is not thy Father, Mat.
7. 9. and therefore depend no longer
on him, but shift for your selfe. This
is the effect of the diuells argument.
            The Fathers vpon the words Eph.
6. 16. (Take the shield of faith, to quench
all the fierie dartes of the Diuell:) doo
note, that about euery one of the darts
or temptations of the diuell, there are
(as it were) balls of wylde fire. For being
to assault our obedience, & knowing
that faith is our shield: to that

end he vseth the arrow-head, which
is distrust in God; about which is
fire, to wit, the vsing of vnlawfull
meanes, to consume our obedience,
which will consume our shielde of
faith, and so make way for the dart to
kill or wound vs. So that his drift is,
to bring our adoption or Son-ship to
a Si.
            
            There is no doubt, but Christ was
able to haue turned stones into bread:
but why would he not then folow the
diuels aduice? The diuell by saying,
Say vnto these stones, seemeth to acknowledge,
that hee had the force to
haue done it, euen by his bare word:
for euen stones are said to heare the
voyce of God, and to obey his Commaundement;
and not onely Gods,
but euen Gods seruants, as 1. Reg. 13.
5. when the man of GOD had pronounced,
that the aulter should rent
in sunder, it did so. And Matt. 27.
51. when Iesus cryed out with a lowde
voyce, the vayle of the Temple rent
in twaine, the earth did quake, and the

stones were clouen. The dead men
are worse than stones, yet they in
their graues heard his voyce.
            And not onely was he able to turne
stones into bread, but into men also,
as Children to Abraham of stones,
Matth. 3. 9. If therefore it had pleased
him, hee was as well able at this
time to haue turned stones into
bread, as after hee turned water into
wine, Iohn 2. 10.
            It was no lesse possible to him (no
doubt) to haue saued himselfe, when
the Iewes scoffingly bad him, Matt.
27. 42. as to haue saued others; and to
haue come downe from the Crosse
being aliue; as it was after for him, not
onely beeing dead and buried, but a
great stone beeing ouer him, to remooue
it, and come out of the graue,
Matth. 28. 2. Hee had power to both,
but not will alike to both.
            But why would he not here vse
his power, for the satisfying of his
hunger, and followe the diuells aduice?
            
               In setting downe the Historie of
turning water into wine, it is thus farther
said, that he did it, that his Disciples
might beleeue in him, Iohn 2. 11.
            That was the reason that moued him
to the working of that myracle: and
because there was no such cause here,
hee did it not. For the Diuell would
not beleeue in him (he knew) though
hee had done it. The Diuell desired
him, but to haue him shew what hee
could doo, for a neede onely, for a
vaunt of his power. Wherein wee
see the humour of pride, that made
him at the first to fall.
            It is the same temptation that his
kinsfolkes vsed, No man dooth anie
thing secretly, that seeketh to bee famous:
if thou doost these things, shewe
thy selfe to the world. But see how vnfitly
the Temptation hangeth together.
He should rather haue said, If
you be hungrie; than If you be the sonne
of God: and then rather haue bid him
fast fortie dayes more, than turne the
stones into bread.
            
               If it had been to haue made a Sonne
of God, Christ would haue done it:
but not to haue shewed himself to be
the Sonne of God.
            But it may be asked, why did Christ
vouchsafe to giue him anie answere at
all; whereas hee might haue commaunded
him to silence, and tormented
him before his time, and haue punished
him for his sawcines? When
Peter tēpted him, he cut him vp verie
sharply, saying; Come behinde me Sathan,
Mark. 8. 33. Why did hee not
answere the diuel so? He might haue
enioyned him▪ and throwne him into
the bottomlesse pit, Luke 8. 31. or at
the least bidden him, Auoyde Sathan,
vers. 10.
            
               Augustine answereth this doubt,
that Christ answered in the like time,
to teach vs to aunswere: willing vs
thereby (as Abimelech did his souldiers)
to doo as hee had doone before,
Iudg. 9. 48. So Christ is our example,
Iohn 13. 15. and bids vs doo as he hath
done. Christ is our Captaine, he hath

gone before vs, and shewed vs how to
behaue our selues in fight: when the
diuell assaulteth vs with distrust, then
are we to ward it off with a Text of
Gods prouidence; and so of the rest,
as he hath done before vs.
            Our Sauiours shield, whereby (we
see) he beareth off all the diuels darts,
is couered all ouer with Scriptum est.
Wee haue here a briefe viewe of the
Churches armorie, Cant. 4. 4. of the
Tower of Dauid, built for defence.
Here be the shields wherewith Salomons
Temple was hanged, and which
Paule calleth The weapons of our warfare,
2. Cor. 10. 4. not carnall, but mightie
(through GOD) to cast downe
holds.
            They are in number fiue. First, a
preparation of our selues by the vse
of Gods Sacraments, that we may be
the more strong to sustaine and beare
off temptations, and to holde out to
the ende without fainting. Secondly,
a withdrawing our selues into the desert,
or some other solitary place, there

(by Meditation) to kindle good
thoughts, Psalm. 39. 3. Thirdly, fasting.
Fourthly, watchfull prayer, Mat.
26. 41. Fiftly, the perfecting of our
selues in the Scriptures. These be the
fiue shields wherewith Salomons temple
was hanged.
            Now as for the Scripture, we are to
note, that where God speaketh of any
good that we are to receiue out of it,
it is recōmended to vs as a storehouse,
whether we are to make our resort for
the bread of life, and the water of life,
whereof he that tasteth, shal neuer thirst.
Ioh. 6. 35. And from thence are we to
draw the waters of comfort, out of the
fountains of saluation, Esa, 12. 3. When
there is anie ill spoken of, which wee
are to resist, then is it commended to
vs as an Armorie, whence wee may
fetch anie kinde of weapon which we
shal need, either offensiue, as a sword,
Hebr. 4. 12. or defensiue, as a shield,
Pro. 30. 5.
            The Scripture is the broad plate,
that is to beare off the darts: our faith

is the braces or handle whereby wee
take hold, Eph. 6. 16. and lift it vp to
defend our selues withall. For the
Scripture is a shield Non quod dicitur,
sed quod creditur. Dicitur; there
is the strong and broad matter, fit to
beare off: and Creditur, that is the
handle or braces to it. God spake once
or twice, I haue heard it, power belongeth
vnto God. Psalm. 62. 11. So that it
suffiseth not that it bee spoken onely
by God, but we must heare it too: neither
must we heare it as the voice of a
man, (as Samuel at the first did; who
when God called him, thought it the
voice of Eli) but as the voice of God,
that we which were dead in our sins,
vs hath he quickned & forgiuen vs al
our trespasses, 1. Thes. 2. 13. This is the
perfection of our faith.
            Generally of the scriptures, this is
Christs opinion, cōfirmed by his own
practise; that if the diuell come as a
serpent, here is a charm for him, Ps. 58.
5. or if he come as a lion, here is that is
able to preuaile against him, 1. Pe. 5. 8.

And that the Diuell knowes well enough,
as appeareth by his mallice
that he hath alwayes borne it, before
it was scripture, when it was but onely
Dictum. For so soone as God had
said, Let vs make man in our likenes, that
word was straight a whetstone to the
diuells enuie. And after the fall, when
the seede was promised, that was, and
is the cause of all the diuells enmitie,
Gen. 3. 15. So when the promise was
reitterated, Genes. 22. 18. that was the
cause hee so turmoyled all the Patriarchs.
            But when the words was to be written,
and to become Scripture, then his
malice began to grow verie hot, in so
much that he caused it for anger to be
broken, Exod. 32. 19. For the Fathers
are of opinion, that all the diuels busie
endeuour, in making the Israelites
to commit idolatrie with the golden
Calfe, was to the ende, that he might
so heate Moses in his zeale, as that in
his anger hee should breake the Tables
of the Law, by casting them hastely

out of his hands. We are to note
therefore, that there is a forceable
sound in the word, which the Diuell
cannot abide; & not onely the sound,
but the sight also.
            It is written of Augustine, that lying
sicke on his bed, he caused the seuen
poenitentiall Psalmes to be painted
on the wall ouer against him, in
great letters; that if after hee should
become speechles, yet he might point
to euerie verse when the diuell came
to tempt him; and so confute him.
Blessed is hee that hath his quiuer full of
such arrowes, they shall not bee ashamed.
Blessed is hee that hath the skill to
choose out fit arrowes for the purpose,
as the Fathers speake out of Esay,
49. 2.
            Christ saith affirmatiuely of the
Scriptures, that in them is eternall life,
Iohn 5. 39. negatiuely, that the cause of
error, is the not knowing of them,
Mark. 12. 24. Dauid saith, it was
that that made him wiser than his enimies,

than his teachers, and than the
Auncients, Psalm. 119. 98. 99. & 110.
Knowledge of the truth▪ is the way to
amendment after a fall, 2. Timot. 2. 26.
There is much calling now a daies for
the word, and others finde fault as
fast, that it is no better harkened vnto:
for as the want of obedience and al other
abuses (which are so much cried
out against) proceede not onely from
the not hearing of the word, but as
well from the not mingling of faith
with it, (without which mixture, it is
nothing worth) it profiteth not, Heb.
4. 2. so the error of the former times
was, in yeelding too farre to the Diuels
policie, by sealing vp the scriptures
and locking the storehouse and
armorie of the people.
            It is the policie Christ tells vs of
in the eleuenth chapter of Saint Lukes
Gospell, the two and twentieth verse.
A strong man puts the strong armed
man out of his house, and takes away
his armour from him: then hee needs
not feare him.
            
               The like policie we read of 1. Sam.
13. 19. when the Philistines had taken
away all smythes and armour, then
they thought they were safe. So in
the time of darkenesse, the Diuell
might let them doo their good works,
and what they list, and yet haue them
still vnder his lure: for hee might offend
them at his pleasure, that had no
armour to resist him.
            All the Children of GOD, had
a right and propertie in the Lawe of
God, as appeareth by Christs words,
Iohn 10. 34. hee answered them▪ that
is, the common people, Is it not wr
                     ••
                  tten
in your law? As though he should
say, the Scripture is yours.
            To the young man (in the tenth
Chapter of Saint Lukes Gospell, and
twentie sixe verse) that asked Christ
what he should do to be saued? Christ
answereth, What is written in the
Law? how readest thou? Whereuntoo
to answere, that we cannot read,
or that the booke is sealed vp, Esay
29. 11. is as the diuell would haue it.
            
               Then hath hee a fit time to offer vs
stones to make bread of. But this answere
with our Sauiour Christ wil not
be allowed of.
            Now come we to the speciall point
of Christs answere, It is written, Man
liues not by bread onely, &c. Deut. 8. 3.
            There is no better kinde of reasoning,
than that, when one graunts all
that hath been said by his aduersarie,
and prooueth it to make on his part;
and vpon a new conceipt, auoyds all
that his aduersarie said. Here our Sauiour
might confesse all that the Diuell
obiected; as that he is the sonne
of God: and admit the stones were
made bread, and that bread were of
absolute necessitie, and that it were so
to be come by (which is vntrue,) were
we then in good case?
            This indeede is the diuels position,
wherewith hee would perswade all
those that haue animam triticeam, (as
the Fathers call it) that those exterternal
things are necessarie to be had:

and that if they haue enough thereof,
they are wel enough; as we see it to be
the minde of the rich man, Luke 12.
19. This man hauing a wheaten soule,
hauing corne enough, bad his soule
take rest, and liue merily for manie
yeares. But Christ goeth further, and
saith; Though the stones bee made
bread, it will not auayle, except it
please GOD (by the blessing of his
word) to giue vertue, and (as it were)
life vnto the bread, there is no difference
betweene it and a stone.
            It is not the plentie or qualitie of
victuals, howsoeuer some doate vpon
such external meanes, as they did,
which sacrificed to their net, & burnt
incense to their yarne, Abac. 1. 16. because
by them their portion was fat,
and their meates plenteous. For what
saith Iob cap. 31. ver. 27. If I reioyced because
my substance was great, this had
been an iniquity. So that our life is not
maintained by bread onely, descended
out of the mould of the earth.
            The nature of bread & stones are not

much vnlike, they come both out of
one belly: that is to say, the earth. Iob
28. 5. 6. and of themselues, the one of
them hath no more power than the
other vnto life: for wee know that the
Israelites died, euen while the flesh of
Quayles was in their mouthes, Num.
11. 33. & Manna (heauenly fare) being
far better than our bread. It is the
diuels craftie policie, to burie a mans
life vnder a loafe of bread: and (as it
were) to fetter the grace of God to the
outward meanes; whereas they of
themselues are of no more efficacie,
without the operation and grace of
the word, than a hammer and a sawe,
without a hand able to imploy them.
            
               Dauid saith (Psalm. 104. 28.) The
eyes of all things waite on God for theyr
meate in due season, & thou fillest them:
With what? with bread? No▪ but
with thy blessing and goodnesse. Our
hearts must be stablished with grace,
not with meates. Hebr. cap. 13. verse 9.
It is Gods prerogatiue, that as all
things had theyr beginnings from

him, Coloss. cap. 1. vers. 17. so hee supporteth
and sustaineth them, Hebr.
cap. 1. ver. 3.
            This is a further point than all philosophie
teacheth vs. For they hauing
layd downe the foure elements, bare
and simple essencies, tanquam materiam,
by compounding or tempring of
them, they bring foorth a certayne
quintessence or balme full of vertue.
But Diuinitie leadeth vs to a quintessence,
without which, all the quintessences
and balmes in the world can
doo vs no good.
            To the question that Ieremie propoundeth,
Is there no balme at Gilead?
               Ierem. 8. 22
               Is there no Phisitian there? The aunswere
may be, Mans health is not recouered
by balme or phisicke onely,
but by euerie word that proceedeth out
of the mouth of GOD, if wee weigh
Christs argument aright: for we may
see 2. Chron. 16. 12. Asa dyed for all
his Phisitians that were about him. So
if it be asked, Are there no horses nor
chariots in Cilead? we may answere,

warlike victory consisteth not in warlike
furniture onely, but in remembring
the name of our Lord GOD.
Psalm. 20. 7. A horse is a vaine thing
to saue, without the power of this
word. And so when a man thriues not
or prospers not in his actions; it is
not often for want of labour or care:
Psalm. 127. 1. tells him, Except the Lord
build the house, &c. Augustine aduiseth
his Auditorie, to beleeue it in time,
least (by wofull experience) they find
it to be true, when as they shall haue
such a consumption, that no meate
shall doo them anie good; or such a
dropsie, that no drinke shall auayle
them.
            The power and vertue of this word
is called, The staffe of bread, Leuit. 26.
26. and it is meant of a chiefe staffe,
such a one as is set in the middest, to
beare vp all the Tent.
            The plainest similitude I can vse, to
make you vnderstand the force thereof,
is this: When we goe to Phisicke
for anie disease, we are bidden seethe

such hearbs in running water, & then
to drinke the water; we know it is not
the water which helpeth, but the decoction
of infusion. So it is not the
bread (considered barely in it selfe)
that nourisheth vs, but the vertue and
grace of the word infused into it. We
are not therefore to sticke to the
meanes, like the Glutton, Luc. 12. 19.
but to pray for this blessing.
            And to this end, God (in the establishing
of nature) hath thereout reserued
foure speaciall prerogatiues to
his word.
            As first, with a verie little of the
meanes, to goe farre in operation, 1.
Reg. 17. 14. with a little oyle and a little
wheate, he fed Elias, the poore widdow,
and her sonne a great while; &
Matt. 17. 14. Christ made fiue loaues
and two fishes serue fiue thousand.
The heathen man thought no certaine
proportion was to be set down
for a familie, because when a heauenly
hunger commeth on men, they eate

more at one time▪ than at another. But
whatsoeuer the heathen haue spoken
wisely, we haue farre more wisely vttered
by the holy Ghost, in one place
or other. In Psalm. 17. 14. this is set
downe, where there is mention made
of a certaine hidden treasure, wherewith
mens bellyes be filled, and Agg.
1. 6. saith, Men eate much, yet haue not
enough; dri
                     •
                  ke much, but are not filled.
This is the First p
                  •
               erogatiue.
            His second is, he takes order as wel
for the qualitie, as for the quantitie;
course meates and fine are al one with
him; for the Israelites notwithstanding
their Quayles and Manna, dyed:
and Daniel and his fellowes, that fed
vppon course meates, looked better
than all the Children that were fed
with the Kings owne dyet, Dan. 1. 15.
            Thirdly, without meanes he worketh
somet
                  •
               mes. Therefore Asa had
said little or nothing to the purpo
                  •
               e,
2. Chron. 14. 11. if hee had said, God

helpeth by manie or by few: if hee had
not put in too, and sometimes by none.
For there was light before anie Sunne
or Moone, Genes. 1. 3. though after
(verse 14.) it pleased God to ordaine
them as instruments. And so Genes.
2. 5. the Earth was fertile, when as
then no rayne had falne on the Earth,
nor anie such ordinarye meanes.
Let Moses be on the Mount, and
but heare GOD, and he needeth no
bread.
            The fourth is, that he can bring his
purpose to passe, euen by those means
whose natures tend to contrarie effects;
as, to preserue by stones.
            
               Colloquintida, beeing ranke poyson,
(in eating whereof is present
death) was (by the Prophet) made
matter of nourishment, 2. Booke of
Kings fourth chapter & fort
                  •
               th verse.
So Christ, by those things which were
fit to put out a seeing mans eyes, as
dust; made a blinde man recouer his
sight, Iohn 9. 6.
            
               And so doth hee make light to shyne
out of darknesse, 2. Cor. 4. 6. one contrarie
out of another. Thus wee see
the diuell answered. Now let vs apply
these things to our selues.
            Christs aunswere doth import two
words, and so two mouthes, and two
breaths, or spirites: and these two bee
as two twinnes. He that will be maintained
by the one, must seek after the
other. The first word is the same decree,
whereby the course of nature is
established, according to Psalm. 147.
15. He sendeth foorth his commaundement
vpon the earth, and his word runneth
verie swiftly: he giueth snow lyke
wool, &c.
            
            Secondly, the other is that whereof
Iames cap. 1. vers. 18. speaketh: to
wit, the word of truth, wherewith (of
his owne will) he begat vs. The one
proceedeth from the mouth of Gods
prouidence, creating and gouerning
all things, Psalm. 33. 6. hee but speaking
the word, and it was done.
            
               The other proceedeth out of the
mouth of Gods Prophets, who are
(as it were) his mouth, Ier. 15. 19. Thou
standest before mee, as if thou wert my
mouth.
            
            From the first word, al things haue
their beginning and beeing; as when
he sent forth his spirite or breath, they
were created & had their beginning:
So Psalm. 104. 29. he teacheth vs, that
so soone as God hides his face, they
are troubled. And if he takes away
their breath, they dye, and returne to
dust.
            The other spirite, that is, the sanctifying
Spirite, ministreth vnto vs supernaturall
life, Esay 59. 21. Now
therefore to set them together, euery
man is thus to thinke with himselfe.
            If I get my liuing contrary to Gods
word, that is, by any vnlawful meanes;
surely Gods other word will not accompanie
such gotten goods. That is,
these two words bee twinnes: if wee

get not our goods by the one woord,
we shal want the blessing of the other
word▪ and then we were as good eate
stones: it will bee but grauell in our
mouthes, or quailes. We are then to
vse the meanes, according to the second
word.
            
               Abraham (wee see) went foorth to
sacrifice, according to Gods appointment,
Genes. 22. the Word was his direction:
therefore when Isaac asked
where was the Sacrifice? hee might
boldly answere, God would prouide
one; as we see euen at the verie pinch
he did: whereupon it came to bee a
prouerbe, that euen In monte, Iehoua
prouide bit.
            
            The Israelites went out of Egypt, by
the warrant and appoyntment of
Gods Word. How then? First, they
had a way made them (where neuer
was anie before) through the Red-sea,
Exod. cap. 14. vers. 21. they had bread
downwards out of the clowdes, wheras
it vseth to rise vpwards out of the
earth: their garments in fortie yeares

neuer waxed olde, Deuteron▪
                the eight
chapter, third and fourth verses: they
had water whence water vseth not to
come▪ by striking the Rockes, water
gushed forth:Num. 20. 11. so that it is true
which the Prophet Dauid saith in
the ninth verse of the foure and thirtie
Psalme, There is no want to them
that feare God.
            
            Though GOD (peraduenture)
will not vse the same meanes hee
did for the Israelites; yet the Children
of GOD (walking after his
will) shall haue some way of reliefe
a wayes.
            And therefore Christ would not
distrust the prouidence of GOD:
for hee knew hee was in the worke
and waye of GOD. For we read,
that hee was led into the Wildernesse
by the Spirite, and therefore
could not lacke; as indeede he did
not, for the Angells came and ministred
vnto him: as it followeth in the eleuenth verse of this Chapter.
            
               So either the Crowes shal minister to
our wants, as they did to Elias: or
our enemies, as the Egyptians did to
the Israelites: or els the Angels themselues,
as they did here.
            But to grow to a conclusion, Let vs
seeke the Kingdome of God, and all
other things shall be ministred vnto
vs. And in all like temptations, wee
may learne a good aunswere out of
Dan. cap. 3. vers. 17. That God that we
serue is able to releeue & deliuer vs, euen
from the burning fire: But if it should
not be his will so to doo, yet wee will
not vse vnlawfull meanes, or fall to Idolatrie,
or turne stones into bread.
            In this aunswere (againe) Christ
would teach vs heere to bee resolute,
howsoeuer Gods blessing dooth not
concurre with our gettings, as it doth
not when wee get them by indirect
meanes, contrarie to God word. To
goods so gotten, God will adde sorrow:
for The blessing of the Lord maketh
rich, and he doth adde no sorrowes
with it. Prouerb. 10. 22. When GOD

giues riches, he giues quietnes withall:
but if God giue them not, wee
were as good be without them, whether
they bee gotten by oppression or
violence, Prouerb. 4. 17. or by fraud &
deceipt, Prouerb. 20. 17. For these two
be the quick-siluer and brimstone of
the Diuells Alchymistrie. God will
adde sorrowe to them: for though
they be pleasant at the first, Prouerb.
20. 17. and money gotten by stinking
meanes, smels like other money (as an
Emperour said): and bread so gotten,
taste like other bread: yet in the end
a plaine conclusion and experiment
will make it manifest, that it was made
of stones, and had sorrow mingled or
added to it. And therefore it shall be
either an occasion or matter of the disease
called the Stone 
               
                  •
               or it shall turne
his meat in his bowels, & fil him with
the gall of aspes, Iob. 20. 14. or as As
                     ••
                  s
oppression by delicacie, became an occasiō
of the dropsy or gowt: or els shal
the executioner catch al that he hath,
& the stranger spoile him▪ 
               Psa. 109. 11▪
               
or spend them vpon Phisitions, Mar.
5. 26. or on Lawyers: or els, though
God suffer them to enioy them quiet
all their life time, and euen to die by
their flesh-pots; yet on their death-bed
they shall finde such a grudging
and torment in their conscience, that
they will wish that they had starued
for hunger, before they had begun to
vse anie such meanes. Or if God in
his iudgements (for their greater torment)
suffer them to die in their beds,
without anie remorse of conscience,
like blockes, or like an Oxe dying in a
ditch; at the last day they shall feele a
gnashing in their teeth, and then they
will know it was made of stones.
         
         
            
            The fourth Sermon.
            
               
                  Matt. 4. vers. 5. 6. 
                  Then the diuell tooke him vp into the
holie Citie, and set him on a pinacle
of the Temple, 
                  And said vnto him, If thou bee the
the Sonne of GOD, cast thy selfe
downe: for it is written, that hee
will giue his Angels charge ouer
thee, and with their hands they
shall lift thee vp, least at anie time
thou shouldst dash thy foote against
a stone.
               
            
            
               THe manner is, after one
hath taken a foyle, his
courage will faile. The
Angel would haue ben
gone, when he saw hee

could not preuaile ouer Iacob, Genes.
32. 26. But it is not so heere with the
diuell: for when he saw that his first
temptations would not preuayle, hee
tryeth another. And euen so he playeth
with Iob: for when he could doo
no good vppon his first patent, by taking
away all that he had, hee comes
and sues for a new Commission, that
he might touch his flesh and boanes,
Iob. 2. 5. And thereby he giueth vs to
learne, that it is not one foyle that can
make him giue ouer.
            He is one of those, whom a Father
saith, to haue courage aboue theyr
strength; and of that nature be manie
in our dayes, whose daring is aboue
their skill; and haue courage to vndertake
much more than theyr abilitie
is to perfourme: not lyke
Dauid, who did as much as he vndertooke
in killing Goliah: nor like
him of whom Esay speaketh in the
seauenth verse of his third Chapter,
that when they would haue

made him Prince, he had no bread
nor cloathing, and therefore refused:
but they will take it vpon them
though they haue not wherewithall,
and thereby become Authours
of trouble, wanting abilitie to goe
through withall. But as Augustine
saith, It is not all one not to bee
able to aunswere, nor to bee able
to hold their peace? Wee see
heere the Diuell is a great vndertaker.
            Secondly, hee is not onely content
to take a foyle, but euen out
of the same thing wherewith hee
was foyled, maketh hee matter of
a new Temptation, a new ball of
fier. Out of Christs conquest hee
makes a new assault; that is, since
hee will needes trust, hee will set
him on trusting, hee shall trust as
much as hee will. As the former
tempted him to diffidence, so this
shall tempt him to prefidence.
            
               As before the diuell brought him to
the waters of Meribah (Exod. 17. 7.)
where the Children of Israel did murmure
and tempt GOD: so now hee
brings him to the temptation of Massah,
(Deut. 6. 16.) that is, to presumption,
wantonnesse and delicacie: for
then with bread they were not content,
but they must haue flesh and other
dainties, Psalm. 78. 20. As the first
might bee called the hungrie Temptation,
so this may be called the wanton
Temptation. That which was in
the olde Testament the Temptation
of Moribah, is here in the new Testament
the Temptation of the Wildernes: & that which was there the
Temptation of Massah, is heere the
temptation of the Pinacle.
            In the first, by want of things necessarie,
he thought to driue them to
vexation and bitternes of spirite, and
to distrust Gods power & goodnes:
In this second, by vnnecessarie matters,
he draweth vs on to wantonnes,
& to put God to try what he can do,

and to set him about base seruices: by
the one, he driueth vs vnto vnlawfull
meanes, by the other, he draweth vs
from the vse of things lawfull: by the
one he brings vs to this conceipt, that
we are so abiected of God, that if we
trust in him, he will in the ende fayle
vs; by the other, to thinke we are so
deare in Gods eyes, and such darlings,
as throw our selues into anie danger,
and he will not forsake vs: by the one
he puts vs in feare (as Augustine saith)
Deum defuturum, et iamsi promisit; by
the other, in hope Deum adfuturum,
vbi non promisit: by the one, he slaundreth
GOD vnto vs, as if hee were a
God of straw, of base condition, and
subiect to our becke; by the other, as
if he were a God of yron, that would
not encline, though wee requested
him.
            Now to the Temptation: wherein
we are to consider three things. First,
the g
                  •
               ound the Diuell chose for the
woorking of this Temptation. Secondly

the temptation it selfe; to wit,
the diuells speech. Thirdly, Christs
answere to it.
            In the place, three things are to be
noted: first, the place it self: secondly,
the diuel chose it: thirdly, that our
Sauiour followed him thether.
            For a new Temptation hee makes
choyce of a new place. Indeed for a
temptation to presumption, the Wildernes
was not a sit place: first it was
not high enough, and then it was not
populous enough. It was a melancholy
place: when a man is vnder the
crosse in affliction, or in some anguish
and sorrow for want, death of frends,
or otherwise; and generally for all solitarie
men: the hungrie temptation
is fitter, than this of presumption.
            As long as Noah was in the Arke
in the midst of the waters, hee had in
him no presumptuous thought: but
sitting vnder the vine in his vineyard,
he was ouercome therewith. And iust
Lot (2. 
                     •
                  et. 2. 8.) in Sodome, had no fit

time or place to bee presumptuous;
but when he dwelt in the mountaine
in securitie, then he committed incest
with his Daughters, beeing made
drunke by them.
            
               Dauid, so long as hee was persecuted
by Saule, and tossed vp & downe
from post to piller, had no leasure to
be presumptuous: but in the top of
his turret, when he was at rest in his
pallace, 2. Sam. 11. 2. presumption
gaue him a blow. So heere the Wildernes
was no fit place, but the Pinacle
is a very fit place for one to be presumptuous
on. It is as good as a stage
to shew himselfe vpon, to see and to
be seene.
            In the Wildernes there was small
warrant for one that would bee presumptuous:
but from the Pinacle hee
might discerne farre and neere, both
the inner Court and outward Court,
and see a whole Clowde of Witnesses,
and haue some warrant of
example of all estates, high or lowe,
wise or noble.
            
               For what abuse soeuer be in him, bee
he neuer so presumptuous, hee shall
see some as prowde, stout, and high
minded as himselfe: be his hayre neuer
so long, or his ruffs neuer so great,
he shall finde some as farre gone therin
as himselfe.
            If wee marke the foure gradations
that it hath, wee shall finde it to bee a
verie fit place. As first, before hee
could come to the Pinacle, hee must
goe out of the Wildernesse into the
Citie: secondly, not anie Citie, but
the holy Citie: thirdly, into the Temple
of the Citie: and fourthly, out of
the Temple vp to the Pinacle.
            First, (hauing got him to leaue the
Wildernes) hee brought him into the
Citie, that there hee might saye vnto
him: you see such & such graue men,
how they behaue themselues: why
should you seeke to bee holier than
they? This was a good ciuill temptation:
hee brought him not to Cesarea
or Samaria, but euen to Ierusalem,
               
the holie Citie: for that addition is giuen
it, Luc▪
                4▪ 9. and Dan. 9. 24. Thirdly,
he brought him into the Temple,
where euen the verie ground was holy.
Fourthly, not to anie other place
of it, but to the verie top and pinacle
which was ouer the Sanctum Sanctorum.
            
            Who would not tread hard there?
and take vpon him being in such a
place, where if a man will be carried
away with example; hee may see Ananias
the high Priest, renting his
cloathes, at the hearing of things that
sounded like blasphemie, Mark▪
                14.
63. and yet buying his Bishoprick for
money; who will not then be bold to
doo the like? And Herod a Prince,
such a one as heard Iohn Baptist
preach; yea, and with much delight,
to commit adulterie, Mark. 6. 20 who
would feare to doo the like? There
he may see the Pharisie, vnder showe
of great holines, tything mynt and comine,
and vnder colour of long praiers,
deuoure widowes houses, bringing

in by extortion, and sending out
by excesse, Matth. 23. 14. 21.
            And so in this Citie, one may see
some men, both great frequenters of
Sermons, and yet great vsurers; gentlewomen
misshapen in theyr attyre.
Seeing this, who will not be as bolde
as they, the place being so holie? And
beeing thus warranted by example,
surely we must needs commend the
diuels wit, for his choyce.
            Out of this arise two notes.
            First against some phantasticall spirites,
who say, Can that bee an holie
Citie, where there be dumbe dogges?
There were so in Ierusalem, Es
                     •
                  . 56. 10.
where the leaders be blinde, Matth.
15. 14. They were so where Iudas ministred
the Sacrament, where there is
diuision and debate amongst themselues,
Phil. 4. 2. Can this (say they)
be the holie Citie? And thereuppon
they forsake the fellowship, Hebr. 10.
25. whereas they (notwithstanding
the former abuses, and notwithstanding

the eleuen Tribes were Apostataes)
did yet name it the holie
Citie.
            Secondly, on the other side wee are
to be instructed, that though a man
be on the battlements of the Church,
yet hath he no sure footing, or cause
to be secure; but rather to feare the
more: for euen there doth the diuell
stand at his elbow, watching his ouerthrow.
There is no place (we see) priuiledged
from temptations, no Desert
so sollitarie, but the diuell will seeke it
out: no pinacle so high, but the Diuell
is a Bishop ouer it, to visit and ouerlooke
it.
            To conclude, though in Ierusalem
sit the abhomination of desolation▪
(whereof Daniel spake) yet it is the
holy Citie stil. And though the place
bee neuer so holy, yet is that no cause
of priuiledge; but euen there may sit
the abhomination of desolation Both
are prooued out of Matth. 24. 15.
            
               The second thing that wee obserued
in the circumstaunce of place, is,
that the Diuell assumpted Christ:
which, to those that are weake (as
Gregorie also collecteth) may be offensiue,
in giuing them to thinke, that
the Diuell had such power ouer
Christ as to carie him whether he listed.
But when they shall consider, that
euen the lymbes of the Diuell haled
and harrowed him too and fro, from
Annas to Caiphas, from Caiphas to Pilate,
from Pilate to Herod, and from
him backe againe to Pilate: and how
spitefully and contemptuously he was
vsed in all these places, and at last caried
to execution: what meruayle
wil it be to see him (as Augustin speaketh)
In monte duci a capite, qui a membris
traditur, &c.
            
            These things doo indeed (as all other
his sufferings) set forth the greatnes
of the loue of GOD towards vs.
Of God the Father, that would giue
his onely Sonne; yea, appoint him

this worke of our saluation, and giue
the Diuell such a power ouer him,
Luc. 20. 53. Of God the Sonne, that he
would bee content to suffer such indignitie,
Phil. 2. 7. as to be obedient to
the death of the Crosse.
            The reason of all these his sufferings,
as also that he would bee baptized
of Iohn, a weake and sinfull man;
was (as himselfe declareth it) to fulfil
all righteousnes, Matth. 3. 15. So heere
he was to suffer it, els Gods righteousnes
would not haue been fulfilled, nor
the worke of our saluation. And as
he suffered this Assumption, so afterwards,
Luk. 9. 51. his second Assumption,
was to goe to Ierusalem to suffer;
and so at the last he came to his third
and last Assumption, to be receiued
vp into glorie, 1. Tim. 3. 16. And by
the very same steps and degrees, must
we be assumpted. And this is his assumption
of suffring, which brought
him to glorifying.
            The third thing is, that our Sauiour

our followed; whereby wee are to
marke, not so much his courage, that
durst encounter with the Diuell in anie
place wheresoeuer he list to carrie
him: and that hee was not onely the
God of the valleyes, but a God of the
mountaines also, contrary to their surmize,
1. King. 20. 23. That (I say) is not
so much to bee marked, as that our
Sauiour would at all stand vpon a Pinacle.
            There be some that would make vs
beleeue, it is a sinne to stand vppon a
pinacle: but then if that had been so,
Christ would neuer haue stood there.
And since Christ stood there, it is no
more sinne for anie man els to stand
there, than it is to stand in the Wildernes:
for it is lawfull for vs to follow
his foot-steps, & to tread wheresoeuer
he hath trod before vs; yet such
places be not priuiledged. For as it is
true, that manie mens table & wealth
is their snare, Psalm. 69. 22. so euen the
good guifts and graces of God, bee
turned to a mans hurt, as knowledge

may serue for a quil to puffe him vp,
and make him swell, 1. Cor. 8. 1. Nay,
euen that godly sorrow, which is so
much to be wished for, hath in it matter
of temptation, least men bee swallowed
vp with too much heauinesse,
2. Cor. 
                     •
                  . 7.
            
            The Scriptures themselues (wee
see) are subiect to the abuse of the diuell:
whereby it should followe, that
they are to be refused, if euerie thing
bee to be refused which brings matter
of temptation. But as Augustin saith,
Non est laus stetisse in pinaculo, sed stetisse
& non cecidisse. In euerie place to
answere the diuell, is praise-worthie.
Indeede it is daungerous for one that
hath a light and giddie brain, for such
as are dronke, Esa. 51. 22. (though not
with wine) to stand so high.
            
               Iob could stand there without falling,
for he had a more settled braine,
Iob. 31. 27. Such places are for the wisest
and sagest men. Saint Paul stood
not there, but yet he could haue stood
there, for he had the trick or skill of it,

as himselfe confesseth, Phil. 4. 12. I can
be abased, and I can abound, &c.
            
            Now come we to the Temptation
it selfe, which hath three generall
heads. First, the ball of wilde fire;
which is to consume his faith. Secondly,
the dart, Cast thy selfe downe; which
is to peirce the soule. Thirdlie, hee
tempereth the head of his dart with
some stronger mettal; which is, Scriptum
est.
            
            
               I.
               First, Si filius Dei es. This is a great
mote in the diuells eye, hee vseth the
same terme in the former temptation,
and here he is vp with it againe. And
al is to this end, that by often bringing
it into question whether we bee the
sonnes of God; hee may at last make
it out of question or doubt, that wee
are not the sonnes of God: that by &
from Si sis, he may bring it to Ne sis;
and so we may be like himselfe.
               For to this end is al his compassing

of sea and land, to make one Proselyte
like himselfe, according to the endeauor
of the Pharisies, Mat. 23. 15. who
did in like sort, and when he is made,
yee make him (two-fold more) the
childe of hell, than your selues: as on
the other side, Christ would haue vs
the sonnes of God like him. But see
what a dexteritie the diuell hath, in
making things serue for his purpose:
he maketh one selfe same thing serue
for two seuerall, yea, contrarie purposes.
What a goodly grace he hath in
the first Temptation? Hee vseth it
there to procure vs to desperation: he
maketh it heere serue for presumption.
               But indeed there be two manner of
Si es, or Ifs: the one is a questioning
or doubting Si, as, If thou be the sonne
of God, shew vs a signe, Mar. 8. 12. Lord
if thou wilt, thou canst make me whole.
Mat. 8. 2. The other is a plaine affirmation,
as Phil. 3. 11 If by any means
I might attaine to the resurrection of the
dead: where we are sure he made no

doubt thereof. So here the diuell saith
If thou be the Sonne of God, as I now
graunt indeede. I was in some doubt,
but now I confesse thou art: I am of
the voyces minde, that pronounced
thee so at thy Baptisme.
               The diuell (in the former temptation)
came out like a malecontent, or
a murmurer: heere hee comes lyke a
flattering parasite, he will pinguare caput
eius oleo, make his head euen swim
in the oyle of ostentation. But though
it be not the same temptation, yet it is
the same diuell in both places: for
both by the one and other, he seeketh
the downfall and destruction of
man: and though his two Ifs bee contrarie
in themselues, yet are they both
also contrarie to the will and word of
God: for he would not in any case we
should distrust him, neither would he
that at anie time wee should cast our
selues downe. And therefore hath he
caused battlements to bee made on euerie
house top, that none might bee
slaine with falling downe, Deut. 22. 8.

Now hee would haue him shew himselfe
(thereby) to bee the Sonne of
God, for hee is now in the sight of all
Ierusalem.
               
               It is said, that Christ comes now to
put too a spark of fier, that is of faith,
& that his will was, it might burne &
be maintained. The diuell on the other
side, labours by all meanes possible
to quench and put it out: and seeing
water would not doo it in the former
temptation; he goeth now about
to see, if he can make the verie oyle it
self to put it out, euen that very thing
whereby it were to be maintained: as
indeede it will, if wee powre out too
great a quantitie. Or if hee cannot
quench it, either with water or oile▪ he
wil see if he can blow it vp with gunpowder.
               As▪ seeing the water of distrust will
not extinguish his faith, but that hee
would trust in God: he endeuoureth
now by Scriptures (that magnifie the
prouidence of GOD, and the confidence
we are to put in him) to set him

as farre gone in the other extream, by
presuming or trusting too much, that
so the fier, which before hee would
haue quenched, maye nowe so flame
out, as, not to keepe it selfe within the
chimnie, but to set the whole house on
fier. This is the ball of wilde-fier of
this second Temptation: and so both
we see tend to the consuming & nullifying
of our faith.
            
            
               II.
               The dart it self is, Cast thy self down:
which consisteth of two poynts. First,
the casting downe: secondly, that hee
himselfe was to cast downe himselfe.
               For the first, it is generall, the neglect
of ordinarie meanes; as heere:
whereas the ordinarie way was down
the staires, he would haue him leap,
or throwe himselfe ouer the Battlements.
And heere a man maye see to
what ende the Diuells halting commeth:
he brings a man vp by little &
little to some high place, that so hee
may send him at once with his head

downward. All the preferments that
he bestoweth on a man, is not to anie
other intent, but that hee may doo as
the diuell himselfe did, (who beeing
on high▪ did cast himselfe downe) and
so bee like him. Io. 8. 23. that is, from
beneath, not from aboue: who fell
from heauen like lightning, Luc. 10. 18
So that howsoeuer in outward showe
he may seeme to befrend vs, yet this is
his inward intention and scoape. As
the Edomites in time of the prosperitie
of the Israelites, pretended great
good will to them: but in the day of
their calamitie, they were they that
cryed, Downe with them, downe with
them, Psalm. 137. 7.
               Gods manner is, when he meaneth
to exalt a man, hee will first humble
him, and make him low, Mat. 23. 12.
The diuels manner is (we see) cleane
contrarie, Esa. 14. 14. to lift them vp to
the clowdes, that he may bring them
downe to the graue, yea to the lowest
graue, Psalm. 86. 13. He carieth them
the higher, to throwe them downe

with the greater violence. He lifteth
vp Adam with a conceipt, to bee like
God, to the verie top of perfection to
the intent he might bee like the beast
that perisheth, Psal. 49. 20.
               The second hath some matter of
comfort: the Diuell is here a suter to
him, to doo it himselfe. Why doth not
the diuell cast him downe? First, it
was not in his power; or if it had, yet
would not that haue serued his turne:
then there had been no sinne of presumption
in it. There must bee two
persons that must concurre in our
downfall: well may the diuell induce
and mooue vs to it; but vnles we our
selues be consenting, & cast our selues
downe, there can be no downe-fall to
hurt vs. For as Chrisostome saith, Nemo
laeditur nisi a seipso: so Nullum precipitium
nisi voluntarium. The Diuell
did not cramme Eue with the forbidden
frute: but when shee saw it, shee
tooke it, and eate it, Gen. 3. 6. So the
diuell when he entreth into the soule
of a man (which he counteth his palace)

hee dooth not breake open the
doore, no, nor so much as drawe the
latch; but when he commeth, he findeth
it swept and garnished, Luc. 11.
25. and so goeth in. There must therfore
be a reaching out of the hand, &
an opening of the doore by our selues,
and so a casting downe of thy selfe,
or els though the diuell thrust sore at
thee that thou maiest fall, the Lorde
will helpe thee, Psal. 118. 13.
               In Deut. 22. 8. God hath caused battelments
to be made on euerie house
top, by which we may stay our selues:
the diuell tells God, that he had made
a hedge about Iob, Chapt. 1. 10. so that
vnlesse Iob steppe ouer it, or breake it
downe, he is safe.
            
            
               III.
               The diuels dart is▪ 
                  Cast thee downe:
but hee bestoweth some great cost on
this. With the selfe same armor that
Christ bare off the other dart, dooth
the diuell sharpen and harden this: he
doth not so in any other of the temptations,
therefore we are to looke for

some great matter: he bringeth scripture,
that he may be the better credited.
He speaks not now after the maner
of men, 1. Cor. 9. 8. so that it is not
he now that speaketh, but Scripture,
as Paul reasoneth there. You see (saith
he) I counsell you to nothing, but that the
Psalmes will beare you out in.
               
               The diuell knewe well by his owne
fall, how dangerous the sinne of presumption
is, it cost him dearely, and
so did Dauid likewise, and therfore of
all other, he praieth God to keep him
from presumptuous sinnes: Psal. 19.
13. He knew also what it was to abuse
the goodnes, patience and long suffering
of God, Rom. 2. 4. Therefore he
auoucheth it by scripture: he tels him
it will be long to goe downe the stayers,
and teacheth him a nearer waye,
but a iump, or to cast himselfe down,
and to feare no hurt, for the Angells
haue charge of him.
               And euen so hee perswadeth men
now a dayes; that they neede not goe
downe faire and softly, in feare and

trembling, but to deferre all till theyr
dying houre, & then commend themselues
to God, and throw themselues
vppon Gods mercie, and that fierye
Chariot that tooke vp Elias, shall
come and fetch vp them: or els an
Angell shall carrie them vp, let them
be sure they shall haue no harme, for
they be Gods darlings, and God doth
so doate on them, that he will not suffer
them in anie case to receaue the
least hurt that may be.
               If euer the diuell came in his likenes,
it was here. In the first of Sam.
28. 18. hee came but in the guise of a
Prophet: so that in stead of saying, Is
Saule among the Prophets? it might
haue been said, What, is the diuell among
the prophetes? But heere hee
hath vsed himselfe so cunningly, that
if euer hee was transformed into an
Angell of light, here it is verefied. 1.
Cor. 11. 14. for he commeth here lyke
a white diuell, or like a Diuine, hee
comes with a Psalter in his hand, and
turnes to the place, & shewes our Sauiour

the 91. Psalm. vers. 11. and 12.
wherein first we are to noate, that the
diuell readeth Psalmes, as well as we,
and hath the wordes of Scripture in
his mouth. And 1. Sam. 28. he counterfeited
Samuel so right, and vsed the
verie words that he had vsde, that they
could not know him from Samuel: so
heere hee counterfeited the voyce of
Dauid, Act. 19. 15.
               
               This will make vs shake off securitie,
considering that God doth (for
our tryall) sometime deliuer the aduersarie
the keye of the Armourie,
whereby he is able to hold argument
with an Archangell, Iude 9. yea, with
Christ himselfe, as we see here. How
carefull therefore had we need to be,
to finde out a fit answere for him? For
onely to assault vs doth hee reade the
Scriptures: yea, but not to anie good
end, but euen thereby to deceaue the
simplicitie of men; as heere, to make
them put their soules in aduenture to
the last hower.
               He hath indeed a grace with some

vaine youths of the Court, & vngodlye
Atheists, to set them a scoffing at
the Scripture, as Esay 28. 22. But with
others, that haue the Scriptures in
more high reuerence, he goeth another
way to worke, making it to them
the sauour of death, Roman. chapt. 7.
vers. 10.
               
               The words which hee vseth in the
name of Samuel, hee vseth to make
Saule dispaire: and here he vseth Dauids
words to cause presumption, and
to make them our bane. And not euerie
Scripture: but if there bee anie
Scripture more full of heauenly comfort
than another, that of all other wil
the diuell abuse; as indeed the psalms
are; and of all the Psalmes, this 91. especially:
and in that part, if anie one
sentence be sweeter than another, that
of all other will the diuell abuse.
               Mark the second verse here cyted.
He shall giue his Angells charge ouer
thee, to keepe thee in all thy wayes. These
last wordes the diuell leaues out, because
they make not for his purpose.

                  They shall beare thee in their hands, that
thou dash not thy foote against a stone.
And we shall see nothing can be spoken
more comfortablie: as first, in that
it is said, that the Angels haue charge
ouer vs in all our wayes: Exod. 23. 20.
Behold I send my Angell before thee, to
guide thee in the way, and to comfort,
and confirme vs: as when Iacob was
in feare of his brother Esau, the Angell
met him, Gen. 32. 1. and to defend
vs in all dangers, and succour vs in all
necessities, spreading their winges ouer
vs, and pitching their tents about
vs, Psal. 34. 7.
               
               Secondly, this charge not only concerneth
our head and principal members,
but also our feet: yea, Gods prouidence
reacheth euen to the haires of
our head, for they are numbred, Mat. 10. 30.
               
               Thirdly, this charge of theirs is not
onely to admonish vs when daunger
commeth, but they are actually to
help vs, as it were putting their hands
betweene the ground and vs. Mat. 13.

41. they shall take the rubs and offences
out of our way.
               Fourthly, this doo they not of curtesie,
as being creatures giuen of nature
to loue mankinde, but by speciall
mandate and charge they are bounde
to it, and haue a praecipe for it, yea, the
very beasts & stones shalbe in league
with vs. Iob. 5. 23.
               
               This Psalme, and these verses conteining
such comfort, hath the Diuell
culled to perswade men, that beeing
such sweete Children of God, they
may venture whether and vpon what
they will; for the Angels attend them
at an inch. He bids them put the matter
in aduenture, and then but whistle
for an Angell, and they will come at
first: he carieth them vp to the top of
the pinacle, and shewes them theyr
owne case in Annas and Herod; and
tells them God will require no more
of them, than he did at their hands: &
all the way as they goe vp, he singeth
them a Psalm of the mercies of God:

he carrieth them vp with a song, that
Gods mercie is aboue all his workes,
Psalm. 145. 9. And with Psalm. 103. 8.
how gracious and long-suffring God
is, who rewardeth vs not according to
our deserts: and Psalm. 136. That his
mercie endureth for euer: God therfore
beeing so full of mercie, will take all
things in good part. But this mercye
the diuell tells them of, differeth from
the mercie Dauid meant: for the mercie
Dauid speaketh of, is coupled with
iudgement, Psal. 101. 1. I will sing mercie
and iudgement to thee O Lord: and
Psal. 85. 10. Mercie & truth are met together,
Iustice and peace haue kissed each
other. Thus I say they shall haue musique
al the way, & if any at the height
thinke it a great way downe: no, saith
the diuell, you need but a iumpe from
your baptisme into heauen, you shall
need no staires at all.
            
         
         
            
            The fift Sermon.
            
               
                  Matth. 4. Ver. 7. Iesus said vnto him, It is written againe:
Thou shalt not tempt the
Lord thy God.
            
            
               COnsidering that Saint
Iames saith chapt. 4. 5.
The Scripture speaketh
nothing in vaine: & that
as our Sauiour Christ
saith Io. 10. 35. No scripture
can be disappointed; it may seeme
strange that the diuell comming armed
with The sword of the spirite, (for so
is the word of God tearmed, Ephes. 6.
17.) Christ giues not place, but opposeth
himselfe to answere. Wee see

that a message comming in the name
of the Lord, this verie name abashed
Nehemias, (Nehe. 6. 10.) at the first
hearing, till hee perceaued it was contrarie
to the law of God, and so came
not from him: which here we see to
bee the cause, why Christ dooth not
yeeld by and by, vpon the hearing of
the Woord, but sets himselfe to make
answere: forsomuch as the word is not
of force, Quia dicitur onely, but Quia
creditur, as Augustine noteth. If there
bee not the mixture of faith with it,
(whereof Paule speaketh, Hebr. 4. 2.)
it is nothing worth. And therfore the
badde spirite was nothing abashed or
daunted, at the hearing of the bare
names of Iesus and Paule, Act. 19. 15.
but answered, I know them, but who are
ye? They did not beleeue, and therefore
could doo them no good, but
were wounded themselues: glorious
names would not serue the turne. So
was it here vsed without faith.
            When the Scripture is heere vrged
against one, a man would thinke it

were not to be answered by cyting an
other place of Scripture; but by some
tradition of the Elders, Mark 7. 1. or
some glosse, or other shift; but wee
see our Sauiour answereth here no other
way but by Scripture.
            Because the wolfe comes somtimes
disguised in a sheeps skin, it is no reason
that therefore the verie sheepe
should lay away their fleeces: so here,
because the diuell vseth the word, as
the slaying letter, 2. Corin. 3. 6. or as the
sword to kill men with; it is no reason
why Christ may not therfore vse
it in his owne defence. Why then (wil
some say) one of these two inconueniences
will followe; that hereby we
shall thinke the Scripture is of the diuells
side, aswell as of Christs side, &
so diuided; as in like sort they make a
diuision of Christ, when one holdes
with Paule, another of Apollos, 1. Cor. 1.
13. No, it is not so, Christ alleadgeth
not this Scripture in that sort, as one
nayle to driue out another: but by way
of harmonie and exposition, that the

one may make plaine the meaning of
the other. For albeit the diuell sheweth
himselfe to be the diuell, in cyting
that Text so, as might best serue for
his purpose: in that, whereas the
Psalme whereout he taketh it, hath it
thus, That he might keepe him in all his
wayes; which words hee leaueth out.
For if he had cyted that, he could not
thereby haue enforced anye casting
down: for the Angels haue no charge
ouer a man, but in his wayes; & from
the toppe of the pinacle there was no
way, but down the staires on his feet.
He was not (relying on the Angells)
to cast himselfe downe with his head
forward. But the diuell hath a wrest,
to make the string sound hie or low,
as he list; or if that will not serue, hee
hath a racke to stretch them out, as
some did Saint Paules Epistles, 2. Pet.
3. 16. He can set them on the tenters,
to proue, that downe the staires, or ouer
the battlements, all is one, the Angels
shall safe-gard him.
            Though this (I say) be the Diuells

corruption, which the late Wryters
haue well spyed: yet Christ (we see)
is not willing to take aduauntage of
that, but vseth a wiser course; for so
are we to think, that he went the best
way to worke, that is, the conference
of Scripture with Scripture, which
Christ here practiseth, and commendeth
vnto vs.
            In euerie Arte, all propositions are
not of a like certaintie, but some bee
grounds and principles so certaine, as
that no exception is to bee taken against
them. From them are others
deriued, by a consequence called Deduction,
not so certaine as the other:
from these againe others, to the twentieth
hand. So is it in Diuinitie. Christ
here reduceth the diuels argument &
place, to a place most plaine to bee
confessed. For the Iewes valuing of
the meanes, had to consider, that God
fedde them with Manna, which they
knew not, to teach them, that Man
liueth not by bread onely, Deut. 8. 3. contemning
the same: and in Deut. 6. 16.
               
bad them they should not tempt their
Lord their God, as in Massah, when
they cried for bread. The Lord curseth
him, that maketh flesh his arme,
and with-draweth his hart from God,
Ierem. 17. 5. They sacrificed vnto their
yarne, because their portion was plentifull,
Abac. 1. 16. Iob condemneth the
making golde our hope, or the wedge
of golde our confidence, chap. 31. ver.
24. As then wee must not deifie the
meanes, attributing all sufficiencie to
them: so we may not nullifie them, &
thinke too basely of them, but vse
them, that we tempt not God, according
to his word.
            Out of these two grounds, may euerie
question be resolued: for euerie
proposition must be prooued out of
the ground. So that, as wee may not
thinke the arme of God to be so shortened,
that he cannot help without
meanes: so are we not to thinke basely
of God, for ordaining meanes.
            Secondly, we heard, that the diuels

allegation was taken out of the psalm,
and one of the most comfortable places
of all the Psalme. Christ by not
standing in Disputation about the
words and meaning of the text, commendeth
to vs the safest and wisest
way to make answere in such like cases.
Our Sauiour would warne vs, that
the psalme 91. is not fit matter for vs
to studie on, when we are on the top
of the pinacle: he therefore chooseth
a place of a contrarie kinde, to counterpoise
himselfe, standing in that tickle
place.
            The Law (we know) is a great cooler
to presumption. If one tamper
much with the Psalmes, beeing in the
case of confidence, hee may make the
fier too bigge. Faith is the fier which
Christ came to put on the earth, and
it is seated betweene two extreames,
Distrust, and Presumption. Distrust
is as water to it, which if it be powred
on in abundance, it will make it to be
smoaking flaxe, or vtterly quench it:
Presumption (on the other side) is a

gunpowder to it, which being thrown
into it, it will blowe it vp, and make it
flye all about the house. Christ was to
take heede of ouer-heating his faith.
Luther vpon the Galathians saith, the
91. Psalme is no meete studie for manie
mens humors in our dayes: they
had more need of a corosiue, to eate
out the soare of the roote and bottome.
            Now to the Answere, which consisteth
of sixe poynts. First, what it is
to tempt God: secondly, wherein:
thirdly, the manner how: fourthly,
this proposition, Thou shalt not tempt:
fifthly, the reason why wee may not:
sixtly, though he be our God, and we
on the pinacle, these be no arguments
for vs to presume.
            
               I.
               First, whosoeuer will not vse such
ordinarie means as God hath appointed,
tempteth God: if hee vse extraordinarie,
(as heere the Diuell would
haue Christ doo) when no body went

about to thrust him downe, wilfullie
to haue cast himselfe downe, were
great madnes: or when a man hath a
faire paire of staires to go downe by▪
to call for a Cherub to carrie him, or
for the winde to flye downe, Psalm. 18.
10. were great wantonnes.
               There is an humor in man, that we
are all giuen vnto by nature; to bee
meruailous desirous to trie conclusions,
in matters that are rare, and vnknown
vnto them▪ contemning things
common, and to be fond after strange
nouelties. It was told them as plaine
as could be, that they should not reserue
of the Manna till morning, and
they needed not to haue reserued it,
they had flesh euerie day: and yet forsooth
they would needes keepe it, if it
were but for an experiment sake, to
trie whether it would stink or no, Exo.
16. 20. And though they were forbidden
to gather on the Sabaoth day, and
on the euen had enough for two dais,
and it was told them they should find
none; yet they must needs try. When

a thing cannot bee had without great
difficultie, it is our manner to haue a
vehement longing after it, as when
Dauid was in a holde, and the Garrisons
of the Philistines were in Bethelem,
then beeing thirstie, no water
would serue his turne, but that in Bethelem,
2. Sam. 23. 15. But when three
mightie men, had broken into the host
of the Philistines, & had brought him
of it, he cared not for it.
            
            
               II.
               For the second, wee are to knowe,
that where neede is, (as the Heathen
speaketh) there a man maye commit
himselfe to the prouidence of God, &
relie vpon him. For wee haue heard,
that where the meanes faile vs, God
hath yet in store his foure prerogatiues:
therefore when it comes to a
dead lift (as wee say) then to haue a
strong confidence in GOD, is thank
worthie: and it is the practise & propertie
of faith, to say boldly with Abraham
when he saw nothing present,

that euen on the hill God wil prouide,
Gen. 22. 14. When our enemies are behinde
vs, and the red sea before vs,
then to looke for a waye through the
sea, and to expect Manna out of heauen,
and water out of the rock, is much
worth. So our Sauiour, when he and
his companie wer in the desert, where
no meate was to be had, fed them miraculoushe:
but beeing neere to the
towne where they might haue it, hee
dismissed them. When Elias was in
distresse, & all meates failed him, then
the Angell brought him meate, 1. Kt.
19. 6. When Hagar and Ismael were
in the wildernes, and the water in the
bottle spent, and shee in great heauines,
then GOD comforted her from
heauen, Gen. 21. 
                     •
                  7. When the Israelites
were in the desarts, then they had
an Angell to lead them, Exod. 23. 20.
When Sidrach, Misach and Abednago
were cast bounde into the fierie Fornace,
then God sent them an Angell
to be their deliuerer, Dan. 3. 38. And
so when Daniel was throwen into the

Lions den (not when he put himselfe
in) God sent his Angell to stoppe the
Lions mouthes, Dan. 6. 22. When we
are deserti in deserto, and all meanes
faile, it is time to trust in God, as Iob
did.
               Our conuersation therfore must be
without couetousnes, and we must be
content with those things that wee
haue: for he hath said, he wil not faile vs,
nor forsake vs, Hebr. 13. 5. This it
out of the compasse of tempting
God, and this is asmuch as the psalme
could warrant him to look for. Looke
vpon it, and you shall see, that it expresseth
such dangers, as could not be
preuented by mans care & industrie,
as, from the snare of the hunter, v. 3. who
vseth to lay it so as we cannot see it to
auoyd it. Vers. 5. Thou shalt not feare
the arrowe that flyeth by daye. An arrowe
(we know) will reach a man far
off before hee bee aware. And so
throughout the Psalm, they are things
out of our defence, therefore they
neede Angells helpe: but when wee

haue meanes to help our selues, Gods
omnipotencie is for the time discharged.
Eutychus that fell out of a windowe
by heauines of sleepe, was restored
to life by Paule, Act. 20. 9. This
then is Christs answere, If there were
no stayres, and hee must needes goe
downe, it were a good Scripture to
meditate on.
            
            
               III.
               Thirdly, as it is a poynt of Gods
power to helpe without meanes: so
hath hee in his wisedome appoynted
means: there be degrees, wherby we
ascend to the effect: they are as a pair
of staires. Where these are, we must
vse them; but when hee offereth vs a
strange signe, it is scrupulous & foolish
nicenesse to refuse it. As, when
God bad Ahaz aske a signe, Esa. 7. 12.
and he would not for tempting God,
he was too precise, he was but an hypocrite.
Moses asked a signe & had
it, and God was well pleased with it.
And so did Gedeon also, to assure him

selfe of deliuering Israel by him, Iud.
6. 36.
               In great, weightie, and extraordinarie
callings, it was allowable to request
a signe: but when there is no
neede, or when there bee other-wise
sufficient, as Mat. 16. 1. where manie
myracles wer daylie done before their
eyes, and where (though they had neuer
so manie more) yet they would
not haue beleeued on him. Such were
the Scribes and Pharisies, that for euerie
trifling occasion, must haue a
signe from heauen. Thus to grate vppon
Gods omnipotent prouidence, is
saucie malapertnesse. For ordinarie
matters, there be ordinarie meanes to
serue our turnes: and for extraordina
                     •
                  ie,
there be extraordinarie wayes
and means reserued, that we need not
let fall our trust in matters corporall,
we all confes there be meanes, as they
which will not worke, may not eate,
2. Thes. 3. 10. in warfare there is no victorie
to be hoped for, without fight,
building of rampiers, and making of

dartes and shields, 2. Chron. 32. 5. onely
in spirituall matters we think to do
well enough, though wee neuer put
too our endeauour; we lay all vppon
God, and trouble not our selues.
               There is but one degree or step in
all Christianitie; it is no more but out
of the font to leap straight into heauen;
from predestination, wee leape
straight to glorification: it is no matter
for mortification, there be no such
meane degrees. But Saint Paule tells
vs, it is so high, that we had neede of a
ladder, in which be manie steps: insomuch,
as he puts a How shall to euerie
step, Rom. 10. 14. How shall they call
on God on whom they haue not beleeued?
&c. There must bee calling on God,
beleeuing on him, hearing his word:
there must ordinarie meanes, & there
is a ladder of practise, aswel as of speculation
or contemplation 2. Pet. 1. 5.
Ioyne vertue with your faith, & with
vertue knowledge, and with knowledge
temperaunce, and so patience,
godlines, brotherly kindnes, and loue:

if these things be in you, you shall not
be idle and fruteles in the knowledge
of Christ: for hee that hath not these
things, is blinde: he goeth blindfold
to the wood, and may chance hop beside
heauen, or step besides the ladder.
A great manie say as Balaam did, O
let my soule dye the death of the Righteous:
but they care not for liuing the
life of the righteous. Hee went but
blindfold, he knew not the Angel that
stood with a sword drawn in the way,
but would haue gone vppon it, if his
asse had been so foolish. A great manie
thinke that presumption, in being
secure of their saluation, is good diuinitie.
Balaam thought he went well,
when he went on the poynt of a naked
sword. So, one entised by the flatterie
of a harlot, thinkes hee goes to a
place of great pleasure: but he goeth
as one that goeth to the slaughter, &
as a foole to the stockes Prouerbes, 7.
22. Those whom it pleaseth God to
haue partakers of his kingdome, hee
puts them in mind to remember their

Creator in the dayes of their youth,
before the euill dayes come: hee giueth
them the grace of timely repentance,
and suffereth them not to deferre
it till the last cast, and then to
think that with the turning of a pinne
(as it were) they shal with a trice be in
heauen, with Elias in a whirle-winde.
Augustine saith, Wee may in some cases
aduise men to haue great hope that they
shall bee saued: but in no case give them
warrant of securitie. So, in Ephes. 5. 6.
This we know, that no whoremonger nor
vncleane person, hath anie inheritaunce
in the kingdome of heauen. Let no man
deceiue you through vaine words, he that
doth righteousnesse is righteous, and hee
that doth vnrighteousnes, is of the diuel.
Io. 3 7. Now therefore to neglect the
hearing of the word, or when he commeth
to heare it, to clap downe in his
place without desire or mind to beare
it away, thereby to be bettered in hys
life; and without purpose after by
meditating on it, to chewe it, and so to
kindle a fire within himselfe, whereby

it may bee digested, and turned into
the substaunce of the minde: this is to
tempt God: so also to beare a greater
countenaunce, and make more
shew of holines than indeed is in one,
is to laye a greater yoake on himselfe
than he neede as Act. 15. 10. is a tempting
of God. Againe, he that sinneth
must looke for euill to followe, Psal.
91. 10. he therefore that sinneth and
yet thinketh to scape punishment▪
tempteth God.
               They that by often experience
haue found, that such and such things
haue been to them occasions of sinning,
and yet will presume to vse the
same againe, tempt God. And those
which set vp their Idols in their heart,
and put the stumbling blocke of iniquitie
before their face, Ezech. 14. 3.
& yet think not they sin, such tempt
God. He that comes to aske forgiuenes
of God, and will not perfourme
the condition in the Lordes praier,
that is, Forgiue others, tempts God.
Generaly, he that seeketh for good of

God, & will not performe that which
he is to doo; or doth euil, thinking to
escape scot-free, without endeuoring
to auoid or resist it, both these tempt
God: and to these two may all other
be referred.
            
            
               IIII.
               The 4 is, wee must not at all tempt
god at no hād: we must not think but
God is able to bring water euen out of
a rocke, Nu. 20. 11. when there is nothing
but rocks and stones: but when
we may hope to finde it, we must dig
for it. So when the soile wil bear corn,
we must till it. When Elisha was in a
little village, not able to defend hym
from the Assyrians, he had chariots, &
horses of fire to defend him, 2. King. 6.
17. but when hee was in Samaria, (a
strong walled Citie) then when the
King of Israel sent to fetch his head,
he said to those which wer with him,
Shut the doore, vers. 32. Christ in the
wildernes myraculously fed manie:
in the Citie hee sent his Disciples to
buy meate, as Iohn. 4. 8.
               
                  In the beginning, when the Gospel
was published, there wanted sufficient
men for the purpose: the Apostles
had the power, as appeareth Actes. 8.
29. that on whom-soeuer they layed
hands, he receaued the holy Ghost, &
was straight able and meet to preach
the Gospell: but after, euerie man to
his studie, 1. Tim. 4. 5. These things exercise,
&c. Wee see, that notwithstanding
Paule was tolde by an Angel
that there should bee no losse of anie
mans life in the ship, yet he caused the
mariners to cut the ropes, and to cast
Anchor, Actes. 27. 23. 24. 29. 30. 31. 32.
nay, when some would haue gone out
by boate, hee would not let them: so
here Christ answereth, that howsoe-Angells
attend on him, hee may not
tempt God.
            
            
               V.
               Now followe the reasons why wee
may not tempt God. There be two
sorts of tempting: the one, by ignorance;

the other by vnbeliefe. It is the
manner of Surgeons, when they are
to dresse a wound, and know not how
farre, nor which way it goeth, to tent
it: In the same manner is God (after
the manner of men) said to tempt vs,
sometimes to prooue what is in our
harts, and whether we will keepe hys
commaundements, Deut. 8. 2. as hee
did the Israelites fortie yeeres. To this
end he both made them hungrie, and
fed them with Manna. We sometimes
tempt God, as if the arme of his power
had receiued a wound, or his eye
a hurt, as if he could not helpe or discern
our wants, aswel now as before,
because he brings vs not water out of
the rocke, Num. 20. 10. but such myracles
now are not agreeing with his
will, which must content vs: hee
will haue mercie on whom hee will
haue mercie, Rom. 9. 19. and we must
not despise the riches of his bounteousnes
and patience, and long suffering▪
which leadeth to repentaunce,
Rom. 2. 4. The Lords hand is not shortened,

that it cannot saue; nor his eare
heauie, that it cannot hear, because he
doth not reprooue vs, we thinke him
like vs, Psa. 50. 19. When god holds his
peace, we think his toung is cut: but I
wil not alwaie hold my peace, saith God,
Mal. vlt. But how shal I knowe this?
say mē now adaies, as Zacharias knew
his wife was with child, Luc. 1. 18. who
(when he would not beleeue the Angel
that told him so, but would needs
haue a sign, was striken dumb, Behold
thou shalt be domb til the day. Here is a
signe for incredulitie: he had been as
good haue beleeued without a signe.
               The second kind of tempting, proceedeth
of ouer-much familiaritie,
when as we thinke wee may bee bold
with God, and that hee will take it in
good part, and therefore wee will put
him to it, (as we say) we will try both
him and his Angels, what mettall is in
them, and what they can doo. Wee
are to thinke vpon the name of God,
as of a heauie and weightie thing, that
is not vpon euery small occasion to be

taken vp and remooued. We are not
to accompt it as a feather, that wee
may lightly tosse vp and down at our
pleasure: & euen so are we to esteeme
of the mercie of God. It is not to be
aduocated vppon euerie vaine trifle,
for that were to vse God as wee are
wont to vse our Iuglers. Come on let
vs see what you can doo, shewe vs a
myracle, say they, Exodus chap▪ 7. ver.
11. So Herode desired to see Christ,
that hee might see some myracle of
him, as in the thirteenth of Luke, the
eight verse. It is a heauie case when
men stand thus affected toward God,
when afterwards in the two & twentieth
of Luke, verse 64. they blindfolded
him, and bad him read who stroke
him. We our selues wold not be so vsed,
wee could not endure to see our
frends vsed so: how much lesse ought
we to vse God in that manner? especially,
that attribute qualitie, or property
of God, which of all others, hee
would haue to bee most magnified,
that is, his mercie?
               
                  Hee must needes take it verie hainouslie,
to see that abused, since (of
all the rest) hee makes most accompt
of it. Howsoeuer he could be content
to serue, yet would he not be a seruant
to our sinnes in anie case, Esay. 43. 24.
especialy not to be made a pack-horse
(if I may so say) for our sinnes to lay
load on, euen till his backe ake. Hee
saith by Amos, chap. 2. ver. 13. that hee
is prest vnder vs, as a cart is prest that
is vnder sheaues. Let vs not make a
dung-cart of Gods mercie, let vs forbeare
him that seruice of all other.
            
            
               VI.
               The 6. is, that none of these Dominū Deum tuum, neither Lord, nor God,
nor that he is thine, are fit arguments
to prooue, that we may presume vppon
him. The diuell belike had perceiued,
that there was some acquaintance
betweene Christ and God, and
peraduenture had said unto him, you
may bee bold with him, and with his

Angels. What? he is your father▪ and
(as Cesars daughter answered) that
though he forget himself to be Caesar,
yet do not you forget to be his sonne.
No saith Christ, these be no good arguments to make one presume. As
for Dominus wee will all graunt (I am
sure) there is smnal matter of presumption
in that. In Deus there maye bee
some more colour: but yet verie little.
It is no good dealing with one that is
mightier than our selues, least he happen
not to take it in good part, but fal
to earnest, and so wee feele the smart.
Wee were not best make sport with
Sampson, least he pull the house about
our eares, and so make vs pay dearlie
for our pastime. Paule saith, Doo wee
prouoke the Lord to anger? are we stronger
than he? 1. Cor. 10. 22. If wee will
needes tempt, wee were best tempt
with our matches. Ther is no dealing
with fire, for it will burne all that toucheth
it. Heb. 1. 7. his Angels and Ministers
are a flame of fire: but Heb. 12.
29. it is said, Our God is euen a consuming

fier. Indeed, if he were like Dagon,
the Philistines God, he might be
set vp and taken downe, and we might
breake his neck & hands at our pleasure:
but being the strong and mightie
God of hoasts, wee were best take
heed how we deale with him.
               
                  Tuum▪
                   what say we to that? An vngracious
childe might make that an
argument of presumption: but whosoeuer
is of anie good nature, wyll
make it an argument of the contrary.
Isaack was Iacobs father, but was Iacob
more bold to abuse him for that? No,
but rather more timerous, Ge. 27. My
father (saith he) may chance feele me; &
so I shal seem to him a mocker, & so bring
a curse on me, and not a blessing. Is God
merciful? yea truly, Mercy is with thee,
but that thou maist be feared, Psa. 130. 4.
Wee maye not abuse his mercie, as to
sinne, that grace maye abound, Rom. 6. 1.
Is hee bountifull and long suffering?
We must therefore the more feare to
displease him. When the Pharasies
tempted him, and would aduenture

their soules in seeking a signe, it is said
Mar. 8. 11. Christ sighed: & why did
he sigh? Because GOD sware in his
wrath, that they should neuer enter
into his rest, whose fathers tempted
him in the wildernes. Psalm▪ 95, What
rest? He dooth not meane the rest in
the Land of Chanaan onely, but that
which shalbe in the kingdom of God.
Heb. 3. 10.
               These two temptations of the diuell,
may fitly be compared to those 2.
rockes, betweene which Jonathan was
to passe, which are said, 1. Sam. 14. 4.
to be sharp: one is called Borez, which
signifieth dirt; the other Sench which
signifieth a bramble, or some sharpe
pricke, betweene which, hee and his
Armor-bearer were faine to clamber
vp. ver. 13. Betweene two such rocks
lyeth our way, that is, Presumption,
and Desperation: therefore blessed is
he that so loueth God, that h
                     •
                   
                  
                     •
                  an be
content to creepe on hands and feete
to him.
            
         
         
            
            
            The sixt Sermon.
            
               
                  Matt. 4. Ver. 8 & 9. 
                  Againe, the Diuell taketh him vp into
an exceeding high mountaine, and
sheweth him all the kingdomes of the
world, and the glorie of them. 
                  And saith vnto him: All these things
will I giue thee, if thou wilt fall downe
and worship mee.
               
            
            
               AT the first ouerthrow,
we had the first Again:
and when Christ ouerthrewe
him then also,
yet would not the diuel
leaue then neither, but hee commeth
with his second Againe: he comes againe
and againe. The first Againe,
               
was an argument of his courage and
stomacke: this second, is an argument
of his importunitie.
            The first repulse could not driue
him away, nor the second neither, no,
nor this third for altogether: for Luke
saith, He departed for a season, Lu. 4. 13.
So that as Christ saith, Iohn 16. 16. After
a while ye shall see mee, and after a
while you shall not see mee: so saith the
diuel also, After a while you shall not see
mee, & againe after a while you shal see
me. Which teacheth vs this lesson, that
it is not enough to haue preuailed against
his temptations twice or thrice,
& so become secure: but we are alway
to stand vpon our gard, knowing how
the diuel wil successiuely, euery turning
of a hand, be with vs; & that while
we liue, we shall neuer be at rest with
him: or if he tempt vs not, we shalbe
in as bad or worse case. For so long as
the Lord left other Nations among
the Israelits, to proue them by, & to be
pricks to their sides▪ it wēt wel inough
with them, Iud. 3. 1. but when they began

to liue in some security (hauing
for the most part subdued them) then
grew they to mutuall dissention. It is
the greatest temptation, to be without
temptation. Therefore Paule had the
messenger of satan to buffet him, 2. Co.
127 for then followes the pressing of
God by praiers. But whether we ioyn
hands with satan▪ or resist him, we shal
be sure he will set vpon vs, & try by
faire meanes what he can doo, or if we
say nay, yet in the end he wil weary vs
as Dalila did Sampson, Iud. 16. 16. who,
because she was importunate, his soul
was pained to the death, & thē he told
her: or if we wil be obstinate in reiecting
his temptations, giuing him at the
first a peremptory refusal: then he wil
go another way to work, as to imagin
som deuise against vs, & smite vs with
the tongue▪ 
               Ie. 18. 18. he will be rough
with vs. If none of these will preuaile,
he will perswade vs, wee must be like
other men, & that is as profitable or
plesant to vs, & then say Samuel what
he can, we will haue a king, 1. Sa. 8. 19.

And whē we haue yeelded once, then
goes he to fetch companie, and takes
vnto him seauen worse spirites than
himselfe, Luc. 11. 26. So the last state
of that man is worse than the first.
Giue but an inch, and he will take an
ell: if he can get in but an arme, he wil
make shift to shooue in his whole bodie.
As we see▪ if the poynt of a nayle
haue once made entrie, the rest will
soone in.
            We see an example of his encroaching
euen in Daiud, 2. Sam. 11. 4. after
he had once made him commit adultrie
by some meane degrees wyth
Bethsheba, see how hee tolls him on
from one wickednes to another. She
was with childe, her husband beeing
in the seruice of God and the King▪
was by the King murdred to hide her
shame, and satisfie his lust. So did he
drawe on Peter, first hee made him
follow a loofe off; secondly, flatlie to
denie Christ; thirdly, to forsweare
him; and fourthly, to curse himselfe
if he knew him.
            
               The Hebrue Writers note, that the
Diuells name Belzebub, signifieth a
great flesh flye, or a master flye: flap
him away neuer so often, hee will still
flie thether againe. So the diuell wyll
neuer cease molesting vs, till the smoking
flaxe be quite quenched, and the
brused reed cleane broken, Esa. 42. 3.
            First, he twists certaine smal threds
together, and so makes a little cord of
vanitie, to drawe vs vnto him: afterward
with a cart-roape or gable of iniquitie,
he seekes to binde vs fast vnto
him for starting; either by the vice
of lust, or of enuie, or at least couetousnes.
But if all should faile, pryde is
sure to hold. Oh Lord, I thanke thee, I
am not like such and such, nor like this
Publicane (a degree further) nor lyke
this Pharisie, Luc. 18. 11.
            This may be a good caueat vnto vs,
that we stand alway vpon our gard, &
that we be sure that wee make strong
resistance in the beginning, and break
it (if we can) while it is but a whipcord.
And to vse the like pollicie in a

good matter, that the King of Egipt
did in a bad; who tooke order that euerie
male childe should be killed, to
keepe the Israelites downe betimes: &
against the succession of temptation,
to entertaine the succession of prayer.
            Now to the matter. The Diuell
deales as with a Citie. In the first he
tells him, he must be famished, except
hee can turne stones into bread. Secondly,
he comes to make a traine of
Scripture to intrap him. Now hee
comes to the ordinary meanes of dealing,
that is; when men striue about
anie thing, and both parties are loath
to yeeld, there will be some parley of
composition and sharing betweene
them. So here▪ the diuell seeing that
he cannot ouer-throw his faith, offereth▪
him to compound: and (on hys
part) hee is content to giue Christ all
the Kingdomes of the world, if our
Sauiour (for his part) will but fall
downe, and worship him.
            The diuel before came disguised in

the shape of a male-content, as that
Christ should bee in such hunger.
Next, he came in the habite of a Diuine,
and that verie demurely, with
his Psalter in his hand. Now he comes
in all his Royaltie, like the Prince of
this world, as he is so called, Iohn 4. 30.
Hee dooth not stand pelting wyth
Christ, but goes roundly and frankelie
to woorke: hee offers all that hee
hath, (and that is no small matter)
to bring Christ but to one sinne, that
so hee might ouer-throwe all mankinde.
            He comes no more now with Si filius
Dei es: for that we see is here left,
he would not haue him thinke on it,
hee would haue him now filius seculi.
This is called by Saint Paule, the bewitching
Temptation, whereby men
become so foolish, as that after they
haue begun in the spirite, they wyll
ende in the flesh, Galath. 3. 3. Where
the Diuell cannot preuayle, eyther
by our owne concupiscence, or by hys
enticings: hee will see what hee can

doo with his Dragons taile, and by
that meanes (say the Fathers) hee did
more hurt, than by the other. Secondly,
his tayle is said to drawe downe the
third part of the starres of heauen,
and to cast them to the earth. Apoc.
12. 4.
            Wee are heere to consider, first the
preparation that the diuell makes, by
taking him vp to an high hill, to make
the offer vers. 8. Secondly, the temptation
it selfe, vers. 9. Thirdly, our Sauiours
answere, and the shield he opposeth
to it, verse 10. Fourthly, the issue
of the conflict, the victorie, vers. 11.
            
            In the first we are to consider, first
the diuells methode: secondly, the
place and ground: thirdly, his pollicie,
in not onely telling what he would
giue; but in shewing thereof: fourthly,
the things themselues which hee
offers, which are two; the kingdome
of the earth, and the glorie thereof.
            
               
               I.
               First, of his methode. Ephes. 4. 14.
we are warned not to be wauering, &
caried about with euerie wynd of doctrine,
by the deceipt and craftines of
men, whereby they lye in waite to deceiue.
Craftines and deceipt then, be
the instruments which the Diuell vseth;
he brings Christ from the Wildernesse
to the Temple, and from the
Temple to the Mountain, to destroy
the Temple, which Mountain is prosperitie.
So in aduersitie wee vowe to
God, that we will serue him; but after
helpe, we breake it.
            
            
               II.
               Secondly, the lysts wher this temptation
was vsed, was the Mountaine.
The reason why hee chose this place
rather than anie other, is the fitnes of
it, in regard of the prospect. The wildernes
(we know) was a melancholie

place, and in no wise fit for this temptation,
so, neither was the pinacle: for
besides that it might haue hindred the
working of this temptation, beeyng
the pinacle of the Temple; the prospect
was not good enough. For
though it were high, yet there were
diuers hilles about Ierusalem, vvhich
would haue hindred the sight of manie
things▪ And though Sion were a
mountaine, yet in respect of Mount
Hermon and Lybanus, it is sayd to bee
but a little one, Psal. 42. 6. and Psalm.
68. 16. Basan is said to be the great hill.
Therefore, as good chose a conuenient
hill, both for height and neerenes,
where hee might behold the whole
Land of Chanaan, Deut. 32. 49. So here
the Diuell chose an exceeding high
mountaine, wher a high minde might
best take view and contemplate: such,
where his horizon might be as spacious
as was possible, & where his sight
might not be hindered by any meane
obiect.
            
            
               
               III.
               Thirdly, he sets before his eies al the
kingdomes of the earth. There is nothing
so soone entised & led awaye, as
the eye: it is the Broker betweene the
hart & all wicked lusts that be in the
world. And therefore it was great
follie in Ezechias, to shew his roabes
and treasure, Esa. 39. 2. as he was told
by the Prophete: it stirred vp such
coales of desire in them that sawe
them, as could not bee quenched, till
they had fetcht awaye all that he had,
and all that his Auncestours had layd
vp euen till that day.
               It is the wisedome that is vsed nowe
a dayes, when men would haue one
thing for another, to shewe the thing
they would so exchange: as the buyer
sheweth his money, and the seller
his wares in the best manner that hee
can, each to entice the other (by the
eye) to the desire of the hart.
               
                  It is the diuels ancient sleight, he wold
not go about to perswade the matter
in words, till he might withall present
the thing to the eye.
               So he dealt with Eue, Gen. 3. 6. First
he shewed her how pleasant the frute
was, and the woman sawe it. So the
cause of the deluge was, Gen. 6. 2. that
the sonnes of God saw the beautie of
the daughters of men. Achabs seeing
of Naboths vineyard, 1. Kin. 21. 2. for
that it laye neere his house, was the
cause of all the mischiefe that followed.
This same foolish vanitie of apparell,
(whereof I haue giuen so often
warning out of this place,) comes
from hence. I saw a fine Babilonish garment,
and desiring it, I tooke it, saith Achan,
Iosua▪
                   7. 21. So the seeing of the
brybe, blindeth the eyes of the Iudge,
Deut. 16. 19. So still the sight of the
eye, allureth the hart to desire.
               The Heathen man therefore wished,
that vertue and honestie might as
well bee seene with bodily eyes: for
then he thinketh, that Admirabiles amores

excitarent su
                        •
                     . So if we could as
well see that which God hath for vs,
as that the diuell here offereth vs: we
would not regard the diuels largesse.
Moses and the other Patriarchs saw
him which is inuisible, which had
prouided a better thing for them:
therefore he refused to bee called the
sonne of Pharaohs daughter, Heb. 11.
27. and to enjoy the pleasure of sinne.
               But you are not so to take it, as
though it were a thing simplie ill to
behold such things, or to looke on a
cup-boord of plate, or to stand on a
pinacle, it is dangerous, but no sinne;
especially, it is vnfit for an vnstayed &
an vngouerned eye. Therefore Lot &
his wife were forbidden to look back
at the destruction of Sodome, Gen. 19.
17. To Abraham it was left at large,
without anie restraint: for that he was
a man of better ruled affections. For
as there must be one without, to take
view and to entice: so must there bee
one within, to hearken to it & to condiscend.
Be sure of that within, that

it be vpright: and then thou maist the
the better looke with that vvhich is
without. But euer bee warie, for the
tinder of thy nature will soone take
fire.
               
                  Ioh said chap. 31. ver. 1. he made a couenaunt
with his eyes: Why then
should he thinke on a maide, and that
he had not been deceiued with a woman,
vers. 9. and that his hart had not
walked after his eye? ver. 7. Paul knew
how to vse want, and how to vse abundance
or plentie, and how pouertie:
both to be full, and to be hungry:
he had stayed affections, Phil. 4. 12.
            
            
               IIII.
               
                  Omnia Regna. This was no small
offer, but euen all the wealth and honour
that may be: two such things as
are most vehemently desired of all
men. So that as Ierome saith, Prae auri
sacra fame nihil sacrum. The desire
thereof also is so vnsatiable, that it is
like the dropsie: which, the more lycour

is ministred to it, the more it
thirsteth: it is perpetuall & vnnatural.
The lesse time a man hath to liue,
and so needes the lesse: the more hee
couets to abound. These two doo neuer
wexe olde: of all vices, graye
haires doo neuer grow on these. This
is the bayte the diuell layd for Christ,
and layes for youth, and mindes lasciuioushe
giuen, he layes a bayte on liue
flesh: to cholericke natures, he ministreth
matters that may encrease their
wrath: for melancholie, he laies baits
of enuie: and so for euerie one, according
to their naturall inclinations
and humours, such baytes as may entice
them soonest. Which if hee can
get them once to swallow his hooke
that is within, it wil hold them sure enough,
and by his line hee will drawe
them to him when he list, so that hee
cares not to let them playe with the
line: then though hee goe to 20. Sermons,
it is no matter: with an apple he
caught Adam and Eue, and all their
posteritie.
               
                  Well, we must be as children, weaned
from this world, though it bring weeping
with it, Psalm. 131. 2. Genes. 27.
38.
               
               When Eue was Ladie and Mistres
of all the world; yet, because there
was a Godship, a higher degree than
hers, she was not content. Princes, because
they can goe no higher by anie
earthly dignitie, aspyre to bee Gods,
and so would bee accounted; as was
said to Herode, that it was the voice of
God, and not of man. But, as they
that are aboue, can abide to haue no
equalls, but will bee alone by themselues:
so they that bee below can abide
no superiour. As when Saul was
chosen by lot from amongst the Israelites,
to bee king ouer them, some wicked
men said, There is a goodly wise
King: nay, I would I were King, I would
they might come to me for iustice 1. Sam.
10. 27. 2. Sam. 15. 4.
               
               Euerie one hath this conceit of him
selfe, that he is worthier to beare rule,
than they which are in authoritie: not

so much as the sillie Fur-bush, but it
thought it selfe a fit person to make a
King, Iudg. 9. 15. & the Thistle would
haue the Cedars daughter married to
his sonne, 1. King. 14. 9. The Spider, a
silly poysonfull thing, wil yet be in the
top of the Kings Pallaces, Pro. 30. 28.
The Gourd start vp in one night, and
was gone in the next. Ion. 4. 6. Goodly
Zebedeus wife could finde no lesse
thing to aske of Christ, for her two
sonnes, that came the last day from the
cart; but that the one might sit at
Christes right hand, and the other at
the left in his kingdome, Mat. 20. 20.
Balaam could neuer thinke his Asse
went halfe fast inough, when he rode
towards preferment, Num. 22. 17. The
Disciples also longed for the kingdom
of Israel to be restored.
               The diuell did not shewe all his
kingdome to Saul, when he was comming
from keeping his fathers sheep,
1. Sam. 9. 24. and Samuel feasted him:
nor after Saule was chosen King, 11. 5.
and he followed his cattell: neyther

did he shew them to the King, bidden
to Absaloms sheep-shearing, 2. Sam.
13. 24. nor at such times as Princes
withdraw themselues to bee priuate,
Dan. 6. 18. but he shewes them at such
time as they are in their greatest glorie
and ruffe, when kingdomes were
growen to the top of iollytie and maiestie,
as the kingdome of Israel was in
Salomons time: and chooseth such a
time, as when they were in most triumph
and pompe, as they were wont
to be at the day of the Kings birth or
inauguration, Ose. 7. 5. Cant. 3. 11. or at
a Coronation, or at the receiuing of
Ambassadours; or at the entertaining
of forrein States, as when the Queene
of Saba was in Salomons Court. 1. Kin.
10. To conclude, hee sheweth them
not when they are in base estate, but
when they are in greatest pompe,
Act. 25. 23.
               
               Now come we to the second point:
to wit, the temptation it selfe: En haec
omnia tibi dabo, vers. 9. Hauing prepared

Christs minde (as he thought) by
shewing him that he wold giue him:
now he comes in with a short and pithie
oration; All this will I giue thee.
Heere thou seest all thou canst wish
for: without thee shall no man lift vp
his hand or his foote in all Egipt, as
Pharaoh said to Ioseph, Gen. 41. 44. so as
he might make all Captaines, & giue
to euerie one fields and vineyards, 1.
Sam. 22. 7. that hee maye say to euerie
one what he list; Speakest thou to mee?
Seest thou not that I haue povver to
crucifie thee, or to let thee goe? Iohn
19. 10. that his fauour might rayse a
man so high, as Haman was exalted aboue
all the Princes, Hest. 3. 1. and his
disfauour, or the least word of his
mouth quite ouerthrowe him, as Haman
was verse. 7. 8. by picking some
small quarrell against him.
               But this is not all neyther: for
this same garish apparell, wherein
manye doo delyght, is contayned
vnder this Haec omnia: Not
onelye embroydered with golde, but

euen gold it selfe, and smells of the finest
sent, Psalm. 45. 8. and 9. And as
for the delights of the flesh, if he can
see anie that delight him better than
other: it is no more than with Dauid
2. Sam. 11. 4. to send for her, and haue
her, she was straight at his commandement.
Neither must any say, it was
vnlawfull: no, not Iohn Baptist, if hee
loue his head, Mark. 6. 17. Hee may
commaund what he list; if any gainsay
it, he may dispatch him out of the
vvay: for hee maye kill and vvound
vvhom he list, Dan. 5. 19. hee maye
commaund all mens tongues, 2. Sam.
14. 10. that they dare not once open
theyr mouth to speake against him.
Nay, he shall haue all mens tongues &
pens readie to extoll all that he doth,
and say; The King is like an Angell
of God, 2. Sam. 19. or that it is the
voyce of God, and not of man, Act.
12. 22.
               
               Why, then to haue all mens hands,
feete, bodies, faces, tongues, and pens▪
this may be vvel said All, to haue not

onely one kingdome, but all: to haue
all the power & glorie of those kingdomes:
here is euen all the kingdome,
the power, and the glorie. He comes
not after a pelting manner, he shewes
himselfe a franke chapman: hee sayth
not that Godlines is great gayne, and a
minde content with his lot, 1. Tim. 6. 6.
and wills him to be content with food
and raiment, ver. 8. He comes not with
Illae, which we shall not once beholde
till another world come; and whether
there bee anie such or no, may doubt.
He shewes him a mount that may be
touched, Heb. 12. 18. hee comes wyth
haec, that is, with readie money in hys
hand: he not onely offers, but stakes
downe▪ and whereas God saith, that in
the sweate of our fore-head we shall
eate our bread, Genes. 3. 19. the Diuell
requires no such thing. This is a donatiue,
Haec omnia dabo: What saye
ye now? Shall Christ take it, or no?
               The Heathen man saith, If a man
be to violate his faith for anie thing, it
is for a kingdome. Christ hath here

offered him all kingdomes, a very entising
bayt: but is there neuer a hook
hidden vnder it? The woman was
fine and braue, and had a cup of gold
in her hand: but it was full of abhomination,
Apoc. 17. 4. So heere, for all
these faire shewes, if you will gain anie
thing by the diuel, you must worship
him: that is the condition annexed
to the graunt, it is no absolute gift,
the diuell is not so kinde, as to part
from all that for nothing. It is such a
gift as the Lawyers call Excambium,
that is, Exchaunge: I will giue you
this, if you will giue me that.
               But yet one would thinke it a verie
large offer, to giue so great a liewe for
so small a seruice: it is but a little externall
reuerence, the bowing of the
knee; you may (notwithstanding) in
hart think what ye list. Well, we may thinke there was somewhat in it, that
the Diuell offered so much for so little,
and yet Christ refused it. Indeed
Christ had great reason to refuse it:
for hee should haue been a looser by

the bargaine. I will stand to it, he had
been better to haue yeelded to either
of the two former temptations, than
to this: hee should full deerely haue
bought all his kingdomes, he had bin
better to haue cast himselfe dovvne
from the pinacle. For that which the
diuell here demaundeth is liew, is as
much worth, as both the glorie of
God, and the redemption of man.
               Of his glorie, God saith, That hee
will not giue it to another, Esa. 42. 8.
If to no other, then not to the Diuell
of all other. And therefore the Angel
would not haue a burnt offering offered
to him, but to God, Iudg. 13. 16.
The Angell would not let Iohn fall
downe and worship him, but bad him
worship God, Reuel. 19. 10. for hee
knewe that God was varie iealous of
his honour, and stood precisely vpon
that poynt. If hee would not impart
this honour with the Angells, much
lesse would hee with the diuell: for
there are degrees in idolatrie, Roman.
1. 23.
               
                  It is not so ill to turne the glorye of
God into the image of a man, as into
birds and beasts.
               Secondly, if we looke into the desire
that he had to satisfie his auncient
enuie, by the destruction of mankind:
we must needes commend the diuells
wit, in making such a bargain. It had
been the best peny-worth that euer
was bought. For if wee marke how
Christ rateth one onely soule, we may
see, how he that to gaine all the kingdomes
of the world, shall loose hys
owne soule▪ 
                  Mat. 16. 26. makes but a
foolish bargaine. Then what rate shal
be made of all mens soules, if one bee
worth kingdomes.
               All which had beene lost, if Christ
had consented to that which the diuel
here requireth: for then he could not
haue said, I restored that which I tooke
not, Psal. 69. 4. By his death he payed
the price for the sinnes of the whole
Wo
                     •••
                  : hee should then haue had a
score of his owne to haue payed, & his

death could haue beene sufficient but
for himselfe onely▪ If hee had fallen
downe, and worshipped him: hee
could not haue sayd, that the Prince
of this Worlde had nothing to saye against
him, Ioh. 14. 3.
               Now let vs apply this to our selues.
               But wee will peraduenture say, the
diuell neuer made vs anie such offer:
and therefore what needes any admonishment
in this behalfe? But I aunswere,
though the diuell come not in
person to vs, as he did to Christ, yet he
comes by his instruments.
               When Balaac sent to Balaam, to
come and curse the Israelites, and promised
him great rewards, Num. 22. 17.
it was not Balaacks messengers that
spake, but the diuell vsed them as instruments
to speake.
               So when Simon Magus would haue
bought the holy Ghost with money:
the Diuell therein tempted the Apostles
with Symonie, Simon was but the

trunk, through which the diuel spake,
Act. 8.
               Againe, there be some that will say,
they were neuer tempted with Kingdomes:
it maye well be, for it needes
not, when lesse will serue. It vvas
Christ onely, that was thus tempted:
in him lay a heroicall mind, that could
not be allured with small matters.
               But with vs it is nothing so, wee esteeme
far more basely of our selues:
we set our wares at a verie easie price,
he may buy vs euen dagger cheape, as
we say: he need neuer carie vs so high
as the mount, the pinacle is high enough,
yea, the lowest steeple in all
the Towne would serue the turne. Or
let him but carrie vs to the leades or
gutters of our owne houses, nay, let vs
but stand in our windowe, or in our
doores: if he will giue vs but so much
as we can there see, hee will tempt vs
throughly, we wil accept it, and thank
him too. He shall not neede to come
to vs with kingdomes, one kingdome
is too much, what say ye to half a one?

                  Mar, 6. 23. No, will the diuell say, I
will giue ye halfe of one? If he would
come to vs but with thirtie pence,
Mat. 26. 15. I am afraid manie of vs
would play Iudas. Nay, lesse than so
would buy a great sort, euen handfuls
of barley, and peeces of bread, Ezec.
13. 19. and Prouerb. 28. 21. Yea, some
will not sticke to buye and sell the
poore for a payre of shooes, as Micah
in his eight chapter and sixt verse
speaketh.
               When he commeth then to tempt
vs, hee may abate a great deale of this
that hee offers Christ: he may stryke
out Omnia, and Haec too, and in stead
thereof put in Hoc, and say; Holde,
yee shall haue this to worship mee, I
will giue ye no more. I feare me wee
will make short woorke, and take it,
Hoc aliquid, a matter of halfe a crowne
or ten groates, a paire of shooes, or
some such trifle, will bring vs on our
knees to the diuell.
               Is there a pretie commoditie to be

had? It makes no matter for breaking
faith and promise. This is that that
makes the diuell so good a husband
and thriftie, and to goe neere hand:
what neede he giue more, when so little
will serue? whereas, if we wil stand
hucking with him, wee might get a
great deale more.
               In this temptation (as in the former)
there is both fire to consume our
saith, and a dart to wound our consciences.
The fire is the motion of discontent,
that GOD is either a poore
God, not able sufficiently to rewarde
those that serue him: or else an vnkinde
God, that will not rewarde the
dueties that are perfourmed by those
that serue him. By this wee come to
say; Who is the Almightie, that wee
shold serue him? Iob. 21. 15. The wicked
are they that prosper and encrease in
riches. I haue cleansed my hart in vaine,
for daylie haue I been punished. Psal. 73.
12. Then this dart makes vs wearie of
well dooing: and then followes, that

we will serue the diuell Being discontent
with Gods seruice, we vndertake
the seruice of his enemie: he requyreth
nothing but a little falling down,
and then if Simon shall come, and require
anye vnlawfull thing at our
hands, wee are readie (with Iudas) to
meete with him, and say; What wil ye
giue me, and I will doo it, Mat. 26. 15.
though it bee to the betraying of
Christ. The Diuell heere opens hys
meaning in this Temptation plainly,
(that he would haue him fall down &
worship him) with a bare and bolde
face: before, hee came disguised, and
spake in parables. His meaning is not
when he saith Dabo, to giue them: but
to barter or exchange one thing for
another. It is no gift, but a flat bargaine:
men vse not to account it a
gift, except it bee without rendring
backe either money or seruice. If hee
render here seruice back, he may well
thinke I haue solde my soule for Hoc
aliquid, Mat. 16. 76. He may think, as
Esau sold his birth-right for a messe of

pottage. Hebr. 12. 16. so hath hee sold
his soule, his birth right, and freedome:
for we were all bought wyth a
price, 1. Cor. 7. 23. the same great high
Priest redeemed vs all with his bloud.
No sinnes are so carefully to be taken
heede of, as these, that haue annexed
to adoration, donation: he hath Malum
with a ioynter. If he should haue
cast himselfe downe from the Pinacle,
heere is all hee should haue had:
they would haue talkt of it, and haue
wondred a while at it.
               Well, we must bee thus perswaded,
that God is as well able and willing to
reward vs for anie seruice, as the Diuell,
and better too. It is hee indeede
that reigneth ouer the kingdomes of
men, Dan. 5. 21. and placeth in them
whom pleaseth him: but when he giueth
or disposeth, hee giueth indeede
freelie, exacting nothing backe again,
vnlesse it be such things, as hee were
to haue without anie such gift, such
things as are due of meere right, with
out anie stipulation or hyre. Iam. 1. 5.

The Diuells Dabo, is, as Offices and
parsonages are giuen amongst vs; that
is, as vsually solde as horses in Smithfield.
But if we could bee content to
giue indeede, let that heroicall minde
that was in Abraham be in vs, Genes.
14. 23. that as hee would not take anie
thing of Melchisedech, so wee will
not bee a shooe latchet the richer by
the Diuell. If hee offer to make vs
wealthie, let vs answere him; Pecunia
tua tecum pereat.
               
            
         
         
            
            
            The seuenth Sermon.
            
               
                  Matth. 4. Ver. 10. 11. 
                  Then Iesus saith vnto him; Get thee
hence behinde me Satan: for it is written,
Thou shalt worship the Lord thy
God, and him onely shalt thou serue.
                  Then the diuell leaueth him, and beholde
the Angels came, and ministred vnto
him.
               
            
            
               THE answering of this
Temptation, if some
had had the answering
of it, would haue been
facto, by the dooing of
of the thing that the diuell required:
and not in woordes, standing vppon

termes in disputation. Insomuch, as
they wold neuer haue cared for a cushion
to kneele on: but haue fallen
downe straight on their verye faces,
and haue thanked him too.
            If Balaack should say vnto any one
of them, I will promote thee to great honour,
Num. 22. 17. an Angell standing
in the waye, should not hinder them
from going. The manner of flesh &
blood is, in cases of preferment to respect
nothing, that maye bring them
out of their conceaued hope or desire
thereof: and therefore whatsoeuer it
is that stands in their way, be it neuer
so holie, downe it shall for hast, to
make the way neerest.
            In regard of this, one brother respects
not another. When Ioseph had
had a dreame of his brethren, & told
it them, all brotherly affection vvas
laid aside, Gen. 37. 5. The sonne and
subiect Absalom, forgetteth his dutie
as to his father, and alleageance as to
his Prince, seeking his life, 2. Sam.
16. 11.
            
            
               The mother of Ahaziah, Athalia,
when she saw her sonne dead, makes
no more adoo, but destroyes all the
Kings seed, 2. King. 11. 1. Iehu makes
no bones, nor is abashed at the sight of
heapes of dead mens heads, of Kings
sonnes that he had caused to be slaine,
but addes more murthers to them, 2.
King. 10. 8. What's a basket full of
heades to a Kingdome? And Herode
stacke not to kill all the male borne
children in Bethlehem, Mat. 2. 16. So
that Gregorie might well say, Ambitio
est vita, cui etiam innocentes nocent,
such is the vehement desire of a kingdome.
            So that a great manie would haue
made no scruple at the matter, neither
would they haue counted it a temptation,
but good counsell. Neither wold
so haue cut vp Peter, as Christ did, to
bid him goe behinde him, and turne
their backes on him: but they would
rather haue turnd their backs to God,
& their faces after satan, Ie. 2. 27. 
                     •
                  . Ti.

                     •
                  . 15. and indeed it must needs be, that

either our Sauiour was vnwise in refusing
so good an offer, or else the
World (in these dayes) is in a wrong
byas.
            Our Sauiour (we see) doth not only
refuse the thing: but also giues him
hard words, for making the offer and
motion▪ For he doth not only confute
him here, by saying, Scriptum est: but
he addes words of bitter reprehēsion,
saying▪ 
               Auoyd Satan. He might haue
giuen faire words, as hee did before:
but here he seemeth to haue left hys
patience. The reason why hee vvas
more hot in this, than in the former,
is: for that this toucheth the glory of
God, & the redemption of mankinde:
the former Temptations touched but
himselfe in perticular, as the turning
of stones into bread, but for myracle:
and the casting himselfe downe, was
but to trie God, what care hee had of
him: But this so much toucheth the
glorie of God, as he can hold no longer.
Also, his longing to redeeme
man, caused the same. Neither did he

onelie aunswere the Diuell so: but
when his blessed Apostle, who meant
friendlie to him, mooued him to the
like matter, he rebuked him sharply.
            Two causes there are, wherein
Christ is verie earnest; one in counsell
ministred to him, tending to the impayring
of Gods glorie: the other in
practises, tending to the impayring of
Gods Church, Iohn 2. 15. there he was
not onely vehement in woords; but
made a whippe to scourge them out.
And so in the olde Testament, it is
sayd of Moses, Numb. 12. 3. that hee
was a meeke man, aboue all the men
of the earth: yet when he came to a
case of Idolatrie, Exod. 32. 19. it is said
he threw the Tables out of his hands,
and brake them. And so farre did he
loose his naturall affection to his people
and Countrey men, that hee caused
a great number of them to bee
slayne.
            And so in a case of the Church,
when Corah rebelled, Numb, 16. 15.

then Moses wexed verie angrie: for
Glorie be to God on high, and peace on
earth, is the Angells song and ioy, and
the diuels griefe: as on the other side,
the dishonour of God, and dissention
of the Church, is the diuells ioy,
and griefe of the Angels.
            Now, besides that hee dooth in
woords rebuke him sharplie, he doth
no lesse in gesture also: as by turning
his backe vppon him, (as it is
most like hee did▪ in saying Auoyde
Satan) which is such a despightfull
disgrace, as if that one should offer vs
the lyke, wee would take it in verye
great disdaine. Which is to vs an instruction▪
that as there is a time, when
wee are to keepe the Diuell before vs,
and to haue our eye still vppon him,
and his weapon or temptation, for
feare least vnawares hee might doo vs
some hurt: so is there a place, a tyme,
and a sinne, that wee are to turne our
backes on, and not once to looke at
his temptation.
            
               In affliction, patience is to bee tryed:
there resist the Diuell, stande to
him, and he will flie from yee, Iam. 4.
7. Heere wee are to set the Diuell
before vs. But in a case of lust, or filthie
desire, then doo ye flie from him,
1. Corinth. 6. 18. So in the second Epistle
to Timothie, second chapter, and
two and twentieth verse, wee are exhorted
to flye from the lusts of youth,
and to follow iustice: there is no standing
to gaze backe on the diuell, and
his temptations.
            Now to the Answere: Scriptum est.
            
            The disputing or decyding of the
Diuells Title: that is, whether the
Kingdomes of the earth were his to
giue or no, Christ standes not vppon;
nor vppon this, whether the Diuell
were a man of his woord or no. Indeede,
it might well haue been doubted,
whether the Diuell be as good as
his woord: his promises are not Yea
and Amen, as the promises of God

are. Wee maie take example by Eue,
to whome hee promised, that if they
did eate of the forbidden Frute, that
they should bee lyke Gods: but were
they so indeede, after they had eaten?
No, but lyke the beastes that perish.
And as true it is, that the Kingdomes
are his.
            If the Kingdome of Israell had
been at his disposition, wee maye bee
sure Dauid should neuer haue beene
King: as well appeareth by the troubles
hee raysed agaynst him. No, nor
Ezechias neyther, of all other hee
would neuer choose such. Wee may
see his good will in Iob, chapter second
verse 7. hee could not onely be
content to spoyle him of all that hee
had, but also hee must afflict his bodie:
and so vpon the Gergashites hogs
in the 8. Chapter, and 30. verse of Saint
Mathew.
            
            The Kingdomes are none of his,
but they are committed to him in
some sort to dispose, as hee himselfe
saith in the fourth of Luke, the 6. vers.

Hee hath (as it were) an Aduowson
of them, to prefent vnto them: but
yet, not as hee there sayth, to giue to
whom he list, but to whom he is permitted.
            God must first put all the Iob hath
in his hands, or els he can do nothing.
Abimelech Iudg. 9. and Herode Mat.
2. came to theyr Kingdomes by the
Diuells patent, they bee the Diuells
Officers. So wee see daylie in our
dayes, that hee bestowes offices, and
presents to Churches. So that as Brentius
saith, Manie haue Panem quotidianum,
that cannot come by Da nobis:
they come not to it by Gods gift: yet
all the interest that the Diuell hath, is
but to present Pro hac vita tantum. As
therefore it maye bee true, that in
some sort they maye bee gyuen
hym: so yet, not to dispose as hee
will.
            It is God onelie that can say so, for
his onelie they are absolutelie. The
earth is the Lordes, and all the fulnesse
thereof, the round world, and all that

dwell therein, Psalm. 24. vers. 1. It is
hee (the most high God) that deuided
to the Nations their inheritance,
Deuteron. chapt. 32. verse. 8. By him
Kings reigne, and Princes haue dominion,
Prouerbes. chapt. 8. verse. 15. Hee
brought Nebuchadnezzer to knowe,
That the most high God bare rule ouer
the Kingdomes of men, Dan. chapt. 5.
vers. 21. Hee indeede may well saye,
Cui voluero, do ea: and to whom soeuer
God giueth, hee giueth liberally,
and reproacheth no man. Iam. chapt.
1. vers. 5.
            
            The Diuel (we see) exacteth more
than the thing is woorth, and restrayneth
the benefite of his graunt with
vniust couenaunts. But Christ goes
not about to aunswere the Diuell that
waye: but by flying to the Scriptures,
as to his surest holde. Therefore
Dauid prayes, that his minde
may bee enclined to Gods lawe, and
not to Couetousnesse: Psalme 119.
verse. 36.
            
               For there is a medicine for euerie
disease, and power as well against this
Temptation of Couetousnesse, as against
the former: the Lawe of God
can as well keepe a man from Couetousnesse,
as from Desperation: Heauen
and earth shall passe, but no one iote
of this. Let therefore Haec omnia giue
place to Scriptum est: mary Omnia illa,
which both wee now enioye, and
which are layde vp for vs heereafter,
are come too by Scriptum est. So that
Omnia haec is not all wee must care
for: there bee things to come (besides
these which wee laye hands on)
farre more precious. Though heere
bee all the Kingdomes of the earth:
yet they are sayd, to bee shewed in
the twinckling of an eye, so cannot
the other Kingdome of exceeding
glorie. All the power of all the Princes
on the earth, haue not power ouer
one sillie soule to destroy it, Mat.
chapt. 10. vers. 28. All the glorie of
them, is called but a great big fanne,
or pompe, Acts. 25. 23.
            
               
               Salomon was the most glorious Prince
that euer was, yet hee was not cloathed
like a Lyllie, Matth▪ chapt. 6.
ver. 29. Nor all the Lyllies in the field,
nor Starres in heauen, nor the Sunne
and Moone it selfe, are comparable to
one soule.
            The Scripture whereby Christ answereth
the Diuell, is in the sixteenth
of Deuteronomie, and thirteenth verse,
Thou shalt feare the Lord thy God, and
serue him. If anie fantasticall spirite
oppose it selfe against Moses, let it be
accursed.
            There is in this answere two things
set downe, Worship and Seruice: both
which are due to God onely. Couetousnes
endeth in Idolatrie, and fitlie
is so tearmed: if Christ had been couetouslie
minded, then he must needs
haue fallen downe, and worshipped
the Diuell; for Couetousnes and Idolatrie
being ioyned together, we wold
not haue parted from so great a benefite.
            
               Christ hath heere changed a word,
which the Septuaginta Translatours
hath: which signifieth, a seruice with
an open testimonie. So that, will yee
know if a man doo beleeue? Hee beleeueth
vnto righteousnes with the heart,
that with the mouth confesseth to saluation,
Roman. chapt. 10. vers. 10. Such as
glorifie God as well in their members,
as in their spirit, 1. Corinth. cha.
6. verse. 20. As Saint Iames saith of
Faith, Shew me thy faith by thy works:
so may it bee sayd of Feare. You say
you haue feare, can ye shew me your
feare? If it bee not a dead feare, it is
to bee seene: as Dan. chapt. 3. verse 5.
it must bee shewed by falling downe,
and worshipping.
            The seruant that feared, fell downe
and besought his Maister, Matth.
chapt. 18. verse. 26. Doo you feare?
then where is the outward reuerence?
The inward affection must appeare
by the outwarde action: Religion is
outward, as well as inward, 1. Kings
19. 18.
            
               There bee two wayes whereby wee
may haue trasfique with the Diuell,
eyther of both will serue his tourne:
first, homage: secondly, seruice of
the bodie; and both these doth God
require, euen when wee are in the
darke, or in our chamber, Ezech. cha. 8.
vers. 12. Indeede might the Diuell
say, this Mountaine is verie open: but
how say yee? wil ye bee content closelie
in a corner to worship mee? If ye
will not weare my cognisance on your
fore-head, yet yee may take my mark
in your hande; then shutting your
hand, no bodie can perceiue it. If ye
will not take the marke, yet take the
number of the Beasts name, that is,
sixe hundred threescore and sixe, Apocalip.
chapt. 13. vers. 17. 18. Will yee
doo none of these? What then? Wil
yee serue mee? Rom. chapt. 16. vers.
18. Thus ye see how glorious termes
he vseth▪ but if one should seeme to
doo one of these on courtesie, he will
not be content till he doo it of dutie.
            Now let vs see first what it is to

worship. It is that which Cornelius did
to Peter, he met him, fell downe at
his feete, and worshipped him. Act.
10. 25. And that which Iohn did to the
Angell: that is, hee fell downe before
his feete to worship him, Apocalips.
19. 10. It is, when one on the knees
doth a bodily worship. I will shew it
you in Dauids words: for I cannot tel
it ye better. When Michel scoffed at
Dauid, for being bare-headed before
the Arke, hee saith; I will be more vile
than thus, and will be low in mine owne
sight, 2, Sa. 6. 22. A man can neuer be
too reuerent to God: wee thinke it a
great disgrace and debasing of our
selues, if we vse any bodily worship to
God. It may be said to thē, as it was to
him, that feared to do too much reuerence
to Caesar, Hic 
                     〈…〉
                   Caesarem.
Our Religion & Cultus must
be vncouered, and a bare-faced Religion:
we would not vse to come before
a meane Prince, as we doo before the
King of Kings, the Lord of Lords, euen
the God of heauen and earth.
            
               The foure and twentie Elders fell
downe before him that sate on the
Throne, and worshipped him that liueth
for euer, and cast their crownes
before his Throne.
            The wandring eye must learne to
be fastened on him, Luk. ch. 4. ver. 20.
and the worke of iustice and peace,
Es. chapt. 32. vers. 17. the worship of
the knees to boow, Ephes. chapt. 3. ver.
14. and kneele before the Lord theyr
Maker, Psalme. 95. verse. 6. Out
feete are to come before his face: for
the Lord is a great God, and a great
King aboue all Gods, Psalm. 95. vers.
2. and 3. Iacob, though hee were not
able to stand▪ or kneele: yet (because
he would vse some corporall seruice)
leaned vppon his staffe, and worshipped
God, as appeareth in the nine &
fortieth chapter of Genesis the three
and thirtieth verse, and the eleuenth
to the Hebrues, the one and twentieth
verse. This must bee done as duetie
due vnto God, and in regard of those
that be strangers.
            
               Secondly, What it is to serue.
            
            This is to boow the soule, as the other
is to boow the bodie. For the
King to serue and speake kindlie to
the people, that they may serue hym
for euer after, 1. King. 12. 7. is not the
seruice he meaneth, not to doo all that
the King commaunds, 2. Sam. chapt.
15. vers. 15. For God must bee aboue
all: and of whomsoeuer a man is ouercome,
to him hee is in bondage▪ 2.
Pet. cha. 2. ver. 19. We must serue
God with our sacrifices▪ but not with
our sinnes, nor wearie him with our iniquities,
Es. chapt. 43▪ vers. 23. Wee
may not make a dung-cart of him, to
load him with our sinne and filth, Amos
chapter second, verse thirteene:
and when hee comes againe, to haue
as much more for him.
            
               Onely. The Diuel himselfe would
graunt▪ that God is to bee serued, his
meaning was, that a man might serue

God, and him too: but Christ sayth,
God onely. But it may be said, this word
Onely is not in the Scripture whence
Christe cyteth this sentence, and so
Christ hath added to the word of god.
Indeed, in Deuter. 6. 13. Alone is not,
but in the next verse it is said, Doo not
follow after other Gods, which is in effect
God onely.
            
            The Papists aske, where wee finde
Onely in iustification by faith: indeed
wee doe not find it, but we doe find
that by faith and nothing else wee are
iustified, Rom. 
               
                  •
               . 28. and so wee maye
wel collect it, by Faith onely. By grace
are we saued through faith: and that not
of our selues, it is the gift of God, Eph.
chapt. 2. verse 7. And on this warrant
haue manie auncient Fathers beene
bold, to adde the word Onely: as Origen
vppon Rom. 3. 28. Hilarie vppon
Mar. 8. and diuers other saye, Fayth
onely iustifieth.
            
            God is onely to be worshipped &
serued, and none besides him. Sophonie
prophecieth against them that

serue the hoast of heauen vppon the
house top, and sweare by Malcham,
Sophon. 1. 5. But Iaacob sware by the
feare of his father Isaac: and it is said,
they feared the Lord, and serued their
Idolls also, Gen. 31. 53. 2. King. 17. 41.
            It is the propertie of Aarons rod,
that being turned into a serpent, if the
Magitians turne theirs also into Serpents,
Aarons will deuoure the rest,
Ezod. 7. 15. Bring the Arke into the
Temple of Dagon, Dagon will fall
downe, & break his face; and though
it were lifted vp again, yet it fell down
againe, 1. Sam. 
               
                  •
               . 3. The stories beare
witnes, that the Gods of the Hebrues
would not come into Pantho. Samuel
bad the people, if they were come again
to the Lord with all their harts,
to put away their strange Gods from
amongst them, 1. Sa. 7. 4. If there were
any other (beside him) that were able
to helpe vp, we might haue some reason
to serue other: but since it is hee
that must help vs in all necessities, we
must worship him alone.
            
               Otherwise, when wee praye to hym,
hee may send vs to the Gods vvhich
we haue chosen to serue for our help,
Iudg. chapt. 10. vers. 14. If wee could
finde an equall, or a better than God,
wee had some reason to make hym a
partner in his worship: but if none be
worthie once to bee named with him,
(so farre is all beneath him) wee shall
offer him too much disgrace and iniurie
in so dooing.
            It is an embasing of Golde, to haue
anie other mettall ioyned with it: yea,
though it bee siluer. The sonne (saith
Malachi, chapt. 1. vers. 6.) honoureth
his father, and the seruaunt his Lord:
if I bee your Father, where is your honour
which you doo mee? If your Lord,
where is your reuerence? Whether we
account of God as of our Lord and
Master, a man can haue but one Lord
or master; or whether wee take hym
for a father, a man can haue but one
Father, except hee bee a bastard, Es.
chapt. 2. vers. 14. and so bee Filius populi:
If for a husband, not two husbands,

for he is a iealous God, and can
not abide that. No man can serue two
masters, but he must loue the one, and
despise the other: no man can loue GOD
and Mammon.
            
            
               Verse 11. Then the Diuell left him, &c.
            
               Blessed is the man (saith Iames, cha.
1. vers. 12.) that endureth temptation:
for when he is tried, hee shall receiue the
crowne of life: Christ hath endured
the Temptation, now followes the
blessing. Iaacob would not let the Angel
depart (with whom he stroue) before
hee had blessed him, Genes. chapt.
32. vers. 26. Iob (after his affliction)
receiued his twofold blessing, Iob. 42.
The woman of Chanaan first hearde
her selfe accounted a dogge: but at
last shee heard, Fiat tibi, &c. Paule
was first buffeted by the pricke of the
flesh: and after heard, My grace is sufficient
for thee.
            
            
               So heere at last, when the Diuell
saw it was bootlesse to stay anie longer,
there was no good by him to bee
done, he leaues our Sauiour. But yet
hee went not away willingly of himselfe,
but was sent away with an Auaunt:
which is a comfort to vs, to
thinke wee stande not at the Diuells
curtesie, and that hee shall not tempt
vs so long as hee list: for God hath the
Diuell in a chayne, Apoc. 20. 2. and
will not suffer him to tempt vs aboue
our strength, 1. Corinth. chapt. 10. ver.
13. For the rod of the wicked shall not
rest on the lot of the Righteous, least
the Righteous put foorth their hand to
wickegdnesse, Psalm. 125. 3. To haue
the Diuel not to come to vs, is a great
fauor: but to haue him come and goe
away conquered, is exceeding mercy.
For Tribulation brings patience, and patience
experience, and experience hope,
and hope makes not ashamed, Rom. chap.
5. vers. 4. As God sayd of Iob, chap.
2. vers. 3. Hast thou markt my seruant
Iob, who keepeth still his integritie?
            
            
               And behold the Angells came, and
ministred vnto him.
            And as Luke: sayth, chapt. 15. verse.
10. There is like ioy with the Angels in
heauen, vpon the conuertion of euerie sinner.
For wee are made a spectacle vnto
men and Angells, 1. Corinth. chap.
4. verse. 9. Before GOD are sayd to
stand ten thousand Angells, Dan. cha.
7. vers. 10. and to minister before him.
Hee hath a greater preheminence,
but wee are also heerein partakers of
the diuine nature, 2. Pet. chapt. 1. ver.
4. either because wee are fed by Angels,
as Elias was, 1. King. 19. 5. or defended
by them, or watched of them.
            But sayth Esay, chapt. 18. vers. 28.
He that beleeueth makes not haste.
            
            Christ was not hastie, but stayed
Gods good time: he would not make
his own bread, but staid till the Angels
ministred vnto him. Then there appeared
an Angell to comfort hym,
Luke. 22. 43.
            
               This wisedome must wee learne by
holding our tongue, Iob. chapt. 33. ver.
33. otherwise one of these two extreames
shall wee come to: eyther
Extremum luctus gaudium occupat, or
Extrema gaudii luctus occupat, sayth
Barnard. Luke 16. 25.
            
            The world is like Iaell, who meetes
Sisera, Iudg. chapt. 4. ver. 19. and entertaynes
him at first verie friendly,
shee allures him to her▪ and giues him
drinke, and layes him downe: but so
soone as he was a sleepe, shee smites a
nayle into his temples. The world beginnes
with milke, and ends with a
hammer: but our Sauiours meaning
is cleane contrary. The world first vttereth
good wine: & when men haue
well drunke, then that which is worse.
Iohn chapt. 2. ver. 10. But Christ hath
kept backe the good wine till nowe,
chapt. 2. vers. 9. as Matthew sayth,
chap. 13. vers. 41. The Sonne of man shall
sende foorth hys Angells and they shall
gather out of his kingdome, al things that
offend, and them which doe iniquitie,

and shall cast them into a furnace of fire:
there shall bee weeping and gnashing of
teeth. Then shall the iust shine as the
Sunne in the kingdome of theyr Father.
Our Sauiours methode is, to giue bitter
first, and sweete after: wherefore
we are to wish, that heere we may suffer
affliction, that wee may after bee
crowned by him.
            FINIS.
         
      
   