
      
         
            
            
            HYMENS TRIVMPH.
            A Pastorall Tragicomaedie.
            Presented at the Queenes Court in the Strand at her Maiesties magnificent intertainement of the Kings most excellent Maiestie, being at the Nuptials of the Lord Roxborough.
            
            By SAMVEL DANIEL.
            LONDON
            Imprinted for Francis Constable, and are to bee sold at his shop in Pauls Church-yard at the signe of the white Lyon. 1615.
         
         
            
            
            TO THE MOST EXCELLENT MAIESTIE OF THE HIGHESTborne-Princesse, ANNE of Denmark, Queene of England, Scotland, France and Ireland
            
               HEre, what your sacred influence begat
               (Most lou'd, and most respected Maiestie)
               With humble heart, and hand, I consecrate
               Vnto the glory of your memorie:
               As being a piece of that solemnitie,
               Which your Magnificence did celebrate
               In hallowing of those roofes (you rear'd of late)
               With fires and chearefull hospitalitie
               Whereby, and by your splendent Worthines
               Your name shal longer liue then shal your walles,
               For, that faire structure goodnesse finishes,
               Beares off all change of times, and neuer falles.
               And that is it hath let you in so farre
               Into the heart of England as you are.
               
                  And worthily, for, neuer yet was Queene
               That more a peoples loue hath merited
               By all good graces, and by hauing been
               The meanes our State stands fast established
               And blest by your blest wombe, who are this day
               The highest borne Queene of Europe, and alone
               Haue brought this land more blessings euery way,
               Then all the daughters of strange Kings haue done.
               For, we by you no claimes, no quarrels haue,
               No factions, no betraying of affaires:
               You doe not spend our blood, nor states, but saue:
               You strength vs by alliance, and your haires.
               Not like those fatall marriages of France,
               For whom this kingdome hath so dearely paid,
               Which onely our afflictions did aduance:
               And brought vs farre more miseries, then aid.
               Renowned Denmark, that hast furnished
               The world with Princes, how much doe we owe
               To thee for this great good thou dist bestow,
               Whereby we are both blest, and honoured?
               Thou didst not so much hurt vs heretofore
               But now thou hast rewarded vs farre more.
               But what doe I on this high subiect fall
               Here, in the front of this low Pastorall?
               This a more graue, and spacious roome requires
               To shew your glorie, and my deepe desires.
            
            
               Your Maiesties most humble seruant
               SAMVEL DANIEL.
            
         
         
            
            The Prologue.
            
               Hymen opposed by Auarice, Enuie, and Iealousie the disturbers of quiet marriage, first enters.
            
               Hym.
               
                  IN this disguise and Pastorall attire,
                  Without my saffron robe, without my torch,
                  Or other ensignes of my duty:
                  I Hymen am come hither secretly,
                  To make Arcadia see a worke of glorie,
                  That shall deserue an euerlasting storie.
               
               
                  Here, shall I bring you two the most entire
                  And constant louers that were euer seene,
                  From out the greatest suffrings of anoy
                  That fortune could inflict, to their full ioy:
                  Wherein no wilde, no rude, no antique sport,
                  But tender passions, motions soft, and graue,
                  The still spectators mast expect to haue.
               
               
                  For, these are onely Cynthias recreatiues
                  Made vnto Phoebus, and are feminine;
                  And therefore must be gentle like to her,
                  Whose sweet affections mildely mooue and stir.
               
               
                  And here, with this white wand, will I effect
                  As much, as with my flaming torch of Loue:
                  
                     And with the power thereof, affections mooue
                  In these faire nymphes, and shepheards round about.
               
            
            
               Enuie.
               Stay Hymen, stay;
               you shall not haue the day
               Of this great glorie, as you make account:
               We will herein, as we were euer wont,
               Oppose you in the matches you addresse,
               And vndermine them with disturbances.
            
            
               Hym.
               Now, doe thy worst, base Enuie, thou canst doe,
               Thou shalt not disappoint my purposes.
            
            
               Auarice.
               Then will I, Hymen, in despite of thee,
               I will make Parents crosse desires of loue,
               With those respects of wealth, as shall dissolue
               The strongest knots of kindest faithfulnesse.
            
            
               Hym.
               Hence, greedy Auarice; I know thou art
               A hagge, that do'st bewitch the mindes of men:
               Yet shalt thou haue no powre at all herein.
            
            
               Iealousie.
               Then will I, Hymen, doe thou what thou canst;
               I will steale closely into linked hearts;
               And shake their veines with colde distrustfulnesse;
               And euer keepe them waking in their feares,
               With spirits, which their imagination reares.
            
            
               Hym.
               
                  Disquiet Iealousie, vile furie, thou
                  That art the ougly monster of the minde,
                  Auant, be gone, thou shalt haue nought to doe
                  In this faire worke of ours, nor euermore
                  Canst enter there, where honour keepes the doore.
               
               
                  And therefore hideous furies, get you hence,
                  This place is sacred to integritie,
                  And cleane desires: your sight most loathsome is
                  
                     Vnto sowell dispos'd a companie.
                  Therefore be gone, I charge you by my powre,
                  We must haue nothing in Arcadia, sowre.
               
            
            
               Enuie.
               
                  Hymen, thou canst not chase vs so away,
               For, looke how long as thou mak'st marriages,
               So long will we produce incumbrances.
               And we will in the same disguise, as thou,
               Mixe vs among these shepheards, that we may
               Effect our worke the better, being vnknowne;
               For, ills shew other faces then their owne.
            
         
         
            
            The Speakers.
            
               Thyrsis.
               
                  Palaemon, friend to Thyrsis.
               
               
                  Clarindo, Siluia disguised, the beloued of Thyrsis, supposed to be slaine by wild beasts.
               
                  Cloris, a Nymph whom Clarindo serued, and in loue with Thyrsis.
               
               
                  Phillis, in loue with Clarindo.
               
               
                  Montanus, in loue with Phillis.
               
               
                  Lidia, Nurse to Phillis.
               
               
                  
                     Forresters.
                     Dorcas.
                     Siluanns.
                  
               
               
                  Medorus, father to Siluia.
               
               
                  Charinus, father to Thyrsis.
               
               
                  Chorus of Shepheards.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
               ACT. I. SCEN. I.
               Thirsis. Palaemon.
               
                  SO to be reft of all the ioyes of life,
                  How is it possible Palaemon, I
                  Should euer more a thought retaine
                  Of the least comfort vpon earth againe?
                  No, I would hate this heart, that hath receiu'd
                  So deepe a wound, if it should euer come
                  To be recur'd, or would permit a roome
                  To let in any other thing then griefe.
               
               
                  Pal.
                  But Thirsis you must tel me what is the cause?
               
               
                  Thi.
                  Think but what cause I haue; whē hauing pass'd
                  The heates, the colds, the trem bling agonies
                  Of feares, and hopes, and all the strange assaults
                  Of passion, that a tender heart could feele
                  In the attempt, and pursuite of his loue.
                  And then to be vndone, when all was done,
                  To perish in the hauen, after all
                  Those Ocean suffrings, and euen then to haue
                  My hopefull Nuptiall bed, turn'd to a graue.
               
               
                  Pal.
                  Good Thirsis by what meanes, I pray thee tell
               
               
                  Thi.
                  Tell thee? alas Palaemon, how can I tell
                  
                     And liue? doest thou not see these fields haue lost
                  Their glory, since that time Siluia was lost?
                  
                     Siluia, that onely deckt, that onely made
                  
                     Arcadia shine; Siluia who was (ah woe the while)
                  So miserablierent from off the world.
                  So rapt away, as that no signe of her,
                  No peece was left to tell vs by what meanes:
                  Safe onely this poore remnant of her vaile,
                  Alltorne, and this deere locke of her rent haire;
                  Which holy reliques here I keepe with me,
                  The sad memorials of her dismall fate.
                  Who sure deuoured was vpon the shore
                  By ravenous beasts, as she was walking there
                  Alone, it seemes; perhaps in seeking me
                  Or els retir'd to meditate apart
                  The storie of our loues, and heauie smart.
               
               
                  Pal.
                  This is no newes, you tell, of Siluias death.
                  That was long since: why shold you waile her now?
               
               
                  Thi.
                  Long since Palaemon? thinke you any length
                  Of time can euer haue a powre to make
                  A heart of flesh not mourne, not grieue, not pine?
                  That knows, that feels, that thinks as much as mine
               
               
                  Pal.
                  But Thirsis, you know how her father meant
                  To match her with Alexis, and a day
                  To celebrate the nuptials was prefixt.
               
               
                  Thi.
                  True, he had such a purpose, but in vaine,
                  As oh it was best knowne vnto vs twaine.
                  And hence it grew that gaue vs both our feares,
                  That made our meeting stealth, our parting teares.
                  
                     Hence was it, that with many a secret wile,
                  Wee rob'd our lookes th'onlookers to beguile
                  This was the cause, oh miserable cause,
                  That made her by her selfe to stray alone,
                  Which els God knowes, she neuer shold haue done.
                  For had our libertie as open beene,
                  As was our loues, Siluia had not beene seene
                  Without her Thirsis, neuer had we gone
                  But hand in hand, nor euer had mischance
                  Tooke vs asunder; shee had alwaies had
                  My bodie interpos'd betwixt all harmes
                  And her. But ah we had our libertie
                  Laid fast in prison when our loues were free.
               
               
                  Pa.
                  But how knowst thou her loue was such to thee?
               
               
                  Thi.
                  How do I know the Sun, the day from night?
               
               
                  Pal.
                  Womens affections doe like flashes proue,
                  They oft shew passion when they feele small loue.
               
               
                  Thir.
                  
                     Ah do not so prophane that precious sexe,
                     Which I must euer reuerence for her sake,
                     Who was the glorie of her kinde; whose heart
                     In all her actions so transparant was
                     As I might see it cleere and wholly myne,
                     Alwayes obseruing truth in one right line.
                  
                  
                     How oft hath she bene vrg'd by fathers threats,
                     By friends perswasions, and Alexis sighs,
                     And teares and prayers, to admit his loue,
                     Yet neuer could be wonne? how oft haue I
                     Beheld the brauest heardsmen of these plaines,
                     (As what braue heardsman was there in the plaines
                     
                        Of all Arcadia, that had not his heart
                     VVarm'd with her beames) to seek to win her loue.
                  
                  
                     Ah I remember well (and how can I
                     But euer more remember well) when first
                     Our flame began, when scarce we knew what was
                     The flame we felt, when as we sate and sigh'd
                     And lookd'vpon each other, and conceiu'd
                     Not what we ayld, yet something we did ayle.
                     And yet were well, and yet we were not well,
                     And what was our disease we could not tell.
                     Then would we kisse, then sigh, then looke: & thus
                     In that first garden of our simplenesse
                     Wee spent our childhood: but when yeeres began
                     To reape the fruite of knowledge; ah how then
                     Wold she with grauer looks, with sweet stern brow,
                     Check my presumption and my forwardnes,
                     Yet still would giue me flowers, stillwould me shew
                     What she would haue me, yet not haue me know.
                  
               
               
                  Pal.
                  Alas with what poore Coyne are louers paid,
                  And taken with the smallest bayte is laid?
               
               
                  Thi.
                  And when in sports with other company,
                  Of Nimphes and shepherds we haue met abroade
                  How would she steale a looke: and watch mine eye
                  Which way it went? and when at Barley breake
                  It came vnto my turne to rescue her,
                  With what an earnest, swift, and nimble pace
                  Would her affection make her feet to run
                  And farther run then to my hand? her race
                  Had no stop but my bosome where to end.
                  
                     And when we were to breake againe, how late
                  And loath her trēbling hand wold part with mine,
                  And with how slow a pace would shee set forth
                  To meet the'ncountring party, who contends
                  T'attaine her, scarce affording him her fingers ends?
               
               
                  Pal.
                  Fie Thirsis, with what fond remembrances
                  Doest thou these idle passions entertaine?
                  For shame leaue off to waste your youth in vaine,
                  And feede on shadowes: make your choice anew.
                  You other Nimphes shall find, no doubt will be
                  As louely, and as faire: and sweete as she.
               
               
                  Thi.
                  As faire and sweete as she? Palaemon peace:
                  Ah what can pictures be vnto the life,
                  VVhat sweetnes can be found in Images?
                  VVhich all Nimphes els besides her seemes to me.
                  She onely was a reall creaturee, shee,
                  VVhose memory must take vp all of mee.
                  Should I another loue, then must I haue,
                  Another heart, for this is full of her,
                  And euermore shallbe: here is shee drawne
                  At length, and whole, and more, this table is
                  A storie, and is all of her; and all
                  Wrought in the liueliest colours of my bloud;
                  And can there be a roome for others heere?
                  Should I disfigure such a peece, and blot
                  The perfectst workmanship loue euer wrought.
                  
                     Palaemon no, ah no, it cost too deere,
                  It must remaine intire whilst life remaines,
                  The monument of her and of my paines.
               
               
                  
                  Pal.
                  Thou maiest be such a fond I dolater
                  To die for loue; though that were very strange.
                  Loue hath few Saints, but many confessors.
                  And time no doubt will raze out all these notes,
                  And leaue a roome at length for other thoughts.
               
               
                  Thi.
                  
                     Yes when there is no spring, no tree, no groue
                     In all Arcadia to record our loue:
                     And tell me where we were (the time we were)
                     How we did meete together, what we said;
                     Where we did ioy, and where we sate dismai'd.
                     And then I may forget her, not before.
                     Till then I must remember one so deere,
                     VVhen euery thing I see tells me of her.
                  
                  
                     And you deere Reliques of that martred Saint,
                     My heart adores, you the perpetuall bookes
                     Whereon when teares permit, mine eye still looks:
                     Ah you were with her last, and till my last
                     You must remaine with me; you were reseru'd
                     To tell me shee was lost, but yet alas,
                     You cannot tell me how: I wold you could.
                  
                  
                     White spotlesse vaile, cleane, like her womanhood,
                     Which whilome covredst the most louely face
                     That euer eye beheld. Was there no message sent
                     From her by thee? Ah yes, there seemes it was;
                     Here is a T made with her blood, as if
                     Shee would haue written, Thirsis, I am slaine
                     In seeking thee; sure so it should haue beene,
                     And so I reade it, and shall euer so.
                  
                  
                     And thou sweet remnant of the fairest haire,
                     
                        That euer wau'd with winde. Ah thee I found
                     When her I hop'd to finde, wrapt in a round,
                     Like to an O, the character of woe;
                     As if to say, O Thirsis, I die thine.
                     This much you tell me yet, dumbe messengers,
                     Of her last minde; and what you cannot tell
                     That I must thinke, which is the most extreame
                     Of wofulnesse, that any heart can thinke.
                  
               
               
                  Pal.
                  There is no dealing with this man, I see,
                  This humour must be let to spend it selfe
                  Vnto a lesser substance, ere that we
                  Can any way apply a remedy.
                  But I lament his case, and so I know
                  Do all that see him in this wofull plight:
                  And therefore will I leaue him to himselfe,
                  For sorrow that is full, hates others sight.
               
               
                  Thir.
                  
                     Come boy, whilst I contemplate these remaines
                     Of my lost loue, vnder this myrtle tree,
                     Record the dolefull'st song, the sighingst notes,
                     That musicke hath to entertaine bad thoughts.
                     Let it be all at flats my boy, all graue,
                     The tone that best befits the griefe I haue.
                  
                  
                     The Song.
                     Had sorrow euer fitter place
                     To act his part,
                     Then is my heart,
                     Where it takes vp all the space?
                     
                        Where is no veine
                     To entertaine
                     A thought that weares another face.
                     Nor will I sorrow euer haue,
                     Therein to be,
                     But onely thee,
                     To whome I full possession gaue:
                     Thou in thy name
                     Must holde the same,
                     Vntill thou bring it to the graue.
                  
                  
                     So boy, now leaue me to my selfe, that I
                     May be alone to griefe, entire to misery.
                  
               
            
            
               SCEN. II.
               Cloris. Clarindo.
               
                  NOw gentle boy Clarindo, hast thou brought
                  My flockes into the field?
               
               
                  Cla.
                  Mistris I haue.
               
               
                  Clo.
                  And hast thou told them?
               
               
                  Cla.
                  Yes.
               
               
                  Clo.
                  And are there all?
               
               
                  Cla.
                  All.
               
               
                  Clo.
                  And hast thou left them safe my boy?
               
               
                  Cla.
                  Safe.
               
               
                  
                  Clo.
                  Then whilst they feede, Clarindo, I must vse
                  Thy seruice in a serious businesse.
                  But thou must do it well my boy.
               
               
                  Cla.
                  The best I can.
               
               
                  Clo.
                  Do'st thou know Thirsis?
                  
               
               
                  Cla.
                  Yes.
               
               
                  Clo.
                  But know'st him well?
               
               
                  Cla.
                  I haue good reason to know Thirsis well.
               
               
                  Clo.
                  What reason boy?
               
               
                  Cla.
                  I oft haue seene the man.
               
               
                  Clo.
                  Why then he knowes thee too?
               
               
                  Cla.
                  Yes I suppose, vnles he hath forgotten me of late.
               
               
                  Clo.
                  But hath he heard thee sing my boy?
               
               
                  Cla.
                  He hath.
               
               
                  Clo.
                  
                     Then doubtles he doth well remember thee.
                     VVell, vnto him thou must a message do
                     From thy sad mistres Cloris; but thou must
                     Doeit exactly well, with thy best grace,
                     Best choice of language, and best countenance.
                     I know thou canst doe well, and hast a speech
                     And fashion pleasing to performe the same.
                     Nor can I haue a fitter messenger
                     In this imployment then thy selfe my boy.
                     For sure me thinkes, noting thy forme and grace,
                     That thou hast much of Siluia in thy face:
                     Which if he shall perceiue as well as I,
                     Sure, he will giue thee audience willinglie.
                     And for her sake, if not for mine, heare out
                     Thy message; for he still (though she be dead)
                     
                        Holdes sparkles of her vnextinguished.
                     And that is death to me: for though sometimes
                     
                        Siluta and I most deere companions were,
                     Yet when I saw he did so much preferre
                     Her before me, I deadly hated her;
                     And was not sorie for her death, and yet
                     Was sorie shee should come to such a death.
                  
                  
                     But to the purpose, goe to Thirsis, boy:
                     Say, thou art Cloris seruant, sent to be
                     The messenger of her distressed teares:
                     Who languishes for him and neuer shall
                     Haue comfort more, vnlesse he giue it her.
                  
               
               
                  Cla.
                  I will.
               
               
                  Clo.
                  Nay but stay boy, ther's something else.
                  Tell him, his cruelty makes me vndoe
                  My modesty, and to put on that part
                  VVhich appertaines to him, that is to wooe:
                  And to disgrace my Sexe, to shew my heart,
                  VVhich no man else could haue had powre to doe.
                  And that vnlesse he doe restore me backe
                  Vnto my selfe, by his like loue to me,
                  I cannot liue.
               
               
                  Cla.
                  All this I'le tell him too.
               
               
                  Clo.
                  Nay but stay boy, there is yet more:
                  Tell him, it will no honour be to him,
                  When euer it shall come to be made knowne,
                  That he hath beene her death that was his owne.
                  And how his loue hath fatall beene to two
                  Distressed nymphes.
               
               
                  
                  Cla.
                  This will I tell him too.
               
               
                  Clo.
                  Nay but stay boy, wilt thou say nothing else,
                  As of thy selfe, to waken vp his loue?
                  Thou mayst say something which I may not say,
                  And tell him how thou holdst me full as faire,
                  Yea and more faire, more louely, more compleate
                  Then euer Siluia was. More wise, more stai'd,
                  How shee was but a light and wauering maid.
               
               
                  Cla.
                  Nay there I leaue you, that I cannot say.
               
               
                  Clo.
                  What sayst thou boy?
               
               
                  Cla.
                  Nothing, but that I will
                  Endeauour all I can to worke his loue.
               
               
                  Clo.
                  
                     Doe good my boy: but thou must yet adde more,
                     As from thy selfe, & say, what an vnkinde
                     And barbarous part it is to suffer thus
                     So beauteous and so rare a nymph to pine
                     And perish for his loue; and such a one,
                     As if shee would haue stoop'd to others flame,
                     Hath had the gallantst heardsmen of these fields
                     Fall at her feete: all which she hath despis'd,
                     Hauing her heart before by thee surpriz'd.
                     And now doth nothing else, but sit and mourne:
                     Speake Thirsis, weepe Thirsis, sigh Thirsis, and
                     Sleepe Thirsis when she sleepes, which is but rare
                     Besides, good boy thou must not sticke to sweare,
                     Thou oft hast seene me sowne, & sinke to ground
                     In these deep passions, wherein I abound.
                     For something thou maist say beyond the truth,
                     By reason of my loue, and of thy youth.
                  
                  
                     
                     Doe, good Clarindo sweare, and vow thus much.
                     But do'st thou now remember all I say,
                  
                  
                     Do'st thou forget no parcell of my speech,
                     Shall I repeate the same againe to thee?
                     Or els wilt thou rehearse it vnto mee?
                     That I may know thou hast it perfect, boy.
                  
               
               
                  Cla.
                  It shall not need: be sure I will report,
                  What you enioyne me, in most earnest sort.
               
               
                  Clo.
                  Ah doe good boy. Although I feare it will,
                  Auaile me little: for I doubt his heart
                  Is repossessed with another loue.
               
               
                  Cla.
                  Another loue? Who may that be, I pray?
               
               
                  Clo.
                  With Amarillis, I haue heard: for they
                  Are thought, will in the end make vp a match.
               
               
                  Cla.
                  With Amarillis? Well, yet will I goe,
                  And try his humour whether it be so?
               
               
                  Clo.
                  Goe good Clarindo, but thou must not faile
                  To worke effectually for my auaile.
                  And doe not stay, returne with speed good boy,
                  My passions are to great t'indure delay.
               
            
            
               ACT. I. SCEN. III.
               Clarindo sol.
               
                  THirsis in loue with Amarillis? then
                  In what a case am I? what doth availe,
                  
                     This altred habite, that belies my Sexe?
                  What boots it t'haue escap'd from pirats hands
                  And with such wiles to haue deceiu'd their wills,
                  If I returne to fall on worser ills?
                  In loue with Amarillis? is that so?
                  Is Siluia then forgot? that hath endur'd
                  So much for him? doe all these miseries
                  (Caus'd by his meanes) deserue no better hire?
                  Was it the greatest comfort of my life,
                  To haue return'd that I might comfort him?
                  And am I welcom'd thus? ah did mine eies
                  Take neuer rest, after I was arriu'd
                  Till I had seene him, though vnknowne to him?
                  Being hidden thus, and couer'd with disguise
                  And masculine attire, to temporize
                  Vntill Alexis mariage day be past,
                  Which shortly as I heare will be: and which
                  Would free me wholly from my fathers feare:
                  Who if he knew I were return'd, would yet
                  Vndoe I doubt that match, to match me there.
                  Which would be more then all my suffrings were.
               
               
                  Indeed me thought when I beheld the face
                  Of my deere Thirsis, I beheld a face
                  Confounded all with passion, which did much
                  Afflict my hart: but yet I litle thought
                  It could haue beene for any others loue.
                  I did suppose the memorie of me,
                  And of my rapture, had possest him so,
                  As made him shew that countenance of woe.
                  
                     And much adoe had I then to forbeare
                  From casting me into his armes, and yeild
                  What comfort my poore selfe could yeild, but that
                  I thought our ioyes would not haue bin complete,
                  But might haue yeilded vs anoyes as great,
                  Vnlesse I could come wholly his, and cleer'd
                  From all those former dangers which we fear'd:
                  VVhich now a little stay (though any stay
                  Be death to me) would wholly take away.
               
               
                  And therefore I resolu'd my selfe to beare
                  This burthen of our sufferings yet a while,
                  And to become a seruant in this guise,
                  To her I would haue skorned otherwise:
                  And be at all commands, to goe, and come,
                  To trudge into the fields, early, and late.
                  VVhich though I know, it misbecomes my state:
                  Yet it becomes my fortune, which is that,
                  Not Phillis whom I serue: but since I serue,
                  I will doe what I doe most faithfully.
               
               
                  But Thirsis, is it possible that thou
                  Shouldst so forget me, and forgo thy vowe;
                  Or is it but a flying vaine report,
                  That slanders thine affection in this sort?
                  It may be so, and God grant it may be so:
                  I shall soone finde if thou be false or no:
                  But ah here comes my Fury, I must flie.
               
            
            
               
               ACT. I. SCEN. IIII.
               Phillis. Clarindo.
               
                  Ah cruell youth, whither away so fast?
               
               
                  Cla.
                  Good Phillis do not stay me, I haue haste.
               
               
                  Phi.
                  What haste shouldst thou haue but to comfort me,
                  VVho hath no other comfort but in thee?
               
               
                  Cla.
                  Alas thou do'st but trouble mein vaine,
                  I cannot helpe thee: t'is not in my powre.
               
               
                  Phi.
                  Not in thy powre Clarindo? ah ifthou
                  Hadst any thing of manlines, thou would'st.
               
               
                  Cla.
                  But if I haue not, what doth it auaile
                  In this sort to torment thy selfe and me?
                  And therefore pre thee Phillis let me goe.
               
               
                  Phi.
                  Ah whither canst thou go, where thou shalt be
                  More deerely lou'd and cherisht then with me?
               
               
                  Cla.
                  But that my purpose cannot satisfie,
                  I must be gone, there is no remedie.
               
               
                  Phi.
                  O cruell youth, will thy hart nothing moue?
                  Shew me yet pitie, if thou shew not loue.
               
               
                  Cla.
                  Beleeue me Phillis I do pitie thee;
                  And more, lament thy error, so farewell.
               
               
                  Phi.
                  
                     And art thou gone hard-hearted youth? hast thou
                     Thus disappointed my desires, and Ieft
                     My shame t'afflict me worser then my loue?
                     
                        Now in what case am I, that neither can
                     Recall my modestie, nor thee againe?
                  
                  
                     Ah were it now to do againe, my passions should
                     Haue smothred me to death, before I would
                     Haue shew'd the smallest sparkle of my flame.
                     But it is done, and I am now vndone.
                  
                  
                     Ah hadst thou bene a man, and had that part
                     Of vnderstanding of a womans hart,
                     My words had bene vnborne, onely mine eies
                     Had bene a tongue ynough to one were wise.
                     But this it is, to loue a boy, whose yeares
                     Conceiues not his owne good, nor weighes my teares:
                     But this disgrace I iustly haue deseru'd
                  
               
            
            
               SCEN. V.
               Lidia. Phillis.
               
                  
                     SO Phillis haue you, and y'are rightly seru'd.
                     Haue you disdain'd the gallanst Forresters,
                     And brauest heardsmen all Arcadia hath,
                     And now in loue with one is not a man?
                     Assure your selfe this is a iust reuenge
                     Loue takes, for your misprision of his powre.
                     I told you often there would come a time,
                     When you would sure be plagu'd for such a crime:
                     But you would laugh at me, as one you thought
                     Conceiu'd not of what mettall you were wrought.
                  
                  
                     
                     Is this you, who would wonder any nymphes
                     Could euer be so foolish as to loue?
                     Who is so foolish now?
                  
               
               
                  Phil.
                  Peace Lidia, peace,
                  Adde not more griefe t'a hart that hath too much,
                  Do not insult vpon her misery,
                  Whose flame, God wot, needs water, and not oyle.
                  Thou seest I am vndone, caught in the Toyle
                  Of an intangling mischiefe: tell me how
                  I may recouer, and vnwinde me now.
               
               
                  Lid.
                  That doth require more time, we will apart
                  Consult thereof, be you but rul'd by me,
                  And you shall finde, I, yet, will set you free.
                  Exeunt.
               
               
                  The song of the first Chorus.
                  
                     Loue is a sicknesse full of woes,
                     All remedies refusing:
                     A plant that with most cutting growes,
                     Most barren with best vsing.
                     Why so?
                     More we enioy it, more it dyes,
                     If not enioy'd, it sighing cries,
                     Hey ho.
                  
                  
                     Loue is a torment of the minde,
                     A tempest euerlasting;
                     
                        And Ioue hath made it of a kinde,
                     Not well, nor full nor fasting.
                     Why so?
                     More we enioy it, more it dies,
                     If not enioyd, it sighing cries,
                     Hey ho.
                  
               
            
         
         
            
               ACT. II. SCEN. I.
               Siluanus. Dorcas. Montanus.
               
                  IN what a meane regard are we now held,
                  VVe actiue and laborious forresters?
                  VVho though our liuing rurall be and rough,
                  Yet heretofore were we for valour priz'd,
                  And well esteem'd in all good companies:
                  Nor would the daintiest nymphes that valleyes haunt
                  Or fields inhabite, euer haue despis'd
                  Our siluane songs, nor yet our plaine discourse;
                  But gracefully accepted of our skill,
                  And often of our loues, when they haue seene
                  How faithfull and how constant we haue beene.
               
               
                  Dor.
                  It's true Siluanus, but you see the times
                  Are altred now, and they so dainty growne,
                  By being ador'd, and woo'd, and followed so
                  Of those vnsinowed amorous heardsmen, who
                  By reason of their rich and mighty flockes,
                  Supply their pleasures with that plenteousnesse,
                  
                     As they disdaine our plainnesse, and do scorne
                  Our company, as men rude and ill borne.
               
               
                  Sil.
                  VVell, so they doe; but Dorcas if you marke
                  How oft they doe miscarie in their loue,
                  Aud how disloyall these fine heardsmen prooue;
                  You shall perceiue how their aboundaut store
                  Payes not their expectation, nor desires.
                  Witnesse these groues wherein they oft deplore
                  The miserable passions they sustaine:
                  And how perfidious, wayward, and vnkinde,
                  They finde their loues to be; which we, who are
                  The eyes, and eares of woods, oft see and heare.
                  For hither to these groues they much resort,
                  And here one wayles apart the vsage hard
                  Of her disordred, wilde, and wilfull mate:
                  There mournes another her vnhappy state,
                  Held euer in restraint, and in suspect:
                  Another to her trusty confident,
                  Laments how shee is matcht to such a one
                  As cannot giue a woman her content.
                  Another grieues how shee hath got a foole,
                  Whose bed although shee loath, shee must endure.
                  And thus they all vnhappy by that meanes
                  Which they accompt would bring all happinesse;
                  Most wealthely are plagu'd, with rich distresse.
               
               
                  Dor.
                  
                     And so they are, but yet this was not wont
                     To be the fashion here; there was a time
                     Before Arcadia came to be diseas'd
                     With thes corrupted humors reigning now,
                     
                        That choise was made of vertue and desert,
                     VVithout respect of any other endes:
                     VVhen loue was onely master of their hearts,
                     And rul'd alone: when simple thoughts produc'd
                     Plaine honest deedes, and euery one contends
                     To haue his fame to follow his deserts,
                     And not his shewes; to be the same he was,
                     Not seem'd to be: and then were no such parts
                     Of false deceiuings plaid, as now wesee.
                  
                  
                     But after that accursed greedinesse
                     Of wealth began to enter and possesse
                     The hearts of men, integrity was lost,
                     And with it they themselues, for neuer more;
                     Came they to be in their owne powre againe.
                     That Tyrant vanquisht them, made them all slaues,
                     That brought base seruitude into the world,
                     VVhich else had neuer bin; that only made
                     Them to endure all whatsoeuer weights
                     Powre could deuise to lay vpon their necke.
                     For rather thē they would not haue, they would not be
                     But miserable. So that no deuice
                     Needes else to keepe them vnder, they themselues
                     Will beare farre more then they are made, thēselues
                     Will adde vnto their fetters, rather then
                     They would not be, or held to be great men.
                  
               
               
                  Sil.
                  Then Dorcas, how much more are we to prize
                  Our meane estate, which they so much despise?
                  Considering that we doe enioy thereby,
                  The dearest thing in nature, Liberty.
                  
                  
                     And are not tortur'd with those hopes and feares,
                  Th'afflction laid on superfluities,
                  VVhich make them to obscure, and serue the times:
                  But are content with what the earth, the woods
                  And riuers neere doe readily afforde
                  And therewithall furnish our homly borde.
                  Those vnbought cates please our vnlearned throats
                  That vnderstand not dainties, euen as well
                  As all their delicates, which doe but stuffe
                  And not sustaine the stomacke: and indeede
                  A well obseruing belly doth make much
                  For libertie; for he that can but liue,
                  Although with rootes, and haue no hopes, is free
                  VVithout the verge of any sou'raintie.
                  And is a Lord at home, commands the day
                  As his till night, and then reposes him
                  At his owne houres. thinkes on no stratagem
                  But how to take his game, hath no deseigne
                  To crosse next day: no plots to vndermine.
               
               
                  Dor.
                  But why Montanus doe you looke so sad?
                  VVhat is the cause your minde is not as free
                  As your estate? what, haue you had oflate
                  Some coy repulse of your disdainfull nymph,
                  To whome loue hath subdu'd you? who indeede
                  Our only master is, and no Lord else
                  But he, hath any power to vexe vs here;
                  Which had he not, we too too happy were.
               
               
                  Mon.
                  
                     In troth I must confesse, when now you two
                     Found me in yonder thicket, I had lost
                     
                        My selfe, by hauing seene that which I would
                     I had not had these eyes to see; and iudge
                     If I great reason haue not to complaine:
                     You see I am a man, though not so gay
                     And delicately clad, as are your fine
                     And amorous dainty heardsmen; yet a man,
                     And that not base, not vn-allyde to Pan;
                     
                     And of a spirit doth not degenerate
                     From my robustious manly ancestours,
                     Being neuer foild in any wrastling game,
                     But still haue borne away the chiefest prize
                     In euery braue and actiue exercise.
                     Yet notwithstanding that disdainfull maid,
                     Prowd Phillis, doth despise me and my loue,
                     And will not daigne so much as here me speake,
                     But doth abiure, forsooth, the thought of loue.
                  
                  
                     Yet shall I tell you (yet asham'd to tell;)
                     This coy vnlouing soule, I saw ere while
                     Soliciting a youth, a smooth fac'd boy,
                     Whom in her armes shee held (as seem'd to me,
                     Being closely busht a prety distance off,)
                     Against his will; and with strange passion vrg'd
                     His stay, who seem'd, struggled to get away,
                     And yet shee staid him, yet intreats his stay.
                  
                  
                     At which strange sight, imagine I that stood
                     Spectatour, how confoundedly I stood,
                     And hardly could forbeare from running in
                     To claime for mine, if euer loue had right,
                     Those her imbraces cast away in sight:
                     
                        But staying to behold the end, I staid
                     Too long; the boy gets loose, her selfe retyres,
                     And you came in; but if I liue, that boy
                     Shall dearely pay for his misfortune, that
                     He was beloued of her, of whom I would
                     Haue none on earth beloued, but my selfe.
                  
               
               
                  Dor.
                  That were to bite the stone, a thing vniust,
                  To punish him for her conceiued lust.
               
               
                  Mon.
                  Tush, many in this world we see are caught,
                  And suffer for misforrnne, not their fault.
               
               
                  Sil.
                  But that would not become your manlines,
                  
                     Montanus, it were shame for valiant men
                  To doe vnworthily.
               
               
                  Mon.
                  Speake not of that, Siluanus, if my rage
                  Irregular be made, it must worke like effects.
               
               
                  Dor.
                  These are but billowes, tumbling after storms,
                  They last not long, come let some exercise
                  Diuert that humour, and conuert your thoughts
                  To know your selfe; scorne her who scorneth you;
                  Idolatrize not so that Sexe, but hold
                  A man of strawe, more then a wife of gold.
               
               Exeunt.
            
            
               ACT. II. SCEN. II.
               Lidia. Phillis.
               YOu must not, Phillis, be so sensible
               Of these small touches which your passion makes.
               
                  
                  Phi.
                  Small touches Lidia, do you count the small?
                  Can there vnto a woman worse befall
                  Then hath to mee? what? haue not I lost all
                  That is most deare to vs, loue and my fame?
                  Is there a third thing Lidia you can name
                  That is so precious as to match with these?
               
               
                  Lid.
                  Now fily girle, how fondly doe you talke?
                  How haue you lost your fame; what for a few
                  Ill-fauour'd louing words, vttred in ieast
                  Vnto a foolish youth? Cannot you say
                  You did but to make triall how you could,
                  If such a peeuish qualme of passion should
                  (As neuer shall) oppresse your tender heart,
                  Frame your conceit to speake, to looke, to sigh
                  Like to a heart-strooke louer; and that you
                  Perceiuing him to be a bashfull youth,
                  Thought to put spirit in him, and make you sport.
               
               
                  Phi.
                  Ah Lidia, but he saw I did not sport,
                  He saw my teares, and more, what shall I say?
                  He saw too much, and that which neuer man
                  Shall euer see againe whil'st I haue breath.
               
               
                  Lid.
                  
                     Are you so simple as you make your selfe?
                     VVhat did he see? a counterfeited shew
                     Of passion, which you may, if you were wise,
                     Make him as easily to vnbeleeue,
                     As what he neuer saw; and thinke his eyes
                     Conspir'd his vnderstanding to deceiue.
                  
                  
                     How many women, thinke you, being espide
                     In neerer-touching cases by mischance,
                     
                        Haue yet not onely fac'd their louers downe
                     For what they saw, but brought them to beleeue
                     They had not seene the thing which they had seen,
                     Yea and to sweare it too; and to condemne
                     Themselues? such meanes can wit deuise
                     To make mens mindes vncredit their owne eyes.
                  
                  
                     And therefore let not such a toy as this
                     Disease your thoughts: and for your losse of loue,
                     It is as much as nothing. I would turne
                     A passion vpon that should ouerturne
                     It cleane, and that is wrath; one heate
                     Expels another. I would make my thoughts of skorne
                     To be in height so much aboue my loue,
                     As they should ease and please me more by farre.
                     I would disdaine to cast a looke that way
                     Where he should stand, vnlesse it were in skorne,
                     Or thinke a thought of him, but how to worke
                     Him all disgrace that possibly I could.
                  
               
               
                  Phi.
                  That Lidia can I neuer doe, let him
                  Do what he will to me: report my shame,
                  And vaunt his fortune, and my weaknesse blame.
               
               
                  Lid.
                  Nay as for that he shall be so well charmd
                  Ere I haue done, as you shall feare no tales.
               
               
                  Phi.
                  Ah Lidia, could that he without his harme,
                  How blessed should I be? But see where comes
                  My great tormentour, hat rude Forrester.
                  Good Lidia let vs flie, I hate his sight
                  Next to the ill I suffer: let vs flie,
                  VVe shall be troubled with him wofully.
               
               
                  
                  Lid.
                  Content you Phillis, stay & heare him speake:
                  We may make vse of him more then you thinke.
               
               
                  Phil.
                  What vse can of so grosse a peece be made?
               
               
                  Lid.
                  The better vse be sure, for beeing grosse,
                  Your subtler spirits full of their finesses,
                  Serue their owne turnes in others businesses.
               
            
            
               ACT. II. SCEN. III.
               Montanus. Lidia. Phillis.
               
                  VVhat pleasure can I take to chase wild beasts,
                  When I my selfe am chac'd more egarly
                  By mine owne passions, and can finde no rest?
                  Let them who haue their heart at libertie,
                  Attend those sports. I cannot be from hence,
                  Where I receiu'd my hurt, here must I tread
                  The maze of my perplexed miserie.
               
               
                  And here see where shee is the cause of all?
                  And now, what shall I doe? what shall I say?
                  How shall I looke? how stand? which vtter first?
                  My loue or wrath? Alas I know not which.
                  Now were it not as good haue beene away,
                  As thus to come, and not tell what to say?
               
               
                  Phil.
                  See Lidia see, how sauagely hee lookes,
                  Good let vs goe, I neuer shall endure
                  To heare him bellow.
               
               
                  Lid.
                  Prethee Phillis stay
                  
                     And giue him yet the hearing, in respect
                  Hee loues you, otherwise you shew your selfe
                  A sauage more then hee.
               
               
                  Phil.
                  Well, it I heare,
                  I will not answere him a word, you shall reply,
                  And prethee Lidia doe, reply for mee.
               
               
                  Lid.
                  For that wee shall, Phillis, doe well enough
                  When he begins, who seemes is very long
                  To giue the onset, sure the man is much
                  Perplexed, or he studies what to say.
               
               
                  Phil.
                  Good Lidia see how he hath trickt himselfe,
                  Now sure this gay fresh suite as seemes to mee
                  Hangs like green Iuy on a rotten tree.
               
               
                  Lid.
                  Some beasts doe weare gray beards beside your goates:
                  And bear with him, this suit bewraies yong thoghts
               
               
                  Mon.
                  
                     Ah was it not enough to be opprest
                     With that confounding passion of my loue
                     And her disdaine, but that I must be torne
                     With wrath and enuie too, and haue no veine
                     Free from the racke of suffrings, that I can
                     Nor speake nor thinke but most distractedly?
                  
                  
                     How shall I now begin, that haue no way
                     To let out any passion by it selfe,
                     But that they all will thrust together so
                     As none will be expressed as they ought?
                     But something I must say now I am here.
                     And be it what it will, loue, enuie wrath,
                     Or all together in a comberment,
                     My words must be like me, perplext and rent,
                     And so I'le to her. Phi. Lidia, see he comes.
                  
               
               
                  
                  Lid.
                  He comes indeed, and as me thinkes doth
                  More trouble in his face by farre, then loue.
               
               
                  Mon.
                  Faire Phillis, and too faire for such a one, shew
                  Vnlesse you kinder were, or better then
                  I know you are: how much I haue endur'd
                  For you, although you skorne to know, I feele,
                  And did imagine, that in being a man
                  Who might deserue regard, I should haue bin
                  Prefer'd before a boy. But well, I see
                  Your seeming and your being disagree.
               
               
                  Phi.
                  What Lidia, doth he brawle? what meanes he thus
                  To speake and looke in this strange sort on me?
               
               
                  Mon.
                  VVell modest Phillis, neuer looke so coy,
                  These eyes beheld you dallying with a boy.
               
               
                  Phi.
                  Me with a boy, Montanus? when? where? how?
               
               
                  Mon.
                  To day, here, in most lasciuious sort.
               
               
                  Lid.
                  
                     Ah, ha, belike he sawe you Phillis, when
                     This morning you did striue with Cloris boy
                     To haue your garland, which he snatcht away,
                     And kept it from you by strong force and might:
                     And you againe laid hold vpon the same,
                     And held it fast vntill with much adoe
                     He wrung it from your hands, and got away.
                     And this is that great matter which he saw.
                  
                  
                     Now fye Montanus fye, are you so grosse,
                     T'imagine such a worthy nymph as shee
                     VVould be inloue with such a youth as he?
                     VVhy now you hauc vndone your credit quite,
                     You neuer can make her amends for this
                     
                        So impious a surmise, nor euer can
                     Shee, as shee reason hath, but must despise
                     your grossenesse; who should rather haue come in
                     And righted her, then suffer such a one
                     To offer an indignity so vile,
                     And you stand prying in a bush the while.
                  
               
               
                  Mon.
                  VVhat do I heare? what, am I not my selfe?
                  How? haue mine eyes double vndone me then?
                  First seeing Phillis face, and now her fact,
                  Or else the fact I saw, I did not see?
                  And since thou hast my vnderstanding wrong'd,
                  And traytour-like giuen false intelligence,
                  VVhereby my iudgement comes to passe amisse.
                  And yet I thinke my sence was in the right:
                  And yet in this amaze I cannot tell,
                  But howsoere, I in an errour am,
                  In louing, or beleeuing, or in both.
                  And therefore Phillis, at thy feet I fall,
                  And pardon craue for this my grosse surmise.
               
               
                  Lid.
                  But this, Montanus, will not now suffise.
                  You quite haue lost her, and your hopes and all.
               
               
                  Mon.
                  Good Lidia yet intreate her to relent,
                  And let her but command me any thing
                  That is within the power of man to do,
                  And you shall finde Montanus will performe
                  More then a Gyant, and will stead her more
                  Then all the heardsmen in Arcadia can.
               
               
                  Lia.
                  Shee will command you nothing; but I wish
                  You would a little terrifie that boy
                  
                     As he may neuer dare to vse her name
                  But in all reuerence as is fit for her.
                  But doe not you examine him a word;
                  For that were neither for your dignity,
                  Nor hers, that such a boy as he should stand
                  And iustifie himselfe in such a case,
                  Who would but faine vntruths vnto your face.
                  And herein you some seruice shall performe,
                  As may perhaps make her to thinke on you.
               
               
                  Mon.
                  Alas, this is a worke so farre, so low
                  Beneath my worth, as I account it none,
                  Were it t'incounter some fierce mountaine beast
                  Or monster, it were something fitting mee.
                  But yet this will I doe, and doe it home,
                  Assure you Lidia: as I liue I will.
               
               
                  Phi.
                  But yet I would not haue you hurt the youth,
                  For that were neither grace for you nor mee.
               
               
                  Mon.
                  That as my rage will tollerate must be.
               
            
            
               ACT. II. SCEN. IV.
               Cloris. Clarindo.
               HEere comes my long expected messenger,
               God grant the newes hee brings may make amends
               For his long stay; and sure, I hope it will.
               Me thinkes his face bewraies more iollytie
               
                  In his returning then in going hence.
               
                  Cla.
                  Well, all is wel; no Amarillis hath
                  Supplanted Siluias louein Thirsis heart,
                  Nor any shall: but see where Cloris lookes
                  For what I shall not bring her at this time.
               
               
                  Clo.
                  
                     Clarindo though my longing would be faine
                  Dispatch'd at once, & heare my doome pronounc'd
                  All in a word of either life or death,
                  Yet doe not tell it but by circumstance.
                  Tell me the manner where, and how thou foundst
                  My Thirsis, what he said, how look'd, how far'd,
                  How he receau'd my message, vsed thee;
                  And all in briefe, but yet be sure tell all.
               
               
                  Cla.
                  
                     All will I tell as neere as I can tell.
                     First after teadious searching vp and downe,
                     I found him all alone, like a hurt Deare,
                     Got vnder couer in a shadie groue,
                     Hard by a little christall purling spring,
                     Which but one sullen note of murmur held;
                     And where no sunne could see him, where no eye
                     Might ouerlooke his louely primacy.
                     There in a path of his owne making, trode
                     Bare as a common way, yet led no way
                     Beyond the turnes he made (which were but short)
                     With armes acrosse, his hat downe on his eyes
                     (As if those shades yeelded not shade ynough,
                     To darken them) he walkes with often stops,
                     Vneuen pace, like motions to his thoughts.
                  
                  
                     And when he heard me comming, for his eares
                     
                        VVere quicker watches then his eyes, it seem'd;
                     He suddenly lookes vp, staies suddenly,
                     And with a brow that told how much the sight
                     Of any interrupter troubled him,
                     Beheld me, without speaking any word,
                     As if expecting what I had to say.
                     I finding him in this confus'd dismay,
                     (VVho heretofore had seene him otherwise:
                     I must confesse, (for tell you all I must,)
                     A trembling passion ouerwhelmd my breast,
                     So that I likewise stood confus'd and dumbe,
                     And onely lookt on him, as he on me.
                     In this strange posture like two statues we
                     Remaind a while; but with this difference set:
                     He blusht, and I look'd pale; my face did shew
                     Ioy to see him, his trouble to be seene.
                  
                  
                     At length bethinking me for what I came,
                     VVhat part I had to act, I rowzd my spirits,
                     And set my selfe to speake; although I wisht
                     He would haue first begun; and yet before
                     A word would issue, twice I bowd my knee,
                     Twice kist my hand; my action so much was
                     More ready then my tongue: at last I told
                     VVhose messenger I was, and how I came
                     To intimate the sadde distressed case
                     Of an afflicted nymph, whose onely helpe
                     Remaind in him: he when he heard the name
                     of Cloris, turnes away his head, and shrinkes,
                     As if he grieued that you should grieue for him.
                  
               
               
                  
                  Clo.
                  No, no, it troubled him to heare my name,
                  Which he despises, is he so pervers
                  And way ward still? ah then I see no hope.
                  
                     Clarindo, would to God thou hadst not gone,
                  I could be, but as now, I am vndone.
               
               
                  Cla.
                  Haue patience Mistres, & but heare the rest.
                  When I perceiu'd his suffring, with the touch
                  And sodaine stop it gauc him, presently
                  I layd on all the waights that motion might
                  Procure, and him besought, adiur'd, invok'd,
                  By all the rights of Nature, pietie,
                  And manlines, to heare my message out.
                  Told him how much the matter did import
                  Your safetie and his fame. How hee was bound
                  In all humanity to right the same.
               
               
                  Clo.
                  That was well done my boy, what said he then?
               
               
                  Cla.
                  Hee turnes about, and fixt his eyes on mee,
                  Content to giue his eares a quiet leaue,
                  To heare me. when I faild not to relate
                  All what I had in charge, and all he heares,
                  And lookes directly on me all the while.
               
               
                  Clo.
                  I doubt he noted thee more then thy words,
                  But now Clarindo, what was his reply?
               
               
                  Cla.
                  Thus. Tel faire Cloris, my good boy, how that
                  I am not so disnatured a man,
                  Or so ill borne, to disesteeme her loue,
                  Or not to grieue, (as I protest I doe)
                  That shee should so afflict her selfe for mee.
                  But.
               
               
                  Clo.
                  Ah now comes that bitter word of But
                  
                     Which makes all nothing, that was said before.
                  That smoothes & wounds, that stroakes and dashes more
                  Then flat denyals, or a plaine disgrace.
                  But tell me yet what followed on that But?
                  
               
               
                  Cla.
                  Tell her (said hee) that I desire shee would
                  Redeeme her selfe at any price shee could,
                  And neuer let her thinke on mee, who am
                  But euen the barke, and outside of a man,
                  That trades not with the liuing, neither can
                  Nor euer will keepe other company.
                  Then with the dead. My Siluias memory
                  Is all that I must euer liue withall.
                  With that his teares, which likewise forced mine,
                  Set me againe vpon another racke
                  Of passion so, that of my selfe I sought
                  To comfort him the best I could deuise.
                  And I besought him that he would not be
                  Transported thus. But know that with the dead
                  He should no more conuerse: and how his loue
                  Was liuing, that would giue him all content,
                  And was all his intire, and pure, and wisht
                  To liue no longer then shee should be so.
                  When more I would haue said, he shooke his head
                  And wild me speake no further at that time,
                  But leaue him to himselfe, and to returne
                  Againe anone, and he would tell me more;
                  Commending me for hauing done the part
                  Both of a true and mouing messenger.
                  And so I tooke my leaue, and came my way.
               
               
                  
                  Clo.
                  
                     Returne againe? no, to what end,
                     If hee be so conceited, and so fond
                     To intertaine a shadow; I haue done,
                     And wish, that I had neuer done so much.
                     Shall I descend below my selfe, to send
                     To one is not himselfe? Let him alone
                     With his dead image: you shall goe no more
                     Haue I here fram'd with all the art I could
                     This garland deckt with all the various flowres,
                     
                        Arcadia yeelds, in hope he would send backe
                     Some cofort, that I might therwith haue crown'd
                     His loue, and witness'd mine, in thendles round
                     Of this faire ring, the Character of faith?
                  
                  
                     But now he shall haue none of it, I rather will
                     Rend it in peeces, and dishatter all
                     Into a Chaos, like his formeles thoughts.
                  
                  
                     But yet thou faist he wild thee to returne,
                     And he would tell thee more.
                  
               
               
                  Cla.
                  Yes so he saide.
               
               
                  Clo.
                  
                     Perhaps thy words might yet so worke with him
                     As that hee takes this time to thinke on them,
                     And then I should doe wrong to keepe thee backe.
                     Well thou shalt goe, and carry him from mee
                     This garland, worke it what effect it will.
                  
                  
                     But yet I know it will doe nothing. Stay
                     Thou shalt not goe, for sure hee said but that
                     To put thee off, that he might be alone
                     At his idolatrie, in worshipping
                     A nothing, but his selfe made images.
                     
                        But yet he may be wearied with those thoughts
                     As hauing worne them long, and end they must:
                     And this my message comming in fit time,
                     And moouingly deliuered, may take hold:
                     He said thou wert a moouing messenger
                     
                        Clarindo, did he not?
                  
               
               
                  Cla.
                  Yes so he said.
               
               
                  Clo.
                  VVell, thou shalt goe; and yet if any thought
                  Of me should mooue him, he knowes wel my mind
                  (if not too well) and where he may me finde.
                  Thou shalt not goe Clarindo, nor will I
                  Disgrace me more with importunity:
                  And yet if such a motion should take fire,
                  And finde no matter ready, it would out,
                  And opportunities must not be slackt
                  
                     Clarindo, thou shalt goe, and as thou goest,
                  Looke to my flocke, and so God speed thee well.
               
            
            
               SCEN. V.
               Clarindo, alias Siluia sol. 
               
               
                  WEll, this imployment makes for my auaile,
                  For hereby haue I meanes to see my loue;
                  Who likewise sees me, though he sees me not;
                  Nor doe I see him as I would I did.
                  But I must by some meanes or other make
                  Him know I liue; and yet not so as he
                  
                     May know that I am I, for feare we might
                  Miscary in our ioyes by ouer haste.
                  But it is more then time his suffrings were
                  Releeu'd in some close sort; and that can I deuise
                  No way to doe, but by relating how
                  I heard of an escape a nymph did make
                  From pirats lately, and was safe return'd.
                  And so to tell some storie that containes
                  Our fortunes and our loues, in other names;
                  And wish him to expect the like euent;
               
               
                  For I perceiue him very well content
                  To heare me speake; and sure he hath some note,
                  Although so darkly drawne, as that his eyes
                  Cannot expresly reade it; yet it showes
                  Him somthing, which he rather feels, then knowes.
               
               
                  The song of the second Chorus.
                  Desire that is of things vngot,
                  See what trauaile it procureth,
                  And how much the minde endureth,
                  To gaine what yet it gaineth not:
                  For neuer was it paid,
                  The charge defraide,
                  According to the price of thought.
               
            
         
         
            
               
               ACT. III. SCEN. I.
               Charinus, the father of Thirsis. Palaemon.
               
                  PAlaemon, you me thinkes might something work
                  With Thirsis my aggreeued sonne, and sound
                  His humour what it is: and why he thus
                  Afflicts himselfe in solitarinesse.
                  You two were wont to be most inward friends,
                  And glad I was to see it; knowing you
                  To be a man well tempred, fit to sort
                  VVith his raw youth; can you doe nothing now,
                  To win him from this vile captiuity
                  Of passion, that withholdes him from the world?
               
               
                  Pal.
                  In troth, Charinus, I haue oftentimes,
                  As one that suffred for his grieuances,
                  Assayd to finde a way into the cause
                  Of his so strange dismay; and by all meanes
                  Aduis'd him make redemption of himselfe,
                  And come to life againe, and be a man
                  With men: but all serues not, I finde him lockt
                  Fast to his will, alleadge I what I can.
               
               
                  Char.
                  But will he not impart to you the cause?
               
               
                  Pal.
                  The cause is loue; but it is such a loue,
                  As is not to be had.
               
               
                  Cha.
                  Not to be had?
                  
                     Palaemon, if his loue beregular,
                  
                     Is there in all Arcadia any shee,
                  Whom his ability, his shape, and worth
                  May not attaine, he being my onely sonne?
               
               
                  Pal.
                  Shee is not in Arcadia whom he loues,
                  Nor in the world, and yet he deerely loues.
               
               
                  Cha.
                  How may that be, Palaemon? tell me plaine.
               
               
                  Pal.
                  Thus plainly; he's in loue with a dead woman,
                  And that so farre, as with the thought of her
                  Which hath shut out all other, he alone
                  Liues, and abhorres to be, or seene, or knowne.
               
               
                  Cha.
                  What was this creature could possesse him so?
               
               
                  Pal.
                  Faire Siluia, old Medorus daughter, who
                  Was two yeares past reported to be slaine
                  By sauage beasts vpon our countrey shore.
               
               
                  Cha.
                  
                     Is that his griefe? alas, I rather thought
                     It appertain'd vnto anothers part
                     To wayle her death: Alexis should doe that
                     To whom her father had disposed her,
                     And shee esteemed onely to be his.
                     Why should my sonne afflict him more for her,
                     Then doth Alexis, who this day doth wed
                     Faire Galatea, and forgets the dead?
                     And here the shepheards come to celebrate
                     His ioyfull nuptials with all merriment,
                     Which doth increase my cares, considering
                     The comforts other parents doe receiue:
                     And therefore good Palaemon worke all meanes
                     You can to win him from his peeuish will,
                     And draw him to these shewes, to companies,
                     
                        That others pleasures may inkindle his.
                  
                  
                     And tell him what a sinne he doeth commit,
                     To waste his youth in solitarinesse,
                     And take a course to end vs all in him.
                  
               
               
                  Pal.
                  Assure your selfe Charinus, as I haue
                  So will I still imploy my vtmost powre,
                  To saue him; for me thinks it pittie were,
                  So rare a peece of worth should so be lost,
                  That ought to be preserued at any cost.
               
            
            
               ACT. III. SCEN. II.
               Charinus. Medorus.
               MEdorus come, we two must sit, and mourne
               Whilst others reuell. We are not for sports,
               Or nuptiall shewes, which will but shew vs more
               Our miseries, in beeing both depriu'd,
               The comforts of our issue, which might haue
               (And was as like to haue) made our hearts
               As ioyfull now, as others are in theirs.
               
                  Med.
                  In deed Charinus, I for my part haue
                  Iust cause to grieue amidst these festiuals,
                  For they should haue been mine. This day I should
                  Haue seene my daughter Siluia how she would
                  Haue womand it; these rites had bene her grace,
                  And shee had sat in Galateas place.
                  
                     And now had warm'd my heart to see my bloud
                  Preseru'd in her; had shee not beene so rapt
                  And rent from off the liuing as shee was.
                  But your case is not pararell with mine,
                  You haue a sonne, Charinus, that doth liue,
                  And may one day to you like comforts giue.
               
               
                  Cha.
                  Indeed I haue a sonne; but yet to say he liues,
                  I cannot; for who liues not to the world,
                  Nor to himselfe, cannot be said to liue:
                  For euer since that you your daughter lost,
                  I lost my sonne: for from that day he hath
                  Imbrak d in shades and solitarinesse,
                  Shut himselfe vp from sight or company
                  Of any liuing: and as now I heard,
                  By good Palaemon, vowes still so to doe.
               
               
                  Med.
                  
                     And did your sonne, my daughter loue so deare?
                     Now good Charinus, I must grieue the more,
                     If more my heart could suffer then it doth;
                     For now I feele the horrour of my deede,
                     In hauing crost the worthiest match on earth.
                     Now I perceiue why Siluia did refuse
                     To marrie with Alexis, hauing made
                     A worthier choice; which oh had I had grace
                     To haue foreseene, perhaps this dismall chance
                     Neuer had bene, and now they both had had
                     Ioy of their loues, and we the like of them.
                  
                  
                     But ah my greedy eye, viewing the large
                     And spacious sheep-walkes ioyning vnto mine,
                     Whereof Alexis was possest, made me,
                     
                        As worldlings doe, desire to marry grounds,
                     And not affections, which haue other bounds.
                     How oft haue I with threats, with promises,
                     VVith all perswasions, sought to win her minde
                     To fancie him, yet all would not preuaile?
                     How oft hath shee againe vpon her knees
                     VVith teares besought me; Oh deare father mine
                     Doe not inforce me to accept a man
                     I cannot fancie: rather take from mee,
                     The life you gaue me, then afflict it so.
                  
                  
                     Yet all this would not alter mine intent,
                     This was the man shee must affect or none.
                     But ah what sinne was this to torture so
                     A hart forevow'd vnto a better choice,
                     VVhere goodnesse met in one the selfe same point,
                     And vertues answer'd in an equall ioynt?
                     Sure, sure, Charinus, for this sinne of mine
                     The gods bereast me of my childe, and would
                     Not haue her be, to be without her heart,
                     Nor me take ioy where I did none impart.
                  
               
               
                  Cha.
                  
                     Medorus, thus wee see mans wretchednesse
                  That learnes his errours but by their successe,
                  And when there is no remedie; and now
                  Wee can but wish it had beene otherwise.
               
               
                  Med.
                  
                     And in that wish Charinus we are rackt;
                     But I remember now I often haue
                     Had shadowesin my sleepe that figures bare
                     Of some such liking twixt your childe and mine.
                     And this last night a pleasing dreame I had
                     
                        (Though dreams of ioy makes wakers minds more sad)
                     Me thought my daughter Siluia was return'd
                     In most strange fashion, and vpon her knees
                     Craues my good will for Thirsis, otherwise
                     She would be gone againe and seene no more.
                  
                  
                     I at the sight of my deare childe, was rapt
                     With that excesse of ioy, as gaue no time
                     Either for me to answer her request,
                     Or leaue for sleepe to figure out the rest.
                  
               
               
                  Cha.
                  
                     Alas Medorus, dreames are vapours, which
                     Ingendred with day thoughts, fall in the night
                     And vanish with the morning; are but made
                     Afflictions vnto man, to th' end he might
                     Not rest in rest, but toyle both day and night.
                  
                  
                     But see here comes my solitarie sonne:
                     Let vs stand close Medorus out of sight,
                     And note how he behaues hlmselfe in this
                     Affliction, and distressed case of his.
                  
               
            
            
               SCEN. III.
               Thirsis solus.
               
                  THis is the day, the day, the lamentable day
                  Of my destruction, which the Sun hath twice
                  Returnd vnto my griefe, which keepe one course
                  Continually with it in motion like.
                  
                     But that they neuer set: this day doth claime
                  Th'especiall tribute of my sighes and teares,
                  Though euery day I duely pay my teares
                  Vnto that soule which this day left the world.
               
               
                  And yet I know not why? me thoughts the Sun
                  Arose this day with farre more cheerefull rayes
                  With brighter beames, then vsually it did
                  As if it would bring something of release
                  Vnto my cares, or else my spirit hath had
                  Some manner of intelligence with hope
                  Wherewith my heart is vnacquainted yet:
                  And that might cause mine eie with quicker sence,
                  To note th'appearing of the eye of heauen;
                  But something sure I feele which doth beare vp
                  The weight of sorrow easier then before.
               
            
            
               SCEN. IV.
               Palaemon. Thirsis.
               VVHat Thirsis still in passion? still one man?
               For shame shew not your selfe so weakely set,
               So feebly ioynted that you cannot beare
               The fortunes of the world like other men.
               Beleeue me Thirsis you much wrong your worth:
               This is to be no man, to haue no powers.
               Passions are womens parts, actions ours.
               
                  I was in hopet'haue found you otherwise.
               
                  Thir.
                  
                     How? otherwise Palaemon? doe not you
                     Hold it to be a most heroicke thing
                     To act one man, and doe that part exact?
                     Can there be in the world more worthinesse change?
                     Then to be constant? is there any thing
                     Shewes more a man? What, would you haue me
                     That were to haue me base, that were indeed
                     To shew a feeble heart, and weakely set.
                  
                  
                     No no Palaemon, I should thinke my selfe
                     The most vnworthy man of men, should I
                     But let a thought into this heart of mine
                     That might disturbe or shake my constancie.
                  
                  
                     And thinke Palaemon I haue combates too,
                     To be the man I am, being built of flesh,
                     And hauing round about me traytors too
                     That seeke to vndermine my powres, and steale
                     Into my weakenesses, but that I keepe
                     Continual watch and ward vpon my selfe,
                     Least I should be surpriz'd at vnawares
                     And taken from my vowes with other snares.
                  
                  
                     And euen now at this instant I confesse,
                     
                        Palaemon, I doe feele a certaine touch
                     Of comfort, which I feare to entertaine,
                     Least it should be some spie, sent as a traine
                     To make discouery of what strength I am.
                  
               
               
                  Pal.
                  Ah worthie Thirsis, entertaine that spirit
                  What euer else thou doe: set all the doores
                  Of thine affections open thereunto.
               
               
                  
                  Thir.
                  
                     Palaemon no. Comfort and I haue beene
                  So long time strangers, as that now I feare
                  To let it in. I know not how t'acquaint
                  My selfe therewith, being vsed to conuerse
                  VVith other humours, that affect me best.
                  Nor doe I loue to haue mixt company
                  VVhereto I must of force my selfe apply.
               
               
                  Pal.
                  But Thirsis thinke that this must haue an end,
                  And more it would approoue your worth to make
                  The same your work, then time should make it his.
               
               
                  Thir.
                  
                     End sure it must Palaeman, but with me:
                     For so I by the Oracle was told
                     That very day wherein I lost the day
                     And light of comfort that can neuer rise
                     Againe to mee: when I the faddest man
                     That euer breath'd before those Altars fell,
                     And there besought to know what was become
                     Of my deare Siluta, whether dead, or how
                     Reast from the world: but that I could not learne.
                     Yet thus much did that voice diuine returne:
                     Goe youth, reserue thy selfe, the day will come
                     Thou shalt be happy, and returne againe.
                     But when shall be that day demanded I,
                     The day thou dyest, replide the Oracle.
                  
                  
                     So that you see, it will not be in these
                     But in th'Elizian fields, where I shall ioy,
                     The day of death must bring me happinesse.
                  
               
               
                  Pal.
                  
                     You may mistake the meaning of those words
                     Which is not knowne before it be fulfill'd.
                     
                        Yeeld you to what the gods command, if not
                     Vnto your friends desires: reserue your selfe
                     For better daies, and thinke the Oracle
                     Is not vntrue, although not vnderstood.
                  
                  
                     But howsoeuer, let it not be said
                     That Thirsis being a man of so rare parts,
                     So vnderstanding and discreete, should pine in loue
                     And languish for a silly woman thus:
                     To be the fable of the vulgar, made
                     Ascorne, and laught at, by inferiour wits.
                  
               
               
                  Thir.
                  
                     In loue Palaemon? know you what you say?
                     Doe you esteeme it light to be in loue?
                     How haue I beene mistaken in the choice
                     Of such a friend, as I held you to be,
                     That seemes not, or else doth not vnderstand
                     The noblest portion of humanity,
                     The worthiest peece of nature set in man?
                     Ah know that when you mention loue, you name
                     A sacred mistery, a Deity,
                     Not vnderstood of creatures built of mudde,
                     But of the purest and refined clay
                     Whereto th'eternall fires their spirits conuey.
                  
                  
                     And for a woman, which you prize so low,
                     Like men that doe forget whence they are men;
                     Know her to be th'especiall creature, made
                     By the Creator of the complement
                     Of this great Architect the world; to hold
                     The same together, which would otherwise
                     Fall all asunder: and is natures chiefe
                     
                        Vicegerent vpon earth, supplies her state.
                  
                  
                     And doe you hold it weakenesse then to loue?
                     And loue so excellent a miracle
                     As is a worthy woman, ah then let mee
                     Still be so weake, still let me loue and pine
                     In contemplation of that cleane, cleare soule,
                     That made mine see that nothing in the world
                     Is so supreamely beautifull as it.
                  
                  
                     Thinke not it was those colours white and red
                     Laid but on flesh, that could affect me so.
                     But something else, which thought holds vnder locke
                     And hath no key of words to open it.
                     They are the smallest peeces of the minde
                     That passe this narrow organ of the voice.
                     The great remaine behinde in that vast orbe
                     Ofth apprehension, and are neuer borne.
                  
                  
                     And therefore if your iudge cannot reach
                     Vnto the vnderstanding of my Case,
                     You doe not well to put your selfe into
                     My Iury, to condemne me as you doe.
                     Let th'ignorant out of their dulnesse laugh
                     At these my sufferings, I will pitty them
                     To haue beene so ill borne, so miscompos'd
                     As not to know what thing it is to loue.
                  
                  
                     And I to great Apollo here appeale
                     The soueraigne of the Muses, and of all
                     Wel tun'd affections, and to Cinthia bright,
                     And glorious Lady of cleere faithfulnesse;
                     Who from aboue looke down with blisfull beames
                     
                        Vpon our humble groues, and ioy the hearts
                     Of all the world, to see their mutuall loues;
                     They can iudge what worthinesse there is
                     In worthy loue. Therefore Palaemon peace,
                     Vnlesse you did know better what it were.
                  
                  
                     And this be sure, when as that fire goes out
                     In man, he is the miserablest thing
                     On earth, his day-light sets, and is all darke
                     And dull within; no motions of delight,
                     But all opprest, lies struggling with the weight
                     Of worldly cares: and this olde Damon saies,
                     Who well had felt what loue was in his daies.
                  
               
               
                  Pal.
                  Well Thirsis, well, how euer you doe guilde
                  Your passions, to indeere them to your selfe,
                  You neuer shall induce me to beleeue,
                  That sicknesses can be of such effect.
                  And so farewell, vntill you shall be well.
               
            
            
               SCEN. V
               Medorus. Charinus.
               O Gods, Charinus, what a man is this?
               Who euer heard of such a constancie?
               Had I but knowne him in enioying him,
               As now I doe, too late, in losing him,
               How blest had bene mine age? but ah I was
               
                  Vnworthie of so great a blessednesse.
               
                  Cha.
                  
                     You see, Medorus, how no counsell can
                     Preuaile to turne the current of his will,
                     To make it run in any other course
                     Then what it doth; so that I see I must
                     Esteeme him irreuocably lost.
                  
                  
                     But harke, the shepheards festiuals begin,
                     Let vs from hence, where sadnesse were a sinne.
                  
               
               Here was presented a rurall marriage, conducted with this Song.
               
                  From the Temple to the Boord,
                  From the Boord vnto the Bed,
                  We conduct your maidenhead:
                  Wishing Hymen to affoord
                  All the pleasures that he can,
                  Twixt a woman and a man.
               
            
         
         
            
               ACT. IIII. SCEN. I.
               Thirsis solus
               
                  I Thought these simple woods, these gentle trees
                  Would, in regard I am their daily guest,
                  And harbour vnderneath their shadie roofes,
                  Not haue consented to delude my griefes;
                  
                     And mock my miseries with false reports:
                  But now I see they will afflict me too.
               
               
                  For as I came by yonder spreading Beech
                  Which often hath the Secretarie beene
                  To my sad thoughts, while I haue rested me
                  (if loue had euer rest) vnder his gentle shade,
                  I found incaru'd, and faire incaru'd, these words:
                  Thy Siluia, Thirsis, liues; and is return'd.
                  Ah me, that any hand would thus adde scorne
                  Vnto affliction; and a hand so faire
                  As this may seeme to be; which were more fit,
                  Me thinkes, for good, then to doe iniurie;
                  For sure no vertue should be ill imployd.
               
               
                  And which is more; the name of Siluia was
                  Caru'd in the selfe same kinde of character
                  Which shee aliue did vse, and where with all
                  Subscrib'd her vowes to me, who knowes it best;
                  Which shews the fraud the more, & more the wrōg.
                  Therefore you stars of that high court of heauen,
                  Which do reueale deceits, and punish them,
                  Let not this crime, to feit a hand
                  To couzin my desires, escape your doome.
                  Nor let these riots of intrusion, made
                  Vpon my louenesse, by strange company
                  Afflict me thus, but let me haue some rest.
               
               
                  Come then, refresher of all liuing things,
                  Soft sleepe, come gently, and take truce with these
                  Oppressours, but come simple and alone,
                  VVithout these images of fantasie,
                  
                     Which hurt me more then thou canst do me good:
                  Let me not sleepe, vnlesse I could sleepe all.
               
            
            
               SCEN. II.
               Palaemon. Thirsis.
               ALas, he here hath laid him downe to rest,
               It were now sinne his quiet to molest;
               And God forbid I should; I will retire
               And leaue him, for I know his griefes require
               This poore releeuement of a little sleepe.
               
                  Thi.
                  What spirit here haunts me? what no time free?
                  Ah, is it you Palaemon? would to God
                  You would forbeare me but a little while:
                  You shew your care of me too much in this:
                  Vnseasonable loue, skarce kindnesse is.
               
               
                  Pal.
                  Good Thirsis, I am sorie I should giue
                  The least occasion of disease to you;
                  I will be gone and leaue you to your rest.
               
               
                  Thi.
                  Doe good Palaemon, goe your way, farewell;
                  And yet Palaemon stay, perhaps you may
                  By charmes you haue, cause sleep to close mine eies;
                  For you were wont, I doe remember well,
                  To sing me Sonnets, which in passion I
                  Composed in my happier daies, when as
                  Her beames inflam'd my spirits, which now are set.
                  
                     And if you can remember it, I pray
                  Sing me the song, which thus begins: Eyes hide my loue,
                  Which I did write vpon the earnest charge
                  Shee gaue vnto me, to conceale our loue.
               
               
                  The Song.
                  Eyes hide my loue, and doe not shew
                  To any but to her my notes,
                  Who onely doth that cipher know,
                  Wherewith we passe our secret thoughts:
                  Belie your lookes in others sight;
                  And wrong your selues to doe her right.
               
               
                  Pal.
                  So now he sleeps, or else doth seeme to sleep;
                  But howsoeuer, I will not trouble him.
               
            
            
               SCEN. III.
               Clarindo. Thirsis
               
                  SEe where he lies, whom I so long to see;
                  Ah my deere Thirsis, take thy quiet rest,
                  I know thou needst it, sleepe thy fill, sweete loue
                  Let nothing trouble thee: be calme oh windes,
                  Be still you heards, chirp not so loud sweet birds,
                  Lest you should wake my loue: thou gentle banke
                  
                     That thus art blest to beare so deare a weight,
                  Be soft vnto those dainty lymmes of his,
                  Plie tender grasse, and render sweet refresh
                  Vnto his wearie senses, whilst he rests.
               
               
                  Oh could I now but put off this disguise,
                  VVith those respects that fetter my des
                        ••••
                     :
                  How closely could I neighbour that sweet side?
                  But stay, he stirres; I feare my heart hath brought
                  My feete too neere, and I haue wakened him.
               
               
                  Thi.
                  It will not be, sleepe is no friend of mine,
                  Or such a friend, as leaues a man, when most
                  He needes him. See a new assault: who now?
                  Ah tis the boy that was with me erewhiles,
                  That gentle boy; I am content to speake
                  With him, he speakes so pretily, so sweet,
                  And with so good respectiue modesty:
                  And much resembles one I knew once well:
                  Come hither gentle boy, what hast thou there?
               
               
                  Cla.
                  A token sent you from the nymph I serue.
               
               
                  Thi.
                  Keepe it my boy, and weare it on thy head.
               
               
                  Cla.
                  The gods forbid, rhat I, a seruant, should
                  Weare on my head, that which my mistresse hath
                  Prepar'd for yours: Sir, I beseech you vrge
                  No more a thing so ill becomming me.
               
               
                  Thi.
                  Nay sure I thinke, it better will become
                  Thy head then mine; and therefore boy, thou must
                  Needes put it on.
               
               
                  Cla.
                  I trust you lo
                        •
                     enesse hath not so
                  Vnciuil'd you, to force a messenger
                  
                     To doe against good manners, and his will.
               
               
                  Thi.
                  No, good my boy, but I intreate thee now
                  Let me but put it on, hold still thy head,
                  It shall not be thy act, but onely mine:
                  Let it alone good boy, for if thou saw'st
                  How well it did become thee, sure thou wouldst.
                  Now, canst thou sing my boy some gentle song?
               
               
                  Cla.
                  I cannot sing, but I could weepe.
               
               
                  Thi.
                  VVeepe, why?
               
               
                  Cla.
                  Because I am not as I wish to be.
               
               
                  Thi.
                  VVhy so are none; be not dipleas'd for this;
                  And if you cannot sing, tell me some tale
                  To passe the time.
               
               
                  Cla.
                  That can I doe, did I but know what kinde
                  Of tale you lik'd.
               
               
                  Thi.
                  No merry tale my boy, nor yet too sad,
                  But mixed, like the tragicke Comedies.
               
               
                  Cla.
                  
                     Then such a tale I haue, and a true tale,
                     Beleeue me Sir, although not written yet
                     In any booke, but sure it will, I know
                     Some gentle shepheard, moou'd with passion, must
                     Record it to the world, and well it will
                     Become the world to vnderstand the same.
                     And this it is: There was sometimes a nymph,
                     
                        Isulia nam'd, and an Arcadian borne;
                     Faire can I not avouch shee was, but chaste,
                     And honest sure, as the euent will prooue;
                     VVhose mother dying, left her very young
                     Vnto her fathers charge, who carefully
                     
                        Did breed her vp, vntill shee came to yeares
                     Of womanhood, and then prouides a match
                     Both rich, and young, and fit ynough for her.
                  
                  
                     But shee, who to another shepheard had
                     Call'd Sirthis, vow'd her loue, as vnto one
                     Her heart esteem'd more worthy of her loue,
                     Could not by all her fathers meanes be wrought
                     To leaue her choice; and to forgoe her vow.
                  
               
               
                  Thi.
                  No more could my deere Siluia be from me.
               
               
                  Cla.
                  Which caused much affliction to the both,
               
               
                  Thi.
                  And so the selfe same cause did vnto vs.
               
               
                  Cla.
                  This nymph one day, surcharg'd with loue & griefe,
                  Which comonly (the more the pittie) dwel
                  As Inmates both together, walking forth
                  With other maydes, to fish vpon the shore;
                  Estrayes apart, and leaues her companie,
                  To entertaine her selfe with her owne thoughts:
                  And wanders on so far, and out of sight,
                  As shee at length was sudainely surpriz'd
                  By Pyrats, who lay lurking vnderneath
                  Those hollow rocks, expecting there some prize.
                  And notwithstanding all her pittious cryes,
                  Intreaty, teares, and prayes, those feirce men
                  Rent haire, and vaile, and caried her by force
                  Into their ship, which in a little Creeke
                  Hard by, at Anckor lay, and presently hoys'd saile,
                  And so away. Thi. Rent haire and vaile? and so
                  Both haire and vaile of Siluia, I found rent,
                  Which heere I keepe with mee. But now alas
                  
                     What did shee? what became of her my boy?
               
               
                  Cla.
                  VVhen she was thus in shipp'd, and woefully
                  Had cast her eyes about to view that hell
                  Ofhorrour, whereinto she was so sudainely
                  Implung'd, shee spies a women sitting with a child
                  Sucking her breast, which was the captaines wife.
                  To her she creepes, downe at her feet she lyes;
                  O woman, if that name of woman may
                  Moue you to pittie, pittie a poore maid,
                  The most distressed soule that euer breath'd.
                  And saue me from the hands of these feirce men,
                  Let me not be defil'd, and made vncleane,
                  Deare woman now: and I will be to you
                  The faithfull'st slaue that euer mistres seru'd;
                  Neuer poore soule shall be more dutifull,
                  To doe what euer you command, then I.
                  No toile will I refuse; so that I may
                  Keepe this poore body cleane and vndeflowr'd,
                  Which is all I will euer seeke. For know
                  It is not feare of death laies me thus low,
                  But of that stain wil make my death to blu sh.
               
               
                  Thi.
                  VVhat, would not all this mooue the womans hart?
               
               
                  Cla.
                  
                     Al this would nothing moue the womans hart,
                     VVhom yet she would not leaue, but still besought;
                     Oh woman, by that infant at your breast,
                     And by the paines it cost you in the birth,
                     Saue me, as euer you desire to haue
                     Your babe to ioy and prosper in the world.
                     VVhich will the better prosper sure, if you
                     
                        Shall mercy shew, which is with mercy paid.
                  
                  
                     Then kisses shee her feet, then kisses too
                     The infants feete, and oh sweet babe (said shee)
                     Could'st thou but to thy mother speake for me,
                     And craue her to haue pittie on my case;
                     Thou mightst perhaps prevaile with her so much
                     Although I cannot; child, ah could'st thou speake.
                  
                  
                     The infant, whether by her touching it
                     Or by instinct of nature, seeing her weepe,
                     Lookes earnestly vpon her, and then lookes
                     Vpon the mother, then on her againe,
                     And then it cryes, and then on either lookes:
                     Which shee perceauing, blessed childe, said shee,
                     Although thou canst not speake, yet do'st thou cry
                     Vnto thy mother for me. Heare thy childe
                     Deare mother, it's for mee it cryes,
                     It's all the speech it hath: accept those cryes,
                     Saue me at his request from being defilde;
                     Lett pittie moue thee, that thus mooues thy childe.
                  
                  
                     The woman, though by birth and custome rude.
                     Yet hauing veynes of nature, could not bee
                     But peircible, did feele at length the point
                     Of pittie, enter so, as out gusht teares
                     (Not vsuall to sterne eyes) and shee besought
                     Her husband, to bestow on her that prize.
                     VVith safegard of her body, at her will.
                  
                  
                     The captaine seeing his wife, the childe, the nymph,
                     All crying to him in this pittious sort;
                     Felt his rough nature shaken too, and grants
                     
                        His wiues request, and seales his graunt with teares;
                     And so they wept all foure for company,
                     And some beholders stood not with dry eies;
                     Such passion wrought the passion of their prize.
                  
               
               
                  Thi.
                  In troth my boy, and euen thy telling it
                  Moues me likewise, thou doost so feelingly
                  Report the same, as if thou hadst bene by.
                  But I imagine now how this poore nymph
                  VVhen she receiu'd that doome, was comforted?
               
               
                  Cla.
                  Sir, neuer was there pardon, that did take
                  Condemned from the blocke, more ioyfull then
                  This graunt to her. For all her misery
                  Seem'd nothing to the comfort she receiu'd.
                  By being thus saued from impurity:
                  And from the womans feet she would not part,
                  Nor trust her hand to be without some hold
                  Of her, or of the childe, so long as shee remaind
                  VVithin the ship, which in few daies arriues
                  At Alexandria, whence these pirats were;
                  And there this woefull maide for two yeares space
                  Did serue, and truly serue this captains wife,
                  VVho would not lose the benefit of her
                  Attendance for 
                        •
                     ll her profit otherwise.
                  But daring not in such a place as that
                  To trust her selfe in womans habite, crau'd
                  That she might be appareld like a boy,
                  And so she was, and as a boy she seru'd.
               
               
                  Thi.
                  And two yeares tis, since I my Siluia lost.
               
               
                  Cla.
                  
                     At two yeares end, her mistres sends her forth
                     
                        Vnto the Port for some commodities,
                     Which whilst shee sought for, going vp and downe
                     Shee heard some merchant men of Corinth talke,
                     Who spake that language the Arcadians did,
                     And were next neighbours of one continent.
                  
                  
                     To them all rapt with passion, down she kneeles,
                     Tels them shee was a poore distressed boy,
                     Borne in Arcadia, and by Pirats tooke
                     And made a slaue in Egypt, and besought
                     Them, as they fathers were of children, or
                     Did hold their natiue countrey deare, they would
                     Take pity on her, and releeue her youth
                     From that sad seruitude wherein shee liu'd:
                     For which shee hop'd that shee had friends aliue
                     Would thanke them one day, & reward them too;
                     If not, yet that, shee knew the heauens would doe.
                     The merchants mou'd with pity of her case,
                     Being ready to depart, tooke her with them,
                     And landed her vpon her countrey coast,
                     VVhere when shee found her selfe, shee prostrate fals,
                     Kisses the ground, thankes giues vnto the Gods,
                     Thankes them who had beene her deliuerers.
                  
                  
                     And on shee trudges through the desart woods,
                     Climes ouer craggie rockes, and mountaines steep,
                     VVades thorough riuers, struggles thorough bogs,
                     Sustained onely by the force of loue;
                     Vntill shee came vnto the natiue plaines,
                     Vnto the fields, where first shee drew her breath.
                  
                  
                     There lifts shee vp her eyes, salutes the ayre,
                     
                        Salutes the trees, the bushes, flowres, and all:
                     And oh deare Sirthis, here I am, said shee,
                     Here, notwithstanding all my miseries.
                     I am the same I was to thee; a pure,
                     A chaste, and spotlesse maide: oh that I may
                     Finde thee the man, thou didst professe to be.
                  
               
               
                  Thi.
                  Or else no man; for boy who truly loues,
                  Must euer so; that dye will neuer out:
                  And who but would loue truly such a soule?
               
               
                  Cla.
                  But now, the better to haue notice how
                  The state of things then stood, and not in haste
                  To cast her selfe on new incumbrances,
                  Shee kept her habite still, and put her selfe
                  To serue a nymph, of whom shee had made choice
                  Till time were fitting to reueale her selfe.
               
               
                  Thi.
                  This may be Siluias case; this may be shee;
                  But it is not: let me consider well:
                  The teller, and the circumstance agree.
               
            
            
               SCEN. III.
               Montanus. Thirsis. Chorus.
               AH sirrha, haue I found you? are you here
               You princock boy? and with your garland on?
               Doth this attire become your peeuish head?
               Come, I must teach you better manners, boy.
               He stabs Clarindo, and rashes off his garland.
               
                  So Phillis, I haue done my taske, and here
               I bring the Trophey to confirme the same.
               
                  Thi.
                  Ah monster man, vile wretch, what hast thou done?
                  Alas, in what a strait am I ingaged here?
                  If I pursue reuenge, l leaue to saue.
                  Help, help, you gentle swaines, if any now be neere, beast
                  Help, help: ah harke cuē Eccho helps me crie
               
               
                  Cho.
                  What meanes this outcrie? sure some sauage
                  Disturbs our heards, or else some wolfe hath seaz'd
                  Vpon a Lambe. Thi. A worse thing then a wolfe,
                  More bloudy then a beast, hath murthered here
                  A gentler creature then a lambe: therefore
                  Good swaines pursue, pursue the homicide.
                  That ougly wretch, Montanus, who hath stabd
                  This sily creature here, at vnawares.
               
               
                  Cho.
                  
                     Montanus? why, we met him but euen now,
                  Deckt with a garland, grumbling to himselfe;
                  We will attach that villaine presently:
                  Come sirs, make haste, and let vs after him.
               
            
            
               SCEN. IIII.
               Palaemon. Thirsis.
               
                  ALas, what accident is here falne out?
                  My deere friend Thirsis, how comes this to passe?
               
               
                  Thi.
                  That monster man Montanus, here hath stab'd
                  
                     A harmlesse youth, in message sent to me.
                  Now good Palaemon help me hold him vp,
                  And see if that we can recouer him.
               
               
                  Pal.
                  It may be Thirsis, more his feare then hurt:
                  Stay him a while, and I will haste and send
                  For Lamia, who with oyntments, oyle and herbes
                  If any help remayne, will help him sure.
               
               
                  Thi.
                  
                     Do good Palaemon, make what haste you may
                     Seeke out for help, and be not long away.
                     Alas sweet boy, that thou should'st euer haue
                     So hard misfortune, comming vnto me,
                     And end thy tale with this sad tragedie;
                     That tale which well resembled Siluias case,
                     VVhich thou resemblest; for such browes had she.
                     Such a proportion'd face, and such a necke.
                  
                  
                     VVhat haue we here, the mole of Siluia too?
                     VVhat and her breasts? what? and her haire? what all?
                     All Siluia? yes, all Siluia, and all dead.
                     And art thou thus return'd againe to me?
                     Art thou thy selfe, that strange deliuered nymphe?
                     And didst thou come to tell me thine escape
                     From death to die before me? had I not
                     Ynough to doe, to wayle reported harmes
                     But thou must come to bleed within my armes?
                     VVas not one death sufficient for my greifes
                     But that thou must die twice? why thou wert dead
                     To me before. Why? must thou dye againe?
                     Ah, better had it bene still to be lost
                     Then thus to haue bene found; yet better found
                     
                        Though thus, then so lost as was thought before.
                     For howsoeuer, now I haue thee yet
                     Though in the saddest fashion that may be.
                     Yet Siluia now I haue thee, and will I
                     No more for euer part with thee againe:
                     And we this benefit shall haue thereby
                     Though fate would not permit vs both to haue
                     Onebed, yet Siluia we shall haue one graue.
                     And that is something, and much more then I
                     Expected euer could haue come to passe.
                  
                  
                     And sure the gods but only sent thee thus
                     To fetch me; and to take me hence with thee;
                     And Siluia so thou shalt. I ready am
                     T'accompany thy soule, and that with speed.
                     The strings I feele, are all dissolu'd, that hold
                     This wofull heart, reseru'd it seemes for this:
                     And well reseru'd, for this so deare an end.
                  
               
            
            
               SCEN. V.
               Chorus. Palaemon.
               SO, we haue tooke the villaine, and him bound
               Fast to an Oake, as rugged as himselfe.
               And there he stares and gapes in th'ayre, and raues
               Like a wilde beast, that's taken in the toyle:
               And so he shall remaine, till time we see
               
                  What will become of this his sauage act.
               
                  Pa:
                  
                     Cheere Thirsis, Lamia will come presently
                     And bring the best preseruatiues she hath.
                     VVhat now? VVho lyes discouered here? Ay me,
                     A woman dead? Is this that boy transform'd?
                     VVhy, this is Siluia, O good Thirsis how
                     Comes this to passe? Friend Thirsis, Thirsis speake.
                     Good Thirsis tell me. Out alas he sownes,
                     As well as she, and both seeme gone alike.
                  
                  
                     Come gentle heards men, come and carry them
                     To yonder sheep-cote quickly, that we may
                     (If possible) recouer them againe.
                     If not performe those rites that appertaine
                     Vnto so rare a couple. Come my friends, make hast.
                  
               
               
                  The fourth Song of the Chorus.
                  
                     
                        Qu. Were euer chast and honest hearts
                     Expos'd vnto so great distresses?
                     
                        Ans. Yes: they that act the worthiest parts,
                     Most commonly haue worst successes.
                     Great fortunes follow not the best,
                     It's vertue that is most distrest.
                  
                  
                     Then fortune why doe we admire
                     The glory of thy great excesses?
                     Since by thee what men acquire
                     Thy worke and not their worths expresses.
                     Nor dost thou raise them for their good:
                     But t'haue their illes more vnderstood.
                  
               
            
         
         
            
               
               ACT. V. SCAEN. I.
               Chorus. Palaemon.
               
                  DId euer yet Arcadia heare before
                  Of two so worthie louers, as we find
                  
                     Thirsis and Siluia were? or euer had
                  Cleare truth, and simple constant honesty,
                  So lamentable an euent as this?
                  But here comes forth Palaemon, we shall now
                  Learne all of him, what hath been done within.
               
               
                  Pal.
                  
                     Goe Pollio, summon all th' Arcadia youth
                     Here, round about, and will them to prepare
                     To celebrate with all delights they can
                     This ioyfull houre, that hath restord to vs
                     The worthiest paire of hearts that euer were,
                  
                  
                     Will them to shew the height of musiques art,
                     And all the straines of cunning they can shew:
                     That we may make these rockes and hilles about,
                     Ring with the Eccho of redoubled notes.
                  
                  
                     And will Charinus and Medorus too,
                     The aged parents of this worthie paire,
                     To come with speed, whose ioy, good soules, wil be
                     More then their speed; and yet their speed I know,
                     Will be beyond th'allowance of their yeeres,
                     When they shall vnderstand this happie newes.
                  
                  
                     
                     And summon likewise all the traine of nymphes
                     That glorifie our plaines, and all that can
                     Giue honour to this day.
                     Goe Pollio hast away, and as you goe
                     Vnbind Montanus that rude sauage swaine:
                     And though he be vnworthie to be here,
                     Yet let him come. He hath bene in his daies
                     Held a good fellow, howsoeuer now
                     His rage and loue transported him in this.
                  
               
               
                  Cho.
                  
                     Poloemon, we are glad to see you thus
                  Delightfull, now we hope there is good newes.
               
               
                  Pal.
                  
                     Good newes my friends, and I wil tell it you,
                     
                        Siluia and Thirsis being to my cottage brought,
                     The skilfull Lamia comes and searcht the wound
                     Which Siluia had receiu'd of this rude swaine,
                     And finding it not deadly she applyde
                     Those remedies she knew of best effect.
                     And bindes it vp, and powres into her mouth
                     Such cordiall waters as reuiue the spirits:
                     And so much wrought, as she at length perceiu'd
                     Life was not quite gone out, but lay opprest.
                  
                  
                     With like indeuours we on Thirsis worke,
                     And ministred like Cordials vnto him:
                     At length we might heare Siluia fetch a groane,
                     And there withal Thirsis perceiu'd to moue,
                     Then Thirsis fet a groane, and Siluia mou'd
                     As if their liues were made both of one peece.
                     Whereat we ioyd, and then remoud' and set
                     
                        Each before other, & held vp their heads,
                     And chaf'd their temples, rub'd and stroak'd their cheekes:
                  
                  
                     Wherewith first Siluia casts vp her dimme eyes,
                     And presently did Thirsis lift vp his.
                     And then againe they both together sigh'd,
                     And each on other fixt an vnseeing eye:
                     For yet t'was scarse the twylight of their new
                     Returning day, out of the night of death.
                     And though they saw, they did not yet perceiue
                     Each other, and yet both turn'd to one point
                     As toucht alike, and held their lookes direct.
                     At length we might perceiue, as life began
                     T'appeare; and make the morning in their eyes,
                     Their beames were cleerer, & their opener lookes
                     Did shew as if they tooke some little note
                     Of each the other: yet not so as they
                     Could thorowly discerne who themselues were.
                  
                  
                     And then we tooke and ioynd their hands in one,
                     And held them so a while, vntill we fealt
                     How euen each others touch, the motion gaue
                     Vnto their feeling, and they trembling wrung
                     Their hands together, and so held them lockt,
                     Lookt still vpon each other, but no words at all.
                  
                  
                     Then we call'd out to Thirsis Thirsis looke,
                     It is thy Siluia thou here holdst, she is
                     Return'd reuiu'd, and safe. Siluia, behold thou hast
                     Thy Thirsis, and shalt euer haue him thine.
                  
                  
                     Then did we set them both vpon their feet
                     
                        And there they stood in act, euen as before
                     Looking vpon each other hand in hand:
                     At last we saw a blushing red appeare
                     In both their cheekes, which sense sent as a Iampe
                     To light their vnderstanding. And forthwith
                     The teares gusht forth their eies, which hindred thē
                     
                     A while from seeing each other, till they had
                     Cleared them againe. And then as if new wak'd
                     From out a fearefull dreame, they stand and doubt
                     Whether they were awake indeed, or else
                     Still in a dreame, distrusting their owne eyes.
                     Their long indured miseries, would not
                     Let them belieue their sudden happinesse,
                     Although they saw it: till with much adoe
                     They had confirm'd their credit, and had kist
                     Each other and imbrac'd, and kist againe,
                     And yet still dumbe: their ioy now seem'd to be
                     Too busie with their thoughts, t'allow them words.
                  
                  
                     And then they walkt a little, then stood still,
                     Then walkt againe, and still held other fast
                     As if they fear'd, they should be lost againe.
                  
                  
                     And when at last they spake, it was but thus,
                     O Siluia, and O Thirsis, and there stopt.
                  
                  
                     VVe, lest our sight and presence
                     So many) hinder might the passage of being there
                     Their modest, simple, and vnpractis'd loue,
                     Came all our way, and onely Lamia left
                     VVhose spirit, and that sufficient skill she hath
                     Will serue no doubt, to see they shall doe well.
                  
               
               
                  
                  Cho.
                  VVell may they do deere couple, who haue thus
                  Grac'd our Arcadia with their faithfulnes.
               
            
            
               SCAEN. II.
               Phillis. Lidia. Cloris.
               
                  VVHat shall we now do Lidia? now am I
                  Vtterly sham'd: this youth turn'd woman is,
                  
                     Clarindo, Siluia is become; how now?
                  Can I for euer looke on her againe?
                  Or come in any company for shame?
                  Now must I needs be made a common ieast
                  And laughing stocke to euery one that shall
                  But heare how grossely I behau'd my selfe.
               
               
                  Lid.
                  Faith Phillis asit is falne out, your case
                  Is very crazie, and to make it whole
                  There is no way but euen to laugh it out,
                  And set as good a face, as you can doe
                  Vpon the matter, and say thus: How you
                  Knew well inough it was no man whom you
                  Affected so, who neuer could loue man,
                  Nor euer would, and that by meere instinct
                  And simpathie of Sexe, you fancied him.
                  So put 
                        •
                     t off, and turne it to a ieast,
               
               
                  Phi.
                  That shall I neuer doe but euer blush
                  At her, to thinke what she will thinke of me,
                  
                     VVho did bewray my selfe so foolishly.
               
               
                  Lid.
                  Are you here Cloris, you are blest to day
                  For being mistres vnto such a boy:
                  You may reioyce that euer this fell out.
               
               
                  Clo.
                  Reioyce? ah Lidia, neuer was there nymphe
                  Had more occasion to be sad then I,
                  For I am quite vndone and sham'd hereby.
                  For I imploy'd this my supposed boy
                  In message vnto Thirsis, whom I lou'd
                  I must confesse, more dearely then my life:
                  And told him all the secrets of my heart.
                  And therefore with what face can euer I
                  Looke vpon them that know thus much by me?
                  No Lidia, I will now take Thirsis course:
                  Hide me for euer in these desert woods,
                  And neuer come in companie againe;
                  They shall not laugh at me in their great ioyes.
               
               
                  Lid.
                  
                     But Cloris, I would laugh with them, were I as you,
                     And how soeuer felt my selfe within,
                     Yet would I seeme be otherwise without.
                     Cannot you say, that you knew well enough
                     How it was Siluia that you intertain'd,
                     Although you would not seeme to take such note;
                     And thereupon imploy'd her in that sort
                     To Thirsis, knowing who it was would giue
                     To him the greatest comfort vpon earth.
                  
                  
                     And thus faire Nimphes you fitly may excuse
                     These simple slips, and know that they shall still
                     Haue crosses with their piles, who thus doe play
                     
                        Their fortunes with their loues, as you two did:
                     But you must frame your countenance thereto
                     And looke with other faces then their owne.
                     As many else doe here, who in their parts
                     Set shining lookes vpon their clowdy hearts,
                     And let vs mixe vs with this company
                     That here appeares with mirth and iollitie.
                  
               
               
                  The Song of the fifth Chorus.
                  
                     Who euer saw so faire a sight,
                     Loue and vertue met aright:
                     And that wonder Constancie,
                     Like a Comet to the eye
                     Seldome euer seene so bright?
                     Sound out aloud so rare a thing,
                     That all the Hilles and Vales may ring.
                  
                  
                     Looke, Louers looke, with passion see,
                     If that any such there bee:
                     As there cannot but be such
                     Who doe feele that noble touch
                     In this glorious companie,
                     Sound out aloud, &c.
                  
               
            
         
         FINIS.
      
      
         
            Pag 51. line 24 & page 54. line 28. for louenesse, reade lonenesse. Ib. p. 54. l. 6. for desci
                     •
                  e r. de
                     •••
                  e p. 59. l. 23 put out, all. p. 62. l 7. at the verses end, adde, help. p. 63. l. 6. r. oyles.
            
            
         
      
   