
      
         
            
            
            THE VISION OF the 12. Goddesses, presented in a Maske the 8. of Ianuary, at Hampton Court: By the Queenes most excellent Maiestie, and her Ladies.
            
            LONDON
            Printed by T. C. for Simon Waterson, and are to be sold at his Sop in Pauls Churchyard, at the Signe of the Crowne. 1604.
         
         
            
            
            TO THE RIGHT HONOrable the Ladie Lucie, Countesse of Bedford.
            
            
               Madame.
            
            IN respect of the vnmannerly presumption of an indiscrect Printer, who without warrant hath divulged the late shewe at Court, presented the 8. of Ianuary, by the Queenes Maiestie and her Ladies, and the same verie disorderly set forth: I thought it not amisse seeing it would otherwise passe abroad, to the preiudice both of the Maske and the inuention, to describe the whole forme thereof in all points as it was then performed, and as the world well knowes very worthily performed, by a most magnisicēt Queen, whose heroicall spirit, and bountie onely gaue it so faire, an execution as it had. Seeing also that these ornaments and delights of peace are in their season, as fit to entertaine the worlde, and deserue to be made memorable as well

as grauer actions, both of them cōcurring to the decking & furnishing of glorie, and Maiestie, as the necessary complements requisit for State and Greatnes.
            And therfore first I will deliuer the intent and scope of the project: Which was onely to present the figure of those blessings, with the wish of their encrease and continuance, which this mightie kingdome now enioyes by the benefit of his most gratious Maiestie, by whom we haue this glory of peace, with the accession of so great state & power. And to expresse the same, there were deuised 12. Goddesses, vnder whose Images former times haue represented the seuerall gifts of heauen, and erected Temples, Altars, & Figures vnto them, as vnto diuine powers, in the shape & name of women. As vnto Iuno the Goddesse of Empire & regnorum praesedi, they attributed that blessing of power. To Pallas, wisedome and defence: to Venus, loue & amitie: to Vesta, Religion: to Diana, the gift of Chastitie: to Proserpina riches: to Macaria, felicitie: to Concordia, the vnion of hearts. Astraea, Iustice: Flora, the beauties of the earth. Ceres plentie. To Tethis power by Sea.
            
               And though these Images haue oftentimes diuers significatiōs, yet it being not our purpose to represent them, with all those curious and superfluous obseruations, we tooke them only to serue as Hierogliphicqs for our present intention, according to some one property that fitted our occasiō, without obseruing other their misticall interpretations, wherein the Authors themselues are so irrigular & confused, as the best Mytheologers, who wil make somewhat to seem any thing, are so vnfaithful to themselues, as they haue left vs no certain way at all, but a tract of cō
               fusion to take our course at aduenture. And therfore owing no homage to their intricate obseruations, we were left at libertie to take no other knowledge of them, then fitted our present purpose, nor were tyed by any lawes of Heraldry to range thē otherwise in their precedencies, then they fell out to stand with the nature of the matter in hand. And in these cases it may well seeme ingenerosum sapere solum ex commentarijs quasi maiorūinuenta industriae nostrae viā precluserit, quasi in nobis offaeta sit vis naturae, nihil exseparere, or that there can be nothing done authenticall, vnles we obserue al the strict rules of the booke.
            
               And therefore we tooke their aptest representations that lay best and easiest for vs. And first presented the Hieroglephicq of Empire & dominion, as the ground & matter whereon this glory of State is built. Then those blessings, and beauties that preserue and adorne it: As armed policie, loue, Religion, Chastitie, wealth, happinesse, Concord, Iustice, florishing seasons, plentie: and lastly power by sea, as to imbound and circle this greatnes of dominion by land.
            And to this purpose were these Goddesses thus presented in their proper & seuerall attyres, bringing in their hands the particular figures of their power which they gaue to the Temple of Peace, erected vpō 4. pillars, representing the 4. Vertues that supported a Globe of the earth.
            First Iuno in a skie-colour mantle imbrodered with gold, and figured with Peacocks feathers, wearing a Crowne of golde on her head, presents a Scepter.
            2 Pallas (which was the person her Maiestie chose to represent) was attyred in a blew mantle, with a siluer imbrodery of al weapōs and engines of war, with a helmet-dressing on her head, and presents a Launce and Target.
            
               3 Venus, in a Mantle of Doue-colour, and siluer, imbrodered with Doues, presented (in stead of her Cestus, the girdle of Amitie) a Skarffe of diuers colours.
            4 Vesta, in a white Mantle imbrodered with gold-flames, with a dressing like a Nun, presented a burning Lampe in one hand, and a Booke in the other.
            5 Diana, in a greene Mantle imbrodered with siluer halfe Moones, and a croissant of pearle on her head: presents a Bow and a Quiuer.
            6 Proserpina, in a blacke Mantle imbrodered with gold-flames, with a crowne of gold on her head: presented a Myne of gold ore.
            7 Macaria, the Goddesse of Felicitie, in a Mantle of purple and siluer, imbrodered with the Figures of Plentie and Wisedome, (which concurre to the making of true happinesse) presents a Cadaceum with the Figure of abundance.
            
               8 Concordia, in a partie coloured Mantle of Crimson and White (the colours of England and Scotland ioyned) imbrodered with siluer, hands in hand, with a dressing likewise of partie coloured Roses, a Branch whereof in a wreath or knot she presented.
            9 Astraea, in a Mantle Crimson, with a siluer imbroderie, Figuring the Sword and Balance (as the Characters of Iustice) which she presented.
            10 Flora, in a Mantle of diuers colours, imbrodered with all sorts of Flowers, presents a Pot of Flowers.
            11 Ceres, in Straw colour & siluer imbrodery, with eares of Corne, and a dressing of the same, presents a Sickle.
            12 Tethes, In a Mantle of Sea-greene, with a siluer imbrodery of Waues, and a dressing of Reedes, presents a Trident.
            Now for the introducing this Shewe: It was deuised that the Night represented in

a blacke vesture set with Starres, should arise from belowe, and come towards the vpper end of the Hall: there to waken her sonne Somnus, sleeping in his Caue, as the Proëm to the Visiō. Which Figures when they are thus presented in humane bodyes, as all Vertues, Vices, Passions Knowledges, and whatsoeuer Abstracts else in imaginatiō are, which we would make visible, we produce them, vsing humane actions, & euen Sleepe it selie (which might seeme improperly to exercise waking motions) hath beene often shewed vs in that manner, with speech and gesture. As for example:

                  
                     Exccussit tandem sibi se; cubitoque leuatus
                     Quid veniat (cognouit enim) Scitatur.
                  
                  
                     Intanto soprauenne, & gli occhi chiuse
                     A i Signori, & a i Sergenti il pigro Sonno.
                  
               
            
            And in another place:

                  
                     Il Sonno viene, & Sparso il corpo stanco
                     Colramo intimo nel liquor di Lethe.
                  
               
            
            So there, Sleepe is brought in, as a body, vsing speech & motion: and it was no more improper in this forme to make him walke,

and stand, or speake, then it is to giue voyce or passion to dead men, Ghosts, Trees, and Stones: and therefore in such matters of Shewes, these like Caracters (in what forme soeuer they be drawne) serue vs but to read the intention of what wee would represent: as in this proiect of ours, Night and Sleepe were to produce a Vision, an effect proper to their power, & fit to shadow our purpose, for that these apparitions and shewes are but as imaginations, and dreames that portend our affections, and dreames are neuer in all points agreeing right with waking actions: and therefore were they aptest to shadow whatsoeuer error might bee herein presented. And therefore was Sleepe (as hee is described by Philostratus in Amphirai imagine) apparelled in a white thinne Vesture cast ouer a blacke, to signifie both the day and the night, with wings of the same colour, a Garland of Poppy on his head, and in stead of his yuoyrie & transparent horne, he was shewed bearing a black Wand in the left hand, and a white in the other, to effect either confused or significant dreames, according to that inuocation of Statius.
               
                  
                  
                     —Nec te totas infundere pennas
                     Luminibus compello meis, hoc turba prccatur-
                     Latior, extremo me tange cacumine virga.
                  
               
And also agreeing to that of Sil. Ital.
               
                  —Tangens Lethea tempor a Virga.
                  
               
            
            And in this actiō did he here vse his white Wand, as to infuse significant Visions to entertain the Spectators, and so made them seeme to see there a Temple, with a Sybilla therin attending vpon the Sacrifices; which done, Iris (the Messenger of Iuno) descends from the top of a Mountaine raised at the lower end of the Hall, and marching vp to to the Temple of Peace, giues notice to the Sybilla of the comming of the Goddesses, & withall deliuers her a Prospectiue, wherin she might behold the Figures of their Deities, and thereby describe them; to the end that at their descending, there might be no stay or hinderance of their Motion, which was to be carryed without any interruption, to the action of other entertainments that were to depend one of another, during the the whole Shewe: and that the eyes of the Spectators might not beguile their eares, as

                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
in such cases it euer happens, whiles the pompe and splendor of the sight takes vp all the intention without regard what is spoken, and therefore was it thought fit their descriptions should bee deliuered by the Sybills.
            
            Which as soone as shee had ended, the three Graces in siluer Robes with white Torches, appeared on the top of the mountaine, descending hand in hand before the Goddesses; who likewise followed three and three, as in a number dedicated vnto Sanctitie and an incorpore all nature, whereas the Dual, Hierogliphicè proimmudis accipitur. And betweene euery ranke of Goddesses, marched three Torch-bearers in the like seuerall colours, their heads and Robes all dect with Starres, and in their descending, the Cornets sitting in the Concaues of the Mountaine, and seene but to their brests, in the habit of Satyres, soūded a stately March, which continued vntill the Goddesses were approached inst before the Temple, & then ceased, when the Consort Musicke (placed in the Cupula thereof, out of sight) began: whereunto the 3. Graces retyring themselues aside, sang, whiles the Goddesses one after

an other with solemne pace aseended vp into the Temple, and deliuering their presents to the Sybilla (as it were but in passing by) returned downe into the midst of the Hall, preparing themselues to their dance, which (assoon as the Graces had ended their Song) they began to the Musicke of the Violls and Lutes, placed on one side of the Hal. Which dāce being performed with great maiesty & Art, consisting of diuers strains, fram'd vnto motiōs circular, square, triāgular, with other proportiōs exceeding rare & full of variety; the Goddesses made a pawse, casting themselues into a circle, whilst the Graces againe sang to the Musicke of the Temple, and prepared to take out the Lords to daunce. With whō after they had performed certain Measures, Galliards and Curranto's, Iris againe comes and giues notice of their pleasure to depart: whose speech ended, they drew thē
               selues againe into another short dance, with some few pleasant changes, still retyring thē toward the foote of the Mountaine, which they ascended in that same maner as they came downe, whilest the Cornets taking their Notes frō the ceasing of the Musick below, sounded another delightfull Marche.
            
               And thus Madame, haue I briefly deliuered, both the reason and manner of this Maske; as well to satisfie the desire of those who could not well note the cariage of these passages, by reason (as I sayd) the present pompe and splendor entertain'd them otherwise (as that which is most regardfull in these Shewes) wherein (by the vnpartiall opinion of all the beholders Strangers and others) it was not inferiour to the best that euer was presented in Christendome: as also to giue vp my accoūt hereof vnto your Honour, whereby I might cleere the reckening of any imputation that might be layd vpon your iudgement, for preferring such a one, to her MAIESTIE in this imployment, as could giue no reason for what was done.
            And for the captious Censurers, I regard not what they can say, who commonly can do little els but say; and if their deepe iudgements euer serue them to produce any thing, they must stand on the same Stage of Censure with other men, and peraduenture performe no such great wonders as they would make vs beleeue: and I comfort my selfe in this, that in Court I know not any,

vnder him, who acts the greatest partes) that is not obnoxious to enuie, & a sinister interpretation. And whosoeuer striues to shewe most wit about these Puntillos of Dreames and showes, are sure sicke of a disease they cannot hide, & would faine haue the world to thinke them very deeply learned in all misteries whatsoeuer. And peraduenture they thinke themselues so, which if they doe, they are in a farre worse case then they imagine; Non potest non indoctus esse qui se doctum credit. And let vs labour to shew neuer so much skill or Art, our weaknesses and ignorance will be seene, whatsoeuer couering wee cast ouer it. And yet in these matters of shewes (though they bee that which most entertaine the world) there needs no such exact sufficiency in this kind. For, Ludit istis animus, non proficit. And therefore, Madame, I wil no longer idlely hold you therein, but refer you to the speeches, & so to your better delights, as one who must euer acknowledge my selfe especially bound vnto your Honour.
            
               Sam: Daniel.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
            
               The Night represented, in a blacke Vesture set with starres, comes and wakens her sonne Somnus, (sleeping in his Caue) with this speech.
            
               AWake dark sleep, rouse thee frō out this Caue;
               Thy Mother Night that bred thee in her
               And fed thee first with silence & with case, (womb
               Doth here thy shadowing operations craue:
               And therefore wake my Sonne, awake, and come
               Strike with thy Horny wand, the spirits of these
               That here expect some pleasing nouelties:
               And make their slumber to beget strange sights,
               Strange visions and vnvsuall properties.
               Vnseene of latters Ages, auntient Rytes.
               Of gifts diuine, wrapt vp in mysteries.
               Make this to seeme a Temple in their sight,
               VVhose mayne support, holy, Religion frame:
               And 1 Wisdome, 2 Courage, 3 Temperance, & 4 Right,
               
               Make seeme the Pillars that sustaine the same.
               Shadow some sybill to attend the Rytes,
               And to describe the Powers that shall resort,
               VVith th'interpretation of the benefits
               They bring in Clowdes, & what they do import.
               
                  Yet make them to portend the true desire
               Of those that wish them waking reall things:
               Whilcst I wil hoou'ring, here a-loofe retire
               And couer all things with my sable Wings.
            
            
               Somnus.
               DEare Mother Night, I your commandement
               Obay, and Dreames t'interpret Dreames will make,
               As waking curiositie is woont.
               Though better dreame a sleep, thē dreame awake.
               And this white horny Wand shall work the deed;
               Whose power doth Figures of the light present:
               When from this sable radius doth proceed
               Nought but confused shewes, to no intent.
               Be this a Temple; there Sybisla stand,
               Preparing reuerent Rytes with holy hand,
               And so bright visions go, and entertaine
               Al round about, whilest I'le to sleepe againe.
            
            
               Iris, the Messenger of the Goddesses discending from the Mount, where they were assembled, (dect like the Raine-bow) spake as followeth.
            
               I The daughter of Wonder, (now made the Messenger of Power) am here discended, to signifie the cōming of a Coelestial presence of Goddesses, determined to visit this faire Temple of Peace, which holy hands & deuout desires, haue dedicated to vnitie and concord. And leauing to shewe themselues any more in Sames, Ida, Paphos, their antient delighting-places of Greece, & Asia, made

now the seats of Barbarizme & spoyle, vouchsafe to recreat themselues vpon this Westerne Mount of mighty BRITTANNY, the Land of ciuil Musick and of rest, and are pleased to appeare in the selfe-same Figures, wherin antiquitie hath formerly cloathed thē, and as they haue been cast in the imagination of piety, who hath giuē mortall shapes to the gifts & effects of an eternall power, for that those beautifull Caracters of sense were easier to be read then their mysticall Ideas, dispersed in that wide, and imcomprehensible volume of Nature.
               And well haue mortall men apparelled, all the Graces, all the Blessings, all Vertues, with that shape wherein themselues are much delighted, & which worke the best Motions, and best represent the beautie of heauenly Powers.
               And therfore reuerent Prophetesse, that here attendest vpon the deuotions of this Place, prepare thy self for those Rytes that appertaine to thy function, and the honour of such Deities, and to the end thou mayst haue a fore-notion what Powers, & who they are that come, take here this Prospectiue, and therein note and tell what thou seest: for well mayest thou there obserue their shadowes, but their presence wil bereaue thee of all, saue admiration and amazement, for who can looke vpon such Powers and speake? And so I leaue thee.
            
            
               
               Sybilla, hauing receiued this Message, and the Prospectiue, vseth these words.
            
               WHAT haue I seene? where am I? or do I see at all? or am I any where? was this Iris, (the Messenger of Iuno) or els but a fantasme or imagination? will the diuine Goddesses vouchsafe to visit this poore Temple? Shall I be blest, to entertaine so great Powers? it can bee but a Dreame: yet so great Powers haue blest, as humble roofes, & vse, out of no other respect, then their owne gracefulnes to shine where they will. But what Prospectiue is this? or what shall I herein see? Oh admirable Powers! what sights are these?
               Iuno.
               
                  FIRST here Imperiall Iuno in her Chayre,
                  With Septer of cōmand for Kingdomes large:
                  Descends all clad in colours of the Ayre,
                  Crown'd with bright Stars, to signifie her charge.
               
               Pallas.
               
                  NEXT war-like Pallas, in her Helmet drest
                  With Lance of winning, Target of defence:
                  In whome both Wit and Courage are exprest,
                  To get with glory, hold with Prouidence.
               
               
                  Venus.
               
                  THEN louely Venus in bright Maiestie,
                  Appeares with milde aspect, in Doue-like
                  With th'all combyning Skarffe of Amitie, (hue:
                  T'ingird strange Nations with affections true.
               
               Vesta.
               
                  NEXT Holy Vesla, with her flames of Zeale
                  Presents her selfe, clad in white Puritie:
                  Whose booke, the soules sweet comfort, doth re-
                  By the euer-burning Lampe of Pietie. (ueale
               
               Diana.
               
                  THEN chaste Diana, in her Robes of greene,
                  With weapons of the Wood her self addrests
                  To blesse the Forrests, where her power is seene,
                  In peace with all the world, but Sauage beasts.
               
               Proserpina.
               
                  NEXT rich Proserpina, with flames of gold,
                  Whose state altho within the earth, yet she
                  Comes from aboue, & in her hand doth hold
                  The Myne of wealth, with cheerfull Maiestie.
               
               
                  Macaria.
               
                  THEN all in purple Robes, rich Happinesse
                  Next her appeares, bearing in either hand,
                  Th'Ensignes both of wealth, and wits t'expresse,
                  That by them both, her Maiestie doth stand.
               
               Concordia.
               
                  NEXT all in partie-coloured Robes appeares,
                  In white and crimson, gracefull Concord drest
                  With knots of Vnion, and in hand she bearcs
                  The happy joyned Roses of our rest.
               
               Astrea.
               
                  CLeare-eyed Astrea, nex, t with reuerent brow
                  Clad in Coelestiall hue, (which best she likes)
                  Comes with her Ballance, and her sword to shew
                  That first her judgement weighs before it strikes.
               
               Flora.
               
                  THen cheerefull Flora, all adorn'd with flowers,
                  Who cloaths the earth with beautie & delight
                  In thousand sundry suits, whilst shining houres
                  Will skarce afford a darknesse to the night.
               
               
                  Ceres.
               
                  NExt plenteous Ceres in her Haruest weede,
                  Crown'd with th'increase of what she gaue to
                  To gratitude & faith: in whom we read, (keepe:
                  VVho sowes on Vertue shall with glory reape.
               
               Tethis.
               
                  LAstly comes Tethis, Albious fairest loue,
                  Whō she in faithfull Armes deigne t'embrace
                  And brings the Trydent of her Power, t'approue
                  The kinde respect she hath to do him grace.
               
               
                  Thus haue I read their shadowes, but behold!
                  In glory, where they come as Iris tolde!
               
            
            
               The three Graces, comming to the vpper part of the Hall, sang this Song, while the Goddesses deliuered their Presents.
            Gratia sum 1 dantium, 2 reddentiū, 3 & promerentium.
            
               1
               DEsert, Reward, and Gratitude,
               The Graces of Societie;
               Do here with hand in hand conclude
               The blessed chaine of Amitie:
               For we deserue, we giue, we thanke,
               Thanks, Gifts, Deserts, thus ioyne in ranke.
            
            
               2
               We yeeld the splendant raijes of light,
               Vnto these blessings that descend:
               The grace whereof with more delight,
               The well disposing doth commend;
               Whilst Gratitude, Rewards, Deserts,
               Please, winne, draw on, & couple hearts.
            
            
               3
               For worth and power and due respect,
               Deserues, bestowes, returnes with Grace:
               The meed, reward, the kinde effect,
               That giue the world a cheerfull face,
               And turning in this course of right,
               Make Vertue moue with true delight.
            
            
               The Song being ended, and the Maskers in the middest of the Hall, disposing themselues to their Daunce: Sybilla hauing placed ther seuerall Presents on the Altar, vtterreth these words.
            
               OPower of powers, grāt to our vowes we pray,
               That these faire blessings which we now erect
               In Figures left vs here, in substance may
               Be those great props of glory and respect.
               1 Let kingdomes large, 2 let armed policie, (white
               3 Milde loue, 4 true Zeale, 5 right shouting at the
               Of braue disignes: 6 let wealth, 7 felicitie,
               8 Iustice, 9 & cōcord, 10 pleasure, 11 plenty, 12 might
               
               
                  And power by Sea, with Grace proportionate,
               Make glorious both the Soueraigne & his State.
            
            
               After this the Maskers danced their owne Measures, which being ended, and they ready to take 
                  ••
               t the Lords, the 3. Graces sang.
            
               
                  WHiles worth with honor make their choise
                  For measured motions ordred right,
                  Now let vs likewise giue a voyce,
                  Vnto the touch of our delight.
               
               
                  For comforts lock't vp without sound,
                  Are th'vnborne children of the thought:
                  Like vnto Treasures neuer found
                  That buryed lowe are left forgot.
               
               
                  VVhere words, our glory doth not shew,
                  (There) like braue Actions without Fame;
                  It seemes as Plants not set to grow,
                  Oras a Tombe without a Name.
               
            
            
               The Maskers hauing ended their dauncing wi
                  ••
                the Lordes, Iris giues warning of their departure.
            
               Iris.
               AS I was the ioyfull Messenger to notifie the comming, so am I now the same of the departure of these diuine powers. Who hauing cloathed themselues with these apparances, doe now returne back againe to the Spheres of their owne being from, whence they came. But yet, of my selfe, this much I must reueale, though against the warrant of a Messenger; who I knowe had better to faile in obedience then in presumption, that these Deities by the motion of the all-directing Pallas, the glorious Patroncsse of this mightie Monarchy, descending in the Maiestie of their inuisible essence, vpon yonder Mountaine, found there, the best, (and most worthily the best) of LADIES, disporting with her choysest Attendants, whose formes they presently vndertooke, as delighting to be in the best-built-Temples of Beautie and Honour. And in them vouchsafed to appeare in this manner, being otherwise no obiects for mortall eyes. And no doubt, but that in respect of the persons vnder whose beautifull couerings

they haue thus presēted themselues, these Deities will be pleased the rather at their inuocation (knowing all their desires to be such) as euermore to grace this glorious Monarchy with the Reall effects of these blessings represented.
            
            After this, they fel to a short departing daunce, and so ascend the Mountayne.
            FINIS.
            
         
      
   