
      
         
            
            ¶A new ballad Intituled, Daniels ſiftyng in
theſe our dayes: aptly applyed to the true Prea chers of the Goſpell.
            
               ¶What God hath wylled vs, to that good eare geue:
               For Daniels are abroad: ſiftyng with their Seeue.
            
            
               GOOD Daniels ſifting, in Gods church aboute,
               The footſteps out findyng: or thoſe as be ſtoute.
               Againſt Gods word deuine, which all 
                     •
                  ught to knowe
               In their owne mother toung: what duty they owe.
            
            
               To God alone iuſtly, to ſerue hym with loue,
               For all are not truſty: as his worde doth prooue.
               Now yf God we obeyd, as be hath vs taught,
               Then were our ſayth ſtayed: in him that vs bought.
            
            
               ¶By Daniels, the Preachers: ſo this vnderſtand,
               Which doo preach Chriſt truly: in euery land.
               Without Pope or popery, our ſoules for to ſaue,
               By faith in Chriſt onely, of whom we it craue.
            
            
               ¶And Gods booke this Séeue is, that they in hand take,
               And his word the Aſhes, there out for to ſhake.
               In Temples and Churches, where people reſort,
               To haue for their ſoules health: the food of comfort.
            
            
               ¶The people is the ground, on whom now doth fall,
               Thoſe high deuine Aſhes: that makes the true tryall.
               Whoſe footeſteppes ſhal ap
                     •
                  ere without trawde or guile,
               Of young and olde people: now marke well this ſtile.
            
            
               ¶By theſe footeſteppes I meane, the whole lyfe of man,
               And of all women kynde: theſe things now well ſcan.
               Who ſo in theſe Aſhes, now treadeth awrye,
               Their ſteps ſhalbe well knowne: to God & mans eye.
            
            
               ¶As was in Bels Temple, a God without lyfe,
               Whereas footyng was found: of Man, Chyld, & Wyfe.
               Who cate vp the vittells, from that falſe God Bell,
               And deceyued the Kyng: as the text d
                     •
                  th tell.
            
            
               ¶But Daniell by ſiftyng, all them to lyght brought,
               And alſo Bels Priſtes: that wickedly wrought.
               Euen ſo now our Siſters, that ſiftes at this day,
               With Gods word ſhall finde out: thoſe in the brode way.
            
            
               ¶When they heare the law red, vnto them full playne,
               As God hath commanded: ſo to be certayne.
               The which law and Goſpell, receiue in good parte,
               And out of the broad way▪ betimes tooke ye ſtarte.
            
            
               ¶The footeſteps that Adam, and Eue firſt dyd trace,
               To the forboden tree: brought them in woe caſe.
               And all we by their fall in bondage be ſet,
               Day by day maſked ſtyl in Sathans great net.
            
            
               ¶The firſte bloty footeſtep
                     •
                  , that Cayne dyd commit,
               To his brother Abell: remaynes in ſome yet.
               As in Ruffians and Rogges, that deſperate be,
               Whoſe footeſteps from much ſinne cannot ſcape frée.
            
            
               ¶The pryde of great Nemrode, that in hym dyd rayne,
               Was knowne by his footeſteps, and all his whole trayne.
               So lykewyſe ſhall theirs doe, that buyldeth exceſſe,
               In any kynd of trade: abuſing Richeſſe.
            
            
               ¶Quéene Iezabell that dyd, Gods true Prophets kyll,
               Her footeyng was found out: agaynſt her owne wyll.
               The Dogs her bloud lapped in Iezraell,
               This ſore greuons plague: was caſt on Iezabell.
            
            
               ¶So lykwyſe the footſteps of Gods enemyes,
               Shall well be ſpyed: when as his wyll is.
               And haue their reward due, for ſhedyng of bloud,
               Of Gods elect people: when the Lorde thinks it good.
            
            
               ¶Remember how Pharao, though he was a King,
               His footeſteps were found out: of perſecutyng.
               He with his whole army, of men drowned were,
               In midſt of the red ſea: God dyd them not ſpare.
            
            
               ¶Euen ſo from tyme to tyme, you may read and ſée,
               How God plageth Tirants: for their iniquytye.
               He is the ſame God ſtyll, ſinners to correct,
               Except they repent now: he wyll them reiecte.
            
            
               ¶Sodome and Gomorra, their footyng was found,
               What wayes they then walked: vpon the Lords ground.
               They liued to them ſelues in the ſinke of ſinne,
               Tyll fyre and brimſtone: therby they dyd winne.
            
            
               ¶Let this be a warnyng, ſo now in lyke caſe,
               To whores and whore mongers: that yet lacketh grace.
               Whoſe cloſe trippyng footeſteps, wyll ſhortly app
                     •
                  ere,
               By our Daniells ſiftyng: they can not ſcape cléere.
            
            
               ¶The coueiteous footeſteps, of Ahabs great ſpight,
               To haue Nabaoths viniard: dyd come vnto light.
               For the which the Lorde, with Abab was wroth,
               And ſent to hym Elyah: who tolde hym the troth.
            
            
               ¶Now the Lorde wold plague hym and all his houſhold,
               For the death of Nobaoth: as Elyah hym tolde.
               Beware now by Ahab, to get worldly muck,
               For many one therby: hath had but yll lucke.
            
            
               ¶Syr Rapax, ſyr Capar and ſyr Tenax alſo,
               And you maſter Vſerers: that now in wealth flow.
               Be not imps of Ahab, common wealth to annoye,
               I caſt you with your footeſteps: the Lord doo deſtroy.
            
            
               ¶The Scribes, the Pharaſies, and Lawyers lykewyſe,
               Their footyng was well knowne: of their enterpriſe.
               How they came vnto Chriſt, to take hym in a trip,
               But be euer came them: and gaue them the ſlip.
            
            
               ¶So Lawyers that wreſt law, and matters prolong,
               Their footeſteps wyll appeere of makyng right wrong.
               Woe be to ſuch ſayeth Chriſt, whoſe ſentence is great,
               Wherfore repent in tyme: and for mercy intreat.
            
            
               ¶Thus for to conclude now, let all men repent,
               And to leade a new lyfe: by Gods Teſtament.
               Ere death ſteale vpon vs, our footeſteps to finde,
               Contray to Gods wyll: and to natures kinde.
            
            
               ¶Wherefore ſiftyng Daniells, now ply your vocations,
               Declare Gods worde truely, vnto all nations.
               God is your head Captayne, your ſhield and defence,
               Without feare or parcialytie, now doo your dilygence.
            
            
               ¶By ſiftyng and ſortyng, the good from the bad,
               Then God wyll be pleaſed: and his people glad.
               To heare what God wylleth, to that good eare geue,
               And to all ſuch Preachers, as vſe wel the Séeue.
            
            ¶FINIS.
         
      
      
         
            Imprinted at London, by Richarde
Iohnes: dwelling in the vpper end of Fleetlane, at the ſigne
of the ſpread Eagle. And are to be ſolde: at his Shop
ioynyng to the Soutweſt Dore of Saint
Paules Church. The xxij day of
October. 1572.
         
      
   