
      
         
            
            
            A SERMON
PREACHED
before His Maiestie,
At Whitehall the fift of
Nouember last,
1617.
            By the Bishop of Elie, His
Maiesties Almoner.
            
            LONDON
Printed by IOHN BILL,
M.DC.XVIII.
         
      
      
         
            
            
               LVC. CAP. 1. VERS. 74, 75.
The 7. and 8. Verses of Benedictus.
               
                  VT, sine timore, de manu inimicorum
nostrorum liberati, serviamus,
Illi
                  IN sanctitate, & justitia coram
ipso, omnibus diebus nostris.
               
               
                  That we being deliuered, from the
handes, of our enemies, might
serue Him, without feare
                  In holinesse, and righteousnes, before
Him, all the dayes of our life.
               
            
            
            
               
                  THE children were
com to the birth,Esay 37. 3. and there
was no strength,The Text the yeere before. to deliuer
them.
            
            (There we left, last)
Their, not being deliuered,
was the cause, of our being deliuered.
(And now I goe on.)
            ANd our being deliuered,
               The end (or vt) of this dayes deliuerance.
                was to this end,
That, we being deliuered frō the hāds of our
enemies, might serue Him, &c. For I demand:
Deliuered we were (as this day) why was it?
Was it, that we might stand, and cry out of
the foulnesse of the fact? or stand, and inueigh,
against those monsters that were
the Actors in it? Was it, that wee might
blesse our selues for so faire an escape? or
bestow a piece of an Holy day on God, for
it? And al these we may do, And all these we
haue done; and vpon good ground, all. Yet,
none of these the very vt: nor we deliuered,
that we might do these: But, when al is said,
that can be said, hither wee must come: to
this vt here, and pitch vpon it: for, this is
indeed, the vt finalis; the right, the true,
the proper That: That, for our deliuerance,
we bethinke our selues, how to doe him
Seruice.
            
            Take the whole tract along, from the
first word, Benedictus: There is visited and
redeemed, in the 1. verse: A horne, or a mighty
saluation, in the next: After, we saued from
them that did hate vs: but you shall see, that
all these suspend still, no perfect period, till
you come to this. But at this, there is. Visited,
redeemed, saued, mightily saued; why all?
For no other end, but that being so visited,
redeemed, & saued, we might wholy addict,
and giue ouer our selues, to the Seruice of
Him who was author of them all.
            I wote well,
                  Our deliuery frō the Grand Deliuery by Christ. that principally and properly,
the whole Song referreth to the deliuerance
of deliuerances, our finall deliuerance,
from our ghostly enemies, and from their
fire, (the fire of hell) by our Blessed Sauiour;
which was so great, as it was able to
open the mouth, and loose the tongue of a
dumbe man, and make him breake foorth
into a Benedictus.
            
            But, inasmuch as in euery kinde, the
chiefe giueth the Rule, (or, as we say here)
the vt, to all that are from, and vnder it:
And that, ours, and all other deliuerances,
that haue beene, or shall be, are from and
vnder that of His: Our enemies, set on by
those enemies, Ours lighted their match,
at their fire, (the fire of hell) and so do all
others, whatsoeuer: therefore is it, that this
Text aptly may be,The same, vt.
                and vsually hath been,
euer applied to any deliuerance, from any
enemies whatsoeuer: those of 88, these of
this day: the same vt, in all: as comming,
all; from the same principium à quo: and tending,
all, to the same finis ad quem, that, here,
is set downe.
            For the principium à quo; wee haue formerly 
endeauoured,The same cause from whence.
                to set that streight,
from whence our deliuerance came: Euen
from the goodnes of God; yet not expressed
vnder that terme, goodnes, but vnder the
terme of mercie, As elsewhere. As here (but
a verse before) To performe the mercie.
               Vers. 5. And
a little after,vers. 11. 
               Through the tender mercies of our
God.
            
            Which terme is made choise of,Mercie. for two
causes. One, it includes miserie; The other,
it excludes merit: and so, fittest for
our turne.
            
               Goodnesse may bee performed to one,
though in good case: Not mercie; but to
such onely, as are in miserie. In misericordia
there is miseri, euer. And this, to put vs
in minde of our case, the extreme miserie
wee had come to, but for His more full deliuerance.
            
            2. Againe, Goodnesse, may be shewed to
such as may seeme some way to deserue it:
So cannot Mercie. For, but where Merit is
wanting, Mercie is not pleaded, properly.
These, set vs right, in the principium à quo,
that wee ascribe it not to a wrong cause.
Out of Ieremie:
               L
                     ••
                  . 3. 22. The Text. An. 1612. 
               It was the mercie of the Lord,
that wee were not consumed.
               Ps. 145. 9. The 
                        •
                     ext An. 1615. Out of the
Psalme: That mercie of His, that is ouer all His
workes.
            
            
               And now to the finis ad quem. For, wee 
are as easily,The same end Wherto.
                and no lesse dangerously, mistaken,
in that. By Mercies meanes, without
all merit of ours, we were not consumed, but
deliuered from so great a miserie, so neere vs:
why were we so? Were we liberati, to become
libertines, to sett vs downe, and to
eate, and to drinke healths, and rise vp, and
see a play? was there no vt in it? Yes: what
was that? Vt seruiamus illi.
            
            So,The Summe or substance of the Text. there growes an obligation out of it.
For, vt, is a conditionall, and implies euer
a kind of contract, at least, that, which is
not named,Contractus innominatus. but is much vsed, Do vt des,
facio vt facias. So that, the Text is of the
nature of a Bond, or Couenant. And I
giue it not that denomination, of mine
owne head: I finde it so called, in expresse
tearmes,Verse 5. but a Verse before, To remember
His holy Couenant.
            
            A Couenant then,The Diuision.
                names it. And a Couenant
diuides it: For a Couenant is euer
betweene two; the two here, God, and vs.
            The Couenant on Gods part, is at the 
fourth verse: That wee should bee saued from
               
               our enemies. Which Couenant is here pleaded,
as performed, by Him, vnder liberati.
            
            
                The Couenant on our parts, rests; That,
then, we should serue Him for it. His part is
kept, liberati shewes that: Then may wee
bee put in suit, for ours, that is, for seruiamus.
            
            On Gods part, I set forth these.
            1.Gods part, The Couenant.
                That, we were deliuered. 2. That,
from our enemies. 3. That, from the hands
of our enemies. And 4. That, without feare,
(for so it stands in the verse) Vt sine timore
liberati; That, without feare being deliuered.
So it may be taken; and so it is taken, by
sundry of the Fathers.
            On ours,Our part, The Condition.
                I reckon these. Our Seruice:
The matter; And the maner of it. The
matter wherin:The Matter.
                
               Serue Him in holinesse, Serue
Him in righteousnesse: not holinesse, or righteousnesse
alone, but to serue Him, in both.
            The mannerThe Manner.
                how, (often, no lesse acceptable
then the seruice it selfe.) 1. Vt
 sine timore; that our seruice bee freely
and cheerefully done, (now wee are out
 of feare) 2. Vt coram ipso, That vnfainedly,

as before Him, not before men (before
whom wee may and doe often, halt.)
3. And, for the time of it, Vt omnibus diebus,
               
that we faint not, or giue ouer, but continue
in it all our life long. Three qualities,
of ours, and indeede of euery true
and faithfull seruice. That these bee
done; And that they may bee done; And
that, that which shall bee spoken may tend
to this, that they may be done, &c.
            
               
                  
                     VT liberati.
                  A The Equitie of Gods Couenant. 
                  That wee being deliuered.
                  
To shew the great equitie on Gods
part of the Couenant,1. Vt, without liberati.
                   we say first:
that we were to serue Him, though liberati
were left out; being, or not being deliuered.
This to be our first point.
               The Noble Armie of Martyrs, it was all
their case, they serued out their seruice,
without any vt liberati, any bond of temporall
deliuerance. Farre from any liberati,
were they three, that were vpon casting
into the fire,Dan. 3. 17. and, euen then, said: Our God,
                  
                  whom we serue, Hee can deliuer vs out of thy
hands,
                  Verse 18. 
                  and from the fiery fornace. But, if Hee
will not, (not deliuer vs) Be it knowen vnto thee,
O King, we will not serue thy gods, nor worship
the golden image, which thou hast set vp.
That is, serue Him, we will, whether He deliuer
vs or no. Will yee heare an Heroicall
spirit, indeed? Not, etsi me non liberârit,
Though He should not deliuer mee: but, etsi me
occider it,
                  Iob 13. 15. yea, though He should kill me, To die
for it, I will doe my duetie, and serue Him,
though. It is IOB. These stood not vpon
liberati: But, deliuerance, no deliuerance,
come of it what would, they were at a
point, would and were resolued to serue
Him.
                  1. Cor. 6. 5. And (
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , ad erubescentiam nostram
dico, I speake it not to our commendation)
If there were in vs, any remnant
of their generous spirit, God should not
need to come in Indentures with vs. It
sauours somewhat of a mercenary, that.
Seruiamus should hold, and let liberati goe,
whither it would: And wee, liue and die,
His seruants, though He had not, or should
not deliuer vs. This is vt without liberati.
               
               
                  But then, vt, with liberati. If God take
vs,2. Vt, with liberati.
                   as He findes vs, and say with the Apostle;
parco autem vobis,
                  1. Cor. 7. 28. 6. 
                  Goe to, I beare with
you; & 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   by way of indulgence, cōdescend
to condition with vs, if Hee come to
vt liberati; shall not that hold vs? Our duetie
being absolute, depending vpon no vt,
if vpon speciall fauour, God will come in
bonds, and let it runne in this tenor, That,
being deliuered, wee shall serue Him; else not:
shall we not then doe it? This being done,
I maruell what we can alleadge, to decline
our duety; vnlesse we meane, it should be,
fast with God; and loose with vs; Hee
bound to doe all for vs; and we free, to do
nothing for him.
               And yet a third (to magnifie His mercy,
yet more,3. Vt, with liberati, first, before Seruiamus.
                   and to tye vs the harder to our
Couenant) vt, is not onely with liberati,
but with liberati, first: God is bound, and
first bound, to doe for vs, before wee doe
ought for Him. It is not, That wee should
serue him, first, and then He deliuer vs, after:
But, that he should first deliuer vs, and after,
when wee are deliuered, then, and not before,

we should doe our seruice. It is not
libentudi, shalbe, or may be, hereafter: it is
liberati, are already. So we are aforehand
with Him. Hee hath done His, before we
begin ours. Liberati, you see, precedes seruiamus:
liberati, the tense past, seruiamus but
the present, (and I would it were the present)
I doubt, for a great part, it is yet to
come.
               And the reason, why He will haue it so
to praecede; is, He would haue our seruice
grow out of His fauours, our duety, out of
His bounty. That, is the right, and, (indeed)
the Euangelicall seruice. If He haue
vs at the advantage, on the hip (as we say)
it is no great matter, then to get seruice at
our hands. None more seruile then wee,
then. But, that, is the Legall, for feare. And
that sometimes he hath, but likes it not; He
would haue it, out of loue, out of the sense
of His goodnesse, haue our hearts broken,
with that. That, is the onely acceptable
seruice to Him, that growes out of that
root. The seruiamus that growes out of liberati,
deliuered and serue: first deliuered, and

then serue. This for the equitie of the Couenant
on Gods part.
               NOw come I to plead,B The Performance of Gods Couenant. that on Gods part
this Couenant was performed, that liberati
we were. Heauen & earth would rise
against vs,That deliuered.
                   and condemne vs, if wee should 
not confesse liberati, this day. Heauen saw
it, and was astonished: And it is gone ouer
all the Earth, the fame of it. But, that, wee
doe. The keeping of this day, the meeting
of this assembly, are both to acknowledge
and professe, that a liberati there hath bene.
               Nay, not one alone:Twise deliuered.
                   Two there haue
bene: and two such, as our eyes haue seene,
but our eares haue not heard,
                  Psal. 44. 1. neither could
our fathers tell vs, of the like. Two such, as
no Age euer saw, nor can bee found, in
any Story. That of 88. This of 605. (both,
within the compasse of seuenteene yeeres)
One by strand, the other by land: (as they
say.) From a Fleet by Sea, from a Vault by
land,Psal. 71. 20. 
                  de abyssis terrae (as saith the Psalme) as
well, as de abyssis maris: a Summer; and a
Winter deliuerance: either of them, like this

of Zacharies, able to bring Benedictus,
from a dumbe man.
               
                   So, deliuered we were. But, a deliuery is
a thing at large,
                     a From our enemies. though it be, but from a
mischance, from some heauy accident, it is
a deliuery. But, if it be from our enemies, it is
so much the more: as, In that, there is nothing
but casualtie: In these, there is rancour
and malice, they hate vs: So this the
greater danger by farre.
               And there is much in the enemies:
                  Mortall enemies.
                   Of thē,
some reach but at our states, lands or liuelihoods:
Other some, nothing will satisfie,
but our liues. Euery enemie is not mortall,
where he is, the danger is deadly. Ours
were such, sought to bring vtter destruction
on vs: and not on vs alone, but on
ours: nor on vs and ours onely, but on the
whole land in generall.
               Againe,Secret enemies.
                   of such as be deadly,Psal. 74. 4. some are
roaring enemies (the Psalme so calls them)
such as threaten and proclaime their enmitie,
like those in 88. Others lurke, like
vipers, that sting to death, without any
hissing at all; as were ours, (this day) which

are the more dangerous, a great deale.
               This made it (indeed) to be more then
liberati,
                  More then liberati, (which is) set free.
                   (ours.) Liberati, is properly set free,
and freeing is but from Seruitude. This
was more. Our death was sought, and we
deliuered from death, and that a fearefull
death, vnprepared, suddenly, in a moment,
to bee shattered to pieces. And, yet it
was liberati too,Yet liberati too. in the proper sense: for, vpon
the matter, it was from both. The Prophets
diuision would haue taken place in
it;Iere. 43. 1
                        •
                     . 
                  Qui ad mortem, ad mortem; qui ad seruitutem,
ad seruitutem. They, that had bene
blowen vp, to death; they, that had bene
left, to Seruitude (to a State more miserable,
then death it selfe.) So, in one liberati,
wee had two.Esther. 3. 73. Both from that of Hamans
lots, which were, to death (onely that
was 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   in Hebrew, this was 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   in Greeke)
And from that of Babylon, besides, which
was thraldome, and confusion. Thus were
we deliuered from our enemies.
               
               But from the hands of our enemies, is more 
then from our enemies.
                  The hands of our enemies, not our enemies. For, let the malice of
an enemie, be what it will, if his handes be

weake, or short, or we farre ynough from
them: the matter is so much the lesse. But,
if we come within his reach, if hee get vs
within his hands, then God haue mercie
on vs.
               Specially, if there be in his hands, a knife
thus engrauen, To cut the throats of the English
haereticks, as, in 88 diuers so engrauen
in Spanish, were brought from the Fleet,
and shewed. Or, if there be in his hands, a
match, ready to giue fire to 30. barrels of
powder (not so few.) If the hands be such;
that is then, a deliuery, not from our enemies
onely but from their hands, or (as wee say)
from their very clouches. Yee will marke,
that through all the Psalmes, euer, the part
is still enforced:Psal 22. 14. 11. 124. 6. Not from the Lions, but,
from the Lions pawes: from the hornes of the
Vnicornes, from the teeth of the dog: So here,
from the hands, from the bloody handes of our
enemies.
               
               
                   Further,
                     From their hands, not out of them. I say, it is more, to be deliuered
from their hands, then out of them. For, if
(out) then (in) first. They must first be in
the hands, that are deliuered, out of them.

But from them, that, may be from comming
in them at all. The better deliuerance
of the twaine. And, that was ours: And
that was Christs: Hee is said, to haue loosed
the sorrowes of hell,
                  In Act. 2. 24. 
                  Non quibus nexus est, sed
ne necteretur, saith Augustine, Not, wherewith
He was bound; but that Hee might
not be at all bound with them. So we, not
by taking vs out, but keeping vs from, from
their hands, from the hands of our enemies.
               
               Let me yet stay a little.
                     Deliuered, the Manner of it Er
                           •
                        ti.
                   For (me thinks)
we may finde in this word, not onely our
deliuerance, but euen the very maner, and the
meanes, of it. Not, in liberati, the Latine:
but, in S. Lukes owne word, 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , that will
come home to both.
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , that is, properly, eruti. Eruti, that
fits vs, for the maner, two wayes.
               
                  Eruere,
                  From a darke hole.
                   
                  is de tenebris in lucem educere. Out
of some darke deepe hole, (as it might be
the cellar) to bring foorth something to
light,Psal. 7. 13. (as it might be those same vasamortis,
vessels there couched, and destined to
the blowing us all vp.) It must bee some
darke vault, or pit, vnde, from whence: well

therfore said of vs eruti, that were deliuered
from a pit-danger, a danger vnder ground,
in abyssis terrae, in the deepe of the earth.
               Secondly,From a ruine or fall.
                   
                  eruere, the compound is, from
ruere (the simple) that is, from a ruine; Not,
as if we should haue fallen into the pit, but
that, there was there bestowed within it,
that which would haue sent vs vp, that
downe we should haue come, haue fallen
downe, all to pieces. Ruina it would haue
bene, and therefore eruti, right. And they
talke of helping incendium ruinâ. Here there
had bene incendium & ruina both, and neither
helped other: but both bene past all
helpe.
               
                  Deliuered from a ruine;With the ruine of our enemies. But eruere is then
in kinde, when we are so deliuered from a
ruine, as with their ruine, that sought ours.
So it was. We parted not of euen hands, we
from them, and they from vs, neither of
both, a fall. No: wee fell not (no fall with
vs) they fell,
                  Psalm. 10. 8. and had a foule fall. Wee were
so deliuered from their hands, as they deliuered
into ours. Wee eruti: they ruti & caesi
both,Psalm. 9. 15. fell and were slaine. The pit they digged

they fell into themselues: In the snare they layed,
was their owne foote taken. The highest deliuerance
of all (so much made of, in the
Psalmes.)
               And thus much was before implied,Implied in cornu salutis.
                  
when it was called cornu salutis, a horne of
saluation.
                  Vers. 2. The saluation that so comes,
comes euer with the perdition of the aduerse
partie. So, is the horne expounded in
Deuteron. 33. With these shalt thou strike thine
enemies, and push them, as any wild beast. Ventilare
is the word,Deut. 33. 17. Tosse them up, into the
wind, vpon the top of their horns, till they
haue gored them, and brought them to
their end. Such was our horne of saluation,
or (as we turne it) a mighty saluation. God
shewing his might no lesse against them,
then for vs: visited and redeemed vs mightily,
in His mercie; visited and ruined them as
mightily, in His wrath.
               And againe,
                     Deliuered, The Meanes of it, By a King. in this, not onely the maner,
how, but the meanes whereby. For, hee hath
raised vp a horne of saluation. Now to raise vp,
must needs be interpreted of a person, the
meanes of the deliuerie. Who was that?

In Daniel,
                  Dan. 7. 24. Reu. 17. 12. and the Reuelation, I finde it totidem
verbis, decem cornua, decem Reges sunt:
Alluding therein, as to their great power,
so somwhat to the anointing thence powred
on their heads: that it should bee salus
Regia, and per Regem. A deliuery wrought
by a King:
                  
                     Eruende By picking out. the King of Heauen to worke it,
mediante Rege terreno. In cuius labijs diuinatio,
if euer it were in any's, who did thereby
eruere that,Prou 16. 10. out of the darke phrase, by
which we all were eruti. And so, not the
manner alone, but the meanes in it, too,
that we were eruendo, eruti.
               
               
                   And last, that all this was sine timore. For
in the verse so it stands,
                     That deliuered without feare. first, vt sine timore
liberati. And stands so first, that we might
take speciall notice, and note of it. And
though divers Writers draw (sinetimore) to
seruiamus, as if there were an hyperbaton, to
serve Him without feare: Yet what should let
vs, so to take it, as it stands? Specially since
diuers of the Ancients take it so: (I name Origen,
Titus Bostrensis, Chrysostom, Theodoret,
and Theophylact.) But we may well reconcile
them both, if we say, (which truely we

may say,) That, without feare we were deliuered:
to serve him in a state without (or voide
of) fea
                        •
                     e.
               
               It is a great fauour, when we are deliuered,
to be deliuered, absque hoc, that we be at
all put in any feare. Some, are sometimes
saued from their enemies, but it is, with some
fright first. It was the lewes case, when
from Haman:
                  Est. 4. 3. It was ours, in Anno 88.
               They that are so, it cannot bee denied,
but deliuered they are, but not sine timore liberati,
not deliuered without feare. This was
without feare. Our case, iust. Wee had no
sense and so, no feare at all, of the danger,
till it was past. I cannot better expresse it,
then in Theodoret's owne words. Sed si sic
dicendum est, (saith he) veluti non sentientes
ita, nos de periculo transtulit in securitatem. If
it may so be sayd, without any sense or feeling
at all, did hee translate vs, from the
depth of danger, into the state of securitie.
In which point, ours did come neere to
the great deliuery of the world, by CHRIST,
what time the world little thought, either
of their owne perill, or of his paines and

passion, that deliuered it.Without feare, or any other passion. Yet, in this, ours
had more then was in CHRISTS owne deliuerie.
That there, though it were without
feare, yet not without somewhat as euill,
as feare. For CHRISTS was wrought
by his innocent death (a matter of sorrow,
and griefe.) But in ours there was none,
neither feare nor griefe, nor any other vnpleasant
passion. No innocent suffered
here; none but they, that had their heads
in the contriuing, or their hands in the digging
about it. Without feare it was, without
any thing else, that might taint our deliuerie,
with the least matter of grieuance.
               So then,The recapitulation of all the former. 
                  1 
                  deliuered we were. 2 And not
from the casualtie of any mischance, but
from the malice of enemies: Enemies, and
those 3 capitall; And those 4 close hidden
enemies: from them; yea, 5 from their very
hands: And 6 
                  From their hands, not out of
them. And our deliuerie was eruti, 
                  7 from
something in abyssis terrae; And 8 from a
ruine too: 9 And that, with their ruine,
that sought ours. 10 Our saluation, cornusalutis,
a Royall deliuerance: 
                  11 And yet eruendo
                  
it was. 12 And all absque timore, 
                  13 Or
absque any thing else, that might blemish
our ioy, with matter of sorrow in the least
degree.
               And this for Gods part; who hath remembred
His holy Couenant (I trust) and
performed it in euery clause, nay, in euery
word, to vs, to the vttermost.
               NOw, to our part (which we may be put 
in suit for.Our Couenant, or Condition.) Liberati then, is cleere. But
how? absolutely? at large? absque aliquo
inde? No condition annexed? No vt? Yes:
take the vt with you. Liberati, vt. Deliuered,
that we should:
                  
                     Deliuered That we should. Should do somewhat:
for, naturaliter obligamur ad dantem. This
vt is naturall, there groweth a naturall obligation
between him that doth, and them
that receiue a good turne, (And a deliuerance,
specially such a one, is a good turne.)
The fields we till, the trees we plant, shew
it. They returne their fruit to them, that
bestow labour, or cost vpon them. That
(I know not how) but so it fals out, in matter
of benefits, we be not so soone loosed,

but we be tied againe: Nor eased, but loaden
afresh: Nor freed, but bound anew.
It is the Law, the bond of nature, this,
Liberati vt.
               
               And that vt,
                  Should serue him. is vt seruiamus. And this
particular, vt, groweth out of the Law of
Nations. There the Law is, vt victus sit
in potestate victoris, the conquered, euer, in
the power of the Conquerour, to take his
life, or to saue it, at his pleasure. But, if
hee will saue it, then comes the voluntary
vt, or Couenant. He that hath his life saued,
to vow to bestow it, in his seruice, that
did saue it. Serui (the very name) came of
seruati, They that should haue died, and
were saued, did willingly couenant, serua
& seruiam, to serue him, by whom their
liues were preserued. This beeing the
Law of Nature, and Nations, why should
not the God of Nature, the King of Nations,
bee allowed it? that if our liues haue
bene by him saued: we should, frō thenceforth,
come to this vt, vt seruiamus Illi.
               
               Well,We would have couenanted to serue Him. well, it is past now; if it were to
come. It is, that we being deliuered. if it were,

                  that wee being to be deliuered, wee would tell
another tale then: wee would be glad and
faine so to couenant, O deliuer vs (then) but
for this once, and we would serue Him, (that
we would) and bee holy and righteous, and
what he would besides. Put any vt, to liberati,
then. Wee would then seeke it of
Him, that now is offered by Him, to be deliuered,
if being so deliuered, wee will couenant,
but to doe that, which we are bound
to doe, deliuered, or no.
               And, why should wee thinke much of
this seruiamus?
                  
                     We should have serued, If not deliuered. All the world knowes, if
the plotte had gone on, and the powder
gone off, the whole land should not haue
scaped vt seruiamus: But should haue serued
duram seruitutem,
                  And serued a worse. For the seruice, seruiamus.
                   been not in seruice,
but in seruitude. Their seruitude, is changed
into this seruice. A blessed exchange
for vs. Great oddes betweene those two:
Nay, no comparison at all, betweene Gods
seruice, and their seruitude; their bondage,
thraldom, slauery, tyranny, I cannot heape
too many names. Gods seruice is freedome
in respect of that: Nay, without any respect

at all, His seruice is perfect freedome, wee say
it, we pray it, euery day.
               And, if no comparison, in seruiamus;
None, in Illi
                  For the partie. Illi.
                   (I am sure.) Nay, if there were
any thing to mislike in seruiamus, amends is
made for it, in Illi. For the seruice, is much
thereafter, as the Illi, the partie is, whom we
serue. Dignitate Domini honorata fit conditio
serui. He may be so great a State (we serue)
as, it is an honor to serue Him. Now, how
great a Lord,
                     For His Greatnesse. the Lord of lords is, what
shall I need tell you?Psal. 145. 3. 
                  There is no ende of his
greatnesse. How great, and how good
withall,For His Goodnesse.
                   
                  res ipsa loquitur: that appeares, by
our deliuery, in part: and more shall, by
his eternall reward layd vp, for them that
serue Him. There is, in all the world, no
more honorable, nor beneficiall Seruice,
then, this seruiamus Illi.
               
               But say, we haue no mind to serue Him;
if we serue not Him,
                  If we serue not Him, some other wee must, and worse.
                   yet serue we must, and
serue we will, if not Him, some other. It
is the condition of our life, one or other
serue we doe. We must hold of some Lord:
if free from one, another wee serue: And,Rom. 6. 18, 20.
                  
who is that other? when we are free from
God, from righteousnesse, we serue sinne and
Sathan, (a worse seruice, I dare say) better
then; bee free from them, and serue God in
righteousnesse.
               
               But, if we will not serue Him; I aske, what
will wee doe then?Those worse be His enemies.
                   will wee serue his enemies?
for so are these. Wee were not deliuered
from our enemies, to serue His enemies,
(I am sure.) That were a foule shame for
vs: that were against all reason. But, if wee
serue not Him, we serue them. Resolue then
to serue Him, that hath saued vs: Not, his
enemies, in a prophane and vnrighteous:
but Him, in a holy and righteous course of
life. And so, am I now come to that,
wherein our seruice lieth.
               
                  IN holinesse and righteousnesse.
                  The Matter of our seruice, Wherein.
                   In which
two, in a sort, are recapitulate the two
Tables of the Law: Holy to God, Righteous
to men. Quod quis reuerenter se habeat ad
diuina: Quod quis laudabiliter cum hominibus
conuersetur, (saith Chrysostome) Reuerently
to performe holy dueties: Laudably to

haue our conuersation among men.
               Both these, (first) not either of them. To
spend our seruice but in one,Holinesse and Righteousnesse, Both. is but to serue
Him by halues: in both, then, to serue Him.
Neither in an vnrighteous holinesse; nor, in
an holy kind of vnrighteousnes. Neither with
the Pharisee,
                  Matt. 23. 5. to haue all our holines in our
Phylacteries and fringes, and frequenting
the Lectures of the Law, (no matter how
we liue:) Nor with the Saducee,
                  Acts 23. 8. liue indifferent
honestly, but neither beleeue spirit,
nor looke for resurrection: be Christians, like
Agrippa, in modico, a little Religion,Acts 26. 28. vpon a
kniues point, wil serue vs. Neither in holines
then onely, nor in righteousnes onely,
but in both.
               In both, but in their order though,Holinesse, first. as they
stand; And holines stands first. So, to reckon
of that as our prime seruice. For, if there
had not been some meaning in it, it is sure,
righteousnesse might haue serued for both:
Religion, holinesse, all vertues are 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   in
it. Suum cuique (saith righteousnesse) and in
that,Matt. 22. 21. is quae Dei, Deo. Euery one, his due, And
so God his.
               
                  
Yet are they euer thus parted, here, and
elsewhere: Partly, to set out Gods part by
it selfe,Ecclus 47. 2. (as the fat from the sacrifice) for the
dignitie of his person: Partly, to keepe vp
the distinction, which euer hath, and euer
must be maintained, of seuering things sacred
from common; and holy, from humane
dueties. And partly also, to checke
the conceit that runs in the world abroad,
O, he is a good man, liues quietly with his
neighbors, payes euery man his due: Euery
man his due? and how then? shall God
lacke his due? I trow not, but haue his too,
and his first, Reason is, He be first serued.
               
               And holinesse is His due: you may read
it, in the plate of gold, in the High Priests
forehead,Exod. 28. 36. 
                  Holinesse to the Lord: you may
heare it, from the mouth of the Seraphim,
                  Esay. 6. 3.
they mention none of all his Attributes,
but that: That they doe, and doe it, thrise
ouer; Pointing vs thereby, what is chiefe
in Him, and should be chiefe with vs, and
whereto we should chiefly direct our seruice.
Holinesse, is His due: and (heare you)
so His due, as the Apostle is direct, totidem
                  
                  verbis, without this due payed,Hebr. 12. 14. 
                  without holinesse,
shall no man euer see God.
               
               But then, you will marke,To serue Him in holines. it is to serue
Him, in holinesse. Holinesse is one thing: To
serue God in Holinesse, is another: Holinesse
we may haue, (at least, thinke our selues to
haue) but, a stately, surly kinde of holinesse
it is, so as in our holinesse, we serue him not.
But it is not ynough to be holy: a seruice in
holinesse is required at our hands: that we
acknowledge a seruice in holines, and as seruants,
cary our selues, and serue Him, in it.
               Our seruice in holinesse I diuide, as the
Psalme doth:Our seruice in holinesse in the congregation. Either in secreto sanctorū, when
we are alone by our selues, (as, there, in secret,
good folks faile not, to serue Him.) Or,
in Synagogâ, in the open assembly,Psal. 111. 1. with the
congregation.
               Our secret holinesse I meddle not with
Abscondita Deo nostro, I leaue it to God.Deut. 29. 29. I
hope, it is better, and more seruice-like, then
our outward is.Deut. 29. 29. As abscondita Deo, so reuelata nobis.
Our Church seruice, our seruice
in Synagogâ, the outside of it (so) that is no
secret, all men see what it is, that full homely

it is, nay full rude it is, (and lightly the
meaner the persons, the more faultie in it)
Our holinesse is growen too familiar, and
fellow like; Our cariage there, can hardly
be termed seruice, there is so very little of a
seruant in it.
               When we doe not onely serue Him, but
doe our seruice before Him, (both, are in the
Text, illi, and coram illo) as, that we do, when
we come hither, it is to professe our seruice,
that we come. When we come, before
the presence of the Lord, the presence of the Lord
of the whole earth, (so the Psalme doubles it,Psal. 97. 5.
to make vs thinke on it the better) then,
saith he, worship Him in decore sancto,
                  Psal. 96. 9. in a
holy kind of decencie, or (as we read it) in
the beautie of holinesse. Our holinesse should
haue a kind of beautie with it.1. Thes. 4. 4. 
                  Holinesse and
honour the Apostle ioyneth them together,
Godlinesse & grauitie, 
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   and them
too.1. Tim. 2. 2. Now this is that, the world complaines
of; there is not that decor, that beautie:
not that honour, not that 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   that venerable
graue behauiour, in our holines, we
cary not our selues in His holy Sanctuarie,
where our holinesse should be at the holiest,

nor at His seruice there, as seruants should,
and vse to doe.
               We stumble at the very threshold.Our seruice in adoration or worship of Himselfe. Our
very first seruice, (or, rather the introduction
to our seruice) in the first Table, (the
table of holinesse) is there set downe to be,
adorabis. Wee turne it, shalt worship.
                  Exod. 20. 5. How
that is, we are told euery day in the Psalme,
Let vs worship, and fall downe, and kneele before
the Lord our Maker.
                  Psal 95. 6. It was euer in the
Primitiue Church, the first voyce was
heard, the first thing they did, ante omnia adoremus
Dominum, qui fecit nos, Before wee
doe any thing, let vs fall downe and worship
the Lord that made vs. And, it shall
neuer be found, that they came in, without
it. But, this shall, that men came to the
Temple, purposely to adore, and that, that
they did, though their time, or occasions
would suffer them to doe nothing else.
That, they held a seruice, of it selfe. Now, adoration
is layed aside, and, with the most,
neglected quite. Most come and go without
it, Nay they scarse know, what it is.
And, with how litle reuerence, how euill
beseeming vs, wee vse our selues in the

Church, cōming in thither, staying there,
departing thence, let the world iudge.
               Why? what are wee to the glorious
Saints in heauen?The worship of the Saints in heauen. doe not they worship
thus? Off goe their crownes, downe before
the Throne they cast them,
                  Reu. 4. 10. and fall downe
themselues after, when they worship. Are
we better then they? Nay,Of the Saints in earth. Are
we better
then his Saints on earth, that haue euer seemed
to goe too farre, rather then to come
too short, in this point? There was one of
them, and he was a King, (no lesse person)
when it was thought, hee had done too-much,
What? vncouered? yea vncouered
(saith he) and if that be too vile,2. Sam. 6. 22. 
                  vilior adhuc
fiam plusquam, I will bee yet more vile;
Why, it is before the Lord, before whom we
cannot be too low. To humble our selues
before Him, it is our honour, in all eyes,
saue such as Mical. And, I read of none, but
of Rabsak
                        •
                     h, that vpbraided King Ezekias,
for saying to his people, You shall worship before
this Altar.
                  Esa. 36. 7. No more then, is sought
from vs, then Kings on earth, then crowned
Saints in heauen, in their holy seruice,
doe before Him.
               
               
                  
In Malachies time, things were growen
much to this passe, that now they are,Gods disdaine of our worship. to
this want of regard; to thinke any seruice
(though neuer so slight) would serue God
well ynough. When they were come to
this, God is faine to take state vpon Him,
and to tell them plainely, He would haue
them know, Hee is a King, and a Great
King, 1 
                  Great;
                  Mal. 1. 14. for He is King of the whole
earth,
                  Psal. 47. 7 Others, but of some part of it.2 
                  Great:
for Hee is King for euer and euer;
                  Psal 10. 16. Others,
but for a terme of yeeres.3 
                  Great: for Hee
is King of Kings, and they His lieges, too,Reu. 1. 5.
whose lieges wee all are. And so falls to
terms with them, that He held scorne to be
so slighted ouer, euen to these very words,
Shall I take it at your hands? And then,Mal 1. 13. 8. bids
them go, & do but offer such seruice, as this,
to their Prince, doe but come before him,
on that fashion: See, if he will be content
with it, or accept his person (that is) giue him
a good looke, if any should so appeare in
his presence. No more wil God: He knoweth
no reasō, why any king or creature on
earth, should be vsed with more respect,
or serued with more reuerence, then He.
               
                  
Thus serue we Him, in His holy worship:
                  
                     Our seruice in his holy things.
how serue we Him, in his holy things?In the Sacrament. how
serue we Him, in our holinesse there? I will
begin, and take vp the same complaint,
that the Prophet Malachi doeth. First,
Mensa Domini despecta est:
                  Mal. 1. 7. 
                  The Table of the
Lord is not regarded. That Sacrament, that
euer hath bene compted, of all Holies the
most holy, the highest and most solemne
seruice of God; (where are deliuered to vs,
the holy Symbols, the precious memorials
of our greatest Deliuery of all:) why, of
all others they speed worst. How are they
in many places, denied any reuerence at all,
euen that which Prayer, which other parts
haue? No seruice then: No seruants there:
but bidden guests, haile fellowes, homely
and familiar, as one neighbour with another.
And, not onely, de facto none they
haue: but, de iure, it is holden, none they
ought to haue. And that, so holden, as rather
then they shall haue any, some wil suffer
for it, or rather, for their owne proud
follie, in refusing it. What time they take
the cup of saluation, they will not inuocate,
                  Psal. 116. 13.
at least not be in specie inuocantis: as the

King the Prophet would. What time they
receiue the cup of blessing,
                  1. Cor. 10. 16. they will not receiue
it as a blessing, as children receiue it
frō their parents, and their children from
them. Both which, inuocation, and receiuing
a blessing, were neuer done, but de geniculis.
What shal the rest looke for, if thus we serue
Him, when wee are at the holiest?
               Shall wee now come to seruice indeede?Our seruice of God in the seruice, that is, in prayer.
                  
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   the word here in my Text. It is no
new thing, for one species, to carie away the
name of the genus from the rest, as in this:
For though there bee other parts of Gods
seruice: yet Prayer hath borne away the
name of seruice, from them all. 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   the
Hebrewes call their Common Prayer, and
that is, seruice. And the Greekes, theirs,

                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , and that is so, too. And wee, when
we say, At Seruice time, and the Seruice
booke, and refuse to be present at Diuine
seruice, meane so likewise. And, God himselfe
seemes to goe before vs, and direct vs
so to doe. For His house, He hath named the
House of Prayer. (Obseruing the Rule,Esa. 56. 7. to
giue it the denomination, from that which
is the chiefest seruice in it.) As indeede,

when all is done, deuotion is the proper,
and most kindly worke of holinesse: and,
in that serue we God, if euer wee serue him.
Now, in what honour, this part of holinesse
is; what accompt we make of this seruice,
doe but tell the number of them that bee
heere at it, and ye shall neede no other certificate,
that in His seruice we serue Him but
slenderly.
               
                  Thou hast magnified thy Name,
                  Psal. 138. 2. On seruice of God in the Word.
                   
                  and thy
Word aboue all things, saith the Psalme. After
inuocation then of His Name; let vs see
how wee serue His word; that part of His
seruice, which in this Age, (I might say, in
the error of this Age) caries away all. For,
what is it to serue God in holines? why, to go
to a Sermon: All our holiday holinesse, yea,
and our working day too, both are come
to this, to heare (nay, I dare not say that, I
cannot prooue it) but, to be at a Sermon.
               The Word is holy (I know) and, I wish
it all the honour that may bee: but, God
forbid, wee should thinke, that in hoc vno,
sunt omnia. All our holinesse, is in hearing:
All our Seruice, eare-seruice: that were in
effect, as much as to say, all the body were
an eare.
                  1. Cor. 12. 17.
               
               
                  
An error it is, to shut vp his seruice into
any one part, which is diffused through
all. Another, so to do, into this one. It is
well knowen that, all the time of the Primitiue
Church, the Sermon was euer
done, before the seruice begun. And that,
to the Sermon. Heathen men, Infidels,
and Iewes, Heretickes, Schismatikes, Energumeni,
Catechumeni, Poenitentes, Competentes,
Audientes, all these, all sorts of people were
admitted: But, when they went to seruice,
when the Liturgie began, all these were voided;
not one of them suffered to stay. It
were strange, that, that should be the only,
or the chiefe seruice of God, whereat, they
which were held no seruants of God, no
part of the Church, might and did remaine
no lesse freely, then they that were.
               But euen, this holy Word (wherein all
our holinesse is) how serue wee Him, in it?
Nay, we serue him not, we take the greatest
libertie there, of all other. We come to it,
if wee will: wee goe our wayes, when wee
will: stay no longer, then we will: and listen
to it, while we will: and sleepe out, or
turne vs and talke out, or sit still, and let

our mindes roue (the rest) whither they
will: take stitch at a phrase, or word, and
censure it, how we wil. So the word serues
vs to make vs sport: we serue not it. At this
part of our seruice in holinesse, we demeane
our selues with such libertie (nay licentiousnes
rather) that holy it may be, but sure
seruice it is not, nothing like. And truely, it
is a notable Stratageme of Sathan, to
shrinke vp all our holinesse, into one part:
and into that one, where wee may bee or
not be: Being, heare or not heare: Hearing,
mind or not minde: Minding, either
remember or forget: Giue no account to any,
what wee doe or not doe; Only, stay
out the houre (if that) and then goe our
way: many of vs, as wise as we came: But
all (in a manner) hearing (as Ezekiel complaineth)
a Sermon preached,Ezek. 33. 32. no otherwise
then wee doe a ballad sung: and doe euen
no more of the one, then we doe of the other.
Eye-seruice God likes not (I am sure)
no more (should I thinke) doth Hee eare-seruice.
Speake on Lord,
                  1. Sam. 3. 8. 
                  for thy seruant
heareth (and well if that, but scarce that,
otherwhile) but, speake on Lord, whether

thy seruant heare or no: would any of vs
be cōtent with such seruice? Yet this is all:
to this, it is come. Thus we serue Him in holines:
This seruice must serue him (as the
world goes;) for if this way we serue Him
not, wee serue Him not at all.
               But all Gods seruice in holines,
                  Our seruice in holinesse out of the Cōgregation. is not in
the Church. Some is abroade. And, when
we are forth of the Church, neither Word,
nor Sacraments, nor Cōmon Praier, there:
Onely there, we serue Him in his Name.
               And,To His Name. Psal. 111. 9. Psal. 99. 3. 
                  Holy and reuerend is His Name
(saith one Psalme,) And, Great and fearefull
is His Name (saith another.) Now, how
vnholily, this holy; how vnreuerently, this
reuerend Name is vsed; vpon how small
cause this great, how without all feare, this
fearefull Name is taken vp in our mouthes,
I must say it againe and againe (which S.
Augustine saith) aures omnium pulso, conscientias
singulorum conuenio: I speake to the eares
of all in generall; I conuent the conscience
of euery one in particular, that heareth it.
That,Psal. 138. 2. which by Him is magnified aboue all
things, is by vs vilified beneath all things.
We pray for it, first;Mat. 6. 9. we regard it last, certeinly.

For if it be indeed holy, let no man
count it common.
                  Acts 10. 15. If not count it so, not vse it
so: for, what we vse as common, eo ipso, we
make it vnholy (quantum in nobis est;) for,
common and holy are contradiuidentia.
               
               
                  1 And to make it so common, that is to
profane it: Euill enough that. 2 But in the
eagernesse of our spirits, to vse it to grieuous
exercrations, that is more,Ezek. 39. 7. euen to
pollute it: A worse matter farre. 3 But beyond both those, to let it come to this, that
wee grow vnsensible of both, and both
passe from vs, and wee haue no feeling of
either, this is worst of all. Call wee this to
serue Him in holines, for this dayes deliuery,
when we so serue His Name?
               But neither is all Gods Seruice in holines
alone:Our seruice to God in righteousnesse.
                   Some is in honest dealing with
men, in righteousnes: God is serued in that
too. He that hath done a piece of good iustice,
downward: that hath done his dutie
to his Superior vpward: that hath dealt
equally with his euen Christen: in so doing,
hath not only dealt wel with men, but
done God good seruice also. That a man
may go from Church, and yet say truly he

goes to serue God, if he goe about these.
               Well, how goes our righteousnes? how
serue wee God there? Diuers errours are
committed in that, too.
               One is of them,Holines held a discharge from righteousnes. that thinke holines a discharge
from righteousnes quite. So they
serue God, and heare Lectures (as the terme
is) they take themselues liberty, to pay no
debts, to put their money out to vsurie; to
grinde their tenants; yea, and so they misse
not such a Lecture, in such a place, they
may doe any thing then. Nay, God is serucd
in righteous doing, as well, nay better,
then in holy hearing.
               A second kinde (which I like not neither)
that when men deale honestly,Righteousnes held no seruice. keepe
touch, pay their debts: they are so braue,
so imperious vpon it, so like great Lords, as
if righteousnes were no seruice, all were mere
liberalitie they did, men were bound to
them for doing it, they were not bound to
doe it: Nay, wee serue in righteousnes too,
That also is a seruice (sure.)
               A third, and that very common,Righteousnes measured by the Common Law. of them
that make the law of man, a scantling of
their righteousnes: And further then that

wil compel them; they will not go, not an
inch; nor so farre neither, sine timore, but
for feare. Yea, not onely our righteousnes to
men: but euen our feare to God is taught vs
by mans precepts: and in both,Esa 29. 13. so the Statutes
of Omri bee obserued, all is well.Mica 2. 6. 16. But,
whatsoeuer a man else may make sure, he
cannot make sure his soule, by the law of
the Land. This righteousnes here, goes vp to
God and his Law: and pierces deeper beyond
the outward act, euen to the inward
man: whence, if ours come not, or whither,
if it reach not; Man wee may, (perhaps)
but God, in righteousnes, serue we not.
               But euen according to mans Law,Our righteousnes too much worke. our
righteousnes goes not well so, neither. The
Philosopher giues a rule, when a people is
iust or righteous, according to mans law:
(Gods hee knew not) and that is, when iustice
wants worke, hath little to doe. By
which rule, ours is in no very good case:
Men are so full of suits, so many causes depending
before euery seate of iustice: Iustice,
so much to doe: and all, to repaire
the wrongs of our vnrighteous courses,
while each one seekes rather, to ouer-rule

men by wrong, then to serue God by
right.
               And, this were not so euill, if all the iniustice
were below:The Seats of righteousnes faultie. if the Seates which are
set to doe iustice and righteousnes, were
themselues right. For, fares it not euen
with them,Hos. 5. 10. as the Prophet Hosee saith, The
Princes of Israel are as they that remooue the
land marke? Each Seate seeking to enlarge
their owne border, and to set their meerstones
within the others ground? A full
vnnaturall thing in a body, that one arme
should neuer thinke it selfe strong enough,
vntill it had cleane shrunke vp the sinnewes
of the other. But I stay. These
things, being amended, wee shall bee so
much the more in a forwardnesse, to serue
God, both in holines and righteousnes: And
so, for the matter of our seruice, keepe our
Couenant.
               
                   FOr the maner, now. To serue Him, 1sine
timore,
                  The Manner of our seruice How.
                   without feare:2 
                  coram ipso, before
Him: 3 
                  omnibus diebus nostris, All the dayes
of our life.
               
                  
                     1 Sine timore,
                  
                     That, without feare. without feare. And so, in a

sense we do. So without feare at all, as if men
were afraid, to seeme to feare God. But,
this is no part of his meaning. Without feare
(here) is not without feare of Him, (of God)
but, that being now without feare of our
enemies, we should doe it, the rather. For,
who being in a bodily feare; who hauing
Pharao and his host hard at their backes,
could quietly thinke of seruing God? That,Exod. 14.
euen God himselfe,Exod. 20. did rid his people of
that feare, before euer hee gaue them his
Law, to serue Him by. But when mens
minds are quiet from the agonie and terror
of it, when they are setled in tranquillo:
they should in all reason then, better intend
His seruice.
               
               And, wil we (thinke you) if we be so out
of feare, intend it the better? without
doubt, in experience, we finde it contrary.
For, except we be held in feare, wee scarse
serue Him at all: how soone we are out of
feare, we forget our selues, and our seruice,
yea God, and all. True: yet for all that, the
seruice so done in feare, is but a dull heauie
seruice. It likes him not. God loues laetus
lubens, when being at libertie, with a liberall

minde, we doe that we doe. Laeti seruiemus
Regi (say they in Genesis) and,Gene. 47. 25. it pleased
the King: And it pleaseth God as well, if
the seruice wee doe, wee doe it cheerefully,
without mixture of feare, or any seruile affection.
               Without This feare to serue Him, but not
without His feare. Nam, si Dominus,
                  Mal. 1. 6. if He be
a Lord (as if we be His seruants, a Lord hee
is) vbi timor? where is my feare, saith hee in
Malachi? As loue, to a father: so feare to a
Lord, doeth belong most properly. And,
this is not Old Testament onely: the Apostle
is as direct, in the New, if wee will
serue Him to please Him, (and as good not
serue, as seruing not please) if wee will so
serue Him:
                  Hebr. 12. 28. wee must doe it, with reuerence
and feare 
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   Neither
rudely then, without feare, nor basely, with
feare: But reuerently, with feare, and cheerfully
without feare: (that is the meaning)
               2 To serue Him, coram ipso, before Him.
Coram ipso:
                  That, before Him. Exod. 20. 3. for, coram me, is the terme of the
Law. As if He were present, and looked
on. And it helps much to our seruice, so to
doe it. Helps our reuerence, not to doe it

rudely: (we doe it before Him.) Helps our
sincerenesse, without hypocrisie, to doe it,
as before Him: For, these two words, coram
ipso, are the bane of hypocrisie.
               All things are before Him: In nothing
can we get behind Him, or where He cannot
see vs. But, somethings are before Him
and men, both: Those, we call not, before
Him, properly. Properly, that is before
Him, that is before none but Him. That is
the heart. Coram homine, the seruice of the
eye: Coram ipso, the seruice of the heart. Men
loue no eye-seruice, neither, if they could
discouer it, but they are faine to take it; the
heart is not coram ipsis; Coram ipso it is: Vpon
that, is His eye: and nothing pleases
Him, if the heart be away: for that, of all other,
is His peculiar coram ipso.
               
               It is a broken seruice, if any part, chiefly,
if the chiefe part (the heart) be away. It
would be entire, and with all parts, since all
are before Him.
               
               It is a mock-seruice, as if what serues
man, would serue Him: as if wee could
complement it with God, with faces and
phrases, as with men we doe.
               
                  
                  3 The last, is omnibus diebus nostris. As sincere,
without faining:
                     That, all the dayes of our life. So, constant without
fainting. Coram me, excludes the Pharisaicall
seruice of the outside of the platter: Omnibus
diebus, the Bethulian seruice,
                  Matth. 23. 25. Iudit. 7. 30. for certaine
dayes, and no longer.
               You shall haue few, but will serue God at
a brunt: haue certaine pangs of godlinesse
come vpon them at times: be affected for
the present, with a deliuery, grow a little
holy vpon it. That little, is little worth. God
complaines in Malachi. That in their holines
they puffed, and blew,Mal. 1. 13. as men short-winded,
quickly weary of it, and soone out of
breath. And in Hosee,
                  Hos. 6. 4. that their righteousnesse
was as the morning cloud, scattered, and
gone, before the Sunne was an houre high.
               To serue Him then, not with vsura exigui
temporis
some smal time: primis diebus, two
or three dayes at the first, and then, defuncti,
we haue quit our selues well: but, from
day to day, as long as there is a day left to
serue Him in, So long to serue Him. To serue
Him to the very last.
               
                  The mercifull and gracious Lord hath so done
his marueilous acts,
                  Some dayes more then some other, though. Psal. 111. 4. 
                  that they ought to be had in
                  
                  euerlasting remembrance; all of them. But
some more specially: for some are more
then marueilous: As, was this of ours. That
if quibusdam diebus, would serue for them:
Omnibus diebus, is little ynough, for this. So,
more then gracious: so more then marueilous:
so more then both, in this: as the
memorie of it, neuer to die, neuer to decay,
but our dayes & it, to determine together.
               And for all that,More The dayes since. though omnibus diebus,
all our dayes, and in them all: yet, not in
them all alike. So in all, as, in some, more
then other some, Suscipiunt magis & minus.
So then to serue: as in our dayes after the
deliuerie, we doe it, more, and better, then
before. And,And this day, most. vpon the day it selfe (that is, as this day) we do it, most of all.
               THus,It wil be wisely done to keepe our Couenant. we haue layed foorth our Couenant,
both for Matter and Manner.
Wherein, if wee will deale as iust men, wee
must keepe it: and, if deale as wise men, we
will keepe it. For, who knowes, but wee
may (perhaps) stand in need of a deliuerie againe?
If we behaue our selues frowardly
in His Couenant, what shall become of vs,

then? How shal we hope for such another
at His hands? And, if He doe not, who can
deliuer vs from such another?
               But,We shall be without feare of such another. such another (wee hope) shall neuer
come: And I wish, and hope so, too:
But should hope so the rather, if I could
see, wee did but set our selues to serue Him,
as sath bene said. Otherwise, the Deuill,
he is our enemie; (that is once) And, if we
had no other, hee is ynough: An vnquiet
spirit he is; I trust him not, though euer
since hee sleeps the foxes sleepe. For the
breach of our couenant, if he beelet loose,
he is able to doe mischiefe enough. And
we haue the amends in our hands. Liberati
we had, seruiamus we returned not. Returne
it then, and then, wee shall be without
feare of any more.
               And, not only without feare:
                  We shall bee in hope of a reward. but we shal
be in hope also; And that, not of a new deliuerāce
only (if need be) but, of a furthermatter:
For, though our seruice bee due, without any:
but much more due, vpon a deliuerie,
specially such as ours this day was,
though no more euer should bee done for
vs: yet, that we may know, we serue a Lord

of great bountie, this shall not be all: Ouer
and aboue our assurance to bee deliuered,
toties quoties; we shall not be vnconsidered
for our seruice, besides. Let our deliuery
goe, transeat: He desires no seruice, but for
a reward.
               And so I returne now to the word of
our seruice,
                  Reward is in the body of the word 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      (to serue) Text, 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . In

                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , there is 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  : And 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , is a recompense,
or reward. Gods seruice is 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   
                  Deliuered
we were, by Couenant: Of His great
bounty: Rewarded we shall be beside. It is
in the very body of the word, (this.)
               So, here is 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   and 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   in our deliuery:
And 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , in our recompense. Let one of
them, 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   or 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   or, if not one of them,
both of them preuaile with vs, to see Him
serued.
               
               And, what shall the reward be?The reward of our seruice, I wil tell
you that, and so end. It shalbe the Grand deliuerance
in Benedictus, here. As ours of the
day was a riddance of vs, from our bodily
enemies, for the time; and we set in a
state of temporal peace, which we haue enioyed
euer since: So,Without feare.
                   the finall reward of
our seruice shalbe a riddance frō our ghostly

a enemies, for euer, that come not with a
puffe or blast of Powder, but with a lake
of fire and brimstone,Reuel. 14. 11. the smoke whereof
shall ascend foreuermore. To be rid of them,
and so being rid, to enioy a State, of perfect,
of eternall peace, and securitie, without
euerfearing more, sine timore, indeed.
               And,Before Him.
                   to make it euery way correspondent,
for coram ipso, here: it shalbe, coram ipso,
there.Psal. 16. 12. 
                  Euen in his presence, in whose presence
is the fulnesse of ioy.
               
               And for omnibus diebus, here:
                     All the dayes of our life 
                  all the-days
of this transitorie, short life, we shall enioy
it all the dayes of Heauen. Omnibus diebus?
nay omnibus seculis, all the Ages of eternitie.
And so, for that, which in Law is held but
as a lease of seuen yeeres: haue an euerlasting
freehold, in His heauenly Kingdom,
there to reape the reward of our Seruice,
world without end.
               
            
         
      
   