
      
         
            
            
            ¶ A Short diſcourſe of the life of Seruingmen, plainly expreſsing the way that is beſt to be followed, and the meanes wherby they may lawfully challenge a name and title in that vocation and fellowſhip.
            With certeine letters verie neceſſarie for Seruingmen, and other perſons to peruſe. With diuerſe pretie inuentions in Engliſh verſe.
            ¶ Hereunto is alſo annexed a treatiſe, concerning manners and behauiours.
            
               Imprinted at London for Ralphe Newberrie, dwelling in Fleeteſtrete, a little aboue the Conduit.
            1578.
         
         
            
            Precepts for Seruingmen.
            
               WHO dwelles in place where Enuie raines,
               and ſpendes his life in clubbiſh ſoyle,
               Shall reape but heapes of endleſſe paines,
               and put his life to wearie toyle.
            
            
               Who ſo beleeueth tattling tales,
               Proceeding out of euery pate,
               The fort of Enuie ſurely ſcales,
               and yeldes him ſelfe to froward fate.
            
            
               Who heareth much and medleth leaſt,
               ſhall ſcape the ſling of chiding chaps:
               Who ſeekes to liue at quiet reſt,
               muſt be content what euer haps.
            
         
         
            
            
               ❧ 
               TO HIS LOVING Couſin Marmaduke Darell, and to all Seruingmen: Walter Darell wiſheth you long life, with happie dayes.
            
               
                  MY welbeloued Couſin,
            
            eache liuing thing created on earth, aſwell the brutiſh beaſts, as alſo fethered ſoules, yeldes tribute to man. The Oxe yeldes his necke to the yoke, his ſkinne to make ſhooes, and his fleſhe to be eaten. The Sheepe, his carcaſe for the reliefe of man, his fleeſe to make cloth to couer our limmes, whereby we are defended from ſtormie Winter. The Gooſe giues her fethers to make ſhafies for defence of our countrie, her quilles to make pennes, which write lawes and ſtatutes: whereby our Common weale is mainteined and vpholden. If this diſpoſition be found in things meere voide of reaſon and vnderſtanding, much more ought man to yeld accompt of his talent, ſith God hath created him after his owne ſimilitude and likeneſſe, indued him with wiſedome, and giuen him ſuch preeminence, that all things on earth are vnder his ſubiection. The conſideration whereof (my welbeloued Couſin) hath moued me at this preſent to penne this ſimple volume, as a teſtimonie of the good will which I beare you: whoſe abilitie, had it beene anſwerable to good will, would haue then aſſuredly preſented you with a iewell of farre greater value, the which, if you accept in good part, my labour hath his hire, and you ſhall not onely incourage mee to imploy my ſtudie to a matter of deeper iudgement, but towardes you alwayes, during life, binde me firme and faithfull.
         
         
            
            To the Reader.
            
               THIS one thing I finde moſte true and euident (gentle Reader,) that nothing more infecteth the minde of man, then the horrible monſter idleneſſe: by the which we daily ſee, no ſmall number drenched in the Seas of manifolde miſeries. Like as yron, if it be not occupied, will quickly waxe ruſtie: and as a flower or plant placed in fertile ſoyle, without water will loſe the ſappe, and become withered: euen ſo, the minde of man, if it be not exerciſed, will eftſoone become dull, and alter his qualitie. This being vndoubtedly found moſte plaine and manifeſt, that idleneſſe is incident to ſo many caſuall calamities, hath incouraged mee to preſent thee with theſe ſimpleinuentions, altogether for an exerciſe, then any vaine glorie: leaſt otherwiſe, my mind fraught with idleneſſe, become dull for want of exerciſe. Thus, hoping thou wilt take them in good parte, I bidde thee farewell.
         
      
      
         
            
            ¶ A pretie and ſhorte diſcourſe of the duetie of a Seruingman.
            
               ALthoughe the Seruingman bée diſdained, and had in ſmall regarde amongeſt a number: yet doth he deſerue to be had in high eſtimation for his worthineſſe & calling. Who in all our countrie maketh a brauer ſhewe at a triumph then the Seruingman? Who ſooner trained to battaile and becomes a Souldier? Who better delighteth the mind with pleaſant exerciſe, as hawking, hunting, and ſuch like, then the Scruingman? Not euery one hauing a blade by his ſide, or liuerie cote on his backe, may be termed a Seruingman: for ſome there are which will crowd them ſelues into their companie, whoſe brutiſh liues neuer ſawe one point of ſeruice: ſuch may be properly called Hindes. Hindes.
            
            For foure eſpeciall pointes there are, whereby to knowe a Seruingman: Godlineſſe, Clenlineſſe, Foure points to knowe a ſeruingman, to be godly, cleanly, bold, and diligent. Audacitie, and Diligence, which are the chiefeſt ornamentes that garniſhe his perſon, without the which he may not be imbraced amongeſt that worthie companie. For this worde Seruingman, hath great relation to his kind: for a Seruingman may be applied to diuerſe cōmodities: as ſeruing God, ſeruing his Prince, ſeruing his Countrie, which way he may profite his Common weale, and not to beare the name of a Seruingman only for outward ſhewe, who in liuing are viler then ſenſleſſe beaſtes, wanting ciuil gouernement, who may be well compared vnto Drones, which lurke in the hiues of

Bées, & liue by their labours. But him I accompt worthy that calling, which for one ſingular qualitie VVho deſerue to be rightly and properly called Seruingmen deſerueth the ſame: as ſome for the gift of the mind, ſome for the exploites in defence of his countrie, ſome for actiuitie, ſome for cunning in weapons, ſome for riding of horſes, ſome for ſeruice at a table, with diuers other things apt for a ſeruingman, which are euident tokens that he hath imployed his youth to that end and purpoſe, whereby to attaine to ſome preferment and winne credit, whereby hée may be receiued into the number of Seruingmen.
            What maketh the Citizens, yea and the countriemen haue in ſuch diſdaine the ſeruingman? Only Cauſes of contempt & diſdaine conceiued againſt Seruingmen. his lewd gouernment, as riott in apparell, dronkenneſſe, quarelling in the ſtréetes, playing vnthriftily at dice and cardes their ſubſtance, ſwearing moſt deteſtable and horrible other: whereby we daily ſée, by that meanes they hazarde their health, & diſcredit themſelues by ſuch diſorder: who wantonly conſuming the ſame, are forced through extreame want and neceſſitie, to robb and ſteale, that oftimes hardly they eſcape without perill of death. By this meanes they much hinder the preferment of Seruingmē. Such haue I thought good to be termed reprobates: for there cannot be more commendation Reprobates. in a Seruingman, then to ſée his life cléerely lead by vertue, alwayes applying his minde to honeſt exerciſe: for otherwiſe his eſtate and calling of due order and gouernement is depriued: for happie dayes excéede the heaped ſummes. And of this be aſſured, ſuch company as thou frequenteſt, of ſuch conuerſation art thou iudged. Therefore the more thou indeuoureſt thy ſelf in vertuous exerciſes, the greater is thy glorie and renowne.
            Percaſe to ſome in this worlde, to liue in ſuche

ſorte, thou ſhalt be accompted ridiculous. It may be of thoſe which wante gouernement: but ſuche as are lead by wiſedomes rule, and policie, ſhall haue thée in no ſmall price and highe eſtimation: the more vertue thou embraceſt, the greater is thy credit. And further, there is annexed to ye duetie of a Seruingmā, theſe thrée ſpeciall points, to be Gentle, Truſtie and Carefull; for wanting Gentlenes, he is contemned: hauing no Credit, alwayes miſtruſted: Gentle, Truſtie, Carefull. voide of Care, litle regarded.
            We ſée daily by experience, howe circumſpecte eache Gentleman is, in receiuing a ſeruaunt, doubtfull to take him without greate warrantize: and this is, by reaſon that youth hauing their libertie, & nouzeled ſo long in idleneſſe, are prone and apt to vice and wickedneſſe, vtterly vndoing them ſelues thorough their owne wilfulneſſe, that impoſſible it is, to bring them to any perfection, as the olde ſaying manifeſtly affirmeth.

                  Naturam expellas furca licet, vſque recurret.
               
            
            That which is ingraffed by nature, neither threatenings, or any perſuaſion may alter: And if it happen ſuch one, who hauing their libertie, bée enterteined into ſeruice: what offence ſo euer he commit to his maiſter, he thinkes it greate ſcorne to be reformed, be is of ſo vile & dogged a nature: and this is the cauſe, ſo many are maiſterleſſe: wherby it commeth to paſſe, that ſeruices are purchaſed by money. For a number, hauing good qualities, & deſcended of honeſt parentage: by their meanes are greatly hindered. For what is the common ſaying amongſt moſt men? If a Seruingman repaire to a maide or widowe, by way of marriage, whereby to winne himſelfe preferment, but ſtraightway they murmur amongeſt themſelues, backebiting him

ſhamefully with flaunderous ſpeaches, calling him ſpend thriſt. A lamentable hearing, that all Seruingmen, for ſome lewde perfome ſakes, ſhoulde be condemned: for this is moſt certeine, that the leaſt faulte a Seruingman comitteth, is greatly remembred: therefore it ſtandeth them vppon, to haue ſpeciall regard to avoyde ſuſpicion, conſidering their credit is their chiefeſt riches, which once being loſt, of the world they are forſaken.
            An other kind of Seruingmen there is, which profeſſeth that life but vpon extremitie, and that is the Seruingmen vpon extremitie. riche Farmours ſonne, who hearing the drumme ſounde preparing to muſter, is meruellous fearefull to become a ſouldier, lamenting heauily to his cockering mother, to he a meanes for him he may not be preſſed: for (ſaith he) I am your onely dearling, and to ſée me miſcarrie it would ſhorten your days: for of this I am aſſured, that if I goe on warfare, I am neuer like to returne home againe to my fathers houſe: for my fortune was reade me, when I was a little one, that I ſhoulde be ſhotte quite thorough with a gunne: therefore, (honnie mother) as you tender my ſafetie, procure me a ſeruice, that I may farrie at home. Then the mother, (to ſaue the prettie ſoule) ſéeketh out ſome preſent, and in haſt repaireth to ſome Gentleman of credit, & vppon requeſt made, forthwith is receiued, & thus for feare of his coſterd becomes a Seruingman. Then Gentlemen perceiuing they may haue ſeruantes Gratis, 
               Seruice without wages. without wages, which will play the Seruingmen, & drudge in their buſineſſe, turne out olde ſeruitors to go pick daſies, who farre from friends & acquaintance, béeing vnexperte of trade and occupation, fall into deſperation, by meanes of pouertie.
            So that hereby the Farmour maketh a rodde for

his owne taile: for it ſtandeth by good reaſon, that being once in aduerſitie, if they haue any ſparke of manhood in them, rather then they will want reliefe they will ſéeke to come by it by vnlawfull meanes. And who will they lie in weight to robbe, and be reuenged of, but on ſuch rich churles, as were cauſes of their vndooing. And thus they, by their double diligence, labour & take ſuche paines, that they créepe in ſuch fauour with their maiſter, who with their profitable ſeruice is ſo infected with couetouſneſſe, that he hath no conſideration of his olde ſeruants true and faithfull diligence, who for their long ſeruice, haue well deſerued a iuſt recompenſe. So that the Gentleman and the Yeoman, aſwell the one as Gentlemen & yeomen do cauſe ſeruice to decay. the other, haue brought ſeruices to a verie weake ſtay, that a number at this day haue ſeruantes and giue them no wages: and if they haue any one ſeruing him, which wanteth liuing, if he hath not ſome good qualitie, in good faith of his maiſter he ſhalbe litle regarded.
            Therefore the eſtate of a ſeruingman is brought to this point, that if he practiſe not ſome trade in his youth, let him be aſſured to begge in his age, as the prouerb manifeſtly affirmeth: Qui antè non cauet poſt dolebit. He that hath no care afore what miſchiefes may afterward inſue, ſhall greately repent him.
            Thoſe which vppon ſuch extremitie profeſſe the life of Seruingmen, may be properly called Sucklinges, or otherwiſe Caterpillers: for they hinder Sucklings or Caterpillers. thoſe which longe time haue ſerued, not profiting them ſelues, but waſting their ſubſtance: So that hereby they thinke to eſchewe one miſchiefe, but vndoubtedly they fall into a worſer. For they vſe a kinde of diligence, but to ſerue their owne turnes: But as ſoone as the brunt is paſt, they beginne to

waxe lazie, and take heart at graſſe, thinking with them ſelues, What dizards are we hauing rich parentes, A ſuppoſed ſpeache. and wealth enough to mainteine our calling, to moyle & toyle in ſuch ſort, & other of our fellowes, hauing litle or nothing to take to, carrie the countenance of Gentlemē, & we to liue thus like ſlaues? Then labour is turned to loytering, the noſegay in the hatt to an Oſtrich fether, his ruſſet ſlapp to a french hoſe, his buckled ſhooe to a Spaniſhe pumpe, his ſparing life to prodigalitie, vntill of All vpon brauer
                     〈…〉
                  e. force they become ſouldiers: for they créepe ſo déepe into the merchantes bookes, and béecome ſuch proper Billmen, that in the ende their ſilkes ſweates out all their reuenewes. Thus they, not content with their owne eſtates, aſpire to be Gentlemen, by meanes of their fine array, that they growe ſo luſtie, that they think ſcorne of their owne parents: but it is commonly ſéene, The forward trée beareth leſſe fruite.
            What auaileth the mariner to ſaile without his compaſſe? What good doth a faire houſe wanting implementes of houſhold? What profiteth braue clothes in any perſon wanting witt and gouernement? They may be aptly compared vnto a corrupt Carion in a golden cup: let them decke themſelues neuer ſo gaie, & want the chiefeſt ornament, that is Wiſedome, in good faith, they ſhalbe but imbraced amongſt the moſt ſort of men for lucre or gaine, and Wiſedome a principall ornament. foothed for that they haue. Therefore, in my ſimple opinion, I think it more credit for them, to go in the fore ward amongſt the number of yeomen, then to come laſt in the number of Gentlemen, being alwayes fearefull to challenge that title: ſo that, when all is gone, from the countrie cart they came, and to the London cart they muſt, that they ring ſuche a

peale that they drawe a yearde of cleane hempe beſides the knott.
            But nowe, to come to the chiefe point and purpoſe which beautifieth a ſeruingman, which is, To To be godly is the chiefeſt thing that beautifleth a Seruingman. be godly. Nothing can proſper which we take in hand, or goe about, vnleſſe we applie our minde to the ſeruice of God: for him muſt we honour aboue all things, eyther in heauen or earth, beléeue in him onely to be our Sauiour, aſke for all good things of him alone: We muſt be content, not onely for the glorie of God, to beſtowe our goods, but alſo our life, if God ſo requireth: to cleaue vnto him as the foundation of all goodneſſe, to looke for health at his handes, to ſerue him in all kinde of fortune, to ſéeke his glorie aboue all thinges, and to ſerue him according to his worde, to walke in ſuch ſorte as ſéemeth to his glorie, not in banqueting and dronkenneſſe, not in chambering and wantonneſſe, not in ſtrife and enuying: but alwayes haue God before our eyes. Remember we liue not to eate, but eate to liue: for nature is content with a little: whatſoeuer is ſuperfluous, is ſinnefull and damnable. Remēber that Adam & Eue did fall thorough gluttonie. Remember that Noe, when he was dronke, was Particular examples touching the in conueniences ſpringing frō exceſsiue eating & drinking. vncouered in his tent, & lay with his priuities bare. Remember that Loth, when he was dronke, committed inceſt with his daughters. Remember when the children of Iſrael ſate downe to eate and drink, they did ſtraight way fall into idolatrie and worſhiped the golden Calfe. Remember that Amon, the brother of Abſolon, was ſlaine at a banquet, when he was dronke. Remember that Holofernes being dronke, was ſlaine of a woman. Remember that at a banquet, it was graunted that Saint Iohn the Baptiſt ſhoulde loſe his head, and yet no cauſe why:

but for informing the king with trueth, which the flatterers miſliked of, and could not abide. Remember the riche glutton, that fared deintily euerie day, was buried and throwne downe into hell. Remember the wickednes of Sodome was pride, fulneſſe of meate, and abundance of idleneſſe. Howe many diſeaſes come thereof? Solomon ſaith, Where is woe? where is ſorrowe? where is ſtrife? where is bralling? where are othes: but amongſt thoſe whiche vſe ſuche vices? Theſe are terrible hiſtories to admoniſhe a ſeruingman: therfore it is the duetie of a Chriſtian, to eſchewe ſuch company: for ſuch as are dronkards and riottous perſons ſhal come to pouertie. Therefore we muſt frame our liues in ſuch ſort, that wée may liue ſoberly, diſcréetely, & ſagely: to inſtitute our liues in ſuch ſort, that our owne conſcience neuer accuſe vs of any euill, but teſtifie with vs, that VVho may rightly challēge the name of a Seruingman. we liue to doe all thinges godlie, and he that liueth thus, may rightly challenge the name of a Seruingman.
            There is a certeine dronkenneſſe aſwell in the mind, as in the bodie: for like as the bodie is counted in ſober and ſafe eſtate, ſo long as it is not diſtempered with ſuperfluitie of meates and drinkes: ſo in like manner, ſo long as the minde is not troubled with vicious affectes, but remaineth in his natiue puritie, it is recounted ſober. For a man muſt haue aſpeciall reſpect to the minde, which being dronken with vices, what doth the ſobrietie of the bodie profit? If I kéepe my bodie ſober, & in neuer ſo good temperance, and my minde be dronken with ire, deſire of vengeaunce, whoredome, vncleane thoughts, and ſuch other carnall affects, and worldly luſtes, what doth the ſobrietie of the bodie profit? Therefore, as the bodie is to be kept from dronckenneſſe,

ſo muſt the minde be kept from vices: ſo ſhall we honour God highly, ſerue our Prince truely, & profit our ſelues greatly, and béecome right Seruing men.
            And nowe touching the ſeconde pointe, called The ſecond point required in a Seruingman. Cleanlineſſe, which is meant, that we ſhould weare our garments in comely order, according to our abilitie and calling, and according to ſuch lawes as by our Prince are ſet forth and eſtabliſhed: and not alwayes in exceſſe, and delighting in newe faſhions, which declareth that our mindes are vnſtedfaſt, and alwayes wauering: wherein we woorke our vtter vndoing. For we are ſo pufte vp in ſuch pride and prodigalitie, that if we may not weare ſilkes and veluets, we thincke it a great diſgrace to our perſonages, wherein we hinder our Countrie, & inriche forreigne nations. For if we would weare cloth made in our owne Countrie, according to our predeceſſours, we ſhould finde it a great deale more commodious, and miniſter much reléefe to a number of poore people, in ſetting them aworke: where nowe, they remaine in extreme pouertie, and all by meanes of prodigalitie, being not content with the benefites of our Countrie. The Frocke maketh not the Frier more deuout, but is rather a ſigne of Religion, then a proofe of holineſſe. The fethers make not the birde, nor the garmentes the man. So, glorie reſteth not in the outward ſhewe, be it neuer ſo ſumptuous, but in the perſon garniſhed with honeſt qualities. For the minde delighting in pride & prodigalitie, luſteth after much wickedneſſe. It is not the rich ornament that carrieth commendation, but a modeſt minde and honeſt conuerſation. If a man, hauing ſmall portion, ſpendeth riotouſly farre beyond his abilitie, men ſtreight way will coniecture

that he commeth by it by fraudulent meanes, and is reputed amongeſt them as a wicked liuer. And if any vnlawfull attempt be committed, be he aſſured, he ſhalbe ſuſpected. And although he be neither priuie or conſenting to the fact, yet by meanes of ſuſpicion his name is brought in queſtion. Therefore, in any wiſe haue reſpect to thy calling.
            I knowe a number within theſe fewe yeares, if I ſaide an hundred I went within my compaſſe, hauing large poſſeſſions left them, haue prodigally conſumed the ſame: wherein, if they had obſerued a ciuil order, they might haue had ſufficient enough to haue kept their eſtates, and beſides mainteyned good hoſpitalitie: But where wiſedome wanteth, there followeth decay. A ſhippe not guided, is ſubiect to daunger: the braines being diſtempered, the pate wilbe idle: the rootes being rotten, the trée wil periſh. And ſo thirdly concerning audacitie, whiche may be properly called boldneſſe, which being tempered with modeſtie, ſetteth foorth a Seruingman Audacitie & boldneſſe ſetteth out a Seruingman in comely order. in comely order: for this worde Boldneſſe, hath manie good vertues in it comprehended. Be bolde to honour God. Be bolde to defend thy Countrie. Be bolde to followe ſuch lawes as thy Prince hath ordeined. Be bolde to ſpeake trueth. By boldneſſe in battaile, great honours haue béene wonne. By boldneſſe, meane perſons haue inioyed faire Ladies. By boldneſſe the valiant capteine hath diſcouered many ſtraunge countries. And, as the prouerbe affirmeth:

                  Audaces Fortuna iuuat timidoſqué repellit.
               
Fortune much fauoureth the ſtout and the valiant: but the faint heart, and the coward ſhée vtterly forſaketh. And if it chaunce, thou art ſent of any meſſage, be bolde to doe thy duetie: with humble reuerence

let thy talke be tempered, in ſuch modeſt maner, that each worde be couched in due order. Haue reſpect to thy talke, that thou vſe comely geſture: thy legges not crooked, but ſtreight as may be: neyther thy hands playing with any of thy garmentes: thy eyes not ſtaring, but alwayes kéeping a modeſt countenance. And if vppon courteſie thou art called to any worſhipfull table, let not thy tongue be lauiſh, or runne at libertie: ſo ſhalt thou diſcredite thy ſelfe, and be accounted ſimple. Uſe not often quaffing at thy meale, but thrée or foure times let be ſufficient. Reache not thy handes ouer the table, nor put thy fingers often in the diſhe: for it excéedeth good manner. For being a ſtraunger, each one will carue thée. Kéepe not thy knife alwayes in thy hande, but at ſuch time conuenient, as thou haſt occaſion to cutt thy victuals, but lay it on the cloth along by the trencher. And if thou art aſked a queſtion, aunſwere him ſagely with humble reuerence.
            And ſo fourthly, concerning diligence, whiche Diligence, what preferments it procureth to ſuch as vſe it. may be aptly applyed to Painfulneſſe. We ſee no man can atteine to any riches, without greate labour and diligence: as to watch, when other ſléepe: to trauell, when other reſt: to worke, when other play. Howe many haue we daily ſéene raiſed from meane eſtate, to rule and gouerne Cōmon weales, and onely by their diligence? Haue not diuerſe by their induſtrie béene called to Princes Counſell? Haue we not ſéene the Lawyers paſſe by degrées, and determine cauſes in ſeate of Iuſtice? The ſimple ſcholer hath thereby much profited. The vnſkilfull apprentice, in time hath béene verie cunning in his trade and occupation. By diligence, we may quite alter our wicked liues, and become

Chriſtians.
            Laſtly, haue not many men, ſeruing their lords and maiſters, béene rewarded with liuings, thorough painefulneſſe, whereby they haue béen mainteined during their liues? Therefore, Lillie herein moſte wiſely affirmeth, ſaying theſe wordes:

                  Nil tam difficile eſt quod non ſolertia vincat:
               
Nothing is ſo harde to learne, but by diligence it is brought to paſſe. Ariſtotle ſpent his youth verie Ariſtotle. Plato. Cato. riottouſly, and Plato was no leſſe addicted to delight in amorous verſe. Cato was olde before he learned Latine letters, and yet became one of the greateſt Oratours of his time. Theſe examples are ſufficient to proue, that by diligence any perfection may be atteined. Let no man ſtand ſo much in his owne conceipt, as to ſay, I will do no more then my couenaunt requireth: Or, if thou art deſcended of a worſhipfull ſtocke, to growe in ſtomache by meanes of gentilitie. Neyther, if thou arte borne to any poſſeſſions, to thincke it a ſcorne by meanes of thy riches. For this hinders not ſo much thy ſelfe, but doth rather miniſter yll counſell to a number, and maketh them withdrawe their mindes from doing well, and to followe lewde example. For if thou be neuer ſo noble of birth, if thou once become a ſeruaunt, whatſoeuer thou do to thy maiſter aboue thy promiſe, if it tende to his profite and commoditie, is but thy bounden duetie. Againe, if ſuch a one which doth his duetie farre beyond his couenaunt, if for his labour he be not conſidered, in good faith he ſerues a ſimple maiſter. But be he aſſured, although he finde no rewarde on earth, his maiſter in heauen ſhall largely yeld him double recompenſe.
            I neuer ſawe as yet, any in my life, for too much diligence employed to their maiſters, that did euer

want in their aged dayes: but many (the more is the pittie) I do knowe, for ſlacking their dueties, & vntruſtie ſeruice, haue beggered their maiſters, who with a iuſt plague for their labour, haue béene rewarded according to their deſertes: whoſe eſtates at this preſent time are moſte miſerable to behold: wandering as outcaſtes amongeſt the froth and Vntruſtie ſeruaunts, frothe and ſcomme of the people. ſcomme of vnhappie people. What if thou diddeſt acquaint thy ſelfe to learne or practiſe all kinde of thinges touching the charge of houſekéeping, from the ſimple plowman vnto the ſuperior ſeruaunt? were this any diſgrace to thy calling? no certeinly, but rather a commoditie: for thou ſhalt gather therby greate knowledge and vnderſtanding. For, what thing is more perfect then that, which we learne by experience? We may not thinke to liue alwayes in ſeruice, but at the laſt to haue houſe and familie of our owne: then the experience which we haue learned through our diligence, ſhall inſtruct vs the better, what belongeth to the duetie of our owne ſeruauntes.
            And if ſo be thou art in credite with thy maiſter, that it pleaſeth him to make account of thée aboue Pride & diſdaine muſt be auoided. the reſt of thy fellowes, be not therefore proude, & diſdaine not thine inferiours, for ſo ſhalt thou haue manie enimies: but rather the more in credite, the more courteous. For, courteſie, is the only badge of a Gentleman and deſcendeth from nobilitie. Again, Courteſie the cogniſance & badge of a Gentleman. gentle communication and friendly countenaunce, one to another, expelleth all rancour and malice, & purchaſeth many friendes. Did not Antonius the luſtie gallant preferre Cleopatra the blacke Aegyptian for her incōparable courteſie before all the blaſing ſtarres in the citie of Rome? It is the onely pathway to praiſe, and the brightneſſe thereof is eclipſed

by pride and arrogancie. What is Honour, Wealth, Beautie, or braue Attire, without courteſie? It is aſſuredly nothing elſe but a goodly gréene trée, which floriſheth with leaues and bloſſoms, and bringeth foorth no fruite.
            Some there are, which will ſtande highly vppon their reputation, for that they haue a reaſonable portion to leane vnto, and holdes it great ſcorne to aſſociate them ſelues with their fellowes of inferiour calling, being not of like abilitie: ſome againe, for their ſtocke and kindred. Such perſons as will growe hautie by meanes of their wealth (being the giftes of Fortune, which is vncerteine) abuſe the Vanitie and follie to brag of kindred or of riches. ſame. And ſuch which glorie in them ſelues by meanes of their greate aliaunce, declare to be in them but méere fooliſhneſſe. Aſſure thy ſelfe of this, that if thou arte alied to manie, and yet haſt but fews friendes, what profiteth thée to boaſt of thy high birth? For, if thou haſt neuer ſo many kinſmen, and if thou doeſt not indeuour thy ſelfe ſome kinde of way to pleaſure them, their friendſhip towards thée in time of néede will become weake and verie ſlender, and thou thy ſelfe little accompted of. But perhaps, if thou viſiteſt them as a ſtraunger, muche welcome: but if thou accompt it as thy home, they will compare thée to a freſhe water fiſhe, which being kept long, will ſauour and become lothfome: Euen ſo, if thou burden thy friendes otherwiſe then a gueſt ought to do, they will repine at thée. Therefore, neyther for birth or riches, be not diſdainfull, but the more courteous, if thou wilt be well thought of. For, haue we not read of Kings gouerning whole kingdomes, and other Nobles, with large reuenues liuing in all felicitie, haue abandoned their countries, and liued in moſte miſerable bondage?

Suche is the rewarde of thoſe that growe proude, and are vnthankful for that they haue. For Fortune fraudulent and faithleſſe. it is commonly ſéene, that when Fortune ſmileth moſte on any mortall wight, then workes ſhée greateſt deceipt. As ſhée hath pleaſure to raiſe meane perſons to credite and dignitie, ſo likewiſe taketh ſhée as great delight to throwe them downe into aduerſitie.
            Delight not to complaine of any of thy fellowes, Complaints muſt be eſchewed. to currie fauour and diſquiet thy maiſter: but after a friendly manner vſe gentle perſuaſions, that if any of thy fellowes haue neglected his duetie, tell him ſecreatly that it may be reformed. At thy maiſters table haue great care and diligence, and eſpecially Precepts concerning maners and behauiour. at ſuch time as there are many ſtraungers. Liſten not to euery tale that at the boord is recited: and if ſo be it miniſter occaſion of laughter, yet in any wiſe do thou refraine and kéepe ſilence. Let thine eyes be fixed round about the table, leſt bread, béere, or cleane trenchers be wanting. Neuer offer to take any diſhe from the table, vnleſſe thou ſetteſt a better in his place, or elſe when thou ſéeſt it almoſt emptie: but if there be not diuerſitie of diſhes, then take vp the table: notwithſtanding, be not ſo haſtie, but vntill ſuch time as they haue talked awhile after their victuals: but at the court, Quicke Caruers in Court. the ſooner the better: for there are quicke caruers. Uſe not often figging in and out with a trencher, more delighting to fill thy paunche, then thou haſt care of thy ſeruice: although thy maiſter eſpie thée not, yet ſtraungers will marke thée. Uſe not any vncomely ſpéeche at thy meale, which ſhall excéede the boundes of honeſtie, amongſt thy fellowes, and Chaſtitie once ſpotted is neuer reiouered. chiefly before maides: conſidering their chaſtitie is a daungerous treaſure, which once being ſpoiled, is

neuer recouered. For, that maide, whoſe eare is pliant to laſciuious talke, although her chaſtitie take no dammage, yet ſuſpicion doth grawe amongeſt the common people. Take heede in any wiſe of horrible ſwearing, leaſt that thou incurre Gods Swering may not be vſed. heauie diſpleaſure: for Falſa iuratio eſt damnoſa, vera iuratio eſt periculoſa, nulla iuratio eſt ſecura. A falſe othe is damnable, a true othe is perilous, & no othe is ſafe, vnleſſe it be before a magiſtrate: in cauſes of controuerſie. Report not any thing which ſhalbe ſpoken at thy maiſters table, vnleſſe it touche thy Prince and Souereigne, for ſo ſhalt thou ſoone purchaſe his heauie diſpleaſure: but alwayes haue this ſaying in thy minde, Video & taceo, I ſée and holde my peace: which (no doubt) well obſerued, ſhall further thy quietneſſe. Challenge not to thy ſelfe finer fare then reaſon requireth: neither finde often Behauiour at boorde. fault with any of thy victuals, vnleſſe thou ſéeſt it verie ſcarce and vnreaſonable: reuite not the cooke for the ſame, vntill thy maiſter be priuie of his dealings: for ſome time thy maiſter may fare but homly by meanes of foule weather, and other caſualties: for many miſfortunes be happen in houſekeeping. Therefore, be content with ſuch fare as thou wouldeſt giue thine owne ſeruauntes, if thou hadſt a houſe of thine owne. And if thou happen to trauell Behauiour abroad. to any place, where thou ſéeſt any nouelties, which thou art aſſured thy maiſter or maiſtres well liketh of, ſpare not for the price, although it be deare: but buy ſomewhat. For, what is better eſtéemed then that which is geaſon? And it is worthie double thankes, then if thou were required.
            When thou rideſt any iorney with thy maiſter, do not vſe to loyter farre behinde, and chiefly when he paſſeth through any towne or village: but while

thou art in preſence of people, kéepe a comely order: for that is commendable, and much for his worſhip: but if thou be careleſſe; then thou challengeſt an intereſt amongeſt the foure and twentie orders.
            When thou comeſt at night to thy Inne, haue care of thy maiſter, that his lodging may in any wiſe be ſwéete and cleanly, his ſhéetes white waſhed, and verie well ayred, his bootes ſée foorthwith made cleane and ſtuffed with ſtrawe in time of foule wether, and bring them vp to his chamber: ſée nothing be wanting when he riſeth next morning. Haue care to the Tapſters, what neceſſaries they bring, and reckon what thinges they ſet on the table: for Tapſters vſe iuggling. they will vſe iuggling to mainteine their brauerie. And when thou art abroade in iorney with thy maiſter, be not negligent: but at night, when thou goeſt to bed, and quietly art laide, call to minde what things thou haſt done all the whole daye, as alſo what weightie affaires haue béen committed to thy charge, and thou ſhalt with continuall vſe bring thy ſelfe to a moſte quicke and perfecte memorie, and ſhalt not onely by this meanes haue a good remembraunce, but beſides, if thou haſt ſpent the daye in the abuſe of God, and his glorie, thou maiſt with a repentant heart call thine owne conſcience to reckoning, and aſke God mercie, and the ſooner prepare thy ſelfe readie when God ſhall call thée.
         
         
            
            Certeine Letters verie neceſſarie for Seruingmen.
            
            
               W. B. to his ſingular good Lord for his captiuitie.
               
                  
                     RIght honourable,
               
               the conſideration of my preſent calamities, cauſeth mée to make my carefull cōplaintes, with all humble and duetifull ſubmiſſion, perſuading my ſelfe, that there is no ſuch way to remedie my griefe, and reſtore againe to it ſelfe a minde perplexed and pittifully plunged through diuerſe déepe diſtreſſes, then there to vnfolde the ſame, where iuſtice with mercie, where ſeueritie with remorce, where pitie with pardon in the meaneſt offences ruleth and hath her Souereigntie. And whereas I knowe my ſelfe guiltles of any grieuous and notorious Remedies againſt griefe. crime, I am the more imboldened to write vnto your honour, not doubting, but there I ſhall find fauour and grace, where God and Nature hath moſte aboundantly beſtowed the ſame: and that you will of your excéeding bountie, clemencie, and goodneſſe, pardon follie not ioyned with any impietie, I beſeeche you, euen for his ſake that ſaued vs all, that you will not ſuffer mée to be vtterly caſt away: A petition opening his preſent caſe. for I am deſtitute of money and all maner of friendſhip: and vnleſſe you ſpeedily ſhew grace and fauour, I vtterly periſhe, being threatened to be throwne downe amongeſt the froth and ſcomme of the vnhappie people. I truſt your honour remembreth well, that more true praiſe and glorie is atteined by pardoning, then by puniſhing. All the Romane Princes were of this opinion. We holde it (ſaith the hiſtorie) more honourable, to pardon

ſuch as offend vs, then to chaſten thoſe which reſiſt our power. And verily, puniſhment is a thing naturall and humane: but to giue pardon and life, is the gifte and bleſſing of God: by which it commeth to paſſe, that men eſtéeme not the greatneſſe & maieſtie of the immortall God for the puniſhement where with he correcteth vs, as for the mercie he vſeth. Wherefore, I humbly yeld, and moſte willingly ſubmitt my ſelfe to your honours grace, fauour, and mercie.
            
            
               R. S. to his friend T. D. for his long impriſonment.
               
                  RIght honourable.
               
               If two brutiſhe creatures, together long continuing, be ſeparated, they will (according to their kind) ſhewe foorth a paſſion: the Lyon will roare, the Cow will yell, the Swine wil grunt, the Dogge cannot but fill the ayre with an intollerable and yrke ſome howling. If this diſpoſition be found in things méere voide of reaſon & vnderſtanding, much more is the condition of man ſubiect to ſorrowe and heauineſſe, in whome Nature bréedeth a more quicke and raging ſenſe of féeling: in ſo muche (I thinke verily) that ſo many times a man ſuffereth death, howe often in a day he ſéeth him ſelfe ſhut vp, or diuided from the ſocietie he dearely and tenderly loueth: or exiled the place which he chiefly liketh. It is (no doubt) right terrible to the fleſhe, to die with the ſworde: but to To be in perpetual ſorrow and heauines of mind, what it may well be termed. be in perpetuall ſorrowe and heauineſſe of minde, may not ſo well be termed a death, as a verie furie and helliſhe torment. And better it were for many to ſuffer without feare, that which they expecte in griefe and penſiueneſſe of ſpirite, then trembling

to be alwayes in martyrdome. Right honourable, I vtter not theſe ſpéeches, to ſhew my guilt, which I truſt appeareth not heynous in your eyes: as to manifeſt my gréefe, which to mée is found moſt tedious, and too too excéeding raging: féeling (as it were) my bodie faint and wearied, being preſſed with the weightie burthen of your heauie diſpleaſure.
               Wherfore (moſt worthie counſellour) exerciſe vppon mée the plentie of your bountie, that I may liuing rather commende your mercie, then in ſilence complaine of your ſeueritie. And thus leauing your worthineſſe in the handes of your counſell, I wiſhe you thoſe felicities which your owne heart deſireth.
            
            
               H. L. to his ſingular good maiſtreſſe, for procuring his pardon.
               THis one thing I learned by the inſtinct and benefite of nature, (my Souereigne good maiſtres) had I neuer peruſed learned treatiſes diſcourſing manifoldly the ſelfe ſame in effecte: that, Happie dayes excéede the heaped ſummes, and long life, (according to the opinion of all) to them chéefely is found moſt ſwéete and plauſible, who being daungerouſly intrapped, haue deſpaired of pittie, or as Long life, to whome it is moſt ſweete and pleaſant. wanderers through want of a ſkilfull Pilote, haue fallen into the ſwallowing ſurge of Silla, readie to be deuoured in that gulfe, and as it were yelding to ſo greate a miſerie and wretchedneſſe. For this ſtandes in common regarde with all, rather to ſéeke to prolong our life, then increaſe our wealth. And the Souereigne delight, and the pleaſure of oure dayes, is the ſolace of life. This being vndoubtedly found moſt true and euident, that there is in vs ingraffed an earneſt and ardent affection of life,

and that life to them is founde moſte deare & pleaſant, who haue béene in perill of death: How ſhould I be addreſſed, or in what manner may I yelde all obſeruaunce to her, by whoſe petition and earneſt ſuite, I haue auoided the terrour of death? Uerily, it is not in my ſlender capacitie to diſcloſe the duetie that aunſwers your deſert, the inſufficiencie and baſeneſſe of the one, is ſo much inferior to the other, Deſert exceeding duetie. in the excéeding greatneſſe and goodneſſe. Wherefore, ſith my ſkill and abilitie is too ſimple to expreſſe liuely a thing of ſo high a nature, I cloſe my lippes, as one vanquiſhed with the excellencie of your goodnes. Thus rendering imnortall praiſe for your greate goodneſſe, and crauing pardon for my preſumptuous boldneſſe, I moſte humbly take my leaue, beſéeching God to lende you long life with happie dayes.
            
            
               W. S. to his louing father, declaring that the cauſe why he did not write, was for his vnhappie ſtate.
               I Haue this long time forborne to write vnto you (deare father) not in any negligent reſpect, as not remembring with what humilitie I am bounde by the lawe of God to obey you, or with what affection I am inioyned by the lawe of Nature to reuerence The cauſe of ſlacking duetie. you: but Fortune, ſince my departure from you, ſéemeth to haue dealt with mée ſo frowardly, that I haue béene by no good order induced to giue you intelligence of my eſtate, leſt that percaſe the opinion of miſliking which is alreadie in your ingendered, viewing the continuance of theſe my ſo many caſuall calamities, might to my greate hinderaunce confirme in you a iudgement. And yet, what

haue I not to fore painefully abode, which preſently I doe not with all patience ſuffer, reteining alwayes a reſolute and vnconquerable minde? For this, by peruſing wittie and profound diſcourſes of Philoſophers, I learne: that albeit aduerſitie hath power to vexe and trouble the condition of mortall men: yet it hath no power to chaunge the conſtancie and courage of a valiant and puiſſant minde, which in all reſolutions and chaunges of times, reteines one firme and vnmoueable vertue: Euen as a trée which being well rooted, although it be ſhaken with many violent windes, yet in his firme there is no power to ſupplant him. We through aduerſitie become humble, wiſe, and perfect: and the offender is better reformed by the proofe of afflictions, then by any other meanes: for, knowing them to be the meſſengers of God, he debateth not the griefes he féeleth, but calleth his owne conſcience to a reckoning: Afflictions are the meſſengers of God. he glorifieth him ſelfe in tribulation, knowing that tribulation brings patience, patience bréedes experience, experience raiſeth hope, hope thus wrought and couched, cannot be confounded. In conſideration whereof, I déeme him moſte vnhappie, which hath not béene infortunate: for he that He is vnhappie that hath not beene in fortunate. hath not béene accuſſomed with aduerſe and crooked Fortune, hath leaſt power ouer his paſſions. And ſuch as neuer haue felt perplexitie, can little iudge of the worthines of patience. Wherefore (deare father) miſlike not of that which in the ende brings true and perfect felicitie. I moſte humbly take my leaue, crauing your fatherly fauour & bleſſing.
            
            
               T. D. to his inconſtant wife, for her malicious ſtomache againſt him.
               
                  
WIfe, I do not a litle maruell at your vncourteous dealing towards mée: howbeit, as I haue iuſt cauſe to ſtomache the ſame, ſo aſſure your ſelfe, I will not be vnmindfull in yelding recompenſe, as opportunitie and occaſion ſhall ſerue. In the meane while, I am content to ſpeake little & ſuffer muche, not for that I ſtande in awe of you or any of yours, but that I ſée you voide of reaſon and gouernement Women are voide of reaſon and gouernement. belonging to a woman, whoſe crooked inclination is ſuche, and in you ſo déepely rooted, that it can no more chaunge your condition, then the Uiper his poyſoning, or the Leopard his ſpottes. You profeſſe outwardly a maruellous ſhewe of religion, I much maruell then that ſuch miſchiefe can harbour in ſo godly a creature, whoſe vndermining pate ſought meanes to ſhorten my dayes. But nowe I finde the olde prouerbe true? Amongeſt ſweete flowers doeth lurke the ſtinging Snake. It is not the point Latet anguis in herba. of any woman once coupled in the bandes of Marriage, to miniſter any occaſion of ſlaunder, whereby the life of him, whome ſhée hath peculiarly choſen, may be defamed: but by all meanes poſſible to indeuour her ſelfe to auoide ſuſpicion, weying that all The glorie of the wife reſteth in her huſband. her glorie reſteth in her huſbande, and that in the huſband is conteined the eſtimation of the wife. If this be the point of any honeſt woman to thirſte after bloud, let all the worlde iudge: for mine owne parte, I can but lament your follie. In hurting mée you hinder your ſelfe: I beare with your infirmitie, for that you are a woman. Wherefore, if you will further your quietneſſe, leaue off thoſe ſlaunderous ſpéeches, leſt the worlde condemne you, & yeld you vp to miſerie and ſhame.
            
            
               
               H. W. to M. H. being moued without cauſe.
               
                  I Receiued your letters, which when I had read, mée thought they were ſo darke and obſcure vnto mée, that ſcarce I vnderſtoode your ſtyle: notwithſtanding, in peruſing them ouer, I partly vnderſtood your meaning. But now to the purpoſe. Haue I gone about at any time to ſhorten your dayes? or Speeches expoſtulatorie. haue I ſought mèanes to erect bloudie ſcaffoldes of murder, whereby you might poſſeſſe your vntimely graue? I perceiue for a trifle you can frame complaint, but your wordes vttered without diſcretion, would moue a Sainct to vſe curſt language. And whereas you lay an action of vnkindneſſe againſt mée that I ſhould deliuer a ring to one which doth profeſſe little friendſhip or good will towardes Charged with an action of vnkindneſſe. you: this is (as it were) a going about the buſhe, & (as one would ſaye) to ſteale a Gooſe & ſtick downe a fether. Well, I feare mée your flattering face wil coſt mée a glaſſe of diſſembling water. Thus leauing at this time to trouble you any further, I yeld you vp to your owne follie.
            
            
               A. D. to his friend M. B. that he would procure her fathers good will.
               
                  I Receiued your letters, giuing you a thouſande thankes for your wiſe and courteous anſwere: aduertiſing you, that I meane to procure my friendes, which ſhall (I doubt not) but according to my expectation, moue your father of the excellent loue & Duetie in the one, wiſdome in the other. ſingular affection which I beare towardes you. And for as much as duetie bindeth you to obey your parents: ſo likewiſe wiſedome warneth mée, not onely

to obey, but alſo to indeuour my ſelfe to be at the will and diſpoſition of my friendes. For ſure, your godly bringing vp, and your vertuous diſpoſition, hath ſo bewitched my vnderſtanding, that will I or nill I, my heart honours you. And if all the friends Patheticall phraſes. I haue would hinder my deſires, yet are they not able to quench the feruent flame which tormenteth my fancie, and vexeth the liuely ſpirits of my mind. Therefore, I ſhall deſire you from the bottome of my hearte, that when ſoeuer my ſuite ſhalbe heard, or that by the meanes of my friendes, the effecte of my loue ſhalbe opened vnto your parents, you will remaine a iuſt and ſtedfaſt friend towards mée, who hath alreadie yelded him ſelfe, his life, and all that he hath into your handes. If you ſéeme to iudge otherwiſe, vnhappie wretche that I am, you thruſt To be thruſt downe from the toppe of hope, to the bottome of deſpaire. mée downe headlong from the topp of all hope and comfort, into the bottomleſſe pitt of cruell deſpaire, where I ſhall as one bereft of a heauenly ioy, torment my ſelfe with a helliſhe care. But when I call to mind the ſundrie vertues that God and Nature hath indued you withall, I fully perſuade my ſelfe, that ſuch crueltie cannot harbour in ſo gentle an heart. And thus I ceaſſe, &c.
            
            
               T. B. to his ſingular good L. for his libertie, being accuſed without deſert.
               IN moſte humble and dutifull manner ſheweth vnto your honour, that whereas it pleaſed your good Lordſhip to accept moſt courteouſly my former letters, I am the more imboldened at this time to write vnto your Lordſhips grace and lawfull fauour, deſiring your protection no further to extend it ſelfe, then the righteouſnes of my cauſe, and

the ſimplicitie and plaineſſe of my meaning ſheweth foorth it ſelfe. My cauſe lawfully and generally is A clauſe excuſatorie. this. I am for an attempt lately committed, more lightly accuſed of ſome vnknowen crime and treſpaſſe, then truely accuſed and ſubſtantially conuinced of any apparent fault. My good Lord, not euery miſtie and duſkie vapour, but an excéeding heauie & darke cloud well preſſed propheſieth raine. Not euery vaine ſuſpicion ſo fondly immagined, or lightly His allegorie expounded. fraught, but firmely grounded, bringeth with it vndoubted trueth & eſtimation. The ſtate of my cauſe, the condition of my accuſer, with the particular notes thereof, may fully manifeſt to your honour the cauſe to be honeſt and good. I humbly therefore pray, that your Lordſhip will, with your helping hand, aſſiſt my happleſſe happe, giuing you to vnderſtande, that I haue béene in durance this foure monethes, long deſtitute of all maner of fauour, & friendſhip, finding in my ſelfe no more force remaining, whereby I ſhalbe able to beare this heauie & intollerable burthen.
            
            
               H. B. to his inconſtant and cruell wife.
               WIfe, I feare mée, leſt that you, eyther through too much familiaritie which you haue with ſome froward and ſiniſter friend of mine, or malicious perſuaſion of others: or, (to ſpeake the trueth) thorough an extreme ouerſight of you, in déede, by detecting a ſecrete ſting of malice in your owne breaſt long conceiued, and vnto the worlde vnknowen vntill this time, haue changed your accuſtomed qualitie, and cauſeth you to be ſo malicious and full of enuie. For, howe can that woman bragge of honeſtie,

which is founde to her owne huſbande not ſo much courteous, as to ſhewe ſome ſparke of good nature That wife hath litle honeſtie which hateth her huſbandes but ſhee none at all that procureth his death. in time of daunger: but moſte cruell and full of tyrannie, in procuring his death? When this ſhall be openly knowen and manifeſtly publiſhed: what countenaunce will all men giue you which defende honeſtie? I ſaye, what interteinment, what chéere, what commendation may all ſuche women yelde to you, who are directed by wiſedomes rule and policie, whoſe liues are clearely ledd by vertue? Conſider that vertue is the onely beautie that carrieth cō
                  mendation with it at all times, which maketh men Vertue commendeth ſuch as haue it. to loue thoſe, whome they neuer knewe. It is the onely pathway to praiſe, and the brightneſſe of all beautie is eclipſed by crueltie.
            
            
               E. D. to my L. S. in the behalfe of his kinſman.
               
                  MY verie good Lorde,
               
               I haue an earneſt ſuite to your honour, touching one of my néere kinſmen, who hath a great goodwill to beſtowe his time in your Lordſhips ſeruice, and of all noble men hath made you his ſingular choice. Wherefore, if you would of your accuſtomed goodneſſe, viewing the perſon, to receiue him, you binde mée in triple bondes to requite your courteſie. And thus crauing your friendly anſwere herein, I moſte humbly take my leaue.
            
            
               R. S. to a widowe to be circumſpect in her choyce.
               AS my abilitie is not of the greateſt to beſtowe on you ſuch giftes, as (perhaps) my well meaning

minde pretendeth: yet am I not ſo ſpurned of Fortune, but that I enioy an honeſt portion. As my yeares are young, my wiſedome but ſmall to giue counſell: yet, neuertheleſſe, if my wordes ſhall ſauour of reaſon, yeld thankes to the writer, and I reſt contented. As God hath bleſt you with the Wholeſome precepts and documents. giftes of Fortune, forget not the giuer, neyther yet abuſe them. Leane to ſuch friendes as are wiſe and of good experience. Ouerſhoote not your ſelfe ſo far, to like without greate deliberation, leſt your delightes be tempered with pilles of ſorrowe, exchanging your quiet dayes into extreme miſerie. And, in your choyce beware of painted brauerie: for, to matche your ſelfe to ſuche, bringeth a gnawing repentaunce. Therefore, let your renowme be aſſured on ſuch a one, which is garniſhed with honeſt qualities. Euen as the valiant Capteine, before he A man indued with honeſt qualities maketh his wife renowmed. buy horſes, he runnes them, traines them, makes many trials of them, refuſing the vnlikely, & maketh choyce, of what price ſo euer he buy them: euen ſo in this ſhort race of life, which you meane to perfourme with your huſband, in comfort, ſolace, and pleaſure, you muſt not ſtande ſo much vppon contemplation of wauering loue, which perhaps is profeſſed vnto you for lucre or gaine, but with aduiſe and conſideration wey the manners and conditions of your huſband, with whome you pretend that waye: for in him reſteth your eſtimation, and renowme. If thy huſband be vnchaſte, ſharpe in wordes, doubtfull to truſt, vaine in life, willfull to be ordered: If laſtly he hath no conformitie with thy conditions, then to his owne liking: Will not theſe things be an occaſion of thine vntimely death? Yea alas, they are poiſons of them ſelues, and galles whoſe bitterneſſe can neuer be taken away. If you

ſéeme to diuide the pleaſures which you challenge peculiar to your ſelfe, ſhall you not then be deceiued in your vaine choice, for whome is reſerued a ſmarting, penaunce? If you marrie more for gredineſſe of gaine then any ſettled affection, it is impoſſible, To marrie for gaine and not for affection purchaſeth an vnquiet life. but you ſhall purchaſe to your ſelfe an vnquiet life. For, Friendſhip kindled in light heat will ſoone vaniſh, by meanes of the ſmall force: where as ſuche which reſt vpon the vnmoueable piller, are neuer ſubiect to ruine, as long as the bodie is ſubiect to life. I doe not denie, but wealth doeth well: and where want is, there colde friendſhip remaineth. Colde friendſhip where want is. neyther do I counſell you to marrie for méere loue, for diminiſhing your ſubſtance: but as your liuing is able to mainteine an honeſt porte, ſo in deuour to matche your ſelfe to ſome worthie perſonage, exchanging your ſolitarie life for a pleaſant libertie. Wherefore, ſith a pleaſaunt libertie is of precious price, make your pleaſure priuie to your choice: & when you bende your affection to any creature, be ſure to angle with an inchaunted hooke, and this To angle with an inchaunted hooke. being done, you ſhall liue in ſafetie.
            
            
               R. D. to a widowe, for abſenting her ſelfe vpon certeine ſpeaches.
               IF euer fiſhe deſired the ſounding and deapth of waters: or woman with childe were deſirous to ſée her offſpring, and to be deliuered: I aſſure your ſelfe, none can be more ioyfull of any thing, then I would be to inioy your preſence, nor gladder to ſée you contented. Wherefore (good widowe) come hither, and paſſe away the time as you haue done, and thinke of mée according to my meaning, & then aſſure your ſelfe, you will not fall into theſe womanlike

ſtormes (vndeſerued) with your friend, which meaneth but well. I ſpeake not this to flatter you, I proteſt before God: I thinke you haue reaſon ſufficient to conſider, that eyther it booteth or néedeth not: but for that I wold ſée you in friendly order, as I haue done, hoping that that quarelling ſpéeche ſhall not be vſed. For I haue ſet downe my reſt in this order: if you grieue or be diſquiet, it ſhall nothing content mée: if you laugh, I will doe A mutual condolencie or ſufferaunce promiſed. the like for companie: ſo that I hope to deale in ſuch order, as ſhall neyther offend you, God, nor the worlde, if you do me right. And what iniurie as hath béene offered, I haue forgotten, eſtéeming them vaine, and as womens humors. And thus farewell, wiſhing to you as well as to my ſelfe.
            
            
               W. S. to a widowe whoſe malice was ſomewhat digeſted.
               BEing fully perſuaded by ſome of my friendes, that your choler is ſomewhat digeſted, I am by that meanes the more willing to write vnto you theſe fewe lines, to manifeſt plainely, that theſe womanlike ſtormes, which of late you haue dwelt in, do peraduenture ſauour of a ſelfe willed malice, then any reaſon that led you to the contrarie. For, I do aſſure you, behind your backe, in reporte or otherwiſe, I haue not offended you, although perhaps you will ſay to my face, I haue more plainely He excuſeth him ſelfe of offence, by charging his widowe with obſtinate malice. then wiſely dealt with any thing, otherwiſe then I ſhould. But for any hurte euer meaning, other then I would ſhould happen to my ſelfe, then God confound mée. For mine owne parte, I am perſuaded, that what in malice you will haue, I am content it ſhall nothing anger mée, vnleſſe it hurt your ſelfe:

the which I would be ſorrie to ſée. Wherefore, as I am content to treade downe ſuche iniuries as haue béene offered vnto mée, who neuer offended: ſo, if you forget ſuch ſlaunderous ſpéeche, then I thinke my labour well beſtowed, you muſt thinke I haue béene beholding vnto you. Firſt let me recompenſe you, and then if I abuſe you, blame mée. In the meane while, thinke mée not of ſo vile a nature, for goodwill to yeld you hatred, &c.
            
            
               T. B. to his louing friend M. D declaring what loue he beareth her.
               
                  F. S. as one not a little ſorrowfull at your ſoudon departure out of towne, for that I had an earneſt occaſion to haue ſpoken with you, hoping to haue renewed the familiaritie of our olde acquaintance, Long abſence breedeth forgetfulneſſe of familiaritie. which is almoſt forgotten, by meanes of my long abſence, which if I had not come at ſo vnfortunate a time, might (no doubt) haue béene ſomwhat renewed. Notwithſtanding, ſith there is no remedie, I will arme my ſelfe with patience, truſting hereafter we may méete againe, where (no doubt) I may manifeſt vnto you the good will I beare you, and vtter ſuche ſecretes as long time haue lien hidden within the ſecrete cloſet of my mind vnvttered, which I onely referre to your maidenly iudgement. And ſurely, for the modeſtie, courteſie, and honeſt behauiour which I ſée you indued withall, yeldes mée ſuch good liking of you, that if euery pennie I haue were worth a pounde, I coulde vouchſafe to make you the maiſtreſſe of it, and as ſoone chooſe you He deſireth to be dealt withall as he deſerueth. for a wife and ſpouſe, as any creature on the earthe: whoſe wordes, if hereafter they be not agréeable to my déedes, then let my good will be rewarded with floutes.
            
            
               
               H. D. to her ſingular good vncle, being an executour.
               FOraſmuch as the ſhortneſſe of time doeth ſomewhat Acknowledgement of benefites receiued, as wel corporall as mental. hinder mée at this time, to doe my duetie, as well of commendations, as of heartie thankes, for your large and innumerable benefites, that is to ſaye, in finding mée not onely with the giftes of the bodie, but alſo with the giftes of the minde: by the which all things in this worlde are mainteined and vpholden. Wée ſée daily before our eyes, that the Common wealth is mainteined with the giftes of the minde, that is, wiſedome, and learning. But nowe to the purpoſe. If there be any ſparke grauen in mée, the which ſparke may ingender a great deal, (as this wiſe and prudent ſaying doeth affirme:

                     Concitat ingentes flammas ſcintilla minuta.
                  
               
               
                  A little ſparke ingendreth a great deale of fire:) then am I bounde with an ardent bonde of loue, to render with all indeuour continuall thankes. But chiefely before I write any further, I ought to pray A concluſion anſwering to his exordium. to God for your proſperitie and health, and to thank him of his goodneſſe, that he hath lefte mée ſuche a friend, (my father being dead,) that will not grudge to beſtowe ſuch large benefits on mée, and to accept mée as I were his owne.
            
            
               W. D. to his louing friend M. G.
               THE long abſence, ſithence my departure, can no leſſe miniſter occaſion to write, then my wil is apt and agréeable to accompliſh the ſame: not vſing any varietie of wordes, but rather a friendly greeting, according to your worthineſſe: not doubting, but you will be agréeable to the old ſaying: To

accept the heart of the giuer more then the value of 
                  Not the gifte but the giuer is chiefly to be conſidered. 
                  the gift: the which accepted, I reſt contented: and ſo preſuming vppon your courteſie, I thought good to write theſe fewe lines vnto you, which are the meſſengers of my well meaning minde towardes you: wherein (I hope) that the long abſence, or diſtance of place, ſhall not be the occaſion of forgetfulneſſe. Thus repoſing my ſelfe wholy in your wonted friendſhip, I committ you to the Almightie.
            
            
               E. S. to his ſingular good maiſtres, for redeeming one of his friendes, beeing in durance.
               
                  MAiſtreſſe,
               
               I am once againe inforced to write, A letter interceſſorie or mediatorie. and not without iuſt cauſe, it toucheth ſo neere my deare friend: wherein, if you further my ſuite, you binde mée (during life) to reſt at your cōmaundement. A matter of ſome importaunce, the ſetting frée of one M. L. whoſe eſtate my L. knoweth verie well, and meaneth to reteine him into his ſeruice. Which perſon, if you were acquainted with, as I my ſelfe am, his honeſt behauiour & wiſedome Commendation deriued from maners and behauior. is ſuch, that you would lament his long impriſonment, and deſolate life, and reioyce againe at his libertie, when you ſhall enter into the ſocietie and fellowſhip of ſo worthie a Gentleman, Wherefore, I moſte earneſtly deſire you, that whin my L. ſhall be at conuenient leaſure, you will put him in mind with daily ſuite, that this my friende may be releaſed. In which doing you bind mée alwayes firme & faithfull to you and your progenie.
            
            
               R. C. to the Iuſtices of peace, for the S.
               
                  
                  RIght worſhipfull.
               
               Theſe are to require you, in the abſence of my huſband, who is not in Countrie to aunſwere his owne cauſe, to ſtand his friend touching the S. and to aſſeſſe him at the ſumme Allegations for the mitigation of the S. by non abilitie. aforetime payde, which was tenne poundes, & now is twentie: whoſe abilitie is not ſo able to beare it, as of him is reported, by meanes he is indebted, and growne to a greater charge. Wherefore, if the trueth were throughly knowen vnto you, either he him ſelfe preſent before your worſhippes, to aunſwere his owne caſe: I doubte not but you woulde beare with his diſabilitie, and aſſeſſe him at the ſumme aforetime payde. In which doing, you miniſter vnto vs both an acceptable pleaſure, and giue vs occaſion, according to our power, to requite your courteſie.
            
            
               G. W. anſwere to his brother, that ſhe would be circumſpect in her choyce.
               
                  I Receiued your letter the xj. of Auguſt, the ſight Concerning matters of mariage counſel giuen and taken. whereof hath miniſtred vnto mée no ſmall comfort, yelding you moſt heartie thankes for the great good will you beare mée: whoſe good counſell, if I ſhould not haue in regarde, in mée might be reputed greate vnthankfulneſſe. And whereas you write vnto mée, to be circumſpect in my choice, it ſtandeth mée vppon (no doubt) to take great deliberation: it toucheth ſo much my making, or vndoing. Wherefore, if it be ſo, that I do marrie againe, (as all is in the will of God,) aſſure your ſelfe, I will not couple my ſelfe in ſuch ſorte, but that the life of him whome I take, ſhall be of credite, and carrie good commendation: neyther ſpurned of Fortune, neither forſaken of friendes. And vntill ſuch time as you come to L. I will not make any promiſe. I would haue béene glad, if your affaires had not béene

otherwiſe, to haue had your aduiſe in drawing my huſbandes will: but your ſoudeine departure was a let to the contrarie: which did not a little diſcomfort mée, being at that time déepely diſtreſſed, by meanes A neceſſarie cauſe to ingender ſorrow in the wife. of my huſbands ſickenes: knowing none, in whome I might repoſe any ſuch confidence, as in you, being my naturall brother, whome I make deareſt account of.
            
            
               H. S. to his friend. T. D.
               
                  FRiend D.
               
               for that I did not take my leaue of you, I am verie ſorrie, and aſhamed: neuertheleſſe, A letter excuſatorie for departing from his friend vnſaluted. time did ſo fall out, that I coulde not, although willingly I woulde. Therefore, in recompenſe of my miſhappe, and ſo ſouden departure from you, without a farewell, I preſume at this time, (by your patience) to trouble you with a fewe lines of remembraunce: although but rude, yet they procéede from a faithfull heart, & ſuche a one, which wiſheth to you as well as to my ſelfe: truſting, that you, being my friend, will take them in good parte. And thus fare you well.
            
            
               A. F. to his ſiſter H. F. giuing her counſel in proſperitie, to be mindfull of aduerſitie.
               
                  RIght welbeloued ſiſter,
               
               among many thinges which are incident to this our life, there is none An epiſtle perſuaſorie. more circumſpectly to be conſidered, then the variableneſſe of fortune, and the not ſo often as ſouden alteration of the beſt and moſt ſouereigne benefites, where with this our tranſitorie life is bleſſed and aduaunced. Wiſely, and not ſo wiſely as truely ſayde a philoſopher, that What wee haue, wee haue not: 
                  A ſage ſentēce 
                  and what we lacke, we poſſeſſe. Meaning hereby the vncerteintie of thoſe thinges, wherevpon our life principally dependeth. For, though we haue this

dayes proſperitie, we may not withſtanding taſſe to morrowes aduerſitie: And though this houre miniſter mirthe vnto vs and ſtore of ioyfulneſſe, yet may the next peraduenture ouerwhelme vs with heauineſſe. Thus much is ſpoken of me, to put you in mind of the time paſt, the time preſent, and the time to The end of his purpoſe. come: for that you haue bene ſometimes a Gentlewoman vnder obedience, though nowe you haue others at ſeruice and commandement, and howe long this libertie will laſt, he beſt knoweth, from whoſe ſight nothing is ſecret: That by conferring time with time, and circumſtance with circumſtance, you may forget to be ambitious, proude, and inſolent: and remember to be lowly, content and indifferent. The beſt things and the faireſt, ſhall ſometimes ſuffer A clauſe comparatiue. ſhipwracke: And what is there or hath bene though neuer ſo precious and amiable, but hath in the ende ſuſteined loſſe of valure, and lacke of loue? The ſwéeteſt perfumes in time giue vp their vertue. The faireſt flowers kéepe not continually their colour. A calme followeth a ſtorme, and after a tempeſt inſueth ſecuritie. Finally, there is nothing but it hath a ſpring and a fal, a Winter and a Summer, an ebbe and a flowe, a day and a night: I meane, a time wherin to be amiable and gratious, and a time to be deſpighted and counted contemptuous. Wherfore (good ſiſter) as your giftes are the more rare and His concluſion exhortatorie. excellent, ſo let your wiſedome haue the larger gouernement: that in the pearle of your beautie, you remember wrinckled olde age: in health, thinke on ſickneſſe: in wealth, be mindfull of pouertie: in abundance, conſider of ſcarſitie: in eaſe, forget not labour: finally, ii: all your proſperitie to account of the contrarie. But leauing you to the gratious guiding of the higheſt, I bid you farewell. Your louing brother,
               
                  A. F.
               
            
         
         
            
            
               Certeine inuentions in verſe, deuiſed at ſundrie idle times.
            
               W. D. to his friends, exhorting them to beware in time.
               
                  MY ſecrete griefes bewray my minde,
                  I ſigh to thinke on paſſed youth,
                  Bent ſo to pleaſures of the worlde,
                  Reſpecting profit vaine forſooth.
                  I ſerude in hope of Courtly gift,
                  No whitt eſtéeming crooked age:
                  Gréene youth did hedlong runne ſo ſwift,
                  I lamde my ſelfe in fanſies barge.
                  No care I tooke, I ſailde on ſtill,
                  (God wott) to hauen of vaine delight:
                  Untill that reaſon ſett vpp ſaile,
                  Prouoking will to baniſhe quight.
                  Hence ſlowly ſailde my broken Barke,
                  And waiteth time till Fortune pleaſe.
                  The Tackels torne, the Maſte 
                        •
                     emaind,
                  Halfe ſpoyled in the furging Seas.
                  By Mermaides ſinging paſt ſhée foorth,
                  Inuirond rounde with gaping iawes,
                  Nowe Neptune King helpe thou (quoth witt,)
                  I fall into their gaping iawes.
                  Nowe like to ſhippe on boyling Seas, Youth compared to a ſhip ſayling at vncerteintie.
                  
                  Compare I youth and gadding yeares,
                  On daungers toſt a thouſand wayes,
                  Unleſſe the helme good counſell ſteares.
                  Regarding ſporte, I ſpeilde my youth,
                  Time wild me thinke on withered age:
                  When pinching colde ſhall nippe thy limmes,
                  Howe wilt thou ſhunne his angrie rage?
                  Eſchewe to drinke on wanton cuppe,
                  Remember yeares do waſte away:
                  Eſchewe eche mate of Uenus troope, Exhortations full of good counſell.
                  
                  Ne care thou for ſuch wanton play.
                  
                     
And quite deteſt all fanſies fonde,
                  Unfolde the tables of thy life:
                  Giue vp thy right of childiſh yeares,
                  Haue care to gett for wedded wife.
                  To turne in time is wiſedome greate,
                  In wiſhing when it is too late,
                  Shall cauſe thée fall in déepe decaye,
                  And bring thy ende to wretched ſtate.
                  Where wealth doeth want, there friendſhip colde:
                  Example ſéene by daily proofe,
                  Bought witt is deare, (the Prouerbe ſayes:)
                  Unſtayed heads will ſoare aloofe.
                  Truſt not thy foe once reconcilde,
                  Unleſſe thou ſéeke thine owne decay,
                  And credite not eche gloſing ſtile,
                  In truſt is treaſon oft (men ſaye.)
                  Nowe farewell youth and wanton will,
                  Deteſting Follir traine,
                  I yeld my ſelfe to Wiſedomes ſkill,
                  Suppoſing pleaſures to be vaine.
                  Proofe willes mée yelde my ſelfe with ſpéede,
                  Once caught in ſnare to ſhunne the trappe,
                  Reſpecting profite wiſedome brings,
                  Then ſhall I ſléepe in vertues lappe.
                  
                     W. D.
                  
               
            
            
               Of one, who thinking to haue wedded a riche widowe, purchaſed an vnquiet lyfe.
               
                  
                     I Likt where no loue was,
                  I matcht in hope to gaine,
                  I ſought for ſwéete, and taſted ſowre,
                  And wedded proude diſdaine.
                  I leade a loathed life,
                  Exild from preſent ioy.
                  
                     
The yoke of bondage weare I on,
                  Which threatens mine annoy.
                  I ſayld in ſeas of griefe,
                  And waſht with waues of woe,
                  I muſt abide appointed courſe,
                  My fate ordeines it ſo.
                  I nowe muſt weaue the web,
                  Which canckard care hath ſpun,
                  And réele vp that againſt my will,
                  Which youth would gladly ſhun.
                  I ſowe my ſéedes in vaine,
                  I plant on barren ſtocke, Pretie and pithie.
                  
                  And nought I get but bloſſome flowres,
                  For wealth is vnder locke.
                  For this by proofe I finde,
                  Not well he often ſpéedes, A proper alluſion.
                  
                  That ſowes his corne in ſuch a ſoyle,
                  Where nothing growes but wéedes.
                  Thus liue I voyde of ioy,
                  And ſpoyle my youth with age,
                  My life is worſer then the birde,
                  Which faſt is pent in cage.
                  I leade a ſparing life,
                  The daintie fare I ſhunne,
                  And yet I waſte, I know not how:
                  As ſnowe againſt the ſunne.
                  A iuſt reuenge (no doubt,)
                  To me for paſſed life,
                  For that I liue, as I do now,
                  With ſuch a dogged wife.
                  Perforce muſt be content, Patience perforce.
                  
                  Though fate on me do frowne,
                  I muſt content me with my lot,
                  Since fortune kéepes me downe.
                  
                     W. D.
                  
               
            
            
               
               Of one which commended diligence, and deſpiſed brauerie.
               
                  
                     I Serue in hope of that to come, Short and ſweete.
                  
                  I paſſe not for no ſlauerie,
                  I ſée a number are vndone,
                  And all for painted brauerie.
                  I know a number luſtie laddes,
                  Which had poſſeſſions plentie,
                  And begin ſtreates with pitious mones,
                  And finde rewardes but ſcantie.
                  Wherefore Ile yelde my ſcepter vp,
                  And hold my ſelfe contented,
                  And labour like the buſie Ant,
                  For feare my purſſe be emptie.
                  
                     W. D.
                  
               
            
            
               W. D. to his vnconſtant friend.
               
                  AT age of twentie yeares and two,
                  Dame Uenus tolde me on,
                  To fixe my fanſie vppon a maide,
                  whoſe perſon nowe is gone.
                  I likte her well, ſhée loude mée deare,
                  I wooed her daye and night:
                  Ill happe was mine to loue her well,
                  And yet to loſe her quite.
                  For miſchiefe made ſuch meanes,
                  And woorked ſuch debate,
                  That I of force was made to yelde,
                  And loue was turnd to hate.
                  Then right and reaſen durſt not ſpeake.
                  For might withſtoode the ſame,
                  Her faith they counted but a ieſt,
                  And termd it Uenus game.
                  For my good will thus haue I gott. Whileſt one beats the buſh another takes the birdes.
                  
                  Moſt bitter brall and ſtrife,
                  For ſhée whome I did fanſie beſt,
                  is nowe a wedded wife.
                  
                     
Nowe lye I drenchte in deadly lake,
                  No mercie may I craue,
                  Her friends for ſpight haue forſte her quite,
                  No comfort I can haue.
                  Nowe doe I wallowe in the woes
                  of Cupide blinded boy:
                  My pleaſures all are turnd to paine,
                  My deareling lookes ſo coy.
                  The great good will betwixt vs twaine,
                  is nowe abandond quite,
                  Shée nought regardes my iourneis cold,
                  nor riding night by night.
                  Perforce muſt be content,
                  For mourning is but vaine,
                  To like or loue where loue is loſt, To loue wher
                           •
                         loue is loſt is double griefe.
                  
                  increaſeth double paine.
                  And thus I ende, fare well, fare well.
                  Farewell, againe I ſay:
                  I would be ſorrie at my heart,
                  to ſée thée caſt away.
                  
                     W. D.
                  
               
            
            
               Certeine verſes written to a maide, to be circumſpect in her choyce.
               
                  WIſedome doeth warne all maides that be wiſe,
                  a héede for to haue, in hearing euery winde, A leſſon for maides to learne that are wiſe.
                  
                  Leſt leſſons lewde, of ſuch as can deuiſe,
                  Trim tempered talk, to allure the ſimple minde:
                  Elſe may ſhée through ſecrete griefe,
                  Repent too late their raſhe and lewde beliefe.
                  Delight not in wordes, for they are but winde:
                  Approue him well that ſhall be thy mate,
                  Remember in ſhewes is harbourd deceit,
                  Eſchewe it in time, leſt it be too late.
                  Loue him therefore that loues thée againe,
                  Long elſe ſhalt thou loue in dolour and paine. Loue and beloued.
                  
                  
                     W. D.
                  
               
            
            
               
               An Epitaph vpon the death of the worſhipfull Edward Darell, Clarke of Catrie of the Queenes Maieſties moſt honorable houſholde.
               
                  IF euer cauſe conſtrained man,
                  with ſhrikes to fill the Skie,
                  If euer woe did will a wight,
                  with teares his tunes to trye:
                  Then cauſe haue I poore ſillie man,
                  to waile with watred eyes,
                  The death of Darell dead and gone,
                  which colde in earth nowe lyes.
                  Whoſe deth a thouſand thouſand times
                  I do lament full ſore:
                  And whileſt my brething ghoſt remains,
                  I ſhall do euermore.
                  If plaints or wofull cries at all,
                  Could raiſe him vp from graue,
                  Then would I wayle in yearnfull ſort,
                  The life of him to haue.
                  So godly was his life on earth, Properties praiſe worthy
                  
                  Euen to the latter end,
                  So patient eke in troubles ſtill,
                  And faithfull to his friend.
                  In court ſo carefull for his prince,
                  So cleare of iudgement ſure,
                  In all his dealings iuſt of word,
                  Of conſcience very pure.
                  So well reported all abroad,
                  So courteous and ſo milde,
                  Moſt dearely loued euery where,
                  Of woman man and childe.
                  A Gentleman in euery point,
                  His life declarde the ſame,
                  Who for his vertues manifold,
                  Hath won immortall fame.
                  
                     W. D.
                  
               
            
            
               
               Of the Deare intoyled in a progreſſe.
               
                  THe Deare purſued, him ſelfe ſore turmoyles,
                  Ouer bramble and bryers his bodies rebounds,
                  Good luck yet may chance him, to pas throgh ye toiles,
                  And frée with his life to ſcape from the hounds.
                  
                     W. D.
                  
               
            
            
               A dittie of hunting:
               to the tune of Light of loue, &c.
               
                  OF all the pleaſures in countrie and court, Hunting is healthfull.
                  
                  Hunting with hounds is the gallanteſt ſport,
                  Though painfull it ſéemeth, yet health it doth bring:
                  It is a paſtime for a Duke or a King.
               
               
                  Merily chaunts the hounds in the wood,
                  Moſt men it delightes, the noyſe is ſo good.
               
               
                  Hunting expelleth the wanton delight, Hunting tameth the fleſh
                  
                  Which often enchaunteth each kind of delight,
                  The pleaſures of Uenus with other vaine ſport,
                  Hunting preuenteth all ſuch kinde of ſport.
               
               
                  Merily, &c.
               
               
                  If youthes would delight in hunting with hound, Hunting mainteineth thriftineſſe.
                  
                  Unthrifts ſo many would ſcarcely be found,
                  Houſe kéeping would neuer ſo ſouden decay:
                  Nor gentle would iet it in going ſo gay.
               
               
                  Merily, &c.
               
               
                  In hunting is harbourde moſt pretie conceits, Hunting makes men actiue & expert.
                  
                  As writers at large moſte trimly intreates:
                  Manhood is prooued, cunning is learnde,
                  Mindes are reuiued, ſleightes be diſcerned.
               
               
                  Merily, &c.
               
               
                  A King in Newe foreſt by chaſing the Harte, Daunger in hunttig.
                  
                  By Fortuue was ſlaine of a fethered darte:
                  Diuerſe beſides in huntiug the Boare,
                  Haue ended their dayes being wounded full ſors.
               
               
                  
                     Merily, &c.
                  
                  Hunting reſembles a battell in field. Hunting compared to a battell.
                  
                  And pretie conceits of warre it doth yelde:
                  
                     
A paſtime truely well worthie of fame,
                  And all that loues it deſerueth the ſame.
               
               
                  Merily, &c.
               
               
                  The hounds be the battell pitcht very ſquare,
                  The grehounds the wings to followe the hare, Proofe of the premiſſes.
                  
                  The hornes blows chace and ſound the retire,
                  To courage the dogges where game doth appeare.
               
               
                  Merily, &c.
               
               
                  When game to the couert ſpéedeth apace,
                  The horſemen giue charge to followe the chace, The proofe continued.
                  
                  Their ſpurres imbrued, their horſe they do ſtrike,
                  Which makes them rebound ouer hedge and dike
               
               
                  Merily, &c.
               
               
                  Yet ſome there be certein which hunting do ſcorne, Hunting foūd faultie.
                  
                  Bicauſe of their hedges and ſpoyle of their corte:
                  What pleaſure (ſay they) to heare a dog ball?
                  A labour they count it, no pleaſure at all.
               
               
                  Merily, &c.
               
               
                  In hunting (ſay they) great charges ariſe, Diſcommodities in hunting.
                  
                  In filling their mawes, to ſtop their outcries,
                  Stenches moſt filthie vnſéemely to views,
                  In kéeping of dogges beſides doth inſue.
               
               
                  Merily, &c.
               
               
                  The dronkard deteſts it, and hunts for good ale,
                  The leacher doth loath it, and hunts for his taile, What maner of men abhor hunting.
                  
                  The gamſter doth ſhun it, and curſeth the ſame:
                  And hunts after dice and other lewd game.
               
               
                  Merily, &c.
               
               
                  But thoſe that be honeſt ſuch paſtime will fly, Hunting highly eſteemed among the honourable.
                  
                  For miſchiefes full many ariſeth thereby:
                  But hunting with hounds doth carrie ſuch fame,
                  That nobles and Gentles doth honour that game.
               
               
                  Merily chaunts the hounds in the wood,
                  Moſt men it delights, the noyſe is ſo good.
               
            
            FINIS.
         
         
            
            The treatiſe of Maſter Ihon Della Caſa, wherin vnder the perſon of an old vnlearned man, inſtructing a youthe of his, he hath talke of the maners and faſhions, it behoues a man to vſe or eſchewe in his familiar conuerſation: intituled Galateo, of faſhions and maners.
            
               FOr as muche as thou doſte now enter the iourny, wherof I haue allredy ronne forth the better parte (as thou ſeeſt) I meane the tranſitorie waye of this mortall life: I haue determined (ſuch is the Loue I beare thee) to ſhewe all the daungerous ſtraights thou muſt paſſe: For my experience maketh me feare, yt walking that way thou mayſt eaſily eyther fall, or by ſome meanes or other go aſtray. To the ende thou maiſt once, taughte both by my inſtructions and experience, be able to keepe the right waye, aſwell for the helthe of thy Soule, as the commendation and prayſe of the Honourable and Noble houſe thou doeſt come of. And bycauſe thy tender Age, is vnfit (as yet) to receaue more principall and higher precepts, reſeruing them for fytter time, I will beginn to diſcourſe of ſuch things as many men wyll deeme, perchaūce, but trifles:

I meane what manner of Countenance and grace, behoueth a man to vſe, that hee may be able in Communication and familiar acquaintance with mē, to ſhewe him ſelfe pleſant, courteous, and gentle: which neuertheleſſe is either a vertue, or the thing that comes very nere to vertue. And albeit Liberalitie, or magnanimitie, of themſelues beare a greater prayſe, then, to be a well taught or manored man: yet perchaunce, the courteous behauiour and entertaynement with good maners and words, helpe no leſſe, him that hath them: then the high minde and courage, aduaūceth him in whome they be. For theſe be ſuch things as a mā ſhall neede alwayes at all hāds to vſe, becauſe a man muſt neceſſarily be familiar with mē at all times, & euer haue talk & communication with them: But iuſtice, fortitude, and the other greater, and more noble vertues, are ſeldome put in vre. Neyther is ye liberall and noble minded man, cauſed euery hower to doe bountifull things: for to vſe it often, cannot any man beare the charge, by any meanes. And theſe valiāt men yt be ſo full of hyghe minde and courage: are very ſeldome driuen to trye their valour & vertue by their deeds. Then as muche as theſe laſt, doe paſſe thoſe fyrſt, in greatnes (as it were) & in weight: ſo much do the other ſurmoūt theſe in number, & oftē occaſiō to vſe thē. And, if I could wel intend

it, I could name you many, whoe, (being otherwiſe of litle account) haue ben & be ſtyll, muche eſtemed & made of, for their cherefull & pleſaunt behauiour alone: which hath byn ſuche a helpe & aduauncemēt vnto them, that they haue gotten greate preferments, leauing farre behinde them, ſuch men as haue byn endowed with thoſe other noble and better vertues, ſpoken of before. And as theſe pleſaūt & gētle behauiours, haue power to draw their harts & mynds vnto vs, with whome we liue: ſo cōtrarywiſe, groſſe and rude maners, procure mē to hate and deſpiſe vs. Wherby albeit the lawes, haue inioyned no payne for vnmanerly & groſe behauiours, as the fault that is thought but light (& to ſaye a trueth, it is not greate) yet we ſee notwithſtanding, yt nature herſelfe puniſheth thē wt ſharpe & ſhrewde correction, putting them by this meanes, beſydes ye cōpanie & fauour of men. And truly euē as greate & foule faults, doe muche harme: ſo doe theſe lyght, much hurt, or hurte at leaſt more oftē. For, as mē doe cōmōly fere ye beaſts yt be cruell & wild, & haue no maner of feare of ſom litle ones, as ye gnats and the flyes, & yet by ye cōtinual noiaūce they find by thē, cōplaine thē ſelues more of thes thē of ye other: ſo it chaūceth yt moſt mē do hate in maner aſmuche, ye vnmanerly & vntaught, as ye wicked, & more. So yt
               
there is no doubte, but who ſo diſpoſeth himſelfe to liue, not in ſolitarie and deſerte places, as Heremites, but in fellowſhip with men, and in populous Cities, will think it a very neceſſarie thing, to haue ſkill to put himſelfe forth comely and ſeemely, in his faſhions, geſtures and maners: the lacke of which parts doth make thoſe other vertues lame, and litle or nothing can they work to good effect, without other helpes: wheare this ciuilitie and courteſie, without other releefe or patrimonie, is riche of it ſelfe, & hath ſubſtance enough, as a thing yt ſtandeth in ſpeache and geſtures alone.
            And that yu mayſt now more eaſily learne the way vnto it, thou muſt vnderſtand, it behoues thee, to frame and order thy maners and doings, not according to thyne owne minde and faſhion: but to pleaſe thoſe, with whome thou lyueſt, and after that ſort direct thy doings: And this muſt be done by Diſcretion and Meaſure. For who ſo applieth himſelf to much, to feede other mens humors, in his familiar conuerſation, and behauiour with men, is rather to be thought a Ieſter, a Iugler or flatterer, then a gentleman wel taught and nourtured: As contrarywiſe, whoe ſo hath no care or mynd to pleaſe, or diſpleſe, is a rude,

vntaught, and vncourteous fellowe. For aſmuche then, as our maners, haue ſome pleaſure in them when we reſpect other men, and not our owne pleaſure: if we diligētly ſearche forthe what thoſe things be, that moſt men do generally lyke or diſlike: we ſhall in ſuche forte wiſely and eaſily finde out, the meanes & wayes, to chooſe and eſchewe, thoſe faſhions and maners, we are to leaue or take, to liue amongeſt men. We ſay then, that euery act that offendeth any the common ſenſes, or ouerthwarteth a mans will and deſire, or els preſenteth to the Imagination and conceite, matters vnpleaſaunt, & that likewyſe, which ye mynde doth abhorre, ſuch things I ſay bee naught, and muſt not be vſed: for vve muſt not only refraine from ſuch thinges as be fowle, filthy, lothſome and naſtie: but vve muſt not ſo muche as name them. And it is not only a fault to dooe ſuch things, but againſt good maner, by any act or ſigne to put a man in minde of them. And therefore, it is an ilfauoured faſhion, that ſome men vſe, openly to thruſt their hands in what parte of their bodye they lyſt.
            Lykwiſe, I like it as yll to ſee a Gentlemā fettle him ſelfe, to do the needes of Nature, in preſence of men: And after he hath doone, to truſſe him ſelfe againe before them. Neither

would I haue him (if I may geue him councell) when he comes from ſuche an occupatiō, ſo much as waſhe his hāds, in the ſight of honeſt company: for yt the cauſe of his waſhing, puts them in minde of ſome filthy matter that hath bene done aparte. And by the ſame reaſon, it is no good maner, when a man chaunceth to ſee, as he paſſeth the waye (as many times it happeneth) a lotheſome thing, yt wil make a mā to caſt his ſtomacke, to tourne vnto the company, & ſhewe it them. And much worſe I like it, to reache ſome ſtynking thing vnto a man to ſmell vnto it: as it is many a mās faſhiō to do, wt importunate meanes, yea, thruſting it vnto their noſe, ſaying: Foh, feele I pray you, hovv this doth ſtink. vvhere they ſhould rather ſay, ſmell not vnto it: for it hath an yll ſent. And as theſe and lyke faſhions offend the ſē
               ſes, to which they appertaine: ſo to grynde the teethe, to whiſtle, to make pityfull cryes, to rubb ſharpe ſtones together, and to fyle vppon Iron, do muche offend the Eares and would be lefte in any caſe. Neither muſt wee refraine thoſe things alone, but we muſt alſo beware we do not ſyng, and ſpecialy alone, if we haue an vntuneable voyce, which is a common fault with moſte men: And yet, hee that is of nature leaſt apt vnto it, doth vſe it

moſte. So there be ſome kynde of men, that Neeſing. in coffyng or neeſing, make ſuche noyſe, that they make a man deafe to here them: other ſome vſe in lyke things, ſo little diſcretion, that they ſpyt in mens faces that ſtand about them: beſydes theſe there be ſome, that in yauning, braye and crye out like Aſſes. And yet ſuch, with open mouth wil euer ſay and do what they liſt, and make ſuch noyſe, or rather ſuchroaring, as the dumme man doth, when he ſtriueth with him ſelfe to ſpeake. All theſe yllfauoured faſhions, a man muſt leaue, as lothſome to the eare and the eye. And a mā muſt leaue to yawne muche, not only for the Yawning. reſpect of the matter I haue ſaide alreadye, as that it ſeemes to proceede, of a certaine werynes, that ſhewes that he that yawneth, could better like to be els where, then there in that place: as wearied with the companie, their talke, and their doings. And ſure, albeit a mā be many times diſpoſed to yawne, yet if he be occupied with any delyght, or earneſt matter to think vppon: he ſhall haue no minde to doe it. But if he be lumpiſhe & idle: it is an eaſy matter to fall in to it. And therefore, VVhen a man yavvneth, in place vvhere there bee ſlouthfull and Idle folkes, that haue nothing to doe, the reſt, as you may ſee

many times, yavvne againe for companie by & by: as it he that yawned, had put them in minde to doe it, which of them ſelues they would haue done firſt, if hee had not begoone vnto them. And I haue many tymes heard learned and wiſe men ſay, that A yavvner meaneth as much in Latin as a careles and Idle bodie. Let vs then flye theſe condicions, that loathe (as I ſayd) the eyes, the Eares, & the Stomacke. For in vſing theſe faſhyons, we doe not only ſhewe that we take litle pleaſure in the company, but we geue them occaſion withall, to iudge amis of vs: I meane yt we haue a drowſye & heuie nowle, which makes vs yll wellcom, to all cōpanies we come vnto. And whē thou haſt blowne thy noſe, vſe not to open thy Blowing of the noſe. handkercheif, to glare vppon thy ſnot, as if yu hadſt pearles and Rubies fallen from thy braynes: for theſe be ſlouenly parts, ynough to cauſe men, not ſo much not to loue vs, as if they did loue vs, to vnloue vs againe. As the Sprite of Labirintho doth teſtifie (who ſoeuer he were that made it) who (to quenche ye 
               Looke in the beginning of Corbaccio. heate wherwith Maſter Iohn Boccaſe burned in deſyre and Loue of his Lady vnknowne) tells, how ſhe cowred her taile ouer the aſhes, ſytting vppon her heeles, and coughed and ſpatte out Collops.

It is alſo an vnmanerly parte, for a man to lay his noſe vppon the cup where another Dropping of the Noſe. muſt drinke: or vppon the meate yt another muſt eate, to the end to ſmell vnto it: But rather, I would wiſh he ſhould not ſmell at all, no not to that which he himſelfe ſhould eate and drinke: becauſe it may chaūce there might fall ſome droppe frō his noſe, that would make a man to loath it: although there fall nothing at all in deede. Neither, by mine aduiſe, ſhalt thou reache to any man, that cup of wine wherof thy ſelfe haſt fyrſt dronke and taſted: wt
               out he be more then a familiar friend vnto thee. And much leſſe muſt thou giue any parte of the peare or the fruite, which thou haſt bitten in thy mouth before. And eſteeme not light of my talke, for that theſe things be of little account: For euen light ſtripes (their number may be ſuch) be able to ſlaye faſt ynoughe.
            
            Now you ſhall vnderſtād, there was in Giouanni. Matheo. Giberti, biſhop of Verona. 
               Verona, a biſhop a wiſe mā, a learned & of a ſingular good wit by nature, whoſe name was Giouāni Matheo Giberti: Amōgſt many good parts yt were in him, he was very courtious & liberall, to all gentlemen & noble men that came vnto him, doing thē all yt honor he could in his houſe, not with

ouer much pompe and coſt, but with conuenient entertainement and meaſure, ſuch as beſemed well a man of the Clergie. It chaunced in his time, a noble gentleman called Count Richard, paſſing that way, to Count Richard. ſpend a fewe dayes with the Biſhop and his houſeholde together: which was thoroughly furniſhed wt honeſt gentlemē and very well learned. And bycauſe they found him a Noble gentleman, courteous and well beſeene in all good behauiour, they prayſed him muche, and made muche of him, ſaue that one vnmanerly faſhion they muche miſliked in him. When the Byſhop was aduertiſed of it, conſulting with ſome of his familiars about it (as he was a wiſe man in all his doings) ſtraite they cō
               cluded, it ſhould be neceſſary to let ye 
               Count haue knowledge of it: albeit they feared, they ſhould offend him. Upon this, ye 
               Count taking his leaue, and redy to ryde away the next morning, the Byſhop called one of his ſeruants vnto him, (a man of good diſcretion) and gaue him in charge to take his horſe, to beare the Count company, ſome parte of his waye: And when he ſawe his time, after an honeſt ſorte, to tell him, that which they had determined betwene them ſelues. The ſame gentleman that had

this charge, was a man well ſtrooken in yeares, very lerned, and meruailous pleaſaunt, wel ſpoken, comely, and had muche frequented in his time, ye Courtes of greate Princes: who was (perhaps) and is, called Galateo: at whoſe requeſt and councell, I Galateo. firſt tooke in hand to ſet forth this preſent treatiſe. Ryding with the Count, he found him pleſaunt talke ynoughe, and paſſing frō one matter to another, whē he thought it tyme to returne to Verona, in taking leaue at parting, with a gentle & cherefull countenaunce, he vſed this ſpeache vnto him. Syr Count, my Lorde yealdeth you many thanks for the honour you haue done him, in that it hath pleaſed you to voucheſafe his poore houſe: and that he may not be vnthankfull, for this your greate courteſie ſhevved vnto him, he hath geuen me in charge, that I muſt leaue a preſent vvith you in his behalfe: and he ſends it vnto vnto you vvith earneſt requeſt, that you pleaſe to take it in good vvorthe: and this is the gift. You are a goodly gentleman, and the beſt manered man my Lorde hath euer ſeene: So that very heedefully beholding your behauiours, and particularly conſidering them all, hee findeth no one that is not very

comely and comendable, only one vnſemely trycke alone excepted, vvhich you make vvith your lippes and your mouth together, feeding at your meate vvith a certaine ſtraunge noyes, vnpleaſaunt to all men that heare it. This my Lord willed me to tell you, and prayes you to endeuour your ſelfe to leaue it, and vvithall to accept in levve of a beter preſent, this louing admonition and councell of his: for he is ſure, there is none in the vvorlde, would make you the like preſent. The Count (that neuer wyſt of his fault till now) hearing himſelfe reproued, chaunged his countenance a little, but (as a mā full of ſtomacke ynough) taking hart at graſſe, he ſaid: Tell your Lorde, that yf all the gifts that men vvont to geue eche other, vvere ſuch as his, men ſhould be muche more riche then they are. And for his greate courteſie and liberalitie to mee, geue him many thanks I pray you, and let him be ſure, I will not fayle from henceforthe to mend my fault, and God be vvith you.
            
            Now what ſhal we thinke this Biſhop, his modeſt and honeſt company about him would ſay, if they ſawe theſe whome wee Greedy feeding. ſee other while, (like ſwyne wt their ſnouts in the waſhe, all begroined) neuer lyft vp their heads nor looke vp, and muche leſſe keepe their hands from the meate, and wt
               
both their cheeks blowne (as if they ſhould ſound a trumpet, or blowe the fyer) not eate but rauon: whoe, beſmearing their hāds, almoſt vp to their elbowes, ſo bedawbe Fyling the napkyns. yt napkyns, that ye cloathes in the places of eaſement, be other while cleaner. And to mend theſe ſlouenly maners, be not aſhamed, many tymes with theſe filthy napkyns, to wype awaye the ſweat that trickleth and falleth downe their browes, their face and their necke (they be ſuch greedy Sweating with feeding. guts in their feeding) and otherwhile to, (when it comes vppon them) ſpare not to ſnot their ſniueld noſe vppon them. Truly theſe beaſtly behauiours and faſhions, deſerue not alone, to be thruſt out of this noble biſhops houſe, that was ſo pure and cleane: but to be throughly baniſhed all places, where any honeſt men ſhould com. Let a man then take hede, hee doe not begreaſe his fyngers ſo deepe, yt he befyle the napkins to much: for it is an yll ſight to ſee it: neither is it good maner, to rubbe your greſie fingers vppō ye bread you muſt eate.
            The ſeruaunts that bee appointed to waite vppon the table, muſt not (in any wiſe) ſcratche and rubbe their heades, nor Precepts for ſeruaunts. any parte els in the ſight of their Lorde & Maſter: nor thruſt their hāds in any thoſe

partes of their body that be couered, no not ſo muche as make any proffer: as ſome careles fellowes doo, holding their hands in their boſome, or caſt vnder the flappes of their coates behind them. But they muſt beare them abroade without any ſuſpicion and keepe them (in any caſe) waſht & cleane without any ſpot of durt vppon them. And they that cary the dyſhes, or reache the cup, muſt beware at that time, they doe not ſpit, coughe or neeſe: for in ſuch doings, Suſpiciō is as greate, and offendeth aſmuche, as the very deede it ſelfe: and therefore, ſeruants muſt forſee, they geue no cauſe to Maiſters to ſuſpect: For that which might chaunce, anoyeth aſmuche, as if it had chaunced indeede.
            And if thou do roaſte any fruite, or make a toaſte at the fyer, thou muſt not blowe of the aſhes, (if there be any) for it is an old ſaying, that, vvinde vvas neuer vvithout water. But yu muſt lyghtly ſtryke it vppō the the plate, or after ſome ſuche ſorte or other beate of ye aſhes. Thou ſhalt not offer thy hādkerchiefe to any mā to vſe it, albeit, it be very cleane waſhed: for he to whome thou doeſt offer it, can not (perhaps) awaye wt it, and may be to curious to take it.
            When a man talketh with one, it is no Breithing in a mans face.
               
good maner to come ſo neere, that he muſt needes breathe in his face: for there be many that can not abyde to feele the ayer of another mans breathe, albeit there come no yll fauour from him. Theſe and lyke faſhions, be very vnſemely, and would be eſchewed, becauſe their ſenſes, wt whome we acquaint our ſelues, cannot brooke nor beare them.
            Now, let vs ſpeake of thoſe things which (without any hurt or anoyaūce to the ſenſes) offende the minds of moſt men, before whome they be doone. You ſhall vnderſtand, that The appetites of men, (throughe a naturall inſtinct and inclinatiō) be verie ſtrange and diuers: Some be cholerike & haſty, & may not be ſatifſied with out reuenge: other doe giue them ſelues cleane ouer, to pamper the belly: this mā ſets his delighte in luſt and ſenſualitie: that man is carried away with his couetous deſires: and many ſuche appetites more there are, to which mans mynde is too ſubiect: but you ſhall not in any company, eaſily iudge or diſcerne betweene them, where and in what, they bee moſte affected. For, theſe matters doe not cōſiſt in the maners, the faſhions and ſpeache of men: but reſt in ſome other point. They ſeeke to purchaſe ye
               
which the benefit of mutuall conferrence may yeald them, & that doe (as I weene) good will, honour, comforte and pleaſure, or ſome other thing lyke vnto theſe: & therfore we muſt neither ſay or doe the thing, that may giue any ſigne of litle louing or eſteming them, we liue withall.
            So that, it is a rude faſhion, (in my cō
               ceipte) yt ſom men vſe, to lye lolling a ſleepe in that place, where honeſt men be met together, of purpoſe to talke. For his ſo doing, ſhewes that he doth not eſteeme the company, and little rekoneth of thē or their talke. And more then that, he that ſleepeth (and ſpecially lying at litle eaſe, as he muſt) wonts (for the moſte parte) to doe ſome fowle thing, to beholde, or heare: and many tymes they awake ſweating and driueling at the mouth. And in like maner, to riſe vp where other men doe ſit and talke, and to walke vp and downe the chā
               ber, it is no poynt of good maner. Alſo there be ſome that ſo buſkell them ſelues, reache, ſtreatch and yawne, writhing now one ſyde, and then another, that a man would weene, they had ſome feuer vppon them: A manifeſt ſigne, that the company they keepe, doth weary them.
            Likewiſe doe they very yll, yt now & thē
               
pull out a letter out of theyr pocket, to reade it: as if they had greate matters of charge, and affaires of the common weale committed vnto thē. But they are much more to bee blamed, that pull out theyr knyues or their ſciſers, and doe nothing els but pare their nayles, as if they made no account at all of the company, and would ſeeke ſome other ſolace to paſſe the time awaye. Theis faſhions to, muſt be left, ye ſome men vſe, to ſing betwene the teeth, or playe the dromme with their fingers, or ſho ofle their feete: For theſe demeanours ſhewe that a body is careleſſe of any man ells.
            Beſides, let not a man ſo ſit that he turne his tayle to him that ſitteth next to him: nor lye fottering with one legg ſo hygh aboue the other, that a man may ſee all bare that his cloathes would couer. For ſuch parts be neuer playde, but amongſt thoſe to whome a man needs vſe no reuerēce. It is very true, that if a gentleman ſhould vſe theſe faſhions before his ſeruants, or in the preſēce of ſome friende of meaner condition then him ſelfe: it would betoken no pride, but a loue and familiaritie.
            Let a man ſtand vppright of him ſelfé, and not leane or loll vppon another mans

ſhoulder: and when he talketh, let him not pounche his fellow with his elbowe, (as many be wont to doe) at euery worde they ſpeake, ſaying: Did not I ſay true Sirra. Maſter. N. It is Maſter. H. And ſtill they be iotting with their elbowe.
            I would haue euery man well appareled, Apparell. meete for his age and calling: for otherwiſe, they ſeeme to haue men in contempt that be better attyred then themſelues.
            And therfore the Citizens of Padua, were woont to take it done of ſpighte vnto thē, when any gentleman of Venice walked vp & downe their citie in his coate, as though he thought him ſelfe in the countrey. And a mans apparell, would not be made of fine cloathe alone: but he muſt frame it, all that he may, to the faſhions that other men weare, and ſuffer him ſelfe to bee lead by cō
               mon vſe: although (perchaunce) it be, and ſeeme to be leſſe commodious, leſſe gallant, and leſſe faire in ſhewe, then his oulde.
            And if all men els, doe weare their heads powled: it ſhalbe an yll ſight for thee alone, to weare a longe buſhe of haire. And where other men, make muche of their beardes and weare them longe: thou ſhalt not doe well to cut thine of, or ſhaue

it. For that weare to be ouerthwarte in euery thing: which thou muſt (in any caſe) beware of, except neceſſitie require it, as thou ſhalt heare hereafter. For this ſingularitie, beyond all other yll cuſtomes, makes vs generally ſpyted of all mē. Thou muſt not then go againſt common cuſtome in theſe things, but vſe them meaſureably: that thou maiſt not bee an odd man alone in a countrey: that ſhall weare a long Gowne downe to the foote, where other men weare them very ſhorte, litle beneath the waſte. For as it hapens to him, that hath a very crabbed ylfauoured face, (I meane ſuche, as is more harde and ſower thē moſt mennes be, for nature doth moſtly ſhape them well in moſte men) that men will wonder and (with a kinde of admiration) gape moſt vppon him: So fares it with thē that attire them ſelues, not as moſt men doe: but as they are egged by their owne fantaſticall heads, with lōg heare ſpred downe to their ſhoulders, their beardes ſhort and ſhauen, and weare quaiues or greate cappes after ye 
               Flaundres faſhion: that all men doe gaze vppon them, as wōdering at ſuche, whome they weene haue taken vppon them, to conquer all

countries whereſoeuer they come. Let your apparell then, be very well made, and fit for your body: for they that weare rich and coaſtly garments, but ſo illfauouredly ſhaped, that a man would weene the meaſure had byn taken by another: geue vs to iudge one of theſe twaine, that eyther they haue no regarde or conſideration how to pleaſe or diſpleaſe: or els haue no ſkill to iudge of meaſure or grace, or what doth become them.
            Such maner of people, with their rude behauiours and faſhions, make men with whome they liue, ſuſpect, they doe eſteeme them but light. And that cauſeth thē worſe welcome wherſoeuer they com and yll beloued amongeſt men.
            But there be ſome beſides theſe, that deſerue more then bare ſuſpicion: their deeds and their doings be ſo intollerable, that a man cannot abide to liue amōgeſt them by any meanes. For they be euer a let, a hurt and a trouble to all the companie, they be neuer redie: euer a trimming: neuer well dreſſed to their mindes. But when men be readie to ſit downe to the table, the meate at the boorde, and their handes waſhed: then they muſt write or make Table.
               
water, or haue their exerciſe to doe: ſaying, It is too early: vve myght haue taryed a vvhile: vvhat haſte is this, this morning? And thus they diſquiet all the company, as men, caring for them ſelues alone & theyr owne matters, without conſideration in the worlde of other men. Beſides this, they will in all things be preferred aboue others: they muſt haue the beſt bed, and beſt chamber: they muſt take vppon them the higheſt place at the table, and be firſt ſet and ſerued of all men. And they be ſo deintie and nice, that nothing pleaſeth them, but what they them ſelues deuiſe: they make a ſower face at any thing ells. And they be ſo proude minded, that they looke that men ſhould waite vppon them when they dyne, ryde, ſporte, or ſolace them ſelues.
            There be other ſo furious, teſtie & waywarde, that nothing you doe can pleaſe them: and what ſoeuer is ſaid they aunſwer in choler, and neuer leaue brauling wt their ſeruants, and rayling at them, and continually diſturbe the company with their vnquietnes: vſing ſuch ſpeeches: Thou cauledſt me vvell vp this morning. Looke heere hovv cleane thou haſt made theſe

pynſons. Thou beaſte, thou diddeſt vvaite vvell vppon me to Churche. It vvere a good deede to breake thy head. Theſe be vnſemely and very fowle faſhions: ſuche as euery honeſt man will hate to death. For, albeit a mans minde were full fraught with all humilitie, and would vſe theſe maners, not vppon pride or diſdaine, but vppon a recheleſſe care, not heeding his doings, or elles by meanes of yll cuſtome: yet notwithſtā
               ding, becauſe his outward doings, woulde make men thinke him proude: it cannot be choſen, but all men woulde hate him for it. For, Pride is none other thinge, then to deſpiſe and diſdaine another. And as I haue Pryde. ſaide from the beginning: Eache man deſireth to bee vvell thought of, Albeit there bee no valoure or goodnes in hym.
            
            It is not long, ſynce there was in Rome a worthy gentleman, of ſingular good witt and profound learning, whoſe name was Vbaldino Bandinelli. This gentleman was Vbaldino Bandinelli. woont to ſay, that as ofte as hee went or came from the Courte, although the ſtretes weare euer full of gallant Courtiers, of Prelates and Noble men, and likewiſe of poore men, and people of meane and baſe condition: yet he thought he neuer encountred any, that was eyther better or worſe

then himſelfe. And without doubte hee could meete with fewe, that might bee compared in goodnes to him: reſpecting his vertues, that did excel beyond meaſure. But we muſt not alwayes in theſe things meaſure men by ye Elne: We muſt rather waye them in the millers ſcoles, then in the goldſmythes balaunce. And it is a courtious parte, redily to receaue them in to fauour: not bycauſe they bee woorthe it: but as men doe with coynes, bycauſe they be currant,
            To go further, wee muſt doe nothing in their ſyght whome wee deſire to pleaſe, that may ſhewe wee couet, rather to rule and to reigne, then to liue in a familiar equalitie amongeſt them. For hautines of harte and ambitious diſpoſition, as it kindleth an yll opinion: ſo it miniſtreth muche cauſe of contempte, which in concluſion will ſo woorke againſt thee, yt thou ſhalt bee cleane caſt out of honeſt company. But our dooings muſt rather beare a A lowly minde. ſigne and ſhewe of reuerence, meekenes, & reſpect to ye company, in which wee fellowſhip our ſelues. So that, what ſo euer is doone in meete and conuenient time, may hapely deſerue no blame: but yet in reſpect of the place and the perſone, it

may be reproued well: althoughe for it ſelf, ye matter deſerue no rebuke. As to brawle and to raile at your ſeruaunts (which we haue talked of before) but muche more to beate them. Becauſe theſe partes, are aſmuche as to reigne and to rule: which no honeſt and ciuil gentlemā wyll vſe, in preſence of them he doth reſpect with any reuerence or courteſie. Beſydes this, the cō
               pany is muche offended with it, and their meetinges are broken, and eſpecially, if it be done at the table, which is a place of ſolace and myrthe, and not of brawle and ſcolding. So that I muſt nedes cōmend Currado Gianfigliazzi for his ciuil behauiour in yt he multiplied no words with Chichibio 
               Boccaccio. Cior. 6. nouel. 4. fo. 194. to trouble his gueſts: albeit he deſerued to be ſharply puniſhed for it, when he would ſooner diſpleaſe his maſter then Brunetta. And yet if Currado had made leſſe adoe about it then he did: it had byn more his prayſe. For then he ſhould neuer haue neded, to call vppō God, to witnes his threatnings ſo muche as he did.
            But to returne to our matter: it is not good for a man to chide at the table for any cauſe. And if thou be angrie, ſhew it not, Chiding at the Table. nor make no ſigne of thy greefe, for the reaſon I haue tolde thee, and ſpecially yf thou

haue ſtraungers with thee: becauſe thou haſte called them to be merry, and this wil make them ſad. For, as the ſharpe and tarte things yt other men doe feede vppō in thy ſight, doe ſet thy teeth likewiſe on edge: ſo to ſee other men vexed and out of quiet, it maketh vs vnquiet too. I call them FROMVVARD people, which will in allthings Fromewarde. be ouertwhart to other men: as the very worde it ſelfe doth ſhewe. For, Fromewarde, ſignifieth aſmuche, as Shorne againſt the wooll. Now, how fit a thinge this frowardnes is, to wyn the good will Frowardenes. of men, and cauſe men to wyſhe well vnto them: that you your ſelf may eaſily Iudge, in that it cōſiſteth in ouertwharting other mens deſiers: which qualitie neuer maynteineth friendſhip, but maketh friends become foes. And therfor let them that deſire to be well thought of and welcome amongſt men, endeuour thē ſelues to ſhunne this fault: For it breedes no good lyking nor loue, but hatred and hurt. I would councell you rather to meaſure your pleaſures by other mens willes: where there ſhal come no hurt nor ſhame of it: and therin alwayes to doe & to ſaye, more to pleaſe other mens myndes and fauſies, then your owne.
            
               
Agayne, you muſt be neither clowniſhe Clowniſhe and Lampiſhe nor lumpiſhe: but pleaſaunt and familiar. For there ſhould bee no oddes, betweene the Myſtell and the Pungitopo: but that the one is wilde: the other growes in gardens. And you muſt vnderſtand, that he is pleaſaunt and courteous: whoſe manners bee ſuche in his common behauiour, as practiſe to keepe, and maintaine him friendeſhip amongſt them: where hee that is ſolleyne and waywarde, makes him ſelfe a ſtraū
               ger wherſoeuer hee comes: a ſtraunger, I meane, aſmuch as a forreigne or aliē borne: where contrariwiſe, he that is familiar & gentle, in what place ſo euer he comes: is taken for a familiar and friend with all mē. So that it ſhalbe neceſſarie for a man, to vſe him ſelfe to ſalute, to ſpeake, and to anſwer after a gentle ſorte, and to behaue him ſelfe wt all men ſo: as if hee were their countryman borne, & of their olde acquaintance. Which ſome can yll ſkill to doe, that neither giue a man a good countenaunce: eaſily ſay, No, to all things: neuer take in good worthe, the honour and courteſie that men doe vnto them (like to the people I ſpake of before, rude and barbarous) neuer take delight in any pleaſaunt conceites or other pleaſures: but euer refuſe

it all, what ſoeuer is preſented or offered vnto them. If a man ſay: Sir, ſuche a one willed me to commend him vnto you: They aunſwere ſtraite: vvhat haue I too doe vvith his greetings? And if a man ſay: Sir, ſuche a one your friend, aſked me hovv you did: They aūſwer againe in choler: Let him come feele my pulſe. Theſe carterlyke and clowniſhe aunſwers and maners, and the men them ſelues that doe vſe them: would bee chaſed and hūted away, out of all good and honeſt company.
            It yll becomes a man when hee is in Muſcing. company, to bee ſad, muſing, and full of contemplation. And albeit, it may bee ſuffered perchaunce in them that haue long beaten their braines in theſe Mathematicall ſtudies: which are called (as I take it) the Liberall Artes: yet without doubte it may not be borne in other men. For, euen theſe ſtudious fellowes, at ſuche tyme, when they be ſo ful of their Muſes: ſhould be much wyſer to get them ſelues alone.
            Againe, to bee to nyce or to deyntie: it Nycenes and Deyntines. may not be abiden, and ſpecially in men. For, to liue with ſuche kinde of people: is rather a ſlauerie then pleaſure. And ſure there bee ſom ſuch, ſo ſofte & tender: yt to liue

and deale with ſuch people, it is as daungerous: as to medle with the fyneſt and brytteleſt glaſſe that may be: So muche they are affrayde of euery light touche. And they wilbe as teſty and frowarde, if you doe not quickly and readily ſalute them, viſite them, worſhip them, and make thē anſwer: as ſome other body would be, for the greateſt iniurie yt can be donne vnto them. And if you doe not giue them all the due reuerence that may be: they will preſently take a thouſand occaſions to quarell and fall out with you. Yf you chaūce to Maſter him, and leaue out his title of Honour or worſhip: he takes that in dougeon, and thinkes you doe mock him. And if you ſet him beneath as good a man as him ſelf at the table: that is againſt his honour. If you doe not viſite him at home at his houſe: then you knowe not your dutie. Theis maner of faſhions and behauiours, bring men to ſuch ſcorne and diſdayne of their doings: that there is no man, almoſt, can abyde to beholde them: for they loue them ſelues to farre beyonde meaſure, and buſie them ſelues ſo much in that, that they fynde litle leyſure to bethinke them ſelues to loue any other: which (as I haue ſaide from the beginning) men ſeeke to fynde in

the conditions and maners of thoſe with whome they muſt liue: I meane, that they ſhould apply them ſelues to the fanſies & mindes of their friendes. But to liue wt ſuche people, ſo hard to pleaſe: whoſe loue and friendſhip once wonne, is as eaſie loſt, as a fyne ſcarfe is lightly caryed away with the winde: that is no lyfe but a ſeruice: and, beſydes that it yealdeth no pleaſure, it geues a man greate diſdayne and horror. Let vs therefore leaue theſe ſofte and wanton behauiours to women.
            In ſpeach a mā may fault many wayes. And firſt in the matter it ſelfe that is in Talke and Communication. talke, which may not be vayne or filthye. For, they that doe heare it, wyll not abyde it: as ye talk they take no pleaſure to heare: but rather ſcorne the ſpeache and the ſpeaker both. Againe, a man muſt not moue any queſtion of matters that be to deepe & to ſubtile: becauſe it is hardly vnderſtoode of the moſte. And a man muſt warely foreſee, that the matter bee ſuche, as none of the company may bluſhe to heare it, or receaue any ſhame by the tale. Neyther muſt he talke of any filthy matter, albeit a man would take a pleaſure to heare it: for, it yll becomes an honeſt gentleman, to ſeeke to pleaſe, but in things that be honeſt. Nei
            
            
               
Neither in ſporte nor in earneſt, muſt a man ſpeake any thing againſt God or Holie thinges muſte not bee Ieaſted at. Ciccro. Mala & impia eſt Conſuetudo, contra deos diſputandi: ſiue ſerio fit, ſiue diſſimulate. his Saintes, how witty or pleaſaunt ſo euer the matter be. Wherein, the company that Giouan Boccaccio hathe brought to ſpeake in his Nouelles and tales, hath faulted ſo muche: that me thinkes euery good body, may iuſtly blame them for it. And you muſt thinke It is not only a token of great deteſtation & Impietie in a man, to talke in ieſtinge wiſe of God: but hee is a vvicked & ſinfull man, that will abyde to heare it. But you ſhall finde ſome ſuche good men, as will flie aſmuche as the plague, the company of ſuch as talke ſo vnreuerently, and without reſpect, of the incomprehenſible Maieſtie of God. And vvee muſt not alone ſpeake religiouſly of him: but in all our talkes wee muſt auoyde what vvee may, that our vvordes may not vvitnes againſt our life and our vvorkes. For mē doe hate their owne faultes otherwhile, when they ſee them in another.
            Likewiſe it is vnſauourie, to talke of things out of tyme, not fitting the place Talke out of time. and company: although the matter it ſelfe, and ſpoken in tyme, were otherwiſe both good and godly. We muſt not then reherſe Fryers ſermones to young gentlewomen, when they are diſpoſed to ſporte thēſelues:

as yt good man did, that dwelles not farr hence, nere to S. Brancatio. And in feaſtes & at table, wee muſt beware wee doe not rehearſe any ſorowfull tales, nor put then in minde of woundes, of ſicknes, of deathes, of Plagues, or of other dolefull matters. But if another man chaunce to moue ſuche matter: it ſhalbe good, after an honeſt and gentell ſorte, to exchaunge that talke, and thruſt in ſome other, yt may giue them more delighte and pleaſure to heare it. Albeit, not long ſince I heard it ſaid to a worthy gentleman our neighbour, that Men haue many times more neede to weepe then to laugh. And for that cauſe hee ſaid, theſe dolefull tales, which wee call Tragedies, were deuiſed at firſt, that when they were plaid in the Theatres (as at that time they were wōt) they might draw fourth teares out of their eyes, that had neede to ſpēd thē. And ſo they were by their weeping, healed of their infirmitie. But albeit it bee good to doe ſo: yet it will il becōe vs to driue men into theyr dumpes: eſpecially where they bee mett to feaſte and to ſolace themſelues, & not to mourne. For if there be any, yt hath ſuche weeping diſeaſe: it will bee an eaſie matter to cure it, wt ſtronge Muſtard or a ſmoaky houſe. So that, in no wyſe,

I can excuſe our friend Philoſtrato, for his Boce. Gior. 4. fol 183. In the beginning. worke that hee made full of dule and of death, to ſuche a company as deſired nothing more then myrthe. Wee muſt the rather vſe ſylence, then diſcourſe of ſuche ſorrowfull matters.
            And they doe aſmuch amiſſe too, that neuer haue other thing in their mouthe, then their children, their wife, and their nourſe. My litle boy, made mee ſo laughe yeſterday: heare you: you neuer ſavve a ſvveeter babe in your life: my wyfe is ſuch a one, Cecchina told mee: of troth you vvould not beleeue vvhat a vvit shee hath: There is none ſo idle a body, that will eyther intend to anſwer, or abyde to heare ſuche fooliſhe pryttle prattle. For it yrcks a mans eares to harken vnto it.
            There be ſome againe, ſo curious in telling their dreames from point to point, vſing ſuch wonder and admiration withall, Dreames. yt it makes a mans hart ake to heare them: & ſpecially becauſe (for ye moſt parte) they be ſuch kinde of people: as it is but labour loſt to heare, euē the very beſt exployts they doe, when they be moſt awake, and labour moſt to ſhew their beſt. Wherfore we muſt not trouble men with ſo baſe and abſurde matter as dreames bee: eſpecially ſuche

foolyſhe things, as moſt tymes men haue. Albeit I haue heard ſay many times, that wiſemen in times paſt, haue leaft in their bookes many ſortes of dreames, conteining matters of deepe knowledge and vnderſtā
               ding: it followeth not yet, that wee, the vnlearned and common ſorte of people, ſhould vſe it in our familiar and common talke. And ſure of all the dreames that euer I heard (albeit I hardly liſten to any) in my cōceit, I neuer heard any, that was worth the hearing but one alone, which the good Maſter Flaminio Tomarozzo a gentleman of Rome did ſee, a man not vnlearned and M. Flaminio Tomarozzo. groſſe: but full of knowledge and ſingular witte. And thus was his dreame, This gētlemā Maſter Flaminio Tomarozzo, thought he was ſitting in a very riche Apothecaries shop, a neere neighbour of his. And after he had byn there a while (what ſoeuer the occaſiō was) the people vvere vp in a rore one a ſodayne, and fell to ſpoilyng of all that vvas in the shoppe. One tooke on Electuarie another a Confectiō, ſome one thing, ſome another, and preſently eate it vpp all: So that within a while, there was neither vitell glaſſe, ertherne pot, wodden boxe, nor any pot els of drugges, that was not emptied broken, or ouerthrowne. But amongeſt them all ther vvas one verye ſmall glaſſe, full to the

toppe of verie cleare vvater, vvhich many did ſmell to, but no man vvould taſte. He ſtoode not there long, but there came in a tall man, an aged and very graue man, to looke vnto. This Aged father beholding this vnfortunate Apothecaries boxes and pottes, and finding ſome emptyed, ſome ouerthrowne, and the better parte broken: at lenght caſting his eye aſyde, he chaunced to ſee the ſmal glaſſe I ſpake of before, and ſetting the ſame to his mouthe, hee dranke it vp ſo cleane: that he leaft not one droppe. And this doone, he went from thence as the reſt did before. Maſter Flaminio vvas abashed and marueled muche at this matter. And therefore turning to the Apothecarie he ſayed vnto him: Syr, whoe is this that came laſte? and why did he drinke vp ſo ſauourly, all the vvater in that litle glaſſe, vvhich all the reaſt refuſed. To vvhome the Apothecarie ſeemed to make this aunſvver. My ſonne, this is the Lord God. And the vvater, that hee alone dranke, and all the reaſt refuſed & vvould not taſte as you ſavv: vvas diſcretiō: vvhich, you knovv vvel ynough men vvill not taſte of, by any meanes.
            
            Such kind of dreames, I hould well a man may rehearſe, and heare with much pleaſure and profit. Bycauſe they doe more reſemble, the Cogitations & thoughts of an awakened minde: or better, I

ſhoulde ſay, the vertue ſenſitiue: then the viſions and ſyghts of a drowſie head. But thoſe other dreames, without ſhape, falſhiō or ſenſe: (which the moſte parte of ſuche men as we are, bee wont to haue) would be forgotten cleane, and loſt with our ſleepe. Howbeit, I doe not deny but the dreames of good men and learned, be better and wiſer then theires of the wicked and more vnlearned ſorte.
            And albeit a man would weene, there can bee nothing in the worlde more vaine then Dreames: yet there is one thing more light then they, and that are Lyes. For there 
               Lyes. 
               is yet ſome shadovve, and, as it vvere, a certaine feeling of that vvhich a man hath ſeene in his dreame. But there is neyther shadovve nor bodye of a trueth in a lye. And therfore we ſhould leſſe buſie mens eares, and their mindes to harken to lyes, then to dreames, becauſe they bee otherwhile receiued for truethes. But tyme, in the ende, diſcouers ſuche pelfe: that lyers, not only doe gayne no credite, but no man voucheſafes to harken vnto them, in otherwiſe (as the men that carry no ſubſtaunce in their woordes) then if they had ſayde nothing Men haue a pleaſure to lye othervvhile. or blowne a litle wynde. And you ſhal vnderſtād, ther be many yt vſe to lye, not

minding any yll purpoſe in it, or to make their owne peculiar proffit by it, to hurt other men or ſhame their neighbour: onely they doe it, for a pleaſure they take to tell a lye: as men that drinke not, all for thirſt: but for a pleaſure they take, to taſte of the wine. Other ſome doe tell lyes, to make a vaine glorious boaſting of them ſelues: vaunting and telling in a brauery, what wonderfull exploits they haue doone, or bearing men in hand, they be greate doctours and learned men.
            In Silence too, after a ſorte, without ſpeache, a mā may tell a leſynge: I meane Lefinges and Countreſectinges. with his geſtures and grace: as ſome you ſhall ſee, that being of meane, or rather baſe condition and calling, vſe ſuche a ſolemnitie in all their doings, and marche ſo ſtately, and ſpeake with ſuche a prerogatiue, or rather diſcourſe lyke Parleament men, ſetteling them ſelues, as it were, in a place of Iudgement, proudly prying about thē like Peacockes: that it is a very death to behold them.
            And ſome ſuche you ſhall fynde, that allthough they bee combered with no more wealthe then eaſily ſerues their turne: yet will they neuer appeare vnles their neckes be laden with chaines, their fingers full of

rings, their cappes beſet with agletts, and euery other parte beſpangled, as though they would defie ye King of Caſtiglio. Whoſe behauiours be full of follies and vaine glorie, which cometh of pryde, growing of vanitie it ſelfe. So that wee muſt eſchew theſe faults, as foule and vnſeemely things. You ſhall vnderſtand, in many Cities, and thoſe of the beſt, the lawes doe not ſuffer, that riche men ſhould go muche more gorgeouſly attyred, then the poore. For poore men thinke they haue a wrong: when mē ſeeme, but in countenaūce alone, as it were Imperiouſly to reigne ouer them. So that we muſt carefully beware we fall not into theſe follies.
            Neither muſt a man boaſte of his Nobilitie, his Honour or riches: muche leſſe vaunt of his witt, or gloriouſly reherſe to much of his deedes & valiāt Actes, or what Glorious boſtinge and braggeing. his Aunceſtors haue done, nor vppō euery occaſion, fall in reherfall of ſuche thinges, as many men doe. For in ſuche caſe, a mā would weene, they ſeeke, either to contend with the Company, (if they be, or will take vppon them to bee, as good Gentlemen, & of as muche wealthe and worthines, as they bee:) or elles to ouercrowe them, (if they liue in meaner condition and calling,

then they doe) And as it were to vpbraide them, their poore and baſe condition of life.
            A man muſt neither embaſe, nor exalte him ſelfe to muche out of meaſure: but rather Exalting and embaſing. bury in ſilēce ſome parte of his merits, then arrogate to muche vnto him. Bycauſe Goodnes it ſelfe, vvhen it excedeth muche is euer enuyde of ſome. And you may be ſure, they that embaſe them ſelues thus beyond meaſure, refuſing that worſhip and honour that is but duely their owne of very right: ſhewe more pryde in this contempte, then they that vſurpe thoſe things, that are not ſo due vnto them. So yt a man perchaūce, might ſaye, Giotto hath not deſerued thoſe Cōmendatiōs yt ſome beleue, in yt he refuſed Bocc. Nouel. 5 Gior. 6. fo. 291 to be called Maſter: being not only a maſter but without doubt a ſingular and cunning maſter in his art in thoſe daiez. But be it blame, or praiſe yt he deſerued: it is moſt ſure, he that refuſeth that which euery mā els doth hunt for: ſheweth therin, he reproueth or contemneth the common opinion of men. And, to contemne the honour & renowne, which other mē gape for ſo much, is but to glorie and magnifie him ſelfe aboue other. For aſmuche as there is no man (without he be mad) will refuſe and reiect things that be deare and of price: vnles

hee be ſuche, as hathe plenty and ſtore of thoſe deare and deintye things.
            Wee muſt not boaſt of thoſe good things that be in vs, nor ſet them to lyght: for in yt one, wee doe vpbraide men their faults: In the other, wee ſcorne to muche their vertues. But it behoueth euery man to ſpeake his owne praiſe, as litle as hee may. And if occaſion driue him vnto it: it ſhalbe good, modeſtly to ſpeake the truethe, as I haue told you before.
            And therefore, they that deſire to doe mē a pleaſure: muſt needes leaue one faulte, yt is to common with all men: they muſt not ſhewe them ſelues ſo afraide and fearefull to ſpeake their mindes, when a man dothe aſke their aduiſe. For, it is a deadly paine to here thē, & ſpecialy if they be mē, in ye Iudge mēt of ye world, of good vnderſtanding and wiſedōe. What a fetchig about is this, ere they cōe to ye matter? Sir I beſeche you pardon mee, if I doe not ſay vvell. I vvill ſpeake like a gros mā as I am: & groſly according to my pore ſkil. And Sir, I am ſure you vvil but mocke me for it. But yet, to obey you: & they drawe their words forth ſo lōg, & put thē ſelues to ſuche paine: yt, while theſe ceremonies be a doig, ye hardeſt queſtiō yt is, might haue byn determined with fewer words and ſhorter time:

bycauſe they cannot get out of theſe proteſtations, when they bee in.
            They bee alſo very tedious to men, and their conuerſation & maners are very troubleſome: whoe ſhewe too baſe and abiect a minde in their doings. And where the chefeſt and higheſt place, is apparantly due Abiecte Minde. vnto them: they will euer creepe downe to the loweſt. And it is a ſpitefull buiſynes to thruſt them vp: For they will ſtraite iogge backe againe, like a reſty Iade, or a Nagge that ſtartleth a ſide at his ſhadowe. So that, there is muche a dooe wt them, when wee meete at a doore. For they will not (for all you can dooe) in any caſe enter before you, but ſo trauerſe their ground, go backe, and ſo fray and defend with their armes and their handes: that at euery thirde ſteppe, a man muſt be ready to wage battell with them: and thus they breake of, all ſolace and pleaſure, and otherwhile, the buiſynes they meete aboute.
            And therfore, Ceremonies, which wee name, as you heare, by a ſtraunge terme, as Ceremonies. lacking a worde of our owne, bycauſe our elders, hauing no knowledge of thoſe ſuperſtitious faſhions, coulde not well giue them a proper name. Ceremonies, I ſaye,

(in my Iudgement,) differ not much from lyes & dreames, for their own very vaineſſe it ſelfe. So that wee may couple and ioyne thē together in this our treatiſe, ſithe occaſion ſerues ſo fytt to ſpeake of them here, As a good man hath often ſhewed me: thoſe ſolemnities that church men doe vſe at their Altars, and in their diuine ſeruice bothe to God and his holy things, are properly called Ceremonies: but after, men did begyn, to reuerence eche other with curious entertaynements, more then were conuenient, and would be called maſters and Lords, amōgeſt them ſelues, yealding bending, and bowing their bodyes, in tokē of reuerence one to another, vncouering their heads, vſing highe titles and Styles of honour, and kyſſing their hands as if they were hollye things: ſome body, by like conſidering all theſe things well, and finding theſe newe founde curious follyes without any name: thought good to Chriſten and call them Ceremonies, but ſure in a ieſt as I take it: as to be mery and make good cheare, we terme it in ſport, a triūph: which cuſtome, no doubt, tooke not his being at vs, but elles where, as barbarous & ſtraunge: and not long ſince, from whence I knowe not, tranſported into Italie:
               
whoſe deedes being wretched, and effects baſe and vile, hath gotten encreaſe and honor, in vayne woords alone, and ſuperfluous titles.
            
               Ceremonies then, if we cōſider well theie intēts that vſe them: are but vaine ſhewes of honour and reuerence, towardes him to whome they be doone: framed of ſemblance and wordes touching their titles and courtious offers. I ſay vaine: In that we honour mē to their face, whome we reuerence not in deede, but otherwhile cōtemne. And neuertheles, becauſe we may not go agaiſt cuſtome, wee giue them theſe titles: The moſt honorable Lord ſuche a one: the Noble Lord ſuche a one. And ſo otherwhile wee offer them our humble ſeruice: whome wee could better vnſerue then ſerue, & cōmaund then doe them any duety.
            Thē not Leſinges alone, but alſo Treacheries and Treaſons, ſhalbe called Ceremonies. But becauſe theſe wordes and theſe titles aboue reherſed, haue loſt their ſtrēgth: and waſte, (as a man may ſay of Irō) their tē
               per, wt ſuch continuall occupying of it as we doe vſe: we muſt not ſo preciſely way them as other wordes, nor ſo ſtrictly conſtrue the meaning of them. And, that this is true, that which allwayes happens to all men,

dothe ſhewe it playne inoughe. For if wee meete with a man, we neuer ſawe before: with whome, vppon ſome occaſion, it behoues vs to talke: without examining wel his worthines, moſt commonly, that wee may not offend in to litle, we giue him to much, and call him Gentleman, and otherwhile Sir, althoughe he be but ſome Souter or Barbar, or other ſuche ſtuffe: and all bycauſe he is appareled neate, ſomewhat gentleman lyke.
            And as men in tymes paſt, were wont to Titles by Priuilege. haue vnder the Priuilege of the Pope & Emperour, peculiar & diſtinct titles of honour, which might not be vntouched, without doing wrong to the priuileged men: nor againe attributed & geuen without a ſcorne, to them that were no ſuch priuileged perſones: So at this daie, wee muſt more freely vſe thoſe titles, and the other ſignifications of honour, like to thoſe titles: bycauſe Cuſtome the mightieſt Lorde hathe largely therewith, priuileged men of our time.
            This vſe and cuſtome, though ſo fayre and gallant without, is altogether vaine within, and conſiſteth in ſemblance without effect, & in wordes without meaning.

But this notwithſtanding, it is not lawful Cuſtom muſt not be altered for vs to chaunge it: but rather, bycauſe it is not our fault, but the fault of our tyme, wee are bounde to followe it: but yet wee muſt diſcretely doe it.
            So that wee are to noate, that Ceremonies 
               The end why ceremonies be vſed. Ceremonies for profit. are vſed, eyther for a Profit, or for a Vanitie, or for a Duetie. And euery lye that is told for a mans priuate profit: is a deceite, a ſinne, and a diſhoneſt parte: for, in what ſo euer it bee, A man can neuer honeſtly lye.
            
            And this is a common fault with flatterers, that counterfet them ſelues to be our friendes, and apply them ſelues euer to our deſiers, what ſoeuer they be: not bycauſe wee would haue it ſo, but to the ende wee ſhould doe them ſome pleaſure, for it. And this is not to pleaſe vs, but to deceiue vs. And albeit this kind of fault be, peraduenture, by reaſon of cuſtome ſufferable: yet notwithſtanding bycauſe of it ſelfe, it is fowle and hurtefull, it yll becomes a gentle man to doe it. For it is no honeſtie to ſeeke a pleaſure by the hurt of another. And if lyes and falſe flatteries, may bee termed Ceremonies (as I haue ſayde before:) ſo oft, as we vſe them for reſpect of our gain & profit: ſo oft wee doe hazard our good name and credite: ſo that this conſideration alone,

myght moue vs well to leaue all Ceremonies, and vſe them no more.
            It reſteth now that I ſpeake of thoſe yt 
               Dutifull ceremonies. bee done of Dutie, and of thoſe that be done of a Vaineſſe. As touching ye firſt, VVe muſt not leaue them vndone in any wiſe. For he that faileth to doe them, dothe not onely diſpleaſe, but doth a wrong to him, to whome they be due. And many times it chaunceth, ye men come to daggers drawing, euē for this occaſion alone, that one man hath not done the other, that worſhip and honour vppon the way, that he ought. For to ſaye a trueth The power of cuſtome is great & of much force, 
               Cuſtome is a lawe. (as I ſaid) and would be taken for a lawe, in theſe caſes. And that is the cauſe we ſay: You: to euery one, that is not a man of very baſe calling, and in ſuche kinde of ſpeach You. wee yealde ſuch a one, no maner of courteſie of our owne. But if wee ſay: Thou: to ſuche a one, then wee diſgrace him and offer Thou. him outrage and wronge: and by ſuche ſpeach, ſeeme to make no better reconing of him, then of a knaue and a clowne.
            And although the tymes paſt, and other countryes, haue vſed other maners: let vs yet, keepe our ſelues to our owne: And let not vs diſpute the matter, which is the better oftwaine. For wee muſt obſerue, not

thoſe, that we Iudge in our owne conceits to be good: but ſuche, as be currant by cuſtome, & vſed in our owne tyme: as lawes, which we be bound to keepe, thoughe they be not all of the beſt, tyll ſuche tyme, as the magiſtrates, the Prince, or they that haue power to amēd them, haue chaunged them to better.
            So that It behoues vs, hedefully to marke the doings and ſpeache, wherewith daily practiſe and cuſtome, wonteth to receaue, ſalute, & name in our owne country, all ſortes and kinds 
               Bocc Nouel. 6 Gior. 5. fo. 259 
               of people, and in all our familiar communicatiō with men, let vs vſe the ſame. And notwithſtanding Peter the King of Aragon. the Admerall (as peraduēture the maner of his time was ſuche) in his talke with Peter the King of Aragon, did many times: Thou him: Let vs yet ſaye to our King: Your maieſtie: and your highnes: aſwell in ſpeache as in writing. And if they haue followed the vſe of their time: then let not vs breake the faſhions of ours. And theſe doe I call Duetifull Ceremonies, bycauſe they proceede not, as we would, or of our free willes: but are layde vppō vs by the Lawes: I meane, Common cuſtome.
            
            
               And in ſuche things, as carry no euill meaning in them, but rather ſome face of courteſie: reaſon would and commaundeth, vve shoulde

rather obſerue common Cuſtome, then diſpute and lay the lawe for them.
            
            And albeit, to kiſſe in ſhewe of reuerence, of very right appertayneth to the reliques of Saints and there holy matters: yet if it bee the maner of your country, at parting, to ſay: Signori, Io vi baſcio la mano. Or: Io ſon voſtro ſeruidore: Or els: voſtro ſchiauo in catena: 
               I kiſſe your hande: I am your ſeruaūt: your ſtaue in chayne. you muſt not diſdaine it, more then other. But, In farewelles and writings, you muſt ſalute and take leaue, not as reaſon, but as cuſtome will haue you: and not as mē wont in times paſt, or should doe: but as men vſeat this day: for it is a chorliſhe maner to ſay: VVhat greate gentleman is he I pray you, that I muſt maſter him: Or: is he becom maſter parſon, that I muſt kiſſe his hands, for he that is wont to be (Sird) and likewiſe (Sirreth) other: may thinke you diſdaine him, and vſe ſome outrage vnto him, when you call him to his face, by his bare name, and giue him no addition.
            And theſe termes of Seignory, ſeruice, & duetye, and ſuch other like vnto theſe, as I haue ſayde: haue loſt a greate parte of their harſhnes, and (as hearbes lōg ſteepte in the water) are ſweetened, and made ſofte and tender, by reaſon of muche ſpeache in mens mouthes, and cōtinuall vſe to ſpeake them.

So that we muſt not abhorre thē, as ſome rude and ruſticall fellowes, full of fooliſhe ſimplicitie, doe: that would fayne beginne the letters we write to Kinges and Emperours after this ſort. vz. Yf thou and thy children be in healthe it is well: I am alſo in healthe: ſaying, that ſuche was the beginning of the letters, the Latins did write to the magiſtrates of Rome. If men ſhould liue by their meaſure, and go backe to thoſe faſhions and maners, our firſt fathers dyd vſe: the worlde thē by litle and litle, would come ſo about, that we ſhould feede vppon acornes againe.
            And in theſe Duetifull Ceremonies, there be alſo certain rules and precepts, we muſt obſerue: that wee may not bee touched wt 
               Vanitie and plyde. Reſpect of countrey. 
               Vaineſſe and Pride. And firſt of all, wee muſt conſider the country where wee doe liue. For all cuſtomes be not currant a lyke in all countreys. And peraduenture that which they vſe in Naples, which is a Citye repleniſhed with gentlemen, of good houſes and Lordes of greate power, were not ſo fitte for Florens and Luke: Which are inhabited, for the moſt part, with Merchāts and plaine gentlemē, without any Prince, Marques, or Barone amongeſt them. So that the braue and Lordelike manners of

the gentlemē of Naples tranſported to Florence: ſhould be but waſte, and more then needes: like a tall mans gowne caſt ouer a dwarfe: as alſo the manners of Florence ſhoulde be to pinchinge and ſtraite, for the Noble natures and mindes of the gētlemē of Naples. And although the gētlemē of Venice, vſe great embracings and entertainementes amongſt themſelues, and fawne without meaſure the one on the other, by reaſō of their offices, degrees and fauours they looke to finde when they meete and aſſemble and chooſe their officers: yet for all this, it is not conuenient, that the good men of Rouigo, or the Citizens of Aſolo, ſhould vſe the lyke ſolēnities, embraceings and entertainemēts one to another, haueing no ſuch kinde of cauſe amongſt them: Albeit all that ſame countrie (if I bee not deceiued) is faine a litle, into theſe kinde of follies, as ouer careleſſe and apt inough by nature, or rather learning thoſe maners of Venice their Lady and Miſtris: becauſe Euerie man gladly ſeeketh to tread the ſteps of his better: although there be no reaſō for it.
            Moreouer we muſt haue a regarde to Time, age, condicion & calling muſt be reſpected. the time, to the age, and the condition of him, to whom we vſe theſe ceremonies, and likewiſe reſpect our owne calling: and with

men of credite maintaine them: but wt men of ſmall account cut them of cleane, or at leaſt, abridge them as muche as wee may, & rather giue them a becke thē a due garde: Which the courtiers in Rome can very well ſkill to doe.
            But in ſome caſes theſe Ceremonies be very comberſome to a mans buſines, and very In what caſe Ceremonies be cumberlome. tedious: as, Couer your head, ſayes the Iudge, yt is buſied wt cauſes, and is ſcanted of time to diſpatche them. And this fellow ſo full of theſe Ceremonies, after a number of legges and ſhuflinge curteſis, aunſwers againe: Sir I am very well thus. But ſayes the Iudge agayne, Couer your head I ſay. Yet this good fellow tourning twiſe or thriſe to & fro, making lowe conges downe to the grounde wt muche reuerence and humilitie, aunſwers him, ſtill: I beſeache your worship, let me doe my duetie. This buſines and trouble laſteth ſo long, & ſo muche tune is trifled: that the Iudge might very nere haue diſpatched all his buſines within that ſpace. Then, although it be euery honeſt mans parte, and the duety of euery meaner body, to honour the Iudges, and mē yt be called to worſhip & honour: yet, where time wyll not beare it: it is a very troubleſome thing to vſe it, and it muſt be eſchewed,

or meaſured with reaſon.
            Neyther be yt ſelf ſame Ceremonies ſemely for young mē, reſpecting their Age: yt ould mē doe vſe together. Nor yet can it becom men of meane and baſe condition, to vſe the very ſame, yt gētlemē & greate men may vſe one to another. And if wee marke it well, we ſhall find, yt the greateſt, ye beſt men, & mē of moſt valour, doe not alwayes vſe ye moſt Ceremonies thē ſelues, nor yet loue nor looke a mā ſhould make many goodly curtſies vnto them, as men that can ill ſpend their thoughts one matters ſo vaine.
            Neither muſt handy crafts men, nor mē of baſe condition, buiſie thē ſelues to much, in ouer ſolemne Ceremonies to greate men, and Lordes: it is not lookt for in ſuche. For they diſdaine them, more then allowe thē: becauſe it ſeemes that in ſuch, they ſeeke & looke, rather for obedience and duetie, then honour. And therefore it is a foule faulte in a ſeruaūt, to offer his maſter his ſeruice: for he coūts it his ſhame, & he thinks the ſeruāt doth make a doubt, whether he is maſter or no: as if it were not in him to imploy him, & cōmaūd him too. Theſe kinde of Ceremonies would be vſed frankely. For, VVhat a man dothe of duetie, is taken for a debte, and hee finds him ſelfe litle beholding to

him that doth it. But he that dothe more, then he is bound to: it ſeemes he parteth with ſomewhat, and that makes men to loue him, and to commende him for a liberall man. And I remember mee well, I haue hearde it ſayde, that a worthy Graeciā
                a greate verſifier, was euer wont to ſaye: that He that could ſkill to entertaine men with a ſmall aduenture, made a greate gayne.
            
            You ſhall then vſe youre Ceremonies, as the tailer ſhapes his garments, rather to large then to litle: but yet not ſo, that hee cutteth one hoſe large inough to make a cloke. And if thou doe vſe in this point, ſome litle gentle behauiour, to ſuche as be meaner then thy ſelfe: thou ſhalt be counted lowly. And if thou doe aſmuche to thy betters: thou ſhalt bee ſayde a Gētlemā well taught, and courtious. But hee that dothe her in to muche, and is ouer lauiſhe, Vanitie. ſhalbe blamed as vaine and light: and perhaps worſe thought of too: counted a buſie body, a fidging fellowe, and in wiſe mens ſight, a flatterer: which vice, our elders haue called, (if I doe not forget me) dowble diligence. And there is no faulte in the worlde, more to bee abhorred, or yt worſſe beſeemes a gentleman, then this. And this is the thirde maner of Ceremonies, which

ſimply procedeth of our owne will, and not of cuſtome.
            Let vs thē remēber, that Ceremonies, (as I haue alwayes ſayd) were not ſo neceſſarie by nature, but a man might doe well inough without them: As for example, our coūtrie liued (it is not long ſince) in maner cleane without any. But other mens diſeaſes haue infected vs, with theſe infirmities and many mo. So that, cuſtome and vſe obſerued: the reſt that is more, is but waſte: and ſuch a ſufferable leeſing, as if it be more in deede then is in vſe, it is not only vnſufferable, but forbidden: and ſo vppon, the matter, a cold and vnſauourie thing to noble mindes, that cannot brouſe vppon ſhrubbes and ſhewes.
            And you ſhall vnderſtand, that truſting my owne ſkill but little, in wryting this preſent treatiſe: I thought good to conſult with many, and to take the Iudgement of better learned men then my ſelfe. And this in my reading I finde. There was a King, they call him Oedipus: being baniſhed Oedipus. and driuen out of his countrie (vppon what occaſion I know not) he fled to King Theſeus at Athens, the better to ſaue him ſelfe and his life, from his enemies, that Theſeus. mainely purſued him. This Oedipus now

comming before the preſence of Theſeus, by good chaūce hearing his daughter ſpeake, (whome he knew by her voice, for he was blind and could not beholde her with his eyes) he was ſo preſently ſtriken with ioy, that, not tarying to doe his allegeaūce and duetie to the King, he did preſētly embrace, & make much of his daughter before him: his fatherly affection ſo led him, and rulde him ſo. But in the end finding his fault, and better aduiſing him ſelfe of his doings: he would needs excuſe it to Theſeus, & humbly prayd his grace to pardon his folly. The good and wiſe King, cut of his talke, and bad him leaue his excuſes, and thus ſaide vnto him: Comfort thy ſelfe Oedipus, and bee not diſmayd at that thou haſt done. For I will not haue my life honoured with other mens woordes, but with my owne deedes. Which ſētēce a man ſhould haue alwaies in mind.
            And albeit men be well pleaſed, that mē doe giue them worſhip & honour: yet when they find them ſelues cuningly courted, they be ſoone weary of it, and alſo diſdaine it. For theſe glauerings, or flatteries I ſhould ſay, to amend their knaueries & falſehoodes, haue this fault withall: that theſe glauering fellowes doe plainly ſhewe, they count him, whome they court in this ſorte,

but a vaine, and arrogant bodie, an aſſe of groſe capacitie, and ſo ſimple, yt it ſhould be an eaſie matter to bayte him and take him too. And theſe Vaine and Curious Ceremonies, beſides that they be ſuperfluous: ſo they beare with all a shape of flattery, ſo ſlenderly couered, that euery man doth opēly ſee them, and know them plaine: in ſuche ſorte, that they that doe them, to the end to make a gaine, beſides that ill that is in them, wherof I ſpake before: ſhewe them ſelues alſo, gentlemen ill taught, without good maner or any honeſt faſhion.
            But there is another ſorte of Ceremonious people, who make it an arte and merchandiſe, and keepe a booke and a reconing of it. One theſe men (they ſay) they muſt ſmile, on ſuch men they muſt laughe: and, ye better man ſhall ſit in the chayr, and the other vppon a lowe ſtoole: which ſuperſtitions Ceremonies, I beleue, were tranſported out of Spaine into Italie. But our country, hath geuen them but colde entertainement, and as yet they haue taken but ſlender roote here: for this preciſe difference of worſhip, and gentry, is not liked of, with vs. And therefore it is but ill maner, for a man to make him ſelfe Iudge, which is the better man.
            
               
But it is much worſe for a man to make a ſale of his Ceremonies and entertainmēts, (after ye maner of harlots) as I haue ſeene many gentlemen doe in the court, geuing good wordes and faire countenaunces for a rewarde and recompence, of the goods and the tyme, their ſeruaunts haue ſpent in their ſeruice.
            And ſure they that take a pleaſure to vſe ouer many Ceremonies, more then neede: ſhewe they doe it vppon a luſtines and brauery, as men that haue nothing elles in thē of any valour.
            And bycauſe theſe follies are learned wt eaſe inough, and carry withall a litle fayre gloſe in ſhewe: they beſtowe all their whole mindes none other waye. But graue matters they can not abide to weelde, as things to farre aboue their reache: and coulde finde in their harts to dwell in theſe toyes and tryfles, as men whoſe capacitie conceiueth nought of Importaunce: like tender mylkeſops that can beare no brūt: or that, beſide a glorious outſide, haue not mettall inough in thē to abide a flea byting. And therfore, they could wiſhe it worſe: that theſe entertainments and acquaintāce with mē, ſhould go no further then the firſt ſight. And of theſe there bee an infinite

number.
            And ſome againe be to full of words, and abound to muche in curtious geſtures to couer and hyde the defects and faults of their treacheries, and their vile & baſe natures: For they ſee, if they ſhould be as barē & rude in their woords, as they be in their deeds & their doings, mē would in no caſe abide them. And to ſaye a trueth, yow ſhall finde yt out of theſe two cauſes, drawe moſt men one, to vſe theſe waſt and needles Ceremonies, and nothing els: which lightly moſt men cannot away withall, bycauſe they be hindered by them, & their meanes, to liue as they would, and loſe their libertie: whiche a mā dothe preferre aboue any thing ells.
            Wee muſt not ſpeake yll of other mē, nor of their doings: althoughe it plainely appere, that men do willingly bēd good eare to heare it, as eaſily moued therto, by ye nature of malice and enuy, that pynes at our Neighbours proſperity and riſing to worſhip & honour: for at lēgth mē will eſchewe the acquayntaūce of Slaūderous Slaundering. people, as much as they ſhunne the Oxe, ye goreth with his horns, or ſtrikes wt his feete: making their reconing, that what they tell them of vs, aſmuche they will tell

vs, of them.
            And ſome ther be, that ſo quarel at euery Quareling. Wrangling. Ouerthwaring. word, queſtion, and wrangle, that they ſhew they haue litle ſkill in other mens natures: for, Euery man deſireth the victory ſhould go one his ſyde: and hates it aſmuche, to be maſtered in words, as to be vanquiſhed in any other acte that he dothe. So yt, willfully to ouerthvvart a man, it workethe no Loue and good vvill: but rather diſpleaſure, rancoure and malice. And therfore, he that ſekes to be well thought of, and would be taken for a pleſaunt and good Companion, muſt not ſo redily vſe theſe ſpeaches: It was not ſo: And, Nay: it is as I tell you. I wil lay a vvager vvith you: But he muſt rather take payns, to apply himſelf to other mēs mīds cōcerning ſuch things, as haue matter of ſmall importaunce: Bycauſe the victorye, in ſuch caſes, is daungerous: for, the gayninge the cauſe, in tryfling queſtions, doth often looſe the Loue of a faithfull friend. And men are ſo farre out of loue & liking, of ſuch hot fellowes: that they will by no meanes growe acquaynted with ſuche, leaſt they be dryuen euery hower to bralle, to chide, and to fighte with them for it. And ſuche kinde of people doe

purchaſe theſe names: Maiſter Vniciguerra: 
               Conquerour. Ouerthwaiter. Know all. The ſubtile Doctour. Or, Sir Contraponi: Or, Sir Tutteſſalle: And ſometime: il Dottor ſuttile.
            
            And if you chaunce otherwhile, to be intreated of the cōpany to ſpeake your mind: I would haue you doe it after a gentle ſort, without ſhewing your ſelfe ſo greedie to carry the bucklers away, as if you would eate them vp for haſte. But thou muſt Leaue to euery man his parte: And bee it right or vvronge, conſent to the minds of the moſt, or the moſt importunate: and ſo leaue the fielde vnto them: that ſome other, and not your ſelfe, may beate and ſweat, and chace in the winning of the cauſe. For theſe quarelous contentions, bee foule and ill fauoured faſhions for gentlemen to vſe: and they get them ill will and diſpleaſure of all men for it: and they bee vncomely for their owne vnſeemelines, which of it ſelfe offendeth euery good honeſt minde, as it may chaūce you ſhall heare hereafter.
            But the common fault of men is ſuch, Counceling and reprouing and eche man is ſo infected with this ſelfe loue and liking of him ſelfe: that he hath no reſpect or care to pleaſe any man ells.

And to ſhewe them ſelues fine headed, of muche vnderſtanding, and wiſe: they counſell, reproue, diſpute, and bralle, to daggers drawing, and allowe nothing els but that they ſay them ſelues.
            To offer aduyſe vnrequeſted: what is it els but to vaunt youre ſelfe wiſer then he is, whom you do counſell: nay rather, it is a playne checke to him, for his Ignoraunce and folly. And therfore, you muſt not do ſo, with all your acquaintance generally: but only with your very friendes, or ſuche whō you are to gouerne & rule: or els, whē a man hapely ſtandes in daunger & perill, how muche a ſtraunger ſo euer he be. But in our common Acquaintance and conuerſation, Let vs not buſy our ſelues, and medle to muche vvith other mens doings. In which fault many doe fall: but moſt of all, the men of leaſt vnderſtanding. For, Men of groſe apacities, conſider but litle: And they take no longe time to debate with them ſelues, as men that haue litle buſines to doe.
            But how ſo euer it be, hee that offereth He that counſelleth hath euer a good conceite of him ſelfe. and geueth his counſell: geues vs to thinke, hee hathe this conceite of him ſelfe: that all the witt is in him,

and other poore men haue none at all.
            And ſure there bee ſome, that ſtand ſo muche in conceite of their wit: that they will be in maner, at warres, with him, tha: wil not follow the counſell they giue them. And thus they will ſay. Very vvell: a poore mans counſell vvill not be taken: ſuche a one vvill doe as he liſt: ſuche a one geues no heede to my vvordes. As though there were not more Arrogancie in thee, that ſekeſt to bring a man to followe thy Counſell: then there is in him, that followes his owne aduiſe.
            And they doe alſo make the like fault, yt take vppon them to reproue and correct Reprouing and correcting of faul. mens faults, and to geue a definite ſentēce in all things, and lay the lawe to all men. Suche a thing would not be done: You ſpake ſuche woordes: Doe not ſo: ſay not ſo: The wine that you drinke is not good for you: but would bered vvine. You should vſe ſuche an Electuarie, and ſuche pilles: And they neuer leaue to reproue and correct. And let vs paſſe that ouer, that otherwhile, they buſy them ſelues ſo much, to purge other mēs groūds: that their owne is ouergrowen, and full of thornes and nettles. For it is a meruailous payne vnto them, to heare one that ſyde.
            And as there be few or none, whoſe mids

can frame, to ſpend their lyfe with a Phyſition, a Confeſſour, and muche leſſe a Iudge that hath iuriſdiction and power to controwle and correct all criminall faultes: ſo is ther not one, that can take any pleaſure to lyue, or make himſelf familiar with ſuche Cenſors: ſo hard, and ſeuere. For, euery man loueth libertye: and they woulde robbe vs of it, and get to be our maſters. So that it is no good māner to be ſo redye to corect and giue rules vnto mē: we muſt geue Scholemaſters and Fathers leaue to do that. And yet that notwithſtanding, experience doth ſhewe, the childeren and ſcholers both, do often hide them ſelues frō them, you ſee.
            Doe not allow, that a man ſhould ſcorne Scornes and Scoffes. or ſcoffe at any man, what ſo euer he be: no not his very enimy, what diſpleaſure ſo euer he beare him: for, it is a greater ſigne of contempt and diſdaine, to ſcorne a man, then to do him an opē vvrōg: foraſmuch as vvrongs may be done, eyther of choler, or of ſom couetous mynde or other. And ther is no mā will take a diſpleaſure with that, or for that, he doth not ſet by: nor yet couet that thing, he doth altogether contemne.
            So that, a man doth make ſome accōpt of

him he dothe wronge: but of him that he ſcoffes and ſcornes, he makes no reconing at all, or as litle as may be.
            And the Nature and effect of a ſcorne, is properly to take a contentation and pleaſure to 
               The Nature of a ſcorne or a ſcoffe. 
               do another man ſhame and villany: thoughe it do our ſelues no good in the world. So that, good maner & honeſty, would vs beware we ſcorne no man in any caſe: wherin they be much to be blamed, that reproue men thoſe blemiſhes they haue in their perſon, eyther in woords, as Maſter Foreſe da Rabatta did, laughing at the coūtenaunce of Maſter Giotta: or in deeds, as many doe, counterfeting thoſe that ſtutter, haulte, or be crookte ſhoulderd. And likewyſe, they that ſcoffe at any man, that is deformed, ill ſhapen, leane, litle, or a dwarfe, at much to be blamed for it: or, that make a gybing and ieſting at ſuch follyes as another man ſpeaketh, or the woordes that eſcape him by chaunce: and with all, haue a ſporte and a pleaſure to make a mā bluſh: all theſe ſpitefull behauiours and faſhions, worthely deſerue to be hated, and make them that vſe them, vnworthy to Boec, Nouel. 5. Gior. 6. fo. 297. beare the name of an honeſt gentleman.
            And ſuch as vſe to ieſt at a man, be very lyke vnto theſe: I meane them that

haue a good ſport to mocke and beguile mē, Morkes. not in ſpite or ſcorne, but on a meriment alone. And you ſhall vnderſtand, There is 
               Difference betwen a ſcorne and a mocke 
               no difference betvveene a ſcorne and a mocke: but the purpoſe alone and intent a man hath, in the meaning the one the other. For a man mockes and laughes otherwhile, in a ſport and a paſtime: but his ſcorne is euer in a rage and diſdaine. Although in common ſpeache and wryting, wee take the one woorde ſometyme for the other. But He that doth ſcorne a man: feeleth a contentation in the shame he hath done him: And hee that dothe mocke, or but laughe: taketh no contentation in that he hath done: but a ſport, to be merry & paſſe the time away: where it would be, both a greefe and a ſorrow, per chaunce, vnto him, to ſee that man receaue any ſhame, by any thing he ſaid or did vnto him.
            And althoughe I profited litle, in my Grammar in my youthe: yet I remember that Mitio, who loued Aeſchines ſo muche, that he him ſelfe had wōder at it: yet other while, toke a ſporte & a pleaſure to mocke him: as when he ſaid to him ſelfe: I vvill go to giue him a mocke: ſo that, I muſt inferre, that the ſelfe ſame thing, done to the very ſelfe ſame body: according to the intent

of him that doth it, may be eyther a mocke or ſcorne.
            And bycauſe our purpoſe, cannot be plainely knowne vnto other men: it ſhall not be good for vs to vſe ſuch parts, as bring men in doubt and ſuſpicion, what our intent and meaning is in them: but rather let vs eſchewe them, then ſeeke to be counted Ieſters. For, It many times chaunceth, in boording and Ieſting, one tackes in ſporte, the other ſtrykes againe in earneſt: & thus from playing, they come to fraying. So, he that is familiarly mockte in paſtime, recons it, otherwhile, to be done to his ſhame & diſhonour, and therat he takes a diſdaine. Beſides this, A mocke is no better, then a deceyte. And naturally, it greueth euery man to erre and be deceyued. So that, many Reaſons ther be to proue, That He that ſeekes to purchaſe goodwill, and be well thought of: muſt not make him ſelfe to cunning in mockes and Ieſtes.
            
            It is very true, we are not able, in no wiſe, to leade this paineful lyfe, altogether without ſome pleaſure and ſolace: And bycauſe Ieſtes do geue vs ſome ſporte, and make vs merry, and ſo cōſequētly refreaſh our ſpirits: we loue them that be pleaſaunt, merry conceited, and full of ſolace.

So that a body would thinke, I ſhould rather perſuade the contrarie: I meane, I ſhoulde ſay: It is conuenient and meete in company, to vſe prety mockes, and otherwhile ſome Ieſtes and taunts. And without doubt, they that can ſlint after a friendly and gē
               tle ſort, be muche more made of, and better beloued then they that cannot ſkill or haue no wit to doe it. Howbeit, it is needeful in this, to haue a reſpect to many thīgs.
            And foraſmuche as it is the intēt of him that doth Ieſt: to make a ſport and paſtime at his faulte, whome he doth loue and eſteeme, and of whom he doth make more thē a commō account: it muſt be well lookte to, that the fault, wherin his friend hath fallen, be ſuche, as he may ſuſtaine no ſlaunder or ſhame, or any harme by any talke or Ieſte he makes vppon it: otherwiſe, his ſkil doth ill ſerue him, to make a good difference betweene a pleaſaunt Ieſt, and a very plaine wronge.
            And there be ſome men, ſo ſhort & ſo teſty, that you muſt, in no wiſe, be merry, nor vſe Bocc. Nouel. 8 Gior. 9. fo. 430 any ieſting with them. And that can Biondello well tell, by Mayſter Philippo Argenti in the gallery of Cauiccioli.
            
            And moreouer, It cannot be good to ieaſte 
               No Ieſting in matters of weight or of ſhame. 
               in matters of weite, and muche leſſe in matters of shame. For, men will weene that wee haue a good ſporte (as the common ſaying

is) to bragge and boaſt in our euill: as it is Bocc. Nouel. 7 Gior. 6. fo. 294. ſaid, the Lady Philippe of Prato, tooke a ſingular pleaſure and contētation in the pleaſaūt & prety aūſwer ſhe made, to excuſe her Lupo is the proper name of a man aſwell as a wolfe. looſe and wanton life. And therefore, I cannot thinke that Lupo of Vberti did any thing extenuat or leſſē his ſhame: but rather increaſte it greater, by the Ieſte that hee made to excuſe his faulte, and qualifie the opinion of his cowardly minde. For, where he might haue kept him ſelfe ſafe without daunger in the caſtle of Laterin, wherein he was beſieged round about, and ſhutte vp: hee thought hee had plaide the man good inoughe, in that hee could ſay at the yealding it vp: that A wolfe doth not loue to be beſieged and shutte vp. For, where it is out of time for to laughe, there to vſe any Ieſtes or daliaunce, it hath a very colde Grace.
            
            And further, you ſhall vnderſtād, there be ſome Ieſtes yt bite, & ſome yt bite not at all. For the firſt ſorte: let yt wiſe counſell that Lauretta gaue for that point, ſuffice to teach Bocc Nouel. 3 Gior. 6. fo. 288 Ieſtes and Taunts. you: That Ieſtes muſt bite the hearer like a sheepe, but not like a dogge. For if it pinche, as the byte of a dogge: it shalbe no more a Ieſte but a vvronge. And the lawes almoſt in all countries, will, that who ſaith

any villanie vnto a man, ſhalbe greuouſly puniſhed for it. And, perchaunce, it were not amiſſe, to prouide with all, ſome ſharp correction for him, that ſhould byte in way of ieſting, beyond all honeſt meaſure. But gentlemen ſhould make account, that the lawe that puniſheth wronges, extendeth as farre to ieſtes, and that they ſhould ſeldome or very eaſily nyp or taunt any man.
            And beſides all this, you muſt vnderſtād, that a ieſt, whether it bite, or bite not, if it be not fine & full of wit, men take no pleaſure at al to heare it, but rather are wearied with it: or at leaſt wiſe, if they doe laughe, they laughe not at the ieſt, but at the ieſter him ſelfe, that brings it forthe ſo colde.
            And bycauſe, Ieſtes be no other thing but deceites: and deceite (as a thing that is framed of ſubtilenes & craft) cannot be wrought but of men, that haue fine and redy wittes, and very preſent: therefore they haue no grace in men that be rude, and of groſe vnderſtā
               ding: nor yet in them alwayes, that haue the beſt and floweing wittes: as, peraduē
               ture, they did not altogether becōe Maſter Iohn Boccaccio.
            
            But taūtes and Ieſtes be a ſpecial redines and aptnes of wit, and quicken the motions of the minde: wherefore they that

haue diſcretion, doe not in this point, conſider their will, but their diſpoſition of nature: and after they haue once or twiſe tried their wittes, and finde them vnfit for ſuche purpoſe: they leaue to labour them ſelues any further in that kind of exerciſe: that it may not chaunce vnto them, that hapt to the knight of the lady Horetta. And if you Bocc. Nouel. 2. Gior. 6. fo. 287. looke in to the maners of many, you ſhall eaſily ſee, this that I tell you is true: I ſay, that To Ieſt or to taunt, is not currant with euery man that will, but onely with them that can. And there be many that for euery purpoſe, haue in their mouth redy, many of theſe wordes, which wee call Bicticcichi: that haue no maner of ſenſe or meaning in them. And ſome, that vſe very fooliſhly and fondly to chaunge Sillables into woords. And ſome you ſhall heare ſpeake and make anſwer, otherwiſe thē a man would lightly Bycauſe theſe ſpeaches haue no grace in our Engliſh toūge, I leaue them in the Italian. But our toung hath ſuch abſurd ieſts as plentifully as any other toung. looke for, without any wit or pleaſure in the world in their talke. And if you doe aſke them, Doue e il ſignore? they anſwer againe. Doue egli ha i piedi: and likewiſe. Gli frae vnguer le mani con le graſcia di ſignore Giouan Boccadoro. Doue mi manda egli? Ad Arno. Io mi voglio radere, Sarebbe meglio rodere. Va chiama il Barbieri. Et perrhe non il Barbadomanie. Al which be to groſe, to rude,

and to ſtale: and ſuch were almoſt, all the pleaſaunt purpoſes and ieſtes of Dioneo. 
               Bocc. Nouel. 10. Gior. 5. fo. 281.
            
            But I will not take vppon me at this tyme, to diſcourſe of the beſt and the worſt kinde of ieſtes, what they be: aſwel for that other men haue written treatiſes therof much more lernedly and better thē I can: as alſo, bycauſe ieſtes & tauntes, haue at firſt ſight, a large and ſure proofe of their grace or diſgrace: ſuch, as thou canſt not do much amiſſe in this point, wtout thou ſtand to much in thy owne conceyte, and think to well of thy ſelfe: for where the ieſt is prety and pleaſaunt, there a man ſtraite is merry, and ſhewes a liking by laughīg, and makes a kinde of admiration of it. So that, where the company geues foorth no liking of thy ſportes and conceites, by their mirthes and their laughing: hould thy ſelfe ſtill then, and ieſt no more. For it is thy owne faulte thou muſt think, and not theirs that do heare the: foraſmuch as the hearers, as it were allured, with the redye, pleaſaunt, and ſubtile aunſwers or queſtions (do what they can, will they or nill they) cannot forbeare their laughing, but laughe in ſpyte of their teeth. From whom as from our right & lawfull Iudges, wee muſt not appeale to our ſelues.
            Neither muſt a man, to make other men merie, ſpeake foule and filthie wordes, nor

make ilfauoured geſtures, diſtorting his coū
               tenaūce, & diſfiguring his bodie. For, No mā should, for other mēs pleaſures, dishoneſt & diſhonour him ſelf. It is an arte for a Iuggler & ieſter to vſe: it doth not become a gentleman Bocc. Nouel. 10. Gior. 5. fo. 281. It is the beginning of a ſōg. to do ſo. We muſt not then, imitate ye cōmon and rude behauiours of Dioneo. Madonna Aldruda Alzate La coda.
            
            Nor we muſt not coūterfet our ſelues to be fooles & vnſauorie doltes: but as time & occaſiō ſerueth, tell ſōe pretie tale or ſōe news, neuer heard of before, he yt cā: & he yt cānot, let him hold his peace. For, theſe be ye partes of ye wit: which, if they be ſodain & prety, giue a proofe & a ſhew of ye quicknes of ye wit, & the goodnes of ye maners of him yt ſpeakes thē: which thing doth verie much pleaſe men & makes thē our louers & friends. But if they be otherwiſe, they woorke thē a cōtrary effect. For, a mā would weene the aſſe would play his parte: or ye ſōe hody dody & louberly lout would friſke and daūce in his doublet. There is another pleſaūte kind of cōmumratiō: Long talke & diſcourſe. & yt is whē ye pleaſure & grace doth not cōſiſt in one merrie cōceite alone, but in lōg & cōtinued talke: which would be well diſpoſed, wel vttered, & very wel ſet forth, to ſhew ye maners, ye faſhiōs, ye geſtures & behauiours of thē we ſpeke, of ſo properly & liueas

ye hearer ſhould think that he heareth thē not rehearſed, but ſeeth them with his eyes do thoſe very thigs he heares them to ſpeak of: which be very well obſerued by the gentlemen and gentlewomen both, in Boccace: although yet otherwhile (if I be not deceiued) they do affect and counterfet, more thē is ſightly for a gentleman or gentlewoman to doe, like to theſe Comedie Players. And to doe this well, you muſt haue the matter, the tale, or the ſtory, you take vppon you to tell, perfect in your minde: and woordes ſo redy and fit, that you neede not ſay in the end: That thing, and tother thing: This man, what doe you call him: That matter, helpe me 
               Bocc. Nouel. 2. Gior. 6. fo. 287. 
               to terme it: And, remember what his name is. For this is iuſt the trot of the knight of the lady Horetta. And if you doe reherſe any chaunce, in which there be many ſpeakers: you muſt not ſay: He ſaid and he aunſwered: bycauſe this worde (He) ſerueth for all men. So that the hearer that harkens vnto it, is eaſily deceiued, and forgets whōe you meane. Then, It behoues them that diſcourſe matters at length, to vſe proper names, & not to chaunge them after.
            
            And more ouer, a mā muſt beware that he ſay, not thoſe things, which vnſaide in ſilence would make ye tale pleaſaūt inoughe,

and, peraduenture, geue it a better grace to leaue them out. As to ſay thus. Such a one, that was the ſonne of ſuch a one, that dwelt in Cocomer ſtreete: do you not knowe him? he maried the daughter of Gianſigliazzi, the leane ſcragge, that went ſo much to Saynt Laraunce. No? do not you know him? why? do you not remember the goodly ſtrayght old man that ware long haire dovvne to his ſhoulders? For if it were nothing materiall to the tale, whether this chaunce befell him, or him: all thys long babble, and fond and foliſhe queſtiōs, were but a tale of a Tubbe: to no purpoſe, more then to weary mens eares that harken to it, and long to vnderſtand the end. As peraduenture our Dant hath made this fault otherwhile, where he ſayeth:

                  And borne my parents were of yoare in Lūbardie,
                  And eke of Mātuaes ſoyle they both by coūtry be.
               
            
            For, it was to no purpoſe, whether his mother were borne at Gazuolo, or ells at Cremona.
            
            But I lerned once of a ſtraūger, a Rethorician very lerned, a neceſſarie leſſon cōcerning this pointꝭ: that Men muſt diſpoſe and order their tale, firſt vvith by names, and then

rehearſe them (as neede is) that be proper. For, the bynames alwayes beare the reſpect of the perſones qualitie: but the other are to be vſed at the Fathers diſcretion, or his whome they concerne.
            And therfore, that bodie whome in your thought and imagination to your ſelfe, you doe cōceiue, might be Lady Couetouſnes her Bocc. Nouel 6 Gior. 1. fo. 41. ſelfe: in ſpeache you ſhall call Maiſter Erminio Grimaldie: if ſuche be the common opinion, the countrie hathe of him. And, if there be no man in place where you dwell, ſo notoriouſly knowne as might ſerue the turne fit for your purpoſe: you muſt then imagine the caſe further of, and ſet him a name at your pleaſure. It is very true, that VVith muche greater pleaſure we harken, and better beholde (as it were with our eyes) what ſoeuer is told vs of mē of our acquaintāce, if the matter be ſuche as toucheth their maners: then what vve doe heare of ſtraungers and men vnknovvne vnto vs. And the reaſon is this: when wee doe knowe, that ſuche a man is woont to doe ſo: we doe eaſily beleeue, he hath doone ſo indeede: and wee take aſmuche knoweledge of him, as if wee were preſent: where it chaunceth not ſo with vs, in the caſe of a ſtraunger.
            
               
               Our vvordes (be it in longe diſcourſes or other communication) Muſt be ſo plaine, that 
               Words would be plaine. 
               all the companie may eaſily vnderſtand them: and withall, for ſounde and ſenſe they muſt be apt and ſweete. For if you be to vſe one of theſe two wordes: you ſhall rather ſay, Il ventre: then L'Epa. And where your country ſpeache will beare it, you ſhall rather The, Bellie. The Lyuer. The Paunche. The Bellie. The Bodie. ſay: La Pancia, then L'Ventre: Or, il Corpo. For, by theſe meanes you ſhalbe vnderſtoode, and not miſſe vnderſtoode, as we Florentines ſay, nor be darke and obſcure to the hearers. The which thing our Poet, meaning to eſchewe: in this very woorde it ſelfe (I beleue) ſought to fīde out another, not thinking muche of his paynes (bycauſe it lyked him wel) to ſeeke farre to borrow it els where. And ſayd:

                  Remember hovv the Lorde a man vvas fayne to be,
                  For mans offence and ſinne in Cloyſter of virginitie.
               
            
            And albeit Dant the learned Poet, did ſet by ſuche kinde of rules: I doe not think yet, a mā ſhould allow well of him in doing ſo. And ſure, I would not coūcell you to make

him your Maiſter in this point, to learne A Grace: foraſmuche as he him ſelfe had none. For, this I finde in a Chronicle of him.

                  This Dant, was ſomewhat proude for his knowledge, ſcornefull and diſdainfull, and muche (as Philoſophers be) without any grace or courteſie: hauing no ſkill to behaue him ſelfe in company.
               
            
            But to come to our purpoſe againe: I ſay, our ſpeache muſt be plaine: which will be eaſie inough to doe: if you haue wit to chooſe thoſe wordes that be naturally bred in our ſoyle: and with all not ſo olde wt Age, that they are become rotten and withered: and as ouer worne apparell, leaft of and caſt a ſide. As, Spaldo, and Epa, and Vopo, 
               Old woordes out of vſe, and Sezzaio, & Primaio. And moreouer, the wordes you ſhall vſe, muſt haue no double Gergo is a very doubtfull manner of ſpeache, as it were in Riddles: and very ambiguous. vnderſtanding, but ſimple. For by coupling ſuche wordes together: wee frame that ſpeache that is called Aenigma. And to ſpeake it plainer in our owne language, we call it Gergo. As in this verſe:
            
               Io vidi vn che da ſette paſſatoi
               Fu da vn canto all' altro trapaſſato.
            
            Againe, our wordes would be, (as nere Apt wordes and proper. as they myght be) aptly and properly applied to that thing we go about to deliuer, &

as litle as may be, common to other matters: for, in ſo doing, a man ſhall weene, the matter it ſelfe is openly laide before him: & that it is not expreſſed with wordes, but pointed foorthe with the finger. And therefore we may more properly ſay: A man is knowen by his countenaunce, then by his figure or counterfet. And Dant did better expreſſe the matter, when he ſaide. Dant. 23. Infer.
               
                  The weightes
                  That peize the weight doe make the balāce creeke,
               
Then if he had ſaide

                  Crie out and make a noiſe.
               
            
            And it is a more proper and peculiar ſpeache to ſay, The shiuering of an ague, then to call it The colde. And fleſh that is Tidie, to terme it rather, Fatte: then Fulſome.
            
            
               Ther be ſome woordes more in this place to like effect, which I meane not to ſtande vppon now: by cauſe our Engliſhe toūge canot hanſomely deliuer their perfect meaning. For the Italians haue (as we haue, and all other Countries ells as well as wee) certaine peculiar wordes and termes, ſo naturally and properly their owne, as it is not poſſible to expreſſe them aptly and perfectly in any other Language. And therefore the Author him ſelfe, fearing, or knowing aſmuche in the ſenſe of theſe wordes,

which he hath inferred in this place (as it were preuenting a blame) in maner excuſeth and ſpeaketh aſmuch as I ſay, as the matter it ſelfe that inſueth doth ſhewe. For, the Author him ſelfe following his purpoſe ſaith thus.
            
            
               I am vvell aſſured, if ſome ſtraunger should, vnhappely for my credite, hit vppon this tteatiſe of mine: he vvould laughe mee to ſcorne, and ſay that I taught to ſpeake in riddles, or els in Ciphers. For as muche as theſe vvordes, be almoſt ſo properly our ovvne, that other countries haue no acquaintance vvith them: or, if they vvoulde vſe them, yet they cannot tell hovv to vnderſtand them. For, vvho is it that knovves vvhat Dant ment in this verſe:
            
            
               Gia veggia per Mezzul perdere o Lulla. Dant. 28. Infer.
               
            
            
               Sure, I beleeue no man ells but vve that are Florentines can vnderſtand it. Notvvithſtanding, for any thing that I haue ſaide, if there be any fault in this text of Dant: it is not in the vvordes. But, if he haue faulted, it is rather in this: that (as a man ſomevvhat vvilfull) he vvould take vppon him, a matter harde to be vttered in vvordes, and peraduenture vnpleaſaunt to heare: then that he hath expreſt it ill.
            
            
               
It is not then for a man to vſe any talke, Talke in a forreigne Language. with him that vnderſtandeth not that language you talke vnto him. Nor yet, bycauſe a Douche man vnderſtandes not the Italian tounge, muſt wee (for that cauſe) breake of our talke, to holde talke with him, to make our ſelues counterfets, as Maiſter Brufaldo did, and as ſome other be woont, that fondly and coldly, without any grace, thruſt them ſelues in to Chat in their language with whome they talke, what ſo euer it be, and chop it out euery worde prepoſteroufly. And many times it chaunceth, the Spaniard talkes Italian with the Italian, and the Italian babbles againe in a braueuery and gallantnes, the Spanishe toung with the Spaniard. And yet, it is an eaſier thing to know, yt they both talke like ſtrangers: then to forbeare to laugh at the foliſh follies that ſcape them both in ſpeache. Let vs not therfore vſe our forreigne language, but vvhen it is needefull for vs to be vnderſtoode, for ſome neceſſitie or other, that appertaineth vn to vs: And in common vſe, vſe our owne tounge, thoughe not altogether ſo good: rather then a forreigne language, better then our owne that is naturall vnto vs. For a Lumbarde ſhall ſpeake his owne

tounge more aptly (which is, notwithſtanding, but baſe and barbarous) then he ſhall ſpeake the Tuſcane, or other language: euen bycauſe he hath not ſo redily, ſo proper and peculiar wordes, althoughe he ſtudie much for them, as wee our ſelues that be Tuſcanes.
            
            But yet, if a man haue a reſpect to them with whome he talkes: and for that cauſe forbeare & leaue out thoſe ſingular wordes, (which I haue ſpokē of) and in ſtede of thē vſe the generall and common: his talke, by ſuche meanes, ſhall haue the leſſe pleaſure & delight.
            Beſides this, it becometh euerie honeſt Woordes that haue no honeſt meaning in them. gentleman, to eſchewe thoſe wordes that haue no honeſt meaning. And, The goodnes of wordes conſiſteth either in their ſound, or pronouncing: or, in their ſenſe and meaning. For a much as ſom wordes ſpeake an honeſt matter, and yet, perchaunce, there is a certaine vnhoneſt ſenſe perceaued to ſtand in the pronouncinge of the worde it ſelfe: as Rinculare: which, notwithſtanding, is Rinculare, is to drawe back warde, arſelonge. daily vſed of all men. But if a man or woman ſhould ſpeake after this ſorte, & at that verie warning doe it in fight of any (I meane ſhuffle backwarde vpon their taile) then would the groſeneſſe of the worde

plainlie appeare vnto them. But our Palate, throughe Cuſtome and Uſe, happilie taſteth ye wine (as it were) and the beſtnes of the ſenſe of the worde, and not ye Dregges or Leeze.

                  She gaue the Spaniſh ſigge
                  with both her thumbes at once. Dant. 25. infer
                  
               
Saith Dant. 
               Fiche, is the thruſting of the thumbe betvveene the forefinger: vvhiche eyther for the vvorde or the remembrance of ſomthinge therby ſignified, is reputed amongſte the Italians as a vvorde of Shame.
            
            But our women, would be much aſhamed to ſpeake ſo: yea to ſhūne this ambiguous woord, yu ſignifieth a worſe matter, they rather ſay Le caſtagne. Albeit yet ſome of them at vnwares, many times, name that vnaduiſedly, which if another man had ſpoken to trie them, would haue made them bluſhe to heare that remembred in way of blaſphemie, which makes them women. And therefore, ſuche as be, or would be better mannered or taught, take good heede they doe eſchewe, not only things vncleane Potta di me and vnhoneſt, but wordes alſo: and not ſomuche thoſe that be euill indeede, but thoſe that may be, or doe but ſeeme to be vnhoneſt, foule & filthie: as ſome men ſay theſe are of Dant.
               
                  She blewe large blaſtes of winde Dant. 17. Infer.
                  
                  Both in my face and vnder.
               
Or els theſe.

                  
                  I pray thee tell mee vvhere about the hole doth ſtand.
               
And one of the Spirits ſaid.

                  Then come behinde and vvhere the hole is it may be ſcand.
               
            
            And you muſt knowe, that albeit two, or moe wordes, otherwhile chaunce to tell one ſelfe thinge, yet the one is more cleanly then the other. As for example, to ſay: She lay vvith him: and she ſatiſfied his deſire vvith her perſon. For this ſelf ſame ſpeach, if it were in other termes, would be to broad before & to filthie to heare it. And ſpeaking of Endymion, you may more aptly ſay: Il Vago della Luna. then you can ſay Il Drudo, althoughe both theſe wordes doe import and ſignifie A louer, and a Friend. And a much honeſter ſpeache is it, if you talke of Aurora, to call, her. Tritons prety gerle and louer, then Concubine. And it better becomes a mās and womans mouth, to call Harlots, vvomē of the vvorlde (as Belcolore did, who was more aſhamed to ſpeake it then to doe it) then to vſe their common name: Thais is a Harlot. And as Boccace declared ye power of whores and boyes. For, if he had termed the males, by their beaſtly occupation, as he termed the women: his talke would haue byn foule & ſhamefull. And withall,

               A man muſt not alone bevvare of vnhoneſt and filthie talke. but alſo of that vvhiche is baſe and 
               Baſe vvords and Vile. 
               vile, and eſpecially vvhere a man talketh & diſcourſeth of greate and highe matters. And for this Cauſe, perchaunce, woorthely ſome blame our Beattice, ſayeing:
            
               To paſse throughe Lethes floud,
               the higheſt Fates vvould blott,
               Yf man mighte taſte the Viandes ſuche, Dant. 30. Purgato.
               
               as there dooe fall by Lott,
               And not pay firſte a due
               repentaunce for his ſcott.
            
            For, in my conceite, theſe baſe wordes that come out of the Tauernes, bee verie vncomely for ſuche aworthy diſcourſe. And when a man hathe like occaſion to ſpeake of ye 
               Sunne, it ſhall not be good to call it The Candell or the Lampe of the world: bycauſe ſuch woordes do put vs in minde of ye Oyle, & the ſtuffe of the kitchyn. Neyther ſhould a man that is well aduiſed, ſay that Saincte Dominicke was Il Drudo della Theologia. 
               Drudo, ſignifiethe a laſciuious louer. Nor yet talke, that the glorious Sainctes haue ſpoken ſuche baſe and vile woordes: As for Example to ſay. Dant. 22. Infer.
               
                  And leaue to ſcratche whereas
                  the ſcabs of ſinne breake out,
               
            
            For they ſauour of ye dregges, & ye filth of ye cōmō people, as euery man may eaſily ſee.
            
               
Againe, in your long & large diſcourſes, you muſt haue yt like cōſideratiōs & cares, & ſome more: yt which you may more cōmodiouſly learne of your Maiſters yt teache you yt arte, that is commonly called Rhetorike.
            
            And amongeſt other things, You muſt accuſtome your ſelfe, to vſe ſuche gentle and courtious ſpeache to men, and ſo ſweete, that it 
               Gentle wordes in Communication. 
               may haue no maner of bitter taſte. And you ſhall rather ſay, I cannot tell how to ſay it: Thē ſay: you ar deceiued: Or, it is not true: Or, you know it not. For, it is a courteous and friendly parte to excuſe a mans faulte, euen in that very thing, wherein you know how to blame him. And withall, it doth well, to make the proper and peculiar fault of your friend, indifferent and common to you both: and firſt, to take one piece to your ſelfe, and then after, to blame and reproue him for it. VVee were deceiued and failed muche: we forgot our ſelues yeſterday to doe ſo. Although ſuche negligence & errour, or what ſoeuer it be: be altogether his fault and not yours. And Reſtagnone forgat him ſelfe muche, when he ſaide to his companions: If your wordes doe not lie. For, A man should not bring another mannes faithe and honeſtie in queſtion and doubte. But, if a man promiſe you any thing, and doe not performe it: it ſhall not doe well, for you to

ſay vnto him: You haue loſt your credite with mee: without ſome neceſſarie cauſe doe driue you to ſay ſo, as to ſaue your owne credite and honeſtie. But, you ſhall rather ſay: You could not do it: Or, you did not remember to doe it: Thē, you haue cleane forgotten mee. For, theſe kinde of ſpeaches, haue ſome prickles & ſtinges of Complaint, Anger and Choler. So that, ſuche as vſe them ſelues to ſpeake ſuche churliſhe and fuiniſhe woordes, are taken for ſharpe and ſower fellowes: & men doe aſmuche ſhunne their acquaintāce: as to thruſt them ſelues vppon thornes and thiſtles.
            And bycauſe I knowe ſom, of this naughtie cōditiō & qualitie: I meane ſome yt be ſo haſtie and greedy to ſpeake, yt they take not the ſenſe with them, but ouer paſſe it and runne before it, as the grehound, that doth not pinche by ouerſhooting his game: therfore I will not ſpare to tell you that, which may be thought needeles to touche, as a thing to well knowen: and that is, that You shall neuer ſpeake, before you haue firſt conſidered & laide the plot in your minde what it is you haue to ſaie. For in ſo doing, your talke shalbe well deliuered and not borne before 
               Parto & non Iſconcratura. 
               the time. I truſt, ſtraungers will eaſily beare with this worde: if at leaſt they

vouchſafe to read theſe trifles of mine. And if you doe not ſkorne my preceptes: it ſhall neuer chaunce you to ſay: vvelcome Maiſter Agoſtino, to ſuch a one, whoſe name is Agnolo, or Bernardo. And you ſhal neuer need to ſay, Tell me your name: Nor ſay againe, I ſaide not well: Nor, Lorde vvhat doe I call him: Nor to hack and to ſtutter long together, to finde out a worde, Maiſter Arrigo: no Maſter Arabico: Tuſhe, what doe I call him I ſhould ſay, Maiſter Agabito. Theſe fonde & fooliſh behauiours & faſhions, paine a man as much to heare thē, as to be drawne and haled with cordes.
            The voyce would be neither hoarſe nor ſhrill. And, vvhen you laugh and ſporte in any 
               Voyce and Tounge. 
               ſorte: you muſt not crye out and criche like the Pullye of a well: nor yet ſpeake in your yavvning. I knowe well it is not in vs, to geue our ſelues a ready tongue or perfect voyce at our owne will and pleaſure. Hee yt doth ſtutter, or is hoarſe: let him not alwayes bable and gabbe, and keepe a courte alone: let him rather a mend the defect of his tounge with ſilence, and hearinge: and withall (if hee can) with ſtudie diminiſhe the fault of Nature. It is an yll noyſe to heare a man rayſe his voyce highe, lyke to a common Cryer. And yet I would not

haue him ſpeake ſo lowe and ſoftly, that he that harkens, ſhall not heare him. And if he be not heard at ye firſt time he ſpeaketh, he muſt ſpeake, the next time, ſomewhat plainer: but yet, not yoape out aloude, that he make not men thinke he is woode and angry with them: for hee ſhall doe but well, to rehearſe that againe he hath ſpoken, yt men may vnderſtand what he ſaid.
            Four wordes would be diſpoſed, euen as the common vſe of ſpeache doth require Manner of Speache. and not vnſorted, diſordered and ſcattered cōfuſedly: as many be woont to doe vppon a brauery, whoſe maner of talke is more like a Scriuener (me thinke) that readeth in his mother tounge, the Indēture he hath written before in latine: then a man that reaſoneth or talketh in his Naturall language: as this for example.

                  They drawe by ſent of falſe
                  and fained ſteps of truth.
               
            
            Or if a man ſhould prepoſterouſly place his wordes thus.

                  Thoſe times did bloſſomes geue
                  before their time of ſoothe.
               
            
            Which maner of ſpeache, may be otherwhile allowed in verſifiers: but it is vtterly forbidden in common talke.
            
               
And, it behoues a mā, not onely to ſhūne this verſifying maner of ſpeache, in his familiar and common diſcourſe, or talke: but likewiſe eſchewe ye pompe, brauery, & affectation, that may be ſuffered and allowed to inriche an Oration, ſpoken in a publike place. Otherwiſe, mē that doe heare it, will but ſpyte it, and laughe him to ſcorne for it.
            Albeit perchaunce, a Sermon may ſhewe a greater cunning and arte, then common talke. But, Euerie thing muſt haue his time and place. For, he that walkes by the way muſt not daunce, but goe. For, euery man, hath not the ſkill to daunce, and yet euery mā cā ſkill to goe. But, Dauncing is meete for feaſtes & weddings: it is not to vſe in the ſtretes. You muſt then take good heede you ſpeake not with a maieſtie.

                  It is thought by many Philoſophers.
               
            
            And ſuche is all Filocolo, and the other treatiſes of Maiſter Iohn Boccace, except his greater woorke, and litle more perchaunce Corbaccio.
            
            I would not for al this, that you ſhould vſe ſo baſe a ſpeache, as yt ſcum, as it were, and the froth of the meaneſt and vileſt ſorte of people, Launderers & Huckſters: but ſuche

as gentlemen ſhould ſpeake & talke, which I haue partly told you before, in what ſorr it may be done: that is, if you talke of matters that be neither vyle, vaine, fowle, nor lotheſome. And if you haue ſkill to chooſe amongeſt the woords of your owne coūtrie ſpeache, the pureſt and moſt proper, ſuche as haue the beſt ſounde, and beſt ſenſe, touching nor remembring, in no caſe, no matter that is foule, vile and baſe: & if you can place your woords in good order, and not ſhoofle them together at randon, nor yet, with ouer muche Curious ſtudie, file them (as it were) one your beades. Moreouer, if you do diſpoſe ſuch things as you haue to ſay with diſcretion. And take good hede that you couple not vnfit & vnlikely matters together: as for Example.

                  As ſure as God is in Heauen:
                  So ſtands the ſtaffe in the chimny corner.
               
            
            And if you ſpeake not ſo ſlowe, as if you were vnluſtie: nor ſo haſty, as if you wer hū
               grie: but as a wiſe and a temperate man ſhould doe. Likewiſe, if you pronounce youre woords and your ſillables with a certaie grace & ſweetnes: not as a Scholemaiſter ye teatheth yoūg Childrē
                to read & to

ſpell. Neyther muſt you mumble them nor ſupp them vp, as if they were glued & paſted together one to another. If you remember theſe and ſuch other rules and precepts: youre talke will be liked, and heard with pleaſure enoughe: and you ſhall well maintaine the ſtate and countenaunce, that well beſemeth a gentleman well taught and honeſt.
            Beſids theſe, there be ſome, that neuer Talkatiue Fellovves. hould their tounge. And as the ſhippe that ſayles, doth not preſently ſtand, ſtill, by taking downe the ſayles: So doe they runne forward, as caried away with a certaine brayde: and looſing the matter of their talke, yet leaue not to babble, but either repeate that againe that is ſaid, or els ſpeake ſtill they cannot tell what.
            And there be other ſo full of babble, that they will not ſuffer another to ſpeake. And as wee doe ſee otherwhile, vppon the flowers in the countrie where they threſh corne, one Pullet pull the corne out of the others beake: ſo doe they catche the tale out of his mouth yt beganne it, and tell it themſelues. And ſure, ſuche maner of people, induce men to quarell and fight with them for it. For, if you doe marke it wel: Nothing moues

a māſooner to anger: then when he is ſoudainely cut short of his will and his pleaſure, be it of neuer ſo little and ſmall importaunce. As whē you gape wide with yawning: another ſhould thruſt his hand in your mouth: or when you doe lift your arme redy to hurle a ſtone: it is ſoudainly ſtayde by one that ſtands behinde you. Euen then, as theſe doings, and many moe like vnto theſe, which tend to hinder the will and deſire of another (albeit but in way of ſporte & of play) are vnſeemely, and would be eſchewed: So in talke and communication with men, wee ſhould rather pull one, and further their deſiers, by what meanes we can, then ſtop them and hinder them in it.
            And therefore, If any man be in a redines to tell his tale: it is no good maner to interrupte him: nor to ſay that you doe knowe it vvell. Or, if hee beſprinckle his tale here and there, with ſome prety lye: you muſt not reproue him for it, neither in wordes nor in geſture, as ſhaking your hed, or ſcowling vppon him, as many be wont: gloriouſly vaunting them ſelues, that they can, by no meanes, abide the taſte of a Lye. But, this is not the

reaſon of this, it is the ſharpenes and ſowernes of their owne ruſticall & eager Natures, which makes them ſo venemous & bitter in all companies they come: that no man cares for their acquaintance.
            Likewiſe, It is an illfauoured condition to ſtop another mās tale in his mouth: and it ſpites him aſmuche, as if a mā should take him by the ſleeue & hould him backe, euen whē he is redie to runne his courſe. And when another man is in a tale, it is no good maner for you, by telling the company ſome newes, & drawing their mindes to other matters, to make them forſake him cleane, and leaue him alone. For, it is an vncourtious parte for you to leade and carry away the cōpany: which the other (not you) hath brought together.
            And, whē a mā tells his tale, you muſt geue good eare vnto him: that you may not ſay otherwhile, O what? Or, how? which is many a mans faſhion to doe. And this is aſmuch trouble and paine to him that ſpeaketh: as to ſhoofle againſt ye ſtones, to him that goeth. All theſe faſhions, and generally, that which may ſtoppe, and that which may trauerſe the courſe of another mans talke, muſt be ſhunned.
            And, if a man tell his tale ſlowe like a drawe latche: you muſt not yet haſten him

forwarde, nor lende him woordes, although you be quicker in ſpeache then hee. For, many doe take that ill, and ſpecially ſuche, as perſuade themſelues they haue a Ioly grace in telling a tale. For, they doe imagine you thīke not ſo well of thē, as they thē ſelues doe: And that you would geue them inſtructions in their owne Art: as Merchaunts that liue in greate wealth & plentie, would count it a greate reproche vnto them, that a man ſhould proffer them money, as if they liued in lacke, & were poore and ſtoode in neede of releéfe. And you muſt vnderſtād, that, Euery man in his owne conceite, thinkes he can tell his tale well: althoughe for modeſtie ſake he deny it. And I cannot geſſe how it cometh to paſſe, that the verieſt foole doth babble moſt: which ouer muche prattle, I would not haue a gentleman to vſe, and ſpecially, if his ſkill be but ſcant in the matter in talke: Not onely, bycauſe it is a hard matter: but, He muſt rū in many faults that talkes muche: but alſo, bycauſe a man weenes, that, He that talkes all the talke to him ſelfe, woulde (after a ſorte) preferre him ſelf aboue them all that heare him, as a Mayſter would be aboue his ſcholers. And therfore, It is no good maner for a man to take vppō him a greater ſtate, thē doth become him.
               
And in this fault, not men alone, but many countryes fall into, ſo cackling and pratling: that, woe be their eares that geue thē hearing.
            But, as ouer muche babble makes a mā weary: ſo doth ouer muche Silence procure Silence as greate diſliking. For, To vſe ſilence in place vvhere other men talke to and fro: is in maner, aſmuche a fault, as not to pay your share and ſcot as other men doe. And as ſpeache is a meane to ſhewe men your minde, to whome you ſpeake: ſo, doth Silence againe make mē wene, you ſeke to be vnknowne. So yt, as thoſe people which vſe to drinke muche at feaſtes, and make them ſelues drunke, are wont to thruſt thē out of their companie, that will not take their drinke as they doe: So be theſe kinde of mute & ſtill fellowes, coldly welcome to pleaſaūt and mery companie, that meete to paſſe the time away in pleaſure and talke. So that, It is good maner for a man to ſpeake, and likevviſe to hold his peace, as it comes to his turne, and occaſion requires.
            
            As an old Chronicle maketh mention. There was in the parts: of Morea, a very good workmā in ye ſtone: Who for ye ſīgular good ſkill he had in his Art, was called (as Maeſtro Chiariſsimo. I take it) Maeſtro Chiariſſimo. This man

(now well ſtrooken in yeares) made a certaine treatiſe, & therin gathered together al ye precepts & rules of his arte: as the man yt had very good ſkill to doe it: ſhewing in what ſorte the proportions and lineaments of the body, ſhould be duely meaſured, as well euery one a parte by it ſelfe, as one reſpecting another: yt they might iuſtly & duely be anſwerable ye one to the other: which treatiſe of his, he named Regolo. Meaning Regolo. to ſhewe, that according to that, all the Images and pictures, that from thenſforth any workemā ſhould make, ſhould be ſquared & lined forth: as yt beames, and ye ſtones, and the walles, are meaſured by ye rules & precepts of that booke. But, for that it is a muche eaſier matter to ſpeake it, then to worke it, or doe it: and beſides that, The greateſt number of men, eſpecially of vs that be prophane and not learned, haue our ſenſes much quicker then our vnderſtanding, and conſequently, better conceiue particular things and Examples, then the generall propoſitions and Syllogiſmes (which I might terme in plainer ſpeache, Reaſons) for this cauſe this worthy man I ſpeake of, hauing regard to the Nature of workemen: whoſe capacities are vnfit and vnable to weeld the weighte of generall Precepts and

rules: and to declare more plainely, with all his cunning and ſkill: hauing found out for his purpoſe, a fine marble ſtone, with muche labour and paine, he faſhioned and ſhaped an Image of it, as perfectly proportioned in euery parte and member: as the precepts and rules of his treatiſe had before deuiſed. And as he named the booke, ſo did he name that Image, and called it by name of Regolo.
            
            Now, (and it pleaſed god) I would I could but one parte of thoſe twoe points, which that noble Ingrauer & worckeman I ſpeake of, had perfect ſkill and knowledge to doe: I meane, that I could gather together in this treatiſe, after a ſorte, the due meaſures of this Art I take vppon me to treate of. For, to perfourme the other, to make the ſecond Regolo: I meane, to vſe and obſerue in my maners, the meaſures I ſpeake of, framig and forming, as it were, A Viſible Example, and a materiall Image of them: it were now, to muche for me to doe. For aſmuch as, It is not inough to haue knowledge and Art, in matters concerning maners & fashions of men: But it is needefull withall, to worke them to a perfect effect, to practiſe and vſe them muche: whiche cannot be had vppon the ſoudaine, nor learned by & by: but it is number
               
of yeares that muſt winne it: & ye beſt parte of mine be runne fourth alredy, you ſee.
            But for all this, you muſt not make ye leſſe reconing of theſe precepts. For, A man may well teache another the way: although he haue gone out of the way himſelf. And peraduenture, they that haue loſt their wayes, do better remember the hard wayes to fynd: then they that neuer went a miſſe. And, if in mine infancie, when minds be tender and pliable, like a young twigge, they that had ye charge & gouernemēt of me, had had the ſkill to ſmoothe my manners, (perhaps of Nature ſomwhat hard and rude) and would haue poliſhed and wrought them fine: peraduēture I ſhould haue beene ſuch A one, as I trauaile to make thee Nowe, whome I loue no leſſe then if thou were my ſonne. For albeit, the power of Nature be greate. yet is ſhe many tymes Maiſtered and 
               Nature muſt be mayſtered by Reaſon. 
               corrected by cuſtome: But, we muſt in tyme begin to encounter and beate her downe, before ſhe get to muche ſtrēgth and hardines. But moſt men will not doe ſo: but rather yealding to their appetite without any ſtriuing, following it where ſo euer it leades thē, thinke they muſt ſubmitte thē
               ſelues to Nature: As though Reaſon were not a naturall thing in man. But, Reaſon

hath (as a Lady and Miſtris) povver to chaunge 
               Reaſon dothe chaunge olde Cuſtomes & helpeth Nature. 
               olde cuſtomes, and to helpe & hold vp Nature, when she doth at any time decay and fall. But very ſeldome we harken vnto her. And yt for ye moſte parte, maketh vs like vnto thē whome god hath not endued wt Reaſon: I meane brute beaſtes, in whome notwithſtanding, ſomething yet worketh: not their owne Reaſons (for they haue none of them ſelues) but ours: as in horſes you ſee it: which by nature would be euer wilde, but yt their ryder makes them tame, and withal, after a ſorte, redy & very well paced. For many of them would haue a hard trot, but that the rider makes them haue an eaſier pace. And ſome he doth teache to ſtand ſtill, to galopp, to treade the ringe, and do the carreere: And they learne to doe it all well you ſee. Then, if the horſe, the dog, ye hauke, & many other beaſtes beſides, more wylde then theſe, be guided and ruled by Reaſon, and learne that which their owne Nature cannot attaine, but rather repugneth: and become after a ſorte cunning and ſkilfull, ſo farre as their kinde doth beare it, not by Nature, but by cuſtome & vſe: how muche then may we thinke wee ſhould excell them, by the precepts and rules of our Reaſon, if wee tooke any heede vnto it.

But, The Sēſes deſire & couet preſēt delightes, what ſoeuer they be: and can abide no paines, but puts them of. And by this meanes, they alſo shake of Reaſon, and thinke her vnpleaſant, foraſmuche as she ſets before them, not pleaſure, many times, hurtfull: but goodnes and vertue, euer paynfull, ſower and vnſauoury in taſte. For, while we liue according to the Senſe, wee are like to the ſelly ſickmā, to whom al cates neuer ſo deinty & ſweete, ſeeme vntoothſome: and he chideth ſtill with his Cater and Cooke, in whome there is no fault at all for it. For, it is the Nature of his diſeaſe, and the Extremitie of his ſicknes, and not the fault of his meate, that he doth not ſauourly taſte what he eates. So Reaſon, which of it ſelfe is ſvveete and ſauourie: ſeemes bitter in taſte vnto vs, though it haue no ill taſte in dede. And therfore as nice & deitie felowes, we refuſe to make any taſte of her: & couer our groſnes, wt ſaying that Nature hath no ſpurres nor raines yt can pricke her forth, or hold her backe. Where ſure, if an Oxe or an Aſſe, or a Hogge, could ſpeake: I beleeue, they could not lightly tell a more fowle & ſhamefull tale thē this. VVe should be childrē ſtill all the time of our riper yeares, & in our extreame age: and vvaxe as very fooles vvith gray hoary heads, as vvhen vve vvere very babes: if it vvere not that reaſō, vvhich increaſeth in vs vvith our yeares, ſubdueth affections in vs,

and growen to perfection, tranſformeth vs from beaſtes in to men. So that it is well ſeene, shee ruleth our ſenſes and bridleth our wittes. And it is our owne Imperfection and not her faulte, if we doe ſwarue frō vertue, goodnes, and good order in life.
            It is not then true, that there is not a bridell and Maſter for Nature. Nay, ſhe is guided and ruled by twaine: Cuſtome I Cuſtome & Reaſon, tvvoe brydles of Nature. meane, and Reaſon. But, as I haue tould you a litle before: Reaſon without Cuſtome and vſe, cannot make an vnciuile bodie, well taught and courtious: Which cuſtome and vſe, is as it were, bred and borne of tyme. And therefore they ſhall doe well, to harkē betime vnto her, not only for that, by this meanes, a man ſhall haue more time and leaſure to learne to be ſuch as ſhe teacheth, and to become as it were a houſhould ſeruaunt of hers, and one of her traine: but alſo bycauſe The tender age, as pure and cleane, doth eaſily receaue all Impreſſiōs, and reteineth more liuely, the colours vvherevvith she is dyed: then vvhen a man comes to ryper yeares: And alſo, bycauſe The things vvherein vvee haue byn nourished and trained frō our youth, doe ordinarily pleaſe vs, aboue all other things. And for this cauſe, it is ſaid that Diodato, a man that had a ſingular good gift & grace Piodato.
               
of vtterance, would euermore bee the firſt that came fourth vppon the ſtage to ſhewe his Comedie: allthoughe they were all but coūterfets vnto him, whoſoeuer they were that ſhould haue ſpoken before him. But he would not his voice ſhould occupie other mens eares, after they heard another man ſpeake. Although, in reſpect of his doings, it were a greate deale Inferiour to his. Seing then, I cannot agree my workes and my wordes together, for thoſe cauſes I haue ſhewed you before, as Maeſtro Chiariſſimo did: whoe had as good a ſkil to doe it, as he had knowledge to teache it: let it ſuffice that I haue tould in ſome part what muſt be done, bycauſe I am not by any meanes able to doe it in dede. He that liueth in darkenes, may very vvell Iudge vvhat comfort it is to enioy the benefit of light. And by an ouer long ſilence, vve knovve vvhat pleaſure it is to ſpeake: ſo when you beholde my groſe and rude maners: you ſhall better Iudge, what goodnes and vertue there is in courtions behauiours and faſhions.
            To come againe then to this treatiſe, which growes now to ſome end: wee ſay that Thoſe be good maners and fashiōs, which bring a delight, or at leaſt, offend not their ſenſes, their mynds, and conceits, vvith vvhom vve

liue. And of theſe, wee haue hitherto ſpoken inoughe.
            But you muſt vnderſtand with all this, that, Men be very deſirous of bevvtifull things, vvell proportioned and comely. And of counterfet things fovvle and ill shapen, they be as ſquemish againe, on the other ſide. And this is a ſpeciall priuilege geuen to vs: that other creatures haue no capacitie, to ſkill what bewtie or meaſure meaneth. And therefore, as things not common wt beaſtes but proper to our ſelues: we muſt embrace them for them ſelues, and holde them dere: & yet thoſe, much more, yt drawe nereſt to ye knowledge of man: as which are moſt apt and inclined to vnderſtand the perfection which Nature hath lefte in men.
            And albeit, it be a hard matter, to ſhewe preciſely, Bevvtie, what maner of thing it is: Bevvtie. yet yt you may haue ſōe marke, to know her by: you muſt vnderſtand, yt 
               VVhere iointly & ſeuerally, euery parte & the whole hath his due proportion and meaſure, there is Bevvtie. And that thing may iuſtly be called fayer, in vvhich the ſaide proportion and meaſure is found. And by that I did once learne of a wiſe & a learned man: Bevvtie he ſaid, would conſiſt but of one, at the moſte. And Deformitie contrarywiſe, meaſured her ſelfe, by Many. As Deformitie. you may ſee by the faces of fayer & goodly

women. For, the euen lineaments and due proportions of euery of them: ſeeme to haue byn created & framed by the iudgement and ſight of one face alone. Which cannot be thought in them that be foule & deformed. For, when you beholde a womā, that hath, peraduenture, bigge and bowle eyes, a little noſe, blubbe cheekes, a fſat mouth, an out chinne, & a browne ſkinne: you thinke ſtraite that that face is not one womans alone: but is moulded of many faces, and made of many peeces. And yet, you ſhall finde amongeſt them, ſome ſuch, whoſe partes cōſidered alone by thē ſelues, be very perfect to ſee to: but all ſet together, be foule and ill fauoured: not for any other cauſe, but that they be ye lineaments of many fayer women, and not of one: So that a mā would weene, ſhee had borrowed her partes, of this and that woman. And it may be, that Painter that had all the fayer maides of Calabria, naked before him: had none other intent therein, then to iudge & diſcerne in many, ye partes yt they haue, as it were, borrowed heere one, & there another, of one, alone: to whome reſtoring frō eache yt was her right: imagining yt 
               Venus bewty ſhould be ſuch, and ſo proportioned: he ſet him ſelfe to paint her.
            And, you muſt not thik, yt this is to be ſeene

the faces, the partes, and the bodies of women alone: but it happeneth more or leſſe, in ſpeache, in geſtures & doings. For, if you ſhould chaunce to ſee a Noble woman gorgius and gallant, waſhing of cloutes in a Riuer by ye highe waye ſide: Althoughe if this were not, you might hapely paſſe away by her, wt little heede to her perſō or ſtate: yet this would not brook you nor like you, yt her ſeruile doings doe ſhewe her more thē one. For her ſtate ſhould anſwer her honourable condition and calling. But her woorke is ſuche, as is meete for women of baſe and ſeruile life: & although you ſhall feele, neyther yll ſauour nor ſent come from her, nor heare any noyſe that ſhould offend you, nor any thing els to trouble your minde: yet the foule and filthy maner of doing it, and the vnſeemely act it ſelfe: will make you muche to loathe it. You muſt then beware of theſe fowle and vncomely behauiours, aſmuche, nay, more then of thoſe other, I haue ſpoken all this while. For, it is a harder matter a greate deale, to knowe whē a man faulteth in theſe, then when he faulteth in them. Bycauſe, It is eaſie much, vve ſee, to feele then to vnderſtande. But yet, it may chaunce otherwhile, that euen that which offendeth the ſenſes, may alſo offend

the minde: thoughe not altogether after one ſorte, as I haue told you before: Apparelling according to the Time. ſhewing you that A man muſt apparell him ſelfe, according to the fashions that other men vſe: that it may not be thought he doth reproue and correct their doings: The which thing offendeth moſt men that ſeeke to be commended: And the wiſeſt mē that be, miſlike it too. For, the garments of the olde world, haue loſt their date, for men of this age and this ſeaſon to weare. And it is ſuche an ill ſhapen ſight, to ſee a man clad with other mens cloathes: that a man would weene there would be a fray betwene the doublet & ye hoſe: their cloathes doe ſit, vppon them ſo vnto wardly.
            So that, many of thoſe matters I haue ſpoken of allredy, or peraduēture all, might be aptly reherſed here again: foraſmuch as this meaſure I ſpeake of here, is not obſerued in theſe thīgs: nor the time, nor ye place, nor the worke, nor the worker, accorded & fitted together, ſo well as it ſhould be. For mens minds and fanſies doe like it, & take a pleaſure and delight in thoſe things. But I thought it good to apply & ſpeake theſe matters, rather vnder ye badge, as it were, of the Senſes and deſires: then properly aſſigne them to the minde: that a man may

the more eaſily perceiue them: bycauſe It is a naturall thinge, for euerie man to feele and deſire: but euery man cannot ſo generally vnderſtand, and eſpecially that, whiche we call bewtie, gallantnes or entertainement.
            
               It is not inoughe for a man, to doe things that be good: but hee muſt alſo haue a care, hee doe them with a good grace. And a good grace is nothing els, but ſuche a maner of light (as I may 
               A Grace, vvhat it is. 
               call it) as shineth in the aptnes of things ſet in good order and wel diſpoſed, one with another: and perfectly knit and vnited together. VVithout which proportion and meaſure, euen that which is good is not faire: & the fairenes it ſelf, is not pleſaunt. And as meates, though they be good & ſauourie will giue men no minde to eate thē, if they haue no pleaſaunt reliſh and taſte: So fares it with the maners of men other while (althoughe in them ſelues in no reſpect they be ill, but fooliſhe a little, and fond) if a man doe not ſeaſon them with a certaine ſweetenes, which you call (as I take it) Grace, and Comlines.
            
            So that, euery vice of it ſelfe, without any further matter to helpe it (it cannot be choſen) muſt needes offend a man. For, Vices be things ſo foule and filthie: that honeſt and modeſt mindes, will greeue to ſee

their shamefull effects. And therefore, it shall behoue them that ſeeke to be well thought of, with their familiar acquaintāce, aboue all things els to eſchewe vices, and eſpecially thoſe, that be fouleſt and worſt: as Leachery, Couetousnes, Crueltie, and other. Of which, ſome be beaſtly, as Drunkennes, and Gluttonie: ſome vncleane, as Leacherie: other ſome horrible, as Murther, and ſuch other: all which for them ſelues, and for the very naughtines, that is properly in them al, all men eſchewe more, or leſſe: But, as earſt I ſaid, generally al, as thīgs of greate diſorder, make a man miſliked muche of all men.
            But, bycauſe I haue not taken vppon me to ſhew vnto you, mēs ſinnes, but their Errors: it ſhalbe no parte of my charge at this time to entreate of ye Nature of vices & vertues: but onely of the ſeemely & vnſeemely faſhions and maners wee vſe one with another. One of the which vnſeemely Counte Richarde. faſhions was, that Coūt Richard did vſe: of which I tould you before. Which, as vnſeemely and vnfitting with thoſe other his good and faire maners hee had beſides: that ſame worthie Biſhop (as a ſkilfull and cunning Mayſter in muſicke will eaeaſily

here a note out of Tune) had quickly founde out.
            
               It shalbe then, neceſſarie for gentlemen and men of good behauiour, to haue a regard to this meaſure I ſpeake of: in going, in ſtanding, in ſitting, in geſture, in porte, in apparell, in talke, in ſilence, in reſt and in action. For, a man muſt not apparell him ſelfe like a woman: that the Attire may not be of one ſorte, and the perſon of another: as I doe ſee it in ſome that weare their heads & their beards curled with bodkins, and haue their face, Beardes and Heades curled with bodkins. and their necks, & their hands, ſo ſtarchte and painted, that it were to muche for a girle, nay harlot, that makes a merchā
               dize of it, and ſets her ſelfe to the ſale.
            Hou muſt ſmell, neither of ſweete nor of ſower: for a gentleman would not ſauour Sweete ſmeles naſtily like a begger: nor yet ſhould a man carry a ſauour and ſent about him, like a harlot or whoore. I doe not by this forbid, but you may very well vſe ſome ſweete ſmelles of ſweete waters.
            Your apparell muſt be ſhaped according Apparell according to the faſhion & calling. to the faſhion of the time, and your calling, for the cauſes I haue ſhewed you before. For, VVe muſt not take vppon vs to alter cuſtomes at our will. For time doth beget them, and time doth alſo weare them out.
            
            
               
Euery mā may applie thoſe faſhiōs, that be in common vſe, ye moſte to his owne aduantage, that he can. For, if perchaunce your legges be very long, and men vſe but ſhort garments: you may vſe a meane, not to long, nor to ſhort. And if your legges be to ſmall, to greate, or crooked: make not your hoſen of to light and gariſhe a colour, that it may not call men to looke and to gawre vppō your deformitie. Thou muſt weare no garment that ſhall be to light, or ouermuche daubde with garding: that mē may not ſay, thou haſt Ganymedes hoſen, or weareſt Cupides doublet. But, whatſoeuer it be thou weareſt, let it be fit and well made for thy bodie: leaſt thou ſeme to braue it, in another mans cloathes.
            But with all, thou muſt in any caſe reſpect thy condition or eſtate. For, A man of the Clergie, muſt not be attired like a Souldier: nor a Souldier goe like a Player. When Caſtruccio was in Rome with Lodouico Bauero at a greate Pompe, and triumphe: who was both Duke of Lucca and Piſtoia, and Count of Palazzo, and Senatour of Rome: this Caſtruccio, being Lorde greate Mayſter of the ſaide Lodouico Bauero his houſehoulde: for his brauery, made him a coate of crimſin, vppon the breſt wherof, there

was this deuiſe, in letters of Golde

                  It is euen as God will.
               
And vppon the backe behinde.

                  And it shallbe as God will.
               
            
            I beleeue, you thinke this garment, would haue become Caſtruccio his Trumpeter better, then it could become him.
            And although Kings be free frō checke, and may doe what they liſt: Yet, I could neuer commend King Manfrede, Whoe euer more vſed, to ſuite him ſelfe in greene. Wee muſt then haue a care, that our apparell be not onely wel made for the bodie: but that it be meete for our calling. And withall, it be ſuche, as the countrie doth vſe, Apparel acording to the Countrey where wee liue. For, As in diuers places be diuers meaſures, and yet bying and ſelling euery vvhere vſed. So in ſundry landes be ſundrie cuſtomes, and yet euery vvhere a man may behaue him, and apparell him ſelfe, ſoberly and comely.
            
            Theſe ſame feathers, which the Neapolitanes and Spaniardes be wont to weare, and braueries and Embroderies: haue but ill place amongeſt graue gowned men, & theattires that Citizens doe weare. But their Armour and weapons become ſuche place

a greate deale worſe. So that, looke what hapely might be allowed in Verona, would not, perchaunce, be ſuffered in Venice. For as muche as theſe gallants, all begarded, and huffing in fethers, & warlike fellowes, would not doe well, in this Noble Citie ſo peacefull & Ciuil. Suche kinde of people be rather, in maner, like nettles and burres, amongeſt good and ſweete garden flowers. And therefore, they come out of ſeaſon to mē that medle with grauer matters then they doe.
            I would not haue a gentleman to runne Running and going in the ſtreat and other ſuch geſtures. in the ſtreate, nor go to faſt: for that is for lackies, and not for gentlemen to doe. Beſides that, it makes a man weary, ſweate, and puffe: which be very vnſightly things for ſuche men to doe. I would not yet haue a man go ſo ſofte and demurely, as a maide or a wife. And when a man walkes, it is no good ſight to ſee a man ſhake his bodie to muche, nor to hold his hands bare and emptie: nor yet caſt & fling his armes vp & downe, in ſuch ſort as a man would weene, hee were ſoweing of Corne in the field: nor Stare in a mans face, as if he had ſpied a mares neſt.
            
               Ther be ſōe again, in their gate pul vp their fete as high as a horſe yt hath ye ſpauē: yt a mā would thik they did pluck their fete forth of

buſhell. Other againe ſtampe their feete ſo harde on the ground: that they make allmoſte aſmuche noyſe as a carte. Another goes as if he were ſplay footed. And ſuche a one quiuers with his legges, as he ſtāds. Some other againe, at euery foote, ſtoope to ſtroke vp their hoſe as they goe. And ſōe ſet their handes to their ſides, and iet vp & downe like a Pecocke: which faſhions doe muche offend men: not as well, but as ill beſeeming a man to vſe them. For, if your horſe, perchaunce, doe champe and play on the bit, and gape or lill out his tounge, albeit this geue little proofe of his goodnes: yet it commends him well to the ſale: and you ſhoulde finde a miſſe of it, if it were otherwiſe: not bycauſe ye horſe ſhould be therfore the worſe: but bycauſe he ſhould ſhew the leſſe courage and pleaſure. Now, if it ſtand ſo, that Comelines and Grace, be ſo much made of in beaſts, and alſo in things without life or ſenſe, as experience doth ſhewe, that, Two things of equall goodnes & comodities, beare not for all that, a like price, if a man doe beholde a finer proportion & bewtie, more in the one then he ſees in the other: How muche then more, ſhould it be eſtemed and commended in men, capable of Reaſon.
            
               
               It is a rude faſhion for a man to clawe Geſtures and Fashions, at the Table. or ſcratche him ſelfe, when he ſitteth at the table. And a man ſhould at ſuch time haue a very greate care yt he ſpit not at all. But Spytting. if neede inforce him, then let him doe it, after an honeſt ſorte. 
               I haue heard tell, many times, of ſuche countries that be ſo ſober: that they doe neuer ſpitt. And what ſhould then let vs, but we may well forbeare it for ſuche a little while. We muſt alſo beware Greedie Eating. we doe not eate ſo greedily, that wee get the hicket, or belche withall: as ſome that feede ſo faſt, that they noy the cōpany with it: they blowe and puffe ſo loude. Likewiſe, you muſt not rubbe your teeth with Scovvring of the teethe your napkyn, & much leſſe with your fingers. For theſe be trickes for a ſlouen. Neither VVashing the mouthe. muſt you openly rynce your mouth wt the wine, and then ſpit it fourthe. Neither is it gentleman like, to carry a ſticke in your Carrying a Sticke, in the Mouthe. mouth from the table when you riſe, like ye birde that builds her a neſt: or put it in your eare, for that is a Barbars tricke.
            And to weare a toothpicke, about your To vveare a Toothepicke about your Necke. necke: of all faſhions that is ye worſt. For, beſides that it is a bauld Iewell for a gentleman to pull forth of his boſome, and putteth mē in mind of thoſe Toothdrawers, that ſit one their benche in the ſtretes: it makes

men alſo to thinke, that the man loues his belly full well, and is prouided for it. And I ſee no reaſon, why they ſhould not aſwell carry a ſpoone, about their neckes, as a toothepicke.
            
            It is a rude faſhion beſides, to leane ouer the table, or to fill your mouth ſo ful of Chearing at the table. meate, that your cheekes be blowne vp wt
               all: neyther muſt you by any maner of meanes, giue another man to know what pleaſure you take, in the meate or the wine. For yt is for Tauerners and Bouſers, to vſe ſuche faſhions. And to entertaine men ye ſit at your table, with theſe wordes: You eate nothing this morning. There is nothing that likes you. Or, taſt you of this or of that: I doe not allowe of theſe faſhions, although they be commonly receiued and vſed of all men. For, albeit by theſe meanes, they ſhewe they make much of thoſe they haue inuited vnto them: yet, many tymes, they make mē to leaue to eate wher they would. For, it geues them to thinke, they haue their eyes, allwayes vppon them, and that makes them aſhamed to feede.
            
            Againe, I doe not like it, that a man ſhall Carueing. take vppō him to be a caruer of any meate that ſtands before him: if he be not muche the better mā, that is the caruer: that he to whome he carues, may thinke he receiueth ſome credite & honour by it. For, Amongeſt men that be of like cōditiō and calling, it makes

a hart burning: that he that playes the caruer, should take more vppō him then another. And otherwhile, yt which hee carueth, doth not like him to whom it is geuen. And more thē this, by this meanes he ſheweth, that the feaſte is not ſufficiētly furniſhed, or at leaſt not well diſpoſed in order, when ſome haue muche, & other none at all. And ye Mayſter of the houſe, may chaunce to take diſpleſure at that, as if it were done to doe him ſhame. Neuertheleſſe in theſe matters, a man muſt demeaſne him ſelf, as common vſe and cuſtome will allowe, and not as Reaſon & duetie would haue it. And I would wiſhe a mā rather to erre in theſe poits with many, thē to be ſingular in doing well. But whatſoeuer good maner there be in this caſe, thou muſt not refuſe it, whatſoeuer is carued vnto thee. For it may be thought thou doeſt diſdaine it, or grunt at thy caruer.
            Now, to drink all out euery mā: which is Drincking & Carrovvſing. a faſhiō as litle in vſe amōgſt vs, as ye terme it ſelfe is barbarous & ſtraūge: I meane, lck bring you, is ſure a foule thing of it ſelfe, & in our countrie ſo coldly accepted yet: yt we muſt not go about to bring it in for a faſhiō. If a man doe quaffe or carrouſe vnto you, you may honeſtly ſay nay to pledge him, & geueing him thanke, confeſſe your weakeneſſe, that you are not able to beare it: or elſe, to

doe him a pleaſure, you may for curteſie taſte it: and thē ſet downe the cup to them that will, and 
               Drincking, muche vſed in Graecia: and by Socrates. 
               charge your ſelfe no further. And although this, Ick bring you, as I haue heard many learned men ſay, hath beene an auncient cuſtome in Greece: and that the Graecians doe muche commend a goodman of that time, Socrates, by name, for that hee ſat out one Socrates. whole night long, drinking a vie with another good man, Ariſtophanes: and yet ye next Ariſtophanes. morning in the breake of the daye, without any reſt vppon his drinking, made ſuche a cunning Geometricall Inſtrument, that there was no maner of faulte to be found in the ſame: And albeit they ſay beſides this, that Euen as it makes a man bould and hardy, to thruſt him ſelfe venterouſly otherwhile, in to daungerous perils of life: ſo likewiſe it brings a man in to good temper and fashion, to enure him ſelfe otherwhile, with the daūgers of things not euer chauncing: And bycauſe the drinking of wine after this ſorte, in a vie, in ſuch exceſſe and waſte, is a ſhrewde aſſault to trie the ſtrength of him that quaffes ſo luſtily: theſe Graecians, would haue vs to vſe it for a certaine proofe of our ſtrength and conſtancie: and to enure vs the better, to reſiſt and maſter all maner of ſtrong temptations.
            
               
All this notwithſtanding, I am of a cō
               trary mind: and I doe thinke all their reaſons to fond, and to fooliſhe. But, we ſee that Learned men haue ſuche art and cunning to perſuade, and ſuch filed wordes to ſerue their turne: that wrong doth carry the cauſe away, and Reaſon cannot preuaile. And therefore let vs giue them no credite in this point. And what can I tell, if they haue a ſecret drift herein, to excuſe and couer the fault of their countrey, that is corrupt with this vice. But it is daungerous, perchaunce, for a man to reproue them for it: leaſt aſmuch happen to him, as chaunced to Socrates him ſelfe, for his ouer lauiſh controuling and checking of euery mans fault. For, he was ſo ſpited of all men for it: that many articles of hereſies & other foule faultes were put vp againſt him, and he cōdemned to die in the end: allthough they were falſe. For in truthe, he was a very good man, & a Chatholike: reſpecting ye 
               Religion of their falſe Idolatrie. But ſuer, in that he drunke ſo muche wine that ſame nyght: he deſerued no praiſe in the worlde. For, the hoggſhead was able to holde & receiue a great deale more, then his companion and hee were able to take: if yt may get any praiſe. And though it did him no harme, that was

more, the goodnes of his ſtrong braine: thē the continencie of a ſober man. And let the Chronicles talke what they liſt of this matter, I giue God thankes, that amongeſt many the Plagues that haue creapt ouer the Alpes, to infect vs: hitherto this worſt of all the reſt, is not come ouer: that vve should take a pleaſure and praiſe, to be drunke. Neither shall I euer beleue, that a man can learne to be temperate, of ſuche a Mayſter as vvine and drounkennes.
            
            The Stewarde of a Noble mans houſe, Inuiting of ſtraungers. may not be ſo bolde to inuite ſtraungers, vppon his owne head, and ſet them downe at his Lorde & Mayſters table. And there is none that is wiſe, will be intreated to it, at his requeſt alone. But otherwhile, the ſeruaunts of the houſe, be ſo inalepert and ſaucie, that they will take vppō them, more then their Maiſter: of which things wee ſpeake in this place, more by chaunce, then that the order we haue taken from the beginning, doth ſo require it.
            A man muſt not vncaſe him ſelfe, in the preſence of any aſſembly. For it is a ſlouenly A recapitulation of ſundrie precepts. Vneaſing. ſight, in place where honeſt men be met together of good conditiō and calling. And it may chaunce he doth vncouer thoſe parts of his bodie, which work him ſhame & rebuke to ſhewe thē: beſides yt, it maketh

other mē abaſhed to looke vpō thē. Againe, Waſhing of hands and combyng of heades. I wold haue no mā to combe his head, nor waſhe his hāds before mē. For ſuch things would be done alone in your chamber, and not abrode: without it be, I ſay, to waſhe your hands when you ſit downe to the table. For, there it ſhall doe well, to waſhe them in ſight, although you haue no neede: that they with whome you feede, may aſſure them ſelues you haue done it. A man muſt not come forthe with his kercheif, or quaife one his head, nor yet ſtroke vp his hoſen vppon his legges in company.
            
            
               Some men there be, that haue a pride or a vſe to drawe their mouthes a little awry, Geſtures of the face and Countenaūce and other partes. or twinckle vp their eye, & to blow vp their cheekes, and to puffe, and to make, with their countenaunce, ſundrie ſuch like fooliſhe and ilfauoured faces and geſtures. I councell men to leaue them cleane. For, Pallas her ſelfe, the Goddeſſe, (as I haue hearde 
               Pallas. 
               ſōevviſe mē ſay) tooke once a greate pleaſure to ſoūd the flute & the cornet: & therin she vvas verie cūning. It chaūſt her, on day, ſoūding her Cornet for her pleſure ouer a fontain, she ſpide her ſelfe in the vvater: and vvhē she beheld thoſe ſtrāge geſtures she muſt nedes make vvith her mouth as she plaid: she vvas ſo much ashāed of it that she brake the cornet in peces & caſt it away.

truely she did but well, for it is no inſtrumēt for a vvoman to vſe. 
               And it becomes men as ill, if they be not of yt baſe conditiō and calling, that they muſt make it a gaine, & an art to liue vppon it. And looke what I ſpeake, concerning the vnſeemely geſtures of the countenance and face: concerneth likewiſe, all the partes and members of man. For it is an ill ſight, to lill out ye tounge, to ſtroke your bearde much vp and downe (as many doe vſe to doe) to rubbe your hands together: to ſighe, & to ſorrowe: to tremble or ſtrike your ſelfe, which is alſo a faſhiō wt ſome: to reatche and ſtretche your ſelfe, & ſo retching, to cry out after a nice maner, Alas, Alas: like a coūtry cloune, yt ſhould rouſe him ſelfe in his couche.
            
            
               And he that makes a noyſe wt his mouth Mopping or mowing. in a token of wonder, and other while, of cō
                  tempte and diſdaine: counterfeteth an ilfauoured grace. And Counterfet things, differ not muche from truethes.
            
            A man muſt leaue thoſe fooliſhe maner of laughings, groaſe and vncomely. And Vnſeemely Laughinges. 
               let men laughe vppon occaſiō, and not vppon cuſtome. But a man muſt beware he doe not laughe at his owne geſtes, and his doings. For that makes men weene hee Laughing at 
                        ••
                     s owne G
                        •
                     ſtes. woulde faine praiſe him ſelfe. It is for oother

men to laughe that heare, and not for him that telles the tale.
            
            
               Now, you muſt not beare your ſelfe in hand, that bycauſe eache of theſe matters conſidered a parte, is but a ſmall fault, ye hole therefore together ſhould be as light: but you muſt rather perſuade your ſelfe yt 
               Many a litle doth make a mickle, as I tould you from the beginning. And how muche leſſe they be, ſo much the more neede a mā hath to looke well in to thē: bycauſe they be not eaſily perceiued a far of, but creepe in to vs by cuſtom, before we be a ware. And, As light expences often vſed, in Continuance of time, doe couertly waſte and conſume a greate maſſe of wealth and riches: So doe theſe light faultes with the multitude and number of thē, in ſecret ouerthrow all honeſt and good ciuilitie and maner. So yt we muſt not make a light reconing of them.
            Moreouer, it is a nedefull obſeruation to bethinke your ſelfe, how you doe moue Mouinges and geſtures of the bodie. your bodie, and ſpecially in talke. For, it many times chaunceth, a man is ſo erneſt in his tale, that hee hath no minde of any thing els. One wagges his head. Another lookes bigg and ſcowles with his browes. That man pulls his mouth awry. And tother ſpittes in and vppon their faces with

whome he talkes. And ſom ſuche there be that moue their hands in ſuche a ſorte, as if they ſhould chaſe ye flies as they go: which be very vnhanſome & vnſeemely maners to vſe. And I haue heard it ſaide (for you knowe I haue byn familiarly acquainted with learned men in my time) that Pindarus that worthy man was wōt to ſaye: that Pindarus. 
                  VVhatſoeuer it were that had a good & ſauourie taſte: vvas ſeaſoned by the hands of the Graces. Now, what ſhall I ſpeake of them ye cōe forthe of their ſtudies with their penne in their care: and nibble their hankercheifs in their mouthe, or ly lolling wt their legge ouer the table, or ſpit one their fingers, and of a nūber of other blockiſhe geſtures and faſhiōs more then theſe, which cānot be all rehearſed well: nor ſhal not, I meane, put me to further paines to tel thē al if I could. For, there be manie perchaunce will ſay this is to muche, that I haue ſaid allredie.
            FINIS.
            
         
      
   