
      
         
            
            
            A
PANEGYRIKE
CONGRATVLATORIE
TO THE KINGS
MAIESTIE. Also certaine Epistles, By SAMVEL DANIEL.
            Carm
                  ••
                ai
                  ••
               t quisquis carmina digna
gerit.
         
      
      
         
            
            
            A
PANEGYRIKE CONGRATVLATORIE
TO HIS
MAIESTIE.
            
               1
               
                  LO here the glory of a greater day
               Then England euer heretofore could see
               In all her dayes. When she did most display
               The Ensignes of her powre, or whenas she
               Did spread herselfe the most, and most did sway
               Her state abroad, yet could she neuer be
               Thus blesst at home, nor euer come to grow
               To be intire in her full Orbe till now.
            
            
               2
               And now she is, and now in peace therefore
               Shake hands with Vnion, O thou mightie State,
               Now thou art all great Brittaine, and no more,
               No Scot, no English now, nor no debate:
               No Borders but the Ocean, and the Shore,
               No wall of Adrian serues to seperate
               Our mutuall loue, nor our obedience,
               All Subiects now to one imperiall Prince.
            
            
               3
               What heretofore could neuer yet be wrought,
               By all the swords of powre, by blood, by fire,
               By ruine, and destruction, here is brought
               To passe, with peace, with loue, with ioy desire:
               Our former blessed vnion hath begot
               A greater vnion that is more intire,
               And makes vs more our selues, sets vs at one
               With Nature that ordain'd vs to be one.
            
            
               
               4
               Glory of men, this hast thou brought to vs,
               And yet hast brought vs more than this by farre:
               Religion comes with thee, peace, righteousnes,
               Iudgement and Iustice, which more glorious are
               Then all thy Kingdomes, and arte more by this,
               Then Lord and Sou'raigne, more than Emperor
               Ouer the hearts of men that let thee in
               To more, than all the powres on Earth can win.
            
            
               5
               God makes thee King of our estates, but we
               Do make thee King of our affection,
               King of our Loue, a passion borne most free,
               And most vn-subiect to dominion:
               And know, that England which in that degree
               Can loue, with such a true deuotion
               Those that are lesse than Kings, to thee must bring
               More Loue, who art so much more than a King.
            
            
               6
               And King of this great Nation, populous,
               Stout, valiant, powrefull, both by Sea and Land,
               Attemptiue, able, worthy, generous,
               Which ioyfully imbraces thy command:
               A people tractable, obsequious,
               Apt to be fashion'd by thy glorious hand
               To any forme of honor, t' any way
               Of high attempts, thy vertues shall assay.
            
            
               7
               A people so inur'd to peace, so wrought
               To a successiue course of quietnesse,
               As th'haue forgot (and O b'it still forgot,)
               The nature of their ancient stubbornnesse;
               Time altred hath the forme, the meanes, and brought
               The state to that proportion'd euennesse,
               As t' is not like againe t' will euer come
               (Being vsde abroad) to draw the sword at home.
            
            
               
               8
               This people, this great State, these hearts adore
               Thy Scepter now, and now turne all to thee,
               Toucht with as powrefull zeale, and if not more,
               (And yet O more, how could there euer be
               Than vnto her, whom yet we doe deplore
               Amidst our Ioy?) And giue vs leaue if we
               Reioyce and mourne, that cannot without wrong,
               So soone forget her, we enioyde so long.
            
            
               9
               Which likewise makes for thee, that yet we hold
               True after death, and bring not this respect
               To a new Prince from hating of the old;
               Or from desire of change, or from neglect;
               Whereby O mightie Sov'raigne, thou art told
               What thou and thine are likely to expect
               From such a faith, that doth not haste to runne
               Before their time, to an arising Sunne.
            
            
               10
               And let my humble Muse whom she did grace,
               Begge this one grace for her that now lies dead,
               That no vile tongue may spot her with disgrace,
               Nor that her fame become disfigured:
               O let her rest in peace, that rul'd in peace,
               Let not her honor be disquieted
               Now after death: but let her Graue inclose
               All but her good, and that it cannot close.
            
            
               11
               It addes much to thy glorie and our grace,
               That this continued current of our loue
               Runnes thus to thee, all with so swift a pace;
               And that from peace to peace we do remoue,
               Not as in motion put from out our place,
               But in one Course, and do not seeme to moue,
               But in more ioy than euer heretofore,
               And well we may, since thou wilt make vs more.
            
            
               
               12
               Our Loue we see concurres with Gods great Loue,
               Who onely made thy way, thy passage plaine,
               Leuel'd the world for thee, did all remoue,
               That might the shew but of a let retaine:
               Vnbarr'd the North, humbled the South, did moue
               The hearts of all, thy right to intertaine,
               Held other States imbroyld, whose enuie might
               Haue fostred factions to impugne thy right:
            
            
               13
               And all for thee, that we the more might praise
               The glory of his power, and reuerence thine,
               Whome he hath raisde to glorifie our dayes,
               And make this Empire of the North to shine:
               Against all th'impious workings, all th'assayes
               Of vile disnatur'd vipers, whose designe
               Was to imbroyle the state t'obscure the light,
               And that cleare brightnesse of thy sacred right.
            
            
               14
               To whose reproach, since th'issue and successe
               Doth a sufficient marke of shame returne,
               Let no penne else blazon their vglinesse;
               Be it inough, that God and Men do scorne
               Their proiects, censures, vaine pretendences:
               Let not our Children that are yet vnborne,
               Finde there were any offred to contest
               Or make a doubt, to haue our kingdome blesst.
            
            
               15
               Bury that question in th'eternall graue
               Of darknesse, neuer to be seene againe,
               Suffice we haue thee whom we ought to haue
               And t' whom all good men knew did appertaine
               Th'inheritance thy sacred birth-right gaue,
               That needed n'other suffrages t'ordaine
               What onely was thy due, nor no decree
               To be made knowne, since none was knowne but thee.
            
            
               
               16
               Witnesse the ioy the vniuersall cheere,
               The speeede, the ease, the will, the forwardnesse
               Of all this great and spacious State, how deere
               It held thy Title and thy worthinesse:
               Haste could not poste of speedy anywhere,
               But Fame seem'd there before in readinesse,
               To tell our hopes, and to proclaime thy name,
               O greater then our hopes, more then thy Fame.
            
            
               17
               What a returne of comfort dost thou bring
               Now at this fresh returning of our blood,
               Thus meeting with th'opening of the Spring,
               To make our spirits likewise to imbudde?
               What a new season of incouraging
               Beginnes t'inlength the dayes dispos'd to good?
               What apprehension of recouery
               Of greater strength, of more abilitie?
            
            
               18
               The pulse of England neuer more did beate
               So strong as now: nor euer were our hartes
               Let out to hopes so spacious and so great,
               As now they are; nor euer in all partes,
               Did we thus feele so comfortable heat,
               As now the glory of thy worth impartes:
               The whole complexion of the Common-wealth
               So weake before, hop'd neuer for more health.
            
            
               19
               Couldst thou but see from Douer to the Mount,
               From Totnes to the Orchades, what ioy,
               What cheere, what triumphs, and what deere account
               Is held of thy renowne this blessed day,
               A day which we, and ours must euer count
               Our solemne festiuall, as well we may,
               And though men thus court Kings still which are new,
               Yet do they more, where they finde more is due.
            
            
               
               20
               They feare the humours of a future Prince,
               Who either lost a good, or felt a bad,
               But thou hast cleer'de vs of this feare long since,
               We know thee more, then by reporte we had,
               We haue an euerlasting euidence
               Vnder thy hand, that now we neede not dread,
               Thou wilt be otherwise in thy designes
               Then there thou art in those iudiciall lines.
            
            
               21
               It is the greatest glory vpon earth
               To be a King, but yet much more to giue,
               The institution with the happy birth
               Vnto a King, and teach him how to liue:
               We haue, by thee, farre more then thine owne worth,
               That doth encourage, strengthen, and relieue
               Our hopes in the succession of thy blood,
               That like to thee, they likewise will be good.
            
            
               22
               We haue an earnest that doth euen tie
               Thy Scepter to thy word, and binds thy Crowne
               (That else no band can binde) to ratifie
               What thy religious hand hath there set downe,
               Wherein thy all-commanding Sov'raintie
               Stands subiect to thy Pen and thy Renowne,
               There we behold thee King of thine owne hart
               And see what we must be, and what thou art.
            
            
               23
               There great exemplare prototipe of Kings,
               We finde the Good shal dwell within thy Court;
               Plaine zeale and truth free from base flatterings,
               Shall there be entertain'd and haue resorte:
               Honest discretion that no cunning brings,
               But councells that lie right, and that import,
               Is there receiu'd, with those whose care attends
               Thee, and the State, more then their priuate ends.
            
            
               
               24
               There grace and fauour shall not be dispos'de
               But by proportion, euen, and vpright,
               There are no mightie mountaines interpos'de
               Betweene thy beames and vs, t'imbarre thy light,
               There Maiestie liues not as if inclos'de,
               Or made a prey t'a priuate benefite:
               The hand of Powre deales there her owne reward,
               And thereby reapes the whole of mens regard.
            
            
               25
               There is no way to get vpto respect,
               But onely by the way of worthinesse:
               All passages that may seeme indirect,
               Are stopt vp now, and there in no accesse
               By grosse corruption, bribes cannot effect
               For th'undeseruing any offices:
               Th'ascent is cleane, and he that doth ascend
               Must haue his meanes as cleane as is his end.
            
            
               26
               The deedes of worth and laudable desarts,
               Shall not now passe thorow the straight report
               Of an imbasing tongue, that but imparts
               What with his ends and humours shal comport:
               The Prince himselfe now heares, sees, knows, what parts
               Honour and Vertue acts, and in what sort,
               And thereto giues his grace accordingly,
               And cheeres vp other to the like therby.
            
            
               27
               Nor shall we now haue vse of flatterie,
               For he knowes falsehoode farre more suttle is
               Than truth; basenesse than libertie,
               Feare than loue, t'inuent these florishes:
               And Adulation now is spent so nie
               As that it hath no coulours to expresse
               That which it would, that now we must be faine
               T'unlearne that Art, and labour to be plaine.
            
            
               
               28
               For where there is no care to be abus'd,
               None will be found that dare t'informe a wrong,
               The insolent deprauer stands confus'd,
               The impious Atheist seemes to want a tongue,
               Transform'd into the fashion that is vs'd,
               All striue t'appeare like those they liue among;
               And all will seeme compos'd by that same square,
               By which they see, the best and greatest are.
            
            
               29
               Such powre hath thy example and respect
               As that without a Sword, without debate,
               Without a noyse, (or feeling in effect)
               Thou wilt dispose, change, forme, accommodate
               Thy kingdome, people, rule, and all effect,
               Without the least convulsion of the State,
               That this great passage and mutation, will
               Not seeme a change, but onely of our ill.
            
            
               30
               We shall continue one, and be the same
               In Law, in Iustice, Magistrate, and forme,
               Thou wilt not touch the fundamentall frame
               Of this Estate thy Ancestors did forme,
               But with a reuerence of their glorious fame
               Seeke onely the corruptions to reforme,
               Knowing that course is best to be obseru'de
               Whereby a State hath longest beene preseru'd.
            
            
               31
               A King of England now most graciously,
               Remits the iniuries that haue beene done
               T'a King of Scots, and makes his clemencie
               To checke them more than his correction,
               Th'annoynted blood that staind most shamefully
               This ill seduced state, he lookes thereon,
               With th'eye of griefe, not wrath t'auenge the same,
               Since th'Authors are extinct that caus'd that shame.
            
            
               
               32
               Thus mightie riuers quietly do glide,
               And doe not, by their rage their powers professe,
               But by their mightie workings, when in pride
               Smal Torrents roare more lowde, and worke much lesse:
               Peace Greatnesse best becomes: calme power doth guide
               With a farre more imperious statelinesse,
               Then all the force of violence can doe,
               And easier gaines those ends she tends vnto.
            
            
               33
               Then England, thou hast reason thus to cheare,
               Reason to ioy, and triumph in this wise,
               When thou shalt gaine so much, and haue no feare
               To loose aught else but thy deformities:
               When thus thou shalt haue health and be set cleare
               From all thy great infectious maladies,
               By such a hand that best knowes how to cure,
               And where most lie those griefes thou dost indure.
            
            
               34
               When thou shalt see there is another grace
               Then to be rich;Nam vbi cupido diuitiarum inuasit, neque disciplina, neque artes bonae, neque ingenium vllum satis pollet. another dignitie
               Then money: other meanes for place
               Then gold: wealth shall not now make honestie;
               When thou shalt see the estimation base
               Of that which most aflicts our misery:
               Without the which, else couldst thou neuer see
               Our wayes laide right, not men themselues to bee.
            
            
               35
               By which improouement we shall gaine much more
               Then by Peru, or all discoueries;
               For this way to imbase, is to instore
               The treasure of the land, and make it rise:
               This is the onely key t'unlocke the dore,
               To let out plentie that it may suffice,
               For more then all this Ile, for more increase
               Of Subiects then, by thee, there can increase.
            
            
               
               36
               This shal make roome, and place inough for all,
               Which other wise would not suffice a few,
               And by proportion Geometricall
               Shall so dispose to all, what shal be due:
               As that without corruption, wrangling, brawle,
               Intrusion, wresting, and by meanes vndue,
               Desert shall haue her charge, and but one charge,
               As hauing but one body to discharge.
            
            
               37
               Whereby the all-incheering Maiestie
               Shall come to shine at full in all her parts,
               And spread her beames of comfort equally,
               As being all alike to like desarts;
               For thus to checke, imbase and vilifie
               Th'esteeme of wealth, will fashion so our harts
               To worthy ends, as that we shall by much
               More, labor to be Good, then to be Rich.
            
            
               38
               This will make peace with Law, restore the Barre
               T'her ancient silence, where Contention now
               Makes so confus'd a noyse, this will debarre
               The fostring of debate, and ouerthrow
               That ougly monster that fowle rauener
               
                  Extortion, which so hideously did grow,
               By making prey vpon our misery,
               And wasting it againe as wickedly.
            
            
               39
               The strange examples of impou'rishments,
               Of sacriledge, exactions, and of waste,
               Shall not be made nor held as presidents
               For times to come, but end with th'ages past:
               Whenas the State shall yeeld more suppliments
               (Being well imploy'd) then Kings can well exhaust;
               This golden meadow lying ready still
               Then to be mow'd, when their occasions will.
            
            
               
               40
               Fauour, like pitie, in the hearts of men
               Haue the first touches euer violent,
               But soone againe it comes to languish, when
               The motiue of that humour shall be spent:
               But being still fed with that which first hath beene
               The cause thereof, it holds still permanent,
               And is kept in, by course, by forme, by kinde,
               And Time begets more ties that still more binde.
            
            
               41
               The broken frame of this disioynted State,
               Being by the blisse of thy great Grandfather,
               
                  Henry the seauenth, restor'd to an estate
               More sound then euer, and farre stedfaster,
               Owes all it hath to him, and in that rate
               Stands bound to thee that art his successor:
               For without him it had not beene begunne,
               And without thee, we had beene now vndone.
            
            
               42
               Hee, of a priuate man, became a King,
               Hauing indur'd the weight of tyrannie;
               Mourn'd with the world, complain'd & knew the thing
               That good men wish for in their misery
               Vnder ill Kings: saw what it was to bring
               Order and Forme to the recouery
               Of an vnruly State: conceiu'd what cure
               Would kill the cause of this distemp'rature.
            
            
               43
               Thou, borne a King, hast in thy State, indur'd
               The sowre affronts of priuate discontent
               With subiects broiles; and euer beene inur'd
               To this great mystery of gouernment:
               Whereby thy Princely wisedome hath allur'd
               A State to peace, left to thee turbulent:
               And brought vs an addition to the frame
               Of his great worke, squar'd fitly to the same.
            
            
               
               44
               And, both you (by the all-working prouidence
               That fashions out of dangers, toyles, debates,
               Those whom it hath ordained to commence
               These first, and great establishments of States)
               Came when your aide, your powers experience
               (Which out of iudgement best accommodates
               These ioynts of rule) was more then most desir'd,
               And when the times of need the most requir'd.
            
            
               45
               And as he lay'd the modell of this frame,
               By which was built so strong a worke of State,
               As all the powers of changes in the same;
               All that excesse of a disordinate
               And lustfull Prince: nor all that after came,
               Nor Childe, nor stranger, nor yet womens fate,
               Could once disioynt the couplements, whereby
               It held together in iust Symetry.
            
            
               46
               So thou likewise art come as fore-ordain'd
               To re-inforce the same more really,
               Which oftentimes hath beene but entertain'd
               By th'onely stile, and name of Maiestie:
               And by no other councells oft attain'd
               Those ends of her inioy'd tranquilitie,
               Then by this forme, and by th'incumbrances
               Of neighbor states that gaue it a successe.
            
            
               47
               That hadst thou had no title (as thou hast
               The onely right, and none hath else a right)
               We yet must now haue beene inforcde t'haue cast
               Our selues into thy armes, to set all right;
               And to auert confusion, blood-shed, waste,
               That otherwise vpon vs needes must light:
               None but a King, and no King else beside
               Could now haue sau'd this State from being destry'd.
            
            
               
               48
               Thus hath the hundreth yeare brought backe againe
               The sacred bloud lent to adorne the North,
               And here return'd it with a greater gaine,
               And greater glory than we sent it forth:
               Thus doth th'all-working Prouidence retaine,
               And keepe for great effects the seede of worth,
               And so doth point these stops of time thereby,
               In periods of vncertaine certainty.It is iust a hundred yeares since the Lady Margaret was married to IAMES the fourth, King of Scots.
               
            
            
               49
               
                  Margaret of Richmond (glorious Grandmother
               Vnto that other precious Margaret,
               
               From whence th'Almightie worker did transferre
               This branch of peace, as from a roote well set)
               Thou mother, author, plotter, Councellor
               Of vnion, that didst both conceiue, beget,
               And bring forth happinesse to this great State,
               To make it thus intirely fortunate:
            
            
               50
               O couldst thou now but view this faire successe,
               This great effect of thy religious worke,
               And see therein how God hath pleas'd to blesse
               Thy charitable Councels, and to worke
               Still greater good out of the blessednesse
               Of this conioyned Lancaster and Yorke:
               
               Which all conioyn'd within, and those shut out,
               Whom nature and their birth had set without.
            
            
               51
               How much hast thou bound all posterities
               In this great worke, to reuerence thy name?
               And with thee, that religious, faithfull, wise,
               And learned Mourton who contriu'd the same,
               And first aduis'd, and did so well aduise,
               As that the good successe that thereof came,
               Shewdwel, that holy hands, cleane thoughts, cleare harts
               Are onely fit to act such glorious parts.
            
            
               
               52
               But Muse, these deare remembrances must be
               In their conuenient places registred,
               When thou shalt bring sterne Discord to agree,
               And bloody warre vnto a quiet Bed:
               Which worke must now be finished by thee:
               That long hath layne vndone, as destined
               Vnto the glory of these dayes, for which
               Thy vowes and verse haue laboured so much.
            
            
               53
               Thou euer hast opposed all thy might
               Against contention, fury, pride and wrong,
               Perswading stil to hold the course of right,
               And Peace hath beene the burthen of thy Song,
               And now thy selfe shalt haue the benefite
               Of quietnesse which thou hast wanted long,
               And now shalt haue calme peace, and vnuion,
               With thine owne warres, and now thou must go on.
            
            
               54
               Onely the ioy of this so deare a thing
               Made me looke backe vnto the cause, whence came
               This so great good, this blessing of King,
               When our estate so much requir'd the same,
               When we had neede of powre for the well-ord'ring
               Of our affaires: neede of a Spirite to frame
               The world to Good, to Grace and worthinesse,
               Out of this humour of Luxuriousnesse.
            
            
               55
               And bring vs backe vnto our selues againe,
               Vnto our ancient natiue modestie,
               From out these forraine sinnes vve entertaine,
               This loathsome surfets ougly Gluttony,
               From this vnruly and this idle vaine
               Of wanton and superfluous brauery,
               The wracke of Gentry, spoile of Noblenesse,
               And spare vs by thy temp rate Sobernesse.
            
            
               
               56
               When Abstinence is fashion'd by the Time,
               It is no rare thing to be abstinent,
               But then it is, when th'Age full fraught with crime
               Lies prostrate vnto all misgouernment.
               And who is not licencious in the prime
               And heate of youth, nor then incontinent
               When out of might he may, he neuer wil;
               No power can tempt him to that taste of ill.
            
            
               57
               Then what are we t'expect from such a hand
               That doth this sterne of faire example guide?
               Who will not now shame to haue no command
               Ouer his lusts? Who would be seene t'abide
               Vnfaithful to his vowes; to infringe the band
               Of a most sacred knot which God hath tide?
               Who would now seeme to be dishonoured
               With th' uncleane touch of an vnlawfull bedde?
            
            
               58
               What a great checke wil this chaste Court be now
               To wanton Courts debaucht with Luxurie?
               Where we no other Mistresses shall know
               But her to whom we owe our loyaltie:
               Chaste Mother of our Princes whence doe grow
               Those righteous issues, which shall glorifie
               And comfort many Nations with their worth,
               To her perpetuall grace that brought them forth.
            
            
               59
               We shall not feare to haue our wiues distain'd,
               Nor yet our Daughters violated here
               By an Imperiall lust, that being vnrain'd
               Will hardly be resisted any where.
               Hee will not be betraid with ease, nor train'd
               With idle rest, in soft delights to weare
               His time of life. But knowes whereto he tends,
               How worthy mindes are made for worthy ends.
            
            
               
               60
               And that this mighty worke of vnion now
               Begunne with glory, must with grace run on
               And so be clos'd, as all the ioynts may grow
               Together firme in due proportion;
               A worke of power and iudgement that must shew
               All parts of wisdome, and discretion
               That man can shew: that no clowd may impaire
               This day of hope, whose morning shewes so faire.
            
            
               61
               He hath a mightie burthen to sustaine
               Whose fortune doth succeed a gracious Prince,
               Or where mens expectations intertaine
               Hopes of more good, and more beneficence:
               But yet he vndergoes a greater paine,
               A more laborious worke, who must commence
               The great foundation of a Gouernement,
               And lay the frame of order, and content.
            
            
               62
               Especially where mens desires do runne
               A greedy course of eminencie, gaine,
               And priuate hopes; weighing not what is done
               For the Republicke, so themselues may gaine
               Their ends, and where few care who be vndone,
               So they be made, whil'st all do entertaine
               The present motions that this passage brings
               With th' infancie of change, vnder new Kings.
            
            
               63
               So that the weight of all seemes to rely
               Wholy vpon thine owne discretion,
               Thy iudgement now must only rectifie
               This frame of pow're, thy glory stands vpon:
               From thee must come, that thy posterity
               May ioy this Peace, and hold this vnion:
               For whil'st all worke for their owne benefite,
               Thy only worke must keepe vs all vpright.
            
            
               
               64
               For did not now thy full maturitie
               Of yeares and wisedome, that discerne what shewes,
               What arte, and colours, may deceiue the eye,
               Secure our trust that that cleere iudgement knowes
               Vpon what grounds depend thy Maiestie,
               And whence the glory of thy greatnesse growes,
               We might distrust least that a side might part
               Thee from thy selfe, and so surprize thy hart.
            
            
               65
               Since th'arte but one, and that against thy breast
               Are laide all th'ingins both of Skil and Wit
               And all th'assaults of Cunning are addresst
               With stratagems of Arte to enter it:
               To make a prey of grace, and to inuest
               Their powres within thy loue, that they might sit,
               And stirre that way which their affection tends,
               Respecting but themselues, and their owne ends.
            
            
               66
               And see'ng how difficult a thing it is
               To rule, and what strength is requir'd to stand,
               Against all the'interplac'd respondences
               Of combinations, set to keepe the hand
               And eye of power from out the prouinces,
               That Auarice may draw to her command,
               Which, to keepe hers, she others vowes to spare,
               That they againe to her might vse like care.
            
            
               67
               But God that rais'd thee vp to act this parte,
               Hath giuen thee all those powers of worthinesse,
               Fit for so great a worke, and fram'd thy hart
               Discernible of all apparences:
               Taught thee to know the world, and this great Art
               Oford'ring man, Knowledge of Knowledges,
               
               That from thee, men might reckon how this State
               Became restor'd, and was made fortunate.
            
            
               
               68
               That thou the first, with vs, in name, might'st be
               The first in course, to fashion vs anew,
               Wherein the times hath offred that to thee,
               Which seldome t'other princes could accrew:
               Thou hast th'aduantage onely to be free,
               T'imploy thy fauours where they shall be dew,
               And to dispose thy grace in generall,
               And like to Ioue, to be alike to all.Est Iupiter omnibus idem.
               
            
            
               69
               Thy fortune hath indebted thee to none,
               But t'all thy people vniuersally,
               And not to them, but for their loue alone,
               Which they account is placed worthily:
               Nor wilt thou now frustrate their hopes, whereon
               They rest, nor they faile in their loyaltie;
               Since no Prince comes deceiued in his trust,
               But hee that first deceiues, and prooues vniust.
            
            
               70
               Then since we are in this so faire a way
               Of Restauration, Greatnesse and Command,
               Cursed be hee that causes the least stay
               In this faire worke, or interrupts thy hand,
               And cursed hee that offers to betray
               Thy graces, or thy goodnesse to withstand,
               Let him be held abhorr'd, and all his race
               Inherite but the portion of disgrace.
            
            
               71
               And hee that shall, by wicked Offices,
               Be th'author of the least disturbancie,
               Or seeke t' auert thy godly purposes,
               Be euer held the scorne of infamie:
               And let men but consider their successe
               Who Princes loues abus'd presumptuously,
               They shall perceiue their ends doe still relate,
               That sure God loues them not whom men do hate.
            
            
               
               72
               And it is iust, that they who make a prey
               Of Princes fauours, in the end againe,
               Be made a prey to Princes, and repay
               The spoiles of miserie with greater gaine;
               Whose sacrifices euer doe allay
               The wrath of men, conceiu'd in their disdaine:
               For that their hatred prosecuteth still,
               More then ill Princes, those that make them ill.
            
            
               73
               But both thy iudgement and estate doth free
               Thee, from these powres of Feare and Flattery,
               The conquerours of Kings, by whom we see
               Are wrought the acts of all impietie:
               Thou arte so set, as th'hast no cause to be
               Iealous, or dreadfull of disloyaltie,
               The pedestall whereon thy Greatnesse stands,
               Is built of all our hearts, and all our hands.
            
         
         
            
            
            TO
SIR THO: EGERTON KNIGHT,
LORD KEEPER OF THE GREAT
SEALE OF ENGLAND.
            
               
                  VVEll hath the powreful hand of Maiestie,
               Thy worthines, and Englands happe beside,
               Set thee in th' aidfulst roome of dignitie,
               As th' Isthmus, these two Oceans to diuide
               Of Rigor and confus'd Vncertaintie,
               
               To keepe out th'entercourse of wrong and pride,
               That they ingulph not vp vnsuccoured right
               By th'extreame current of licencious might.
            
            
               Now when we see the most combining band,
               The strongest fasting of societie
               
                  Law, whereon all this frame of men doth stand,
               Remaine concussed with vncertaintie,
               And seeme to foster rather than withstand
               Contention, and embrace obscuritie,
               Onely t'afflict, and not to fashion vs,
               Making her cure farre worse than the disease.
            
            
               As if she had made couenant with Wrong,
               To part the prey made on our weakenesses,
               And suffred Falshood to be arm'd as strong
               Vnto the combate as is Righteousnes,
               Or suted her, as if she did belong
               Vnto our passions, and did euen professe
               Contention, as her only mystery,
               Which she restraines not, but doth multiply.
            
            
               
               Was she the same sh'is now in ages past,
               Or was she lesse when she was vsed lesse?
               And growes as malice growes, and so comes cast
               Iust to the forme of our vnquietnesse?
               Or made more slow, the more that strife runnes fast,
               Staying t'undo vs ere she will redresse?
               That th'ill shee checks seemes suffred to be ill,
               When it yeelds greater gaine than goodnesse will.
            
            
               Must there be still some discord mixt among
               The Harmonie of men, whose moode accords
               Best with Contention, tun'd t'a note of wrong,
               That when war failes, peace must make war with words,
               And b'arm'd vnto destruction euen as strong,
               As were in ages past our ciuill swordes;
               Making as deepe, although vnbleeding wounds,
               That when as furie failes, wisedome confounds.
            
            
               If it be wisedome, and not cunning, this
               Which so imbroyles the state of truth with brawles,
               And wrappes it vp in strange confusednesse
               As if it liu'd immur'd within the walls,
               Of hideous termes fram'd out of barbarousnesse
               And forraine Customes, the memorials
               Of our subiection, and could neuer be
               Deliu'red but by wrangling subtiltie.
            
            
               Whereas it dwells free in the open plaine,
               Vncurious, Gentile, easie of accesse:
               Certaine vnto it selfe, of equall vaine,
               One face, one colour, one assurednesse;
               It's Falshood that is intricate, and vaine,
               And needes these laborinths of subtilnesse.
               For where the cunningst cou'rings most appeare
               It argues still that all is not sincere.
            
            
               
               Which thy cleere ey'd experience well discries,
               Great Keeper of the state of Equitie,
               Refuge of mercie, vpon whom relies
               The succour of oppressed miserie:
               Altar of safegarde, whereto affliction flies
               From th'eger pursuite of seueritie:
               Hauen of Peace, that labourst to withdraw
               Iustice, from out the tempests of the Law.
            
            
               And set her in a calme and euen way,
               Plaine and directly leading to redresse,
               Barring these counter-courses of delay
               These wasting dilatorie processes:
               Ranging into their right, and proper ray,
               Errors, demurs, essoines; and trauerses,
               The heads of Hydra springing out of death
               That giues this Monster malice still new breath.
            
            
               That what was made for the vtilitie.
               And good of man, might not be turn'd t'his hurt
               To make him worser by his remedie,
               And cast him downe, with what should him support:
               Nor that the State of Law might loose thereby
               The due respect, and reu'rence of her porte,
               And seeme a trap to catch our ignorance
               And to intangle our intemperance.
            
            
               Since her interpretations and our deedes,
               Vnto a like infinitie arise,
               As be'ng a Science, that by nature breeds
               Contention, strife and ambiguities:
               For altercation controuersie feeds,
               And in her agitation multiplies:
               The field of Cauell lying all like wide,
               Yealds like aduantage vnto eyther side.
            
            
               
               Which made the graue Castillian King deuise
               A prohibition,Ferdinand king of Castile. that no Aduocate
               Should be conuaid to th' Indian Colonies,
               Lest their new setting, shaken with debate,
               Might take but slenderroote, and so not rise
               To any perfect growth of firme estate,
               For hauing not this skill, how to contend,
               Th'vnnourisht strife would quickely make an end.
            
            
               So likewise did th'Hungarian, when he saw
               These great Italian Bartolists,The king of Hungarie. who were
               Call'd in, of purpose to explane the Law,
               T'imbroyle it more, and make it much lesse cleere,
               Caus'd them from out his Kingdome to withdraw
               With this infestious skill someother-where:
               Whose learning rather let men farther out,Difficultatem facit doctrinae.
               
               And opened wider passages of doubt.
            
            
               Seeing euen Iniustice may be regulare;
               And no proportion can there be betwixt
               Our actions which in endlesse motion are
               And th'Ordinances which are alwayes fixt.
               Tenne thousand Lawes more, cannot reach so farre,
               But Malice goes beyond, or liues immixt
               So close with goodnesse, as it euer will
               Corrupt, disguise or counterfeite it still.
            
            
               And therefore did those glorious Monarchs, (who
               Deuide with God the Stile of Maiestie
               For being good, and had a care to do
               The world right, and succour honestie)
               Ordaine this sanctuarie wherevnto
               Th'opprest might flie, this seate of Equitie
               Whereon thy vertues sit with faire renowne,
               The greatest grace and glory of the Gowne.
            
            
               
               Which Equitie being the soule of Law
               The life of Iustice, and the Spirite of right,
               Dwell's not in written Lines, or liues in awe
               Of Bookes; deafe powres that haue nor eares, nor sight:
               But out of well-weigh'd circumstance doth draw
               The essence of a iudgement requisite:
               And is that Lesbian square, that building fit,
               Plies to the worke, not forc'th the worke to it.
            
            
               Maintaining still an equall paralell
               Iust with th'occasions of humanitie,
               Making her iudgements euer liable
               To the respect of peace and amitie:
               When surly Law, sterne, and vnaffable,
               Cares onely but it selfe to satisfie:
               And often, innocencie skarse defends,
               As that which on no circumstance depends.
            
            
               But Equitie that beares an euen raine
               Vpon the present courses, holds in awe,
               By giuing hand alittle, and doth gaine
               By a gentle relaxation of the Law;
               And yet inviolable doth maintaine
               The end whereto all constitutions draw;
               Which is the well-fare of societie
               Consisting of an vpright pollicie.
            
            
               Which first being by Necessitie compos'd,
               Is by Necessitie maintain'd in best estate,Necessitas est lex temporu
                        •
                     .
               
               Where, whenas Iustice shal be ill dispos'd
               It sickens the whole body of the State:
               For if there be a passage once disclos'd
               That Wrong may enter at the selfe-same gate
               Which serues for Right, cladde in a coate of Law,
               What violent distempers may it draw?
            
            
               
               And therefore dost thou stand to keepe the way,
               And stoppe the course that malice seekes to runne
               And by thy prouident Iniunctions stay
               This neuer ending Altercation;
               Sending contention home, to th'end men may
               There make their peace, whereas their strife begun:
               And free these pestred streets they vainely weare
               Whom both the State, and theirs, do need elsewhere.
            
            
               Lest th'humor which doth thus predominate
               Conuert vnto it selfe all that it takes;
               And that the law grow larger then debate,
               And come t'exceede th'affaires it vndertakes:
               As if the onely Science of the State
               That tooke vp all our wits for gaine it makes;
               Not for the good that thereby may be wrought
               Which is not good if it be dearely bought.
            
            
               What shall we thinke when as ill causes shall
               Inrich men more, and shall be more desir'd
               Then good, as farre more beneficiall?
               Who then defends the good? who will be hir'd
               To intertaine a right,A remedie for defending ill causes. whose gaine is small?
               Vnlesse the Aduocate that hath conspir'd
               To pleade a wrong, be likewise made to runne
               His Clients chaunce, and with him be vndunne.
            
            
               So did the wisest nations euer striue
               To binde the hands of Iustice vp so hard,
               That lest she falling to prooue Lucratiue
               Might basely reach them out to take reward:
               Ordaining her prouisions fit to liue
               Out of the publike as a publike Guard
               That all preserues, and all doth entertaine,
               Whose end is onely glory, and not gaine.
            
            
               
               That eu'n the Scepter which might all command,
               Seeing her s' vnpartiall, equall, regulare,
               Was pleas'd to put it selfe into her hand;
               Whereby they both grew more admired farre.
               And this is that great blessing of this land,
               That both the Prince and people vse one Barre,
               The Prince, whose cause, (as not to be withstood)
               Is neuer badde but where himselfe is good.
            
            
               This is that Ballance which committed is
               To thy most euen and religious hand;
               Great Minister of Iustice, who by this
               Shalt haue thy name, still gratious in this land:
               This is that seale of pow're which doth impresse
               Thy Acts of right, which shall for euer stand:
               This is that traine of State, that pompously
               Attends vpon thy reu'rent dignitie.
            
            
               All glory else besides, ends with our breath,
               And mens respects scarse brings vs to our graue:
               But this of doing good, must out-liue Death,
               Aud haue a right out of the right it gaue:
               Though th'act but few, th'example profiteth
               Thousands, that shall thereby a blessing haue.
               The worlds respect growes not but on desarts,
               Powre may haue knees, but Iustice hath our harts.
            
         
         
            
            
            TO
THE LORD HENRY HOWARD,
ONE OF HIS MAIESTIES
PRIVIE COVNCEL.
            
               PRaise, if it be not choice, and laide aright,
            Can yeeld no lustre where it is bestowde,
            Nor any way can grace the giuers Arte,
            (Tho'it be a pleasing colour to delight,)
            For that no ground whereon it can be shew'd
            Will beare it well, but Vertue and Desart.
            And though I might commend your learning, wit,
            And happy vttrance, and commend them right,
            As that which decks you much, and giues you grace,
            Yet your cleere iudgement best deserueth it,
            Which in your course hath caried you vpright,
            And made you to discerne the truest face,
            And best complexion of the things that breed
            The reputation and the loue of men.
            And held you in the tract of honestie
            Which euer in the end we see succeed,
            Though oft it may haue interrupted bin,
            Both by the times and mens iniquitie.
            For sure those actions which do fairely runne
            In the right line of Honor, still are those
            That get most cleane, and safest to their end,
            And passe the best without confusion,
            Either in those that act or else dispose,
            Hauing the scope made cleere whereto they tend.
            
               When this by-path of cunning doth s'imbroile
            And intricate the passage of affaires,
            As that they seldome fairely can get out;
            But cost, with lesse successe, more care and toile
            Whilst doubt and the distrusted cause impaires
            Their courage, who would else appeare more stout.
            For though some hearts are builded so, that they
            Haue diuers dores, whereby they may let out
            Their wills abroad without disturbancie,
            Int'any course, and into eu'ry way
            Of humour, that affection turnes about,
            Yet haue the best but one t' haue passage by.
            And that so surely warded with the Guarde
            Of Conscience and respect, as nothing must
            Haue course that way, but with the certaine passe
            Of a perswasiue right, which be'ng compard
            With their conceipt, must thereto answere iust,
            And so with due examination passe.
            Which kind of men, rais'd of a better frame
            Are meere religious, constant and vpright,
            And bring the ablest hands for any' effect,
            And best beare vp the reputation, fame
            And good opinion that the Action's right,
            When th'vndertakers are without suspect.
            But when the bodie of an enterprise
            Shall goe one way, the face another way,
            As if it did but mocke a weaker trust,
            The motion being monstrous cannot rise
            To any good, but falls downe to bewray
            That all pretences serue for things vniust.
            Especially where th'action will allow
            Apparancie, or that it hath a course
            Concentrike with the Vniuersall frame
            Of men combind, whom it concerneth how
            
               
These motions turne and intertaine their force,
            Hauing their being resting on the same.
            And be it, that the vulgare are but grosse
            Yet are they capable of truth, and see,
            And sometimes gesse the right, and doe conceiue
            The Nature of that text, that needes a glosse,
            And wholy neuer can deluded be,
            All may a few, few cannot all deceiue.
            And these strange disproportions in the traine
            And course of things, do euermore proceede
            From th'ill-set disposition of their minds,
            Who in their actions cannot but retaine
            Th'incumbred formes which do within them breede,
            And which they cannot shew but in their kindes.
            Whereas the wayes and councells of the Light,
            So sort with valour and with manlinesse,
            As that they carry things assuredly
            Vndazeling of their owne or others sight:
            There be'ng a blessing that doth giue successe
            To worthinesse, and vnto constancie.
            And though sometimes th'euent may fall amisse,
            Yet shall it still haue honour for th' attempt,
            When Craft begins with feare, and endes with shame,
            And in the whole designe perplexed is.
            Vertue, though luckelesse; yet shal skape contempt,
            And though it hath not hap, it shall haue fame.
         
         
            
            
            TO
THE LADY MARGARET
COVNTESSE OF CVMBERLAND.
            
               HE that of such a height hath built his minde,
               And rear'd the dwelling of his thoughts so strong
               As neither Feare nor Hope can shake the frame
               Of his resolued powres, nor al the winde
               Of Vanitie or Malice, pierce to wrong
               His setled peace, or to disturbe the same,
               What a faire seate hath he from whence hee may
               The boundlesse wastes, and weilds of man suruay.
            
            
               And with how free an eye doth he looke downe,
               Vpon these lower Regions of turmoyle,
               Where all these stormes of passions mainely beate
               On flesh and blood, where honor, power, renowne
               Are onely gay afflictions, golden toyle,
               Where Greatnesse stands vpon as feeble feete
               As Frailtie doth, and only great doth seeme
               To little mindes, who do it so esteeme.
            
            
               He lookes vpon the mightiest Monarchs warres
               But onely as on stately robberies,
               Where euermore the fortune that preuailes
               Must be the right, the ill-succeeding marres
               The fairest and the best-fac't enterprize:
               Great Pyrat Pompey lesser Pyrates quailes,
               
                  Iustice, he sees, as if seduced, still
               Conspires with powre, whose cause must not be ill.
            
            
               
               He sees the face of Right t'appeare as manyfold
               As are the passions of vncertaine man,
               Who puts it in all coulours, all attires
               To serue his ends, and make his courses hold:
               He sees that let Deceit worke what it can,
               Plot and contriue base wayes to high desires,
               That the all-guiding Prouidence doth yet
               All disappoint, and mockes this smoake of wit.
            
            
               Nor is he moou'd with all the thunder crackes
               Of Tyrants threats, or with the surly brow
               Of power, that prowdly sits on others crimes,
               Chardg'd with more crying sinnes, then those he checks:
               The stormes of sad confusion that may grow
               Vp in the present, for the cumming times,
               Appall not him, that hath no side at all
               But of himselfe, and knowes the worst can fall.
            
            
               Although his hart so neere allied to earth,
               Cannot but pittie the perplexed State
               Of troublous, and distrest mortalitie,
               That thus make way vnto the ougly birth
               Of their owne sorrowes, and doe still beget
               Affliction vpon imbecilitie:
               Yet seeing thus the course of things must run,
               He lookes thereon, not strange, but as foredun.
            
            
               And whilst distraught Ambition compasses
               And is incompast, whil'st as craft deceiues
               And is deceiu'd, whil'st man doth ransack man
               And builds on bloud, and rises by distresse,
               And th'inheritance of desolation leaues
               To great expecting hopes, he lookes thereon
               As from the shore of peace with vnwet eye
               And beares no venture in impietie.
            
            
               
               Thus, Madame, fares the man that hath prepar'd
               A rest for his desires, and sees all things
               Beneath him, aud hath learn't this booke of man,
               Full of the notes of frailtie, and compar'd
               The best of glory with her sufferings,
               By whom I see you labour all you can
               To plant your heart, and set your thought as neere
               His glorious mansion, as your powres can beare.
            
            
               Which, Madame, are so soundly fashioned,
               By that cleere iudgement that hath caried you
               Beyond the feeble limits of your kinde,
               As they can stand against the strongest head
               Passion can make, invr'd to any hew
               The world can cast, that cannot cast that minde
               Out of her forme of goodnesse, that doth see
               Both what the best and worst of earth can bee.
            
            
               Which makes, that whatsoeuer here befalles,
               You in the region of your selfe remaine,
               Where no vaine breath of th'impudent molests,
               That hath secur'd within the brasen walls
               Of a cleere conscience, that without all staine
               Rises in peace, in innocencie rests:
               Whilst all what malice from without procures,
               Shews her owne ougly heart, but hurts not yours.
            
            
               And whereas none reioyce more in reuenge
               Then women vse to doe, yet you well know,
               That wrong is better checkt, by being contemn'd,
               Then being pursu'd, leauing to him tauenge
               To whom it appertaines, wherein you show
               How worthily your Clearenesse hath condemn'd
               Base malediction, liuing in the darke,
               That at the raies of goodnesse still doth barke.
            
            
               
               Knowing the heart of man is set to be
               The centre of his world, about the which
               These reuolutions of disturbances
               Still roule, where all th'aspects of miserie
               Predominate, whose strong effects are such
               As he must beare, being powrelesse to redresse,
               And that vnlesse aboue himselfe he can
               Erect himselfe, how poore a thing is man?
            
            
               And how turmoyld they are that leuell lie
               With earth, and cannot lift themselues from thence,
               That neuer are at peace with their desires,
               But worke beyond their yeares, and euen deny
               Dotage her rest, and hardly will dispence
               With Death: that when ability expires,
               Desire liues still, so much delight they haue
               To carry toile, and trauaile to the graue.
            
            
               Whose ends you see, and what can be the best
               They reach vnto, when they haue cast the summe
               And recknings of their glory, and you know
               This floting life hath but this Port of rest,
               A heart prepar'd that feares no ill to come:
               And that mans greatnesse rests but in his show;
               The best of all whose dayes consumed are,
               Eyther in warre, or peace conceiuing warre.
            
            
               This Concord (Madame) of a wel-tun'd minde
               Hath beene so set by that all-working hand
               Of heauen, that though the world hath done his worst,
               To put it out, by discords most vnkinde,
               Yet doth it still in perfect vnion stand
               With God and Man, nor euer will be forc't
               From that most sweete accord, but still agree
               Equall in Fortunes inequalitie.
            
            
               
               And this note(Madame) of your Worthines
               Remaines recorded in so many Hearts
               As time nor malice cannot wrong your right
               In th inheritance of Fame you must possesse,
               You that haue built you by your great desarts,
               Out of small meanes, a farre more exquisite
               And glorious dwelling for your honoured name
               Then all the gold of leaden mindes can frame.
            
            S. D.
         
         
            
            TO
THE LADY LVCIE, COVNTESSE
OF BEDFORD.
            
               THough virtue be the same when low she stands
            In th'humble shadowes of obscuritie
            As when she either sweats in martiall bands,
            Or sits in Court, clad with authoritie:
            Yet Madame, doth the strictnesse of her roome
            Greatly detract from her abilitie:
            For as inwalld within a liuing tombe
            Her handes and armes of action, labour not;
            Her thoughts as if abortiue from the wombe,
            Come neuer borne, though happily begot.
            But where she shath mounted in open sight
            An eminent, and spacious dwelling got.
            Where shee may stirre at will, and vse her might,
            There is she more her selfe, and more her owne:
            There in the faire attyre of honour dight,
            She sits at ease and makes her glory knowne,
            Applause attends her hands, her deedes haue grace,
            Her worth new-borne is straight as if fulgrowne,
            With such a goodly and respected face
            Doth vertue looke, that's set to looke from hie,
            And such a faire aduantage by her place
            Hath state and greatnesse to doe worthily.
            And therefore well did your high fortunes meete
            With her, that gracing you, comes grac't thereby,
            And well was let into a house so sweete
            So good, so faire; so faire, so good a guest,
            Who now remaines as blessed in her seate,
            
               
As you are with her residencie blesst.
            And this faire course of knowledge whereunto
            Your studies, learned Lady, are addrest,
            Is th'onely certaine way that you can goe
            Vnto true glory, to true happines:
            All passages on earth besides, are so
            Incumbred with such vaine disturbances,
            As still we loose our rest, in seeking it,
            Being but deluded with apparances.
            And no key had you else that was so fit
            T'vnlocke that prison of your Sex, as this,
            To let you out of weakenesse, and admit
            Your powers into the freedome of that blisse
            That sets you there where you may ouersee
            This rowling world, and view it as it is,
            And apprehend how th'outsides do agree
            With th'inward being of the things, we deeme
            And hold in our ill-cast accounts, to be
            Of highest value, and of best esteeme.
            Since all the good we haue rests in the mind,
            By whose proportions onely we redeeme
            Our thoughts from out confusion, and do finde
            The measure of our selues, and of our powres.
            And that all happinesse remaines confind
            Within the Kingdome of this breast of ours.
            Without whose bounds, all that we looke on, lies
            In others Iurisdictions, others powres,
            Out of the circuit of our liberties.
            All glory, honor, fame, applause, renowne,
            Are not belonging to our royalties,
            But t'others wills, wherein th'are onely growne.
            And that vnlesse we finde vs all within,
            We neuer can without vs be our owne:
            Nor call it right, our life we liue in.
            But a possession held for others vse,
            That seeme to haue most int' rest therein.
            
               
Which we do so disseuer, parte, traduce,
            Let out to custome fashion and to shew
            As we enioy but onely the abuse,
            And haue no other Deed at all to shew.
            How oft are we constrained to appeare
            With other countenance then that we owe,
            And be our selues farre off, when we are neere?
            How oft are we forc't on a clowdie hart,
            To set a shining face, and make it cleere.
            Seeming content to put our selues apart,
            To beare a part of others weaknesses:
            As if we onely were compos'd by Arte,
            Not Nature, and did all our deedes addresse
            T'opinion, not t'a conscience what is right:
            As fram'd b'example, not aduisednesse
            Into those formes that intertaine our sight.
            And though Bookes, Madame, cannot make this minde,
            Which we must bring apt to be set aright,
            Yet do they rectifie it in that kinde,
            And touch it so, as that it turnes that way
            Where iudgement lies: And though we cannot finde
            The certaine place of truth, yet doe they stay,
            And intertaine vs neere about the same.
            And giue the Soule the best delights that may
            Encheere it most, and most our spirits inflame
            To thoughts of glory, and to worthy ends.
            And therefore in a course that best became
            The cleerenesse of your heart, and best commends
            Your worthy powres, you runne the rightest way
            That is on Earth, that can true glory giue,
            By which when all consumes, your fame shal liue.
         
         
            
            TO
THE LADY ANNE
CLIFFORD.
            
               VNto the tender youth of those faire eyes
            The light of iudgement can arise but new
            And yong the world appeares t'a yong conceit,
            Whilst thorow th'vnacquainted faculties
            The late inuested soule doth rawly view
            Those Obiects which on that discretion waite.
            Yet you that such a faire aduantage haue,
            Both by your birth, and happy powres t'out-go,
            And be before your yeares, can fairely guesse
            What hew of life holdes surest without staine,
            Hauing your well-wrought hart full furnisht so
            With all the images of worthinesse,
            As there is left no roome at all t'inuest
            Figures of other forme but Sanctitie:
            Whilst yet those cleane-created thoughts, within
            The Garden of your innocencies rest,
            Where are no notions of deformitie
            Nor any dore at all to let them in.
            With so great care doth shee, that hath brought forth
            That comely body, labour to adorne
            That better parte, the mansion of your minde,
            With all the richest furniture of worth,
            To make y'as highly good as highly borne,
            And set your vertues equall to your kinde.
            She tells you how that honour onely is
            A goodly garment put on faire desarts,
            Wherin the smallest staine is greatest seene,
            
               
And that it cannot grace vnworthinesse;
            But more apparant shewes defectiue partes,
            How gay soeuer they are deckt therein.
            She tells you too, how that it bounded is,
            And kept inclosed with so many eyes,
            As that it cannot stray and breake abroade
            Into the priuate wayes of carelessenesse,
            Nor euer may descend to vulgarize,
            Or be below the sphere of her abode.
            But like to those supernall bodies set
            Within their Orbs, must keep the certaine course
            Of order, destin'd to their proper place;
            Which only doth their note of glory get.
            Th'irregulare apparances inforce
            A short respect, and perish without grace.
            Being Meteors seeming hie, but yet low plac't,
            Blazing but while their dying matters last,
            Nor can we take the iust height of the minde,
            But by that order which her course doth shew:
            And which such splendor to her actions giues,
            And thereby men her eminencie finde,
            And thereby only do attaine to know
            The Region, and the Orbe wherein she liues.
            For low in th'aire of grosse vncertaintie,
            Cofusion onely rowles, Order sits hie.
            And therefore since the dearest thing on earth,
            This honour, Madame, hath his stately frame
            From th'heau'nly order, which begets respect,
            And that your nature, vertue, happy birth,
            Haue therein highly interplac'd your name,
            You may not runne the least course of neglect.
            For where, not to obserue, is to prophane
            Your dignitie, how carefull must you be
            To be yourselfe, and though you may to all
            Shine faire aspects, yet must the vertuous gaine
            
               
The best effects of your benignitie:
            Nor must your common graces cause to fall
            The price of your esteeme t'a lower rate,
            Then doth befit the pitch of your estate.
            Nor may you build on your sufficiency,
            For in our strongest partes we are but weake,
            Nor yet may ouer-much distrust the same,
            Lest that you come to checke it so thereby,
            As silence may become worse than to speake;
            Though silence women neuer ill became.
            And none, we see, were euer ouerthrowne
            By others flattery more than by their owne.
            For though we liue amongst the tongues of praise
            And troopes of soothing people, that collaud
            All that we do, yet t'is within our harts
            Th'ambushment lies, that euermore betraies
            Our iudgements, when our selues become t'applaud
            Our owne abilitie, and our owne parts.
            So that we must not onely fence this forte
            Of ours, against all others fraud, but most
            Against our owne, whose danger is the most,
            Because we lie the neerest to doe hurt,
            And soon'st deceiue our selues, and soon'st are lost
            By our best powres that do vs most transport.
            Such are your holy bounds, who must conuay
            (If God so please) the honourable bloud
            Of Clifford, and of Russell, led aright
            To many worthy stemmes whose off-spring may
            Looke backe with comfort, to haue had that good
            To spring from such a branch that grew s'vpright;
            Since nothing cheeres the heart of greatnesse more
            Then th'Ancestors faire glory gone before.
         
         
            
            
            TO HENRY WRIOTHESLY ERLE
OF SOVTHAMPTON.
Nonfert vllum ictum illaesa foelicitas.
            
               
                  HE who hath neuer warr'd with misery,
               Nor euer tugg'd with Fortune, and Distresse
               Hath had n'occasion nor no field to trie
               The strength and forces of his worthinesse:
               Those partes of iudgement which felicitie
               Keepes as conceal'd, affliction must expresse;
               And only men shew their abilities,
               And what they are, in their extremities.
            
            
               The world had neuer taken so full note
               Of what thou arte, hadst thou not beene vndone,
               And onely thy affliction hath begot
               More fame then thy best fortunes could haue done:
               For euer by aduersitie are wrought
               The greatest workes of admiration,
               And all the faire examples of renowne,
               Out of distresse and misery are growne.
            
            
               
                  Mutius the fire, the torturs Regular,
               
               Did make the miracles of Faith and Zeale:
               Exile renown'd, and Grac'd Rutilius:
               
               Imprisonment, and Poyson did reueale
               The worth of Socrates: Fabricius
               
               Pouertie did grace that Common-weale
               More then all Syllaes riches got withstrife,
               And Catoes death did vie with, Casars life.
            
            
               
               Not to b'vnhappy is vnhappinesse;
               And miserie not t'haue knowne misery:
               For the best way vnto discretion is
               The way that leads vs by aduersitie:
               And men are better shew'd what is amisse,
               By th'expert finger of Calamitie,
               Then they can be with all that Fortune brings,
               Who neuer shewes them the true face of things.
            
            
               How could we know that thou could'st haue indur'd
               With a reposed cheere, wrong and disgrace,
               And with a heart and countenance aslur'd
               Haue lookt sterne Death, and Horror in the face?
               How should we know thy soule had bin secur'd
               In honest councels, and in wayes vnbase?
               Hadst thou not stood to shew vs what thou wert,
               By thy affliction, that descride thy heart.
            
            
               It is not but the Tempest that doth shew
               The Sea-mans cunning: but the field that tries
               The Captaines courage: and we come to know
               Best what men are, in their worst ieoperdies:
               For lo, how many haue we seene to grow
               To hie renowne from lowest miseries,
               Out of the hands of death, and many a one
               T'haue bin vndone, had they not bin vndone.
            
            
               He that indures for what his conscience knowes
               Not to be ill, doth from a patience hie
               Looke, onely on the cause whereto he owes
               Those sufferings, not on his miserie:
               The more h'indures, the more his glory growes,
               Which neuer growes from imbecilitie:
               Onely the best compos'd, and worthiest harts,
               God sets to act the hard'st and constant'st parts.
            
         
      
   