
      
         
            
            
            TRVE and Chriſtian Friendſhippe. With all the braunches, members, parts, and circumſtances thereof, Godly and learnedly deſcribed. Written firſt in Latine by that excellent and learned man, Lambertus Danaeus, and now turned into Engliſh.
            Together alſo with a right excellent Inuectiue of the ſame Author, againſt the wicked exerciſe of Diceplay, and other prophane Gaming.
            ¶ Imprinted at London for Abraham Veale, dwelling in Paules Church-yard at the ſigne of the Lambe. 1586.
            
         
         
            
            
            ¶To the Worſhipfull, my very good friendes, Maister VVilliam Bromley, and Maiſter Reginald Skreuen, Secretaries to the right Honorable, the Lord Chauncelor of England.
            
               
                  DANAEVS mine Author, choſe for ye
                Patrone of this his Treatiſe in Latine, a Gentlemā, Secretarie to the King of Fraunce. I, for my trāſlatiō thereof into Engliſh, haue made choyſe of you twaine, Gentlemen, as well as the other, and Secretaries, though not to a King, yet to a Perſonage of Honor next to a King: and in vertue, wiſedome, zeale, grauitie, authoritie and knowledge ſo rarely furniſhed, as I would yt
                all Kings were. Your friendly curteſies towards me, deſerue this and a farre more thankful remēbraunce,

and the very title of this Pamphlet emboldened me, to woe you for pardon, in thus farre preſuming and aduenturing vpon your patience. I haue choſen, not the one, but both twaine of you, becauſe firme, ſtedfaſt and perfect friendſhip cannot bee betweene either moe or leſſe then twaine: and becauſe alſo I am not ignorant, in what a ſweete league of mutuall loue, and Chriſtian ſympathie, you twaine be linked together. Fare ye hartily well. 
            
               At Butley in Cheſshyre 
                  the 22. of Iuly. 1586.
                
               Your vnfayned well willer, Thomas Newton.
               
            
         
      
      
         
            
               
                  ¶ A Diſcourſe of true and Christian Friendſhip: with all circumſtances thereof, godly and learnedly diſcuſſed.
               
                  The firſt Chapter. Of the ground and foundation of true & Chriſtian friendſhip.
                  
                     THe ground and foundation of true & Chriſtian Friendſhippe, is the admiration of vertue, or of ſome ſpeciall gift of God that is in an other: the praiſe & vſe whereof, reſpecteth either God himſelf, or els man.1. Sam. 18. verſe 1. and 27. &. 30. This mooued Ionathan to knit himſelfe in moſt firme friendſhip with Dauid: whom for his valiaunt heart and noble courage in vanquiſſhing proud Goliath, he highly eſtéemed, honoured and entierly loued. Such perſons therefore as either for ſome ſingular gift of true Godlineſſe, or for ſome ſpeciall praiſe of ſome morall vertue (as namely, Iuſtice, fortitude,

liberalitie, &c.) doe excell others, and are worthily therefore inueſted with the title of deſerued commendation, we doe throughly loue, entierly reuerence, and hartily fauour. And this later is the neereſt & the next cauſe, that wee commonly vſe to reſpect, and to haue regarde vnto. But the former of the twaine is that, which is occaſioned, bredde and brought forth by a ſecrete inſtinct of the Spirite from God: to wit, the mutuall knitting together of myndes, and a like inclination and conformitie of willes. For al true and holy Friendſhip
hath his ground from GOD, in whome it is firmely eſtabliſhed, and by whom only it continueth ſure, ſtedfaſt and permanent.
               
               
                  The ſecond Chapter. Who be fit to lincke together in faſt friendſhip, and betweene what perſons it may be.
                  
                     ALthough many ſortes and kindes of Familiaritie be tearmed by the name of Friendſhip, yet of them all, is there but one onely kinde, that of right may chalenge the name of true Friendſhippe. And this can be among none others, ſauing onely thoſe, which be faithfull and true hearted Chriſtians: ſuch (I ſay) as

are ledde by the Spirite of God, and haue his feare before their eyes.
                  For when Infidelles and vnbeleeuers doe ioyne together in conſent about any matter among themſelues, they doe it either for reward, hyre and gayne ſake: or els for their priuate pleaſures: or finally, for their aduauncement and honours ſake: all which endes are moſt farre from true Friendſhippe. Therefore (I ſay) it can be among none others, thē onely ſuch, as be godly and faithful, and feare the Lord effectually. For there can be neither fellowſhip nor agreement of mynds betwene a beleeuer and an Infidell: yea,2. Cor. 6.14. the Apoſtle Paule warneth vs not to cōpanie with ſuch: but to come out from them, and to ſeparate our ſelues from their familiaritie. Now, although wee bee in ſome ſorte allowed, and not altogether flatly forbidden a certaine kinde of common conuerſation with Infidelles and vnbeleeuers, ſo farre forth as the ſocietie and neceſſitie of this our humaine life for mutuall entercourſe of cōmodities and curteſies one with an other requireth: yet may we not linck our ſelues in that neere familiaritie, or vſe that ordinary companie, and friendly conuerſation with them,1. Cor. 5.1.2. 2. Theſ. 3.14. wherby any inward heartie friendſhip or good liking one of an other may

growe and be engendred. In this godly ſorte was the faſt friendſhip betweene Dauid and Ionathan made and confirmed, which were both of them godly perſons, and fearing the Lord. For like with like (according to the old Prouerbe) doe beſt agree, and are eaſilieſt brought to keepe companie together.
               
               
                  The third Chapter. What true and Christian friendſhip is.
                  
                     WE muſt therefore plainely declare, what true Friendſhip is. Wherein we muſt firſt note the diſtinction and difference that is made betweene fauourable goodwill called Beneuolentia: and perfect Friendſhip tearmed Amicitia. For a fauourable goodwill is that, when men being abſent one from an other, yea, which neuer ſawe one an other, doe yet heartily loue one an other, drawne thereunto by a kinde of admiration of vertue, or ſome notable and ſingular gift of God, which ye one doth perceiue, eſpye and knowe to bee reſiaunt in the other. So, when as Paule had as yet neither ſeene Peter,Gala. 1.18.19. Iames, nor Iohn, yet did he loue thē: and this kind of loue, was this fauourable good

will, and this Beneuolentia, which wee ſpeake of, beeing knitte and combined together betweene perſons abſent.
                  But Friendſhip requireth both the companie, the ſight, and the familiar conuerſation of friends together amōg themſelues. Therfore it is onely among them, which are either daiely conuerſaunt one with an other: or els ſuch as haue aforetyme liued long tyms together. For, familiar conuerſation, and frequent companie keeping, encreaſeth (as the Prouerbe ſaith) this friendſhip, and ſowdreth men together in this indiſſoluble agreement of myndes. Now, Friendſhip is ſuch a kinde of loue and inwarde affection, as that there can not poſſiblie be any greater, and vnto which, there cannot any thing be either added or put vnto more. It requireth therefore a mutuall frequentation and familiar conuerſation, becauſe thereby our goodwill, liking and affection is vſually encreaſed, ſtrengthened, and made greater. In this ſorte was that friendſhip betweene Dauid and Ionathan, not only at the firſt occaſioned and begun, namely, by that their domeſticall and familiar conuerſation at home in Saules houſe: but was alſo thereby much encreaſed and furthered.1. Sam. 18. &. 20.5. For this ſame dailey being in companie together

(which I ſpeake of) or at leaſt,Pſal. 41.9. this often meeting and conference together, doth feede (as it were) this newe kindled fier or flame of ardent affectiō, which burneth alike in the breaſtes of either partie.
                  Neither yet doth friendſhip ceaſſe or vtterly periſh, through abſence, growing vpon iuſt and reaſonable cauſes: as we may ſee in Dauid and Ionathan, whoſe friendſhip cōtinued and laſted ſtill, the one (notwithſtanding) being abſent from the other: for ſuch deepe rooted goodwill, and ſuch ardent affection can not be eaſely quenched. Therefore, Friendſhip being firſt well and ſurely grounded betweene perſons preſent,1. Sam. 23.16. continueth ſtill euen betweene them being abſent: and the further they be aſunder, the greater commonly is the longing deſire of either partie to other: and the more vehemently doth their enflamed myndes encreaſe. But if this abſence and diſcontinuaunce be long deferred, protracted or delayed: or if this Friendſhip were not at the beginning well and throughly ſettled and grounded, then truely (ſuch is the fickle condition and inconſtancie of the worlde now adaies) it is wont commonly either to ſlyde quite away and take his leaue, or at leaſt to waxe cold, and not to haue ſuch great heates

and deſires as before. For Ariſtotle ſaith, and that very truely, Silence and abſence diſſolueth many friendſhips.
                  
                  What is therefore this true and Chriſtian Friendſhip whereof wee now ſpeake? Many men doe bring many reaſons, whereby they goe about (if not altogether and plainly to explicate and at large to diſplaye, yet at leaſt wiſe) to depaynt and ſomewhat to ſhadow out the force and nature thereof. Some therfore define it with too large circumſtaunces, and ſome againe, hemme it in within too narrowe a compaſſe. For they which ſay, that Friendſhip
is a conſent of mindes in all cauſes and all matters whatſoeuer, doe not well aduiſe themſelues, what they ſay: for that, they doe ſtretch the force of Friendſhippe further then they ought to doe. For, there may bee many things, wherein two men or moe doe not alwaies agree together in one, but be of diuers and ſundrie opinions. As namely, they may at ſome tymes agree together to doe ſome good thing, and oftentymes againe, they may conſult together to do ſome things naughtie and wicked: So that in ſuch a caſe, this conſent of mindes in them ought rather to be termed a ſecrete compact, a whiſpering aſſemblie, or a cloſe conference, rather then true

and ſtedfaſt Friendſhip. For they that ſo define Friendſhip, that they make it to be a conſent of goodmē among themſelues, touching their priuate affayres and dealings onely, doe make of Friendſhippe as it were a kinde of Merchandize.
                  But wee doe thinke that Friendſhip may very well be thus defined, if wee ſay, that it is a Pact or Couenaunt made betweene two perſons, (God himſelfe beeing called to witneſſe) wherein they faithfully promiſe, th'one to th'other, mutually to loue, cheriſh, and entierly to conſerue, protect, maintaine and defend one the others perſon, eſtate, and goods, ſo farre foorth as it may lawfully bee done, without breach of God his lawe, or diſhonour to his worde. Which definition being particularly examined, ſhal the better appeare, and be found to carie in it the more certaintie and trueth. Hierome in his 5. Epiſtle doth thus define it: Friendſhippe is a mutuall loue engraffed in the mynde, and a ſtrong linking of the harts together, chaſt, ſincere, and without emulation.
                  And firſt it is called a Pact or Couenant, becauſe in Friendſhippe this ſeemeth to be a thing thereunto ſingularlie and peculiarlie appropriate, that there is alwaies betweene

faithfull vowed Louers, a certaine bargaine or agreement ſolemnely made. So did Ionathan
and Dauid agree and conſent betwene themſelues, making a Couenaunt betweene them, and that not only once, but many times renewed and repeated. For,1. Sam. 18.3. &. 20.8. &. 17. & 23 18. 1. Cor. 1.10. as loue and charitie doth generally commaūd and will euery one of vs to bee knit together in a moſt firme conſent of myndes and agreement of iudgements: ſo ſpecially & namely in true Friendſhip, it is among Friends moſt chiefly required, that their faithfull hearts and true affections may not bee ſmoothered in ſecrecie, or kept vnknowne, but be apparaunted, made open and manifeſted.
                  For, ſuch is the force and efficacie of this loue and affection which knitteth and linketh them together, that it will not in any wiſe bee hidd, but will breake foorth into open ſhewe. Wherby it commeth to paſſe, that the one vttereth and teſtifieth to the other, what affection raigneth in him, and what deſire he hath to bee loued againe of the other, whom he ſo ardently fauoureth. Among other kindes of men, the mutuall goodwill that one beareth to an other may many tymes be kept ſecrete and vnuttered: But betweene Friends it can not in any caſe ſo be. Therefore they doe vſe

this teſtification of their mutual affection and will, as it were, the liuely voyce of both their hearts, and the firmer bond and ſtrōger Buttreſſe for perpetuitie and continuaunce.
                  Now, the name of God is vſed, and in this caſe called to witneſſe, becauſe he is the true Author and very Fountaine of al firme, faithfull and ſtedfaſt Friendſhip, without whom no maner of Friendſhip can be good, godlie, or commēdable. For a higher, greater, mightier or ſurer witneſſe, pledge, or token, of their inward minde and will, then God himſelf is, can they haue none: and therefore doe they reuerently in this behalf, and for this purpoſe call him as Witneſſe to their Cōſcience and proteſtatiō. And what better witneſſe of their profeſſed promiſe can they bring then God himſelfe? Whoſe name or authoritie can they vſe, that can and wil more ſeuerely and ſharply puniſh their breach and contempt, then he? For, their deſire and wiſhe is, that the couenant, pact, league, promiſe, vowe, proteſtation agreeement and conſent ſo betweene them mutually made, and enterchaungeablie receiued and taken, ſhould not be for a tyme but for euer: not momentanie, but perpetuall: not fleeting and fading, but permanent and ſtable. For this intent therefore (I ſay) doe they

vſe and enterpoſe the name of God, building their matters vpon him, who is the ſtrongeſt and ſureſt foundation. And thus doe we reade that Ionathan and Dauid knit their Friendſhip & made their couenaunt before the Lord.1. Sam. 23.18.
                  
                  It is further alſo written of the ſame Ionathan, that he gaue vnto Dauid, as a pledge, bonde or pawne of their newe begon Friendſhippe, not onely the ſolemne cyting of the name of God, but alſo other viſible giftes and outward teſtifications, to wit, his Robe,1. Sa. 18.3. Girdle, Sword, Bowe, and ſuch other garments and furniture, as at that tyme he had: for ſuch heartie curteſies maketh men, not onely the mindfuller, but alſo more religious keepers and obſeruers of their promiſe and couenant.
                  It is ſaid in the definition to be betweene two: becauſe neuer or very ſeldome is firme and faſt Friendſhip among moe then twaine. And therefore for the preſeruing of it ſtable, ſtedfaſt and vnuiolated, there muſt not a third be taken into this knot of true Friendſhippe. Now, whereas it is written of Dionyſius King of Sicile, that he earneſtly requeſted to be taken into the perfect bond of ſincere amitie together with Damon & Pythias, it maketh nothing againſt this our ſaying. For, there was no ſuch nere coniunction of mynds

with him, as was betweene them two them ſelues, the one with the other: but it was rather an admiration of that moſt rare Friendſhip and ſurpaſſing goodwill of men among themſelues: which vnto a moſt mightie King ſeemed admirable, happie and entierly to bee wiſhed for, and which alſo ſeemed farre ſafer and bleſſedder then that his royall eſtate and condition. So were Ionathan and Dauid friendes together, being but onely two. For, Friendſhip betweene moe then two, groweth out of eſtimation, looſeth of his dignitie and price, is contemned and leſſe accoumpted of, and in trueth forfaiteth his wonted force and proper vertue.
                  It followeth in the definition: Of mutually louing, defending, cheriſhing, & mainteyning one an other. For theſe be the very chiefeſt and principalleſt effects of Friendſhip, that ſuch as bee true friendes in deede, muſt mutually loue one the other, and that not faynedlie and clokedlie, but euen truely and ſincerely: and becauſe of ſuch their mutuall ſinceritie and true loue, they doe alſo mutually defend, cheriſh, maintaine and protect one an other.
                  Laſt of all, there is added in the definition: ſo farte foorth as may lawfully bee done

without offence to GOD, or diſhonor to his moſt glorious Maieſtie. Wherein be ſet downe the endes whereunto, and the bounds how farre Friendſhip may ſtretch: beyond which bounds it is not in any wiſe lawfull to paſſe. So that hereby we ſee three eſpeciall poyntes moſt neceſſarie and behoouefull for the better explication and further opening of the force, vertue, efficacie & nature of Frendſhippe, namely, to bee heere opened, handled and diſcuſſed, viz.
                  
                  
                     1 The ſcope and marke whereat Frends doe ayme.
                     2 The very effects of Friendſhip.
                     
                     3 The Endes and bounds that muſt bee layed out: and of Frindes in their Friendſhip to be kept and obſerued.
                  
                  Which three poynts I purpoſe here particularly to proſecute, after that I haue firſt laied downe myne opinion and iudgement of this queſtion: Whether an holie, firme and neere friendſhip, lincked and vowed betwene certaine godly and faithfull perſons, bee any way repugnaunt to that charge and Commaundement of our heauenly Father, touching the louing of all men in generall.
               
               
                  
                  The fourth Chapter. Contayning a question: Whether the lawe of Friendſhip doe any whit oppugne the generall Commaundement of God, touching loue and charitie to all men.
                  
                     FIrſt, ſuch men as holde opinion that there is herein a repugnācie, doe alledge two reaſons: The one is, The generall Commaundement of God,Rom. 13.8 wherby we are charged to loue one an other. Now, if it bee lawfull for ſome particular perſons to contract within them ſelues a kinde of more ſtreict and nere amitie then with others, then thinke they, that this generall Rule of louing all men indifferently, is tranſgreſſed and broken.
                  Their ſecond reaſon is this: Our dueties, (commaunded and enioyned vnto vs in that generall Commaundement of Loue) ought to bee ſo great towards all men, yea towards our very Enemies, that greater, better, or faithfuller can there not, ne poſſiblie ought there to be ſhewed vnto thoſe, whom wee call and tearme Friendes. What force or effect then (ſay they) is there in this ſingular and ſpeciall goodwill, mutuall agreement and inward Friendſhippe onely betwene ſome two,Mat. 5.44.
                     
and no moe? By theſe two Arguments they thinke this ſame neere bond, infringible conſent, firme loue and ſingular force of ſpeciall Friendſhip is encountred and taken away: becauſe it maketh vs (ſay they) the more remiſſe, negligent and ſlacke to loue, ayde, aſſiſt and relieue others, which are not ſo faſtlie ioyned in heart vnto vs: & becauſe thereupon wee haue more minde to pleaſe and benefite thoſe whom we haue ſpecially choſen for our deare and neere Friends: letting all others (in a maner) to paſſe by, without any helpe at our handes at all.
                  For anſwere whereunto, we ſay,Anſwere. that there be other, and the ſame moſt ſtrong and inuincible Arguments to confirme, approue, eſtabliſh and warrant this ſpeciall kinde of entier Amitie among men: prouing the ſame to bee to the godlie not onely lawful and allowable, but alſo honeſt, lawdable and neceſſarie.
                  Firſt, the authoritie of the Sacred Scriptures, which teacheth vs that wee ought to loue ſuch as wee admit and receiue into our inward Friendſhip. And therfore the Spirite of GOD, thundreth out threates,Pſal. 41.9. Pſal. 55.21 Iſaiah. 3.5. Mic. 7.5.6. Eccl. 22.25 comminations and puniſhments againſt violaters and breakers of this inward amitie and profeſſion of ſpeciall Loue.
                  
                     Secondly, the example of godly men, who both publiquely and priuately haue ſundrie tymes ſolēnely entred into, & religiouſly with mutuall conſent profeſſed this neere & ſtrict bond of Amitie. Which deede and purpoſe of theirs, God himſelf both praiſeth and alſo ſetteth the ſame forth vnto vs, as a patterne to imitate.1. Sam. 18.3. &. 19.1. In this ſorte were Dauid and Ionathan lincked together in a moſt firme bonde of perfect Friendſhip. And thoſe couenants which among Kinges and Princes and high Eſtates are called Leagues, are among priuate perſons tearmed Amitie. But Leagues are allowable and warrantable by the lawe of God:1. Kin. 4.5. And therfore Amitie and Friendſhip alſo.
                  Thirdly, Nature her ſelf: together with the common ſpeach and ſettled opinion of al Nations: for there is no people but highly extolleth the vertue of Frendſhip, and hath deuiſed notable ſentences of praiſe in condemnation thereof: as namely this: Wee haue no leſſe neede for the vſe of this life of Friendſhip, then we haue of water and fier. Notablie and excellently is the ſame diſcourſed vpon, and cōmēded vnto vs in their learned works, both by Ariſtotle and Cicero. And it is the common receiued opinion and vſuall tearme

of Nature, & of all people of the world generallie: againſt the which, whoſoeuer reſiſteth and againe ſaieth, ſpeaketh euen againſt his owne Conſcience.
                  Finally, theſe former Arguments of the againſayers, are vnſufficient and prooue nothing: becauſe they may both of them be eaſily anſwered and quickly confuted. As firſt, I ſay and anſwere that (by entring into a certaine hearty and inward friendſhip with ſome one particuler perſon) the generall Commaundement and Precept of almightie God is neither hindred nor taken away. For, God himſelf who teacheth vs to loue all men, hath (notwithſtanding) by his Lawe appoynted certaine degrees of Loue, for vs to followe, whereby wee are to loue ſome more tenderly and dearely then other ſome. For, he willeth vs not to yeeld alike and equall loue vnto all men indifferently and without reſpect:Gen. 2.24. Mat. 19.5. Ephe. 5.25. Col. 3.20. Gal. 6.10. ſeeing that, wee are commaunded to loue our wife more then our parents: our Children aboue Straungers: and them which bee of the houſhold of Faith, more then Infidels. Seeing therefore in reſpect of conſanguinitie, kindred and proximitie of bloud, it is lawfull for vs to make a difference, by louing our neereſt friendes more ardently and with greater

affection then others: and to diſcerne betwene the inwarde heartie loue which wee beare to them, and the common generall loue which vniuerſallie we beare to all others: why may wee not alſo bee allowed the ſame, in reſpect of our vowed promiſe, ſworne couenant and profeſſed Amitie? And our Sauiour Ieſus Chriſt,Ioh. 21.20. &. cha. 13.23. being the patterne of all true Loue, is ſaied to haue loued Iohn aboue all the reſt of his Diſciples.
                  Their ſecond Argument is vaine, and friuolous. They demaund this queſtion: what is there left for any ſpeciall Friendſhip, when as all men in generall (yea our very Enemies) ought of vs to be vnfaynedly loued? To whom let this briefly ſuffice for anſwere: that albeit we loue all, and ſhewe our ſelues ready and willing to helpe, relieue and defend all: yet be ſome more ſpecially commended vnto our care then other ſome. Therfore the goodlieſt and fayreſt fruite of Loue, is this noble vertue Friendſhip.
                  
               
               
                  The fifth Chapter. To what ſcope and drift true friendſhippe tendeth.
                  THE common & vulgar ſorte of men ioyne together in friendſhip, one with an other

for many conſiderations and for ſundry endes & purpoſes. For either they knit themſelues in league together in reſpect of ſome priuate gayne, commoditie and profite that the one hopeth to reape by the other: or els for ſome reſpect of pleaſure: or finally becauſe they ſeeke thereby to attaine ſome preferment honour, dignitie, praiſe or countenaunce. The true Chriſtian friend of whom we here ſpeake is farre from any of theſe endes: neither reſpecteth he any of all theſe aforeſayd purpoſes: but his chiefe and principall drift is, that in this his Friendſhip, God ſpecially may be truely honored, and his Neighbour vnfainedly loued. For, this onely thing doe al the godlie ſpecially care for, and this marke doe they in the whole courſe of their loue chiefly ayme and ſhoote at.
                  But as there may be aſſigned many endes and ſcopes wherefore Friendſhip is ſought for and concluded among men: ſo is there one ſpeciall, and (as it were) a proper, chiefe and peculiar ende thereof. And that is this: looke whome GOD hath adorned and bleſſed with ſome ſpeciall giftes aboue others, and therby mooued vs to haue the ſame partie for his rare qualities in admiration, vnto ſuch an one doe we willingly adioyne our ſelues, and

with him deſire wee moſt gladly to enter into entier familiaritie.
                  The firſt meanes therefore, that firmely knitteth this moſte friendly agreement of mindes together, is the will of God, which mooueth and draweth our hearts ſo to doe. And next is the admiration of the rare vertues and ſingular giftes, which we ſee in an other: in ſo much that we earneſtly deſire (becauſe of the ſame) to bee in his companie, to haue his vnfained loue, and to ſtand aſſuredly in his fauour. And becauſe we commonly admire and moſt eſpecially loue thoſe vertues, wherein wee chiefly take moſt delight, and whereunto we feele in our ſelues by God his good gift, ſome ſparkes and inclinations: it commeth therfore to paſſe thereby, that there is ſeene in thoſe that enter into this faſt bond of friendſhip, a ſimilitude and likeneſſe of maners and affections, the one with the other: and that being thus linked together, they doe (by a certaine inwarde teſtimonie and ſecrete iudgement) retaine one and the ſame conſent in all things, and ſtill iumpe together in one opinion.
                  This third cauſe therefore for the procuring and piecing of firme and true Friendſhip, is of moſt excellent force, and beareth

moſt effectuall ſway, I meane, the ſimilitude of maners, and like delight in ſtudies and affections. For, to will and iuſt alike, (that is to ſay, what the one willeth, the other to will the ſame: and what the other nilleth, the other to be alike affected,) is firme and ſtedfaſt Friendſhip. Friendes therefore commonly take delight in thinges alike, and chiefly for the moſt parte frame themſelues by natures conduction and inclination, vnto the loue and ſtudie of one and the ſelfe ſame vertue.
                  The firſt foundation therefore of Friendſhip, is grounded vpon likenes of ſtudies and ſimilitude of maners. For, in that we hope to be defended, maintained and protected by our friendes: in that, we our ſelues deſire to be amiable and admirable to the good and godly: in that, finally we ſeeke a faithfull companiō and helper, vnto whome to impart our whole deuiſes and counſailes, all theſe are rather effects of true Friendſhip, then ends thereof. Certes, in that firme and faſt agreement of mynds betweene Dauid and Ionathan, there was none other ſcope or ende reſpected, then this which we here mention.
                  As touching that ſentence of our Sauiour Chriſt, Make you friendes of the vnrighteous Mammon,
                     1. Sa. 18.3. Luc. 16.9. it is not to bee otherwiſe vnderſtood,

then that we muſt learne to beſtowe our wealth and money better, then the common ſorte of men doe: namely vpon the poore and needie, which may commēd vs vnto God by their prayers: and not vpon the rich and wealthie, whom we commonly (notwithſtanding) are more readie to pleaſure and benefite. To conclude therefore with Cicero: Where is this holy Amitie & godly Friendſhip, if the partie whom wee profeſſe to loue and chooſe to our friende, bee not truely, ſincerely, vnfainedly, and onely for himſelfe and by himſelfe, ardently, affectionatly, and hartily loued?Lib. 1. de 
                           •
                        ragib.
                  
               
               
                  The ſixt Chapter. Of the effects of true Friendſhip.
                  THere bee three eſpeciall effects of true Friendſhip: to witte, mutuall loue in God: an holie conſent of myndes: and an interchaungeable or reciprocall defence, maintenaunce, aſſiſtaunce and protection one of an other to the vttermoſt of abilitie and power.
                  Firſt, as touching Loue: It is an affection of the heart, by the which wee eſpecially loue ſome one, more thē others: wiſhing vnto him

all welfare and proſperous ſucceſſe. And this Loue is called Dilectio, as who ſhould ſay, Delectio, which ſignifieth a choyſe or an electiō & culling out: & the word Diligere to loue, is ſo named of an other like worde Deligere, which ſignifieth to pick or chooſe out: becauſe that party whō we tenderly loue, we ſpecially pick and chooſe out frō among all others, and haue a ſpeciall care and deſire for his well doing and proſperitie more then for all others beſides. Therefore we loue all men in a generalitie, but we tenderly and affectionatly embrace but fewe, or but ſome one onely, or paraduenture none at all. For there is a greater vehemencie, and a more effectuall ſignification in this word Diligere, then there is in the word Amare, although to loue be the ſignification both of the one and the other: which difference is wel noted by that moſt eloquent Marcus Cicero in one of his familiar Epiſtles, written to Paetus.
                  
                  Whereby wee may ſee, that force and violēce is not the way to procure and knit firme Friendſhip betweene parties: nor yet feare: but rather a free choyſe of the mynde, and an hartie good liking toward ſome peculiar perſon, vpon whom (God ſo diſpoſing our heart) wee franklie and in full meaſure beſtowe the

whole zeale of our entier fauour. For, a man that enrolleth himſelfe once in the Regiſter of a perfect and ſincere friend, doth ſo effectuouſly and dearely loue his friend, that he euen accoumpteth and acknowledgeth him, as an other himſelfe: and wiſheth no better in any reſpect to himſelfe, then he doth vnto that his newe choſen Friend. For, if there ſhould bee allowed neuer ſo little difference herein, the name of Frendſhippe were vtterly gone and quight quayled, and might no longer enioye that title:Lib. 1. de tragib. as the ſame Cicero no leſſe eloquently then truely hath ſet downe.
                  For, ſuch is the force of Friendſhip, that whenſoeuer a man wiſheth any better happe to himſelf, then he doth to his friend, it by & by ceaſſeth and dyeth. And ſuch effect doth this Loue worke in the mynds of faithful frendes, that the one reioyceth at ye proſperous eſtate and welfare of the other: and contrariwiſe, ſoroweth and is greatly greeued at his miſhap and aduerſitie: euen as wee ſee, came to paſſe in Ionathan,
                     1. Sam. 20. verſ 34. &. 41. who greatly ſorowed at the calamitie and affliction of Dauid. Yea, ſo mightie is the force of this Loue and coniunction of myndes, that they weepe together, and reioyce together.
                  Finally, when a man is faithfully profeſſed

in this league of ſincere and true Friendſhip, he preferreth and more eſteemeth his friende then he doth any other whomſoeuer: and beareth vnto him a farre greater affection and zeale then to all other men, (for ſo ſeemed Ionathan to preferre his deare friende Dauid before his owne naturall father) ſo farre forth as Gods glorie is not thereby eclipſed, nor his holy will and commaundement wilfully tranſgreſſed. For, he be wrayed and opened his fathers ſecrete counſell vnto Dauid, and tried out by deuiſes, what his fathers purpoſe ſayinges and meaninges were toward him: yea,1. Sam. 20.4. &. 9. this Ionathan feared not a whit to diſcouer and opē vnto him ſuch practiſes as greatly ſounded to the ſhame and reproach of his owne father King Saule.
                  
                  This ſo vehement mutuall Loue, breedeth likewiſe among friendes a mutuall conſent and an holy agreement of mynds in al things yea, it ingendreth alſo betweene thē a ſweete pleaſure and lōging deſire of the one toward the other. And the further that they bee aſunder by diſtaunce of place, the more ardently do they deſire and long the one for the other: as it were, one entier Soule, being ſeparated and vehemently deſiring the other halfe of it ſelfe being abſent. Finally, the neerer they be

together, the more is ye flame of their inward mutuall affection inkindled, and through daily conuerſing together, is ſtill made ſweeter, and pleaſaunter.
                  This kinde of vehement Affection is not lightly ſeene among any other perſons: for it commonly falleth out, that this daily conuerſation and frequent familiaritie together, breedeth and ſoweth among them either flat hatred, or at leaſt apparant contempt. But betweene Frendes it is the meanes that bindeth and tyeth them the ſurer and the faſter together. For, their naturall diſpoſitions ſo rightly agree together, that what the one thinketh good, the other thinketh not amiſſe: and in all things they commonly retaine one and the ſelfe ſame iudgement, ſtriuing within themſelues, whether of them may ſurmount and ouercome the other in curteſies and benefites.
                  They drawe moreouer in one equall yoke, they haue one will, one minde, one purpoſe and meaning, whereby their mutuall conſent in all reſpects is not onely inuiolably conſerued, but alſo much the more encreaſed. Therfore there is no iarring, no diſſenſion, no brawling, no chyding, no contention, no froward ouerthwarting betweene them that be

friendes in deede: but the one beareth with the other: the one yeeldeth to the other: in giuing of honour the one goeth before the other: the one not ſo wedded to his opinion, but that he ſuffreth himſelf to be eaſily perſuaded or diſſuaded by the other, ſo farre as the honor of God is not thereby any way empayred or emblemiſhed.
                  The third and laſt effect of true Friendſhip, is the interchangeable curteſie, defence, protection, aſſiſtaunce, ayde, maintenance and conſeruation to the very vttermoſt of abilitie and power, of one Friend for an other: with no leſſe care for his preſeruation, ſafetie, preferment, commoditie, and all other benefites whatſoeuer, both touching himſelfe, and alſo all them that depend vpon him.
                  For, if by that ſocietie & loue which ought to bee betweene all the godlie among them ſelues, we accoumpt thoſe that by nature are ioyned and lincked vnto vs as our owne, and doe ſtudie which way wee may doe them any good, either in mainteyning them with neceſſaries, or defending them frō extremities: how much more ought one Frend to be carefull for the good eſtate and welfare of an other, and to accoumpt him as his owne, yea as himſelfe: ſpecially hauing vowed and promiſed

(and that with an oth) ſo to doe? Therfore he will bee readie in trueth to ſay and to promiſe the ſame that Dauid ſpake and vowed to Abiathar:
                     
                        
                           •
                        . Som. 22.23. 
                     He that ſeeketh thy life, ſhall ſeeke my life alſo. Their Gueſtes, their familiars, their friendes, and their enemies ſhal be common betweene them, and no more to the one then to the other. And to conclude: All things among friendes (according to the olde Prouerbe) are common.
                  Chiefly, principally and afore all thinges, the one ought to haue an eſpeciall care for the ſaluation and ſoule health of the other: next, for the ſafetie and welfare of the bodie: and thirdly, for their other goodes ioyntly appertayning vnto them, either in common, in the right of faithfull Friendſhip: (of which ſorte be worldly goodes, Cattaile, money, wealth, and the francke vſe thereof at either of their pleaſures) or els priuately and ſingularly belonging vnto the one of them: as for example, his wife. Therfore, if the one ſhall vnderſtand of any conſpiracie or practiſe deuiſed, imagined, or intended to the hurte and hinderaunce of the other, he will diſcouer and reueale it. For ſo dealt Ionathan toward Dauid.
                     1. Sam. 19.2. &. 20. verſ. 2.12.
                  
                  They will alſo hazard themſelues the one for the other, and put themſelues in preſent

daunger for their defence and reſcue, aſwell in their abſence as in their preſence.1. Sa. 1.20.30. Ioh. 15.13. For ſo did Ionathan put himſelfe into moſt apparant perill for his faithfull friend Dauid. In al reſpects, and at all aſſaies they are helpfull and aſſiſtaunt, the one to the other.
                  To conclude, by their moſt friendly and ſyncere admonitions, aduiſes, aſſiſtaunce and ayde (ſo farre as by the warrant of the Word of God and of a good Conſcience is lawfull) they vnfaynedly relieue, ſuccour, helpe, cheriſh, comfort, encourage, maintaine, nouriſh, cheere vp and ſuſtaine the one the other. For, Friendes doe mutually helpe the one the other, either with their wealth and goodes: or els with their aduiſe and counſell: or finally with their trauaile, and labour.
                  In their giuing of counſaile, and aduiſe, or in their admonitions and frendly directions, one Friend doth not flatter an other: neither doth he cōceale and hide from him, if he eſpye and knowe in him any faultes worthie of reprehenſion. For, Chriſtian Friendſhip tendeth vnto, and reſpecteth the aduauncement of Gods glorie, and not the foſtring and nouriſhing of men in their errors. He that is a godly friend, remembreth and vſeth this notable ſentence of Phocion the Athenian:

                     Thou canſt not haue mee to bee both a Flatterer, and a Friend to thee alſo.
                  
                  For a Flatterer and a Friend doe not onely differ in deed and in name: but ſure and certaine it is, that Flatterie is the rankeſt poyſon & the moſt daungerous plague to Frendſhippe that poſſiblie can bee. The which, although it carie an outward ſhewe of great affection and ſyncere goodwill, yet (doubtleſſe) doth it vtterly vndoe the bond of Friendſhip, vtterly weaken and enfeeble his ſtrength, and vtterly each way deſtroye and marre the nature thereof. For, the Flatterer reſembleth and counterfaiteth the wordes of an vnfained Friend, but not his honeſt mynde, neither his ſyncere loue, nor his true hearted Affection.
                  Moreouer, all theſe three poyntes aboue ſpecified, ought among Freendes to bee common. For, Friendes not onely ſtraine them ſelues mutually to requite curteſies, but alſo in theſe their curteſies, couet the one to ſurmount & paſſe, yea, & to preuēt (as much as in them is) the one the other. And therfore theſe perfourmances of mutuall Loue, of mutuall Conſent, & of mutuall Defence, Protection and Aſsiſtaunce, bee actions enterchaungeable, and reciprocall. But yet not ſo, as that a Friend ſhould purpoſelie beſtowe a curteſie

vpon his Friend, in hope of as good a turne or as large a benefite at his handes againe: (for no other godly honeſt man extendeth his loue and charitie toward his neighbour, mercenarywiſe, or as it were, letting and fearming it out for hyre and gaine) but becauſe the force and nature of Friendſhip is ſuch, that it will not haue theſe things otherwiſe, then mutually and reciprocally returnable.
                  All curteſies therefore are betweene them giuen, taken, reſtored, and requited mutually: howbeit (and let this bee well noted) not alwaies alike, not alwaies equally, nor in ſemblable proportion. For many tymes the one receiueth at the handes of the other, more curteſie and greater benefite, then he is able againe in the like meaſure to requite and repay: either by reaſon of the great oddes of the eſtate and condition of friendes, or els for the difference of their wealth and abilitie. As for example: the one peraduenture is very rich, the other poore: the one fortunate, the other miſerable: the one exiled and baniſhed, the other liuing at home in his natiue Countrey. But (all theſe notwithſtanding) he that hath leſſe ſtoare and ſmaller pittaunce of abilitie, although (perchaunce) he requite not ſo amplie and beneficially as hee receiued, yet requiteth

hee and returneth as much as he is able. Wherevpon I ſay, that curteſies and benefites among Friendes, are alwaies mutuall and enterchangeable, but yet not alwaies alike and equall, as appeareth in Ionathan and Dauid.
                     1. Sam. 20.41.
                  
                  Yea, Friends doe not onely mutually protect, defend and maintaine one an others perſon, credite, ſtate, wealth and poſſeſſions, but alſo (as much as they are able) procure the ſame to bee bettered and augmented. And therefore there is no maner of rancorous enuie or ſpightful diſdaine betweene them. For there is not a greater nor a certainer plague, nor a more fretting Canker vnto ſyncere and true Frendſhip (next to Adulation and Flatterie) then is Spight and Enuie.
               
               
                  The ſeuenth Chapter. The right Ends of true and Christian Frendſhippe.
                  
                     IN diſcuſſing the Boundes and Endes of true and Chriſtian Friendſhip, there bee two eſpeciall poynts to bee decided, that are commōly brought into queſtion. The firſt is, of the Tyme: how long it

ought to remaine and bee continued. The ſecond, of the maner and way how it ought to be obſerued, retayned and kept: that is to ſay, what, how farre and how much one friend is to perfourme and to doe for an other.
                  Cōcerning the firſt, which is of the Tyme: let this ſtand for a definitiue and reſolute anſwere, that (if the ſyncere vowe and vnfained goodwill of them that godly enter into this Chriſtian league of Friendſhip be aduiſedly conſidered) it ought to be endleſſe, and to continue betweene them perpetually, euen ſo long as they both ſhall liue in this world.
                  And yet many tymes without any fault of theirs, by ſome caſuall error and miſhappe, it may ſo fall out, that there may be good cauſe, either vtterly to renounce and breake of, or at leaſt to withdrawe and relent Friendſhippe. For, what if the one of the Friendes ſhould renye his faith, and of a faithfull beleeuer, become a faithleſſe Infidell? and of a Chriſtian become a Turke or a Pagan? Certes, in this caſe all Friendſhip is vtterly to be forſaken, and all Amitie (if after ſundrie exhortations and admonitions hee ſtill perſiſt in his obſtinate miſcreancie) muſt be quight renounced. Howbeit, ſuch a greeuous Apoſtacie and ſuch an horrible backſliding, breedeth in the mynd

of a Friend, no ſmall heauineſſe and ſorowe, yea, and many tymes alſo cauſeth him for a tyme to ſuſpende his determination, and to linger ſome while in hope of amendment and repentance. For, euen ſo likewiſe, at the death of our Friend, (although wee verily beleeue and reſt aſſured that his ſoule is receiued into euerlaſting bliſſe) yet doe wee ſorowe and lament,1. Sa. 1.26. and that ſometyme very much, as wee may ſee in Dauid. But yet muſt wee obeye the lawes of God and of our frailtie: Leaſt otherwiſe, wee ſhould (like the olde Gyaunts) goe about to make warre againſt God, or irreligiouſly to preferre our owne affections before the feare of the Lord our maker.
                  Therfore, there may oftentymes be giuen moſt iuſt occaſion to breake and renounce Friendſhip: but yet the vowe and purpoſe at the firſt, ought ſo ſyncerely to be made and intended, as that it ſhould laſt, continue, and be retayned for euer. And therefore that tearme and ſentence which by ſome is vſed, is moſt beaſtly and reprooueable: Loue, as though thou ſhouldeſt one day hate. Which ſentence and aduiſe, if it ſhould preuaile and bee allowed, then farewell all faſt Friendſhip: for then is all the force, pith and ſtrength thereof vaniſhed: then bee all the ſynewes of it looſed

and weakened: and all that firme truſt and aſſured opinion yt ought to be among Frendes, (ſafely, boldly and willingly to impart and cōmunicate together their myndes one with an other, and one to reueale and open his ſecretes vnto an other) is vtterly daſhed and put to flight. For why? neither will they, neither dare they aduenture ſo to doe, for feare of afterclappes.
                  Finally, to the ende they may thankfully, pleaſantly, truſtily and boldly liue together, this ſilthie Deuiliſh tearme of diffidence and diſtruſt (Loue, as though thou ſhouldeſt one day hate) muſt bee quight baniſhed and vtterly remoued out of their mynds: although (as I ſaid afore) it may ſometyme ſo fall out, that we may and ought to hate thoſe whom aforetyme wee haue right dearely loued: but this thing happeneth contrary to the hope, deſire and wiſh of Friendes. Therefore let this ſentēce of truſt and good opinion rather take place & be heard, Loue, as though thou ſhouldeſt neuer hate.
                  
                  So long therefore, as thoſe two Friendes doe liue together, they ought in heart & vowe to cōſerue, keepe and maintaine their Frendſhippe with all maner of behoouefull curteſies: and not to conceiue ſo much, as any ſuſpition,

either of breaking, or vtter diſſoluing thereof. For this courſe doe they ſtill take, that are true and faithfull Friendes within themſelues.
                  But there is an other queſtion here moued: When the one of the Friendes is dead, what ought the other Frend being aliue, to do with the deceaſed parties Children? and how is he in reſpect of the Friendſhippe which hee bare to their father, to deale with them? and whether, the ſame Friendſhippe ought to be continued towarde the Children of him beeing dead or no?
                  Truely, it very well ſtandeth with the rule of Equitie and Reaſon, that as Children bee heyres of their fathers Landes and Goodes, ſo alſo to enherite their fathers Friendſhip: accordingly as Iſocrates writing to Demonicus hath moſt excellently ſet downe. Becauſe among the fathers Goodes, his Frendſhip is alſo reckened, and is many times farre better and profitabler, then al the enheritance that the Father leaueth or can bequeath vnto his Children. And to ſuch effect commonly, is Friendſhip embraced and entred into, with an heartie deſire and affectionate vowe of the Parents: that the fruite thereof may redound and bee continued euen vnto their poſteritie

and Children.
                  Thus did the Friendſhip betweene Ionathan and Dauid reach and extend vnto the Children of Ionathan.
                     2. Sam. 9. verſ. 1. &. 7 1. Sam. 20. verſ. 15. & 42. Which although it may ſeeme to bee done by Pact and Couenaunt, at the firſt agreed vpon betwene them: yet (doubtleſſe) is this euer included in the wiſh and deſire of all Friendes, that the fruict of their mutuall Friendſhippe and loue, ſhould alſo after a ſorte appertaine and be entailed vnto their children: for that, euery godly and faithfull perſon hath ſpeciall reſpect to prouide, not onely for himſelfe, but alſo for his Children & thoſe that depend on him. Therefore are both the Wife and Children of the deceaſſed Friend to be tenderly loued, and all other thinges beſides, that appertained vnto him: yea, the very Dogges and the Cattaile that belonged vnto him: and all this, through an inward affection of hearty goodwil borne vnto the late owner, and by the law and duetie of perfect Friendſhippe: Howbeit not in ſuch meaſure and proportion as the partie Friend himſelfe being deceaſſed: but the exceeding great loue & vehement zeale of their late firme Amitie and ſtedfaſt coniunction liueth ſtill in the breaſt of him that remayneth aliue, and ſendeth foorth many ſparkes of his

vnfayned loue, whereſoeuer he beholdeth and is brought into godly remembraunce of his deceaſſed Frend, by his true and liuely Images, which be his Children left behinde.
                  Hereupon there groweth yet an other queſtion, about that gift of Goodes, which Dauid beſtowed on Ziba the ſeruant of Mephiboſheth: which (gift notwithſtanding that he was afterward better enfourmed of ye trueth of the matter, and of Ziba his treacherous infidelitie towarde his Maiſter): yet did he not wholly and entierly reuoke. For, the Goodes which in right belōged vnto Mephiboſheth (who was the Sonne of Ionathan,) he gaue vnto Ziba: whereas he had afore, in remembraunce of his Friend Ionathan appoynted the ſame vnto this his Sonne, and had giuen commaundement that the ſame ſhould be aſſigned and aſſured vnto him: thereby to ſhewe himſelfe thankfull and myndfull of the firme Friendſhippe betweene himſelfe, and Ionathan,
                     2. Sam. 9. verſ. 7. father of the ſayd Mephiboſheth. Yet Dauid being afterwards ſuttly beguiled and craftily deceiued by Ziba, reuoked his former gift made to Mephiboſheth, and tooke away from him,2. Sam. 16. verſ. 4. all that he had afore beſtowed vpon him.
                  Now, the queſtion is this, whether this laſt

fact of Dauid may bee defended: or how can hee any wayes bee excuſed, but that he dealt herein, directly and flatly againſt the lawes and endes of true Friendſhip?
                  
                  Firſt and formoſt, when as the ſame Dauid
might eaſilie haue eſpyed the falſhood of Ziba, and how cunningly he had bene deceiued and circumuented by his treacherie and falſe tales: yet ſhewed hee not ſo much fauour and compaſſion vnto his deare Friendes Sonne, as either ſeuerely to puniſh and ſharpelie reuenge ſo notable a villanie and fraudulent coſenage, wrought againſt him by his owne ſeruaunt:2. Sam. 19. verſ. 29. nor yet to reſtore vnto him all his Goodes againe.
                  Certes, in this caſe, (as I thinke) Dauid cannot at any hand bee excuſed, but that hee greatly offended and ſinned, and that moe waies then one: to wit, firſt in reſpect of being a King: and ſecondly as being the profeſſed and ſworne Friende of Ionathan the father of this Mephiboſheth.
                  
                  In that, he was a King, his office and duetie had beene to haue puniſhed and reuenged the open treacherie and manifeſt falſhood of the Seruaunt againſt his Lord and Maiſter. And in that he was a Friend: his duetie had bene to haue relieued & protected the Sonne

of his deceaſſed Friend, being ſhamefully abuſed and lewdly deceiued through the fraude of his owne Seruaunt, and pitifully deſpoyled of all his Goodes by him that was his Vaſſall. His office and duetie (I ſaye) had bene, in remembraunce of the great Friendſhippe betweene him and Ionathan, to haue defended and ſupported his Sonne being oppreſſed and afflicted: and being well able, to haue reſtored him to his fathers inheritance.
                  But in that, Dauid neglected and omitted ſo to doe, ſurely therein he is worthy of great reprehenſion, and to be deemed and accoumpted as one vtterly vnmyndfull of his office and duetie. Furthermore to haue tranſgreſſed the Boundes, and to haue ſinned againſt the lawes of true Friendſhip, yea and quight to haue forgotten both his promiſe and the benefites which he had afore receiued. Therefore this fact of Dauid is not by any that are profeſſed Friendes to be imitated and followed, neither to be drawne into example.
                  If any man to excuſe Dauid, will ſay: that becauſe he had bound himſelf by an Oath, and had now alreadie giuen the ſame Goodes vnto Ziba, that therefore he could not lawfully call backe his promiſe: the anſwere hereunto is eaſilie ſhaped. For Dauid had afore giuen

the very ſame Goodes vnto Mephiboſheth: and therefore in that partition of them which hee graunted to bee equally made betweene them both, hee cleared not himſelfe from the Conſcience of his Oath before God. For, he ſware alſo vnto Ziba, that he would giue vnto him all the whole Goodes of Mephiboſheth, and not a moytie or portion of them onely. And yet he aſſigned vnto him but onely a part, and tooke an other part away from him. And therefore, euen in this ſame partition, Dauid brake his Oath, and therein is he manifeſtly culpable afore God, for taking his Diuine name in vaine.
                  To be ſhort, there can no excuſe bee pretended, nor any reaſon (as I thinke) alledged, whereby Dauid in this caſe can bee cleared either frō the foule fault of breach of Friendſhip, or of his ſolemne Oath lōg afore ſworne vnto Ionathan.
                  
                  The ſecond thing, that in the diſcuſſing of the Endes of Friendſhippe, is brought into queſtion, is of the Maner and Way, how and in what ſorte, and how farre, by the lawes of Friendſhippe, Friendes muſt doe one for an other. Sūmarily, ſuch Maner, ſuch Bounds, ſuch Endes, ſuch Limites and Markes muſt to the ſame bee appoynted, and ſo farre muſt

mutuall curteſies among Friendes be enterchaungeably perfourmed, as that at no hand the Maieſtie, Will, and glorie of God be any way hindered or in anywiſe diſhonoured. For further then ſo, neither ought they to goe, neither is it in anywiſe lawfull for a Chriſtian man further to preſume.
                  For, although among vs men, that Friend is highly and dearely to be loued, vnto whom by Vowe and Oath wee haue moſt ſtrictly bound our ſelues: yet is God more to bee loued, vnto whom we owe both our ſelues, and our Friends, and all things els that we haue: and in whoſe name and authoritie al the force, ſubſtaunce and effect of Friendſhip is founded and eſtabliſhed.Gal. 2.14. So did Paule loue Peter, but yet he loued the glorie of God more. So did Ariſtotle loue Plato, but yet (as he him ſelfe ſaieth) he loued the trueth more. And the very Heathen and Paynim people, being demaunded concerning the boundes of Friendſhip, and how farre one Friend were to deale and to doe for an other, could eloquently and pithily anſwer, euen as did Pericles, that they would both ſpeak, doe, & goe for their Frend, but yet no further then to the Aultar, that is, no further then Religion and Conſcience ſhould warrant them. Their opinion therefore

& their doctrine was this, that a man lawfully may doe for his Friend all the pleaſure he poſſiblie can, ſauing and forpriſing his conſcience and obedience to the word of God: but no further. And herein truely ſaied they well. As alſo Aulus Gellius hath likewiſe noted.
                  For,Noct Attic. lib. 1. cap. 3. although we bee to hazard the loſſe of our owne ſtate and wealth, yea and of our life alſo, for our Friendes ſake (neither ought this loſſe and daunger to be refuſed,Ioh. 15.13. if we will bee true Friends in deede) yet the glorie of God, and ye eternall ſaluation of our Soule, ought more to bee eſteemed and regarded then any cauſe of our Friend whatſoeuer it bee. And we neither may, neither ought to bee thought herein to faile, or to come ſhorte in the office and duetie of a faithfull Friend, if we denye, at our Friends requeſt (be it neuer ſo earneſt) to doe any thing that is vnlawfull and vniuſt, or againſt the law of God and Godlines: yea wee muſt rather doe the parte of a godly and Chriſtian Friend, in ſhewing our ſelues readie rather to obey God then Man: and alſo to haue more care of our Friends ſaluation and Soule health, then of any worldly wealth or tranſitorie commoditie.
                  And let him (whoſoeuer he bee that requeſteth vs to doe for him any vnlawfull act)

blame and accuſe himſelfe for aſking: rather then vs for denying and for not obeying and feeding his humour. For, he it is which tranſgreſſeth and breaketh the true bounds of perfect and faithfull Friendſhid, and not we.
                  Wee muſt not ſticke many times to ſuffer our name & fame to bee vniuſtly reported and ſpoken of, among the vulgar ſorte of People: but neuer muſt wee either for Friend or any man els, commit that which is filthie, vngodlie, fraudulent, vnhoneſt or wicked. Whereby it euidently appeareth, that that ſentence of Marcus Tullius Cicero in his Booke of Friendſhip, and other Philoſophers alſo, is erroneous, falſe, and vtterly to bee reiected: for they ſay: If the caſe ſo ſtande, or if the matter ſo fall out, that our Friends willes in vniuſt cauſes muſt bee furthered & holpen, whereon either dependeth their life and death, or their fame and credite: Wee may in ſuch a caſe for their ſakes digreſſe, ſwerue and wander ſomewhat out of the path of honeſtie, ſo that it be not in a matter extreemely villanous, or wherein vtter ſhame and reproach may grow. For there bee certaine boundes: how farre to wade in our Friends behalfe, and wherin a man in reſpect of Friendſhip is pardonable.
                  
                  
                     Wee both may, and alſo ought (I ſay) to gratifie and pleaſure our Friend: but by committing ſinne, or offending the Commaundements of God, to caſt away both our Friend and our ſelues, we may not, nor ought not in any wiſe. Therefore maye wee not for our Friends cauſe, or at his requeſt, either waſte, ſpoyle, conſume and ſet on fier Churches, Palaces and houſes, neither ought we to warre and beare Armes againſt our Countrey, neither violently to aſſault or contemptuouſly abuſe the Magiſtrate, neither any way iniuriouſly to hurt any priuate perſon. For Loue (ſaieth the Apoſtle) reioyceth not in iniquitie.
                     1 Cor. 13.6.
                  
                  Neither is it lawfull to lye for our friends ſake, therby to helpe his cauſe, or to bring him out of any extremitie: albeit at ſome tyme, and in ſome caſes, it is not forbidden vs in our Friendes cauſe to diſſemble a matter, or to make ſemblaunce & countenaunce as though ſome things were true, which in deed are not ſo: ſuch things I meane, as whereby neither God is diſhonored, nor our Neighbour damniſted. An example whereof we haue in Ionathan, as appeareth 1. Sam. 20. verſ. 29.
                     1. Sam. 20.29.
                  
                  So that, wee neither allowe the example and fact of Huſhai the Archite, neither in any

wiſe thinke it meete and lawfull to be imitated: who for that duetifull ſeruice that hee would ſeeme to doe vnto Dauid, and for that entier and loyall Friendſhip that he bore vnto him, circumuented and entrapped an other,2. Sam. 16. verſ. 16.17 18.19. (to wit, Abſolon) by craft and ſubtiltie. For, he lyed, and diſſembled with Abſolon, and therein hee greatly ſinned, although hee was not onely aduiſed and admoniſhed, but alſo requeſted and earneſtly entreated by Dauid ſo to deale and ſo to doe.2. Sam. 15.34.
                  
                  But in all theſe things we muſt diligently marke, and carefully reſpect not onely what our Friend requeſteth at our handes to be done for him: but much rather to conſider what beſeemeth vs or any Chriſtian man in duetie and Conſcience to perfourme.
                  And thus much of Friendſhip, and of the Endes, Bounds and Circumſtaunces thereof, briefly and ſummarily haue wee hitherto diſcourſed, vpon aduiſed conſideration and diligent meditation of that faithfull Friendſhippe that was betweene Dauid and Ionathan. 
                  
                  Laus Deo.
                  FINIS.
                  
                     Tho: Newtonus, Cestreſhyrins.
                  
                  
                     Ad adyta, virtuti aditus.
                  
               
            
         
         
            
               
                  
                  A TREATISE, touching Dyceplay and prophane Gaming. Wherein, as Godly recreations and moderate diſportes bee Chriſtianly allowed and learnedly defended: ſo, all vaine, ydle, vnlawfull, offenſiue and prophane Exerciſes, bee ſharply reproued and flatly condemned.
                  Written in Latine by Lambertus Danaeus: Engliſhed by Tho: Newton.
                  
                  
                     Filia auaritiae, Nutrix eſt alea ſurti,
                     Pestis amicitiae, triste furoris opus.
                  
                  Imprinted at London for Abraham Veale. 1586.
               
               
                  
                  
                  To the right Worſhipfull his very good Frend: Maiſter William Higham Eſquier, one of her Maiesties Iuſtices of the Peace in the Countie of Eſſex.
                  
                     VNkind is he, that hauing receiued curteſie at an other mans hands, denieth it: vnkinde (againe) is he, that diſſembleth and will not ſeeme to know it: vnkinde likewiſe is hee, that ſtudieth not one way or other to requite it: but of all others, the moſt vnkind and vnthankefull is he, that quite forgetteth it.
                  Much to blame therfore were I (good Maiſter Higham) if for the manifolde benefites receiued from you, I ſhould either denye, conceale, miſregard or forget, how deeply I ſtād in your debt Booke: or what a number of Arrerages I am behinde withall in your Iournall, in respect of that great heape of curteſies, which I frankly and willingly confeſſe in full meaſure to haue flowed from you towards mee.
                  Neither may I (without bluſhing) pretermit, how deepely I reſt beholding to your Worſhipfull father in law, my eſpeciall good Friend

Maiſter Richard Stonley: neither yet can J in honestie conceale the great curteſie that I daylie to my comfort receiue, by and frō your good Coſen my deare Friend and louing neighbour Maister W. Waldgraue. I wil not here ſpeake of your learned brother in lawe, Maiſter D. Dunne, to whom alſo I owe greater things, euen my ſelf. No way am I able (J confeſſe) to requite any of you, but you remember (I doubt not) what one ſaith: Mola ſalſa litāt, qui thura non habent.
                  
                  Jn part of payment, & for ſome diſcharge of duetie, loe here (good Sir) I boldly preſent vnto you (and in you alſo to them) this my ſimple trauaile of three daies, in tranſlating this godly and profitable worke of Danaeus. What effect it ſhall worke in others I know not: but (ſurely) if they like no worſe of it in reading, then I my ſelfe haue done both in reading, aduiſing and tranſlating of it, their labour ſhall not bee loſt, nor their diligence waſtfully bestowed. Commending therefore both it and my poore ſelfe vnto you J end: wiſhing you and your good wife, no worſe to fare, then your vertue requireth, the fauour of men wiſheth, and your owne dexteritie promiſeth. 
                  
                     From my houſe at Litle Ilford
                        this 24. of Iuly. 1586.
                        
                      
                     
                        Your bounden Thomas Newton.
                  
               
               
                  
                  
                     ❧ The Authours Preface.
                  
                     THE diſſolute & licentious diſorder of maners and Chriſtian behauiour now adayes in this our corrupt Age being growne ſo great, that among other miſchieues ſwarming amōg vs, the odious and deteſtable exerciſe of Dyceplay hath hitherto bene either negligētly vneſpied, or not (as it ought to be) cōdignely puniſhed, hath preſently occaſioned me ſomewhat to write cōcerning this Argument: and to teſtifie to the world (for that Chriſtian affection that I beare to all good and godly mē, deſiring reformation of things amiſſe) what wickedneſſe and daunger reſteth in this vile and Deuiliſh play. Albeit I am not ignorant, that there will ſtart vp ſome buſie bodies and wilfull fellowes, which will not ſticke to deride this my labour, and frumpe me for my paines herein taken: neither regarding what ſhall be

ſayd by me, nor yet caring for any amendment in themſelues. Though (I ſay) I know there will bee ſome ſuch diſordered Perſons, yet doubt I not on the other ſide, but there bee ſundrie good and zealous men, fearing God, who vnderſtāding the lewdneſſe and looſeneſſe of this damnable Exerciſe, will gladly and willingly ſuffer them ſelues to bee reclaymed from the ſame, whereunto (perhappes) aforetyme they were giuen and addicted: and will receiue ſome profite by this my diſcourſe. Giue admonition to the wiſe (ſaieth Salomon) Pro. 9.9. and he will be the wiſer, teach a righteous man and he will encreaſe in learning.
                  
                  FINIS.
               
            
            
               
                  ¶ A Diſcourſe of Gaming, and ſpecially of Dyceplay.
               
                  The firſt Chapter. Whether it bee lawfull at all, for a Chriſtian man or woman to play and vſe recreation of their minde.
                  
                     FOr the better ripping vp & plainer opening of all ſuch poyntes as are neceſſarily required in this Argument to be ſpoken of: let vs firſt lay downe our opiniō (by way of anſwere) vnto a certaine queſtion demaunded and moued by ſome, yea and the ſame, very graue & wiſe Perſonages: Whether it be in any wiſe, lawfull, allowable, or tollerable for a godly Chriſtiā to recreate himſelfe with any maner of game or paſtime. Neither doth this their queſtion and motiue, altogether want ſome colour of reaſon to leane vnto.
                  For, firſt they alledge, That we muſt yeeld an accoumptes vnto God, not onely of this

our whole life, but alſo of euery ſingular actiō therof, and how we haue beſtowed euery ſmal moment of tyme in this preſent world. And what good accoumpts (ſay they) can he yeeld of his Idleneſſe, that hath ſpent his tyme in playing?
                  Furthermore, ſeeing we are commaunded to refraine from euery ydle worde,Mat. 12.36 as Chriſt himſelfe teacheth vs: for that all our triefling toyes and fond vanities doe greatly diſpleaſe and offend God, although in them we neither ſweare, neither blaſpheme his holy name: How ſhall we bee accoumpted guiltleſſe and blameleſſe before the ſame our heauenly Father, if wee ydlie, vainely, vnthriftily and vnfruitfully miſſpende our tyme (which is a thing moſt precious) in play and diſporting? For, whatſoeuer we doe, we muſt ſo doe it, as that it may tend to the glorie of God and aduauncement of his honor, as that bleſſed Apoſtle S.1. Cor. 10.31. Paule moſt diuinely teacheth vs.
                  Now, if wee ſpende our tyme in vanities▪ and conſume our life in Play, may it bee well ſayde (I praye you) that wee therein reſpect Gods glorie, or haue regard to his honor?
                  
                     Ephe. 5.16.The ſame Apoſtle alſo diligently and earneſtly in an other place admoniſheth vs, to redeeme the tyme. For wee haue beſtowed

the ſame aforetyme in vaine ſtudies and phantaſticall deuiſes, all the while that wee were drowned in the dregges of Idolatrie, and ſoyled with the ſuddes of Superſtition.
                  Beeing now therefore through the ineſtimable benefite and goodnes of God become Chriſtians, and enlightened with the bright beames of the glorious Goſpell of Chriſt, ſhall we, or is it meete we ſhould beſtowe the reſidue of our tyme in playing, trifeling, toying, and idle loytering?1. Pet. 4.3. 
                     It is ſufficient for vs (ſaieth the Apoſtle Peter) that wee haue ſpent the tyme paſt of the life after the luſte of the Gentiles, walking in wantonneſſe, luſtes, drunkenneſſe, gluttonie, drinkinges and abhominable Idolatries: that hencefoorth we ſhould not liue (as much tyme as remayneth) in the fleſh, nor after the luſtes of mē, but after the will of God.
                  
                  And truely there be ſo many vertuous dueties of Chriſtian life, which God requireth at our handes: and ſo many occaſions euery hower miniſtred vnto vs, whereby we may premote and aduaunce the glory of God, and alſo procure the benefite and commoditie of our Neighbour: that euery hower and minute of an hower ſtill bringeth with it ſome one new occaſion or other, to ſuch end and purpoſe.
                  
                     Therfore, to omit thoſe ſo many and ſo holie exerciſes both of minde and bodie: and in ſteede thereof, ydlie, vainely, ſecurely and Dronelike, to embuſie our ſelues with ſporting, paſtime, playe and daliaunce, is a thing, that many thinke not to bee allowed of, in vs that bee Chriſtians. And if wee will knowe what thoſe many good exerciſes bee, we will here note ſome certaine of them for example ſake: to wit, diligent reading and hearing of the holie and bleſſed Worde of God: conferring and peruſing of the auncient Fathers and Catholique writers: knowledge of Hiſtories, which are moſt profitable for the orderly direction of our life: viſiting of the Sicke: comforting of them that are in Priſon: and finally the diligent exerciſe and meditation of that Arte, Trade and Function which euery man particularlie profeſſeth.Math. 25.35.36. All which the Lord in his Worde commaundeth.
                  Now, that we ſhould either altogether, or for the moſt part omit theſe things, and be (in lieu thereof) addicted to beſtowe our ſelues and our tyme in vanities: this is a thing (I ſay) that ſome men and the ſame both vertuous and godlie, cannot well allowe of: but do thinke it to carie matter of great inconuenience

that any Chriſtian ſhould ſo vainely beſtowe any part of his life in Playe and idleneſſe.
                  And for ye better confirmation of this their opinion, they bring the ſentence & iudgement of that reuerend Father Ambroſe, in his firſt Booke of Offices. Chap. 23. and alſo in his expoſition of the 118. Pſalme: where that holie man and graue Father ſeemeth flatly and abſolutely to condemne all kindes of Playe, generally. And ſo alſo an other auncient Father, S. Chriſoſtome, in his 6. Homilie vpon Mathewes Goſpell, diſalloweth in a generalitie all maner of ſportes and playes. And theſe be the reaſons which thei briefly alledge and bring for confirmation of their aſſertion.
                  Notwithſtanding, we doe not altogether ſo thinke, but are rather of an other opinion, and ſay, that ſome conuenient recreation may very reaſonably be allowed, and pardoned vnto humaine imbecillitie: and herein haue wee on our ſide, ioyning in iudgement with vs, the authoritie of other auncient Fathers, no leſſe reuerend and accoumpted of, then they: namely Auguſtine in his ſeconde Booke de Muſica: whoſe minde and opinion we rather following, doe denye, that it is vtterly forbidden a Chriſtian man, to play at all, or not to

vſe any recreation. Yea, we ſay, that it is euery wiſe mans parte to recreate and refreſh his minde and bodie, being ouerwearied with ſtudies, accumbred with cares, and cloyed with labours, by laying aſide (for a while) his earneſt and ſerious buſineſſe, and to betake him ſelfe to ſome comely and decent recreation: whereby he may (as it were) breathe a while from his burthen, to the intent afterwarde with the freſher courage and liuelier minde to renewe his former toyle, and giue the luſtier onſet vpon his intermitted buſineſſe.
                  Their reaſons therefore afore, may eaſilie and with one word be anſwered: to witte, by diſtinguiſhing betweene ſuch thinges as bee allowed vnto a Chriſtian man, and be merely indifferent. For, ſome things be of ſuch kind and nature, that to bee ſtill occupied therein, is not at any hand allowable: of which ſorte is Playe: which for ſome ſhort time onely and ſome very ſmall while, may be well allowed and borne withall in a Chriſtian man. But to ſpend much tyme therein, or to make a continuall practiſe thereof, is (vndoubtedly) vnlawfull, vntollerable, and vttetly diſcommendable.
                  Therefore as that worthie Warriour ſaid of Philoſophie, that he delighted to reaſon of

Philoſophie, but yet in fewe words & briefly: ſo the ſame and in better right may wee ſaye of Playe, viz. that to Playe now and then is lawfull, but yet for a ſmall while, not for any long ſpace.
                  For, vtterly to abandon, baniſh, and take away Playe from this life of ours, is a thing more rigorous, ſeuere and cruell, then the nature of man can eaſilie beare. Neither may a Chriſtian mā cloyed with long trauailes and much labours bee any whit leſſe denyed and debarred Play, for the refreſhing of his mind and reuiuing his wittes, then being wearie, to bee allowed to ſleepe: beeing thirſtie, to drinke: being hungrie to eate, &c.
                  Yea, the Scriptures of God (which be left and deliuered vnto vs as ye beſt rule to knowe what things wee are bounden to doe, & what to eſchewe and forbeare) make mention hereof, as of a thing lawfull and allowable, and ſetteth it downe as a great benefite and bleſſing of God. Zech. 8.5.
                     Zech. 8.5. And in that ſentence which is aduouched and brought out of the Epiſtle of Paule to the Corinthians:1. Cor. 10.1. 
                     Whether ye eate or drinke, or whatſoeuer ye doo, doe all to the glorie of God, it cannot be denyed but that Playes and Sportes are incluſiuely comprehended in theſe wordes, or

whatſoeuer other things ye doe: conſidering that intermiſſion of labour and honeſt recreation of mynde is no leſſe profitable, and oftentymes alſo no leſſe neceſſarie, for the recouerie and comforte of the weake Powers and exhauſted ſtrength of our ſeelie bodies, then is Reſt, Sleepe and Meate, wherewith wee are nouriſhed. And our Lord and Sauiour Ieſus Chriſt moſt excellently teaching vs that man was made for the glorie of God,Mat. 2.27. ſaieth, that the Sabbath was made for man and not man for the Sabbath.
                  
                  The which ſelfe ſame thing is alſo to bee thought of Play and diſport. For it was deuiſed for man, to refreſh his decayed ſtrength and to reuiue his wearied ſprightes, and alſo by this kind of reſt and recreation to preſerue his bodie in health and ſoundnes, the better, therelier and freelier afterward to ſerue God and applye his vacation.
                  Certes, in the number of ſuch thinges as are tearmed Indifferent, and are allowed by God vnto a Chriſtian man, ought Play to be reckened: and yet may not the ſame bee abuſed, as alſo no other of thoſe things ought to bee, that are called Meane, Indifferent, and Adiaphorall.
                  For doubtleſſe, thoſe men are too ſtraite

laced, and are too preciſely wedded vnto an ouerharde cenſure and opinion, which flatly and abſolutely denye and debarre a Godlie faithfull man (beeing oppreſſed and almoſt foreſpent with infinite cares of the mynd, and otherwiſe wearied with bodily labour) al maner of recreation and diſport, which might be (as it were) a profitable & wholeſome remedie for his diſeaſe and inconuenience.
                  Neither may that man bee ſayd not to regard and reſpect Gods glorie, who refreſheth and recreateth himſelfe with an intent, and to the ende hee may afterwarde with perfecter ſtrength, luſtier cheere, and greater courage both of bodie and mynd, returne to his former charge, and afreſh betake himſelfe vnto that calling, wherunto he is by God aſſigned: and may alſo the readier ſerue his Countrie, benefite the Common wealth, and prouide for his houſhold and familie, for that his health is ſtrong, perfect and ſound.
                  For, the wit and nature of man may very well and aptly be likened vnto a Bow, according to yt excellēt verſe & ſaying of the Poet.
                  
                     The bodie and wit of man may well bee
                     Reſembled and fitly comparde to a Bow:
                     Which ſtill ſtanding bent, and at no tyme free,
                     Muſt needes (and that ſhortly) grow weake, ſoft and ſlow.
                  
                  
                     Therefore, as a Bowe if it be not ſometyme vnbent, becōmeth ſoft, ſluggiſh, weake and vnprofitable: ſo fareth it with the quickneſſe and fineneſſe of the wit: if ſometyme it haue not his conuenient reſt and relaxation, it ſoone ſhrinketh vnder his burthen, and in ſhort while becommeth both dull, blunt and loggiſh. We doe not therfore generally condemne all Playe, neither doe wee denye the ſame to a Chriſtian man, but that he may in ſome honeſt ſort recreate and refreſh himſelf. For, honeſt Sportes and comely Playes we doe well allowe euen vnto Godly and faithfull men: howbeit wee will and wiſh that a meaſure and moderation bee therein alſo orderly kept and Chriſtianliie obſerued.
               
               
                  The ſecond Chapter. Whether it be lawfull for a man to play for money: and the ſame beeing wonne, to keepe to his owne vſe.
                  
                     THis muſt firſt and formoſt bee ſet downe for a rule, that in no maner of Playe (for of Playes ſome bee honeſt, decent, and Gentlemanlie: ſome (againe) vnhoneſt, vnlawful, & vnſemelie, as hereafter we ſhall further ſhew) a Chriſtian

may not playe for money, with an intent to make it his owne, to keepe it to his priuate vſe: or (as we ſay) to put it vp in his own purſe for his owne priuate gaine and commoditie.
                  The reaſons moouing vs hereunto be many, and the ſame alſo very manifeſt: of the which, ſome we will at this tyme and in this place alledge and declare.
                  Firſt, Play was not at the beginning deuiſed among men for any Commerce, barter, buying or ſelling, chopping or changing, traffique or entercourſe, whereby to procure and catch vnto our ſelues any thing that belonged to any other: but onely to bee a kinde of meanes & way for recreation of the mynd, and a refreſhing or exerciſing of the bodie: in ſo much that whoſoeuer vſeth Play to any other ende or purpoſe, doth not rightly vſe, but filthilie and diſorderly abuſe it, exchaunging that which ſerueth for an honeſt recreation of Man, into a moſt vile and filthy kind of gaine and couetouſneſſe,Eph. 5.3. Collo. 3.5. which (as the Apoſtle teacheth) we ought chiefly to eſchue.
                  Neither by any lawe either diuine or humaine, hath Playe euer beene reckened and accoumpted among thoſe ſortes and kindes of Contracts, whereby we lawfully may barter or alienate our goodes. If there bee any

humaine Lawes, which recken vp all the honeſt kindes of contracts, and maners of bargayninges, they bee thoſe, that are at this day called the Ciuill Lawes of the Romaines. But they onely recken vp Buying, ſelling, letting out, hiering and ferming, making and taking of Leaſes with Couenaunts, and infinite other contracts beſide: by the which wee maye by Lawe both conueigh that which is ours to others, and alſo aſſure that which is other mens, to vs.
                  As for Play, it is not once named among them. For why? Play is none of thoſe kindes of things and actions, if we throughly conſider and truely looke into either the nature or the ende of Play. Whoſoeuer therefore detayneth and keepeth to his owne vſe an other mans money or goodes, onely becauſe he hath by Playe gayned and wonne the ſame: that man truely doth uniuſtly and wrongfully detaine it: & with no better right or conſcience, then a Theefe keepeth & poſſeſſeth the thing that he falſlely hath ſtolne.
                  For, if it might be lawfull for vs (after this ſorte, that is to ſay, by Play) to catch and get other mens goodes or money: what other thing (I pray you) ſhould wee bring in, then in ſteede of Play, to ſet vp a kinde of vnſaciable

and greedie couetouſneſſe: and therby vtterly peruert the very right nature of things, while of a matter of ſporte and paſtime wee make, not onely a matter of ſerious earneſt, but alſo of raking gayne and filthie lucre?
                  By Play therefore to gayne other folkes money, is all one with ſtealing. And lawfull is it not any way: no, although the maners, or priuate cuſtome of any particular Citie or Countrey did permit and allowe it. For that permiſſion and allowance (if any ſuch ſhould be) is encountred, met with all, oppugned and repealed by the Lawe of Nature her ſelfe: which being of farre greater force and equitie then any priuate or municipall Lawe, ought much more to be obeyed.
                  Albeit, I doe not remember that I haue euer read, that it hath bene enacted, conſtituted and allowed by the Law written of any Citie or Countrey, that ſuch kind of money as was gotten by Play, might either be kept and detained: or (if it were not payed) might by law from the debter bee recouered. For, there lay no action for any ſuch debt, neither was there euer any iudiciall Plea by the lawes allowed to bee commenced and recorded, whereupon the Iudge proceeded to any ſentence: vnleſſe (perhappes) it were the Teniſe play, (which

hath found ſo much fauour, to be ſpecially priuiledged in ſome Cities & places, by the priuate lawes of their Countrey) that if a man doe winne thereat ſome little portion or ſmal pittaunce of money, (as namely a groate or ſixe pence, or thereaboutes) he may indicially demaund and recouer the ſame. Which Play ſeemeth hereupon to haue found this ſpeciall fauour, for that there is in it (as Galene affirmeth) an excellent good and wholeſome exerciſe of the Bodie, and no leſſe induſtrie of the mynde.
                  But as for other ſortes of Play & Games, or of any gaine or money thereupon promiſed, there lyeth neither Action nor Iudgmēt. Yea which is more: if the money ſtaked and layed downe bee kept backe, detayned or purſed by the winner after the victorie or game ended, the looſer ſhall haue his remedie by lawe, and may lawfully ſue the winner as an vniuſt withholder and wrongfull detayner of that which is none of his. And this our aſſertion is plainely and euidently confirmed by Franciſcus Hottomanus one of the learneddeſt and notableſt Lawyers of our Age,Lib. 2 ca. 2 de Vſ
                           •••
                        s. and right godly and Chriſtian writer. For, hee plainely there affirmeth, that all that is gayned by Play, is by the Ciuill Lawe condemned,

and alſo forbidden to bee claymed or aſked.
                  
                     Auguſtine alſo commaundeth and willeth all that is gained this way to bee taken from the Winner, and to be beſtowed on the poore.Epiſt. 54. ad Macedon. But to him that hath once loſt it, he will not that it ſhould in any wiſe bee reſtored: that by this meanes both the Winner may be defeated from that which he lewdly wanne, and ſo diſappoynted of his purpoſe and hope: and that alſo the raſh, hardie and fooliſh Looſer, may thereby beare a kinde of puniſhment.
                  Whoſe ſentence and opinion as I willinglie embrace and like: ſo alſo would I further thinke it very conuenient, that both the one and the other, ſhould bee deepely payned and amerced by the Iudge in ſome round ſumme of money, to be certainly cōuerted and leuied to the vſe of the Common Treaſurie, or the Princes Exchequier.
                  For what maner of dealing and beaſtly faſhion of life is this among Chriſtians? what madneſſe (I pray you) is it? firſt, that a thing inuented and deuiſed onely for recreation of the mynde, ſhould for the ſatiſfying of mens greedie couetouſneſſe, bee conuerted into a practiſe of moſt filthie gaine?
                  Againe, that ſo many of the poore members

of Chriſt being daylie and howerly euen in the middeſt of the Church, and for lacke of reliefe, readie to ſtatue through want of neceſſarie ſuſtentation, being both men as wee are, and Chriſtians, and our brethren alſo, yea our owne fleſh, as the Prophet Iſaiah calleth them:Iſay. 58.7. yet we beholding and ſeeing this their greeuous caſe and pitifull penurie, and paſſing by them without relieuing and ſuccouring them, can finde in our hearts to ſaue our money this way, and to ſpende and conſume the ſame vpon Playe and other trifling Guegawes?
                  Woe vnto this vnmercifulneſſe, ſenſualitie and vaine pleaſure, which we ſhall hereafter (without earneſt and ſpeedie repentance) moſt greeuouſly & ſmartingly pay for. Woe vnto this wilfull looſing of money: which, not onely God himſelf, but thoſe poore Creatures alſo (whom wee in their miſerie and neceſſitie contemned and regarded not, becauſe wee would ſatiſfie our owne wicked luſtes in Playing) ſhall before all the bleſſed Angels, caſt in our teeth and lay to our charge, as it is euidently written and plainly ſet forth in the Goſpell.Mat 25.44
                  
                  What ſhame is it for thoſe whom GOD hath bleſſed with ſtore of worldly wealth, and

are called Chriſtians, not onely daintilie to wallowe in all pleaſures and delightes, but alſo for fulfilling of their ſenſuall luſtes and affections ryotouſly and diſorderly by Playe to ſpende and conſume aboundant riches, and wilfully in vanitie to caſt away huge Sūmes of Money: dealing therein not vnlike vnto that miſerable rich Glutton,
                     Luc. 16.1
                           •
                        
                      whereof Saint Luke ſpeaketh. Whereas in the meane while poore afflicted and diſeaſed Lazarus, our brother, lying at their gate begging reliefe and making pitifull mone for foode, is nothing at all regarded but rather vtterly contemned and deſpitefully rahated, and ſuffered miſerably to ſterue for hunger. Vpon whom, the very Dogges by licking his woundes, ſhewed a kind of humaine affection, and beſtowed on him that almes, that belonged to their nature any way to yeeld.
                  Shall wee that bee men and Chriſtians, ſhewe no maner of compaſſion, no ſuccour, no relief to our Chriſtian brother, diſtreſſed with want, and afflicted with pouertie as Lazarus
was? What a ſhame is it that we ſhould haue money to waſte and conſume vpon Play: & to haue none charitablie to beſtow vpon the ſeelie poore members of Chriſt, to relieue them in their neede and extremitie?
                  
                     Let vs therefore (brethren) followe that counſell or rather commaundement of our Sauiour Chriſt: that is, of the vnrighteous Mammon to make vs friendes:
                     Luc. 16.9 not thoſe which winne our money & ſo catch our Mammon from vs by Play: (for, ſuch kind of perſons are neuer a whit the more our friendes, neither doe they thinke themſelues any thing the more bounden to thanke vs therefore) but the poore Creatures of God, the members of Chriſt, and our brethren: for which bountie to them ſhewed, God himſelfe will become our Paymaiſter,Matth. 19. and reſtore vnto vs an hundreth folde.
                  And certainly very excellent is that ſentence of Lactantius.
                     lib. 6. ca. 17 
                     It ſkilleth much (ſaith be) what maner of perſons they bee that helpe thee to ſpende thy thrift: whether Makeſhifts, Dycers and Bawdes do catch it from thee, or whether thou doe beſtow the ſame vppon godly vſes and for Gods ſake: and whether thou prodigally ſpend it in gluttonie and cramming thy belly, or els laye it vp for ſtore in the Treaſurie of Righteouſneſſe. Therefore as it is a vice, waſtfully for ill purpoſes to ſpende and conſume our wealth: ſo is it a vertue, to beſtowe the ſame to good vſes.
                  
                     
                     Auguſtine forbiddeth vs to beſtowe any money for the ſeeing of Stage Playes and Enterludes: or to giue any thing vnto the Players therein, and yet theſe kinde of perſons doe after a ſorte let out their labour vnto vs, and their induſtrie many times is laudable. What ſhall we ſay then to our ſelues, if we laſh out the ſame vpō theſe iolly Gameſters and frolick companions, whoſe humour we feede and delight, aſwell as they do ours: and from whom wee receiue none other maner of thing, but loſſe of tyme, and waſting of our life?
                  All theſe things being moſt true, wee may boldly thus conclude, that all this kinde of gaine and aduauntage, gotten by Playe, is no whit better then plaine Theft: and that whatſoeuer we detayne and keepe to our ſelues beeing thus gotten, is (in trueth) none of ours, neither can it bee iuſtly, and with good conſcience by vs poſſeſſed.
               
               
                  The third Chapter. Of Games, Playes and publique Exerciſes: and of the Rewardes thereunto aſſigned by the Common wealth.
                  BVT leaſt hereby any man (miſtaking our meaning) ſhould thinke wee went about

to binde, clogge and enſnare the conſcience: we wil here in this caſe ſet downe two exceptions.
                  The firſt whereof is this: That thoſe publike Exerciſes & Games which are appoynted by authoritie of the Magiſtrate (although they bee tearmed and knowne by the name of Playes) yet are not comprehended within the compaſſe of that generall Rule, before by vs ſet downe & deliuered: neither that the gaines and rewardes publiquely appoynted and aſſigned by authoritie of the Magiſtrate for benefite of the Common wealth, to bee thereby condemned. For, ſuch Games and Exerciſes are lawfull for vs, not onely to followe and frequent, and for the ſame to ſtriue and doe our vttermoſt deuoyre: but alſo, if wee can in the ſame winne the victorie, we may honeſtlie carie the prize away, and detaine and reſerue it to our ſelues, and lawfully keepe it as our owne well and truely gotten goodes.
                  Neither needeth any doubt thereof to bee made, but that it is both lawful, and may alſo be done with a good and ſafe conſcience. For, ſuch maner of Prizes and rewardes are propoſed and appoynted by the Magiſtrate, and not by priuate perſons. And if they were (as many times they bee) aſſigned and ſet out by

priuate perſons, yet are they warranted by publique authoritie. Againe, theſe Exerciſes of minde and bodie are profitablie meant and appoynted, for the whetting, ſharpening and encreaſing of mens induſtrie: whereby both the priuate perſon is ſolaced and recreated, and alſo a publique benefite to the Countrey and Common wealth procured and prouided.
                  For, theſe publique Exerciſes and euen Shewes, Games, Sportes and Prizes, bee (as it were) certaine preludes, preparatiues, aſſaies and traynings of Warfare: and may ſtande in great ſteede for ſundrie occaſions: that when the Commonwealth ſhall haue any neede of our helpe, wee may be the readier to ſerue, and the riper in our charges: & therefore the trayning vp of the people therein, (to helpe when neede is, their Countrey) is a thing not onely tolerable, but alſo very neceſſarie and commendable.
                  To this ende, and for this purpoſe is it at this day in moſt Countries vſed, to traine and exerciſe their ſeruiceable perſons in hādling their Pieces, their Caliuer, their Muſkee or the Harquebuſe, to prime, charge or ſhoote in great Ordnaunce, to traile and toſſe the Pike, to ſhoote in the long Bowe or Croſſebowe: becauſe theſe bee the things that haue

many times ſtoode the Countrey in notable ſteede, when it hath by forraine inuaſion or inward garboyles bene endaungered.
                  And to the end, the people ſhould the more willingly frame themſelues to the ſame exerciſes, there are Prizes & rewards by publike authoritie propoſed and ſet out: yet not of any great ſumme, but rather of ſome ſmall valew, and to bee as it were, a certaine cheering or honeſt allurement vnto them for their induſtrie: or as a token of an open praiſe and commendation giuen vnto them for their well doing: which is a thing greatly profitable for the Common wealth. For, honor, preferment, reward and dignitie nouriſheth Arts, and encreaſeth knowledge: & Glorie is the Spurre that pricketh all men forward to wel doings. And therefore in all Ages ſuch kinde of publique Exerciſes and Wagers haue bene appoynted, allowed and practiſed.
                  And albeit thoſe which were in the old time exerciſed, were farre differing from ſuch as we now adaies haue in vſe: yet were they ordeyned, and had a reſpect vnto the maner of Warfare and Martiall ſeruice then among them vſed. For although they then had deuiſes and Engines to throwe Darts and Iauelins to annoye their Enemies a farre of, yet

had they no Gunnes, but fought it out, man to man, with downe right blowes, ioyning foote to foote and hand to hand: And among them alſo, they had ſundrie ſortes of publique Exerciſes and Games for wagers, but yet eſpecially theſe fiue: Wreſtling, hurling a Coyte who could hurle it fartheſt or higheſt, of length or height: Running or leaping: Cō
                     bating with leatheren bagges hauing plummets hanging at the endes thereof: Barriers and Torneaments on Horſebacke,Lib. 8. Odiſs. Aeneid. 5. all which are mentioned aſwell by Homer as alſo by Virgill and Pauſanias.
                  
                  Vnto theſe, did the Romaines afterwards adde an other, which was, fighting with Ships on the water: exhibited and ſolemnely kept, ſpecially in the Raigne of Auguſtus Caeſar, to conſerue in freſh memorie his noble victorie at Actium: and the ſhew thereof was on the Riuer of Tyber.
                  
                  Afterward there was alſo added an other kinde of warlike exerciſe on Horſback, which in the old time was tearmed Troye, and was accuſtomed to be openly ſhewed in the vſuall Fielde of Exerciſe called Campus Martius:
                     It was alſo called Pyrrhica. Vide Tranquill. & Polyd. Virg. lib. 2. cap. 13. de inuentor. rerum. but the name of this kinde of Exerciſe was afterwarde called Torneyments: which for that there grew many times much harme and

daunger thereof, and alſo was found to be an occaſion to drawe aſpiring mindes vnto ambicious deſiers, it was afterwards by publick authoritie of the Lawes worthilie put downe and diſcontinued.
                  But to returne again to our purpoſe: thoſe Rewards, Wagers, Prizes and offers which were publickly ſet out & propoſed for ſuch mē as ſhould put forwarde themſelues in theſe kinds of exerciſes to play & ſtriue for ye ſame, were cōmonly and for the moſt part of ſmall value: ſo yt they might ſeeme to bee rather as a token of victorie and a praiſe to the partie that wanne the ſame,Lib. 5. Sympoſiac. quaeſt. 3. & lib. 8. cap. 4 then any great gaine. For our forefathers (as Plutarch writeth) vſed for Rewardes (and thought the ſame very large and bountifull) at publique Shewes and open Games, none other things then theſe fower: viz, an Oliue, a Pyne tree, Parſelie and Apples. Which ſmall giftes & trifeling Prizes were for very long ſpace accoumpted for a great rewarde of praiſe: as the ſame Plutarch in the life of Cato Vticenſis witneſſeth in theſe wordes: The rewardes that were publiquely giuen at Games in the olde tyme, and deemed as right bountifull and large amōg the Greekes were, Beete, Lettice, Radiſh and Peares: among the Romaines,

flagons of Wine, Porke, Figges, Cucumbers, Faggots and bundelles of Woode. But theſe haue in proceſſe of time through Ambition and Couetouſneſſe beene chaunged and altered. For, in place of them there are now other things grow
                        •
                      
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      
                     
                        •
                     ſe, and cuſtomablie giuen to the winners.
               
               
                  The fourth Chapter. Of them, that beſtowe their winnings gayned by play, vpon a Banquet, or good cheare for the whole Companie.
                  
                     THE other exception from our former Rule is this: That no man ſhould thinke vs ſo hardly to meane, as that we flatly condemned or miſliked ye cuſtome, of hauing ſome ſmall ſumme of money gayned by Play (not with any intent of the winner to kéepe it to his owne vſe) to be freely beſtowed vpon common cheare betwene them. For, ſuch winning may not be conſtrued to be meere gaine and priuate profite, ſeeing it is forthwith lated out and beſtowed vpon a continuation of friendlines, & maintaynaunce of neighbourhood: and wherby alſo after a ſort, the looſer hath ſome kinde of benefite. For,

although he be the looſer, yet hath he his part and ſhare of the gaine it ſelf, becauſe he eateth and drinketh his portion. And all that is this way gotten, is and may well bee called Expence, and not the gaine of the Winner: becauſe hee courteouſly and friendly therewith entertaineth the whole companie: and for the more confirmation of friendſhip and mutuall good will among themſelues, francklie beſtoweth the cheare vpon them.
                  Which curteſie and cuſtome among Chriſtians may (doubtleſſe) without any ſcruple of Conſcience bee lawfully done: forſeene, that there be no lauiſh expence or wilful waſt: but onely ſome ſmall ſumme of money that is played for, and the ſame to be conuerted to theſe vſes. But, if either the Summe of it ſelf be bigge: or in reſpect of the eſtate of the Players and Gameſters, exceſſiue and too much: in ſuch caſe, both the winner and the looſer ought by the Magiſtrate to bee puniſhed: and in ſuch perſons, both ſuch coſt as I haue ſpoken of, and ſuch Playe alſo, is by vs in this place flatly forbidden and vtterly (as vnlawfull) condemned.
               
               
                  
                  The fifth Chapter. What kinde of Games and Playes bee lawfull, and what be forbidden and vnlawfull.
                  
                     BVT now let vs came to ſpeake of ſuch Games & Playes as are lawful and permitted, or vnlawful and prohibited: leaſt (otherwiſe) all this our diſcourſe and treatiſe might ſeeme vainlie enterpriſed and to ſmall purpoſe taken in hande. The queſtion (ſurely) is hard and difficult, and diuerſly by diuers perſons maintained and decided. Whereunto when any queſtion is mooued vnto mee for my opinion therein to bee had, my cuſtome and order is this to anſwere. If wee firſt ſet downe and ſhewe what kindes thereof bee forbidden, it ſhall be an eaſie matter to pronounce of al the reſt: to wit, that all others hee lawfull and directly permitted to a Chriſtian.
                  Of Games and Playes therefore which are vnlawfull, the ſortes bee ſundrie and diuers. For, firſt, whatſoeuer Games or Playes are prohibited and forbidden by the lawes and cuſtomes of that Countrey or Citie wherein we liue, are generally to bee accoumpted vnlawfull: although otherwiſe, in reſpect of their action, they bee not diſhoneſt: yet for ſo

long time as we ſhall dwel or ſeiourne in that Countrey and place, wee muſt and ought of refraine them. For, ſuch is the condition to Chriſtian libertie, concerning things of them ſelues meerely indifferent, that according to the diuers circumſtances of matters, places, times and perſons, it may be reſtrayned.
                  Neither ought wee to violate and breake ſuch lawes, as particular Countreyes, Seigniories and Cities haue eſtabliſhed, enacted and made concerning the ſame: ſpecially if therein we may keepe a good and cleare conſcience, without ſtooping or yeelding to any Superſtition. We muſt be ſure therfore that ſuch Decrees, Lawes, Statutes, Permiſſiōs or prohibitions be grounded vpon ſome good reaſons and iuſt cauſe: and applyed for the better gouernement of the ſtate of that place and Countrey.
                  If therefore we tranſgreſſe thoſe Lawes, we commit a very great fault, and by our euil example, giuing cauſe of offence to others, doe procure and drawe them into the like contemptuous dealing.
                  Secondly, I call all thoſe Games and Playes vnhoneſt, vnſeemely and vnlawfull, wherein there is any euill, vnhoneſt, filthie, vnchaſt or vnſeemely actiō, practiſe or pranke,

as namely, laſciuious talke & wanton words, vnchaſt groapings and ribald handlings, vnſhamefaſt geſtures and fancieful behauiours: becauſe Chriſtians ought not only to abſtaine from euery thing whatſoeuer, that is by nature euill, but alſo from all that, which hath any maner of ſhew or appearaunce of looſenes and diſhoneſtie, as the Apoſtle warneth vs.1. Theſ. 5.22.
                  
                  All ſuch Playes, Games and Sportes therefore, wherein there is any maner repreſentation, counterfayting, imitation, or pronunciation of filthineſſe and vnchaſtitie, are, as lewd and laſciuious, to be vtterly condemned, and worthily to be baniſhed. For they bee the flaming fierbrandes of all beaſtly luſtes, and the ſhameleſſe occaſions of many outragious diſorders.
                  Thirdly, all ſuch Games and Playes as merely conſiſt vpon blind hazard and doubtfull chaunce, are flatly by vs (as vnlawful) reiected and condemned. And ſuch are all thoſe, that ſtand vpon haphazard, and wherein the victorie hangeth, as chaunce falleth out and allotteth. Vnder this kind, are contained and comprehended almoſt an infinite number and ſorte of Playes and Games, ſpecially and namely Cardes and Dyce: which therefore all good and godly perſons, whether they bee

rich or poore, learned or ignoraunt, Gouernours or Artificers: publiquely or priuately: at home or abroade: in tyme of Warre or in tyme of Peace, ought to forbeare and eſchew. For, this kind of Play and Gaming, thus depending vpon hazard, is moſt manifaſtly reproued and cōdemned, not onely by the lawes deuiſed by man: but alſo by moſt ſtrong and ineuitable reaſons out of the ſacred worde of God.
                  The Frenchmē vnder the names of Cards and Dyce comprehende all maner of Playe conſiſting vpon hazard: and that there are and were in the old time moe ſorts of this wicked and vnlawfull Play,Lib. 8. Nomenc. cap. vlt. 
                     Iulius Pollux plainely witneſſeth.
               
               
                  The ſixt Chapter. What the meaning of this worde Alea properly is: and what Games and Playes are contayned and comprehended vnder the name thereof.
                  
                     BVt in theſe Games, Paſtymes, Sportes and Playes at Cards and Dyce, there is a certaine diſtinction to bee vſed. For, ſome of them, are after ſuch a ſorte

played and paſſed ouer, that to the winning and obteyning of the victorie, honeſt induſtrie of the minde helpeth more, then any blind caſualtie or chaunceable hazard: in ſo much that the acward lucke which falleth out contrarie to deſire, is ſupplied, amended and refourmed by Arte and cunning. Theſe kindes of Playe may not properly be tearmed Alea or Hazardrie, neither are they abſolutely to be forbidden: onely let meaſurable meane therein bee vſed.
                  Others there be that hang and depend (as it were) vpon mere chaunce & caſting: wherein a mans induſtrie (if there bee no packing, falſehoode and cogging deceipt vſed) can nothing auaile. This kinde of Play is properly called Alea: and this is it, that wee ſay is vtterly diſallowable, and to be baniſhed and caſt out of the Banquettes, Feaſtes, Meetinges, Aſſemblies, Families and handes of all Chriſtians: for that, whatſoeuer lucke giueth and blind chaunce herein allotteth, the Players and Gameſters take vp and deteyne: and the loſſe or chaunce hereby ſuſtained cannot by any Art that is lawfull and honeſt, bee recouered or amended.
                  For, if there bee any cogging Panion or ſhifting mate, that by ſleight and paltry goeth

about to help the chaunce, or ſtrike the Dyce, (as many foyſting Coſeners and deceiptfull Packers in playing both can doe and vſe to doe) ſuch an one is accoumpted for a lewd felowe and a cogging Verlet: and being once knowne or taken with the maner, hee is worthilie expelled and abandoned of all men, out of all honeſt companies.
                  Theſe cogging trickes and ſubtile ſhiftes in Playe whoſoeuer vſeth, is euer the cauſer of much brabbling, wrāgling, ſkoulding and fighting: which to bee true, appeareth by the example of one Temenus, of whom Pauſanias
writeth in his Booke, entituled Meſſaniaca.
                  
                  And therefore all ſuch kindes of Playes and Games, we muſt confeſſe to be properly and truely tearmed Alea: for that, al the hope of victorie and winning thereby, conſiſteth in the doubtfull hazard, euent, and caſting, whether it be at Cardes or Dyce: and not in any laudable, commendable or lawfull induſtrie of man. And the auncient Writers are of the ſame opinion with vs: for they like wiſe affirme this word Alea, to ſignifie all that what ſoeuer, wherein caſuall lucke, vncertaine euent and doubtfull hazard beareth ſway.
                  For, where the winners themſelues cannot

tell how they ſhall ſpeede, nor what good ſucceſſe they ſhall haue, till they ſee it plainely ſo come to paſſe, there muſt lucke, chaunce and hazard needes altogether take place & beare ſway: and therefore is this maner of Play called Alea. And this is that naughtie and vile Play, which wee in this place and in all this our preſent Treatiſe haue pronounced and proteſted to bee vnlawfull and diſallowable: and doe heartilie wiſh it to be farre of from al Chriſtian mens practiſe: & if it haue through too much licentious ouerſight beene at any time heretofore frequented and vſed, that it be now from hencefoorth renounced, forſaken, loathed and deteſted.
                  Now, that we may the ſooner bee aſhamed of this ſo vglie and ſo beaſtlie an Exerciſe, let vs ſhewe forth and ſet downe the wickedneſſe and the harmes that growe thereof. And firſt, let vs heare what opinion and iudgement, euen prophane and Heathē men, which lacked the cleare light of the word of God, had therof: who yet (notwithſtanding) will teach vs, what to deeme and think of ſuch a filthie and vile practiſe.
               
               
                  
                  Againſt Dyceplay The vij. Chapter. Dycing and Carding reproued and condemned euen by the Heathen and Infidelles that knewe not God.
                  
                     Philipp. 2.
                     
                        CIcero obiected vnto Marcus Antonius the Conſull, ſitting in the Counſel Chāber among all the noble Senatours, and laied it to his charge as ye greateſt reproach that could be, that he was a Dycer and a Gameſter, and that hee foſtered and countenaunced ſuch kinde of perſons about him. Suetonius Tranquillus in the life of Auguſtus. Cap. 71. writeth, that this kinde of Play was noted and reputed in that mightie Monarch (being otherwiſe a moſt excellent Prince) for a great diſgrace and diſhonorable blemiſh: in ſo much that his delight in this filthie exerciſe greatly eclipſed and dimmed the reſt of his notable vertues.
                  
                     Claudius Caeſar gaue no way more occaſion to the world to accoumpt and iudge him for a Blockhead and Dolt, then by his great delight that he tooke in Dyceplay.
                  
                     Gobilo the Lacedaemonian being ſent in the behalfe of his Countrey, as Ambaſſadour to the Corinthians to ioyne friendſhip and

league with them: and finding the Princes and People there, playing at Dyce, made no longer tariance, but preſently returned home without either declaring his meſſage or concluding any League: ſaying that hee would not ſo diſtaine and diſhonor his noble Countreymen of Lacedaemonia with ſuch an infamie, to be ſaid that they had concluded friendſhip and made League with Gameſters and ydle Dyceplayers.
                  The King of Perſia ſent (in mockage and deriſion) vnto Demetrius the King of Aſia, for his lightnes in playing, a payre of golden Dyce.
                  
                     Aſconius Paedianus writeth that ſuch as were knowne in Rome to bee common Dycers,Aſcon. Paedian. in ſecund diuinat Ciceronis. in thoſe daies were amerced and cōdemned to pay foure fould the valew of the money that they had loſt by play: to the intent others by their example & penaltie ſhould take warning and be terrified.
                  By the law Roſcia, al ſuch as either plaied or loſt at Dyceplaye more then their abilitie might well beare, were baniſhed the Countrey.
                  And Plato ſaieth in his Treatiſe entituled Conuiuium: that thoſe men which at their Feaſtes muſt haue Stageplayers, and Actours

of Enterludes, ſhewed thēſelues therein to be men ignorant of al good knowledge: who hauing (thēſelues) no furniture of matter nor ſtore of wordes, were glad (as it were) to begge and borowe, or rather to hyre pleaſure at the handes of a ſorte of ſottiſh & looſeminded fellowes.
                  The ſame doome may wee likewiſe very aptly and well giue vpon Dycers: to witte, that they addict themſelues to theſe trifeling exerciſes, for that they haue no better nor honeſter recreation of the minde to betake them ſelues vnto. And therefore are glad to ſeeke pleaſure, euen in theſe vainetromperies and idle deuiſes.
                  But what neede we hereupon to ſtand any longer,11. Paudect. tit. 5. ſithence that one onely law of the Romaines euidently ſheweth how odious the ſame was accoumpted? the wordes be theſe: If any one ſhall bee found to haue beaten or otherwiſe to haue hurt him that ſhalbe ſayd to keepe a Dycing houſe: or if during that tyme, any thing fortune to bee taken or ſtolne out of his houſe, I will giue no iudgement on his behalfe. And him, that ſhall offer any outrage or ſhew violence to any man about Dyceplay: I wil according as I finde the matter, ſeuerely puniſh.
                  
                  
                     Theſe be the wordes of the Law, whereby it appeareth, that all that gayne which groweth by this kinde of Play, cannot lawfully in any wiſe bee demaunded or recouered, neither in place of Iudgement nor elſwhere. So harmefull, and ſo directly againſt all good maners was it deemed, euen among the prophane and heathen people.
                  
                     Iuuenal alſo a graue and excellent Poet accoumpteth Dyceplaye am
                        •••
                      
                     
                        ••
                     oſe 
                        〈◊〉
                      that eaſilieſt corrupt & 
                        〈…〉
                      a whole houſehold.
                  
                     If that th' old Syre d
                           •
                        e take delight
                     To play at wicked Dyce:Juue
                              •••
                            Satyr. 1 
                              •
                           
                        
                     
                     His dapper Sonne will quicklie learne
                     To vſe the ſelfe ſame vice.
                  
                  But now let vs ſee what the Emperours themſelues in the Lawes haue enacted and ſet downe touching this beaſtly, ſhameful and idle Play. And that very plainely appeareth,Cod. lib. 3. tit. 43. and is to be ſeene in theſe wordes: We tendering and carying a ſpeciall care for the benefite and weale of our Subiects, do enact, and by this preſent Lawe decree, that no maner of perſon ſhal either play himſelfe, or bee a looker on, of others that playe at Dyce, neither publiquely abroad, nor priuately

in their owne houſes. If any thing haue bene attempted to the contrarie, let not the looſers be damnified and cōdemned: but let the money ſo loſt be reſtored to them againe: and for want of due payment, let it bee recouered by competent actions and formall pleas by the looſers, that it may reuert to thē or to their heires after them. And a little after in the ſame place: Let the Biſhoppes of thoſe places where this ſhall be tryed, bee helpfull and aſsiſtant vnto them for the better accompliſhment hereof, and the Preſidents, Prouoſtes and Gouernours likewiſe.
                  
                  Biſhoppes therefore and Eccleſiaſticall Paſtors if they will effectually execute their dueties and maintaine Religion in hir puritie and ſoundneſſe, muſt haue a diligent care hereunto, that this wicked exerciſe and paltrie Plaie may bee baniſhed out of all mens companies within their charge and iuriſdiction:Interdici. Authen. De ſacroſanc. Epiſcopis. as here (for example) they ſee it plainely enioyned vnto them by the Edicts and Commaundements of the Emperours.
                  Whereunto they were ſpecially mooued: for that they perceiued in this kinde of Playe ſuch an heape of miſcheeues and inconueniences alwaies attending thereon: ouer and

beſide the horrible blaſpheming of Gods holie name, and other moſt deteſtable and vnſufferable outrages, vſually practiſed in theſe ſo filthie and vnchriſtian exerciſes.
                  But what? doth the Canon Lawe, (as it is called) which was gathered and packed together by Papiſtes, any whit more fauoure them, then doth the Ciuill Law? although the Biſhoppes of Rome would gladly be coumpted milde, and ſeeke for the title and praiſe of clemencie and gentleneſſe, yea and then alſo, when as maners were moſt corrupt & al good orders in the Church out of ſquare? I ſay, no. For, euen the Canon Lawe doth moſt ſeuerelie condemne them,Canon. Epiſcop. diſtinct. 35. in Decreto. Decretal. lib. 3. tit. 1. c. Clerici. and vtterly deteſt them as the moſt hurtfull and peſtilent people that can bee.
                  So that al men in generall with one common aſſent, and (as it were) with the mouth of Nature her ſelfe, haue flatly euer condemned this Dyceplay, and baniſhed it out from among all godly Chriſtian mens companie: for that it hath bene the vtter ouerthrow not only of many a priuate perſon, but alſo the very ſubuerſion of ſundrie whole Kingdomes, and namelie, the Kings of Aſia and all their royall eſtate.
               
               
                  
                  Againſt Dyceplay The viij. Chapter. That the auncient fathers of the Church haue euer miſliked and written againſt Dyceplay.
                  
                     AS this vile kinde of Deuiliſh exerciſe and idle Playe is deteſted, condemned and ſpoken againſt by heathen perſons, prophane Magiſtrates, and lawes both Ciuill and Canon: ſo alſo and no leſſe, is it abhorred, reprooued and written againſt, by diuers auncient Fathers and reuerende Pillers of Chriſtian Religiō. Yea, they haue with much more vehemencie thundred and inueighed againſt it, as a paſtime in no wiſe among them that feare God, allowable or ſufferable.
                  
                     Cyprian.That good Father Cyprian, (then whom in his tyme there was none either more learned or holy) ſaieth plainly that the Deuil him ſelfe was the firſt author and inuenter of this peſtilent and pernicious Play. And therefore his aduiſe and warning is, that it ought with all diligence, care and endeuour of the heart and minde to be deteſted & abhorred: becauſe we are ſtrictly commaunded, not to haue any fellowſhip or dealing with the Deuill, or any of his wicked practiſes.
                  
                     
                     Barnard alſo writing to certaine Soldiours, touching thoſe godly Chriſtians which were in Hieruſalem, ſaieth thus: They defie,
                     Barnard ad Milites. 
                     reiect and abhorre Dyce and Dycers, Mū
                        mers, Enterlude and Stageplayers, Sorcerers, Wyzardes, Fablers, Taletellers, and ſingers of Ribald ditties, as the breeders of many Vanities, or rather of much phrā
                        ticke madneſſe.
                  
                  The Canons alſo that are fathered vpō the Apoſtles, & which (as ſome doe ſay) are of very great antiquitie,Canon. 41. & 42. doe muſt plainly likewiſe forbid this maner of play. So that, there hath bene no. Age of the Church, no faithfull men at any tyme, that wee can reade of, but haue flatly, directly and plainly proſtigated, reproued, and condemned this kinde of Deueliſh Game.
                  But let vs heare ſome of the reaſons of theſe graue and godly Fathers, which cauſed them ſo ſharplie and ſo worthilie to inueigh againſt this odious Play: that the ſtiffeſt, wilfulleſt & obſtinateſt defenders of ye ſame, may thereby at length learne to holde their peace, and to be aſhamed of themſelues. And leaſt any man ſhould thinke vs to bee in this poynt more preciſe and Stoicall then needes: or to ſpeake ſo much againſt it, as we doe, without

iuſt cauſe or reaſon, there is a little Booke of Nicolas de Lyra (a man accoūpted the learnedeſt in his tyme) touching the ſame, entituled Praeceptorium: wherin he alledgeth nine ſpeciall reaſons, gathered and collected out of diuers Wryters, why this Dyceplay among Chriſtians ought not in any wiſe to be ſuffered. Out of whom, and alſo out of other Writers beſides, wee here haue culled and ſelected the chiefeſt and moſt ſpecial: which may fully ſuffice to perſwade al thoſe that be godlie minded, and not wilfully wedded to their owne fooliſh opinions, how entierly and effectually wee ought to abhorre this kinde of lewde and Deueliſh exerciſe.
               
               
                  The ix. Chapter. That Dyceplay is directly condemned and reprooued by manifeſt textes of the ſacred Scriptures.
                  
                     FIrſt, there be ſome that thinke, (and very well truely) that this maner of Playe is directly againſt the Law of God, contained in the third Commaundement of the Decalogue.Firſt reaſon againſt Dyceplay. Wherein wee are preciſelie commaunded not to take the name

of the Lord God in vaine. And thereupon they gather, that in Lotte caſting (in which kinde (doubtleſſe) Dyceplaye is contained,) wee ought not in any wiſe for maintenaunce of our peeuiſh pleaſures, to vſe vaine and ydle matters, in ſteede of graue and godlie exerciſes: for that therein we doe after a ſorte make a mock of Gods prouidence,Pro. 16.33. and raſhly abuſe the greateſt teſtimonies and effects thereof, ſuch as Lotterie is. By this meanes therefore, they holde opinion that the power and Maieſtie of God, is prophaned and taken in vaine.
                  For, thus are we taught both by the examples of holy men, and by the very Commaundements of God himſelfe, that we ſhould not vſe theſe Lottes (wherein there reſteth a ſingular argument and token of Gods diuine prouidence, as before was ſayde) in vaine, trifeling or phantaſticall matter: but rather then and at ſuch tyme onely, when as there falleth out ſome matter of great moment and waightie importaunce: wherein God himſelf (as an extraordinarie moderatour, Ruler and Vmpier) muſt interpoſe his doome, ſtrike the ſtroake and decide the caſe: leaſt otherwiſe, if wee raſhlie and lightlie caſt out Lottes, wee ſeeme not onely to goe about to tempt God,

but alſo wickedly to offer ſome notable iniurie and villanous diſhonour vnto his extraornarie power and prouidence.
                  In deede, for the electing of Magiſtrates, diuiding of Goodes, partition of Landes among Coheires, or in making a choyſe of Paſtors in the Church, there maye bee cauſe ſometyme to vſe Lottes: becauſe in theſe, oftentymes the voyce and conſent of GOD is more neceſſarie, thē of men: and alſo, for that, there appeareth many tymes therein an, extraordinarie meanes of Gods will and pleaſure: & is a good way alſo to ende al quarrels and to auoyde all corruption of voyces. But in ſporting toyes and friuolous cauſes (as though we would make God, ſeruaunt to our vanities and paſtimes) to vſe Lots, they hold it vtterly vnlawfull.
                  Now, there is no man will denye, but that Dyce is one of ye chiefe kinds of Lot caſting. And therfore therby if not in plaine tearmes, yet neceſſarilie and incluſiuelie by waye of manifeſt circumſtaunce, the name and Maieſtie of God, is by Dyceplaye expreſſely prophaned and blaſphemouſlie diſhonored.
                  
                     Second reaſon.Secondly, they ſay, this kinde of Play is reproueable, for that it is vſed and inſtituted contrarie to the true nature and end of Patyme.

For, ſeeing that the ende and ſcope of Play is or ſhould be, either to exerciſe the induſtrie of the mynde, or els to cheriſh and reuiue the ſtrength and powers of the bodie: truely Dyceplay is moſt farre from either of them both. For therein wee neither exerciſe the Bodie, as wee doe in Wreſtling or Running, yea wee many tymes therein doe not ſo much as ſtirre or mooue our Bodie, nor any part of the ſame, excepting our hands and fingers: but rather ſit ſtill gaping and ſtaying for the chaunce of the Dyce, ſitting in the meane while like idle Drones playing al the day, and giuing our ſelues to no maner of actiuitie in the worlde: in ſo much that many tymes for a iuſt reward of this our loytering occupation, we are paied home with the grieuous payne of the Gowtes and other Ioynt diſeaſes.
                  And as for induſtrie of the mynde, who can ſay, that Dyceplayers doe vſe or increaſe any at all? ſeeing that in this play there is no maner of exerciſe for the witte at all: but all the hope of victory and winning, dependeth vpon Chaunce: in ſo much, that the Winner many tymes is driuen to wonder how hee wanne, and for the winning of any hande or ſtake afterward, cannot (in certaintie) any thing at al

aſſure himſelfe. And thus alſo it commeth to paſſe, that he which goeth away a looſer, doth not ſo much meruaile, as chafe and fret that he hath loſt: ſeeing that he could not perceiue (in that conqueſt and victorie made on him) any maner of induſtrie or ouerreaching wit in the Winner. And therfore they ſit the longer and playe thereat the eigerlier, for that they cannot ſee any probable reaſon, nor yeeld any ſufficient cauſe either of their winning, or of their looſing. Whereupon they cannot moderate and ſatiſfie themſelues herein, but the more they play, and the longer they continue thereat, the greedier they are, and the willinger to hold out: for that, in this wretched and ſlouthfull idlenes, they perceiue neither their bodies wearied, nor their mindes exerciſed and occupied.
                  
                     Third reaſon.Thirdly, they alledge the Lawes of the Magiſtrate, which forbiddeth theſe Playes, as offenſiue and wicked. A lawe therefore being once enacted and made againſt it, this Play cannot bee vſed, nor defended without offence. And notable is that ſaying of the Apoſtle, and for this preſent purpoſe very fit to be applyed:1. Cor. 8.13. 
                     If meate (ſaieth he) be a cauſe to offēd my brother, I will eate no fleſh while the world ſtandeth, that I may not offend

my Brother. Now, ſeeing it is a great de
                        •
                     le eaſier for vs to refraine theſe trifeling toyes, then to abſtaine from fleſh, which is a thing ſo commodious and neceſſarie for the ſuſtentation of our bodies in this life, who needeth to doubt, but that theſe paltring vanities are much more to be renounced and forborne, for feare of offending our Brethren? For there is no kinde of pleaſure, which we ought ſo much to eſteeme, as therby and for the ſame to giue offence vnto our Brother. Furthermore, although wee altogether forbeare and for euer abſtaine from this kinde of Play, yet be there other meanes enough, whereby wee may honeſtly and decently recreate both our Bodies and alſo our Mindes.
                  Fourthly, we are charged and commaunded by the Apoſtle, to redeeme the tyme,
                     Fourth reaſon. Ephe. 5.16. Colo. 4.5. and to beſtowe it in honeſt matters and Chriſtian exerciſes. For, when God graunteth vs tyme, and giueth vs leiſure either to reade his holie worde, to viſite the ſicke, to comfort our friends, or to doe other charitable deedes, wee ought not to omit this fit occaſion, which (according to the Prouerbe) is balde behind, but to doe the ſame quicklie and out of hand: becauſe (being forſlowed) one let or other may happen, and drawe our myndes from thoſe

godly actions. Yea, many cauſes may fal out, and ſo carie away our meanings, that we ſhal not afterward ſo much as once thinke of theſe our dueties, our fluggiſhneſſe and dulneſſe this way is ſo great. And therefore this our idle tyme and cōuenient leiſure, which ought to be ſo precious vnto vs, may not ſo waſtfullie and vnthriftilie be ſpent in Dyceplay.
                  
                     Fifth reaſon.Fifthlie, the very nature of this Playe is ſuch, that aboue all other Games it hath this filthie propertie, peculiarlie entailed vnto it, to wit, that it maketh men of all others moſt idle, moſt ſluggiſh, moſt couetous, and moſt deſirous of other mens goodes, and finallie moſt loath and vnwilling to leaue it. For, with much ado can we be drawen therefrom, after we haue once ſettled our delight therein, partlie for that through lazineſſe of ſitting ſtill, it bringeth with it no maner of wearines or labour to the bodie: and partly for that, through the vncertaine hazard and chaunce of the Dyce (whereupon onely dependeth the whole hope of victorie) it bringeth no maner of ſound pleaſure to the mynd, nor perfect cō
                     tentment to the Conſcience. Therefore the looſers, ſtil hoping for better luck, & chaunge of fortune (which he ſeeth eaſilie to come to paſſe and often to happen) continue play ſtill,

truſting to recouer their loſſes, and feeding themſelues with a greedie expectation of alterable chaunce. Likewiſe, the Winners, are ſtill in hope and thinke their good lucke will continue and neuer chaunge. Whereby it commeth to paſſe, that neither partie is willing to deſiſt and leaue, but perſeuer and laye on loade moſt eigerlie and earneſtlie. Whereas, in all other exerciſes either of the Bodie or of ye Mynde, there is at length ſome ende made, and the iſſue thereof ſoone eſpied: either by reaſon of the wearineſſe of the limmes, or for the oddes of their wittes: wherby the one plainlie perceiuing the other to be ſtronger and himſelfe the weaker, curteouſly yeeldeth himſelf, and willingly leaueth work. Dyceplay therefore hauing no ho, admitteth neither end nor meaſure.
                  Sixtlie,The ſixth reaſon. it is to bee abhorred and deteſted for the filthie couetouſneſſe and griping deſire of gaine, which therin is more notoriouſly vſuall, then in any other game. Where is there more inſaciable or miſerable ſeeking to winne one an others money? Where is there ſuch gaping, which way one may defeate and wipe an other of all that he hath? Where is there moe practiſes how they maye deceiue, yea vndoe the one the other? What hard hold

is there to ſeeke the vtter ſpoyle and decaye one of an other? Wherein bee there moe cogging tricks & coſening ſhifts vſed thē in this vile, deueliſh & vngracious play? In ſo much that the Apoſtle Paule in his Epiſtle to the Epheſians vſeth this word 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      and Alea for deceipt,Ephe. 4.14. craftineſſe and ſhifting deuiſes. Certes, there is no Game in the world, wherin more ryotous waſt of money is made then in this. None, wherein is more apparaunt proofe of wilfull and witleſſe loytering. For we haue heard of ſome, read of others, yea and knowen not a few, that by this wicked game haue played a way their Lordſhippes, Dukedomes, Seigniories, Mannors, Houſes and Landes: ouer and beſides their Horſes, Apparell, Gold, Siluer, Iewelles, houſhold ſtuffe, and all that they had beſide or could borowe. Yea, we reade of ſome, that haue ſet their own Bodies at the Stake, and throwen for the propertie of their owne ſelues at a caſt at Dyce, in ſteede of money, when they haue lacked it: and looſing the chaunce, and thereby themſelues, haue afterwarde lead the remaunder of their daies, as Slaues, in miſerable ſeruitude, at the diſcretion of the winners. So that this kinde of Play endeth at length (as Iuſtinian ſaieth) in the lamentable

ouerthrowes of many noble and renowmed houſes, and bringeth many an honeſt familie to weeping cheere, when all their wealth and ſubſtaunce is thus rufullie and pitifullie ranſacked.
                  Finally, there is no kinde of Vſurie more wicked, more deteſtable, or any way comparable to this kind of Gaine, that is, thus damnablie gotten by Dyceplay. For, here without any lending and without any labour on our part, wee get an exceſſiue gayne and vnmeaſurable encreaſe: yea, aſmuch and peraduenture much more then our principall ſtock that we beganne withall: and that alſo not in any long tract and proceſſe of tyme, but euen quicklie, preſentlie, and as it were in a moment. All which, doe plainly prooue an intollerable kinde of Couetouſneſſe to raigne ſpeciallie in this Playe: and that a great deale worſe, then the taking of Vſury vpon Vſury: which in all Ages hath bene alwaies accoūpted and reputed for one of the vileſt and deueliſheſt practiſes that could be.
                  Laſt of all:The ſeuēth reaſon. the ſeuenth reaſon why this wicked Game is to bee vtterly condemned and baniſhed out of the ranke and number of all honeſt and Chriſtian diſportes is: becauſe the ſame is vſuallie accompaignied with horrible

blaſpheming of Gods moſt holy name, terrible banning and curſing, ſpightfull chafing and rayling, curſed inuocation and naming of the Deuill, dreadfull and abhominable denyings and defyings of God himſelfe, & rechleſſe miſregarding of his ſeuere iudgements: al which horrible outragious enormities are ſo incident to this moſt helliſh Dyceplay, that they are ſeldome or neuer aſunder from it. Which thing the Emperour Iuſtinian
by an authentical law thereupon made, doth manifeſtly and plainly giue vs to vnderſtande. Whereupon, Dyceplay grewe ſo odious in the iudgements of all good & godlie perſons, that order was taken and by lawe confirmed, that the places and houſes where it was vſed, were commaunded and adiudged firſt to bee conſiſked and forfeited, and afterwarde to bee vtterly ruinated and throwen downe: and commaundement giuen that neuer afterward any man ſhould dwell therein: becauſe ye heauie wrath of God was thought to be ſtill ouer that place.
                  To conclude, I might here bring a great many of other hurtes and miſchieues occaſioned hereby: but what neede we moe? ſeeing thoſe that we haue alreadie alledged, be ſufficient (as we hope) to perſwade all honeſt and

well giuen mindes, that both can and haue learned to be ruled by reaſon, and to liſten to Chriſtian inſtruction.
                  As for the ſtubborne crewe of wilfull perſons borne rather to purſue beaſtly pleaſures and ſauage ſenſualitie, then to embrace humaine ſocietie and honeſt orders, there can nothing ſuffice at all. To perſwade therefore ſuch monſtruous people wee will not goe about, for we knowe therein we ſhall but looſe our labour. Wee rather thinke ſuch Dingthriftes and Makeſhiftes worthie to be grieuouſlie puniſhed by the Magiſtrate with ſundrie and many penalties both pecuniarie and corporal, and by ſeueritie of Lawes to be terrified and reſtrayned from this Play. Other reaſons a great ſort, to confirme ſo much as we haue here ſayed, are alledged and cited by that reuerend man Peter Martyr in his learned Commentaries vpon the Booke of Iudges. Cap. 14. But we haue here brought ſuch onely, as we had of our owne ſtoare, and deuiſed by our owne induſtrie.
               
               
                  
                  The x. Chapter. An anſwer to their obiections, that ſtoutly and ſtiffely maintaine this kinde of Play.
                  
                     BVT leaſt theſe fellowes ſhould complaine, as their maner and faſhion is, that they are hardlie dealt withal in this caſe, at our handes: and that they are condemned by vs before their cauſe bee heard, or at leaſt throughly waighed and ſufficiently diſcuſſed, let vs heare what reaſons they are able to bring for themſelues.
                  Firſt and formoſt, they exclame againſt vs and ſay that we are too ſeuere, too preciſe and almoſt too ſuperſticious, vnder a pretence of being too righteous. Of which thing we are warned to beware and take heede of, by the Preacher.
                     Eccle. 7.17 
                     Cap. 7. verſ. 17. Wee (truely) doe confeſſe that ſaying, written by the Preacher, to be moſt true and godlie. But yet wee anſwere, that wee ought to abſtaine, not onely from that which is euill of it ſelfe and by his owne nature: but alſo from all ſhewe, ſemblaunce and appearaunce of euill, as the bleſſed Apoſtle S.1. Theſſ. 5.22. 
                     Paule expreſſely teacheth vs. And we haue ſhewed afore, that Dyceplay is not onely harmefull, pernicious and damnable

to them that play thereat, but alſo that it is of it ſelfe filthie and wicked, and of it owne nature ſhamefull and deteſtable. What ſeueritie therefore, or too much preciſeneſſe may this ſeeme to be, if this Dyceplay & Carding be reproued by vs, & wiſhed not to be vſed by thoſe that are godly Chriſtians? Is this Superſtition, or a taking away of Chriſtian libertie from Chriſtiās (for ſo they alſo obiect) when as we both allowe honeſt diſportes and ſeemelie Games? not onely tolerating, but commending alſo moderate exerciſes aſwell for the mynd as for the bodie, whereby the powers both of the one and of the other maye conueniently bee conſerued?Chryſoſt. Hom. 1. 
                     Chryſoſtome the learnedeſt and eloquenteſt of all the Fathers of the Greeke Church in his Homilie of the looſeneſſe and corrupt maners of his Tyme, anſwering vnto ſuch like certaine obiections of wilfull mynded perſons in thoſe daies, ſaieth, That when wee reſtraine from the godlie their ſuperfluities and exceſſes of life, we may not therein be thought to bee ſeuere, or to deale any thing more hardlie then we ought to doe.
                  And as cōcerning that Chriſtian Libertie, which they ſo much pretend and make ſhewe of, we ſay yt euen in theſe indifferent things
                     
it ought ſo to be moderated and conſtrued, as that it neither at any tyme tende to the contempt of good and politique Lawes of the Countrey profitablie enacted, neither to the offence of our Neighbour: much leſſe ought we to vſe the ſame licentiouſlie in any things that of their owne nature be hurtfull, inconuenient, vnhoneſt, forbidden or vnlawfull.
                  Secondly they obiect vnto vs: That they ſee no harme to growe by this Playe, ſo that there hee no ſwearing, no blaſpheming, no chaſing nor couetouſneſſe therein vſed. A very proper and fine exception (I promiſe you) and wittilie by them alledged. As though the playing for money, can poſſibly bee without ſome ſpyce of couetouſneſſe, or deſire of gayuing that which is an other mans? Nay, wee flatly ſay, that it is not at any hande lawfull, (whether the Games bee honeſt or vnhoneſt) to play for money.
                  And whereas they ſay, they ſee no cauſe, why Dyceplay ſhould worthilie be reproued and condenmed: therein are they very greatly deceiued. For, ouer and beſides their vſing of Dyceplaye, which is a moſt plaine kinde of Lotte caſting, and which in vaine and friuolous matters they are expreſſely forbidden to practiſe: There is alſo an other reaſon that

maketh againſt them: which is, that this ſame Dyceplay hath euer bene prooued and found pernicious and miſerable to the very Dycers and Gameſters them ſelues. Alſo it hath ſcarcely (yea lightly not at al) bene ſeene, that it hath euer bene vſed without ſwearing and blaſpheming of the name of God: ſo that as the Wiſe man ſaieth, the ende of this ſhorte pleaſure leadeth vnto al wickedneſſe, and the iſſue of ſuch mirth (beſides the conſuming of a mans wealth) bringeth alwaies with it,Pro. 14.1
                           •
                        .13. heauineſſe of the mynd and ſorowfulnes of heart. And although beeing blinded in their owne follie, they thinke not of this geare preſently, yet ſhall they hereafter (if they ſpeedilie repent not, and turne ouer the leaſe into a newe leſſon) feele by experience the ſmart of their deſertes, and ſhall finde this our admonition and ſaying to be moſt true and certaine.
                  Thirdly, they ſay and aduouch, that Dyceplay is not ſimply, and of it ſelfe, harmefull or reprooueable: but only yt the immoderate & exceſſiue vſe thereof is to be condemned and diſallowed, and ſuch Dycing houſes and Tabling houſes as purpoſelie ſerue for this idle and loytering trade. But I would gladlie learne of thē, what this worde Alea in Latine doth truely ſignifie? Is not the Game aſwell

as the place condemned, and expreſſely in the Law forbidden? And whence proceedeth this ordinarie and immoderate cuſtome of Play, but from theſe ſmall beginninges at the firſt, which muſt therefore bee cut away and auoyded.
                  And whereas they further ſay, that there is a Vertue (called in Greek Eutrapelia, and in Engliſh Curteſie) which conſiſteth in mens ſporting and recreating themſelues together: I affirme likewiſe that there is ſuch a vertue in deed: but that it alloweth any man to play at any lewde and vnlawfull Games (ſuch as Dyceplaye is) I vtterly denye: for it reſpecteth onely ſuch, as are warrantable by the right rule of Honeſtie. And moreouer, it is ſuch a Vertue, as moderateth and gouerneth thoſe good Games and honeſt diſportes alſo whereof I euen now ſpeake, that we giue not our ſelues to them beyond meaſure, nor keepe our ſelues therein occupied, longer then becommeth.
                  Finally, they aſke this queſtion: Where in all the whole Scripture is there ſpecially any ſuch odious mention made of Dyceplaying, as we would ſeeme to vrge? Wherein (verily) they vnawares bewraye their great ignoraunce. For, there be two moſt manifeſt

places in the Scriptures, expreſſely making mention thereof, and that with as great horror and deteſtation as poſſibly can be. The firſt is in the Pſalmes:
                     Pſal. 22 19 The other in the Goſpell after S. Iohn: where it is ſayd,Ioh. 19.24. that they played for our Sauiour Chriſtes Coate, and that they caſt lottes (which was Dyce) who ſhould haue it. And truely this Game is a wide windowe, and almoſt the firſt gappe vnto all looſenes and diſſoluteneſſe of maners, which Sathan to diſturbe the vnitie of the Church, is wont commonly to ſet wide open.
                  Briefly, and to make an ende, let vs conclude this our preſent Treatiſe, with that place of that auncient Father Cyprian, in his Booke de Alea, wherein he plainlie ſheweth that Sathan the Deuill was the firſt deuiſer of this Play. For, when as Sathan the Enemie of Mankinde went about deepelie to roote & imprint Idolatrie in the hearts of men: and to make it an ordinarie Gheſt alſo at Banquets, Diſportes and Meriments, to the ende that hee might thereby the more freely raigne and carie rule among them, and bring them to his lure by a kinde of pleaſure, (or as it were a ſweete poyſon) he deuiſed and hatched this deteſtable and wicked kinde of Game.
                  
                     And therefore the Kinges, Queenes and Verlettes which are now with vs the Coatecardes, were in olde tyme and at the beginning, the Images of Idolles, and were called by the very names of the Idolles and falſe Gods themſelues. Which now ſince, becauſe men be Chriſtiās, they haue (for ſtark ſhame) ſkowred, burniſhed, and newe furbiſhed the names thereof onely, but as for the plauſible memoriall and very monument it ſelfe of Idolatrie, is ſtill retayned. For, becauſe they would not be thought to imitate the Heatheniſh Idolatrie of the other, and yet neuertheleſſe maintaine the playe it ſelfe, they haue chaunged thoſe olde Idolatrous names and Images, and call them now by the names of Charlemaine, Launcelot, Hector, or ſome other valiaunt Captaines, Dukes or Kings: but (as I aforeſayd) the thing it ſelfe, and the vſe of this Deueliſh deuiſe they kepe ſtill, and doe diſguiſe the horrible inconuenience growen thereby, vnder the cloake of ſuch gaye tearmes, to the no ſmal daunger of Idolatrie among Chriſtians euen at this day.
                  The name therefore is onely chaunged, that is to ſay, the colour, phiſnamie, purtrature and countenaunce, but the thing it ſelfe, together with the lewdneſſe and beaſtlineſſe

hereof, remaineth the ſelfe ſame, and is al one and alike among all ſuch Chriſtians, as addict themſelues to Dyceplay.
                  Seeing therefore that it hath here beene prooued and ſufficientlie ſhewed, that Dyceplay is directly and flatly repugnaunt to the written word of God, vtterly harmefull and pernicious to the Players and Gameſters themſelues: accompanied & fraughted with ſuch a ſorte of diſcommodities and offences: contrary to all good Lawes: ſweruing from all wholeſome eſtabliſhed orders: offering defiaunce to all reformation: bidding battaile to all honeſtie: and finally beeing nothing els, then (as it were) the moſt filthie excrements and helliſh inuention of Sathan the Deuill, there is no Chriſtian mā needeth to doubt, but that he ought with all endeuour to abandon, forſake, renounce, defye, and vtterly to abſtaine from it.
                  
                     Thomas Newtonus, Ceſtreſhyrius.
                  
                  FINIS.
                  
                     
                        Ludens taxillis, bene reſpice quid ſit in illis:
                        Mors tua, ſors tua, res tua, ſpes tua pendet in illis.
                     
                     
                        Aleator quanto in arte eſt melior, tanto eſt nequior.
                     
                  
               
            
            
               
                  
                  
                     ❧ A Table, ſhewing the Contents of euery Chapter in this Treatiſe of Dyceplay and Gaming.
                  
                     WHether it be lawful at al, for a Chriſtian man or woman to play and vſe recreation of their mynd. Chap. 1.
                     Whether it be lawful for a man to play for money, and the ſame being wonne to keepe to his owne vſe. Chap. 2.
                     Of Games, Playes, and publique Exerciſes: and of the Rewardes thereunto aſſigned by the Magiſtrate and Common wealth. Chap. 3.
                     Of thoſe that beſtowe their winninges gayned by Play, vpon a Banquet or cheere for the whole Companie. Chap. 4.
                     What kindes of Games and Playes be lawfull, and which bee forbidden and vnlawfull. Chap. 5.
                     The true meaning and ſignification of this word Alea, and what Games & Plaies be comprehended vnder the name thereof. Chap. 6.
                     
                        Dycing and Carding reproued & condemned euen by the Heathen and Infidelles that knew not God. Chap. 7.
                     That the aūcient Fathers of the Church haue euer miſliked and written againſt Dyceplay. Chap. 8.
                     That Dyceplay is directly condemned and flatly reprooued by manifeſt textes of the ſacred Scriptures. Chap. 9.
                     An aunſwere to their obiections, that ſtoutly defend and ſtiffely maintaine this kinde of Play. Chap. 10.
                  
                  FINIS.
               
            
         
      
   