
      
         
            
            
            THE
TRVE DISCRIPtion
of a Royall
Maſque.
            
            
               PRESENTED AT HAMPton
Court, vpon Sunday night, being
the eight of Ianuary.
1604.
            AND
Perſonated by the Queenes moſt Excellent
Majeſtie, attended by Eleuen
Ladies of Honour.
            LONDON
Printed by Edward Allde, and are to be
ſolde at the Long Shoppe, adjoyning vnto
S. Mildreds Church in the
Poultrye. 1604.
         
      
      
         
            
            
            THE
TRVE DISCRIPTION
Of a Royall Maſque.
Preſented at Hampton Court vpon Sunday
night being the eight day of
Ianuary. 1604.
            
               The Night apparelled in a black veſture ſet with Stars
comming from belowe, and approching neere vnto the Temple
erected towarde the vpper end of the Hall: wakens her Sonne
Somnus that there lyes ſleeping in a Caue; with this ſpeech.
               
                  AWake dark ſleep, rouſe thee from out thy Caue;
                  Thy Mother Night, that bred thee in her womb,
                  And fed thee firſt with ſilence and with eaſe,
                  Doth heere thy ſhadowed operations craue.
                  And therefore wake my ſonne, awake and come:
                  Strike with thy Hornie wande, the ſpirits of theis
                  That here expect ſome pleaſing nouelties;
                  And make their ſlumber to beget ſtrange ſightes.
                  
                     
Strange viſions and vn-uſual properties,
                  Vn-ſeene of latter ages, auncient rites;
                  Of gifts diuine, wrapt vp in Miſteries,
                  Make this to ſeeme a Temple in their ſight:
                  Whoſe maine ſupport, holy religion, frame,
                  And wiſedome, courage, Temperaunce and right:
                  Make ſeeme the pillors that ſuſtaine the ſame,
                  Shadow ſome Sibill to attend the rites;
                  And to deſcribe the power that ſhall reſorte,
                  With the interpretation of the benefites
                  They bring in Cloudes, & what they doe importe,
                  Yet make them to protend the true deſire
                  Of thoſe that wiſh them, waking reall things;
                  Whilſte I wil hoou'ring heere aloofe retire,
                  And couer all things with my ſable wings.
               
               
                  
                     Som. Deere Mother Night, I your commandement
                  Obay, and dreams t'interpret dreames, will make
                  As waking curioſitie is wonte.
                  Though better dreames aſleepe, the dreames awake
                  And this White Horny wande ſhall worke the deed:
                  Whoſe power, doth figures of the light preſent,
                  When from this ſable Radius doth proceede
                  Nought but confuſde darke ſhewes to no intent:
                  And therefore goe bright viſions, entertaine
                  All round about, whilſte Ile to ſleepe againe.
               
            
            
               
               Iris the Meſſenger of the Goddeſſes, diſcending
from the Mountaine where they were aſſembled,
deckt in the couller of the Raine-bow, ſpeakes as foloweth.
               
                  
                     I The daughter of wounder, now made the
Meſſenger of power; heere deſcended, to ſignifie
the comming of a Celeſtiall preſence of Goddeſſes,
determined this faire Temple of peace, with holy
handes and deuoute deſires, haue dedicated to vnity
and concord: and leauing to themſelues in Ouidos Ida
Paphos their auncient delighting places of Greece and
Aſia, now made the ſeates of Barbariſme, and ſpoyle,
vouchſafe to take their recreation, here, vpon the Weſterne
Mount of mightie Brittanie, the Land of Ciuill
Muſicke and of reſt: And are pleaſed to appeere in
the ſelf-ſame figures, wherein antiquitie hath formorly
cloathed them; and as they haue bene caſt in the
imagination of pittie, who hath giuen mortal ſhapes
to the gifts and effects of an eternall power: For that

thoſe beautifull Carrecters of ſence were eaſier to be
read, then their miſticall Ideas, diſperſed in that wide
and incomprehenſible volume of Nature. And well
haue mortall men apparelled all the vertues, all the
graces, all bleſsings, with that ſhape wherewith themſelues
are moſt delighted, and which worke the beſt
motions, and beſt repreſent the beauty of heauenly
powers. And therefore, reuerend Propheteſſe,
who heare attendeſt vpon the deuotions of this
place, prepare thy ſelfe for thoſe rites that pertaine to
thy function, and the honour of ſuch deities. And to
the end thou maiſt haue a fore-notion what powers,
and who they are that come; take here this Proſpectiue,
and herein note and tell what thou ſeeſt: For
well maiſt thou there obſerue their ſhadowes, but
their preſence will bereaue thee of all, ſaue admiration
and amazement. For who can looke vpon ſuch
powers and ſpeake? And ſo I leaue thee.
               
            
            
               
               Sybilla deckt as a Nunne, in blacke vpon
White, hauing receiued this Meſſage, and the Proſpectiue, vſeth
theſe words.
               
                  WHat haue I ſeene? Where am I? Or doe I ſee
at all? or am I anie where? What? was this
IRIS the Meſſenger of IVNO, or elſe, but a fantaſma
or imagination? Will the Diuine Goddeſſes
vouchſafe to viſit this poore Temple? Shall I be bleſt
to entertaine ſo great powers? It can bee but a
dreame; yet ſuch great powers haue bleſt as humble
Roofes, and vſe it of no other reſpect, then their
owne great fauours to ſhine where they will. But
what Proſpectiue is this? or what ſhall I herein ſee?
O admirable powers! what ſights are theſe?
               
               
                  
                  JVNO.
                  FIrſt, heere Imperiall IVNO in her chayre,
                  With Scepter of command, for Kingdomes large:
                  Aſcends, all clad in colours ef the ayre,
                  Crown'd with bright Starres, to ſignifie her charge.
               
               
                  PALLAS.
                  Next, warlike PALLAS, in her helmet dreſt,
                  With Launce of winning; Target of defence:
                  In whom both wit and courage are expreſt,
                  To get with glory, hold wth prouidence.
               
               
                  VENVS.
                  Then louely VENVS in bright Majeſtie,
                  Appeares with milde aſpect in Doue-like-hewe,
                  With th'al combining ſcarffe of amitie;
                  T'ingird ſtrange Nations with affections true.
               
               
                  DIANA.
                  Next, chaſte DIANA in her robes of greene,
                  With weapons of the Wood her ſelfe addreſts,
                  To bleſſe the Forreſt where her power is ſeene,
                  T'hold peace with all the World, but with wilde beaſts.
               
               
                  VESTA.
                  Then comely VESTA with her flames of zeale▪
                  
                  Preſents her ſelfe, clad in white puritie,
                  Whoſe booke the ſoules ſweet comfort doth reueale,
                  By th'euer burning lampe of pietie.
               
               
                  
                  PROSERPINA.
                  Next, rich PROSERPINA with flames of gold,
                  Whoſe eſtate, although within the earth, yet ſhee
                  Comes from aboue, and in her hand doth hold
                  The Mine of wealth, with cheerefull Majeſtie.
               
               
                  MACARIA.
                  Then al in purple robes, rich Happineſſe:
                  Next her appeares, bearing in either hand,
                  Th'enſignes both of welth and wit; t'expreſſe,
                  That by them both, her Majeſtie doth ſtand.
               
               
                  CONCORDJA.
                  Then all in partie-coloured robes appeares
                  In White and Crimſon-gracefull Concord, reſt
                  With knottes of vnion; and in hand ſhe beares
                  The happy joyned Roſes of our reſt.
               
               
                  ASTRAEA.
                  Cleare-eyde ASTRAEA next, with reuerend browe,
                  Clad in Celeſtiall hew, which beſt ſhe likes:
                  Comes with her ballance, and her ſword to ſhowe,
                  That firſt her judgement weighes before it ſtrikes.
               
               
                  FLORA.
                  Then cheerefull FLORA, all adornd with flowers,
                  Who cloathes the earth with beauty and delight,
                  In thouſand ſundrie sutes, whilſt ſhining howers,
                  Will ſcarſe afford a darkenes to the Night.
               
               
                  
                  CERES.
                  Next, plenteous CERES in her harueſt weede,
                  Crown'd with the'ncreaſe of what ſhe gaue to keepe,
                  To Gratitude and Faith in whom we neede:
                  Who ſowes on Vertue, ſhall with glory reape.
               
               
                  TETHIS.
                  Laſtly comes TETHIS, ALBIONS deereſt Loue,
                  Whom ſhe in faithfull armes doth deigne t'imbrace:
                  And brings the Trident of her power t'approue
                  Her fauour and reſpect to do him grace.
                  
                     Thus haue I read their ſhadowes, but beholde:
                     In glory where they come as IRIS tolde.
                  
               
            
            
               
               The three Graces march before the Goddeſſes,
diſcending downe the Mountaine with lowd Muſicke, and comming
vp to the vpper ende, ſtay and ſing this Song, whilſt the Goddeſſes
go vp to the Temple with Preſents, and from them, march downe
the Hall.
               
                  
                     The Song.
                     
                        DEſert, Reward, and Gratitude,
                        The Graces of Society:
                        Do heere with hand in hand conclude,
                        The bleſſed chaine of amity.
                        1. For I deſerue. 2. I giue. 3. I thanke:
                        
                           All. Thanks, guifts, deſerts thus joyne in ranck.
                     
                     
                        Wee yeeld the ſplendent rayes of light,
                        Vnto the bleſsings that diſcend;
                        The grace whereof with more delight,
                        The well diſpoſing doth commend,
                        Whilſt gratitude, rewards, deſerts,
                        Pleaſe, win, draw on, and couple hearts.
                     
                     
                        For woorth, and power, and due reſpect,
                        Deſerues, beſtowes, returnes with grace;
                        The meed, reward, the kind effect,
                        That giues the world a cheerefull face.
                        And turning in this courſe of right,
                        Makes vertue moue with true delight.
                     
                  
               
            
            
               
               The Song being ended, and the Maskers in the middeſt
of the Hall, diſpoſing themſelues to their daunce, Sibilla hauing
placed their ſeuerall Preſents on the Altar, vttereth theſe words.
               
                  
                     O Power of powers, graunt to our vowes we pray,
                  That theſe fayre bleſsings which we here arreſt,
                  In figures left vs here, in ſubſtance, may
                  Be thoſe great proppes of glory and reſpect.
                  Let Kingdomes large, let armed Pollicye,
                  Milde Loue, true Zeale, right ſhooting at the white,
                  Of braue deſignes, let Wealth, Felicitie,
                  Iuſtice, and Concord, Pleaſure, Plenty, Might
                  And powre by Sea, with grace proportinate,
                  Make glorious both this Kingdome and Eſtate.
               
               After this the Maskers dawnced their owne meaſures,
which being ended, & they ready to take out the Lords,
the three Graces ſing.
               
                  
                     
                        I.
                        VVHilſt worth with honour, make their choiſe,
                        For meaſured motions ordered right:
                        Now let vs likewiſe giue a voyce,
                        Vnto the touch of our delight.
                     
                     
                        II.
                        FOr comforts lockt vp without ſound,
                        Are th'vnborne Children of the thought:
                        Like vnto Treaſures neuer found,
                        That buryed lowe, are left forgot.
                     
                     
                        III.
                        Where words or glory do not ſhow,
                        There like braue actions without Frame,
                        It ſeems like plants not ſet to growe,
                        Or as a tombe without a name.
                     
                  
               
            
            
               
               The Maſkers hauing ended the Dauncing
with the Lords: IRIS, giues warning of their departure, in this
manner,
IRIS.
               
                  AS I was the joyfull Meſſenger, to notifie the comming
of theſe diuine powers; ſo am I nowe the
ſame of their departure, who hauing cloathed themſelues
with theſe apparances, doe nowe returne backe
Spheres of there owne being from whence they are.
But yet of my ſelfe, this much I muſt reueale, though
againſt the warrant of a Meſſenger, who, I know had
better to fayle in obedience, than in preſumption,
that theſe Deities by (the motion of the all-directing
Pallas, the glorious Patroneſſe of this mighty Monarchie)
deſcending in the Majeſtie of their inuiſible eſſences,
vpon yonder Mountaine; found there the beſt
and moſt worthy, the beſt of Ladies, diſporting her
ſelfe with the choiſeſt attendants, whoſe formes they
preſently tooke, as delighting to be in the beſt built
Temples of beauty and honour, and in them vouch ſafed
to appeare in this manner, being otherwiſe no
objects for mortall eyes.
                  
                     
And no doubt, but that in reſpect or the perſons,
vnder whoſe beautiful couerings they haue thus preſented
themſelues? theſe Deities will be pleaſed, the
rather at their inuocation, knowing all their deſires
to be ſuch, as euermore to grace this glorious Monarchie,
with the Royall effects of theſe bleſsings repreſented.
               
               After this, they fel to a ſhort parting Daunce,
and ſo aſcended the Mountaine in the ſame
order as they came downe.
            
            FINIS.
            
         
      
   