
      
         
            
            
            A BRIEFE DISCOVRSE OF THE SPANISH STATE, VVITH a Dialogue annexed intituled PHILOBASILIS.
            AT LONDON, Imprinted by Richard Field dwelling in the Blacke-Friers neere Ludgate. 1590.
         
         
            
            
            TO THE MOST HIGH MIGHTIE AND VERTVOVS PRINCESSE ELIZABETH BY THE GRACE OF GOD QVEENE OF ENgland, France and Ireland, &c. be a most prosperous, long and victorious raigne.
            
               IF Caesar, most gracious Soueraigne Ladie, encouraged his Pilot being feareful in a tempest at sea, by saying to him, Feare not thou cariest Caesar: howe much more may we be comforted, & feare no wind of fortune, your sacred person being in our arke, and your royall hand at the sterne of our gouernment: for greater is your Maiestie then Caesar, and of more power to giue life to the fift Monarchie which shall haue no ende; then he to the fourth almost ended.
            To subdue mightie nations remaineth onely in the monuments of time: but to conquer men with pietie (the guidon of all the vertues) is to leaue a Trophaea of your Maiesties victories, so great as no age can comprehend. The consideration of this moueth the world with a reuerent regard of your Maiesties proceedings; which being houed vnder the wing of God, can suffer no alteration of time or fortune.
            
               Who would an instance hereof, he can haue none more honorable then the resolution of all men to withstand the Spaniards intended inuasion; they being then most enclined to your Maiesties seruice when the danger seemed greatest by the neere approch of the Spanish Armado.
            
            Seing then most mightie Princesse, the blason of your vertues is best knowne by expressing their barbarous tyrannie, contraries being perceiued by their contrarie effects, I thought meete in regard thereof (my dutie to your Maiestie commanding no lesse) to display some Spanish colours, whereby the brightnesse of your glorie issued from your qualified gouernment, may the sooner appeare to all men.
            This collection I most humbly Dedicate vnto your most excellent Maiestie, beseeching him who hath placed you in the royall seate, and miraculously preserued your Maiestie from sundrie sorts of great danger, to giue your Highnesse a most prosperous and long life in assured tranquillitie, to the glorie of his name, and comfort of your faithfull and louing subiects.
            
               Your Maiesties most faithfull, humble and obedient subiect, EDWARD DAVNCE.
            
         
         
            
            TO THE NOBLE AND vertuous Reader.
            
               THose may muse, vvho sucke the breastes of change, that by an odious inuectiue dravving enuie, I should stirre them vvho (by the indisposition of time) make the vvorld tremble before them: but let those knovve, vvho, to their losse desire nouelties, that, I being a naturall subiect of this realme, esteeme nothing my hurt, that may discouer the perill and reproch of a common enemie. Common I tearme him, vvho, vnder colour of reformation, seeketh to enlarge his Empire, vvith the bloud of his ovvne sort. Let them then (vvho affect that faction) rather desire to haue such a common vveale (vvhich by false positions) they thinke to be dismembred, then none at all. Let them be moreouer persvvaded, that there is no religion vvhere there is no care of countrie, vvhich I conclude from these principles. First that vve can not loue God vvhom vve haue not seene, if vve loue not our neighbours vvhom vve do see. Secondly that he that regardeth not his houshold is vvorse then an Ethenicke. To procure then the ruine of a region, and to be guides to that enemie (against vvhose auarice being entred, there is no prouision to be made) it is to be sea monsters, and such as scoure in the sands of Tagus▪
                Farevvel Noble & vertuous Reader, vvith this caution, that vpon any daunger of thy countrey, thou place thy mind in heauen, thy heart in Court, and thy bodie in thy cuyrasse.
            
               E. D. Gent.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
            A BRIEFE DISCOVRSE OF THE SPANISH STATE.
            
               PHILIP (the father of great Alexander) hauing increased his small kingdome of Macedonia to the Empire of Greece: and considering how needfull the fauour of all men was for the life of his reputation in that romth; commanded that daily ere he came from his chamber, a boy standing at the dore should say with loud voyce, Philip remember thou art a mortall man: a course beyond anie expectation of that time; he being deriued from Hercules, whom for his excellencie, they feigne was translated amongst the gods.
            Some who haue since that time preferred iustice before the other vertues, do name humilitie; (as that which belongeth onely to man) to be the meanest notwithstanding that she linketh the rest, and is mother to clemencie, who chiefly bringeth forth the fauor of the people.
            The regard which this prudent king had to make his succession immoueable, and to raise them to the highest top of glorie (as he did by making their foord, by his affabilitie, tempetance and clemencie) is of excellent president for all Princes: who to effect the like, are to appeare before God as men clothed with humilitie; and before men as God adotned with clemencie: they being both men & gods respecting their condition of humane frailtie; and high place of their royall dignitie.
            
               The error which groweth by the abuse of these things is dangerous, as that which leadeth either into a manifest tyrannie, or a remissenesse of gouernement. For howe may he that perceiueth not the passions of men, or feeleth not in him selfe an inclination to mercie; either relieue the people of their miseries as man, or prouide for their infirmities as God?
            To seeme therfore such who seeke a reformation and benefit of the people (a report very plausible) and couertly to deuour manie prouinces, is a practise neither of man or God, but of Deuils incarnate. I would there were not any vnto whom this might be obiected: & that her Maiestie whose most noble Progenitors haue deserued well of Spaine, might, if for no other cause then the auncient league betweene the Crowne of Castill and the house ofFrossart. 
               Lancaster, haue enioyed their good neighbourhood and friendship of times past. But seeing that their cheerefull countenance (being oppressed with the ill humours of their ambition) is turned into a melancholie darke, I haue thought good for the benefit of her Maiesties subiectes, (some of them hauing vaine imaginations of the Spaniards excellent giftes and greatnesse) to drawe the lineaments of their Empire and good nature, by which it may appeare howe monstruous the proportion of both is, which they would should seeme most exquisit and comely to all men.
            It is certaine that Spaine is of great antiquitie, bearing that name vnder the first Monarchie; but when we shall consider the significations of her and of her first inhabitant, we shall find her age no ornament (as it hath bene in the names of the foure Monarchies, and of some other nations) but a great deformitie considering her incommodities,

and peruerse qualities of that people all naturall defects being made more imperfect by continuance or alteration of times. Touching therefore the significationsGieronimo Ruscelli 
                     •
                  el Ptolomeo. of that countrie: 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                (being a Greeke word) is interpreted needinesse, penurie and raritie; and was not long after the diuision of tongues, first inhabited by the third sonne of Iaphet named Iobel or Tubal, signifying worldly,Iosephus lib. 1. antiq. cap. 11. or of the world, confusion and ignomie: which significations meet so iumpe regarding the state of that counrie, and customes of that nation, as nothing could be deuised apter.
            Of this contemptible beginning (which in respect of their meannesse was long without suspition of tyrannie haue they (lothing the streights of Hercules pillers, and his Plus vltra) extended their limits to the vtmost Indians; where they haue erected this Trophaea of Alexanders conceipt, Non sufficit orbis; but how farre from the temperance of good Princes, let anie barbarian iudge, who would haue bene glutted with halfe the miseries of them, with whose euils the Spaniard is not yet satisfied.
            For better expressing the particularities of their policie let vs (before we come to the significations of 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                and Tubal, only for an introductiō to the nature of both) obserue these foure points: First how that that nation rising1 like the bettle frō the cowshern, hurtleth against al things Secōdly that they being of the nature of shadows, which2 are short the Sunne ascending the Meridian; and long, being neere the Horizon, make a deceiptfull proportion of their greatnesse. Thirdly, that whilest the great kings of3 Europe liued, they were obscure, and haue onely since their time bene seene, like glowe wormes shining in the darke. Fourthly, that this region of Spaine (though verie4
               
ancient) was after the report of Polybius vnknown to theLib. 3. Hist. old Romanes, (the South part excepted) aswell in respect of the vnfruitfulnesse of the soyle, as sauage and rude life of the inhabitants: all which concerne the significations of that countrie and inhabitant: but first of 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               .
            It is conuenient, that we perceiue the effectes of this name by nearer circumstances of ages then the former generall poincts: in respect whereof, we must first looke1 backeward as farre as three thousand yeares: at which time the Phaenicians (who were then of the greatest nauigation)Diodorus Sicu. rerum anti. lib. 6. cap. 9. did buy of them their mettall for things of no accompt and small price: an argument that either the Spaniards then were of great simplicitie (a qualitie neuer growing to a habit in them) or that they had great want of those things which are ordinarie for the life of man, which is an inseparable accident of the greatest part of their countrey. Secondly who considereth their naturall2 disposition to robberie in the maiden yeares of Spaine,
               Diodorus Sic. rerum anti. lib. 5. cap. 2. & li. 6. cap. 9. would thinke they had onely studied that lawe Licurgus made in the benefit of secret theft; neither Hercules though he maistered their countrimen Gerion and the sonnes of Chrysaurus; or the Romanes who often restrained them, being able to suppresse their theeuerie. But they depend vpon this ground, that those things in which manie offend, are alwayes forgiuen, and that there is no law prescribed to necessitie.
            Thirdly behold their small multitude of people regarding3 the bignesse of their countrey, being one of the greatest kingdomes of Europe: which proceedeth of the significations of Spaine; caritie, penurie and want. For as it is natural that those females that giue sucke, may bring so manie of their kind as they haue tets: so is it monstruous

to produce moe than they haue meanes to releeue: this being alwaies a rule, that there is no region which is fruitfull (vnlesse mortalitie be a depriuing cause) but that according to the good prouidence of nature it is also populous.
            Fourthly, suruay the scituation of Spaine, which generally4 yeeldeth moe rockes and barren hils, than champain and plaine fieldes, from which (after the midst of Iune) they reape no profite till the next spring: their trees and vines excepted, neither haue they any great vse of their riuer waters, which are so troubled and extreme colde inFrossard. the first part of summer by snowes, that descend from the hils by the heate of the sunne, that they do not onely morfound and kill horses, but also men if they haue not the dayly vse of Garlike, which is esteemed very profitable for them that drinke corrupted water.
            Fiftly, obserue some causes of their rebellion in the5 time of the emperor Charles the 5. which were (amongst other mislikes) for that their coine was transported into Italy, Flanders and Almaine: and their graine into Portingall
               Antonio di Gueuara. their next neighbour: and note also how they are yeerely releeued from the Esterlings and Normandie with corne, and from Brittani with Poultrie.
            Sixtly, marke their couetousnesse: which vice though6 it be not alwaies in the poore, yet haue they more cause to offende therein, respecting their needie state, than others.
            This fault of auarice is no lesse peculiar to the Spaniards than theft: both issuing from one fountaine, and hauing their difference but in circumstance of time, and persons: the first belonging to their Princes, is somewhile named ambition: the other appertaining to the meaner

sort, they would should be called a militarie libertie: but we know it by no other name then pilfring and robbery.
            Touching their couetousnesse, it partly appeareth in fraudulent shifting their creditors: partly by their rauenous desire to oppresse all parts, and partly by offending against the affections and dignitie of parents.
            As concerning the cousinage of their creditors, our Princes haue deeplier tasted their deceit then any others.
            
               Don Piero, being restored to his kingdome of Castill by the onely cheualrie and sole charges of the Duke of Aquitaine
               Frossard. then Prince of Wales; entertayned his most noble patron and good benefactor only with promises, and after dispatched him into France with that payment: which being not currant amongst the Gascon and English souldiers, he was compelled to practise diuerse things contrarie to the custome of those partes, which bred manie nouelties to the losse of those prouinces.
            The Duke of Lancaster pursuing in Galitia the title ofFrossard. his wife Constance, daughter to Don Piero and heire of Castile: sent the Archbishop of Burdeaux to Piero king of Aragon, for the arrerages of those summes hee was to pay Edvvard the third and his heires Dukes of Aquitan, for the yearely discharge of 500. horse: but hee had no other paiment (the alterations of this Realme not permitting to bring this king to reason) but the imprisonment of his Ambassador in Barcelona.
            
            The Emperor Charles the 5. as king of Spaine, to draw Henrie the eight into a warre against France, who had paide him yearely from thence 133. thousand crownes forIohn Slei. lib. 3. his sisters dower and pencion; made himselfe debtor to the king for that annual summe; couenanting moreouer that if hee married not in conuenient time, Marie then

Princes, of the age but of seuen yeares, to pay the king foure hundred thousand crownes, besides three hundred thousand crownes that were lent him: which billes for any thing I know lie in the deck, vnlesse Queene Marie, to please her husband, cancelled them.
            How the French king Charles the 8. released the kingL'esiat des maisons illustres de France. of Aragon 50000. crownes, his father Levvis the 11. lent vpon the Counties of Roussilion and Parpignan, by meane of that cousining frier, Oliuer Maillard, I let passe with these notes, that as it behooueth the kings of France to suspect the hypocrisie of friers in regard of the ambitionDiodorus Sicu. re anti. lib. 1. cap. 3. of Spaine and Lorran: so it standeth the king of Spaine in hand not to dye in Egypt, no man being buried there, by an ancient law of that region, (if his gouernement hath bin tyranous) or his debts vnpaide.
            To returne to the second part of their couetousnesse, ouerthrowing the foundation of Iustice: if this ground be true that nothing is profitable that is not honest, these men are too deuout seruitors of the Pope, he crying this Prince sweats, or fetch, to leape like water spaniels at the sacred dignities of kings, and to enter violently their Domaines established by his diuine order, who said by meProuerb. 8. kings do raigne.
            I will iustifie it, that if the right of Millaine appertaine not to the kings of France, who claimed that Dutchie by Valentina grandmother to Levvis the twelfth, & daughter and heire to Iohn Galeazzo, who had it of the gift of the Emperor Sigismund, that then it belongeth to the Empire. It is also certaine that the Spanish claime to the kingdome of Naples and Sicilia (if the treatie at Madrick helpe not) is voidable: the same growing vpon the adoptionBernard de Girard. of Alphonso king of Aragon, by Iohn the daughter of

               Lancelot the son of Charles de la Paix, an vsurper of those realmes: which for good cause shee retracted in her life, & conuaied her title to Levvis the third, sonne to Levvis the second, sonne to Levvis the first, being Duke of Aniou; and before adopted by Ioan the daughter of Levvis the sonne of Robert: all which were lawfully possessed of those Realmes. After which Levvis the third Duke of Aniou, hauing in him the right of the two Queenes, and dying without issue, left thē to his brother Rene, who hauing no issue male, gaue his interest to his brother Charles who dying likewise without issue, left his title by testament to the french king Levvis the 11. in respect wherof Charles the 8. his sonne entred Italie & recouered Naples, where he was crowned. Moreouer the Spaniard neither as king of Spaine or Duke of Burgundie hath any right to Holland, Zeland, and Henault, the same hauing bene the patrimonie of Iaquet daughter & heire to Guilliam Duke of Bauiers & wife to Iohn Duke of Brabant, who died without issue; since which time Philip the Duke of Burgundy his cosen, & his heire (hauing their will for law) haue violently detained those prouinces. Furthermore, their title to Maiorica, Minorica, & to the higher Nauar, resteth vpon these doubts: first that if king Philip were takē in battel, or intrapped by other meanes, and imprisoned during his life, whether Spaine shuld be forfait to him whose captiue he were. Secondly, if Spaine were prescribed by the holy father (who many times is implacable) whether that kingdome were his, who first laid hand thereon. I am perswaded they would reck on these questions absurd: but if the case bee altered with names, it is cocke on the hoope for them, & clearer then the midday. For the king of Aragons conquest of Maiorica, and Minorica was by no other

meane then by keeping the king of both in prison till his death: of which wrong the king his sonne complained to Edvvard Duke of Aquitan, who assured him, (his warsFrossard. ended for Don Piero of Castile) he would yeeld him all fauor possible.
            Their chiualrie in their thieuish surprising the higher Nauarre (which they hold by force of the Popes proscription) is of like condition: whereby it may appeare that notwithstanding these Caualeros haue their Rapiers hanging point blancke, that it is their penurie at home, that giues them stomake, according to their name that they are Sagaces Hispani, to winde, or smell their neighbors cupbords abrode.
            The late Prince of Orenge hath declared their iniurie to Don Anthonio for Portingall, and God himselfe, (wherein we haue to boast and be thankfull) hath with hautie stile penned our Apologie for England: wherefore I omit both, to shewe the last branch of their couetousnesse, then which there is nothing that more toucheth their indignitie: for if it be proper to the Lion and Tiger to pursue with incredible furie, those that bereue them of their whelpes: what greater beastlines can there be in man who hath reason, & is not borne for himselfe, then contrarie to the naturall instinct of brute beastes, to make his issue captiue, whom nature made free? as the Spaniards by selling the Indian women conceiued with child by them, haue done to their great obloquie.
            This kinde of auarice caused the Indians to practise new matter: but rather it may be the diuine punishment, considering the simplicitie of that people; who as they could opportunely take the Spaniards, powred melted gold into their mouthes, vsing Thomyris words to Cyrus
               
head in bloud, now drinke your fill
            To returne from whence I digressed, touching their qualities expressing the significations of Spaine. Next to their couetousnesse their enuy is to be regarded, a vice proper to men of base account, and peculiar aboue allProssard. others to this nation: as well by testimonie of Gaston the Erle of Foix (a Prince of singular magnificence and valure) who (dehorting the Lords of Biern from seruing the king of Castill against the Portingall) tould them the Spaniards were filthie, lowsie, and enuious of the prosperitie of straungers: which at Iuberoth the French desiring to haue the vanward found true: the king of Castill not being able (in regard of their place) to bring his Spaniards though 20000. to make supply: by meane whereof, the Lords of Biern with their retinue, being 12000. were slaine. As also by the Duke of Albas reproouing Countie Egmond, (who with the aide of our artilery from sea) ouerthrew the Frenchmen betweene Grauelin and Dunkercke: which victorie the Spaniard imputed onely to the Counties temerity, and for recompence of his valure, could not after aford him his life.
            Hitherto haue I prooued the significations of Spaine as causes by their effects, or maximes by their consequences: now remaineth to speake of Tubal, signifying, of the world, worldly, confusion, and ignomy.
            Some may thinke that what hath bene said for Spaine belongeth also to Tubal; but I am of another minde: for as it followeth not necessarily, that whosoeuer is rich, is therefore proud, high minded and insolent, no more is it consequent, that the poore are worldly, confuse, and ignominious: many of both sorts being such whom God doth loue: in respect whereof, it behoueth me to handle

this, as the other a part; to make apparant that they are no lesse confuse, and ignominious, than naturally poore and miserable.
            As for these words, worldly, or of the world; although their grosse ignorance of diuine things may be prooued thereby, yet for that they belong to my Masters the Diuines, I let them passe.
            First therefore as touching confusion, it is a peruerting or confounding the comlinesse and order of things Diuine, naturall, and ciuill; by meane whereof a detriment or deformitie of our persons, dignities, or states presently ensueth.
            As concerning things Diuine, there is no nation that so confoundeth their vse, and seemeth religious not being so, as the Spaniard for an instant.
            
               Ferdinando and Isabella after they had recouered Granado from the Mores, were presently intituled the most Christian Princes: which being stomached by France, they had after the name of Catholike, which did no lesse hurt then the title of vniuersall or supreme bishop: for hauing so glorious an addition annexed to their newe kingdome, they studied to do somwhat, sauoring also of noueltie, that might seeme worthie of the holy fathers fauour, and their Epitheton: in respect whereof they established a company of the order of Dominicks, to looke into the corrupt life & maners of the Mores and Ievves of Spaine, whom they named fathers of the holy Inquisition.
            These Fathers as dropt from heauen, gaue great hope of their proceeding to all men; for in short space, all Mahumatisme and Iudaisme, seemed by their diligent search to be extirped in Spaine: neither was there any thing expected

from them, but the effects of pietie, and propagation of Christianitie: their aduantage to this sentence, The vvorkman is vvorthy his hier, excepted; which greatly inriched their holy house with confiscate goods, but after their trade, in which they had found some sweetnes, began to decay at home; they thought good (as grayhounds missing wolues do fall to sheepe) to make it currant at Naples, which the Princes & people of that kingdome a while withstood: but being after terrified, partly with the Popes censures, partly with the power of the Emperor Charles the 5. they accepted it, Sed iniquis conditionibus.
            
            Hauing gotten free passage for this newe creature in Italy, they attempted to make it knowne to our worlde, where it bred such Antiphisicall effects, by tearing the vnion of Belgia, and renting our peace, that if euer this saying were found true that Religion brought forth riches, and the daughter deuovvred the mother, it was then when their auarice, cloked with Christian reformation, filled all places with proscriptions, slaughter, and flame.
            Moreouer, where the Greeke Tau (hauing some forme of a crosse) was amongst the Egyptian Hierographicall letters in great admiration, as containing diuine mysteries: and furthermore, where the Emperor Constantine hadEuseb. lib. 9. cap. 9. Eccle. Hist. reuealed vnto him that he should vanquish the tyrāt Maxentius in the same signe: these minions notwithstanding they magnifie these presidents, naming all Lutheranos, and Burrachios that adore not the same: yet without any religious feare, (which no Iewe would doe, esteeming swine vncleane) drue the Iudge of Tordissillas out of a Church, and strangled him vpon a gallowes betweene two hogges, as Christ was crucified betweene two

theeues, wherein they blasphemed not the signe, but the thing signified.
            This report Antonio di Gueuarra (a man of more qualified condition than their countrie yeeldeth, made in his Oration at Braxinia to the Knights of the assembly.
            He affirmed also in his Epistle to the bishop of Zamona, chieftaine of the rebels in Spaine, that one of his priests standing behind a window at Tordissillas, ouerthrew eleuē of the Emperors souldiers with his Hargabusse: with which ech time before he slew one with the bullet, hee crost himselfe.
            Let Charles the fift censure their Pageants with their holy father, and his venerable companie vnder Bourbon, at that time his son Philip was borne: he doubting whether he had more cause to glorie in the birth of his sonne, or to lament their contempt of the Pope, and holie places.
            I denie not but some Almaines had their handes also in that matter, but the fault belonged to no other then the Spaniards: (who the Duke of Bourbon being slaine) commaunded the armie, and were masters of the field.
            In reproouing of their abuse, either of the Crosse or Pope, let no man take me that I esteeme them as things Diuine or holy: I speaking onely according to their opinion of both, which they reckon diuine and holy.
            Nowe commeth in place the second part of confusion, which consisteth in violating that order which hath bin prescribed by nature, for preseruation of honestie, and the excellency of man.
            This schoolemistris, was of her selfe daintie and most excellent, till the serpent deflowred her, and the Spaniard abused her fauour: notwithstanding which, she aloweth

not the desire of man to increase his like, in vnlawfull or vncomely sort: both which are against the dignitie and intention of Nature, whose obiect is honestie. Her lawes are, that we be followers of modesty, that a Parent should cherish his childe, a husband his wife, and all liuing creatures should liue pacified with them of their owne kinde. But to vse women forcibly in publike places, or in the presence of many, as some phrenticke persons accustomeSansoninus de Regnis. in Fez: or for Parents to kill their children, husbands their wiues, and one people many Nations, she detesteth, as customes vnfit for men, and not vsed (the first excepted) by fierce and vnreasonable creatures.
            I meane to cite but few examples, yet such as may no lesse expresse this confusion, then the print of Hercules foote his whole stature.
            At their first arriuall in the West Indes (there accounting nothing vnlawfull) exercised all tyranny on that people, who hauing till then enioyed a long libertie, estemed the Spaniards more daungerous than wilde beasts: in respect whereof many flying their seruitude, cast themselues from rockes: other pined themselues with famine, and some cut their throates with sharpe stones: neither spared the Indian women that were with childe to take venimous potions, and to rippe their wombes to set free their infants from the cruell bondage of Spaine.
            
            But this booted not, the Spaniards minding rather to reserue them to foule vses, and to aid them in their slaughters, then they should pine, or ende their liues by any other meane then their chiualrie.
            Hauing therefore recouered such as Fortune spared, they shamed not, driuing them as droues of beastes, to rauish the women hauing children fastened to their necks,

both their owne bands and the Indians beholding them.
            But what durst not these rutters do amongst a naked, & simple people, that omitted no outrage in a country hauing lawes, walled townes, and armed men? for many thousand of like stuffe receiue this one for proofe of the rest.
            At Insul a towne in Flaunders, three of these gallants entered a citizens house wholy of their faction; where two of them held the husband, whilest the third rauished his wife in his presence: who crying for helpe, & hauing two neighbours come to his rescue, the Spaniardes also cried Spaine (a watch word to assist their villanies) wherevpon diuerse of their company repaired to them, accusing the husband and his neighbors of riot, for which the one was adiudged to be whipt, and the other to be hanged.
            Let this much suffise for that vice, wherein they contend only with vnreasonable creatures: somewhat being to bespoken also of their murther and cruelty, which belongeth to this part of confusion, wherin they alone haue top and top gallant.
            
               Solon hauing giuen lawes to the Athenians, was demanded why he made not one for parricide: for that saith he, I thinke no man so beastly to commit it. The Philosopher thought nature to haue great authority in this matter; but seing that loue only descendeth, she commandeth little.
            That the child hath murthered the parent, moued by a couetous desire, either of patrimony or gouernement, is more apparant in the line of Othomano then piety would: but for the father to kill his innocent sonne, or the husband his chast wife, besides that family and the act of Herod, I knowe no authentike proofe, vnlesse Spaine can

yeeld some president for both.
            In the yeare 1568. the Duke of Alba descending with the Terrezans of Milan and Naples into the lower countries, vpon pretence of pacifying that state: and leauing no kind of tyranny vnexercised, gaue great mislike of his doings to all men: especially to the young Prince of Spaine, who often complained of his crueltie in those prouinces: the gouernment of which belonged (as he saide no lesse to him in the life of his father, then it did to Philip (who had the same) in the time of Charles the fift.
            This complaint though it seemed iust to some, yet others, chiefely the fathers of the Inquisition, reproued it as matter to be suspected, and sauoring more of noueltie then appertained to one of his yeares: by which slaunder they brought him into common hatred, specially of his father, who being wholly addicted to his secreat pleasures, easily beleeued any thing: in respect whereof, and that hee had made committies for hearing all matters of State: it was thought meete by them to restraine the Prince of libertie, as a man without other practise, knowing the greatnes of his mind, to shorten his time, although he died not without suspition of poyson.
            The Queene of Spaine during his restraint (presuming much on her place, and pitying his innocencie and tender yeares) solicited the king to receiue him againe into fauour: but the mallice of the Princes aduersaries preuailed both towards him and the Queene, whom they found no lesse zealous for the peace of Belgia, then for the kings honour: for which cause they ordered that both their hearses were within one moneth, which I sawe at Antvvarpe lamented with teares, and at Naples solemnized with ioy: so great a matter it was for the prouinces to

loose good Princes, and for the Spaniards to be ridde of them, by whose pietie and wise prouidence their auarice and crueltie had beene bridled, and so small a thing it is in Spaine, for a father to murther his son, and a husband his wife: the one being after the French phrase Le petit fils of two Emperors and the sonne of a king: the other the daughter of a king, the sister of kings, and wife of a king.
            Some may obiect that these reports are scandalous, and belong rather to the Councell of Spaine, and fathers of the Inquisition, then to the king.
            I confesse that besides publicke fame, which suffizeth to driue the accusant to his purgation; I can oppose but these grounds. First, that he who propelleth not an iniurie if he may, is no lesse faultie then he that offereth the wrong: secondly that those subiectes, whose Prince regardeth not by what meane his sonne and wife were oppressed, are not to hope the defence of his ciuill or martiall sword.
            Now remaineth their confusion of things ciuill, which I ascribe not only to the subuersion of positiue lawes, priuiledges and customes; but to the ouerthrow also of that society, which ought to be betwene men of one nation, or seueral countreyes, for maintaining their particular quiet.
            That they haue subuerted the ciuill state by altering of ancient ordinances, I hope they will not denie: which if they do, their policie in Belgia (framed by Escou
                     •
                  do secretarie to Don Iohn of Austria) (vz. that the king must chastice one Prouince by an other to be made absolute in all) being compared with the priuiledges and customes of those Prouinces, graunted in the Bull of gold, and since confirmed by their Princes, will conuince them of great

impudencie. For if amongst other things contained in that Bull, the Princes of Belgia are prohibited to amplifie the Ecclesiasticall state further then hath bene prescribed, or to leauie any mony, or to make any innouatiō in matter of state without consent of the Nobilitie and people: or to place forenners in the ciuill gouernment, vnlesse in some small offices, with this caution, that if they fall into any of these errours, their subiects (making due protestation) are absolued from their obedience: what is it to enioyne diuerse townes of Brabant to receiue Bishops, the vnited Prouinces the Spanish Inquisition, & Spanish and Italian gouernours? and to impose this burthen, that besides the yearely tenth of mens goods, nothing is bought and sold to the vse of the bodie, out of which the kings officers trie not a part of siluer? What other thing I say is this alcumie, then the rooting vp of a State planted by the hands of good Princes, then which there is no iniustice more capitall?
            To antiquate these things seemeth no other, then the cancelling of societie, but they are distinct, and but in part like: some obeying no ordinance, and yet hauing mutuall societie; which groweth by a secret agreement of nature making them conuersant.
            By which I collect the confusion of societie amongst men liuing vnder one law, is their morositie onely.
            This vice is rife amongst them, and wherein the Spaniard hath his difference from all men, aswell for offending therein their owne persons, as priuate persons the Soueraigne, and the Soueraigne the subiect: as also priuate persons one another: in all which they haue predominatiou, and if it were possible exceede them selues.
            For sinning against their owne persons behold a rare

example. Don Piero of Castill the sonne of Alphonso the xi. leading the vantgard of a battail against the Mores of Granado, and being aduertised that his vnkle Don Iohn, who was in the arergard, was like to be distressed by a sudden eruption of Mores: and finding him selfe vnable to relieuePiero Messie. his vnkle, his souldiers departing the field, was so surprized with beastlines, that he fel from his horse dead: which when Don Iohn was certified, he died also. A matter saith the author, not before heard, that a man should die of displeasure: yet presidents no lesse rare in their sort do folow: but first of offences against the Soueraigne.
            A Spaniard beholding Ferdinando (grandfather to Charles the fift) in procession at Barcelona, that day they name Corpus Christi feast, strake him so furiously with a dagger on the necke, that he had slaine him if the greatnesse of his chaine had not put by the thrust: and that for no other cause, as he confessed being taken, but that the king stood not in his good grace, and that he liked not his countenance: an opinion no lesse daintie then that of the Romane Senate: for as they esteemed not on a God, whoEuseb. Eccl. hist. was not allowed by their authoritie, no more would this yonker that any should haue the name of king, that had not dignitie of person agreeable to his romth: which villanus temeritie hath giuen iust cause for Princes to withdraw their ordinarie presence from the common subiect; and to bring in this custome, that no man weareth a dagger in Spaine.
            
            But nowe to their confounding of societie with the subiect: for the sequell, of singular president for all princes.
            
               Ferdinando the fourth of Castill, for displeasure onely against two knights of good name, made their processe of execution; and though supplications were offered with

teares for pacifying that rigor, yet contrarie to the lyons nature (who spareth the humble) he proceeded with all seueritie: in respect whereof the two knights appealed to the great iudge, before whō they summoned the king to be in person within twentie dayes; the last of which, Ferdinando appeared.
            Time may rather want then iust matter to blase their vices, which are not common, but rare and in the highest degree of beastlinesse: leauing therefore their murthering the Nobilitie of the sacred order of Burgundi, their cutting out, and searing with hot irons the tongues of honest Citizens, their drawing the mouthes of some a sunder with other instrumentes, their wilfull murthering a father at Traiect beyond the Mose, for lodging his sonne one night; their banishing chast matrons, for receauing their husbands, an act condemned by no good law, for the inseperable bonds of their loue: their furious beastlinesse at Turnace vpon the citizens and a widow named Potier whom they slue with her daughter and neece; and their massacring with bullets the vnarmed people at Ipre beholding a godly minister put to death: I will touch onely their barbarous inhumanitie towards the naked Indians, a people very tractable, if they had found good maisters, and such as had skill of honestie.
            Setting the acts of Moses and Iosua a part, I think there is no president that the godly haue rooted out the natural inhabitants of any countrey: but that the wicked haue chastized sinners, many passages, both of diuine and prophane writings haue testified. It is then apparant that the Spaniards as idolaters were suffered to chastice idolaters, and not to enlarge the faith: for had their intention bene to haue learned those simple soules the true knowledge of

God, (as they made shewe at the first by erecting in some regions diuerse Bishoprickes and schooles) they would either haue continued that order, or haue bin conuersant with them in all mildnesse and humanitie: pietie being no way better taught then by demonstration: but as they could seeme no others then they were: no more could the Indians gather grapes of thornes: in respect whereof though at the first this naked people might haue bene moulded into anie forme, yet after they had tasted the Spanish Creados, they abandoned their companie, with all rites and ceremonies of the Romish religion, which manie of them had reuerently before receiued: neither was there anie death so fearefull, whether by poyson, famine, or other meane before mentioned, that in respect of the cruelty of those Don Diegos, they would not haue willingly embraced as their sure port of rest & end of their euils.
            In describing the miserable state of these wretched people, Metellus saith, that to a very ill president, manie of the Spanish souldiers punished their seruants most greuously; if either they brought not home their day hier, or finished not their taske in the gould and siluer mines, or had committed smaler faults yealding them (their hands and feet being bound to a crosse pale) in steed of their supper, many stripes with corde, or the sinnewes of a Buphal; dropping on them either boyling pitch or oile: and after washing them with salt water they would lay them so long vpon a table, as they imagined those wretches might beare the paine: after this kind of cookerie, if a more cruell maister hapened to some of them, they were buried all night in earth to the necke, as a present remedie for their stripes. If any of them died in this newe diet (as it chaunced very often) the maister accompting to the King

the heds of his slaine seruants was quited of the paine of manslaughter. This crueltie some excuse saith Metellus by the law of Baion: But it appereth vpon iust cause wicked to all men, as being void of all piety.
            Touching this barbarous crueltie he bringeth in also one Alquinotec baptized Cacicnis of the prouince of Iucatana, complaining to Monteius generall of that prouince in these or the like wordes.
            Our natiō, Monteius, whilst I was a boy, was grieuously afflicted with a disease causing them to vomit wormes, whereof the greatest part died: after which (falling by degrees from on euill to another) we had wars with them of Mexico; wherin we lost mo then an hundred and fifty thousand; all which, in respect of the slaughter & crueltie that we receaue of thee, Monteius, & of thy souldiers, we esteeme nothing. Metellus further affirmeth, that the Spaniards hauing wasted many prouinces with their crueltie; and transporting by sea (from other places better peopled) sundry of those miserable & wretched Indians) murthered many by pestering them in the bottomes of their ships: some by famine, & some by their daily stripes, so that few or not one of thē landed, that were imbarked.
            Hee moreouer specially noteth for the rest, one Piero Calis, who (in driuing whole droues of that naked people) slue all that were not able to trauell, without regard of age, sexe, or their vse of labour, which in respect of a continuall ease, was most hard and intollerable to them.
            He lastly concludeth with Macchiauel (who maintaineth that where the Pope and Cardinals set footing, they leaue most fearefull printes of confusion) that in what place the Spaniards display their ensignes, nothing is to be looked for but crueltie and slaughter, and all miserie:

The prouince of Cumanus, of 700000. hauing scarce any remaining: Hispaniola of 2000000. hauing left but 200. or 150. and Hondurensis of 400000. but 8000. besides the slaughters of Cuba, Iamica, and Portus diuitis.
            
            Thus farre Metellus, by which I collect, in respect of a Sympathia betweene the creatures of seuerall kinds, that the Spaniards are no lesse daungerous, in regarde of their crueltie, then the Basilisc, both hauing a desolate and wast Empire: as also that those Indians hauing behelde moe miseries then all the Nations of the earth, haue beene reserued for the handes of this cruell and proude Nation, whose condemnation may appeare iust, and most great.
            I also note the sagacitie of this politike and wise people, that if they establish any law tending to reformation, they conuert it for the most part to their priuate commoditie: for as they dealt by the Inquisition, specially prouided for the Moores and Ievves of Spaine, so haue they done by the Law of Baion made by Ferdinando and Isabella for the Canibals onely: not one in these dayes feeling the smart of either, hath not more pietie, or is not more simple then others.
            Omitting for that I would draw to an end, their crueltiesPetrus Martyr de angleria. which haue no ende: as their hunting the Indians with dogs, and other like villanies, (hauing spoken before of men offending against their owne persons, the subiect the Magistrate, and the Superior the inferior.) The next is of confounding societie amongst priuate persons, of one Nation, for which I wil cite one example, as it was reported to me at Venice 1569. by a Gentleman of the house of Mantua, of great credite: His other additions I passe with silence, least he yet liue, and may thereby be in daunger of the bugges of Millan his neighbors.
            
               The manner thereof was, as he said, in this sort. One of these monsters meeting his enimie vnarmed, threatned to kill him if he denied not God, his power, and essentiall properties, vz. his mercy, sufferance, &c. the which when the other desiring life, pronounced with great horror, kneeling vpon his knees: the Brano cried out, nowe will I kill thy bodie and soule, and at that instant thrust him through with his Rapier.
            The last part of confusion is left to their confounding the societie of Nations, belonging also to ciuill societie, maintained by Ambassadors, entercourse of trafficke, iustice ministred strangers, open denouncing of warre, and mercie to the vanquished.
            As for the first, though it hath beene in vse to beare with whatsoeuer an Ambassador (not exceeding his commission,) or an Herault (wearing the Cote-armor of his Prince) deliuered, (as the French king, Charles the sixt, suffered a proud defiance from the Duke of Geldres) yet haue the Spaniards (as men tied to no rule) not onely murthered Ambassadors passing their countrie (as Alphonso
               Iohan. Slai. lib. 14. 
               d'Aual their Lieuetnant in Lumbardy, slue Caesar Fregoso, and Antony Rinson, sent from France towards Constantinople) but also haue killed some sent to themselues:Philip du Comines. as Ferdinando of Aragon, who vsurped Naples, murthered one Segnior Iacobo the Ambassador of Francis Duke of Millan, and imprisoned others, as the king of Aragon did the Archbishop of Buxdeaux, sent from the Duke of Lancaster before named.
            Neither haue they beene lesse iniurious to our marchants: they hauing arrested some, burnt others, and stayed the goods of many without restitution: vpon this pretence, they had in their ships or chambers, the Psalmes

of Dauid, or some treatise of Scripture in the vulgar: the same being either the Erle of Surries sonets, or some other like matter: but neither were our countrie men so happie to bee afflicted for righteousnesse, or the Spaniards so iust in censuring their lightnesse, which should haue bin reformed at home: for if the reading a Sonet, or the bookes of Amadis du Gaul, which they haue incresed to a great volume b
                  •
               e death, which of them are free from iudgement? their chiefest Lectures consisting (vnlesse in the superstitious iudicials of Astronomie) in such light and vaine matter: sed hinc ille lacrymae, that they are of all men most contemptible, if they loose the counterfait of holinesse.
            To seeme good and be so, is hard: but to be euill and seeme good is easie, and the onely thing that hath made them great.
            To seize therefore on the foxes case, it was requisite to name him a horned beast entring the lyons denne: which rule maketh much for their oppression of all nations by stealth.
            Neither is this name Lutheran vnprofitable for them, they meaning to ouerthrow thereby this position: Contra hostes non est nisi legitimè dimicandum, (which partly is by deuouring warre to them whom they inuade) and to draw vs either as heretickes, or traitors to their persons, into a degree higher then those that are tearmed hostes. But how that may be I see not, the one being in question, and the other vntrue: vnlesse the regard of neighborhoodGen. cap. 14 be an offence, which Abraham with the testimonie of a good conscience vsed.
            But grant we were worthily excluded the priuiledges of armes, for not being of that church (we thanke God)

they are of. What moued them to pretend an indefesible peace (by meane of no lesse State than Philip the Archduke of Austria) with Levvis the twelfth, named for his pietyL'estat des maisons ilstres de France. the father of his countrie, and being as they tearme their friends buenos Catholicos, they surprising at that time the kingdome of Naples? surely no other thing then which caused the Duke of Parma to entertaine her Maiesties Ambassadors with a long parle, till their great Armado was vpon our coast.
            These things are inexcusable, and therefore I am of this minde, that if they had that bell named Martinella,
               Nic. Macch lib. 2. hist. which the ancient Florentines rong one moneth continually before they entered into any warre, they would say they could not make her sound for want of a rope.
            Their want of compassion towards the vanquished, is of one scantling with their iniustice to straungers, to whom the lawe of Nations hath alwayes had speciall regard.
            The lawes permit to take armes against enimies, but to spoile them who haue submitted their liues to vs, is ignoble, and farre from the generositie of our elders.
            Some obiect for their cruelty, the slaughter of the French prisoners at Iuberoth, wherein (I shew my opinion) they had double wrong: first for that they were Portingals that did that deede, a Nation for this eight hundred yeares distinct frō 
               Spaine: Secondly, if they had bin Spaniards, they had bin without blame, hauing to do with a new enimie that was fresh and thrise their number. I therefore omit this, and Francis the French king complaining in Guicciardin of his entertainement in Spaine: and wil for their acts done, put the reader in mind of their gratious behauiour (before recited) towards the simple

               Indians: and for their purpose to doe, shewe him the intention of the Marquise of Guasto.
            
            It is in controuersie whether a Christian taking a Christian in battell may giue his armes: so is it determined, hee may not simply detaine his prisoner paying his ransome; much lesse oppresse him being yeelded: the Marquise notwistanding these rules, encountering Francis of Bourbon, Earle of Anguien at Sirrizolles, entendedL'estat des maisens ilstres de France. (had he gotten the victorie) to send all the frenchmen in chaines to the gallies: a most cruell thought, considering the noblenes of the French Nation, and his owne profession of knighthood.
            Thus much of their confounding things diuine, naturall, ciuill, and forren; the same appertaining to one of the significations of Tubal: now remaineth to say somewhat of the other and last signification, which is Ignomy; This may be named a reproch or blot belonging to the foulenesse of any act before done: a description not disagreing with the French prouerbe, Orguiell cheuauche deuant, & honte vene apres.
            
            That Ignomy followeth our vices as shadowes our bodies, though it needeth no proofe, experience teaching no lesse, yet not to leaue men to coniectures, behold a position made by Philip de Comines Lord of Argentai, whose singular honestie and valure sufficed to giue his sentences the authoritie of maximes.
            Whosoeuer is a tyrant (saith he) is also a coward: for an instance of which, after he had cited sundrie cruelties of Alphonso the father, and Ferdinando the sonne (kingsPhilip de Comines. of Aragon, and vsurpers of Naples,) he sheweth that vpon the approach of the French king Charles the eight to Naples: they both departed the realme in such haste that

manie of their souldiers lept out of the windowes hauing not seene the enimy: Alphonso beleeuing that all thinges tooke part against him in fauour of the French king: and that the moouing of the leaues of trees, sounded in the behalfe of Charles (as a watchword of partie) France, France.
            
            
               Ferdinando his sonne (after Charles had taken his pleasure in the kingdome, and was departed towards France, leauing for his viceroy the Duke Monpensier) returned, and hauing alied himselfe with the Venetians and the Marquise of Mantua (who could not digest the greatnes and neighborhood of the French nation) he fell to ill arts, for recouerie of that kingdome he lost by cowardice. This disgrace he recompenced with a greater, tending to his perpetuall infamie.
            For after the French had cleared all parts from apparant hostilitie, they were notwithstanding conquered by diseases, gotten by eating the flesh of dead mē, which Ferdinando had procured to be sold them for Tunny: the vse of which, corrupting the liuer by extreame moisture, and matter of too neere qualitie; brought forth most foule vlcers, with other paines, of which many miserably died: leauing for Trophees of their victories, their countrie name to the disease.
            This is fearefully described by Guicciardin, (in respectLib. 2. Hist. the disease was infectiue, and then incurable) and as sincerely laide downe by Giouanni Fioreuanti a Philosopher of that time; who beholding the deformitie of that sicknesse, and hearing of their new diet, indeuoured to finde the reason by the effects.
            He kept (for that he would not be deceiued in the diuersitie of kinds) a tame Pie and a Dog so long without

meate, that the one refused not to eate the flesh of another Pie; and the Dogge to feed of an other Dog: by meane whereof the Pie within few dayes lost her fethers, and the Dog his haire, both hauing most filthy soares breaking forth in sundrie parts of their bodies.
            The want of victuall being accessarie to this calamitie, draue the French to accept no lesse dishonorable conditions for their departure, than their disease was horrible; the most part of them dying in their returne.
            Some reply, that if that contagion were as Fioreuanti coniectured, the Canibals would haue the like: which obiection proueth no lesse then is affirmed, no people being more subiect thereto then they that are within that tract: in which (as in the scorpion there is his sting to kill, and his oyle to cure) is found the wood Guaicum, a most present remedie for that disease.
            This practise hath deepely touched the renowne ofExodus 22. Lex Corneliaff. lib. 46. titu. 8. this Nation, which being in the highest degree of socery, hath for the ineuitable daunger, hapening by the abuse of things naturall, bene alwayes seuerely punished, both by diuine and humaine lawes; I am therefore perswaded that of all villanies it is the greatest, and most worthy of chastisement.
            As for that which is named Magia infamis, or what else may be concluded by impr
                  •
               cation, or incantation; or any other thing meeting with the shrewdnesse of our nature, it is not to be esteemed: but this onely is to be feared, which being receiued for food entereth the vaines and entrals, either inflaming vnlawful lust, or abating the power of generation, to cut off discents, or presently killing, or breeding diseases worse then death; and more to be regarded at this instant, in which they striue who shal

be, and not who shall raigne, then in that age, in which neither their malice or power had taken so deepe roote as at this time.
            To returne from whence I digressed: the Archbishop of Treues, withstāding the election of the emperor Charls the fift (whose greatnesse was extolled by Maience, in respect of his new kingdome of Spaine) affirmed that the Spaniards seldome aford them selues in field without the aide of straungers: a report very sclaunderous to chiualry, for which (though they be often well backt as they were at Naueret by the Lords of France) they deserue no souldiers crowne or garland.
            This cowardise at Nauaret, where they had 60000. of their owne people, was after obiected against them by Monsieur du Lignac in a consultatiō of warre amongst the French men that serued king Iohn of Castill (sonne to Henry the bastard) against the Duke of Lancaster. It hath bin also remembred by Frossard, against whom & Monsieur du Lignac, they can take no exception.
            He first citeth the wordes of one Hartesel an English man at Iuberothe to the king of Portingall, whom he told that the Spaniards were flying calues without wings, bearing banners wauing with the winde: & lastly sheweth his owne opinion of them as followeth.
            At the first incounter, saith Frossard, they are fierce, (& if they haue aduantage) high minded: they fight well on horseback; but as soone as they haue cast two or three dartes, and giuen a stroke with the sworde, and see that their enemies be not discomfited, they turne their horses and fly. This far Frossard, woh in other places doth altogether discommend their footmen, as such that are vtterly vnprofitable for battell. The like report in a maner Florus
               
maketh, sauing that he speaketh somewhat more reuerētly of the Numātines, Portingals & Celtiberians, frō whō
               Florus lib. 2 cap. 17. 18. 
               Marcus Porcius Cato, and Tiberius Sempronius Gracchus, conquered seuen hundred of their walled townes in fewe yeares, as Plutarche, Strabo and Polybius witnesse.
            The great antiquarie and historian Antonio di Gueuarra, in his epistle to Don Alphonso of Fonseca, bishop of Burgos, affirmeth that the Mores in eight moneths conquered Spaine to the rocke Horadada, and that the Spaniards were eight hundred years before they recouered that losse: during which time, we must not thinke that the Negros sent for women out of Aphrick, or that the Spaniards were in those dayes very martiall.
            By comparing these numbers, I find them no lesse vnable to defend, then to recouer a thing lost; so there be an election of seasons, and a prouision of other necessaries: which is to be regarded by our nation, as well for that we being brought vp in a more temperat and colder clime then Spaine, haue our naturall moisture easilie exhausted by the heat of that country opening our poets in the sommer: by which that quicke and subtill ayre named Serena entreth the vitall parts, and sleyeth the bodie: as also for that we being not accustomed to their strong wines, and hauing no other waters to mingle with them, then snow broth descending in the spring from the hilles into the riuers, fall into pestilent feauers, fluxes, and inflammations of all the inward parts: as moreouer, for that after May (about which time they haue their haruest) nothing remaineth out of their townes (vnlesse some fruites) to sustaine either man, or horse, their fields being extremely parcht with the Sunne till the returne of the Equinoctial.
            Who therefore mindeth to inuade Spaine, hauing no

acquaintance with that ayre; it behoueth him to take the field in March, or at the least in Aprill: so councelled Iohn the king of Portingale his father in law the Duke of Lancaster, who hauing in few weekes conquered Galitia, after contended only with the aire & scarsitie of the fields; the Spaniards hauing brought their corne, hay, and other prouisions into their walled townes; by meane whereof he lost twelue Barons, foure score knights, and two hundred Esquires, besides the common souldiers, and horse of seruice. Yet are not these discommodities of aire or countrie, or losse of so many great personnages and resolute men, to deterre vs hereafter, we being not to measure at any time our attempts by the euents, but by what reason they were enterprized; which, being of late to diuert a capitall and stubburne enemie, are (necessitie commanding) oportunely to be renued: nothing being impossible to a prudēt deliberation, accōpanied with true fortitude. Say then, noble countrimen, with resolute Cato speaking to his souldiers in the deserts of Libya,
            
            
               These are my mates in armes, vvhom dangers onely leade.
               Luca. lib. 9. But what heare I? Great is the Hesperian god Plutus, Spain not onely abounding with fruitfull fields and rich mines, but with such men as haue bene parentes of all good customes.
            It suffiseth; but let this be tried by Lazarillo di Tormes, he being lesse partiall then Hieronimo Ruscello, Rodirigo di Toledo, or Taraphe, and by the trauellers in Spaine, who find nothing in their hosteries but a mat to lye vpon, and a candle to bring them to bed. It is no good consequent, there be birds, because there is a nest: or he is a gentleman, for that he neuer leaueth riding But graunt the South of Spaine may be compared with the fruitfull parts of Italie,
               
and that some of them were of like seede as Pallas: yet it maketh no more for the fertilitie of the rest, and good breeding of that people, then the teeth of an Aethiopian for the whitenesse of his bodie. Neither doth the varietie of their mines proue the fatnesse of the soyle, but the contrarie: for all mettals being ingendred by influence of the Planets (of which they haue their properties) and apt temperature of the earth inclined to the disposition of those Planets, of which she is impressed, do shew the nature of their cause by their effects, which being in the third and fourth degree of drought, prooueth their ground more barren (vnlesse in some part) then any region about them. Moreouer their mines (which by men skilfull in minerals) are likened to trees hauing rootes, trunkes, boughes, branches, blossomes, or floures) they haue bene wasted by sundry nations in all ages: as the mines of seacole and kannel, which haue their bounds, & are subiect to an end.
            First the Phoenecians had (for things of small price) great store of their mettall, by the helpe whereof, they erected diuerse colonies in Sicilia, Sardinia, Libya, and Spaine it selfe.
            Secondly the Carthagenians did trafficke their brasseEzech. cap. 27. with the Tyrians, & inlarged thereby, & their commodities in other mettall, their Empire against the Libyans, Sicilians, and Romaines.
            
            Lastly the Romaines mined many furlongs with greatDiodorus Sicu. lib. 6. rerum anti. cap. 9. vaults in sundrie parts of Spaine, an argument of scarsitie in their time, and that the birds were then flowen: which is now a cause also the king of Spaine preuaileth little for the lower countries: treasure, as some hold, being the sinewes of warre.
            As for this opinion that other nations should take lightGirolomo Ruscelli.
               
frō their courtly port & martiall behauiour, it is vaine, &Girolomo Ruscelli. argueth a yearely pention: Antonio di Gueuarra affirming that to giue perfection to the Spaniards it behoueth to draw him that is bred in the mountaines, to be trained in Castill: which I gesse is for no other cause then that the Montanese is by nature rough, and the Castillian efeminat: but what state this man will beare, let them report who haue either seene beggers set on horsebacke; or haue beheld a mans head placed on a horses necke, &c.
            This my self can say, that I haue knowē fifteene hūdred Biscaies (which people Florus nameth the chiualrie of Spaine) at their first landing in Antvvarpe to be men contemptible of person, filthy in apparell, and rude in behauiour; and within one moneth after they had tasted the pay of that towne, and relished the cates of that contrey, to be terrible of countenance, magnificall in gesture, and seeming of so hautie conceit; as though all things were vile which they esteemed not: and therefore dare auowe that who so was entertained with their customes, prospered as a tree embrased with iuie.
            This barbarous naturall of the Spaniard, was better knowen to Hanibal, then to men of our time; for he afterAppianus Alexandrinus libr. L
                     •
                  bico. his discomfiture at Cilla, hauing some Spanish horsemen remaining; and fearing in respect of their vertuous training, their readines to chaffer the state of their friends, fled with on horseman in two dayes & two nights to Adrumetum distant frō the battail three thousand furlongs, which commeth to three hundred seuentie fiue of our miles: an argument he loued and trusted them well from whom he fled in such hast.
            It is a ground that a compound is lesse perfit, & more daungerous for nature then a simple, if therefore those

               Spaniards which descended only of Tubal, haue, in respect of their parent or soile, but the image of perfect men: what shall we thinke of the Spaniards of these dayes, which are confected of the pilferers of the wold? truely that there is no vice in which they haue not a surplussage aboue anie other nation of the earth: I meane the South of Spain (now containing Catalonia, Aragona, Castilia nueua, Valenza, Granado and Andaluzia) to which only the Romans before Polybius time gaue the name of Spaine.
            
            As for Galitia and Portingale, the one taking name of those French men that in the time of Charles the great entred Spaine against the Mores, & the other of those French and Normans that in the yeare 700. past against the Sarasins; as also the Biscais descended of those Gauls which were called Celtae, and of those Spaniards named Iberi, as Diodorus in his sixt booke of antiquities, and Lucan in his fourth hooke make mention: I number them a part, as being ech way more honorable then the rest.
            But to returne to the South of Spaine, (the rest not being knowen to the learned antiquitie) the Goths and Alani (being of those Scythians that dwelt neere the riuer Danubius, who in the time of Honorius came vnder the leading of Gensericus into Spaine) inhabited that part, which is now called Catalonia, a word compounded of both theirGirolomo Ruscelli in la Geo. di Ptolo. names; and was at the first named Gottalania.
            
            Of these Scythes who haue their name as vacantes scyphis are descended those that inhabit Castilia nueua, and Arragon named at the first Terracona. Next to these is the prouince of Valenza, so called by the Mores, who about nine hundred yeares past tooke footing in that kingdome, and since ouerflowed Spaine. About eight hundred years past another company of Mores possessed that part which

they named Granado of a citie they built.
            The next are the Vandals, a people of the North, calling that part, after their name Vandaluzia, which by loosing the first letter and corruption of speach is called Andaluzia, as Arrogona hath T, being before Terracona. But here I must not forget a report of their own touching the etimologie of Andaluzia: which is, that the Mores landing in Spaine, demanded a pesant driuing an asse, the name of that prouince: but he vnderstanding them not, spake to his asse, Anda luzia, which is, go luzia: according to which the Mores named that country: but to returne. Of these is a like quintessence drawne as Alexander drank out of the hoofe of an horse: for what vicesoeuer hath bin peculiar to any of them (besides those they had in cōmon) is now proper to them all.
            As I sayd before that a simple is more perfect then a compound: so affirme I, that those beasts which are engendred of sundrie kinds, are most cruell. If a lion match with a Parde, there remaineth in the issue some generositie of the parent: but if the Leopard couple him self with a Tiger, nothing is to be looked for in their broode, but a barbarous fiercenesse. The naturall Spaniard, being as a simple, is of a confuse and beastly conceipt, of diet miserable and furious, nourished to increase those humours in scarsitie: but mixed with the Gothes and Vandals, giuen to the euery and drunkennes: mingled with the Mores cruell and full of trecherie: and consequently, tasting of euerie one, a spring of all filthinesse.
            The Italian hath this prouerbe, that a thing begun is halfe ended: and experience teacheth, that after the sunne hath climed the Meridian, he declineth. All things haue their infancie, riper yeares, decrepitage, and are subiect to

alteration; yet passe not with like celeritie to their period. The Spaniards began to be of some reputation but in the time of Ferdinando and Isabella, (who vnited Aragon and Castilia) before which they were either subiect to the Carthaginians, Romans or some other nation: or els so deuided into small kingdomes, that they were of no force.
            It is therefore no maruell that Antonio di Gueuara in regard of their weaknes, and want of valiant personages, cited, (in his epistle to Don Ian di Padillia a Captaine of the rebels in Spain) one Cid, Fernan Gonsalis & the knight Tiran: and in his epistle to Sir Antoni of Cuniga (prior of S. Iohn) named Viriato a Spaniard; he being a naturall Portingall, whom the Spaniard aboue all men hateth, asPhilip de Comines. 
               Comines maintaineth, vnlesse it be to rob him of his honor and dignitie.
            In the time then of Ferdinando, after the rapine of the kingdomes of Naples, Sicilia and Nauarre; were they first esteemed: neither would their fortunes haue had longer life then his age, had they not ben after houed vnder the wings of the eagle (during which time they increased their empire with Milan) and caught some heat of the Lion. In their prosperity they are of the nature of gourds which ouerlooke those things by which they clime. England hath yelded them the greatest countenance (besides their comoditie of sheepe, the King hauing for the duties of wool 30 quentos) & the lower contries the greatest reuenues, and these two are they at which they haue first leuelled.
            They esteme the kingdoms of Castill and Aragon to be the cheifest of their Diadem, yet do the commodities of Belgia contrepois more then the weight of both: the due of the prouinces being seuen hundred quentos, the kingdom

of Castill but foure hundred and fifty: and of Aragon & Catalonia but one hundred and fifty: wherby it should seeme that before they had rauened Malorques, Nauar, Milan, Sicilia and Naples, that their proper right (notwithstanding their mine of Guadalcanal) was of no great accompt; the kingdom of Naples yelding three hundred and fifty quentos, and the state of Milan three hundred quentos, (or after the opinion of Philip de Comines six hundred and fifty thousand Duckets) which cometh neere to one reckning (exceeding the rest of their aunciēt Domains of Spaine.
            
            I speake nothing of the States of Parma and Florence, for that since their match with the house of Austria, they yealded the Spaniards but the lone of some citadells. Yet was the surprising of Piazenza by the Emperors lieutenātSleidan. lib. 19. of Lūbardy; treacherous & cruel, & the Emperors answer framed by a Spanish frier Iacobin his confessor, to the Bishop of Phano (the Popes nuncio) who solicited the restitutionL'esta
                     •
                   des maisons illustres de France. thereof, no lesse cautelous and dishonerable, vz. that in a doubtfull or obscure title, the condition of the possessor is to be preferred before the other. Lo here diuinity fit for Spaine, and martial pollicie of Ferdinando Gonzaga. But most infamous was their attempt towardes their general lieutenāt of Belgia, who had deserued better of their nation, which hath bene often fatall to his house: but so vse they to make happy their frends. It should seeme the king of Spaine exceedeth in greatnes and reuenues, the mightiest kings in Europe; but remember with all that vertue vnited is stronger, and being dispearsed, weaker; and that also many things fall betwene the vpper lippe and the cuppe.
            That garment therefore (in my conceit) is most comely

that is of one cloth, and most strong that is least peeced. How then their robe will hang together, I may gesse, & what the euent of all will be, the wiser may foresee.
            I alledged that as all things had their risings, so had they also their fall, though not after one motion
            I gather therby and the former circumstances, that the empire of Spaine declineth: but my chiefest ground is; that nothing which is vehement is durable.
            To deuine of those things which are in the secret purpose of God, is impietie: but to vse coniectures against coniectures, answereth the iniustice of their ambition: no man taking hurt but by meane of him selfe.
            I could vse an incident for this, which though it mayDiodorus Sic. Bibliothe. lib. 17. seeme of small weight, yet may it haue his misterie with his act, who being of base condition placed himself (with out any perturbation of minde) in the royall seat of Alexander, which the Caldeans prognosticated to portend the death of Alexander.
            
            The actors were, that Bergamasco (for his phantastick humors) named Monarcho, and two of the Spanish embassadors retinue, who being about foure and twentie yeares past in Paules church in London, contended who was soueraigne of the world: the Monarcho maintained him self to be he, and named their king to be but his viceroy for Spain: the other two with great fury denying it. At which my self, and some of good account now dead, wondred in respect of the subiect they handled, and that want of iudgment we looked not for in the Spaniards. Yet this moreouer we noted, that notwithstanding the weight of their controuersie; they kept in their walke the Spanish turne: which is, that he which goeth at the right hand shall at euery end of the walke turne in the midst,

the which place the Monarcho was loth to yeald (but as they compelled him, though they gaue him sometimes that romthe) in respect of his supposed Maiestie; but I would this were the worst of their ceremonies; the same keeping some decorum concerning equalitie.
            As I haue (for some proportion betweene the two princes Alexander and Philip) compared him who sate vnder the cloth of state of Alexander with the Monarcho, so would I for conclusion expresse my conceit in a matter of great apparance, and nearer similitude.
            
               Cesar Borgia the sonne of Roderigo a Spaniard, who named himselfe after he came to the Papacie Alexander V I. (which some reade Alexander ui) to that ende as Sabellicus noteth, they hauing the names of those two that were the greatest emperours, might make the world tremble before them: after he had renounced his fathers bishoprick of Valentia in Spaine (of which he was named Cardinal) and to attaine by degrees the Maiesty of Cesar, was created Duke of that place, gaue for his poesie, Aut Cesar, aut nihil. which being not fauoured from the heauens, had presently the euent the same predicted.
            
               Philip of Macedonia at a banquet he made the embassadorsDiodorus Sic. Biblio
                  
                     ••
                  . lib. 16. of Greece (the day before he was slaine by Pausanias) inioyned one Neoptolemus (a tragedian of great name) to recite some poeme before composed that might prognosticat the good successe of his iourney against the Persians. Neoptolemus supposing he had apt matter to extoll his enterprise and greatnes of the Persian empier, which was then like to fall, began in this sort.
            
               For you (vvhich rashly hold,
               The giuen course of life,
               And carefully aspire
               
                  T inuade Olimphus top:
               The champion fieldes, and courtes
               VVhich lift their turrets high)
               The time novv moues regard,
               For lo a vvay not knovven
               He goeth, novv thrid of hope,
               Though long he cuts in tvvo.
               And vtmost day of death,
               Vnbid, presents it selfe.
            
            How this may be applyed to their late enterprise by sea; their penons, banners, stremers and enseignes hauing sundry figures portending a doubtfull euent: I leaue to their iudgments who haue seene both them and their successe; as also the poesie of Borgia, for a neare resemblance of their deuice (at S. Domingo) to the censure of the great iudge. There is no oracle, beside the diuine, more certaine for signifying our estate, or which more bindeth vs to the condition of the thing signified, then that which is pronounced either by our selues, or our meanes: of both which there is no difference. Of this are infinit examples besides those before cited, which for breuity I omit. From these particles I framed this ground, that whatsoeuer is doubtfully laid downe (being not founded vpon the base of iustice) is infirme and of small life. In respect whereof, I iudge we may lawfully affirme by application from the former examples; that the name of the first inhabitāt of Spaine and that countrey, fatally signifying confusion and penury: the auarice of that people, being, by meane thereof, made insatiable; their policie to inlarge their empire cruel, their later proceedings & resolutions terrible; & their embleme of a horse (alluding to the name of their king and his ambition) standing on his hinder legges

vpon the globe of the whole earth, his former partes aduanced as though he would leape from thence, with this written scroll in his mouth, Non sufficit orbis,) proude & not contained in order: expresseth, according to the particular circumstances & blason, that God (hauing restored euery bird her fether) hath left for this proud & stubburne nation, the reward of his wrath, and iust effectes of the signification of Spaine and Tubal: howsoeuer he hath of late delt with vs for our vnthankfulnes, he before powring vpon vs with ful measure, so rare blessings as no nation receaued like, his peculiar people excepted. So that we may iustly bost with Cesar, Ante victum hostem esse quam visum.
            
         
         
            
            A DIALOGVE INTITVLED PHILOBASILIS.
            Philobasilis, Philopolis.
            
               
                  ANatharsis a Scythian, desiring to be numbred at Athens amongst the friends of Solon, was answered, that he was to procure himselfe friendship in his owne country: which rule, vertue being the lodestone, or polestarre of perfect loue, we find of no weight: for as wines made of good grapes are more holsome being drawne from their lies: so those which for a good cause depart their countrey, are as men of singular and diuine qualitie to be embraced of all sorts.
            I feare not Theophilus to affirme this much by my experience of Philopolis, who hauing bene with the king in that battel, where Duke Ioieux was slaine: and after minding to returne to his house in Paris, scaped from thence with great ieoperdie of himselfe to this citie; with whom since that time, for his rare parts which draw to him the fauour of all men, (he being both of counsell and fact,) I haue bene still conuersant.
            With this our Philopolis, I would Theophilus you were acquainted, for that I thinke him worthie your friendship and fauour of good men: in respect whereof, I haue commended to you the speeches of our first conference, though not so well pend, as spoken by him.
            After therefore he had inquired the forme of our gouernement,

which in respect of our factions, he thought miraculously preserued by God: I answered, true Philopolis, the same is neither casuall, or framed by man, but ordained of God, according to the prediction of Sibylla Phrygia, who aboue two thousand yeares past left these verses in letters of gold.
            
               In fruitfull Ile beyond the Gauls shall rule,
               More chaster one, than euer Dian savv:
               The Muses shall depart Parnassus hill,
               To haunt her Court, vvhere all the Graces flovv.
               Dame Pallas shall giue place, and Iuno blush,
               To see that time in vvhich their vertues dimme,
               By beame of brighter starre than earth did knovv:
               vvhose cheerefull gleames shall glad the exiles vvoe.
            
            And somewhat after:
            
               She shall vvith vs adore a virgines sonne,
               And he her sacred head shall crovvne vvith Bayes:
               She shall not bovv, O Thetis to thy doome,
               Or yeeld in light to Phoebus cleerest rayes:
               Thrise happie he, O Queene, that shall behold,
               Thy parts more rare then due to mortall vvight.
            
            By which notwithstāding your Nation noteth our people ceremoniously giuen to matter of prophesie, I collect the iustice of the present policie; which receiueth not only strangers being good men, but some of our owne people for Citizens, who would not if they might be subiects.
            
               Philopo.
               All Oracles not being diuine are doubtfull: but the euent of this hath raised the holy Sibyllae frō death, who many wayes foreshewed the deepe mysteries of our religion, for which our aduersaries by sleight oppresse vs and our Princes, according to the Poet.
               
                  
                  He terror bred vvith fained crimes, hence doubtfull voice
                  He spred in peoples eares, and guiltie sought for armes.
               
               This haue we with teares proued and seene thereof, their bloudie Trophaeas, who leading vs as a Buphal by the nose, seeke our health as he that sought his wife against the streame: yet in these calamities we enuie not, but reuerence your godly and flourishing peace, which is great knew you the vse thereof: and most rare, prouided you she were not deuoured of ease.
            
            
               Philoba.
               This happines is not continued by our policy, but according to the eternall prouidence of the soueraine law-giuer: neither can the same be altered by any constellation, fatall computation of yeares, or mightie preparation of our enimies: but by the Angell of the great Councell, who moderateth not either after the will or manner of men, howsoeuer they dreame of times, or nations: as your Heraults haue done of the forme of your Armories, which resembling three swords, signifie say they, persecution to your kings, princes, & people: which coniecture with many like I condemne, as being ill rules for the multitude, who are easily deluded by phanaticall men, who hunt onely for ostentation, though it be to the daunger of themselues and their countrie.
            
            
               Philopo.
               Our Heraults perhaps deale herein like some Phisitions, who discerning not their patients infirmitie, attribute it either to witchcraft, or their last diet: but we who can best yeeld the reason of our disease, say sin to be the cause, and the Epilepsi of our late king in discipline the signes thereof, who hauing taken no other Phisicke then the flatterie of diuerse great Lords, and officers of the crowne, felt not in that resolution, the heauy hand of his mothers gouernement, contrarie to the custome of our

Nation and Salick Law, then which we for antiquitie, and our common quiet, iudge not any more excellent.
            
            
               Philoba.
               Pardon me though I esteeme that law without praise of either.
            
            
               Philopo.
               Though it standeth not with the humours of your Nation, yet ours reuerently receiueth the same as an honorable testimony of Pharamunds prudence, who for our stronger vnion ordained that Law: that we, by meane thereof, beholding in the families of our Princes which we call of the blood, the race of our kings, might be void of those factions, with which your Nation and others either haue, or may hereafter take hurt.
            
            
               Philoba.
               You lead me as Sibylla Cumana did Eneas to view a phantasticke apparition of men: or as Syrus taught old Demea the way to his brother.
            
            
               Philopo.
               Not so but as the great artificer shewed the Assyrian his counterfait of the foure Monarchies: or as our first parent learned, that his cohelper was flesh of his flesh, and bone of his bones: the vnion not being vnlike betweene the Prince and people, they differing neither in religion, law, custome, or language: all which are neuer consequent, if women attaining the royall seate yeeld the same to straungets: for though the goodnes of Nature be not extinguished in them by those matches, yet are they not (their superioritie being restrained) masters of their owne affections: neither will their husband so naturally regard their new subiects as were requisite, as well for that in seeking to place their men of court in the highest roomes, they expell the naturall subiect: which alteration neuer happeneth without great daunger to the state, as also for that they whom they prefer of their owne traine being ignorant of the lawes, language, and rites of the

people, are in respect thereof, either remisse in the execution of iustice, or so inclined to their owne profite, that the common weale taketh no lesse hurt thereby, then if it were wasted with sundrie enimies: those states which haue fallen into the Spaniards hands by the like meane (which are all they haue in Europe some part of Spaine and the higher Nauarre excepted) being seruile presidents of this argument: especially Naples, Millain, & the lower Germanie: where the meanest companion being a stranger, liued with greater libertie than the nobilitie, being natiues of the Country.
            
            
               Philoba.
               It is cleare that the gouernement of those places (if it be not reformed) answereth not the dignitie of free men: but such is the policie of Spaine, rather to be feared then loued: which Paradox hath hitherto made good their affaires in Italy, as the continuall aid the Duke of Florence yeeldeth the king, and the faithfull seruice of the Duke of Parma to him hath made apparant: notwithstanding that in the States of both, though the one were his alie, and the other his cousen germaine, he hath intruded seuerall garisons of Spaniards, thereby to keepe both the Princes at his deuotion: in what sort therefore he either hath or will vse straungers, that so neerely regardeth the Princes of his house, may be greatly doubted. But to returne to your Salick Law, which profiteth so little in commō opinion, that many of your owne people feare not to publish the vaine title of a Lorainer to that Crowne, he being neither Frenchman, Pair of France, or Prince of the bloud, but one, who for effecting his purpose, would bring in a proud nation to supply the French nobilitie: which act contrarying the diuine law thatDeut. 17. commandeth you to choose no straunger to your king,

what is to be said thereof and of your Salick lawe, seeingNum. 27. to conspire against the holy ordinance, that iudgeth daughters for want of sonnes (and not strangers) capable of gouernement: but that the one by the effects is full of impietie, and the other not onely vnprofitable, but also most daungerous by those warres it draweth on your countrie.
            
            
               Philopo.
               As we may graunt you the first part, so denie we the second, though the ouerthrowes giuen to Philip and Iohn de Valois, are made equall with any that hapned betweene the ancient Gauls and Romaines: since which great slaughters, that law being thē sealed with the bloud of many valiant persons, hath so freed vs from all alterations of succession, that few nations can therein compare their happinesse with ours: the same answering the holy decree you named, which forbiddeth the election of forrē Princes, most like by a secreat consent to ensue, if daughters succeeded. But what letteth the later law, being of more Maiestie, should not in a cause of kings cancell the first specially ordained for priuate persons? and withall the inordinate passions of women, who being lesse qualified than men, are therefore more vnapt to rule.
            
            
               Philoba.
               To graunt their defection maketh not against my purpose: the like happening also to men.
            
            
               Philopo.
               I would their vertues were equall, and you not lead with a partialitie of humors.
            
            
               Philoba.
               I am not, but with the matches of your second Henrie with the house de Medicis, and of your third Henry with the Lords of Guise: after the fancie of which families, your affaires haue since then bene gouerned, and France by meane thereof either named Itagallia, or la France perdue, euen to the losse of him, who fearing

a long time to displease those Lords, gaue them oportunitie to offend himselfe. To impugne therefore the succession of daughters, and to allow your kings marrying such by whose authoritie all things are administred, it being not material by what sexe foriners should tyrānize, is a matter of no weight: the retinue of your kings wiues ouerflowing all places of Iustice, being no lesse daungerous to your peace, than the punicke faith to the auncient Romaines. And likewise, that if Prudence and Fortitude be peculiar to men, that Iustice and Temperance are as proper to women: for which we neede no other presidents than our soueraigne Ladie, whose diuine graces are as the sunne beames, spred into all parts of the world: as Scotland in the minoritie of her king and manie other Nations can witnesse, if she and they be not vnthankefull for that benefite.
            
            
               Philopo.
               I gladly allow your opinion of this one, and of some other of that kinde of most excellent qualitie: all which notwithstanding are no swallowes to make our summer: you know what the learned antiquitie both diuine and prophane haue thought of the weakenesse of this sexe, whose gouernement elsewhere I reuerence, as the ordinance of God, and agreeing with the lawes of other Nations? Yeelding therefore all due honor to your star of peace, which I pray may long shine in the Church of God: I will (leauing that Bruenhault, who according to her Nation, was most daungerous for our Countrie) name but one of the house de Medicis: who after the comicall Poet, was the calamitie of our land. This Ladie hauing (by the death of her husband and discretion of diuers Lords) oportunitie to looke into the gouernment of her children: not onely abused (for desire of rule, of

of which she was impatient) their young yeares, but also the authoritie of the Princes of the blood, to whom during the minority of the king the same belonged: causing moreouer her sonnes (for seruing her ambition) to play all parts of a dreadfull tragedy, in which she was a seuere actor till her last breath: hauing vnto that time hid many daungers from the king which might greatly haue profited him and the realme, had they bene reueiled in season, which she concealed for her owne profite: not one being more able to dissemble then she, who had by that meane deceiued many great Princes and Captaines of her time, especially the Admirall Chastilion, who affirmed in all speeches of her, that he greatly doubted her vnstable wit. And though that wind be ill that turneth none to good, yet her arts greatly auailed Spaine; which she euermore regarded for preferring her particular (notwithstanding the losse of her daughter) before the nobilitie and common profite of France, entertaining in respect thereof diuerse (vpon other mens cost) with the hope of many excellent titles and great Signiories; the desire of which are not yet forgotten, nor will be, till God moderate our troubles, and take compassion of our poore afflicted France.
               
            
            
               Philoba.
               Feare not Philopolis for if there were euer time to pacifie the broiles of your countrie it is in the raigne of the fourth Henry, your third Henry hauing bin vnmeet to repaire the house of God being imbrued with the bloud of his Saincts.
            
            
               Philopo
               I haue thought as much, and therefore haue alwaies relied my self vpon the good prouidence of God, which neuer faileth his people. But at this one thing I tremble to behold the diunine iudgment in the Duke of

                  Guise and late king, who being companions at the great murther at Paris ended their liues, in a sort, the one by the others sword. Of this our Bardi of one authoritie with the ancient Gauls, as the Sibyllae with the reuerent antiquitie haue long since giuen some testimonie in these rithmes.
               
                  VVhen men that sprong of serpents teeth are slaine,
                  Then leaue, O Gauls, to mourne: for sound of Trumpe
                  Shall cease, vvith ciuill hate, and dolefull vvarre.
                  His foes shall giue him place, and yeeld their roomes,
                  The most of them by stroke of others svvord.
                  He holy league shall haue vvith neighbour Ile,
                  VVhere crovvned maid shall daily pay her vovves,
                  Vnto th'eternall God, her God of old.
                  For this Apollo tune thy golden harpe,
                  And sound vvith siluer quill their high renovvne;
                  You Muses still assist this goddesse praise,
                  And Fauns that haūt the vvoods, vvith vvater Nimphs
                  That often treadon pleasant greene the rounds,
                  In rounds still sing long may that Ladie liue,
                  And double do thou bashfull Ecchocrie,
                  Liue, Liue.
               
            
            
               Philoba.
               I dayly pray no lesse, and should be also of that conceit for the peace of your France, & our realme: if Egles disclosed doues: but you know that factions are the porters of warre: of this your kings are not ignorant, whose sufferance encreased their number, who would wreath their chaplets with your Fluerdelices, and twist their Garlands with our Roses.
            
            
               Philop.
               Nothing is more probable than which you lastly alledged: as their execrable practise touching the death of the godly and valiant Prince of Conde, hath to

to the vniuersall hurt of the Church sorrowfully confirmed, and the slaughter of the late king to an ill president for all Princes that acknowledge not their indignitie of place, made apparant to all men: yet is there not anie thing lesse to be feared then the effecting of their ambition: for he who planted those flowers, which for beautie and smell are excellent, will also keepe them to their vse, who are the true owners of both.
            
            
               Philob.
               Those speaches ended, I tooke occasion (fearing to abuse his time, which he being alone bestoweth most religiously) to depart: minding as I haue giuen you some feele by this conference (intermedled with diuers matter) of his good meaning to the Christian publike weale, to acquaint you, Theopilus, with himselfe: who (as the lightning cannot be counterfaited, or glimmering of swords shadowed,) is neuer well perceiued but by the weight of his owne words.
            
            FINIS.
            
         
      
   