
      
         
            
            
            A LETTER VVRITTEN FROM PARIS, BY THE Lord Cardinall of Peron, TO MONSr. CASAVBON in England.
            Tranſlated out of the French corrected Copie, into Engliſh.
            Anno M.DC.XII.
         
         
            
            
            
               
                  GENTLE Reader,
            
            This Epiſtle was cōpoſed by the Lord Cardinall of Peron, without any purpoſe to haue it ſeene in publike, but rather with deliberation not to impart it ſo much as to his very familiar friends. But a Copie therof being by chance gotten, it was preſently printed in Paris, with many faults, yea and with ſome hereſies. And although the foreſaid Cardinall vſed all diligence to haue it ſuppreſſed, cauſing the Copies to be ſeyzed on by the Officers of Iuſtice, and the Printer to be puniſhed for publiſhing them without his knowledge: yet was there ſoone after another impreſsiō made therof in Roan,
               
conformable to that faulty Copie of Paris, and the like may alſo be done elſe-where. For remedy therfore of the diſaduantage which may ariſe hereof, both to the doctrine of Catholikes, and the reputation of the Author, it hath ſeemed neceſſary to permit, that it be printed entire and perfect, according to the Copie which was written & ſent. And this we do at this preſent, diſclayming from all the former copies, and whatſoeuer elſe not cōformable to this.
         
      
      
         
            
            
               
                  SYR.
            
            THE Letter which you deliuered to Monſieur de la Boderie, to be giuen me, I receaued when I was vpon my departure, taking my iourney into Normandie. Since my returne, I haue bene allwaies ſick; which hath bene the cauſe, that my Anſwer cōmeth no ſooner to your hands. But now, that my infirmity alloweth me ſome little eaſe, I will pay the arrierages of my former ſlackneſſe. And firſt I yield you many thankes, for the pleaſure you did me, in ſhewing my Letter to

his Maieſty of Great-Britaine, and procuring me ſome part in his gracious fauour; which I will endeauour ſo to increaſe by moſt humble ſeruices, and particulerly by ſetting forth his Royall Praiſes (the only fruite, which good and vertuous Kings, ſuch as his Maieſty is, do receaue of the thorny cares annexed to Royall Gouernement) as he ſhall haue no cauſe to be ſorie, that Poſterity know the honour, which his Maieſty did me with his Royall fauour, and the Reuerence and Admiration I had of his Princelie vertues.
            As for the Tranſlation of Virgils verſe, wherof you ſay his Maieſty deſired a Copie, that being loſt, which before I ſent you, I muſt differre for ſome daies the performance of this duty, for that I haue cauſed it to be printed againe with an Addition of one part of the fourth; which for his Maieſties ſake

I haue of purpoſe added, to make therof vnto him a more ample and worthy preſent; and as ſoone as ſome few Copies ſhalbe finiſhed, I will not fayle to ſend you one, that you may preſent it to his Maieſty in my name.
            There reſteth now the third point of your Letter; which is, that his Maieſty much meruailed at theſe wordes of mine, where I ſayd, that excepting the only Title of Catholike, there was nothing wanting in his Royall Perſon, to expreſſe the liuelie patterne of a Prince, completely endued with all Princely vertues: and that he pretended the Title of Catholike, could not be denied him, ſince he belieued all thoſe things, which the ancient Fathers with vniforme conſent eſteemed neceſſary to ſaluation.
            To this I anſwere, that as on the one ſide I cannot but greatly praiſe the Chriſtian humility of

his Maieſty, in that he refuſeth not to ſubmit his Iudgement, adorned with ſo rare light of Nature, and increaſed by Induſtrie, to thoſe bright ſhining Lampes of Antiquity; imitating herein the prudence of the Great Emperour Theodoſius, who thought no other meanes more ready for the compoſing of thoſe diſſentions, wherewith the Church was moleſted in his time, then to demaund of both parties, if they belieued, that the ancient Fathers, who flouriſhed before their contentions began, had the true faith; which they confeſſing, he required them to ſubmit themſelues to that, which they ſhould find to haue byn belieued by the ancient Fathers: ſo on the other ſide, there are diuers things to be obſerued vpon the Premiſes before we come to the Concluſion; which for that I haue not meanes to preſent to his Maieſty, I ſhalbe content to informe you of

thē for your particuler ſatisfaction.
            The firſt is, that the Name of Catholike, is not a Name of only Beliefe, but of Communion; otherwiſe the ancient Fathers would neuer haue refuſed to giue this Name to them, that were ſeparated from them, not in beliefe, but in the communion & vnity of the Church. Neither would they euer haue affirmed, that out of the Catholike Church they might haue Faith and Sacraments, but not Saluation.
Out of the Catholike Church (ſaith S. Auguſtin in his Treatiſe of the Conference had with Emeritus) a man may haue all things, excepting ſaluation: he may haue Orders, he may haue Sacraments, he may ſing Alleluia, he may anſwere Amen, he may haue the Ghoſpell, he may haue, and preach the faith in the Name of the Father, & of the Sōne, and of the holy Ghoſt; but he can by no meanes obtaine ſaluatiō,

but in the Catholike Church.
            
            And in his booke de vtilitate credendi.
               Cap. 7.
               There is one Church, as all do confeſſe: and if you looke on the whole compaſſe of the world, it exceedeth all others in number: and as they affirme that know, it is more ſincere in the doctrine of the Truth. But this is another queſtion. That which ſufficeth for our preſent purpoſe, is, that there is one Catholike Church, to which diuers hereſies haue giuen different Names, when as euery of them haue their proper Names, which they dare not deny: by which it may eaſily appeare, to whome the Name of Catholike, of which all are deſirous, ought to be attributed.
            
            
               Cap. 4.And in his booke contra Epiſt. Fundam.
               And that I may omit this wiſdome, which you denie to be in the Catholike Church, there are diuers other things, which do moſt iuſtly retayne, and hould me in her

bounds & vnity. There doth hould me the conſent of people and natiōs, the authority which had her beginning by miracles, nouriſhed by hope, augmented by charity, confirmed by antiquity. There doth hould me the Succeſſion of Biſhops vntill this preſent day, from the very Seate of Peter, to whom our Lord committed the feeding of his ſheepe after his Reſurrection, to the Epiſcopall dignity of the preſent Biſhop. And laſtly this very name Catholike doth hould me in the vnity of this Church; which name this Church hath alwaies, not without cauſe, amongſt ſo many different ſects of hereſies, in ſuch ſort obtained, that although all heretiks deſire to be called Catholiks; yet if a Stranger ſhould demaūd where is the Aſſembly of the Catholike Church, there is no Heretike that dareth to aſſigne him his Temple, or his houſe.
            
            
               
               Cap. 10.And in his Treatiſe de fide & ſymbolo.
               We doe belieue the holy Church, that is Catholike; for the Heretikes and the Schiſmatikes do cal their Congregations Churches: but the Heretikes belieuing thoſe things of God, which are falſe, do violate the fayth; and the Schiſmatiks by vnlawfull diuiſions, doe ſeparate themſelues from brotherly charity, although they belieue in all things the ſame with vs. And for this cauſe neither doth the Heretike appertaine to the Catholik Church, for that ſhe loueth God; nor the Schiſmatike, for that ſhe loueth her neighbour.
            
            
               Cap. 4.And in his Booke de vnitate Eccleſiae. 
               All thoſe that belieue, as hath bene ſaid, that our Lord Ieſus Chriſt is come in fleſh, & riſen from death in the ſame fleſh, in which he was borne, and hath ſuffered; and that he is the Sonne of God, with God, and one with the Father, and the

onely immutable Word of the Father, by whome all thinges were made, but doth yet in ſuch ſort diſſent from his body, which is the Church, that their communion is not with all them with whome the Catholike Church doth participate, but are in ſome deuided part; it is manifeſt, that they are not in the Catholike Church.
            
            And Proſper his Diſciple ſaith:
That he who doth cōmunicate with this Vniuerſall Church, is a Chriſtian, and a Catholike, and he that doth not cōmunicate, is an Heretike and Antichriſt. By which we ſee, that the ancient Fathers denyed the Title of Catholike to the Donatiſts, becauſe they ſeparated themſelues from the Communion of the Church, and graunted it to them, from whome the Donatiſts tooke their doctrine, becauſe they remayned in the Vnity of one communion.
The people vnder S. Cyprian
                  
his charge (ſaith Saint Pacianus) haue neuer bene called otherwiſe then Catholike. And S. Vincentius Lyrinenſis: O admirable change of things! The Authors of one and the ſame opinion are eſteemed Catholikes, and their followers are iudged Heretikes. And S. Auguſtine. Your diſſention, ſaith he, and your diuiſion maketh you Heretikes, & their peace and vnity made them Catholikes.
            
            And when as in the fourth Councell of Carthage this Article was put in the examen of thoſe that were to be made Biſhops, the ſame was repeated in the Epiſtle of the Councell, by Saint Auguſtine, who was the Secretary, in theſe words:epiſt. 152. ad Donat
                     •
                  ſt.
               Whoſoeuer is deuided from the Catholike Church, how laudably ſoeuer he ſeeme to liue, for this only cryme that he is ſeparated frō the Vnity of the Church, he ſhall be excluded from life, and the wrath

of God ſhall remayne vpon him. And the ſame was repeated againe by Fulgentius, who ſaith:lib. de fid. ad Pet. Diac. cap. 29. Hold for moſt certaine, and doubt not in any manner, that no Heretike or Schiſmatike, baptized in the name of the Father, of the Sonne, and of the holy Ghoſt, if he be not vnited to the Catholike Church, although he giue neuer ſo great almes, and ſhed his very bloud for the name of Chriſt, yet can he in no wiſe be ſaued.
Thus ſayd theſe Fathers, wholy or principally againſt the Donatiſts; who notwithſtanding agreed with the Catholikes in all articles of the Creed, and in holy Scripture.
            
               You accord with vs (ſayth S. Auguſtine) in Baptiſme, and in the Creed, and in all other Sacraments of our Lord: but in the ſpirit of Vnity, in the place of peace, & laſtly in the Catholike Church, you are not with vs. And yet they differed only in one poynt of Tradition, not

expreſſely contayned in Scripture.
And S. Auguſtine himſelfe, the chief Conquerour of this Hereſy, doth confeſſe, that it could not be proued by Scripture.
This (ſaith he lib.
                  Cap. 19. 
                  de vnitate Eccleſiae) neither you, nor I, do read in expreſſe wordes. And in his firſt booke contra Creſconium:Cap. 33· 
               Although no example of this matter be found in holy Scriptures, yet do we follow in this, the Truth of the Scriptures, when we do that which is agreable to the Vniuerſall Church, cōmended vnto vs by the authority of the ſame Scriptures. And l.
                  Cap. 4. 11. de Bapt. cont. Donat. And we our ſelues (ſaith he) ſhould not dare to affirm any thing of this matter, if we were not warrāted by the moſt vniforme Authority of the Church.Cap. 24. And l. 5. The Apoſtles haue cōmanded nothing concerning this matter: but the cuſtome which was alleadged againſt S. Cypr. is to be thought to haue deſcended frō their

traditiō, as diuers other things haue done, which the Vniuerſall Church doth obſerue, and are therfore with great reaſon belieued, to haue bene commaunded by the Apoſtles, although they be not written.
            
            Whence it followeth, that it ſufficeth not, for the obtaining of the Name Catholike, to hould, or rather to thinke we do hould the ſelf ſame beliefe of the ancient Fathers, if we do not participate with them in the Vnity and Communion of the ſame Catholike Church, with which the ſame ancient Fathers did communicate, and which by ſucceſſion of perſons, and, as we further pretend, by the ſucceſſion alſo of doctrine is deſcended vnto vs. And if ſhe hath loſt any part of her greatnes in our Hemiſphere, ſhe hath gotten as much, or more, in the other Hemiſphere, that is vnder vs: that ſo thoſe ancient Propheſies may be fulfilled;Gen. 26. 
               In thy ſeed all the nations of the

earth ſhallbe bleſſed And: In the laſt dayes,
               Iſa. 2. 
               the mountayne of the houſe of our Lord, ſhalbe in the top of mountaines, and ſhalbe lifted vp aboue the hilles, and all nations ſhall come vnto it. The Ghoſpell of the Kingdome muſt be preached through the vniuerſall world,
               Matth. 23. 
               and then ſhall follow the end and conſummation: with other the like ſentences of holy Scripture. By which (as Saint Auguſtine noteth) the Church hath obtayned the Title & Marke of Catholike.
            
            The ſecond obſeruation is, concerning the reſtriction to things, neceſſary to ſaluation. For beſides thoſe that are neceſſary to ſaluation, there are two other degrees of things: the one, of ſuch as are profitable to ſaluation: as, according to the iudgment of your Miniſters, is the ſelling of all that a man hath, and giuing it to the poore. Likewiſe to faſt in time of afflictiō, to appeaſe the indignation of God; to pray for

the brethren that are of the ſame faith with vs; to pray to Almighty God for our owne neceſſities. The other degree is of things lawfull, & not repugnant to ſaluation; as to flie in time of perſecution, and for ſuch as ſerue the Altar, to be maintained by the Altar; to put away the wife that is Adultreſſe, and the like. For I alleage theſe, as exāples, and not for inſtances. Now for entire conformity with the beliefe of the ancient Fathers, it is neceſſary, that we belieue all thoſe things which they belieued, euery one according to the degree in which they were held by them; that is, to belieue thoſe things to be neceſſary to ſaluation, which they reputed neceſſarie; and thoſe things profitable to ſaluation, which they eſteemed ſo: and likewiſe to belieue thoſe things to be lawfull, and not repugnant to ſaluation, which they did hold for lawfull & not repugnant:

and that vnder colour, that theſe two laſt degrees are not of things neceſſary to ſaluation, but only profitable or lawfull, we ſhould not condemne them, nor ſeparate our ſelues for any reſpect of them from the Church, which did, and doth practiſe them.
            The third obſeruation is, concerning the ambiguity of the words (neceſſarie to ſaluation) which for that there are diuers kindes of neceſſities in matters of Religion, may be diuerſly taken. For there is one neceſſity, which is called Abſolute, and another Conditionall. There is a neceſſitie of the meanes to do a thing, and there is a neceſſitie induced by the precept, by which we are commaunded to do it. There is alſo a neceſſitie of ſpeciall and particuler beliefe, and a neceſſitie of beliefe in generall: a neceſſitie of act, and laſtly a neceſſity of approbation. I call abſolute neceſſity (not

that it is ſimply ſo, but for that God hath ſo ordained it) that which admitteth no excuſe of impoſſibility, nor any exception of place, time, or perſon. Of this kind is the knowledge and beliefe of Chriſt, the Mediatour betweene God and man, which is of abſolute neceſſitie to be knowne of all that be of age. For it is not excuſed with the circumſtance of not being in place, where one may be inſtructed, nor with the condition of being ignorant and vnlearned, rude, and of little capacity, a ſheepe, and not a ſheepheard: for none of theſe exceptions can defend them from eternall death, that do not actually belieue. Foraſmuch as whoſoeuer belieueth not in the only begotten Sonne of God, is allreadie iudged.Ioan· 3. And of the ſame neceſſitie to little infants, is the receauing of the Sacrament of Baptiſme, by which alone, according to the doctrine of

Catholikes, the faith in Chriſt is in them ſupplyed: following herein the ſentence of S Auguſtine,
               lib. 3. de an. & eius orig. c. 9. who ſaith:
Do not belieue, do not ſay, do not teach, that the Infants preuented by death, before they be baptized, can obtaine remiſſion of Originall ſinne, if thou will be a Catholike.
And of this kind of neceſſitie, there are but few examples.
            I call that neceſſitie Conditionall, which obligeth not, but when there is poſſibility, and admitteth exception of place, time, and perſons: and this againe is ſubdeuided into many branches. For firſt of all (to ſpeake of matters which concerne Faith) there are many points, which neceſſarily are to be belieued by him, that is in place, where he may be inſtructed, or hath time to informe himſelf, which are not neceſſary to another, that liueth in a deſert, or is ſo ſuddainly preuented by death, that he hath no leaſure

to be inſtructed: as, that Chriſt was borne of a Virgin, that he was crucified vnder Pontius Pilate, that he roſe againe the third day. And many things are neceſſary to be belieued and held for points of Faith, either by the whole body of the Church in generall, or by the order of Miniſters or Paſtours, who are the eies of the Church, which be not neceſſary to be knowne and belieued as articles of Faith by euery one in particuler: As, that the perſons of the bleſſed Trinity are one in Eſſence, and diſtinct in Subſiſtence: that the Father hath begottē his Sonne of neceſſity, and not of free accord; that they are the diuine Perſons which do produce, and are produced, and not the Eſſence which doth neither produce, nor is produced; that the externall operations of the bleſſed Trinity are vndeuided: that the only Perſon of the Sonne hath taken fleſh, and not any

of the others: that in Chriſt there are two Subſtances, and one Subſiſtence: that the Diuinity was not in place of the ſoule, but that beſides the body and Diuinity, there was in Chriſt alſo a ſenſible and reaſonable ſoule: that what Chriſt did once perſonally vnite vnto him, he doth neuer abandone: that the Diuel was created good, and by the liberty of his owne free will, he became euill; and other the like.
            And as for the neceſſity of action, there are many things neceſſary, when there is poſſibility and opportunity of times, of places, and of perſons; which are not neceſſary abſolutely, and when theſe commodities and meanes to performe them, are wanting: As to aſſiſt at Eccleſiaſticall ſolemnities; to receaue actually the Euchariſt. And many things are neceſſary to ſome, as Miſſion and Impoſition of hands to the Paſtours of the Church; and

Marriage to ſuch as deſire lawfull ofſpring, which are not neceſſary to others. And briefly, other things are needfull for the obtayning of ſaluation, and others for the obtaining of it with more facility: others for the obtaining of it for ones ſelf, and others for the procuring and getting of it for another: others for the conſtitution of the Church, and others for the edification and more large propagation of the Church: others for the meere being of Chriſtian Religion, and others for the better being, that is, for the decēcy, dignity, and ſplendour therof. I call neceſſity of meanes that which is in the things themſelues we vſe, as that of the Sacraments, to which God hath giuen power, for the imparting of Grace, and the reall cooperation to the health of a mans ſoule, That alſo of the Cōmaundements of the morall law, the neceſſity wherof is impoſed by the order

of nature. In like manner the neceſſity of repenting for our ſinnes, which is a neceſſary meane for obtaining of pardon.
            I call that neceſſity of Precept, which proceedeth only from the force of commaundment, as is the keeping holy of the firſt day in the weeke, in memorie of that day in which our Sauiour roſe from death, and which for this cauſe is called Dies Dominicus, that is, the day of our Lord, and other the like obſeruations; the omiſſion of which, would nothing endanger ſaluation, if it were not for diſobedience and the breaking of the precept, by which they are commaunded. I call neceſſitie of particuler and ſpeciall beliefe, the neceſſity of thoſe articles, which all faithfull ſoules not preuented by death are bound to know and belieue with an expreſſe, diſtinct, and determinate faith, which in Schooles is called Fides

ex licita: and of this kind, are the twelue Articles of our Creed.
            Neceſſity of generall beliefe comprehendeth thoſe things, which euery one in particuler is not bound to belieue in diſtinct and expreſſe manner; as the doctrine of Originall ſinne; the article of two wills in Chriſt; the proceeding of the holy Ghoſt from the Father and the Sonne; the force of Baptiſme giuen in due forme out of the Catholike Church; and that the baptized by heretikes are not to be rebaptized, when they returne to the vnity of the Church, and other the like, which euery ſimple and rude Chriſtian is not bound expreſly and diſtinctly to belieue, but it ſufficeth, that they belieue them in generall, in the faith of the Church, that is, that they adhere, and be vnited to the Church, which belieueth them; in the faith whereof they liue as long, as they remaine

in her communion and vnity; in like manner as the infant liueth by the food receaued by the mother, as long as it is within her wombe.
            Neceſſity of Act I call that, which is of thoſe things, which euery one in particuler is bound actually to do: As to profeſſe the name of Chriſt, to pardon receaued iniuries, to reſtore the goods of others vniuſtly detayned. Neceſſity of approbation is of thoſe things, which euery one in particuler is not bound actually to execute; but he is bound not to contradict, or condemne thoſe that do them, nor the Church which doth approue them, nor for any diſlike of them to ſeparate themſelues from the Church, vnder paine of being excluded from euerlaſting ſaluation. Of this ſort is the choice of liuing a chaſt and ſingle life, and other the like. Of all which kindes of Neceſſitie the ancient Fathers held many things,

ech one in his degree, differently neceſſary to ſaluation: as we will ſhew in thoſe particulers, which ſhalbe preſented to be examined. Now if we hold the points of doctrine or of action, which the Fathers eſteemed neceſſary for ſaluation, according to ſome of theſe neceſſities, and do reiect the reſt, we cannot for this be ſaid to agree in beliefe with the ancient Fathers: but it is further needfull to hold and eſteeme all thoſe things neceſſary to ſaluation, which the ancient Fathers did eſteeme to be neceſſary, euery one in the degree, and according to the kind of neceſſity, as they were eſteemed by them.
            The fourth Obſeruation is about the word (Ancient) which ſome, when they ſhould come to performe their promiſe of ſubmitting their iudgment to Antiquity, do reſtraine to the firſt or ſecond Age immediatly after the Apoſtles,

not for that they hope to find within that ſpace any ancient Father, that doth fauour them, but for that the Church being then oppreſſed with perſecutions, left vs but few writings of that Date; and thoſe for the moſt part againſt ſuch perſons, & about ſuch matters, as do ſo little appertaine to the queſtiōs now in cō
               trouerſy, as the face of the anciēt doctrine, & the practiſe of the Church in thoſe dayes, cannot be fully repreſented vnto vs & knowne. But reaſon and equity requireth, that if we wil confer the eſtate of the Sects of this age, which would chalenge to themſelues the Title of the Catholike Church, with the eſtate of the ancient Church; we ſhould take a time, wherin not only our Competitours do agree with vs, that the Church of that age was the true Church, & the true Spouſe of Ieſus Chriſt, and that ſhe had lawfull authority to iudge and determine the

Cōtrouerſies in matters of Religiō; but alſo it behoueth vs to take ſuch a tyme, of which we haue ſufficient Monuments and Records, to ſhew cleerly vnto vs the doctrine & obobſeruatiōs of that Church, which cannot in any ſort be better found then in the tymes of the foure firſt Councels, that is, from the tyme of Conſtantine the Great, who was the firſt Emperour that publikly profeſſed Chriſtian Religion, to the tyme of the Emperour Martian.
            
            And it ſeemeth his Maieſty doth liberally accord, not onely to this, but to much more in ſome of his writings, hauing extended the continuance of the true Church, to the whole ſpace of the fiue firſt ages. For beſides that the freedome from the yoke of ſeruitude of the Pagans, gaue place to the Church then to ſpeake with more liberty, and to haue more free communication with all the parts belonging

vnto it, diſperſed in diuers Countreys and Kingdomes, and to flouriſh in a greater multitude of learned and excellent Writers, which hath bene the cauſe, that we haue at this preſent without compariſon, many more teſtimonyes of thoſe ages, to diſcouer the entire and perfect forme of the ancient Chriſtian Religion, then we haue of the other ages which went before. Beſides this, I ſay, our Aduerſaryes cannot deny, but that Church, which was nouriſhed with the breſts of the firſt Chriſtian Emperours, and which deſtroyed the Temples, aboliſhed the ſeruice and honour done to falſe Gods, and exerciſed the ſoueraigne Tribunall of ſpirituall authority on earth, by the ſentence of condemnation, which ſhe pronoū
               ced againſt the foure moſt famous Hereſies, in the foure firſt generall Councells, which were the foure firſt generall Aſſemblyes, and

Parlaments of Eſtate of the Kingdome of Chriſt, was that Church of whom it was fortould, that ſhe ſhould ſuck the breſts of Kings;Iſa. 62.54. and that Nations ſhould walke in her light, and Kings in the brightneſſe of her orient; that all attempts againſt her ſhould be deſtroyed; that ſhe ſhould iudge euery tongue that reſiſted in iudgement; that God had put watchmen vpon her walles, who ſhould not be ſilent day or night for all eternity;Matth. 16.18. that the gates of Hell ſhould not preuaile againſt her; and whoſoeuer refuſed to heare her, ſhould be eſteemed as a Publicane and Heathen:1 Tim. 3. and briefly that ſhe was the pillar and firmament of truth.
Shall we doubt,de vtilitate cred. c. 17. ſaith Saint Auguſtine, to put our ſelues in the boſome of that Church, which by  ſucceſſion of Biſhops from the Seat of the Apoſtles, to the vniuerſall confeſſion of mankind, the Heretikes barking on all ſides, and condemned

partly by the iudgement of the very people, and partly by the Maieſty of miracles, hath obtained the higheſt degree of authority, which not to obey and acknowledge, is an act of extreme impiety or precipitous arrogancie. And againe.De ſymb. ad Catech. lib. 1. c. 5. 
               The Catholike Church reſiſting all Heretikes may be impugned, but neuer ouercome: al hereſies haue come out of her, as vnprofitable branches cut off from the vine, but ſhe remaineth ſtill in her roote, in her vine, in her charity.
            
            That doctrine therefore ſhall truly be ſayd to be ancient, and marked with the character of the primitiue Church, which ſhalbe found to haue bene belieued and practiſed vniuerſally by the Fathers, who liued in the time of the foure firſt Generall Councells; and principally when it ſhall appeare, that the things affirmed by the authors of thoſe ages, were not held by

them as doctrines and obſeruations of their owne, but as doctrines and obſeruations perpetually practiſed by the Church in all ages, from the time of the Apoſtles: although perhaps there cannot be found ſo many expreſſe teſtimonies of euery one of thoſe things within the compaſſe of the precedent ages, as may within the time of the foure firſt Councells, by reaſon of the ſmall ſtore of writings, which the Perſecution of thoſe times ſuffered to come to our hands. For it ſufficeth to aſſure vs of the perpetuall practice of thoſe matters, that the Fathers who liued in the time of the foure firſt Councells, and knew better then we what paſſed in the ages that went before them, do teſtify that they were belieued and practiſed, not as things inſtituted in their age, but as things, which had bene practiſed in all times in the Church, & were come by cō
               tinuall and ſucceſſiue obſeruation

from the Apoſtles vnto them; and that in the Authors of the precedent ages, no repugnant teſtimonie can be foūd, but wholy to the contrary: when any occaſion of ſpeaking of thoſe things is offered, they alwaies affoard cōformable and fauourable teſtimonies; which is in few words to ſay: That thing ought to be held in all reaſon for ancient, which thoſe, whome we do accompt ancient, did themſelues eſteeme to be ancient.
            The fifth obſeruation is, about the Vnanimity and vniforme conſent of the Fathers; which ſome contentious ſpirits would haue to be vnderſtood only, when one and the ſelfe ſame thing is actually found in the writings of all the Fathers; which is a moſt vniuſt and impertinent pretenſion. For, that any doctrine or obſeruation be truly held by the Fathers to be Vniuerſall and Catholike, it is not needfull

that it be found in the writings of all the Fathers, when as many of them perhapps neuer treated of thoſe matters, and of whoſe writings ſome haue periſhed, and neuer come to our hands: but there are two other lawfull waies to aſſure and ſatisfy vs in this matter. The one, when the Fathers or greateſt eminencie in euery Countrey, do agree in the affirmation of one and the ſelf ſame doctrine or practiſe, and none of the others haue noted it, as diſſenting from the Church, nor haue written againſt it. In this ſort,Contra 
                     〈…〉
                  . when Saint Auguſtine had cited againſt the Pelagians the teſtimony of an eleuen Fathers, eminēt in learning, and agreeing in the ſame points of doctrine, he thought he had ſufficiently produced againſt them the beliefe of the Catholike Church: and when the Councell of Epheſus had produced ten Fathers of former ages, they

thought, they had ſufficiētly expreſſed the cōſent of the Church in the precedēt tymes, againſt the doctrine of Neſtorius:Cap 42▪
                for that, as Vincentius Lyrinenſis noteth, they doubted not, but thoſe ten Fathers held & belieued the ſelf ſame, which all the reſt of their brethren did.
            The other way is, when the Fathers do ſpeake not as Doctours, but as witneſſes, of the vſe and practiſe of the Church in their ages, & do not ſay; In my opinion, this ought thus to be belieued, or thus to be vnderſtood, or thus to be obſerued: but the Church from one end of the world to the other, belieueth thus, or obſerueth this. For then we do not hold that, which they ſay, as a thing ſayd by them, but as ſayd by the vniuerſall Church: and principally in matters whereof they could not be ignorant, by reaſon either of the condition of things, as in matters of fact, or in reſpect

of the ſufficiencie of the perſons. And in this caſe we do not draw from their words, only a probable argument, as we do, when they ſpeake as particuler Doctours; but the argument we draw from hence, is an abſolute demonſtration.
            This therfore is to be held vndoubtedly for Vniuerſall & Catholike, which the moſt eminent of the Fathers, that liued in the time of the foure firſt Councells, haue taught in diuers Countreys, and different parts of the world, and which none of the reſt haue impugned or noted, as diſagreing from the doctrine of the Church; or which the Fathers of theſe Councells haue witneſſed, to haue bene belieued and practiſed by the whole Church in their ages: and that ſhall vndoubtedly remayne as ancient and Apoſtolike, which the Fathers of thoſe ages haue teſtified to haue bene obſerued by the whole Church, not as

a thing newly begun in their time, but deſcended to them by continuall and immemorable ſucceſſion from former ages, or from the expreſſe Tradition of the Apoſtles. For thoſe thinges hauing bene vniuerſally obſerued in the tyme of the foure firſt Councels, they could not be inſtituted, but by an vniuerſall authority. For in the Catholike Church was then exactly obſerued the rule mentioned by Vincentius Lyrinenſis, to oppoſe Vniuerſalitie againſt Particularitie. And therefore one doctrine or obſeruation of one particuler Prince, could neuer come to be the beliefe or cuſtome vniforme and vniuerſall throughout all parts of the world: eſpecially in ſuch ſort, as no one of the Fathers liuing neere the tyme of thoſe vniuerſall innouations, ſhould haue perceaued or noted; but whatſoeuer was then vniuerſally obſerued in the whole Church, muſt neceſſarily

be inſtituted by ſome vniuerſall Prince.
            For according to the opinion of your Miniſters, there were in thoſe ages but two principall and vniuerſall authorities; the one of the Apoſtles, and the other of generall Councells. For they will not admit, that the Sea Apoſtolike had at thoſe tymes any vniuerſall authoritie: and therefore, whatſoeuer ſhalbe found to haue bene vniuerſally and vniformly obſerued in the Church, in all Countreys & Prouinces of the earth, in the tyme of the foure firſt Generall Councells, and not to haue bene begun in that time, but to haue bene formerly practiſed, that is, before there was any Generall Councell in the Church, muſt neceſſarily be a tradition of the Apoſtles, following thoſe rules of S. Auguſtine Epiſt. 18.
Thoſe things, ſaith he▪ which we keep, not by writing, but by

Tradition, which are obſerued through the whole world, are vnderſtood to be receaued from the ordination and inſtitution either of the Apoſtles themſelues, or of Generall Councells, whoſe authority is moſt profitable to the Church. And in another place.De Bapt. cont. Donat. lib. 4. c. 6. 
               That cuſtome alſo, which men looking vpwards, could not find, that it was inſtituted by poſterity, was iuſtly belieued to haue bene inſtituted by the Apoſtles.
And there are many other things, which would be long to repeat. And againe. If any one in this do ſeeke diuine authority, although that which the vniuerſall Church obſerueth, and hath not bene inſtituted by Councells, but alwayes retayned; is iuſtly belieued not to haue bene deliuered by Tradition, but by Apoſtolicall authority &c.
Which rules of S. Auguſtine if they haue place in thoſe things, which the Fathers, who liued

in the tyme of the foure firſt Councells, do teſtifie, to haue bene obſerued in the Church before thoſe Councells; with how much more reaſon ought they to haue place in thoſe matters, which the ſame Fathers affirme, not in doubtfull, but in expreſſe termes, to haue bene inſtituted, and ordained by the Apoſtles.
            Theſe fiue Obſeruations then thus made vpon the Premiſſes, to paſſe now to the Concluſion; I ſay, that ſo farre of it is, that your Miniſters to whome his Maieſty doth exteriourly adhere, doe hold the ſame thinges, which the ancient Fathers haue belieued and practiſed, as neceſſary to ſaluation, that in the ſolemne Seruice or Liturgie of the Church, which is the ſeale of Eccleſiaſticall Communion, the foure principall points, for which they haue ſeparated themſelues frō vs, which are, the Reall Preſence

of the body of Chriſt in the Sacrament; the Offering of the Sacrifice of the Euchariſt; Prayer & Oblation for the dead; & Prayer to Saints, the ancient Fathers haue vniuerſally and vniformly belieued, held, and practiſed them all, as thinges neceſſary to ſaluation; although in different degrees of neceſſitie. So as if your Miniſters had liued in the time of the ancient Fathers, they muſt, as they haue now forſaken and renounced our ſolemnities and communion for theſe cauſes: ſo alſo haue then renounced the ſolē
               nities & cōmunion of the ancient Fathers, and conſequently the title & ſociety of the Catholike Church.
            I ſayd the Reall Preſence of the body of Chriſt in the Sacrament, not becauſe I thinke not to paſſe further, to affirme the ſubſtantiall conuerſion of the Sacrament into the body of Chriſt, but it ſufficeth for my purpoſe to ſay, the

Reall Preſence. For it is not preciſely and particulerly the Tranſubſtantiation of the Sacrament, but the Reall Preſence of the body of Chriſt in the Sacrament, on which is grounded the importance of this article, and the neceſſity of it to ſaluation, to wit, the Communion and ſubſtantiall Vnion to the body of Chriſt; which Saint Cyrill calleth the knot of our Vnion with God. Neither is it particulerly and preciſely the Tranſubſtantiation, but the Reall Preſence, from whence thoſe two inconueniences do proceed, for which your Miniſters in this article haue ſeparated themſelues from our Communion; which are, the one, the adoration of the body of Chriſt in the Sacrament, whome they would haue to be ſought and adored only in heauen; and the other is, the pretended deſtruction of the Vnion of the body of Chriſt, by

being at one time in many places in the Sacrament.
            I haue ſayd nothing of the prerogatiue of the Roman Church, which all the ancient Fathers haue held to be the Center and roote of Epiſcopall Vnitie, and Eccleſiaſticall communion. For that I perſwade my ſelf, that You are ſufficiently conuerſant in antiquity, to know, that the moſt ancient Fathers, Councells, and Chriſtian Emperours haue perpetually giuen vnto her the Primacie and ſupereminent Authority in all Eccleſiaſticall matters, and ſuch as concerne Religion: which is as much as the Church requireth, to be confeſſed as a point of faith, by them that do returne to the Vnity therof, that ſo this companie of the Faithfull may be diſcerned from the Grecians, and others of their Sect, who ſome ages ſince haue ſeparated themſelues from the viſible,

and miniſterious head of the Church.
            Theſe foure points therfore are the principall fountaines of our diſſention: & if about theſe we were of accord, it would be eaſy to agree about the reſt. I ſay, that the Fathers, who liued in the time of the foure firſt Councells, haue all of thē held & practiſed, as neceſſary to ſaluatiō, albeit in different degrees of neceſſity, to wit, the Reall Preſence of the body of Chriſt, & the oblatiō of the Sacrifice, as a meanes abſolutely neceſſary to the whole body of the Church, and conditionally neceſſary to euery one in particuler: Prayer and Oblation for the dead, as neceſſarie neceſsitate medij to them for whom they are offered, to help thē by the prayers and Sacrifices of the Church, to deliuer from temporall paines after this life, thoſe who hauing ſinned after baptiſme, haue not done ſufficient pennance, nor

fully ſatisfied the iuſtice of Allmighty God: and they are neceſſary neceſsitate praecepti, for the exerciſing of Chriſtian charity & piety, both to the Church, who maketh them, and to the Miniſters and Paſtours, by whom ſhe maketh them.
            And Praier to Saintes hath bene practiſed, as neceſſary to the body of the Church, and to the Miniſters, by whome ſhe maketh them: neceſſary, I ſay, neceſsitate praecepti, for the communion and commerce betweene the Triumphant and Militant Church. And as for particuler men, than haue no office in the Church, but vſe their priuate deuotions, it is not neceſſary neceſsitate actus, but it is only profitable for the more eaſie obtaining pardon for their ſinnes, by making their recourſe in praier to them, that are allready in perfect and aſſured poſſeſſion of the grace and fauour of God: but to theſe

and to all other it is neceſſary neceſſitate approbationis, that is, they are bound not to contradict it, nor to condemne the vſe and doctrine of the Church in this point, nor to ſeparate thēſelues from the Church for this cauſe, vnder paine of Excommunication, and to be held and eſteemed for Heretikes.
            Of all which things I do not for the preſent vndertake the proof, leaſt in place of a Letter I ſhould ſēd you a booke, but I oblige my ſelf to performe it, whenſouer you ſhall require it: and to ſhew vnto you, both by the vniforme conſent of the Fathers, who flouriſhed in the time of the foure firſt Councells, and by the formes which they haue left vs in their writings, of the ancient ſeruice of the Catholike Church in their ages, vniuerſally and vniformely were held, belieued, and practiſed through all the Prouinces and Countries of the

earth, theſe foure points, in the ſame ſenſe, and in the ſame forme, as they are vſed in our Liturgies and common Seruice, and not as Obſeruations, which then had their beginning, but as things which the ſame Fathers affirme to haue bene belieued and practiſed by all Antiquity; and to haue come to them, by a neuer-interrupted ſucceſſion of the tradition or approbation of the Apoſtles. So as, no man can renounce the Communion of our Church vnder the pretext and colour of any of theſe things, but they muſt alſo renounce the Communiō of the ancient Catholike Church, and conſequently the inheritance of ſaluation.
            And this I will doe by authors and teſtimonies of good ranke and marke, as you know I am curious not to vſe others, and with plaine and cleare anſweres to all obiections, taken out of the Fathers of

thoſe or former ages; which thing will be vnto me ſo much the more eaſy, forſomuch as the proofes, which we bring out of the Fathers, do containe in expreſſe tearmes the affirmatiue of what we ſay; whereas on the contrary, our Aduerſaries ſhall neuer be able to find one paſſage, which doth in expreſſe tearmes containe the negatiue: but only by ſuch inferences, as in an equall and iuſt Tribunall deſerueth not ſo much as once the hearing. For who knoweth not, how contrary to reaſon it is, to alleage the conſequences of paſſages, and thoſe alſo ill interpreted and vnderſtood, & in whoſe inferences doth alwaies lye hidden ſome Paralogiſme and fallacie, againſt the expreſſe words, and the liuelie and actuall practice of the ſame Fathers, out of whom they are taken: and that this is a ready way to accuſe the Fathers of want of vnderſtanding and memory,

not to take them for iudges, and to ſubmit ones ſelfe to the obſeruation of that, which they haue belieued and practiſed.
            To this I will further adde when you ſhall deſire it, the preſent conformitie of all other Patriarchall Churches, in theſe foure poynts, with the Church of Rome, and of all thoſe which do yet remaine to this day vnder their iuriſdiction, that is, of thoſe that doe remaine vnder the Patriarchall Iuriſdiction of the Patriarch of Conſtantinople, as the Grecians, Ruſsians, Muſcouites, and Aſians of the leſſer Aſia, ſeparated from vs ſome eight hundred yeares ſince: of thoſe alſo which are vnder the Patriarch of Antioch, as the Syrians, Meſopotamians, and others that are further Eaſt: For thoſe that acknowledge the Patriarch of Syria, as the Maronites, do ſtill perſeuere in the Communion of the Church of

               Rome. Of thoſe alſo, which rely and depend of the Patriarch of Alexandria, as the naturall Egyptians, whome they call Copthes, and the Ethiopians, deuided from vs and the Grecians, more then eleuen hundred yeares agoe, euen from the laſt of the foure firſt Councells, that is, from the Councell of Chalcedon; theſe do hold theſe foure articles, and with greater iealouſie, if it were poſſible, then the Latins do; and particulerly that of the Sacrament, in which they do not only belieue the Tranſubſtantiation which the Grecians at this day doe call 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , but do alſo adore it with externall actions, full of much more humility, then ours are; which is a manifeſt ſigne, that theſe foure poynts were vniformely held and obſerued by the ancient Catholike Church; ſeeing that all the partes, into which the Catholike Church is deuided, retayne them to this

preſent day with great vniformity, notwithſtanding the diſtance, ſeparation, and diuiſion of them, through all Nations of the earth.
            Behould heere in generall, the cauſes, which moued me in my Letter, to vſe that exception obiected vnto me in yours, which if his Maieſty of Great-Brittaine had as well the leaſure to conſider in particuler, as he hath capacitie to comprehend them; I aſſure my ſelfe, he would not thinke it ſtrange, that I ſhould wiſh him the Title of Catholike: but would alſo wiſh and deſire it himſelf, and put himſelfe in ſtate to obtayne it both to himſelfe, and his: I meane, he would to his other Crownes adde alſo this, that he would become a Mediatour for the reconciliatiō of the Church which would be vnto him a more triumphant Glory, then that of all Alexanders, and Ceſars: and it would obtaine no leſſe honour to his Iland,

to haue bene the place of his birth, then to haue brought forth the Great Conſtantine, the firſt deliuerer and pacifier of the Church of Chriſt.
            I beſeech the infinite goodnes of God, that he would vouchſafe one day to increaſe with this, the other graces, which he hath giuen him, and to graunt in this behalfe, the prayers of the happy deceaſed Queene his Mother, whoſe not only teares, as did thoſe of S. Auguſtines Mother; but alſo her bloud doth make interceſſion, and cry vnto heauen for him: and allwayes preſerue You in health and ſafety.
            FINIS.
         
      
   