
      
         
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
            THE good huſvvifes Ievvell.
            
               VVherein is to be found moſt excellent and rare Deuiſes for Conſeites in Cookerie, found out by the practiſe of THOMAS DAWSON.
            Whereunto is adioyned ſundry approued reſeits for many ſoueraine Oyles, and the way to diſtill many precious waters, with diuers approued medicines for many diſeaſes.
            
               Alſo certain approued points of husbandry, very neceſſarie for all Husbandmen to know.
            
            Newly ſet forth with Additions. 1587.
            Imprinted at London by Iohn Wolfe for Edward White, dwelling at the litle North doore of Paules at the ſigne of the Gunne. 1587.
         
      
      
         
            
            
            Here followeth the order of meates, how they muſt be ſerued at the Table, with their ſauces for fleſh daies at dinner.
            
               The firſt courſe.
               POtage or ſtewed Broath. Boyled meate or ſtewed meate. Chickins and Bacon. Powdred Beefe. Pies. Gooſe. Pigge. Roſted Beefe. Roſted veale. Cuſtard.
               The ſecond courſe.
               Roaſted Lambe, Roaſted Capons. Roaſted Conies. Chickins. Pehennes. Baked Ueniſon. Tart.
               The firſt courſe at Supper.
               A Salet. A Pigges Petitoe. Powdred Beefe ſliſed. A Shoulder of Mutton or a Breaſt. Ueale. Lambe. Cuſtard.
               The ſecond courſe.
               Capons roaſted. Connies roaſted. Chickins roſted. Pigions roſted. Larkes roſted. A pye of Pigions or Chickins. Baked Ueniſon. Tart.
               The ſeruice at Dinner.
               A doſen of Quayles. A diſh of Larkes. Two paſties of red deare in a diſh. Tarte, Ginger bread. Fritters.
               Seruice for Fiſh dayes.
               Butter. A ſallet with hard Egges. Potage

of ſand Eles and Lamperns. Red Hearing greene broyled ſtrowed vpon. White hearing. Ling. Haburdine. Muſtard. Salt Salmon minced. Two paſties of fallowe Deare in a diſh. A Cuſtard. A diſh of Lieches.
               The ſecond courſe.
               Jelly. Peacocks, Sauce wine and Salt. Two Conies or halfe a doſen rabets, ſauce Muſtard and ſuger. Halfe a doſen of Pigions. Mallard. Toyle. Sauce muſtard and vergious. Gulles. Storke. Heronſhewe. Crabbe. Sauce Galentine. Gurlew. Bitture. Buſtarde. Feaſant. Sauce, water and Salt, with Onyons ſliced. Halfe a doſen Woodcocks, Sauce, Muſtard and Suger. Halfe a doſen Teales, Sauced as the Feſants. A doſen of Quayles. A diſh of Larks. Two Paſties of red Deare in a diſh, Tarte. Ginger bread. Fritters.
               Seruice for fiſh dayes.
               
                  Butter. A Sallet with hard Egges. Potage of ſand Eeles, and Lamperns, Red Hearing, greene broyled ſtrowed vpon. White hearing, Ling, Haburdine. Sauce, Muſtard. Salt Salmon minced. Sauce, Muſtard and vergious, and a litle Suger. Powdred Conger. Shadde. Mackrell

Sauce vineger.
                  Whyting: Sauce, with the Liuer & Muſtard. Playce: Sauce. Sorrel, or wine, and Sault, or Muſtard, or Uergious.
                  Thorneback: ſauce, Liuer and muſtard, Pepper and ſault ſtrowed vpon, after it is bruſed. Freſh Cod: Sauce greene ſauce. Dace, Mullet, Eeles vpon Soppes. Roch vpon ſoppes. Perche. Pike in Pikeſauce. Trowte vpon ſoppes. Tench in Gelly or Greſyll. Cuſtard.
               
               The ſecond courſe.
               
                  Flounders or Flokes Pike ſauce. Freſh Salmon. Freſh Conger, Brette, Turbut. Halybut. Sauce Uineger.
                  Breame vpon ſoppes. Carpe vpon ſoppes. Soles or any other Fiſhes fried. Roſted Eele: Sauce the dripping. Roſted Lamperns. Roſted Perpos. Freſhe Sturgion. Sauce Galentine.
                  Creuis, Crab, Shrimps. Sauce vineger.
                  Baked Lampray, Tarte, Figges, Apples, Almondes blaunched, Cheeſe, Rayſins, Peares.
               
            
            FINIS.
         
         
            
            A Booke of Cookerie.
            
               To boyle Larkes.
               
                  TAke ſweete Bread, and ſtraine it into a pipkin, & ſet it on the fire, and put in a péece of Butter, & ſkimme it as cleane as ye can, and put in ſpennedge, and Endiue, and cut it a little, and ſo let it boyle, and put in Pepper, Cloues and Mace, Synamome and Ginger, and a litle Vergious, and when you ſerue them vp, lay ſoppes in the diſh.
            
            
               To boile Conyes.
               TAke a Cony and perboyle it a litle, then take a good handful of perſely and a few ſwéete hearbes the yolke of iiii. hard egges chop them all together then put in pepper and a fewe currantes, and fill the Conies bellie ful of Butter then pricke her head betwéene her hinder legges and breake her not and put her into a faire earthen pot with mutton broth and the reſt of the ſtuffe roll it vp round and put it in withall and ſo boyle them well together and ſerue it with ſoppes
            
            
               
               To boyle a Cony.
               YOu muſt boyle your Cony, and ſtreine your Sweete bread into a Pipkin, and put in your meate, ſkumme it as cleane as you can, and put in a good deale of Endiue, and cut it a litle, and a good péece of Butter, and all kind of ſpices, and a little vergious, and ſo ſerue it on ſoppes.
            
            
               To boyle Chickins.
               FIrſt you ſhall take Chickins and boyle them with grapes and with a racke of Mutton together and let the racke of Mutton boyle before the Chickins one houre and a halfe and then make a bunch of herbs with Roſemarie, Time, Sauory and Iſope, and alſo Margerum and binde them faſt together, put them in the pot, and when you ſee your time put in your Chickins with Perſely in their bellies and a little ſweete butter, vergious, and peper, & when you haue ſo done boyle your grapes in a little pipkin by themſelues with ſome of the broth of the Chickins, but take heede you boyle not them too much nor yet too litle, and then take the yolkes of ſixe egges and ſtreine them with a little broth of the pot, and when they are ſtreyned put them in the pipkin to the grapes and ſtirre them and

when they begin to boyle take them from the fire and ſtirre them a good while after you haue taken then vp and then haue you Syppets ready in a platter, and lay your meate vpon it, and then take your pipkins and grapes and al that is in them and powre it vpon the meate. And after this ſort ſerue it in.
            
            
               To boyle Mutton and Chickins.
               TAke your Mutton and Chickins and ſet vpon the fire with faire water and when it is well ſkimmed, take two handfull of Cabbadge Lettice, a handfull of currants a good péece of butter the iuyce of two or thrée leammans a good deale of groſſe Pepper and a good péece of Suger, and let them ſéeth all well together, then take thrée or foure yolkes of egges together harde roſted and ſtraine them with parte of your broth, let them ſéeth a quantitie of an houre. Serue your broth with meate vpon Sippets.
            
            
               To boyle Chickins.
               STreine your broth into a pipkin, & put in your chickins, and ſkumme them as cleane as you can, and put in a péece of butter, and a good deale of Sorrell, and ſo let them boyle, and put in all maner of ſpices,

and a little vergyce pycke, and a fewe Barberies, and cut a Lemman in péeces, and ſcrape a litle Sugar vpon them, and laye them vppon the chickins when you ſerue them vp, and lay ſoppes vpon the diſh,
            
            
               An other way to boyle Chickins.
               YOu muſt ſtreine your broth into a Pipkin, and ſet it a boyling, and ſkumme it and put in a péece of butter, and endiue, and ſo let it boyle, and a fewe currants, al maner of ſpices, and ſo ſerue it on ſoppes.
            
            
               To boyle Plouers.
               YOu muſt ſtreine your ſwét broth into a pipkin, and ſet them on the fire, and when they boyle, you muſt ſkumme them, and then put in a péece of butter, and a good deale of ſpinnedge, and a litle perſely, and a péece of carret roote cut verie ſmall, and a fewe currants, and ſo let them boyle, and all manner of ſpices, and a little white wine, and a litle vergice, and ſo ſerue them vpon ſoppes.
            
            
               To boyle Teales.
               TAke ſwéete broth and Onions, & ſhred them, and Spennedge, and put in butter and pepper, and then leyre it with

toſtes of bread, with a litle vergious, and ſo ſerue it on ſoppes.
            
            
               To boile ſteaks between two diſhes.
               YOu muſt put Perſely and Currants, and Butter and vergious, two or thrée yolkes of Egges, and Pepper, Cloues and Mace, and ſo let them boyle together, and ſerue them vpon ſoppes.
            
            
               To boyle a neates tongue.
               IN primis, in faire Water and ſalt, then péele it, and cut it in the middle, and then boyle it in red wine, & fill him full of cloues, and a litle ſugar, and then waſh it with a litle ſwéete broth, to doe away the ſent of the wine, and you muſt make a litle red Muſket with red wine and pruines boyled together, then ſtreine it, and ſtreine a litle Muſtard in a fine cloute together, and ſo ſerue it vp.
            
            
               To boyle a Capon.
               PVt the Capon into the pouder béefe pot and when you thinke it almoſte tender take a litle potte and put therein halfe water and halfe wine, marie, currants, dates, whole mace, vergice, pepper &a litle time.
            
            
               The boyling of a Capon.
               SEeth the Capon it ſelf in water and ſalt and nothing elſe and to make the broth

                  Videl. take ſtrong broth made with béefe or mutton or both, ſo that it be ſtrong broth & put into it, roſemarie, perſelie & time, with iiii. leaues of ſage, this let ſeeth in it a good while, and then put into it ſmall rayſons and a fewe whole mace, A quarter of an houre before it be readie to be taken from the fire haue readie ſodden foure or v. egges boyled hard take nothing out but the yolks ſtreyne the egges with a litle of the ſame broth and vergice, haue a litle marie cutte in ſmall péeces, and an apple pared and cutte in ſmall peeces, and if that time of yeare do ſerue take the beſt of lettice cutting of the toppes to the white and beſt, and take a fewe prunes with a few dates two or thrée.
               Thus let it ſéeth a quarter of an houre or more and when it is readie to take vp haue your diſh with ſoppes readie, and the water well ſtrained out of the capon, and then ſeaſon the broth with a little pepper, then take it and diſh it and ſcrape vpon it a litle ſuger laying ye Prunes round about the diſh ſide.
            
            
               To boile a Capon with Orenges and Lemmans.
               TAke Orenges or Lemmans pilled and cut them the long way, and if you can keepe your cloues whole and put them

into your beſt broth of mutton or capon with prunes or currants and thrée or foure dates, and when theſe haue bene well ſodden put whole pepper great mace, a good péece of ſuger, ſome roſe water, and eyther white or claret wine and let all theſe ſéeth together a while & ſo ſerue it vpon ſoppes with your capon.
            
            
               To boyle a Capon in whit broth with Almondes.
               TAke your Capon with marie bones and ſet them on the fire, and when they be cleane ſkimmed take the fatteſt of the broth, and put it in a little pot with a good deale of marie, prunes, raiſons, dates whole maces, & a pint of white wine, then blanch your Almonds and ſtrain them, with them thicken your potte & let it ſéeth a good while and when it is enough ſerue it vpon ſoppes with your Capon.
            
            
               To boyle a Capon in white broth.
               TAke a good Capon and ſcalde him and truſſe him and when he is faire waſhed put him in your pot, and take a good marie bone too, or if you haue no marie bone take a necke of Mutton and when your capon is halfe boyled take a pottle of the vppermoſt of your broth and put it into a faire

poſnet, Then take two handfulles of fine currants, and viii. dates cut euerie one of them in foure péeces & foure or fiue whole mace, foure ſponfulles of vergious, and as much ſuger as a negge, a litle Time, and a litle Perſely, and a litle margerum, and if you haue no Margerum, then one ſmall ſprig of roſemarie, bind al your hearbs faſt, together, and when you haue cleane waſhed them put to the ſaide hearbes ſuger, currants, mace, and vergice into your poſnet and a grated nutmegge, and let them boyle all together, and when it is almoſt enough haue a ſmall handfull of Almondes blanched and beaten and ſtreyned with a little of the ſame licor, and put that into your broth a good quarter of an houre before you take it vp and that will make it white, you muſt alſo put in ſome good peeces of marie, and let not the marie and the dates ſéeth aboue halfe an houre, you muſt take a good handful of prunes and tie them in cleane clothes & ſéeth them in the broth where the Capon is, when you take vp your Capon to ſerue it in, lay a few ſippets in the bottome of your platter and lay a fewe Prunes and Barberies both about the brimme of the platter, and alſo vpon the

Capon, you may boyle Chickins in the like ſort.
            
            
               To make boyled meates for dinner.
               TAke the ribbes of a necke of mutton and ſtuffe it with margerum, ſauery, time, perſelie chopped final, currants, with the yolkes of two egges, pepper, & ſalt, then put it into a poſenet with faire water, or elſe with the liquor of ſome meate with vineger pepper and ſalt, and a little butter and ſo ſerue it.
            
            
               To boyle meates for ſupper.
               TAke veale and put it into a poſnet with carret roots cut in long peeces then boile it and put thereto a handfull of prunes and crummes of Bread, Then ſeaſon it with pepper ſalt and vineger.
            
            
               To boyle a legge of Mutton with a Pudding.
               FIrſt with a knife raiſe the ſkinne round about til you come to the ioynts & when you haue perboyled the meate, ſhred it fine with ſwéete or marie, Perſelie, Margerum and penyriall then ſeaſon it with pepper, and ſalt, cloues, mace, and ſynamom, and take the yolkes of ix. or x. egges, and mingle with your meate a good handfull of currants, and a fewe minced dates and put the

meate into the ſkinne of the legge of mutton and cloſe it with prickes and ſo boyle it with the broth that you boyle a Capon and let it ſéeth the ſpace of two haures.
            
            
               To boile Pigges feete and Petitoes.
               TAke and boyle them in a pint of vergice and baſtard take iiii. dates minced with a fewe ſmall rayſons then take a litle time and choppe it ſmal and ſeaſon it with a litle ſynamon and ginger and a quantitie of vergice.
            
            
               To make a mortis.
               TAke almondes and blanche them, and beate them in a Mortar, and boyle a Chickin, and take all the fleſh of him and beate it, and ſtreine them together, with milke and water, and ſo put them into a pot, and put in Suger, and ſtirre them ſtill, and when it hath boyled a good while, take it of, and ſet it a cooling in a payle of water, and ſtreine it againe with Roſe water into a diſh.
            
            
               To boyle a Lambes head and purtenance.
               STreine your broth into a pipkin, and ſet it on the fire, and put in butter, and ſkumme it as cleane as you can, and put in your meate, and put in endiue, and

cut it a litle, and ſtreine a litle yeaſte, and put into it, and currants and prunes, and put in all maner of ſpices, and ſo ſerue it vpon ſoppes.
            
            
               To boyle Quailes.
               FIrſt, put them into a Pot with ſweete broth, and ſet them on the fire: then take a Carret roote, and cut him in péeces, and put into the potte, then take parſely with ſwéete hearbes, and chop them a litle, and put them into the Potte, then take Sinamome, Ginger, Nutmegges, and Pepper, and put in a litle Uergice, and ſo ſeaſon it with ſalt, ſerue them vpon ſoppes, and garniſh them with fruite.
            
            
               To make ſtewed Steakes.
               TAke a péece of Mutton, and cut it in péeces, and waſh it verie cleane, and put it into a faire pot with Ale, or with halfe wine, then make it boyle, and ſkumme it cleane, and put into your pot a faggot of Roſemarie and time: then take ſome Parſely picked fine, and ſome onions cut round, and let them all boyle together, then take prunes, & reaſons, dates, and currants, and let it boile altogether, and ſeaſon it with Sinamon and ginger, Nutmegs, two or thrée Cloues and Salt, and ſo ſerue

it on ſoppes, and garniſh it with fruite.
            
            
               To ſtewe Calues feete.
               TAke calues féete faire blanched and cut them in the halfe, & when they be more then halfe boyled, put to them great raiſons, mutton broth, a little ſaffron and ſwéete butter, pepper, ſuger, and ſome ſwéet hearbes finely minced, boyle calues féete, ſhéepes féete, or lambes feete with mutton broth ſweete hearbes and Onions chopped fine, butter and Pepper, and when they boyle, take the yolke of an egge and ſtraine it with vergice ſo ſerue it.
            
            
               To ſtewe a Mallard.
               TAke your Mallard and ſéeth him in faire water with a good marie bone and in cabbadgeworth or cabbadge lettice or both or ſome perſneps roots, and carret rootes, and when all theſe be well ſodden put in prunes, put in prunes enough and thrée dates, and ſeaſon him with ſalt, cloues, and mace, and a little ſuger & pepper and then ſerue it forth with ſyppets & put the marie vpon them, and the whole mace lay on the ſyppets, and the dates quartered and the prunes and the rootes cut in round ſlyces, & lay them vpon the ſippets alſo & the cabbadge leaues lay vpon the Mallard.
            
            
               
               To make Aloes.
               TAke a legge of veale, or mutton, and ſlice it in thinne ſlices, & lay them in a platter and caſte on ſalt, and put thereon the yolkes of tenne egges and a great ſort of ſmall raiſons and dates, finely minced, then take veniger, and a litle ſaffron, cloues, and mace, and a litle pepper, and mingle it together and powre it al about it, and then al to worke it together, and when it is thorowly ſeaſoned put it on a ſpit, and ſet platters vnderneath it, and baſt it with butter, and then make a ſauce with vineger, and ginger, and ſuger, and lay the aloes vpon it and ſo ſerue it in.
            
            
               To make Fritters of Spinnedge.
               TAke a good deale of Spinnedge, and waſh it cleane, then botle it in faire water, and when it is boiled, then take it forth and let the water runne from it, then chop it with the backe of a knife, and then put in ſome egges and grated bread, and ſeaſon it with ſuger, ſinamom, ginger and pepper, dates minced fine, and currants, and rowle them like a ball, and dippe them in butter made of Ale and flower.
            
            
               A Fritter to be made in a Moulde.
               
                  TAke Oxe white and mince it fine, then take Dates, and mince them fine, then take Currants, Egges, white grated bread and ſeaſon it with ſuger, ſynamon and ginger, cloues, mace and ſaffron, and ſtirre it well together, then driue a thicke cake of paſte, and lay in the mould, and fill it with the ſtuffe, and lay an other cake of paſt vpon it, then iogge it about and ſo frie it.
            
            
               To boyle Pigeons in blacke broath.
               FIrſt roſte them a litle, then put them into an earthen pot, with a litle quantitie of ſwéete Broth, then take Onions, and ſlyce them, and ſet them on the Coles with ſome butter to take away the ſent of them, put them into the Pigions, and leyre it with a toſte of bread, drawne with Uineger, then put ſome ſweete hearbes halfe cut, and ſynamom and ginger, and groſſe Pepper, and let them boyle, and ſeaſon them with ſalt, ſerue them vppon ſoppes, and garniſh them with fruite.
            
            
               To ſmere a Conie.
               TAke the Liuers and boyle them, and chop it, and ſwéete hearbes, apples, and the yolkes of hard egges, and choppe them altogether, and currants, ſuger, ſynamom,

ginger and perſely, and fill the Conny full hereof, then put her into the ſweete broth, and put in ſweete butter, then choppe the yolks of hard egges, ſynamom, ginger, ſuger, and caſt it on the Cony when you ſerue it vp, ſeaſon it with ſalt, ſerue it on ſoppes, and garniſh it with fruite.
            
            
               To boyle a Mallard with Cabbedge.
               TAke ſome Cabbedge, and pricke & waſh them cleane, and perboyle them in faire water, then put them into a Collender, and let the water run from them cleane, then put them into a faire earthen pot, and as much ſwéete broth as will couer the Cabbadge, and ſweete butter, then take your Mallard and roſt it halfe enough, and ſaue the dripping of him, then cut him in the ſide, and put the mallard into the cabbedge, and put into it all your dripping, then let it ſtew an houre, and ſeaſon it with ſalt, and ſerue it vpon ſoppes.
            
            
               To boyle a Ducke with Turneps.
               TAke her firſt, and put her into a potte with ſtewed broth, then take perſely and ſweete hearbs, and chop them, and perboyle the rootes very well in an other pot,

then put vnto them ſwéete butter, Synamome, Ginger, groſſe Pepper and whole Mace, and ſo ſeaſon it with ſalt, and ſerue it vpon ſoppes.
            
            
               To make white Eſtings.
               TAke great Otemeale, and lay in milke to ſtéepe, then put in the yolkes of ſome Egges, and take Oxe white and mince it ſinal, then ſeaſon it with ſuger, ſynamom, ginger, cloues, mace, and ſaffron, and ſalt, and ſo fill them.
            
            
               To make blacke Puddings.
               TAke great otmeale and lay it in milke to ſteepe, then take ſhéepes bloud and put to it, and take Oxe white and mince into it, then take a fewe ſweete hearbs and two or thrée leeke blades, and choppe them verie ſmall, and put into it then the yolkes of ſome Egges, and ſeaſon it with Synamom, ginger, cloues, Mace, pepper and ſalt, and ſo fill them.
            
            
               To make ſtrong broth for ſicke men.
               TAke a pound of Almonds and blanche them, and beate them in a morter very fine, then take the braines of a capon and beate with it, then put into it a litle creame, and make it to drawe through a ſtrayner,

then ſet it on the fire in a diſh, and ſeaſon it with roſe water and ſuger, and ſtirre it.
            
            
               To boyle a Breame.
               TAke white wine, and put it into a pot, and let it ſéeth, then take your breame, and cut him in the midſt, and put him in, then take an Onion and chop it ſmall, then take nutmegs beaten, ſynamome and ginger, whole mace, and a pound of butter, and let it boyle al together, and ſo ſeaſon it with ſalt, ſerue it vpon ſoppes, and garniſh it with fruite.
            
            
               To boyle Muskles.
               TAke water and yeſte, and a good diſh of butter, and Onions chopt, and a little pepper, & when it hath boyled a litle while, then ſée that your Muſkels be cleane waſhed, then put them into the broth ſhels and all, and when they be boiled wel, then ſerue them broth and all.
            
            
               To boyle Stocke fiſh.
               TAke Stockfiſh when it is well watered, and picke out all the baſte cleane from the fiſh, then put it into a pipkin, and put in no more water then ſhall couer it, then ſet it on the fire, and aſſoone as it beginneth to boyle on the one ſide, then turne the other ſide to the fire, and aſſoone as it beginneth

to boile on the other ſide, take it off, and put it into a Colender, and let the water runne out from it, but put in ſalt in the boyling of it, then take a litle faire water and ſweete butter, and let it boyle in a diſh vntill it bee ſomething thick, then powre it on the ſtockfiſh and ſerue it.
            
            
               To make bake meates.
               TAke a legge of Lambe, and cut out all the fleſh, and ſaue the ſkinne whole, then mince it fine and white with it, then put in grated bread, and ſome egges white and all, and ſome Dates and Currantes, then ſeaſon it with ſome Pepper, Synamome, Ginger, and ſome Nutmegges and Carrawaies, and a litle creame, and temper it all together, then put it into the leg of the Lambe againe, and let it bake a little before you put it into your Pye, and when you haue put it into your pie, then put in a little of the Pudding about it, and when it is almoſt baked, then put in vergice, ſuger and ſwéete butter, and ſo ſerue it.
            
            
               An other bake meate.
               TAke a leg of Veale, and cut it in ſlices, and beate it with the backe of a knife, then take time, margerum and penniriall, ſauerie, and perſely, and one Onion,

and chop them altogether verie ſmal, then breake in ſome egges whites and all, and put in your hearbes and ſeaſon it with pepper, nutmegs and ſalt, and a litle ſuger, then ſtirre them altogether, and then lap them vp like allowes, and caſt a fewe currants and dates, and butter amongſt them.
            
            
               An other bake meate.
               TAke two pound of White and a little veale, and mince it together, then take a litle peniriall, ſauerie and margerum and vnſet Léekes, and chop them fine, and put in ſome egges and ſome creame, then ſtirre it all well together, and ſeaſon it with pepper, nutmegs and ſalt, then put it into the pye, and cut the lid, and let it bake till it be drie, then ſerue it.
            
            
               To make Marie pies.
               MAke fine paſt, and put in the white of one egge and ſuger, and when they are made in litle coffins ſet them into the Ouen vpon a paper a litle while then take them out and put in marie, and then cloſe them vp and pricke them, and ſet them in again, and when they are broken ſerue them with blanche pouder ſtrowed vpon them.
            
            
               
               To boyle pie meate.
               TAke a legge of mutton & mince it very fine with ſuet and ſéeth it in a litle panne or an earthen pot with butter and ſeaſon it with cloues, mace, great rayſons and prunes, and ſalt, and ſerue it in a diſh, and if you will put in ſome iuyce of Orenges and lay halfe an orenge vpon it.
            
            
               To make fine Cakes.
               TAke fine flowre and good damaſke water you muſt haue no other liquor but that, then take ſweete butter, two or thrée yolkes of egges, and a good quantitie of ſuger, and afewe cloues, and mace, as your Cookes mouth ſhall ſerue him, and a litle ſaffron, and a litle Gods good about a ſponful if you put in too much they ſhall ariſe, cut them in ſquares like vnto trenchers, and pricke them well, and let your ouen be well ſwept and lay them vpon papers and ſo ſet them into the ouen, do not burn them if they be three or foure dayes olde they be the better.
            
            
               To make fine cracknels.
               TAke fine flower and a good quantitie of egges as many as wil ſupply the flowre, then take as much ſuger as will ſwéeten the paſt, and if you will not be at the coſt to

rayſe it with egges, then put thereto ſwéet water Synamome and a good quantitie of nutmegges and mace, according to your bread, take a good quantitie of Annis ſéede, and let all this be blended with your flower, and the putting in of your egges or other moyſture, then ſet on your water and let it be at ſéething, before you put your Crackenelles in it they will goe to the bottome and at their riſing take them out and drie them with a cloth then bake them.
            
            
               To bake Connies.
               HAue fine paſt readie, waſh your Connies, and perboyle them then caſt, them into the cold water, then ſeaſon them, with ſalt and ginger, laye them into the paſt and vpon them lay leached, larde cloſe them and bake them.
            
            
               To bake a breſt of Veale.
               TAke and breake the bones thereof in the middeſt and perboyle him and take out the bones, and ſeaſon him with pepper and ſalt, and laye him in the coffin with a little ſweete butter, and cloſe him vp then make a caudell of the yolkes of an egge and ſtraine it, and boyle it in a chafing diſh of coles and ſeaſon it with ſuger,

and put it in the pie and ſet it into the Ouen againe.
            
            
               To make a pudding in a breaſt of Veale.
               TAke Pereſely, Time, waſhe them, pricke them, and choppe them ſmall, then take viii. yolkes of egges grated bread and halfe a pint of creame beeing verie ſwéete, then ſeaſon it with Pepper, Cloues, and Mace, Saffron, and Sugar ſmal Raiſons and Salt, put it in and Roſte it and ſerue it.
            
            
               To bake a Gammon of Baken.
               TAke a gammon of Baken, water it ſixe dayes and perboyle him halfe enough and laye him in preſſe then take the ſword of him and ſtuffe him with cloues, and ſeaſon him with Pepper, and ſaffron. And cloſe him vp in a ſtanding pie, bake him and ſo ſerue him.
            
            
               To make fine Bysket Bread.
               TAke a pound of fine flower, and a pound of ſuger, and mingle it together, a quarter of a pound of Annis ſéedes, foure egges, two or thrée ſponfuls of roſewater put all theſe into an earthen Panne. And with a ſlyce of Woode beate it the ſpace of two

houres, then fill your moulds halfe ful your mouldes muſt be of Tinne, and then ſet it into the ouen, your ouen beeing ſo whot as it were for cheat bread, and let it ſtand one houre and a halfe, you muſt annoint your moulds with butter before you put in your ſtuffe, and when you will occupie of it ſlice it thinne and drie it in the ouen your ouen beeing no whotter then you may abide your hand in the bottome.
            
            
               To bake a Turkie and take out his bones.
               TAke a fat Turkie, and after you haue ſcalded him and waſhed him cleane, lay him vpon a faire cloth and ſlit him through out the backe and when you haue taken out his garbage, then you muſt take out his bones ſo bare as you can, when you haue ſo done waſh him cleane, then truſſe him and pricke his backe together, and ſo haue a faire kettle of ſéething water and perboyle him a little, then take him vp that the water may runne cleane out from him, and when he is colde, ſeaſon him with pepper and ſalt, and then pricke him with a fewe cloues in the breſt, and alſo drawe him with larde if you like of it and when you haue made your coffin and laide your

Turkie in it then you muſt put ſome butter in it and ſo cloſe him vp in this ſort you may bake a Gooſe, a Pheaſant, or Capon.
            
            
               To bake a Kidde.
               TAke your Kidde and perboyle him and waſh it in vergice and ſaffron and ſeaſon it with pepper, ſalt, & a litle mace, then lay it in your coffin with ſwéete butter and the liquor it was ſeaſoned in, and ſo bake it.
            
            
               To bake a Mallard.
               TAke thrée or foure Onions and ſtampe them in a morter then ſtrain them with a ſaucer ful of vergite, then take your mallard and put him into the iuyce of the ſaide Onions and ſeaſon him with pepper and ſalt, cloues and mace then put your mallard into the coffin with the ſaide iuyce of the onions and a good quantitie of Winter ſauorie, a litle time, and perſely chopped ſmall and ſwéete Butter, ſo cloſe it vp and bake it.
            
            
               To make a pie of Humbles.
               TAke your humbles being perboyled and choppe them verie ſmall with a good quantitie of mutton ſwéete, and halfe a handfull of hearbes, folowing time, margerum, borage, perſely, and a litle roſemarie,

and ſeaſon the ſame beeing chopped with pepper, cloues and mace, and ſo cloſe your pie and bake him.
            
            
               To bake Red deare.
               TAke a hand full of time, and a hand full of roſemarie, a hand full of winter ſauorie, a hand full of bay leaues and a hand ful of fennel, and when your liquor ſeeths that you perboyle your veniſon in, put in your hearbes alſo and perboyle your veniſon vntill it be halfe enough, then take it out and lay it vpon a faire boorde that the water may runne out from it, then take a knife and pricke it full of holes, and while it is warme haue a faire traye with vineger therein, and ſo put your veniſon therein from morning vntill night, and euer nowe and then turne it vp ſide downe, and then at night haue your coffin ready, and this done ſeaſon it with ſynamome, ginger, and nutmegges, pepper and ſalte, and when you haue ſeaſoned it, put it into your coffin, and put a good quantitie of ſwéete butter into it, and then put it into the Ouen at night, when you goe to bedde, and in the morning drawe it forth, and put in a ſaucer full of vineger into your pye at a hole aboue in the toppe of it, ſo that the vineger may

runne into euerie place of it, and then ſtop the whole againe and turne the bottome vpward and ſo ſerue it in.
            
            
               An other bakemeate for Chickins.
               FIrſt ſeaſon your Chickins with ſuger, ſinamom and ginger, and ſo lay them in your pye, then put in vpon them Gooſeberies, or grapes, or Barberies, then put in ſome ſweete butter, and cloſe them vp, and when they be almoſt baked, then put in a Cawdle made with harde egges and white wine, and ſerue it.
            
            
               To bake Calues feete.
               TAke Calues féete and boyle them and chop them fine, and a pound of white, and chop it with them, then chop an onion ſmal, and put it in them, then take prunes, dates and currants, and put to them, ſeaſon them with Pepper, Nutmegs, and a litle large Mace, then put in ſome Egges, and ſtirre it altogether, & put it into a Pye, and let it bake two houres, then put in a litle vergice and ſuger, and ſo ſerue it.
            
            
               To ſowce a Pigge.
               TAke white Wine and a litle ſweete broth, and halfe a ſcore Nutmegs cut in quarters, then take Roſemarie, Baies,

Time, and ſweete margerum, and let them boyle altogether, ſkum them verie cleane, and when they be boyled, put them into an earthen pan, and the ſyrop alſo, and when yee ſerue them, a quarter in a diſh, and the Bayes, and nutmegs on the top.
            
            
               The order to boyle a Brawne.
               TAke your Brawne, and when ye haue cut him out, lay him in faire water foure and twentie houres, and ſhift it foure or fiue times,, and ſcrape and binde vp thoſe that you ſhall thinke good, with Hempe, and bind one handfull of greene Willowes together, and lay them in the bottome of the Panne, and then put in your Brawne, and ſkumme it verie cleane, and let it boyle but ſoftely, and it muſt be ſo tender, that you may put a ſtraw through it, and when it is boyled enough, let it ſtand and rowle in the panne, and when you take it vp, let it lye in Trayes one howre or two, and then make ſowſing drinke with Ale and water, and ſalt, and you muſt make it very ſtrong, and ſo let it lie a weeke before you ſpende it.
            
            
               To make Almond Butter.
               TAke Almondes and blanch them, and beate them in a morter verie ſmall,

and in the beating put in a litle water, and when they bee beaten powre in water into two pots, and put in halfe into one & halfe into an other, and put in Suger, and ſtirre them ſtill, and let them boyle a good while, then ſtraine it through a ſtrainer with roſe water, and ſo diſh it vp.
            
            
               To roſt an Hare.
               YOu muſt not cut off her head, féete nor eares, but make a pudding in her bellie, and put paper about her eares that they burne not, and when the Hare is roſted, you muſt take ſynamom and Ginger, and grated bread, & you muſt make verie ſweet ſauce, and you muſt put in Barberies and let them boyle together.
            
            
               To make Fritter ſtuffe.
               TAke fine flowre, and thrée or foure egs, and put into the flower, and a péece of butter, and let them boyle all together in a diſh or chafer, and put in Suger, ſynamom and ginger, and roſe water, and in the boyling, put in a litle grated bread to make it big, and then put it into a diſh, and beate it well together, & ſo put it into your moulde, and frie it with clarified butter, but your butter may not be too whot nor too colde.
            
            
               
               For to bake a Hare.
               TAke your Hare and perboile him, and mince him, and then beat him in a morter verie fine, liuer and all if you will, and ſeaſon it with all kinde of ſpices and ſalt, and doe him together with the yolkes of ſeuen or eight egges, and when you haue made him vp together, draw larde verie thicke through him, and mingle them altogether, and put him in a Pye, and put in butter before you cloſe him vp.
            
            
               To preſerue Orenges.
               YOu muſt cut your Orenges in halfe, and pare them a litle round about, and let them lye in water foure or fiue dayes, and you muſt chaunge the water once or twice a day, and when you preſerue them, you muſt haue a quarte of faire water to put in your ſuger, and a litle roſe water, and ſet it on the fire, and ſcum it verie cleane, and put in a litle Sinamome, and put in your Orenges, and let them boile a litle while, and then take them out again, and doe ſoe fiue or ſixe times, and when they be inough, put in your Orenges and let your ſirroppe ſtand till it bee cold, and then put your ſirrop into your Orenges.
            
            
               
               To make all maner of fruit Tartes.
               YOu muſt boile your fruite, whether it be apple, cherie, peach, damſon, peare, Mulberie, or codling, in faire water, and when they be boyled inough, put them into a bowle, and bruſe them with a ladle, and when they be cold, ſtraine them, and put in red wine or claret wine, and ſo ſeaſon it with ſuger, ſinamom and ginger.
            
            
               To make a Tarte of preſerued ſtuffe.
               YOu muſt take halfe a hundreth of Coſterds, and pare them, and cut them, and as ſoone as you haue cut them, put them into a pot, and put in two or three pound of ſuger, and a pint of water, and a litle roſe water, and ſtirre them from the time you put them in, vntill the time you take them out againe, or els you mar all, & put it into a diſh, and when your Tart is made, put it into the Ouen, and when it is caked, endore it with butter, and throw ſuger on the top, & then do on your ſauce, & ſet comfets on the top, and ſo ſerue it vp.
            
            
               To make Tartes of Proines.
               PUt your proines into a pot, and put in red wine or claret wine, & a litle faire

water, and ſtirre them nowe and then, and when they be boyled enough, put them into a bowle, and ſtreine them with ſuger, ſynamom and ginger.
            
            
               To make a Tart of Ryſe.
               BOyle your rice, and put in the yolkes of two or thrée Egges into the Rice, and when it is boyled put it into a diſh, and ſeaſon it with ſuger, ſynamom and ginger, and butter, and the iuice of two or thrée Orenges, and ſet it on the fire againe.
            
            
               To make a Cuſtard.
               BReake your egges into a bowle, and put your Creame into another bowle, and ſtreine your egges into the creame, and put in ſaffron, cloues and mace, and a litle ſynamom and ginger, and if you will, ſome ſuger and butter, and ſeaſon it with ſalt, and melt your butter, and ſtirre it with the ladle a good while, and dubbe your Cuſtard with dates or currants.
            
            
               To make a tart of Wardens.
               YOu muſt bake your Wardens firſt in a Pie, and then take all the wardens and cut them in foure quarters, and coare them, and put them into a Tarts pinched, with your ſuger, and ſeaſon them with ſuger, ſynamome and ginger, and ſet them in

the Ouen, and put no couer on them, but you muſt cut a couer and lay on the Tarte when it is baked, and butter the Tart and the couer too, and endore it with ſuger.
            
            
               To make a tarte with Butter and Egges.
               BReake your egges, and take the yolks of them, and take butter and melt it, let it be verie hote ready to boyle, and put your butter into your egs, and ſo ſtreine them into a bowle and ſeaſon them with ſuger.
            
            
               To make a Tarte of Spinnedge.
               BOyle your Egges and your Creame together, & then put them into a bowle, and then boyle your Spinnedges, and whē they are boyled, take them out of the water and ſtreine then into your ſtuffe before you ſtreine your Creame, boyle your ſtuffe and then ſtreine them all againe, and ſeaſon them with ſuger and Salt.
            
            
               To make a Tarte of Staweberries.
               VVAſh your ſtrawberies, and put them into your Tarte, and ſeaſon them with ſuger, ſynamom and ginger, and put in a litle red wine into them.
            
            
               
               To make a Tart of Hippes.
               TAke hippes and cut them, and take the ſéedes out, and waſh them verie cleane, and put them into your Tarte, and ſeaſon them with ſuger, ſinamon and ginger.
               So you muſt preſerue them with ſuger, Sinamom and ginger, and put them into a gellipot cloſe.
            
            
               To bake the humbles of a Deere
               MInce them verie ſmall, and ſeaſon them with pepper, Sinamom and ginger, and ſuger if you will, and cloues & mace, and dates, and currants, and if you will, mince Almonds, and put vnto them, and when it is baked, you may put in fine fat, and put in ſuger, ſinamom and ginger, and let it boile, and when it is minced, put them together.
            
            
               To make a Veale Pye.
               LEt your Veale boile a good while, and when it is boiled, mince it by it ſelfe, and the white by it ſelfe, and ſeaſon it with ſalt and peper, ſinamom and ginger, and ſuger, and cloues and mace, and you muſt haue proines and raiſons, dates and currants on the top.
            
            
               
               For to make Mutton Pyes.
               MInce your mutton and your white together, and when it is minced, ſeaſon it with pepper, ſinamon & ginger, and cloues, and mace, and proines, currants and dates, and reaſins and hard egges boyled & chopped verie ſmall, and throw them on the toppe.
            
            
               To bake calues feet.
               SEaſon them with ſalt and pepper, and butter, and currants if you wil, and when they be baked, put in a litle white wine and ſuger, or vineger and ſuger, or vergious and ſuger.
            
            
               To bake Chickins in a Cawdle.
               SEaſon them with ſalt and pepper, and put in butter, and ſo let them bake, and when they be baked, boile a few barberies and proines, and currants, and take a litle white wine or vergious, and let it boile and put in a litle ſuger, and ſet it on the fire a litle, and ſtreine in two or thrée yolkes of egges into the wine, and when you take the diſh of the fire, put the proines and currants, and barberies into the diſh, and then put them in altogether into the pye of Chickins.
            
            
               
               To bake Pigeons.
               SEaſon them with Pepper and Salt and Butter.
            
            
               To bake a Conie.
               SEaſon him with Pepper and Salt, and put in butter and Currants, and when it is baked, put in a litle vergice and ſuger into the Pie, and ſerue it vp.
            
            
               To bake a Gammon of Bacon to kepe cold.
               YOu muſt firſt boyle him a quarter of an houre before you ſtuffe him, and ſtuffe him with ſwéete hearbes and harde Egges chopped together, or Parſely.
            
            
               To bake a Fillet of Beefe to keepe colde.
               MInce him verie ſmall, and ſéeth him with Pepper and ſalt, and make him vp together accordingly, and put him in your pie, and Larde him verie thicke.
            
            
               To make fine bread.
               TAke halfe a pound of fine ſuger well beaten, and as much Flower, and put thereto foure Egges whites, and being very wel beaten, you muſt mingle them with Anniſeedes bruiſed, and being all beaten together, put into your mould melting the ſawce ouer firſt with a litle butter, and ſet

it in the Ouen, & turne it twice or thrice in the baking.
            
            
               To bake a Neats tongue.
               FIrſt pouder the tongue three or foure dayes, and then ſéeth it in faire water, then blanch it and larde it, and ſeaſon it with a litle Pepper and Salt, then bake it on Rie paſte, and before you cloaſe vp your pie, ſtrowe vpon the tongue a good quantitie of Cloues and mace beaten in pouder, and vpon that halfe a pounde of butter, then cloſe vp your Pie verie cloſe, but make a round hole in the toppe of the pie. Then, when it hath ſtoode more then foure houres in the Ouen, you muſt put in halfe a pint of Vinegor or more, as the Vineger is ſharpe, then cloſe vp the hole very cloſe with a peece of paſt and ſet it in the Ouen againe.
            
            
               To make Muggets.
               FIrſt perboyle them, and take white and chop them both together, and put Currants, Dates, Sinamome and Ginger, Cloues and Mace, and groſſe Pepper and Suger if you will, two or thrée yolkes of Egges, and ſeeth them all together with Salt, and put in the ſtuffe into the 
                     〈◊〉
                   of Mutton, and ſo put them in diſhes, and

take two or thrée egges white and all, and put them on the cawles, and make ſome pretie ſauce for them.
            
            
               To make Fillets of beef or clods, in ſtead of red Deare.
               FIrſt take your Beefe, and Lard it verie thicke, and then ſeaſon it with Pepper and Salt, Sinamome and ginger, Cloues and Mace good ſtore, with a great deale more quantitie of Pepper and Salt, then you would a péece of Veniſon, and put it in couered Paſte, and when it is baked, take vineger and ſuger, Sinamom and Ginger, and put in, and ſhake the Paſtie, and ſtop it cloſe, and let it ſtand almoſt a fortnight before you cut it vp.
            
            
               To make a tart that is a courage to man or woman.
               TAke two Quinces, and two or three Burre rootes, and a Potaton, and pare your Potaton, and ſcrape your rootes and put them into a quart of wine, and let them boyle till they be tender, & put in an ounce of Dates, and when they be boyled tender, Drawe them through a ſtrainer, wine and all, and then put in the yolkes of eight Egges, and the braines of thrée or foure cocke Sparrowes, and ſtreine them into

the other, and a litle Roſe water, and ſeeth them all with Sugar, Synamom and ginger, and Cloues and mace, and put in a litle ſweete butter and ſet it vpon a chafingdiſh of Coles betweene two platters, and ſo let it boyle till it be ſomething bigge.
            
            
               To ſtew a Cocke.
               YOu muſt cut him in ſixe peeces, and waſhe him cleane, and take Prunces, Currantes and Dates cutte very ſmall, and Reaſons of the Sunne, and Suger beaten verie ſmall, Synamome, Ginger and Nutmegs likewiſe beaten, and a litle maydens haire, cut verie ſmall, and you muſt put him in a Pipkin, & put in almoſt a pint of Muſkeden, and then your ſpice and Suger, vpon your Cocke and put in your fruite betweene euerie quarter, and a peece of Golde betwéene euerie peece of your Cocke, then you muſt make a lidde of wood fit for your Pipkin, and cloſet it as cloſe as you can with paſte, that no ayre come out, nor water can come in, and then you muſt fill two braſſe pots full of water, and ſet on the fire, and make faſt the Pipkin in one of the Braſſe pottes, ſo that the Pipkins feete touch not the braſſe pot bottom, nor the pot ſides, and ſo let them boyle

foure and twentie howers, and fill vp the pot ſtill as it boiles away, with the other pot that ſtands by, and when it is boyled take out your Gold, and let him drinke it faſting, and it ſhall help him, this is approued.
            
            
               To preſerue all kind of fruites, that they ſhall not breake in the preſeruing of them.
               TAke a platter that is plaine in the bottom, and lay ſuger in the bottom, then Cheries or any other fruite, and ſo betwene euerie row you lay, throw ſuger, and ſet it vpon a pots head, and couer it with a diſh, and ſo let it boyle.
            
            
               To make a ſirroppe for bakemeates.
               TAke Ginger, Cloues and Mace, Nutmegs, beat all theſe together very fine, and boile them in good red vineger vntill it be ſomewhat thicke, this being done, drawe your pie when it is hard baked, and a ſmall hole being made in the couer thereof at the firſt, with a Tunnell of Paſt, you muſt powre the ſirroppe into the Pye, that done, couer the hole with paſte, and ſhalb the Pye well, and ſet againe in the Ouen till it be throughly baked, and when you

haue drawne it, turne the bottom vpward vntill it be ſerued:
            
            
               To roſt a Carpe or Tench with a pudding in his bellie.
               TAke the Rones of a Pike and choppe them verie ſmall, then put in grated bread, two or thrée Egs, Currants, Dates, Suger, Sinemome and Ginger, and Mace, Pepper and ſalt, and put it in his bellie, and put him on a Broche, and make ſwéete ſawce with Barberies or Lemmons minced, and put into the ſwéete ſawce, and then put it on the Carpe when you ſerue him vp.
            
            
               To make a freſh Cheeſe and Creame.
               TAke a gallon or two of milke from the Cowe and ſéeth it, and when it doth ſéeth, put thereunto a quart or two of morning milke in faire cleanſing pans, in ſuch place as no duſt may fall therein, and this is for your clowted Creame, the next morning take a quart of mornings milke and ſeeth it, and when it doth ſéeth, put in a quarte of Creame thereunto, and take it off the fire, and put it into a faire earthen pan, and let it ſtand vntill it be ſomewhat bloud warme, but firſt ouer night put a good

quantitie of Ginger, with Roſe water, and ſtirre it together, and let it ſettle all night, and the next day, put it into your ſaid bloud warme milke to make your cheeſe come, then put the Curdes in a faire cloth, with a litle good Roſewater, and fine powder of Ginger, and a litle Suger, ſo laſt, great ſoft rolles together with a thréede, & cruſh out the Whey with your clouted Creame, and mixe it with fine pouder of ginger and Suger, and ſprinkle it with Roſe water, and put your Cheeſe in a faire diſh, and put theſe cloutes round about it, then take a pint of rawe Mike or Creame, and put it in a pot, and all too ſhake it, vntill it be gathered into a frothe like ſnowe, and euer as it commeth, take it of with a ſpoone, and put it in a Collender, then put it vpon your freſh Cheeſe, and pricke it with Wafers, and ſo ſerue it.
            
            
               
                  THE NAMES OF ALL thinges neceſſarie for a banquet.
                  Suger.
                  Sinamome.
                  Licoras.
                  Pepper.
                  Nutmegs.
                  All kinde of Comfets.
                  Safron.
                  Saunders.
                  Anniſéedes.
                  Coleander.
                  Orenges.
                  
                     Pomegranat.
                  ſeedes.
                  Damaſke water.
                  Torneſeli.
                  Lemmans.
                  Prunes.
                  Roſewater.
                  Dates.
                  Currants.
                  Reaſons.
                  Cheries conſerued.
                  Barberies cō
                     ſerued.
                  Rie flower.
                  Ginger.
                  Swéete Orenges.
                  Paper White and browne
                  Cloues and Mace.
                  Wafers.
                  For your March-panes ſeaſoned and vnſeaſoned, Spinnedges.
               
            
            
               To make manus Chriſti.
               TAke ſixe ſpoonefull of Roſewater, one graine of Amber gréece, and 4. graines of Pearle beaten verie fine, put theſe thrée together in a Saucer and couer it cloſe, and let it ſtande couered one houre, then take foure ounces of verie fine Suger, and beate it ſmall, and ſearch it through a fine ſearch, then take a litle earthen pot glaſed, and put into it a ſpoonefull of Suger, and a quarter of a ſpoonefull of Roſewater, and let the Suger and the Roſe water boyle together ſoftely, till it doe riſe and fall againe three times. Then take fine Rie flower, and ſift on a ſmooth borde, and with a ſpoone take of the Suger, and the Roſe water, and firſt make it all into a round Cake,

and then after into litle cakes, and when they be halfe colde, wet them ouer with the ſame roſe water, and then laye on your golde, and ſo ſhal you make very good Manus Chriſti.
               
            
            
               To make a Caudle to comfort the ſtomacke, good for an old man.
               TAke a pint of good Muſkaden, and as much of good ſtale Ale, mingle them together, then take the yolkes of twelue or thirteene Egges newe laide, beate well the Egges firſt by themſelues, then with the wine and ale, and ſo boyle it together, and put thereto a quarterns of Suger, and a fewe whole Mace, and ſo ſtirre it well, til it ſeeth a good while, and when it is well ſod, put therein a few ſlices of bread if you wil, and ſo let it ſoke a while, and it wil be right good and wholeſome.
            
            
               To make a Trifle.
               TAke a pint of thicke creame, and ſeaſon it with Suger, and Ginger, and Roſewater: ſo ſtirre it as you would then haue it, and make it luke warme in a diſh on a Chaffingdiſh and coales: and after put it into a ſiluer péece or a bowle, and ſo ſerue it to the boorde.
            
            
               
               To make Marmelat of Quinces.
               YOu muſt take a pottle of water, and foure pound of Suger, and ſo let them boyle together: and when they boyle, you muſt ſkumme them as cleane as you can: and you muſt take ye whites of two or thrée Egges, and beate them to froth, and put the froth into the pan for to make the ſkum to riſe, then ſkumme it as cleane as you can, and then take off the kettle and put in the Quinces, and let them boyle a good while, and when they boyle you muſt ſtirre them ſtil, & when they be boyled you muſt boxe them vp.
            
            
               To make butter paſte.
               TAke floure, and ſeuen or eight Egges, and colde butter & faire water, or Roſewater, and Spices (if you will) and make your paſte and beate it on a boord: & when you haue ſo done, deuide it in two or three péeces, and driue out the péece with a rowling pinne, and doe with butter one 
                     〈◊〉
                   by another, and then folde vp your paſt
                     •
                   
                  
                     ••
                  
                  pon the butter and driue it out againe; 
                     〈◊〉
                   ſo doe fiue or ſixe times together, and 
                     〈◊〉
                   not cut for bearings, and put them int
                     •
                   
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   Ouen, and when they be baked ſcra
                     ••
                   
                  
                     ••
                  
                  ger on them and ſerue them.
            
            
               
               To make Fritter ſtuffe.
               TAke fine flower, and thrée or foure egges and put into the flower, and a peece of Butter, and let them boyle altogether in a diſh or a Chafer, and put in Suger, Synamom, and Ginger, and Roſewater, and in the boyling put in a little grated bread to make it bigge, and then put it into a diſh and beate it wel together, and ſo put it into your mould, and frie it with clarified butter, but your butter may not be to whotte nor too colde.
            
            
               To make a made diſh of Artechokes.
               TAke your Artechokes and pare away all the top euen to the meate and boyle them in ſweet broth till they be ſomewhat tender, and thē take them out, and put them into a diſh, and ſéeth them with Pepper, 
                     ••
                  namom and Ginger, and then put in 
                     〈◊〉
                   diſh that you meane to bake them in, 
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  
                     •
                  ut in Marrowe to them good ſtore, 
                     〈◊〉
                   let them bake, and when they be ba
                  
                     〈…〉
                  t in a little vineger and Butter, and 
                     〈◊〉
                   thrée or foure leaues of the Artechoks 
                     〈◊◊〉
                   diſh when you ſerue them vp, and 
                     〈◊〉
                   Suger on the diſh.
            
            
               
               To frie Bakon.
               TAke Bakon and ſlice it verie thinne, & cut away the leane, and bruſe it with the backe of your knife, and frie it in ſweete Butter, and ſerue it.
            
            
               To frie Chickins.
               TAke your Chickins and let them boyle in verie good ſwéete broath a pretie while, and take the Chickens out, & quarter them out in péeces, and then put them into a Frying pan with ſwéete Butter, and let them ſtewe in the pan, but you muſt not let them be browne with frying, and then put out the butter out of the pan, and then take a little ſwéete broath and as much Vergice, and the yolkes of two Egges, and beate them together, and put in a litle Nutmegges, Synamom and Ginger, and Pepper into the ſauce, and then put them all into the pan to the Chickens, and ſtirre them together in the pan, and put them into a diſh and ſerue them vp.
            
            
               To make a boyled meate after the French waies.
               TAke Pigions and larde them, and then put them on a Broach, and let them bee halfe roſted, then take them off the Broach, and make a pudding of ſweete hearbes of

euerie ſorte a good handfull, and chop Oxe white amongſt the hearbes verie ſmal, and take the yolkes of fiue or ſixe Egges and grated bread, and ſeaſon it with Pepper, ſynamom and ginger, cloues and Mace, ſuger, and currants, and mingle all together, and then put the ſtuffe on the pigeons round about, and then put the pigeons into the cabbeges that be perboyled, and binde the cabbege faſt to the Pigeons, and then put them into the pot where you meane to boyle them, and put in Béefe broth into them, and cabbeges chopped ſmall, and ſo let them boyle, and put in Pepper, Cloues, and Mace, and pricke the Pigions full of Cloues before you put the pudding on thē, and put a péece of Butter, Sinamom, and Ginger, and put a litle Vineger and white wine, & ſo ſerue them vp, and garniſh them with fruite, and ſerue one in a diſh, and but a litle of the broth you muſt put into the diſh when you ſerue them vp.
            
            
               To make a Sallet of all kinde of hearbes.
               TAke your hearbes and picke them very fine into faire water, and picke your flowers by them ſelues, and waſh them all cleane, and ſwing them in a ſtrainer, and

whē you put them into a diſh, mingle them with Cowcumbers or Lemmons payred and ſliced, and ſcrape Suger, and put in vineger and Oyle, and throw the flowers on the top of the Sallet, and of euery ſorte of the aforeſaid things, and garniſh the diſh about with the foreſaide thinges, and hard Egges boyled and laide about the diſh and vpon the Sallet.
            
            
               A ſauce for a Conie.
               CVt Onions in rundels and frie them in butter, then put to them wine vineger, ſalt, ginger, camimel and pepper, and a litle ſuger, and let it boyle til it be good and faſt, then ſerue it vpon the Conie.
            
            
               To make a Sallet of Lemmons.
               CVt out ſlices of the péele of the Lemmons long waies, a quarter of an inch one péece from an other, and then ſlice the Lemmon very thinne, and lay him in a diſh croſſe, and the peeles about the Lemmons, and ſcrape a good deale of ſuger vpon them, and ſo ſerue them.
            
            
               To make a Sauſedge.
               TAke Martinmaſſe Béefe, or if you can not get it, take freſh Béefe, or the leane of Bacon if you will, and you muſt mince

very ſmal that kinde of fleſh that you take, and cut Lard & put into the minced meate, and whole Pepper, and the yolkes of ſeuen Egges, and mingle them altogether, and put the meate into a gut very ſalt, and hang him in the Chimney where he may drie, and there let him hang a moneth or two before you take him downe.
            
            
               To make a Pie.
               FIrſt perboile your fleſh and preſſe it, and when it is preſſed, ſeaſon it with pepper & ſalt whileſt it is whot, then larde it, make your Paſte of Rye flower: it muſt be verie thick, or elſe it will not hold, when it is ſeaſoned and larded lay it in your Pye, then caſt on it before you cloſe it a good deale of Cloues and Mace beaten ſmall, and throw vpon that a good deale of Butter, and ſo cloſe it vp: you muſt leaue a hole in the top of the lid, & when it hath ſtand two houres in the Ouen, you muſt fill it as full of vineger as you can, and then ſtoppe the hole as cloſe as you can with paſte, and then ſet it into the Ouen againe: your Ouen muſt be very whot at the firſt, & that your Pies will kéepe a great white, the longer you keepe them, the better they will be: when they be taken out of the Ouen and almoſt

colde, you muſt ſhake them betwéene your handes, and ſet them with the bottome vpward, and when you ſet them into the Ouen, be well ware that one Pye toucheth not another by more thē ones hand bredth: Remember alſo to let them ſtand in the Ouen after the vineger be in two houres and more.
            
            
               To make white broth with Almondes.
               FIrſt looke that your meate be clean waſhed, and then ſet it on the fire, & when it boyleth ſcumme it cleane, and put ſome ſalt into the pot, then take roſemarie, time, Iſope and margerum, and bind them together, and put them into the pot, and take a diſh of ſweete butter, and put it into the pot amongeſt your meate, and take ſome whole mace, and binde them in a clout, and put them into the pot with a quantitie of vergice, and after that take a quantitie of Almondes as ſhall ſerue the turne, blanche them, and beate them in a morter, and then ſtraine them with the broth your meate is in, And when theſe Almondes are ſtrained put them in a pot by them ſelues with ſome Suger, and a little Ginger, and alſo a little Roſe water, and then ſtirre it while

boyle, and after that take ſome ſlyced orenges, without the kernelles, and boyle them with the broth of the pot vpon a chaffing diſh of Coles, with a litle ſuger, and then haue ſome ſippets ready in a platter, & ſerue the meate vpon them, & put not your Almondes in till it be readie to be ſerued.
            
            
               To make pottage to looſe the body.
               TAke a chicken and ſéeth it in running water, then take two handfuls of violet leaues, and a good prety ſort of reaſons of the Sunne, picke out the ſtones, and ſeeth them with the chickins, and when it is wel ſodden, ſeaſon it with a litle ſalt and ſtreine it and ſo ſerue it.
            
            
               To make another very good potage to be vſed in the Morning.
               TAke a chickin and ſeeth it in faire water and put to it violet leaues a handfull or two, or elſe ſome other good hearbes, that you like in the ſtead of them, and ſo let them ſéeth together till the chicken be ready to fall a péeces then ſtraine it, and cut thinne péeces of bread, and ſeeth in it till the bread be verie tender, and then ſeaſon it with ſalt. And on the fiſh day ſéeth the hearbes as

before in faire running water & ſtraine it & ſéeth bread as before in it, & ſeaſon it with ſalt and put in a péece of butter.
            
            
               To boile diuerſe kindes of Fiſhes.
               BRet, Conger, Thornebacke, plaice, freſh Samon all theſe you muſt boyle with a litle faire water and vineger, a litle ſalt, & bayleaues, and ſauce them in vineger, and a litle of the broth that they are ſodden in with a litle ſalt, and as you ſee cauſe ſhift your ſauce, as you do béefe in brine, and alſo freſh Sturgion, ſéeth it as is aforeſaide, and ſauce it as ye did the other, and ſo ye may kéepe it halfe 
                     •••
                  eare are with chaunging of the ſauce, and ſalt Sturgion ſéeth it in water & ſalt, and a litle vineger, and let it be cold, and ſerue it forth with vineger, and a litle Fenell vpon it but firſt or ye ſéeth it, it muſt be watered.
            
            
               To make broth for one that is weake.
               TAke a legge of veale and ſet it ouer the fire in a gallon of water ſkimming it cleane, when you haue ſo done put in thrée quarters of a pound of ſmall reaſons, halfe a pound of prunes, a good handfull of burrage, as much langdebéefe, as much mintes

and the like quantitie of harts-tongue, let all theſe ſéeth together till all the ſtrength of the fleſh be ſodden out, then ſtraine it ſo cleane as you can, and if you thinke the patient be in anie heats, put in violet leaues and ſauorie as you do with the other herbs.
            
            
               To boile a Capon with a Syrrope.
               BOile your Capon in ſwéete broath, and put in groſſe Pepper and whole Mace into the Capons bellie, and make your ſirrope with Spinnage, White Wine, and Currants, Sugar, Sinamome and Ginger, and ſwéete Butter, and ſo let them boyle, and when your Capon is readie to ſerue put the Sirrope on the Capon, and boyle your ſpinnage before you make your Sirrope.
            
            
               To dreſſe a hare.
               VVAſh her in faire water, perboile her, then lay her in cold water, then lard her and roſt her, and for ſauce take red wine, ſalt, vineger, ginger, pepper, cloues and mace, put theſe together, then mince onions and apples and frye them in a panne, then put your ſauce to them with a litle ſuger, and ſo let them boile together, and then ſerue it.
            
            
               
               To bake a Hare.
               TAke your Hare and perboile him, and mince him, & then beat him in a morter verie fine, liuer and all if you will, and ſeaſon him with all kinde of ſpice and ſalt, and doe him together with the yolks of ſeuen or eight egges, when you haue made him vp together, draw Lard verie thicke through him, or cut the Lard and mingle them altogether and put him in a Pye, and put in butter before you cloſe him vp.
            
            
               To roſte Deares tongues.
               TAke Deares tongues and lard them, and ſerue them with ſweete ſauce.
            
            
               To make Blewmanger.
               TAke to a pint of creame twelue or ſixtéene yolks of egges, and ſtraine them into it, and ſéeth them well, euer ſtirring it with a ſticke that is broad at the end but before you ſeeth it put in ſuger, and in the ſéething taſt of it that you may if néed be put in more ſuger, and when it is almoſt ſodden put in a litle roſe water▪ that it may taſte therof, and ſéeth it well till it be thicke, and then ſtraine it againe if it hath neede, or els put it in a faire diſh and ſtirre it till it bee almoſt cold, and take the white of all the egges and ſtraine them with a pint of

Creame and ſéeth that with ſuger, and in the end put in roſewater as into the other, and ſéeth it till it be thicke inough, and then vſe it as the other, and when ye ſerue it ye may ſerue one diſh and another of the other in rolles, and caſt on Biſkets.
            
            
               To make peaſcods in Lent.
               TAke Figs, Kaiſons, and a few Dates and beate them verie fine, and ſeaſon it with Cloues, Mace, Sinamom and Ginger, and for your paſte ſéeth faire water and Oyle in a diſh vpon coales, put therein ſaffron and ſalt and a litle flowre, faſhion them then like peaſcods, and when ye will ſerue them, frye them in Oyle in a frying panne, but let the Oyle be verie hote, and the fireſoft for burning of them, and when yee make, them for fleſh dayes, take a fillet of veale and mince it fine, and put the yolkes of two or thrée raw egges to it, and ſeaſon it with pepper, ſalt, cloues, mace, honie, ſuger, ſinamom, ginger ſmall raiſons, or great minced, and for your paſte, butter, the yolke of an egge, and ſeaſon them, and frye them in butter as ye did the other in Oyle.
            
            
               
               To bake Quinces, Peares and Wardons.
               TAke and pare and coare them, then make your paſte with faire water and butter, and the yolke of an egge▪ then ſet your Oringes into the paſte and then bake it well, fill your paſte almoſt full with Sinamom, ginger and ſuger. Alſo Apples muſt be taken after the ſame ſort, ſauing that whereas the core ſhould be cut out they muſt be filled with butter cuerie one: the hardeſt Apples are beſt, and likewiſe are Peares and Wardons, and none of them all but the wardons may be parboiled, and the Ouen muſt be of a temperate heate, two houres to ſtand is inough.
            
            
               To make a Tarte of Spinadge.
               TAke Spinadge and ſéeth it ſtalke and all, and when it is tenderly ſodden▪ take it off, and let it drayne in a Colliander, and then ſwing it in a cloute and ſtamp it and ſtraine it with two or three yolks of egges, and then ſet it on a chaſing▪ diſh of coales and ſeaſon it with butter and ſuger, and when the paſte is hardened in the Ouen put in this Comode ſtrake it euen.
            
            
               
               To make blame mangie.
               TAke all the braine of a Capon & ſtampe it in a morter fine, and blanched Almonds, and ſometimes put to them roſe water, and ſeaſon it with pouder of ſinamom, ginger, and ſuger, and ſo ſerue it.
            
            
               To make a Tarte of a neare of Veale.
               TAke two pound of great raiſons, and waſh them cleane, and picke them, and take out the ſtones of them, and take two kidneys of veale, and a péece of the legge which is leane, and boile them altogether in a pot with the ſtraint of the broth of mutton, and boile it, and let it boyle the ſpace of one howre, then take it vp and choppe it fine, and temper it with cromes of bread finely grated, and take nine yolkes of egs & temper them altogether & ſeaſon them with ſinamom, ginger, ſuger and ſmall raiſons, great raiſons minced, dates and ſaffron. Then take fine flowre and water and thrée yolkes of egges, butter and ſaffron, and make them like a round tarte cloſe with a couer of the ſame paſte, and ſet him in the Ouen, and let him ſtand one howre, then take him forth, and indore it with butter,

and caſt a pouder of ſinamom, ginger and ſuger and ſo ſerue it.
            
            
               To make a Tarte of Strawberies.
               TAke Strawberies and waſh them in claret wine, thicke and temper them with roſewater, and ſeaſon them with Sinamom, ſuger and ginger, and ſpread it on the Tart and endore the ſides with butter, and caſt on ſuger and biſkets and ſerue them ſo.
            
            
               To make a cloſe Tarte of Cheries.
               TAke out the ſtones, and lay them as whole as you can in a chardger, and put muſtard in, ſinamom and ginger to them, and laie them in a Tarte whole, and cloſe them, & let them ſtand thrée quarters of an houre in the Ouen, then take a ſirrop of Muſkadine and damaſke water and ſuger, and ſerue it.
            
            
               To make a cloſe Tart of greene peaſe.
               TAke halfe a pecke of gréene peaſe, ſheale them and ſeeth them and caſt them into a colliander, & let the water goe from them, then put them into the Tart whole & ſeaſon them with pepper, ſaffron and ſalt and a diſh of ſwéet butter cloſe and bake him almoſt one houre, then draw him and put to

him a litle dergice and ſhake them and ſet them into the Ouen againe and ſo ſerue it.
            
            
               To make a Tarte of Damſons.
               TAke Damſons and ſéeth them in wine, and ſtraine them with a litle creame, then boile your ſtuffe ouer the fire till it be thicke, put thereto ſuger, ſinamom and ginger, but ſet it not in the Ouen after but let your paſte be baked before.
            
            
               To make a florentine.
               TAke the kidneies of a loine of veale that is roſted, and when it is cold ſhredde it fine and grate as it were halfe a manchéete verie fine, and take eight yolkes of egges, and a handfull of currants, and eight dates finely ſhred, a litle ſinamom, a litle ginger, a litle ſuger & a litle ſalt, and mingle them with the kidneys, then take a handfull of fine flower and two yolkes of egges, and as much butter as two egges, and put into your flower, then take a litle ſéething licquor, and make your paſte and driue it abroad verie thinne, then ſtrake your diſh with a litle butter, and lay your paſte in the diſh & fill it with your meat, then draw another ſhéet of paſte thinne and couer it withall, cut it handſomly vpon the top, and by the ſides, and then put it into the Ouen,

and when it is halfe baked draw it out, and take two or thrée feathers, and a litle roſe water, and wet all the couer with it, and haue a handfull of ſuger finely beaten, and ſtraw vpon it, and ſee that the roſe water wet in euerie place, and ſo ſet it in the ouen againe, and that will make a faire iſe vpon it, if your Ouen be not hote inough to reare vp your iſe, then put a litle fire in the Ouens mouth.
            
            
               To make Almond butter after the beſt and neweſt faſhion.
               TAke a pound of Almonds or more, and blanch them in cold water or in warme as you may haue leaſure, after the blanching let them lye one houre in cold water, then ſtamp them in faire cold water as fine as you can, then put your Almonds in a cloth, and gather your cloth round vp in your handes, and preſſe out the iuice as much as you can, if you thinke they be not ſmall inough beat them againe and ſo get out milke ſo long as you can, then ſet it ouer the fire, & when it is readie to ſéeth put in a good quantitie of ſalt, and roſewater that will turne it, after that is in, let it haue one boyling, and then take it from the fire, and caſt it abroad vpon a linnen cloth▪
                  
and vnderneath the cloth ſcrape of the whay ſo long as it will runne, then put the butter together into the middeſt of the cloth, binding the cloth together, and let it hang ſo long as it will drop, then take peecees of ſuger ſo much as you thinke will make it ſwéet, and put thereto a litle roſe water ſo much as you will melt the ſuger, and ſo much fine pouder of ſaffron as you thinke will collour it, then let both your ſuger and ſaffron ſtéepe together in the litle quantitie of roſe water, and with that ſeaſon vp your butter when you will make it.
            
            
               To make Oiſter Chewets.
               TAke a pecke of Oiſters and waſh them cleane, then ſheal them & waſh them faire in a Culliander, and when they be ſodden ſtraine the water from them, and chop them as ſmall as pie meat, then ſeaſon them with pepper, halfe a pennie worth of claues and mace, halfe a peny worth of ſinamom and ginger, and a penie worth of ſuger, a litle ſaffron & ſalt, then take a handfull of ſmall raiſons, ſixe dates minced ſmal and mingle them altogether, then make your paſte with one pennie worth of fine flower, tenne yolkes of egges, a halfe penniworth

of Butter with a little ſaffron and boyling water, then raiſe vp your chewets and put in the bottom of euerie one of them a litle butter, and ſo fill them with your ſtuffe, then caſt proines, dates, and ſmall raiſons vpon them, and being cloſed, bake them: let not your Ouen be two hote for they will haue but litle baking, then drawe them and put into euerie one of them two ſpoonefull of vergice and butter, and ſo ſerue them in.
            
            
               To make a Tart of Medlers.
               TAke medlers that be rotten, and ſtamp them, then ſet them on a chaffing diſh and coales, and beat in two yolkes of egges, boyling it till it be ſomewhat thicke, then ſeaſon them with ſuger, ſinamom and ginger, and lay it in paſt.
            
            
               To make a Quinces moyſe, or Wardens moyſe.
               YOu muſt roſt your wardens or quinces, and when they be roſted pill them▪ and ſtrain them together, and put in ſuger Sinamom and Ginger, and put it in a plate, and then ſmooth it with a knife, and ſcrape a litle ſuger on the top, and nicke a litle with a knife.
            
            
               
               To make an other pretie diſh, with dates, and the iuice of two or three Orenges.
               STraine them into a diſh, and ſo make Chambers of paſte vpon a ſticke, put the ſtickes vpon a loafe of bread, and ſo drie them in the Ouen, and then clarifie a litle butter and frie them in it, and laie them in a diſh and ſcrape ſuger on them.
            
            
               To make hypocraſe.
               TAke a gallon of white wine, ſuger, two pound of ſinamom, ij. d. ginger. y. d. long pepper. ij. d. mace. ij. d. not bruſed graines, ij. d. gallingall, i. d. ob. cloues not bruſed, you muſt bruſe euerie kind of ſpice a litle, & put them in an earthen pot all a day, & then caſt them through your bags two times or more as you ſée cauſe, and ſo drinke it.
            
            
               To make marmalet of Quinces.
               TAke verie good Quinces and pare them and cut them in quarters, then core them cleane, and take heed it be not a ſtony Quince, and when you haue pared and cored them, then take two pintes of running water and put it into a braſſe pan, caſting away eight ſpoonfuls of one of the pintes, then waigh thrée pound of fine ſuger & beat

it, and put it into the water, make your fire where you may haue a good light, not in a chimney, then ſet on your pan vpon a treuet, and when your ſuger and water beginneth to boile, you muſt ſkimme it cleane, then put in ſixe ſpoonfuls of roſe water, and if there riſe anie more ſkumme, take it off and ſo put in your thrée pound of quinces, and let them boile but ſoftly, and if you ſee the colour waxe ſomwhat déepe, now & then with a faire ſlice be breaking of them, and when your liccor is well conſumed away, and the colour of your quinces to growe fairer, then be ſtill ſturring of it, & when it is inough you ſhall ſée it riſe from the bottom of your pan in ttirring of it, and ſo boxe it, & ye ſhall haue it to be good marmalet and a verie orient colour, if you will you may put ſome muſke into it, ſome roſe water, & rubbe your boxe withall, it will giue it a pretie ſent, and it is a verie good way.
            
            
               To make a ſirrop of Quinces to comfort the ſtomake.
               TAke a great pint of the iuice of Quinces, a pound of ſuger, and a good halfe pint of vineger, of ginger, ye waight of fiue grotes, of ſinamom, the waight of ſixe grots, of pepper, the waight of thrée grotes, & two pence.
            
            
               
               To make Marmalet of Quinces.
               TAke verie good Quinces and paire them & cut them in quarters, then core them cleane, & take heed it be not a ſtony quince, and when you haue pared and cored them, then take two pints of running water, and put it into a braſſe, caſting away eight ſpoonefulls of one of the pints, the waight of foure pound of fine ſuger, & beat it & put it into the water: make your fire where you may haue good light, & not in the chimney, then ſet ouer your pan vpon a Treuet, and when your ſuger and water beginneth to boile you muſt ſtraine it cleane, then put in ſixe ſpoonefull of roſe water, and if there riſe anie more ſkimme, take it off and put it into boxes.
            
            
               To make Codamacke of Quinces.
               TAke fine quartes of running water, & a quart of french wine, put them together, then take quinces and paire them and cut them till you come at ye coares, then waigh ten pound of the quinces, and put them into your pan of water and wine and boile them ouer a quicke fire till they be tender, keeping your panne verie cloſe couered, then take a peece of fine canuas & put your quinces and liquor in it, and when your ſirroppe

is all runne through, put in ſo much fine ſuger as will make it ſweet, and ſet it ouer a quicke fire againe, ſtirring with a ſticke till it be ſo thicke that a drop will ſtand vppon a diſh, then take it from the fire, and put it in Boxes.
            
            
               To make caſt creame.
               TAke milke as it commeth from the cow▪ a quart or leſſe, and put thereto raw yolkes of egges, temper the milke and the egges together, then ſet the ſame vpon a chafingdiſh and ſtirre it that it courd not, and ſo put ſuger in it, and it will be like creame of Almonds, when it is boyled thicke enough caſt a litle ſuger on it, and ſprinkle Roſe water thereupon, and ſo ſerue it,
            
            
               To make good Resbones.
               TAke a quart of fine flower, lay it vpon a faire board and make a hoale in the middeſt of the flower with your hand, and put a ſpoonefull of Ale yeaſt thereon, and ten yolkes of egges, & two ſpoonefuls of ſinamom & one of ginger, and one of cloues and mace, and a quartern of ſuger finely beaten, and a litle ſaffron, & halfe a ſpoonefull of ſalt, then take a diſh full of butter, melt it and put it into your flower, and

therewithal make your paſte as it were for mancheat, and mould it a good while, & cut it in péeces of the bignes of Ducks egges, and ſo mould euerie peece as a mancheat, & make them after the faſhion of an inckhorn broad aboue and narrow beneath, then ſet them in the Ouen, and let them bake thrée quarters of an houre, then take two diſhes of butter and clarifie it vpon a ſoft fire, then draw it out of the Ouen, and ſcrape the bottom of them faire and cleane, and cut them ouerthwart in foure péeces, and put them in a faire charger, and put your clarified butter vpon them, and haue ſinamom and ginger readie by you, and ſuger beaten verie ſmall, and mingle altogether, and euer as you ſet your péeces together, caſt ſome of your ſuger, ſinamom & ginger vpon them, when you haue ſet them all vp, lay them in a faire platter, & put a litle butter vpō them, & caſt a litle-ſuger on them, & ſo ſerue them.
            
            
               To make a vaunt.
               TAke marie of béefe as much as you can hold in both your hands, cut it as big as great dice, then take dates and cut them as bigge as ſmall dice, then take fortie prunes and cut the fruites from the ſtones, then take halfe a handfull

of ſmall raiſons, waſh them cleane and pricke them, and put your marie in a faire platter, and your Dates, Prunes and ſmal raiſons, then take twentie yolks of Egges, and put in your ſtuffe before rehearſed, then take a quarterne of Suger or more, and beat it ſmall and put in your marrow, then take two ſpoonefulles of Sinamon and a ſpoonefull of Ginger, and put them to your ſtuffe & mingle them altogither, then take eight yolkes of egges, and foure ſpoonefuls of Roſewater, ſtraine them and put a little ſuger in it, then take a faire frying panne and put in a litle peece of butter in it, as much as a walnut, & ſet it vpon a good fire, and when it looketh almoſt blacke, put it out of your panne, and as faſt as you can put halfe of your egges in the middeſt of your panne, and frie it yellowe, and when it is fried, put it into a faire diſh, and put your ſtuffe therein, and ſpred it all the bottome of your diſh, and then make another vaunt euen as ye made the other, and ſet it vpon a faire boord, cut it in pretie péeces, of the length of your litle finger, as long as your vaunt is, and lay it vpon your ſtuffe after the faſhion of a litle windowe, and then cutte off the endes of them as much

as liefh without the inward compaſſe of the diſh, then ſet the diſh within the Ouen, or in a baking panne, and let it bake with leaſure, and when it is baked enough, the marrowe will come faire out of the vaunt to the brimme of the diſh, then drawe it out, and caſte a little Suger on it, and ſo ſerue it in.
            
            
               To preſerue Quinces whole.
               TAke a pottle of faire water, and put it into a cleane panne, and beate iij. pound of fine ſuger, and put into it, then ſet it on the fire, and when you haue ſkimmed it, put in twelue ſpoonefuls of roſewater, then take x. faire Quinces, and pare them, and core them cleane, then put them into your ſyrrup, aud ſo couer them verie cloſe for the ſpace of two houres with a faire platter, and let them boyle a good pace at the two houres, and vncouer them, and looke whether you finde them tender, and that they haue a faire crimſon colour, then take them vp and lay them vpon a faire platter, couering your ſyrruppe againe, And let it ſéeth while it be ſomewhat thicke, then put your Quinces into your ſyrrup againe, and ſo haue a faire gallie pot, and put in both your ſyrrup and quinces as faſt as you can, and

couer your potte cloſe that the heate goe not foorth, you muſt not put them in a glaſſe for it will breake.
            
            
               To preſerue Peare Plummes.
               FIrſt take two pound and a halfe of fine Suger, and beate it ſmall, and put it into a pretie braſſe potte with xx. ſpoonefulles of roſewater, and when it boyleth ſkimme it cleane, then take it of the fire, and let it ſtand while it be almoſt colde then take two pound of peare plummes, and wipe them vpon a faire cloth, and put them into your ſyrruppe when it is almoſt colde, and ſo ſet them vpon the fire againe, and let them boyle as ſoftely as you can when they are boyled enough the kernelles wilbe yellow, then take them vp, but let your ſyrrup boile till it be thicke, then put your plummes vppon the fire againe, and let them boyle a walme or two, ſo take them from the fire, and let them ſtande in the veſſell all night, and in the morning put them into your pot or glaſſe and couer them cloſe.
            
            
               To preſerue Orenges.
               CHuſe out the faireſt, and the heauieſt, that is ful of liquor, & cut them full of litle ſpecks, then make a litle round hole in the ſtalke of the Orenge, and breake the

ſtringes of the meate of the Oringes & cloſe the meat to the ſides of your Oringes with your finger, then will part of the iuice and kirnels come out, and laie them in water thrée daies and thrée nights, then take them out, and ſet a pan with water ouer the fire, and when it ſéeths, put in your Orenges, let them not ſeeth too faſt, then you muſt haue another panne with water ready ſeething to ſhift your orenges out of the other water, whē they haue ſodden a prety while and ſo haue one panne after another to ſhift them ſtill vpon the fire x. or xij. times to take away the bitterneſſe of the Orenges, and you muſt kéepe them as whole as you can in the boyling, and then take them vp one by one, & lay them vpō a platter the hole downeward, that the water may runne the clearer out of them, then let them ſtand ſo vntill you haue boyled your ſyrrup, ready for them. Nowe to make your ſyrrup take to euerie two Orenges, a pint of water, & a pound of ſuger, let your ſuger be finely beaten before you put it into your licor, & looke that the kettell you boyle them in, be swéet braſſe, then take x. whites of egges, and put them into your kettle with your licor and ſuger, and beate your whites of egges, and

the liquor together a good quarter of an houre, then ſet your liquor vpon a ſoft fire of coales, and let it ſéeth ſo ſoone as you can, hauing a faire ſkymmer, and a Coliander ready, and ſet your Coliander in a faire baſon, and as your whites of egges riſeth in ſkumme take them vp with your ſkimmer and put them in your Colliander, and you ſhall haue a great quantitie of ſyrrup come from your ſkumme through your Coliander into your Baſon, & that you muſt ſaue and put it into your kettle again, and when your great ſkumme is off, there will ariſe ſtill ſome ſkumme, which you muſt take off with a ſkymmer, as cleane as you can, & when your ſyrrups hath ſodden a prety while, then put in your Orenges, and let them boyle ſoftly, till you thinke they be enough, & the ſirrup muſt be ſomwhat thick, then let your Orenges ſtand all night vpon the fire, but there muſt be nothing but imbers. And in the morning take them vp, and put them in Glaſſes or Gallie pottes.
            
            
               To preſerue Cheries.
               TO euery pound of Cheries take a pound of ſuger, that done take a fewe Cheries and diſtreine them to make your ſyruppe, and to euerie pound, a pound of Suger, and

Cheries, take a quarter of a poūd of ſyrrup, and this done take your ſyrrup and Suger, and ſet it on the fire, then put your Cheries into your ſirrup, and let them boyle fiue ſeueral times, and after euerie boiling ſkum them with the backeſide of a ſpoone.
            
            
               To preſerue Gooſeberies.
               TAke to euerie pound of Gooſeberies, one pound of Suger, then take ſome of the Gooſeberies and diſtraine them, then take the ſyrrup, and to euerie pound of Gooſeberies take halfe a pound of ſirrup, then ſet the ſuger, and the ſirrup ouer the fire, and put in the gooſeberies, and boyle them foure ſeuerall times and ſkumme them cleane.
            
            
               To make Apple moyſe.
               ROſte your apples, and when they bee roſted, pill them and ſtreine them into a diſh, and pare a dozen of Apples and cut them into a chafer, and put in a litle white wine and a litle Butter, and let them boyle till they be as ſoft as Pap, and ſtirre them a litle, and ſtreine them to ſome Wardens roſted and pilled, and put in Suger, Sinamom and Ginger, and make Diamonds of Paſte and lay them in the Sauce, then ſcrape a little Suger vppon them in the diſh.
            
            
               
               A pouder peereleſſe for woundes.
               TAke Orpiment and Uerdigréece, of ech an ounce, of Uitrial burned till it be red two ounces, bray each of them by it ſelf in a Braſen morter as ſmall as flower, then mingle them altogether that they appeare all as one, and kéepe it in Bagges of Leather well bound, for it will laſt ſeuen yeare with one vertue, & is called Pouder péereles, it hath no péere for working in Chirurgerie: for put this pouder in a wounde, whereas is dead fleſh, and lay ſcrapt Linte about it, and a Plaiſter of Duifloſius next vnderneath written, and it, &c. The reſt wanteth.
            
            
               A medicine for the Megrime, Impoſtume of the Rewme, or other diſeaſes in the head.
               TAke Pellitorie of Spaine the weight of a groate, halfe ſo much Spegall, beate theſe in pouder, take the tops of Iſope, of Roſemarie with the flowers, thrée or foure leaues of Sage in the hole, of theſe hearbes one ſmall handfull, boyle all theſe hearbes with the Spices in halfe a pint of White wine, and halfe a pinte of Uineger of Roſes, vntill one halfe of the liquour be

conſumed, then ſtreyne forth the hearbes, and ſet the liquor to coole, and being colde put thereunto thrée ſpoonefull of good Muſtarde, and ſo much honey as will take away the tartnes of the medicine, and when the patient feeleth any paine in his head, take a ſpoonefull thereof and put it into his mouth, and holde it a pretie while gargaſing, and then ſpit it forth into a veſſell, and ſo vſe to take ten ſpoonefulles at one time in ye morning faſting, vſing this three daies together: when they feele themſelues troubled with the Rewme, at the fall and ſpring of the leafe is beſt taking therof, and by the grace of God they ſhall finde eaſe.
               You muſt keepe this ſame medicine verie cloſe in a glaſſe, whoſe goodneſſe will laſt ten dayes, & when you take it, warme it as Milke from the Cowe.
            
            
               A Copie of Doctor Stephans water.
               TAke a gallon of Gaſcoigne wine, then take Ginger, Galingale, Camamill, Sinamome, Graines, Cloues, Mace, and ſeedes, Fennell ſeedes, Carraway ſeedes, of euerie of them one dramme, that is two

pence halfe peny weight, then take Suger minced, red Roſes, Time, Pellitorie of the wall, wilde Margerum, Peniriall, Penymountain, wild Time, Lauender, Auens, of euerie of them one handfull, then beate the ſpice ſmall and bruſe the hearbes, and put all to the wine, and let it ſtand twelue houres ſtirring of it diuers times, then ſtill it in a Limbecke, and keepe the firſt pint of water by it ſelfe, ſo is it beſt, then will come a ſecond water which is not ſo good as the firſt, the vertue of this water is this: It comforteth the ſpirites, and preſerueth greatly the youth of man, and helpeth inwarde diſeaſes comming of colde, againſt the ſhaking of the Palſey: it cureth the contraction of ſinewes, and helpeth the vnception of women: it killeth the wormes in the bellie, it helpeth the toothache, it helpeth the cold Gowte, it comforteth the ſtomack, it cureth the colde Dropſie, it helpeth the Stone in the Bladder, and the Reines of the backe, it cureth the Canker, it helpeth ſhortly a ſtinking breath: And who ſo vſeth this water now and then and not too often, it preſerueth him a good liking, and ſhall make him ſeeme young very long.
            
            
               
               A medicicine for all manner of Sores.
               TAke vnwrought Waxe, Turpentine, oyle Olife, ſheepes fallowe, or Déeres Sewet, a quantitie of euerie of them, and then take a quantitie of the iuyce of Bugel, the iuyce of Smallage, a quantitie of Roſſen, and boyle them all together ouer a ſoft fire, ſtirring them alwayes till they be well mingled, and that the greenes of the ioyce be come, and then ſtraine it through a faire cloth, into a cleane veſſell, and this ſhall heale wounde or ſore whatſoeuer it bee.
            
            
               Another for all ſores.
               TAke a quarter of a pound of Pitch, as much of Waxe, as much of Roſſen, as much of capons greaſe, or other ſoft greaſe, and put them in a panne, and ſeeth them al together, till they bee melted, and then ſtraine them through a faire cloath: and make a plaiſter to lay to the place greeued.
            
            
               To defend Humors.
               TAke beanes, the rinde or the vpper ſkin being pulled of, & bruſe them and mingle them with the white of an Eg: and make it ſticke to the Temples, it keepeth backe humors flowing to the eyes.
            
            
               
               To make Roſemarie water.
               TAke the Roſemarie, and the flowers in the middeſt of May, before ſunne ariſe, and ſtrippe the leaues and the flowers from the ſtalke, take foure or fiue Alicompane rootes, and a handfull or two of Sage, then beat the Roſemarie, the Sage and rootes together, till they be verie ſmall, and take thrée ounces of cloues, iij. ounces of Mace, iij. ounces of Quibles, halfe a pound of Anniſſeedes, and beat theſe ſpices euerie one by it ſelfe. Then take all the Hearbes and the Spices, and put therein foure or fiue gallons of good white wine, then put in all theſe Hearbes and Spices, and Wine, into an earthen pot, and put the ſame Pot in the ground the ſpace of ſixeteene dayes, then take it vp, and ſtill in a Still with a verie ſoft fire.
            
            
               To make Bisket bread.
               FIrſt take halfe a Pecke of fine white flower, alſo eight newe laid Egges, the Whites and Yolkes beaten together, then put the ſaid Egges into the Flower, then take eight Graines of fine Muſke, and ſtampe it in a Morter, then put halfe a pint of good Damaſkewater, or elſe Roſewater into the Muſke, and mingle it together,

and put it into wine, or Muſcaden, but Muſcaden is better, and put it into the flowre, alſo one ounce of good Anniſſeedes cleane picked, & put therein, and ſo to worke them altogether into a Paſte, as yee doe bread, and then make your biſkettes into what faſhion you thinke beſt, and then put them into an Ouen and bake them harde if you will kéepe them long, or elſe but indifferent, if you will haue it candite, take roſe water and Suger, and boyle them together till they be thicke, and ſo ſlices of bread, then ſet hot in the Ouen vntill the ſame be candit,
            
         
         
            Certaine approued points of Husbandrie, very neceſſarie for all Huſbandmen to knowe.
            
               Firſt of Oxen.
               TOkens whereby an Oxe is knowen to be good and towarde for the worke, are theſe: ready and quicke at the voyce, hee moueth quickly: he is ſhort and large, great eares, the Hornes liuely and of meane bigneſſe and blacke, the head ſhort, the breaſt large, a great panche, the tayle long touching the ground with a tuffe at the ende, the haire curled, the backe ſtraight, the

raines large, the leg ſtrong & ſinowes, the houffe ſhort, and large, the beſt colour is blacke and red, and next vnto that the bay and the pyed, the white is the worſt, the greye and the fallowe or yellowe is of leſſe valure. The charge of one that kéepeth them is chiefly to vſe them gently, to ſerue them with meate and good litter, to rubbe or kembe them at night, to ſtrike them ouer in the morning, waſhing ſometimes their Tailes with warme water, alſo to keepe their ſtable cleane, and that the poultrie or Hogges come not in, for the feathers may kill the Oxen, and the dung of ſick Pogges breedeth the Murren.
               Item hee muſt knowe diſcreetely when oxen haue laboured enough, and when but litle, and according to that they are to bee fedde.
               Item that he worke them not in a time too cold or to wet.
               Item that hee ſuffer them not to drinke preſently after a great labour, and that he tie them not vp foorth with, vntill they be a little refreſhed abroade.
               The Oxe deſireth cleare or running water like as the Horſe deſireth the puddle or troubled water.
               
                  Item that at their comming home, hee alwayes ouerlooke them, whether there be any Thornes in their féete, or if the Yoke haue galled them.
               In Fraunce they gelde all their Bulcalues about the age of two yeares, & that at the fall of the leafe.
               The day when they are to be cut, they muſt not drinke, and muſt eate but little. They ſuddenly clippe the ſinnowes of the ſtones with a paire of tongues, and ſo cut out the ſtones in ſuch ſort, as they leaue behind the end that is tied vnto the ſinnowes for ſo the Calfe or Bullocke ſhall not bléed ouermuch, nor ſhall léeſe all his virilitie and courage.
               At the age of ten moneths the Bullocke changeth his foreteeth, and at ſixe moneths after they ſcale the next teeth, and at the ende of thrée yeares he chaungeth all his teeth▪
               
               Note when an Oxe is at beſt, his téeth are equall, white and long, and when he is old, the teeth be vnequall and blacke.
               If an Oxe haue the laſke, which often times is with bloud, and maketh him very weake, they kéepe him from drinke foure or fiue dayes, they giue him Walnuttes and

harde Chéeſe, tempered in thicke wine, and for the vttermoſte remedie, they let him bléed in the middes of the forehead.
               To make him looſe bellied they giue him two ounces of aloes, made in pouder with warme water.
               An Oxe piſſeth bloud of beeing too much chafed, or of eating il hearbes, or flowers, they kéepe him from drinke and drench him with Treacle in two pintes of Wine or Ale, putting thereto Saffron.
               For the Cough they ſéeth I ſope in his drinke.
               For the biting of an Adder or venimous dogge, they noint the place with oyle of Scorpion.
               If hee bee lame of colde in his féete, they waſh him with olde vrine warmed.
               If he be lame of the aboundance of blood fallen downe into the paſtornes and hoofe, they diſſolue it by rubbing and launcing.
               Item the better to keepe their Oxen in health, whether they be to be laboured or to be fatted, they waſh his mouth eight dayes with vrine, and there is taken away much fleame, which taketh from an Oxe his taſie and ſtomacke.
               If the fleame haue made him haue the

murre, which is knowne by the watering of the eye, they waſh his mouth with time and white Wine or rubbe it with water and ſalte.
            
            
               Of Horſes.
               TOkens of a good Colte, the head little and leane, the eare ſtraight, the eyes great, the noſtrelles wide, the necke little towardes the head, the backe ſhort & large, cloſe bellied, the cullions or ſtones equall and ſmall, the tayle long tuffed with haire thicke and curled, the legges equall high and ſtraight, the houffe blacke harde and hye, he ſhould be quicke and pleaſant.
               The age of Horſes is knowen partly by the hooffe, & principally by the teeth. When the Horſe is two yeres and a halfe, the middle téeth aboue and beneath doe fall.
               When he is foure yeare olde, the dogge téeth fall and others come in their places, before he be ſixe yeere olde the great téeth aboue doe fall, and the ſixt yere the firſt that fell come againe, the ſeauenth yeere all is fulle, and they be all ſhut.
            
            
               Of Sheepe.
               CErtaine dayes before the Rammes be put to the Yowes, they drench them with Salt water, thereby the Yowes will

tooke the better, and the rammes (they ſay) waxe more full of appetite.
               To haue manie male lambes, they chuſe a drie time, the wind at North, letting the Yowes goe in paſture that laieth open againſt the Northerne wind, and then put in the Rammes.
               To haue manie female Lambes, they contrariewiſe obſerue the South winde.
               When a Yow is with lambe, if ſhe haue a blacke tongue they ſay, the lambe will be black, and if the tongue be white, the lambe likewiſe will be white.
               Tokens of a good ſheepe: a great bodie, the necke long, the woll deepe, ſoft and fine, the bellie great and couered with woll, the tets great, great eyes, long legges and long taile.
               Tokens of a good Ramme, the body high and long, a great bellie couered with woll, a fliece thicke▪ the forhead broad, eyes black with much woll about them, great eares couered with woll, great ſtones, well horned but the more writhed the better, the tongue and pallat of the mouth all white, to the end that the Lambes may bee all white.
            
            
               
               Of Hogges.
               THe Hogge of himſelfe though filthy, yet they ſay he proſpereth the beſt, if hee lodge in a cleane ſtye, and euery moneth his ſtye ſhould be caſt ouer with freſh grauaile or ſand, to make his lying freſh, and to drie vp the piſſe and filth.
               They geld their pigges when they are a yeare old or ſixe monethes at the leaſt, for they waxe much greater if they be gelded at the ſaid age.
               They chuſe them Bores that haue the head ſhort and large, the breſt large, colour blacke or white, the feet ſhort, the legges great, and thoſe that haue ſtrongeſt haire on the top of their backe.
               Thoſe are to be kept for ſowes which be longeſt, with hanging bellies, great Tettes, deepe ribbed, a litle head, and ſhort legges.
               Hogges be ſicke when they rubbe much their eare or refrain their meat, but if none of theſe ſignes appeare, they plucke of one of his haires on the backe, if he be cleane & white at the roote, he is well, if he be bloudie or foule, he is ſicke.
               They will haue their hogges either all white, or all blacke, and in anie wiſe

not ſpeckled or of two colours.
               They refraine from dunging their land while the moone encreaſeth, for that they note more aboundance of wéedes to come thereby.
               Touching the ſowing of Beanes they obſerue this. At the fall of the leafe, in ſtrong land they ſow the great Beanes. At ſpring time in weake and light ground, they ſow the common ſmall Beanes and both ſortes at the full of the Moone, that they may be better codded.
               They vſe to cut them at the new of the Moone before day.
               Their flaxe as ſoone as they haue gathered it, they ſet it vnder a houſe or houell, and ſuffer it not to take raine or dewe as we doe.
               To make Cheſe yelow, they put in a litle Saffron.
               To keepe Apples, they lay them on ſtraw ſtro wed, the eye of the Apple downwards, and not the ſtemme.
               And when they would haue anie great ſtore, well and long kept from periſhing, they gather and chuſe the ſoundeſt, heauieſt and faireſt, being not ouer riped, they prouide a Hogſhed, Fat, or great Whitch,

they bring the Apples where it ſhall ſtand, then they lay a laine of ſtraw, and vpon the ſame a laine of Apples, and then ſtraw againe, and Apples likewiſe vntill the veſſell be full to the brimme, ſhuting it cloſe, with the head or couer that no aire come in.
               To cure the malladie of trées that beare wormeaten fruite, which commeth of much wet or a moiſt ſeaſon, at that time they pearſe the trées through with an Auger as neere the roote as they may, to the end that the humor whereof the wormes doe bréed, may diſtill out of the trée.
               If trées through oldneſſe or otherwiſe leaue bearing of fruite vſually, they vſe not to loppe them, but onely cut away the head boughes, they vncouer the rootes after all Saintes tide, and cleaue the greateſt of the rootes, putting into the clefts ſhiuers of flints or hard ſtones, letting them there remaine, to the end that the humor of the earth may enter and aſcend into the trée, after about the end of winter, they couer againe the rootes with verie good earth, if they haue anie deade Carrens, they burie them about the rootes of ſuch Trées.
            
         
         
            Approued Medicins for ſundrie diſeaſes.
            
               
               An excellent drinke for the Tiſſicke well approued.
               TAke a handfull of fennell roots, as much perſly roots, as many Aliſander rootes, halfe a handfull of Borrage rootes, and put out the pith of all the ſaide rootes, then take halfe a handfull of Peniryall, as much of Uiolet leaues, and as much of cinckfoyle, as much Succary, Endiue, Holly hocke leaues, Mallow leaues, and redd gardene mints, of all theſe the like quantitie as of theſe next before, halfe a handfull of Licoris ſticks ſcraped, bruſed and beaten to fine powder, a gallon of faire running water, boyle therein all theſe ſimples, and boyle theſe ſéedes with them, that is, thrée ſpoonefull of Anniſéeds, as much Fennell ſeede, the like of Colliander ſeede and Commin ſéede, a good handfull of Dandelion rootes, and ſo boyle altogether from a gallon to a pottell, and let the patient drinke thereof firſt and laſt, and it will helpe him in ſhort ſpace. probatum eſt.
               
            
            
               
                  To make water imperiall for all woundes and Cankers.
               TAke a handfull of red Sage leaues, a handfull of Selondine, as much of woodbind leaues, take a gallon of conduit

water, and put the hearbes in it, & let them boile to a pottle, and then ſtrain the hearbes through a ſtrainer, and take the liquor and ſet it ouer the fire againe, take a pint of Engliſh hony, a good handfull of Koch Allam, as much of white Copper as, Tyme beaten, a pennieworth of graines bruſed, & let them boile all together thrée or foure wawmes, and then let the ſkumme be taken off with a feather, and when it is colde, put it in an earthen pot or bottle, ſo as it may be kept cloſe, and for a greene wound take of the thinneſt, and for an old wound of the thickeſt, couer the ſore rather▪ with Veale or Mutton, ſkimme them with dock leaues, when that you haue dreſſed them with this water.
            
            
               To make water imperiall an other way.
               TAke a handfull of Dragon, of ſcabious, of Endiue, a handfull of Pimpernell, a handful of Wormewood, of Kew, of Tanſie, of Fetherfoye, of daſie leaues, of Conſlips, of maiden haire, of ſinckfoyle, of dandelion, of Tyme, of bawne, of each of theſe hearbes a handfull, of Treakle a pound, of Bole armoniacke foure ounces, and when you haue all theſe hearbes together, you

muſt take and ſhread them a litle, not too ſmall, then take the Treakle, and the Bole armoniacke, and mingle them and the hearbes together, then put them in a ſtillatorie, and ſtill them: & fiet.
            
            
               To make Sinamom water.
               TAke Renniſh wine a quart, or Spaniſh wine a pint, roſe water a pint & a halfe, Sinamom bruſed a pound and a halfe, let theſe ſtand infuſed the ſpace of foure and twentie houres, then deſtill it, and beeing cloſe ſtopped and luted, then with a ſoft fire deſtill the ſame ſoftly in a Limbeck of glaſſe and receiue the firſt water by it ſelfe.
               Alſo if ye be ſo diſpoſed to make the ſame water weaker, take thrée pints of roſe water, and a pint and a halfe of Renniſh wine, and ſo diſtill the ſame, and you ſhall haue to the qualitie of ſtuffe the quantie of the water, which is three pints, but the firſt is beſt, and ſo reſerue it to your vſe both morning and euening.
            
            
               To make Sinamon water another way.
               TAke three quarts of Muſeadine, and a pound of Sinamon, and halfe a pint of good Roſewater, & ſo let them lie infuſed the ſpace of foure and twenty howers,

and deſtill it as aforeſaid, and you ſhall receiue to the quantitie as to the quallitie, but the firſt pint is the beſt and the chiefeſt of all the other as is manifeſt by practiſe,
            
            
               To make Aqua compoſita for a ſurfet.
               TAke roſemarie, Fenell, Iſope, Time, Sage, horehound, of each of theſe a handfull, Penniryal; red mints, marierum, of each ſixe crops, a roote of Enula Campana, of Licoras, Anneyſéede bruſed of each two ounces, put all theſe to thrée gallons of mightie ſtrong Ale, and put it into a braſſe pot ouer an eaſie fire, and ſet the Limbecke vpon it, and ſtop it cloſe with dowe or paſt, that no aire doe goe out, and ſo keepe it ſtilling with a ſoft fire, and ſo preſerue it to your vſe as need requireth.
            
            
               To make the water of life.
               TAke Balme leaues & ſtalkes, burnet leaues and flowers, a handful of roſemary, turmentill leaues and rootes, Roſa ſolis, a handfull, red roſes a handfull, Carnations a handfull, Iſop a handfull, a handfull of Time, redſtrings that grow vpon Sauerie a handfull, red Fennel leaues and rootes a handfull, red Mints a handfull, put all theſe hearbs into a pot of earth glaſed,

and put therto as much white wine as will couer the hearbes, and let them ſoake therein eight or nine dayes, then take an ounce of Sinamom, as much of Ginger, as much of Nutmegs, Cloues and Saffron, a litle quantitie, of Anneyſéedes a pound, great Raiſons a pound, Suger a pound, halfe a pound of Dates, the hinder part of an olde Cony, a good fleſhly running Capon, the fleſh and ſinewes of a legge of mutton, foure young Pigiōs, a doſſen of Larks, the yolkes of twelue egges, a loafe of white bread cut in ſippettes, Muſcadell or Baſtard thrée gallons, or as much in quantitie as ſufficeth to diſtill all theſe things at once in a Limbecke, and thereto put off Methridatum two or thrée ounces, or elswith as much perfect treakell, and deſtill it with a moderate fire, and keepe the firſt water by it ſelfe, and the ſecond water alone alſo, & when there cōmeth no more water with ſtrings, take away the limbecke, & put into the pot more wine vppon the ſame ſtuffe, and ſtill it againe, and you ſhal haue an other good water, and ſhall ſo remaine good. In the firſt ingredience of this water, you muſt kéepe a double glaſſe warely, for it is reſtoratiue of all principall members,

and defendeth againſt all peſtiliencial diſeaſes, as a gainſt the Paulſie, Dropſie, Spleene, yellowe or blacke Jaundice, for wormes in the bellie, and for all agues bee they hot or cold, and al maner of ſwellings, and peſtilenciall ſorowes in man, as melancholy, & fleugmatike, & it ſtrengtheneth and comforteth al the ſpirits and ſtrings of the braine, as the heart, the milte, the liuer, and the ſtomacke, by taking thereof two or three ſpoonefuls at one time by it ſelfe, or with Ale, wine or beare, and by putting a pretie quantitie of Suger therein, alſo it helpeth diſgeſtion, and doth breake winde, and ſtoppeth laſke, and bindeth not, and it mightely helpeth and eaſeth man or Woman of the paine af the heart burning, and for to quicken the memorie of man, & take of this water thrée ſpoonefuls a day, in the morning, and an other after hee goeth to dinner, and the third laſt at night.
            
            
               To make a good plaiſter for the ſtrangurie.
               TAke holly hocks, and violets, and mercury, the leaues of theſe herbes, or the ſeedes of them, alſo the rinde of the elderne tree, and alſo leyd Wort, of ech of theſe a handfull, and beate them ſmall, and ſeeth

them in water till halfe be conſumed, then doe thereto a little oyle Oliue, and all hot make thereof a plaiſter, and laye it to the ſore and raines, and alſo in Sommer thou muſt make him a drinke in this maner: take Sapifrage, and the leaues of elderne, fiue leafed graſſe, and ſéeth them in a pottell of ſtale ale, till the halfe be waſted, and then ſtraine it and kéepe it cleane, and let the ſicke drinke thereof firſt and laſt, and if you lacke theſe hearbes becauſe of winter, then take the rootes of fiue leaued graſſe and drie them, and make thereof pouder, and then take Oyſter ſhelles and burne them, and make pouder of them, and mingle them together, and ſo let the ſicke vſe thereof in his pottage and drinke, and it ſhall helpe him.
            
            
               To make a powder for the ſtone and ſtrangullian.
               TAke blacke bramble berries while they be redde, Juie berries, the inner pitch of the Aſhe Keyes, the ſtones of Eglantine Berries clouen, rubbed from the haire. Nutte Keyes, the rootes of Philopendula, of all theſe a like quantitie, Accorne kernels, the ſtones of Slowes, of each a like quantitie, drie all theſe on platters in an

ouen til they will be beaten to pouder, then take gronſell ſeede, Sapifrage ſeede, Aliſander ſeede, coliander ſeede, parſley ſeede, comin ſéede, fenell ſeede, anniſéede, of ech of theſe a like quantitie, as much as is before written, and dried in like ſort, then beate al theſe to fine pouder, and take Licoras of the beſt that you can get faire ſcraped, as much in quantitie as of al the other, & beate it fine, & mingle it with the ſame pouder, & ſo keepe it cloſe that no winde come at it, vſing it firſt & laſt with poſſet drinke made with white wine, or Ale, & when you eate your potage or other broth, put ſome in it if you be ſore pained, & if you haue any ſtone, it wil come away by ſhiuers, and if it do ſo, when you thinke that your water beginneth to cleare againe, take this drinke that followeth, and it will cleane your bladder, and it wil leaue no corruption therein.
            
            
               The drinke.
               TAke Roſemary, wild Time, and ſeeth them in running water, with as much Suger as will make it ſwéete from a quart to a pint, vſe the quantitie of your hearbes according to your diſcretion, ſo that it may ſauer well of the hearbes, and ſo vſe it 9. mornings 6. or 7. ſpoonefulles at a time.
            
            
               
               For the ſhingles a remedie.
               TAke Doues dirt that is moiſtie, and of Barly meale heaped halfe a pound, and ſtampe thē well together & do thereto halfe a pint of vineger, and meddle them together, and ſo lay it to the ſore colde; laye wall leaues thereupon, and ſo let it lie thrée dayes vnremoued, and on the thirde day if neede require, lay thereto a newe plaiſter of the ſame, and at the moſt he ſhalbe whole within thrée plaiſters.
            
            
               For all maner of ſinnewes that are ſhortened.
               TAke the head of a blacke ſhéepe, Cammemill, Lorrell leaues, Sage of eache, a handful, and bray theſe hearbs in amorter, then boyle them altogether in water till they he well ſodden, and let them ſtand till that they be colde, then drawe it through a ſtrainer and ſo vſe it.
            
            
               A ſufferaigne ointment for ſhrunken finnowes and aches.
               TAke eight Swallowes readie to flie out of the neſt, driue away the breeders whē you take them out, and let them not touch the earth, ſtampe them vntill the Fethers can not be perceiued, put to it lauender cotten, of the ſtrings of ſtrawberies, the tops

of mother time, the toppes of roſemarie of eache a handfull, take all their weight of May butter, and aquar more, ſtampe all the Fethers that nothing can be perceiued, in a ſtone morter; the make it vp in bales, and put it into an earthen pot for eight daies cloſe ſtopped that no ayre take them, take it out, and on as ſoft fire as may be ſeeth it, ſo that it do but ſimper, then ſtrain it, and ſo reſerue it to your vſe.
            
            
               For ſinowes that be broken in two.
               TAke wormes while they be knitte, and looke that they depart not, and ſtampe them, and lay it to the ſore, and it will knit the ſinowes that be broken in two.
            
            
               For no knit ſinowes that be broken.
               TAke archangel, and cut it ſmall in gobbets, and lay it to the ſore, and take milfoile, and ſtampe it, and lay it aboue it hard bound, and let it lie ſo three dayes, and at the three daies end take it away, and waſh it with wine, and then make a new plaiſter of the ſame, and at three dayes end put thereto an other, and doe nothing els thereto.
               Alſo take peniryall, and bray it, and put ſalt enough to them, and temper it with hony, and make a plaiſter therof, and lay it

vpon the ſinowes that be ſtiffe, and it will make them to ſtretch.
            
            
               An oyle to ſtretch ſinowes that be ſhrunke.
               TAke a quart of Neates foote Oyle, a pinte of Neates Gall, halfe a pinte of Roſe water, as much Aqua Vita, then put all theſe together into a braſſe panne, then take a handfull of Lauender cotten and as much of Bay leaues, a good quantitie of Roſemary, a good quantie of Lauender ſpike, of Strawbery leaues the ſtringes and all, then take thread and bind them all in ſeuerall braunches, and put them into the panne or pot, and ſet them ouer the fire vpon cleare coales with the oyles altogether, and ſo let them boyle a good while, and when it is boyled enough, it will boyle but ſoftly, then take it of the fire, and let it ſtand till it be almoſte colde, then ſtraine it out into a wide mouthed Glaſſe, Bottle or pewter pot, and ſtop it cloſe, it will not continue in no wodden thing, and where the ſinowes be ſhrunke, take of this being warmed, and annoint the place therewith, and chafe it well againſt the fire, and vſe this morning and euening, and keepe the place warme, and you ſhal find great eaſe.
            
            
               
               For to ſtaunch bloud.
               TAke Bole Armoniake, and Turpentine, and make a plaiſter, and lay it too. Alſo take the moſſe of the Hazell trée, and caſt it into the wound and it will ſtaunch foorthwith, and the longer that it is gathered the better it is. Alſo take a good péece of Martinmas Biefe out of the roufe, and heate it on Coales, and as hot as ye may ſuffer it lay it thereto. Alſo take a péece of leane Salt Biefe, and let the Biefe be of that greatneſſe that it may fill the wound, and lay it in the fire in the hot Aſhes, till it be hot through, and all hot thruſt at in the wound, and bind it faſt, and it ſhall ſtaunch anon the bleeding, when a maiſter vaine is 
                     •
                  ut, and if the wound be large.
            
            
               For ſwelling that commeth ſuddenly in mans limmes.
               TAke hartes tongue, cherfoyle, and cut them ſmall, and then take dregges of Ale, and Wheate branne, and ſheepes tallowe molte, and doe all in a potte, and ſeeth them, till that they be thick, and then make a plaiſter, and lay it to the ſwelling.
               Alſo take faire water and ſalt, and ſtirre them wel together, and therein wet a cloth, and lay it to the ſwelling.
            
            
               
               For to make one ſlender.
               TAke Fennell, and ſeeth it in water, a very good quantitie, and wring out the iuyce therof when it is ſod, and drinke it firſt and laſte, and it ſhall ſwage either him or her.
            
            
               A good ointment for ſcabs, and for itching of the bodie.
               TAke foure ounces of oyle de bay, and an ounce of frankenſence, & two ounces of white waxe, and three ounces of ſwines greaſe, and an ounce of Quickeſiluer that muſt bee ſlacked with faſting Spittle, an ounce of great Salt, as much of the one as of the other, and of all theſe make an oyntment, and if the ſcabs or itch be vpon all the whole body as well aboue the girdle as beneath, then when thou goeſt to bedde waſh both thy hands and thy feete with warme water, and battle them well therein by the fire, and after drie them with a cloth of linnen, then take vp with thy fingers of that oyntment, and doe it in the palmes of thy hands, and in the ſoles of thy feete, and rub it wel together that it may drinke in wel, & if it do ſoke in wel, thou muſt put gloues on thy hands and ſockes on thy feete, and thus doe euerie night when thou doeſt go to bed,

and in the ſcabbe or itch be aboue the girdle and not beneth, then anoint but the hands, and if the ſcabbe be beneath the girdle, them looke that you annoint the ſoles of your feete, and the ſcabbe or itch be in all thy body as wel aboue the girdle as beneath, then thou muſt annoint both thy hands and thy feete as thou ſitteſt by the fire, & thou ſhalt be whole: this hath bene proued.
            
            
               For all maner of ſcabbes.
               TAke Enela Campana, red docke rootes, nightſhad, woodbind leaues, and then caſt in a péece of Allam, and put in Vitriol Romana rubrified, when it is cold, & waſh the ſcab there with.
               Alſo take white pintment▪ Brimſtone, Quicſiluer, verdigreaſe, and mingle them together, & therewith annoint the ſore ſcab.
            
            
               For a man that hath drunken poiſon.
               TAke betony, and ſtampe it, & mingle it with water▪ and the poiſon that the partie hath drunke, will preſently come foorth againe.
            
            
               To reſtore ſpeech that is loſt ſuddenly.
               TAke penerial, & temper it with ayſel, & giue it to the ſicke to drinke it, lay alſo a plaiſter of this to his noſthrils ſo gréeued.
            
            FINIS.
         
      
      
         
            
            The table of the Booke foloWing, gathered according to euerie folio throughout the whole Booke.
            
               TO boyle Larkes fol. 4.
               To boyle Conies. fol. 4
               To boyle a Conie. fol. 4
               To boyle Chickins. fol. 4
               To boile Mutton and Chickins. fol. 4
               To boyle Chickins. fol. 4
               An other way to boile Chickins. fol. 4
               To boile Plouers. fol. 4
               To boile Teales. fol. 4
               To boile ſteakes between two diſhes. fol. 4
               To boile a neats tongue. fol. 4
               To boile a Capon. fol. 4
               The boiling of a Capon. fol. 4
               To boile a Capon with Orenges & Lemmons. fol. 5
               To boile a Capō in white broth with Almondes. fol. 5
               To boile a capon in white broth. fol. 5
               To make boiled meates for dinner. fol. 6
               To boile meates for ſupper. fol. 6
               To boile a legge of mutton with a Pudding. fol. 6
               To boile pigges feete & petitoes. fol. 7
               To make a mortis. fol. 7
               To boyle a lambes head and purtenance. fol. 7
               To boile quailes. fol. 7
               To make ſtewed ſteakes. fol. 7
               To ſtewe Calues feete. fol. 8
               To ſtewe a Mallard. fol. 8
               To make Aloes. fol. 8
               To make fritters of ſpinnedge. fol. 8
               A fritter to be made in a moulde. fol. 9
               To boile Pigeons in

blacke broth. fol. 9
               To ſmeare a Conie. fol. 9
               To boile a Mallard with Cabbege. fol. 9
               To boile a Ducke with Turneps. fol. 9
               To make white Eſtinges. fol. 10
               To make blacke puddings. fol. 10
               To make ſtrong broth for ſicke men. fol. 10
               To boyle a breame. fol. 10
               To boile Muskles. fol. 10
               To boile ſtocke fiſh. fol. 10
               To make bake meates. fol. 11
               An other bake meate. fol. 11
               An other ibidem. fol. 11
               To make Marow pie. fol. 11
               To boyle pie meate. fol. 14
               To make fine Cakes. fol. 12
               To make fine cracknels. fol. 12
               To bake Conies fol. 12
               To bake a breſt of Veale. fol. 12
               To make a pudding in a breſt of veale. fol. 13
               To bake a Gammon of Baken. fol. 13
               To make fine Bisket Bread. fol. 13
               To bake a Turkie and take out his bones. fol. 13
               To bake a Kidde. fol. 14
               To bake a Mallard. fol. 14
               To make a pie of Humbles. fol. 14
               To bake Red deare. fol. 14
               An other bakemeate for Chickins. fol. 15
               To bake Calues feete. fol. 15
               To ſauce a pigge. fol. 15
               The order to boile a Brawne. fol. 15
               To make Almond Butter. fol. 15
               To roſt an Hare. fol. 16
               To make fritter ſtuffe. fol. 16
               For to bake a Hare. fol. 16
               To preſerue Orenges. fol. 16
               To make all manner of Fruite Tartes. fol. 17
               To make a tarte of preſerued ſtuffe. fol. 17
               To make tartes of prunes fol. 17
               To make a tarte of Riſe. fol. 17
               To make a Cuſtard. fol. 17
               To make a tarte of Wardens. fol. 17
               To make a tart with butter and egges. fol. 17
               To make a tarte of Spinnedge. fol. 17
               To make a tarte of ſtrawberies. fol. 17
               
                  To make a tart of Hippes fol. 17
               To bake the humbles of a Deere. fol. 17
               To make a veale pie. fol. 17
               For to make mutton pies. 
               To bake Calues feete. fol. 19
               To bake Chickins in a Cawdle. fol. 19
               To bake Pigeons. fol. 19
               To bake a Conie. fol. 19
               To bake a Gammon of Baken to keep cold. fol. 19
               To make fine bread. fol. 19
               To bake a neates tongue fol. 18
               To make Nutmegs. fol. 18
               To make fillets of Beefe or clods, in ſteede of red Deare. fol. 18
               To make a tart that is a courage to man or woman. fol. 18
               To ſtewe a Cocke. fol. 21
               To preſerue all kinde of fruites, that they ſhall not breake in the preſeruing of them. fol. 21
               To make a ſirruppe for bakemeates. fol. 21
               To roſt a carpe or tench with a pudding in his bellie. fol. 19
               To make freſh cheeſe & Creame. fol. 19
               THE NAMES OF al thinges neceſſarie for a banket.
               To make manus Chriſti. fol. 23
               To make a Caudle to comfort the ſtomacke, good for an old man. fol. 23
               To make a trifle. fol. 23
               To make marmelet of Quinces. fol. 24
               To make butter paſte. fol. 24
               To make fritter ſtuffe. fol. 24
               To make a made diſh of Artechokes. fol. 24
               To frie Baken. fol. 25
               To frie Chickins. fol. 25
               To make a boyled meate after the French waies. fol. 25
               To make a Sallet of all kinde of herbes. fol. 25
               A ſauce for a Conie. fol. 26
               To make a ſallet of Lemmons. fol. 26
               To make a Sauſedge. fol. 26
               To make a Pie. fol. 26
               To make white broth with Almondes. fol. 27
               To make pottage to loſe the body. 
               To make another verie  good potage to be vſed in the morning. fol. 27
               To boile diuerſe kinds of Fiſhes. fol. 28
               To make broth for one that is weake. fol. 28
               To boile a Capon with a Syrrup. fol. 28
               To dreſſe a hare. fol. 28
               To bake a Hare. fol. 29
               To roſt deares toungs. fol. 29
               To make blackemanger. fol. 29
               To make peſcods in lent. fol. 29
               To bake Quinces, peares, and Wardens. fol. 30
               To make a tarte of Spinnedge. fol. 30
               To make blame mangie. 
               To make a tart of a neare of veale. fol. 30
               To make a tart of ſtrawberies. fol. 31
               To make a cloſe tarte of Cheries. fol. 31
               To make a tart of greene peaſe. fol. 31
               To make a tart of Damſons. fol. 31
               To make a florentine. fol. 31
               To make Almond butter after the beſt and neweſt faſhion. fol. 32
               To make oiſter chuets. fol. 32
               To make a tart of Medlers. fol. 33
               To make a quinces moiſe or Wardens moiſe. fol. 33
               To make an other prety diſh, with dates, & the iuyce of two or three orenges. fol. 33
               To make hypocras. fol. 33
               To make Marmelet of Quinces. fol. 33
               To make a ſirup of quinces to comfort the ſtomacke. fol. 34
               To make Marmelet of of Quinces. fol. 34
               To make Codamacke of Quinces. fol. 34
               To make caſt creame. fol. 35
               To make good resbones. fol. 35
               To make a vaunt. fol. 35
               To preſerue Quinces whole. fol. 36
               To preſerue peare plums. fol. 37
               To preſerue Orenges. fol. 37
               To preſerue Cheries. fol. 38
               To preſerue gooſeberies. fol. 38
               To make apple moiſe. fol. 38
               A pouder peereleſſe for wounds. fol. 39
               A medicine for the Megrime, Impoſtume of

the rewme, or other diſeaſes in the head. fol. 39
               A Copie of Doctor Stephans waters. fol. 39
               A medicine for al manner of ſores. fol. 40
               An other for all ſores. fol. 40
               To defend Humors. fol. 43
               To make roſemarie water. fol. 41
               To make bisket bread. fol. 41
               Certain approued points of husbandry, verie neceſſarie for all husbanmen to know. fol. 41
               Firſt for Oxen. fol. 41
               Of Horſes. fol. 43
               Of Sheepe. fol. 43
               Of Hogges. fol. 44
               An excellent drinke for the Tiſsick wel approued. fol. 46
               To make water imperiall for al wounds & cankers. fol. 46
               To make water imperiall an other way. fol. 46
               To make ſinamom water. fol. 47
               To make Sinamon water another way. fol. 47
               To make Aqua compoſita for a ſurfet. fol. 47
               To make the water of life. fol. 47
               To make a good plaiſter for the ſtrangune. fol. 48
               To make a pouder for the ſtone & ſtrangullian. fol. 49
               The drinke. fol. 49
               For the ſhingles a remedy fol. 50
               For all maner of ſinowes that are ſhortened. fol. 50
               A ſufferaigne ointment for ſhrunken ſinowes and aches. fol. 50
               For ſinowes that be broken in two. fol. 50
               For to knit ſinowes that be broken. fol. 50
               An oile to ſtretch ſinowes that be ſhrunke. fol. 51
               For to ſtaunch bloud. fol. 51
               For ſwelling that cōmeth ſuddenly in mans lims. fol. 51
               For to make one ſlender fol. 52
               A good ointment for ſcabbes, and for itching of the body. fol. 52
               For all maner of ſcabs. fol. 52
               For a man that hath drunken poiſon. fol. 52
               To reſtore ſpeech that is loſt ſuddenly. fol. 52
            
            FINIS.
         
      
   