
      
         
            
            
            
               Daphnis and Chloe EXCELLENTLY describing the vveight of affection, the simplicitie of loue, the purport of honest meaning, the resolution of men, and disposition of Fate, finished in a Pastorall, and interlaced with the praises of a most peerlesse Princesse, wonderfull in Maiestie,
                and rare in perfection, celebrated within the same Pastorall, and therefore termed by the name of The Shepheards Holidaie. By ANGELL DAY
                  •…
               .
            
               Altior fortuna virtus.
            
            AT LONDON Printed by Robert Walde-graue, & are to be sold at his shop in Paules church-yard at the signe of the Crane. 1587▪
            
         
         
            
            
            TO THE RIGHTLIE ennobled in all virtues, Sir VVilliam HATTON knight, aduancement in virtue, worship in life, and fame in perpetuitie.
            
            
               TO enforce Sir vnto your worthynes herein, by many circustaunces how much led on with the BOVNTIE, VALOR, COVRTESIE, SKIL, and many other complements of VIRTVE, resiant in your wel noted and known disposition, I haue dared to aduenture vnto your fauourable acceptaunce, this simple and plaine dedication (simple I meane in respect of the handling) might seem in the deliuerie, to equall an other volume.
            Omitting therefore all those particularities to them that know you, and to mine owne priuate meditation, that especially do honour you, I will onely say for this, that the greatest forwardnes craueth a shrowd, and the meanest matter cannot be without defence.
            TO VIRGIL there was an AVGVSTVS, to HORACE a MECAENAS, to CICERO a CAESAR, to APPELLES an ALEXANDER. If to these? how much more then to me needeth there, to couer the deformitie of my stile, a most exquisite PATRON.
            In a matter simple, it is yet a grace, but to insinuate

the name of such as do merite well, the verie respect of whome, in the generallitie of the most, beareth alwaies we see, a more than common reputation,
            Herein if I presume on your VIRTVES, I vrge the necessity, if to craue your patronage, then custome may free me.
            Nowe, if the course of the weeke-daies pastimes of these SHEPEHEARDS seeme happelie to mislike you, turn then I pray to their HOLIDAIE, where (how rudelie so euer handled) yet the Maiesty of her, who is without comparison, being there in most especially honoured, shunneth not the fauour of anie sweete conceipte to haue the same recommended.
            Fruitles were it on a short request, to erect large matter. For which my sute shalbe, that with the selfe BOVNTIE, wherewith your present yeares are so largely beautified, your VIRTVE will vouchsafe fauourablie to repute both of me and my trauel, which hauing obteined the shrowd thereof as AIAX shield, shall become vnto me henceforth of a sufficient gard from all kinde of biting serpents whatsoeuer.
            
               Your worships in all to be commaunded.
Angell Daie.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
               THE FIRST BOOKE of the loues Pastorall, of Daphnis and Chloe.
               
                  
                     MITELENE among all the notable cities of Greece, is for the delicacie and strength of the same, not the least in bewtie and greatnes of all others to be commended. The scituation of which (being in the Isle of Metelene) hath enuironed rounde about it, a continuall springe of freshe, sweete and deyntie water, the issue whereof floweth from the Seas, and ouer the same are builded manie bewtifull and fine bridges, wrought and curiously polished of fayre white stone. The shewe and brauerie of all which, giueth so large and goodly demonstration vnto the eyes, as he that behelde the same at a sodaine, woulde rather iudge it, an Island of it selfe, then the meere scituation of one sole Citie.
               Not farre from thence (as is accustomed vnto the most riche and popular cities of Greece) one of the worthiest and noble personages of the same, had in the countrie by, about two or three miles from the towne, a goodly Mannour house, pleasant for the seate, and holsome for the dwelling, wherevnto were adioyninge diuers fayre and welthie possessions, enlarged for commoditie, and exceeding for pleasure. as namely, large hie and goodly mountaines,

where were nourished and bred sundrie sortes of wilde beastes, groundes all couered with vines, plaines, stored with all manner of fruits and graines, and with most fertile pastures, whereon to feede and nourishe their cattell, the chiefest whereof laye for the most part, alongest the waters side, which for that cause, rendred the place, something the more delectable Within these groundes, Lamon a poore goatheard, whilest warely he often continued to keepe his charge, founde by chaunce a young childe, the life of which was onely preserued by the sucke it receiued from one of his shee-goates, and nowe see the maner howe. There was about the place where he fedde his flocke, a certaine thicket all ouergrowne with brembles and thornes, and compassed about with furzes, vnder the couert whereof grewe a soft fine and delicate kind of grasse, the turfe thick, as in such shadie places is often accustomed, wheron laid this tender infant. Thither ordinarily ranne one of his shee-goates, the custome whereof made the heardsman oftentimes to misse her, and knewe not where she was become, for that leauing hir young kiddes vncherished, shee onely against nature gaue heede to the feeding and nourishment of this preetie babe.
               
                  Lamon piteing the selie young ones, that thus were abandoned by their Dam, began to marke and watche the goate whether she went, and one time amongst the rest in the heate of the daye, sued her trace so neere, that he sawe howe she past vnder the thicket and that with so tender & warie touch, as y• with her hoofs going in, she might no wayes hurte the babe: and there being entred in most louing sort, enclined her teates vnto the infant, who hungerly sucked the same, no otherwise, then if it had beene the brestes of a naturall mother. At the sight of this, the heardsman wonderfully abashed, drew yet at the last more neere, & serching further, founde it was a male childe, well growen for his age, of beautie marueilous, and farre more richly attired, than beseemed any wayes the infelicitie of his fortune, abandoned so miserablie as he was, and laid forth, to euerie common aduenture. The vesture wherin he was wrapped was a rich mantle of purple veluet, the compasse fastned about his necke with a brooch of gold, and by his side was layde a short fine sworde of most excellent workemanship

all curiously guilt, on the hiltes and the handle thereof, of the most precious yuorie.
               
                  Lamon (greedie at the first of the riche iewels he sawe) resolued onely to beare them awaye, and to leaue the childe as hee founde it, to some other fortune, but hauing considered a while of that purpose, a bashfull shame quickely surprised his thoughtes, that beeing a man, 
                     •…
                  ee should bee lesse pitifull and humaine than the poore beast it selfe, that he thereto had with so great regarde attended and nourished it. In so much, that when night came on, hee tooke both childe and other attire about it, and caried them home vnto his wife, whose name was Myrtale, and therewithall the shee-goate that thither to hadde cherished and brought it vp.
               
                  Myrtale, astonnished at the vewe, demaunded if it were possible that goates in their selfe kinde, could produce young ones of so marueilous shape and proportion, but Lamon suppressing in her the simplicitie of that conceit, reuealed both the manner howe he found the babe, and in what sort, and with howe great delicacie, hee sawe the beast enclining vnto it, and therewithall forgate not to prescribe vnto her and him a greater cause of humanitie, considering that a bestiall nature, deuoyde of reasonable liuing, had by the gentle condition thereof, taught them so readie a waye vnto the same. Myrtale, (whose humors sauoured in nothing of a crab tree stock) did not at all discommend her husbandes regarde herein, but ioyning in one moode of mannerly enterteinement togethers, as housewifely as shee could, (hauing neuer had any of her owne) shee lulled the babie, and locking vp the ornamentes and iewels in a fast barred cheste, they both thencefoorth endeuoured to foster it vp, in no other sort, nor by any other kinde of deliuerance then as their owne. And to the intent it might as well in name as otherwyse, resemble the place of education, where it was bred, they called it by the name of Daphnis.
               
               Two yeares were not fullye past and expired, ere one Dryas a sheepeheard keeping his sheepe in great quantitye vppon the plaines and downes thereabouts, happened after this also vppon the like, or verie selfe same aduenture. There was indifferent

almost between either of those places, a certaine great caue, standing in a rocke, sacred sometimes to the Nimphes, and therefore called by the name of the Nimphes Caue, somethinge crooked within, but altogether round without. In the inward part wherof were diuers statues of Goddesses & other Nimphes, wrought finely out of stone, the feete vnshod, the armes all naked, & th'atire buckled on the shoulders, their haires cast onely vpon their necks, without tressing at all, girded they were vpon their loynes, their lookes sweetly smiling, and their countenaunces such, as seemed with interchaungeable fauour in delicate sorte to greete eache other.
               Right vnder the hollowe rising of this caue, sprang in the middest of the bottom a sweet fountaine, which raising it selfe, with a softe bubling, gathered into a pleasaunt springe, wherewith the fresh and fruitfull greues round about the same, were continually watered. Ouer the mouth of the caue, where the ouerflowinge waues with Cristall humor, had wrought from the earth, sondrie kindes of flowers and hearbs of delicate vewe, hong diuers flutes, Pipes, and Flagiolots, made of reedes, which the auncient shepheards had often tofore-time sacred vnto the Nimphes for their greatest offrings.
               To this caue, a sheepe from out of Dryas flocke, that newly had yeaned her lamb, oftentimes in the day frequented, and that with such continuaunce, as the shephearde thinking it manie times to bee lost, endeuoured at the last, to make some deuice whereby to constraine it to feede in companie, without wandring any more as it was accustomed. And going to the Caue to seeke the sheep, with an Osier twig wreathed in his hande, wherewith to fasten the necke and foote thereof togethers, a sight more straunge then looked for, presented it selfe vnto him. For the Ewe (framed as it seemed by nature, to the pitying of distressed creatures) hauing there found a sweete babe, did in most soft and gentle maner, visite it many times with her teats, and that with so meek and tender handling as if it had bin the proper Nurce. The childe vnused to any difference, esteemed it as a naturall diet, and without crying or other distemperature at all, first on the one side, and after on the other, as the Ewe turned her selfe, with the prettie mouth

(which was sweete and pleasaunt to behold) sucked the same. The Sheepe seeming therevnto to haue borne a most straunge and peculiar affection, which one while with the licking of her tongue on the visage, and another while with softe and deyntie coying it with her head, it exceedingly did manifest.
               
                  Dryas, though he were clubbishe in condition, yet not herein estraunged from that pietie, which the gentle beast had thus alreadie portraied vnto him thought himselfe also in nature bounde to tender the infant, and perceiuing it was a girle; and there withall what ornaments (testimonies that the place whence it came was of no meane reputation) were also annexed vnto it, hauing on the head a coyfe curiously wrought and imbroidred with golde, iewels and other precious things, not to be despized: he adiudged the chaunce thereof not to haue happened vnto him, without some diuine preparation: Wherefore taking it vp in his armes, he gladly receiued the charge thereof, and making his prayers to the Nimphes, that with good successe he might afterward bring her vp, whom as an humble Suppliant, left (as it seemed) to their patronage) he had found laid at their feet, he departed.
               Nowe when night came, that he was to driue his sheepe home to their folde, hauing secretly in the meane time conueied all the iewels and ornaments into his bouget, assoone as he was returned to his house, he began to recompt vnto his wife al that he had seene, and shewed her also what hee had founde: Nape was the Sheperdesse called, to whose especial care her husband with many words recommended the regard of the distressed infant, commanding her thence forward to repute it as her own natural daughter, & in such sort only to nourish and prouide for it. The woman was not stony harted, but according to her shepheards guise began to imbrace and entertain the girle, deeming already that she became a mother vnto it, by meere affection, her conceit grew tender ouer it, and with such feruent loue, and continuall watching did she endeuour to foster it, as that she feared lest the sheepe that whilome sucked the swatheled unpe, should in the beastly regard it shewed be preferred before her. And for that her care stretched that the girle in farther springing yeres might the sooner be taken and reputed for hers, she gaue it thence-fro a name Pastorall, and called

her Chloe.
               These two children in processe of time grew to be great, and shewed well by theyr beautie and other complements, that their parentage was not meane, nor their descent deriued from out of old thatched cotages. And about the time that the elder of them, was come to the age of fifteene yeares, and the yonger about two yeares lesse: Lamon and Dryas at one very instant, and in the selfe-same night interchangeably (as it fell out) dreamed in this sort togithers. It seemed vnto them both, that the Nymphs, whose statues and images were in the caue (where you heard before the fountaine was, and where Dryas (as is reported) had found his daughter) took Daphnis & Chloe, and them both iointly deliuered to the guidance and protection of a verye yoong boy, gentle in all kinde of behauiours, but of beautie most wonderful, frustrate was his body of garments, his shape curious, his skinne pure as alablaster, his shoulders feathred as wings, his left hand supported with a slender bowe, a small quiuer at his backe, and a fine arrowe in his right hand. Who touching them both with one and the fame dart, gaue charge vnto Daphnis thence-forward to feed his goats on the pastures, and to the other immediatlie to keepe flockes of sheepe.
               The heardsmen both at once deepely conceiuing of this vision, were sodenly quailed of al their former expectation, insomuch as the fruits of their carefull nurseries, seemed thus contrarie to that they hoped, and what their seuerall badges, might before that, respectiuely haue presaged, to be destined at one instant to the keeping of cattell togethers. For that the markes of theyr birth, had offered vnto their former notice, so manifest intendments of farre greater fortune, in full pursute whereof, their carefull endeuors had thitherto sought to conduct them, and that in farre more delicate and daintie maner, than beseemed the children of heardsmen, as wel in an honored kinde of vsage to theyr persons, as in liberall training them vppe in letters, and other conuenient skill and demeanours, whereof their yeares at that instant were nothyng ignorant, and that so farre foorth as the largesse of their country dwelling, coulde anye waies affoorde vnto them. Neuerthelesse, forsomuch as the iniunction appeared

to be deriued altogither from the pleasure of the gods, they determined in their obedience, rather to giue place vnto theyr commaundes, whose prouidence had saued them both from their former perilles, than to yeelde vnto their owne proper fancies, whose greatest respect of care they were sure coulde least of all auaile them.
               Not long after, these two neighbor-dwellers found meanes to conferre at full, touching both their visions, and by one wine consent, they first agreed to go vnto the caue of the nymphs, and there to offer sacrifices, for the better prosperitie and happy proceedings of their seuerall charges, which offering of theirs, they by one vowe togethers, deuoted to the faire yoong boy, vnto whose protection, by the same Nymphs, theyr nurceries had bene before committed, whome they called by the name of the winged god, for otherwise by anye more speciall title or particular effect they had not discerned hym. Which doone, they iointly inferring, whatsoeuer after care of the two youthfull and sweetest of all natures creatures, vppon him, both Lamon and Dryas recorded as a summe of all their expectation, these foure verses to remaine on the wall of the nymphes, as a perpetuall memoriall:
               
                  To thee thou winged God, what ere thou bee
                  (A god thou art) we sheepheards fruits do bring
                  Let Daphnis and his heards be deare to thee,
                  And Chloes flocks eft cast this sacred spring.
               
               Hauing herewith greatly satisfied their longing desires, and manifolde well-wishinges vnto their tender fosterlings, Lamon returned to hys Myrtale, and Dryas to Nape, and by assent of both their wiues, dispatched the next day with all kind of necessaries, the two darlings of the earth to their seuerall heards, sweet Daphnis to his goates, and faire Chloe to hir sheep, instructing them seuerally, in al things belonging to a heardsmans office. As how to driue their beasts to pasturing before the heat of the daie, and in the coole of the euening againe ho
                     •…
                  e to guide them: what times, & where to water them, whē to bring them home at night,

and how in the mornings likewise to driue them to the field. In what sort, and vpon what occasion to vse the Whistle-Pipe, and how at another time to call with their voice alone.
               These Images of Beautie, mildly yeelding them selues to what herein to them inioyned, receaued as willinglie their charges, and with as deepe contenting pleasure, as though they therwith had receiued some great and notable signorie, Daphnis tendring his goates, and Chloe her sheepe, and that with so entier and more then common affection accustomablie vsed among sheapeheards, as well shewed, that hee for his part had some reason to induce him, and shee for her part could not omit it without seeming vnthankefull.
               The season was then of the yeare, about the beginning of the spring, when the very delicacie of Floras selfe was growen to her most naturall prime, and she as Lady and queene of that iollie being, had by a meere earthly shew of most exquisite perfourmance, coloured her walkes and passages, with blossomes of sweetest verdure and die most perfect, for the more ample beautifiyng and enrichment of all her seemly creatures. Hearbs then began to be in their force, trees in their pride, fields in their brauerie, floures in their sweetenes, and the earth in her delicacie. The birds had felicitie to resound their variable notes to the woods, & to acquaint the hedge rowes with their warbling tunes, the lambes and tender kids skipped vpon the hillockes, the yong rammes hurtled on the bankes with their wreathed hornes, & had pleasure to pearch to the highest mountaines, the bees sweetlye murmured from vnder their hiues, and all that frequented the passures had vniuersall gladnes.
               The marke of Loue himselfe, combined within the verie eieliddes of these two excellent creatures, seing all things thus daintelie decked and trimmed vp, by so curious workemanshippe, kindled in their mindes the selfesame sparke and common desire of al naturall enforcements, whereby each of them became studious, according to their humaine nature and disposition to immitate by lik
                     •…
                   equalitie, what they then perceaued to be gras
                     •…
                  ed in all other tenderlinges. In so much as with the birds they sang, seing the kids leape, they daunced, and after the bees they gathered floures,

with some part wherof they trimmed their bosomes, and of others made pret
                     •…
                  e small chapelets, the brauest of which they caried vnto the Nimphes, and therewith crowned their heades. Finally as it were vnited in one continued linke of 
                     〈◊〉
                  , these seemely portraictures of well pleasing youth, louingly alwaies accompanied each other, and euermore on the 
                     〈◊〉
                   fed their heardes together.
               Manie times befell it, that when her sheepe were anye waies straied, Daphnis with great desire would speede him selfe before her to gather them in againe: And when the most hardie of hys yong kids, and 
                     •…
                  ender goa
                     •…
                  s had mounted to the top of some hie or steepe rocke, neatlye would likewise Chloe applie her selfe to make them drawe downe the same with eas
                     •…
                  e pace againe. O
                     •…
                  e while guided she both herds her selfe, whilest he vsed his pastime, and another while ordered he the flockes, whilest shee sported her selfe vnder the shadie toppes. Their exercises were in Sheapehearde games, and the pleasures they intertained, such as beseemed the nonage of their outgrowing childhood, for some part of their time, they spent in gathering bulrushes, wherewith Chloe would make pretie bird▪cages and therein put the grashoppers. Daphnis on the other side often times cut downe the reedes, and vnclosing their 
                     •…
                  oints, glewed them orderlie together againe with soft waxe, and of these found diuers pastimes wherewith to occupie them selues togethers. Their vsages were holie, as vnexperienced of euill, and such whose delicate imaginations, were neuer surprizd with the least taint at all of harmefull thinking. Enterchangeably did they 
                     •…
                  ch to other impart their milke, their wine, and what other vitailes, the simplicitie of their shewe, and countrie being could besides afford. To conclude, it might seeme a thing more ordinary, to see their flocks asunder scattred, than at any time to see Chloe from him, or Daphnis from her to be diuided. Now as they thus passed their time in such kind of daliance Loue, the grand Prince and Soueraigne of their vnmacheable bewties, had by this time prepared a secrete ambush wherewith to frame some notable breache, into the vndefensiue imaginations of these two innocent louers, and thus stoode the case. There was not farre from the place where these two gentle Shepheards

kept their haunts a she-wolfe that newly hauing cast her whelps, accustomed there-vpon to run often-times into the flockes thereabouts, and there to raum the small cattell, to carrie to her yong ones: By occasion whereof the husband-men and sheapheards inhabiting the villages about, and seeing their cattell thus to bee destroyed, deuised in the night to make sundrie deepe pittes and trenches and them subtilye to couer againe with thin earth cast vppon small twigges whereby to make the place seeme plaine, so that whatsoeuer came running there-vppon, were it of the smalest waight that might bee reasonablie conceiued, the twigges would presentlie fall vnder them, and whelme them there-with into the pitte. A number of such like trappes both in the mountaines and plaines, were cast, wherewith to catch the subtill beast: but shee accustomed to those wiles, shunned the traine and them continuallie discouered, notwithstanding manie sheepe and goates were thereby destroyed, and Daphnis him selfe by that onely inconuenience was like to haue perished.
               It happened that two of the fairest buckes of all his heard beeing vehemētly chafed one against the other vpon a long fight together, rushed at the last so rudely vppon each other, that with the greatnes of the stroke, a horne of one of them was broken, whereof feeling great paine, the bucke thus disarmed of one of his hornes turne
                     •…
                   him-selfe to flight. The victor (proude of the conquest wonne) pursued notwithstanding, and haunted the pore beast both with strokes and pace so busilie, that he hardly gaue it so much leasure as to gather a litle breath. Daphnis grieued at the mishap, to see so faire a beast thus vnhappely spoiled, and vexed also in mind to behold the vnquenchable furie and ho
                     •…
                  e pursute of the other, which with the hurt done could not be satisfied, but with further cruelty, sought to oppresse him whom alredie he had maimed, tooke vp a cudgell in the one hand, and his whistle pipe in the other, and followed the pursuer, laying still at him as hee followed, in minde to beate him, The beast, shonning the strookes, and he more enraged to hit him, then circumspect howe or where he followed him, the buck for feare, and he for haste, tombled both together into one of those pics, the beast first, and Daphnis vpon him, the chaunce whereof (as it fell out) saued his life, for that the

beast first susteined the hard stroke, & himselfe with lesse damage, fell the more easely vpon him. But Daphnis seeing himselfe thus pitifully distressed in so deepe a passage, could do no other but crie out, and with plentie of teares lament his hard hap, attending if happely some one or other comming that way, might chaunce to here him, and so proture meane to relieue him.
               
                  Chloe, whose eie was seldome estraunged from some (more thē ordinarie) care of her regarded companion, albeit she was then a great way from Daphnis when he fell, perceiued yet his sodaine vanishment, & was not vnmistrustfull at all, of his present harme. And for that she was altogether ignorant what it might bee, and yet doubting the euill she knew not, because shee sawe him not againe, she hastned to the place where her sight had lost him, withal speede possible. There beholding the great depth of the pit, & seeing contrary to expectacion, that he was sound & aliue, she thence sped her pace quickly to a Coweherd that fed cattell hard by, requiring his present aide to helpe Daphnis forth of that grieuous place, who serching vp and down for a corde, and finding none of length sufficient: Chloe with great desire vntressed quickly her golden wirie lockes, and with the silkin twine that bound vp the same, eftsones dobled togethers in manie cōpasses, supplied what wanted to the former shortnesse, by fastning it to the cordes end that by the Cowherds meanes, they had there already prepared. And this done, ioyning both their aides together, they did so much Daphnis without great hurt, was goten forth again.
               The louely shepehard thus raized vp from so depe a dongeon, & by y• gentle trauaile of y• 
                  Nimph freed of the great feare wherinto he was falue, casting many times his bashfull & deep pecring countenances towards her, could not for the present deuise with what kinde of speaches (sufficient to so great a benefit) to salute her. And much the rather was he nowe so mazed, for that at that instant more then at any time before, it seemed there harbored in her delicate spirits, a more stronger effcacie, then euer hee had ere then perceiued, in her lookes, were caried an especiall eye marke of he knewe not, what kynde of most sweete and pleasing delight, some onething more then common, rested as he thought in the precious content, of her well applied countenaunce,

her speeche was not as the ordinarie sound of her accussomed deliuerance, her gestures (amiable of themselues) were fraught as now to his seeming, wyth a more estranged kinde of excellence. Neither knew he, whence the humor hereof proceeded, albeit he felt himselfe euen then deepely touched, but embracing wyth an vnacquainted desire, the conceit where-into hee was carried by the present obiect, he only framed some few speeches, in acknowledgement of this first conceiued benefit, which by the watchfull regard of Chloe he had already receiued. And turning hymselfe likewise to Dorcon- (for so was the cow-heard called) giuing a multitude of thankes vnto him for his trauell taken, his lookes and speech at one instant, were therewith both surprised togethers.
               This being the first publike place wherein loue, either by looke or gesture had made way into the secret though is of these two Iouers to be discerned. Daphnis as yet ignorant of his passion, and holding himselfe highly pleased, but nothing lesse than satisfied in beholding of Chloe, reposed his chiefest content to gaze vppon hir, and the most pretious part of his delight in kissing hir, wherin, redoubling e
                     •…
                  t soones the pleasures, thereby conceiued a sweeter humor than that which the hony Bee by nature congealeth, or the Candy sugar in taste deliuereth, issued (as hee thought) from her lippes, hir lookes were as piercing arrows, and Cupid himselfe seemed to lodge in the very eie-browes of hir countenaunce. Roste, nay far more orient was the hew, that hir hastie pase and yet panting breathing to relieue him had setled vpon her cheekes, the delay mingled, where-vpon was the very die of the white and purest marble. Hir lockes dispersed on hir shoulders, in colour like the burnisht yellow of the finest gold, made hir to appeare as one of the nymphs, whom Iupiter erst fauored, or Apollo with a
                     •…
                  den flames whilom eagerly pursued. Pleasing, and more than pleasing was shee to be seene at that instant, and such as wherein not Daphnis alone, but the pore cow-heard Dorcon also more than ordinarily reioiced.
               The simple cow-heard, vnacquainted before time, with such admirable features, and not accustomed to the contemplation of so diuine & far surpassing measures, esteemed one while of Chloe,
                  
that according to so rare and exceeding beautie, some what remained graffed in hir countenaunce that appeared more singular than was to be attributed to the common proportion of euerie other creature. Another while, considering the meanenesse of hir fortune, being but in common reckoning the daughter of Dryas hir selfe, but as a simple sheepeheardesse, m
                     •…
                  red only to the downes, he then deemed hir greatnes to be no more than as the reputation of euery other common dweller. And though his rurall condition had not till then made estimate of any thing, more than his countrie feeding, neyther in all his pleasures had ought exempted more peculiar than his cattel keeping: yet by the deep impression of hir sight the grand maister of al humane affections, had led him to an imagination of far more greater consequent, yea the blun
                     •…
                  nesse of his former conceit (such as seldome falleth out in men of base and seruile reckoning) began here-with to be molifted, his spirits grosly weighed before wyth an earthly nutriment waxed now more tender. His onely houshold care furnished till then with a couetous regard of profit and husband-like desire, by hardned labours, to see his cattell prosper, was turned into a newe kinde of obseruaunce: his morning walkes where with he wonted erst to visit his pastures, were conuerted into a heede full attendance of blisfull Chloe, and her most daintie passages. Now gan he to aduert the holidays, and to long for the plesant seasons, wherein heardsmen without checke or controlment doe celebrate their interchangeable pastimes▪ him seemed the bois
                     •…
                  rous leather, and laborsome sweate, dried wyth the dusty season vpon his wrinckled eie-browes, disgraced at one instant both his person and countenaunce, he meerely wared weary of his habite, and grew into great mislike, that he were not presently here, otherwise he might be decked or changed. Much was it that he thoght in himselfe, where with he might afterward be better contented, and hir whom he loued) by a like coniecture) to be both the soner pleased and satisfied.
               Thus and in such manner wrought the vnknowing conceipts of these two heardse-men eache vnto the other. Daphnis by reason of too much youth and small experience, neither capable of fraud, nor iniured to anie sleight or subtiltie, and leaste of all

surmizing what hee coulde or woulde go about to doe, to winne vnto himselfe the effect of that where-vnto, though in trueth hee were so farre forth inclined, he was yet able of the same to frame no perfect end or distinguishment, not so much as mistrusted at al these sodaine alterations bred in the minde of hys newe acquaintance Dorcon, for that neither knewe hee his owne desire to be defined by any title or name of loue, or that any other might be a copart
                     •…
                  er, or become an impatient rivall of his so vehement a passion. But wading with all kinde of simplicitie into the furie of his affection, inclined to whatsoeuer in accompanieng his derely regarded Chloe, was by the subtilty of the cow heard afterward of him required.
               Here-vpon Dorcon hauing taken leaue for the present, conceiued thence-forward in his minde, that the place of his intertainment, solicited vnto his remembrance, a respecte more curious in all his actions, than to-fore time accustomed, and forgat not in his holiday shirt, and cleane washed doublet vnbuttoned to the girdle, and there fastened to the waste of his hose wyth a newe greene silken point, importing thereby, that all his you 
                     〈◊〉
                   was not yet fully spent, oftentimes to take occasion to visit these louers. And for that their purest conceits, harmelesse of euill, and neuer so muche as tainted with any similitude of guile, gaue both scope and courage, whereby wythout suspicion, this newe tricked cow-heard might be receiued into their companies. Hee the better nowe to insinuate him selfe into their fauours, one while indeuored to present them with his new made fresh cheeses, couered wyth a faire white napkin, and strowed ouer wyth the most sweete and delicate floures, therewithall woulde hee bring of his best and morning skimmed creame, spice-cakes, and other preatie conceits. To Daphnis besides gaue hee a yoong fatte calfe from the damme, and manye other faire tokens to Chloe, suche as eyther his countrie trauell hadde purchased, or wherewith hir sweete conceited spirits were any ways delighted.
               This sudden alteration of Dorcon, both in habite and other demeanors therevnto according, not so much by any abilitie of coniecture, that thereby could solie arise in the opinion of Daphnis,
                  
as by the generall notice and common speech of all the other heardsmen, made euery where knowne, that hee was become a louer, and who but fa
                     •…
                  re Chloe was shee, to whome the man was so fa
                     •…
                  re deuoted in affection, insomuch as Daphnis also among the rest grewe nowe to be partaker thereof, the manner of which, neither place, time, or company, had taught him before to discerne. Yet knewe hee not for this, what was it to be mated wyth a companion of so vnus
                     •…
                  d 
                     •…
                  ollitie, neyther did hee for ought hee heard or sawe, emulate at all the cow-heardes proffered courtesie. This onelye marked hee, which all men else had specially noted, that sithence Dorcon first had framed his spirits to loue, hee became indeede farre more gay, pleasant, and trimmer attired, his tresses as woonted, lay not scattred or hard knurled vppon his head, but faire kembed and rounded fine vnder his eares, neatly shauen was he, as the brauest of the other sheepheards, and not on the holiday alone, but euery morning fasting pinned he (laced in a silke riband) on his but toned cappe, a faire and florishing nosegay, well gartered and str
                     •…
                  ked vp were his ho
                  
                     •…
                  en with a crosse bound caddis ribon, his buckled shooes, seemed vnweldie and curiositie of the rest, made him at the least to bestow on him selfe a paire of calues leather pumpes for his wearing.
               These onely being specially considered vppon of Daphnis, and there wythall how passing cunning hee had framed the notes of his old tuned pipe, where-upon he diuers times plaied sundrie country laies, in the hearing of Chloe, draue him at one time aboue the rest into a little melancholie, not for that he stoode ignorant howe much the Nymphe was vnto him aboue all others inclined, or that he mistrusted Dorcon, or enuied his pursute, but for the vehemencie of his passion being so feruent, as had already mastred and ouerwearied his imaginations, neither experience of manly knowledge, had yet so farre instructed him, as that he was able to determine the same vpon any certaine limits, nor any other insight directed him, in what sort the operation therof might with more facility be caried, both of which (as he thought) Dorcon by this liking of his body & brauery wherin he marched, had already atchieued: insomuch as seing one day the sweetest

of his delights to haue taken vppon her the feeding of both their heards, he priuilie secluded him selfe for a while into the thickest of a prea
                     •…
                  ie pleasant groue adioyning, and reposing his youthfull limmes on the soft and tender grasse, nere vnto one of the nimphlike springs whereof the wood euerie where was most aboundant, the solemne tunes of a most sweete sounding flute (wherein both priuate practize and the common vsage of the countrie, had made him excellent) gaue musique to his mar
                     •…
                  yred thoughtes, whereupon his mollified spirits so pressed with the weights that which troubled him, enforced him in the barke of a fine Popler tree standing thereby to graue these fewe verses following.
               
                  What may I call the sweete whence springs my sweetest ioy,
                  Or wherein rests that on such sweete depends so great annoy.
                  How haps that where I touch the aire hath sweetest breath
                  And in the selfe-same fume I find my cause of death
                  Whence sues that where I liue where most delight I see
                  In selfe-same mood my life consumes, & 
                        •…
                     oies confounded bee
                  Whereon engendred is the heat that breeds the flame
                  Sith tempered is with sweetest blasts the cause that mooues the same
                  What phisicke may I finde what art to cure the sore,
                  Which guided by the aide it seekes the wound makes still the more
               
               This done, led on by the solitarines of the place, musique, and present fau
                     •…
                  ie, hee brake into these farther complaints. Sweete, ah sweete said he, what strange kinde of maladie hath insued vnto me, only in kissing my Chloe, my sweetest Chloe, whose lippes are more delicate then the softest roses, and her mouth and deintie breathing of far more sweetnes, than the finest wafers, yet is the impression of this softnes far more percing than the sting of a bee. Often haue I kissed my tender kiodes, newlie as it were fallen from the dames, & that fine speckled calfe that Dorcon did giue me, yet felt I no damage, but this kisse is of far other efficacie and operation, by touch whereof, my pulse beateth, my hart trembleth, and my verie soule languisheth, all which notwithstanding, my suffizaunce of remedie resteth yet onely in kissing her. O cruell victorie, O straunge mischiefe whereof I neither know the name

or am able to determine the qualitie. Is it possible, the lippes whereof the pressure is so delicate, and the closure so excellent, may be attainted with poison, or that within the medicinable compasse of so sweete a refreshing may be included a matter so monstrous as may breede infection. No, no, for then with the far piercing venim therof, had my death long ere this time beene acquired. What then may I tearme it whereof insueth so great a languishment? See, see, the Nightingale howe melodiously shee chaunteth, and my Flute hath forgotten hir wonted musike. Behold how the yong kiddes skippe vpon euery hillocke, and I sitte heere laden with teares. The floures are nowe in their chiefest prime, and Dorcon alone maketh chapelets and nosegaies: the Uiolet and the Dasey haue couered the pastures with their beauties, and Daphnis languishing by his maladie withereth onelie in flames. Dorcon is in his gaietie, and shortely will become fairer than I. These, and such like shepeheards iamentations deliuered hee foorth, till wearied with the remembrance and search of that griefe, whereto he knewe neither remedy nor end, hee left the desolate groue, and with a counterfet excuse returned againe to his Chloe, who long ere this time had awaited his presence.
               Now Dorcon, whose riper yeares had inabled his clownish sconce, both with larger skil, and greater experience, triumphing on the harmelesse simplicitie of either of these two louers, listed not to spend much time in the long and needelesse wooing (as he thought) of hir, whome though of her selfe he were repulsed, yet by imparting some part of that whereof hee had sufficient, to the couetousnesse of him that guided hir) he presumed he might when he list purchase at all times of hir supposed father, fixing therfore his eies on his store of cattell and other coine, wherewith his laboring yeares were plentifully inough stored, hee onely wanted but time and meete occasion, to further his pretended conference, for which hee thence-forth attentiuely waited, Making therfore a sure reckoning of Dryas, whom antient neighborhood, and long acquaintance had linked vnto him in some particular knowledge, it fell out, that by a preatie occasion, his intendment grewe speedilye to bee effected. Dryas hadde a peece of ground adioynyng not farre from the dwelling of the cow-heerd,

whereuppon, whilest hee was there busied, in planting an arbor, Dorcon made the often sutuiew thereof a meanes of his communication: and greeting him euery day, and his people with sundry necessaries wherewith to ease their far set prouision, as well of cheeses, bread, and other vittelles, he one day among the rest began to enter in purpose & renouation of their antient continuance their yeres both being alike, their keping of cattel togithers, and such like remembrances, wherewith men of common account are wont to commend their acquaintaunce. In continuall harping wherevpon, he lastly fell on termes of Chloe, and to discourse of hir marriage.
               Much was it that the cow-herd, after his subtil clownish guise, inforced vnto Dryas, wherby the better to make him selfe seeme a man adapted to such a pursute, & the rather to incorage Dryas to make him his son in law, besids the much reputation of his welth euermore thrust forward, to giue vnto him also the greater and more euident demonstration, that he should not marry his daughter to a beggar or a pinch fist, hee tendred vnto him for his good wil, many faire and husband-like presents, rich for the state of a cow-heard as he was, wherof he praid him to make acceptance, & to giue his good will to the mariage. A yoke of fayre large oxen would he giue for the plough, 4 hiues of bees, fiftie foote square of the best part of his orchard, an ox hide large & thicke for lether, & euery yere besides a faire & principal hecfar. That Dryas was couetous Dorcon had good experience, and therfore intruded vppon him so manye faire offers: the delicacie and wealth wherof tickled indeede something exceedinglye the minde of the man, and had it not beene, that a certaine doubtfull feare ouer-tooke him, of some vnlooked for after-clappes, hee had peraduenture, by desire of that commoditie consented to the determined purpose.
               But considering afterwardes better of the case, and esteeming by the likelihoods of those ornaments which with Chloe hee had had receiued, that hir descent was not so meane, as to respecte a place of so base a calling, nor a shape so far more than seemely, resting in hir excellent proportion, ought to be bestowed vppon a creature so far out fauour, and altogither seruile: hee vtterly abstained

any further to harken to the sute of Dorcon, reckoning fully with himselfe, that if euer after it did happen, that she were recognized by hir parents, & that then it should be known, that for couetousnes of gaine, hee had in so bad and vile maner misprized hir, it could not but turne to his great detriment & irrecuperable vndoing, if at the least wise he might vpon the knowledge thereof be infranchized from death: Led therfore as he was, by the regard of these doubts, he therevppon praied Dorcon for very neighborhoodes sake, to pardon him, and excusing in other sort the matter, willed him from thence-forth that hee woulde sue no further vnto him.
               This conceited fore-cast of Dryas, was nothing at al pleasing to Dorcon, who seeing himselfe now the second time, with so flat resolution put off, could almost (what betweene loue and griefe of so many good gifts, that hee had in vaine bestowed) haue become desperat. It vexed the poore soule to the hart, to see, that his mornings-milk cheeses, his fat calues, and bacon, were thus vnto the chuffe Dryas imparted, and all for nothing: he could haue whined out-right for sorrow, and his humors rumbled togither with so bad a medley, as made his senses wring foorth diuers tender passions from out his wrinckled countenance. But yet recomforted quickly (as to such it often hapneth) of these vncouth pangs, the suttle clown began by a new deuised fraud now to cōpas that which before he found so difficult, watching for this cause a conueniēt time to find Chloe (if it were possible alone) & to this end, bethought himselfe, that vpon custome eche after others they vsed to driue their flockes at one certain time of the day togithers to drinke, the one of them daily, as it fel out after the other. Hereof Dorcon tooke heede, and onely expected the day when shee alone should driue them, which being come, the seelie cow-heard thinking to worke a great maisterie in the simplicitie of these soules, tooke vppon hym a deceit of maruellous finenesse (resspecting, that it was wrought out of so hammer-head
                     •…
                  ed a trunke) and the deuise was this. He took the skin of a great wolse which one of his bulles fighting by chaunce had killed with his hornes, and spread the same all ouer his backe, and that so 
                     •…
                  ly as the fore-feete thereof, fell iustly before him right euer his hands,

and the hinder legges also couered his thighs downe vnto his heeles, the head, as a visard, lay all ouer his face, and thus disguised as hee was, by likelihoode in the full shape and proportion of a woolfe, hee drewe himselfe right vnto the fountaine, whither should come the flockes of Daphnis and Chloe to be watered. The spring was scituate in a valley verye intricate and crooked, and all the place rounde about for the most part enuironed with brembles, sharpe pricking furzes, and lowe declining ginipers, in sort, that if a woolfe in very deede he had beene, he might easily haue couched himselfe thereaboute to haue doone a spoile, Dorcon bussed himselfe in the thickest of these couerts, waiting the houre when Chloe should come, assuring himselfe, that by the fearfull shewe of his shape, hee coulde not choose but amaze hir, and in such amaze might easily seaze vppon hir, and do what he list vnto hir.
               Not long had the woolfe-like cow-heard couched himselfe, but the shepheardesse (as wonted) came with hir dainty flocks, hauing left hir Daphnis behind, busied in cutting downe of the most tender twigs and boughs, for his goats to browze vpon, against they were returned to pasture, the dogges neuertheles, as accustomed gards vnto hir yonglings, at that instant accompanieng her. And as it is a thing vnto them naturall, to hunt vp and down, & range round about the field, so at the last it befell, that drawing neere vnto the bush where this disguised cow-heard lay couching, they perceiued him bussing, and deeming it some beast, began to baie apase: the fiercest of them herevpon began to snap at the woolfe, and the rest, hardned with this onset, set also vpon him. Dorcon was now in an extasie, and not daring to stand vpright, for feare and shame of the disguise by him without effect pretended, the dogges vnweeting of the fraud, tooke no more knowledge of him than whilom did the hounds of Acteon vpon their master, disguised as he was in the shape of a Hart, but harrieng fast vppon the cow-heard, one in one place, and an other in an other place, so rudely rushed vpon him, as tearing the woolfes skinne from his shoulders, they made him discouer him selfe at the last to be no more than the poore and simple cow-heard Dorcon.
               
               By this time the maske grew vtterly to be marred, & the sharp

percing teeth of those mercilesse dogs, pinched so neere his buttockes, as Dorcon was faine to start. Chloe fearefull of the euent, & dreading the furie of some wilde beast, skreched a maine, whereof Daphnis hauing regarde, sped himselfe in all hast to her reskue. But Dorcon contrarie to expectation, hauing susteined more penance than he required, and pestered with the continuall biting of the dogges, could no other waies releeue him selfe then in discouering what hee was, wherewith incite against his will, he cried vehemently to Daphnis. The simple youth suspecting as little fraude, as his innocent yeares ministred vnto him occasion of euill, wondering at the accident, and thinking that it had bene done onely but as a iest, wherewith to haue frayed them, approched the Coweherde, and both he and the Shephardesse rating the dogges, and drawing them thence with their common whistlepipe tooke poore Dorcon with much paine from out of the couert, whom scarce being able to stande for the many hurts in diuers parts about him receiued, hauing nothing wherewith to fende him selfe, they led betweene their armes to the fountaine, and washed his woundes, which done, they brought him by the hand vnto his waie, and recomforting his decaied spirites by all meanes possible left him at the last to the peculiar in sight, & consideration of his owne euils, vnknowing alas were these to hardie guiles and enterprizes of Loue, vnto those tender Impes, nor did they at all participate anye parte of the frawde to the same incident or belonging, whose charie regarde of well-doing, became the onely supporte of their meere simplicitie and good meaning.
               
                  Dorcon, now solitarily conceiuing of this so strange an alteration, had all his imaginations thenceforth vtterly benommed, for euer thereafter to continue a louer. And in this hurlie burlie, the vnaccustomed baying also of the dogges, had so farre scattered abroade the flockes and herdes, as both Daphnis him selfe and Chloe had much paine, til night to drawe them together againe, the one part whereof being climed to the hiest rockes and mountaine toppes that might be, and the other fearefully straggled in diuers partes downe towardes the sea coastes. And albeit, their ioynt herdes were otherwise so well ordred and taught by their

guides, as that with the least clap of handes, whistle, or other sounde of voyce that might bee, they woulde drawe to their companies, yet nowe were they so farre frighted with this vncouth noyse, as that with all the trauell to them vsed, they could scarce be wholie brought together againe to accompanie. But night, that bringeth in conclusion euerie labour to eude, had at the last conducted also these heardes into their seuerall fo
                     ••
                  es. And werisomnes of the painefull trauel susteined, serued them as a medicine to bring into the thoughtes of these passionate derlings the accustomed rest, from whence a good while since they had beene bereued. Sleepe made them to forget their loues, and the feruencie of their passion swaied thereby a great deale lesse in the disturbance of those their mutuall affectes. But the bright shining day, which is the discouerer & common renewer of euerye crased fantasie, put her and him in minde againe, of their wonted misease. The ruddie raies brandishing the Easterne skies, reuealed a new the fresh & quick spreading flames of their late receued passions, the enteruewe of each breding on the first sight, a nouell grief, issuing interchauncheablie from him to her, and her to him, not for that they sawe eche other, in either of whom the contemplation was a mithridate to a pestered conceipted minde, but y• the deep percing in sight therby sustened conceiued in each vew so wonderfull and straunge an effecte, as in conclusion conuerted the former physicke it receiued, to a most encreasing and almost irrecuperable maladie,
               Infinite were their desires (for to couet, is to mankinde naturall) but what it was they desired, or wherein consisted the determinate conclusion of the same, that by their simplicitie, could no waies be defined. If they coueted to see each other they saw, if to plaie togethers, they plaied, if to speake, they spake, if mutuallye to embrace, they imbraced, and heereof there was vnto them at all no kinde of controlment, At their libertie they enioyed what they listed, and hauing all that they would, they could not yet, conceiue therein the principall part, of that they most desired. Contentment reposed it selfe vppon their deepest disquiet, and from their greatest miscontentment sprang vppe againe their chiefest ease. Now was it in the decreasing time of the spring, and freshest

                  Sommer perking in her gayest pryde, made waye to her entrance, the flowrishing growth of euerie liuing thing, wared prowde of their beeing. Nowe bloss
                     •…
                  nted were the fruites on trees, and Ceres in her tillage, and Pomona in her orchardes, brethed in the fresshest ayre their sweetest sauours, Titan hauing wound hym selfe in the Crabbe, drewe fast to the Lions cabbin, whereby the season growing hoote, it seemed the Riuers and grauellie springes, placed in most coole and temperate shades, inuited each youthfull gallant, to theyr sweete pleasing baynes: Whereunto Zephyrus gentlie busling thorowe the twigges of the loftie Pines his comfortable blastes, appeared by the pleasaunt murmure thereof to make a kynde of Musique, by meanes of which trilled sometymes downe before them the sweete smelling appels from the hyest braunches.
               
                  Phoebus sporting him selfe to glaunce through the thickest grooues vppon their naked shapes, made Daphnis (enflamed both by an inwarde loue and heate of the present season) to visice the springs, where casting him selfe into a delicate Riuer, one whyle would hee chase the Swannes alofte, and an other whyle cast himselfe to the bottom, catching therewithall at the smoothe gliding fishes. Often would hee gulpe into his entrayles a great quantitie of the coole water, and then swimme again washing & turning himselfe in the streame desirous to see if there-withall the hotte parching heate hee sustemed, might anie wayes bee cooled: but all invaine, for that the force thereof, by afarre more vehement furie, was inwardlye supported.
               
                  Chloe hauing by this time drawen foorth her sheepe and goats to be milked, remained so much the Ienger thereaboutes, for that the sharpe singing flies buzzing round about her vnstained visage hadde in the drawing downe of the sonne something busilie vexed her, wherevppon hauing washed her face in one of the neerest fountaines, shee gathered of all sortes of flowers, and them wreathed, in the braunches and tenderest twygges of the Pine-trees, whereof shee made a chapelet, and therewith crowned her amber coloured tresses, and hauing girded her selfe in the skinne of a mightye heart, buckled fast on her euen pressed

sholders, she filled one pot of wine and another of milke, and therewith came to entertaine her deerlie fauoured Daphnis. Who fastening his earnest lookes on her admirable bewties made waie to issue from the riuer, and she stroking againe his delicate limmes with f
                     •…
                  esh prepared clothes, finding nothing therein to be reprehended, (so rightly proporcioned was hee in all fewtures) with many sweete embratings clothed she him apace in his shepheards garmentes. In all this demeanour were not the conceites of Daphnis, in beholding her graces altogether vnoccupied, who seeing her compassed in such nymphlike attire, supposed one while that she was as the fayre Laeda, who for her exceading shape, deserued solie to become the mother of the most beautifull Helena, an otherwhile him seemed that she was some Io, onely meece to be reserued to none other but for the mightie Iupiter, sometimes hee likened her to one of the Nymphes in the Caue. whose lookes as he thought, caried of her behauiour a most notable resemblaunce, and holding her pot in her handes of wine and milke towardes him, hee was wholie confused by Loue the force whereof distilling amaine within him, had wrought to his most secret entrailes. Smilingly therefore taking the Chapelet from her head, and with great deuotion kissing it, he put it on his own, and taking in hand an harpe, whereon his softened strokes were varied with most excellent conning, he tuned the same forthwith, and song thereunto in her praises this dittie following.
               
                  Sweete sweetned be the houres, the daies, the monthes and times,
                  Wherein with sweete conceipts my soule, thy sweetned fauor climes
                  Sweete be thy lookes, thy touch, thy speach, thy gate and all
                  Ten thousand sweets betide thee still, whose sweetnes staines them all.
                  Ye floures whose motlie hues do pranke in Natures pride.
                  Do shrowd your selues, and for my sweete, your beauties lay aside.
                  Ye temprate westerne winds, whose aire yeilds sweetned breath
                  Denie your sweete to be as hers, whose sweet yeelds life or death
                  Ye deintie tuned fowles whose notes do decke the spring
                  Confesse in hearing of her soundes, your sweets small pleasure bring
                  Ye christall sacred springs, ye vales and mountaines hie,
                  Whose pleasant walkes her passage decks, and spreading fauours die
                  
                     Agree with me in this, my sweete (surpassing far)
                  Excels the sweetnes of you all, and doth your pleasures bar.
               
               His song concluded in the delicacie of this so great a commen
                  
                     •…
                  acion, Chloe tooke no small pleasure, in seeing her selfe thus highlie to be magnified in the liking of him, whom aboue al other she most entierly fauoured, wherefore enclining her lookes to his sweete distilling fauours, one while conceiued she great pleasure in parting of his locks, brown in colour as the Mirtle berries, resembling therein the comlie shape of Adonis, Iulled sometimes in the lap of Venus, and denoting in particuler termes the som of al his perfections, with many sugred speches shee began to admire him, which kindling in Daphnis an earnest zeale in contemplacion of all her fauours, made him in farther demonstration of the great felicitie he thereby conceiued, to adde vnto his former praises also, these succeding verses.
               
                  Those hears the golden wiers of my wel tuned sounde,
                  Become the pleasure of my panges, and make my ioyes abounde.
                  These seemely eies the glasse, whereof my fewture staies,
                  And forehead large, the field on which, depends my blisfull raies.
                  This mouth the deintie spring that yeldes me cause of life,
                  These teeth the pearles of precious price, that cure mine inward grife.
                  These lips the curroll fresh, that comforts heart and mind,
                  These looks the guarders of my loue, by whom I fauor find.
                  Those cheeks the apples fresh, whereon Vermilion taint,
                  Be mixed with the siluer white, my sugred pleasure paint.
                  These pits in dented cheeks, are chaires for Beautie plaste,
                  Wherein, triumphant fauor sits, impugning woes to waste.
                  This necke of yu'ry white, confounder of my cares,
                  These hands the aids to further that, which loue for me prepares.
                  These feet the wished steps, whereout my ioies arise
                  From these and out of these ensue, what els I may deuise.
                  Thus decked in my ioyes, on her I gaze my fil
                  Whose shape hath power to comfort all, but neuer force to spill
               
               Herewith Daphnis hauing taken his flute sounded thereupon

diuers excellent ditties. And for so much as it grewe towards the middest of the daie, the melodiousnesse of the sound together with the heate of the season, brought Chloe a sleepe, their flockes by this time beeing couched all together vnder the shadie toppes which Daphnis perceiuing, stayed quickly his musique and withdrawing his flute, gaue him selfe thereupon to gaze at full vpon her most exquisite perfections. And seeing that there was none about him to countermaund his demeanors, hee began secretly thus to deliuer in him selfe. Oh howe sweetlie these eie liddes of my fayre and blissefull Chloe are couched together, howe delicate is the sent and sauour of her breath, the sweetnesse whereof neither these albpine buddes, nor flowres them selues, doe in any sort imitate, yet dare I not for this, to kisse at all, these sweete sauours for that the very touch is more peercing than the swords point, and the force thereof cutteth the verie heart on sonder, and as the receipt of the newe made honie, so swelleth in those that touche it the harmefull poyson thereof: Neither would I yet inforce that iniurie to my Chloe, as by to rude pressing her lippes, to yeeld disturbance to her quiet. Alas these grashoppers I feare me with their piping tunes, will wake my deerling. Yee cruell beastes, why hurt yee so rudely with your hornes, vnpacient as it seemeth to giue vnto my derling any rest. O yee wolfes, at this instant more crauinlike then the foxes them selues, why rush yee not into these heardes to scatter them on sonder? Whylest Daphnis continued in these and such like complaintes, a seelie greshopper egerly pursued by a swallowe, cast her selfe by chance, for her sauegarde into the bosome of Chloe, by meanes whereof, the Swallowe neither was able to catche her, nor lenger could vse vnto her the force of her wing, notwithstanding, the birde came so neere that with fluttering vp and downe about her face, shee awakened Chloe out of her sleepe, the feare whereof, made the Nymphe, (for that shee knewe not what it was) to skritche alowde, but when shee sawe the Swallowe yet fluttering top and fro about her, and Daphnis laughing by her at the harmelesse feare and sporte thereof, shee deemed the lesse of the matter, and rubbing her eies, yet greedie of sleepe, shee made her selfe readie to arise.
               
                  The grashopper was yet betweene her brestes, and as on e deliuered as it seemed from danger, and in the kinde it bare, willing to shewe it selfe thankefull, began to chante where shee sate, remunerating thereby the good turne at her handes receiued, by reason of which, Chloe not yet experienced of the accident, cried outright, and Daphnis againe laughed a pace at the sport, and loathing to grieue her ouermuch, conueied thereupon his hande betweene her breastes, and tooke out the grassehopper, which yet thankefull of hir sauegarde continued chaunting betweene his handes, whereupon the faire Shepheards knowing what it was, tooke it againe & returned it forthwith into her bosome. Shortly hereupon it befell that a certaine Ringdoue sitting in a groue hard by, began to sing, in whose song Chloe taking great delight, demaunded of Daphnis the reason thereof, whereupon the gentle Goatheard desirous of her vtmost satisfaction, began to recompe vnto her, this storie following.
               There was (my dere) sayd hee, in times passed, a young damosell fayre of shape, and in the prime of her age, bewtifull as your selfe, who keeping her cattell vpon these pastures, had right excellent skill, both to sing and playe delicately. Her beastes had pleasure in her tunes, and so delightfull was the sounde of her voyce and pipe, that shee gouerned them at pleasure, and was able to drawe them whether she would.
               This beautifull Nymphe sitting vnder a statelie Pine, hauing her head crowned with the leaues thereof, one daye happened to sing a song in the honour of Pan, wherewith her beastes began so earnestly to be enclined, as that they drewe them close to her soundes. Neere vnto her was there likewyse keeping of Cattell a certaine young youth, freshe and froolicke as her selfe, who right well handled his pipe, and could thereon playe manie deintie ditties. One daie amongst the rest, with intent to shewe that his comming was not bad, hee tooke his pipe in hande, and thereon in disdaine of the Nymphe, placed so sweetely and melodiously, as that with the ouerpleasing sounde thereof, hee drewe from her eight of her fayrest beastes, pursuing the sweetnesse of his Pipe, doe what shee could, and made them to ioyne to his companie, where-with the poore wenche vexed for griefe &

intollerable dispite, to see hir flockes so muche to be diminished, and chiefly also, that she was thus ouercome in hir own cunning, tooke so great a griefe of the same, as that shee praied the gods, and they vouchsafed to change hir into a foule, rather than any more wyth such infamie to returne to hir dwelling. This performed, and she, as you see, being made a bird of the mountaine, in accustomed sort, followeth vp and downe, plaining hir ill hap and losse of hir beasts, whome she seeketh, being thus as she was vnluckily ouercome, and singing as she was woont to doe, reteineth yet some part of hir auntient tunes and sorowfull complainings.
               In these, and such like deuises, spent they the disportes of the pleasant Summer, till Autumne drawing on, the vintage began to approch, for that the grapes grew fully to be ripened, in which time certaine rouers of Tyre, hauing a Foist rigged and manned lately from Carye, hapned to come ala
                     •…
                  d vppon the Island, and roming vppe and downe here and there vppon the countrey, they pilled and spoiled all places where they came, and armed as they were, ranne into euery corner to take what they could get, whereby, as chance hapned, they tooke great store of wines, graine, and hony, the noueltie whereof was such, as it was yet in the waxe, and therewithall robbed and spoiled the seelie Dorcon of all his beasts and cattell, leauing the man sore wounded, and wel-nigh dead with their blowes. And cou
                     •…
                  sing as they were vp and down in the Island, Daphnis by ill hap walking on the sea-banke, was by them surprised, for yet was not Chloe gone foorth wyth her sheepe, being early dayes, and fearing (for she was alone) to be inforced, by some other of the rudest sort of the sheepheards. The rouers seeing this yong youth, faire, seemly and strong, and thinking him of better regard than any part else of their prize, they made no further pursute after his goates, but contenting themselues with his person, and that they had besides, they returned againe to their Foist: Daphnis cryeng out vpon Chloe, the remembraunce of whome in this extremity did onelye consume him.
               These theeues being scarce got aboard, and not yet makyng way with their oares into the streame, Chloe by this time was

come vnto the pastures with hir sheepe, and failing of Daphnis in the place of their accustomed meetings, seeing therewithall his goats and tender kiddes all scattered and disordered, here and there, she began to feare the woorst. At last, hearing his voice, yet crieng and complaining after her (for yet was hee within sound) she left hir sheepe, and throwing downe her▪ Pipe, has
                     •…
                  ned with all speede possible to Dorcon, in minde to require his aide, whome betweene life and death shee founde groueling vppon the ground, halfe slaine of the theeues, and scarce able for faintnes to deliuer his minde vnto hir, hauing lost of his bloud an exceeding quantitie. The cow-heard yet perceuing Chloe to be there, the remembrance of his antient loue, kindled in his minde some n
                     •…
                  uell forces, whereby inforcing himselfe a little, he thus sayde vnto hir: My deere Chloe, thou commest euen nowe vnto mee at the rendring of my ghost, for long I knowe I cannot liue, so many wayes haue these cruell rouers wounded me, and beat me downe as an oxe in the s
                     •…
                  all: neuertheles, if thou wilt, it is yet in thy power to saue Daphnis, and to be reuenged on the wicked creatures for my death. I haue (Chloe) hitherto accustomed my beasts to the sound of my pipe, and that in so certaine and assured manner, as in the hearing thereof, be they neuer so far from me, they wil yet by all meanes possible draw homewards againe: take here my Flute quickly, and hasting to the sea-coast, sound vnto the beasts my tune, that often before this thou hast heard me teach vnto Daphnis, and wherein thy selfe I knowe, art reasonably well instructed by him, at the hearing whereof, my beasts I dare assure thee will shift to come backe, and Daphnis thereby may be saued. My Flute I freely giue vnto thee for thy trauell, whereon heretofore I haue gained the prize among all the heardsmen, onely for recompence I require at thy hands but once to kisse me, whilest yet I am now dieng, and that my soule shal foorthwith depart the bodie, and when I am gone, bewaile my death, and yet thinke vpon Dorcon at the least wise when hereafter thou shalt behold any others a keeping of their cattell, who once aboue all others so entirely loued thee.
               Hauing deliuered vnto her these speeches, the kisse he receyued of Chloe, and his life ended at one instant togither. Wherevpon

she tooke his pipe, and foorthwith sette it to hir mouth, on which the blasts she blewe were so shrill, that the beastes hauing knowledge thereof, and the tune thereby deliuered, they altogither with one amase, bussed out of the Foist, and iointly with one poise rushed into the sea, which being but on the one side alone of the ship, the force and waight of the multitude was so great, that therewith they quite ouerturned the vessels, and whelmed men and all therein into the sea
                     •…
                  , but not with one and the selfe-same hope of safetie: for that the theeues beeing clogged with theyr harnesse, swordes, and other defensiue weapons, were not able by the waight thereof long to helpe themselues, but Daphnis being light as the Summer season required, vnshod and naked in the vpper parts, easily came to land, supported by the hornes of two of these oxen iointly, betwene whome, hauing cast himselfe, he was easily carried to land, for these kind of beasts by common opinion hauing longer force of swimming than any other creatures whatsoeuer, except onely the fishes and water-foules, the proofes whereof haue beene made by diuers. In this force, as you haue heard, escaped the poore Daphnis in dangerous aduentures at one instant togithers, the one in becomming a perpetuall bondslaue to the theeues, the other after escape of that hazard, in being deliuered from drowning.
               In being come foorth of the sea, he found Chloe vpon the shore betweene hir former distilled teares, and present reioicing of his safe arriuall, entertaining him at one instant togethers▪ wherevpon, casting himselfe betweene hir armes, he desired to vnderstand of hir the cause of hir playing at that instant on the Flute. Chloe, vpon such demand recounted vnto him the whole progression of speech betweene hir and Dorcon, the vse of his beastes to that sound, the robberie, spoile, and woundes by him receiued, finally, his death, and before his dying, how he committed to her vsage the custodie of his pipe, onely of modestie abstained shee to tell of her kissing him, as a matter ouer and besides the chance of that his present deliuery. But Daphnis recreated of his heauie labours, forgat not for to honour the memorie thereof in the person of Dorcon for a perpetuall remembraunce, and therefore togither wyth his parents and friendes celebrated accordingly

his vnhappy funeralles, as by the death of whome grewe the occasion of his vnlooked for escape out of so manifest perilles. His body therefore being closed in the ground, Daphnis with other sheepeheards round about his graue, planted sundry trees, and eache one hun
                     •…
                   vppon the boughs some part of his cunning maistries, they cast also therevpon hallowed grapes, and milke, and for that he was cunning vpon the Flute, they fixed ouer his graue sundrie sortes of pipes. His beasts being come ashore, piteously belowed, and cryed after him, which some heardsemen interpreted to be a sorrowfull lamentation, for the want of their guide and maister.
               When Dorcon was thus enterred, Chloe tooke here Daphnis, and led him to the caue of the Nymphs, where shee cleansed and washed his bodie, neat, and pure of it selfe, as the whitest alablaster, afterwards gathering together sundry sortes of floures, as the pleasant season of the yeare then freshly serued, they made chapele
                     •…
                  s for the images, and ouer the mouth of the caue amongest the other instruments, tendered vnto the Nymphs the Flute of Dorcon, as an offering, which being finished, they returned both againe to their flockes, whome they founde all sorrowfully couched togethers on the tender grasse, abstaining (as it seemed) from their foode, for the losse of those who were w
                     •…
                  ont to gouerne them, whome they deemed to be vtterly perished. But hauing againe the sight of their beloued guides, they fell afresh to their pastures, the sound of whose voices and melodious piping, made them for to taste the better their accustomed feeding.
               The goats couched before in the lowest bushes, began now to peke to the hilles, the kiddes skipped for ioy, the sheepe and tender lambs amazed no more, but vniuersally reioiced at their presence. Sitting therefore downe on the hillockes, whilest Chloe wearied with ernest labor, & moiled with trauell for the search of hir Daphnis, gaue hirselfe to the fountaine, wherein to bathe and wash hir 
                     •…
                  ender limmes: the parts discouered vnto the yong goatheard, carrieng in themselues the purenesse of hir complexion, renued afresh in his imaginations the thoghts of his loue. Now began he again to pant & breath, as if newly he were to be inforced

for a pray to the theues, nowe languished he in like sort by his secret imaginations, and so much also inwardly swelled, as it had bene one that had dronke poyson, his pulces furiously bet by a disordered heat, as if yet his spirits had beene chased, he liued & longed, and looking was neuer satisfied of that, which alwaies hee most desired. The christall waters conteined onely in one slender spring, in which the Nymphe washed herselfe, became vnto his sight, more fearefull than the verie depest seas. Him seemed thervpon, his life as yet stood in hazard, at the hands of the most merciles rouers. And thus continuing in these variable fits, liued pore D
                        •…
                     phnis sequestred from the due accomp
                     •…
                   and benefit of all his passed pleasures, like vnto such a one as him selfe, who beeing alwaies nourished in the fieldes, knewe not howe to make decernement of Loue or any part of his subtilties. But shee whose gracious lookes were replenished with all kinde of fauour towardes him, perceiuing the melancholie Muse wherunto he was driuen, now fresh as the cristall dewes had made her, and much like vnto one of these daughters of the Springs, or Neptunes derling, the faire Venus her selfe issuing out of one of her fathers riuers, in such maner approched she his presence, wherfore for y• she was the soueraign guide and director of all his thoughts, she quickly could finde the delay wherewith his continuall coursing fancies were presently to be mitigated. Whereupon ioyning her selfe side to side vnto him, each greting the other with many louing imbracements they enterchangeable framed their tunes one to the other, concluding that daies traueill with this sonet folowing,
               
                  Daphnis.
                  
                     Ye brightest gleames within those percing eies
                     Whose glimpse retaines a shew of power deuine
                     Enclose your selues, for feare from loftie skies
                     Some enuious star do at your glory pine.
                  
               
               
                  Chloe
                  
                     Ye mightie powers, to whom these sacred groues
                     Right pleasing bene. And Nimphes that haunt this shade,
                     Enuie you not with wreake the hardye proues
                     That Natures selfe in Daphnis shape hath made
                  
               
               
                  
                  Daphnis
                  
                     Alas if Phoebus should the heat for-thinke
                     That once for loue in burning breast he bare
                     And mazed at thy fewter, gin to shrincke
                     From her to thee, then woe be
                           •…
                        ide my share.
                  
               
               
                  Chloe
                  
                     Alas if Venus stealing to her springs
                     In mind her sweet Adonis to embrace
                     Thy curled locks should vew whose beautie stings
                     And thee for him admire, then woe my cace.
                  
               
               
                  Daphnis
                  
                     Excelling iewels, beare the choisest price
                     Things lesse in shewe, enuie alwaies the best:
                     Lesse Phoebe shines, when Tytan ginnes to rise
                     Where mightie force effects, there shrowds the least.
                  
               
               
                  Chloe
                  
                     Unmatched pearles, haue value still for showe
                     When best exceeds, who can denie the place
                     Though things be rated hie, yet this we knowe
                     It (needs) excels, whose weight hath highest grace,
                  
               
               
                  Daphnis
                  Be honored then, thou Nimphe of all the flockes
               
               
                  Chloe
                  Be fairest thou of all that guide their b
                        •…
                     ard
               
               
                  Daphnis
                  Let still thy name resound on hiest rockes
               
               
                  Chloe
                  And Chloe ne're be of thy chaunge afeard.
               
            
            
               
               
                  The second booke of the loues pastorall of Daphnis and Chloe.
               
                  BY this time had the haruest season ripned and caried in all the corne, and the vintage began a pace to bee brought in hand, Bacchus feasted in his glorie sate enuironed with the vines and the Bacchanals of the youthful god were now to be cellebrated. The people of Mitelene each where prepared their vessels fitte and meet for this season, some beginning to haue in a readines their presses, others to wash their tunnes, some to make pots and panniers wherin to conuey the grapes, others to sharpe their hookes, sheares and kniues where-with to cut downe the stalkes, this man prepared pestles to bruse the grapes, they againe scaled hempe to be beaten where-with to make cresset-light to continue burning for them, when the wine waxed readie for tunning. Daphnis and Chloe were not idle in these companies, who putting them-selues also forwardes to the common labour, were of all sortes of the people generallie eche where liked and commended. Hee for his part, caried the grapes in the panyers, and trode them in the troughes, afterwardes also tunned the newe wines, and gaue him selfe with trauell vnto euerie exercise. Shee likewise tricking her selfe neatlie, made sondrie things readie for the workemen, dressed their meates, and prepared for them wines of the olde yeare passed, and mingled with milke, and when shee had so done, then would she retourne againe to the vines, and from the braunches that she might easelie attaine vnto, cut downe the grapes, for the vines of Uignenoble in Mitelene, doe all for the most part growe 
                     •…
                  lowe, or at the least-wise neuer to h
                     •…
                  e, or spreading to much on the trees, whereon the bonches pendaunt also are commonly so weightie and great, and spreading themselues there-with into such length and breadth, as that a childe of foure or fiue yeares

olde, may almost reach vnto them.
               And as the custom is in these Bacchanales, whē the grapes are in this sort gathered in, they call from all places of their villages, their neighbours, as well men as women togethers to help in the vintage. According wher-vnto they being there assembled a wonder was it to see the womanish demeanors of the most part of those gossips, what censures each of them gaue of y• yong shepeheard Daphnis. They seemed eache of them to bee enamored on all his particularities, some of them hauing in choisest reconing his talke and seemely stature, some his youthfull countenances, not yet fullie growne vnto manly tipenes, others his abourne locks curled naturally in the forepartes & sides, and artificiallie 
                     •…
                  emed and tressed behinde, on his shoulders, this againe had in estimat his faire & goodly forehead, eies, & other seemlie propor
                  
                     •…
                  ioned fewturs not to be despised, shee looked on his legs straight and hie calued, that commended his amiable fauours, beeing such as where-with the Nymphes them selues might not disdaine to bee acquinted. With those, his ac
                     •…
                  iuitie was greatlye praised, and by them againe his skill in Musique principallie extolled.
               One amongst the rest vnpacient, as appeared of her feruent affection, running vppon a sudden to the bashfull Shepheard, kissed ere hee was aware his delicate lippes, wherewith as one that had beene pricked or stong with a waspe, the blushing youth angrie in his minde at the wrong to him tendred in his Chloes presence, rubbed and roused his lippes, as if thereby he had sus
                     •…
                  eined some notable blemishe.
               Nowe as the women fedde thus their gasing eies vppon Daphnis, so likewise the men on the other side vppon the surpassing demeanours of Chloe grewe greatlye to bee amazed. Her gestures to them appeared of so notable excellencie, as with the like whereof their grosse conceiptes had seldome before beene invred. The vnaccustomed gasing of whom had cast in her seemelievisage, a vermillion more perfect, than rested in the freshe springing rose, wherewith the verie coloure of the fine and fresh garden lillie beeing conferred, a mixture so exquisite and deintie thereout arose, as that it seemed the purest and liuelie

counterset of a sweet fauoured beautie, that might be, had taken harbour in hir countenaunce. They daunced oftentimes, and skipped about hir, as whilom did the Satyres in their madding pastimes, full oftentimes wished they themselues to haue become as the sheepe and tender lambes, the rather to be resiant in the company of so seemely a sheepeheardesse, and often to be dallied with and touched in hir delicate hands. The inducements wherof, grewe vnto the seclie Chloe, so tedious, as before the seuerall vsages of the others had bene vnto Daphnis. Often wished they iointlye, that these vintages were once passed, and that their libertie (sequestred from those vnused societies) might returne to thē again in haunting the valle is, as they were to-fore time accustomed, and that in steade of these fawning praises, they might once heare againe their mellodious Flutes in the fields amongst their flockes freshly to be sounded.
               After a fewe dayes nowe passed, and the vintage something spent, their wishes there with began also to take effect, by mean
                     •…
                   whereof Chloe in woonted guise ledde earelie in the morning her sheepe to the pastures: Daphnis also setled amongest his heards, as one that had a long time beene estranged from his delights, began with pleasure to haunt the downes, and sometimes with his goats to clime the steepest rockes. It was a world of liking vnto him, to ioine his pipe and tunes to her notes, sometimes also plaied she sweetly vppon his Flute, wherevnto, one while with his voice, an other while with his musike would Daphnis answere againe artificially. Then dooing their woonted obseruances to the Nymphs, they visited their caues, groues, and pleasant fountaines, and on their statues hung they many bunches of their fairest grapes: Chloe renued againe their heads and tresses, with fresh herbs and floures, and dallieng afterwards togethers, as beeing returned to the place and resiaunce of all theyr happinesse, they entred into their woonted sheepeheardes pastimes.
               Now as they were thus playieng, and spending the time togithers, there hapned into their company on a sudden, an auncient heardsman, his head and beard snowish white for age, but yet not altogether spent in yeares, who beeing clothed in the fashion of

the oldest sheepeheards, saluted these darlings, and presented thē with sundry fruits which he had brought thither in his budget. And resting himselfe vpon the soft turfe hard by their sides, beganne to enter wyth them into diuers discourses. The yoong sheepeheard and his Nymph had pleasure to heare him, and with great attention gaue héede to all the speeches, that by his auncitient experience were deliuered, which hee perceiuing, the good old man continued with great good wil, & hauing ended the same, and they both woondring still what hee was, hee entered at the last with them into these termes following.
               I am, my sonne (said he) the aged Philetas, which heretofore haue honoured these Nymphs, and haunts, with diuers and sundry ditties, and yet record I my Flute at this day, nothing worne from the ancient melodie, in the honour of the mightie Pan. Many stately heardes heeretofore haue I guided, and onelye by the sound of my Pipe, to all thinges constrained, and to this ende came I nowe vnto you, to tell you what I haue seene, and what on your behalfe, hath by the mightie soueraigne of Loue beene deliuered vnto mee. There is no hill nor groue heereabouts that hath beene vnknowne vnto me, no valley that I haue not haunted, nor spring or fountaine, but I haue tasted, full ofte in my youth haue I reposed these decayed limmes vppon the sweetest grasse, and with pleasure haue I soong vpon these hillockes our sheepeheards merry layes and pastimes.
               And nowe vnderstande yee, that I haue heere-by a very faire nurserye, which by mine owne handie exercise I haue sowed, planted, laboured, and trimmed, with all kinde of delicacies, euen sit hence the very time that (constrained by creeping age) I haue abstained any more to feed and watch my beasts, vpon these goodly plaines. Within my nurserie, there is nothing, that for the season of the yeare may be desired, but I haue it there sea
                     •…
                  ed. For the spring time, I haue roses, violets, flouredelis, hearbs, and other deuises of sundry sorts: for the summer, peares, apples, cherries, plummes, berries, and fruites of all kinde of pleasure. Now for this sea
                     •…
                  on of autumne haue I also, grapes, figs, nuts, orenges, pomegranats, mirtles, and twentie other like pleasures. To this nurcerie by reason of the scituation and delicacie,

haue customably alwayes resorted diuers sortes of birdes, of the brauest kindes, flocking in troopes, both to feed and solace themselues, chanting on the branches and hedge-rowes thereabout, their harmonious soundes, wherein the couer
                     •…
                   being very spacious and wide, by reason of the great number of trees, euery where growing giueth vnto them the more scope and pleasure a great deale, whereby at will they might recreat them selues all togethers.
               In three sundry places of this plotte, ariseth three principall fountaines, issuing from the most sweetest and holesome springs▪ watering with their ouer-flowing toppes, all ouer the gardens. The grounde beeing so wide, and the tr
                     •…
                  es so thicke, make the place seeme a farre off as if it were a woode. Whilest warily I haue daye by daye attended my fruites, and with great pleasure hearkened after the sound of these gentle birdes, beholde, for a great space together ech day about noone, I haue perceiued tripping in the shade, vnder my mirtle trees, & pomegranats, a faire yong boy, holding in ech hand pomegranats and mirts. His shape white as the colour of milke, an other time red as the glowing fire, his skinne pure, neate, and cleane, as if euen nowe he were come foorth of some pleasant riuer, naked is he alwayes in shew, and euer alone, and without company: him seemeth to haue great felicitie, in gathering my floures, my fruits, and my berries, and that doth he so freely and so carelesse of checke or controlment, as if the plot were his owne, and not belonging at all to anyeother but himselfe, which hauing often perceiued, I indeuored manie times to runne vnto him, fearing least in his tripping and skipping vp and downe, he might happen to breake my mirtle twigs or pomegranat branches, but not for this could I euer so muche as once reach neere vnto him, so nimble is he in his flight, and therewithall so swift, and beeing so escaped, then cooleth hee himselfe couertly, shrowding vnder the rosters, and sometymes vnder the broad spreading poppies, no otherwise than if it were some preatie flieng partridge.
               Many times haue I coursed after the yoong sucking kiddes, and often folowed after my tender calues, but this than those, seemeth a farre more contrarye pastance, for doe what I coulde, I

might neuer attaine vnto him, no, when sometimes hee hath almost seemed to be vnder my handes. Wherefore, seeing that no pursute auailed, and considering, that by reason of mine age I became wearie, and fainted, I lea
                     •…
                  ed once on my s
                     •…
                  affe, watching alwayes his goings, that still I might keepe him in sight, and the tripping lad, drawing something neere mee, I began to reason with him after my manner, and demaunded therevpon, what neighbourhoode he had vnto vs, and vppon what occasion hee tooke vppon him in such manner to enter my nurserie and garden, and without leaue or other demaunde, in sorte as hee did to gather my floures and fruites, wherevnto he answered me nothing, but approching something more neere vnto me, he sweetely beganne for to smile, and daintily seemed for to sporte at mee, casting with his delicate handes, the mirtle berries on my face and breast. What operation the same might by nature haue receiued I knowe not, but with the soft touching blowes, I felt my senses and minde immediatly towardes him to be mollified, neither could I afterwardes for my life, so much as seeme angrie.
               Being thus calmed of all mine eager pursute against hym, I conuerted therevpon my collour to intreaty, gently praying that vpon assurance, and without any feare or doubt at all hee woulde come vnto me, swearing by my Mirts and all my pleasant fruits and nurseries, that with as much good wil as might be, I would let him go againe, and besides of my mirtle berries, and fairest pomgranats would giue vnto him also the best choice and plenty, and suffer him at all times after when hee listed, to gather both floures and fruites at his pleasure, onely that for all these courtesses and offers, he would permit me at his daintie cheekes to haue but one sole kisse▪ Here-vppon the gentle lad beganne to laugh right hartily and apase, and with a gay and pleasant cheere, filled with all kinde of delight that might be, hee tendred vnto my hearing a found so sweete, amiable, and well pleasing, as there is no nightingale, thrush, or other kinde of bird whatsoeuer, that haunteth either won
                     •…
                  s or hedge-rowes, that euer gaue foorth the like, or carried in hir tunes, so delightfull a melodie, and in the deliuery thereof thus he saide vnto me.
               
                  It can not, nor shall (Philetas) bee vnto me a paine to kisse thee▪ for that of mine owne instinct, and proper condicion, the ami
                     •…
                  ble custome thereof, is giuen to delight mee, and more esti
                  
                     •…
                   and pleasure haue I therein, then there is desire in thee to recouer thy youth and wonted passed sportes, wherein thou hast bene conuersant, againe. But take heede that what herein thou demaundest of me, retourne not in the end to thine own hurt and damage, as a thing altogether vnfit and disagreing to thy present age. For that I can assure thee, that notwithstanding thine auntient estate, wherein thou thinkest thy selfe to be vtterly freed▪ if but in the least sort that might be my lippes should touch thee, thou shouldest yet as ho
                     •…
                  elie broile in desire, and couet to fellowe me, as anie others. Nowe is my flight so great, as there is neither Egle, Falcon, nor other foule whatsoeuer, be their winges neuer so swifte, that can ouertake me.
               I am not as thou deemest, a childe, albeit in my shape there is at all no other appearance, but for my of spring am more antient then olde Saturne, or anie auncientrie it selfe. When thou Philetas wast here a young-man, and in the flowre and prime of thy youth and iolicie, when thou feddest thy heardes in these marishes, then and long before that, did I knowe thee. Thy playing here on these hillockes and plaines, whereon thou often soundest vnto the hilles and rockes thy wonted tunes, are not to mee vnknowen. Neither thy fa
                     •…
                  re Amarillis on whose youthfull beawties, thy amours waxed then so feruent, and notwithstanding nor shee, nor thou coulde euer perceiue mee, yet was I still in the middest of your loues, neere, and euermore here and there about you. By me Philetas thou enioycost her as thine owne, by meanes whereof thou hast obteined many children, who as thy selfe are at this instant growen vp to be good heardsmen and labourers. So nowe haue I also in like charge two impes of the same kinde, sacred from their infancie to the Nymphes, and honouring in their shepheard habits, both the pastures & downs, Daphnis and Chloe, derlings vnto bewties selfe, and vnto whose affections both Pan and Satires become charie. Hauing this morning brought them together vnto the downes, I entred immediatly for my dispore into thy nourserte, cussing as thou seest, thy fruites flowres and

trees, which thou by thy fruitfull labour hast there planted, and washing my shape in thy fountaines, doe solace my selfe round about the same, which is the cause Philetas, why all thy plantes and herbes do grow with so great successe, and are in their prime so faire and seemely to shewe, for that by the selfe same spring wherein my louing limmes are bathed, thy flowres and plants be watered.
               For proofe of this, behold thy trees, and al thy nourserie ouer, round about, and see if by reason of my passage, sport or daliance there-on, any one iote be broken or perished, the fruites any thing spoiled, or either stalke or herbe, so much as by any of my steps foiled, or thy fountaines troubled, and then repute thereby thine owne happinesse, who only among all others of thine age, hast the daily successe and fruition of my wished companies. He had no soner deliuered vnto me these speaches, but fluttering forthwith ouer my Mirtes, no otherwise then if it had bin some pretie plesant redbrest, he p
                     •…
                  rched frō twig to twig▪ through & besides the green leaues, and in the end mounting to the verie toppe of the tree, I there perceiued his bowe, his arrowes, his quiuer, and winges at his backe, in the beholding and admiring whereof, he sodenly vanished away, and I beheld him no more. If now my white heares and aged experience, may giue testimonie of any accident, or that my iudgement thereby may be a
                     •…
                  aileable in ought, then dare I assure vnto you both, that you be chairie vnto Loue, and that the respectes and speciall disposition of your actions are wholie deuoted vnto his godhead. Daphnis and Chloe giuing heede to this sage conclusion of the auntient Philetas, conceiued as great felicitie therein, as if he had reported vnto them a matter importing a mightie kingdome, vppon which occasion, they began earnestly to demaunde of him, what maner of thing it might be, that so was termed and called by the name of Loue, if it were an infante, a birde, or what other thing els that might be conceiued, and what was the power and force, and in what manner is swaied. Whervpon old Philetas answered them againe. Loue, said he, is a God, young, faire, and beautifull to beholde, fethered also with wings, by reason whereof his apparance is soden, and taketh pleasure to be conuersant with young folkes, he searcheth fauours, & maketh

the hearts of men to flie as it were with winges, his powre is mightier then that of Iupiter, hee ruleth ouer the Elements and starres, & ouer those also who are gods as him selfe. Your selues haue not so great soueraigntie ouer your flocks, as he hath powre ouer the world. The flowres herbes and trees, are the labours of Loue, by him the waters coole, and the windes doe blowe. I haue seene in the verie beastes and birds also his powre to haue greatly swaied. I my selfe some-times being young, loued the faire and fresh Amarillis, in which time of the continuance and feruencie of mine affection, my feeding and appetite was taken away, I cared neither to drinke nor eate
                     •…
                  , nor was capeable of any ease or quiet, melancholie and sadnes ministred my pleasure, my heart panted in the dailie imagination of her whome I loued, sometimes seemed I to be in a traunce, an other time as one that were beaten or tormented in his ioyntes. Uerie flames as I thought, were kindled within me, for the stanching wherof, I often cast my selfe into the riuers, and called often-times the mightie Pan to releue me, as he that once had beene amourous himselfe of the faire Pithys, and therefore was not vnexperienced of such louely passions. I often thanked the 
                     Nymphe Echo, in that beeing in the woods, shee sondrie times would repeate, the name of sweete Amarillis after me. In so much as perceiuing my selfe manie wayes to be perplexed, I neuer could finde anie remedie whereby to lessen the vehement and ardent flames that fretted within me, saue onely the last and finall conclusion of all manner of affection, which was the sole and onely linke whereby enchained eache to other, my long beloued Amarillis did at the last embrace me. In the enioying whereof I founde that kisses gaue ease to sighes, liking to longing, and bedding eache with other after mariage concluded, the some of all out determined affection.
               
                  Philetas hauing thus debated with these seelie louers, leuing (by discription of himselfe) within them, a plaine and euident discouerie of their owne knowne dispositions, and continued griefes, departed at the last vnto his dwelling. Upon all which speaches, Daphnis for his part was not vnmindefull, but finding in him selfe, a perfect patterne of all that by Philetas was before discoursed vpon, he founde himselfe nowe in greater distresse then

before, for that Loue had long since alreadie begon to touch him to the quicke, wherefore seeing by all similitudes of comparing him selfe with the discourse vttered by Philetas betweene him & his Amarillis, that the passion be sustained, was only by Loue, and that to the quenching and satisfaction thereof belonged, that eche of them might freely and soly inioy eache other, hee began now to studie by all meanes possible how & in what sort he might best endeuour to compasse the same. And hearing that Loue was a God, and remembring there-withall that the like of the same shape and proportion which Philetas had to them described, appeared to their parents in a vision, at such time as by expresse direction both hee and Chloe were committed to their cattell keeping, hee began in minde, with humble obseruaunce to reuerence him. But for asmuch as the extremities reported by Philetas to be continued in his loue, had bred in Daphnis more perseuerance then the euent also therein deliuered, could by anie contecture of his owne, succeed to good and present end, the Shepeheard vexed with his auncient passion (renued by a freshe conceipt of an other imagination) brake into this complaint, which as a testimony to Pan and the other Nymph, of his vnuiolable meaning, hee reserued at one time or other in some of the trees there-abouts to be engrauen.
               
                  To loue alas, what may I call this loue?
                  This vncouth loue, this passion wondrous straunge,
                  A mischiefe deadlie, such as for to proue
                  My heart would shunne, if powre I had to chaunge.
               
               
                  To chaunge said I? recant againe that sownd
                  Recant I must, recant it shall indeed
                  Sith in my heart so many things abound
                  As yeelds desert how ere my fancies speede.
               
               
                  Sweete is the lure that feeds my gazing eies
                  Sweete be the lookes, that whet my hot desire
                  Sweete is the harbour where my quiet lies
                  But to vnsweete, the meanes for to aspire.
               
               
                  
                  Yet must I loue? I must, and so I doe.
                  Suppoze it hard the thing whereat I reach
                  Who doubtes but pearles are for the best to wooe
                  And greatest mindes to highest actions stretch.
               
               
                  Be witnes yet (my flockes) of all my paine
                  And sacred groues that knowe my iust complaint
                  Let aie my loue within this barke remaine
                  Whom harmefull force haue neuer power to taint.
               
               Concluding in this solitary fantasie the lode-starre of his happinesse, who for a little time after the departure of Philetas, had wandered downe to the riuers, approching apase, the very apparance of whome was as the comfortable Sunne in the Spring time, casting his radiant beames for stirring vp and quickening of all earthly creatures. Their entermeeting togither was not without the accustomed pleasure and torments, the mixture whereof, neither grewe altogither exempted from the danger of one other particular most strange kinde of accident, and thus fell out the matter.
               There was a company of rich and wealthy youths of the towne of Metelene, who intending to take a little pleasure on the water, coasted in a calme sea, as it happened from the territorie of their owne citie, downe along the coast of Metelene, the bourenesse whereof, made the passage the more pleasaunt, in that the same is curiously decked with faire and most excelent buildings. These yong men, passing along as they did, by the Island side, landed in diuers places at their pleasure, not offering violence or hurt to any thing, but quietly still tooke the delight they came for, and departed. They fished, angled, and fowled, with ginnes, nettes, and hookes at their pleasure, and the country being fertile of it selfe, they not onely satisfied their delight with present pastime, but filled also the table the better with good vittelles. And forsomuch as their intendment was onely to be merrye abroad, they resolued to fasten their boat for one night, with their corde vpon the sea side, and there continue themselues in a towne hard by vppon the side of the Island.
               
                  It chanced that the vintage, not yet being fully gathered in, the laborers working in the night as well as by day, one of them by occasion, had to vse a strong corde, which for that he had none of his owne, he went to the coast hard by, and tooke the corde wherewith the boat was fastned. These youths in the morning, seeing the hazard of their boat, being so at libertie, made earnest inquirie of the wrong doone, but the party that did it could not be found: wherefore chiding with their host alittle for the iniurie, they retired backe againe into their vessell, and hauing coursed vp along the coast about two leagues and more, they came at the last on that parte of the countrie where Daphnis and Chloe pastured their hearde together. And for that the soile on that side the coast was altogither large and plaine, almost without any couert, they determined to land there againe, and to haue a course or otherwise to hunt, with their dogges or houndes, if so they might be suffered. For which cause they alighting all togither from their boat, drew the same as neere to the shore as coulde be, and cutting downe the braunches from a greene oziar standing hard by, they wreathed the strongest of them that they coulde bend, and therewith fastned their boat safe enough (as they did thinke) to the land.
               Being now on the plaines furnished with their dogs, hounds, and other necessaries, they began to place their toiles, on those sides and places that to them seemed conuenient and necessarie, but their dogges coursing very euill, ranne here and there verye disordered, insomuch, as leauing the game, they ranne into the middest of the heards of Daphnis and Chloe, and their continually baying at their very heeles, fraied so much the goats & sheep, that all of them beganne therevppon to be immediatly scattered, whereof the most part of the goats turning directly vppon the sea coasts, Daphnis ranne after the one part of them, and Chloe after the other.
               The goats there continuing, and hauing neither bush or ought else to browze vppon, got them to the oziar wreath, with whiche the boat was fastned, and browzing two or three of them vpon it, quickly riued the same in sunder, whereby the boat being loosed, floted, by reason of the violence of the waues, immediatly vppon

the seas. The Methiniens misliking their sporte, and drawing downe vnto the coast, missed the boat, and enraged deepely by reason that with such misaduenture, the same, by tempest was thus vehemently carried, had no other reuenge, but altogether fell vpon the poore and solitarie Daphnis. Nowe had the sheepheard no meane to make any resistance against a multitude, but defending himselfe as hee coulde, hee kepte them backe, till he had cried and called for more aid. Whervpon Lamon & Dryas, olde Philetas and others a number, that were nerest about them, came foorth, and desirous to knowe the cause of the griefe of the Methiniens, they declared, as before you haue heard, that beeing at their sport, and hauing fastened their boat with a strong oztar band, the goates of Daphnis by their euill attendaunce and keeping had browzed the same in sunder, wherein their apparell, money, iewelles, and diuers kindes of prouision being, in the same by misaduenture of the loosenesse and tempest was vtterly lost.
               The whole fault and accusation hereof, they vtterly laid to Daphnis, and for sentence therein they were content to bee adiudged by Philetas. Daphnis, hee contrary-wise pleaded for himselfe, that in keeping his goates there a long time together they neuer did spoile or offence to any man, but that the badnes of their hounds, & their owne vnskilful hunting driuing themselues amongest his heards, made them to take the sea-coast, where whilest he was gathering the greatest number together, two of them lay browzing vppon the greene oziar without his knowledge. Philetas hauing heard both allegations, freed Daphnis fro hurt, and imputed the whole fault as it was to the Methiniens, the yong men enraged herewith, beganne to stand vpon force, and answeared, that either they woulde haue Daphnis as slaue for the trespasse, or otherwise be there recompenced their losses.
               Here-vppon ensued on all sides a great hurlie-burlie, and the Metelins drawing in still to their aides, the Methiniens were quite beaten out with their losses and discomfited. Being returned home to their Cittie, they enforced marueilouslie to their rulers, the wrongs receiued by the Metelians, not onelye

affirming, that they had beat them, but stoutly also and vntruely inserted, that they had robbed and taken their goods from them. The Methiniens conceiuing greate dispite heereof in suche sorte to haue their citizens vsed, and they also descended of their most noblest parentage and houses, denounced immediatlie war in open fielde against the Metelenians for the reuengement of these wrongs, but sent them no word at all of this their speedie intendment. For the accomplishment of this exploit, they gaue charge and direction to their Captaine onely for the arming and furniture of 12. gallies, commaunding him with the strength thereof, to enter the fields and teritories of the Metelenians, and without all pitie to forage, wast, and spoile them of all they could get. And farther strength then this they thought not meet at this present to send, winter drawing on as it did, and therefore the lesse meet to trust a greater flote on the sea, than those which were in such maner by them prepared already.
               The captaine slacked no time, but furnished with al things necessarie, coasted that part of the countrie of the Metelene, which altogether bordered vpon the sea, and on that side of the land next vnto them, foraged and wasted all the countrie ouer, carryeng away diuers and sundrye booties and praies, as well of cattell, corne, wine, and a great multitude besides of prisoners, all for the most parte laborers, and such as at that instant holpe in wyth the vintage. This doone, hee proceeded further, and foraged also al along the plaines, where Daphnis and Chloe mainteined their pastures, and they being there in like maner, as the others vnprouided of any resistance, they tooke and did what they would on the borders. Daphnis was not as then with his heard, but trauelled a little way to gather greene boughs for his yoong and tender kids to browze vpon, & seeing a far off the great concourse & formost entrance of his enimies, crept into the hollownesse of a certaine crooked passage vnder a rocke, and there hid himselfe. Chloe was then a keeping the flockes, who no sooner perceiuing the bruite and outrage alreadie begun, tooke hir to flight, & thinking to saue hir self by swiftnes, got into the caue of the Nymphs. But the foragers hauing quicke sight of hir, followed the tract so neere, as they pursued hir euen hard to the very caue. There

seeing no other remedy, she fell flat vnto the souldiors, & prayeng them for the reuerence and regarde due vnto the Nymphs, that would tender no hurt, neither to hirselfe, nor to any of hir beasts. But this petition of hers preuailed not, for the Methinian souldiours after many villanies and dispites, doone and vttered in dirision of the Images, led both hir and hir beasts away as a spoile, chasing and driuing both hir and them before them, in most cruel manner, and without any pitie or compassion. And seeing nowe that they had fully laden their gallories, with all kind of spoiles and booties of euery sort, they ceased to tyre themselues any further: but fearing the vncertaintie of the winter weather, besides the hazard of meetings with any enimies, they desired now none other, but in safetie to returne home to their owne houses, and finding the weather sortable to their purpose, they laid strength to their ores, and made way abroad, the season being so calme, as there was not so much as one puffe of winde wherewith to resist them.
               When all the harrieng of this great spoile and brute was at the last appeased, Daphnis sorted himselfe out of his hollowe rhine, and came againe into the plaine, where he left their heards when hee went a feeding, and finding there neither goates nor sheepe, nor any newes at all either of them or of Chloe, but onelie the emptie fieldes and plaines a lone without anye other creature or companye, and the flute whereon the Nymphe sweetlye was woont to sound, cast downe and lying on the ground, his heart sweltred within him by exceeding sorrowe, insomuch as hee was not scarce able to stand, but lykelie foorth-with to haue swooned, and shedding foorth aboundaunce of teares, so great was his griefe, as hee could not chuse but crie out vppon Chloe, and that also right biterlie. First ranne hee to the foot of a hie and vmbragious rocke, whereon customablie they both were woont to sit and talke togethers, and not hearing any newes of Chloe thereabouts, he then trudged as fast as hee could downe to the sea coasts, and there not finding her, he last of all returned to the caue of the Nymphs, whether him seemed at the first incursion of these souldiers shee made haste to flie, and casting him selfe downe prostrate there, at the feete of the Images, hee

entred into these or the very like complaintes deliuered in verst before them.
               
                  What griefe alas, what hell vnto my woes?
                  What sorrow may exceede my foule mishap?
                  What more excesse than mischiefe where it flowes?
                  Or deepe dispaire that all my woes doeth wrap?
                  Vnhappy downes, what ailed wicked spight
                  To reaue from you and me, our sweete delight.
               
               
                  My tender kiddes if ere your louing skips
                  You beare in minde, and on this pleasaut dale
                  How manie times your young delightfull trips
                  Haue Daphnis mo'ud to mourne his bitter bale
                  Then for his sake that whilom was your guide
                  Yeeld foorth your plaints, and griefes to you betide.
               
               
                  Ye mournefull flockes dispersed where ye goe
                  To vncouth pastures yeeld my drearie tunes
                  Lamenting teares, and sighings full of woe
                  Wherein my thoughts for Chloes loue consumes
                  Let be your foode, and your tender walkes
                  Conceiue the sorrowe that my pleasure balkes
               
               
                  Returne to me your stately heards. Returne
                  My heart, my ioye, my comfort and my care.
                  My blisfull Chloe once againe returne.
                  Ye sacred Nymphs, or death for me prepare
                  Seale vp your springs, and praise in secret lie
                  If Chloes rape doe cause her Daphnis die.
               
               Infinite were the complaints that the seemely shepheard made in the Caue, missing the sweetened societie of his chiefest dearling. One while exclaimed he, on the hilles, the dales, the springs, the groues and broade stretched shades, eache one of which he inuited to lament the losse of her, whose presence he adiudged vnto them as to him selfe to haue beene the greatest comfort.
               
                  Then conuerting him-selfe againe to the Statues in the caus. O vngratefull goddesses said he, that haue so suffered her, who honored your being, with so many sweet regardes, to be thus rauished betweene your hands. O negligent of her whome committed to your charge being an infant, you would thus suffer to become a praie to so vile and wicked persons. Why shewed you not your mightie powers in so manifest contempt done vnto your Images▪ your Statues, and these springs? what 
                     •…
                  ooted mee in all the time hithertoo that I haue guarded my heards vpon these downes, in which neuer the woolfe could so much as bereaue me of one of my kiddes, when now at one instant the enemies haue carried awaye the whole flockes. Alas Chloe bearest thou the like paine of thy seelie Daphnis, being nowe estraunged from me by forreine rouers? or remembrest thou at all these fields, these valleies, these Nymphes, or him that waileth for thee nowe, in this most vnfortunate state? Oh if the sound of my lamentations may any waies be caried to those landes and seas wherein thou art (alas to farre from me cooped) pittie yet his distresse, who desperate of all other comfort than that which hee solie expecteth in thy happie presence, sigheth and euermore longeth after thee. O Goddes and Nymphes, to whom these woods and walkes haue at any time bin charie, reuenge the wrong done vnto those who haue honored you, and let not my infortunate heardes and fairest bewty of my deere Chloe become an honor to that their cruell conquest.
               Hauing run himselfe a great while into these & such like wofull remembrances, (as it often happeneth vnto minds surcharged with too extreme sorrowes) a broken slumber surprised at last his restles fantastes. And lying before the statues of the Nymphs in such kind of Extasie, there appeared to him in a vision, thre women seming by their port to haue bin goddesses, their attire altogether Nimphlike, their countenances freyght with manifest pleasures, who yelding vnto him sondrie and most amiable graces, appeared to put forward to his reliefe many occasions of comfort, Afterwardes the most excellent. as well in stature port and bewty of them all, casting vpon the forlorne shepheard, her amiable gestures, said vnto him: Cease shepheard, thy plaintes and incessant 
                     •…
                  mentations, and henceforth be recomforted, assuring thy selfe

that thy Chloe is, and shall continue in 
                     •…
                  auerie. The Nymph is ou
                     •…
                   charge, to whom her yeares and education haue bin committed from her for
                     •…
                  st cradle, and being left an infant in this 
                     •…
                  aue, we haue purue
                     •…
                  ed hetherto for her, and so will continue to haue speciall conceit & respect towards her. Thinke not Daphnis that she is the daughter of Dryas, or borne in this village as thou hast supposed, or that this estate and calling wherein shee now is, befitteth her place and parentage. But know that in keping her flocks here, & doing vnto vs obseruances, we haue sufficiently laid down and prouided what shall become of her, and to what ende remaineth both your fortunes. She is not, n
                     •…
                   shal
                     •…
                  e lead away prisoner▪ to Methimne, nor shall as thou doubtest become any part or parcell of
                     •…
                  he it spoyle. To assure thee the better whereof, knowe that we haue made meanes vnto the god Pa
                        •…
                     , who resideth hereabout this large Pine, to become fauourable and aiding to ou
                     •…
                   purpose, for that his power is more pliable, and better exercised then ours in fea
                     •…
                  es of warre. He is euen nowe parted from vs, and go
                     •…
                   forwardes at our requestes in the cause, intending to become a daungerous enemy to the Methimnians▪
                   Wherfore be of good courage, and rayse thy selfe fr
                     •…
                   this solitarie Caue, goe 
                     •…
                  ome to thy fostering parentes Lamon and Mirtale▪
                   and shew thy selfe vnto them for their better comfort, who supposing thee with Chloe to be taken, and spoyled in this hurlie hurlie▪ haue serched and sorrowefulli
                     •…
                   sought the round about these pastures. Thy Chloe, or euer the faire 
                     〈◊〉
                   next▪ shal haue 
                     〈◊〉
                   vailed of her purple couer powdered with glimp sing stars▪ together with both your flocks, whole safe and entier, shalbe here againe returned vnto thee. Such is the pleasure of the Nymphs, that haue endeuored to perfourme this with such speede, in demonstration of the lo
                     •…
                  e and care they haue of thee▪
               
               
                  Daphnis, asser
                     •…
                  eined in his imaginations of the truth of this vision, a 
                     •…
                  ooke, and weeping as much for ioy, as h
                     •…
                  e did 
                     〈◊〉
                   for sorrow, made his deuotions before the Nymphes, and there vowed that 
                     •…
                  f according to their promise his Chloe, and flocks v
                     •…
                  ble mi
                  
                     •…
                  ed were returned▪ he would then sacrifice 
                     〈◊〉
                   end of his fa
                     •…
                  
                  test 
                     〈◊〉
                  
                  ▪ And running frō thence incontinent, towa
                     •…
                  ds the image of the God 
                     〈◊〉
                   who appearing▪ vnderne
                     •…
                   the 
                     〈◊◊〉
                   had

the feete of a goate, and two hornes on his head, and helde in one of his handes a flute▪ and in the other a young kidoe, leaping as i
                     •…
                   were and skipping about him, he also made his prayers to him; to become forward in the purpose, promising in like sorce vnto him one of his hiest and stateliest goates. The euening drawing on, he tooke vp the twigges and small bowes which hee had gathered for his goates, and departed home to Lamon, who glad to see him, contrarie to expectation to be retorned in sauetie, reioyced with his wife Mirtale.
               By this▪ time now the captaine of the Methimenians, hauing long traueiled on the seas in his way homewards, and laden with great spoiles, and finding his people also to bee some-thing ouerweried, thought to take a harbor hard by, and there a while with vic
                     •…
                  uals and some rest to refresh them. And finding at the last a place conuenient did there cast ankers, and gaue them to all maner of sport that might be to delight them, as those that besides the rich bootie they had taken, had no want of wine or other delicate viandes, that the Ilande whence they came, could any waies afforde vnto them. And carelesse as they were of all things, freed and secure of foes or 
                     〈◊〉
                   other hazard, it seemed at night in the middest of their vanqu
                     •…
                  ing, that all the land about them was 
                     〈◊〉
                   fire, and a sodaine noise arose in their hearing as of a great fleete, and armed nauie for the seas, approching towardes them. The sound whereof and 
                     •…
                  re adf
                     •…
                  ll sight, made some of thē to crie Arme Arme, and others to gather together their companies, & weapons. One thought his fellowe next him was hurt, an other feare
                     •…
                   the shot that he heard ratli
                     •…
                   in his eares, this man thought his companion slaine hard by his side, an other seemed to stumble on dead carcasses. In briefe▪ the hurt
                     •…
                  e and tumult was so wonderfull and straunge, as they almost were at their wit
                     •…
                  es endes.
               This great afr
                     •…
                  ie continued in such sort as you haue heard all the night long, and that in so terrible manner as that they vehementlie wished for the daie, hoping in the appearing thereof to be relieued. But yet their rest grewe not by the mornings shewe as was expected, but rather the light thereof discouered vnto the
                     •…
                   farre more fearefull and straunge effectes, for the goates and kiddes of Daphnis were all wreathed and enuironed about their

hornes with vine-leaues and grapes, their weathers, sheepe, and lambes, howled as woolues, vpon diuers of their heads were garlands of pine-trees. The seas also them-selues were not void of these wonderfull shewes, for when they that ruled the oares went about to stirre them, they shiuered all in fitters. When they went about to 
                     •…
                  oyse vppe their ankers They cleaued fast to the seas.
               The dolphins tumbling about their vessels, bounsed them so hard, that they were ready to fall in-sunder, and themselues to be drowned in the seas. A dreadful noise was heard from the rocks, not as the sound of any naturall crumpets, but far more shril and hideous, which shewed an onset to be giuen vppon them by some waighty armies. Wherof the Methimnians being in exceeding dread, hurled altogether to their weapons, supposing, that the enemies from whome they had re
                     •…
                  t that spoile, had come vppon them on a sudden, without giuing them respect to gather their weapons.
               By the conceit hereof may easily be gathered, howe Pan the mightie sheepe heard ioyning with the Nymphes, became aiding to their petitions▪ and that exercising vpon these cruell rouers, the power of a god, hee deliuered 
                     〈◊〉
                   their knowledge, how the mighty powers were not for some cause or other pleased with those their spoiles and robberies. But the occasion by these Methimnians could not be diuined, for that they could not imagine themselues to haue rest away any thing sacred either to Pan or any other of the Nymphs. And beeing as they were in this muse, about the middest of the day, the captaine of their galleies (not without expresse diuine prouidence) was cast in a deepe and heauie slumber. And as he lay sleeping in his cabine, to the great amaze of all the company, considering those tumults, Pan himself in a vision stoode right before him, and beeing as hee was in the shape 
                     〈◊〉
                   the Pine before described, he vsed vnto him these or the like speeches following.
               O cruell and mischiefe us sacre
                     •…
                  egers▪ ho
                     •…
                  e haue you dared with 
                     •…
                  o great and vncontrolled boldnes, in armes and shewe of wa
                     •…
                  
                  ▪ to enter thus cruelly vppon my haunts and pastures, deare vnto me alone, as wherevpon reposeth my speciall delights, why haue your 
                     〈◊〉
                   from the my stockes and heards, my cattell▪ and

beeues, and so thereby dishonoured my walkes and valleis, they resting as parcell of my charge, and vnder my sole protection? And not contented herewith haue most contemptuously, and in greatest dispite that might be of the Nymphes and of mee, who haue seene it with our own eies, caried away the faire sheepe heardesse Chloe, euen whē she remained in the caue, as committed to their patronage and charge. I heere protest and denounce vnto you, as I am the god Pan, and as the▪ liuely flockes and heards, are vnto me of sacred pleasance, that no one of you shall euer see Methimne againe, if you do but so much as make meane to passe forwards with this pillage. Nor shal you escape the wreake of those hideous soundes that you haue heard, without leauing so much as one of you aliue▪ but that the sea it selfe shall soake you vppe, and your carcasses become a foode vnto the fishes: Render therefore backe againe vnto the Nymphs their Chloe▪
                   ou
                     •…
                   to me the flockes and heards you haue taken, and set them immediatly 
                     〈◊〉
                   land, that I may conduct them backe againe into their haunts and pastures, so dooing, I may remit the residue of the wrong, and suffer you in saftie to 
                     〈◊〉
                   againe into your countries.
               The Captaine whose name was Briaxia, beeing awa
                     •…
                  ed, of this vision, grewe into greater feare and amaze of this heau
                     •…
                   charge and speeches. And calling together his souldiors and companies, he caused present serch to be made for Chloe throghout all the galleis, among their number of prisoners, and shee being found with a chapelet of the Pine tree leaues vppon her head, hee declared vnto them the expresse commaundement and direction of the god: which doone▪ they all by o
                     •…
                   consent set hi
                     •…
                   al and. Chloe was no sodner parted out of the vessell where she
                     •…
                   was, but they heard from the hie rockes a sound againe, but nothing dreadfull as the other, but rather much sweete, me lod
                     •…
                  ous, and pleasing, such as the most cunning sheepheards vse▪ before their flockes and heards, leading them vnto their pastures▪ 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   noise whereof the goo
                     •…
                  es, kiddes▪ and sheepe togither with their tender lambes, issued ouer the 
                     •…
                  ankes▪ without feare or any regard at all of euil, skipping and leaping about Chloe▪
                   as if they seemed to haue i
                     •…
                  iutly with hi
                     •…
                   reioiced at their present deliuer
                     •…
                   are▪ But the other he 
                     〈◊〉
                   and flockes with them did 
                     〈◊◊〉
                  
                  
saue onelye these, to whome it seemed, appertained the sounde from the rocke, wherewith they aloue were called. This shewed vnto the beholders a great wander which made them fearefully to regard the power and puissance of the mightie Pan. An other thing as strange also as this was shewed vnto them, for that the sheepe and goats of Chloe led by the onely musike, without them of any person at al that conducted them, followed on the pastures, and fedde togither as they went, as if they had beene therevnto guided.
               It was now about the time that the heardsmen after the middest of the day passed, did accustome to driue their beastes and flockes to be pastured, when Daphnis a far off from the top of a hie mount watching the time of his delightsome Chloes appearance, perceiued hir comming with their heards. Wherevpon descending with all haste possible into the plaines, with intent to meete hir, he called and cried with loud voice. O sacred Nymphs, O honoured and gentle Pan, and without beeing able to speake the rest, he ran wi
                     •…
                  h maine force vnto Chloe, and embracing hir fast in his armes, grew so vehemently surprized with the thoght, that he had no power to vnloose himselfe againe, so great and exceeding was the ioy whereinto he was whelmed, by the sudden & long looked for sight of her desired presence. But Chloe during this long embracement, so louingly chafed his spirites as that she quickly recouered his surcharged conceits againe. And then recounting togither this long seeming time of 
                     •…
                  their short disseuerance, impatient each one at the rehearsall of the others euilles, they got them to the vmbragious rocke, wherein erst they were accustomed with great pleasure to be recreated.
               There being set, it is not like but he with great desire serched of her the manner of her 
                     •…
                  ereauing, her vsing and entertainement during all her absence, the summe and effect whereof she gently recompted vnto him, not forgetting, there-withall the hazards and daungers that for her sake they were in, and finally, howe that by the gentle conduction of Pan, shee thitherto had beene garded and deliuered, whereat the youthfull sheepeheard wondering, and knowing howe mightily his prayers had wrought in the eares of the Nymphs, he likewise vnfolded to her his fortune

for his part reckoned vnto her his griefes, his serch, lamentation, and all things that euer he had heard or seene in her absence.
               Now when they had thus ech to other recounted their griefes and cares, and seemed both of them to be well contented and eased of their ill happes, they then deuised of these their ioyfull meetings, to send word to Lamon and Dryas: and onely to make preparation thence-forth for their promised sacrifices. Daphnis hauing perfourmed what he would or desired herein, the antient heardsmen were by this time come, wherefore they deuised immediately to go forward to their sacrifices. Daphnis for himselfe first wreathing the yong hornes of one of his fattest kiddes, with broad vine leaues, in sort as at the appearaunce of Pan to the captaine Braxia, they were decked in the galleis, he brought the same before the caue of the Nymphs, and there slaying the kidde, did flea off the skinne, and sprinckling wine and milke thereon, hung it vppe before the Nymphs for a memoriall, then banquetted they with the fleshe by themselues, and with manie praises and notable ditties framed, in their sweete remembrances, praied all togither the Nymphs to become vnto them for euermore fauourable and gratious.
               But the next day approching vnto them with a nouell pastime, brought also a new kinde of obseruance vnto them, the maner whereof they wholie dedicated to Pan, in whose honor til this time, neither Chloe nor Daphnis had euer emploied any seruice. To this action also were aiding and assisting both Lamon and Dryas. Daphnis thinking no rewarde sufficient to him that had done him so great a benefit, as not only to restore vnto him againe his heards whole and sounde, which vtterly els had miscaried, but also to bring vnto his bosome againe his Deere Chloe, which of all other things earthly, he most obserued, tooke forth of his hear
                     •…
                   the goodliest and fairest of all his goates, amongst the which hee choose the greatest and most principall bucke, him decking with wreathed bowes of the goodliest Pine, and al bedewing his forehead and hornes with newe wine, & the milke of one of his speckled goates, he began to make ready his sacrifice.
               To this newe obseruance doone to the god of sheepeheardes, came also the good old man Philetas, and with him his yongest

sonne Syterus, and filling his lap with bunches picked of the finest and most deintie grapes, fruits straunge and dellicate for that season, Mirtle bowes, and pomegranats yet hanging vpon the branches, and enuironned with their greene leaues, hee approched the Image of Pan, and honoring the same with these sundrie presentes awayted the rest that should bee doone and perfourmed by Daphnis.
               
               Before the pinetree where stoode the image of Pan, compassed as it were in a tabernacle, there was an alter pastorall made of a great square stone, fit and propo
                     •…
                  cioued in auntient time to the shepheards God, whereon the oldest sheapheardes and greatest heard kepers, were wont for the sauetie of them and their heards yearely to performe diuers offerings and banquers, the recordation whereof, brought good Philetas to this pastaunce.
               Thither Daphnis hauing brought his gift, killed the same besides that stone, and taking off the skinne with head, hornes, and feete, hanging still about it, fastned the same to diuers braunches of the Pine, and hong it ouer the image of Pan, then causing the flesh thereof in diuerse sortes to bee dressed, they spread their clothes on the stone, and there-with first of all began to furnish their banquet. Then tooke Philetas in the honour of Pan and Bacchus, a great goblet of wine and milke togethers, and dronke thereof as much as hee woulde, and gaue it afterwardes to Daphnis.
               
               During all this feast, appointed to the memoriall of this seemly sheepheardesse, the antient heardsmen and sheepheards, when they had well drunke and vitled themselues together, took great delight to recorde amongst them, each to other their trauels passed, then beganne they to reckon the sports and pastimes of their yong yeares, their feeding of flockes, and keeping of cattell togethers, their prizes wonne by diuers kindes of actiuities, theyr shepheards loues, their laies, their many and hard kinde of aduentures to compasse their likings: and finally, out of all these, how many dangers and threatned perilles, aswell by theeues, as otherwise, both by land and sea they had escaped. One of them vaunted himselfe in his youth to haue killed a mightie woolfe, an other, that with ginnes and trappes he had beene the destruction

of sundry rauening wild beasts, this man declared how well & thriftily he had kept his cattel, only aged Philetas, forgeting these long passed memories, recorded howe many times before all the heardsmen, & al that honored Pan vpon their downs, he had in the seruice of Loue, & sound of al their brauest musik gained the victorye: Insomuch as, but onely Pan himself with his sweet Syrinx, there was neuer any shepherd found, that in his daies was able to excel him. The praise of this Philetas skil, hartned the fresh & iolly Daphnis with his faire Chloe, to pray of him, that at that instant in honour of the gentle Pan, he would manifest vnto them some part of his science, as the only gift wherein they had greatest desire to be instructed, and wherewith the god of shepeheards delighted most to be saluted. Philetas would not denie them so iust a demaund, albeit he something excused himselfe, by reason of his great age, which permitted him not so good breathing, and of so long con
                     •…
                  nuance, as whilom in his youth he had. Notwithstanding, he tooke in hand the pipe of yong Daphnis, and beganne to profer thereon, but he found the smalnes thereof to be too litle to comprehend thereon any excellencie of cunning, as being the pipe of a yoong beginner, and such as whereon a man so wel practised, as himselfe was able to shew no great skill. For which cause, he sent his son Tytirus to his lodge, which was distant from thence but halfe a mile at the most, willing to fetche him his owne pipe. Tytirus throwing off his iacket, tripped as light as dooth the tender fawne, running away in his shirt, to shewe vnto Philetas, and the rest, his agilitie, and great nimblenes, during whose absence, to thintent therby somwhat to recreat the hearers, Lamon tooke vpon him to recount in their presence▪ the historie of the faire and beautifull Syrinx, which hee saide he heard in his youth deliuered by a Sicilian goat-heard.
               The company gaue heed to his speaking, and Lamon thus began therevpon in their hearing. This Syrinx, said he, the musicke wherof hath bene from Pan recounted alwayes so excellent, was not by the formost antiquity therof at the first an instrument▪ but was a faire yong maide of fauor and feature most singular & perfect, wel loued she to chaunt and sing foorth hir laies, with grace most wonderful, and harmonie right pleasant. Often frequented

she the downes, & had great felicitie in keeping hir flocke. The sheep she fed stood amazed on their pastures, and when they heard hir tunes, immediatly they left their appetite of eating. At hir voice they danced & skipped, the lambs themselues frequented hir sounds, & at the hearing therof, would trip vpon the hillocks. The Nymphs regarded much hir musike, and had hir oftentimes to accompany their disports. Pan frequenting at this instant the fields & pastures, and hauing plesure to chase the fewnes & kids round about the groues, heard vpon a time the faire Syrinx, sitting by a plesant fountain vnder the shady thickets, melodiously to deliuer foorth hir tunes, & hearing the wonderful and variable notes she sang, drew neere and neere vnto the place, and 
                     •…
                  eeing that aswell with excellent cunning, as with most rare and p
                     •…
                  erring beautie she was replenished, he boldly stept to hir, bicause he was a god, & praied at hir handes the thing he most desired, & being exceeding amorous as he was, he began to tempt the Nymph with gifts, & many other faire promises, saying, that if she would incline to his loue, he would cause, that twice a yere hir sheepe and goats should yeane and bring forth their yong, & for the greater increase of hir flocks, should haue two at once, besides, the pastures shoulde vnto them be euermore fruitfull.
               But Syrinx nothing regarding these amorous offers, vnto hir made by the god, scoffed rather at his shape thā otherwise, saying she aspected not the loue of any one much lesse of such as he, who thogh he were a god, yet was in proportion more like to one of y• goats of hir troop, than to a man. The god angry at hir disdaineful vsage, intended to take hir by force, but shee preuenting his fraud by flight, indeuored to escape, & he stil pursued hir. And feeling hirself in thend to be gretly wearied, she sudenly got at last among the reeds, and therin creeping from place to place, woond hirselfe out of sight. But Pan inraged with greater vehemencie than before, in that hee coulde not ouertake hir, curte downe the reedes in haste, in minde to seeke & sue after her, and not finding any thing else besides the marishes, for that shee was vtterlie vanished, hee then perceiued the great inconuenience wherevnto he was driuen, and sorrowing greatly for the Nymph, whome he knewe to haue beene conuerted into a reede, hee cropped the

same reede also from the place, and thereof framed in seauen quils his artificiall and excellent pipe, the most sweete and delicate instrument of any other, the pleasantnes whereof recording yet the melodie of hir from whence it came, beareth at this present the prize and honor of musike among all the sheepeheardes. Lamon hadde no sooner finished his discourse, and that Philetas with all the rest hadde highly commended it, but Tytirus was quickely returned againe with his fathers pipe, which was composed of diuers reedes great and small togethers, trimmed at the toppes with Laton, and to him that hadde not beene acquainted with the difference it might haue seemed the former instrument of Pan, which he had framed out of the faire Syrinx.
               
               
                  Philetas then raising him selfe on his feete from off his seate, beganne first in gentle sort, to assay the quilles, and finding them to be in order, and without any impeachement of the sound or blast, he beganne to shew his cunning. The noise thereof, was questionlesse most pleasant, and therewithal strange to be heard, wherein his artificiall handling the stops, was such, as he could at pleasure make them go soft or hie, as him listed. Then began Philetas for the more inlargement of his cunning, to shewe vnto them vppon his pipe all sortes of pleasures and pastimes that hee could, the moodes whereof he handled with such perfection▪ as all that he plaied, you woulde haue thought almost to haue beene a thing indeede effected, whether it were in actions belonging to the feeding and garding of all kinde of beastes, which in sundrie orderly tunes he diuersly had expressed, or in any sorte otherwise.
               All the companie were whusht and verie attentiue vnto his soundes, without one worde or other speaking at all, till Dryas at the last rising from his siege, praied Philetas that hee would sound foorth some excellent tune in the honour of Bacchus, whervnto himselfe likewise daunced, and there handled the manner of their vintages, one while seemed he to carry the pots, then to bring the grapes in a trough, after to lade the 
                     •…
                  uice into diuers vesselles, lastly, to tunne the wine when it was made, al which so promptly and readily he did, and with so naturall a grace, as vnto the beholders did minister occasion of great pleasure, insomuch

as them seemed verily before their eies, to see the vines, the grapes, the troughs, the 
                     •…
                  unnes, and Dryas himselfe, drinking in very deed of the newnesse thereof.
               This olde fellow hauing so neate and finely done his deuoire, ranne immediately after to Daphnis and Chloe, and winding their turnes next wherewith to conclude the pastime, the faire yoong goat-heard counterfeating himselfe to be Pan, and she the faire Syrinx in their daunces, he first beganne to woe hir, and she refused, then would he inforce hir, and she then departed, he following hir, she fled, then ranne he to ouertake hir, and she seeming wearie, bicause the reedes wanted, hid hirselfe closely behind the bushes. Then Daphnis taking in hand the great flute of Philetas, sounded thereon a dittie lamentable and piteous, and of one amorous, that knewe not to be satisfied: of one suing, and still was refused, then sounded hee the sorrowe and griefe of hys want growne by extremitie, and that in so rufull manner as moued the hearers generally to compassion and pittie, after closing his pipe vnder his arme, as one desperate of hir hee pursued, hee chaunted foorth in their presence this rufull complaint following:
               
                  Ye heauens (if heauens haue power to iudge of things amisse)
                  Ye earthlie guides that swaie and rule, the stem of all my blisse.
                  Ye starres if you can iudge, ye Planets if ye knowe
                  Of haynous wrongs, that tendred beene to men on earth belowe,
                  Then iudge, reput
                        •…
                     , & deeme, giue sentence and diuine
                  Of all the wo that rues my hart, and causlesse makes me pine,
                  If right to men of right belongs with equall doome,
                  Then heauens I pray admit my teares, and do my plaints resume,
                  Your sacred powre it is that yeeldes me bale or boote:
                  The sighs I spend are else but waste, and vaine is all my sute.
                  I loue, alas, I loue, and loued long I haue,
                  My loue to labour turned is, my hope vnto the graue,
                  My fruit is time mispent, mispending breedes my gaine,
                  My gaine is ouer-rulde by losse, and losse breedes all my paine,
                  Here my gastly ghost could halt or go awrie,
                  I aske no fauour for my sute, but let me starue and die,
                  
                     But if by fixed faith by trouth I sought to clime
                  By seruice long that nere should be shut vp by any time.
                  Yf onely zeale I beare to that I most desire
                  And choice reguard of purest thoughts hath set my heart on fire
                  Why should not my reward conformed be with those
                  Whose liues at happiest rate are led and craue aright suppose
                  If this be all I seeke, if sole for this I serue
                  Then heauens vouchsafe to graunt me this els let me die and sterue.
               
               
                  Daphnis hauing ended his song and musique togethers, the olde Philetas could not but commend therein both his youth and verie forward inuention, and abashing him selfe wonderfullye of his so great towardnes, in signe of loue and good affection he bare vnto him, he gaue him his flute as he that for his present skill had well shewed himselfe of all others neerest to approche his cunning. The guyft whereof Daphnis taking right thankefully, offered immediatlye his owne pype vnto the God Pan, and after he had fet forth Chloe and kissed her, as one whom newlie he had found & receiued from a very flight indeed, the company dissolued here-vpon, and each one returned home seuerally. The night drawing on, cōmanded euery man to the rest, y• daies trauel also ta king end, they iointly reposed their heards in their peculiar places But these two louers not hauing herewith fully cōcluded, al their determinatiō, began in their going homewards, eche one to make a particular interest of the others affection. And to the ende the better assurance thereof might passe to both their contentments, they iointly agreed to geue eche to other an interchangeable oth. In so much as Daphnis first beginning, returned back to the Image of Pan from vnder the Pine, and taking his Chloe by the hand, said.
               I sweare and here protest by the God Pan, through whose sacred aid, I purchased thy late deliuerance, and whom for this purpose I zealouslie do here call to witnesse, that Chloe of all others shall euer be vnto me most deerest, and that without her I shal not at any time think my life to be prolonged in happines. This done, Chloe leading him also to the caue of the Nymphs, swore and protested there the like othe in their presence, affirming solemnelie

that she would euer liue and die with her Daphnis. But Chloe as she that was young, plaine and simple, and vnused before time to the fidelitie of mens promises, recounting with her selfe that Daphnis in his othe had called the god Pan to bee a witnesse, would needes haue in the same caue by othe also to make her a newe promise. This Pan (my Daphnis saide shee) is a wanton god, verie subtil and amorous, in whom there is at all no credit or affiance, he hath beene enamored on Pitys he hath loued Sirinx he pursueth also dailie y• 
                  Naiades, & likewise the 
                     Nymphs Dryades, in him is nothing but inconstancie and chaunge, so that if swearing by him, thou afterwardes doest falsifie thy promise to me giuen, he will do nothing but sport at thy deceit, because he is trustlesse himselfe, though thy loue tend to as many as he hath canes in his Syrinx. But sweare thou me here before these Nymphs, by the tender goat, by whose louing care & suck thou wast preserued, that Chloe neuer louing any but thee, thou wilt not forsake her. And when shee faileth at any time vnto thee of the othe and promise she hath sworne before the Nymphes, then chase her heere and there, or slea her at one stroke as if she were a wolfe.
               
                  Daphnis greatly contented in minde at this hot
                     •…
                   pursute of Chloe, would do nothing at all that might impugne their fantasie, wherefore standing before the caue of the Nymphes, in the midst of his heard, hee tooke the horne of a buck in the one hand and of a she goate in the other, and there swore vnto Chloe the othe and assurance she required, wherewith the Nymphe beeing right well satisfied, esteemed of the sheepe and goates to bee gods more proper and meete vnto shepheards, whereon to haue protested then any other persons, that thereunto might better bee accepted. And sealing vp the memorie hereof with manifold embracements, the stars now ginning to peare through out all the skies, commended the residue of their meanings, to an other daies cōference, wherby their loue and pastimes were at this instant concluded togethers.
            
            
               
               
                  The third booke of the loues pastorall of Daphnis and Chloe.
               
                  THe brute of these late broiles hauing greatly enraged the mindes and courages of the Metelenians against those of Methimne, in that without all lawe and order of armes, they had thus entred vppon and pillaged their landes and countries, they esteemed it a thing to farre vnmeete this estate and seigniorie to put vp the reproche of so great a damage, considering that the reputation of their soyle was neuer before enabled to the dishonorable tolleration of so heinous and expresse iniuries. Wherefore beliberating with all possible speede to be reuenged vpon them, the Prince and councell of that state, caused incontinent to be leuied in their Island, an armie of seuen thousand footemen, and three thousand horsemen, and therof made Captaine generall, a notable and right valiant gentleman, whose name was Hippasia, commanding them to leaue the sea (for the winter stormes approching) and to marche with easie iourneies by land, into the territories of the enemies.
               
                  Hippasia hauing receiued his charge, departed from Metelene, and with his companie made such speede, as that in verie short space he came to Methimnia, where behauing himself right honorablie, wherein he vsed neither crueltie nor tyrannie, anie in the countrie where he came, neither fourraged he their landes, or tooke at all anie praye, spoyle, or bootie from the poore people or labourers. For that standing highly vpon the honor of a Captaine and his owne reputation, he deemed those kinde of proferings to be the workes rather of some thiefe or rouer, than of him that should be a Captaine, or among souldiers esteemed as a generall. Wherefore to auoyde this slaunder, and to the intent by some notable valor to accomplishe the matter hee came for, he tooke the direct waye leading towardes their citie▪ intending there by force

of armes to make his conquest honourable, and not otherwise, In which pretence he well hoped by his more then common indus
                     •…
                  rie to vse so great expedition, as that vppon a sudden hee might enter their portes before they had time to knowe, or leisure to prouide for anie resistance at all if it were possible.
               But he in this resolution being now come within a six miles of the citie, contrarie to all expectation, respecting the great brauado they had tofore time geuen, encountred with a Herault of armes sent vnto him from the Magistrates & people of the same. Who had in request with all submission to deliuer, that the Methimnians not seeking warre at his handes, or to haue to do with armes, desired only to haue peace. And that beeing enformed that the vprore committed in Metelene, began at the first by the insolencie of a fewe young men of their citie, and only betweene the peasantes of the Islande and them, and that the worthiest sort of the Metelenians neuer consented to the cause, nor had hetherto till this present entermedled in the matter, they were therefore hartelie sorie for the iniuries by them on their partes offered, and desired therefore, that as good and louing neighbours, they both might thenceforth trafique and liue anew togethers, and for any wrongs by the Methimnians to them tendred, or prisoners takē, or spoyles made, they were readie to restore and make amendes, in anie sort that reasonablie might be required.
               Hereupon were these articles with other conditions of peace therein also inserted, and to the Herault deliuered in writing, presented to the generall Hippasia, who being a man alwaies honorablie conceipted, and well weighing of the cause in hand, together with the largenesse of their offers, albeit he had in cōmission by full power and aucthoritie to do vppon them what manner of spoyle he might or could, yet neuerthelesse abstained hee vtterly therefro, and yet continuing his forces hard by vpon them, gaue leaue and libertie vnto the Ambassadours of Methimnia, to passe through his armie, and to goe with their ambassage vnto their Prince, and both to the same Prince and councell, aduertised hee also in report the said articles and offers, desirous to know therin their spedie opinions and pleasure. The considerations of this treatie seemed vnto the Councell of Metelene to bee of so great

consequence, and the condicions eke of the same to them so honorable, as that vpon a litle debatement had with th'ambassage they receiued their offers, & for the more confirmation of what on each part intended (after present restitution made of such wrongs and trespasses agreed vppon: and hostages giuen for a surplusage of mony shortly to be paid vnto them) they assosiated other commissioners to Hispasia, and by effectuall letters returned, gaue order vnto him and them of a new league and peace to be made.
               
                  Hispasia harkened to all thinges to him on that behalfe enioyned, & traueiling with those persons to whom his aucthoritie was here in now annexed, brought the matter forth-with to very good conclusion. Thus was the Methimnian warre being enterprised and taken in hand by a straunge beginning, assoone as the same came in bruite, by this meanes all at one instant both published and ended. Toe finishing of this strife, brought the Winters entrie vpon their backes: the sharpe season whereof, by reason of the great frostes and snowes immediatlye ensuing there-vppon in so great aboundance, became right piercing and hideous. Now was the vncomfortable time wherein nothing then stormes, and blustering northren blastes were so rife, the snowe lay thick lined on the ground, shutting the poore labourers with the great depth therof fast into their houses, the springs ratled downe the mountaines with their icie streames, the trees spoiled of their gallant brauerie seemed as dead, the earth appeared no where but euen vpon the verie brimme of the riuers and fountaines. It was now no time to leade the beastes to pastures, nor to suffer them almost to go out of doores. The freesing Boreas called for great fires, which according to ancient hospitalitie of shepheards, was made on a large harth in the middest of their halles, the blasing shewe wherof immediatly after the mornings cocke, inuited each one in the cold frostie seasons, to drawe round about it: and there with farre more easie labour then abroade, to dispatch their housholde busines. The hindes and such as tilled and labored the groundes, tooke herein great pleasure, in so much as the bitternesse of the weather, became vnto them for the time being, a releasment of their hard endured labour, so that sporting themselues in diuers housholde pastimes, they chaunted their countrie tunes, and diuers

songes accustomed in their vintages to y• honor of Bacchus.
               
               But young Daphnis, remembring himselfe of his Chloe and all their pleasures passed, accused the gods (as enemies to nature, and her goodly brauerie) in this sort to macerate and punish the mother of all earthly creatures, Chloe whose fancie was also as his, thought some manifest wrong to be tendred vnto Pan and the Nimphlike fountaines, in thus discol
                     •…
                  ring their daintie springs and walkes, & 
                     〈◊〉
                   without mercie vpon their nurses bosome, the sweetest of all their derlings. It ioyntly grieued them when they sawe their sachell wherein they wont to carie their foode togethers, their bottel also wherin their wine was many times filled, how in a corner they lay despised and vnoccupied, the hilles also, the groues, and sweete smelling eglantine, and woodbindes growing on euerie bushes, did wonderfully vexe them to see how all their glorie was spoiled. Often would they whister & murmur in them selues saying, O when shall the earth againe recouer her wonted forces, when wil the soft and fresh coloured greene with motlie pinkes & sweetest primrosen spring vpon these hard knotted turfes, & clustered clods againe. And when they beheld their flutes and pipes lying by the walles vnoccupied, the echo whereof was wount to resound ouer all the woods, then grieued it them to thinke what enterchangeable notes, each of thē accustomed theron to deliuer vnto y• other, & how their sheep & goats, would with great pleasure skip & daunce at the hearing therof. These & such like remēbraces, renuing in them a kinde of pleasure mixed with sorrow, for their ouerlong debarment of these desired recreations, made them eftsones to pray, the Nymphs & gentle Pan togethers, to hasten their deliuerie from these cruel euils, & that at the least wise they would now in the end discouer vnto them & their beasts the glorie of the faire sonne shining beams. And in making these praiers vnto the gods they began to imagine of diuers & sundrie inuentions wherby to compasse the companie eche of others, but to 
                     •…
                  o hard was it for Chloe anie way to enter therinto, for y• shee was alwaies watched vnder the wings of her supposed mother, & kept hard to spinning of wol and other such countrie exercises.
               There was before the house of Dryas two Myrtes, betwene whome did growe also an Iu
                     •…
                  e, the vaines whereof wound on both sides ouer the others boughes, on which the berries

were as if they had beene bunches of grapes, by occasion whereof, the winter being hard, and the ground thicke with snowe, there flocked thither continually a great multitude of birdes, as well thrushes, red-breasts, larkes, ringdoues, and sundry other foules. Under the colour of these, Daphnis, by pretence of going a birding, hauing prepared his lime-twigs and other necessaries, to come before the house of Dryas, and vnder the Myrtes aforesaide, pitched his nets, and laid his lime-twigs.
               The distaunce betweene both houses of Lamon and Dryas, was about halfe a mile, and were it not, that the furie of Loue is such, as neither feeleth heat nor cold, weather or winde, whereby to compasse the satisfaction desired, it happilye might haue bin (the season being such as it was) the fowler would haue had litle liking at that instant, to haue passed betweene both houses to lay his twigs, considering y• the same hauing no tract at all, so moiled the labouring sheepeheard, as with long standing afterward in the colde and wet, he might peraduenture haue had his paines but hadly rewarded.
               But these, and such like warie coniectures, being scaled from Loue, the sheepeheard neither felt nor regarded it, so well able was his youth to out-countenance the burthen therof. Not long had Daphnis staid there, before his nettes placed, and the twigs therevpon in order prepared, but downe came the birds by heaps, and fluttred immediatly, by the legges, he tooke and kept which 
                     •…
                  e list, and the residue let flie. Then returned hee backe to his nooke againe, and there watched his birdes, and faire Chloes also, to come thither togethers, but the enuious soile hadde so ramnied in their doores, by sharpenesse of the weather, that there was not so much as a cock or a pullet seene to look out either at doore or windowe. Thus staied the amorous lad all the forenoone long, and till also the middest of the day was reasonablye well spent: his birdes were vppe in his budget, and yet Chloe came not, nor any body else appeared to take notice of his beeing there, according as hee hoped, and faine woulde by some meanes or other haue procured, which seeing the dismaied youth, he began to accuse the vnhappy houre, and vnfauoring planet that raigned at his foorth-going, deeming that hee had not well picked

his time, that the gods were vnto his wish at that instant no more fauourable: yet resolued hee not so to depart and loose his long emploted trauell and watching, but desperate howe by any chaunce she might haue occasion to issue foorth, hee beganne to imagine with himselfe, what coulour or excuse most credible, hee might see vpon the cause, whereby to take occasion to visite her.
               If (said he) I should say I came for fire, they might aske me whether neighbors neerer hand were not to giue it, and so laugh at my follie. If I should, being thus farre from home, and now in fowling, craue of their vittelles, they might by search of my budget perceiue that I had enough. If I shoulde aske of their wine, why, we are not without our selues, for it is but thother day since our vintage was in. If I shoule councerfeit a feare of the woolfe, then where is the trace. If I shall tell them, I came to catch birds, why am I not then packing when I haue doone my businesse? If plainely I shoulde then deliuer vnto them howe I came to see Chloe, that toie were too plaine, for who is hee so simple that woulde saye to a father and mother, I come to your daughter? Insomuch, as none of these occasions seemed vnto him to be voide of suspicion, as that in handling of anye of them hee coulde not needes be descried. For which cause, seeing no way nowe left to satisfie his intendment, he concluded to make of necessitte a vertue, saying to himselfe: Wel, this too cruel season and peruerse enimie to our affections will not euer holde, one day wil the spring time be returned to his prime, and then shall I see againe at libertie my Chloe.
               
               Whilest the louing lad was thus concluding vppon his impacient affections, and hauing buckled vp all his trinkets, in full minde to be gone: It seemed that Loue expresly pitieng his hard and ouer long sufferance, suggested a sudden occasion, which maruellously sorted to the effecting of this his awaited purpose. Dryas and his family within doores being ready to haue setten down to meate, it fortuned, their faces being turned from the table, and the meat set on the boorde, a mastiffe that was in the house, seeing none to regarde him, suddenly caught in his mouth a great peece of meate from the table, and as it hapned, of the best and

principall part of the same. Which Dryas seeing, as the dogge chaunced to go out of doores, he followed, harrieng, and rating him with a great cudgell in his hand, and passing along to beat the dog, sawe Daphnis without, yet standing vnder the Myrtes, with his trinkets on his backe. Whom when Dryas perceiued, forgetting at one instant both his dogge and meate togethers, he louingly turned himselfe to the yong sheepheard, and taking hym by the hand, led him into his house.
               
                  Daphnis seeing the good fortune heereof, coulde not frame himselfe to make any shew of refusall, to that which he had before so feruently longed after, but entred willingly with Dryas. Where the first obiect that presented it selfe before his eies, was the sweete Chloe, who meeting also hir beloued on a sudden, with great paine, they both with-held themselues that they were not surprised and quite ouerwhelmed with ioy, but modestie, and seemely bashfulnes, casting on hir a secret couert, and meere constraint in him, that in any sorte hee might not be reuealed, they ioyfully eache for the present saluted the other, as befitted, and so parting on sunder Daphnis was by Dryas led forward to Nape to be welcommed.
               To tell you of the old Dryas, how much he made of the youth, were wonderfull, for that being once entred, he could not be suffered that night to returne backe againe. O thrice blessed hap. how fauourable wast thou at this instant to the mutuall desires of these louers, and thou Loue, well might it be saide, that thy care in them was not so much as in one iote perished. Daphnis looked not to be demanded of his carriage, nor what lucke he had then in his birding, but vnbuckling freely his budget, he referred vnto his friendly host, both the choice and plenty thereof, at his pleasure to be accepted.
               The dayes naturally approched at this instant to their greatest shortnesse, and nowe the purple couert of Iupiters segniory, beganne to take hold in the element, and chasing the fast fleeting Aurora, into her westerne cabbin, all bedewed as shee was with hir duskie snowish couering, made Dryas both in fire, cheere, prouision, and all other intertainements to seeke to welcome within doores his guest. Chloe was not behinde hand to doo him al

the fauours shee might, yet was she wooed of a great many, and many wealthy proffers were daily made vnto Dryas to obtaine his good will to marry her, but the faire shepheardesse, wholy deuoted as she was to an other purpose, freely now reioiced at the sight of him shee liked, but not so frankly, as when besides the downes they pastured their fruitful heards for the times, and seasons thereof affoorded vnto them a farre greater blessednes. Yet Loue continuing his good graces in their auowed furtheraunce, made Dryas and Nape about some secret occasions to withdraw a little their presence, whereby the amazed youth surprized at the sudden motion, and Ioth to leese the opportunitie, raught Chloe quickly vnto him, and stole from hir a kisse ere she was aware. O howe hony sweete vnto him was the pressure of those hir candie lippes, and howe much eased hee his minde therein, the content whereof was such as hardly he would haue exchanged for a mighty Seigniorie.
               
               But when the Nymph also beganne in louing sorte to challenge him, and seemed to counterfeit an amorous mislike of that hee meant so neare to approche the place where shee was, and yet would not come in, if he had not bene of Dryas required, howe neere then beganne his very thoughtes to melt and consume him inwardly, when excusing the manner thereof wyth some bashfulnesse, shee was faine to pronounce a free pardon vnto him, or euer hee was able to demaunde it, else hadde hee bin in the retourne of Dryas discouered by his very countenance.
               But Dryas hauing no other minde than howe to make cheere to Daphnis▪
                   whome by a more peculiar affection than to any other, hee feruently embraced, called for what might bee hadde to supper, and afterwards spent foorth the time, vntill the length of the night called them to bed-ward, where, with what kinde, and howe many sorts of imaginations poore Daphnis reposed, I leaue to the full pleasing content of euery louer to be discerned.
               The next day calling them foorth to the celebration of a certaine yearly feast, euermore with great and most religious deuotion honoured among all the sheepeheards from the highest vnto the lowest of that Island, and all the territories therevnto adioyning, made Daphnis (who till his comming to the house of

                  Dryas, and the preparation there seene was ignoraunt thereof) to bestir himselfe earely in the morning, with intent to prepare him also with the rest to these sacred obseruances, the custome and occasion whereof grew thus. There was at that present a Princesse, by lyneall dissent sprong from out the auncient and most renowmed race of their worthiest Kinges, who swaying the Scepter of that Island▪ had with great happines to her people, fame to herself, honour to her countrie, admiration to the world, and loue to her subiects, in a farte estraunged manner of pollicie, peace, and most wonderful successe ruled and raigned by the space of many yeares ouer them. Their Queene was then, and so alwaies continued a virgin, wise was shee as the sagest, reguarded as the mightiest, honoured as the rarest, followed as the fairest, and reputed of as the worthiest: Her yeares as it seemed, were vnto her subiectes most precious, for she might assure herselfe of all the Princes that liued in her time, to be most entierly beloued. Her soueraigntie and rule in the greatest reputation thereof, it principallye bare swaie, and chiefe honour of that Island, yet was shee of auntient, intitled to farre greater gouernements, and as then also besides possessed of larger iurisdictions and kingdomes. The recordation of her happines, her rule, her power, her honour, and vertues, for the manifolde benefites thereout dailie reaped by her exceeding worthines, vnto the vniuersalike of all her louing subiects, made this daye for euermore sacred among them, in which shee liuing they in testimonie of their inseperable and gratefull pietie, loue, dutie, and affection towardes her, with sundrie accustomed triumphes, praiers, vowes, feastes, and hanquetings, do ioyntly altogether reioyce, and ten thousand times beseech the soueraigne director of all humaine actions, that long and euer shee may liue blessed, famous, happie, and in all her vertuous actions most hie, peireles, and inuincible among them.
               Of this daies reuerend and most seemely obseruaunce, were fawtors the greatest and mightiest of all the Shepeheardes, for that them-selues challenging in the fertilitie of their fieldes and flocks, whereby their heards mightilie still encreased, and they in riches abounded, to be in this action vnto her rare and most singuler clemencie of all others most deuoted, as they that by her vertues

and long continuance had euer receiued the greatest benefit, did alwaies therefore ioyntly and willingly, formost of all others procéede in this enterprize. The youthfull and gallantest troppe of them richly trimmed on horse-backe and on foot, exercised in her honer diuers and sundrye feates of actiuitie, the rest, and those that were more auncient, attentiuely reioycing and beholding them, Afterwards they altogether came to a publike place, to that sole end and purpose, specially of long time reserued, where reuelling and sporting themselues vniuersally in all kinde of shepherds, pastimes & dances, they sing before Pan and the Nymphs: who reuerencing also with like regarde the Paragon, whome they honor, assent to their tunes and inusique, and yéelde therevnto for the greater beautifiyng of the same, al swéetnes and pleasure that may be.
               To this feast came the good Meliboeus and Faustus, the yong and gallant Thyrsis, Philetas, and Tytirus, with sundrie the most antient and skilfull shepheards, descending out of the places most statelie of all that Island, they brought thither in signe of their loues, many fayre and gallant presents, which they offered for her safetie, whome they honored to the father of the gods, to Pan and to all the Nymphes. Eliza was the most excellent and braue Princesse, in whose fauor, memorie, regarde, and kingly worthynesse, they ioyntly thus assembled, to celebrate with perpetuall vowes, her famous and long continued happinesse. And to the intent, this festiuall, as it was the day peculiar and most principall among the shepheards, and wherein each one then indeuoured to be commended, in the greatest and highest actions, so gaue they it a name singular and proper to their owne intendments, calling it vniuersallie the Holiday of the Shepeheards, which in sort following beganne to be effectted.
               
                  
                  The shepheards Hollidaie.
                  
                     THeir sacrifices, vowes and triumphes, with all reuerence required being perfourmed, the most artificial & cunning of the shepherds ioyned togither in company, & their deliuery vpō their instruments sundry sorts of musike, hauing among them all most excellent comfort, & knowing the great worthines of Meleboeus, & large accōpt among them that vniuersally hée had attained, they prayed him first, in example to all the residue, to strain his ancient tunes to the religious aduauncement of those their forward seruices.
                  The graue old man renied not at all their su
                        •…
                     es, but gladly taking in hand his harpe, plaied thereon a right solemne sound, such as 
                        〈◊〉
                      
                     Yopas handled in the banquets of Dido, at what time in her princely pallace she feasted the noble Troian duke Aeneas, so or more exceeding far
                        •…
                     e were the strokes of this honored shepheard, which done, he reuerently vncouering himselfe, and standing vp before all the company, deliuered vnto them in song this inuention following.
                  
                     IN statelie Romance of the worthie liues,
                     Of mightie princes free from fortunes grieues,
                     An such as whilom in their kingly raygne,
                     Of vertues selfe were deemed soueraigne,
                     From ou
                           •…
                         the stocke of euery princely line,
                     A choyce was made of noble worthies nine.
                     Of these and such as these a manie moe,
                     Haue diuers Poets written long agoe.
                     In skilfull verse and to the world made knewne,
                     The sondrie vertues in their liues that shone.
                     For kingdomes well we know and statelie ruls,
                     Possessions large aud chaire of honours stoole,
                     Gold pearle and stones with iewels rich of ptice▪
                     
                     Large pallaces built by deintie rare deuice.
                     
                        Yea all the pompe that worlde can here afford,
                     Or masse of treasure laide in manie a hoorde
                     Ne are each one but for the roome they beare,
                     A mortall shewe that earthly honors reare
                     But when we come to talke of worthines
                     Of kinglie actes and Princely noblenes,
                     Of right renowne each where that spredeth farre
                     Of honored titles both in peace and warre,
                     Of their decease that euer liue by fame.
                     Tis vertue then that yeeldes a glorious name,
                     The welth of Croesus quickelie was forgot
                     
                        Darius eke his rule by death did blot
                     And Philips sonne the Macedonian king,
                     His latest powre in shrowde of graue did bring
                     King Dauids sonne the tipe of sapience
                     That whilome liud in greatest excellence
                     His gloryous state in life wherein he was,
                     Is sheuered all like to a broken glas
                     His rich attire his pompe and dailie charge
                     His rarest buildings, chambers wide and large
                     His temple huge with pillers stately built
                     Sweet smelling roofe with rafters ouer guilt
                     The plated walles of brightest golde vpon,
                     And costlie siluer fret with manie a stone.
                     His pallace and the numbred square degrees,
                     That from his throne a deepe discent contriues,
                     With equal numbers matcht of lions strong,
                     Of massie golde vpholding pillers long
                     Of marble white, with veines by nature wrought
                     In precious wise, as rich as may be thought:
                     His costly throne bright shining to the eie,
                     That in it selfe reteind a dignitie,
                     His many pleasures thousands moe than one,
                     In walkes, in fruits, in fountaines wrought of stone,
                     In musike strange, in sugred harmonie,
                     By sound stroke and voices melodie,
                     In quicke solucions made of strange demands,
                     
                        In sundrie artes wrought foorth by diuers handes
                     In womens pleasures and their sugred smiles
                     In all the giftes of fortune and her wiles
                     In what by nature could for sweete delight
                     Befit the mind or please the outward sight
                     What each conceipt imagine could or scan
                     That might contenting be to any man
                     All this and more by all that may be thought
                     On earth to please or liking breede in ought
                     Were it in skill, in word, or power to frame
                     The same in him did breede a glorious name
                     Yet pe
                           •…
                        isht is his rich and fine aray
                     So that as erst I may conclude to saye
                     These gifts of fortune, sounds of earthly glorie,
                     Are of themselues but meerely transitorie,
                     The greatest Prince, but while he liues in powre
                     Renowmed is, and after in one howre
                     If vertue be not then to him more kinde,
                     His death him reaues full quickly out of minde.
                     Then not for nought the woorthies heeretofore,
                     That praised were in elder times of yore,
                     And named chiefe of many Princes erst
                     On honors palme to reare a stately crest,
                     Did studie stil for vertue by their names,
                     To be renowmed with sundry kinde of fames,
                     As some for zeale and some for pietie,
                     Some for their warres and noted cheualrie,
                     Some of their triumphs had by lands subdued,
                     Some of their acts by labours eft renued,
                     And each for bountie bright in them that shone,
                     For which therebe that haue bene famde alone,
                     And so of right ought euery noble minde,
                     To vaunt himselfe by verie natures kinde,
                     Who for they were put forth of finest mould,
                     As by instinct of neate and purest golde
                     That cleansed is from worst of natures drosse,
                     Or tallest timber growing free from mosse,
                     
                        So is in truth eche stately noble wight,
                     Of very kinde, and so should proue aright,
                     So Alcibiades to his endles praise
                     The stately lauds of mighty Greece did raise:
                     So did with Galles the worthie Charlemaine,
                     
                     So sundry kings in Britaine that did raigne,
                     So Albion had hir mightie Edwardes, peeres
                     (And Henries eke) to greatest conquerers,
                     So hath our isle (and euer praies to gaine
                     The ioy it hath) a peerelesse soueraigne,
                     So Brutus land inuicted euer liues,
                     By selfe instinct it proper vertue giues,
                     Yet guided stil (what vertue else could vaile)
                     By grace diuine which neuer shall it faile,
                     Such is the cause that prict with former praise,
                     Of worthie wightes that liud in auntient daies
                     The seedes long since of all their vertues sowen,
                     From time to time are stil sprong vp and growen.
                     And springes and buds with ripest fruites are seene,
                     Of elder stalkes that erst before haue bene,
                     So vertue swaies (what end of vertues raigne
                     So long vpheld by Peres and Soueraigne)
                     O pierles vertue knit with endles fame,
                     Do guide my skil and shrowde my Muse from blame,
                     Thy praise it is, thy mightie praises I
                     In royall race do seeke to magnifie
                     Immortall fawtors sacred sisters nine,
                     Of sugred artes shew forth your powers deuine,
                     Let not your Poet blemish with his vaine,
                     The honored steps of her that sues your traine
                     Yet blemish must he or vnshadowed fittes
                     Set forth of her, who daunts the finest wittes,
                     Can earthly eies geue in sight to the sonne,
                     Or reach the course that Phoebe faire doth ronne,
                     Can men the waters in a measure holde,
                     Or thinke on all that may on earth be tolde,
                     Is it in powre the skies to comprehende
                     
                        Or witte of man the starres to bring to ende.
                     With reuerence yet though vertue seeme deuine,
                     Men may proceede to touch her sacred shrine.
                     All haue not treft he skill to speake aright,
                     Nor may they aime thereat if so they might,
                     Immortal Phoebus radiant in his beames
                     Yeelds dazled sight, for gazing on his gleames,
                     More stately graces mighty powres do shend,
                     Than meanest wits are apt to comprehend,
                     Yet feedes Apollo fresh Auroras raies,
                     And fluttring fowles that chirp with pleasant laies,
                     So Philomene in shade of gloomy night,
                     When Dian faire shewes foorth hir siluer whight,
                     Recordes the comfort of hir sorrows past,
                     By change of times releeued from winters blast,
                     And as the graces of these beauties sheene,
                     Enuirond haue thee peerelesse noble Queene
                     
                     So peereles, for thou art a stately iem,
                     O care of skies whome God and men esteeme
                     By all thy bountie shed in princely line,
                     By all thy vertues which are saide diuine,
                     By all the fauours that thou hast from skies,
                     And euery blisse that on thy safegard lies,
                     Assent I pray, and lowlie I beseech
                     Vnto my muse thy gratious hands to streteh,
                     Of Shepheards ioy, so boldely dare I sing,
                     And happy sway thy gladsome yeares do bring,
                     Of faire Eliza then shal I be prest,
                     To chaunt the praise that in hir vertues rest.
                     No other sound shal be to me so deere,
                     As in my song to praise this goddesse peere,
                     Hir noble worthies and hir stately knights,
                     Whose honored acts in sundry valiant fights,
                     Whose councell graue, whose sage aduise at home,
                     Resembling much the flowring state of Rome
                     
                     Commend the titles of their endlesse praise:
                     But first (O Queene) of thee shall be my laies,
                     
                        THou stately Nymph, that in the shadie groues
                     The fayrest art, of all whome Dian loues:
                     With quiuer deckt in glittering rayes of golde
                     Thy maydens bowe full seemely dost thou holde.
                     Thy garments are of siluer shining white,
                     Thy feature rare, and filde with sweete delight.
                     Thy golden tresse like Phoebus burnisht chaire
                     Whom sweete Zephyrus puffes with pleasant ayre:
                     Like Venus selfe (or if but one then she,
                     Of all the Nymphes may more surpasing be)
                     Then like to hir, or hir excelling farre,
                     Thy seemely hue all other features barre.
                     Thy gestures are on honors placed hie,
                     Thy lookes doe beare a princely Maiestie.
                     Thy honored minde with dignitie is clad,
                     Thy bountie rare the like but seldome seene.
                     And port-like shewe beseeming such a Queene,
                     Thy nurse was Skill, Minerua gaue thee s
                           •…
                        cke,
                     And Iuno prest to yeelde thee happie lucke:
                     Thy cradle was on Tempe placed hie,
                     Within the walkes of pleasant Thessalie,
                     
                     Full oft within those virgine yeares of thine,
                     Both Ida woods and bankes of Muses nine,
                     Both Pegase spring and forked mountayne top,
                     Hast thou possest, and euerie roote and crop.
                     That Science yeeldes with all the sweete delights,
                     Where Poets wont refresh their dulled sprights:
                     Thy skilfull eye by choyce hath marked eft,
                     And from thy thoughts they neuer were bereft:
                     At morning walkes when forth thou list to go,
                     A crue of Nymphs attend thee too and fro,
                     Like fragrant smell of sweete Auroras dew,
                     When as the twinnes in Titan gin to shew,
                     The freshest prime of all the pleasant yeare,
                     When lustie greene the brauest hue doth beare,
                     Or like the blossomes hie on branches sweete,
                     That stilled liquor of the morne hath weete.
                     
                        Or as the beames of Thetis louer true,
                     When from hir bed he is but risen nue,
                     In easterne skies to cast his cheerefull raies,
                     Fore dulled mindes in spring from dumps to raies.
                     So comst thou forth in royall vestures dight,
                     Fresh as the Rose, of colour red and whight:
                     The glorie great of Brutus great renowne,
                     Distilling fauors each where drophing downe
                     The rurall gods, about my chariot flocke,
                     That milke-white steeds of Pegase heauenly stocke,
                     With breathing nosthrils spa
                           •…
                        ling fire amaine,
                     Do trampling drawe, and fomie bits constraine.
                     Thy virgin sway the gaftly impes admire,
                     And seeke by flight to shunne their deepe desire,
                     Which wish to see, and cannot gaze their fill
                     Vpon hir shape whom yet they honor still,
                     Of youthfull peeres eke issue foorth a route
                     That fiercely mounted hie thy chayre about,
                     Like to the traine that once Bellona led,
                     When on her altars prowde they incense shed
                     Triumphant on the honor and the spoile,
                     That fell to Rome by mightie Affrickes foile,
                     They stately stride, and beating earth and skies,
                     With nighing sound of horses lowd that flies
                     Now here now there, this one, and that amayne,
                     Doth ioy himselfe to shew in formost trayne,
                     With curled lockes like to the blooming spring.
                     And colours deckt that secret sauours bring,
                     In costly robes of Pallas curious wrought,
                     Bedect with gold and pearles from Pastole brought,
                     Then Phoebe like thou gladsome mornings starre,
                     To them appearst, or like the gleames afarre
                     That issue foorth before the glittering chayre,
                     When Phoebus first him busseth in the ayre,
                     And salued is with fauours bright and sheene,
                     Of hir that called in the Mornings Queene,
                     
                     Who vailing of her hue that is so white,
                     
                        The darkened shadowe of the glomie night,
                     Distressed hartes that long the day to see,
                     Forthwith doth lade with euerie kinde of glee
                     Such (gracious Nimphe) so pleasing is thy face,
                     Like comfort yeeldes thy hie distilling grace,
                     A heauens repose to seelie shepheards is,
                     To vewe the shadoe of thy heauenly blis,
                     And when thy pleasures be to rest thee downe
                     Or neere the fountaine spring at after noone,
                     Amidst the shades of hiest toppes to straie,
                     To fore the euening in a sommers daie,
                     Where coolest blastes of sweete Zephyrus straines,
                     His gentle breath throughout his pleasant vaines
                     Each chirping birde his notes wel tuned hie,
                     Yeeldes forth to thee their sweetest harmonie,
                     The fairest then of al the gallant crue
                     Of water Nymphs, that fields and fountaines sue,
                     And such as haunt with siluer bowe the chace,
                     Thy virgin steppes ful meekely do embrace,
                     The Satyres and of shepheardes mightie Pan,
                     
                     Commandes the fields to thy obedience than.
                     Since Ceres first these thickie groues pursued,
                     And countrie soile with sacred walkes endued.
                     Since that Apollos curled lockes of gold,
                     For Daphnis loue in tresses gan to fold,
                     Since that Actaeon by the water side,
                     Transformed was in forest large and wide.
                     There neuer Nymphe so chairie was to viewe,
                     That did the walkes of Phoebe chaste pursue
                     Nor of such honor blasing in each eie,
                     Nor crowned so with stately dignitie,
                     Nor to her Peeres and vassalls al so deere,
                     Nor of such port and euer louing cheere,
                     Ne middest so manie that right famous beene,
                     In grounded Science was so throughly seene:
                     Nor better could with Muses al accorde,
                     Nor vnto whom the gods could more afforde,
                     
                        Nor yet of Uirtue held so hie a prize,
                     Nor in all knowledge deemed was so wize,
                     Nor kept by peace, more quiet all her daies,
                     Ne happy stood so many diuers waies,
                     As faire Eliza thou of heauens the care,
                     The elder times ne may with thee compare,
                     For if I should thy soueraignetie descriue,
                     These 29. yeares for to contriue,
                     Thy royall state and glory passing great,
                     Thy wondrous acts if here I should repeat,
                     Th'unspotted honor of thy princely race,
                     And how thou rulest now with kingly mace,
                     The riches that by this thy rule abound,
                     The happie daies that we for thee haue found,
                     Thy bountie shining as the christall skie,
                     Thy yeares replenisht with all clemencie,
                     The load star of thy gracious sweete conceipt,
                     Yea when it was surprizd by deepe deceipt,
                     It were a world to thinke vpon the same,
                     So honored is each where thy Princely fame,
                     Not English shore alone but farther coasts,
                     Both of thy name and of thy honour boasts,
                     In vncouth seas, in soile till then vnknowne,
                     Thy worthy Captaines haue thy praises blowne,
                     And pillers set and markes of signorie,
                     Aduauncing there thy mightie Monarchie,
                     And lands subdued tofore by forraigne states,
                     That heare report of these thy blisful fates,
                     And of thy peereles name so mightly borne,
                     And how thy Uirtues do thy seat adorne,
                     The glorie of thy stately swaie and power,
                     That springeth vp as doth the lillie flower,
                     They sue and seeke and humblie make request,
                     To yeeld them-selues vnto thy hie behest,
                     So sacred Queene so fittes the noble name,
                     Of this our Is
                           •…
                        and stil to rule with fame,
                     So fits that she who others doth excell,
                     
                        Be deemd from all to beare away the bell,
                     Eft haue the shepeheards song thy sweetest praise,
                     And them ychaunted on their holidaies,
                     Eft in their feasts they doe record thy deedes,
                     And regall mind whence all thine acts proceedes,
                     And with halfe sounding voice of shiuering dread,
                     As men amazed at thy seemely head,
                     They with whispering sound as eft thou passest by,
                     They praie to Ioue to keepe thy Maiestie,
                     Lo thus can shepeheards of thine honour sing,
                     That of their ioies, art verie root and spring,
                     Thus Meliboeus of thy honored name,
                     That from the line of mightiest Princes came,
                     Of all thy virtues and thy statelines,
                     Which art the crop of verie gentlenes,
                     Reioyceth a
                           •…
                        e his tunes thereon to frame,
                     And meekely praies thou shend his Muse from blame.
                  
                  
                     Meliboeus hadde no sonner ended his song, but the whole companie clapping their handes, highlie commended these hys Metaphoricall allutions, and there was not one shepehearde of them all that did not admire his rare and delicate inuention therin. And for so much as in honour of this so statelie a personage, the formost memorie of all their meeting was at the first purposed to bee continued. The shepeheards intending the celebration of this whole daie to bee perpetuallie consecrated to the eternall praises of her deuine excellencie, and knowing also teat Meliboeus (greatlie deuoted to the seruices of this Nymphe) had not omitted at many other times before that to pen diuers ditties aduauncing the most singuler partes, that in this Paragon were ordinarilie appearing, they altogether requested him, and hee in performaunce of that their earnest sute, caused his two daughters yet virgins, the one of them named Licoria, and the other Phoenicia to stand forth, ech of which hauing a voice sugred with the most sweetest delicacie that might be, & ther-withall in

countenance and gesture naturally adapted, to what might bee required to the most pleasing eare, & best contented eie in augmentation of their melodious harmonie, the eldest first, being Licoria yelding her soft and pleasant strokes, fitte to rauishe the minde of anie curious beholder, vnto a deintie harpe fastened with a silken scarfe cast ouer her alablaster necke (wher-vnto by her father she had with rare perfection bene instructed) and casting her modest eies eft-soones to and fro vpon the attentiue regarders, manifoldlie admiring (as it were) in her song, the wonderfull graces that therein she conceiued, deliuered her tunes answerable to the proportion of all the residue of her behauiour, as in fourme following the same is repeated.
                  
                     
                        Phoebus vouchsafe thy sacred Muse to lend
                     
                        Pieria dames, your solemne tunes applie,
                     Aid sisters nine with me your deitie,
                     That to your seates these sacred notes may bend,
                     That you with me, and I with you may praise,
                     
                        Elizas name and blisfull happie daies.
                  
                  
                     A Nymph more charie farre to gods than men,
                     Of gods belou'd. O happy we that knowe,
                     O blisful soile where blossoms such do growe.
                     Vnkindest earth that should not loue hir then,
                     Vnworthie much of hir that lou'd thee stil,
                     Whose loue the gods accept with better wil,
                  
                  
                     People vnkinde, but those that vertues prize,
                     You kinde by loue do knowe what ioy it is
                     To dwel on soile where peace yeeldes setled blis,
                     Vnkind the rest too much that doe deuize
                     To rue the soile, the seat, the state and al,
                     Of hir, for hirs that liues, and euer shal.
                  
                  
                     O Nature, wert thou now as firme on earth,
                     By equal mixture with the heauenly powers,
                     That in the soile where grewe such princely flowers,
                     
                        The brauest blossome sprung by stately birth:
                     Now liuing stil might euer liue on mould,
                     And neuer fade (O gods) that you so would.
                  
                  
                     
                        Virtue be dombe, and neuer speake of grace,
                     And gracious Nymphs, that Virtues handmaides be,
                     Shrowde al at once your sweet eternitee:
                     
                        Be Uertue now no more, nor in your space
                     Let grace be set without in large account,
                     O sacred Queene, thou others doost surmount.
                  
                  
                     
                        Peace be thy nurse to feede thy happy yeares,
                     And endles Fame whereon thy throne is set,
                     To sound thy praise my Muse shal neuer let:
                     Liue long, and raigne in ioy among thy peeres,
                     Deare to the gods, to vertue, to thy soile,
                     Kept by thy grace from pray of forren spoile.
                  
                  Shee hauing done, the other of the maidens, faire and young Phoenicia nothing backwarde of the number of all her sisters deseruings, with gratious countenaunce replenished in all kinde of seemelie fauours (much like vnto Cydippe when in the temple of chast Diana kneeling at Delos by reading the subtill poesie of Acontius in a golden apple trilled before her, shee vnwittingly had vowed her selfe to his choice, and that in the presence of the goddesse, which in no wise might be infringed) her sister yet holding the harpe as before, and couerting the present sound thereof to the Muse in hand, she thus framed her selfe, admirable in grace, and surpassing in deliuerie, shee first beginning, and her sister answering, and both iointlye repeated, as sorted out in the dittie oftentimes to be contriued.
                  
                     Phaenicia.
                     Lul pleasant fancie, bring my thoughts to rest
                  
                  
                     Licoria.
                     O delicate Fancie,
                     
                  
                  
                     Phoen.
                     
                        The Muses on Ida sweete Phoebus be prest,
                        That whilest I admire hir whō heau'ns do loue best,
                     
                  
                  
                     Lic.
                     This most sugred Fancie,
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     Phae.
                     
                        Wherewith my delightes are fully possest,
                        With musicall harmonie, with songs of delight,
                     
                  
                  
                     Both
                     All haile noble Princesse may sound in her sight.
                  
                  
                     Phae.
                     Faire Phaebe thou knowest my muze doth not lie
                  
                  
                     Lico.
                     In chaunting this fancie,
                  
                  
                     Phae.
                     
                        If pearlesse I vaunt her whom precious in skie
                        Thou praizedst for perfect to blaze in our eie,
                     
                  
                  
                     Lico.
                     Extolling my fancie,
                  
                  
                     Phae.
                     
                        O deintie surpassing sweete Goddesse say I,
                        Enhaunsing thine honors whence all our ioyes spring,
                     
                  
                  
                     Both
                     Thrise blisfull Eliza thy handmaids doe sing.
                  
                  No soner had ended the musique, & Meliboeus with his daughters a while reposed, but Titerus, whose turne was next, prepared himselfe. And calling first the immortal gods to witnesse, how much both him selfe and all others, were bound to their sacred deities for the happie enioying and preseruation of this their pierles princesse, willing to honour the feaste, and to shewe howe weightelie hee conceiued of all their purposes then presently intended, he framed his auncient yeares to refresh renewed memorie of his youth long since passed, wherein he was knowne in all kinde of shepheards pastimes to haue excelled. In the recordation whereof perceiuing that he was already mellowed in yeares, and grieuing that by reason of his drawing age, he was now debarred the ordinary vse of that in which being a bacheler he had so greatly delighted, (and yet not so farre oreslipped, but that both skill & voice reasonably serued, to doe any thing, that of the most cunning shepheards might not seem vtterly to be misliked) he ordered his tunes to these proportions, acquainting thereby the companie with that, wherevnto those vnpractized seasons of his, had not of long time before bene accustomed.
                  
                     Since first thy soile O countrie Pan I knewe,
                     Since on the dales my sheepe long time I fed,
                     
                        Since in my heart the sweete remembrance grewe,
                     Of all these valleis where the Nymphes do tread.
                     Since first thy groues and pleasant shadie topps,
                     Thy christall springs and scituate hie prospects,
                     The sacred dewes which from the braunches drops.
                     That fresh Pomonae on thy groundes erects:
                     Since all these pleasures thousands mo then one
                     My auntient yeares partaked haue ere this
                     The mightie Ioue doth know wherein alone,
                     I haue repozd the somme of all my blis.
                     To Tytirus not all the yeaned lammes,
                     Nor of his flock a rich encrease to gaine,
                     Ne sporting hops of young kiddes by their dams,
                     Are halfe so pleasing or to him so faine
                     As are (Eliza blisfull maiden Queene)
                     The sweete recorde of all thy happie daies,
                     Those thoughts to me, full oft haue gladsome beene,
                     And on these ioies consist my shepheards laies,
                     O happie soile long happie maiest thou stand
                     So sacred be thy mountaines and thy groues
                     So be the walkes of that thy pleasant land,
                     Frequented eft with store of fatted droues,
                     Let be thy glorie like the shining sonne
                     That glides as far as doth the whirling sphere,
                     And as the course from whence the riuers ronne
                     That through the earth a compasse round do beare.
                     First faile the skies first Phoebus cease to raunge
                     First christal dewes back to your springs returne
                     First heate and cold desist your daily chaunge,
                     And let the fire leaue of his force to burne,
                     Let Phoebe first by night her wandring staie
                     And darkened be to vs the starrie pole,
                     Let Phoeton lose againe the milkie waie
                     And fishes leaue to swimme within the poole,
                     Cease birdes to flie cease Philomene thy song
                     And yearely spring that yeldes of fruites encrease,
                     And ycie drops that dangling vnder song,
                     
                        Thy frozen chin let (Saturne) euer cease,
                     Ere Brutus soile, thou seate of mightie kings,
                     The antient race of haughtie princes peeres,
                     Ere from thy lappe the slippe whence honor springs,
                     By this default do loose the sway it beares,
                     Ere thou the glorie of the present rule,
                     And honor tied long since to thy desert,
                     Thy stately conquests neere that didst recule
                     With cloked guile doost seeke for to insert,
                     But waste thy glory with the mightiest powres
                     And stay thine honor on the greatest fame,
                     And selfe-same time that al things els deuoures,
                     Renue thy faith, and yeeld thee glorious name,
                     As faire thy fate as are thy happie yeares,
                     As firme thy seate as euer Princes was,
                     Great be thy sway as any strength that reares
                     The mightiest force that euer man did pas:
                     And fairest thou of al the Nymphs that haunt
                     These sacred walkes, in which we shepheards wone,
                     So Ioue vouchsafe our springs of thee may vaunt,
                     As erst before our fertile fieldes haue done.
                  
                  
                     Tyterus hauing herewith ended his song, and the shepheardes their musique ac one instant togethers. Thyrsis stood vp, a youthfull impe seemely in shape, and as pleasing in behauiour as delicate in conceit, sweete were his countenances, his person generally commended of all the shepheardes: much was he beloued for that he deserued. There was no Nymphe whatsoeuer, vnto whome either fountaine, or broad shadie woodes were of resort but had him in great expectation for the vertues by him pursuied, and as much remained, he deuoted with all obeyzaunce to the greatest of their seruices as anie shepheard might be. Great was hee in accompt amongest them, as well for his more then common inclination to the highest exploits as that by discent hee was sprong out of those that whilom in that soile passed in greatest reckoning. And for asmuch as his youthfull desires led him forwardes to far loftier purposes, then the aged yeares of the other seemed for the

present to bee adapted vnto, hee conuerting his Muse to those delights wher-vnto he was accustomed, vsed both time and musique to this purpose following.
                  
                     Geue me thy Syrinx, Pan, giue me thy flute,
                     (A worthier musike farre, beseemes my laies)
                     In speach of her I tel, the best are mute,
                     And may not weld the greatnes of her praise▪
                     
                     If any Muse of all the Nymphs that staies
                     About these walkes and louely pleasant springs
                     Haue greater gift then others, let them raies,
                     The sweetned lawdes that faire Eliza. brings,
                     And sharpened be my wits, O God of Loue,
                     
                     (Loue hath men saie a furie tha
                           •…
                        ts deuine)
                     Yelde me the scope of thy delights to proue
                     And in my brest thy sweetned fancies shrine,
                     O would my pipe had such proportions fine,
                     Or that deriu'd from greatest excellence,
                     My endles skil her fewtures could define,
                     Whom gods and men admire with reuerence,
                     Vouchsafe my Goddesse yet vouchsafe to see▪
                     
                     The wil I haue to weld so hie aspects,
                     Yet shall it be hence-forth a grace to mee,
                     That Loue thy name within my Muse erects,
                     Much gratious Soueraigne t'is that Loue effects,
                     Wherein if skilful Pan and Nymp
                              •…
                           s me faile,
                     My actiue forces shall with large respects,
                     Compence the rest, and yeeld me more auaile,
                     Let be as yet for this not all in vaine,
                     My sacrifice, my vowes, and praiers eke,
                     Wherein O Nymphe, thy fame shall aie remaine,
                     Enhaunst by those that to thy Bountie seeke.
                  
                  The wearing awaie of the daye and other braue feates and exercises to bee accomplished, with sundrie gallaunt shewes in honour and great regarde of this peereles Princes, would not permitte the lenger continuance of their musique and inwarde

pastimes. Where-fore Thi
                           •…
                        sis hauing in this his last deliueraunce, concluded, what for the shortnesse of the tyme, might of him-selfe bee propozed, and finding it an endles Laborinth for anie of them in distinguishing her commendacion to enter into the singularities of all her most worthie and ine
                        •…
                     imable prayses, which the farther they waded into, the more they intended, in somuch as the same seemed a thing euer-more to bee, but neuer able by anie skill or inuention what-soeuer fully to be determined, they contented them selues with the testimonies alreadye gyuen of their good willes, and as forced there-vnto gaue ouer for the present, gyuing place for the execution of the rest to the times apt and conuenient. Nowe the night approcheing, they spent in feasting, reuelling, and dauncing, where-in Philetas occupied his pipe whilest Daphnis and the other youthfull heards-men, sported in the counterfeite disguisings of sundry shapes of Satyres; to the accompaning where of Chloe and the rest of the shepheards daughters stood foorth, and by them were in diuers straunge gestures sued vnto and entreated: But Phoebe being by this time wounde into the highest skies, called fas
                        •…
                      to the rest: where-vppon, as all thinges haue ende, so this religious festiuall (not thereby 
                        •…
                     ing at all) was but vnto the nexte yeares solemnities, and after to the perpetuitie of their wishes, by their whole consents discontinued, wherewith, as they that euer wished happinesse, long life, health, 
                        •…
                     ie estate and vnmatchable prosperitie, vnto hir for whom they liued, making a great shout in conclusion, each one seuered themselues therevpon, and so for the present departed.
               
            
            
               
               
                  The fourth booke of the loues pastorall of Daphnis and Chloe.
               
                  THis statelie festiuall and holie daie of the shepheards being thus solemnelie ended, Daphnis with great longing continued the winter season, and often tooke occasion to watch the birdes & his Chloe togethers, vntill at the last the paine of this vntamed sharpnes vanished, and the fresh couloured spring had new mantled againe the withered plantes in her sommer
                     •…
                   liuerie. The delight whereof, none otherwise then is accustomed to the residue of Natures derlings, reioyced the hartes of these two louers, aswell for that the occasiō therof became a medicine to their wanted disseueranc
                     •…
                  , as that also the iolitie of the prime then being in her excellencie, reuiued the dul conceits of euery one, and confounded the winters melancholie before passed, with a new maner tender of her surpassing sweet nes & brauerie. Their heards vnpatient of their long penning in, now driuē to their accustomed pastures, tooke pleasure to climbe the 
                     •…
                  arkes, and to lifte vp their hornes ouer the fresh springing hedge rowes. Uniuersall reioycing was in euerie thing▪ and now seemed it a kinde of louelie satisfaction, to call in question their frequented places of conference, of delight, of disturbance, and of sorowe that had hapned vnto them.
               And as the spring passed in this kinde of pleasure, so likewise was not the sommer voyde of the pastime▪ the 
                     〈◊〉
                   belonging. In which occurred vnto them sondrie actions, as well to the in
                     •…
                  endement of their present loue, 
                     •…
                  s in other occasions right pleasing. It happened at one time amongest the rest; during this season that diuers fishermē being in y• se as▪ & the weather caling, the sound of their songs and voice redoubled so much, vppon the rockes▪ as thereon gaue a most shrill 
                     •…
                   not able Ecch
                        •…
                     
                   the wōder

hereof seemed vnto Chloe very great as she that seldome had bin vsed to the difference of the same, by reason of which, supposing that on the other side of them, there also had bin an other sea, and other fishermen, she began to loke about hir, demanding of Daphnis, by what reason they should in their song so well in that maner agree togither. Daphnis smiling at her simplicitie, the better to satisfie hir demaund, and to informe hir at large of the plesures of the 
                     •••
                  ld, discoursed vnto hir the certaintie, by reuealing vnto hir the tale of the Eccho.
               
               There were (said he) in antient time (as yet there be) Nymphs of diuers sorts, some of the groues, some of the woods, some of the riuers, and others of the springs, and fountaines. Of one of these sorts was sometimes a gallant girle, who was called Eccho, she was norished by the Nymphs, and instructed and brought vp with the Muses, the charie account of whome, gaue hir (besides fauor) a most excellent knowledge and cunning in all kinde of songs and instruments, insomuch, as beeing come vnto the very floure and full prime of hir age, shee was for hir vnmatchable skill deemed fit to be intertained with their praises, with their companies, and with their pleasures, and being conuersant with them wholy in sort aforesaid, listed not to recke of at all the company of men, nor of God, but being a virgin by disposition, sought fully and wholy how to preserue the same.
               Pan (my deere as thou knowest) being a god altogither, amorous▪ and solacing himselfe as his nature is in the woods and pastures, h
                     •…
                   hearing once of this Nymph, and beganne therevpon to woonder at hir dainty and melodious sounds, indeuoring (if possibly he could) to woe hir to his fauor, but when in no sort hee could compas it, he waxed angrie at the Nymph, and she being alone in the fields without any company, he wrought so woonderfully by his power, as that for mee
                     •…
                  e dispite of hir fauor, hee inraged against her all the heat 
                     〈◊〉
                   men and shepeheards of the country where she was, that like woolues and mad dogges they 
                     •…
                  are 
                     •…
                  he poore Nymph peece-meale in their 
                     •…
                  urie, and throwing the 
                     〈◊◊◊〉
                   here and there, as she was yet singing hir songs, the very earth 
                     •…
                  t selfe fauored hir musike▪ and here acted immediatly 
                     〈◊〉
                   soundes, in 
                     •…
                  orte as 
                     〈◊〉
                   agreeing to this day with the

Muses in accorde, the same tune that is plaied she recordeth, the same song that by any voice is deliuered, she repeateth.
               The earth thus retaining the former condicion of the Nymph while she liued, when either gods, or men, or instruments of musike, or beasts, or Pan himselfe soundeth his sweet Syrinx ouer the hollow rockes, it counterfeiteth euermore the same notes, which the directer of shepheards often-times perceiuing, sometimes runneth skipping and leaping after the sound, not for desire or hope he hath to inioy his faire Eccho, but only to find by what instinct the manner of his ditties are so disguised withall, without knowledge, how, or whence it commeth.
               The recitall hereof grew of such admiration vnto Chloe, as that to make present triall thereof, hirselfe recorded diuers tunes vpon hir flute, wherevnto the Eccho, as it were in confirmation of that which Daphnis had said, immediatly answered, not without the great pleasure of the shepeheardesse, who had felicitie often-times to sport hirselfe with those redoubled sounds. But this daliance of theirs, and sweete societie euermore thus continued, could not yet assure their minds with such safety, as that the same should alwayes haue dured. for that Chloe becomming both tall in stature, and ripe in yeares for a husband, the sons of diuers the wealthiest sheepheards frequented earnestly the house of Dryas, to wooe hir. And praising in their mindes all the complements of hir fauor and wonderfull perfections: some gaue in hand both to Dryas and Nape many fruitful presents, others promised vnto them a great deale more, so that Nape hir selfe being nowe also stoong with the couetous gaine thereof, counselled hir husband Dryas in any wise to marry hir.
               And to the intent to moue him the rather thereunto, shee forgat not to laie before him hir ripenes, and howe aduenterous it was to keepe in their house a maide of such beawtie and stature to continue vnmaried▪ putting him also in minde how that accepting the present offers, he might now marie her to his profit and hir owne aduauncement, but if shee fortuned once in keeping of sheepe to lose her maidenhead, they might marie her afterwarde for roses and nuttes to whom soeuer would be contented to take her Dryas, as willing as her selfe to finger the coine, and lothe to

lose the oportunitie in hand, would not yet ouerhastelie conclude any matth, for that him seemed still to haue a mind to harken after hir parents, and for this cause found he diuers meanes and doubts, whereby to delay the matter from one time to an other, whereby the subtill gnoffe, being of a great many required, obtained also at their hāds great plenty of gifts, the fertility wherof he wished by all pollicie so long as he might to drawe on vnto him.
               
                  Chloe was not all this while ignorant of these deuises, as shee that was a principall partie therein to be acquainted, but sorrowing in hir minde of long time in feare of the disseuerance to be made of hir and Daphnis, shee at the last, after much sighing and lamentation reuealed it vnto him. The yoong youth astonied at the first, beganne to be thinke himselfe immediatly of the mishap intended, and his owne irrecuperable griefe, if the same should proceed to be effected, but recomforting for the present her sweete imaginations, and ouer tender spirites, hee declared vnto hir, that he had good suppose, that if hee demaunded hir himselfe of hir father, he would not greatly say him nay, for that he thought he was not so much backeward, but that he easely might surmo
                     •…
                   in any thing, but in wealth, the greatest of all the other shepeheards. Onely this somewhat quailed his assurance in that his foster father Lamon was not rich, but rather a very poore man, and such as no way could deuise to satisfie the courto
                     •…
                  snesse of▪ 
                  Dryas. Notwithstanding which, hee yet resolued, whatsoeuer came thereof, to putte the request in aduenture, and this to accomplishe, Chloe hir-selfe didde also aduise him.
               Not for all this durst the bashfull youth, at the first time to reueale it to Lamon, but rather chose, as with whome hee might be most boldest, to make knowen his loue before hand to Myrtale. Myrtale, she held 
                     •…
                  o secret of it▪ but the same night also tolde it to Lamon. The blunt fellow, quite contrary to expectation, accepted the motion but very badly, calling his wife, beast, dol
                     •…
                   and sottish asse, that so rashly without consideration at all, would become a meane to bes
                     •…
                  w their 
                     〈◊〉
                   (whom of what parentage he was descended they litle knew) vpon a simple 
                     〈◊〉
                  
                  
heardesse, the testimonies of whose reputation, being found with him, did promise vnto them a farre better fortune, and whose parents, if happily by his being in their custodie might be found, it might not onely perchance be a meane to infranchize them from that their yoke of seruitude, but happily also enrich them with possessions of greater value than those that then they liued vpon.
               
                  Myrtale hearing her husbands coniecture, would not for this discourage the youth in his fancie, for feare least quenched of all hope therof (being so sharpe in loue as he was) some worse matter might betide him than they expected: wherefore laying thervppon some other deuises, shee proposed vnto him their pouertie, and the riches of those that were tendred vnto Chloe, likewise their seruage, by reason of which nothing was their owne that could be imployed to his preferment. But (said she) be ruled by me, the girle I knowe doth loue thee, and in respect thereof desireth to enioy thee aboue any other. Doe this therefore, that shoe acquaint hir father with the purpose, and happily being her own sute, he will the sooner assent vnto thee, and require my husband Lamon for thee. By this excuse Myrtale supposed with herselfe honestly to haue shifted off Daphnis: for well stoode she assured, that Dryas for his parte woulde neuer consent vnto it: but the simple gote-heard neuertheles tooke the deferment in good part, and knowing with him selfe, that there was no supposition of treasure to be had to set forward his demaunde, he did as many other poore louers, intend to proceede by intreatie.
               For the furtherance hereof, it fortuned, that the Nymphs euermore gracious vnto their ioint affections (Daphnis sleeping at night) appeared vnto him, to whome, being in shape accustomed, the eldest declared, that the patronage of his loue▪ rested in the perfection of a greater deitie than themselues, but to giue hym meane to accomplish it, by mollifieng the flintie conceited disposition of Dryas, that could they do: And it to bring to passe▪ returne thee to marrow next said she to the place where the last yere the bote of the Methimnians by vnloosing the ozia
                     •…
                   twig wherewith it was tied, was lost and driuen to the Sea, there

by tempest of the weather shalt thou finde in the banke vnder a bush hard by the same oziar, a bagge of three hundred crownes, which in ouerturning of the same boat, the waues did there driue on lande, and for that it hath hetherto lien couered with sande and mosse throwne out of the sea, no man hath yet euer found it, take that purse, and giue the money to Dryas, that shalbe sufficient for the present to shew thou art not vtterly deuoide of riches.
               
                  Daphnis awakened out of the dreame, longed earnestly for the morning, and the day appearing, ran in all haste to the sea coast, where serching in the place apointed, he found the purse and gold therein. Nowe thinking him selfe to bee the welthiest man of all the shepheardes, he hied him first to the fieldes with his flocke, & after debateth the matter to Chloe, and without farther staie (requiring her to haue care of their beastes) he hastneth as fast as he could to Dryas. Being thither come, he saluteth the man, and afterward setteth forth vnto him his occasion of comming. I am said he, Dryas as thou knowest thy neighbour, well know I what belongeth in euerie thing to the countrie, the ordering of Uines, Oliues, and husbandrie, is not to me unknowen. How able I am and with what good successe and skill I haue garded my heard, Chloe her selfe can witnesse, and the profe it selfe will discouer. Thy daughter is woed of a great manie, none of which as I, can or may so wel deserue her, they profer the for thy good will, goats, sheepe, oxen & corne, as much as will bring the vp three or fowre chickens. But Dryas, though both for neighbour-hood and these causes before alleaged, I might seeme in this action to be preferred, yet for that thou shalt know that as well as in other qualities I will not bee behind them in giftes, geue me my Chloe in marriage, and take here three hundred crownes for thy labour, which vnto Nape heere, and thee, I frankly and freelie doe render: but with this cōdition that you both promise me neuer to be aknowne of the present, no not to Lamon himselfe, for whatsoeuer hereafter that herein may be supposed.
               
                  Dryas & Nape seeing so grosse a sum, the like quantitie wherof they had neuer seene before, beeing ouertaken with the couetousnes of the same, gaue their immediate consents without anie further deniall, and both tooke vpon them thereunto to drawe the

good liking of Lamon. All busines therefore nowe laide aside, and the purse first locked vp with the gold, Dryas goes forward to seeke out Lamon and Myrtale, and to them breaketh foorth the purpose intended. The seelie man with his wife was winowing of corne, and at the first sight began to complaine of their harde peniworths, and the had yeelding thereof, all which (after the maner) Dryas in his blunt & groslike condicion recomforted, and proceeding from out thereof began to demaund of them Daphnis for his daughter in mariage, & added further that albeit of others, he had bene therefore fairely offered, yet of them hee demaunded nothing, but rather was willing to contribute of his own to haue their consentes, his reason for that they had bin norished, brought vp, liued, and kept beasts togither, and that he stood most assured of, they loued and intirelie fauored and desired ech other. Lamon who could not for the obiections aforesaid excuse himselfe by pouertie, by want of age of the youth, by difference of education, nor otherwise, and fearing to disclose the thing it selfe, which in veritie did withdraw him, which was the doubt and expectation of his parentage, thanked Dryas hartilie of his good suppose, commended the maiden, and praised his courtesie verie highlie, but yet answered there withall, that he was a seruant to another man, and that liuing in seruitude as he did, he was not by reason of his bondage to dispose of anie part of his owne, without his lords consent. And forsomuch as to the agreement of this match, it seemed a thing meet and pertinent to his dutie, to haue him therevnto required, he persuaded him they might continue freends, and let the conclusion of the marriage suspend till the time of the next vintages, which not being long, his L. he had vnderstanding would then be there in person to suruiew the state of his house and maner of the countrie, & then with the good liking on ech part they might be the better solemnized. But heerewithall Drias (said he) I will of one thing aduertise thee, that thou shalt not in matching with him marrie thy daughter to one of base birth, or place of meane calling, but better a great deale descended than either of vs both be, and so giuing drinke ech to other, they vpon this resolution for the present departed.
               
                  Drias who had not put these last speeches of Lamon into a

deafe eare, as his waie laie homewards, reuolued in his mind the state of his Chloe with that of Daphnis, which by the few speeches that by Lamon had beene opposed, he found to be by likelihood of good place, which made him not a little inwardlie to reioice that therein was some hope that she should not be much disparaged: in the consideration wherof, he began to bethinke himselfe whether Lamon finding him as he did, had therewithall receiued anie such like ornaments to shew his birth as himselfe had doone with Chloe, and tickled with the conceipt heereof, with twentie praiers made to Pan and the Nimphs that it might be so, he came in these muses to the place at last where rested yoong Daphnis, togither with his beloued Chloe, to whom hauing recounted the storie heereof, a world of ioies befell immediatlie vnto the youth, considering that Autume was now at home, and the marriage should no longer be deferred, and thanking his supposed father in lawe Dryas a thousand times the olde man departed.
               Now after these shepheards had both dispatched their businesse, and the sunne readie to go downe, they passed homewards, gathering in the waies diuerse sorts of apples, the yeere was plentie, and frutes were now in their ripenesse, among the number whereof, they chanced to come by one tree, the frute whereof was all gathered, and the tree thereby of the leaues left almost naked, onelie one apple excepted, the bewtie of which was as the colour of the shining gold mixed with an orient red of the freshest and brauest hew that might be, this apple stood on the verie top of the highest branch of all the tree, and for the hight therof seemed to be left vngathered: the louelie lad, casting eies therevpon, thought that it was a present fit to be giuen for a loue token, and suddenlie getting vp to the tree, climed so nimblie that he brought it downe in his hand from the top where it grew.
               
                  Chloe became greatlie miscontented at his rashnesse, and fearing to see him fall, and wound hir selfe from the place among the thickest of hir flocks, but Daphnis pursuing the gentle Nymph, my sweet said he, the faire and beautifull season hath brought foorth this frute, a statelie tree hath nourished it, the

radiant and most comfortable sunne beames haue ripened it, and onelie good fortune as a thing most choice and perfect, hath hitherto reserued it, the woorthinesse onelie apperteining to you as to a creature most excellent. Ill had I beene disposed to suffer so faire a frute by falling on the hard ground to haue beene brused, foiled, or otherwise trode vnder feet, or perished. The apple of gold was erst on Venus bestowed for the prise of hir beautie, and that by a shepheard, and I likewise garding my beasts, haue found this apple, comparable to that in shew, wherewith to present my Chloe, who ma
                     •…
                  chest hir in fauor, In this case am I Paris and thou the selfe Venus.
               
               The lasse appaised with these delightsome speeches, assented quickelie with hir Daphnis to be at attonement, and he throwing the apple into hir lap, she onelie gaue him a louers kisse, wherewith the well pleased goteheard held himselfe contented.
               In these continued pastances, the often wished and longed for Autume did now draw on apace, and a messenger from the maister of Lamon was alreadie approched, to informe them shortlie of their lords comming, the bruite of spoile doone by the Methimnians on the grounds thereabouts was cause thereof, and to that end was deliuered their maister intended to suruiew the harme by them committed. It was now no need to appoint the olde Lamon to his businesse, who carefull of himselfe to see all things well, indeuored so to prouide that no one iote might in the least respect be amisse: Daphnis likewise tooke in charge neatlie to picke and crimme his heards, and orderlie ech daie to see them fed on the best and most frutefull pastures, to the intent the heard being mightie and fat, they might haue the more thankes for their trauell, and be the better reputed of at their maisters comming. It was vnto him a matter of great nouell, to thinke what maner of man should be his maister, so much as the name of whome till that time hee neuer before had heard.
               
                  Lamon for his part began to passe throughout all the hearbers, the vines, the fruites, and the berries, those boughes hee tricked,

those knobs he pared, those branches he slipped, and them in another place cut downe and cropped. The shew of this place was a thing of most excellent pleasure, as well of the scituation, prospec
                     •…
                  s, plentie and varietie of deuises, as also for diuersitie of trees, and all kinds of fruits. To this had Lamon of all others a most speciall regard, wherein his carefull in-sight and continual trauaile had wrought so great perfection, as seemed to bee helde a thing rare and wonderfull. The trees hung yet laden with all kinde of fruites, plums, apples, peares, mirtes, granades, oringes, limons, figs, oliues, and twentie other pleasing conceits. Besides the number whereof, the order yet curiositie and braue disposition of euerie thing was such, as a man would haue thought it a paradise, ānd deeplie haue sorrowed to forethinke that the least spoile in the world should haue happened vnto it.
               The messenger hauing seene all thinges in a readinesse prepared, returned to the Citie againe to aduertise his Lord of the estate of the same, who not being vnrewarded of the poore Lamon and Mirtale, they onely desired his good word in setting forth the manner of that he sawe, to their greater commendation, the messenger omitted nothing to him in charge giuen, but hauing asserteined what he came for, waited onlie the time of his maisters readinesse.
               In this meane while of the returne made of the seruant to his maister, after all this 
                     •…
                  ost bestowed and trauaile taken of poore Lamon, happened a foule and cruell mischaunce, the euent of which made all the house sorrowfull, and them now onelie to feare the comming of him thether, whome before they earnestlie looked and most instantly desired, the case standing as it did, vppon a dreadfull hazard of their vtter vndooing, the occasion of all which insued in forme following. There was neere thereabouts dwelling to them a cow-heard, a stubborne and a knurleheaded knaue, whose name was Lap
                        •…
                     s, who being of Chloe to-fore time exceedinglie enamoured, and seeing that by a conuention betweene Dryas and Lamon, hee was preuented of his purpose, and hope to obtainé hir in marriage, grew thereby into so cruel and presumptuous a conceit of doing vnto him some one or other notable mischiefe, as that hee endeuored nothing so much as to

seeke occasion, how, and by what mea
                     •…
                  es to be re
                     •…
                  enged.
               He was well warie that the dependancie of this marriage consisted solie on the fauour and good opinion to be by them receiued from their maister, whereinto if it were possible, that hee could deuise by the committing of some o
                     •…
                  e or other notable villany, to worke a breach, twenty to one hee thought, that ill must needes betide them, and the marriage in haud shoulde neuer be brought in question. This vilde and mischeuous imagination in some sorte to effect, the villaine aduised him selfe of this beautifull plotte, the trimming and decking whereof had now of long time being attended, brought the same to a most exceeding perfection, besides the deuises thereof being euerie wai
                     •…
                   (as they were) most excellent, had made the maister of Lamon to be of all thinges about his house the most in loue with it. Hereuppon as the thing that on all sides might turne them to most displeasure the cruell and wretched Lapes desired to bee most reuenged. Wherefore spyeng a time conuenient, one night when all about the house were vniuersally at rest: this false and villanous churle, woond himselfe secretly into the garden, and there moiled and spoiled, with hookes, with hatchets, and other cutting instruments, the most part of the hedgerows, vines, fruites, and trees of all the hearberie and garden ▪ which being doone he returned himselfe secretly againe, without being perceiued of any man.
               
                  Lamon, the next morning early, entring into his gardeine with intent to surue we and tricke what he might in the least iott see thereabout amisse, perceiued the spoyle and notable misusance euery where doone vnto it, and not knowing from whence it came, but moued exceedingly with the dispight & villanie therof, as the onely thing of all others that his maister loued, looked for no other reliefe at all, but to be beaten to death or hanged. Wherefore ouercome as he was with great griefe, hee tare his garment from his shoulders, and therevpon skritched and cried most lamentably.
               
                  Myrtale hearing the clamor, left what was in hir hand, and ranne in all haste vnto him. Daph
                        •…
                     is also which euen then had but led his beasts to the field, moued with great lamentation,

returned backe againe vnto them. And seeing this great disgrace most vile and detestable hauocke and wracke doone and committed on all partes of the hearberie, it could not but greatlie become vnto them a matter most sorrowefull, for to saye the truth, were a manne there-vnto but a meere straunger, hee coulde not but haue deepelie greeued to see the malicious and caussesse spoile of so faire and pleasaunt a dwelling, the partes yet vntouched whereof, for all the disorder therein committed, carried notwithstanding some maner demonstration of the beautie of the other. The greuousnes of the sight made them al to shed teares abundant, for their vndoing stoode vppon it, Lamon one while for hym-selfe, and an other while for Daphnis exceedinglie weeped. During the continuaunce of which discomforte, Eudrome the page and messenger, that before had beene with them, from their Maister was returned againe, declaring, that after three dayes passed, their olde Maister intended to bee there present, but their yoong Maister his sonne woulde come thither the morrowe.
               Preparation heere-vppon ensued on all sides, and nowe the monstrousnesse of the euill doone didde trouble them more and more. But Eudrome beeyng of his owne disposition, a youth of verye good nature, they deuised amongest them-selues for to call hym also to councell about this enterprise. The case beeing made knowen vnto him, Eudrome seeing their excessiue sorrowe and mone made, recomforted them, and aduised as most meete, that the matter were first made knowne vnto their yong Maister, whome hee assured vnto them to be of louing and most kinde condition, and that vppon their submission made, hee woulde not sticke so farre foorth to pittie them, as that by his good and fauorable conceit, some one thing or other for redresse might there be the better prouided.
               
                  Lamon not withstanding was not yet idle, but slipped and cropped the hanging boughes and twigges rounde about the garden, hee didde what hee coulde by all the arte and cunning hee had, to make the hauocke seeme lesse, insomuch as by hys diligent looking too, and attendaunce, hee hadde reasonablie amended the matter in diuers places. Their yo
                     •…
                  ng Maister according

vnto appointment came the next day, whose name was Astile, and wyth him brought to accompany him for his disporte, a parasiticall gester, whose name was Gnatho. The gentleman was yet verye yoong, vpon whose chinne the tender downe hadde scarcelie crept, and therewithal of most gentle and friendlie condicion: bee was no sooner entred the grounds, but Lamon & Myrtale his wife togither with yoong Daphnis fell prostrat at his feete, desiring his fauour and forgiuenesse, and that beeing campassionate vppon the olde yeares of his bondman, hee woulde indeuour so farre as he might, to withdraw his fathers rage and displeasure from them.
               
                  Astile rewed the miserable complaint, and the better to relieue them, out of their woonted distresses and sorrowes, hee promised, that at his fathers comming, hee woulde endeuour to make some prea
                     •…
                  ye excuse of the matter, and for to take the cauie and choice occasion thereof wholly vppon him-selfe. They thankefully heere-vppon tooke his agreement, and endeuouring by all the meanes possible to cont
                     •…
                  nt him, both Lamon and Daphnis, with diuerse notable presents did afterwardes entertaine him, they praied God also in respecte of their disabilitie, that it would please him of his goodnesse to requi
                     •…
                  e him.
               Nowe Gnatho this parasite being a right belli-god, a villaine by nature, and one that loued none, but where hee might be fedde, nor cared for any, but onelye for his profite, seeing the sweete and naturall fauour of this yoong Daphnis, beganne as an vnnaturall beast, so against nature become wanton ouer him. The paunch-filled rascall, seeing that Astile was a braue yong gentleman, tooke pleasure in hunting, and to haunt the fields abroad with his hawks and spaniels, deuised from time to time sundry shifts, whereby to ridde himselfe of his company. And in these spaces would he haunt the heards of yong Daphnis, & one while hearing him sound his flute, and another while sing, thoght there was no felicitie in the world so great, as to be accompanied with his pleasure. The wretch mouing to the goat-heard manie questions, & perceiuing his simplicity and vnacquainted disposition to villanous purposes, one time by watching his goings and cōmings wold haue found means in forcible maner to abuse him.

But the in
                     •…
                  inuat condition by nature and his former birth, planted in the imbold
                     •…
                  ed spirits of the yoong youth, with a maner of sweltring kind of disdaine▪ shooke the raskall off, and that so tudelie, as his pampered drunken carcas squatted against the ground with the pezant and vnweldie burden thereof.
               The parasiticall tricker perceiuing the vnmollified spirit of the braue goatheard, and weieng there withall the maner of his vnexpected colour and courage, such as seldome falleth in those that by nature are borne to be slaues, thought that in his natiuitie the stars and planets were vnto him too sinister, in that vnto a mind & fauor so correspondent, they yeelded an estate & condition so mightilie different. Neuerthelesse though in so forcible maner he dared no more to affaie the youth, yet for all that withdrew he not frō him his sensuall & beastlie disposition, but considering that the lad was but the sonne of Lamon reputed, & therefore thought as a 
                     〈◊〉
                   to belong vnto his lord, he deemed with himselfe to practise another deuise more colourable, whereby when time should serue, he might the easter attain
                     •…
                   to that his wretched and most abhominable desi
                     •…
                  e.
               This could he not immediatlie bring to passe, for that the old man with his wife, children and familie were now all arriued at this his countrie dwelling. In the first two daies after whose arriuall, there was nothing but feasting and banketting, Dionysophanes was the old mans name, and Clearista his wife. After then that he had rep
                     •…
                  sed himselfe by the space of two daies, he then began to visit his herberies, his gardens, walks, and other 
                     〈◊〉
                   and pleasant deuises, in all which he found no fault at all, saue onelie the spoile which before you heard of, which yoong Astile had ere this to him execused and taken the matter vpon himselfe, where with Dionysophanes held himselfe contented. Then walked he forwards to see the heards and flocks, at the sight of which companie of so manie strangers, Chloe 
                  
                     •…
                  ashfull on a sudden, and being in the fields, as she that had neuer bin accustomed to their view, stole awaie secretlie, and hid hir selfe in the 
                     〈◊〉
                  , but Daphnis stood still awaiting their comming. Lamon then pointing out vnto his maister his goats and sheepe that so daintilie had beene fe
                     •…
                   and increased, added further vnto him, that the

youth standing by was his goate-heard, who by his dilligent care and attendaunce had thither to conducted them.
               
                  Dionysophanes and Clearista beholding the excellent fauor and sweete gestures of the youth, who furnished in euery condicion as a heardseman, and hauyng a faire large skinne of a hee goate, smoothelie dressed with the haire fastened vnto his necke, and hanging ouer his shoulders, thought that there appeared in him a kinde of beautie, more commendable farre, than customably was to bee seene in euery other sheepeheard. Daphnis beganne to make vnto them musike vppon his flute, and with diuers and excellent layes and ditties of the sheepeards 
                     •…
                  o entertaine them, all which of the company Generallye, but Clearista especiallie, was in him both rewarded, liked, and highly commended, besides commaunded shee him, and likewise Dionysophanes his Maister expres
                     •…
                  y enioyne
                     •…
                   him, not to bee absent from the house during their abode and continuaunce in the country, but alwayes there to attend them.
               All this vnto the vile and beastly conceipt of Gnatho, di
                     •…
                  de but adde fire vnto the flame, who beeing wholie dedicated vnto luxurie and his bellie, was not able to containe himselfe within l
                     •…
                  mits, but taketh Astile on a time a tone side, and thus c
                     •…
                  utelously, the better to accomplishe his purpose deliuereth vnto him. I haue (Sir) heere-tofore neuer in my life yeelded appetite or liking to any thing so much, as to quaffing companye, and aboundaunce of feeding, but nowe is my minde chaunged there-fro, and since I sawe this freshe yoong goate-heard playing on his pipe so melodiously as hee dooth, me thinkes than the sole and sweet pleasure thereof, there is no delight in the worlde. Nowe Sir, albeit he bee the sonne of your fathers villaine, yet surely respecting the seemely fauours he beareth: for estraunged in shewe from so simple a proportion, mee thinkes you might doo very well to craue him of your father, and to take him from these heards to dwell with you at home in the citie. Astile harkened heere-vnto, and thought it not amisse, and onely attended, but time conuenient to mooue his father thereof. This speach by Eudrome the page, being ouer-heard, who knewe the 
                     〈◊〉
                   delights of this parasite ges
                     •…
                  er, and marked since

their comming thither this continuall fawning and pursuite of the gentle Daphnis, and howe many exercises there withall he tendered, that hee woulde procure hys freedome, thought this faire weather was not all for naught, and therefore speeding him-selfe to Lamon and Myrtale (as one compassionate of the youths misfortune, if the way in question shoulde be taken) hee reuealed vnto them both the practise, and also what of the euent thereof, not without good cause he had coniectured.
               The poore olde man surcharged nowe, with farre greater griefes than euer before hee was pestred, for that the losse of his life coulde not haue beene more miserable vnto him than the sorrowe of this mischiefe, sawe that the disguise of this youth in sending his sonne, should
                     •…
                   nowe without speedie preuention, become mea
                     •…
                  e to make him the beastly pray and spoile (vnder pretext of bringing him to the seruice of Astile) to a base, vile, ser
                  
                     •…
                  ile, and gorbellied drunkard. This thought the poore man, rather to die than to suffer: wherefore resoluing him-selfe to reueale (if neede compelled) what he was, that the woorthinesse of his birth might the sooner free him from such intollerable seruage, hee onelye 
                     〈◊〉
                   but for the oportunitie when Astile shoulde begge him of his father, which beeing by the continuall suggestion of Gna
                        •…
                     o the 
                     •…
                  ext day put in practise. The simple bondman standing foorth, fell prostrate immediatly at his lordes feete, and embracing straightly his knees besought him to haue compassion of his humble sute and petition then to be made vnto him. Dionysophanes willed him to speake▪ and then taking Daphnis by the hand. Clearista present, and the most part else of the familie, Lamon therevpon said: I am not (sir) discontented, that it is your good pleasure, and my yoong L. Astile heere, to take from me this yoong youth out of these countrie laboures, to attend, and there to remaine with him in the citie, for so might it thereby happen, that a woorthie and noble Maister, might also enioy of him by this meanes, a free and noble seruaunt, but that by pretext thereof, and vnder colour to drawe him hence to an other place, whereby in most vile and insufferable manner to abuse the woorthinesse of his shape against nature, onely by notice, that he is the sonne of a bondslaue, and bred of my loines,

and that namely also to bec
                     •…
                  me a vessell to hi
                     •…
                   
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  , eue
                     •…
                   the grosse villanie of this parasiticall gester: this Gnatho heere present, who vpon a beastlie and 
                     〈◊〉
                   conceipt to accomplish the same, hath onelie suggested this motion, that can I neuer suffer. Wherefore (Sir) that the better it may appe
                     •…
                  re vnto your knowledge, howe vnfit it is, that so great and not co
                     •…
                  
                  monlye accustomed feature and comelinesse, shoulde in so vile and bad manner be misprized: vnderstande I beseeche you, that this yoong and braue youth heere present is not my sonne (as it hath beene supposed) nor is the basenesse of our condicion able to produce so excellent a creature: but beeing now
                     •…
                   eighteene yeares since I found him laide foorth in pastures 
                     •…
                  enderly 
                     〈◊〉
                   within a small thicket, where-vnto o
                     •…
                  e of my 
                     〈◊◊〉
                  , to my great astonishement ordinarily resorted to su
                     •…
                  ke it, n
                     •…
                  ither am I able to say howe, or by whose handes it came there▪ but this knowe I, that the descent thereof can not bee meane, resp
                     •…
                  cting the costly attire, 
                     〈◊〉
                  , 
                     •…
                  nd 
                     〈◊◊〉
                   which I found about it, all which I haue hithe
                     •…
                   to whol
                     •…
                   and e
                     •…
                  tirely preserued, by the co
                     •…
                  iecture whereof you may the better d
                     •…
                  eme of his parentage, and howe 
                     〈◊〉
                   it is, that so gentle 
                     〈◊〉
                   nature shoulde become the subiect and spoile of so base and serui
                     •…
                  e 
                     〈◊〉
                   condition.
               
                  Lamon had 
                     〈◊〉
                   scarce shut his lippes vppo
                     •…
                   these speeches, but that Gnatho enraged at these his sharpe peercing 
                     •…
                  auntes 
                     •…
                  nd inforcements vsed against him, closed straight wayes wyth his wordes, and threatened, that ere long hee woulde for this be throughly reuenged on him. Dionysophanes for his pa
                     •…
                  te was amazed at the accident, and charging his bondman, in 
                     〈◊〉
                   vehement and hard speeches thereof to deliue
                     •…
                   
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   truth. L
                        •…
                     
                     mon▪
                   further added, and swore by the immortall gods, by Pan, and the Nymphs, that heerein hee had 
                     •…
                  ot lied one word, and to the ende to make cleere the matter, caused his wife Myrtale to bring foorth the attire, the mantle, and iewelles, and there shewed them in his presence.
               
                  Dionysophanes hauing heard these last speeches of Lamon togither with his attentiue countenance & 
                     •…
                  arnest protestation, looked vppon G
                        •…
                     atho with an aspect austere and grimme, as one

loue with thy brother indifferentlie. And in the parting of my possessions betweene you, I will that this house, these lands, the moouables heere in my heards, flocks, seruants, and all things else therevnto belonging, doo remaine and continue vnto thee. Daphnis at the repetition of these last words, not suffering his father to speake foorth the rest, start vp quicklie on a sudden, and there with O Nymphs, said he, my heards haue not all this while beene watered, and I stand heere stil a doing nothing. The companie heereat fell a laughing, to see that the remembrance of that wherein so long he had beene trained, could not yet make him forget what he had to doo when he was woont to be a seruant. But they aduertised vnto him that the care of his gotes belonged now vnto another, and that he needed not to troble his thonghts therwith any longer. Chloe all this while being filled with the▪ brute of Daphnis and his new acknowledgement of his parents, did nothing else but greeue and lament to see the bad successe (as she deemed) of their loues, for thinking that Daphnis being now aduanced to rich parentage, would not anie more regard or account of hir, he could but sigh and waile, accusing hir selfe to haue giuen more confidence to his othsworne by his gotes than to that he had made before to the 
                     Nymphs. Lapes therefore, who for dispite and wreak of the loue of Daphnis then made to hir, had spoiled in the night time, and marred the workmanship of Lamon as you heard before, perceiuing now that the state of Daphnis might tend to other effect, began to deuise to steale the shepheardesse by force, and for that purpose accompanied with a number of r
                     •…
                  de rakell fellowes, encountered with hir one morning as she was drining hir 
                     •…
                  ocks, and offering violence vnto hir shee skritched alowd▪ the sound of hir voice came first to Nape, and after to Drias and from him to Daphnis: but the yoonge goteheard conferring n
                     •…
                  we the state and reputation of his freends, durst not be acknowne publikelie of the action, but called foorth some of the house, to whom he gaue speciall direction to aid and assist Dryas.
               
               
                  Gnatho, who had euer since his villenie discouered, hid himselfe from all companie, hauing notice of the direction, thought with himselfe that now was the time wherein occasion was offered him to be reconciled to Daphnis, and putting himselfe forth

in the prease, as he that intended to be a guide vnto them in that action, they encountered Lapes by their hast, and the residue of his clownes that now were euen readie to haue conueied awaie the Nimph, and buckling heerevpon togithers, with hard strokes on either sides, Dryas and his companie in the end had the best, and rescuing Chloe againe lambs kind the rude lobkins welfauoredlie.
               
                  Gnatho supposing that he had behaued himselfe reasonable manlie in this enterprise, chalenged the honor of the conquest into his hands, wherof he now thought to make a gratefull present vnto his yoong maister Dryas, was not therewith miscontented, but accompanied them both to Daphnis, where being come, Gnatho made offer of the braue Nymph into his hands, humblie submitting himselfe therewithall at his feet, and praied him of pardon for his misd
                     •…
                  meanors passed, and that he might againe be restored by his meanes to the former enterteinment that in his fathers house he woontedlie receiued.
               
                  Daphnis gladded inwardlie at the sight of his Chloe, accepted his seruice, and imbracing hir manie times, he was in mind to haue committed hir againe to Dryas, with great desire that their loues might be kept secret. But Dryas vtterlie denied that, but rather deliberating to make the matter plaine, seeing the other was alreadie by fortune made knowne to his parents, tooke Chloe againe for that instant, and the next morning leading hir with him to the house of Dionysophanes, & desiring at the hands of him and his wife a little attentiue hearing, he made knowne vnto them the finding of Chloe, hir education, hir putting to the charge of keeping of flocks in the pastures, the vision to him and Lamon appearing touching the disposition of their fosterlings, Daphnis putting also to the feeld, the mutuall societie of him and Chloe there begun, continued and concluded vpon after in mariage, and therewithall praied that the Nymph by change and alteration of the state of Daphnis might not now be despised: and to the intent that they might the beeter stand assured of hir parentage, he shewed also the call, mantle, slippers and other attire and iewels that he found with hir: and those with hir, recommended e
                     •…
                  tsoones to their patronage, loue, care, and common defense.
               
                  
                  Dionysophanes and Clearista beholding the beautifull and seemelie parts of the shepheardesse, and weieng also, that by like ensignes and badges as theirs, she had beene laid foorth, concluded the likelihood thereof with their owne intendments, and the rather in respect of those testimonies which shewed in some sort, the reckoning of hir parents, and as king also of Daphnis his willingnesse therein, they accepted hir immediatlie as their daughter in law, and confirmed the liking, wherewith before he had receiued hir as his wife.
               Time wearing out the period of euerie determinat purpose and resolution, made Dionysophanes & his wife to thinke themselues sufficientlie by this time recreated with the pleasure of the count
                     •…
                  ie: wherefore apparelling Chsoe after the maner of the citie, and as beseemed their daughter, they iointlie with all their whole houshold remooued, and came backe againe to Meteline, but first in recompence of the painefull trauell of both these aged heardsmen, Dionysophanes rewarded Lamon with his freedome, and besides gane him afterwards wherwith to liue richlie: to Dryas also of his bountie he gaue three hundred crownes more than those he had before, and a gowne furred, and other apparrell both for winter and summer. To Nape, and e
                     •…
                  peciallie to Myrtale Clearista was not vnthankefull, both she and Lamon, besides greatlie reioicing in their olde age to haue obteined their f
                     •…
                  eedome.
               Now grew there to be a woonder at their arriuall in Metelene vpon this strange kind of accident, by meanes of which, diuerse of the woorthiest of the citie and their wiues visited Dionysophanes to know the maner and truth of the same: among all the rest that were there to participat this nouell, one Megacles a wealthie noble citizen, hearing the recount of the 
                     •…
                  ding and knowledge of Daphnis made by Dionysophan
                        •…
                     
                     ▪
                   sighing deeplie in his mind, began at a sudden to weepe verie tenderlie, and being earnestlie of the assistants demanded the occasion therof, he said: It is now about sixteene yeeres since, that by reason of my great charge bestowed in trauell, and sundrie losses hapned vnto me by seas, I had then a daughter borne vnto me by my wife Rhode, and forsomuch as my estate was at that instaut so

weake, as made me in great hazard how I might recouer my losses and fortune againe, and yeelded me also some dispaire how, or by what meanes I might afterwards liue hauing so manie children: in great agonie of minde I tooke the infant and gaue it in like manner as thou Dionysophanes to one of my seruants, with apparell, iewelles, and other things about it, and willed him, in some conuenient place to bestowe the same, recommending it thereby to the protection and guidance of some better hap. My children then had, are since all of them dead, my wealth neuerthelesse not any wayes diminished, but rather increased, but ah my greatest vnkindnesse to that infant, hath nowe bereft mee of any childe at all, and there is none to inherit the possessions and goodes I leaue behinde me. The recordation heereof (Dionysophanes) reported by a newe relation and deliuerie of thy good hap in recouering thy sonne, togither with the manner of thy departing from him so iustly agreeing in euery thing with mine, maketh me onely in this to accuse my ill hap, that can not also in the selfe occasion attaine the euent and fortune of other men, and lamenting the vntimely miscarryeng of hir (whome then I deemed some one or other beeing without childe might happilie finde, and take to their guidance, but nowe do expect vtterlie to be destroied) do wish to continue for hir sake the residue of my life in perpetuall sorrow and heauines.
               This pitifull discourse of the olde Megacles, bredde in the minde of all the companie an extreame sadnesse, wherefore, as well on a sudden to alter the dombe conceit therof, as otherwise to manifest vnto them all, a double occasion of his gladnesse: this aged Dionysophanes first brought foorth to Megacles the ornaments found with Chloe (hir-selfe hitherto remaining vnspoken of, and vnseene, but altogether in secret) and thereof demaunded of Megacles if he had any knowledge, affirming, that in the recouerie of his sonne, such manner of thinges also came to his handes. But Megacles well knowing and remembring the tokens of the same, fell heereby into a greater extremitie than before, thinking, that hee by this might well be assured, that his daughter could not nowe otherwise choose but be dead, and that some heardsman of the field had by chance taken vp these things,

and brought them also to Dionysophanes togither with Daphnis. Dionysophanes seeing heereby, that it was not requisit vnto the intendment of a ioifull mee
                     •…
                  ing long time in this sort to dally, began then with sweete words to comfort this Megacles, and assured him, that his daughter was liuing, and therewith presenting vnto the viewe of all the company, the meere diuine and exquisite proportion indeede of very Beautie it selfe, harbored in the amiable lookes of this faire and excellent Chloe, hee made known also to their hearing the whole maner of hir continuance euen to hir present finding.
               
                  Megacles not sufficiently able vppon a sudden to digest his ioyes, straightly embraced the Nymph, and being also informed of the marriage intended to the celebrated betweene hir and Daphnis, desired no better aliance. And in signe how well and worthily he deemed of the match, he freely there gaue and bestowed vpon hir, to hir present aduancement, the inheritaunce of al his lands, wealth, and possessions whatsoeuer, onely reserued vnto those that so charily had vnto that estate conducted hir, suche liberall rewards and presents, as to the reputation of his person, and the benefit at that instant receiued, might seeme most agreeing and correspondent.
               The citizens all thereabouts, commending highly the rare and woonderfull accomplishments of these two noble creatures, extolled the indifferencie of the match, and praied Himenaeus to giue vnto them, a happie, fruitfull, and gladsome continuance: whereby were finished in most honourable, and sumptuous maner, to the reioycing of al the beholders, the finall determination of all these pastorall amours.
            
            FINIS.
            
         
      
   