
      
         
            
               
                  
                  
                  THE
SEAMANS SECRETS,
                  Deuided into 2. partes, wherein is taught the
three kindes of Sayling, Horizontall, Peradoxall, and ſayling vpon
a great Circle: alſo an Horizontall Tyde Table for the eaſie finding
of the ebbing and flowing of the Tydes, with a Regiment newly calculated
for the finding of the Declination of the Sunne, and many
other moſt neceſſary rules and Inſtruments, not
heeretofore ſet foorth by any.
                  
                  Newly publiſhed by Iohn Dauis of Sandrudge, neere
Dartmouth, in the County of Deuon. Gent.
                  
                  ¶Imprinted at London by Thomas Dawſon,
dwelling at the three Cranes in the Vinetree,
and are these to be ſolde, 1595.
               
               
                  
                  
                  To the right honorable Lord Charles Haward,
Baron of Effingham, Knight of the noble order of the
Garter, Liuetenant of her Maiesties Counties of Suſſex and Surrey.
Conſtable of her Maieſties Honor and Caſtle of Winſor,
Lord high Admirall of England, Ireland, and VVales, and of the
Dominions and Iſles of the ſame, of the Towne of Callis and
marches thereof, Normandy, Gaſcony, and Geynes, Captaine
generall of her Maieſties Seas and Nauie royall, and one of
her Maieſties moſt honorable priuie Counſell. Iohn Dauis
wiſheth increaſe of honour and
perfect felicitie.
                  
                     RIght Honourable and my eſpeciall good Lord, as by
the inſtinct of nature all men are deſirous of knowledge,
and take pleaſure in the varieties of vnderſtanding,
ſo it is likewiſe ingraffed by the ſame benefit of
nature, in the harts of true nobilitie, not onely to excell
the vulgare ſort, but alſo to cherriſh, ſupport, and
countenance all ſuch as ſhall in due courſe proſecute
their vocation: and as ſuch practiſes either ſpeculatiue
or mecanicall, ſhall receiue ſauourable place in
the honourable opinion of nobilitie, by ſo much the
more ſhall the practiſer be eſteemed: which is the cauſe that at this time imboldneth
me, to preſent vnto your moſt honourable fauour this ſmal treatiſe of Nauigation, being
a breefe collection of ſuch practiſes as in my ſeuerall voyages I haue from experience
collected Among which in my three ſeuerall attempts for the diſcouery of the
Northweſt paſſage, thereby to finde a ſhorte and nauigable courſe vnto the riche and
famous Countries of Cathayo, China, Pegu, the Iſles of Molucan and Phillipina,
that thereby to the great and ineſtimable benefite of our Countrie, there might
be a rich and plentifull trade procured betweene vs and the ſaid nations in ſhort time
to be perfourmed, and with great ſafetie in regarde of the courſe: which action and
diſcouery (by meanes of that honourable Counſeller Sir Frauncis Walſingham
Knight, principall Secretary to her Maieſtie) was with good reſolution accepted by the
Merchants of London but in the decay of his honourable life, the attempt was likewiſe

quailed: but howſoeuer mens mindes alter, yet vndoubtedly there is a paſſage
nauigable, and eaſie to be perfourmed by that courſe (whenſoeuer it ſhall pleaſe God
to reueale the ſame) by inuincible reaſons, and ſufficient experience to be proued: and
although before I entred into that diſcouery, I was ſufficiently perſwaded of the certaintie
thereof, by hiſtoricall relation ſubſtantially confirmed, whereof to the aduentures
I made ſufficient proofe, but eſpecially to my worſhipfull good freend Maſter
William Sanderſon, the onely Merchant, that to his great charges with moſt conſtant
trauaile did labour for the finiſhing thereof: yet I thanke God that of late it hath
beene my very good chaunce to receiue better aſſurance then euer before of the certaintie
of that paſſage, and ſuch was my vehement deſire for the perfourmance thereof,
that thereby I was onely induced to goe with M. Candiſhe in his ſecond attempt
for the South Seas, vpon his conſtant promiſe vnto me, that when we came to the
Callifornia, I ſhould there haue his Pinnice with my owne Barck (which for that
purpoſe went with me to my great charges) to ſearch that North weſt diſcouery vpon
thoſe backe partes of America, but God hath otherwiſe diſpoſed our purpoſes in his
deuine Iudgements, for M. Candiſhe being halfe way through the ſtraights of Magilane,
and impatient of the tempeſtious furiouſnes of that place, hauing all his Ships
and company with him, returned for Braſill, by the authoritie of his commaund, whē
with a leading winde we might haue paſſed the ſame, and returning more then 80.
leages toward Braſill, my ſelfe being in his Ship named the Deſire, without Boate,
Oares, Sayles, Cables, cordage, victuals, or health of my companye ſufficient for that
attempt, was ſeperated in a frette of weather, and forced to ſeeke the nex ſhorte for my
releefe, and recouering a harborow by vs named Port Deſire, being in the lati. of 48.
deg. did there repaire my moſt miſerable wantes, and there ſtaying foure moneths in
moſt lamentable diſtreſſe, did againe conclude with my company to giue an other attempt
to paſſe the ſtraights, as my beſt meane to gaine releefe. And three times I
was in the South Seas, but ſtill by furious weather forced back againe: yet notwithſtanding
all this my labour to perfourme the voyage for his profite, and to ſaue my
ſelfe, (for I did aduenture and my good freends for my ſake 1100. pounds in the action.)
M. Candiſhe was content to account me to be the authour of his ouerthrowe,
and to write with his dying hand that I ranne from him, when as his owne Ship was
returned many moneths before me,
                  I am bolde to make this relation vnto your Lordſhip, onelye to ſatisfie your Honour
of my conuerſation, for were I faultie of ſo foule a crime, I were worthy of tenne
thouſand tormentes, in preſuming to preſent this Treatiſe to your honourable Lordſhip,
and now referring my cauſe to your Lordſhips conſideration, I will again returne
to my purpoſe.
                  In thoſe Northweſt voyages where Nauigation muſt be executed in moſt exquite
ſorte, in thoſe attempts I was enforced to ſearch all poſſible meanes required in

ſayling, by which occaſion I haue gathered together this breefe treatiſe, which with my
ſelfe I doe dedicate to your moſt honourable protection, being deſirous if it lay in my
power, to doe farre greater matter in your Lordſhips ſeruice, hoping of your honourable
pardon, becauſe it is onely done to ſhew my dutifull affection, and not for any
ſingularitie that the worke containeth, For I thinke there be many hundreds in England
that can in a farre greater meaſure and more excellent methode expreſſe the noble
arte of Nauigation, and I am fully perſwaded that our Countrie is not inferiour
to any for men of rare knowledge, ſinguler application, and exquiſite execution of the
Artes Mathematick, for what Strangers may be compared with M. Thomas Digges
Eſquire, our Countryman the great maſter of Archmaſtrie, and for Thericall ſpeculations
and moſt cunning calculation M. Dee and M. Thomas Heriotts are hardly to
be matched: and for the mecanicall practiſes drawnefrom the Artes Mathematick,
our Countrie doth yeelde men of principall excellencie, as M. Emery Mulleneux
for the exquiſite making of Globus bodies, and M. Nicholas Hellyar for the ſingularitie
of portrature hath the praiſe of Europe, M. Baker for his skill and ſurpaſſing
grounded knowledge for the building of Ships aduantageable to all purpoſe, hath not
in any nation his equall.
                  And now that I may returne to the painefull Seaman, it is not vnknowne to all
nations of the earth, that the Engliſh goeth before all others in the practiſes of ſayling,
as appeareth by the excellent diſcouery of Sir Franncis Drake, in his paſſage
through the ſtraights of Magilane, which being then ſo rawly knowne, he could not
haue paſſed, vnleſſe he had beene a man of great practiſe and rare reſolution: ſo much
I may boldely ſay, becauſe I haue ſeene and taſted the frowardnes of the place, with
the great vnlikelyhoode of any paſſage to be that way.
                  I might heere repeate the moſt valiant and excellent attemps of Sir Hugh Willougbie,
Sir Iohn Hawkins, Sir Humfry Gilbert, and your Lordſhips ſeruant M.
George Raymond, with diuers others that haue giuen moſt reſolute attempts in the
practiſes of Nauigation, as well for the diſcouery as other execution, whereby good
proofe is made, that not onely in the skill of Nauigation, but alſo in the mecanicall
execution of the practiſes of ſayling, we are not to be matched by any nation of
the earth.
                  And ſith Nauigation is the meane whereby Countries are diſcouered, and comunitie
drawne betweene nation and nation, the word of God publiſhed to the bleſſed
recouery of the forraine of caſtes from whome it hath pleaſed his deuine Maieſtie as
yet to detaine the brightnes of his glory: and that by nauigation common weales
through mutuall trade are not onely ſuſteined, but mightily enriched by whole hard
aduentures ſuch excellent benefites are atchieued, for by his exceeding great hazzards
the forme of the earth, the quantities of Countries, the diuerſitie of nations, and the
natures of Zones, Climats, countries and people, are apparantly made known vnto vs:

Beſides, the great benefites mutually interchanged betweene nations, of ſuch fruites,
commodities, and artificiall practiſes wherewith God hath bleſſed eche perticular
Countrie, coaſt, and nation, according to the nature and ſcituation of the place.
                  For what hath made the Spaniard to be ſo great a Monarch, the Commaunder of
both Indias, to abound in wealth and all natures benefites, but onely the painefull induſtrie
of his Subiects by Nauigation: their former trade was onely figs, Orenges, and
Oyle, but now through Nauigation it is brought to be golde, ſiluer, pearles, ſilkes, and
ſpice, by long and painefull trade recouered. Which great benefites onely by her Maieſties
louing clemencie and mercifull fauour he doth poſſeſſe: for if her highnes and
her moſt honourable Lords would but regarde the ſmall diſtance betweene her dominions
and thoſe famous rich kingdomes, the eaſines of the paſſage being once diſcouered,
(the Northweſt I meane) with the full ſufficiencie of her highnes Subiects to
effect the ſame, there could then be no do doubt but her ſtately ſeate of London ſhould
be the ſtorehouſe of Europe, and a nurſſe to all nations, in yeelding all Indian commodities
in a farre better condition, and at a more eaſie rate then now brought vnto vs,
exchanging commodities of our owne ſtore, with a plentifull returne at the firſte
hand, which now by many exchanges are brought vnto vs.
                  Then ſhould the Spaniard againe returne to his olde trade, and our ſacred Soueraigne
be ſeated the Commaunder of the earth: which trade and moſt fortunate
diſcouery, we aboue all nations ought moſt principally to regarde, becauſe of the ſingularitie
and inviolable force of our Shipping, which is not onely the commaunding
fortreſſe of our Countrie, but alſo the dread of our aduerſary, and glory of our nation:
wherein we doe in no ſorte flatter our ſelues▪ for it was made apparant to all nations
of the earth, by the late moſt famous conqueſt that her Maieſtie had againſt the
huge ſuppoſed inuincible fleete of the Spaniard, being by her Nauie vnder the commaund
of your Lordſhip who there in perſon and in place of her Maieſtie, to your
eternall glorious ſame did diſgrace their glory, and confound their force, and manifeſt
their weakenes by their daſtardly flight, through Gods prouidence and your Lordſhips
ſtately reſolution.
                  Then ſith Nauigation is a matter of ſo great moment, I ſuppoſe that euery man is
bound in dutie to giue his beſt furtherance thereunto: among whome as the moſt
vnmeete of all, yet wiſhing all good to the painefull traueller, I haue publiſhed this
ſhorte treatiſe, naming it the Seamans Secrets, becauſe by certaine queſtions demaunded
and anſwered, I haue not omitted any thing that appertaineth to the ſecret
of Nauigation, whereby if there may growe any increaſe of knowledge or eaſe
in practiſe, it is the thing which I cheefely deſire.
                  To manifeſt the neceſſary concluſions of Nauigation in breefe and ſhorte tearmes
is my onely intent, and therefore I omit to declare the cauſes of tearmes and diffinition
of artificiall wordes, as matters ſuperfluous to my purpoſe, neither haue I laide

downe the cunning concluſions apt for Schollers to practiſe vpon the ſhore, but onely
thoſe things that are needfullye required in a ſufficient Seaman: beſeeching your
honourable Lordſhip to pardon my boldeneſſe, and with your fauourable countenance
to regarde my dutifull affection, I moſt humblye commit your good
Lordſhip to the mercies of God, who long preſerue your
health with continuall increaſe of
honour.
                  From Sandrudge by Darthmouth the 20. of
Auguſt 1594.
                  
                     Your Lordſhips in all dutifull
ſeruice to commaund,
Iohn Dauis.
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                        Imperiall
The firſt mouable
Criſtalin
The firmamēt
Saturnus
Iupiter
Mars
Sol Venus
Mercurius
Luna
                     
                  
               
            
            
               
                  
                  THE
FIRSTE BOOKE OF THE
SEAMANS SECRETS.
                  
                     What is Nauigation?
                     
                        NAuigation is that excellent Arte which demonſtrateth by
infallible concluſion, how a ſufficient Ship may be conducted
the ſhorteſt good way from place to place, by Corſe
and trauers.
                  
                  
                     What are thoſe infallible concluſions?
                     
                        NAuigation conſiſteth of three partes, which being well vnderſtood and
practiſed, are concluſions infallible, wherby the ſkilfull Pilote is void
of all doubt to effett the thing purpoſed. Of which, the firſt is Horizontall
Nauigation, which manifeſteth all the varieties of the Ships motion, within
the Horizontall plaine ſuperficies, where euery line drawne is ſuppoſed a
parallell.
                     The ſecond is a peradoxall or Coſmographicall Nauigation, which demonſtrateth
the true motion of the Ship vpon any courſe aſſigned in longitude,
latitude and diſtance, either perticular or general, and is the ſkilfull gathering
together of many Horizontall Corſes, into one infallible and true
motion peradoxall.
                     The third is great Circle Nauigation, which teacheth how vpon a great
Circle drawn betweene any 2. places aſſigned, (being the only ſhorteſt way
betweene place and place) the Ship may be conducted, and is perfourmed
by the ſkilfull application of Horizontall and peradoxall Nauigation.
                  
                  
                     What is a Corſe?
                     A Corſe is that peradoxall line which paſſeth betweene place and place,
according to the true Horizontall poſition of the Magnet, vpon which
line the Ship proſecuting her motion, ſhalbe conducted betweene the ſaide
places.
                  
                  
                     What is a Trauers?
                     A Trauers is the varietie or alteration of the Ships motion vpon the
ſhift of windes, within any Horizontall plaine ſuperficies, by the good

collection of which Trauerſes, the ſhips uniforme motion or Corſe is giuen.
                  
                  
                     What Inſtruments are neceſſary for the execution
of this excellent skill?
                     THe Inſtrumentes neceſſary for a ſkilfull Seaman, are a Sea Compaſſe,
a Croſſe ſtaffe, a Quadrant, an Aſtrolabie, a Chart, an inſtrument
magneticall for the finding of the variation of the Compaſſe, an Horizontall
plaine Sphere, a Globe, and a paradoxall Compaſſe. By which inſtruments
all concluſions and infallible demonſtrations, Hidrographicall, Geographicall,
and Coſmographicall, are without controlement of errour to be performed:
but the Sea Compaſſe, Chart, and Croſſe ſtaffe, are inſtruments ſufficient
for the ſeamans vſe: the Aſtrolabie and Quadrant being inſtruments
very vncertaine for Sea obſeruations.
                  
                  
                     What is the Sea Compaſſe?
                     THe Sea Compaſſe is a principall inſtrument in Nauigation, repreſenting
and diſtnguiſhing the Horizon, ſo that the Compaſſe may conueniently
be named, an Artificiall Horizon, becauſe by it are manifeſted all the
limits and diſtinctions of the Horizon required, to the perfect vſe of Nauigation,
which diſtinctions are the 32. points of the Compaſſe, wherby the Horizon
is deuided into 32. equall partes, and euery of thoſe points hath his proper
name, as in the figure following appeereth. Alſo euery point of the Compaſſe
doth containe degrees, minuts, ſeconds, and thirds, &c. Which degrees
are called degrees of Azumuth, whereof there are in euery point 11¼. ſo that
the whole Compaſſe of Horizon containeth 360. degrees of Azumuth, for if
you multiplie 11¼. degrees, the degrees that ech point containeth, by 32. the
points of the Compaſſe, it yeeldeth 360. the degrees of the Compaſſe. And of
minutes eche point containeth 45. being ¾. of an hower, ſo that the whole
Compaſſe is heereby deuided into 24, howers, by which accompt there are in
an hower 15. degrees, ſo that euery degree containeth 4. minutes of time,
for an hower conſiſting of 60. minutes, hath for his fifteenth part 4. minutes
of time, and in euery minute there is 60. ſeconds, and euery ſecond containeth
60. thirds, either in degrees applied to time, or degrees applied to meaſure:
ſo that the generall content of the Compaſſe is, 32. points, 360. degrees, and
24. howers, with their minutes, ſeconds, and thirds.
                  
                  
                     What is the vſe of the 32. points of the Compaſſe?
                     THe vſe of the 32. points of the Compaſſe, is to direct the ſkilful Pilote
by Horizontall trauers, how hee may conclude the corſe or peradoxall
motion of his Ship, therby with the greater expedition to recouer the place
deſired, becauſe they deuide the Horizon into ſuch limits as are moſt apt for
Nauigation, they doe alſo diſtinguiſh the windes by their proper names, for

the winde receiueth his name by the parte of the Horizon from whence hee
bloweth.
                  
                  
                     What is the vſe of the 360. degrees of Azumuth?
                     BY the degrees of Azumuth is knowne the quantitie of the riſing and ſetting
of the Sunne, Moone and Starres, whereby is knowne the length
of the dayes and nightes in all climates, and at all times, they alſo ſhew a
moſt preciſe Horizontall diſtiuction of the motion of the Sunne, Moone and
Starres, whereby the certaintie of time is meaſured, and the variation of the
Compaſſe, with the Poles height is ingeuiouſly knowne at all times and in
all places, by helpe of the Globe.
                  
                  
                     How is the hower of the day knowne by the Compaſſe?
                     IT hath been an ancient cuſtome among Mariners to deuide the Compaſſe
into 24. equall partes or howers, by which they haue vſed to diſtinguiſh
time, ſuppoſing an Eaſt Sunne to be 6. of the clocke, a Southeaſt Sunne
9. of the clocke, and a South Sunne 12. of the clocke: &c. as in the figure
following ſhall plainely appeere. But this accompt is very abſurd, for with
vs in England (the Sunne hauing his greateſt North declination,) it is
ſomewhat paſt 7. of the clock, at an Eaſt Sunne, and at a Southeaſt Sunne
it is paſt 10. of the clocke: alſo when the Sunne is in the Equinoctiall, the
Sunne is halfe the day Eaſt, and halfe the day Weſt, to all thoſe that be vnder
the ſame, ſo that the Sunne then and to thoſe people vſeth but 2. pointes
of the Compaſſe, to perfourme the motion of 12. howers: therfore the diſtinctions
of time may not well be giuen by the Compaſſe, vnleſſe the Sunne be
vpon the Meridian, or that you be farre toward the North, in ſuch places
where the Sunnes Horizontall motion is very oblique, for there the hower
may be giuen by the Compaſſe, without any great errour, but elſewhere it
cannot. Therefore thoſe that trauaile muſt either vſe the Globe, or an
Equinoctiall diall, by whom time may be moſt certainly meaſured, if there
bee good conſideration of the variation of the needle by which the Equinoctiall
diall is directed, for this is a generall thing to be regarded aſwel in the
compaſſe, as in any dials or other inſtrument or concluſion whatſoeuer wherin
the vſe of the needle is required, that vnleſſe there be good regarde vnto
the variation of the ſame, there can no good concluſion follow of any ſuch
practices.
                     
                        
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     What is the next neceſſary thing to be learned?
                     
                        HAuing perfectly learned the Compaſſe, the next neceſſary thing for a
Seaman to know, is the alteration or ſhifting of tydes, that thereby he
may with the greater ſafetie bring his Ship into any barred Port, Hauen,
Creeke, or other place, where tydes are to be regarded. And this difference of
tides in the alteration of flowing and reflowing, is by long experience found
to be gouerned by the Moones motion, for in ſuch proportion of time as the
Moone doth ſeperate her ſelfe from the Sunne, by the ſwiftnes of her naturall
motion: in the like proportion of time doth one tide differ from another,
therefore ta vnderſtand this difference of the Moones motion, is the onelye
meane whereby the time of tides is moſt preciſely knowne.
                  
                  
                     
                     Of the Moones motion.
                     
                        YOu muſt vnderſtand the Moone hath two kinde of motions, a naturall
motion, and a violent motion, her violent motion is from the eaſt toward
the Weſt, cauſed by the violent ſwiftnes of the diurnall motion of primum
mobile, in which motion the Moone is caried about the earth in 24. howers
and 50. minutes nereſt one day with another, for although the diurnall period
of the firſt mouer the perfourmed in 24. howers, yet becauſe the Moone euery
day in her ſloweſt naturall motion moueth 12, degrees, therefore ſhe is
not carried about the earth, vntill that her motion be alſo caried about, which
is in 24. howers and 50. minutes nereſt.
                     Her naturall motion is from the Weſt towards the Eaſt, contrary to the
motion of the firſt mouer, wherein the Moone hath 3. differences of mouing,
a ſwift motion, a meane motion, and a ſlowe motion all which is perfourmes
by the diuine ordinance of the Creator, in 27. daies and 8. howers nereſt,
through all the degrees of the Zodiac.
                     Her ſlowe motion is in the point of Auge or apogeo, being then fartheſt
diſtant from the earth, and then ſhe moueth in euery day 12. degrees.
                     Her ſwift motion is in the opoſite of age or perigeo, being then nereſt vnto
the earth, at which time ſhe moueth 14. degrees, with ſome ſmall difference
of minutes in euery 24. howers.
                     Betweene thoſe 2. points is her meane motions, and then ſhe moueth 13.
degrees nereſt, all which differences are cauſed by the excontricitie of her
Orbe wherein ſhe moueth, and are onely perfourmed in the Zodiac, but the
Sea men for their better eaſe in the knowledge of tides, haue applied this
the Moones motion, to the points, degrees, and minutes of the Compaſſe,
whereby they haue framed it to be an Horizontall motion, which ſith by long
practiſe is found to be a rule of ſuch certaintie, as that the errour therof bringeth
no danger to the expert Seaman, therefore it is not amiſſe to follow
their practiſed precepts therein.
                     In euery 29. daies 12. howers 44. minutes, one with another through the
yeere, the Sunne and Moone are in coniunction, and therefore that is the
quantitie of time betweene change and change, for although the Moone in
27. daies and 8 howers perfourming her naturall motion, doth returne to the
ſame minute of the Zodiac from whence ſhe departed, yet being ſo returned,
ſhe doth not finde the Sunne in that parte of the Ecliptick where ſhe lefte
him, for the Sunne in his naturall motion mouing euery day one degree towards
the Eaſt, is moued ſo farre from the place where the Moone left him,
as that the Moone cannot ouertake the Sunne to come in coniunction with
him, vntill ſhe haue perfourmed the motion of 2. daies, 4. howers, and 44. minutes
nereſt, more then her naturall reuolution, and that is the cauſe wherefore

there are 29. daies, 12. howers, 44 minutes, betweene change & change,
one with another through the whole yeere: but the Seaman accompteth the
Moones motion, to be vniforme in all places of the Zodiac alike limiting her
generall ſeperation from the Sunne, to be ſuch as is her ſloweſt naturall motion,
which is 12. degrees, or 48. minutes of time, in euery 24. howers.
                     By which accompt there are 30. daies reconed betweene change and
change, being 11, howers, 16, minutes, more then in truth there is: but becauſe
this difference breedeth but ſmal errour in their accompt of tides, therfore
to alter practiſed rules where there is no vrgent cauſe, were a matter
friuolous, which conſidered, I thinke it not amiſſe that we proceede therein
by the ſame methode that commonly is exerciſed.
                     Allowing the Moone in euery 24. howers to departe from the Sunne 12
degrees, or 48. minutes of time, and in this ſeperation the Moone moueth
from the Sunne Eaſtwards, vntill ſhe be at the full, for betweene the change
and the full, it is called the Moones ſeperation from the Sunne: for after
the full ſhe doth apply towards the Sunne, ſo that betweene the full and the
change it is called the Moones application to the Sunne, in which time of
application ſhe is to the Weſtward of the Sunne, as in her ſeperation ſhe is
to the Eaſtward, or I may ſay in the Seamans phraise, all the time of her
application ſhe is before the Sunne, and in the time of her ſeperation ſhe is
abaft the Sunne.
                     Then if the Moone doe moue 48. minutes of time in 24. howers, it followeth
that ſhe doth moue 24. minutes in 12. howers, and in 6. howers ſhe
moueth 12. minutes, therefore euery hower ſhe moueth 2. minutes, and ſuch
as is the difference of her motion, ſuch is the alteration of tides, and therfore
euery tide differeth from the other 12. minutes, becauſe there is 6. howers
betweene tide and tide, and in euery hower the courſe of flowing or reflowing
altereth 2. minutes, whereby it appeereth that in 24. howers the foure
tides of flowing and reflowing doe differ 48. minutes of time.
                     And ſith the whole knowledge of this difference or alteration of tides, as
alſo the quantitie of the Moones ſeperation and application to and from the
Sunne, dependeth vpon the knowledge of the Moones age, it is therfore neceſſary
that next you learne how the Sunne may be knowne.
                     For the perfourmance whereof there are 2▪ numbers eſpecially required,
named the Prime and the Epact, for by the prime the epact is found, and by
helpe of the Epact the Moones age is knowne.
                  
                  
                     Of the prime or Golden number.
                     THe Prime is the ſpace of 19▪ yeeres, in which time ye moone performeth
all the varieties of her motion with the ſunne, and at the end of 19. yeres
beginneth the ſame reuolution againe, therefore the Prime neuer exceedeth
the number of 19. and this prime doth alwaies begin in Ianuary, and thus

the prime is found: vnto the yeere of the Lord wherein you deſire to know
the prime adde 1. then deuide that number by 19. and the remaining number
which commeth not into the quotient is the prime. Example, in the yeere of
our Lord 1590. I deſire to know the prime, therefore I adde I. vnto that
yeere, and then it is 1591. which I deuide by 19. and it yeeldeth in the quotient
83. and there remaineth 14. vpon the diuiſion, which commeth not into
the quotient, which 14. is the prime in the yeere of our Lord 1590.

                           1590
                           1
                           1591
                        
                        
                           1
                           74
                           1591
                           199 (83
                           1527
                           1
                           5
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     Of the Epact.
                     THe Epact is a number proceeding from the ouerplus of the ſolar and
lunar yeere, which number neuer exceedeth 30. becauſe the Moones age
neuer exceedeth 30. for the finding whereof this number onely ſerueth: and
thus the Epact is knowne, which Epact doth alwaies begin in March, multiplye
the prime by II. (being the nereſt difference betweene the ſolar and lunar
yeere) deuide the product by 30. and the remainer is the epact. Example,
in the yeere of our Lord 1590. I would know the Eqact, firſt I ſeeke the
prime of that yeere, and finde it to be 14. I therfore multiply 14. by 11. and
that yeeldeth 154. which being deuided by 30. it giueth in the quotient 5.
and there remaineth 4. vpon the diuiſion, which 4. is the Epact in the yeere
1590. which beginning in March, doth continue vntill the next March of
the yeere 1591.

                           14
                           11
                           14
                           17
                           154
                        
                        
                           15 (4
                           130 (5
                           50
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     Of the ſolar and lunar yeere.
                     THe ſolar yeere or the Suns yeere conſiſteth of 12. moneths, being 365.
daies, and about 6. howers, the lunar yere of ye Moones yere containeth
32. Moones, and euery Moone hath 29. daies, 12. howers, 44. minutes nereſt,
which amount vnto 354. daies, 5 howers, 28. minutes, the content of the Lunar
yeere, which being ſubſtracted from 365 dayes, 6. howers, there reſteth
11. daies and 32 minutes, the difference between the ſaide yeeres, from which
difference the Epact commeth.
                     
                        
BY this Table the prime and Epact may for euer be found, for when the
yeeres be expired, you may begin againe and continue it for euer at yaur
pleaſure.
                     
                     The firſt circle containeth the yeeres of our Lord, the ſecond the prime,
and the third and inner circle ſheweth the Epact: vnder euery yeere you ſhal
finde his prime and Epact, the prime beginneth in Ianuary, and the Epact
in March.
                  
                  
                     How to finde the Moones age.
                     FIrſt conſider the day of the moneth wherein you ſeeke the Moones age,
then note how many moneths there are betweene the ſaid moneth and
March, including both moneths, vnto thoſe numbers adde the Epact of that
yeere, that is, you muſt adde into one ſumme the day of the moneth, betweene
March and your moneth, reckoning both moneths and the Epact, all which
numbers ioyned together, if they exceede not 30. is the moones age, if they
be more then 30. caſt away 30▪ as often as you can, and the remainer is the
Moones age, if it be iuſt 30. it is then new Moone, if 7. it is the firſt quarter

day, if 15. it is full Moone, if 22. it is then the laſt quarter day, and thus the
Moones age is found for euer.
                     And now being able for all times either paſt, preſent or to come, to giue
the Moones age, I think it good by a few queſtions conuenient for the Seamans
practiſe, to make you vnderſtand the neceſſary vſe thereof.
                  
                  
                     For the accompt of Tydes.
                     WHen you deſire to know the time of full Sea in any place, at all
ſuch ſeaſons as occaſion ſhall require, you muſt firſt learne what
moone maketh a full Sea in the ſame place, that is, vpon what point of the
Compaſſe the Moone is, when it is full Sea at the ſaid place, you muſt alſo
know what hower is appropriated to that point of the Compaſſe, as before is
ſhewed: for vpon the change day it will alwaies be full Sea in that place, at
the ſame inſtant of time, by which conſiderations you muſt thus proceed for
the ſearch of tides.
                     Multiplie the Moones age by 4. deuide the product by 5. and to the quotient
adde the hower which maketh full Sea in that place vpon the change
day, if it exceede 12. caſt away 12. as oft as you may, and then the hower of
full Sea remaineth, and for euery 1. that reſteth vpon your diuiſion, allow 12.
minutes to be added to the howers, for 2. 24. minutes, for 3. 36▪ and for 4. 48.
minutes, for more then 4. will neuer remaine, and thus you may know your
tides to a minute. Example, the Moone being twelue daies olde, I deſire to
know the time of full Sea at London: firſt it is found by experience, that a
Southweſt and Northeaſt Moone make full ſea at London, next, I conſider
that 3. of the clocke is the houre appropriated to that point of the Compaſſe,
whith number I keepe in memory, then I multiplie the Moones age, being
12. by 4. and that yeeldeth 48. which being deuided by 5. it giueth in the
quotient 9. and three remaineth, I adde the quotient 9. to the hower 3. and
it maketh 12. howers, and for the remaining number 3. I alſo adde 36. minutes,
ſo that I finde when the Moone is 12. daies olde, it is 12. of the clocke.
and 36. minutes paſt, at the inſtant of full Sea at London: by this order you
may at all places & times know the certaintie of your tides at your pleaſure.
                     But thoſe that are not practiſed in Arithmetick may accompt their tides
in this ſorte, knowing how many daies olde the Moone is, he muſt place the
Moone vpon that point of the Compaſſe which maketh full Sea at the place
deſired, and then reckoning from that point with the ſunne according to the
diurnal motion, muſt accompt ſo many points, and ſo many times 3. minutes
as the Moone is daies olde, that is for euery day one point and 3. minuts, and
there finding the Sun, he muſt conſider what is the hower allowed to that
point where he findeth the Sunne, for that is the hower of full Sea. As for
Example, the moone being 12, daies olde, I deſire to know the hower of full

Sea of London, now finding by former experience, that a Southweſt
Moone maketh full Sea at London, I therefore place the Moone vpon the
point Southweſt, then I accompt from the point Southweſt 12, points, reckoning
with the Sunne according to the diurnall motion, Southweſt and
by weſt for the firſt pointe, Weſt Southweſt for the ſecond, Weſt by South
for the third, Weſt for the fourth point, and ſo forth vntill I come to North,
which is 12. points from Southweſt, and becauſe the Moone moueth 3. minutes
more then a point in euery day, I therefore adde three times twelue,
which make 36. minutes vnto the point North, at which place I finde the
Sunne to be, and knowing that twelue of the clocke is appropriated to the
point North, I may therfore boldely ſay that at twelue of the clocke 36. minutes
paſt, it is full Sea at London. when the Moone is twelue daies olde,
which 36. minutes are added, becauſe the Moone hath moued 36. minutes
more then twelue points in thoſe twelue daies, which is one point and 3. minutes
for euery day, as before.
                     
                        Heere followeth a very neceſſary Inſtrument for
the knowledge of the Tydes, named an
Horizontall tyde Table.
                  
                  
                     
                     Of this Inſtrument and his partes.
                     THis neceſſary inſtrument for the yong practiſing Seamans vſe, name
                           •
                        
an Horizontall tyde table, whereby he may ſhift his Sunne and Moone
(as they terme it) and know the times of his tides with eaſe and very certainly,
beſides the anſwering of many pleaſant and neceſſary queſtions vſed amongſt
Mariners) I haue contriued into this methode, onely for the benefite
of ſuch yong practiſers in Hauigation.
                     The firſt parte of this inſtrument is a Sea Compaſſe, deuided into 32.
points or equall partes, the innermoſt circle of which Compaſſe is deuided
into 24. howers, and euery of thoſe into 4. quarters, eche quarter being 15.
minutes, and againſt euery point of the Compaſſe thoſe places are laide
downe, in which places it is full Sea when the Moone commeth vpon the
ſame point, ſo that whatſoeuer is required as touching time, or the pointes of
the Compaſſe, is there to be knowne.
                     The next moueable circle vpon this Compaſſe, is limited to the Sunne,
vpon whoſe index the Sunne is laide downe, which circle is deuided into 30
equall partes or daies, ſignifying the 30, daies between change and change,
according to the Seamans accompt, ſo that whatſoeuer is demaunded as
touching the age of the Moone, is vpon the circle to be knowne.
                     The vppermoſt moueable circle is applied to the Moone, vpon whoſe index
the Moone is laide downe, which is to be placed either to the points and
partes of the Compaſſe, or to the time of her age, as the queſtion requireth:
which conſidered, the vſe of this inſtrument is largely manifeſted, by theſe
queſtions with their anſweres following.
                  
                  
                     How to know the hower of the night by the Moone, being vpon any
point of the Compaſſe, by this inſtrument.
                     I. Q. The Moone 10. daies olde, I demaund what it is a clocke, when ſhe
is Eaſt Northeaſt.
                     1. A. In this queſtion the Moones age and the point of the Compaſſe is
giuen, therby to know the hower, I therfore place the index of the Moone vpon
the point Eaſt Northeaſt, there keeping the ſame not to be moued, then
becauſe the Moone is 10. daies olde, I moue the index of the Sunne vntill
I bring ye tenth day of the Moons age vnto the index of the Moon, and there
I looke by the Index of the Sunne and finde vpon the Compaſſe that it is
twelue of the clocke at noone and 30. minutes paſt, when the Moone is vpon
the point Eaſt Northeaſt, being 10. daies olde,
                     2. Q. The Moone being twelue daies olde, I demaund at what hower
ſhe wile vpon the point S. S.?:
                     
                        
2. A. In this queſtion the point of the oampas of Moons age is giuen, as in
the firſt, therfore I place the index of the Moon upon the point S. E. C. and
there holding it without mouing, I turne the index of the Snnne, untill the
twelfth day of the moones age come to the index of the moone, and then the
index of the Sunne ſheweth me vpon the Horizon the hower 8. therefore I
ſay that 8. of the clock at night the moone was then vpon the point South
Southeaſt.
                     And thus you may at al times know the hower of the night by the Moon,
vpon any point of the Compaſſe, ſo that Moones age be alſo had.
                  
                  
                     How by this Inſtrument, you know at all times vpon what point
of the Compaſſe the Moone is.
                     I. Q. When the Moone is 10. daies olde, vpon what pointe of the Compaſſe
will ſhe he, at 9, of the clocke in the morning.?
                     1. A. In this queſtion the houre of the day and the Moones age is giuen,
thereby to finde vpon what point of the Compaſſe ſhe is at the ſame time. I
therefore place the Index of the Sunne vpon the Compaſſe, at the houre 9. of
the clocke in the morning, being upon the point Southeaſt, then I turne the
Index of the Moone, untill I bring it to the tenth day of her age, and then I
ſee upon the Compaſſe that the Moone is North and by eaſt, and 15. minutes
to the Eaſtwards, at 9. of the clocke when ſhe is 10. daies olde.
                     2. Q. When the Moone is 20, daies olde, upon what point of the Compas
will ſhe be at 2. of the clocke in the after noone?
                     2. A. I place the Index of the Sunne vpon the hower 2. noted in the compaſſe,
there holding the ſame without mouing, then I turne the Index of the
Moone, untill I bring it unto the twentith day of her age, and there I ſee upon
the Compaſſe that the is Northeaſt and by north, and 15. minutes to the
Northward, at 2. of the clocke in the afternoone, when ſhe is 20. daies olde.
                  
                  
                     To finde the Moones age by this inſtrument.
                     1. Q. When the Moone is North at 7. of the clocke in the forenoone, how
olde is ſhe:
                     1. A. In this queſtion the point of the Compaſſe and the hower is giuen
for the finding of the Moones age: therefore I ſet the Index of the Sunne
vpon the hower 7. in the forenoone, there holding it without mouing, then I
bring the Index of the Moone to the point North, and then vpon the circle
containing the daies of the Moones age, I ſee the Moone is 8. daies and about
18. howers olde, when ſhe is North at 7. of the clocke in the forenoone.
                     2. Q. When the Sunne is Eaſt, and the Moone Southweſt, how olde is the Moone?
                     
                        
2. A. In this queſtion the points of the Compaſſe are onely giuen for the
finding of the Moones age, therefore I ſet the Index of the Sunne vpon the
point Eaſt, there holding him ſtedie, then I put the Index of the Moone vpon
the point Southweſt, and there I ſee that moone is 18. daies and 18
howers olde, when the Sunne is Eaſt, and the Southweſt.
                     After this order by the varietie of theſe fewe queſtions, you may frame vnto
your ſelfe many other pleaſant and neceſſary queſtions, which are very eaſily
anſwered by this Inſtrument: and entring into the reaſons of their anſweres,
you may very readily by a little practiſe, be able by memorye to anſwere
all ſuch queſtions with eaſe.
                  
                  
                     How to know the times of your tides by this inſtrument.
                     I. Q. When the Moone is 12. daies olde, I deſire to know the time of
full Sea at London.
                     1. A. To anſwere this queſtion, I firſt looke through all the pointes of
the Compaſſe of my inſtrument I finde where London is written, for
when the Moone commeth vpon that point of the Compaſſe, it will then be
full Sea at London: therefore I place the index of the Moone upon the ſame
point, whith I finde to be Southweſt or Northeaſt, there holding the index
not to be moued, then I turne the index of the Sunne untill I bring the
twelfth daye of the Moones age to the Index of the Moone, and then the
index of the Sunne ſheweth me that at 12. of the clocke 36. minutes paſt, it
is full Sea at London, the Moone being 12. daies olde.
                     2. Q. The Moone being 21. daies olde, at what time is it full Sea at
Dartmouth?
                     2. A. I finde vpon my inſtrument, that Dartmouth is noted vpon the
points Eaſt and Weſt, whereby I know that when the Moone is Eaſt or
Weſt it is alwaies full Sea at Dartmouth: therefore I place the Index of
the Moone vpon the pointe Eaſt, and there holding it without mouing, I
turne the Index of the Sunne untill I bring the 21. day of the Moones age
unto the Index of the Moone, and then the Index of the Sunne ſheweth me
vpon the Compaſſe, that at 10. of the clocke and 48. minutes paſt, it is full
Sea at Dartmouth, when the Moone is 21. daies olde, and not onelye at
Dartmouth, but my inſtrument ſheweth me that the ſame inſtant it is alſo
full Sea at Exmouth, Weymouth, Plymouth, Mounts bay, at Lynne, and
at Homber: and thus with great facilitie the time of flowings and reflowings
is moſt preciſely knowne.
                     And now that there may be a finall ende of the vſ
                           •
                        s and effectes of the
Compaſſe, it is convenient that I make knowne unto you, how many leages▪,
ſhall be sailed vpon every perticular point of the Compaſſe, for the raiſing or

laying of the degrees of latitude, and in the diſtance ſayling how farre you
ſhall he ſeperated from the Meridian from whence the ſaide courſes are begun,
for as euery point of the Compaſſe hath his certaine limited diſtance for
the degrees of the Poles eleuation, ſo they doe likewiſe leade from longitude
to longtitude, euery point according to his ratable limits, which diſtances of
leages are without alteration, keeping one and the ſame proportion in euery
perticular Horizon of any latitude, but the degrees of Longitude anſwerable
to ſuch diſtances, doe differ in euery altitude, according to the nature of
of the perallell, as hereafter ſhalbe more plainly manifeſted. And now know,
that in ſayling North and South, you departe not from your Meridian, and
in euery 20. leages ſayling you raiſe a degree; Nor and by eaſt raiſeth a degree
in ſayling 20. leages and one mile, and leadeth from the Meridian 4.
leages: Nor noreaſt raiſeth a degree in ſaying 21. leages and two miles,
leadeth from the Meridian 8. leages & one mile: Noreaſt by norht raiſeth a
degree in ſayling 24. leages, and leadeth from the Meridian 13. leages and
a mile: Noreaſt raiſeth a degree in ſayling 28. leages and a mile, and leadeth
from the Meridian 20. leages: Noreaſt by eaſt raiſeth a degree in ſaling 36
leages, and leadeth from the Meridian 30. leages. Eaſt noreaſt rayſeth a
degree in ſayling 52. leages and mile, and leadeth from the meridian 48.
leages and 2 mile: Eaſt and by north raiſeth a degree in ſayling 102. leages
and a mile, and leadeth from the Meridian 100. leages and 2, mile: Eaſt and
Weſt doe not raiſe or lay the Pole, but keepeth ſtill in the ſame perallell: the
like allowance is to be giuen to euery quarter of the Compaſſe, as is laide
downe vpon this Northeaſt quarter.
                     
                        Leages ſeperated from the Meridian in raiſing a degree.
                     
                  
                  
                     Q. I perceiue that degrees are to great purpoſe in Nauigation,
What is a degree?
                     
                        
An. IT is moſt true, that degrees are of very great imployment in Nauigation,
and a degree is the 360. part of a circle, how big or little ſo euer the
the practiſes Gubernautick, ſo yt there be degrees of longitude, degrees of latitude,
degree of Azumuth, degrees of altitude, degrees applied to meaſure,
and degrees applied to time.
                     A degree of longitude is the 360. parte of the Equinoctiall.
                     A degree of latitude is the 360. parte of the Meridian.
                     A degree of Azumuth is the 360. parte of the verticall circle, or the 90. parts
of the diſtance betweene the Zenith and the Horizon.
                     Every degree applied to meaſure, doth containe 60. minutes, and every
minute 60. ſeconds, and every ſecond 60. thirds, &c, and every degree of a
great circle ſo applied, containeth 20. leages, which is 60. mile, ſo that every
minute ſtandeth for a mile in the accompt of meaſure, and a mile is limited to
be 1000. paces, every pace 5. foote, every foote 12. inches, and every inch 3.
barly cornes drye and round, after our Engliſh accompt, which for the uſe of
nauigation is the onely beſt of all other: ſo by theſe rates of meaſure you
may prove that a degree is 20 leages or 60. miles, a minute is a mile or
5000. feete, a ſecond is 83 ⅔. feete, and a third is 16 ⅔. inches: and thus much
of degrees and their partes applied to meaſure.
                     Of degrees applied to time, there are 15. contained in every hower, ſo
that every degree of time ſtandeth in the accompe of time for 4. minutes, for
an hower conſiſting of 60. minutes of time, hath for his fifteenth parte 4. minutes,
ſo that a degree being the fifteenth parte of an hower, containeth 4. minutes
of time, ſo that 15. degrees or 60. minutes make an hower, 24. howers
make a naturall day, and 365. daies 6. howers, are contained in a yeere, and
thus much as touching time, and degrees applied to time.
                  
                  
                     What is the vſe degrees?
                     The vſe degrees is to meaſure diſtances betweene place and place, to
finde altitudes, latitudes, and longtitudes, to deſcribe countries, to diſtinguiſh
courſes, to finde the variation of the Compaſſe, to meaſure time, to
finde the places and motions af all releſticall bodies, as the Sunne, Moone,
Planets and Starres: to conclude, by degrees have beene perfourmed all
mathematicall obſervations whatſoeuer, whoſe vſe is infinite.
                  
                  
                     What is the Poles altitude, and how may it be knowne?
                     ALtitude is the diſtance, height, or mounting of one thing aboue another,
ſo that the altitude of the pole, is the diſtance, height, or mounting of the
pole from the horizon, and is defined to be that portion of the meridian, which

is contained betweene the Pole and the Horiſon, which altitude or eleuation
is to be found either by the Sunne, or by the fixed Starres, with the helpe of
pour Croſſe ſtaffe, Duadrant, or Aſtrolabie, but the croſſe is the onely
beſt inſtrument for the Sea mans vſe.
                     And in the obſervation of this altitude there are 5. things eſpecially to be
regarded: the firſt is, that you know the meridionall diſtance between your
Zenith and the Sunne of Starresa, which by your Croſſe ſtaffe or Aſtrolabye
is giuen: the ſecond, that the declinaiton be truely knowne at the time of
pour obſervation. And the other three are, that you conſider whether your
Zenith be beweene the Equinoctiall and the ſunne or Starres, or whether
the Equinoctiall be betweene your Zenith and them, or whether they be between
your Zenith and the Equator, for there is a ſeverall order of working
vpon eche of theſe three differences.
                     Latitude you muſt alſo know, that ſo much as the Pole is aboue the Horizon,
ſo much is the Zenith from the Equinoctial, and this diſtance between
the Zenith and the Equator is called latitude or widenes. and is that portion
of the Meridian which is included betweene your Zenith and the Equator, for
it is generall rule for ever, that ſo much as the Pole is aboue the Horizon,
ſo much the Zenith is from the vpon Equinoctiall, ſo that in this ſence altitude
and latitude is all one thing, the one hauing relation to that parte of the
Meridian contained betweene the pole and the Horizon, and the other to that
parte of the Meridian which is contained betweene the Zenith and the
Equinoctiall.
                     You muſt further vnderſtand, that betweene the Zenith the Horizon it is
a quarter of a great circle, containing 90. degrees, ſo that knowing how
much the ſunne or any Starre is from the Horizon, if you take that diſtance
from 90. the remainer is the diſtance betweene the ſaid body and the Zenith:
as for example, if the Sunne be 40, degrees 37. minutes from the Horizon,
I ſub
                           •
                        tract 40. deg. 37. min. from 90. and there remaineth 49. deg. 23. min.
which is the diſtance betweene my Zenith and the Sunne, &c. Thoſe inſtruments
that begin the accompt of their degrees at the Zenith concluding 90.
in the Horizon, are of moſt caſe for the finding of the latitude by the Sunne
or fixed Starres, becauſe they giue the diſtance betweene the Zenith and the
body obſerued, without further trouble, and that is the number which you
muſt haue, and for which you do ſearch in your obſeruation: all which things
conſidered, you muſt in this ſorte proceede for the finding of the Poles height
or altitude.
                  
                  
                     By the Sunne or fixed Starres being betweene your Zenith and the Equinoctiall the
latitude is thus found, in what parte of the worlde ſoeuer you be.
                     FIrſt place the Croſſe ſtaffe to your eye, in ſuch good ſorte as that there
may grow no errour by the diſorderly vſing thereof, for vnleſſe the Center

of your ſtaffe and the center of your ſight doe ioyne together in your obſeruation,
it will be erronious whatſoeuer you conclude thereby: your ſtaffe
ſo ordered, then mooue the tranſuerſary vpon your ſtaffe to and fro as occaſion
requireth, vntil at one & the ſame inſtant you may ſee by the vpper edge of
your tranſuerſary halfe the body of the Sunne or Starres, and that lower
edge or ende thereof do likewiſe touch the Horizon, at that place where it
ſeemeth that the Skye and ſeas are ioyned, hauing eſpeciall regarde in this
your obſeruation, that you holde the tranſuerſary as directly vpright as poſſibly
you may, and you muſt begin this obſeruation ſomwhat before the Sun
or Starres be at South, and continue the ſame ſo long as you perceiue that
they riſe: for when they are at the higheſt then are they vpon the Meridian.
and then you haue the meridionall altitude which you ſeeke, at which time
they will be due South from you, if your Compaſſe be good and without variation,
and then doth the tranſuerſary them vpon the ſtaffe the degrees and
minutes that the ſaid body in from your Zenith, if the degrees of your inſtrument
be numbred from the Zenith toward the Horizon: or elſe it ſheweth the
diſtance betweene the ſaide body & the Horizon, if the degrees of your inſtrument
be numbred from the Horizon, concluding 90. in the Zenith as commonlye
Croſſe ſtaues are marked, which is not the eaſieſt way: but if your
ſtaffe be accompted from the Horizen, then ſubſtract the degrees of your obſeruation
from 90. and the remainer ſheweth the diſtance betweene your Zenith
and the Sunne or Stares, which is the number you muſt know: vnto
that number ſo knowne by your inſtrument, adde the declination of the bodye
by which you doe obſerue, whether it he the Sun or any ſtar, and that which
commeth by the addition of thoſe 2. numbers together, is the poles height, or
the latitude of the place wherein you are: as for Example. In the yeere of
our Lord 1593. the 3. day of March, the Sunne being then betweene my
Zenith and the Equinoctiall, I obſerued the Sunnes Meridionall altitude
from the Horizon to be 72. deg. and 20. min. but becauſe I muſt know the
diſtance of the Sun from my Zenith, I therfore ſubſtract 72. deg. 20. min.
from 90. deg. and there remaineth 17. deg. 40. min. the diſtance of the Sunne
from my zenith, to that diſtance I adde the Sunnes declination for that day,
which by my Regiment I finde to be 
                           •
                        . degrees of South declination, and it
ameunteth vnto 20. deg. 40. min. ſo much is the South pole aboue the Horizon,
and ſo much is my Zenith ſouth from the Equinoctiall, becauſe the Sun
hauing South declination, and being betweene me and Equinoctiall,
therefore of neceſſitie the Antartick pole muſt be aboue my Horiſon.
                     
                        89—60—the diſtance betwene
the Zenith and the Horizon.
                        72—20—the Sunnes altitude.
                        17—40—the Suns diſt. from ye Zen.
                        3—00—Sunnes declination.
                        20—40—Poles height.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     When the Equinoctiall is betweene your Zenith and the Sunne or Starres,
the latitude is thus found in all places.
                     BY your inſtrument as before is taught, you muſt ſeek the meridionall diſtance
of the Sunne or Starres from your Zenith, which being knowne,
ſubſtract the declination of the Sun or Stars from the ſaid diſtance, and the
remaining number is the poles height or latitude which you ſeek: Example.
                     The 20. of October 1593. I fitnde by my inſtrument that the Sun is 60
deg. 45. min. from the Zenith at noone, being then vpon the Meridian, the Equator
being then betweene my Zenith and the Sun, I alſo finde by my Regiment
that at that time the Sun had 13. deg. 47. min. of South declination,
becauſe the Equinoctiall is betweene me and the Sun, therefore I ſubſtract
the Suns declination from the obſerued diſtance, and there reſteth 46
deg. 58. min. latitude deſired, and becauſe the Sun hath South declination,
and the Equinoctiall being betweene me and the Sun, therefore, I may
conclude, that the pole Artick is 46. deg. 58. min. aboue my Horizon, or that
my Zenith is ſo much toward the North from the Equator.
                     
                        g m
                        59—15—the Sunnes diſtance.
                        13—47—the declination.
                        46—58—the latitude.
                     
                  
                  
                     When your Zenith is betweene the Sunne or Starres and the Equinoctiall,
the Latitude is thus found.
                     BY your inſtrument as in the firſt example is ſhewed, you muſt obſerue the
Meridionall diſtance of the Sunne or Starres from your Zenith, you
muſt alſo by your Regiment or other tables, ſearch to know the declination
of that body which you obſerue, then ſubſtract the obſerued diſtance from
pour Zenith out of the declination, and the remaining number is the latitude
deſired: Example, The Sun hauing 20. deg. of North declination, and being
vpon the Meridian is 5. deg. 9. min. from my Zenith, I therefore ſubſtract
5. deg. 9. min. from 20. deg. and there reſteth 14. deg. 51. min the latitude deſired:
and becauſe the Sun hath North declination, my Zenith being between
the Sun and the Equinoctiall, therefore, I conclude that the North Pole is
14. deg. 51. min. aboue my Horizon.
                     
                        g m
                        19—60—the Suns diſtance from my Zenith.
                        5—09—the declination.
                        14—51—the Poles height.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     How ſhall I know the true order of placing the Croſſe ſffe to mine eye,
to anoide errour in my obſeruation?
                     TO finde the true placing of the ſtaffe at your eye thereby to amend the
parallar or falſe ſhadowe of your ſight, do thus: take a ſtaffe hauing two
croſſes, a long croſſe which endeth in 30. degrees, and a ſhort croſſe which beginneth
at 30. deg. where the long croſſe endeth, put the long croſſe vpon his
30. deg. and there make him faſt, then put the ſhort croſſe like wiſe vpon his
30. de. there faſten him without mouing, then ſet the end of your ſtaſſe to your
eye, mouing it from place to place about your eye, vntill at one inſtant you
may ſee the ends of both croſſes, which when you finde, remember that place
and the ſtanding of your body, for ſo muſt your ſtaffe be placed, and your body
ordered in all your obſeruations.
                     
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     Are theſe all the rules that appertaine to the finding
of the Poles height?
                     THoſe that trauell farre towards the North vnder whoſe Horizon the
Sunne ſetteth not, ſhall ſome time haue occaſion to ſeeke the latitude
by the Sunne when the Sunne is North from them, the pole being then betweene
the Sunne and their Zenith. When ſuch obſeruations are made, you
muſt by your inſtrument ſeeke the Suns height from the Horizon, ſubſtract
that height from his declination, and the remaining number ſheweth how
far the Equinoctiall is vnder the Horizon vpon the point North, for ſo much
is the opoſite parte of the Equator aboue the Horizon vpon the point South,
ſubſtract that Meridionall altitude of the Equinoctiall from 90. and the remaining
number is the poles height deſired. Example.
                     
                        
The Sunne hauing 22. degrees of North declination, his altitude from
the Horizon is obſerued to be 3. degrees 15. minutes, therefore ſubſtracting
3. deg. 15. min. from 22. degrees, there reſteth 18. deg. 45. min. which is the
diſtance of the Equinoctiall
from the Horizon, which being taken from 90.
there reſteth 71. deg 15. min, the poles eleuation deſired.
                     
                        g m
                        22—60—the Suns declination.
                        31—15—the Sunnes altitude.
                        18—45—the altitude of the equinoctiall.
                        gm———
                        89—60—ye diſt. between Zen. & Dori▪
                        
                        18—45—altitude of the Equator.
                        ———
                        71—15—the altitude of the pole.
                     
                     But you muſt know that the declination found in your Regiment, is not
the declination which in this caſe you muſt vſe: for the regiment ſheweth the
Suns declination vpon the Meridian or South point, in the place for whoſe
Meridian the ſame was calculated, and not otherwiſe: therefore it is neceſſary
to know the Suns declination at all times, and vpon euery point of the
Compaſſe: for I haue beene conſtrained in my Northweſt voyages, being
within the frozen zone, to ſearch the latitude by the Sun, at ſuch times as I
could ſee the Sun, vpon what point of the Compaſſe ſoeuer, by reaſon of the
great fogges and miſtes that thoſe Northern partes are ſubiect vnto: and
there is conſideration alſo to be had vpon euery difference of longitude for the
Sunnes declination, as I haue by my experience found at my being in the
ſtraights of Magilane, where I haue found the ſuns declination to differ from
my regiment calculated for London, by ſo much as the Sunne declineth in
5. howers, for ſo much is the difference between the meridian of London, and
the Meridian of Cape froward, being in the midſt of the ſaid ſtraights.
                  
                  
                     How may this declination be found for all times, and vpon all
points of the Compaſſe?
                     FIrſt conſider whether the Sun be comming towards the Equinoctiall,
or going from him, that being knowne, conſider the time wherin you ſeeke
the declination, then looke for the Sunnes declination in your regiment for
that day, and alſo looke his declination for the next day, ſubſtract the leſſer
out of the greater, and the remainer is the whole declination which the Sun
declineth in 24. howers, or in his mouing throughu all the points of the Compaſſe, for
which number you may by the rule of proportion finde his declination
vpon euery point of the compas, as for euery hower of the day, as by theſe
examples may appeare. Example, In the yeere 1593. the 20. of March, I
deſire to know the Suns declination when he is vpon the North parte of the
Meridian of London, I ſeeke the Suns declination for that day, and finde it
to be 3. deg. 41. min. the Sunn then going from the Equator, I alſo ſearche
his declination for the next day being the 21. of March, and finde it to be 4 de.
3. min I then ſubſtract 3. deg. 41. min. from 4. de. 3. min. and there reſteth 22

min. ſo much the Sun doth decline 24. howers, or in going through all the
points of the Compaſſe. Then I ſay by the rule of proportion, if 24. howers
giue 22. min of declination, what will 12. howers giue, &c. I multiplye and
deuide, and finde it to be 11. min. the Suns declination in 12. howers motion
to be added to the declination of the 20. day, being the Suns going from
the Equator, or for the points of the Compaſſe I may ſay, if 32. points giue
22. min. of declination, what will 16. pointes giue, which is the diſtance betweene
South and North: I multiply and deuide as the rule of proportion
requireth, and finde that 16. points giue 11. min. the Suns declination, in mouing
through 16, points of the Compaſſe, which is to be added to the declinanation
of the 20. day, becauſe the Sun goeth from the equator, ſo I conclude
the declination to be 3. deg. 52. min. the Sun being North the 20. of March.
                     
                        ho. m. ho.
                        24—22—12—11
                        12
                        —
                        44
                        22
                        —
                        264
                        
                           
                              〈 math 〉
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        ho. m. po. m.
                        32—22—16—11
                        16
                        —
                        132
                        22
                        —
                        352
                        
                           
                              〈 math 〉
                           
                        
                     
                     Being Weſt from the Meridian of London 19 degrees of longitude, I
deſire to know the Suns declination when the Sun is vpon the Meridian
the 20. of March 1593. I muſt here conſider that 90. deg. of longtitude make
6. howers of time, for euery hower containeth 15, deg. whereby I know that
when the Sun is South at London he is but Eaſt from me, for when it is 12
of the clocke at London, it is but 6. of the clocke in the morning with mee,
and when it is 12. of the clocke with me, it is then 6. of the clocke in the after
noone at London: therefore I muſt ſeeke for the declination of the Sun at
6. of the clocke in the afternoone, and that is the meridionall declination
which I muſt vſe, being 90. deg. Weſt from London, which to doe, the laſt
example doth ſufficiently teach you, whereby you may eaſily gather the perfect
notice of whatſoeuer is requiſite in any of theſe kinde of obſeruations, if
you reade with the eye of reaſon, and labour to vnderſtand with iudgement
that which you read.
                     There is another way moſt excellent for the finding of the Suns declination
at all times, that is to ſearch by the Ephimerides the Sunnes true
place in the Ecliptick for any time propoſed whatſoeuer, and then by the tables
of Sinus the declination is thus knowne. Multiply the Sinus of the Suns
longtitude from the Equinoctiall points of Aries or Libra, to which ſoeuer he
is neereſt, by the Sinus of the Suns greateſt declination, and deuide the product
by the whole Sinus, and the arke of the quotient is the declination dlſircl

but becauſe Seamen are not acquainted with ſuch calculations, I therfore
omit to ſpeake further thereof, ſith this plaine way before taught is ſufficient
for their purpoſe.
                     
                        A neceſſary Inſtrument for the better
vnderſtanding of ſuch things as are
required to the finding of the
Poles Eleuation.
                     
                  
                  
                     The vſe of this Inſtrument.
                     BY this inſtrument you may ſufficiently vnderſtand, the reaſons of whatsoeuer
is before ſpoken for the finding of the Poles eleuation, or the latitude
of your being: into the conſideration whereof, becauſe the yong practiſer
may the better enter, I think it not amiſſe by a few examples to expreſſe
the neceſſary vſe thereof.
                     1. Q. The Sun hauing 7. degrees of North declination, and the pole
Artick being 45. degrees aboue the Horizon, I demaund what will be the
Sunnes meridionall diſtance from my Zenith:
                     1. A. Firſt I turne the Horizon vntill I bring the North Pole to be 45.
degrees aboue the ſame, there holding the Horizon not to be moued, I then
bring the thnd that is faſtened to the Center of the inſtrument, 7. degrees
from the Equinoctiall towards the North, becauſe the Sun hath ſo much
North declination, and the thrid doth ſhew me vpon the verticall circle, that
the ſunne is 38. degrees from my Zenith.
                     
                        
2. Q. The pole artick being 50 deg. aboue the Horizon, and the Suns diſtance
30. deg. from the Zenith, I demaund what is the Suns declination?
                     2. A. As in the firſt queſtion I place the North pole 50. degrees aboue
the Horizon, there holding the Horizon not to be moued, then I bring the
thrid to the 30. degree vpon the verticall circle, becauſe the Sunne is 30.
Degrees from my Zenith, and then the thrid ſhe weth vpon the Meridian betweene
the tropick of Cancer and the Equinoctiall, that the Sunne hath
20 degrees of North declination.
                     3. Q. The Sunne hauing 10. deg. of South declination, being vpon the
Meridian, is 53. deg. from my Zenith, I demaund what is the poles height:
                     3. A. In the firſt queſtion the Poles height and the Sunnes declination
are giuen, fore finding of the Sunnes meridionall diſtance from the Zenith.
In the ſecond the Poles height is giuen, and the Sunnes meridionall
diſtance from the Zenith, therby to finde the Sunnes declination. And in this
queſtion the Sunnes declination and meridionall diſtance is giuen, for the
finding of the Poles height. I therefore bring the thrid faſtned in the center
of the inſtrument 10. degrees South from the Equator, between the Equinoctiall
and the tropick of Capricorne, there holding the third not to be moued,
I then turne the Horizon vntill I bring the 53, degree of the verticall
circle vnder the third, and then the Horizon ſhe weth me, that the North pole
is 43. degrees aboue the ſame.
                     4. Q. The Sunhauing 12. degrees of ſouth declination, and being vpon
the Meridian South from me, is 30. degrees aboue the Horizon, I demaund
how farre the Sun is from my zenith, how much the Equinoctiall is aboue
the Horizon, and what is the Poles height?
                     4. A. Firſt I bring the third to the place of the Sunnes declination as before,
there holding it not to be moued, then I turn the Horizon vntill I bring
it to be 30 deg. vnder the thrid, and then the third ſheweth me that the Sun is
60. deg. from my zenith, and the Horizon ſhe weth that the Equinoctiall is 42
deg. aboue the ſame, and that the North pole is alſo eleuated 48. deg. aboue
the horizon. Although theſe queſtions are ſo very eaſie and plain, as that they
may readily be anſwered by memory, yet becauſe the reaſons how they are
anſwered may the better appeare, is the cauſe wherefore they are demaunded
and in this ſort anſwered, only for the benefit of ſuch as are not altogether expert
in theſe practiſes, that thereby they might like wiſe frame vnto themſelues
queſtions of other varietie, and ſo gather thereby the more ſufficient
iudgement in this parte of Nauigation.
                  
                  
                     What is the Zenith?
                     THe Zenith is that prick or point in ye heauens which is directly ouer your
head, from whence a line falling perpendicularly, will touch the place of
your being, and ſo paſſe by ye center of the ſphere, and this line may be called
the Axis of the Horizon, and the Zenith the Pole of the ſame being 90. deg.

                        
                           〈1 page duplicate〉
                        
                        
                        
                           〈1 page duplicate〉
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     The vſe of the Regiment.
                     
                        FOraſmuch as the Poles height cannot be
obſerued by the Sunne, vnleſſe the Suns
true declination be knowne, I haue therfore
carefully calculated theſe Tables or
Regiment, out of Stadius Ephimerides, for
the yeeres 1593. 94. 95. and 1596. which will ſerue vntill
the yeere 1612. without further correction: and becauſe
there may growe no errour by miſtaking the
yeeres, I haue ouer euery moneth written the yeere of
the Lord, in which the declination of the ſame month
is to be vſed, therefore when in any yeere and moneth
you ſeeke the Sunnes declination, firſte looke for the
moneth, and there you ſhall finde 4 of thoſe moneths,
which are the moneths betweene the Leape yeeres,
then look ouer eche of thoſe moneths, vntil you finde
the yeere of the Lord wherein you ſeeke the declination,
and directly vnder that yere is the month wherin
you muſt ſeeke the Suns declination. Example, 1595.
the tenth day of February I would know the Suns declination,
firſt I ſeeke out February, and ouer the third
moneth I ſee the yeere 1595. therefore that is my moneth,
againſt the tenth day of which moneth I finde
that the ſunne hath 11. degrees 10 minutes of ſouth declination,
and after the like manner you muſt doe in all
the reſt as occaſion requireth.
                     
                        
                        
                           Ianuary.
                           
                              Firſt.
                              Second.
                              Third.
                              Fourth.
                           
                           
                              1
                              2
                              3
                              4
                           
                           
                              1593
                              1594
                              1595
                              1596
                              Yeere of the Lord
                           
                           
                              1597
                              1598
                              1599
                              1600
                           
                           
                              1601
                              1602
                              1603
                              1604
                           
                           
                              1605
                              1606
                              1607
                              1608
                           
                           
                              1609
                              1610
                              1611
                              1612
                           
                           
                              D. G. M.
                              D. G. M.
                              D. G. M.
                              D. G. M.
                           
                           
                              1
                              21
                              50
                              1
                              21
                              52
                              1
                              22
                              56
                              1
                              21
                              57
                           
                           
                              2
                              21
                              40
                              2
                              21
                              43
                              2
                              22
                              9
                              2
                              21
                              48
                           
                           
                              3
                              21
                              30
                              3
                              21
                              33
                              3
                              21
                              36
                              3
                              21
                              38
                           
                           
                              4
                              21
                              20
                              4
                              21
                              23
                              4
                              21
                              26
                              4
                              21
                              28
                           
                           
                              5
                              21
                              9
                              5
                              21
                              16
                              5
                              21
                              15
                              5
                              21
                              17
                           
                           
                              6
                              20
                              58
                              6
                              21
                              1
                              6
                              21
                              4
                              6
                              21
                              7
                           
                           
                              7
                              20
                              47
                              7
                              20
                              50
                              7
                              20
                              53
                              7
                              20
                              55
                           
                           
                              8
                              20
                              35
                              8
                              20
                              38
                              8
                              20
                              41
                              8
                              20
                              44
                           
                           
                              9
                              20
                              22
                              9
                              20
                              26
                              9
                              20
                              29
                              9
                              20
                              32
                           
                           
                              10
                              20
                              9
                              10
                              20
                              1
                                    •
                                 
                              
                              10
                              20
                              16
                              10
                              20
                              20
                           
                           
                              11
                              19
                              56
                              11
                              20
                              0
                              11
                              20
                              3
                              11
                              20
                              6
                           
                           
                              12
                              19
                              43
                              12
                              19
                              47
                              12
                              19
                              50
                              12
                              19
                              53
                           
                           
                              13
                              19
                              29
                              13
                              19
                              33
                              13
                              19
                              36
                              13
                              19
                              39
                           
                           
                              14
                              19
                              14
                              14
                              19
                              19
                              14
                              19
                              22
                              14
                              19
                              25
                           
                           
                              15
                              19
                              0
                              15
                              19
                              4
                              15
                              19
                              8
                              15
                              19
                              11
                           
                           
                              16
                              18
                              45
                              16
                              18
                              49
                              16
                              18
                              53
                              16
                              18
                              56
                           
                           
                              17
                              18
                              29
                              17
                              18
                              34
                              17
                              18
                              38
                              17
                              18
                              41
                           
                           
                              18
                              18
                              14
                              18
                              18
                              19
                              18
                              18
                              22
                              18
                              18
                              26
                           
                           
                              19
                              17
                              58
                              19
                              18
                              3
                              19
                              18
                              7
                              19
                              18
                              11
                           
                           
                              20
                              17
                              42
                              20
                              17
                              46
                              20
                              17
                              50
                              20
                              17
                              54
                           
                           
                              21
                              17
                              25
                              21
                              17
                              30
                              21
                              17
                              34
                              21
                              17
                              38
                           
                           
                              22
                              17
                              8
                              22
                              17
                              13
                              22
                              17
                              17
                              22
                              17
                              21
                           
                           
                              23
                              16
                              51
                              23
                              16
                              56
                              23
                              17
                              0
                              23
                              17
                              4
                           
                           
                              24
                              16
                              32
                              24
                              16
                              38
                              24
                              16
                              43
                              24
                              16
                              47
                           
                           
                              25
                              16
                              16
                              25
                              16
                              21
                              25
                              16
                              25
                              25
                              16
                              29
                           
                           
                              26
                              15
                              57
                              26
                              16
                              3
                              26
                              16
                              7
                              26
                              16
                              12
                           
                           
                              27
                              15
                              39
                              27
                              15
                              45
                              27
                              15
                              49
                              27
                              15
                              54
                           
                           
                              28
                              15
                              21
                              28
                              15
                              26
                              28
                              15
                              30
                              28
                              15
                              35
                           
                           
                              29
                              15
                              2
                              29
                              15
                              7
                              29
                              15
                              12
                              29
                              15
                              23
                           
                           
                              30
                              14
                              43
                              30
                              14
                              48
                              30
                              14
                              53
                              30
                              14
                              58
                           
                           
                              31
                              14
                              24
                              31
                              14
                              29
                              31
                              14
                              34
                              31
                              14
                              39
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                        
                           February.
                           
                              Firſt.
                              Second.
                              Third.
                              Fourth.
                           
                           
                              1
                              2
                              3
                              4
                           
                           
                              1593
                              1594
                              1595
                              1596
                           
                           
                              1597
                              1598
                              1599
                              1600
                           
                           
                              1601
                              1602
                              1603
                              1604
                           
                           
                              1605
                              1606
                              1607
                              1608
                           
                           
                              1609
                              1610
                              1611
                              1612
                           
                           
                              D. G. M.
                              D. G. M.
                              D. G. M.
                              D. G. M.
                           
                           
                              1
                              14
                              4
                              1
                              14
                              9
                              1
                              14
                              14
                              1
                              14
                              19
                           
                           
                              2
                              13
                              44
                              2
                              13
                              50
                              2
                              13
                              54
                              2
                              14
                              0
                           
                           
                              3
                              13
                              24
                              3
                              13
                              29
                              3
                              1
                                    •
                                 
                              
                              35
                              3
                              13
                              40
                           
                           
                              4
                              13
                              4
                              4
                              13
                              9
                              4
                              13
                              15
                              4
                              13
                              20
                           
                           
                              5
                              12
                              44
                              5
                              12
                              49
                              5
                              12
                              54
                              5
                              13
                              0
                           
                           
                              6
                              12
                              23
                              6
                              12
                              28
                              6
                              12
                              34
                              6
                              12
                              39
                           
                           
                              7
                              12
                              2
                              7
                              12
                              7
                              7
                              12
                              13
                              7
                              12
                              18
                           
                           
                              8
                              11
                              41
                              8
                              11
                              46
                              8
                              11
                              52
                              8
                              11
                              58
                           
                           
                              9
                              11
                              20
                              9
                              11
                              25
                              9
                              11
                              31
                              9
                              11
                              37
                           
                           
                              10
                              10
                              58
                              10
                              11
                              4
                              10
                              11
                              10
                              10
                              11
                              15
                           
                           
                              11
                              10
                              37
                              11
                              10
                              43
                              11
                              10
                              48
                              11
                              10
                              54
                           
                           
                              12
                              10
                              15
                              12
                              10
                              21
                              12
                              10
                              26
                              12
                              10
                              33
                           
                           
                              13
                              9
                              53
                              13
                              9
                              59
                              13
                              10
                              5
                              13
                              10
                              11
                           
                           
                              14
                              9
                              31
                              14
                              9
                              37
                              14
                              9
                              43
                              14
                              9
                              49
                           
                           
                              15
                              9
                              9
                              15
                              9
                              15
                              15
                              9
                              21
                              15
                              9
                              27
                           
                           
                              16
                              8
                              47
                              16
                              8
                              53
                              16
                              8
                              59
                              16
                              9
                              5
                           
                           
                              17
                              8
                              25
                              17
                              8
                              30
                              17
                              8
                              36
                              17
                              8
                              43
                           
                           
                              18
                              8
                              2
                              18
                              8
                              7
                              18
                              8
                              13
                              18
                              8
                              20
                           
                           
                              19
                              7
                              36
                              19
                              7
                              45
                              19
                              7
                              51
                              19
                              7
                              58
                           
                           
                              20
                              7
                              16
                              20
                              7
                              22
                              20
                              7
                              28
                              20
                              7
                              35
                           
                           
                              21
                              6
                              53
                              21
                              6
                              59
                              21
                              7
                              5
                              21
                              7
                              12
                           
                           
                              22
                              6
                              30
                              22
                              6
                              36
                              22
                              6
                              42
                              22
                              6
                              49
                           
                           
                              23
                              6
                              7
                              23
                              6
                              13
                              23
                              6
                              19
                              23
                              6
                              26
                           
                           
                              24
                              5
                              44
                              24
                              5
                              50
                              24
                              5
                              56
                              24
                              6
                              4
                           
                           
                              25
                              5
                              21
                              25
                              5
                              27
                              25
                              5
                              32
                              25
                              5
                              40
                           
                           
                              26
                              4
                              58
                              26
                              5
                              3
                              26
                              5
                              9
                              26
                              5
                              17
                           
                           
                              27
                              4
                              34
                              27
                              4
                              40
                              27
                              4
                              46
                              27
                              4
                              54
                           
                           
                              28
                              4
                              10
                              28
                              4
                              17
                              28
                              4
                              22
                              28
                              4
                              30
                           
                           
                               
                               
                               
                              29
                              4
                              7
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                        
                           March.
                           
                              Firſt,
                              Second.
                              Third.
                              Fourth.
                           
                           
                              1
                              2
                              3
                              4
                           
                           
                              1593
                              1594
                              1595
                              1596
                           
                           
                              1597
                              1598
                              1599
                              1600
                           
                           
                              1601
                              1602
                              1603
                              1604
                           
                           
                              1605
                              1606
                              1607
                              1608
                           
                           
                              1609
                              1610
                              1611
                              1612
                           
                           
                              D. G. M.
                              D. G. M.
                              D. G. M.
                              D. G. M.
                           
                           
                              1
                              3
                              47
                              1
                              3
                              53
                              1
                              3
                              59
                              1
                              3
                              43
                           
                           
                              2
                              3
                              24
                              2
                              3
                              29
                              2
                              3
                              35
                              2
                              3
                              19
                           
                           
                              3
                              3
                              0
                              3
                              3
                              6
                              3
                              3
                              12
                              3
                              2
                              56
                           
                           
                              4
                              2
                              36
                              4
                              2
                              42
                              4
                              2
                              48
                              4
                              2
                              32
                           
                           
                              5
                              2
                              13
                              5
                              2
                              18
                              5
                              2
                              25
                              5
                              2
                              9
                           
                           
                              6
                              1
                              49
                              6
                              1
                              55
                              6
                              2
                              1
                              6
                              1
                              45
                           
                           
                              7
                              1
                              25
                              7
                              1
                              31
                              7
                              1
                              37
                              7
                              1
                              22
                           
                           
                              8
                              1
                              2
                              8
                              1
                              11
                              8
                              1
                              14
                              8
                              0
                              59
                           
                           
                              9
                              0
                              39
                              9
                              0
                              47
                              9
                              0
                              50
                              9
                              0
                              34
                           
                           
                              10
                              0
                              15
                              10
                              0
                              
                                 
                                    •
                                 0
                              10
                              0
                              26
                              10
                              0
                              11
                           
                           
                              11
                              0
                              8
                              11
                              0
                              3
                              11
                              0
                              3
                              11
                              0
                              12
                           
                           
                              12
                              0
                              32
                              12
                              0
                              27
                              12
                              0
                              21
                              12
                              0
                              36
                           
                           
                              13
                              0
                              56
                              13
                              0
                              51
                              13
                              0
                              44
                              13
                              0
                              59
                           
                           
                              14
                              1
                              19
                              14
                              1
                              14
                              14
                              1
                              8
                              14
                              1
                              23
                           
                           
                              15
                              1
                              43
                              15
                              1
                              37
                              15
                              1
                              31
                              15
                              1
                              46
                           
                           
                              16
                              2
                              6
                              16
                              2
                              1
                              16
                              1
                              55
                              16
                              2
                              10
                           
                           
                              17
                              2
                              30
                              17
                              2
                              24
                              17
                              2
                              18
                              17
                              2
                              33
                           
                           
                              18
                              2
                              54
                              18
                              2
                              48
                              18
                              2
                              41
                              18
                              2
                              56
                           
                           
                              19
                              3
                              17
                              19
                              3
                              11
                              19
                              3
                              5
                              19
                              3
                              20
                           
                           
                              20
                              3
                              41
                              20
                              3
                              34
                              20
                              3
                              28
                              20
                              3
                              4
                                    •
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              21
                              4
                              3
                              21
                              3
                              57
                              21
                              3
                              
                                 
                                    ••
                                 
                              
                              21
                              4
                              6
                           
                           
                              22
                              4
                              27
                              22
                              4
                              21
                              22
                              4
                              
                                 
                                    ••
                                 
                              
                              22
                              4
                              29
                           
                           
                              23
                              4
                              50
                              23
                              4
                              44
                              23
                              4
                              38
                              23
                              4
                              52
                           
                           
                              24
                              5
                              13
                              24
                              5
                              7
                              24
                              5
                              1
                              24
                              5
                              15
                           
                           
                              25
                              5
                              36
                              25
                              5
                              30
                              25
                              5
                              24
                              25
                              5
                              38
                           
                           
                              26
                              5
                              59
                              26
                              5
                              52
                              26
                              5
                              47
                              26
                              6
                              1
                           
                           
                              27
                              6
                              21
                              27
                              6
                              15
                              27
                              6
                              10
                              27
                              6
                              23
                           
                           
                              28
                              6
                              44
                              28
                              6
                              38
                              28
                              6
                              32
                              28
                              6
                              46
                           
                           
                              29
                              7
                              6
                              29
                              7
                              1
                              29
                              6
                              55
                              29
                              7
                              8
                           
                           
                              30
                              7
                              29
                              30
                              7
                              23
                              30
                              7
                              18
                              30
                              7
                              30
                           
                           
                              31
                              7
                              51
                              31
                              7
                              46
                              31
                              7
                              40
                              31
                              7
                              52
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                        
                           Aprill.
                           
                              Firſt.
                              Second.
                              Third.
                              Fourth.
                           
                           
                              1
                              2
                              3
                              4
                           
                           
                              1593
                              1594
                              1595
                              1596
                           
                           
                              1597
                              1598
                              1599
                              1600
                           
                           
                              1601
                              1602
                              1603
                              1604
                           
                           
                              1605
                              1606
                              1607
                              1608
                           
                           
                              1609
                              1610
                              1611
                              1612
                           
                           
                              D. G. M.
                              D. G. M.
                              D. G. M.
                              D. G. M.
                           
                           
                              1
                              8
                              13
                              1
                              8
                              8
                              1
                              8
                              10
                              1
                              8
                              15
                           
                           
                              2
                              8
                              35
                              2
                              8
                              30
                              2
                              8
                              25
                              2
                              8
                              37
                           
                           
                              3
                              8
                              57
                              3
                              8
                              52
                              3
                              8
                              47
                              3
                              8
                              58
                           
                           
                              4
                              9
                              19
                              4
                              9
                              14
                              4
                              9
                              9
                              4
                              9
                              19
                           
                           
                              5
                              9
                              41
                              5
                              9
                              36
                              5
                              9
                              30
                              5
                              9
                              41
                           
                           
                              6
                              10
                              2
                              6
                              9
                              57
                              6
                              9
                              52
                              6
                              10
                              2
                           
                           
                              7
                              10
                              23
                              7
                              10
                              18
                              7
                              10
                              13
                              7
                              10
                              23
                           
                           
                              8
                              10
                              44
                              8
                              10
                              40
                              8
                              10
                              34
                              8
                              10
                              44
                           
                           
                              9
                              11
                              5
                              9
                              11
                              1
                              9
                              10
                              55
                              9
                              11
                              5
                           
                           
                              10
                              11
                              25
                              10
                              11
                              21
                              10
                              11
                              16
                              10
                              11
                              25
                           
                           
                              11
                              11
                              45
                              11
                              11
                              42
                              11
                              11
                              36
                              11
                              11
                              46
                           
                           
                              12
                              12
                              6
                              12
                              12
                              2
                              12
                              11
                              56
                              12
                              12
                              6
                           
                           
                              13
                              12
                              26
                              13
                              12
                              22
                              13
                              12
                              16
                              13
                              12
                              26
                           
                           
                              14
                              12
                              46
                              14
                              12
                              45
                              14
                              12
                              36
                              14
                              12
                              46
                           
                           
                              15
                              13
                              6
                              15
                              13
                              3
                              15
                              12
                              56
                              15
                              13
                              5
                           
                           
                              16
                              13
                              25
                              16
                              13
                              23
                              16
                              13
                              16
                              16
                              13
                              25
                           
                           
                              17
                              13
                              44
                              17
                              13
                              42
                              17
                              13
                              35
                              17
                              13
                              44
                           
                           
                              18
                              14
                              4
                              18
                              14
                              1
                              18
                              13
                              55
                              18
                              14
                              3
                           
                           
                              19
                              14
                              22
                              19
                              14
                              20
                              19
                              14
                              14
                              19
                              14
                              22
                           
                           
                              20
                              14
                              41
                              20
                              14
                              38
                              20
                              14
                              32
                              20
                              14
                              40
                           
                           
                              21
                              14
                              59
                              21
                              14
                              58
                              21
                              14
                              51
                              21
                              14
                              59
                           
                           
                              22
                              15
                              17
                              22
                              15
                              15
                              22
                              15
                              9
                              22
                              15
                              17
                           
                           
                              23
                              15
                              35
                              23
                              15
                              33
                              23
                              15
                              27
                              23
                              15
                              35
                           
                           
                              24
                              15
                              53
                              24
                              15
                              50
                              24
                              15
                              45
                              24
                              15
                              52
                           
                           
                              25
                              16
                              10
                              25
                              16
                              8
                              25
                              16
                              2
                              25
                              16
                              9
                           
                           
                              26
                              16
                              27
                              26
                              16
                              25
                              26
                              26
                              19
                              26
                              16
                              27
                           
                           
                              27
                              16
                              44
                              27
                              16
                              42
                              27
                              16
                              36
                              27
                              16
                              4
                                    •
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              28
                              17
                              1
                              28
                              16
                              58
                              28
                              16
                              53
                              28
                              17
                              0
                           
                           
                              29
                              17
                              17
                              29
                              17
                              14
                              29
                              17
                              9
                              29
                              17
                              16
                           
                           
                              30
                              17
                              33
                              30
                              17
                              30
                              30
                              17
                              26
                              30
                              17
                              32
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                        
                           May.
                           
                              First.
                              Second.
                              Third.
                              Fourth.
                           
                           
                              1
                              2
                              3
                              4
                           
                           
                              1593
                              1594
                              1595
                              1596
                           
                           
                              1597
                              1598
                              1599
                              1600
                           
                           
                              1601
                              1602
                              1603
                              1604
                           
                           
                              1605
                              1606
                              1607
                              1608
                           
                           
                              1609
                              1610
                              1611
                              1612
                           
                           
                              D. G. M.
                              D. G. M.
                              D. G. M.
                              D. G. M.
                           
                           
                              1
                              17
                              49
                              1
                              17
                              45
                              1
                              17
                              41
                              1
                              17
                              48
                           
                           
                              2
                              17
                              57
                              2
                              18
                              1
                              2
                              17
                              57
                              2
                              18
                              3
                           
                           
                              3
                              18
                              12
                              3
                              18
                              16
                              3
                              18
                              12
                              3
                              18
                              18
                           
                           
                              4
                              18
                              27
                              4
                              18
                              31
                              4
                              18
                              27
                              4
                              18
                              33
                           
                           
                              5
                              18
                              41
                              5
                              18
                              45
                              5
                              18
                              45
                              5
                              18
                              48
                           
                           
                              6
                              18
                              56
                              6
                              19
                              0
                              6
                              18
                              56
                              6
                              19
                              2
                           
                           
                              7
                              19
                              9
                              7
                              19
                              13
                              7
                              19
                              10
                              7
                              19
                              16
                           
                           
                              8
                              19
                              23
                              8
                              19
                              27
                              8
                              19
                              23
                              8
                              19
                              29
                           
                           
                              9
                              19
                              36
                              9
                              19
                              40
                              9
                              19
                              38
                              9
                              19
                              42
                           
                           
                              10
                              19
                              49
                              10
                              19
                              53
                              10
                              19
                              50
                              10
                              19
                              56
                           
                           
                              11
                              20
                              2
                              11
                              20
                              6
                              11
                              20
                              3
                              11
                              20
                              8
                           
                           
                              12
                              20
                              14
                              12
                              20
                              17
                              12
                              20
                              15
                              12
                              20
                              20
                           
                           
                              13
                              20
                              26
                              13
                              20
                              30
                              13
                              20
                              27
                              13
                              20
                              32
                           
                           
                              14
                              20
                              38
                              14
                              20
                              41
                              14
                              20
                              39
                              14
                              20
                              43
                           
                           
                              15
                              20
                              49
                              15
                              20
                              53
                              15
                              20
                              50
                              15
                              20
                              54
                           
                           
                              16
                              21
                              0
                              16
                              21
                              4
                              16
                              21
                              1
                              16
                              21
                              5
                           
                           
                              17
                              21
                              10
                              17
                              21
                              14
                              16
                              21
                              11
                              17
                              21
                              16
                           
                           
                              18
                              21
                              20
                              18
                              21
                              24
                              18
                              21
                              22
                              18
                              21
                              26
                           
                           
                              19
                              21
                              30
                              19
                              21
                              34
                              19
                              21
                              2
                              19
                              21
                              35
                           
                           
                              20
                              21
                              59
                              20
                              21
                              43
                              20
                              21
                              41
                              20
                              21
                              45
                           
                           
                              21
                              21
                              49
                              21
                              21
                              
                                 
                                    •
                                 2
                              21
                              21
                              50
                              21
                              21
                              54
                           
                           
                              22
                              21
                              
                                 
                                    •
                                 7
                              22
                              22
                              0
                              22
                              21
                              
                                 
                                    •
                                 9
                              22
                              22
                              2
                           
                           
                              23
                              22
                              6
                              23
                              22
                              8
                              23
                              22
                              7
                              23
                              22
                              10
                           
                           
                              24
                              22
                              14
                              24
                              22
                              16
                              24
                              22
                              15
                              24
                              22
                              18
                           
                           
                              25
                              22
                              21
                              25
                              22
                              24
                              25
                              22
                              22
                              25
                              22
                              25
                           
                           
                              26
                              22
                              28
                              26
                              22
                              21
                              26
                              22
                              0
                              26
                              22
                              3
                                    •
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              27
                              22
                              35
                              27
                              22
                              
                                 
                                    •
                                 7
                              27
                              22
                              36
                              27
                              22
                              
                                 
                                    •
                                 9
                           
                           
                              28
                              22
                              41
                              28
                              22
                              4
                                    •
                                 
                              
                              28
                              22
                              
                                 
                                    •
                                 2
                              28
                              22
                              45
                           
                           
                              29
                              22
                              4
                                    •
                                 
                              
                              29
                              22
                              49
                              29
                              22
                              
                                 
                                    •
                                 8
                              29
                              22
                              
                                 
                                    ••
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              30
                              22
                              52
                              30
                              22
                              54
                              30
                              22
                              53
                              30
                              22
                              
                                 
                                    •
                                 6
                           
                           
                              31
                              22
                              57
                              31
                              23
                              0
                              31
                              22
                              
                                 
                                    ••
                                 
                              
                              31
                              23
                              1
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                        
                           Iune
                           
                              Firſt.
                              Second.
                              Third.
                              Fourth.
                           
                           
                              1
                              2
                              3
                              4
                           
                           
                              1593
                              1594
                              1595
                              1596
                           
                           
                              1597
                              1598
                              1599
                              1600
                           
                           
                              1601
                              1602
                              1603
                              1604
                           
                           
                              1605
                              1606
                              1607
                              1608
                           
                           
                              1609
                              1610
                              1611
                              1612
                           
                           
                              D. G. M.
                              D. G. M.
                              D. G. M.
                              D. G. M.
                           
                           
                              1
                              2
                                    •
                                 
                              
                              
                                 
                                    •
                                 
                              
                              1
                              23
                              4
                              1
                              23
                              3
                              1
                              23
                              6
                           
                           
                              2
                              23
                              9
                              2
                              23
                              8
                              2
                              23
                              7
                              2
                              23
                              10
                           
                           
                              3
                              23
                              13
                              3
                              23
                              12
                              3
                              23
                              11
                              3
                              23
                              13
                           
                           
                              4
                              23
                              16
                              4
                              23
                              16
                              4
                              23
                              15
                              4
                              23
                              17
                           
                           
                              5
                              23
                              19
                              5
                              23
                              19
                              5
                              23
                              18
                              5
                              23
                              20
                           
                           
                              6
                              23
                              22
                              6
                              23
                              21
                              6
                              23
                              21
                              6
                              23
                              22
                           
                           
                              7
                              23
                              24
                              7
                              23
                              23
                              7
                              23
                              23
                              7
                              23
                              24
                           
                           
                              8
                              23
                              26
                              8
                              23
                              25
                              8
                              23
                              25
                              8
                              23
                              26
                           
                           
                              9
                              23
                              27
                              9
                              23
                              26
                              9
                              23
                              26
                              9
                              23
                              27
                           
                           
                              10
                              23
                              28
                              10
                              23
                              27
                              10
                              23
                              27
                              10
                              23
                              28
                           
                           
                              11
                              23
                              28
                              11
                              23
                              28
                              11
                              23
                              28
                              11
                              23
                              28
                           
                           
                              12
                              23
                              28
                              12
                              23
                              28
                              12
                              23
                              28
                              12
                              23
                              28
                           
                           
                              13
                              23
                              28
                              13
                              23
                              28
                              13
                              23
                              28
                              13
                              23
                              28
                           
                           
                              14
                              23
                              27
                              14
                              23
                              27
                              14
                              23
                              27
                              14
                              23
                              26
                           
                           
                              15
                              23
                              26
                              15
                              23
                              26
                              15
                              23
                              26
                              15
                              23
                              25
                           
                           
                              16
                              23
                              24
                              16
                              23
                              25
                              16
                              23
                              25
                              16
                              23
                              23
                           
                           
                              17
                              23
                              22
                              17
                              23
                              23
                              17
                              23
                              23
                              17
                              23
                              21
                           
                           
                              18
                              23
                              19
                              18
                              23
                              20
                              18
                              23
                              21
                              18
                              23
                              18
                           
                           
                              19
                              23
                              16
                              19
                              23
                              17
                              19
                              23
                              18
                              19
                              23
                              15
                           
                           
                              20
                              23
                              13
                              20
                              23
                              14
                              20
                              23
                              15
                              20
                              23
                              12
                           
                           
                              21
                              23
                              9
                              21
                              23
                              10
                              21
                              23
                              11
                              21
                              23
                              8
                           
                           
                              22
                              23
                              5
                              22
                              23
                              6
                              22
                              23
                              7
                              22
                              23
                              4
                           
                           
                              23
                              23
                              1
                              23
                              23
                              2
                              23
                              23
                              4
                              23
                              22
                              
                                 
                                    •
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              24
                              22
                              56
                              24
                              22
                              57
                              24
                              22
                              58
                              24
                              22
                              54
                           
                           
                              25
                              22
                              51
                              25
                              22
                              52
                              25
                              22
                              
                                 
                                    •
                                 3
                              25
                              22
                              49
                           
                           
                              26
                              22
                              45
                              26
                              22
                              46
                              26
                              22
                              48
                              26
                              22
                              43
                           
                           
                              27
                              22
                              38
                              27
                              22
                              40
                              27
                              22
                              41
                              27
                              22
                              3
                                    •
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              28
                              22
                              32
                              28
                              22
                              34
                              28
                              22
                              35
                              28
                              22
                              30
                           
                           
                              29
                              22
                              25
                              29
                              22
                              27
                              29
                              22
                              26
                              29
                              22
                              23
                           
                           
                              30
                              22
                              18
                              30
                              22
                              20
                              30
                              22
                              21
                              30
                              22
                              15
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                        
                           Iuly.
                           
                              Firſt.
                              Second.
                              Third.
                              Fourth.
                           
                           
                              1
                              2
                              3
                              4
                           
                           
                              1593
                              1594
                              1595
                              1596
                           
                           
                              1597
                              1598
                              1599
                              1600
                           
                           
                              1601
                              1602
                              1603
                              1604
                           
                           
                              1605
                              1606
                              1607
                              1608
                           
                           
                              1609
                              1610
                              1611
                              1612
                           
                           
                              D. G. M.
                              D. G. M.
                              D. G. M.
                              D. G. M.
                           
                           
                              1
                              22
                              10
                              1
                              22
                              12
                              1
                              22
                              21
                              1
                              22
                              12
                           
                           
                              2
                              22
                              2
                              2
                              22
                              4
                              2
                              22
                              6
                              2
                              22
                              4
                           
                           
                              3
                              21
                              54
                              3
                              21
                              56
                              3
                              21
                              58
                              3
                              21
                              56
                           
                           
                              4
                              21
                              45
                              4
                              21
                              47
                              4
                              21
                              49
                              4
                              21
                              47
                           
                           
                              5
                              21
                              35
                              5
                              21
                              38
                              5
                              21
                              40
                              5
                              21
                              38
                           
                           
                              6
                              21
                              26
                              6
                              21
                              28
                              6
                              21
                              
                                 
                                    ••
                                 
                              
                              6
                              21
                              28
                           
                           
                              7
                              21
                              16
                              7
                              21
                              19
                              7
                              21
                              21
                              7
                              21
                              19
                           
                           
                              8
                              21
                              6
                              8
                              21
                              6
                              8
                              21
                              11
                              8
                              21
                              2
                           
                           
                              9
                              20
                              55
                              9
                              20
                              58
                              9
                              21
                              0
                              9
                              20
                              52
                           
                           
                              10
                              20
                              44
                              10
                              20
                              47
                              10
                              20
                              49
                              10
                              20
                              40
                           
                           
                              11
                              20
                              33
                              11
                              20
                              36
                              11
                              20
                              38
                              11
                              20
                              29
                           
                           
                              12
                              20
                              21
                              12
                              20
                              24
                              12
                              20
                              26
                              12
                              20
                              17
                           
                           
                              13
                              20
                              9
                              13
                              20
                              12
                              13
                              20
                              14
                              
                                 
                                    •
                                 3
                              20
                              5
                           
                           
                              14
                              19
                              57
                              14
                              20
                              0
                              14
                              20
                              6
                              14
                              19
                              52
                           
                           
                              15
                              19
                              44
                              15
                              19
                              47
                              15
                              19
                              49
                              15
                              19
                              4
                           
                           
                              16
                              19
                              31
                              16
                              19
                              34
                              16
                              19
                              36
                              16
                              19
                              27
                           
                           
                              17
                              19
                              17
                              17
                              19
                              20
                              17
                              19
                              23
                              17
                              19
                              13
                           
                           
                              18
                              19
                              4
                              18
                              19
                              7
                              18
                              19
                              10
                              18
                              18
                              59
                           
                           
                              19
                              18
                              42
                              19
                              18
                              53
                              19
                              18
                              56
                              19
                              18
                              45
                           
                           
                              20
                              18
                              35
                              20
                              18
                              38
                              20
                              18
                              43
                              20
                              18
                              31
                           
                           
                              21
                              18
                              21
                              21
                              18
                              24
                              21
                              18
                              28
                              21
                              18
                              16
                           
                           
                              22
                              18
                              6
                              22
                              18
                              9
                              22
                              18
                              13
                              22
                              18
                              1
                           
                           
                              23
                              17
                              51
                              23
                              17
                              54
                              23
                              17
                              58
                              23
                              17
                              47
                           
                           
                              24
                              17
                              35
                              24
                              17
                              38
                              24
                              17
                              42
                              24
                              17
                              30
                           
                           
                              25
                              17
                              19
                              25
                              17
                              23
                              25
                              17
                              26
                              25
                              17
                              14
                           
                           
                              26
                              17
                              3
                              26
                              17
                              6
                              26
                              17
                              11
                              26
                              16
                              58
                           
                           
                              27
                              16
                              47
                              27
                              16
                              50
                              27
                              16
                              55
                              27
                              16
                              42
                           
                           
                              28
                              16
                              30
                              28
                              16
                              33
                              28
                              16
                              38
                              28
                              16
                              25
                           
                           
                              29
                              16
                              13
                              29
                              16
                              17
                              29
                              16
                              21
                              29
                              16
                              8
                           
                           
                              30
                              15
                              56
                              30
                              16
                              0
                              30
                              16
                              4
                              30
                              15
                              51
                           
                           
                              31
                              15
                              39
                              31
                              15
                              42
                              31
                              15
                              47
                              31
                              15
                              33
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                        
                           Auguſt.
                           
                              Firſt.
                              Second.
                              Third.
                              Fourth.
                           
                           
                              1
                              2
                              3
                              4
                           
                           
                              1593
                              1594
                              1595
                              1596
                           
                           
                              1597
                              1598
                              1599
                              1600
                           
                           
                              1601
                              1602
                              1603
                              1604
                           
                           
                              1605
                              1606
                              1607
                              1608
                           
                           
                              1609
                              1610
                              1611
                              1612
                           
                           
                              D. G. M.
                              D. G. M.
                              D. G. M.
                              D. G. M.
                           
                           
                              1
                              15
                              21
                              1
                              15
                              25
                              1
                              15
                              30
                              1
                              15
                              15
                           
                           
                              2
                              15
                              3
                              2
                              15
                              7
                              2
                              15
                              12
                              2
                              14
                              57
                           
                           
                              3
                              14
                              45
                              3
                              14
                              49
                              3
                              14
                              54
                              3
                              14
                              39
                           
                           
                              4
                              14
                              27
                              4
                              14
                              31
                              4
                              14
                              36
                              4
                              14
                              20
                           
                           
                              5
                              14
                              8
                              5
                              14
                              12
                              5
                              14
                              18
                              5
                              14
                              2
                           
                           
                              6
                              13
                              49
                              6
                              13
                              53
                              6
                              13
                              59
                              6
                              13
                              43
                           
                           
                              7
                              13
                              
                                 
                                    •
                                 0
                              7
                              13
                              34
                              7
                              13
                              40
                              7
                              13
                              24
                           
                           
                              8
                              13
                              9
                              8
                              13
                              15
                              8
                              13
                              2
                              8
                              13
                              5
                           
                           
                              9
                              12
                              51
                              9
                              12
                              56
                              9
                              13
                              2
                              9
                              12
                              4
                                    •
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              10
                              12
                              31
                              10
                              12
                              36
                              10
                              12
                              42
                              10
                              12
                              25
                           
                           
                              11
                              12
                              12
                              11
                              12
                              16
                              11
                              12
                              23
                              11
                              12
                              5
                           
                           
                              12
                              11
                              52
                              12
                              11
                              56
                              12
                              12
                              
                                 
                                    •
                                 
                              
                              12
                              11
                              41
                           
                           
                              13
                              11
                              32
                              13
                              11
                              36
                              13
                              11
                              42
                              13
                              11
                              25
                           
                           
                              14
                              11
                              11
                              14
                              11
                              16
                              14
                              11
                              22
                              14
                              11
                              4
                           
                           
                              15
                              10
                              51
                              15
                              10
                              59
                              15
                              11
                              2
                              15
                              10
                              44
                           
                           
                              16
                              10
                              
                                 
                                    •
                                 0
                              16
                              10
                              35
                              16
                              10
                              41
                              16
                              10
                              23
                           
                           
                              17
                              10
                              9
                              17
                              10
                              14
                              17
                              10
                              20
                              17
                              10
                              2
                           
                           
                              18
                              9
                              48
                              18
                              9
                              53
                              18
                              9
                              59
                              18
                              9
                              41
                           
                           
                              19
                              9
                              27
                              19
                              9
                              31
                              19
                              9
                              39
                              19
                              9
                              19
                           
                           
                              20
                              9
                              5
                              20
                              9
                              10
                              20
                              9
                              16
                              20
                              8
                              58
                           
                           
                              21
                              8
                              44
                              21
                              8
                              49
                              21
                              8
                              55
                              21
                              8
                              35
                           
                           
                              22
                              8
                              22
                              22
                              8
                              27
                              22
                              8
                              33
                              22
                              8
                              15
                           
                           
                              23
                              8
                              0
                              23
                              8
                              
                                 
                                    •
                                 
                              
                              23
                              8
                              11
                              23
                              7
                              53
                           
                           
                              24
                              7
                              38
                              24
                              7
                              43
                              24
                              7
                              50
                              24
                              7
                              31
                           
                           
                              25
                              7
                              16
                              25
                              7
                              21
                              25
                              7
                              28
                              25
                              7
                              9
                           
                           
                              26
                              6
                              53
                              26
                              6
                              
                                 
                                    •
                                 9
                              26
                              7
                              5
                              26
                              6
                              47
                           
                           
                              27
                              6
                              31
                              2
                                    •
                                 
                              
                              6
                              36
                              27
                              6
                              43
                              27
                              6
                              25
                           
                           
                              2
                                    •
                                 
                              
                              6
                              9
                              28
                              6
                              14
                              28
                              6
                              20
                              28
                              6
                              1
                           
                           
                              29
                              5
                              46
                              29
                              5
                              51
                              29
                              5
                              57
                              29
                              5
                              39
                           
                           
                              30
                              5
                              23
                              30
                              5
                              29
                              30
                              5
                              31
                              30
                              5
                              16
                           
                           
                              31
                              5
                              0
                              31
                              5
                              6
                              31
                              5
                              12
                              31
                              4
                              53
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                        
                           September.
                           
                              Firſt.
                              Second.
                              Third.
                              Fourth.
                           
                           
                              1
                              2
                              3
                              4
                           
                           
                              1593
                              1594
                              1595
                              1596
                           
                           
                              1597
                              1598
                              1599
                              1600
                           
                           
                              1601
                              1602
                              1603
                              1604
                           
                           
                              1605
                              1606
                              1607
                              1608
                           
                           
                              1609
                              1610
                              1611
                              1612
                           
                           
                              D. G. M.
                              D. G. M.
                              D. G. M.
                              D. G. M.
                           
                           
                              1
                              4
                              38
                              1
                              4
                              42
                              1
                              4
                              49
                              1
                              4
                              43
                           
                           
                              2
                              4
                              14
                              2
                              4
                              20
                              2
                              4
                              26
                              2
                              4
                              20
                           
                           
                              3
                              3
                              51
                              3
                              3
                              56
                              3
                              4
                              3
                              3
                              3
                              57
                           
                           
                              4
                              3
                              28
                              4
                              3
                              33
                              4
                              3
                              39
                              4
                              3
                              34
                           
                           
                              5
                              3
                              5
                              5
                              3
                              10
                              5
                              3
                              16
                              5
                              3
                              12
                           
                           
                              6
                              2
                              37
                              6
                              2
                              47
                              6
                              2
                              53
                              6
                              2
                              47
                           
                           
                              7
                              2
                              18
                              7
                              2
                              23
                              7
                              2
                              29
                              7
                              2
                              24
                           
                           
                              8
                              1
                              55
                              8
                              2
                              0
                              8
                              2
                              6
                              8
                              2
                              1
                           
                           
                              9
                              1
                              31
                              9
                              1
                              37
                              9
                              1
                              43
                              9
                              1
                              37
                           
                           
                              10
                              1
                              8
                              10
                              1
                              13
                              10
                              1
                              19
                              10
                              1
                              14
                           
                           
                              11
                              0
                              45
                              11
                              
                                 
                                    •
                                 
                              
                              49
                              11
                              0
                              56
                              11
                              0
                              51
                           
                           
                              12
                              0
                              21
                              12
                              0
                              
                                 
                                    •
                                 6
                              12
                              0
                              32
                              12
                              0
                              27
                           
                           
                              13
                              0
                              2
                              13
                              0
                              3
                                    •
                                 
                              
                              13
                              0
                              9
                              13
                              0
                              3
                           
                           
                              14
                              0
                              25
                              14
                              0
                              21
                              14
                              0
                              15
                              14
                              0
                              20
                           
                           
                              15
                              0
                              48
                              15
                              0
                              44
                              15
                              0
                              38
                              15
                              0
                              43
                           
                           
                              16
                              1
                              12
                              16
                              1
                              8
                              16
                              1
                              2
                              16
                              1
                              7
                           
                           
                              17
                              1
                              35
                              17
                              1
                              31
                              17
                              1
                              25
                              17
                              1
                              30
                           
                           
                              18
                              1
                              58
                              18
                              1
                              55
                              18
                              1
                              48
                              18
                              1
                              54
                           
                           
                              19
                              2
                              22
                              19
                              2
                              18
                              19
                              2
                              12
                              19
                              2
                              17
                           
                           
                              20
                              2
                              45
                              20
                              2
                              45
                              20
                              2
                              35
                              20
                              2
                              41
                           
                           
                              21
                              3
                              9
                              21
                              3
                              5
                              21
                              2
                              59
                              21
                              3
                              4
                           
                           
                              22
                              3
                              32
                              22
                              3
                              28
                              22
                              3
                              22
                              22
                              3
                              27
                           
                           
                              23
                              3
                              55
                              23
                              3
                              51
                              23
                              3
                              45
                              23
                              3
                              50
                           
                           
                              24
                              4
                              18
                              24
                              4
                              15
                              24
                              4
                              9
                              24
                              4
                              14
                           
                           
                              25
                              4
                              41
                              25
                              4
                              38
                              25
                              4
                              32
                              25
                              4
                              37
                           
                           
                              26
                              5
                              4
                              26
                              5
                              1
                              26
                              4
                              55
                              26
                              5
                              0
                           
                           
                              27
                              5
                              27
                              27
                              5
                              23
                              27
                              5
                              18
                              27
                              5
                              23
                           
                           
                              28
                              5
                              51
                              28
                              5
                              46
                              28
                              5
                              41
                              28
                              5
                              46
                           
                           
                              29
                              6
                              14
                              29
                              6
                              9
                              29
                              6
                              4
                              29
                              6
                              8
                           
                           
                              30
                              6
                              36
                              30
                              6
                              32
                              30
                              6
                              26
                              30
                              6
                              31
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                        
                           October.
                           
                              Firſt.
                              Second.
                              Third.
                              Fourth.
                           
                           
                              1
                              2
                              3
                              4
                           
                           
                              1593
                              1594
                              1595
                              1596
                           
                           
                              1597
                              1598
                              1599
                              1600
                           
                           
                              1601
                              1602
                              1603
                              1604
                           
                           
                              1605
                              1606
                              1607
                              1608
                           
                           
                              1609
                              1610
                              1611
                              1612
                           
                           
                              D. G. M.
                              D. G. M.
                              D. G. M.
                              D. G. M.
                           
                           
                              1
                              7
                              0
                              1
                              6
                              54
                              1
                              6
                              48
                              1
                              6
                              53
                           
                           
                              2
                              7
                              22
                              2
                              7
                              17
                              2
                              7
                              11
                              2
                              7
                              16
                           
                           
                              3
                              7
                              44
                              3
                              7
                              39
                              3
                              7
                              33
                              3
                              7
                              38
                           
                           
                              4
                              8
                              7
                              4
                              8
                              1
                              4
                              7
                              55
                              4
                              8
                              1
                           
                           
                              5
                              8
                              29
                              5
                              8
                              24
                              5
                              8
                              18
                              5
                              8
                              23
                           
                           
                              6
                              8
                              51
                              6
                              8
                              46
                              6
                              8
                              40
                              6
                              8
                              45
                           
                           
                              7
                              9
                              13
                              7
                              9
                              8
                              7
                              9
                              2
                              7
                              9
                              7
                           
                           
                              8
                              9
                              36
                              8
                              9
                              30
                              8
                              9
                              24
                              8
                              9
                              30
                           
                           
                              9
                              9
                              58
                              9
                              9
                              52
                              9
                              9
                              42
                              9
                              9
                              52
                           
                           
                              10
                              10
                              19
                              10
                              10
                              13
                              10
                              10
                              8
                              10
                              10
                              13
                           
                           
                              11
                              10
                              41
                              11
                              10
                              35
                              11
                              10
                              39
                              11
                              10
                              35
                           
                           
                              12
                              11
                              2
                              12
                              11
                              0
                              12
                              10
                              51
                              12
                              10
                              56
                           
                           
                              13
                              11
                              23
                              13
                              11
                              18
                              13
                              11
                              12
                              13
                              11
                              17
                           
                           
                              14
                              11
                              45
                              14
                              11
                              39
                              14
                              11
                              33
                              14
                              11
                              39
                           
                           
                              15
                              12
                              5
                              15
                              12
                              0
                              15
                              11
                              54
                              15
                              11
                              59
                           
                           
                              16
                              12
                              26
                              16
                              12
                              21
                              16
                              12
                              15
                              16
                              12
                              20
                           
                           
                              17
                              12
                              47
                              17
                              12
                              41
                              17
                              12
                              36
                              17
                              12
                              41
                           
                           
                              18
                              13
                              7
                              18
                              13
                              1
                              18
                              12
                              56
                              18
                              13
                              1
                           
                           
                              19
                              13
                              27
                              19
                              13
                              22
                              19
                              13
                              17
                              19
                              13
                              21
                           
                           
                              20
                              13
                              47
                              20
                              13
                              41
                              20
                              13
                              36
                              20
                              13
                              41
                           
                           
                              21
                              14
                              6
                              21
                              14
                              1
                              21
                              13
                              56
                              21
                              14
                              1
                           
                           
                              22
                              14
                              26
                              22
                              14
                              21
                              22
                              14
                              16
                              22
                              14
                              17
                           
                           
                              23
                              14
                              45
                              23
                              14
                              40
                              23
                              14
                              
                                 
                                    •
                                 5
                              23
                              14
                              39
                           
                           
                              24
                              15
                              4
                              24
                              14
                              59
                              24
                              14
                              54
                              24
                              14
                              58
                           
                           
                              25
                              15
                              23
                              25
                              15
                              17
                              25
                              15
                              13
                              25
                              15
                              17
                           
                           
                              26
                              15
                              41
                              26
                              15
                              36
                              26
                              15
                              31
                              26
                              15
                              35
                           
                           
                              27
                              15
                              59
                              27
                              15
                              54
                              27
                              15
                              50
                              27
                              15
                              54
                           
                           
                              28
                              16
                              17
                              28
                              16
                              12
                              28
                              16
                              8
                              28
                              16
                              12
                           
                           
                              29
                              16
                              35
                              29
                              16
                              30
                              29
                              16
                              25
                              29
                              16
                              29
                           
                           
                              30
                              16
                              52
                              30
                              16
                              47
                              30
                              16
                              43
                              30
                              16
                              47
                           
                           
                              31
                              17
                              9
                              31
                              17
                              4
                              31
                              17
                              0
                              31
                              17
                              4
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                        
                           Nouember.
                           
                              Firſt.
                              Second.
                              Third.
                              Fourth.
                           
                           
                              1
                              2
                              3
                              4
                           
                           
                              1593
                              1594
                              1595
                              1596
                           
                           
                              1597
                              1598
                              1599
                              1600
                           
                           
                              1601
                              1602
                              1603
                              1604
                           
                           
                              1605
                              1606
                              1607
                              1608
                           
                           
                              1609
                              1610
                              1611
                              1612
                           
                           
                              D. G. M.
                              D. G. M.
                              D. G. M.
                              D. G. M▪
                              
                           
                           
                              1
                              17
                              26
                              1
                              17
                              21
                              1
                              17
                              17
                              1
                              17
                              36
                           
                           
                              2
                              17
                              42
                              2
                              17
                              38
                              2
                              17
                              33
                              2
                              17
                              53
                           
                           
                              3
                              17
                              58
                              3
                              17
                              54
                              3
                              17
                              49
                              3
                              18
                              9
                           
                           
                              4
                              18
                              14
                              4
                              18
                              9
                              4
                              18
                              6
                              4
                              18
                              25
                           
                           
                              5
                              18
                              29
                              5
                              18
                              25
                              5
                              18
                              22
                              5
                              18
                              41
                           
                           
                              6
                              18
                              44
                              6
                              18
                              40
                              6
                              18
                              37
                              6
                              18
                              55
                           
                           
                              7
                              18
                              59
                              7
                              18
                              55
                              7
                              18
                              52
                              7
                              19
                              10
                           
                           
                              8
                              19
                              14
                              8
                              19
                              10
                              8
                              19
                              6
                              8
                              19
                              24
                           
                           
                              9
                              19
                              26
                              9
                              19
                              24
                              9
                              19
                              21
                              9
                              19
                              38
                           
                           
                              10
                              19
                              42
                              10
                              19
                              36
                              10
                              19
                              35
                              10
                              19
                              52
                           
                           
                              11
                              19
                              45
                              11
                              19
                              52
                              11
                              19
                              48
                              11
                              20
                              5
                           
                           
                              12
                              20
                              8
                              12
                              20
                              5
                              12
                              20
                              7
                              12
                              20
                              18
                           
                           
                              13
                              20
                              21
                              13
                              20
                              18
                              13
                              20
                              14
                              13
                              20
                              30
                           
                           
                              14
                              20
                              34
                              14
                              20
                              30
                              14
                              20
                              27
                              14
                              20
                              43
                           
                           
                              15
                              20
                              46
                              15
                              20
                              42
                              15
                              20
                              39
                              15
                              20
                              54
                           
                           
                              16
                              20
                              57
                              16
                              20
                              54
                              16
                              20
                              51
                              16
                              21
                              6
                           
                           
                              17
                              21
                              8
                              17
                              21
                              5
                              17
                              21
                              3
                              17
                              21
                              17
                           
                           
                              18
                              21
                              19
                              18
                              21
                              16
                              18
                              21
                              14
                              18
                              21
                              27
                           
                           
                              19
                              21
                              29
                              19
                              21
                              27
                              19
                              21
                              24
                              19
                              21
                              37
                           
                           
                              20
                              21
                              39
                              20
                              21
                              37
                              20
                              21
                              35
                              20
                              21
                              47
                           
                           
                              21
                              21
                              49
                              21
                              21
                              47
                              21
                              21
                              44
                              21
                              21
                              56
                           
                           
                              22
                              21
                              58
                              22
                              21
                              56
                              22
                              21
                              54
                              22
                              22
                              5
                           
                           
                              23
                              22
                              7
                              23
                              22
                              5
                              23
                              22
                              3
                              23
                              22
                              14
                           
                           
                              24
                              22
                              15
                              24
                              22
                              21
                              24
                              22
                              11
                              24
                              22
                              21
                           
                           
                              25
                              22
                              23
                              25
                              22
                              14
                              25
                              22
                              19
                              25
                              22
                              29
                           
                           
                              26
                              22
                              31
                              26
                              22
                              29
                              26
                              22
                              27
                              26
                              22
                              36
                           
                           
                              27
                              22
                              38
                              27
                              22
                              37
                              27
                              22
                              34
                              27
                              22
                              43
                           
                           
                              28
                              22
                              44
                              28
                              22
                              43
                              28
                              22
                              41
                              28
                              22
                              49
                           
                           
                              29
                              22
                              50
                              29
                              22
                              49
                              29
                              22
                              47
                              29
                              22
                              55
                           
                           
                              30
                              22
                              56
                              30
                              22
                              54
                              30
                              22
                              53
                              30
                              23
                              0
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                        
                           December.
                           
                              Firſt.
                              Second.
                              Third.
                              Fourth.
                           
                           
                              1
                              2
                              3
                              4
                           
                           
                              1593
                              1594
                              1595
                              1596
                           
                           
                              1597
                              1598
                              1599
                              1600
                           
                           
                              1601
                              1602
                              1603
                              1604
                           
                           
                              1605
                              1606
                              1607
                              1608
                           
                           
                              1609
                              1610
                              1611
                              1612
                           
                           
                              D. G. M.
                              D. G. M.
                              D. G. M.
                              D. G. M.
                           
                           
                              1
                              23
                              1
                              1
                              23
                              0
                              1
                              22
                              58
                              1
                              23
                              5
                           
                           
                              2
                              23
                              6
                              2
                              23
                              5
                              2
                              23
                              4
                              2
                              23
                              10
                           
                           
                              3
                              23
                              10
                              3
                              23
                              9
                              3
                              23
                              8
                              3
                              23
                              14
                           
                           
                              4
                              23
                              14
                              4
                              23
                              13
                              4
                              23
                              12
                              4
                              23
                              17
                           
                           
                              5
                              23
                              17
                              5
                              23
                              17
                              5
                              23
                              16
                              5
                              23
                              20
                           
                           
                              6
                              23
                              20
                              6
                              23
                              20
                              6
                              23
                              9
                              6
                              23
                              22
                           
                           
                              7
                              23
                              23
                              7
                              23
                              22
                              7
                              23
                              22
                              7
                              23
                              25
                           
                           
                              8
                              23
                              25
                              8
                              23
                              25
                              8
                              23
                              24
                              8
                              23
                              26
                           
                           
                              9
                              23
                              26
                              9
                              23
                              26
                              9
                              23
                              26
                              9
                              23
                              27
                           
                           
                              10
                              23
                              27
                              10
                              23
                              27
                              10
                              23
                              27
                              10
                              23
                              28
                           
                           
                              11
                              23
                              28
                              11
                              23
                              28
                              11
                              23
                              28
                              11
                              23
                              28
                           
                           
                              12
                              23
                              28
                              12
                              23
                              28
                              12
                              23
                              28
                              12
                              23
                              28
                           
                           
                              13
                              23
                              28
                              13
                              23
                              28
                              13
                              23
                              28
                              13
                              23
                              27
                           
                           
                              14
                              23
                              27
                              14
                              23
                              27
                              14
                              23
                              27
                              14
                              23
                              26
                           
                           
                              15
                              23
                              26
                              15
                              23
                              26
                              15
                              23
                              26
                              15
                              23
                              24
                           
                           
                              16
                              23
                              24
                              16
                              23
                              24
                              16
                              23
                              25
                              16
                              23
                              21
                           
                           
                              17
                              23
                              21
                              17
                              23
                              22
                              17
                              23
                              23
                              17
                              23
                              18
                           
                           
                              18
                              23
                              19
                              18
                              23
                              20
                              18
                              23
                              20
                              18
                              23
                              15
                           
                           
                              19
                              23
                              16
                              19
                              23
                              17
                              19
                              23
                              17
                              19
                              23
                              12
                           
                           
                              20
                              23
                              12
                              20
                              23
                              13
                              20
                              23
                              14
                              20
                              23
                              8
                           
                           
                              21
                              23
                              8
                              21
                              23
                              7
                              21
                              23
                              10
                              21
                              23
                              6
                           
                           
                              22
                              23
                              
                                 
                                    •
                                 
                              
                              22
                              23
                              4
                              22
                              23
                              5
                              22
                              22
                              57
                           
                           
                              23
                              22
                              58
                              23
                              22
                              59
                              23
                              23
                              1
                              23
                              22
                              52
                           
                           
                              24
                              22
                              52
                              24
                              22
                              54
                              24
                              22
                              56
                              24
                              22
                              46
                           
                           
                              25
                              22
                              47
                              25
                              22
                              48
                              25
                              22
                              50
                              25
                              22
                              40
                           
                           
                              26
                              22
                              40
                              26
                              22
                              42
                              26
                              22
                              43
                              26
                              22
                              33
                           
                           
                              27
                              22
                              36
                              27
                              22
                              35
                              27
                              22
                              37
                              27
                              22
                              25
                           
                           
                              28
                              22
                              30
                              28
                              22
                              28
                              28
                              22
                              30
                              28
                              22
                              18
                           
                           
                              29
                              22
                              22
                              29
                              22
                              20
                              29
                              22
                              22
                              29
                              22
                              9
                           
                           
                              30
                              22
                              14
                              30
                              22
                              12
                              30
                              22
                              14
                              30
                              22
                              0
                           
                           
                              31
                              22
                              6
                              31
                              22
                              4
                              31
                              22
                              6
                              31
                              21
                              52
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     What is the Sea Chart?
                     THe Sea Chart is a ſpeciall inſtrument for the Seamans vſe, whereby
the hidrographicall deſcription of the Occean Seas, with the anſwerable
geopraphicall limits of the earth, are ſuppoſed to be in ſuch ſort giuen,
as that the longitudes and latitudes of all places, with the true diſtance and
courſe betweene place and place might thereby be truely knowne. But becauſe
there is no proportionable agreement betweene a Globus ſuperficies
and a plaine ſuperficies, therefore a Chart doth not expreſſe that certaintie of
the premiſſes which is thereby pretended to be giuen, for things are beſt deſcribed
vpon bodies agreeable to their owne forme. And whereas in the true
nature of the Sphere there can be no perallelles deſcribed but the East and
Weſt courſes onely, the reſt of the courſes being concurued lines, aſcendent
toward the Poles, the Meridians all concurring and ioyning together in the
Poles, notwithſtanding in the Sea Chart all thoſe courſes are deſcribed as
perallells, without any diuerſitie, alteration, or diſtinction to the contrary,
whereby the inſtrument is apparantly faultie: yet it cannot be denyed but
Charts for ſhort courſes are to very good purpoſe for the Pilots vſe, and in
long courſes, be the diſtance neuer ſo farre, if the Pilote returne by the ſame
courſe, whereby in the firſt he proſecuted his voyage, his Chart will be without
errour, as an inſtrument of very great commoditie: but if he returne by
any other way, then by that which hee went foorth, the imperfections of the
Chart will then appeare to be very great, eſpecially if the voyage be long, or
that the ſame be in the North partes of the worlde, the farther towards the
North, the more imperfect: therefore there is no inſtrument anſwerable to
the Globe or peradoxall Chart, for all courſes and climats whatſoeuer, by
whom all deſired truth is moſt plentifully manifeſted, as ſhall hereafter at
large be declared: but for the coſting of any ſhore or countrie, or for ſhorte
voyages, there is no inſtrument more conuenient for the Seamans vſe, then
the well deſcribed Sea Chart.
                  
                  
                     What is the vſe of the sea Chart?
                     BY the directions of the ſea chart, the ſkilful Pilote conuaieth his ſhip from
place to place, by ſuch courſes as by the chart are made known vnto him,
together with the helpe of his Compaſſe or Croſſe ſtaffe as before is ſhewed,
for the Croſſe ſtaffe, the Compaſſe and Chart, are ſo neceſſarily ioyned together,
as that the one may not well be without the other, in the execution of the
practiſes of Nauigation: for as the Chart ſheweth the courſes, ſo doth the
compaſſe direct the ſame, and the Croſſe ſtaffe by euery perticutar obſerued

latitude doth confirme the truth of ſuch caurſes, and alſo giueth the certaine
diſtance that the Ship hath ſayled vpon the ſame.
                     And in the vſe or vnderſtanding of the Sea Chart there are fiue thinges
cheefely to be regarded.
                     The firſt is, that the Countries or geographie of the Chart be knowne,
with euery Cape, Promontery, Port, Hauen, Bay, Sands, Rocks, and dangers
therein contained.
                     Secondly, that the lines drawne vpon the Chart, with their ſeuerall properties
be likewiſe vnderſtoode.
                     Thirdly, that the latitudes of ſuch places as are within the Chart be alſo
knowne, as by the Chart they are expreſſed.
                     Fourthly, that you be able to meaſure the diſtances betweene place and
place vpon the Chart.
                     And fiftly, the Seaman muſt be able by his Chart to know the true courſes
betweene any les, contenents, or Capes whatſoeuer, for by theſe fiue diuerſities,
the Chart is to be vſed in the ſkill of Nauigation.
                  
                  
                     How is the latitude of places knowne by the Chart?
                     THe latitude is thus found by the Chart, vpon the place whoſe latitude
you deſire to know, ſet one foot of your compaſſes, then ſtretch the other
foote to the next Eaſt and Weſt line (for that line is your director) keeping
that foote ſtill vpon the ſame line, moue your hand and Compaſſes Eaſt or
Weſt as occaſion requireth, vntill you bring the Compaſſes to the graduated
Meridian, and there that foote of the Compaſſes which ſtoode vpon the
place whoſe latitude you would know, dooth ſhewe the latitude of the ſame
place.
                  
                  
                     How is the courſe betweene place and place knowne?
                     WHen there are two places aſſigned, the courſe betweene which you
deſire to know, ſet one foote of your Compaſſes vpon one of the places,
then by diſcretion conſider the lines that lead toward the other place,
ſtretching the other foote of the Compaſſes to one of thoſe lines, and to that
part of the line which is neereſt to you, keeping that foote ſtill upon the ſame
line, moue your hand and Compaſſes toward the other place, and ſee whether
the other foot of the Compaſſes that ſtood vpon the firſt place, doe by this direction
touch the ſecond place, which if it doe, then that line wherupon you
kept the one foote of your Compaſſes, is the courſe betweene thoſe places:
but if it touch not the place, you muſt by diſcretion ſearch vntill you finde a
line, whereupon keeping the one foote of the Compaſſes, will lead the other

foote directly from the one place to the other, for that is the courſe betweene
thoſe two places.
                  
                  
                     How is the diſtance of places found vpon the Chart?
                     IF the places be not farre aſunder, ſtretch a paire of Compaſſes betweene
them, ſetting the one foote of the compaſſes vpon one of the places, and the
other vpon the other place, then not altering the compaſſes, ſet them vpon the
graduated Meridian of your Chart, and allowing 20. leags for euery degree
that is contained betweene the 2. feet of your Compaſſes, the diſtance deſired
is therby knowne: if betweene the places there be 5. degrees, then they are
100. leages aſunder, &c. But if the diſtance betweene the places be ſo great,
as that the compaſſes cannot reach betweene them, then take out 5. degrees
with your compaſſes which is 100. leages, and therewith you may meaſure
the diſtance as practiſe will teach you. There is alſo in euery Chart a ſcale
of leages laide downe, whereby you may meaſure diſtances, as commonly is
vſed.
                  
                  
                     How doth the Pilote order theſe matters, thereby to conduct
his Ship from place to place?
                     THe Pilote in the execution of this parte of Nauigation, doth with carefull
regarde conſider three eſpeciall thinges, whereupon the full practiſes
are grounded.
                     
                        1 Of which the firſt is, the good obſeruation of his latitude which how it
may be knowne is before ſufficiently expreſſed.
                        2 The ſecond is a carefull regarde vnto his ſteredge, with very diligent
examination of the truth of his Compaſſe, that it be without variation or other
impediments.
                        3 And the third is a carefull conſideration of the number of leags that the
Ship ſaileth in euery houre or watch, to the neereſt eſtimation that poſſibly
he can giue, for any two of theſe three practiſes being truely giuen, the third
is therby likewiſe knowne.
                     
                     As by the Corſe and height the diſtance is manifeſted, by the diſtance and
Corſe the height is knowne: by the height and diſtance the Corſe is giuen, of
which 3. thinges the Pilote hath onely his height in certaintie: the corſe is
ſomewhat doubtfull, and the diſtance is but barely ſuppoſed, notwithſtanding
from his altitude and corſe he concludeth the truth of his practiſe, proceeding
in this ſort.
                     First he conſidereth in what latitude the place ſtandeth from whence hee
ſhapeth his Corſe, which for an example ſhalbe the Lyzart ſtanding in 50. degrees

of ſeptentrionall latitude, then directing his corſe S. w. ſaileth 3. or 4.
daies or longer in ſuch thick weather, as that he is not able to make any obſeraution
of the Poles altitude, in which time he omitteth not to keepe an
accompt how many leages the ſhip hath ſailed vpon that corſe as neere as he
can geſſe, which number of leages in this example ſhalbe 100. according to
his iuugement: then hauing conuenient weather, he obſerueth in what latititude
he is, and findeth himſelfe to be in 47. degrees, now with his compaſſes
he taketh the diſtance of 100. leages, which is the quantitie of the
Ships runne by his ſuppoſition, and then ſetting one foote of the compaſſes
vpon the Lizart, which is the place from whence hee began his corſe, and directly
S. W. from the ſame he ſetteth the other point of the compaſſes, by
the direction of another paire of compaſſes, in ſuch ſorce as corſes are found,
and there he maketh a prick for the place of his ſhips being, according to his
reconing and Corſe.
                     And now ſearching whether it doe agree with his height, (for the height,
corſe, and diſtance, muſt all agree together) he findeth that his prick ſtandeth
in 46. degrees, 29. minutes, but it ſhould ſtand in 47. degrees, to agree with
his obſeruation. Therefore perceiuing that he hath giuen the ſhip too much
way, he bringeth his corſe and obſerued altitude to agree, and then hee ſeeth
that his ſhip hath ſailed but 85. leages, and there he layeth downe a prick for
the true place of his ſhips being, according to his corſe and latitude, for ſo by
his corſe and height he findeth the truth of his diſtance, and reproueth his
ſuppoſed accompt to be 15. leags too much: and after this ſort he proceedeth
from place to place, vntill he ariue vnto his deſired porte: which is a concluſion
infallible if there be no other impediments, (whereof there hath not been
good conſideration had) which may breede errour, for from ſuch negligence
there may ariſe many inconueniences.
                  
                  
                     What may thoſe impediments be?
                     BY experience at the Sea we finde many impediments that ſo diſturb the
expected concluſion of our practiſes, as that they agree not with the true
poſitions of arte. For, firſt it is a matter not common to haue the winde ſo
beneficiall, as that a ſhip may ſaile thereby, betweene any two aſſigned places
vpon the direct corſe, but that by the contrarietie of windes, ſhe may be conſtrained
to trauers vpon all the points of the Compaſſe, (the nature whereof
I haue before ſufficiently expreſſed.
                     Secondly, although the winde may in ſome ſorte fauour, yet the ſhip may
haue ſuch a leward condition, as that ſhe may make her way 2. or 3. pointes
from her caping.
                     Thirdly, the ſteredge may be ſo diſorderly handled, as that thereby the

Pylote may be abuſed.
                     And laſtly, the compaſſe may be ſo varied, as that the Pylote may likewiſe
thereby be drawne into errour, of all which things and many moe, as the nature
of his ſayling, whether before the winde, quartering, or by a bowling, or
whether with lofty or low ſailes, with the benefites or hinderances of the ſea,
tydegates, ſtreames, and forced ſet thereof, &c. Of all which thinges I ſay,
the ſkilfull Pylote muſt haue carefull conſideration, which are better learned
by practiſe then taught by penne: for it is not poſſible that any man can
be a good and ſufficient pylote or ſkilful Seaman, but bypainefull & diligent
practiſe, with the aſſiſtance of arte, wherby the famous Pylote may be eſteemed
worthy of his profeſſion, as a member meete for the common weale.
                     And now hauing ſufficiently ſhewed you the ordering of your Chart for
the execution of the ſkill of Nauigation, and being alſo deſirous that you
ſhould effectually vnderſtand the full nature and vſe of the ſame. I thinke it
good by a few queſtions to giue you an occaſion to exerciſe your ſelfe in the
perfect accompliſhment of ſuch concluſions as are by this excellent and commodious
inſtrument to be perfourmed.
                  
                  
                     Neceſſary queſtions for the better vnderſtanding of the commodious
vſe of the Chart.
                     1 Q. If I ſayle 70. leages vpon the Southweſt corſe, I demaund how
many degrees I ſhall lay or depreſſe the Pole?
                     A. The difference of the latitude wilbe 2. degrees, 30. minutes.
                     2 Q. If in ſayling Weſt Norweſt I raiſe the Pole 3. degrees, 30. minutes,
I demaund how many leages I haue ſailed?
                     A. The diſtance ſailed, is 180. leages.
                     3 Q. If in ſayling 108. leages between Weſt and Nor, I raiſe the Pole
3. degrees, I demaund vpon what corſe I haue ſailed, and how farre I am
from the Meridian from whence I began that corſe?
                     A. The corſe ſailed is N. w. b. W. and the diſtance from the Meridian
is 90. leages.
                     4 Q. If in ſayling 154. leages I be 80. leages Weſt from the Meridian
from whence I began my corſe, I demaund vpon what point of the compaſſe
I haue ſailed, and how much I haue raiſed the Pole?
                     A. The corſe is N w, b. N. and the Pole is raiſed 6. degrees.
                     5 Q. If I ſayle N w. vntill I be 50. leags from the Meridian where I began
my Corſe, I demaund how many leages I haue ſailed, and how much
the Pole is raiſed?
                     A. The diſtance ſailed is 71. leages, and the Pole is raiſed 2. degrees,
30. minutes.
                     
                        
6 Q. If in ſayling W. N. W. I doe in 30. howers raiſe 2. degrees, how
many degrees ſhould I haue raiſed the Pole, if the ſame motion had beene
North and by Weſt?
                     A. You ſhould haue raiſed 5. degrees?
                     7 Q. A Ship ſailing towards the Weſt, for ettery 80. leages that ſhe sayleth
in her Corſe, ſhe departeth from the Meridian from whence ſhe began
the ſame Corſe 45. leags, I demaund vpon what point of the Compaſſe, and
how many leages ſhe hath ſailed, in rayſing the Pole 5. degrees:
                     A. She hath ſailed Northweſt by North 120. leages.
                     8 Q. A Pylote ſayling toward the Weſt 100. leages, hath forgotten his
Corſe, yet thus much he knoweth, that if he had ſailed vpon ſuch a Corſe, as
that in 160. leages ſayling hee ſhould haue raiſed the Pole 3. degrees, hee
ſhould then haue beene twiſe as farre from the Meridian as now hee is, and
ſhould alſo haue beene ½ degree further to the Northwards then now hee is.
I would now know what Corſe he hath ſailed, how many leages, and how
farre he is ſeperated from the Meridian from whence hee began the ſaide
Corſe.
                     A. She hath ſailed 88. leages Northweſt byweſt, and is 73. leages
from the Meridian nereſt.
                     9 Q. Two Ships departing from one place, the one in ſayling 145. leags
towards the Weſt, hath raiſed the Pole 4. degrees, and the other hath raiſed
the Pole 7. degrees, and is 95. leages Weſt from the Meridian of the place
from whence he began his corſe, I demaund by what corſe the ſaid ſhip hath
ſailed, how farre they be aſunder, and by what corſe they may meete?
                     A. The firſt ſhip hath ſailed Northweſt by weſt, the ſecond hath ſailed
Northweſt bynorth, 170 leages, they are aſunder 65. leags, and the corſe betweene
them is North northeaſt, and South ſouthweſt.
                     10 Q. Two ſhips ſayling from one place, the one is ſayling 180. leages, is
to the Eaſtwarde of the Meridian where hee began his corſe 150. leages, I
demaund vpon what corſe and how many leages the other ſhip ſhall ſaile, to
bring himſelfe 50. leages N. b. W. from the firſt ſhip?
                     A. The firſt ſhip hath ſailed N. e. b. e. and hath raiſed the Pole 5. degrees,
the ſecond ſhip muſt ſaile Northeaſt bynorth 237 leages.
                     
                        
                        ALthough it may ſeeme (to ſome that be very
expert in Nauigation) that theſe queſtions
are needleſſe, and without vſe, being ſo
plaine as not deſeruing in this ſorte to bee
publiſhed, notwithſtanding that their opinion, I do in
friendly curteſie aduiſe all yong practiſers of this excellent
arte of ſayling, that they doe not onely by their
Charts proue the trueth of theſe anſwered queſtions,
but alſo indeuor themſelues to propound diuers other
ſorts of queſtions, and in ſeeking their anſweres, to enter
into the reaſon thereof: for by ſuch exerciſe, the
yong beginner ſhal vnderſtand the ſubſtantiall groūds
of his Chart, and grow perfect therein: for whoſe eaſe
and furderance onely, I haue at this preſent publiſhed
this briefe treatiſe of Nauigation, knowing that the expert
Pylote is not vnfurniſhed of theſe principles, but
euery little helpe doth greatly further in euery beginning:
and therfore for the further benefite of the practiſer,
I haue hereunto annexed a perticular Sea Chart of
our Chanell, commonly called the Sleue, by which all
that is before ſpoken as touching the vſe of the Chart,
may be practiſed, wherin the depths of the Chanell are
truely laide downe: being an inſtrument moſt commodious
and neceſſary for all ſuch as ſeeke the Chanel
coming out of the occean Sea, much of it is from my
owne practiſe, the reſt from Pylotes of very good ſufficiencie:
I haue found great certaintie by the vſe of
this Chart, for by the altitude and deapth I haue not at
no time miſſed the true notice of my Ships being,

which (through Gods mercifull fauour) by my land
falls I haue alwaies found to be without errour, therefore
haue it not in light regarde, for it will giue you
great euidence, and is worthy to be kept as a ſpeciall
iuell for the Seamans vſe, be he neuer ſo expert.
                     And thus hauing ſufficiently expreſſed all the practiſes
appertaining to the skill of horizontal Nauigation,
which kinde of ſailing is now of the greateſt ſort only
practiſed, I think it good for your better memory briefly
to reporte that which before is ſpoken as touching
this kinde of Nauigation, and withall it will not bee a
miſſe to ſhew you after what ſorte I haue beene accuſtomed
to keepe my accomptes in my practiſes of ſailing,
which you ſhall finde to be very ſure, plaine and
eaſie: whereby you may at all times examine what is
paſt, and ſo reforme the corſes laide downe vpon the
Chart, if by chaunce there ſhould any errour be committed.
And ſo concluding this parte of Nauigation,
will in the next treatiſe make knowne vnto you the
vſe of the Globe, ſuch vſes I meane as the Seaman may
practiſe in his voyages, and that are moſt neceſſary for
his knowledge.
                     
                        
A Table ſhewing the order how the Seaman may keepe his accompts, whereby
hee may at all times diſtinctly examine his former practiſes, for in euery 24.
howers, which is from noone to noone, hee doth not onely lay downe his latitude,
with the corſe and leages, but alſo how the winde hath blowne in the ſame time.
                     The firſt Colume is the moneths and daies of the ſame, the ſecond is the obſerued
altitude▪ the third is the Horizontall corſe or motion of the Ship, the fourth the
number of leages that the Ship hath ſailed, the fifth is a ſpace wherein muſt be noted,
by what winde thoſe things haue beene perfourmed: and the next great ſpace
is to lay downe any breefe diſcourſe for your memory.
                     
                        
                           Anno. 1593.
                           
                              Monthes and daies of the month.
                              Latitude. G. M.
                              Corſe.
                              Leages
                              Winde
                              The 23. of March, cape S. Auguſtine in Braſill, being 16. leags eaſt from me, I began this accōpt.
                           
                           
                              March. 24
                              7
                              30
                              N. N. E.
                              25
                              Eaſt.
                               
                           
                           
                              25
                              5
                              44
                              N. b. E, norly
                              36
                              E. b. N.
                              
                                 Compaſſe varied 9. deg. the South point w eſtward.
                              
                           
                           
                              26
                              4
                              1
                              N. b. N.
                              35
                              E. b. N.
                              
                                 Compaſſe vried 8. deg. the South point weſtward,
                              
                               
                           
                           
                              27
                              2
                              49
                              N.
                              24
                              E. b. N.
                               
                           
                           
                              28
                              1
                              31
                              N. eſterly.
                              26
                              E. b. N.
                               
                           
                           
                              29
                              1
                              4
                              N. N. W.
                              9
                              N. E.
                              
                                 Compasſſe varied 6. deg. 40. 
                                       •
                                    . the South point weſtward.
                              
                           
                           
                              Aprill. 31
                              0
                              0
                              N. b. W.
                              21
                              E. N. E.
                              
                                 Obſeruation, the Pole artick aboue the Horizon.
                              
                           
                           
                              4
                              0
                              39
                              N. W. b. N.
                              15
                              N. E.
                               
                           
                           
                              7
                              1
                              53
                              N. N. W.
                              28
                              N. E.
                               
                           
                           
                              9
                              3
                              5
                              N. W. b. N.
                              30
                              N. E. b. E.
                               
                           
                           
                              10
                              4
                              5
                              N. w. b. N.
                              22
                              N. E.
                               
                           
                           
                              11
                              4
                              45
                              N. W.
                              18
                              N. E. b. N.
                               
                           
                           
                              12
                              5
                              16
                              N. W.
                              14
                              N. E. b. N.
                               
                           
                           
                              13
                              6
                              11
                              N. W. b. N.
                              23
                              N. E.
                               
                           
                           
                              14
                              7
                              16
                              N. W. b. N.
                              24
                              N. E.
                              
                                 Compaſſe varied 7. deg. the north point eaſtwards.
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     A breefe repetition of that which is before ſpoken.
                     THere are 3. kindes of Nauigation, Horizontall, Paradoxall, and ſayling
vpon a great Circle, performed by Corſe and trauers.
                     A Corſe is the paradoxall line, which is deſcribed by the Ships motion
vpon any point of Compaſſe.
                     A Trauers is the varietie of the Ships motion vpon euery alteration of
Corſes.
                     The Compaſſe is an artificiall Horizon, by which Corſes and Trauerſes
are directed, and containeth 32. pointes, and euery point containeth 11¼. degrees,
or 45. minutes, being ¾ of an hower.
                     By ſuch quantitie of time as the Moone ſeperateth her ſelfe from the
Sunne, by the like rate of time euery tide doth one differ from another.
                     In euery hower the tide altereth two minutes, in euery flud twelue minutes,
and in euery ebbe twelue minutes, and in euery day 48. minutes, becauſe
that ſo is the Moones ſeperation from the Sunne: for the Moone
doth ſeperate her ſelfe from the Sunne, in euery day one point and 3. minutes,
betweene the change and the full ſhe is to the Eaſtwardes of the Sun,
and then is her ſeperation, at which time ſhe is before the Sunne in reſpect
of her naturall motion, but in regarde of her violent motion, ſhe is then behinde
or abaſt the Sunne.
                     Betweene the full and the change, ſhe is to the Weſtward of the Sunne,
applying towards the Sunne, and then is her application, at which time ſhe
is behinde ar abaſt the Sunne, in reſpect of her naturall motion, but in consideration
of her violent motion, ſhe is then befare the Sunne.
                     She hath a violent motion, a naturall motion, a ſlowe, ſwift, and meane
motion.
                     In euery 27. daies and 8. howers ſhe perfourmeth her naturall motion
through the Zodiac.
                     Betweene change and change there is twentie nine daies, twelue howers,
forty foure minutes nereſt.
                     The ſolar yeere conſiſteth of 12. moneths, and the lunar yeer of 12. Moones.
                     The Moones age is found by the Epact.
                     All inſtruments vſed in Nauigation, of what ſhape or forme ſoeuer they
be, are deſcribed or demonſtrated vpon a Circle, or ſome portion of a Circle,
and therefore are of the nature of a Circle.
                     A degree is the 360. parte of a Circle, how bigge or little ſoeuer the
Circle be.
                     A degree is applied after 6. ſeuerall ſortes, to the Equator, to the Meridian,
to the Horizon, to the verticall Circle, to meaſure, and to time.
                     Altitude is the diſtance, height, or mounting of one thing aboue another.
                     The Poles altitude is the diſtance betweene the Pole and the Horizon,

or that portion of the Meridian which is contained betweene the Pole and
the Horizon.
                     The altitude of the Sunne aboue the Horizon, is that portion of the circle
of Azumuth, which is contained betweene the Horizon and the Sunne.
                     Latitude is that arke of the meridian which is contained betweene the
parallell of any place and the Equator, or that part of the Meridian which
is included betweene the Zenith and the Equinoctiall.
                     Longitude is that portion of the Equator contained betweene the Meridian
of S. Mihels, one of the Iles of the Aſſones, and the Meridian of the place
whoſe longitude is deſired: the reaſon why the accompt of longitude doth
begin at this Ile, is, becauſe that there the Compaſſe hath no varietie, for the
Meridian of this Ile paſſeth by the Poles of the worlde and the Poles of the
Magnet, being a Meridian proper to both Poles.
                     The longitude betweene place and place, is the portion of the Equator
which is contained betweene the Meridians of the ſame places.
                     Declination is the diſtance of the Sunne, Moone and Starres, from the
Equinoctiall, or that portion of the Meridian which paſſeth by the Center of
any celeſtiall body, and is contained betweene the ſame center and the
Equinoctiall.
                     Hidrographie is the deſcription of the occean Sea, with all Iles, bancks,
rocks and ſands therein contained, whoſe limits extend to the geographicall
borders of the earth, the perfect notice whereof is the cheefeſt thing required
in a ſufficient Pylote, in his excellent practiſe of ſayling.
                     Geographie is the deſcription of the earth onely, whereby the terreſtriall
forme in his due ſituation is giuen, whoſe diſtinction is by mountaines, riuers,
vallies, cities, and places of fame, without regarde of the Circles, Clymates,
or Zones.
                     Coſmographie is the deſcription of the heauens, with all that is contained
within the circute thereof, but to the purpoſe of nauigation, we muſt vnderſtand
Coſmographie to be the vniuerſall deſcription of the terreſtriall
Globe, diſtinguiſhed by all ſuch circles, by which the diſtinction of the celeſtiall
Sphere is vnderſtoode to be giuen, with euery Countrie, Coaſt, Sea,
Harborow, or other place, ſeated in their true longitude, latitude, Zone,
and Clyme.
                     The Chart is a ſpeciall inſtrument in Nauigation, pretending the Coſmographicall
deſcription of the terreſtriall Globe, by all ſuch lynes, circles,
corſes and diuiſions as are required to the most exquiſite ſkill of nauigation.
                  
                  The end of the Firſt Booke.
               
            
         
         
            
               
                  
                  
                  THE
SECOND PART
OF THIS TREATISE
OF NAVIGATION.
                  WHERIN IS TAVGHT, THE
nature and moſt neceſſary vſe of the Globe, with the Circles,
Zones, Climates, and other diſtinctions to the
perfect vſe of Sayling.
                  
                     By which moſt excellent Inſtrument is perfourmed,
all that is needfully required to the
full perfection of all the
three kindes of Nauigation.
                  
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                  
               
            
            
               
                  
                  THE
SECOND BOOKE OF
THE SEAMANS SECRETS.
                  
                     What is the Sphere?
                     
                        THe Sphere is a ſolide body, contained vnder one ſuperficies, in
the midſt whereof there is a point or prick, which is the Center
of the Sphere, from whence all right lines drawn to the circumference,
are equall the one to the other, whereby it is to be vnderstoode,
that the centre of the Sphere is ſo euenly placed in his midſt, as yt it
hath like diſtance from all parts of the Circumference. And foraſmuch as the
Sphere is an inſtrument demonſtrating nnto us the nniuerſall ingine of the
world, we muſt therfore vnderſtand this Center to be this terreſtrial Globe,
wherin we haue our being, which compared to the celeſtial Globe or heauenly
circumference doth beare propertie, as ye center to his circle: which earthly
globe by the diuine mightie workmanſhip of God, doth admirably hang vpon
his center, being of equall diſtance from all partes of the circumference.
                  
                  
                     What are the diſtinctions of the Sphere?
                     THe Sphere is diſtinguiſhed by ten circles, whereof ſixe are great
circles, and 4. are leſſer circles: whereof there are onely 8. deſcribed
vpon the body of the Globe, limiting the Zones and motion of the Planets,
as the Equinoctiall, the Ecliptick, the Equinoctiall Colure, the Solsiticial
Colure, the Tropick of Cancer, the Tropick of Capricorne, the Artick
Polar Circle, and the Antartick Polar Circle. The Horizon and Meridian
are not deſcribed vpon the body of the Globe, but artificially annexed
thereunto for the better perfection of his vſe.
                  
                  
                     Which are the great circles, and which the leſſer?
                     THe Equator, the Ecliptick, the 2. Colures, the Meridian and the Horizon
are great circles, becauſe they deuide the ſphere into 2. equall parts.
The 2. Tropicks, the 2. Polar circles, are leſſer circles, becauſe they deuide
the Sphere into 2. vnequall partes.
                  
                  
                     What is the Equator or Equinoctiall?
                     THe Equinoctial is a great circle deuiding ye Sphere into 2. equal parts,
leauing the one halfe towardes the North, and the other halfe towards
the South, and is equally diſtant from both the Poles of the worlde 90. degrees,

placed euenly betweene them, and deſcribed vpon them, this line croſſeth
the Horizon in the true points of Eaſt and Weſt, and hath alwaies his
owne halfe aboue the Horizon, vnles it be vnder either of the Poles, for there
the Equator is in the Horizon: it croſſeth the Meridian at right Spherick
angles, and it alſo croſſeth the Ecliptick line in the firſt minute of Aries and
Libra, diuiding the Ecliptick and Horizon, and is alſo by them deuided into
two equall partes. This line is alſo deuided into 360. equall partes or degrees,
which are the degrees of Longitude, beginning the account in the
point of Aries, reckoning twoards the Eaſt, concluding the number 360. in
the place where the firſt account began: viz, where the Equator doth interſecte
the Ecliptick in the firſt minute of Aries, vnder which Meridian S.
Mihels one of the yles, of the aſſores is to be placed in the geographicall
deſcription of the terreſtriall Globe.
                  
                  
                     What is the vſe of the Equator?
                     THe vſe of the Equinoctiall, is to know the declination of the Sunne,
Moone & Starres, wherby the latitude of places is giuen, for that portion
of the Meridian which is contained betweene the Equator and the
Centre of the Sunne, Moone or Starres, is their declination: alſo by the
Equinoctiall is knowne the Longitude of places, for a quarter of a great
Circle being drawne from the Pole, to the place whoſe Longitude is deſired,
and ſo continued to the Equinoctiall, that degree and minute in which
the quarter circle dooth touch the Equator, is the Longitude of the ſame
place, or if you bring any place (that is deſcribed vpon the Globe) whoſe Longitude
you would know, vnder the Meridian of the Globe, that degree of
the Equinoctiall that is then likewiſe directly vnder the Meridian is the
Longitude deſired. When the ſunne commeth vpon the Equator, then the
Daies and nights are of one length through the whole worlde: and then the
Sunne riſeth vpon the true point of Eaſt, and ſetteth vpon the true point of
Weſt, and not els at any time. This circle being fixed in the firmament, is
moued with the firſt mouer in euery houre 15, degrees, by which accompt in
24. houres his motion is perfourmed. And here note, that the degrees of the
Equinoctiall haue a double application, the one to time, and the other to meſure:
in reſpect of time 15. degrees make an houre, ſo that euery degree
containeth but 4, minutes of time, but when his degrees haue relation to
meaſure, then euery degree containeth 60. minutes, being 20 leags, ſo that
euery minute ſtandeth for a mile after our Engliſh accompt.
                     But this allowance of 20. leags to euery degree of the Equinoctiall, in
ſayling, or meaſuring of diſtances vpon the East and West Corſes, is onelye
when you are vnder the ſame, becauſe the Equinoctiall being a perallell,
is likewiſe a great circle, and euery degree of a great circle is truly accompted
for 20. leages, or 60. myles.
                     
                        
But in the reſt of the perallells where either of the Poles are eleuated aboue
ye Horizon, if there you ſaile or meaſure vpon the Corſes eaſt or weſt,
there are not 20. Leags to be allowed to euery degree, becauſe ſuch perallelles
are leſſer circles, therefore they haue the fewer number of leags to euery
degree: ſo that the further you departe from the Equator, the leſſer are
the perallelles, and the leſſer that any perallell is, the leſſer are his degrees,
becauſe euery circle containeth 360. degrees, and as the circles and degrees
are diminiſhed in their quantitie, in like ſorte the diſtance anſwerable to ſuch
degrees, muſt abate, as their circles do decreaſe. And further know, that the
Equator, is the beginning of all terreſtriall Latitude, and declination of the
celeſtiall bodies.
                  
                  
                     What is the Ecliptick?
                     THe Ecliptick line is greate
                           •
                         circle, deuiding the ſphere into 2. equall
partes, by croſſing the Equator in oblique ſort deuiding him, and being
diuided by him into 2. equall partes, bending from the Equator towards the
North and South 23. degrees, and 28. minutes, being in the firſt minute
of Cancer and Capricorne, there determining the Tropicall limits, this line
likewiſe deuideth the Zodiack, by longitude into 2, equall partes, and is deuided
together with the Zodiac, into 12. equal portions called ſignes, and euery
of theſe ſignes is deuided vpon the Ecliptick into 30. equall partes, or degrees,
ſo that this line is deuided into 360. degrees, vpon which line the center
of the Sunne doth continually moue: this circle is deſcribed vpon his
proper poles, named the Pole of the Zodiac, beeing in all his partes 90. degrees
from either of them.
                     The Zodiac is a circle contrary to all the other, for they are mathematicall
lines, conſiſting only of length, without breadth or thicknes: but the Zodiac
hath latitude or bredth 12. degrees, whoſe limits are 6. degrees, of either
ſide of the Ecliptick, wherein the Sunne, Moone and Planets perform their
motions and reuolutions, the center of the Sunne onelye keeping vpon the
Ecliptick, but the other Planets haue ſometime North latitude, and ſometime
South latitude. And here you muſt vnderſtand, that the latitude of the
Planets or Starres, is that portion of the eclipticall meridian which is
contained betweene the center of the Planet or Star and the Ecliptick line,
and their longitude is that portion of the line Ecliptick, which is contained
betweene the the ſaide meridian and the eclipticall meridian that paſſeth by
the poles of the Zodiac and the firſt minute of Aries.
                     The 12. deuiſions or ſignes of the Zodiac are theſe, Aries ♈, Taurus ♉,
Gemini ♊, Cancer ♋ Leo ♌, Virgo ♍ Libra ♎ Scorpio ♏ Sagitari ♐
Capricorne ♑, Aquarius ♒, Piſces ♓: and theſe are their characters that
ſtand by them.
                     The 7. Planets that keepe within the limits of the Zodiack are theſe,

Saturne ♄, Iupiter ♃, Mars ♂, Sol ☉, Venus ♀, Mercury ☿, Luna ☽: Saturne
perfourmes his courſe through all the degrees of the Zodiac, once in euery
30. yeeres: Iupiter in 12. yeeres, Mars in 2. yeeres, the Sunne in
365. daies and 6. houres being one yeere, Venus and ☿ as the Sunne, and
the Moone performeth her courſe in 27. daies and about 8. houres, through
all the degrees of the Zodiac.
                     And note that this naturall motion of the Planets in the Zodiac, is from
the Weſt toward the Eaſt, the diurnall motion is violent, cauſed by the
firſt mouer, or primum mobile, who in euery 24. houres doth perfourme his
circular motion from the Eaſt to the Weſt, carrying with him all other inferiour
bodies whatſoeuer.
                  
                  
                     What is the vſe of the Zodiac?
                     BY the Zodiac and Ecliptick is knowne the longitude and Latitude of
any Celeſtiall body, either Planets or fired Starres, for a quarter of a
great circle drawne from the pole of the Zodiac to the center of any Planet
or Star, and ſo continued vntill it touch the Ecliptick, that degree and minute
where the ſaid quarter circle toucheth the Ecliptick, is the longitude of
the ſaid body, which is to be accompted from the firſt minute of Aries, for the
longitude of Aries is the portion of the Ecliptick line, which is contained
betweene the eclipticall meridian paſſing by the poles of the Zodiac, and the
firſt minute of Aries, and the eclipticall meridian which paſſeth by the poles
of the Zodiac and the centre of any Planet or Starre.
                     When the Planets are vpon the North ſide of the Ecliptick, they haue
North latitude, and being South from the Ecliptick, they haue South
latitude.
                     Alſo the motions of the Planets, the time of any Eclipſe, and the Suns
declination by his place in the Ecliptick, are known by this circle, whoſe vſe
is very ample and to great purpoſe, for all Aſtronomicall conſiderations.
                  
                  
                     What are the Colures?
                     THe Solſticiall Colure is a great circle paſſing by the Poles of the
world, and the poles of the Zodiac, and the Solſticial points or firſt minute
of ♑ and ♋, cutting the Equinoctiall at right ſpherick angles, in his
90. and in his 270. degrees.
                     The Equinoctiall Coloure is likewiſe a great circle paſſing by the poles
of the worlde, and the equinoctiall point of ♈ and ♎, and croſſeth the equator
in his firſt and 180. degrees, and thoſe Coloures do interſect ech the other
in the poles of the world to right ſpherick angles.
                  
                  
                     What is the vſe of theſe Colures?
                     Their vſe is to diſtinguiſh the 4. principall ſeaſons of the yere, Spring,
Summer, Autumme, and winter, deuiding the Equator and Ecliptick
into 4. equal parts: alſo that arke of the Solſticiall Colure which is included

betweene the firſt minute of ♋ and the Equinoctiall, is the Sunnes
greateſt declination toward the North, the like arke being betweene the
tropicall point of ♑ and the Equator, is the Sunnes greateſt South declination,
being in theſe our daies 23 degrees, 28. minutes.
                  
                  
                     What is the tropick of Cancer?
                     The Tropick of ♋ is one of the leſſer circles deuiding the ſphere into
two vnequall partes, and is deſcribed vpon the pole Artick, a perallell to
the Equator 23. degrees 28 minutes from him, being the fartheſt lymit of
the Ecliptick bending towards the North, to which when the Sunne commeth,
the daies are then longeſt to all thoſe that inhabit in the North partes
of the worlde, and ſhorteſt to the Southerne inhabitants: betweene this
circle and the Equator are included the 6. Septentrional ſignes, ♈, ♉, ♊, ♋,
♌, ♍, in which ſignes during the time that the Sunne abideth, being from
the 11. of March, to the 13. of September, he hath much declination, and
then is the ſpring and Summer to all ſuch as inhabite in the North partes
of the Worlde, and Autumme and Winter to the inhabitants of the South
partes of the Worlde: this circle doth touch the Ecliptick in the firſt minute
of ♋, where the Sun beginneth his returne toward the South, wherupon
it tooke the name Tropick, which ſignifieth conuerſion or returne, by
which point of the Ecliptick, the diurnall motion deſcribeth this Circle.
                  
                  
                     What is the tropick of Capricorne?
                     THe Tropick of ♑, is one of the leſſer circles deuiding the ſphere into 2.
vnequall partes, and is deſcribed vpon the pole Antartick, a perallell to
the Equinoctiall 23. degrees 28 minutes from him, being the fartheſt bending
of the Ecliptick towards the South, to which when the Sunne commeth,
the daies are then longeſt to al thoſe that inhabite in the South partes
of the worlde, and ſhorteſt to the Northern inhabitants: betweene this circle
and the Equator are included the 6. Southern ſignes, ♎, ♏, ♐, ♑, ♒, ♓,
in which ſignes during the time that the Sunne abideth, being from the 13
of September to the 11. of March, he hath South declination, and then is
the Spring and Summer to all ſuch as inhabite in the South partes of the
worlde: and Autumme and Winter, to all the inhabitants in the North
partes of the worlde: this circle toucheth the Ecliptick in the firſt minute
of ♑, by which point the diurnall motion deſcribeth this perallell.
                  
                  
                     What is the vſe of the Tropicks?
                     BY the Tropicks the Sunnes declination is known, as alſo the tropicks
by the Sunnes fartheſt motion towardes the North and South, for ſo
much as the Tropicks are diſtant from the Equator, ſo much is the ſunnes
greateſt declination: and ſuch as is the Suns greateſt declining, ſuch is the
diſtance betweene the Tropicks and the Equator they are alſo the limits of
the burning Zone, ſeperating the burning and temperate zones. For between

the two Tropicks is contained the burning Zone.
                  
                  
                     What is the Artick polar Circle?
                     THe Artick Polar Circle is one of the leſſer circles, deuiding the
ſphere into two vnequall partes, and deſcribed vpon the Pole Artick in
perallell, to the Tropick of ♋, hauing ſuch diſtance from the Pole as the
Tropick hath from the Equator, being 23. degrees 28. minuts, vpon which
circle the Artick pole of the Zodiac is placed, which being fixed in the firmament,
by the vertue of the firſt mouer is carried about with the heauens, by
which motion this circle is deſcribed.
                  
                  
                     What is the Antartick polar Circle?
                     THe Antartick polar circle is oppoſite to the Artick, and perallell to the
Tropick of ♑, being in all reſpect of ſuch diſtance and deſcription, from
and about the pole Antartick, as the Artick polar circle is about the Pole
Artick.
                  
                  
                     What is the vſe of the Artick and Antartick polar Circles?
                     THe vſe of theſe 2. polar Circles, is to ſhew the diſtance of the poles of the
Zodiac, from the poles of the Worlde, for ſo much as the Solſticiall
points are diſtant from the Equator, ſo much are the poles of the Zodiac
from the poles of the Worlde: theſe circles doo alſo deuide and limit the
temperate and frozen zones, for betweene the Tropick of ♋ and the Artick
Polar circle is contained the Northern temperate zone, and betweene the
Artick polar circle and the Pole artick, that is, within the Artick polar circle
is contained the Northern frozen zone. Alſo betweene the Tropick of ♑ and
the Antartick polar circle, is contained the Southern temperate zone, and
within the ſaid polar circle is included the Antartick frozen zone, and cheſe
are all the circles that are deſcribed vpon the body of the Globe.
                  
                  
                     What is the Meridian?
                     THe Meridian is a great circle paſſing by the Poles of the Worlde, and
by your zenyth, deuiding the Horiſon into 2. equall partes, in the pointes
North and South, it alſo deuideth the ſphere with all the perallell circles
therein contained, into 2. equall partes, croſſing them at right ſpherick angles.
And this Meridian is not fixed in the firmament as the reſt of the circles
are, for if it were, then ſhould it be moued with the firſt mouer as the reſt
are, but it is not ſo: therefore the Meridian is manifeſted vpon the Globe,
by a circle or ring of copper faſtened vnto the Globe, vpon the 2. Poles, ſo
that the Globe moueth round vpon his 2. Poles within the Meridian: this
Meridian is graduated in euery of his quarters into 90. degrees, by which
his vſe is perfourmed: and note that one Meridian may haue many Horyzons,
yet euery Horizon hath but one Meridian, yet in euery ſencible difference
of diſtance you ſhall enter into a change of Horizons, for there bee as

many Horizons as there be ſencible differences of diſtance, and there bee as
many Meridians as there be ſencible differences of diſtance, ſo that the difference
be not vpon the points North or South, but this copper Meridian
annexed to the Globe, is to be applyed to all differences and diſtances whatſo.
euer, as amply as if the number were infinite.
                  
                  
                     What is the vſe of the Meridian?
                     THe vſe of the Meridian is to know the higheſt aſcending of the Sunne,
Moone or Starres from the Horizon, for when they bee vpon the
Meridian, then are they fartheſt from the Horizon, and then is the moſt conuenient
time to take the altitude of the Sunne or Starres, thereby to finde
the Poles eleuation.
                     By the Meridian of your Globe is knowne the latitude and longitude of
any place vpon the Globe contained, for if you bring any place vnder the Meridian,
the degrees of the Meridian do ſhew the latitude of the ſame, and that,
degree of the Equator which the Meridian doth croſſe is the longitude, &c.
                  
                  
                     What is the Horizon?
                     THe Horizon is a great circle deuiding the heauens into 2. equall partes
the one halfe being aboue the horizon is alwaies in ſight, the other
halfe is not ſeene being vnder the Horizon, and therefore is called the finitor
or lymit of our ſight, for where the heauens and feas ſeeme to ioyne together,
that is the Horizon: the Horizon is not fixed in the firmament, and yet
is a fixed circle conſtant to his proper latitude, but becauſe in the Globe one
and the ſame Horizon may perfourme whatſoeuer is required to all eleuations,
the Horizon is ſo artificially annexed to the Globe, that by the motion of
the Meridian, in the ſame there faulteth nothing in his vſe: and the Horizon
is in all reſpects diſtinguiſhed, as is the ſea Compaſſe. There are two
kindes of Horizons, a right Horizon, and an oblique Horizon: when the
Poles are in the Horizon, then is it a right Horizon, for then the Equator
doth cut the Horizon to right angles, making a right Sphere and a right
Horizon, an oblique Horizon is where either of the Poles are eleuated
aboue the ſame, for then the Equator doth cut the Horizon to vnlike angles,
making an oblique Sphere, and an oblique Horizon, and although the Horizons
be diuers and many in number, for euery ſencible difference of diſtance
hath his proper Horizon, yet is the Horizon of the Globe ſo conueniently
annexed thereunto, as that by the mouing of the Meridian in the Horizon,
and by the Globes motion in the Meridian, both the Horizon, and Meridian
are to be applyed as proper to all places whatſoeuer: and note that the place
where you are, is alwaies the center of the plaine ſuperficiall Horyſon.
                  
                  
                     What is the vſe of the Horizon?
                     THe Horizon is the beginning of all altitude, for whatſoeuer is aboue the
Horyzon, is ſaid to haue altitude more or leſſe, and by the horizon ſuch

altitudes are giuen with helpe of the croſſe ſtaffe, for placing the croſſe ſtaffe
at your eye, if by the one end of the tranſuerſary you ſee the Horyzon, and by
the other end (at the ſame inſtant) you ſee the body obſerued, then doth the
tranſuerſary ſhew vpon the ſtaffe the altitude deſired, by the Horizon the nauigable
courſes from place to place are like wiſe knowne, as alſo the quantitie
of the riſing and ſetting of the Sunne, moone and Starres: whereby is
knowne the length of the daies and nights in all climats and at all ſeaſons:
by the Horyzon is knowne vpon what degree of Azumuth, the Sun, Moone
or Starres are, when they may be ſeene, in what part of the Heauen ſoeuer,
whereby the variation of the Compaſſe is found, and the Poles altitude
may at all ſeaſons be giuen.
                  
                  
                     Are theſe all the circles appertaining to the Globe?
                     There are other Circles which are fixed and doe properly appertaine to
euery perticuler Horizon, as Azumuths, Almicantans, the Artick, and
Antartick circles.
                  
                  
                     What are circles of Azumuth?
                     CIrcles of Azumuths, or verticall circles, are quarters of great circles,
concurring together in the Zenith, as the Meridians do in the Pole, and
are extended from the Zenith to euery degree of the Horizon, &c. And becauſe
they cannot be conueniently deſcribed vpon the Globe to bee applyed
to all Horizons, therefore vpon the Meridian of the Globe there is a peece of
copper artificially placed, to be remoued to any degree of the Meridian at
pleaſure, which peece of copper repreſenteth the zenith, and muſt alwaies be
placed ſo many degrees from the Equator, as the Pole is eleuated from the
Horizon: and vnto this zenith there is ioyned a quarter of a great circle called
Quarta altitudo, the ende whereof doth continually touch the Horyzon,
and is ſo ioyned to the zenith, as that it may be moued round vpon the Horizon,
and to euery parte thereof at your pleaſure: this Quarta altitudo is deuided
into 90 degrees, being the diſtinction of all altitude, and beginneth the
accompt from the Horizon, which is the beginning of altitude, and concludeth
90, degrees in the zenith, being the end and extreme lymite of all altitude.
                  
                  
                     What are Almicantans?
                     ALmicantans or circles of altitude, are parallel circles to the Horizon, and
are deſcribed vpon the zenith, as the perallells to the equator, are deſcribed
vpon the Poles, of which circles there are 90. anſwerable to the diſtinctions
of the Quarta altitudo, which are the degrees contained betweene the
Horizon and zenith, theſe circles cannot be deſcribed vpon the Globe, to be
applyed to euery Horizon, but they are diſtinguiſhed by the circular motion
of the Quarta altitudo, fox if I deſire to ſee the almicantar circle of 10. degrees,
by mouing the Quarta altitudo round about the Horizon, the zenith

degree of their quarter circle, doth ſhew the Almicanter deſired, in what eleuation
ſoeuer.
                  
                  
                     What is the vſe of theſe two Circles?
                     THe quarta altitudo perfourmeth the vſe of both, by the quart
                           ••
                         altitude
and Horizon the courſes from place to place are known according to the
true horizontall poſition, as hereafter ſhall plainely appeere: it alſo ſheweth
the degree of Azumuth, and obſerued altitude of any celeſtiall body, in what
latitude ſoeuer: by the Quarta altitudo and Horizon, you may deſcribe a
peradoxall Compaſſe vpon the Globe, the Poles length is at all times therby
to be knowne, and the variation of the Compaſſe is thereby likewiſe giuen,
as hereafter in the practiſe you ſhall be taught.
                  
                  
                     What are the Artick and Antartick circles?
                     EVery Horizon hath his proper Artick or Antartick circle, thoſe Horizons
that haue the Pole Artick eleuated aboue them, haue their proper Artick
circle, and thoſe that haue the South pole eleuated, haue their proper
Antartick circle, the quantitie of which circle is according to the Poles eleuation,
for if the Pole be much eleuated, then is the Artick circle great, for
the Poles altitude is the ſemidiamiter of this circle, if the Pole be in the Zenith,
then halfe the Heauens is the Artick circle.
                  
                  
                     What is the vſe of this circle?
                     IF the Sunne, Moone, or any Starres be within this circle, they are neuer
caried vnder the Horizon during the time of their abode therin, whervpon
it commeth to paſſe that ſuch as trauaile farre towards the North, haue
the Sunne in continuall viewe, and thoſe that inhabite vnder the Pole (if any
ſo doe) the Sunne is in continuall ſight for ſixe moneths together, becauſe
the ſixe Septentrionall ſignes are within their Artick circle, the Equator
being in the Horizon &c.
                     There is another ſmall circle, which is called Ciclus horarius, or the
hower circle, to be annexed to the Meridian of the Globe, for the perfection
of his uſe, this circle muſt be deuided into 24. equall partes or howers, and
thoſe againe into ſuch partes as you pleaſe for the better diſtinction of time:
this circle muſt be faſtened to the meridian, ſo that the howers 12. muſt ſtand
directly vpon the edge of the meridian, and the Pole muſt bee the center of
this circle, vpon which Pole there muſt be faſtened an Index to moue proportionably,
as the ſphere (vpon any occaſion)ſhalbe moued.
                     There is alſo an halfe circle, called the Circle of poſition, which ſith it
ſerueth to no great purpoſe for Nauigation I heere omit, and thus is the
Globe fully finiſhed for the perfection of this vſe.
                  
                  
                     What are the Poles of the worlde?
                     THere are two Poles 
                           〈◊〉
                         the North or artick Pole, and the South or antartick
Pole, which Poles are two moueable prickes fixed in the firmament,

wherupon the ſphere is moued by vertue of the firſt mouer, and are the
limits of the Axis of the worlde, as alſo the extreme terme or band of all declination,
being 90. degrees from all partes of the Equator.
                     By the raiſing of the Pole from the Horizon, is knowne the perallell or
latitude of our being, it alſo giueth the quantitie of the Artick circle, and the
obliquitie of the ſphere.
                  
                  
                     What is the axis of the worlde?
                     THe Axis of the worlde is a right line paſſing by the center of the ſphere,
and limited in the circumference, about the which the Sphere moueth, and
is therefore called the Axis of the Sphere, and as all lines comenſurable
are limited betweene two pointes or pricks, ſo is the Axis of the worlde,
and thoſe two limiting pricks are called the Poles of the worlde.
                  
                  
                     What are the Poles of the Zodiac?
                     THe zodiac hath likewiſe two Poles, Artick and Antartick, being two
prickes fixed in the firmament, limiting the Axis of the zodiac, and are
diſtant from the Poles of the world 23. degrees, 28. minutes, which Poles
by the motion of the ſphere doe deſcribe the Polar circles, perfourming
their motion about the Poles of the worlde in euery 24. howers, by vertue
of the firſt mouer, vpon theſe poles the Ecliptick and zodiac is deſcribed: alſo
a quarter of a great circle graduated into 90 degrees, being faſtened to either
of theſe Poles and brought to the center of any Star, ſheweth by that
graduation the latitude of the ſame Starre, and where the quarter retire circle
toucheth the Ecliptick, that is likewiſe his longitude, alſo the 7. Planets do
perfourme their naturall reuolutions vpon theſe Poles, whoſe motion is
from the Weſt towards the Eaſt, coutrary to the motion of the firſt mouer.
                  
                  
                     What is the Axis of the Zodiac.
                     THe Axis of the zodiac, is a right line paſſing by the center of the ſphere,
and limited in the circumference, whoſe limiting pointes are the
Poles of the zodiac, and this Axis is moued with the Sphere as are his
Poles.
                  
                  
                     What are the Poles of the Horizon?
                     THere are two Poles of the Horizon, which are the limits of his perpendicular
dimetient, being equidiſtant 90. degrees from all parts of the
Horizon, and are the extreme limits of all altitude, that Pole which is in the
vpper Hemiſphere is called the zenith, and his oppoſite pole is called Nadir,
they are extended to the firmament but not fixed in it, for they moue neuer,
but remaine alwaies ſtable to shew proper Horizon, which could not be
if they were fixed in the firmament, for then ſhould they be moued with the
firmament as the reſt are, by the helpe of theſe Poles is found the Azumuth
and Almicanter of any celeſtiall body, for a quarter circle deuided into 90.
degrees, and fixed to the zenith as is the Quarta altitudo, being moued to any

celeſtiall body, doth by thoſe degrees ſhew the almicanter or altitude of
the ſame bodye from the Horizon, and that parte of the Horizon which the
quarter circle teacheth, is the azumuth of the ſame body, alwaies prouided
that the zenith ſtand auſwerable to the Poles eleuation, that is, ſo many degrees
from the Equator, as the Pole is from the Horizon.
                     
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     How many Zones are there?
                     THere are 5. zones, 2. temperate zones, 2. frozen zones, and one burning
zone, the burning zone lyeth between the two Tropicks, whoſe latitude
is 46. degrees, 56. minutes, which zone by auncient Geographiers is
reported to be not habitable, by reaſon of the great heat which there they ſuppoſed
to be, through the perpendicularitie of the Sunne beames, whoſe perpetuall
motion is within the ſaide zone, but we finde in our trauels, contrary
to their reporte, that it is not onely habitable, but very populous, contayning
many famous and mightie nations, and yeeldeth in great plentye the
moſt pureſt thinges that by natures benefits the earth may procreate: twice
I haue ſayled through this zone, which I found in no ſorte to bee offenciue,

but rather comfortable vnto nature, the extremetie of whoſe heate is not furious
but tollerable, whoſe greateſt force laſteth but 6. howers, that is, from
9. of the clocke in the morning, vnto 3. in the afternoone, the reſt of the day
and night is moſt pleaſing and delightfull: therefore they did nature wrong
in their raſh reporte.
                  
                  
                     Of the frozen Zones.
                     THe frozen zones are contained within the polar circles, the Artick frozen
zone within the Artick polar circle, and the antarttck frozen zone within
the Antartick Polar circle, which are alſo reported not to be habitable, by
reaſon of the great extremetie of colde, ſuppoſed to be in thoſe parts, becauſe
of the Sunnes farre diſtance from thoſe zones. but in theſe our dayes we
finde by experience, that the auncient Geographiers had not the due conſideration
of the nature of theſe zones, for three times I haue beene within the
Artick frozen zone, where I haue found the aire very temperate, yea and many
times in calme wether meruailous hot: I haue felt the Sunne beames
of as forcible action within the frozen zone in calmes neere vnto the ſhore, as
I haue at any time found within the burning zone. this zone is alſo inhabited
with people of good ſtature, ſhape, and tractable conditions, with whome
I haue conuerſed and not found them rudly barberous, as I haue found the
Caniballs which are in the ſtraights of Magilane, and Southerne partes of
America: In the frozen zone I diſcouered a coaſt which I named deſolation
at the firſt viewe thereof, ſuppoſing but by the loathſome ſhape to be waſte
and deſolate, but when I came to an Ancker within the harbours thereof, the
people preſently came unto me without feare, offering ſuch poore thinges as
they had to exchange for iron nailes and ſuch like: but the Canibals of America
flye the preſence of men, ſhewing themſelues in nothing to differ from
brute beaſtes: thus by experience it is moſt manifeſt that thoſe zones which
haue beene eſteemed deſolate and waſte, are habitable, inhabited and fruitfull.
If any man be perſwaded to the contrary of this truth, he ſhall doe himſelfe
wrong in hauing ſo baſe an imagination of the excellency of Gods creation,
as to thinke that God creating the worlde for mans vſe, and the ſame
being deuided but into 5. partes, 3. of thoſe partes ſhould bee to no purpoſe:
but 
                           〈◊〉
                         let this ſaying therefore of the Prophet Eſaias be your ful ſatiſfaction,
to confirme that which by experience I haue truly ſpoken: For thus ſaith
the Lord that created heauen, God himſelfe that framed the earth and made
it, hee that prepared it, hee created it not in vaine, hee framed it to be inhabited,
&c. Eſai 45, 18.
                     
                  
                  
                     Of the temperate zones.
                     THe temperate Artick zone is included betweene the tropick of ♋ and
the Artick Polar circle, whoſe latitude or bredth is 42, degrees, 2. miuntes,

within the which we haue our habitation.
                     THe temperate Antartick zone is limited by the tropick of ♑ and the Aatartick
Polar circle, and hath breadth or latitude 42, degrees, 2, minutes.
                     
                  
                  
                     What is a Climate?
                     A Climate is the ſpace or difference vpon the vpper face of the earth, included
betweene two perallells, wherein the day is ſenſibly lengthened
or ſhortned halfe an hower, for as you trauaile from the Equator toward the
Artick Pole, the Sunne hauing North declination, the daies doe grow Ionger
and longer, vntill at laſt the Sunne not ſetting under the Horizon, you
ſhall haue continuall day, and euery ſpace or diſtance that altereth the day
halfe on hower, is called a Climate: theſe Climates take their names from
ſuch famous places as are within the ſaide Climates, of which there are 9. as
by their diſtinctions may appeare.
                     1. The firſt paſſing through Meroe, beginneth in the latitude 12. de.
45. m. and endeth in 20. d. 30. m. whoſe bredth is 7. d. 45. m.
                     2. The ſecond paſſing through Syene, begiuneth in the latitude of 20. de.
30. m. and endeth in 27. d. 30. m. whoſe bredth is 7. d.
                     3. The third paſſing through Alexandria, beginneth in the la. of 27. d. 30. m

and endeth in 33. d. 40. m. whoſe bredth is 6. d. 10. m.
                     4. The fourth paſſing by Rhodes, beginneth in the la. of 33. d. 40. m. and
endeth in 39, d. whoſe bredth is 5. d. 20. m.
                     5. The fifth paſſing by Rome, beginneth in the la. of 39. d and endeth in
43. d. 30. m. whoſe bredth is 4. d. 30. m.
                     6. The ſixt paſſing by Boriſthines, beginneth in 43. d. 30. m. and endeth in
47. d. 15. m. whoſe bredth is 3. d. 45. m.
                     7. The ſeuenth paſſing by the Rhiphaan mountains, beginneth in 47, d.
15. m. and endeth in 50. d. 20. m. whoſe bredth is 3. d. 5. m.
                     8. The eight paſſing by Meotis or London, beginneth in 50. d. 20. m. and
endeth in 53. d. 10. m. whoſe bredth is 2. d. 50. m.
                     9. The ninth paſſing by Denmarke, taketh his beginning in the latitude of
53. d. 10. m. and endeth in the latitude of 55. d. 30. m. and hath in bredth 2. d.
20. m.
                     If you deſire to know how many leagues euery Climate is in bredth, allow
for euery degree 20. leagues, or 60. miles, and for euery minute a myle,
ſo is the diſtance giuen.
                     Thus haue I manifeſted vnto you all the diuiſions and particularities of
the Spheres diſtinction.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     What is the vſe of the Globe?
                     THe vſe of the Globe is of ſo great eaſe, certaintie and pleaſure, as
that the commendations thereof cannot ſufficiently be expreſſed, for
of all inſtruments it is the moſt rare and excellent, whoſe concluſions are
infallible, giuing the true line, angle, and circular motion of any Corſe or
trauers that may in Nauigation happen, whereby the longitude and latitude
is moſt preciſely knowne, and the certainty of diſtance very plainelye
manifeſted, according to the true nature thereof: it giueth the variation of
the Compaſſe, and the howre or time of the day at all ſeaſons, and in all places.
And by the Globe the Poles height may at all inſtants and vpon euery
point or azumuth, of the Horizon, by the Sunnes altitude taken, be moſt preciſely
knowne, by the certainty of whoſe excellent vſe, the ſkilfull Pilot ſhall
receiue great content in his pleaſing practiſe gubernautick.
                  
                  
                     How are diſtances meaſured vpon the Globe?
                     VVHen there are 2 places aſſigned the diſtance, betweene which you
deſire to know, with a paire of circular compaſſes you muſt doe it
in this ſort: ſet one foote of the Compaſſes vpon one of the places, and the
other foote vpon the other place, the Compaſſes ſo ſtretched forth bring vnto
the Equator, and as many degrees as may bee contained betweene thoſe
two points of the Compaſſe, allowing 20. leages for euery degree as the
diſtance diſired: or if the places be of ſuch diſtance, as that you cannot with
your Compaſſes reach them, then take with the Compaſſes 5. degrees of
the Equator, which is 100. leages, or 10. degrees for 200. leages, and ſo
meaſure how often the diſtance is contained betweene the ſaide places, if any
parte of a degree doth remaine, for halfe a degree allow 10. leages, for a
quarter 5. leages, &c. but if you deſire a moſt exquiſite preciſenes in meaſuring
to the minute, ſecond and third, then doe thus. When your Compaſſes
doth fal vpon any parte of a degree, note the diſtance between the end of that
degree and the point of the Compaſſes, then with a paire of conuenient compaſſes
take the diſtance, then meaſure the ſame 60. times upon the Equator,
(beginning at ſome certaine place) then conſider how many degrees are contained
within the meaſure, and allow euery degree to be a minute or myle, ſo
are the leages and miles knowne, if any perallell of a degree remaine vpon
this meaſure of minuts, do as at the firſt, meaſuring the ſame 60. times vpon
the Equator, the degrees comprehended within ye meaſure, are ſeconds; if any
parcell of a degree remaine vpon theſe ſeconds, do as in the firſt, and the degrees
contamed in this meaſure are thirds, and ſo you may proceed infinitly.
                  
                  
                     How may the Globe be rectified anſwerable to the true poſition of the
heauens, for any place, Cittie, or promontery?
                     THe place being knowne for the which you would rectifie the Glode, doe
thus: bring the place vnder the Meridian, and there conſider the latitude

thereof: and as many degrees as that place is from the Equator, ſo
many degrees you muſt eleuate the Pole from the Horizon, then bring the
zenith directly ouer the ſame place, and ſo is your Globe rectified for the execution
of any practiſe: and without this ordering of the Globe, there is no
concluſion to be executed by the ſame.
                  
                  
                     How is the longitude and latitude of places known
by the Globe?
                     BY turning the Globe within the Meridian, you muſt bring the Promontery,
Bay, Harborow, Cittie, or other place, (whoſe latitude and
longitude you ſeeke) preciſely vnder the Meridian, there holding the Globe
ſtedy, the degree of the Meridian that is directly ouer the ſaid place, ſheweth
the latitude thereof, and that degree of the Equinoctiall which is directly vnder
the Meridian, is the longitude of the ſame place.
                  
                  
                     How is the Corſe found betweene place and place?
                     TWo places beeing aſſigned, the Corſe betweene which you deſire to
know, firſt ſeek the latitude of one of theſe places, and rectifie the Globe
anſwerable vnto the ſame, as before is taught, then bring that place directly
vnder the Meridian and Zenith, if both places be vnder your Meridian, they
then Iye North and South, if not, then bring the Quarta altitudo to the other
place, and note vpon what parte of the Horizon the end of the ſame toucheth,
for that is the preciſe Horizontall Corſe betweene the ſaid places, but
this you muſt conſider, that the Horizontall Corſe is not the nauigable corſe,
vnles the places be of ſmal diſtance, for if any place hare Northeaſt from me,
or Eaſt from me, or vpon any other point, North or South excepted, and be
diſtant 500. leages, if I ſayle vpon the Horizontall Corſe, I ſhall neuer ariue
vnto the ſame place.
                  
                  
                     How then ſhall the Pylote ſaile by the Globe? if the
matter be ſo doubtfull?
                     THe ſhilfull Pylote that vſeth this excellent inſtrument, dooth firſt conſider
the place from whence he ſhapeth his corſe, and rectifieth the Globe
anſwerable to the ſame, then bringing the place directly vnder the Meridian
and Zenith, there holding the Globe ſtedie, bringeth the Quarta altitudo to
the place for which he is bound, the end whereof ſheweth vpon the Horizon the
true Horizontall Corſe, vpon which Corſe he ſayleth 20. or 30. leages, and
there maketh a note or prick by the edge of his Quarta altitudo, according
to the true diſtance proued by Corſe, reconing an altitude as in the vſe of a
Chart: then hee bringeth that prick or note vnder the Meridian, and there
conſidereth the true latitude of his being, he then rectifieth the Globe anſwerable
to the ſame prick, and keeping the ſame vnder the Zenith, dooth againe
turne the Quarta altitudo to the place for which he is bound, the end wherof
ſheweth vpon the Horizon the Horizontall Corſe, then ſayling as at the firſt

he maketh a note or prick as before. and thus proſecuting his Corſe, ſhall ariue
unto his deſired place: but in this practiſe he ſhall plainely proue that his
Horizontall Corſe will differ greatly, and that by his ſayling in this ſorte,
he ſhall by his notes and pricks deſcribe the true nauigable and neereſt Corſes
betweene the ſaid places: The like methode is to bee obſerued vpon any
trauers or forced courſe whatſoeuer: and therefore the Pylote muſt take
care, that although the winde be neuer ſo fauourable, yet hee muſt not proſecute
any Horizontall Corſe (North and South only excepted.)
                     Therefore I ſay, the Pylote muſt take ſpeciall care to conſider the diſtance
of places, whether the Horizotall Corſe will leade him betweene the
ſaide places: for if places be more then 45. degrees aſunder, the Horizontall
Corſe is not the meane to finde thoſe places, unleſſe they lye Nouth & South:
for the Horizoutall courſe betweene any 2. places, is a portion of a great circle,
which being of large diſtance, muſt be perfourmed by great circle nauigation,
and not by Horizontall Corſes: for the collection of many Horizontall
Corſes being knit together, doe performe a peradoxall motion, altogether
differing from a great circle, as for an example: being at Cape verde,
there is a place diſtant from me 80. degrees, vpon the point Northweſt, unto
which place I deſire to ſayle, I therefore bring Cape verde under the Meridian
of my Globe, there conſidering the latitude of the Cape, I rayſe the
Pole anſwerable to the ſame, and place the Zenith directlye ouer the Cape,
then turning the Quarta altitudo to the point Northweſt vpon the Horizon,
all ſuch places as the ſaide Quarta altitudo then toucheth, doe heare due
Northweſt from me: now proſecuting this Corſe by the direction of my
Compaſſe, the firſt day I ſayle 20 leages, therefore I make a marke by the
edge of the Quarta altitudn, 20. leages from the Zevith, then bringing that
marke lnder the Meridian, I rectifie the Globe anſwerable to the latitude
thereof, the next day I ſayle other 20. leages vpon the ſame point, and make
a marke as at the firſt, I bring that marke likewiſe under the Meridian,
and rectifie the Globe as before, and by this methode proſecuting the Corſe
NW, I ſhall deſcribe a peradoxall lyne, which will leade me to the North
of the place unto which I would ſayle, the farther the diſtance, the greater
the difference: by this order you may deſcribe peradoxall lynes, vpon all the
points of the Compaſſe, but this is to be regarded, that your differences be as
ſmall as you may, and that none of them exceed 20. leags, fox by the ſmalleſt
diſtinctions, is perfourmed the greateſt certaintie. And by the deſcription of
theſe lynes, you may Very manifeſtly underſtand the differences of Horizontall
peradoxall and great circle Nauigation.
                     And this may ſnffiſe for the ſayling vſe of the Globe, conuenient for the ſeamans
purpoſe.
                  
                  
                     
                     What is great Circle nauigation?
                     GReat Circle nauigation is the cheefeſt of all the 3. kindes of ſayling, in
whom all the other are contained, and by them this kinde of ſayling is
perfourmed, continuing a Corſe by the ſhorteſt diſtance betweene places, not
limited to any one Corſe, either horizontall or peradorall, but by it thoſe corſes
are ordered to the full perfection of this rare practiſe, whoſe benefites in
long voyages are to great purpoſe, ordering and diſpoſing all horizontall
trauerſes to a perfect concluſion: for there are many changes of horizontall
and peradoxall Corſes in the execution of this practiſe, ſo that vpon the ſhifting
of a winde, when that it may ſeeme that you are forced to an inconuenient
Corſe by the ſkill of great Circle ſayling, that Corſe ſhall be found the
ſhorteſt and onely proper motion to perfourme your voyage. And alſo when
with fauourable windes the Pylote ſhall ſhape a Corſe by his Chart or
Compaſſe peradoxall, as the beſt meane to attaine his porte, he ſhall by this
kinde of ſaying finde a better and ſhorter Corſe, and by ſufficient demonſtration
proue the ſame, ſo that without this knowledge I ſee not how Corſes
may be ordered to their beſt aduantage: therefore ſith by it the perfection
of ſayling is largely vnderſtoode, and the errors likewiſe moſt ſubſtancially
controled, it may of right challenge the cheefeſt place among the practiſes
Gubernautick. The perticularities whereof if I ſhould by an orderly
methode labour to expreſſe, it would be a diſcourſe ouer large for this place,
and as I thinke troubleſome if the premiſſes be not well vnderſtoode: therfore
I will now ouerpaſſe it, vntill a time more conuenient and of better
leaſure.
                  
                  
                     Of peradoxall Nauigation.
                     PEradoxall Nauigation, demonſtrateth the true motion of the Ship vpon
any Corſe aſſigned, in his true nature by longitude, latitude and
diſtance, giuing the full lymit or determination of the ſame, by which motion
lines are deſcribed neither circular nor ſtraight, but concurued or winding
lynes ſhould be deſcribed by plaine horizontall motion: for the full
perfection of which practiſe I purpoſe (if God permit) to publiſh a peradoxal
Chart with all conuenient ſpeede, and ſo will diſcouer by the ſame at large,
all the practiſes of peradoxall and great Circle nauigation, for vpon the peradoxall
Chart it will beſt ſerue the Sea-mans purpoſe, being an inſtrument
portable, of eaſie ſtowage and ſmall practiſe, perfourming the practiſes of
Nauigation as largely and as beneficially as the Globe in all reſpects: and
all theſe practiſes of ſayling before, mentioned, may in a generall name be
aptly called Nauigation Geometricall, becauſe it wholly conſiſteth of Geometricall
demonſtratiue concluſions.
                     
                        
But there is another knowledge of Nauigation, which ſo farre excelleth
all that is before ſpoken, or that hath hitherto beene vulgarly practiſed, as
the ſubſtance his ſhadowe, or as the light ſurpaſſeth the thick obſcured darkenes:
and this ſweete ſkill of ſayling may well be called Nauigation arithmaticall,
becauſe it wholly conſiſteth of Calculations, comprehended within
the lymit of numbers, deſtingniſhing Corſes not only vpon the points of the
Compaſſe, but vpon euery degree of the Horizon, and giueth the diſtance of
any trauers for the particular eleuation of minutes, yea, and leſſe partes aſſure
your ſelfe: it giueth longitudes and latitudes to the minute ſecond and
third: in ſo great certaintie, as that by no other meanes the like can be perfourmed:
in ſo great certaintie, as that by no other meanes the like can be perfourmed:
it teacheth the nature of Angles and Triangles, aſwell Sphericall
as plaine ſuperficiall and ſolide Comenſurations, the effect of lynes
ſtraight, circular, and peradoxall, the quantities and proportions of perallells,
the nature of Horizons, with euery particular diſtinction of any alteration
whatſoeuer, that may in Nauigation be required, to a moſt wonderfull
preciſe certainty: for there can nothing be required, to a moſt wonderfull
preciſe certainty: for there can nothing be required, that by this heauenly
hermonye of numbers ſhall not bee moſt copiouſlye manifeſted to the Seamans
admiration and great coutent: the orderlye practiſe whereof to the
beſt of my poore capacitie I purpoſe to make knowne, if I may perceiue my
paines already taken, to be receiued in good parte, which I diſtruſt not but
all honeſt minded Seamen, and Pylots of reputation will gratefully embrace,
onely in regarde of my friendly good will towards them, for it is not
in reſpect of my paines, but of my loue, that I would receiue fauourable curteſie.
                  
                  
                     How may the Poles height be knowne by the Globe?
                     THere are diuers waies to finde the Poles height by the Globe, aſwell
from the Meridian as vpon the ſame, but ſith before I haue ſufficiently
taught how by the Sunnes Meridian altitude, the Poles height may bee
found, I will therefore in this place ſpeake no further thereof, but for the other
kindes it may be knowne as followeth.
                  
                  
                     How by the Sunnes riſing or ſetting, the Poles height
may be knowne.
                     BY your Compaſſe of variation, or ſome magneticall inſtrument, obſerue
at the ſunne riſing, vpon what degree of the Horizon the center toucheth,
according to the true horizontall poſition of the Magnet, all variation dulye
conſidered, that being knowne, ſearche in the tables of the Ephimerides, for
the Sunnes place in the Ecliptick, at the time of your obſeruation, then
bring that place or degree of the Ecliptick wherein you finde the Sunne to
be, to the Horizon, and moue that Meridian of the Globe as occaſion requireth,
vntill that obſerued degree of the Horizon and the Sunnes place in the
Ecliptick doe iuſtly touch together, for then is the Pole in his due Eleuation,

as by the interſection of the Horizon and Meridian may appeare, in like
ſorte you may finde the Poles altitude, by any knowne fixed Starre in the
Horizon.
                  
                  
                     To finde the poles height by the Sunne, vpon any point
of the Compaſſe.
                     BY the Compaſſe of variation, rectified to the true horizontall poſition,
obſerue the Sunne vntill he come to any point thereof at your pleaſure,
and at the ſame inſtant take the ſunnes height from the Horizon, then bring
the Quarta altitudo to that point of the Compaſſe vpon the Horizon of the
Globe where you obſerued the Sunne to be, there holding the Quarta altitudo
ſtedye, moue the Globe vntill you bring the degree of the Ecliptitk
(wherein the Sunne is at the time of your obſeruation) vnto the edge of the
Quarta altitudo, if it fall vpon that degree of altitude as was the Sunnes
obſerued height, then doth the Pole ſtand to his true Eleuation, but if it agree
not, you muſt eleuate or depreſſe the Pole as occaſion requireth, rectifying
the Zenith anſwerable thereunto. And againe make triall as at the
firſt, bringing the place of the Sunne to the Quarta altitudo, and ſetting the
ſame vpon the obſerued point of the Compaſſe, vntill it agree in all reſpects
with your obſeruation, and then the Meridian ſheweth in his interſection
with the Horizon, the Eleuation of the Pole from the Horizon.
                  
                  
                     To finde the Poles height by any giuen Azumuth by the Sunne
being aboue the Horizon.
                     BY your magneticall inſtrument, or Compas of variation obſerue the azumuth
of the Sunne at any time in the forenoone, or afternoone, the neerer
the Sun is to the Horizon, the better ſhalbe your obſeruation, and at the
ſame inſtant take the height of ye Sun from the Horizon, keep theſe 2. numbers
in memory, and note that the Azumuth be obſerued according to the true
poſition of the Horizon, by hauing good regarde to the variation of ye compas,
then bring the Quarta altitudo to the place of the Sun in the Ecliptick, and
ſet that degree of the Sunnes place in the Ecliptick vpon the obſerued degree
of altitude by the graduation of the Quarta altitudo, and if the end
thereof at the ſame inſtant doe fall right vpon the obſerued degree of Azumuth,
then is the Pole in his due Eleuation: if not, then raiſe or lay the
Pole as occaſion requireth, alwaies regarding that you place the Zenith anſwerable
to the Poles altitude, and then againe bring the Sunnes place to
his altitude vpon the Quarta altitudo, and looke againe whether the end
thereof doe touch the obſerued degree of Azumuth vpon the Horizon, if not,
you muſt proſecute this order, vntill at one inſtant the place of the Sunne
be vpon his true almicanter, by the edge of the Quarta altitudo, and that the
end of the quarta altitudo doe alſo touch the obſerued degree of Azumuth

vpon the Horizon, for then is the Pole in his true eleuation, as by the Meridian
and Horizon will appeare.
                  
                  
                     To finde the Poles height by the Sunne, by any two giuen azumuths
and altitudes, not regarding the true horizontal
poſition or nedles variations.
                     BEcauſe there may great errors be committed in the former obſeruations
vnleſſe the Compaſſe be perfectly well rectified, ſo as it may reſpect the
true partes or diſtinctions of the Horizon, it is not amiſſe to enforme you
how without regarde of variation, the Poles height may be found.
                     Therefore by your Magneticall inſtrument or Compaſſe of variation obſerue
the Sunnes azumuth, without regarde of the true horizontall poſition,
and at the ſame inſtant obſerue alſo his altitude from the Horizon, keepe
thoſe two numbers in memory. then after the Sunne hath moued a point or
two points of the Compaſſe more leſſe at your diſcretion, obſerue again his
azumuth and altitude as the firſt, then conſider the arke of the Horizon
through which the Sunne hath moued betweene theſe two obſeruations, for
by the 2. obſeruations of the Sunnes altitude, and by the degrees of Azumuth
through which the Sunne hath moued, the Poles height is thus
knowne: Firſt ſet the Globe to the eleuation of the place wherein you are
as neere as you can geſſe, and bring the Zenith to the like latitude from the
Equator, as the Poles eleuation is from the Horizon, then bring the Quarta
altitudo to the place of the Sunne vpon the Ecliptick, for the time of
your obſeruation, there place the Sunne vpon the firſt obſerued altitude by
the degrees of the quarta altitudo, and note the degree of the Horizon which
the Quarta altitudo then toucheth: this done, bring the Sunnes place to
the ſecond obſerued altitude, by mouing the Quarta altitudo and the Globe
vntill the degree of the Sunnes place in the Ecliptick and the degree of his
altitude vpon the Quarta altitudo doe meete. Then againe conſider the degree
of the horizon which the end of the Quarta altitudo toucheth, and note
the Arke of the Horizon contained betweene your 2. obſeruations, of how
many degrees it conſiſteth, if it agree with the obſeruations made by your
Magneticall inſtrument, then doth the Pole ſtand in his true altitude, if not
you muſt either raiſe or depreſſe the Pole, and againe proſecute the former
practiſe, vntill you finde ſuch azumuths and altitudes vpon the Globe, as you
found by your Magneticall obſeruations, for then the Pole doth ſtand in
his true altitude, and then doth alſo appeare the true azumuth of both your
obſeruations, which if it agree not with your Compas, then is your compas
varied, and may heereby be corrected, ſo that this doth not onely giue the
Poles height, but alſo the true horizontall poſition without error.
                  
                  
                     
                     To finde the Poles height by taking the Sunnes altitude aboue the Horizon,
ſo that the preciſe time of any ſuch obſeruation
be knowne.
                     IF you deſire at any time of the day to know the Poles height, as at 8, 9, or
10. of the clocke, &c. marke diligently the time of your obſeruation, at
what inſtant you doe obſerue the Sunnes altitude from the Horizon, the
time and altitude thus knowne, bring that place of the Ecliptik wherin the
Sunne is at the time of your obſeruation directly vnder the Meridian, there
holding the Globe ſtedye, bring the Index of the Ciclus horarius to the
hower of 12, or noone, then moue the Globe vntill the Index come to the
hower of your obſeruation, there holde the Globe ſtedy, then bring the quarta
altitudo to the place of the Sunne in the Ecliptick, if it agree with your
obſerued altitude, then doth the Pole ſtand in his true eleuation, if not, moue
the Meridian by raiſing or depreſſing ye pole as occaſion requireth, vntill you
bring the altitude & the hower to agree, and then you haue the Poles height,
and by the end of the quarta altitudo doth alſo appere the degree of azumuth,
wherupon the Sunne was at the time of your obſeruation, and note that in
rayſing or depreſſing the Pole of the Globe, you muſt alſo place the Zenith ſo
farre from the Equinoctiall, as the Pole is from the Horizon, for this is a
generall rule, that ſo much as the Pole is eleuated from the Horizon, ſo much
is the latitude of the Zenith from the Equator, therefore you muſt alwaies
bring the Zenith and altitude to agree, whenſoeuer you alter the Eleuation
be it neuer ſo little.
                  
                  
                     To finde the Poles height by any two obſeruations of the Sunnes altitude,
not regarding the hower of the day, or any horizontall poſition
of the Magnet, ſo that you know the diſtance of
time between the ſaid obſeruations.
                     ALthough there be ſome difficultie in giuing the true time of any obſeruations
at the Sea, by reaſon of the alteration of Horizons, and of the
needles variation, yet it is a matter moſt eaſie by a good hower Glaſſe,
halfe hower Glaſſe, and minute Glaſſe, to meaſure the diſtance of time betweene
any two obſerued altitudes, you may therefore vpon that ground
finde the Poles height with great facilitie at any time, by the Sunne or any
fixed Starre, in this ſorte.
                     Conſider in what place of the Ecliptick the Sunne is at the time of your
obſeruation, bring that place to the Meridian, there with a black leade by
mouing the Globe deſcribe a perallell to the Equator, anſwerable to the
Sunnes diurnall motion and declination for the ſame inſtant, then if betweene
your obſeruations there be an hower, two howers, more or leſſe at
your pleaſure, as by your running glaſſes may be knowne, you muſt allowe
for euery hower 15. d. of the Equator, for ſo much aſcendeth euery hower,

and for euery 4. minutes one degree, and for euery minute 1/4 of a degree, then
knowing by this order how many degrees the Sunne is moued betweene
your 2. obſeruations, you muſt vpon the perallell which you drawe make 2.
notes, ſo many degrees aſunder as the Sunne hath moued betweene your
obſeruations, which may be done in this ſorte: bring the place wherein the
Sunne is vnder the Meridian, and mark what degree of the Equator is then
vnder the Meridian, the Globe ſo ſtanding vpon your perallell cloſe by the
Meridian, make the firſt note or marke, then turne the Globe, and reckon the
degrees of the Equator that paſſe vnder the Meridian, vntill ſo many be paſt
as was your obſeruation, there againe holde the Globe ſtedie, and vpon your
perallell cloſe by the Meridian, make your ſecond note or marke, then knowing
the Sunnes altitude at both the obſeruations, you muſt bring the Quarta
altitudo to the firſt note made vpon your perallell, there holding the globe
ſtedie, the Quarta altitudo and marke agreeing in altitude, bring the quarta
altitudo to the ſecond note, if that doe alſo agree with your former obſerued
altitude, then doth the Globe ſtand in his true Eleuation: if not, you
muſt eleuate or depreſſe the Pole by diſcretion, vntill you bring the two obserued
altitudes of the Sunne, to agree with the two markes which you
made vpon your deſcribed perallell, and then is the Pole at his true eleuation:
and what is ſpoken of the Sunne, the like may be done by any knowne
fixed Starre. I holde this concluſion to be very neceſſary, pleaſant, and eaſie
for the Seamans purpoſe.
                  
                  
                     To finde the true place of the Sunne in the Ecliptick
at all times.
                     BEcauſe it is moſt neceſſarily required in the former practiſes, that the
Sunnes true place in the Ecliptick be at all times knowne, I thinke it
not amiſſe to enforme you how the ſame may be done.
                     The cheefeſt and moſt certaine meane to know the ſame, is by the tables
of the Ephemerides, but thoſe tables wanting, the Seaman may in this ſorte
doe it: by the Regiment ſeeke out the declination of the Sunne, that being
knowne, bring the Zenith vpon the Meridian, ſo many degrees and minutes
from the Equator as is the Sunnes declination, then moue the Globe
vntill ſome degree of the Ecliptick doe come directly vnder the point of the
Zenith, for that is the Sunnes place: you muſt further conſider, whether it
be betweene March and Inne, for then you muſt finde the degree in that
quarter of the Ecliptick, contained betweene ♈ and ♋: if it be betweene
Iune and September, you muſt finde the degree in that quarter of the ecliptick
contained betweene ♋ and ♎, &c. of the reſt.
                     It may alſo be knowne vpon the Horizon of the Globe by a Calender
Circle that is there deſcribed, in this ſorte: firſt ſearch the day of your moneth
wherein you deſire to know the Sunnes declination, and directly againſt

the ſame degree which ſtandeth for that day, doth alſo ſtand the degree
of the Zodiac wherein the Sunne is at the ſame time, in a circle repreſenting
the Zodiac, and deſcribed vpon the Horizon.
                     But if it be Leap yeere, you muſt not take the preciſe day of the moneth
wherein you ſeeke the Sunnes place, but the next day following, and againſt
that day ſeeke the declination.
                  
                  
                     To finde the Poles height by any two knowne fixed Starres.
                     WHen you ſee any 2. fixed Starres which you know to be both at
one inſtant in the Horizon, vpon your Globe ſearche for thoſe
Starres, and bring one of them to touch the Horizon of the Globe, if the other
doe not likewiſe touch the Horizon, you muſt raiſe or depreſſe the Pole
by diſcreete mouing of the Meridian, vntill you bring both thoſe Starres to
be at one inſtant in the Horizon, for then the Globe doth ſtand to his true eleuation.
                  
                  
                     To finde the Poles height by any two knowne fixed Starres,
an other way.
                     WHen you ſee any fixed Starre that you know to be in the Horizon,
you muſt preſentlye take the height of ſome other Starre, that
you likewiſe know, before the firſt be riſen from the Horizon, then vpon your
Globe ſearch for the Starre that you obſerued in the horizon, bring that ſtar
to ye horizon of the Globe, there holding the Globe ſtedy, bring the quarta altitudo
to the other Starre, whoſe altitude you obſerued, if it agree vpon the
Quarta altitudo with the obſerued altitude, then the Globe doth ſtand to
his true eleuation, if not, you muſt by diſcretion raiſe or lay the Pole vntill
you finde the one Starre in the Horizon, and the other vpon his true obſerued
altitude, for then the Pole doth ſtand to his true eleuation.
                  
                  
                     To finde the Poles height at all times by any 2. knowne
fixed Starres.
                     WIth your croſſe ſtaffe take the diſtance of any 2. ſtarres from your
Zenith, which muſt be done with as much expedition as may be,
their diſtances ſo know, with a paire of Compaſſes meaſure ſo many degrees
vpon the Equator, as is the diſtance of the firſt obſerued Starre, with an other
paire of Compaſſes doe the like for the ſecond obſerued Starre, vpon the
firſt Starre ſet one point of the Compaſſes that tooke his diſtance, and vpon
the ſecond Starre ſet likewiſe one foote of the Compaſſes that tooke his diſtance,
bring the other 2. feete of the Compaſſes to meet together, there make
a marke, for that is the perallell wherin you be, and that marke is the Zenith,
bring it to the Meridian by mouing the Globe, and there will appeere the
latitude deſired, for ſo many degrees and minutes as that marke is from the
Equator, ſo much is the Pole eleuated aboue the Horizon. This concluſion
the Seaman ought to haue in good eſteeme.
                  
                  
                     
                     To know the preciſe hower at all times, by the Sunne.
                     FOr the finding of the hower of the day by the Globe, it is neceſſary that
the Poles height be firſt knowne, therefore ſet the Pole to his true eleuation,
and the Zenith to his anſwerable latitude, then bring the place of the
Sunne in the Ecliptick vnder the Meridian, there holding the Globe ſtedy,
place the Index of the Ciclus horarius vpon 12. of the clocke or Noone, your
Globe thus ordered, then with your croſſe ſtaffe take the Sunnes height
from the Horizon, that being knowne, you muſt bring the place of the Sun
to the Quarta altitudo, by mouing the Globe and Quarta altitudo vntil the
place of the Sunne doe agree with the obſerued altitude, there holding the
Globe that he moue not, the Index doth ſhew vpon the Ciclus horarius, the
true hower deſired.
                  
                  
                     To finde the hower of the night by any knowne fixed starre.
                     SEt the Globe to his true altitude, and the Zenith to his anſwerable latitude,
you muſt alſo place the Index of the Ciclus horarius vpon the hower
of 12. or noone, by bringing the Sunnes place vnder the Meridian, &c.
as before you did by the Sunne, then take the height of any knowne fixed
Starre, bring that Starre to the Quarta altitudo, by mouing the Globe and
Quarta altitudo vntill the Starre come to his true obſerued altitude, there
holding the Globe ſtedie, the Index doth ſhew vpon the Ciclus horarius the
true time of your obſeruation.
                  
                  
                     To know the length of the daies and nights, at all times, and in all places.
                     THe place and time being giuen wherein you deſire to know the length of
the day or night, firſt ſet the Globe to his true altitude for the place, then
ſearch the place of the Sunne in the Ecliptick, for the time wherein you
ſeeke the daies length, bring that place of the Sunne vnder the Meridian,
there holding the Globe that he moue not, place the Index of the Ciclus horarius
vpon the hower of 12. or noone, then turne the Globe vntil you bring
the place of Sun to touch the Eaſt part of the horizon, there holding the
Globe, you ſhall ſee by the Index of the cyclus horarius, the true time of the
Sunnes riſing, then bring the place of the Sunne to the Weſt parte of the
Horizon, and you ſhall there ſee the true time of the Sunnes ſetting, wherby
the length of the day day and night doth moſt plainely appeere. And this may
ſuffiſe for the vſe of the Globe, neceſſary for the Seamans purpoſe
                     I might heere recite the triple riſing and ſetting of the Sarres, Coſmice,
Acronyce, and Heliace, the aſcentions right and oblique, the dawning and
twylight, howers equall and vnequall ordenary and planetary, daies naturall
and artificiall, the triple riſing of the Sunne Equinoctiall and Solſticiall,
Circles of poſition with their vſe and nature, the horoſcope and domifying
diſtinctions of the heauens, the planets, their motions, retrogradiations,
and excontricitie of their orbes, herologie, and many other moſt pleaſant concluſions:

but becauſe they doe in no ſort appertaine to the Seamans vſe, 
                           •
                        
I therfore omit them, as matters more troubleſome then profit able for him,
expecting from ſome learned Mathematician a worke of worthy eſteeme,
wherein theſe and many other excellent concluſions ſhall by running demonſtration
be made knowne vnto vs.
                  
                  
                     Of the Croſſe ſtaffe and his demonſtration.
                     THe Croſſe ſtaffe is an artificiall quadrant, geometrically proiected into
that forme as an inſtrument of greateſt eaſe and exacteſt vſe in Nauigation,
by which in any naturall diſturbance of wether (the Sunne or Starres
appeering) the Poles height may be knowne, when the Aſtrolabie or quadrant
are not to be vſed. Conueying the vſe of the quadrant from the beame
of the Sunne to the beame of the eye, for whereas by the quadrant the Sun
beame perceiuing the Dioptra ſheweth his height, ſo by the Croſſe ſtaffe the
beame of the eye conueyed to the Sunne or Starre, doth likewiſe giue their
height. The demonſtration whereof is thus.
                     Make a plaine ſquare conſiſting of 4. right angles, as is the ſquare,
I. o. h. n. the angle I. ſhalbe aſſigned the Center of the quadrant, where
placing one foote of your Compaſſes, ſtretch the other foote to the angle n.
and therewith deſcribe a quarter of a circle, as is the arke o. d. n. then from
the center I. to his oppoſite angle h. drawe a right lyne, by which lyne the
quadrant o. d. n. is deuided into 2. equall partes, in the point d. deuide the
arke d. n. into 90. equall partes, drawing from the center I. lines through euery
of thoſe diuiſions touching in the line n. h. as by this figure appeareth:
then conſider the length of your tranſuerſary, and take halfe thereof laying it
vpon the lyne I. o. in the point S. from that point S. drawe a perallell to the
lyne I. o. as is the lyne S. Y. and as that lyne doth interſect the diuiſions of
she halfe quadrant, ſo ſhalbe the degrees of the croſſe ſtaffe, and note that the
ſides of the ſqare, mnſt be as long as the ſtaffe that is to be graduated.
                     
                        
                        
                        
                     
                     Becauſe the ſtaffe ſhould be of vnreaſonable length to contain more then
60. degrees, the rfore to keepe him in due forme for the eaſe of his vſe, and
that the complement of 90. degrees ſhould be contained vpon the ſtaffe, the

other 30. are artificially proiected vpon the tranſiterſary, as by this demonſtration
appereth, and in this ſort conſider the length of your ſtaffe from that
point S, to the laſt interſection which endeth in 30. degrees, lay downe the
length vpon the line I. h. at the point v. from that point drawe a right line
cutting the line I. h. to right angles, as is the line v. a. being iuſt the length
of halfe the tranſuerſary: then deuide the arke o. d. into 45. equall partes,
accompting from the point d. to te point o. then from the angle I. drawe
right lines to the firſt 15. of thoſe partes, and as thoſe lines doe cut the lyne
v. a. ſo muſt the tranſuerſary be graduated on both his partes, whereunto
banes being framed, your ſtaffe is finiſhed to your vſe.
                     THere is a ſtaffe of another proiection, which I finde by practiſe to be an
inſtrument of very great eaſe, and certaintie at the Sea, the Sunne not
being more then 45. degrees aboue the Horizon, whoſe vſe is contrary to
the other before demonſtrated, for by this ſtaffe the beame of the Sunne ſhadowing
vpon the tranſuerſary, doth thereby giue the height moſt preciſelye,
not regarding how to place the Center of the ſtaffe to the eye, for the correction
of the parrallax of the fight, and without looking vpon the Sun, whoſe
demonſtration is thus.
                     Drawe 2. right lines, cutting ech other at right angles, as doe the lines
d. v and d. s. vpon the angle d. deſcribe a quarter circle, as is the arke v. s.
deuide that quadrant into 2. equall partes by the line d. n. cutting the quadrant
in the point h. deuide the arke s. h. into 45. equall partes or degrees,
drawing lines from the center d. to euery of thoſe diuiſions, then from the
point I. being the third parte of the line d. s. vpon the center d. deſcribe an ark
of a circle, as is the arke I. o. which is for the tranſuerſary of this ſtaffe, and
and the line d. s. is for the ſtaffe, then from the point o. where the vpper ende
of the tranſurſary toucheth the line d. n. drawe a perallell to the line d. s. as
is the lyne o. y. and as that line doth cut the lines drawne from the center d.
ſo muſt the ſtaffe d. s. by graduated, laying it vpon the line o. y. putting that
parte of the ſtaffe where the point I. toucheth, vpon the point o. and then from
the point I. lay downe the degrees, as are the interſections vpon the line o. y.
and ſo is the ſtaffe graduated.
                     
                        
                        
                        
                     
                     The tranſuerſary at the point i. muſt haue an artificiall hole made for the
ſtaffe to runne in, as other ſlaues haue, alſo there muſt be a plate of
braſſe with a ſoccat to be ſet to the center of the ſtaffe, as is the figure a. in the

midſt whereof there muſt be a ſlitte, through which the ſight muſt be conueyed
to the Horizon, and this plate muſt receiue the ſhadowe of the tranſuerſary,
and ſo the ſtaffe is finiſhed.
                  
                  
                     How is the vſe of this ſtaffe?
                     THe vſe of this ſtaffe is altogether contrary to the other, for the center of
this ſtaffe where the braſſe plate is faſtned, muſt be turned to that parte
of the Horizon which is from the Sunne, and with your backe toward the
Sunne, by the lower edge of the halfe croſſe, and through the ſlitte of the
plate you muſt direct your ſight onely to the Horizon, and then mouing the
tranſuerſary as occaſion requireth, vntil the ſhadowe of your upper edge of
the tranſuerſary doe fall directly vpon the ſaide ſlitte or long hole, and alſo at
the ſame inſtant you ſee the Horizon through the ſlitte, and then the tranſuerſary
ſheweth the height deſired.
                     
                     FInding by practiſe the eccellencye of the Croſſe ſtaffe aboue all other
inſtruments to ſatiſfie the Seamans expectation, and alſo knowing that

thoſe inſtruments whoſe degrees are of largeſt capacitie, are inſtruments of
moſt certaintie. I haue very carefully laboured to ſearch a good and demonſtrable
meane how a Croſſe ſtaffe might be proiected, not onely to contayne
large degrees, but alſo to auoide the vncertaintie of the ſight, by diſorderlye
placing of the ſtaffe to the eye, which demonſtration I haue found, and haue
had the inſtrument in practiſe, as well vnder the Sunne, as in our climates:
but becauſe it hath a large demonſtration with manifolde vſes, I heere omit
to manifeſt the ſame, purpoſing to write a perticular treatiſe therof, notwithſtanding
his forme and vſe, by picture I haue thought good to expreſſe.
                     THis ſtaffe is a yard long, hauing 2. halfe, croſſes, the one circular, the
other ſtraight, the longeſt not 14. inches, yet this ſtaffe doth contain the
whole 90. degrees, the ſhorteſt degree being an inch and 3/4 long, wherin the
minutes are perticularly and very ſenſibly laid downe, by which ſtaffe not regarding
the parallar of your fight, nor looking vpon the Sunne, but onelye
vpon the Horizon, the Sunnes height is moſt preciſely knowne, as well and
as eaſily in the Zenith, as in any other part of the Heauen. Then which inſtrument
(in my opinion) the Seaman ſhall not finde any ſo good, and in all
Clymates of ſo great certaintie, the inuention and demonſtration whereof, I
may boldly chalenge to appertain vnto my ſelfe be (as portion of the talent
which God hath beſtowed vpon me) I hope without abuſe or offence to any.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     Of the Quadrant.
                     A Quadrant is the fourth part of a circle, containing 90 degrees, and repreſenteth
the diſtance betweene the Horizon and Zenith, being an excellent
inſtrument vpon the ſhore, to perfourme any Aſtconomicall obſeruations,
but for a Seaman it is to no purpoſe: and although there may be very
much written of the commodious and excellent vſes of the Quadrant, yet
not being an apt inſtrument for Sea obſeruations, it ſhall be from my purpoſe
to write further thereof, and therefore the onelye laying downe of his
forme may at this preſent ſuffiſe.
                     
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     Of the Aſtrolabie.
                     AN Aſtrolabie is the repreſentation of a great circle, containing foure
quadrants, or 360. degrees, which inſtrument hath been in long vſe among
Seamen, and is an excellent inſtrument being rightly underſtoode
and ordered, but ſith the vnlgare Aſtrolabie with his vſe is to euery Seaman
ſufficiently knowne, it ſhould be vaine labour for me to lay downe his vſe
and demonſtration: therefore by his fourme it ſhall ſuffiſe to expreſſe him.
                     
                        
                        
                     
                     THere hath been great paines taken by many for the enlarging of the degrees
contained in an Aſtrolabie, among which there is a proiection to
conueye the degrees of a quadrant into the concauery of a Aſtrolabie, wherby
thoſe degrees ſhalbe double, to any other Aſtrolabie of the ſame quantitie,
ſo that the Sunne beame pearcing a hole made in the ſide of the Aſtrolabie,
is thereby caried to the degrees noted, in the oppoſite concaue parte, as
by his forme may appere.
                     Also my ſelfe labouring in the ſame matter, haue found a meane whereby
an Ark of quadrant whoſe ſide is 10. foote, may be conueied into an Aſtrolabie
of 10. inches diameter, whoſe dioptra ſhall cut his lymbe to right angles,
and ſhall perfourme the complement of 90 degrees, as amply and as effectually
as by the quadrant it may in any ſort be done.
                     Whoſe demonſtration, together with the demonſtration of my Staffe, A
purpose God willing, at large to manifeſt. But there can be no inuention
that can eſtabliſh the certaintie of the vſe of either Quadrant or Aſtrolabie at
the Sea, for vnleſſe it be in very ſmoothe water, there can be no certaintie of

any obſeruation by thoſe inſtruments, whereby the Seaman may reſt aſſured
of the la. which he ſeeketh, but the obſeruations made by the croſſe ſtaffe,
are without all diſtruſt of errour, and therfore no inſtrument may compare
with the excellencie of the croſſe ſtaffe for the Seamans vſe.
                     
                  
                  FINIS.
               
            
            
               
                  Imprinted at London at the three Cranes
in the Vintree, by Thomas
Dawſon. 1595.
                  
               
            
         
      
   