
      
         
            
            
            
THe bearer hereof, Chriſtopher Angell, a Greeke borne in Peloponneſus, hauing been perſecuted by the Turkes for his Religion, which by his Letters teſtimoniall appeareth, and for that cauſe was forced to leaue his Countrey, came to Cambridge about Whitſontide 1608. and finding ſome releife, hath continued vnto the day of the date hereof. During which time, his manner of life hath been very honeſt and ſtudious. Now, becauſe he could not here haue his health, being deſirous to trauell abroad into the Country, hee hath requeſted theſe our letters for a Teſtimonie of his honeſt behauiour, which we haue willingly granted vnto him, and ſet to our hands, this tenth of May. 1610.
            
            
               
                  
                     Ioha. Duport. Vicecan.
                     Thomas Comber Trinitatis Coll.
                     Samuel Brooke Trin. Coll.
                     Geruaſe Nid.
                     Nath. Taylor.
                     Ioſua Blaxton.
                  
               
            
         
         
            To the Clergie and others of the Dioces of Sarum.
            WHereas the bearer hereof, Chriſtopher Angelus a poore Grecian (whom wee haue known in the Vniuerſitie of Oxford well and honeſtly to behaue himſelfe towards all men) being in great want, and hauing not wherewith to ſupply the ſame, requeſted our Letters to ſtirre vp the hearts of thoſe that ſhall be ready to commiſerate his caſe. Theſe are therefore to commend him and his charitable ſuite to your Chriſtian beneuolence, in ſuſtayning of whom you ſhall doe very wel: and ſo much the more, becauſe he hath bin perſecuted for his Religion, as by his Letters Teſtimoniall plainly appeareth. Thus far you well.
            
               From our Palace at Sarum. 
                  15. Die Auguſti. 1616.
                
               Ro. Sarum.
            
         
         
            THe bearer hereof, Chriſtopher Angell, a Greeke, borne in Peloponneſus, hauing been perſecuted by the Turkes for his religion, as by his Letters Teſtimoniall appeares, and for that cauſe forced to leaue his Country, came to Oxford about Whitſontide 1610. and finding reliefe, hath continued vnto the day of the date hereof, during which time, his manner of life hath beene quiet, honeſt, and ſtudious. And becauſe he is weary, and deſirous to viſit his friends in England, he hath requeſted theſe our Letters Teſtimoniall of his honeſt behauiour amongſt vs, which we haue willingly granted vnto him, and thereunto ſet our hands this 20. of March, An. Dom. 1617.
            
            
               
                  
                     Arthur Bath and Wells, Vicean. Oxon.
                     R. Kilby.
                     R. Kettell.
                     William Goodwin.
                     Sebaſtian Benefield.
                     William Langton.
                     Richard Moket.
                     Iohn Prideaux.
                     Tho. Anyan.
                     Theod. Price.
                     Io. Wilkinſon.
                     Tho. Iames.
                     Samuel Radeclif.
                     Ant. Blincowe.
                     Griffith Powell.
                     Fr. Greuile.
                  
               
            
         
      
   