
      
         
            
            
            Foure Birds OF Noahs Arke: Viz.

                  1. The DOVE.
                  2. The EAGLE.
                  3. The PELLICAN.
                  4. The PHOENIX.
               
            
            
               The Doue bringeth Comfort.
               The Eagle bringeth Courage.
               The Pellican bringeth Health.
               The Phoenix bringeth Life.
            
            Vigilate & Orate.
            LONDON, Printed by H. B. for Nathaniel Butter, and are to be sold at his shop neere S. Austins Gate. 1609.
         
         
            
            
            A Table shewing the contents of all the foure Bookes.
            
               
                  The Doue.
                  1. A Prayer for a child before hee goeth to his studie, or to schoole.
                  fol. 4.
                  2. A Prayer for a

prentise going to his labour.
                  fol 8.
                  3. A Prayer for him that buies and selles.
                  fol. 12
                  4. A Prayer for a mayd-seruant.
                  fol. 17.
                  5. A Prayer for a Seruing man.
                  fol. 20.
                  6. A Prayer for a Husbandman.
                  fol. 22.
                  7. A Prayer for a marriner going to Sea.
                  fol. 25.
                  8. A Prayer for a marriner at Sea in a storme.
                  fol. 28.
                  9. A Thankesgiuing for a mariner being safelie

landed.
                  fol. 31.
                  10. A Payer for a Soldier going to a battell.
                  fol. 34.
                  11. A Thankesgiuing for a Soldier after victorie.
                  fol. 36.
                  12. A Prayer for a womā great with child.
                  fo. 38.
                  13. A Prayer for a midwife.
                  fol 42.
                  14. A Thankesgiuing after a womans deliuerie.
                  fol. 44.
                  15 A Prayer for a sicke man, to be said by himselfe.
                  fol. 46.
                  16 A Prayer to bee said by them that visit

the sicke.
                  fol. 50
                  17. A Prayer for a prisoner.
                  fol. 53.
                  18 A Prayer for a Gally-slaue.
                  fol. 57.
                  19 A Prayer for men that worke in dangerous works, as Coale-pits, &c.
                  fol 60.
                  20. A Prayer for a poore man.
                  fol. 63.
               
               FINIS.
            
            
               
               
                  The Pellican.
                  THe Pellican a figure of Christ vpon the Crosse.
                  fol. 1.
                  Christ the Pellican dies to kill sinne.
                  fol. 6.
                  1 A Prayer for the morning.
                  fol. 13.
                  2 A Prayer against pride.
                  fol. 16
                  3 A Prayer against enuie.
                  fol. 22
                  4 A Prayer against

wrath.
                  fol. 26.
                  5 A Prayer against sloth.
                  fol. 29.
                  6 A Prayer against couetousnes.
                  fol. 33.
                  7 A Prayer against gluttony.
                  fol. 37.
                  8 A Prayer against lust.
                  fol. 40.
                  9 A Prayer against the temptation of the Diuel.
                  fol 65.
                  10 A Prayer for the euening.
                  fol. 69.
               
               FINIS.
            
            
               
               
                  The Phoenix.
                  THe Phoenix a figure of Christ.
                  
                  1. A Thankesgiuing for all those benefits which wee reape by the death of Christ.
                  fol. 1.
                  2. A Thankesgiuing for all those benefits which wee reape by the buriall of Christ.
                  fol. 8.
                  3. A Thankesgiuing for all the benefits which wee reape by the

resurrection of Christ.
                  fol. 14.
                  4. A Thankesgiuing for all those benefits which wee reape by the ascension of Christ.
                  fol. 19.
                  5. A Thankesgiuing for all those benefits which we are to receiue by Christs comming in glorie.
                  fol. 24.
                  Also, other short and pitihe sentences, fit to be applied to those purposes for which the former Prayers are made.
                  
               
               FINIS.
            
            
               
               
                  The Eagle.
                  1. A Prayer made by the late Queene Elizabeth.
                  
                  fol. 1.
                  2. A Prayer for the King.
                  fol. 4.
                  3. A Prayer for Qu. Anne.
                  
                  fol. 8.
                  4. A Prayer for Prince Henry, Prince of Wales.
                  fol. 12.
                  5. A Prayer for the Counsell.
                  fol. 16.
                  6. A Prayer for the

Nobilitie.
                  fol. 18.
                  7. A Prayer for the Church.
                  fol. 20.
                  8. A Prayer for the Clergie.
                  fol▪ 22
                  9. A Prayer for the Iudges of the land.
                  fol. 25.
                  10. A Prayer for the Court.
                  fol. 27.
                  11. A Prayer for the Citie.
                  fol. 29.
                  12. A Prayer for the Countrie.
                  fol. 32.
                  13. A Prayer for a Magistrate.
                  fol. 34.
                  14. A Prayer for a Lawyer.
                  fol. 37.
                  15. A Prayer for the 2. Vniuersities.
                  fol. 39
                  
                     16. A Prayer for confusion of traitors
                  fo. 42.
                  17. A Prayer in time of ciuill warre.
                  fol. 45.
                  18. A Prayer to stay the pestilence.
                  fol. 48.
                  19. A Prayer in time of Famine.
                  fol. 51.
                  20. A Prayer in the time of persecution.
                  fol. 53.
               
               FINIS.
            
         
         
            
            
            To the Religious, Vertuous, and noble Gentleman, Sir Thomas Smith Knight; the happines of both worlds, this present, and that to come.
            
               SIR, I present vnto your view, a book of prayers; not that you neede my weake instructions: for you are knowne to be a good proficient in Gods Schoole, and haue more of this heauenly language in you by heart, then I can teach you by precept. The tree of sound Religion flourisheth

in your bosome, and beareth (both in the eie of man (outwardly) and (inwardly) to God) much, and very much good fruit. You thereby proue your selfe a confirmed Christian: and shall giue further testimonie of your being so, if you incourage others (that are weake) to feed vpon this milke for babes, by tasting of it your selfe. They (by you) shall be led into the path of goodnes, if you but vouchsafe to walk out before them, and commend the way. Foure Birds (of Noahs Arke) haue taken foure seueral flights. The Doue (which is the first) flies to your hand; not by chance,

but vpon good choice, as knowing you to be a Doue your selfe. The badge which a Doue weares, is innocence: and by wearing that Christian Armor, you defended your selfe, and returned safe out of the Lions denne with Daniel, whē it was thought you should haue bin deuoured. God hath since heaped Graces on your head, and by the hands of his Anointed hath rewarded you with deserued honours, in the selfe same place, into which you were throwne to be swallowed vp by destructiō. Receiue therfore (I beseech you) a Doue, sithence her harmeles & spotles wings haue caried

you ouer such great danger to so great happines.
            In her bill she brings a branch, vpon which growes seueral sorts of fruit, & al of thē wholsome for the soule. You are the first to whose hād they are offred: if any others gather thē after you, & find in them the sweetnes of the food of life, they shall (as I) pray to God, that his blessings may stil more & more be multiplied so long vpon you, til the last garlād which he keepes in store for those that run their race (here) wel, may be to you a crown of heauenly blessednes.
            
               Euer bounden to your worship.
            
         
         
            
            To the Reader.
            
               REader, I haue for thy comfort sent vnto thee 4. Birds of Noahs Ark, vpon foure seuerall messages: and haue changed the notes of those Birds voices into Prayers of different musicke, but all full of sweetnesse. Vnder the wings of the Doue, haue I put

Prayers, fitting the nature of the Doue, that is to say, simple Prayers, or such as are fitting the mouthes of yong & the meanest people: and for such blessings as they haue most need of. The Eagle soares more high, & in his beake beareth vp to heauen supplications in behalfe of Kings and Rulers. The Pellican carieth the figure of our Redeemer on the crosse, who shed his blood to nourish vs (hee being the right Pellican): with the drops of which blood, haue I writ Prayers against

all those deadly & capitall sinnes, to wash out whose foulenes our Sauiour suffered that ignominious death. And lastly, in the spiced nest of the Phoenix (in which Bird likewise is figured Christ risen againe) shalt thou find a book written ful of Thanks & Wishes: of thankes, for those benefits which grow vnto vs by Christs death and resurrection: of Wishes, that hee would in diuers gifts bestow those blessings vpon vs. Nothing that is set downe is tedious, because I had a care

of thy memorie Nothing is done twice, because thou mayst take delight in them. If thou art yong, here is pleasure for thee: if old, here is cōfort▪ if thou art poore, here is riches; if thou hast enough, here is more: vse this physicke wel, and liue well: runne this circle truely, and die wel: that is the goale: winne that, winne Heauen.
            Fare-well.
         
         
            
            What Prayer is.
            
               PRayer, is the language in which we talk to God: for when we read (the Booke) God speaketh to vs, but when we Pray, wee speake to him: It is therefore a dialogue between him and vs. It is that leader which Iacob saw ascending vp to the clouds, for by the staires of it do we climb vp to heauen. Prayer is the key that opens all the gates of heauen. It is the compasse by which we saile thither. It is the badge by which a Christian is knowen that he

serueth God. It is our best friend that speaketh to him in our behalfe. It is the eloquence that onely ouercommeth him. It is the musicke, that only charmes his anger to sleepe. It is our peace-maker, in the warres betweene God and vs. It is the sword of defence in the combat betweene vs and the diuell. It is the ship, in which if our soule sailes not, we perish. It is the anchor, at which we lie safe in the stormes of death. It is the balme that cureth the wounds of pouertie, of oppression, of imprisonment, of banishment, of despaire, of cares, of sorowes & of all calamities, that like diseases hang vpon our life. Such is Prayer, such armor must we put on if wee meane to winne Heauen.
         
      
      
         
            
               
                  
                  The Doue, compared to Prayer.
                  
                     THe Doue was the first Bird that being sent out of Noah his Arke, brought comfort to Noah: So Prayer being sent out of the Arke of our bodyes, is the onely and first bringer of comfort to vs from Heauen. The Doue went out twice ere it could finde an Oliue Branch, (which was the ensigne of

peace:) So our Prayers must flie vp againe and againe, and neuer leaue beating at the doores of Heauen, till they fetch from thence the Oliue-Branch of Gods mercie, in signe that wee are at peace with him, and that he hath pardoned our sins. The Doue no sooner broght that bough of good tidings into the Arke, but the vniuersall floud fell, and sunck into the bowels of the deepe: So no sooner doe our hearty Prayers pierce the bosome of the Lord Almightie, but the waters of his indignation shrinke away, melting to nothing like hilles of

Snowe, and the vniuersall deluge of sinne that floweth 40. dayes and nights togeather, (that is to say, euery houre, or all our life time) to drowne both soule and body, is driuen backe, & ebs into the bottomlesse gulfe of hell. The Doue is said to be without gall: Our Prayer must be without bitternesse, and not to the hurt of our neighbour (for such Prayers are curses) lest we pull down vengeance on our heads. Such was the Doue that Noah sent out of the Ark, with such wings let our Prayers carry vp our messages to Heauen.
                  
                     
                     1. A Prayer for a childe before he goeth to his study, or to schoole.
                     
                        O GOD, that art the fountaine of all wisedome, & founder of all learning: breathe into my soule the spirit of vnderstanding, that in my childhood I may learne, and (as I grow farther into yeres) may practise the study only of thee and of thy lawes. Feed me (O Lord) as babes

are fed, with the milke of thy holy word, that I may grow strōg in setting forth thy praises. Make me (O Iesus thou Son of God) one of those of whom thou speakekest thus, Suffer little children to come vnto mee, and forbid them not. And as thou hast promised that thy wonders shold be soū
                        ded foorth by the tongues of infants & sucking babes; so powre into my lips the waters of the well of life, that whatsoeuer I learne may bee to proclaime thy glorie. Polish thou my mind (O God) that it may shine bright in goodnesse: and that I may not defile or deface this weake temple of my body by corrupted

manners or leaud speeches; but so season my tongue that all the lessons which I take foorth, may seeme to be read to mee in thine owne schoole. Bee thou my Schoole-master to instruct mee, so shall I repeate the rules of true wisedome: keepe thou mee in feare of the rod of thy displeasure, so shall I bee sure to haue my name set in the booke of life. Make mee obedient to my Parents: dutiful to my Teachers: louing to my Schoole-fellowes: humble to my superiours; full of reuerence to old men: proud towards no man; & that I may win the loue of all men. Blesse mee, O Lord, this day:

guide my feete, direct my mind, sanctifie my studies, gouerne al my actions, preserue my body in health, my soule from vncleannesse. Graunt this, O my God, for thy Sonnes sake (Iesus Christ:) or if it bee thy pleasure to cut me off before night, and that this flower of my youth shall fade in all the beauty of it, yet make me (O my gratious Sheepheard) for one of thy Lambs, to whom thou wilt say, Come you blessed, & clothe mee in a white robe (of righteousnes) that I may be one of those singers, who shall cry to thee Allelluia. Amen.
                  
                  
                     
                     2. A Prayer for a prentice going to his labour.
                     O The builder of this world! (whose workemanship is to bee seene excellent euen in the frames of the least and basest creatures which thou hast set together:) Cast a gratious eye vpon mee, and lend me thy directing hand that the labours which this day I am to vndertake may prosper. Let me not (O God) goe about my busines with eye-seruice; but sithence thou hast ordained that (like poore Ioseph) I must enter into the state of a seruant, so humble my mind,

that I may perform with a cheereful willingnes whatsoeuer my master commands mee, and that all his commandements may be agreeable to the seruing of thee. Bestow vpon me thy grace that I may deale vprightly with all men, and that I may shew my selfe to him, who is set ouer mee (a Ruler) as I another day would desire to haue others behaue themselues to mee. Take away from him (that is, my master) all thoughts of crueltie, that like the children of Israel vnder the subiection of Pharaohs seruants, I may not be set to a taske aboue my strength: of if I be; stretch thou out my sinewes (O God) that I

may with vn-wearied limbs accomplish it. Fill my veynes with blood, that that I may goe thorow the hardest labours: sithence it is a law set downe by thy selfe, that I must earne my bread with the sweat of my owne browes. Giue mee courage to beginne: patience to goe forward: and abilitie to finish them. Cleanse my heart (O thou that art the fountaine of purity) from all falsehood, from all swearing, from all abuse of thy sacred Name, from all foule, loose and vnreuerend languages. Let my thoughts when I am alone bee of thee: let my mirth in company bee to sing Psalmes, and the arguments

of my talke onely touching the works of thy hand. Take sloth from my fingers, and drowsinesse from the lids of mine eye; whether I rise early, or lie downe late, so gladly let me doe it, as if my prentiship were to bee consumed in thy seruice. The glasse of my yeares shal thereby run out in pleasure, & I in the end shall be made free of that citie of thine, The heauenly Ierusalem; into whose fellowship, I beseech thee, to enfranchise & enrol me, and that after I haue faithfully laboured six dayes of my life here vpon earth, I may vpon the seuenth rest in thy euerlasting Sabbath. Amen.
                  
                  
                     
                     3. A Prayer for him that buyes and sels.
                     O Good God, what is our life but a common Mart, wherein we sel away our bodies to shame for the price of momentarie pleasure, & barter away our soules to sinne, which were bought at the dearest rate (euen thy Sonnes blood?) What are all our labours, but desperate voiages, made to purchase wealth? And what are the riches of a worldly man when they are gotten, but (as thy Prophet singeth) The weauing of a spiders webbe?
                        
                           Esay 59. The spider makes fine nets to catch

flyes; and the worldling wasteth his nights, & weareth out his dayes in tying his conscience full of knots to pull vp riches. Sithence then the heaping vp of wealth is for the most part, the heaping vp of wickednesse; and that all the trauailes of our life, are but like buying and selling in a fayre, which wee beginne to day and end to morrow: so direct my steps (deare Lord) that I may neither wāder to get goods by vnlawfull courses, nor that I may fal in loue with riches, how well soeuer they bee gotten. Let me not be one of those buyers and sellers, whom thy Sonne Iesus thrust out of the Temple:

But rather one of those Merchants that sell all to follow thee. And since to loue our neighbour is the fulfilling of the Law, giue mee grace that I may bee counted no breaker of that Law, but a keeper of it sound, dealing iustly with all men. And for that purpose, let not mine eye look vpon false waights, nor my hand be held out to take vp an vneuen ballance. Hee loseth a piece of his soule, (euery time) that robbeth his chapmā of his measure: & he that vniustly gaineth but thirtie pence, selleth (like Iudas) euen his master Christ. As thou (O Father of vs all) hast giuen mee two hands, so appoint

those seruants of my bodie to execute none but good and holy offices: Let the one hand buy honestly, and the other sell iustly. Let the left bee to lay vp wealth to maintain my bodie, and the right to distribute thy blessings to those whose bodies are in miserie. Seale vp my lips from lying and forswearing (the two poisons that ouerflow euery citie.) Purge my bosome from corruption: pull out of my heart the stings of enuy, and let me reioyce to see others prosper in the world, & not to murmure if I my selfe wither like trees in Autumne, though I lose the goldē leaues of wealth, and be left naked with pouertie.

Keep the Wolf from my doore, & the Fox out of my bed-chāber, that other men may neither lye in waite to robbe mee of my goods, nor I sit vp late in the counsell of the wicked, how to deceiue other men of theirs. Be thou (O Lord) at my elbow in all my proceedings, so shall I feare to doe amisse in any. And so mortifie my affections, that euery day casting behinde my backe the comfort, the cares, the vanities, the vilenesse, the pleasures and the sorowes of this bewitching world, I may continually haue this cry aloude in my mouth, I desire to be dissolued and to be with thee. Amen.
                  
                  
                     
                     4. A Prayer for a mayd-seruant.
                     STop not thine eares (O Lord) to the requests of thy poore and humble handmaid, but as thou hast laid vpon her the condition of a seruant, so let her mind be subiected to the state to which thou hast called her. And for that thou didst ordaine in that great worke of the Creation of mankinde, that woman should bee the weaker vessell, both in the labours of the body, and endeuours of mind: strengthen mee therefore (O God) with thy assistance, & enlighten my soule with thy diuine inspiration.

Bestow vpon my youth a prosperous flourishing, but let it be in goodnes. As I grow vp in yeres, let me grow vp in grace: & write my name (O thou eternal Register) in that general pardon wherein thou forgiuest the follies of our youth. Crown my Virginstate with chaste & religious thoughts: & so temper my desires, that the wanton pleasures of the flesh may not drown in mee the heauēly treasures of the Spirit. Take from me (O God) the health of my bodie, rather then by the possession of it, I shold grow proud of beautie. So thou accountest me faire, I care not how vgly I appeare to the world. And

for that I am but poore, so blesse mee, that I may preserue my fame: for an honest reputatiō is to a maidē an ample dowry. Defēd me frō the poisō of euil tōgues, which are more deadly thē the stings of scorpions Defend me frō violating those lawes written downe by thine owne finger: defend me frō shame, whose spots disfigure the liuing, & disgrace the dead. Defend me from sinne, for the wages thereof are death and hell. Make mee a faithfull steward in ordering the goods of my M. & M
                           ris. so shal I be a more carefull disposer of my own. At my going to rest, take thou charge of my soule, for it is thy iewel;

at my vprising guard thou my body, for thy Son hath bought it: so shall I at the Sunnes rising pray to thee; when hee is at his height, I shall praise thee; and at his going downe, shall I sing Hymnes of thankes to thy Name. To which bee all honour, for it is due; All glorie, for it is proper; all feare, reuerence and adoration, for they are onely thine.
                  
                  
                     5. A Prayer for a seruingman.
                     NO seruice (O God) is like vnto that of thine: It is the highway to the highest honour; It is a preferment

to eternitie, a promotion beyond that which is bestowed by Kings. Admit me therfore into thy houshold of Faith: clothe me in the liuery of a true Christian, so shall I euer waite vpon thee (O my Lord:) lead me out of the company of swearers, quarrellers, drunkards, boasters, adulterers, & all those that blaspheme thee. Arme mee with thy grace, assist mee with thy Spirit, blesse me with thy hand, fill me with thy blessings, looke downe vpon my weakenesse; lift me vp in strength: beare with my frailtie: suffer not my heart to swell with pride, mine eye to burne in lust, my tongue to sting with slaunder,

my hand to be dipt in blood. But succour me (O my maker) and saue mee, (O saue me) now and euer, (O my Redeemer,) So bee it. Amen.
                  
                  
                     6. A Prayer for an husband man.
                     THe earth (O Lord) is thy garden in which thou hast appointed man to be a labourer. Of that stuffe in which hee daily diggeth and delueth was Man made; so that in trimming the earth, Man doeth but dresse himselfe. But albeit Paul planteth and Apollo watereth, no herb or flowre can come vp or tree prosper vnlesse thy hand be at the graffing: send thou therfore forth a wholsome

breath from thy nostrils vpon those fruits of the earth which out of the boūty of thy loue thou hast bestowed vpon me thy seruant. Let not the leafe of my labors wither, but prosper it till it grow vp like a Cedar on the top of Libanus, or like a tree planted by the waters side, bringing forth fruite in due season. Checke (O my God) the Northren wind, that it beate not downe the husbandmans hopes, but that the sicke mayl in fit time send in a ripe and plentiful haruest. Strike not the oxe at the plough with death, nor the horse in the pasture with diseases: yet I confesse, that my sinnes deserue

to haue the plagues of Egypt fall on mee and my cattell. But the wings of thy mercie (O gracious God) spread further then those of thy Iustice. Shed therefore those comfortable beames vpon mee that am a creeping worme vpon earth. And not onely do I begge these worldly and fading blessings at thy hand, but those rather that are heauenly, & which laste for euer: powre thy abundant grace on my soule, that it may be fruitfull in good workes, and euer bringing foorth seedes of holinesse. Open my heart, that it may not bee barren of vnderstanding thee; cleare thou mine

eyes, that they may behold the face of ignorāce & lothe her, and that they may look vpon the beautie of thy sacred wisedome, and be enamored of it. For these and whatsoeuer else thou thinkest fit for the health of my bodie or happinesse of my soule: I most humbly beseech thee in the Name of that blessed Son of thine, Iesus Christ.
                  
                  
                     7. A Prayer for a Marriner going to Sea.
                     O Thou that ridest vpon the Cherubins and fliest vpon the wings of the winds: Thou, at the brightnesse of whose presence the

clouds remoue, & at whose chiding hailestones and coales of fire fall vpon the world, whose arrowes are swiftest lighting, & whose bow at the going off, shooteth forth thunder. Be mercifull vnto me (O my God) that am to venture into the horrors of the deep. There shall I see thy wonders, but let mee not see thy wrath: there shall I looke into hel, but let me not fall into the iawes of feare & desperation. Preserue mee (O Lord) in the wombe of the ship, though the waters climbe round about the ribbes to swallow mee vp, as thou didst saue Ionas in the belly of the Whale. And when with thy seruant Peter I cry

out (to thy Sonne) Helpe Lord, or we perish: let his hād be stretched forth, to command the waters to bee quiet. Fill our sayles with gentle & prosperous windes; let not the sunne bee couered in stormes by day, nor the Moone and starres conspire with darkenesse by night, to spoile vs by ship-wracke. But set thou an Angel at our helme, when wee hoist sailes to go forth, & charge the same Angel to guide vs through that wildernes of waters, till wee safely ariue on shore. Or if for our sins it bee thy pleasure that our bodies in this voiage shall perish, yet (O our mercifull Pilot) saue our soules

from the great Leuiathan, whose iawes are euer open to deuoure: vpon what rocks soeuer the vessel that beares vs bee split, yet wee (most wretched sinners) beg at thy hands, that our heauenly vessels may arriue at the euerlasting land of promise. Graunt this (O Father) for his sake, that swum thorow a red Sea of pretious blood on the crosse, to bee mans Redeemer.
                  
                  
                     8. A Prayer for a Marriner at Sea in a storme.
                     SAue vs (O saue vs miserable wretches.) who haue no hope in the helpe of man, but only (O Lord Almightie) in thee. Heare

the cryes of thy seruants, and let them pierce into thine eare, thorow this battell of the clouds & the waters. Wee perish (O Sauiour) we perish in this prison of the deepe, vnlesse by thy miraculous power thou deliuer vs from death. Cast a bridle therefore about the stubburne neckes of the windes, for they are thy seruants: and beate backe this furious armie of the waters, for they are thy slaues. Send (O Lord) a Moses vnto vs, to cōduct vs thorow this Sea of death: send but a warrant vnder thy dreadful & commaunding voyce, & the tempest shall obey thee. Thou holdest the windes in thy

right hand, & the waues in the left; the heauens are thy throne, and earth thy footstoole: All is thine, & thou art all; to thee therefore do we fly for succour, because there is no succour but vnder thy wings. The sorrowes of death doe round encompasse vs, the paines of hell are felt in our bones; gather thou therefore the seas into an heape, and lay these stormes of wrath vp in thy treasure house of vē
                        geance, to confound thy professed enemies. Wee (silly wretches) call vpon thy Name, O heare vs: we are the worke of thine own hands, O deface not thine owne buildings: it was a part of thy glorie to make

vs, let it be a greater part of thy glorie to saue vs, now that we are vpon the point to perish. Saue vs, O saue vs, for thine owne sake, for thy Sonnes Sake, for thy glories sake, and wee shall sing Psalmes in thy praises vpon the lute, and vpon an instrument of ten strings.
                  
                  
                     9. A Thankesgiuing for Mariner being safely landed.
                     EVerlasting thankes doe we pay vnto thee (O thou that art mercie it selfe) in that when our feete were stepping into the graue, thou diddest raise vs (with

poore Lazarus) from the dead. Blessed bee the God of hostes, that thus hath redeemed vs from dā
                        ger. Wee were in the lions denne▪ and yet did he deliuer vs: Wee were in the fornace, yet not a haire hath perished: Wee were at the gates of hell, yet did hee fetch vs backe; the bitter cup of death did hee remoue from our lippes, and out of the pit of desperation hath hee pulled vs vp aliue. He did but say the word, and the winds stood still; hee did but frowne, & the waters shrunke in their heads; hee did but beccon, and his Angel came and brought vs comfort. Wee wil sing therefore vnto our

good God a song of thāks: Wee will sound foorth his Name euē amongst Turks and Saracens: and send abroad the miracle of our deliuerance to the furthest corners of the earth. All glorie, honour and praise bee thine, O Lord: for thou art iust without corruption, mercifull beyond our deseruings, and mightie aboue our apprehension. All glorie, honour and praise bee thine for euer and euer. Amen.
                  
                  
                     
                     10. A Prayer for a Souldier going to a Battell.
                     ARme mee (O thou God of Battels) with courage this day, that I may not fall before my enemies: The quarrell is thine, let the victorie bee thine; tie to my sinewes the strength of Dauid, that I may with a peeble stone strike to the earth these Giants that fight against thy trueth. The weaker meanes I vse, the greater shall bee thy glory, if I come from the fielde crowned with conquest. I put no cōfidence (O Lord)

either in the strong horse, or the iron-headed speare: the armor that must defend mee, is thy right arme. Bee thou therefore this day my Captaine to conduct mee: let thy word bee the trumpet to incourage mee; the banner of the Church, the colours which I follow; the weapōs which I fight with fayth and hope; and the cause for which I fight, The aduancement of true Religion. Keepe my handes (O my God) from playing the bloody executioners; let pitie sit vpon mine eylids, euen in the heate of battell, and mercie on the point of my sword when it is most readie to kill. So let mee fight, that whether

I come off, lame or sound, dead or aliue, I may liue or dye thy Souldier. Amen. Blesse me, strengthen mee, guide me, guard mee, saue me, O thou Lord of hosts. Amen.
                  
                  
                     11. A Prayer, or Thanksgiuing for a Souldier after victorie.
                     VEngeance is thine, O Lord: and the fall of thy enemies is thy glorie. Immortal honour (like the beames of the sunne) shine about thy Temples, because thou hast this day stood by thy poore seruant. When death trampled vpon heapes of mangled carcases, thou (O Lord) plantedst

a guard of Angels about mine. Thou hast circled my browes with Baytree, in signe of conquest, and with the Palme-tree, in token of peace. All that I can giue to thee for these blessings, is but a giuing Thanks. Accept it (O my God) accept this sacrifice of my heart: and so hold in the reines of my passions, that I bee not swolne vp with arrogance and pride, for that which is no worke of mine; but that I may humbly acknowledge thee for the Author both of my owne safety, and my foes deseature. And so instruct me in the heauenly discipline of other wars which I am to fight in, in this

world, that I may defie sathan and his troupes, beate downe sin and his damned regiment, & triumph ouer the assaults of the world, that in the ende I may march vnder the banner which Christ shall spread in Heauen. Amen.
                  
                  
                     12. A Prayer for a woman great with childe.
                     LOoke downe from Heauen (O Lord) vpon me thy handmaid, look downe from thy throne of mercie. A curse hast thou laid vpon all women, (for their Grand mother Eues sake) which is, that the fruites of their wombes shal fill them with paine and torments: Iust

art thou in thy sentence, for all women in that battel of life and death, doe feele the rigour of thy doome. The horrors of the graue doe in that houre stand before them, the terrors of hell, do in that conflict houer-roūd about them; yet (O God) one drop of thy mercy hath souereigne power to cure all the woūds of those sorrowes. Shed it therefore (O Father) shed that drop of grace vpon me (most miserable woman) in that minute when I am to encounter with so sterne an enemie. What weight of thy wrath soeuer thou layest vppon mee (for my sinnes,) strengthen mee with patience to beare it,

that I may not in that fearfull agony bee vnruly, or vnforgetfull of that modestie fitting a woman beset with such dangers; but rather, that in those throws of child birth, (to which no pangs in the world are comparable) I may verily belieue I see thy blessed Sonne (my Redeemer) torn vpon the crosse: suffering paines insufferable, tortures inexpresseable, and sorrowes of soule in-vttereble, onely for me, onely to pay for my sins, & only to free mee from the shame of death and hell. Let his immensurable & incōprehensible agonies on the crosse, put me in mind how much he ventured for mee

(a wretch) and that hee can not plague mee with too many miseries, that haue (for all this loue bestowed) euery day, and euery houre in a day, and euery minute of an houre, playd the wā
                        ton with his fauour, and haue abused his mercies. Forget my sinnes notwithstanding (O my God) but forget not thy seruant. Forgiue me: and so forgiue me, that the childe in my bodie bee not punished for the mothers offēces Blesse this fruit of my wombe, which thou hast grafted with thine own hand: giue it growth, giue it florishing, giue it forme. And when the time is come that thou wilt cal it out of this close house

of flesh, (wher now it inhabiteth) to dwell in the open world. Sanctifie thy creature, and on the forehead of it, set that sacred seale of Baptisme, that it may be known to be a Lāb of thy own flocke. Graunt this, O maker of mankind, grant this (O Redeemer of mankind) at the request of thy seruant and handmaid. Amen.
                  
                  
                     13. A Praier for a midwife
                     WIth handes lifted vppe to Heauen, knees prostrated on the earth, & with a soule humbled at thy feete (O Lord) do I beg, that thou wouldst prosper this worke which I am to vndertake. Suffer mee not to bee feareful

in my office, fainting in my spirits, or too violent in my duetie: but that I may discharge it to thy honor, this thy handmaids comfort (who is full of paine) and to my owne credit. Blesse me (O God) with skil, sithence thou hast placed me as thy deputie in this great and wonderfull businesse: giue vnto thy seruant an easie & speedy deliuerance. Giue vnto me a quick, a constant & a gentle hand. Giue vnto this new vnborne creature (into whom thou hast breathed a soule) a faire & wel-shapē body; that thou mayst haue glorie by thy works, & the mother gladnesse in beholding her infant, after all her sorrowes.

Graunt this, O Father, for thy Sons sake Iesus Christ. Amen.
                  
                  
                     14. A Prayer, or Thanksgiuing, after a womans deliuerie.
                     GLorified bee thy Name (O God) for this mercy extended to thy seruant: It lay in thy power to strike death into her wombe, but thou hast giuen her a double life: and to heape sorrowes vpon her sorrowes, but her anguishes hast thou sweetened with gladnesse. Praised bee thy blessed Name: Praised be thy wō
                        drous workes. Continue (O Lord) these thy fauours

to thy weake hand-maide: put strēgth into her blood, blood into her veines, and courage into her heart, that her lips may render thee a thanksgiuing. Looke (O God) vpon this babe with an eye of loue; preserue it in health, quicken it with thy grace, and crowne it with long life, that it may growe vp to bee a seruant in thy houshold. Vnty the strings of his vtterance (when thou thinkest it meete) and giue vnto it a tongue that may without stammering or any other imperfect sound speake clearely. Let all other organs of his bodie execute their offices, as in thy mercie thou hast appointed.

Sanctifie O Lord, the brests that must giue it sucke, and feed the soule of it (when it shall please thee to fill it with vnderstanding) with the milk of thy word. Blesse vs (O Lord) that are heere met together to behold the glorie of our creation, and the wonders of our creator in this little infant. Thāks, honour, & praise be giuen vnto thee for euer and euer. Amen.
                  
                  
                     15. A Prayer for a sicke man, to be sayd by himself.
                     SIcknesse (O Lord) is, I know, thy herald, and summoneth vs to death: It is thy messenger, and thou hast sent it into my body: Welcome it is, because it

commeth from thee; yet (O my God) if it bee thy pleasure, let thy anger cease, & cast thou that rod into the fire which hath beaten mee thus long with affliction. My soule is brought lowe, (euen to the dust) hide not therefore thy beames from mee, but shed the light of them vpon my face, that I may lift vp my head and be cōforted. Mercifully hast thou dealt with mee I confesse, for I deserue, and it lies in thy strength vtterly and in an instant to confound mee in the heate of thy indignation: But thou hast laid a gentle punishment vpon mee, and the blowes are such as fathers giue to children,

not to kill them, but to correct them. Thou hast not yet calde me to the barre of death, yet hast thou cald mee to a triall. My sinnes cry out as witnesses against my soule, & my soule pleadeth guiltie of treason against thy Maiestie. Restore mee (O God) by thy pardon vnder that great seale of thy promise, To forgiue a sinner at what time soeuer hee heartily powres out his teares of repentance. Or if it bee set down in thy booke of irreuocable decrees, that my flesh must with this sicknes bee turned into dust, so strengthen mee (O my Redeemer) that to the last houre and latest gaspe, I

may hold thy Name betweene my lippes, and die with that musicke onely sounding in my voyce. Grant this request O Lord to me thy seruant; that whensoeuer or howsoeuer the glasse of my mortalitie shall runne out, my soule at her departure may runne and be receiued into Abrahams bosome, which is the sanctuarie for all the faithfull: at which blessed hauen that I may arriue, praier shal for euer be the sailes that shall carrie vp my heart; and aboue all, that, praier which the best preacher of the world hath taught me; saying, Our father, &c.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     16. A Prayer to be sayd by them that visit the sicke.
                     O Thou (O Lord) that art the Physitian both of soule and bodie, stretch foorth, wee beseech thee, thine arme toward this thy seruant: poure out the oile of thy mercy and compassion, and with it balme his temples, that his memorie may not be taken from him, but that hee may call vpon thy glorious Name. Speake vnto him, as thou didst speake to thy seruant, when thou saidst, Arise, take vp thy bedde and walke:

for health is thy subiect and obeyes no command but thine. Arme him (O father of vs all) arme this thy sonne with patience to indure this triall, and with constancy to wait thy pleasure: giue him the fortitude of Iob, to beare the burden of all tribulations, of all crosses, and of al calamities, sithence the waight of them is not to beare him downe, but to lift him vp to blessednes. Settle O Lord his spirits, that they may not wander and flie out into any vnruly motions. Lay thy finger vpon his lippes, that they may not fall into cursing or blaspheming thy deity, or into any vaine language. Take frō his eye al

delight of this fraile world, and let his soule make readie onely for a voyage to heauen: heare vs O Lord that beg this at thy hands: heare him O Lord, that lifteth vp his hands vnto thee, and begges a pardon for his sinnes: open the gates of mercy: open the doors of thy sauing health: open thine armes, to receiue him into thy fauour, or into the celestiall freedome: adopt him for thine owne: adopt him in the blood of thy Sonne; or if it be thy will, to adde more daies to his life, turne then speedily his weakenes into strength, and his sickenesse into health; so shall he confesse that thou art mighty, that

thou art mercifull, and that thou alone art the God of saluation. To thee therefore that art One in Three, and Three in One, and in all things incomprehensible, bee all honour. Amen.
                  
                  
                     17. A Prayer for a Prisoner.
                     MY feete (O my Sauiour) are in the snares of the hunter, and like a beast in the Wildernesse haue my enemies pursued mee: I am now entangled in the chaines of captiuitie; yet (O my God) bestow thou vpon mee the freedome of my soule: Soften thou the flintie

hearts of those men, that haue cast me into this house of mourning and heauinesse: and as thou didst to Daniel in the Lions denne, defend and keepe mee from the iawes of miserie, that are stretched wide open to swallow mee vp aliue. It is for my sinne that I am thus round beset with pouerty, shame, and dishonour. Receiue thou therefore these sacrifices of my contrition, and turne not away thine eare, when my prayers are flying towards thee. The sighes of a sinner repenting is a sweete breath in thy nostrils, his teares are pretious, and like those teares that washed the feet

of Christ. Accept therefore this offring from the altar of an humble, contrite, and wounded heart.
                     Put into my bosome Good and Charitable thoughts, that I may pray for them that persecute and trouble mee; and that I may vndergoe and passe ouer all their oppressions and bearings of mee downe, with a setled, constant, and suffering spirit. Let this imprisonment (O LORD) bee alwaies vnto mee a Booke wherein I may reade, first, the knowledge of thee (which hitherto I haue not studied) and secondly, the knowledge of my selfe. Let it be a glasse

wherein I may see all the blemishes of my youth; as riots, whoredomes, drunkennesse, pride, and such like foule and vlcerous spottes, that haue disfigured my soule. Change (O mercifull God) if it bee thy will, my wants into plentie, my thraledome into liberty, my mourning into gladnesse, for thy Sonne Iesus Christ his sake, who was a prisoner vpon the Crosse, onely to set all mankind free: Worke pitie O my Sauiour, in the brests of my aduersaries, that I may sing with the Prophet: Blessed is hee that considereth the poore and needy: the Lord shall deliuer him in the

time of trouble. But if it be thy will and pleasure that I must grone vnder this trouble and affliction; arme mee (O God) with a constant patience to beare all. Amen.
                  
                  
                     A Prayer for a Gally-slaue.
                     O THOV that thorow the redde Sea diddest guide the children of Israel, thrust forth the selfe same arme, and pull mee thy seruant, out of the hands of a Tyrant, whose heart is hardened worse then Pharoahs. Hee that

hates thy glorious Name (O Lord) and persecuteth thy beloued Sonne in the bodies of Christians; doeth with an iron rodde bruise my bones: O Lord be thou my deliuerer. In penury and woe doe I toyle out my dayes: In cold and hunger doe I passe ouer and waste out my nights: my labours are at the Oare, and my tortures at the will of a barbarous infidell; in whose eye, stripes to a wretched and poore Gally-slaue are but a merriment; and the gushing out of a Christians blood but a mockerie. For the honour of thy beloued Sonne (who laid downe his

owne life for my ransome) suffer not these enemies of thy glory to insult ouer one of thy children. For the honor of thy Church (of which I am a member) suffer not thy Religion to be trodden to dust (in mee) by the tyranny and crueltie of a blaspheming Pagan: or if it bee in thy Diuine purpose, to haue me longer to grone vnder this heauie yoake of seruitude and slauerie for the triall of my faith; thy will bee done: yet O LORD, stand thou by my side: shrink not from me, lest thou forsaking mee I fall away from thee, & so vtterly perish in Turkish ignorance: confirm me in my religiō, infuse into me

thy grace, teach my tongue to speake of thee boldly, my thoughts to meditate vpon thee sincerely, and strengthen thou my bodie to maintaine thy cause euen to the death. Amen.
                  
                  
                     19. A Praier for men that worke in dangerous workes▪ as Colepits▪ mines, &c.
                     OVT of my Bedde (the image of my Graue) hast thou raised mee (O Lord) thy Angels sat vpon mine eye-liddes, like Centinels to guard me all the while I

lay asleepe: O suffer thou the same watchmen to protect me now I am awake. I need thy help alwayes, (for what is man without thee?) but so neere the house of danger must I this day dwell, that on my knees I entreate thee to keepe side by side with mee in my goings. Saue my bodie, O Lord: for death is (at euery turning about) at my elbow. Saue my soule, whatsoeuer fals vpon my bodie. Which diuine part of me, that it may come into thy heauenly treasure-house, inspire mee with that wisedome which descendeth from aboue. Purifie my thoughts, & let them with spotles wings bee continually

flying about thy throne. Purge my heart, that it may come before thee like a bride-groome, full of chaste loue. Refine my soule, that like siluer seuentimes tried in the fire, it may beare the bright figure of Saluation. In vaine doeth the builder lay his foundation, vnlesse thy hand bee at the setting vp. Set therefore thy hand to this worke of mine; encourage mee to vndertake it, embolden mee to goe forward, and enable me to finish it. Amen.
                  
                  
                     
                     20. A Prayer for a poore man.
                     O Thou King both of Heauen and earth, whose blessings fall vpon man like showers of raine: open that rich fountain of thy grace, and let the drops of it reliue me that am the miserablest of thy creatures. Thou hast clothed mee in the habits of basenesse; but, O LORD, furnish thou my minde with the riches of thy mercie. I am content (O FATHER) with this poore estate, and comfort my selfe with it, knowing that thy blessed

Sonne had at his birth but a māger in stead of a cradle to ly in, & being the Lord of the whole world, not so much as a dwelling house of his his owne to lodge in. The Sparrow lighteth not vppon the ground without thy prouidence, nor doeth the meanest of thy children breath, but thou prouidest for him. Sithence I came naked into the world, this nakednesse of mine is but the badge of my natiuitie: bestow therefore thy grace vpon mee, that I may not enuy those that swim in the abundance of wealth. Feed me, O Lord, with the bread of life: that I may growe strōg in health euerlasting;

let me drinke of the benefit of my Redeemers blood: Clothe mee (O God) with righteousnesse: and albeit thou hast in thy iudgement and to expresse thy glorie, appointed mee to bee an out-cast amongst men, and to be the scum of the world, yet, O Lord, cast mee not out of thy presence, but for thy deare Sons sake, whose blood bought the begger as well as the Prince, make mee a free-denizen in the citie of Heauen. So be it.
                  
                  FINIS.
               
            
         
         
            
               
                  
                  
                  THE Eagle.
                  The EAGLE bringeth courage.
                  Vigilate & Orate.
                  Printed at London by H.B. for N.B. 1609.
               
               
                  
                  
                  To the right worthie and right worshipfull Gentleman, Sir Iohn Scot, knight: a prosperous increase of honour in this world, and a perfect inioying of glorie in the world to come.
                  
                     SIR, after I had builded vp these foure altars of deuotion, with purpose to present the first of thē to your worshipful brother in Law (Sir Thomas Smith;) I knew not where to find a man that did more truely parallell him in goodnesse then you your selfe; aswell for the ornaments of mind, as for that integritie, pietie, zeale, and other riches of the soule, wherewith the world taketh especiall note, that you are (both) abundantly stored.

For that cause thefore, (as also in regard that Affinitie hath knit you together in a strong and holy league of loue) am I bold to reare vp this my second altar to the memorie of your name. Vpon it are offered vp Prayers onely, whose incense are as sweet odours in the nostrils of God. They are in behalfe of Princes and Rulers (who are the highest vpō earth) & therfore doeth an Eagle carie them vp to heauen. Shee flieth now to your bosome, there to build her nest: esteeming it a happie place for her to abide in, sithence shee foreseeth (or at least with me praieth) that all your thoughts, words and actions which are bred within you, doe shew themselues, and so may proue still true Eagles, by being able to looke stedfastly on the sunne of righteousnesse. And thus crauing pardon for boldnesse, I rest:
                  
                     
                        Deuoted yours
                  
               
               
                  
                  To the vertuously-hopefull yong Gentleman, Sir George Hayward, Knight, sonne in law to the right worshipfull, Sir Iohn Scot, Knight.
                  
                     GOD is the best Schoole-master, his laws the noblest studie: and what lessons (of Him) are taught, (truely) how plaine soeuer the Method be, the wisest need not be ashamed to read them. So that I presume, you will fauour these yong blossomes, because your selfe are but in growing. They are dewed with the drops of a Pellicā
                      whose property is to suffer her own bosome to bleed, that others may be fed. It is the

bird of Charity, & the true Embleme of Christ on the Crosse, (who was al Loue.) His sids are here pierced, & his blood here runs forth, making a riuer, in which only (& by no other fountain) the leprosie of sin is for euer to be clensed. You shal find only 7. heads of sinne (here) cut off by prayer: not because it hath no more heads but 7. or that these ar the greatest: but being not able to fight (in so narrow a roome) with the multitude of thē al, I was contented to set vpō a certain nūber. The Armour to encounter with them is here prepared: it is made fit for any Christian to weare. If you vouchsafe to put it on, others by your

example wil vndertake the same quarrell. To fight for Christ is an honorable combat. Sins are his vtter enemies, & here you may learn how to cōfound them. The war is godly: the victorie glorious: your triumph will be in heauen. To wrastle against such foes shall well become your yeres, and to giue thē the ouerthrow wil be a crowne to you in olde age. To the honor of which I do as heartily wish you may come, as you are happily ingrafted into religious & vnblemished Families, which (to your cōfort) you may reckon the first of those good blessings which God hath multiplied vpon you,
               
               
                  
                  To the Reader.
                  
                     READER: the greatest good that Christ did for thee, was to die for thee: and the greatest pleasure thou canst doe for him, is to die to thy selfe. That is to say, to crucifie all the sinnes and corruptions of thy soule, as he suffered his bodie (to redeeme thine) to be mangled on a Crosse. He was a Pellican for thy sake; bee thou a Pellican to thy selfe and others▪ and flie with two wings (to heauen) Faith and good Workes. If thou vsest the first wing without the second, thy fligpt is but lame: if the last only without the former, thy pace is but losie: exercise both, and be sure thou shalt get thither.
                  Fare-well.
               
               
                  
                  THE EAGLE.
                  The EAGLE bringeth courage.
                  Vigilate & Orate.
                  Pinted at London, by H. B. for Nathaniel Butter. 1609.
               
            
            
               
                  
                  
                     1. A Prayer made by the vertuous and renowmed Queene ELIZABETH, of most happie memorie.
                  
                     O GOD allmaker, keeper, & guider; Inurement of thy rare-seen, vnused, and seld-heard-of goodnesse, powred in so plentifull sort vpon vs full oft, breeds now this boldnesse, to craue with bowed

knees & hearts of humility, thy large hand of helping power, to assist with wonder our iust cause, not foū
                     ded on Prides-motion, nor begū on Malice-stock; but as thou best knowest, to whom nought is hid, groū
                     ded on iust defence from wrongs, hate, and bloody desire of conquest. For since, meanes thou hast imparted to saue that thou hast giuen, by enioying such a people, as scornes their blood-shedde, where suretie ours is one: fortifie (deare God) such hearts in such sort, as their best part may bee worst, that to the truest part meant worst, with least losse to such a nation, as despise their liues

for their Countreys good. That all Forreine lands may laud and admire the Omnipotēcie of thy work: a fact alone for thee onely to performe. So shall thy Name bee spread for wonders wrought, & the faithfull encouraged, to repose in thy vnfellowed Grace: And wee that minded nought but right, inchained in thy bonds for perpetuall slauerie, and liue & die the sacrificers of our soules for such obteined fauour. Warrant, deare Lord, all this with thy command. AMEN.
               
               
                  
                  2. A Prayer for the King.
                  KINGS are gods vpō earth, yet (O Lord) they are but thy seruants; they rule kingdomes, yet the chariot of their Empire turnes ouer & ouer, vnlesse thou teach their hands how to holde the bridle. More then men they are amongst men, yet lesse they are then themselues, if they breake thy lawes: for sithence they are thy Stewards, and are trusted with much, it is a great reckoning to which they must answere.
                  
                     Lay therefore (O God) thy right hand vpon the head of our soueraigne (King IAMES) fasten his Crown to his temples, that no treason may lift it off: bind it about with Oliue-branches, and let peace euer dwell in the circle of it. Plant a guard of Angels about his bed, and a troupe of Saints about his throne: that his sleepes may bee golden slumbers, and his watchings may bee Diuine Meditations. Powre into his bosome thy grace, that all his actions may aduance thy glorie. Be thou his armour in the day of battell, and (like the wings of an Eagle) let thine armes couer him in the sunne-shine of

peace. Make him (O Lord) a Priest in thy Church, a sheepheard to thy flockes, a father in the Cōmō wealth, a Captaine in thy quarrell, a conqueror in thy warres. Crowne his middle age with numbers of yeares, as thou hast crowned his youth with the inheritance of many kingdomes; let the diall of his life mooue slowly on, and suffer not the last houre of his olde age to strike, till those that now stand vp about him like the tender branches of the vine may bee seene growing on the bankes of his kingdome, like so many rowes of tall Cedars. Let his raigne (O Lord) be like the age of Methusalem: his

knowledge like the wisedome of Salomon: and his off spring blessed like the seede of Abraham. Giue him Dauids soule, but suffer him not to fall into Dauids sinnes: let him number his people, not to make thee angry with him, but to make him loue them. Tie (O God) all the strings of their hearts to his bosome, like so manie lines drawne to one center, so shall their safety bee his fortresse, their prosperitie his riches, and the houres of his pleasure, the sweetest of their contentation. Grant these and all other blessings fit for such a Prince, grant them (O LORD) for the benefit of thy Church, for

the honour of this Kingdome, and the peace of thy people. Amen.
               
               
                  3. A Prayer for the Queene.
                  SHED (O Lord) thy graces in showers of abundance vpon thy royall hand-maid, ANNE, the wife of our Soueraigne, thy seruant, & the mother to so manie nations, besides the glorie of her own. Cō
                     tinue that great and excellent worke in her which thou hast begunne; hidde from our eyes for a number of yeares together (now past) & to our Kingdome,

the best and onely comfort, which for the present, or for the hopes of future ages, wee doe now enioy: and that is a long, a faire and a certaine line of succession, of which heretofore we stood doubtfull: albeit in the secrets of thy wisedome we were not depriued of it. As she is now a mother to a heap of Princes, that are borne to bee Kings and Queenes, so (O Lord) make her a grandmother to the sonnes of Kings and Queenes, that they may stand about her like so many crowned rulers of nations, and shee in the midsts of them, as the onely tree, vpon which those nations haue beene

grafted. Let (O God) such an euen thred of loue bee spunne betweene the King & her, that all her thoughts may be confined to his bosome, & all his desires may sleep only vpō her pillow, and that both their hearts may burne in holy flames of affection towards thee. Sanctifie her wombe, that it may bring foorth none but such fruite as may glorifie thy Name, may shine as sunne-beames to comfort this land, and to bee as rich iewels in the royal eyes of the parents. Keep treason (O Lord) from the throne vpon which shee sits, and parasites (who are as dangerous as traitours) from her princely eare,

when thee wanteth counsell. Support her by thy right hand when shee walketh foorth, and let thy Angels goe before her, at her returning home. As thou hast crowned her with happinesse in this world, so when it is thy pleasure, that shee shall put off the robe of mortaltie, grant (O FATHER) that shee may bee crowned with starres, and cloathed in a robe of righteousnesse and of heauenly eternitie. Amen.
               
               
                  
                  4. A Prayer for the Prince of Wales.
                  WHat are KINGS (O Lord) vnlesse thou standest by thē as their guard? And what are the sonnes of Kings, vnlesse thou vouchsafest to be their Father? Let the armes therefore of thy loue be throwen about that hope-full and royall heyre to our Countrey, Prince HENRY: adopt him into thy fauour: couer him with thy wings, let him bee tender to thee as the apple of thine eye. As yet he is but a greene plant; O drop the deaw of thy graces vpon his head,

that he may flourish till the shadow of his branches be a cōfort to this whole Iland Breath thou all wisedome into their soules that are set ouer him as tutors or guardiās, that knowledge may, as it were, from so manie pipes bee conueie into his brest, and that from thence againe (as from a fountain) it may flow cleerely and abundantly into all the parts of this thy Church & kingdome. Let Religion be the columne vpon which hee shall alwayes stand, zeale the pillow vpon which hee shall kneele, and the quarrel of the Gospel, for which he shall goe to warre: knit therfore (O Lord) strength to his right arme, and when

a good cause calles him (at his manly state) into the field, gird thou about his loines the sword of victorie. No musick (O Lord) is more pleasing to thine eare (as thy kingly Prophet Dauid doth sing) then the vnitie of brethren: It is like the pretious ointment, that ran downe from the head to the beard, euen to the beard of Aaron, and so to the skirts of his clothing, yea, it is like the dewe of Hermon, which fel vpon the hill of Sion: tune therfore (O mercifull God) all the heart-strings of this our young Prince HENRY, & the rest of that royal blood (his Brethren and Sisters) that thy may neuer sound

in discord. Let no more the leaues of our two Roses be plucked by ciuill vprore from their stalkes: no more suffer thou ensignes to be spread by Yorkists and Lancastrians one against another: But (according to their names) grāt (O Lord) that they may bee good Stewards ouer this great houshold of the now-firmlie vnited Families, and covnited kingdomes. Subscribe to these requests of ours (O God) for thy mercies sake: Seale them vp, vnder the large patent of thy promise for thy Sons saks Iesus Christ: In whose Name whatsoeuer we aske thou hast vowed to grant: grant this, giue this, O

God, wee beseech thee. Amen: Amen.
               
               
                  5. A Prayer for the Counsell.
                  COunsell to a Kingdome is like the Compasse to a ship vnder saile; without the one, a State is shaken by euery tempest, and without the other, men run vpon the rocks of ineuitable danger. Set therefore thy foote (O God) amongst the Lords of our Counsell: sit thou at their Table with them, & suffer no decrees to passe there, but those wherin thou hast a hand. Appoint Prouidence, to dwell vpon their browes, that they may fore see thine and our enemies:

bid watchfulnesse to sit on their eye-lids, to meete the stroake when it is cōming, and courage to buckle armour to their brests, that they may valiantly beare it off without shrinking: let zeale & integritie go on either side of thē, to make thē walk vpright, whilest concord holdes them hand in hand to preserue them frō factions. Giue them long life with much honour: heape vpon thē wisedome, with much loue. As they are one body in Counsell, so let all their counsels bee to the safety of one head. Graunt this, O thou that wey ghest all the actions of Rulers and Princes vpon earth. Amen.
               
               
                  
                  6. A Prayer for the Nobilitie.
                  LOoke down (O Lord) from heauen vpō this land, and amongst all those in the same, whom, we beseech thee, to blesse, powre vpon our Nobibitie the riches of all thy graces: as euery good man (O Lord) in thy sight is noble, so make thou euerie man that is noble amongst vs to bee good. Teach them to know, that greatnesse of blood is giuen them to the intent they should build vpō the same the greatnes of thy glory. And sithence they are the fairest streames that beautifie

this kingdome, preserue them (O Lord) from the poison of ambition, of enuie one against another, and from dessension, lest the common people tasting likewise of the same after them▪ the whole Commonwealth be swallowed vp in confusion. Stand thou before the gates of their houses, that no foule thoughts or acts may enter to staine their Families with the spots of treason; but bee thou the pillar to vpholde them, sithence if thou forsake them, the foundation of their houses must fal, and their posteritie bee rooted frō the earth. Guide them therefore with thy grace, arme them with thy feare▪
                     
assist them with thy loue. So be it. Amen.
               
               
                  17. A Praier for the Church
                  THE Church (O God) is the Schoole, where thine owne lawes (written by thine owne hand) are taught: It is the Temple where thou thy selfe vtterest thy diuine oracles. It is the house where thou dwellest: It is the palace where (with spiritual eyes) we behold the brightnesse of thy Maiestie: Giue it therefore illumination by the beames of thy glorie: and since it is thy Spouse, let her stand before thee as a virgine (chaste and vndefiled.) Driue all foxes, and rauening wolues out of this thy Temple, and admit

none but Lambes (clothed in puritie & innocencie of life) and thy chosen flocke to feede there. Suffer it not to bee (as it was when thy blessed Sonne went vpon earth) a denne of theeues, but (as hee did, so do thou) driue from thence all those that sell thine honour and the soules of thy people. O Lord, weed this great and vniuersall garden of thine from al thornes and briers, that seeke to choake the good seed: plant in it none but grafts of thine owne nurcerie, so shalt thou bee sure they will bring foorth fruite, faire for shew, sweet for taste, wholesome for vse, and such as shall bud out in due season: so shall

thy Name bee truely hououred, thy praises duely sung, thy workes (with reuerence) wondred at, and thy wonders magnified from one end of the world to another. Graunt that it may bee so, for the fulnesse of thy Sonnes merits, and for the setting foorth of thine owne mercies. Amen.
               
               
                  8. A Prayer for the Clergie.
                  O Euerlasting King of glorie, that sendest the Ministers of thy word as thine Embassadours, to treat with men about the peace of their soules, giue them (O Lord) such instructions

that they may deliuer their messages boldly, vprightlie, & to the good both of thy kingdome, & of those to whom they are sent. They are those heauenly purseuāts that run vpō the errāds of our sauing health: They are Angels that goe and come betweene thee and vs: guide therefore their feete, that sinne may lay no stumbling blockes before them to make them fall; nor that forgetting the high honour in which thou hast placed them, they bee cast downe for their pride, into the pit of darkenesse. And sithence (O God) thou hast placed thē on thy holy hil (the Church) as beacons, giue them grace

that (with the 7. wise virgins) their lights may neuer goe foorth, but still burne brightly to arme thy people against the inuasion of that enemie of mankind the diuel and his army, that day & night seeketh to deuoure him. Wipe away al mists of errors frō their eies, that seing thee cleerely, they may teach others how to behold thee truely. They are Pastors ouer thy flocks: as they haue the names of Shepheards, so let them haue the natures to feede the sheepe cōmitted to their charge, & not to fliece them. And as they breake vnto vs the bread of life (which thou sendest, imploying them but as the stewards, or almoners of thy housholds)

so graunt, O Lord) that we may not suffer them to starue for earthly bread, but that like brothers wee may relieue them, like children wee may reuerence them, like Lambes of thy fold we may loue the shepheards of thy fields, and like sworne souldiers to the crosse of Christ, wee may liue and die with then vnder his glorious banner. Amen.
               
               
                  9. A Prayer for the Iudges of the land.
                  IVDGEMENT, O Lord, is thine: yet to keep man in awe hast thou appointed Iudges (as thy deputies on earth) to punish

him when hee goeth beyond his bounds. Vnto those therefore that holde the sword of Iustice, giue thou steddy hands, that they may not strike innocence, and that when they are to punish, they may imitate thee, who smitest not to kill, but to beget amendement. Suffer not the left hand of our Iudges to know what the right hand doeth: nor that the eare neere vnto which the rich man stands bee open, till the poore mans wrongs be both heard and redressed. Whip, O Lord, briberie from their gates, and partialitie out of their priuate chambers; let thy lawesly before thē when they read

the statutes of mens making, that reading what thou hast writ, they may not open their lippes to pronoūce false iudgement: but sit, O Lord, so close by them vpon their seates of Iustice, that by thinking they themselues must one day be called to a bar, they may doe nothing here but what (with a good conscience) they may answere there. Amen.
               
               
                  10. A Praier for the Court.
                  O Lord, bee thou a husband to that great houshold of our King, bee thou a father vnto that familie, and keepe them (as children) both in thy feare and loue. And because the Courts of Princes are the very lights of kingdomes,

powre thy oyle of grace into this light of ours that it may not be darkned, but may bring cōfort to all thy people: preserue those that liue there in brotherly affection one towards another, and in loyaltie to him that is their Soueraigne. Banish frō thence all those vices that commōly blemish the beautie of kings Palaces: and let thy word bee of such power in this place, that it may rather seem the Temple of the euerlasting king of Heauen, then the dwelling house of a king vpon earth. Grant this (O Lord) & whatsoeuer else is requisite for the setting forth of thy glory, wee beseech thee, in the name of thy Sonne Iesus Christ. Amen.
               
               
                  
                  II. A Prayer for the Citie.
                  O Father of mercy, look downe vpon this cittie, not with an eye of Iustice, for no flesh is righteou in thy sight: but behold this thy sanctuarie, as thy Sonne did Ierusalem, when he wept, that the citie of the Lord should bee so full of iniquitie. If those miracles (O God) which haue bene shewen in this greatest city of thine now vpon earth, had beene done in Tyre and Sidon, they would haue repented in sackcloth and ashes; but wee more and more prouoke thee to anger: yet, O Lord, stay thy

hand from striking, and thy lippes from pronouncing those woes that were breathed foorth by thee against Chorazin and Bethsaida. Say not thou, O God, to this Citie, as thou didst to Capernaum: And thou Capernaum which art lifted vp to Heauen, shalt be brought down to hell. But gather thy children together as the Hen gathereth her chickens vnder her wing, and suffer not thy holy habitations to be left desolate. Set, O Lord, an hoste of Angels at the gates, and let trueth spread her banner on the walles: suffer not the arrowes of the inuader to fall vpon our houses by day, nor the sword of the strong man to

smite vs by night. Giue wisedome, O Lord, to the Rulers of this Citie, zeale to the Preachers therein and holinesse of life to the Inhabitants. Let the tree of thy Gospel (which so many years hath here flourished) still spread into large branches, and those branches beare abundance of liuely fruit. Saue, O Lord, this Temple of thine; blesse it, defend it, crowne it with honours, that it may out-shine all the Cities in the world in goodnesse as it doeth in greatnesse. Amen.
               
               
                  
                  12. A Prayer for the Countrey.
                  O Thou that art the Creator of all things that are good for man, giue vnto our corne-fields fatnes and increase, and vpon our medows raine downe the waters of plentie: let our lād be like vnto that which thou saidst should flowe with milke and hony: for as the heauens are thine so is the earth thine: Thou hast made also the North and the South: the winds are in thy hand; bridle them therefore, and binde them in the prisons of the earth, that they may not come forth to destroy the labours of the ploughman,

nor to defeat the husbandman of his hopes. Set, O gracious Father, faithfull and learned and watchfull shepheards ouer the poore flock of vs thy people, that the blindnesse of ignorance may not cause our soules to wander in the shades of euerlasting death. Guide vs, O Lord, neither in the pathes of our forefathers (if they went astray) nor after the common steppes of the present time, vnles it be according to those wayes which are trode out before vs, by thy Sonne Iesus Christ. Teach vs to loue thee, to know thee, to liue after thy lawes, and to die after thy commandements; so shall we be sure to chāge

this countrey of frailtie, of sinne and of miserie, for the land of promise, and the kingdome of all fulnesse & felicitie. Grant this O Father of vs all, grant this O Redeemer of vs all. Amen.
               
               
                  13. A Prayer for a Magistrate.
                  THou hast called mee (O Lord) being but a worme of the earth, and raised to riches, as it were, euen out of dust, to be a Ruler ouer others: bestow on mee therefore the spirit of Wisedome, that I may first learne how to gouerne my selfe: for the perfect knowledge of a mans self, brings

him (O God) to the true knowledge of thee. Humble mee (O my Maker) in this toppe of my height: that my head being lifted vp to honor, my heart may not swell vp with pride: giue mee a mind not to execute my owne will but thine: giue me an eye that may not lust after my owne profit, but the aduancement of thy glorie, and the good of the Commonwealth. As thou hast placed mee, to bee a Pillar to vphold others, so grant that I may not prooue a weake Pillar, to throw my selfe downe; and with my fall to bruise others that stand vnder me. In all my waies (O Lord) goe thou

before me, as a Lanthorne to my feet: In all my actions stand thou by me, as my Schoolemaster to direct mee: In all my prosperity let mee looke onely vpon thee: In all my troubles of bodie or mind, turne not thou thine eyes from mee: suffer mee not (O Sauiour) by abundance of wealth to forget thee, nor by feeling want, to fall into despaire, and so forsake thee. Grant this, and whatsoeuer else O Lord, I stand in neede of to guide me in this dangerous Sea, wherein thou hast appointed me to saile. Grant it O God, for thy Sonnes sake, in whose Name I beg thy mercies. Amen.
               
               
                  
                  14. A Prayer for a Lawyer.
                  O THOV that art the truest Law-giuer, so instruct mee in the holy decrees of thy word, that I may practise nothing but the fulfilling of thy Ordinances: let not my tōgue plead and bee imployed about purchasing earthly goods for other men, and be forgetfull how to prouide for the saluation of my owne soule. As my profession is the law of man, so let my profession bee to doe right to all men: for equitie is the ground vpon which law is builded. Take from my

bosome, O Lord, all moderate and vnmeasurable desires of heaping the riches of this world together by meanes vnlawfull. Suffer mee not by oppression to ioyne house to house, land to land, and lord-shippe to lordship; but that I may euer remember that I am but as a pilgrim vpō earth, and that at my departure from thence I must goe either to glorie eternall or torments to endure without end: grant therefore (O my God) that I may deliuer to euery man his true Epha, & his true Hin, that is to say, Iust measure, of that which of right belongs vnto him. O Lord, giue mee (as thy kingly

Prophet beggeth at thy hands, neither pouerty nor abundance of wealth; onely grant vnto me so much as may maintaine my life. For thy Sonnes sake my redeemer, hearken, O Lord, to these requests of thy seruant. So be it. Amen.
               
               
                  15. A Prayer for the two Vniuersities.
                  O THOV insearchable depth of all wisdome, open thou the fountaines of knowledge, and let the streames of it equally run to the two famous Nurseries of learning (the two

Vniuersities of this land) Oxford and Cambridge, that from the brests of those two (as it were from the tender nipples of mothers) the youth and Gentry of this land may sucke the milke both of Diuine and Humane Science. Graft thou, O LORD, vpon those two great Trees infinite numbers of Plants, that in good time may yeelde much fruite to thy Church, and profit to the weale publicke. And seeing that these two Starres of Learning are to giue Comfort, or to fill with darkenesse this our whole Kingdome, bestow vpon them (O Lord)

such beames of Heauenly light, that euen forraine countreyes, aswell as our owne, may be glorified in their splendor. Direct all the studies of those that liue vpon the foode of the soule there, (which is wisedome) to a holy end. Make them to loue as brethren, & to liue as Christians: suffer not vaine glorie to ingender pride amongst them, nor phantasticknesse of wit, to drowne them in ridiculous and apish folly. But so mould both their minds & bodies, that they may enter into those sanctified temples as thy children, & come from thence as seruants of thy ministerie. Amen.
               
               
                  
                  16. A Prayer for the confusion of traytors.
                  O Father of nations, O king of kings, & Lord of Lords, send from thy throne an hoste of Angels to guard our Prince, his Realme & his people from the deuouring iawes of traitours that are stretched wide open to swallow vp this land, where thy Gospel is taught & practised. Arm vs with safety & with boldnesse that we without feare or perill may walke vpon the lyon & the adder, that lye in dennes waiting to sucke our blood: yea couer vs (O God) with thy wings, that wee may tread

vpon the yong lyon and the dragon, that spit fire to destroy this noble kingdom, & to drinke the blood of thine anointed. The death of Saul fall vpon thē that persecute thy seruant Dauid: let Dauid (O Lord) escape, but let these Sauls perish by the sword. The miserie that struck the house of Ieroboam, because hee made Israel to sinne, round begirt these enemies of thy Church and of our countrey. Smite (O God) in thy iust wrath the rocks, & send the whirlewinds forth to blow the dust of their wicked counsels into their owne eyes: giue to these Achitophels, the shame and confusion that Achitophel
                     
met with in his cursed treasons to Absolon against his father Dauid; yea, O Lord, let the proudest of the faction die vpon a tree as proud Absolō
                      did. Vp, Lord arise, and with the breath of thy nostrils, disperse into aire, all these conspiracies: scatter the traytors and their treasons, as chaffe tossed before the wind. Bring to light whatsoeuer they plot in darkenesse, and let their owne counsels bee their owne confusions. Amen.
               
               
                  
                  17. A Prayer in time of ciuill warre.
                  HEauie are our sinnes, and many in number, yet doe wee run out still in the summe of them, not thinking vpō the last, deere and most dreadfull accompt, to which one day we must be called: our sins are great in quantitie, yet haue they a quicke pace, & are euer at our heeles, flie weneuer so fast from them: so that if thy iustice (O God) pursue vs, we are but as sheepe running to the slaughter, or as soldiers felled to the earth in the day of battell. Haue mercie therefore (O thou God of

all mercie) pull in the rod of thy anger, and take pitie of vs thy children. Smite vs not in thy rage, for then wee perish, but beate vs in thy loue, and then we shall amend. But aboue all the punishments which thou hast layd vp in store for vs, and which wee all deserue, deferre, O God, defer, yea, sweare thou wilt no more mowe downe this land (as the haruesters sickle doeth the Corne) with the iron sword of ciuill warre. Beat backe those surges that would drowne their owne shores to whom they owe obedience, and let them serue to quench any fires that by rebellious hands shall bee kindled to burne

in the bosome of our kingdome. We haue beene (O Lord) a long time lookers on vpon our neighbour-contreyes, and haue seene their cities turned to cinders, yet haue not beene scorched with the flames. France doeth yet mourne in the ashes of those fires, and Germany is euē now stiffled with the smoaks. O send not thy Angel with a fierie sword from them to vs, to make them spectators of our miseries, nor to shake it ouer our cities, as thou didst whē thou threatnedst destruction to that thine owne citie Ierusalem. Spare vs, O Lord, and looke not vpō vs in the day of indignation, saue vs from the arrowes

of strange nations, and suffer not the hands of our owne to bee our own murderers: for thy Sonnes sake Iesus Christ, who lost his blood that ours might not bee cast away, doe we beg this. Grant this, O Lord. Amen: Now, and for euer. Amen.
               
               
                  18. A Prayer to stay the pestilence.
                  CAll home, O Lord, thy messengers whō thou hast sent forth with full vials of thy wrath to powre vpon thy people: O stay the Inuaders arme, who shooteth darts of pestilence so thickly amōgst vs, that in heapes we descend into the mericlesse graue. Death is but thy seruant,

and can execute none but those whom thou condemnest, yet hee hath (and still doeth) plaid the cruell tyrant: for the liuing whom he spareth, are not able to bury carcases so fast as hee destroyeth them. Checke him therefore, O God, and charge him no more to spoile these temples made by thine owne hands. O God of heauen, wee haue broken thy lawes: we confesse so much: wee repent that wee haue angred so good & gracious a Father. O Sonne of God, wee haue crucified thee againe and againe in our sinnes, wee confesse so much, wee repent that wee haue abused so excellent an Author of

our Repemption; yet haue mercie vpon vs: O Father speake in our behalfe, O thou blessed Sonne, plead for our pardon: bee thou our mediator, reconcile vs to the king of heauen and earth, against whom wee haue committed treason. And whatsoeuer becomes of our bodies, or how soon soeuer they must turne into earth, yet haue mercy on our soules, saue them (O Sauiour) challenge them for thine owne, and lay them vp in the treasure-house of Heauen, because they are the iewels bought with the price of thy precious blood Amen.
               
               
                  
                  19. A Prayer in time of Famine.
                  THree whips (O Lord) thou holdest in thy hād, when thou art displeased with any kingdome, each of thē with one blow being able to destroy the mightiest nation: & those are, Warre, Pestilence, and Famine; the last of them being the worst, the sharpest & most terrible: wind vp therefore (O mercifull God) the cords of this thy dreadfullest executioner: bind vp the iawes of this insatiable vulture, that she breath not vpon thy people: but open the entrals of the earth, that shee may

giue to man and beast their wonted sustenance. As thou hast made mouthes, so make meate to fill those mouthes; lest otherwise Christians feede vpon the blood of Christians, as heretofore they haue done in other kindgdomes, that haue fallen from thy obedience. Auert, O Lord, this consuming plague frō the gates of our cities, and in stead of peniury, send plentie to relieue vs. Make vs thankfull for thy blessings, let vs not repine at thy punishments, but with patience beare willingly whatsoeuer thou laiest vpō vs; yet, O FATHER, lay no more then flesh & blood may suffer, and let

all that thou doest bee onelie for our triall and amendement. Amen.
               
               
                  20. A Prayer in time of persecution.
                  WOlues (O Lord) & rauenous beasts haue from the beginning broke into thy pastures, and suckt the blood of thy sheepe: now, euen now, are the snares pitched, and the Butchers knife whetted to take away the liues of thy yong ones. Arise therefore from thy throne, and set thy foote on the proude and stiffe neckes of these persecutors of thy Gospell and scoffers of thy glorie.

Strike them (O Lord of hosts) with thy right arme, and make them feele what it is to striue against the Almightie: Smite them blind in their own works: and as at the building vp of Babel, thou didst confoūd the pride of thine enemies by altring their languages; so (O GOD) cast thou downe this Babell of idolatrie which these vngodly ones build vp in their own braines, and by the traditions of men: and put into their mouthes, tongues which none may vnderstand. Bee thou our God, & saue thy people whom thy Sonne hath redeemed; bee thou our Captaine, and fight for thy Church,

whom thy Sonne calleth his Spouse: Be thou Iehouah, and command the earth to open and swallow these prophane and professed enemies of thy truth: so shal we thy people worship thee freely; so shall we triumph to see thy honour aduanced; so shall we euer praise thee; so shall all nations glorifie thy Name. Amen.
               
               
                  21. A Praier for the Master of a Family.
                  SINCE thou hast (O Lord) made me a Steward ouer a familie; direct me by thy owne Lawes, that I may neuer steppe

beyond the limits of my duetie: to the intent that when at the great Audit-day I shall bee called to an account, how I haue behaued my selfe in that office; I may receiue from thee (O LOD) the hire of a faithfull Seruant. Blesse (O Father of heauen and earth) the labours of mine owne hand, and of those that are committed to my charge. Suffer mee not to descend into base and indirect wayes, to purchase riches; but (according to thine owne statute) with the sweat of my brow let mee eate my bread. Inspire me with knowledge of thy holy word, that I may learne how to liue

well my selfe, and instruct others (about mee) to doe the like. Temper, O Lord, my mind & my affections, that no houshold brawles be kindled vnder my roofe; or if they take fire, giue me patience to endure them, & wisedom how to quench them: preserue my name (O my GOD) from the sting of the slanderer, and let me be so iealous of my reputation, that I enter neuer into any action to the dishonouring of thee, or bringing my own life into infamie. At my vprising, blesse mee: at my downe-lying, lay thy hand ouer me: In my walkes, be thou my guide: In my meditations, be thou my Tutour:

let thy booke be my studie, and let all my study bee to get aduancement with those that are preferred to euerlasting life; to which (O Lord) bring me, I must hūbly beseech thee, for thine owne glories sake, and for thy Sonnes sake Iesus Christ. Amen.
                  FINIS.
               
            
         
         
            
               
                  
                  
                  THE Pellican.
                  The PELLICAN bringeth health.
                  Vigilate & Orate.
                  London printed by H. B. for Nathaniel Butter. 1609.
               
               
                  
                  
                  To the Reader.
                  
                     READER: as it behoueth thee to become an humble suppliāt to God, when thou standest in neede of any necessaries to maintaine thine owne life: so art thou bound by duety to thy maker, and by the lawes of religion and Christianitie to bee an earnest suter to his Maiestie in behalfe of others: sithence then that the most

righteous man vpon earth sinneth seuen times a day, and that Rulers and Magistrates, who are set ouer others, are but men themselues; God hath appointed thee to make intercession (before him) for them, because it is his custome to lay his blessings vpon one man, through the faithfull and zealous Prayers of another. I haue in few words told thee with what office the king of heauen & earth hath put thee in trust. Read ouer this booke, and it will teach thee how to execute it: and by discharging the place, to be a true Christian. Doe so: Thou knowest thy reward.
                  Farewell.
               
               
                  
                  THE Pellican.
                  The PELLICAN bringeth health.
                  Vigilate & Orate.
                  Printed at London by H. B. for N. B. 1609.
               
            
            
               
                  
                  The Pellican.
                  
                     THe third Bird that I call out of Noahs Ark, is the Pellican. The nature of the Pellican is to peck her owne bosom, & with the drops of her blood to feede her yong ones: so in our Prayers wee must (in the loue that wee beare to God) beate at our brests till (with the bleeding

drops of a contrite and repentant heart) we haue fedde our Soules with the nourishment of euerlasting life. The Pellican is content to yeeld vp her owne life to saue others: so in our Prayers, wee must bee willing to yeeld vp all the pleasures of the world, and to kill all the desires of the body for the preseruation of the soule. As Christ therefore suffered abuses before his death, and agonies at the time of his death (both of them being to the number principally of ten) so (because

our Pellican is a figure of him in his passion) doth this third Bird take tenne flights; at euery flight her wings bearing vp a praier, to defend vs frō those sins for which Christ died. The abuses & agonies which Christ put vp & suffred being in number x.) are these: First, the betraying of him by one of his owne seruants: Secondly, the buffeting of him, and scrourging him in the open Hall by his owne nation: Thirdly, his arraignement and condemnation, when nothing could be prooued

against him: Fourthly, the compelling of him to carrie his owne crosse, when already he had vndertaken to cary on his backe all our sinnes: Fiftly, the nailing of him to the tree of shame: Sixtly, the crowning of him in scorne, with a crowne of thornes: Seuenthly, the hanging of two common theeues in his company: Eightly, the giuing of Vineger and Gall to him when he was thirsty: Ninthly, the sorrows of hel, which he felt when in the vnspeakable anguish of his soule hee

was forced to cry: Eli, Eli, Lamasabacthani. And lastly, the piercing of his glorious side with a speare. These are the ten wings with which Christ (our Pellican) flew to his death. Now cast vp your eyes and behold, and listen with your eares and heare what ten notes our Pellican maketh comming out of Noahs Ark.
                  
                     
                     CHRIST, the Pellican.
                     Christ bringeth into the field seuen liuely vertues, to fight against, and confound seuen deadly sinnes.
                     
                        CHRIST the Sonne of GOD, is the Pellican, whose blood was shet out to feed vs: the Physition made of his owne bodie a medicine to cure vs;

looke vpon him well, and behold his bodie hanging on a crosse, his wounds bleeding, his blood trickling on the earth, his head bowed downe (as it were to kisse vs) his verie sides opened, (as it were to shew how in his heart he loued vs) his armes stretched out to their length, (as it were to embrace vs.) And iudge by all these, if Christ be not our truest Pellican. He that was the Son of God, became the mockerie of men: He that was King of heauen and earth, suffered his browes to weare a crowne of thornes: He endured hunger that is our food: he drunk gal that is our foū
                        taine

of life: He receiued wounds, that is our health: He tasted the bitternesse of death, that is mans only saluatiō & what Pellican can do more for her yong ones?
                     Our bodies were ful of corruptiō; our soules were spotted: our soules & bodies were forfeited to hell: sinne had pawnd them, sinne had lost them, sinne had made them foule. All the physicke in the world could not purge our corruption: all the fountains in the world could not wash out our spots: al the gold & siluer on earth could not redeeme our forfeitures: al the Kings vnder heauen could not pay our rāsoms: nothing

could free vs frō captiuity, but to make Christ a prisoner Nothing could giue vs life, but the heauenly Pellicanes death, hell, was the goale into which we were to be throwē, diuels the keepers, that shold haue fettered vs for euer: our euill actions, the Iudges that should haue called vs to a bar: Conscience the euidence that should haue cast vs away: and sinnes, the executioners that were to bee our tormentors. But note the mercie of our Maker, note the courage of our Redeemer. Against seuen deadly and detestable sinnes, that came into the field (to

set vpon all the children of Adam) in that great battell and worke of our Saluation, came Christ, armed with seuen liuely vertues. Thus was his combat, and thus was his victorie. Hee suffered himselfe to bee betrayed by a Iudas; there fought his humilitie, and ouercame pride. Hee left not our safetie, till hee had lost his owne life; there fought his loue, and ouercame enuy. Hee tooke buffets on the face, scourges on the backe, pricking briers on the forehead; there fought his patience, and triumphed ouer wrath. He was ready in all tempests

to throw himself ouer-borde to saue vs from shipwrack; there fought his watchfulnesse, and slew the sinne of sloth. He gaue away himself and the world, that the world to come might by his Father be giuen to vs; there fought his liberalitie▪ and ouercame couetousnes. He drunke of the sowrest and bitterest grape, that we might taste of the sweetest; there fought his temperance, and ouer gluttony got the conquest. He could not be tempted with al the kingdomes vpon earth, nor all the pleasures in those kingdomes; there fought his

continence, and ouercame lust. Thus with seuen blows strooke hee off the heads of seuen dragons that stood gaping to deuoure vs. We are still in danger of them: let vs therefore arme our selues with those weapons, which Christ hath taught vs to handle in our owne defence, and those are these which follow.
                  
                  
                     
                     1. A Prayer for the Morning.
                     
                        WHen I rise from my bed (O my Redeemer) it puts mee in mind of my rising from the graue, when the last trumpet shall sound, & summon vs to the generalll resurrection: and as then I hope to behold thee comming in thy fulnesse of glorie, and thy Father sitting in the brightnes

of his maiestie, and that I shall haue a place amongst those that are written in thy booke of life: so (O thou my mediator) make intercession for mee, that all the sinnes of my former dayes and nights being freely pardoned, I may this day be intertained againe into thy seruice. Receiue therefore (O Lord) this earely sacrifice both of my soule and bodie: I offer them vp into thy hands to be disposed at thy pleasure, and with them vnfained sighes for offending thee: & with those sighes my zealous Prayers, for thy pardon: and with those Prayers an assured hope, that (in thy mercie) and in the blood of

that louing Pellican (Christ Iesus) that died for mee, I shall be forgiuen. Blessed bee thy Name for blessing me this night from danger. I read in the booke which was written by thine owne finger, that thou didst cast Adam into a sleepe, when thou madest (of his rib) a woman; by which I note, that man of himselfe hath no power to binde slūbers to his temples, vnlesse thou giue it him. All thankes therefore be thine, that this night hast couered me with the soft wings of quietnes, and so graciously dost now suffer mee to behold the light of the day. Goe on (O God) with thy fauours towards me thy humble seruant:

goe on along by me, and with mee, all this day, and all the dayes of my life; that I may not step into the path of sinne. Grant this, I beseech thee, giue me thy grace, and forgiue mee my debts which I owe to sinne and death. So be it. Amen.
                  
                  
                     2. A Prayer against pride.
                     O THOV Son of the euerliuing God, who euen in thy birth thou vouchsafedst to call Ioseph thy Father, and in thy cradle, which was but a poore manger, and who in the height of all thy

passions and sorowes vpon the crosse; wert the true patern of true humilitie; teach me, O Lord, to tread that path in all my tribulations: make me thy scholler, and leaue me not till I haue that lesson perfectly by heart. God (thy father) is ouer all the world, the highest; but it is to expresse his Maiestie. Thou (that art God the sonne) of all those that are of thy fold, art the lowliest-minded; but that is to instruct vs (thy children) in obedience. For alack, whereof should I bee proud? Am I not dust and ashes? Am I not made of the clay of the earth? And must I not (in the end) like a potters earthen vessell be

broken all into pieces? Thy Prophet Amos told the people, that thou didst hate the pride euen of Iacob, and didst abhorre his palaces: And can I haue any hope (being nothing so deere vnto thee as Iacob) that thou canst loue to behold that Serpent (of pride) with seuen heads, sleeping in my bosome? Now thy hand is armed against the hand of the proud man, and he cannot escape confusion. Pride was the first sin that crept into the world; but so vgly a sinne it was, that it could not be suffered to stay in heauen: for Lucifer (the father of it) from the glory of an Angel, was throwne headlong (for his insolence)

into the pitte of hell. Pharaoh was proud, but Pharaoh and his host fell in their pride. Senacherib was proud, but Senacherib was trod vpon by the feete of his owne children. Hammon was proud, but his end was the gallow-tree, which hee set vp for another. Yea so odious a monster in thine eye (O God) is a proud man: that proud Nabuchodonozer being a king, was by thee turned into a beast and eat the grasse, till hee confessed himselfe to be but a man; and that thou onely (O God) wert the God of heauen and earth. And on the contrary side, so pretious a iewell is humilitie

in thy sight, that none could bee Christs disciples, but such as wore the Garment of Lowlinesse. Pull therefore downe (O LORD) nay pull vp by the very roote, this tree of Pride, if thou perceiue it growing within me. Suffer (O GOD) none of the branches of this sinne to spread in the world, but lop them off euen in their budding forth: and for the purpose let not vaine glory (one of the pages of Pride) follow learning: let not disdaine sit in the eye of Greatnes, to cast terrifying looks vpō the distressed: let not presūptiō of thy mercies make vs tempt thee to destroy vs in our

security; nor let thy long suffering and winking at our sinnes, stirre our soules vp to disobedience and rebellion. But turne thou all our affections in such concord, that we may count our glories but shadowes, our strength weakenesse, our riches but temptations, & snars to catch our souls, our wisedome but folly, our life but a bubble in water, and our death our euerlasting iourney to the land of sorrow, vnles at our setting forth thou vndertakest to be the Pilot. Be therefore so our merciful God, & in despite of all the rockes which sinne and her dreadfull Sea-monsters set in the way for our destruction,

safely set vs, we beseech thee, vpon the shore of eternall felicity: Amen, O Lord, Amen, So be it, now, and for euer. Amen.
                  
                  
                     3. A Prayer against Enuie.
                     IT is a branch in thy heauenly statute (O King of heauen) that wee should loue our enemies, and blesse them that curse vs, and doe good to them that hate vs, and to pray for them that lay plots for our liues: these are the strings (O God) whose musicke is pleasing to thine eare; these are the staires by which we climbe vp to charity, and holding her by the hand,

we are led vp into heauen. Purge thou therefore (O Lord) our veines, and suffer not the stincking poison of enuy to infect our blood. But following the steps of Samuel, let vs euen pray for king Saul, albeit king Saul be an enemy to thy seruants: and with Moses, let vs not repine at the stubborne Iewes, though they rebell and threaten to kill vs with death. Enuy (O God) is the destroier of him that nourisheth it in his bosome: it is the tormentor of a mans owne selfe: thou hast commanded vs to loue our neighbours as our selues. But how can wee shew loue to them, when if enuy lie sucking of our

owne blood, wee sucke euen the ruine of our owne bodies? As the rust eateth the iron, so doeth this vulture gnawe the soule.
                     Enuie turnes man into a Diuell; yea into the worser shape of a Diuell, doeth it turne him. The Iewes perished, because they chose rather to enuie Christ and his miracles, then to beleeue him.
                     Other sinnes haue their limits, but the streame of enuie keepeth within no bounds. If pride were barren, enuie would neuer haue beene borne: but that sinne is the mother to this, and this sin the fountaine of tenne

thousand more. By meanes of this sinne the world was drowned, and by meanes of this sinne was thy Sonne betraid to death: cut it therefore off (O Lord) and suffer not the seede of it to grow in mens hearts. How dare we, O God, aske forgiuenes at thy hands, when we are out of charity, and wish the downefall of our neighbour? Poure therefore into our soules thy diuine grace, that wee may striue to be like thee; that is, to be al loue, and all mercy: so shall we liue with thee for euer; so shall wee die thy seruants, and being raised vp againe, shall be thy children. Amen.
                  
                  
                     
                     4. A Prayer against Wrath.
                     WRath is a short madnesse: madnesse is the murderer of reason; so that anger transformes a man into a brute beast. Giue vs therefore courage (O Lord) to fight against this strong enemy, and not to fight onely, but to ouercome him: sithence the conquest is harder, to triumph ouer our raging affections, then to subdue a Citie. All vengeance is thine (O God) and if wee offer to take it out of thy hand, it is high treason, for we doe as much as if wee went about to pull thee

from thy throne: Inspire vs therefore with patience, that we may beare iniuries as thy Son did vpon earth, and may endure afflictions (as thy seruant Iob did) when it shall please thee to send them on thy message; and that we may not at any time either murmure against thy prouidence, or bee angry with thee for whatsoeuer thou sendest, be it health or sicknes, life or death; nor in the bitternes of our soules, powre downe curses (which are some of the droppes of wrath) vpon whatsoeuer Rulers or Teachers thou settest ouer vs; lest thy heauenly vengeance smite vs, (with Mirian, who murmured

against Moses.): But cast (O Lord) such a bridle vppon our stiffe-necked affections, that all contention, quarrels, blood-shed, war, and murder (who are the sonnes of wrath) may bee curbed, and not suffered to doe violence to thy Church, to offer dishonour to thy Saints, or disturbance to the Common-wealth. Sign (O Lord) to this humble petition of thy seruants, that they may liue here like Doues one to another, without gall; and at their departure hence, they may mutually embrace and hold hands together, to meete thee in glory.
                  
                  
                     
                     5. A Prayer against Sloth.
                     HOw hatefull the sinne of Sloth is in thine eyes (O Lord) we may gather by the life of our first father Adam; who albeit he had a whole world to himself, and al things made ready to his hand; yet to shew that he was not borne to liue idlely, thou placedst him in the garden of Eden, and there appointedst him to labour. And euen from the beginning hast thou enacted, that man should liue by the sweate of his brow; that he should earne his bread, ere hee tasted

bread; and that hee who would not worke should not feede, for as a bird is created to flie in the ayre, as fishes are to swim in the waters, so is man made to take paines vpon earth. What were the sinnes of Sodom but pride, fulnesse of meate, wealth and idlenesse? Keepe these sinnes therefore O Lord, from the gates of our cities, lest they bring vpon vs the like confusion. Haue wee not examples (euen of those that were tender to thy loue) that wee should not nourish this disease in our blood, but that wee should spend our liues as the clouds execute their offices to be still in motion? were

not Abraham, Lor, Isac, and Iacob ploughmen and shepheards? Did not thy seruant Moses keepe the sheepe of Iethro his father in law, the Priest of Midia? Was not Dauid, before he was an annointed king, a shepheard likewise? Yea, did not thine owne Sonne take paines continually, whilest hee liued amonst men? Were not his Apostles fishermen, and did not Luke (thy blessed Euangelist, and one of thy Sonnes Chroniclers) practise physicke & painting? In these men (O LORD) and in their liues hast thou set downe rules for vs to follow. Put therefore strength into our armes, that we may endure

labour: kindle our mindes with courage, and liuely-hood, that in winter wee may not bee loath to take holde of the plough for feare of the colde, lest when summer commeth, we fall into beggerie. And aboue all things, so encourage vs with thy grace, and so quicken our vnderstandings with thy spirit, that we may not be dulled and so neglect the knowledge of thy lawes, nor by lasines be besotted with ignorāce, and so lose the remembrance of our duties. Suffer not (O Lord) this vnprofitable weede (of sloth) to grow vp amongst the Ministers of thy word: let no standing waters be in thy

Church, but giue swiftnesse to them, that they may all bee running streames, so shall thy pastures bee watered and bring foorth encrease: so shall thy flockes bee well tended, when the sheepheards bee watchfull; so shall we all set ourhands to the raising vp of thy heauenly tabernacle, & so in the end shall we be lifted vp to sit with thee, and thy Sonne in Heauen. Amen.
                  
                  
                     6. A Prayer against couetousnesse.
                     O Father of heauen▪ and giuer of all blessings open thy hand, but so open it, that the powring downe of thy benefits, may not

make vs swell into a desire to hoord vp more then is fit for vs to receiue. The loue of worldly honours, maketh vs onely in loue with the world, and to forget thee; the loue of gold & siluer, maketh vs to forsake heauen, and to lose thee. O let not therefore the griping talants of couetousnesse seize vpon our soules. It is a golden diuell that tempteth vs into hell. It is a Mar-maid, whose songs are sweet▪ but full of sorcerie. It is a sinne that turneth courtiers into beggers, and yet maketh them weare monopolies on their backes, when the common-wealth shiuereth through cold. It is a sinne,

that sels thy Church (by simonie) and sends soules away at an easie rate. It is a sinne, that blindeth the eye of iustice; It is a bell, whose sound so deafes the poore mans voice, that his wrongs cannot bee heard. Driue therefore this plague out of our land (O Lord) and make vs couetous of nothing but of thy glorie, & of the riches of thy Gospel: let vs bee couetous of doing well one to another, so shall we be sure to stand in fan our with thee. A couetous man is like hell, euer deuouring, neuer satisfied; hee is an insatiable drunkard of gold. Quench, O Lord, this thirst of money in vs: keepe our hands

clean from touching riches vnlawfully, lest with Achab and Iezabel wee commit murder, and shed Naboths blood, to wring from him his vineyard: or with Achan bee stoned to death fos taking goods that are to vs forbidden. Grant these blessings (O FATHER Almightie) and with them, giue vs grace to bee content with such estate (how meane soeuer) as thou shalt lay vpon vs: let the wealth we desire be thy kingdome, and the gold we thirst after, be our Saluation. Amen.
                  
                  
                     
                     7. A Prayer against gluttonie.
                     HOw manie woes (O Lord) are thundred out by thy Prophets against this bestiall and deuouring sinne of gluttony? Where is woe (crieth out that proclaimer of all wisedome king Salomon) where is wailing? Where is strife? Where are snares laid? Where are wounds taken? Where are bloody eyes? but where the drunkard filleth out his wine, and the epicure feeds on his varietie of dishes? Preserue vs therefore, O God, from falling into this bottomles gulfe. All creatures hast

thou giuen to man, to serue his vse, but let not man turne that to his destruction, which was ordained for his comfort. This sinne of intemperance, was the sin of our first parents: it was a lickorish sin, but it was sowerly & seuerely punished: the eating of one apple lost Paradise frō thē, & brought thy heauie curse vpon vs. This sinne of inordinate eating and drinking, kindled vnnaturall lust in the Sodomites, which afterwards in flakes of burning brimstone fell from heauen, and destroyed their cities. This sinne in Lot, made him fall into incest: and this in the people of Israel, turned thē into idolatrie. Strengthen

therefore our hearts (O God) with thy grace, and not with the fulnesse of meates: giue vs the waters of life to taste, & not strong wines to ouercome vs: sithence drunkards shall not inherite the kingdome of heauen: and lastly, set still before our eyes the pictures of the rich glutton, and of poore Lazarus; the one fared deliciously euery day, and drunke of the purest grape, but afterwards hee lay howling in hel & could not get a drop of cold water to quench his burning thirst. The other fed vpon crummes, and he was caried into Abrahams bosome. To vs: that place, O Lord, send & grant that we may sit at

that table of thy Saints, where neither hunger nor thirst shal afflict, but where is all fulnesse, all gladnesse, all riches, all rest, all happinesse. Amen.
                  
                  
                     8. A Prayer against lust.
                     MY bodie (O Lord) is a temple consecrated to thee, keep it then, I beseech thee, cleane and free from the pollution of sinne, and amongst all that lay siege to destroy it, defend it from vnbrideled flames of lust: with which poison, who so are infected, haue their part in the lake that

burneth with fire and brimstone, which is the second death. Close vp my lippes (O God) from speaking vnchast language; sanctifie my thoughts, that no wanton desires may burne in my bosome: be thou present in all my actions, that no temptations of the flesh may lead my soule into wickednesse. The sinne of lust (O Lord) is a couetous sinne, and not content with the spoile of one bodie, but worketh the euerlasting perdition of two at once. It is a sinne so foule, that by a strait law thou hast forbidden it in thy tables: yea, and hast vowed that the offender therein shall goe downe into hell, whereas

hee that goeth from it shall be saued. Place modesty therefore in mine eye, that lasciuious glances may not there haue entrance: let mee with Ioseph rather suffer imprisonment, then to make any body a slaue to intemperate lust. It is written vpon those Records of thine which cannot lie, that foure & twentie thousand Iewes were slaine for the whoredomes by them committed; yea the deflowring of a Leuites wife, cost the liues of an hundred thousand people. And so hatefull vnto thee (O God) was Dauids adultery with the wife of Vrias; that albeit he were thy chosen seruant, hee

could not scape thy punishment. Forgiue therefore the follies of my youth and let my body hereafter be a vessell of purity, that at the last day when all creatures must stand before thee, I may appeare in whitenes, and receiue that crowne of glory, prepared for the blessed. Amen.
                  
                  
                     9. A Prayer against the temptation of the Diuel.
                     OVr life (O Lord) passing thorow so dangerous a wildernes, cannot chuse but meete with many sins: euery sin is a temptation; to ouercome euerie temptation is a glorious victory; and the reward of

that victory, is an euerlasting crowne of starres: for there can be no conquest without a combat; & there can be no combat without an enemy to encoūter with; and no enemy is more ready to set vpon vs, and more subtil in his fight, nor more cruell where he subdues, then that arch-traytor to thy kingdome, and old enemy to mankind, the Diuell. Giue him therfore (O Lord) no power ouer me: or if it be thy pleasure that I must enter into the lists with him, let my trials bee like those of Iob, to exercise my faith, and not to confound my soule: to which battel when I must be summoned, stand thou (O my

Sauiour) in my sight to inspire mee with courage, and plant a guard of Angels on either side of mee, to take my part if I shrink; that in the end I may bee ledde away in triumph. Breake (O my God) all the snares which daily and howerly this politick hunter pitcheth to intrap me, in the lustines of my health and youth. But aboue all, suffer mee not to fall into those, which he spreadeth at the houre of my death, to catch my soule at her departure. O Lord driue away despaire, that it may not enter at that time (nor any other) into my bosome; neither let mee be afraid that I knock at the gates of thy

mercy too late, or distrust thy grace, because so many thousands of sins do muster themselues before me: but comfort me with the sweet physicke of thy promises, and with the examples of thy holiest seruants, who all sinned grieuously; yet didst thou seale them a pardon. In my meditations stand, O Lord, at my elbow, that my soule may not wander and so bee lost. Defend mee from the arrow of death eternall: saue mee from the iawes of the redde Dragon: keepe me from entring into the gates of hell. Amen.
                  
                  
                     
                     10. A Prayer for the Euening.
                     THus (O God) am I neerer to old age then I was in the morning, but (I feare) not neerer to goodnes: for he that striues to do best, comes short of his duety. The night now stealeth vpon me (like a thiefe.) O defend me from the horrors of it. When I am to lie downe in my bedde, let me imagine I am to lie in my winding sheete: and suffer me not to close mine eyes, til my soule & I haue reckoned and made euen, for all the offences which not only this day, but all the former minuts of my life,

I haue committed against thy diuine Maiestie. Pardon them, O LORD, forgiue mee my sinnes, which are more infinite then the starres, and more heauie then if mountaines lay vpon my bosome; but thy mercy, and the merits of my Redeemer do I trust in. In his Name doe I sue for a pardon. Suffer, O LORD, no vncleane thoughts this night to pollute my body and soule: but keep my cogitations chaste, and let my dreames be like those of innocēts & sucking babes. Grāt, O Lord, that the Sun may not go down vpō my wrath. But if any man this day hath done me wrong,

that I may freely and heartily forgiue him, as I desire at thy hands to bee forgiuen. Whether I sleepe or wake, giue thy Angels charge ouer mee, that at what houre soeuer thou callest mee, I may like a faithfull souldier be found ready to encounter death, and to follow the Lambe wheresoeuer he goeth. Amen.
                  
                  FINIS.
               
            
         
         
            
               
                  
                  The Phoenix.
                  
                     THE fourth and last Bird which you are to behold, flying out of Noahs Arke, is the Phoenix. The Phoenix of all other birds liueth to the longest age: so must our Prayers fly vp in bright flames all the dayes of our life: wee must be petitioners euen to the houre and last minute of our breath. The

                     Phoenix hath the goodliest feathers in the world: and Prayers are the most beautifull wings by which we may mount into heauen. There is but one Phoenix vpō earth, as there is but one tune, in which God delighteth, and that is the Prayer of a sinner. When the Phoenix knoweth shee must die, shee buildeth a nest of al the sweetest spices, and there looking stedfastly on the Sunne: shee beateth her wings in his hottest beames, and betweene thē kindleth a fire amongst those sweet spices, & so burneth her selfe to death. So when we desire to die to the

vanities of the world, wee must build vp a nest, and fill it with faithfull sighes, grones, teares, fasting, and prayer, sackecloth & ashes, (all which in the nostrils of the Lord are sweete spices) and then fixing our eyes vpon the crosse where the glorious Sonne of God payed the ransome of our sinnes, we must not cease till with the wings of faith and repentance, wee haue kindled his mercie, and in that sweete flame haue all our fleshly corruptions consumed & purified. Out of those dead ashes of the Phoenix, doeth a new Phoenix arise.

And euen so out of the ashes of that one repentance, shall we bee regenerate and borne anew.
               
               
                  
                  CHRIST is the true Phoenix.
                  
                  
                     CHrist (out of the purest flames of loue) kindled a fire which drunk vp the wrath of his father, wherein all men should haue beene drowned for sinne, and in that fire did hee die to redeeme vs that were lost. Yet left hee not there. To haue died for vs had beene nothing, vnlesse like a true Phoenix he had beene raised

vp againe: as therefore a graine of wheat is cast into the earth, and there first rots and then quickens againe, & after yeeldeth it selfe in a tenfold measure: so was our Sauiour cast into his sepulcher, there lay his dead body for a time, & then was quickened, and then raised vp: and in that rising did hee multiply those benefits which before hee sowed amongst vs, when he was torne in pieces and scattered on the crosse. Whē he died; he died alone, but when he did rise, he did not rise

alone. for in his resurrection do we all ascend vp into heauen. Hee fought hand to hand with death, that death might not kill vs, & shewed vs his resurrection, that wee might die more willingly, because wee haue hope to liue eternally. Vpō those fiue altars therefore, of the death, burial, resurrection, ascension, & comming of Christ in glorie, doe wee offer vp fiue Thanksgiuings, or rather fiue Sacrifices, (imitating therein the Phoenix, who maketh her owne bodie a burnt offering)
               
               
                  
                  THE Phoenix.
                  The PHOENIX bringeth life.
                  Vigilate & Orate.
                  Printed at London by H. B. for N. B. 1609.
               
               
                  
                  
                  To the two worthie and worthily admired Ladies, Sarah, wife to the right Worshipful, Sir Thomas Smith Knight, and Catharine, wife to the right Worshipfull Sir Iohn Scot, Knight.
                  
                     Vertuous Ladies:
                  
                  
                     NO tunes (I know) can be more welcome to ears so chast and vndefiled as yours are, then the Diuine Musicke of

Prayers and Meditations. And therefore am I bold to bestow vpon you both a Bird, whose voice yeeldeth none but heauenly sounds. There is but one Phoenix (at one time) in the world: It is rare in shape, and rare in quality; for which cause, I send it flying to your bosoms; sithence you both are like the Phoenix (Rare) as well in the perfection of bodie, as the excellency of minde. It is a Bird to which Christ suffereth himselfe to bee compared. And it may aptly bee a figure of his resurrection: so that my hopes are,

you will gladly receiue it, because Christ his death and rising again, are two strong, stedfast, and maine anchors to which (as appeareth by your liues) your faith is fastned, thereby to lay hold on saluation. You are sisters in loue, as you are sisters by the lawes of marriage: Indifferently therefore to you both doeth this our Phoenix offer vp his heauenly songs. Heare them, I beseech you, if not for any worth that is in them, yet for the loue you zealously beare to him, of whose glorious resurrection, ascension, &c. they make onely mention. And thus

crauing pardon of both your Ladiships, for this my boldnesse, which groweth out of my loue and respect to your Names & Families. I wish you all the happinesse that this earthly paradise can yeeld, and pray, that at your going from thence, you may enter into the euerlasting Paradise of Heauen.
                  
                     Humbly deuoted to your Ladyships, Tho. Dekker.
                  
               
               
                  
                  To the Reader. Christian Reader:
                  
                     THou hast by these three former birds of Noahs Arke, gotten three blessings. The Doue hath ministred comfort to thine afflicted mind, in a number of those stormes of tribulation which shal fall vpon man in this life. The Eagle hath armed thy Soule with courage, and taught it to soare high with the wings of Prayer, till they

beat at the very gates of heauen, & from thence receiue mercie. The Pellican hath playd the true Physition, and (where thou art full and foule with diseases bred by sinne) that teacheth the way to cure thee, and to attaine to the health of saluation. The fourth & last bird is now flying out towards thee; spred therfore thine armes wide open to welcome it: and this Phoenix will carie thee vp to a second life, that shall be euer, euerlasting.
                  
                     The fiue Altars stand prepared before in order, the Sacrifices are at hand. And thus much to shew that our Prayer must resemble the Phoenix. And thus much to shew that the true and only Phoenix is Christ Iesus.
               
            
            
               
                  
                  1. SACRIFICE. A Thankesgiuing for all those benefits which wee reape by the death of Christ.
                  WHat thankes (O Lord) can wee powre foorth? What Hymnes shall we sing? What praises haue wee to crowne thee with, or what giftes can we bestow worthy enough vpon thee, that didst not spare thine owne and only deerest Sonnes blood, to saue vs? (that were miserable and condemned castaways) But, O Lord, thou in thy prouidence didst foresee, that all thy glorie,

and in thy wisedome and compassion didst consent that all the health of mankind should consist in the death of thy blessed Sonne. Wee were the arch-traytors, but hee answered all our treasons at a most dreadfull barre. Wee had transgressed, but hee was the Lamb that was to bee sacraficed. Glorified bee thy Name for being so full of pitie: Glorified be thy Sonnes death, for being so full of charitable pietie. For let vs reckon before thee (O Father) and betweene vs & our soules, how much we are indebted for this thy Sonnes suretie-ship. Wee owed all, and hee payed the vtmost farthing. Let vs

summe vp the foote of this accompt, and take a note of our gaines, and his losses in this voiage. Hee ventured his life, and lost it: wee ventured nothing, but were vpon point of shipwrake, and yet came home sauers. By his death wee are ingrafted into the Tree of life, his blood doeth giue it nourishment. His nailing on the crosse cleft the dores of hell in sunder, and set wide open the gates of heauen: Christ by this meanes is become our way, our guide, our hauen. Would we walke safely? Christ is our path: would we not stumble? Cstrist is our leader: would wee not be cast away? Christ is our Pilot.
                  
                     What need wee now to feare? whom should we fly from now, for sathans head is broken in sunder: sinne is vanquished: death is ouercome: hell is swallowed vp: the diuel that had power ouer death, is put to flight. Before wee liued in slauerie, but now we dwell within the liberties of the holy citie. Before we were spotted, & foule as leapers, but the precious drops that fell from Christs side, haue clensed our soules, & now they look as white as snow. In a most desperate state liued we before, but now in the most happie: for wee are bought, and payd for, and none can lay claime to vs now, but Iesus Christ.

To quit which loue of his (albeit there is nothing in vs of value that can giue him satisfaction) yet rather then to pay no part of the debt, let vs tender downe so much as wee can make. And that is, not to forget his kindnesse: which that wee may neuer doe; let vs print him in our hearts, ingraue him on our hands, write him on our brests, yea, weare him in our garments. Set the sorowes of his suffering for euer before our eyes.
                  When wee sit to meate, let vs thinke vpon the traitour that dipt his finger with him in the dish: when the night approcheth, let it bee a memoriall

of his apprehension with bils and staues: It was a deed of darkenesse, and therfore done in the night. When wee doe but stretch foorth our armes, let vs call to mind how hee was racked vpon the crosse. The branches of these meditations shall beare this fruit; by turning ouer the leaues of his death and passion, we shall still read the storie of our owne end: and nothing can more fright a man out of the companie of sinne, then when hee looketh vpon that which he is sure to goe to, and that is his graue: so to meditate, is to liue well: so to liue, is to die well; for no pil remaines to make death

taste bitter afterward, vnlesse it were taken downe before. He that thus fights is sure to conquer: he that thus conquers is sure to be crowned; he that is ambitious of that crowne, will desire to bee dissolued and to be with Christ: hee that so desires, doeth not die patiently, but hee liues patiently, and dieth ioyfully. Such a death, O Lord, let me die, for in the sepulcher of thy Sonne, death (that once was terrible) is swallowed vp: so that now we may triumphantly sing, Where is thy sting, O death? Where is thy victorie, O hell?
                  The sting of death is

sinne, but that is taken out: the power of sinne is the Law, but that is satisfied. Thankes therefore, and immortall honour be giuen to our glorious GOD, who hath giuen vs so noble a victorie, through the death onely of his Sonne Iesus Christ. Amen.
               
               
                  2. SACRIFICE. A Thankesgiuing for all those benefits which we reape by the buriall of Christ.
                  THE graue is full of horror, the house of the dead is the habitation of sadnesse, for the body receiueth no comfort,

when it commeth to lodge in this last & fardest Inne. When our feete step vpon that shore, wee are robd of all our honours, stript out of all our gay attires, spoiled of all our gold and siluer, forsaken by our friends, fled frō by our kinsfolkes, yea, abhorred to bee looked vpon by our owne children: nothing is left vs but a poore mantle of linnen to hide our nakednesse; that is the last apparell wee must weare, and when that is worne out, wee must bee turned out of all.
                  A dreadfull thing therefore would it bee to dwell in this land of euerlasting silence and darkenesse, but

that Christ himselfe hath gone thither before vs. How infinitelie are wee bound to him, that (in this battell of death) wee are not thrust vpon any danger, but what he hath gone thorow. How aboue measure doeth hee loue vs, to trie the ice first, before he suffer vs to venture ouer? Hee went into the graue before vs, to shew that we all must follow him. But what riches may we gather out of this his sepulcher? What treasure lieth hid in these coffins of the dead? This cleere gaines we gather; this profitable knowledge wee gaine, that as Adam was made of a piece

of clay, so all the sonnes of Adam must crumble into dust. The wombes of our mothers are the first lodgings that wee lie in, and the womb of the earth is appointed to be the last. The graue is a But at which all the arrowes of our life are shot; and the last arrowe of all hits the marke.
                  Yet suffer vs, O Lord, not to repine, whether in the morning, at noone, or at mid night, that is to say, in our cradle, in our youth, or old age, wee go to take our long sleepe, but let vs make this reckoning of our yeres, that if we can

liue no longer, that is vnto vs our old age; for hee that liueth so long as thou appointest him (though hee die in the pride of his beautie) dieth an olde man. Sithence then that wormes must bee our last companions, & that the pillowes vpon which wee are to rest for euer, are within but dead mens sculles, whereof should wee bee proud? Why should wee disdaine the poorest begger? when the hand that swayes a Scepter, and the hand that holdes a sheepe-hooke, being found together in the earth are both alike. What madnesse is it so to pamper the flesh with curious

meates, and costly wines, when (doe what we can) we do but fatten it for crawling vermine? What folly is it, to cloth our bodie in sumptuous attires, when (let them be neuer so gorgeous) we shall carry with vs but a winding-sheete? Why doe we bathe our limmes in sweete waters, and embalme our bodies with rich perfumes, when no carion in the world can smel more noisome, then must our carcases? Blessed therefore bee the sepulcher that held our Sauiours bodie, sithence it is a booke wherein wee may learne how to contemne this foolish loue of our selues.

Happie was thy buriall (O IESVS) that prepared our way to our last habitation. Thanks bee rendred vnto thee for thy loue; glorie to GOD thy FATHER, for his compassion towards mankind. So be it. Amen.
               
               
                  3. SACRIFICE. A Thankesgiuing for all the benefits which wee reape by the resurrection of Christ.
                  CHRIST is risen againe. O happie tidings! O blessed message! He is risen from an

ignominious death, to a life full of glorie. Hee is risen now, to fall no more: the Iewes haue done their crueltie: death hath done his worst: hell hath spitte forth her venome: for in spite of all their malice, Christ is risen in triumph. Receiue your lights againe you lamps of heauen: darknes flie from the world: you graues that yawned and cast out your dead, close vp your deuouring iawes. Sithence Christ is risen, let all the world reioyce; As at his crucifying all the whole world felt paines in his suffering. How happy is miserable man made by this resurrection of his glorious

Redeemer? For now is he sure, that his body fals not like the body of a beast (for then his estate were more then most wretched) but that the Lord killeth, and maketh aliue againe, and that he bringeth downe to the graue, and fetcheth vp againe. My Redeemer now liueth, and by his life, doe I know that I shall rise out of the earth at the latter day; and that I shall bee clothed againe in my frailtie, as my Sauiour was at his resurrection in his owne flesh. What a blessing therefore is by this meanes powred vpon vs? For albeit our bodies are laid downe (to rest) in deformity, in vglines, in contempt,

in basenes, in pouerty, and in dishonour; yet shall they be raised in beauty, in brightnesse, in fulnes of riches▪ and in glory. We were afflicted in Christ when we saw him hanging on the crosse in torments: But we are made ioyfull in Christ, seeing him raised from the dead in triumph. The cogitation of this his resurrection, and so consequently of our owne calling vp from death to life, is a spurre vnto vs whilst we are vpon earth, to runne the race of blessednes. We are not to awaken out of our dead sleepes, and to be apparelled with the selfe same flesh, skinne and bone for nothing: but there is a

goale, proposed, and a garland propounded; and to winne that must we begin to runne in this life. Giue therefore (O God) alacrity to our hearts, that we with cheerefulnes may set forward. Giue wings to our souls, that with swiftnes we may make our flight: giue strength to vs in our race, that wee faint not till wee come to the end; and giue vs grace to run wel without stumbling, that we may win the prize with honor. Grāt (O Lord) that we may goe into our graues in peace; so shall we be sure to come from our graues in gladnes. Glorified for euer be thy Name, that workest these wonders of saluation for

vs: With all admiration let vs adore thee, that holdest out such bright crownes of immortality for vs. Suffer vs, O Lord, to deserue them on earth, to be promised them at our departure from earth, and to weare them with thee in heauen. Amen.
               
               
                  4. SACRIFICE. A Thankesgiuing for all those benefits which we reape by the ascension of Christ.
                  LIft vp your eies (O you sonnes of Adam) and beholde your Sauiour ascending vp into the clouds: bitter was his death, his resurrection victorious,

but his ascension glorious. He died like a Lamb, he rose againe like a Lion, but hee ascended like an Egle. By his death did he quicken vs to life: By his resurrection did he raise vs to faith: By his ascension did he lift vs vp to glorie. The resurrection of Christ is our hope, but the ascension of Christ is our glorification. He ascended into heauen; but how? he shut not the gates of heauen vppon vs, but of purpose went thither to make the way plaine before vs. His bodie is in heauen, but his maiesty abides vpon earth. Here hee was once according to the flesh, and here he is still according to his

diuinitie. Absent is Christ from vs, yet is he still present with vs. Wouldst thou see him? Wouldst thou touch him? Wouldst thou embrace him? Thine eies haue sight too weake to pierce thorow the clouds; his brightnes is too great, and would strik thee blind with dazeling: thy hands are too short to reach vp to the seat where he sits; and thine armes not of compasse bigge enough to bee throwne about his bodie. But let thy faith open her eyes, for shee can behold him: let thy faith put out her hand, and with the least finger she can touch him. As our forefathers held him in the flesh, so we must

hold him in our hearts. By his ascending vp into heauen are we sure that he is the very Son of God: for none can ascend thither, but hee that comes from thence. Celebrate therefore this his ascension with faith, and with deuotion, and thou shalt presently be in heauen with him. There he sitteth at the right hand of his father, like an Atturney in our behalf, pleading for mercy; and like a petitioner, stil preferring vp our prayers and complaints to his heauenly father. How happy is man to haue such a speaker for him? How miserable were man, if Christ were not his Intercessiour? Sithence then that

our Redeemer hath begunne so happie and glorious a voyage, onely to kindle in vs an ambition to follow him; let vs therefore hoist vp all the sailes of duetie and obedience, of zeale and holinesse, to arriue in that same hauen. The ladder which must reach vp to heauen, and by which wee must climb, hath many steps of righteousnes; the burdens which keepe vs from getting vp, are infinite in number, and they are our sinnes. Giue vs strength, O Lord, to throw them down. Giue vs grace to lay hold on the other. The reward of this conquest shal be ours; the glory shal be thine: the

path which we must tread to the land of happines is beaten out by thy Sonne, but our welcome must be from thy lippes. Say therefore vnto vs, come you blessed: enter the citie of the Lord; fall downe before his Throne, and cry, Glory, glory, glory, now and to the worlds end. Amen.
               
               
                  5. SACRIFICE. A Thanksgiuing for all those benefits which we are to receiue by Christs comming in glory.
                  BEhold the gates of heauen stand wide open:

Armies of Angels are mustred together, the Apostles keepe their places, the Euangelists their offices, the Saints their degrees and all are attendant vpon our Lord and Sauiour Christ Iesus; who sittes vpon a Throne of maiesty, and is comming to iudge the world. The wicked at sight of this tremble, and call for mountaines to couer them; but the godlie reioyce and are proud of this high day of triumph. The Goats howle, for they are to be sent to hell, with Goe you cursed; but the Lambes skippe vp and downe for ioy that they shall heare a voice crie, Come you blessed. Who

therefore would not put on his wedding garment to meete such a bridegroome? Who would not put on the Armor of faith, to fight vnder such a banner? Vpon this daie shall we behold him that in himselfe is Alpha and Omega: In the world is the maker and the maintainer: In his Angels is their power and their beautie: In the Church is as a father to a Family: In our soules as a bridegroom to a bride: To the iust as a bulwarke: To the reprobate as a Battry. What eie hath seene, what eare hath heard, what vnderstanding can comprehend the excellencies of this heauenly Citie; from

whence the King of it (so ful of Maiestie) comes in person, and in progresse to conduct vs thither? There is security without feare; peace without inuasion; wealth without diminishing; honours without enuie: there is all blessednes, all sweetenes, all life, all eternity. Thy hunger shall there be filled with bread of life; thy thirst with the fountaine of goodnesse; thy nakednesse clothed with a garment of immortalitie. The comforts wee shall receiue vpon this blessed day of peace are, that wee shall see and behold our God, who hath created vs; our Lord Iesus, who hath redeemed vs;

and the holy Ghost that hath sanctified vs. Come therefore speedily, O God, for thine Elects sake hasten to this great and generall Sessions: and grant, O mercifull Father, that our accounts may bee found so iust, that we may receiue the rewards of good Stewards. Make vs, O LORD, to be Doues in our liues, innocent and without gall: to be Eagles in our meditations, cleere sighted, and bold to looke vpon thee: to be Pellicans in our workes, charitable and religious: and last, to be as the Phoenix in our deaths, that after we haue slept in our graues, wee may rise vp in ioy with

thy Son. Ascend with him vp into heauen, and there at thy hands receiue an immortal crowne of euerlasting glory. Amen.
                  FINIS.
               
            
         
         
            
               
                  
                  
                  Short and pithie Sentences, fit to be applied to those purposes, for which the former Prayers are made.
                  1. GOd is to thee all things: if thou art hū
                     gry▪ he is thy bread; if thou art thirsty, he is thy drinke; if thou art in darkenes, he is thy light; if in nakednes, he puts vpon thee the garment of immortality. Aug.
                  
                  2. God the true and only life: in whom and

from whom, and by whom all good things are, that are good indeede. God; from whom to be turned, is to fal; to whom to turne, is to rise again; in whom to abide, is to dwell for euer. God; from whom to depart, is to die: to whom to come againe, is to reuine: and in whom to lodge, is to liue. Idem.
                  
                  3. Whatsoeuer is not of God, hath no sweetenesse: Whatsoeuer he wil giue me, let him take all away, so he giues mee onely himselfe. Idem.
                  
                  4. God in himselfe is Alpha & Omega, (beginning & ending) In the world, he is the Ruler: In Angels hee is their Glorie: In the Church, hee is as a Father

in his Family: in the soule as a Bridegroome in his bed chamber: in the good, hee is as a helper and protector: in the wicked as feare and horrour. Idem.
                  
                  5. If God heare our prayers, he is merciful: if he will not heare them, yet is he iust.
                  6 God is length, bredth, heigth, and depth. Hee is length in his Eternity: bredth in Charity: heigth in Maiestie: depth in Wisdome. Bernard.
                  
                  7. Hast thou a desire to walke? I am the way (saith Christ:) Wouldst thou not be deceiued? I am the truth: Wouldst thou not die? I am the life. Aug.
                  
                  8. No man can take

Christ from thee, vnlesse thou takest thy selfe from him. Ambrose.
                  
                  9. Christ (our Redeemer) in his birth was a man: in his death a lamb: in his resurrection a Lion: in his ascension vp to heauen an Eagle. Greg.
                  
                  10. Christ is honny in the mouth, musicke in the eare, and gladnesse in the heart. Bernard.
                  
                  11. In Christs doctrine is found true wisedome: in Christs mercie is found iustice: in his life is found temperance: in his death is found courage. Idem.
                  
                  12. Christ is so much the more worthie of honour amongst men, by how much he suffred the more dishonor

in the behalfe of men. Gregorie.
                  
                  O man, see what I suffer for thee. There is no griefe comparable to this of mine on the crosse: I that die for thee, cry vnto thee: see what punishments I endure, see how I am nailed, and how I am pierced. If my outward sorowes be so great, the grief that is within me must needs bee greater, because I find thee vnthankefull. Bernard.
                  
                  14. In vaine doeth hee weare the name of a Christian who is not a follower of Christ. What good is it for thee to bee taken for that which thou art not? and to vsurpe a title which is not thine owne? if needs

thou wilt bee a Christian, doe those things that belong to Christianity, and then challenge the name. Augustine.
                  
                  15. Hee is a Christian, that euen in his owne house acknowledgeth himselfe to be a stranger. Our countrie is aboue: in that Inne we shal not be guests. Idem.
                  
                  16. A Christian can take no hurt by beeing throwne into [Turkish] captiuity; for euen in those his fetters, wil his God come to him. Idem.
                  
                  17. A Christian is not so much to stand vpon beginning, as vpon the end. Gregory.
                  
                  18. Thou art a fresh-water souldier (O thou that

art a Christian) if thou hopest to ouercome without a battell, or to triumph without a victorie. Chrysostome.
                  
                  19. It is not such an honour to bee good amongst those that are good, but to bee good amongst them that are euill. Gregorie.
                  
                  20. A godly conuersation ouercommeth thine enemie, edifieth thy neighbour, and glorifieth thy maker. Isidore.
                  
                  21. Hee that waiteth on Christ, must bee of such a conuersation, that his outward manners may bee but the glasse to shew the inward mind. Bernard.
                  
                  22. Such as wee are our

selues, in such companie wee delight. Hierom.
                  
                  23. Our lookes and our eyes cannot put on maskes close euough to hide a bad conscience: for the wantonnesse of the mind is drawen in the face, and the actions of the bodie, betray the conditions of the soule. Idem.
                  
                  24. Woe to the heart that is double, it giueth one halfe to God, and another to the diuell. God (being angry that the diuell hath a share in it) giueth away his part too, and so the diuell hath all to himselfe. Augustine.
                  
                  
                     25. The heart of the gluttō is in his belly: of the adulterer in his lust: of the couetous man, in his vsurie. Idem.
                  
                  26. Amongst men, the heart is weighed by the words; but with God, our words are weighed by the heart. Bernard.
                  
                  27. Let not thy face and thy heart be of two colors: thy face lookes vpward, let not thy heart looke downward. Idem.
                  
                  28. The heart hath foure offices to look to, viz. What to loue, what to feare, what to reioyce in, and for what to bee sad. Idem.
                  
                  
                     29. Amongst all the creatures that liue vnder the Sunne, there is none hath a heart more excellent then that of man, nor more noble, nor more like to God: and that is the reason that God asketh nothing at thy hands, but thy heart. Hugo.
                  
                  30. The heart of man is of it selfe but little, yet great things cannot fill it: it is not big enough at one meale to satisfie a bird, and yet the whole world cannot satisfie that. Idem.
                  
                  31. The diuell hath a will to hurt, but not power▪ because a greater controles this; for if hee should doe asmuch hurt as hee desireth to doe, there would not be

left one righteous man liuing. Augustine.
                  
                  32. The diuels seruice is the worst of all others, because he is neuer pleased with any duetie is done to him. Gregory.
                  
                  33. Where discord dwels, God neuer commeth neere the dore. Aug.
                  
                  34. As God taketh delight in nothing so much as in loue: so the diuell taketh pleasure in nothing more then in the death of charitie. Gregory.
                  
                  35. No miserie is greater then to leaue God for the loue of gold. Hierom.
                  
                  36. What good can a chest full of riches do thee, if thou cariest about thee an emptie conscience? Thy

desire is to haue goods, but not to bee good. Blush therefore at thy wealth, for if thy house be ful of goods it hath a master to it that is naught. What profit doth a rich man get by that which he hath, if hee haue not God too, who is the giuer? Hierome.
                  
                  37. The disease of riches is pride. Idem.
                  
                  38. Riches are not sin, but it is sin, not to let the poore haue a part in them. August.
                  
                  39. So liue, that whatsoeuer thou doest, may bee as if it were done in presence of thine enemie.
                  40. There is nothing more high then humilitie, which (as if it were alwaies in the superior) knoweth not how

to be extolled higher Amb.
                  
                  41. Our contrie is aloft, the way to it is below: if then thou wouldst trauell vpward, why doest thou goe out of the path that leadeth thee thither? [which path is humilitie.] Aug.
                  
                  42. Humilitie is a glorious robe, which pride her selfe doeth desire to put on, lest she should bee disdained. Bernard.
                  
                  43. It is more honour to auoid an iniurie by silence, then to get the better of it by words. Gregory.
                  
                  44 If thou wouldst bee reuenged, onely hold thy tōgue: & thou giuest thine enemy amortal woūd. Chr.
                  
                  45. He that maketh his belly his god, maketh

to himselfe a new God. So many sinnes as wee haue, so many gods wee haue. I am angrie: anger is then my god. I haue seene a womā, & haue lusted after her; I make lust my god. Whatsoeuer we desire and make much of, that we make our God. Hierome.
                  
                  46. When man is proud, it is a great miserie; but when God is humble, it is a greater mercie.
                  FINIS.
                  
               
            
         
      
   