
      
         
            
            
            ¶ The deceyte of women. to the inſtruction and enſample of all men, yonge and olde, newly corrected.
            
               
                  depiction of Woman with whip sitting astride man, as if he were a horse
               
            
         
         
            
            
            ¶Prologue.
            
               TAke on thy way thou lytle booke
            And feare not for no maner blame
            For though theſe wemen looke a crooke
            Take thou thereof hardly no ſhame
            For they that be good, without deceyte
            Wyth this will not be greued
            But they that for falſe louers wayte
            Beſode their huſbandes, be ſoone meued
            They that be good and not infecte
            For all that is ſayde / nede not to care
            For in this booke they be not electe
            Wherfore do thou not ſpare.
            To ſhew of the lewde, and theyr demeanour,
            Throughout this booke, where euer it be
            There came neuer good, of their behauour
            Experience dayly ye may ſe
            Of women maried many one
            Which were right lewde, and wyl not be knowen
            This booke right playnly maketh mencion
            For diuers of their huſbandes, were ouerthrowen
            Through their falſe wyles, and arte miſcheuous
            yet the good women herein be not named
            Wherfore to them it is nothing greuous
            That they be fauty, be ſomewhat blamed
            Vyrgyll complayneth here and Hercules alſo
            For all their will great power and ſtrength
            Sampſon ſtronge, with many worthies mo
            Haue bene begiled through women at length.
            Finis.
         
      
      
         
            
            
               WHan the creatour of al thinges had create and made heauen and erth of nought and all that is thei in ſaue man. Than made he vpon the ſyxte daye of erth, our fyrſt father Adam in ye campe of Damaſco, & he gaue vnto hym lyfe, and made hym lorde and inherit our of all thynges that were creat vpon earth. And alſo ye knoledge and vnderſtandyng wyth the propertyes and vertues of all thynges and to eche thyng his proper name Than the lorde tooke from hym the place where he was made and ſet hym in Paradyſe terreſtre, that he ſhould in herit it. And ye lorde ſente into Adam a ſlepe and than tooke a rybbe of hym and made therof a woman. And And whā Adam awoke and founde the woman by hym he ſayd. Theſe bones bene of my bones, and this fleſhe is of my fleſhe. And God gaue commaundemente to thē bothe and ſayd eate of all the fruytes of Paradice, but touche not: the tree the whiche ſtandeth in the middes.
            
               ¶How the Serpent deceyued Eue, and how ſhe forthwyth deceyued Adam.
               
                  WHan that the Lorde had giuen the commaundement / than the olde ſerpent the deuill practiſed how that he might make him diſobediēt for he knew the ſtrength of the man and ſo he thoughte for to deceyue the woman for ſhe is of much febler nature to wtſtande temptacion; & ſo he found the woman alone about the tree, than ſayd the ſerpent to eue where

fore hath the Lorde for byden you to eate of ye fruyte of knowledge of good & euyll? Than ſayde Eue, we ſhould peraduenture dye. The ſerpent ſayde no nat ſo, but ye ſhall be lyke goddes knowyng good and euyll, therfore take the fruite and eate therof. and ſhe ſaw that the apple was ſo fayre to ſe, and ſo ſhe toke the apple and eat there of and gaue it forth to her huſband Adam yt whiche alſo eate thereof. as one that wold not dyſpleaſe his wyfe and yet neuertheleſſe he was one of the wiſeſt mē that euer was vpon erth ſauyng only the ſonne of god. And whan that they had eaten of the Apple, than were bothe their eyes opened. and the ſaw that they were naked, and thus was the moſte wyſeſt and fayreſt man of the worlde deceyued of his wyfe.
               But whether ye Eue were to blame or no that Adam was deceyued that is in the great wyſdum & predeſtynacyon of almyghty god, for ye ſecrete was cloſed in ye conſiſtory of the holi trinitie that the ſonne of god ſhuld ones die for the loue of man, and the death of the Sonne of god ſhould haue an occaſion wherfore that he ſhoulde dye.
               ¶For bycauſe that the erthly paradyſe, is the place of all erthly pleaſures and is receyued to be the worthyeſt and the moſte precyouſe place of the worlde, and for as much as the woman is ſhaped and made in that place & the man in the campe of Damaſco, therfore ſom womē haue an opinion and ſay that they be better than ye mē and wyll be mens mayſters as it fortuneth, yet nowe a dayes in the worlde. But they allegate not the wordes that god ſpake to the woman after that the commaundement was broken, and ſayde, ye ſhall bere your chyldren with payne and wo ye ſhall be vnder the power of your huſband, and he ſhall be your mayſter, and ſhal

haue Lordſhyp ouer you. And thā the man muſt ſe that the woman haue that at ſhalbe nedeful and neceſſarye for her, for god hathe commaunded men to worke whan that he ſayde, in the ſweate of thy labour thou ſhalt eat thy brede, but alas there is now adayes muche people, yt whiche obeyeth not the commaundement. Alſo the man ſhal know the ordenaunce of god, and how that he hath made the woman out of the middes of the man, and not of the head, betokening that ſhe ſhal not be the maiſter of the man, and alſo he hath not made her of a ſide & ſet lytle regarde by her / but he hath made her oute of ye myddes to the helpyng of man and that man and wyfe ſhall lyue wyth one accorde and one wyll in the ſtate of wedlocke, and ſhall be two ſoules and one body, the whyche god hath ſo ordeyned to the ſaluacion of ourſoules,
            
            
               
                  
                     depiction of woman waving at two men
                  
               
               
               ¶A new deceyte of a woman in Henegow, of late dayes.
               
                  IN the Citie of Valenciē was a mighty ryche man the whiche was receyuer of the country of Henegowe, and dwelte in an ende of the citie beſide in a fayre houſe yt which houſe had many places and wayes to paſſe throughout to diuers ſtretes. And ſo there was one gate that was the waye in to an out ſtrete, in the which ſtrete dwelt a good ſimple man the which had a very fayre woman to his wife, & the receyuer went often times out at the gate for the amorouſe ſight of that louely woman ſo that he was taken wyth her loue / and made ſuch acquayntaunce wyth her loue / that at laſt ſhe conſented to him, in ſo much yt he lacked nothing but time and place. And ſo paſt forth and the receyuer deſyred often times this ſimple man and his wife to dinners and ſuppers, in ſo muche that the receyuer and he were great freendes, and ſo he had this poore ſymple man alwayes at his wyll and pleaſure. And ſo it fortuned vpon a tyme that this ſymple man ſhould go to a caſtell, the whiche was .iii. myte frō Valencyen and ſo he tooke his iourney thetherwardes and commaunded to his wyfe the kepyng of the houſe the whyche ſhe was very glad, and ſhewed the receyuer therof, & he alſo was very glad therof, and toward night the backe gate was vnlocked, and there the prenely cam through to the receyuer, and he ioningly receyued her and ſhe went with him into his houſe, for to make better acquayntaunce with him, where as al thinges ſtode redy of al ſortes, and plentye of wyne, and ſo they paſt foorth the euenynge makynge good there, and gaue and receyued many a friendly kyſſe. And in makynge

of this chere cam ye good man from his iorney, and cam by the receyuers daore, & ſaw that there was much light in the chāber, and becauſe that ye good mā of the houſe and he were good freendes, he knocked boldly at ye dore and ſo the receyuer demaunded who was there, and the good man anſwered, your freend, and hys wyfe incontynent harde and knew the voyce of her goodman, than was ſhe fo ſore agaſt and afrayde that ſhe could ſkant ſpeake, and ſhe wyſt not what ſhe ſhould doo.
            
            
               ¶How that the receyuer dyd comfort his louer.
               ¶Whan the receyuer ſaw yt the woman was ſo afrayde be ſayd my loue come by and by to bed for I ſhall couer you that no man ſhall ſe you. And thus they laye arme in arnie, with her backe toward thee doore and the good man was let in, and cam in the chamber where he found the table well arayed and well be ſet wyth good meate, & drynke and ſaw the receyuer lye wythe his louer in the bed the goodman ſeinge thys, was in doubte and ſayde to the receuer, what hore haue ye there wyth you in the badde, and with that the good man was ſet at the table where he eate and dranke, and made good chere. But the good man hauing ſome ſuſpeccion roſe frō the table and came afore the bed of the receyuer, and ſayd I muſte ſee this woman ones ere that I departe and he lyfte vp the clothes where his honeſt wyfe laye vnder, but the receyuer did let him and the good poore man ſeinge thys, he wolde fayne haue lyfte vp the couerlet & the ſhete wyth force, wherewyth the receyuer hys freend, was halfe an gey, for they made a compacte together, that he ſhoulde ſhow her hynder parte and her backe to hym the whiche was ſo fayre and ſo whyte. And whan this was done

that he had ſeene her ſo behynde, he ſayde that he neuer ſee a fayrer woman as pertaynynge the hynder parte and ſwore that he neuer ſawe hinde caſtell ſo lyke hys wyfes ars. For yf I knewe not that my wyfe were honeſt and that ſhe were now at home: I wolde ſaye that it were ſhe, and wyth that ſhe was couered agayne, and the receyuer rebuked hym, & ſayd, why doo ye ſay ſuche thinges by your wyfe, and ſuche dyhoſty by her, and ſo at laſt he is departed from thēce, taking his leue of the receiuer, and bad him good night, with his concubine, And he deſyred hartely that they wolde let him go home through the backe gate, but they made an excuſe & ſayd that the keye was loſt, and ſo he muſte go a great waye aboute, & the receiuers ſeruaunt went wyth him home ward, and kept him with talking ſo longe as he could. And the good woman roſe and plucked on her hoſē and caſt her gowne vpon her arme, and ſo ſhe was let out at the backe gate, and ſhe came incontinent home to her houſe, and ſo abode the commyng of her good man the whyche came frō his iorney. And whan yt he came afore his houſe he ſawe that there was yet lyght in it & knocked at the doore, and hys wyfe went with a brome and ſwept the houſe, and ſhe aſked who was there, and he ſayd: I am he thy huſban, and ſhe ſayd thou art not my huſband for my huſband is not in the towne, neuertheleſſe he knocked agayne, & ſayd I am thy huſbande, hys wyfe anſwered and ſayd go from my doore, for I know well the voyce of my huſbande. And alſo it is not my huſbandes cuſtome for to come and knocke this late at the doore. And ſo at the thyrde tyme he ſayd ſo muche yt ſhe knewe hym, for he was ſore amoued, and laid vpon the doore as though he wolde haue brokē it in pieces, 
                     •
                  
                  
ſo at laſt ſhe let him in, & ſhe ſet her handes on her ſide & ſayde thou noughty knaue this haſte thou doone for to proue me, and I tell thee yt thou arte not worthy for to haue ſo honeſt a wyfe. The good mā ſaw yt he had wrōg he ſpake feendly to his wyfe and ſayd I beſeche ye gētyl wife be cōtent, For of great neceſſitie I muſt nedes returne agayne, for I haue forgotten the principall letter yt I went for, But his wife wolde not be content & ſayd yt he cā from the tauerne & from the ſhewes & ſhe curſed the houre that euer ſhe was maryed to hym, The poore ſimple mā whan he ſaw yt his wife was to angry (thinkyng him ſelfe to be the occaſion therof) cam to his wife bare head wyth his cap in his hād & ſayd, my moſt treweſt wife I beſeche thee if I haue myſſayd or my ſoone any thyng againſt thee: I beſeche the for the loue of god forgeue it me, For I com from a place where that I had good cheere, & there as I thoughte that I had ſene thee and through thee I was ſore moue
                     •
                   & wythout cauſe, & I am very ſory for it, therfore I beſeche thee forgeue it me & ſo at laſt ſhe was ſom what content, but ſhe ſayd yu humanetly caytife thou comeſt frō thyne hores & there yu haſt ſene theyr lewdnes, & now wilt caſt thi good wife in cheteth there wych. The good man anſwered alas good wyfe ſay not ſo, & I beſeche ye ſpeke no more therof but forgeue it me, and I wyll neuer doo ſo agayne as longe as I lyue. Nowe after thys tyme hath the good wife gone oftētimes throughe the backe gate wyth leſſe ſorow and drede wythout the knowledge of the ſymple mā her huſbād (the whiche neuer knew no more therof after that day) as it is ſhewed mee. Thus ye may heare how that men be oftentymes deceyued by their wyfes.
            
            
               
                  ❧How the patriarche Loth was deceyued by hys two doughters.
               
                  
                  
                     depiction of Lot with two daughters
                  
               
               THat tyme whan Loth was departed out of Sodom with hys wyfe and his two doughters: thā the Ange
                     •
                  l cōmaunded hym that what ſo euer he hearde that he ſhould not loke backwarde the which cōmaū
                  dement Lothes wife brake, and ſoo ſhe remayned there ſtandyng and was trāſfygured into the Image of a ſalt ſtone, there to remayne for euer. Than went Loth into a ſmall Cytye called Segor, the whyche throughe the prayer of thys Loth was ſpared for a wyhle, and

remaynyned ſtanding ſo longe as Lot was therin, but Loth ſeynge that they wolde not leue their foule ſynne, wolde not abide no lenger therin, & ſo he fled frō thens, and in continent the citie was alſo deſtroyed, & ſo Loth was in a ſpeluncke or caue of an hyll (ther about) with his two doughters, and they had with them meat and drinke, and thus beynge there, the elder doughter ſayde to her ſyſter. Our father is olde, & there be no mē vpon the earth that we may haue conuerſacion withal after the maner of the world therfore come and let vs make our father dronke with wine & let vs golye with him to thende yt we may kepe the ſeede of our father. And ſo at euen they gaue theyr father wyne to drinke: and ſoo the elder doughter went and lay with her father Loth, but Loth knew not of his doughter, nor whan that ſhe roſe vp agayne, and the next night they made theyr father dronke agayne, and than the yonger doughter went and lay by hym, but Loth knewe not whan that he was by her, nor whan that ſhe aroſe from him, and bothe the doughters conceyued of theyr father, and the elder doughter bare a ſon the which was called Moas and he was the father of the Moabices. And the yonger bare a ſonne called Amon, that is as muche to ſay, the ſonne of my people, and was the father of the Amonytes, & thus was Loth deceiued of hys doughters with the wyne but for to ſaye the truthe it was no deceyte, for it was throughe loue and for the generation, and multyplying of the worlde, for they thought that there had ben no more people in the world and that ther had ben no more in the world but they, for they knewe none otherwyſe, & therfore they made not theyr father dronke throughe decyte to obtayne theyr fleſſhelye luſtes,

lyke as now many a man ye hath a fayre wyfe ye which drinketh the wine with marchauntes, & wyth preeſtes and ſo they make theyr huſbandes good chere and make them dronke ſo that they fall aſlepe, and than they go a ſporting wyth the woman in venus paſtaunce. But ſo dyd not Loths doughters, for they dyd it in a good intent and for a good purpoſe, howbeit there was great dyſceyte doone.
            
            
               
                  ❧A new deceyte fortuned of late in England.
               THere was in England in the Cytie of London a proctour of the Arches, the whiche was an olde man, and had to hys wyfe a fayre yonge gentilwoman. And this proctour had amonge his ſeruaūtes one that was a mery and a fayre yonge man, the which was his principal clarke ye wrote for him. This clarke through the dayly preſēs of his maſters wife, ſet his loue vpon her, and ſpoke ſo often and ſo louyngly to her, that her hart alſo was ſet afyre with the loue of hym, in ſo much that ſhe loued him aboue all men, and ſhe conſented to him in al thynges that he deſyred of him, & ſo they vſed theyr louely paſtyme as often as they wolde, Vpon a tyme they ſpake together and tooke counſell how they myght beſt obtayne & doo theyr pleaſure together without any drede or ſorow of enuyous tōges or knowledge of her huſbād, the which was ſōwhat ialeous of hys wife. And than he found a ſuttel craft, for euer he was as ſeruyſable to hys mayſter as he was to his maſtres And whan that the clarke ſaw that he ſtode well in the fauour of his maſter, thā he thought to blynd ye ialouſy of his maiſter, and ſo vpon a time he came a fore him

and wept very bytterly, wherof hys maiſter had greate maruayle and ſaid beloued ſōne ſhewe to me what thou ayleſt, for I wyl helpe thee if it be in my power. Than ſayd the clarke, God thanke you good mayſter for that haue I not deſerued, & the cauſe is ſo ſhameful that I 
                     •
                  a
                     •
                  e not ſhewe it you nor let it be knowen, wel ſayd the mayſter ſhewe it me hardyle wythout any drede, for I wyl kepe it as ſecrete as thou wylt thy ſelfe. Thā ſaid the clarke, my beloued mayſter euery mā thinketh (and you your ſelfe perchaunce) that I am a mā as a nother man is, and for to lyue with women in bodely pleaſure as other doth, but alas I am not ſo, for I haue not wher with, and he had couered his preuy membres with a lytle thinge with ſhepes fleſhe, and he had ſteyken vp his preuy member towarde his nauell warde as farre as he could, and thā he ſhewed it to his mayſter, the which ſaw nothing but a cleane voyde place, and it was to ſee to: as though that he had nothing there, & thā the clarke ſayd, my beloued maiſter there is no man that knoweth this but you only, And therfore for the trew ſeruice that I haue doone to you I requyre you, that it wyl pleaſe you to doo ſo muche for me as to helpe me in to ſū cloyſter or abbey where that I may haue my meate & drynke and that I may ſerue god for I am not mete to be in the worlde and wyth that he beganne bytterlye to wepe and ſo he blynded the eyes of his mayſter, and by cauſe that he thought that he was a trewe ſeruaunt to hym his mayſter counſeled him that he ſhould not goo to no abbay nor cloyſter, & ſayde that he hym ſelfe wolde prouyde for hym, & that he ſhoulde remayne ſtyll wyth him and ſo his mayſter entreated him with ſo fayre promyſes: that the clark promyſed him for to ſerue him to doo

hym pleaſure yet a certayne yeres, wherof his maiſter was very glad, for he could endyte & wryte very well & coulde ordeyne all other thinges belongyng to his office as well as hym ſelfe. And for bycauſe that he dyd truſt his maiſter & had ſhewed & opened to him all hys ſecretes: his maſter thought that he wold not kepe hys owne ſecretes frō hym but opened hys hart to hys ſeruaunt in lykewyſe & ſayde to hym, I am ſory for thyne impediment that god hath ſent to the, therfore I haue great pitie on ye, but one thinge I ſhal geue the to know for yu maye doo me good ſeruyce therin, yu knoweſt wel yt I haue a fayre yonge wyfe, ye whiche is ſomwhat light hatred and quick ſpirited, & ye know wel yt I am an olde man & not very luſti, & therfore perchaunce I might be ye occaſiō ye yong luſty felowes ſhould come & proue her for to bryng her to diſhoneſtye, and therefore I wyll betake her in thy keping, & I requyre thee that thou take ſo heed to her that I may haue no occaſion to be ialous or amoued agaynſt her, Thā ye clarke prayeſed his mayſtres maruayloſly wel & ſayd yt ſhe was thereto to good and to honeſt, & he promiſed his maiſter yt wold keep and take good hede to her, & ſhew him if he fynde her in any ſuſpect place, lyke as a good ſeruaūt was hoūd to do, And of this was ye maiſter glad, & let al ſorow paſſe and ſo went about his buſynes, cōmaūding his houſe & his wyfe to the keping of his clark, & incōtinēt the ſeruaunt went to his maiſtres (the whiche was commaū
                  ded to hym) and tolde her all, how that his maiſter was deceyued: & that that he was wont to doo afore wyth feare & drede, that dyd he now with a fre wyl and with a free heart, And oftentymes as his maiſter rode forth: he lefte his Clarke at whome for to kepe hys maiſtres,

And whā yt his wyfe rode out to pilgrymage or to weddinges or to any other feſtes, than he had leuer that his clarke had ben wyth his wife thā any of his other maydens, and thus had the clarke good fortune and chaūce for his mayſter neuer knew therof. And who that ſayd ought therof: let them ſay what they wolde, & thoughte euermore that he knew well cōtrary, but his good wife knew it muche better, & thus was the poore mā foule deceyued of his wyfe.
            
            
               
                  
                     depiction of Jael hammering nail into the head of Sisera
                  
               
               
               ¶How the woman Iahell deceyued the great Captayne Syſara.
               THe captayne Syſara had great puyſance of men of warre, and was a great enemy agaynſt them of Iſraell, he had in hys batayle .ix.C. greate Charettes the whyche were beſet on bothe ſydes with ſithes, ſuche as they haue for to ma whay and Corne wythal, wyth the whyche he dyd great morther amonges the people of Iſraell. And whan that he had perſued the chyldren of Iſraell .xx. yere wyth warre, than vpon a day there came the prophereſſe Deelbora, to Barache (the captayne of Iſraell) and ſayd ryſe vp this is thy day, in the whyche the Lorde ſhall delyuer Syſaram into thy handes, and ſo ſhe and Barache went out wyth .x.M men, Syſara heard that the people came vpon hun, he was afrayd and lept from hys charet, and fled away a foote. And thus as he fled the woman Iahel met hym and ſayde, Lorde come with me and go to my houſe for thi ſauegarde, and he went wyth her, and than he ſayde I dye for thurſt. And Iahel heryng that gaue hym mylke to drynke. And Siſara was very wery in ſo muche that he fell a ſlepe. And Iahell tooke a great nayle and ſet it vpon the temple of hys head and droue the nayle croſſe wiſe thorough hys head, and ſo ſhe kylde him. Now behold the captaine the whyche all the power of Iſraell coulde not ſubdewe, and one only woman hath wonne hym with her deceyte.
            
            
               ¶A deceyte doone in Artoys of a late tyme.
               
                  
                  
                     depiction of knights on horseback approaching women
                  
               
               
                  IN the Erldome of Artoys was a mā of great power, ye which had a fayre yonge gentilwomā to his wife and liued veri louingly to gether, This knight had loſt in a batayle one of hys eares & his lord and captayne that was aboue him was duke of Burgon and erle of Artoys the which had made peace & concorde wyth all the other kynges and lords in thryſtendome, And for becauſe that man ſayde that this

knyght was a deuoute man. Vpon a tyme he thought that he wolde not lede his lyfe in makyng of good chere and euer to lyue in Welthe, and alſo coniectured in hys mynde that it was not the waye of ſaluacyō. And ſo vpon a tyme he made hys vowe to the lande of Pruyſſe for to helpe to defende the chryſten fayth with the men and Lordes of the countrye, And ſhortly after he tooke hys leue of the Duke & of hys lordes and gentylmen, and of hys good wyfe, and ſo rode hys waye, with proper compeny accordyng to hys eſtate, tyl that he came in Pruyſe where as he was ryght nobly receiued, and there he dyd many noble feates of warre agaynſte the infydeles, in ſo muche that his name was ſpred through al the world And ſo it fortuned in the meane tyme whyl that he was out of hys countrey, and hys wyfe beyng a fayre young gentyl woman, the which laye alone: it fortuned vpon a tyme there cames a yonge proper gentylman the whyche wooed her for to lye wyth her and ſo he deſyred her that he myght haue the kepynge of the Cytye and be her, huſbandes liuetenant, the whyche within a ſhorte tyme & with a lyttel labour, conſented to hym. And whan that her huſband had bene certayne yeres forth, he tooke his leue of the lordes of Pruyſe, & is returned agayne homwardes, ſore longynge for to reſte in the ſwete armes of hys fayre wyfe. And ſo it fortuned vpon the laſt nyght that he laye but .iii. myle from his owne caſtel where as he dwelt, longynge ſore all the nyght for hys good wyfe (the whyche was verye beſy wyth an other) and he was ye fyrſte vp in the mornynge and toke hys horſe, and rode all alone in greate haſte, and wyth a feruente deſyre towarde his caſtell, to thentent that he might yet fynd his wyfe vpon her bed, & he to warm him by her ſwete dſyes

whyche thought full lytle vpon his commynge, and he rode ſo faſt that he cam before day to his caſtel, & whan that he cam he found the vtter court open. and there he left his horſe ſtandynge and wente ſo forthe boted and ſpored to fore his wiues chamber where that ſhe laye & had her paſtauns with another mā, and the lorde drew his ſword and knocked at the chaumber doore, whereof his wife and the keper of the Citie marheyled ſore who that it myght be & the wife axed who was there, & the lorde anſwered I am here, what ſlepe ye yet? opē ye dore The wyfe knowynge well the voyce was ſore amaſyd and ſayde to her louer, that he ſhuld incontinent riſe and clothe hym, the whyche he dyd by and by. And the wyfe faried ſo longe tyll that he knocked agayne and ſayd open quikly. Thā ſayd his wyfe alas my huſband is farre from hens, I beſeche god ſende hym well home agayne. Than ſayd the lord by my knyghthod, woman I am he, and knowe ye me not. The woman ſaid whan that it ſhal pleaſe my huſband to com home, he wyl gyue me good knowlege before by ſume of his ſeruauntes to thende that I maye mete hym and byd him welcome home with his coſins and his nexte kynred, & ſo I maye honourablye receiue him as it pertayneth to a Lorde, Than ſaid the lord what mene ye, ſhal I ſtāde long here wyll ye not knowe your huſband? and forthwyth he named his name and whan that her louer had clothed hym ſhe bad hyme that he ſhould come & ſtand by her behynd the doore. Than ſayde the woman, alas good huſbande yf it be you I requyre you ye you forgiue it me. The lord ſayde I am content, than ſayd the woman I wyll come and let you in yf I had a candell lyght. And for a truth whan that ye knocked at the doore I had a marueylous

good dreine of you, what was that ſayd the lord, ſhe anſwered. My lord I dremed that ye were come home and that ye ſpake wyth me, and me thought that ye ſawe as clerely with your blynde eye, as ye dyd wyth the other eye. The lorde ſayd I wolde it were ſo. Than ſayde the woman I beleue yet that it is ſo, what ſayde the lorde, be ye foly ſhe that ye beleue me not the woman, ſayd let me proue for my mynde ſake, and with that ſhe opened the dore and helde a candell burnying in her hande. And the poore lord ſuffered his wyfe to hyde his eye with her hande and withe the other hande ſhe helde the Candell before his blynde eye and ſayde lorde I beſeche you tel me the truthe whether ye do ſe wyth your other eye orno, the lorde ſayde no by my knighthode, and with that his leuetenaunt of the towne wente be hind him out at the doore ſo pryeuely that the lorde perceyued hym not, And then ſayde the woman, now ſe I well that my dreme is but deceyte but thanked be god that ye be here. And than ſhe toke hym in her armes & kyſſed hym many tymes and her lord told her how that he had lefte his company behynd, and how that he roſe before them and rode his way to thend that he might yet fynd her a bed Than ſayd the woman for a truth yet ye be a good man Than wet he to the hote howſe & bathed and waſſhed hym, and than forthwyth wente to bed to his lady with great ſolace & pleaſure. And thus was the lord deceiued of his wyfe, the whyche he tooke yet for a good honeſt woman for it lay dead, and was ſo ſecretly kept that mi lorde knewe neuer therof. And yf my lorde had biden at home peraduenture the woman had neuer fallen to that myſgydinge, for they neuer coulde perceiue, but that ſhe gydede her ſelfe well and honeſtelye all here lyfe afore

Now take example by thys, for it is a comon prouerbe carre from home, nere thy harme.
            
            
               ¶The deceyte of Iudyth that wonne Holyfernus.
               
                  
                     depiction of Judith with severed head of Holofernes
                  
               
               THe king Holofernus beſeged the Citie of Bethulien with a hundred & .xx.m. footemē, and .xx.M horſemen ſo ſtrongly yt there was no drinke to be gotten in the Citie but that they muſte drynke the bludde of

beſtes. The wydow Iudith ſeing this: tóoke great pity on the people, and prayed mekely to God for grace and for to be delyuered out of captyuitie, and for to obtayn the victory of their enemies, and then ſhe went into her chamber and arayed her with her beſt araye verie rychelye (for ſhe was fayre and comely of perſone) and God made her more fayrer. And ſhe tooke with her a maide & went to the gate of the Cytie where yt the Lordes ſtoode, and ſhe ſayd to them. Pray vnto the lord god for grace for me, that it wyl pleaſe hym that I maye obtayne my purpoſe. And ſhe went out of the Citie, where ſhe was taken and brought to fore Holofernus by hys ſeruauntes, and than ſhe ſayd to Holofernus I am come for to put my lyfe in thy hāde & that I may be preſerued thorough thee for the Citie muſt come ſhortely into thy hādes, and ſo by that men as ſhe obtayned hys grace, and what that ſhe deſyred of hym ſhe had it. And ſo ſhe deſired of him yt ſhe might go euen and morning to the moūtaynes yt ſhe myght pray there to her god for hym. And thā he gaue commaūdement to all his lords that where ſoeuer yt the woman Iudith wolde go, ye they ſhould let her go fre & no man ſay her nay, & vpon the fourth day Holofernus made a coſtly dyner for his lordes, & ſayd to his chāberlen. Vaago? Tel ye Hebrw womā the ſhe come to me, ye whyche he did, & he ſayd to Iudith. O ye gētilwomā drede not to go in, to my lorde Holofernus for he requireth you ye ye wyl be mery and drinke the wine with him. Thā ſayd Iudith who am I, that I ſhouldēnot be obedyent to my Lord. All that ſhal pleaſe my lord, yf he thynke it good, I wyll be gladde to doo. And al that ſhall pleaſe hym, ſhall be good for me as longe as my lyfe ſhall endure. Than Iudyth roſe vp ſecretely and

arayed her rychely & went ſo forth wythin to Olephernꝰ and ſhe ſtoode before hym. Than was Olefernus herte troubled, and brenned in the loue of her, & ſo he thought that he wolde ſlepe by her the ſame nyght and was very mery & droncke more wyne that nyght than he had done all hys lyfe tyme to fore, and ſo fel a ſlepe vpon his bed And Iudyth was onely alone with him in his chamber and her mayde ſtode without and kept the doore and at the beddes hed honge his ſworde, & ſhe drew the ſworde out of the ſhethe, and tooke him bi the heare and lift vp hys heade and ſo cut it of and put it into a lether baggē and tooke it to her mayd and ſo brought it into the citie of Bethulyen, and whan that it was publyſhed & knowen that theyr kynge Olephernus was dead, they went all away, and ſo the Cytie was delyuered out of captyuitie and bondage. O behold how the great and mighty prynce, the whyche coulde not be ouercome wyth all their craft, how he was wonne through the louely wordes and deceyte of a woman, the whyche many a thouſand men dyd repent, and leſe theyr lyfe therfore, who is it that can take hede of the deceyte of women, except he doo vtterly abſtayne their company, for they be ſo falſe and ſo full of deceyte, that all the hede that a man can take is to lytle.
            
            
               ¶A new deceyte doone of late in Fraunce.
               
                  IN Fraūce was a gentilman of great puyſaunce, the whiche entyerly loued a yonge fayre gentilwoman beynge maryed, whyche gentylwoman loued him no leſſe than he dyd her, And therfore the gentylman made oftentymes his cōplaynt to his louer of the great dolours & paynes yt he ſuffred for her ſake, and ſhe hearynge hym ſo pyteouſly complayne: conforted hym the beſt that ſhe could, ſayeng to hym, I am alwayes redy and at your pleaſure: but I can not be at youre deſyre and wyll becauſe of my huſbād. For ye know well that I muſt be obedient & euermore be redy at my huſbādes wyll and pleaſure. Alas (ſayd the gentilman) yf there be no meanes for to ſhortē my great paynes I wote not what to doo. Than ſayde the gentilwoman with a feruent deſyre to her louer: Come to nyght at one or two a clocke and knocked at my chāber doore. For I wyl fynde ſuche meanes that I wyl departe frō my huſbād except ſom fortune do let me. The gentilmā heryng this: was conforted and was glad, & ſo departed from her, and abode ye houre that ſhe had poynted him, and ſo the yonge gentylwoman ſat all the nyght and had many fantaſyes and ſat muſynge and was very ſad for ſhe wyſt not what ſhoulde fortune her, but her chaunce and fortune was that her huſbande him ſelfe gaue the occaſion and cauſe, that her heuynes was tourned to myrthe, for her huſbād ſaw a male lyenge in the chāber in the whyche male was his wifes clothes & for by cauſe that he ſaw that his wife ſate in heuines: he demaūded what ye male did in the chamber. & wherfore that it was not brought into his place where it was wont to lye. Than ſaid his wyfe wel huſband I requyre you be not angry for our chamberlain ſhal take them out for therin is part of my

clothes. Than ſayd her huſbande my ſemes that the male is ouer lytell for to put your clothes in wythout crokynge for they be large and longe. The gentyl woman ſayde the male is great ynough, the lorde ſayde my ſemes naye, well ſayde the gentyll woman yf it pleaſe you I wyll lay wt you a doſen of teuen ſhertes agaynſt a ſatyn kertyll, that we wyl put you in the male as ye be, for all that the male is ſolytle. The lorde ſayde I holde ye that ye doo not. Than ſayde the hande mayde, we ſhall ſée who ſhal wynne it Than he drew the clothes out of the male, and then the maydē toke hym and made ſuche ſhyft that ſhe put him in the male to his mā hode to. and all that were there laught and had good ſporte at it, and ſo playenge and mockynge wyth hym they bonnde hym faſte in the male and ſo brought him into a lytle out chamber ferre from his owne chamber, and they cryed all, we haue wonne it, and for that he coulde crye or call abode all that nyght there, & in ſhort tyme after that he was put in the male came the gentylwomans louer the whiche ſhe had apeynted pryuily by her, of whome he was louyngly receyued, and the vp & tolde him what was fortuned, and how ſhe had put her huſbande in the male, and ſhewed hym that all thinges was well and therfore (ſayd ſhe) ye ſhal remayne thys night by me, and kepe my huſbādes place. And thus bē theſe two louers gon to bed together & louynglye haue helſed and kyſſed eche other laborynge ſo ſore that they both did ſwete in obtayning theyr louely purpoſe. And in the mornyng thys gentyl woman and her louer departed heuely from eche other and ſhe wente vnto the out chāber where her huſband lay and cryed ful loude let me out, for my ſemes ye mocke & geſt with me. Than

ſayd the gentylwoman alas good huſbande be ye here yet? now of trouth I knew it not, for yeſternight I cō
                  maunded my chamberlin that ſhe ſhuld loſe the male & let ye out. and one of my chamberlyns ſaid that ye wer loſed and that ye were haſtely ſend for, for certayn cauſes, and ſayd that ye wold not com home as this night and whan I herde that I wente to bed and ſlepte for I wēt that it had bene ſo. Than ſaid her huſbād to her I beſeche you let me out, for I trow I haue bene here lōg ynough. And ſo this gentil wife vnloſed the male and her huſbād exept out and was almoſt lame with lieng, and than ſhe tooke him in her armes & kiſt hym ſwetely and prayed him hertely that he wold not be angry wt her. Than ſāid her good huſband I know wel it is not your faute, but the chamberleyns ſhal repent it, & than he made his mone and ſaid that they had him in diriſiō and mocked with him, and alſo the mooſt greefe was yt he had loſt his reuen ſhertes. And for this he ſhall neuer know wythout a myſchaunce fall that this booke come to his hand for to read, the whiche God forbyd. Amen.
            
            
               
                  ❧In olde deceyt how the Prince Naboth was killed, of the foule woman Ieſabel
               
                  
                  
                     depiction of King Ahab with Jezabel
                  
               
               THe Kynge Achab, kyng of Iſraell dwelt in Syry, & had to his wyfe the miſcheuous womā Ieſabel the whyche purſued holy prophetes in al that ſhe myght. And this king Achab had by him in his garden a great prince called Naboth, the whiche Naboth had a goodly vinyard by this king Achabs houſe, yt which the kyng entyerly deſyred, & ſaide to Naboth I beſeche thee let me haue thy Vynyarde, and Naboth wold not forgo his Viniarde, where vpon this king Achab went

and layd hym in the bed and turned his face to the wal and wolde nother eat nor drynke. His wyfe Ieſabell ſeynge this: demaunded what him ayled? Than he ſayde my louer Naboth hath ſayd to me nay, that he wyll not ſell to me his vineyard. Than Ieſabel cauſed the prince Naboth to be ſtoned to death. And than came Ieſabel a gayne to her kynge ſaying, Ryſe vp and drynke and make good cheere, and take the Vynyarde to thee, for Naboth is dead. And whan that Achab heared this: hearoſe vp and dyd enherit the Vinyarde. Here may ye ſee how that the good prynce Naboth hath loſte hys lyfe thorough the myſcheuous woman Ieſabell. But the bloud of Naboth was auenged vpon Achab him ſelfe. For Helyas ſayde to hym. There that the dogges haue lycked the bloud of Naboth: there ſhall they alſo lycke thy bloud. And the dogges ſhal eat the fleſhe and body of the miſcheuous womā Ieſabel. And it fortuned in ſhort tyme after, for ſhe was ſtoned to death in a lytle oute ſtrete and there ſhe remayned lying tyl the tyme that the wordes of Helyas were fulfylled. O moſt myſcheuous women take her enſample, for God is a ryghtwyſe Iudge. for he ſayth in the Goſpell, wyth what meaſure ye mete out wythall, wyth the ſame meaſure ſhall be meaſured in wyth all, againe, lyke as it fortuned to the curſed woman Ieſabell, as it is wrytten. Therfore ye women, let be your diſceyte, & than ye ſhal not be deceyued, for what God ſayth that is nolye.
            
            
               
                  ❧A new deceyt doone of late.
               
                  THere was a wedded womā, yt which was of lyght cōtenaūce, & muche more lighter of hert for ſmal labour and expenſis wolde obteyne her grace and fauour if one had ſought vpō her for loue for ſhe was ſo gentyl and ſo fre herted. And ſo it fortuned vpō a tyme ſhe thought for to haue two yonge men vpon one day, & yt the one ſhould not knowe of ye other, for ſhe had apointed eche vpō a certayne houre, that was, the one at .viii. a clocke, and the other at .ix. And ſo in the morninge the good man ariſe vp from hys wyfe and clothed him and went and woke hys wyfe, & aſked her if ſhe wolde not aryſe, and ſhe anſwered ye knowe well that I am halfe acraſed, & haue not ſlept of all the nyght, therfore I cannot aryſe yet. And ſo her huſband let her lye and weare his way into the cytie to worke, and in the meane while hys wyfe was not ydle, for as ſoone as the clocke had ſmytten .viii. there caue the yongmā the which ſhe had apoynted the day afore, and he knocked at the doore and by and bi he was let in and haſtely vnclothed him and went to bed to her, & ſo they two laye ſo longe together paſſyng the tyme tyl that another ſued & cam knocking at the doore. Than ſayde the woman, alas there is my haſband: than ſaid the yongman where ſhal I hyde me yt your huſbād finde me not, for yf he finde me it wolde coſt vs both our liues. The womā ſayd, take your clothes and go vp in the chamber and be there ſtyl and ſecret tyll that my huſband be gone, & ſo the yongmā did as the womā gaue hī coūſel & ſat ſtyl in the chāber the which was very olde & ful of holes. And than ſhe lept luſtly frō her bed (knowyng wel ynough yt it was not her huſband yt knocked at ye doore) & let ye other yonge man in, yt which ſhe had apoynted at .ix. a clocke, & by &

by he dyd of hys clothes, & wēt to bed to this luſty trull (for ſhe was good ynough & there had come .iiii. ſuche) and beſely went & plowed Venus grounde, & there ocupyed the luſtes of the fleſhe, ſo long til ſhe had weried hī But he that ſat aboue in the chāber & ſaw yt, I reken he was not very well pleaſed, for he knew right well that it was not her huſbād, & ſo he wiſt not whether it were beſt to ſpeke or to holde his peace And ſo thei lay ſo lōg a bed til that her huſbād came knocked at the doore and by and by ſhe perceyued yt it was her huſbande and than ſhe wyſt not what ſhyfte to make nor where ſhe ſhould hyde hym, but bad him yt he ſhould lye betwene the bed & the wall & ſhe toke the clothes and the couerlet and caft thē vpon him. And whā her huſbād was com he be thought hym that he had heard mo than one in his houſe, and whā that he ſaw the bed ſo caſt out of order, he maruayled for it ſemed not as though ther had layn a ſycke womā, but a though there had ben a fyghtyng & a battell for ſtones, for it loked more lyker a boulting trough, than a ſycke womās bed. Thā ſaid her huſbād out thou my ſcheuous whore, where is that knaue that hath laine wyth the, if I finde hym ye ſhall both repent it by gods body, and wyth that he caughte the couerlet and the clothes in his hand, and than he ſayd, how properly is this gere done, for hys bed ſhewed as thoughe here had lyne .ii. Than ſayde the woman be my trouth I am ſure thou arte droncke all tedye, that thou rayleſt thus vpon me, and call me hore & thou knoweſt right well that I am none, but alas I am to trew to ſuche a Cocold and rebald as thou arte & I am ſory that I haue ben ſo long ſo trew to the, ſeynge that thou neuer founde no dyſhoneſt in me. Thys poore man weſt not what

to ſay whan that he hard his wyfe, ſay ſuche wordes & begon for to chyde hym ſo, ye he mighte be glad that he had no ſtripes. And ſo the good mā (as it was beſt for hym) helde his prace, and ſaid mekely My gentyl wife, I beſeche thee be contente, for I loue not to chyde, and he that is here aboue ones ſhal pay for all, but he mente our lorde that he wolde haue accompte of it ones. But he that ſat aboue in the chamber and heard al: he wende that he had ment hym and that he had thretened hym. Than ſayd the yong man, my frende, it is ynough that I paye the halfe, for he that lieth beſide the bedſted may wel paye the other halfe, for he is as wel culpable as I, Than had the man great maruaile and thought ye god had ſpoke to hym, and he that lay beſyde the bed wylte not what to doo, for he knew nothyng of the other that was aboue in the chamber, but he was bolde and roſe vp, and the other came downe out of the chamber. And whan they ſaw eche other they went together frō thens and none of them bothe that payde for theyr lyinge, nor yet for theyr bed hyre, and thus the man was troubled, and ſhe made her huſbande beleue that the one was a doctour of phyſyke the which came to ſee her water, and the other was a Surgyn that came to let her bloud and to chafe her vaynes, and ſo ſhe pleaſed her huſband, for al that ſhe had made him cokcolde, ye prety trulles that loue to cary ſtones: learne this prety conceyt againſt ye be ſycke.
            
            
               
                  ❧An olde deceyte of Vergilius.
               
                  
                  
                     depiction of Virgil in basket
                  
               
               VYrgyll was a very wyſe and experte man, and was a mayſter of many dyuers ſciences ye whiche (as ſome men ſay) the deuel had learned him, and alſo he was a wiſe man of councel▪ in ſo muche that ye Emperour choſe him to be one of the lordes of his counſell. This Vyrgyl did many meruay els wyth Nicromaci for he made a gardē wherein were al maner of trees of al fruyte and fruytes, & what time that he wolde / there they found euer more rype frute, fayre floures and ſede And alſo there was in the garden all maner of birdes,

the whiche ſonge, nyght and daye. And this garden had no incloſing but onely the lyght that ſhone ouer it, and yet there could nobody come in. Alſo he had made in Rome an Image of gret light, the which might not fal And they of Rome might not open not her dore nor wī
                  dow, but they muſt nedes ſe the Image. And who ſoeuer had ſene that ymage, ye daye he ſhoulde haue had no pleaſure for to haue doone the workes of the fleſſhe, of the which the women of Rome wente and ſhewed Vyrgilius, the which at laſt caſt downe the Image, and thā the women had their pleaſure agayne. Alſo this Virgilius had made in the myddes of Rome to the profyte of the commen people, a lampe of glaſſe the which ſhone & lyghted all Rome ouer and ouer, in ſo much that there was neuer ſo ſmal a ſtrete but it was as lyghte of that lampe as though there had ben two torches burnynge, and ſome men ſay it ſtode well .iii.C. yere. And not fer from thens in an other place he had made a man of copper wyth a bow in his hande, poyntynge wyth hys atowe to the Lampe. And ſo it fortuned vpon a tyme the doughters of Rome wente a ſportynge in an euenynge, and there came one of the maydens of Rome the which ſmote vppon the ſtrynge of the bowe wyth her finger, and ſo the arow ſprong louſe, and ſhot the lampe in peces the whiche was greate pitye, And vpon an other tyme Vyrgilius did put out al the fyre that was in Reine, that no man coulde get fyre but onelye at one womans ars, the whyche had deceyued hym, and none coulde lyghte an others fyre, but that eche houſe myſte goe vppon the Markete place and fetche hys fyre, at that womans ars. This Virgyl for all that he was ſo wyſe, and a mayſter of all ſcyences yet not wythſtandynge

he was deceyued of women. Vpon a tyme he ſet his loue vpon a fayre gentylwoman the whiche was of noble progeny, and made ſuche meanes that it came to her knowlege, and when that ſhe knew that: ſhe bethought her how ſhe myght deceyue him, and than ſhe ſayd to him that it were very petilous for to beginne ſuche a thynge, for a man cometh lyghtly in the bound of loue, but he cannot come ſo lightly out agayn. But welbeloued Vyrgil for to pleaſe you and that ye maye haue your pleaſure, ſo come to nyght to fore my houſe whan euery body is gone to ſlepe: and I wyl let down a baſket out the chamber wyndow and there ye ſhal ſyt in, and ſo I wyl draw you vp into my chamber, of the whiche Vyrgyll was very glad, and ſayde that he wolde doo ſo, whan it was nyght: Vyrgil came to fore thys gentylwomans houſe, the whyche ſtoode in the market place, and in the myddle of Rome. And ſo whā that Vyrgil was come: ſhe let the baſket downe to the erthe, And Vyrgyl went and ſate in it, & than ſhe drew him vp tyl that he came to the middle of the houſe, and whan that he was .xl. fote from her window ſhe made the corde faſte, and let him hange ſo in the baſket, and ſayde nowe men ſhall ſee thy iniquitie, and howe thou woldeſt haue layne by me, and there he remayned hangyng ſtyll in the baſket tyl the next day, to hys reprofe before all men, the whiche he auenged after warde vpō her. And thus was he deceyued to his vtter confuſiō. And alſo Vyrgill made to the profyte of the Romayns (to thēde that they myght haue ſhort lawe & that euery man myght incontinent know whether his cauſe wer trewe or falſe) by the crafte of Nycromancy a Lyon of braſſe, and who that put hys hande in the throte of the

lyon, and ſwore that his cauſe was true, and good and his othe being falſe loſt his hand. And who that ſwore a true othe: drewe his hande agayne, wythoute drede or peryll. And ſo it fortuned vpon a time, that Vyrgyll ſayd to hys wyfe that ſhe had to doo wyth a gentylman the whiche ſhe forſoke, and ſayd that it was not ſo, and ſayde that ſhe wolde take the lawe at the Lyon, and ſo whan this was doone, and the day appointed that ſhe ſhould be iudged by the Lyon, and come to her anſwere than ſhe found the meanes that the gentylman (her louer, was clothed in fooles clothyng, and ſo he went wt her to the place where the Lion ſtode, and there in ye preſence of them al that was there: put her hande in the lyons throte, and there ſhe did ſwere that ſhe had no more to doo wyth that man that ſhe was blamed for: than wt the foole that ſtode ther preſent, and ſo the woman drew her hand out agayn withoute any hurt, yet neuertheles Vyrgyl knew wel that ſhe had to doo wyth the man of the which ſhe was ſuſpect wyth. Than was Vyrgyll wrothe, and deſtroyed the Lion, in ſo muche that neuer after that day was no iuſtyce doon with the Lion. Here may ye ſe how the mayſter Virgilius that was ſo wiſe and ſo crafty in al thinges: and yet he was deceyued of a woman, ye of more then of one, as is reherſed afore
            
            
               
                  ❧A new deceyte doone of late.
               
                  THere was a lady beyōd ye ſea, which was a wedowe. This lady had a fayre gentilwoman for her chamberlen, that dyd lye wyth her. And it fortuned vpon a time that a luſty yonge gentylman dyd ſee hys loue vpon this yonge woman, the whiche was the fayreſt and the moſt goodlieſt of ſtature yt was in that coū
                  trie, and ſhe was ſo beautiful & ſo vertuous yt ſhe laye by her lady, and the gentylman often times did talke & comen with this gentylwoman, and opened hys harte and ſhewed to her all his intent, and ſpake ſo louingly to her: that alſo her hert was ſet in the loue of him, & ſo ſhe conſented to him to be redy at al times, yt it ſhould pleaſe him, but they wyſt not how nor by what meanes that they might come togither. And ſo vpon a tyme ſhe came vnto the gentilmā and ſayd, ye know wel that I lye by my lady, the which is great honour to me, and I may not leue her except I ſhould be vtterly ſhamed and yet I wolde wel that you had youre deſyre, and alſo I wyl gladly be at your commaundement and pleaſur in all thinges that ye wyll deſyre of me, yf that we may do it ſecretlye, and alſo I will ſhew you my minde, & what I wyl do. My lady hath a litle dogge, as ye know well yt which ſhe loueth well, and muſt euer lye in her chābre and to night I wyl locke it wythoute the chamber, and wyl leue the next chāber open, and whan that ye think that my lady is in bed, com ſecretly into the chamber & locke the chamber doore and there ye ſhal find the lytle dogge, the whiche knoweth you well, & take hym by the eares and ſhake him that he may crye loude, and whan my lady ſhal heare hym. ſhe ſhall know the voyce, & thē incontinent ſhe ſhal cauſe me to riſe, for to let the dogge in, and than I wil come ſecretly to you, but I pray you

fayle not, for yf ye doo, I wyl neuer ſpeake wyth you a agayne, Than ſayd the gentylman, O my mooſt truſty and gracyous louer, I wyll thanke you hartely of your gracyous and lonely wordes, & be ye ſure that I wyll not fayle, and ſo the gentylman abode hys tyme, & cam vnto ye place that was appointed according to hys promyſe. And ſo the lytle dogge thought to haue gone into the ladyes chāber as it was wonte to doo, and for by cauſe that the chamber dore was locked. he abode in the chamber that was next vnto the ladyes. And ſo the lady is gone to bedde, and her chamberlaen wyth her, and the luſty gentilman is come into the next chamber, and went vpon hand and fote for to ſeeke the dogge, and at laſte he found hym, & hath made him crye oute a loude and ſo the lady hearde the dogge crye, and thought that he wolde come in, & ſayd to her gentylwoman the chā
                  berleyn that ſhe ſhould aryſe and let the dogge in, for me ſemes that he is in the nexte chamber, and ſhe ſayd I wyll doo it gladly, and ſo ſhe aroſe and came to the doore in her ſmocke, and the gentilman came and mette her, and when that he ſawe that ſhe was ſo gracyous and ſo goodlye of perſon, he was ſo galdde that he loſte all hys power, and fayled, and it was not in his power to doo her ſwerely, and groped her round breeſtes, & all that he coulde doo perteyninge to loue, but the fleſſhly operacion excepted, and ſo the gentylman returned agayne wythout comforte and yet he wolde gladly haue kepte her: but ſhe durſt tary no longer, and ſo the Lady went her maye and ſhytte the doore agayne, and the Lady demaunded her if ſhe had lett in the dogge, and ſhe ſayde naye, for ſhe coulde not fynde it. The ladye ſayde well let hym alone, and ſo the chamberlayne was ſore agreued,

but he tooke courage vnto hym and ſayde, yf yt my louer came agayne, for al that ſhe is ſo fayre. I wold gyue her better knowledge that I am a man, and ſo he caught the dogge by the eares agayne, and made hym for to crye, that the Lady hearde it, and ſo the Lady cauſed her chamberlayn for to ryſe, and alſo the thirde tyme ſhe aroſe and came for the dogge, but the pore gentylmā had not her power nor ſtrength for to breke one ſpere And whan that ſhe ſaw that there wolde come nothing ſhe went away into her chamber, and he perceyued her Than ſayd the chamberlayn for to recompence hym of his great payne, and for to pleaſe the lady, awaye thou noughtye ape as thou arte, for thou ſhall not come thys night in the houſe, thou foule yll fauored beaſte, and wyth that ſhe dyd ſhyt the camber doore, And the ladye demaunded to whome that ſhe ſpake, and ſhe ſayde that it was to the other dogge, the whiche hathe doone me great payne in ſeking of him, for he had hyd him vnder the benche, and whan that I had founde hym he wolde not aryſe, for all that I coulde doo to hym. I woulde fayne haue had him in, but he wolde not ones lyftre vp hys head, and therfore I haue lefte him wythout, and ſo ſhe locked the doore wyth greate ſpyte to fore hys face The Lady ſayd my doughter that is well done, And thus was the gentylman deceyued:
            
            
               ☞A deceyte how that Sampſon was deceyued of hys wyfe.
               
                  
                  
                     depiction of Delilah cutting the hair of Samson
                  
               
               SAmpſon beyng a ſtrong yong mā came to Thā
                  nats where that he ſaw one of the doughters of the philyſtins, the which he deſyred to haue to his wife And whan that he came to fore the Vinyarde of the Citie there came a yonge Lyon tonnyng to hym, which he kylled. And in ſhort time after as he came from his father and mother, it fortuned that he cam agayne to the place where that he had kylled this Lion, & ſo he found in the mouth of the Lion, a ſwarme of Bees. And whā that his wedding ſhould be, there came .xxx. yonglings

to his feaſt. And Sampſon ſayd to them I wyll giue to yon a ryddle, and if that ye can aſoyle it win .vii. dayes after my feaſt: I wyl gyue to you .xxx. ſilkē poynts, and as many cotes, and if that ye aſſoyle not my ryddle: ye ſhal leſe as muche. Than ſayd the yonglinges ſhew to vs your ryddle. Then ſayd Sampſō of the etet is mete gone out, and of the ſtronge is come ſu
                     •
                  ten
                     •
                  s. And ſo they could not aſſoile that riddle, & thā they came to his wife and ſayd, deſyre your huſband, that he ſhew to you the ryddle & what it ſygnifieth. And yf that ye wyl not we wyl ſet thy houſe and thy fathers in fyre. And than ſhe went to her huſband Sampſon wiping & makyng her moue to hym, and ſayd I pray you ſhewe to methe ſolucyon of the ryddle, and what ye meane wyth all, or els I ſaye that ye loue me not. Sampſon anſwered and ſayde I wolde not geu
                     •
                  nother father nor mother to know what it mēt, & ſhuld I tel it you▪ And ſo his wife wept & made greate lamentacyon .vii, dayes after he feaſt of theyr weddyng. And vpon the ſeuenth day ſhe croudled Sāpſon ſo ſore, yt he ſhewed it hir, & ſhe forth wt ſheweth it to the yonglynges, yt whych ſayd to Sāpſon, what is ſhorter than heuy, & what is ſtronger thā a Lyon. Than ſaid Sāpſon, yf my 
                     •
                  teſſhe 
                     •
                  alfe had not ben: ye had not ſoyled my riddle. Neere ye may ſee how Sampſon was deceiued through ye, weping & lamētacion of a womā, and after ye Sampſō ca
                     •
                  u
                     •
                  t
                     •
                   his wyfe for to haue doone as he was wont to do, which his father had forbode hī, & ſaid to Sāpſō I had went ye wold haue kylled her, & therfore I haue betake her to another huſband. Thā was Sāpſon wreth & did great miſchef to the philyſtens. And ſo the philiſtens ſ
                     •
                  eyng that Sāpſons wyfe was the cauſe of that myſchef thā went ye
                  
philiſtens and ſet her fathers houſe in fyre (the father & the doughter beynge in the houſe) & ſo dyd burne them both. ¶And after that he enterely loued a woman that dwelt in the valy of Soreth, whoſe name was Dalida. And ſo the cheefe hed prynce of the Phylyſtens came to Dalida & ſayd we requyre the that thou wylt deceyue Sampſon, and demaunde of hym wherein yt the ſtrength of Sampſon is, to the ende that we may conquere hym. And yf that ye doo it: eche of vs ſhall gyue to you 
                     •
                  .c.M. ſyluerpence. And ſo Dalida ſought the occaſiō to deceyue him & Sampſon cauſed hym ſelfe .iii. times to be boūde through the petitiō of Dalida wt .iii. maner of bādes, but euer more he brake the bādes & ouer cam his enemies .iii. tymes. And whā that Dalida had ſene al this: She came to Sāpſon wt ſweet flatteryng wordes and ſayd, O my dere beloued Sāpſon ye ſaye that ye do 
                     •
                  ore me and your hart thynketh it not, for ye haue denyed to me .vi. times, for ye wold not ſhew me where that your ſtrength teſteth. And ſo ſhe troubled Sāpſō many a day vnto the tyme that ſhe brought him to his death, And ſo at laſt Sāpſon ſhewed his wyfe the truth & ſayd, yf my hed were ſhaue: thā were all my ſtrength and power gon, Than Dalida ſent worde to the Phylyſtens, and ſhe cauſed Sampſon for to ſlepe in her lap, and ſhe called to her a barbeur, & he dyd ſhaue of al the here of Sampſons head & thā ſhe thruſt hym from her and hys power and might was gone from hym, And than cryed Dalida, Sampſon Sampſon, the phyliſtens ben come vpō thee, Thā he aroſe out of his ſlope & was incontinent as a pryſoner, & his eyen were put out and ſo by that meanes he was killed, Now behold ye men, be the yonge and olde, heave that the ſtrange Sampſon

was deceyued of the falſe womā Dalida, who is yt may beleue the ſwete and flatteryng woordes and the bitter mourning and weping of women,
            
            
               
                  ❧ A new deceyte doone of late.
               
                  
                     depiction of man on horse
                  
               
               Ther was a gentylman yt which was very bold in the feares of warres, and entyerly loued a yerge fayre Lady, and had ſo oftentymes cōmunycacyō wyth her: that ſhe conſented to hym in all thynges that

he wolde deſyre of her, And whā yt he had done his wyl a certaine time with her: thā went he into ſpayne with hys lord for to kepe warre and in the meane while yt he was abſēt: his louer was maried to an olde knyght the which knew right wel ye other mā, but this olde knyght knew not yt he was hys wyfes paramour, but at laſt it cā to his knowledge, of yt which he was not wel cō
                  tent, And ſo it fortuned yt in ſhorte time after, her paramour came home againe, & by chaūce in an euenyng cā to ye caſtel where yt his ſweeting was, & the old knight made him good cheere, for he was of his olde acquaintaūce, but it was halfe agaynſt his hert. And in ye mene whyle yt 
                  
                     •
                  he old knight went about for to make al thynges 
                     ••
                  dy for to welcome his geſt withal: he ſat & talked wt his louer his prety foole yt he was wont for to play wt a
                     ••
                   & deſyred of her for to haue the olde freendſhypp yt he was went to haue in time paſter that ſhe was wedded: ſhe denyed hym & ſayd that it was not poſſyble for to haue place & time ſuffycient. Than ſayd her geſt, O my dere beloued oſ
                     •
                  is, yf it pleaſe you ye may doo 
                     •
                  eſō freendſhyp, for your huſband ſhal know nothyng ther of, whā that he is a bed and a ſtepe that ye come and vyſit me in my chāber, or in any other place where that it ſhal pleaſe you, or yf ye pleaſe I wyl come to you, then ſhe ſayd it may not be ſo, for my huſbande is very ſoone awake, and I ſhould haue great drede and ſorowe, & alſo he neuer waketh, but he doth fele after me, & whā that he miſſeth me: than he wyl thinke what there is to doo. Thā he demaūded, what doth he more? More quod ſhe: nothing, but turneth him again, for yf he com ones in a moneth that is muche to hym, for it is but fely for to fable wt you, for yf it came I wolde take it wyth all

my harte, Than ſayde he, I beſeche the my ſweete loue make it ſo that I may ly wyth the to night. Than ſhe anſwered and ſayd, I know a remedy, I haue a ſeruing mayde to the whych I wyll ſhew my ſecrete, and with her I wyll take counſell. And ſo incontinent ſhe called her and ſayd, my beloued mayde, ye muſt now helpe me in a matter, for I truſt you beſt for to kepe my preuytie, Thā ſayd the mayde, what yt ſhal pleaſe you I wil be glad for to doo. Thā ſayd her lady to her,. This knight I loue aboue all men, & I wolde be ſory that he ſhould departe from hens, except I had ſpoke preuelye wt hym and it is not poſſible that I may ſpeke ſecretely wt hym wtout that ye wil be ſo good as to kepe my place by my huſband in my bed this night, for it is hys cuſtom whā yt he waketh to feele after me, & than he layeth hym to ſlepe agayne, but I praye what ſo euerye doo ye maye not ſpeake one worde but ſuffre all that he doth to you for I knowe of a very certayne that ye ſhalbe wythout ſorow or drede for any thing that my huſbond thy maiſter wyl doo, Than ſayd the yonge luſtly mayden to her Lady, your commaundement I wyll be glad to doo it, So ſoone as they had ſupte: ther wence all and walked abrode and the lady ſhewed her paramour how that her maide ſhould kepe her place by her huſband for ye night of the which the knight was maruailous glad, And ſo after that whan they had dronke, they went all to bed and the knyght went into his chāber where yt he ſhuld lye the which was gorgeouſly ordeyned, and there the table was beſet with ſuckettes, confectes, & other coſtly thinges and of the beſt wine that might be got, And ſo incontinently the olde knight and his lady hath both vnclothed them, and went to bed and my lady did put

out the candell, and the mayde ſtoode preuely by the bed ſyde, and whā the candell was out: ſhe went to bed to her mayſter, & ſo lay wyth him, & my lady went incontynent to hym yt abode her commynge, and about .iii, a clocke afore day: the olde knight dyd turne him, and he groped for hys wyfe, & thought yt ſhe had layne by hym & ſo layde his hand vpon her breſtes, & he felt that they were harde and rounde & thā incontinent he knew yt it was not his wyfe, for her breſtes were not ſo roūd nor ſo hard: Thā he tooke her in his armes & gaue her a kis wt that ye longed therto; Al his buſines was harde for hym, for ſhe was a mayde, And ſo the poore mayde durſt not ſpeake one worde for ſauinge of her mayſtres honeſtie, whan this was done: he begā to call to him that lay by his wife, & ſayd how, how, ſyrknyght of whens be ye? ſpeke once to me: The knyght hearing this: was fore amaſed, & my lady was whole agaſt, but they helde theyr pace, Than he called agayne, how my geſt where be ye ſpeke to me, Than ſayd the knyght what is youre wyl ſyr, Than ſayde he a ha ſyr I wyll euer be gladde of this exchaunge, the knyght ſayd what exchaunge good ſyr: Mary for an olde hoore, to haue a yōg proper mayd for ſo haue ye ſerued me of the whyche I thanke you & ſo this geſt wt his wyfe knew not what to ſay, And alſo ye poore mayd was hole aſhamed, as wel for the dyſhhoneſtie of her lady, as for her owne diſhoneſtie & maydē
                  hode, the which ſhe had loſt ſo pyteouſly, & ſo departed frō thens, & after had wept bytterly therfore, and the ſtraūge knyght is departed from thence wtout any thā
                  kes geuynge to any body, nor ſayd not once adewe, but left the lady in great ſorowe and drede, & ſo the ſtraūge knyght came neuer there after that, but howe that the

lady byd, and what chaunce ſhe had: of that I had notinges, and therfore & can wryte no more therof.
            
            
               
                  ❧ An olde deceyte doone in olde tyme
               
                  
                     depiction of Hercules brandishing sword
                  
               
               HErcules the worthye champion was a man of greate renowne, and was the baſtarde of Kynge Iupyter, and of the Quene Alcumena, This Hercules whan that he lay yet in the cradel: he ſtrangled & kylled two gret ſerpentes yt wold have kylled hym, the which

hys ſtepmother Iuno had brought to hym. This Hercules ouercame a mighty great greke, yt which was called Phylotes, yt whych afterward becā Hercules ſeruaūt And throughe the informacion of Iuno his ſtepmother (the whych wolde wel that he had ben dead) went into a foreſt or heth of Neemy; & there he ouercam .iii. Liōs wt great power & ſtrēgth. This Hercules toke his iourney into the cytie of Moloſen, & fetched agayn the fayre Proſerpina Orpheꝰ wyfe, the whych kyng Pluto had ſtolen, & he fought agaynſt the porter Cerberꝰ, which was a mighty great Greke, but hercules ouercam him and bound hym hand & fore, and ouercome .iii.C. cytieſens of Moloſyn, the whych wold haue taken Proſerpina from him. This Hercules ouercame the great mō
                  ſter of leerne, the vpper part like a mā, and: iether part lyke a ſergent, by the whyche mōſter no mā myght paſſe wtout that he went wt, iii.C. or moſtrong mē of armes And hys foode was the fleſhe of mē & the 
                     •
                  with he liued And he ouercame the king C
                     •
                  cꝰ, the which was a fers tyraunt & oppreſſed all the people of that countrey, and vpon a nyght he hadde ſtolen away Hercules Oxen in Italy, and Cacus had eyed them tayle to tayle and ſo brought thē into the caue wher that he dwelt, to thend yt they ſhould not fynde ye footing of thē, for the footyng of the oxen did ſhe wal wayes frō the caue ward where that he dwelt. Alſo he cōquered the great mōnſter of the ſea 
                     •
                  afore Troye, the which they muſt haue gyuē euery day for hys dyner a 
                     〈◊〉
                   a ſhepe, and yt ꝯtained ſo longe tyl the lot fel vpon the kynges doughter, the which he delyuered, & ſubdued the greate monſter, and delyuered the Cytie of Troye, and alſo he was a greate iuſter, for where that he heard yt there were any greate Lorde, or

kyng that was a tyraunt, or an oppreſſer of the people? thether wolde be go, and auēture his lyfe, & purſue thē to death, Ha good lord yf yt an infidell hath doone ſuche thynges (yt which had no hope of ye life eternal) through loue of iuſtice, how muche the more ſhould euery chriſte lorde fyght for the trew iuſtyce, and that ſame to exalt, the which knoweth wel the great reward that is promiſed them of the lorde celeſtyall? ¶Vpon a tyme Hercules tooke his iourney towarde hys owne countrey, of Ycoyien wyth hys wyfe Megera, and her hand mayde And alſo he came into the land of Taſſalian where that he muſt puſſe ouer the water with the ſhyppe, and the ſhyppe was ſo lytle that it coulde not cary thē all ouer at ones, and ſo Hercules remayned and went not ouer wyth the ſhippe, and the fery man behelde Dianira, and whan thei came to lande: the fery man tooke Hercules wyfe and wolde haue runne away wyth her, and Hercules ſeynge that: tooke hys bow and ſhot ouer the water towarde Neſſums the fe
                     •
                  y man, and ſhot the arow in Neſſums ſyde▪ in ſo muche that he felt that he muſte dye, and than he ſayd to Dianira, Ye be a fayre woman, & therfore I requyre you take compaſſion vpon me, for your huſband Hercules is not true, for he loueth other beſide you. Hold take this box for therin is ſuch a thing that whan that ye anoynt therwyth his ſhert, and that he put it vpon his body: than ſhal all the ſtraunge loue departe from hym. And vpon a time Hercules ſubdued the kynge Prycus, the which had many doughters, and amonge them there was one that was the fayreſt, the whych he entyrely loued aboue al the other and her name was Yole, and Hercules ſayde to her Yole take me as your frend, for ſo muſt it be, for the goddes haue giuē
                  
to me this chaunce. And whā that yole herde this that ſhe muſt doo him freendſhyp, the whych had oppreſſed & conquered her father, than fel Yole in a ſwound and in great ſorow. And than Hercules betooke Yole in the kepyng of, xii, men, that ſhe ſhould not eſcape him, And Hercules deſyred her that ſhe wolde be his wife, yt whiche at laſt ſhe conſented, and ſo Hercules lay bi her and accompliſhed his pleaſure ſo longe with her that he holy forgat hys wyfe Dianira, Dianira heard of this & ſo ſhe wrote a letter to him, remēbring him of ye great loue that was wonte to be betwene them, and to knowe yf that ſhould be ſo loſt and forgottē, and that he, the whyche all the worlde did drede, wolde ſo ſuffre hym ſelfe to be ouercome of a ſtraunge woman, And whā Hercules hadred this letter he was not well contente and was yll apayde therof, in ſo muche ye none durſt com by him nor alſo the fayre Yole, And ſo Hercules beynge in he up fantaſy, deuyſed him ſelfe home he might beſt forget the fayre yole, and ſo he tooke his way and Iourney to the mounte Othes on pylgrymage, and for to doo Sacryfice: to the God Appollo, and in the way met with hī Lucas chamberlyn of Dianira▪ and whan that Dianira knewe that, than ſhe tooke one of Hercules ſhertes, the whiche was ouerſtryken wyth the poyſon that Neſſūs had geuen to her and ſent it to Hercules, for to put on, knowing no otherwiſe but that the ſtraūge loue ſhould therwyth haue departed from him, as Neſſums made her to beleue, And than Hercules had made a great fyre for to doo ſacrifice vnto the God Appollo wt an harte that Hercules had takē tunnyng, And Lucas gaue to h
                     •
                  m the ſherte and for becauſe that he ſ
                     •
                  et ſo ſore through the great anguyſhe & hard ſorow he tooke

the ſhert of Lucas and put it on, and whā that the ſhert was warme vpon him, it cleued ſo caſt to his body, and he felt ſuche great payne that he wiſte not what to doo and wold haue drawen of the ſhert agayne, but he could not but drew it of by great peeces from his body with the ſkinne and the fleſhe to the bone, in ſuche wyſe that one might haue ſene his bowels. And ſo hercules ſaw and knewe wel that he muſte dye, than Hercules ſayde to Philotes tel Yole and all her frendes (wyth habundaūce of teres) of the miſerable death of Hercules. Thā wayled Yole ſo bytterly that her hart dyd braſt and died for ſorow. whan that Dianira heard tell of the deathe of Hercules▪ and how that it was through the ſhert the which ſhe had ſent hym▪ ſhe tooke a knife and kilde her ſelfe for ſorow. And thus was the valyaunt Hercules ſhamefully deceyued of a woman, neuertheleſſe it w
                     •
                  s without the knowledge of the woman, though tha
                     •
                   the woman wss the cauſer therof.
            
            
               
                  ❧ A new deceyte of late doone in the Cytie of Tours.
               
                  
                  
                     depiction of people seated at table, eating
                  
               
               
                  IN the Citie of toures there was a marchaūt of great power the whych had deſyred vpō a fryday his paiſon & other mo of his louers & freedes to dine wt hym & had promiſed thē a certayne great fyſſhe, the which was called a pyke. and coſt hym two ſhyllinges, beſyde the other ſmal fyſſhes, as Carpes, Bremes & pykerel, and other ſuch ſmal fiſſhes, This marchaūtes wife loued wel a certayne frere and whā the huſband had brought home the pyke, hys wyfe tooke it priuely & ſent it to the frere, bi a Coblers wyfe, the whych knew all her ſecretes, and tolde her yt
                  
ſhe ſhould ſhewe the frere, that ſhe wolde come yt nyght and make mery wyth hym, and remayne wyth hym all that nyght and helpe for to eat the Pyke, Thā was the Frere maruaylous glad and ſayde, if there be any good wyne for to get for money I wil prouide vs ſome, & we wyl teache the Pike for to ſwym therin, Than went the good Frere muſyng in hym ſelfe and thought how that he wolde cheriſhe this marchaūtes wyfe, And about, xii a clocke the good man came home with his geſtes, the whyche he had deſyred for to eat of the pyke, & brought them into the kitchyn for to ſee the great pyke yt he had bought, & ſayd to hys wyfe ſhewe to my geſtes what a great pyke that I haue bought, what Pyke ſayde hys wyfe? Mary ſayde he the great pyke that I ſente home wyth the other fyſſhes, The good wyfe ſayd yt ſhe had ſeene no pyke, I thynke yt ye dreme, for heere is a great carpe, ii, pykerels and, iiii, Bremes, wyth other ryuer fyſſhes but as for the pyke, I haue not ſene, why (ſayd her huſband) weene ye that I dreme? Than ſayd the perſon and the other geſtes we beleue that is not ſo for ye be very ſuttell and deceytfull, Than ſayde hys wyfe by my trouth, I ſuppoſe that he mocked wyth you, for I haue ſene no pyke of al thys yere, and therfore I thinke that he had dremed of a pyke, Than ſayd the goodman I promyſe you, it ſhabe a dere pyke for you And ſo he tooke a ſtaffe and wolde haue beaten hys wife, but hys geſtes tooke hym from her with force & dyd as muche as they could, for to make the peace, & went from thēce wyth the perſon for to make mery, And than his wyfe deſyred one of the neyghbours (a yonge wedow) to dyne wyth her, and whan ſhe was com to her ſhe ſayd, O my beloued neighbour I beſech you doo one thyng for me,

and I wyll rewarde you well therfore. Than ſayde the wedow what ſoeur pleaſe you I wyl be glad for to doo. Tan ſayde that woman, my huſhande is maruelous hote upon hys buſines, for he hath troubled me ſo muched the nyght paſt, that I ſhould not be able to abide it this night, and therfore I requyre you hartly that ye wyll doo ſo muche as to kepe my place to night, yt whyche the wedow conſented gladly. And ſo whan the good man had dyned he went pryuely & got him ſū rods, whiche he layd at his beddes feete, for ther wt he wold haue chaſtiſed his wyfe in the night as he was wont to doo, forth▪ knoweth wel her huſbādes minde, for he cānot home to ſupper but abode ſo longe out tyl he thought yt his wyfe were to bed. But ſhe cauſed her neybour to vnclothe her & to kepe her place for her for that nyght and cōmaunded her that whan her huſband cam home yt ſhe ſhould not ſpeke to him, and his wife put out al the fite yt was in the houſe. And whā this was done ſhe cōmaū
                  ded her neybour, yt as ſoone as her huſbād dyd ryſe in ye morning yt ſhe ſhuld go her way home to her own hous which ſhe did promyſe ſo for to doo. And than wēt his good wife to the graye freres cloyſtet for to helpe to eate the good Pyke wyth the frere, like as ſhe had ſent hym worde, and for her pardon, like as ſhe was wonte to doo, and ſo made good there and dronke the wyne merely wyth the frere. And ſo whan it was night her huſbande came home and thought to haue lyght a candell, but he foūde no fyre. He ſeing that went preuily to bed, and ſlept almoſt tyll it was day light, and thā he aroſe preuely & tooke the rods & caſt vp the clothes & did bete his neibour yt the bloud ran downe of al ſides. But his poore neybour durſt not ſpeke one word. And ſo at laſt

he let her alone and went hys waye out. And than the poore wedowe (hys nedghboure) aroſe vp and went her way home to her owne houſe al morning, and complaynyng of her miſchaunce, and curſed her neyghbour, and the time that euer ſhe came there. And in ſhort tyme aftercā his wife home from the freres, & cam in her chā
                  ber, & ſawe yt it was al to be ſtrawed wt the roddes, and ſaw yt the ſhetes were al bloudy, & thā ſhe perceiued wel yt her neyghbour had ſuffered penaunce. And incōtinent ſhe wēt & made the chāber cleane, & made her bed & laid on a cleane payre of ſhetes & wēt to bed, & lay there tyl her huſband came home, & whan yt he cā in the chābre he foūde his wife a bed faſt a ſlepe & ſaid, ha ladi wil ye not aryſe yet why (ſaid ſhe) is it day I wiſt not that ye wer vp for I lay and dreamed, and that hath cauſed me for to lye ſo longe a bed, I beleue yt ye dreamed of the Pyke, for I gaue you a good remēbraūce therof. Thā ſaid his wyfe, I haue no remēbraunce of you nor of the Pyke, Thā ſayd he, is it al redy forgottē, how ſo ſaid his wife, who ſhould remēber dreames. Than ſayd her huſband is that a dreame, for to bete a handful of roddes to peres vpon thy body, And alſo I wote well yt the ſhetes wyl teſtify whether it be ſo or not. Thā ſayd his wife, I wote not what ye meane, but I wote wel yt ye gaue me a frēdly kyſſe to day morning and ſo left me ſleping Than ſayd her huſband, I maruayle of that, let me ſee the ſhetes, and thā ſhe ſhewed to hym the cleane ſhetes that ſhe had layde newe vpon the bed, and ſhewed her naked body all hole and cleane, and ſo whan her huſband ſaw that the ſhetes were cleane, and her body hole he wyſt not what to ſay, and ſo he was ful of fantaſyes and ſaid of a truth (wyfe) I had went yt I had beten you

well to day mournynge, but I ſee well it is not ſo, and therfore I wote not what to ſay. Than ſayd hys wyfe put that fātaſyes out of your minde, for ye may ſe that ye haue not touched me, for ye haue dremed, lyke as ye dremed yeſterday of the Pyke. Than ſayde her huſband Now I know well that ye ſayd the truthe, and therefore I beſeche you for the loue of God forgeue it me, for now I know wel that I ſayd not the truth yeſterday of the Pyke. And moſte of all I am aſhamed that I ſpoke ſo to you in the preſence of the worſhypfull men, & ſpecyally in the preſence of oure parſon, and therfore I requyre thee forgeue it me. And than his wyfe ſayde I forgiue you gladly, but I pray you be not ſo haſty another tyme. Than ſayd he, My beloued wyfe it ſhall neuer be ſo more. And ſo what that he heard or ſaw after that: he thought all that he had dremed of it. And thus was the good man deceyued of hys wyfe, and thought that he had dremed of the Pyke. And ſhe wente and made good there wyth this Frere, and euenynges and mornynges thei were together. and this marchaunt man was a litle Ialouſe. And whan he ſpoke a worde to hys wyfe: Than ſayde ſhe peace foole thou dremeſt of the Pyke. And ſo thys Marchaunte was deceyued of hys wyfe indede.
            
            
               
                  ❧ An olde deceyte doone in olde tyme.
               
                  
                  
                     depiction of King Solomon
                  
               
               THat tyme whan Dauyd was departed out of the worlde: than was Salomō his ſonne made kyng of Iſrael in his fathers ſtede, & he put hys truſte in phararo the king of Egipt and toke his doughter, and brought her into the Cytie of Dauid, Vpon a time Salomō made ſacrifice and offered to Gybeō.a.M Offerynges or ſacryfices, that were burned, And thā our lorde made reuelacion to him in his ſlepe and ſayd, Aſke what thou wilt, I ſhall geue it to thee. Than ſayd Salomon, I am yet but yonge, and I know not my ſelfe whych is good or yll, & Salomon thy ſeruaunt requyreth of the worthy

hert, that he may know this people, and vnderſtand what is good and yl. Than ſayd our lord for as much as ye haue not deſyred longe lyfe, nor ryches nor youre enemyes euyl fare, but for a ſkylful perſeueraūce,: therfore I geue to thee accordyng to thy wordes and deſyre, fyrſt a ſkylful heart, in ſo muche that nō like vnto thee hath not bene to fore thee, nor after thee ſhal none aryſe that ſhal haue ſuche a wit as thou haſt, And alſo I geue to thee that, that thou haſt not deſyred, that is ryches & honour, that there hath bene none a monge the kynges like vnto thee. And Salomon builded wel .xx. yere vpō the houſe ef god, & of the houſe of the kynge, and he had therto .ixx.m. laboryng mē yt bare the burthens, & .lxxx M. workemen that layd ſtones and ſuche other officers and .iii.m. and .iiii.c. rulers & ouerſeers to gouerne the workemen, And the kyng Salomon was greater in riches & in wyſdome than were al the kynges that were vpon earth, And all the people of the worlde deſyred for to ſee Salomon, and for to heare of his wyſedome that God had gyuen to hym, and euery man brought to him honourable gyftes, as golde, ſyluer, iewelis, and coſtely rayment, harneys, and ſweet ſmelling herbes, & horſes and mules. But Salomon loued wel outlandy ſhe women, as the doughter of Pharao, the Moabites, the Amonytes, and the Edomytes, the whyche the lord of Iſrael had forboden ſaying beware go not to them and let them not come to thee for of a ſuetti they wyl cauſe thee to bowe thy heart to theyr god And yet Salomon went to them wyth great loue. And he had .vii.C, women to his wyfes, and, iii,c. cōcubines, and his wyues cauſed him to apply his hert to ſtraūge goddes, in ſo muche yt his heart could not be whole wt the lord god, as ye hert of

his father Dauid was, And ſo Salomon and Amoche went to the god of zydon and to Meicon the god of the Amoytes, and he buylded a houſe Chamos the God of the Moabites, vpon the mount yt lyeth before Ieruſalem, and Moloch god of the Amonites, and Salomon cauſed all his outlandy ſhe wyues to offre frankenſēce to theyr god. And therfore god tooke wrathe vpon hym and departed his kyngdom. Now behold how the moſt wyſeſt Salomon was deceiued of the women, & howe his hert was ſeperated from the lord God. Alas who may with ſtand the deceyte, the flateryng, & the weepyng of women.
               
                  
                     depiction of two men and a woman
                  
               
            
            
               
               
                  ❧A new deceyt doone of late at Danſwyke in Pruyſe.
               VPon a tyme it fortuned in the worthy Cytye of Danſwyke: that two yonge marchauntes went walkyng together to warde a place called artus gardeyn, whych ſtoode in the market place, & as they went walkyng: there came a yonge luſty fayre gentyl womā the whych met them, and her mayde wayting vpon her for they came fro the churche, and ſo one of the yong mē behelde this gentil womā, and ſaid, without aduyſemēt to his companion, by my trouth there goeth a fayre we mā by vs, yf that I might lye one nyght by her, I wold ſpend .l. nobles, the mayde (hearing ye word) ſayde vnto her maſtres, herken maſtres what one of thoſe men ſayth, one of the men that paſſeth by vs ſaid to his companion that he wolde gyue .l, nobles that he myght lye one night wyth you, The wife turned and loked backe warde, and ſaw that he was a luſty yonge man, & ſaid vnto her mayde, abyde a lytle tyl he be departed frō hys felow, & than aſke him if it pleaſe him to come to nyght to our houſe, he ſhalbe welcome and yet for all that her huſband was in the ſtrete. The mayde dyd lyke as her maſtres had commaunded her, and ſhe wente vnto the yonge marchaunt whan he was departed fro his felow and ſayd to him gentyl yonge man wyl ye yet abyde by the wordes that ye ſayd whan the gentylwoman came by you? yes ſayd ye yonge marchaunt yet wil I abide bi my worde yf I may obtayne my purpoſe of yt woman. Than ſayd the mayde, if it pleaſe you to obtayne your purpoſe: thā com to night to her houſe whan the clock hath ſmytten .vii. For it is the maner in Danſwyke yt the moſte parte of all the marchaunte men haue ſupped

at .vii a clocke, and than they goe to Artus gardeyn to drinke and there to take there recreacyon. and ſomtyme to make bargains with theyr marchandiſe, ſo that it is fomtyme late in the night ere that they com home. And thus went this gentilwomans huſband to Artus gardeyn at .vii. of the clocke after ſupper, and thā the yong marchaunt came home to the wife of the houſe, and ſhe brought hym aboue in a fayre chamber, where ſhe had arayed a coſtly bed after the goodlyeſt maner, and there they enbraſed eche other with many a freendly kys, and there was geuen the erneſt peny vpon theyr marchaundyſe. And in ſhort tyme after the yonge man dyd gyue her the .l. nobles wherof ſhe ſente one of them for wyne and layde a way the reſydue of the money and kept it ſecretly, and than they dronke the wyne and made good chere, and one began to tother lyke as Venus chyldren ſhould doo, and ſo they wente to bed together, and there ſhe tooke him in her armes with great loue: ſeking the floures of nature in the ſwete roſe gardeyne: and in the meane whyle the mayde lay looking out at the window for a ſpye, wayting the commyng of her mayſter, as her maſtres had commaunded her. For ſhe knew wel of the marchaundyſe that was made betwene the marchaunt and her maſtres. ❧And ſo whā the clocke ſmote .xi. in the nyght: than came her mayſter home, and incontinēt the mayde perceued hym and ran to her maſtres, whyche by and by came downe and went to bed in her owne chambre, and whan her huſband came to his chamber: hys wyfe lay and routed as thoughe ſhe had ben faſt a ſlepe, and ſo he put of hys clothes & went to bed to hys wyfe, and ſhe ſpake in her ſlepe (as he thought) & ſayd, alas huſbande why doo ye a wake me ſo haſtely out of

my ſlepe I lay and ſlepte ſweetly, ye ſayd her huſband, ye know well that I muſt come to bed, and ſo in ſhorte tyme after ſhe longed for to haue bene aboue agayne, for to renue the good paſtaunce, & ſo ſhe found a ſubtyl meanes to begyle her huſband and ſayd, good huſband I haue ſo great luſte to ſlepe, that I wote not what to doo, and alſo I haue ſuche a tumblyng in my bely, that I muſt nedes goe to the preuy houſe, and I am afrayde that I ſhould fall aſlepe vpon the preuy, and than ſhe aroſe vp from her huſbande, and dyd ſet before the bed a baſyn and a ſtycke in it, and ſayde my beſte beloued huſband, yf that I fall a ſlepe vpon the preuy. I praye you than knocke vpō the baſyn that I may with the noyſe therof awake, And her huſbande promyſed her that he wolde doo her requeſt, and than ſhe went againe aboue where ſhe was ioyfully receiued, for he thought it very longe tyl that ſhe came and her huſband had dronk wel in ſo muche, that incontynent he fel aſlepe, and ſlept tyl in the mornynge at .iiii. a clocke, and than he ſtarte out of his ſlepe & groped roūde about the bed: but he foūde not his wyfe, of the whych he was a frayde & lept from the bed and ſmote vpon the baſyn in ſo much that incō
                  tinent his wyfe came running and made her complaint & ſayd, alas good huſband, I haue ſuffered very great coulde, for I haue ſit al this night ſleapyng there vpon the preuy and I drede ſore that I ſhall get a greate ſickenes after this colde. And ſo ſhe went to bed to her huſbande and lay there tyl it was fyue of the clocke in the mornyge. And than aroſe her huſband for to goe heare maſſe and for to doo ſuch thinges as he had for to do. And whan that her huſband was gone out, ſhe wente incontynent aboue to her other louer, and there ſhe remayned

tyl that the clocke ſmote .viii. for than it was lefull for them to aryſe and ſo depart without the knowledge of any body ſauyng only the mayde. And ſo it fortuned whan yt they were departed this youg marchaūt wolde take his iourney toward his houſe, that was in the cytie of Lubeck in Saxō and tooke his horſe & wēt thetherwardes. And vpon the ſame daye this womans huſband rode out of the cytie of Danſwyke towarde ye citie Lubecke & ſo whā that he had ryden a whyle vppon hys iourney: he looked vp and ſaw a horſe man ride afore hym and whan that he had ſeene hym: he deſyred gladly for to haue company, and rode the faſter tyll that he had ouer taken the other man that rode afore hym, and ſo whan he had ouer taken him they rode together, and than the elder mā ſayde to the yonge marchaunt I pray you tel me ſome newes or els of youre chaunces for to ſhorte our way wythall. Than ſayde the yonge marchaūt there is no chaunce fortuned to me and therfore I can tel none. Than ſayde the marchaunt I haue maruayle of yt, for in the cytie of Danſwyke the yonge merchaunt men get many ſtraūge chaūces, for the marchaunces be comenly olde men, and haue for the moſte parte yonge luſty wyfes the wyhche haue more worke in their ſhoppes than theyr huſbandes may wel awaye wyth all, in ſo muche that they borowe nowe and than a lofe of you or of ſuche other. Than ſayd the marchaunt by cockes bones there is a prety chaunce fortuned to me of late of a Marchauntes wyfe, and ſo he vp and tolde him al the ſtory of the woman and how it was brought to paſſe, and of the mayde, & of the baſon, lyke as is expreſſed afore, The good man heard him tell his tale and was not well contente thereof in hys mynde

and thought in him ſelfe, that al choſe thynges were fortunate to hym ſelfe but he laught therwith. And whan that they had rydon a lytle forther: the marchaunt held ſtyl with his horſe, and ſayd, alas it is wrong with me for I ſhould ryde to Lubeck for money, & I haue forgot tē my pryncipall oblygacyō yt I ſhould requyre my money wythall, & therfore I muſt nedes returne home wardes again, & if ye haue no great buſines: I require you that ye wyll bere me companye to my houſe, and I wyll paye for your coſtes and for your horſe, & make you the beſt chere that I can, Thā ſayd the yong marchaunt, if I can doo you any pleaſure: I wil be glad to beat your commaundemēt. And ſo they tooke theyr iourney back warde agayne and rode home and came in at the back ſyde of the marchauntes houſe, and came in at the horſe ſtable, ſo yt the yong man knew nat the houſe and than they went forth into the houſe, whereas they founde ye good wyfe ſyttyng, the whych he beheld & knew wel in ſo muche that he was aſtonyed and ſayde to hym ſelfe. Alas what haue I done, for it is not wel now, but if I had kept my teth before my tongue: thā had I done wel but there is no remedy it is doone, & that yt is ſayd: cannot be called agayn, for it is ſaid, and ſo muſt it be. And whan that they were with the wyfe, than ſayd her huſband, wife take money and go to market & bye vs ſome good meat, for I bryng here wyth me a good frende, the which I wyll make good there to night. But god knoweth the wyfe was not wel cōtent wt that frende to com in ſuch maner. But not wſtandyng ye wife muſt obey the cōmaundemēt of her huſband. And whā it was nyght: the meat was redy, than the good man tooke hys geſt and ſet them downe at the table, and there thei were
well

but the wyfe went about the houſe and came not to ſupper, in ſo muche yt her huſbande was amoued with her and bad her that ſhe ſhoulde come and ſyt by hym, the whych ſhe did at ye laſt, & was ſore aſhamed. The good man made his geaſt the beſt chere yt he could: and dronke eche to other plenty of wyne. And ſo whan that the ſupper was doone and the meat taken from the table: than he commaunded hys ſeruaunt and one of the maydens to depart out of the chambre, and the other mayde that knewe of the bargaine: remayned ſtyll in the chambre, and than he cauſed the chamber doore to be locked, and ſayd with a loude voyce, Is here no honeſtly? for he that byteth hys noſe of, ſhameth hys fate, and ſo it is wyth me, for yf I ſhame my wife: I ſhame my ſelfe. And than he ſayd to his wyfe. My wyfe ye be to coſtly for to be my wyfe yf ye cā wyn one night .l. nobles: for thā wolde I haſtely or ī ſhort tyme ſpend al my goodes. The wyfe ſayd that is not trew, than was her huſband angri and ſaid. Gothy wayes and fetche me hether the money, for God hath ſent me ynoughe & alſo I wyl haue no ſuche money in my houſe. Thā the wife went with a moued myned, and did fetche the money and layd it to fore her huſband vpon the table, and he tooke it and cold it, and there was .xlix. nobles. And thā he demaunded the yōg man ſayinge, is thys thy money? no ſayd the yong man but it was once my money. Than ſaid his hoſte, put it in thy purſe. Than the hoſte had yet ſome ſyluer money that was remayning of the noble, yt was chaunged for the wyne. And thā ſayd the hoſt, yet not withſtanding ye labour muſt be payd, what ſhal I geue thy wife for her labour? Than ſayd the yong man mine hoſt, that I put to your good iudgement. Than ſayd the hoſte, ſhe ſhal

haue for her parte a payre of ſhewes & a payre of Slippers, and the mayde that kept the watche ſhall haue a payre of ſlyppers, and the mynſtrell that playde vpon the baſyn at the fockynge ſhal haue for hys parte a pot of wyne, And ſo the hoſt gaue eche his money the whiche they muſt receyue. And than Iohn Iohn the boſte that was mynſtrell gaue hys parte fyrſt of all and ſente for the wyne and dronke and made good chere, and that that yet remayned of hys moneye: he gaue it agayne to the yonge man and ſaid, holde take this and make good there therwyth to nyght, and goe to morowe where it pleaſe you, I requyre you that ye come here no more. And yf ye haue founde anye good fortune: I praye you be ſecret of your tounge and make no wordes of it for that yt is doone: muſt ſo remayne for there is none other remedy. And ſo the yonge man rode the next mornynge hys waye and was very glad of hys chaunce. Now ye maye ſee what that women can brewe. Now be holde ye ryche men of great power, & alſo yonge men the whych haue takē vpon you great buſines & take a good hede hardely of falſe and ſubtle womē. But alas who is it that can take hede? for ſcripture fayth that a man ſhal ſeldō fynde an honeſt woman, or a worthy woman. For there ſtandeth wryttē. Mulietem fortē quis inuentet? procul hic. &c. who is that, yt may fynde a ſtrong honeſt womā or a ſubſtancy all honeſt woman, farre from hence or at the ende of the worlde. Thus euery man that wyl be ſure: he may abſtaine the face of women and the conuerſacyon, theyr company, and beyng wyth them.
            
            
               ¶An olde deceyte doone of olde tyme.
               
                  
                  
                     depiction of man with head of John the Baptist
                  
               
               THe ſeruauntes of Herode were ſente forthe: and haue take ſaynt Iohn & brought him to ye gayle & there ſet him faſt in pryſon for Herodias ſake. And Herodias layde agaynſt him many thinges & wold haue beheded him, but they coulde not brynge it to paſſe, and Herod drad Iohn, for he knew wel that he was a Prophete and a holy man, and tooke great heed to him and was obedient to him in many cauſes, and alſo he hero him gladlye. And ſo it fortuned vpon a day yt he madi a great ſupper for his gentyles & principal ſtates of Galyle. Than cam in the doughter of Herodyas & daūced of the whiche kynge Herode and they that were at hys table tooke great pleaſure therin. And incontinent ſaid

kyng Herode to Herodias doughter and ſayd, deſyre of me what it pleaſe you and I wyl giue it you. and with that he ſwore an other & ſayd, what ſoeuer that ye wyll deſyre: I wyll geue it you, ye to halfe my realme to, thā ſayd her mother to her, deſyre and aſke the head of Iohn baptyſt And than incontinent ſhe went to the kyng, in great haſt, and ſayd, I wyl that ye geue to me incontynent the hed of Iohn baptyſt in a platter Thā was the kyng very ſord wfull and ſo for hys othe ſake, & for the company that were at his table: he wolde not that ſhe ſhould deſyre in vayne but gaue to her her deſyre, And incontinent the kyng ſent the hangman to the pryſon, and cauſed him to hed Iohn baptyſt & brought ye hed in a platter and gaue it the doughter, and the doughter gaue it forthwyth to her mother. Now behold how yt ye holy prophet Iohn baptyſt loſt his hed & lyfe thorow the cauſe & falſed of the miſcheuous womā Herodias Beholde what myſchyef and what maruaylous thynges that women can bryng to paſſe,
            
            
               ¶A new decyte doone of late of a❧ Ialowſy man that wolde not very well truſt hys wyfe.❧
               
               
                  
                     depiction of flower
                  
               
               
                  THere was in Italy a well learned man the which had a fayre yonge floure to hys wyfe. This man had for the moſte parte red all the practyces of the womē how that they were wont to deceyue their huſbādes and therfore he wolde not well truſt hys wyfe, and alſo he thought that he wolde take good heed, and to be wel ware that he wolde not be deceyued with ſuche deceyte and that perchaunce that his wyfe would ſpyn yl yarne like as many wiues had ſerued their huſbandes before And ſo he abode in his ialouſy wel .iii. or .iiii. yere in ſo much that his wyfe myght neuer be out of his preſence but al wayes ſhe muſt be by hym, without that ſhe went to the churche for to here maſſe, & incontynent to come home agayne. And alwayes whan ſhe went to church ſhe had an olde woman bi her, as it is the maner in Italye, the whiche tooke heed to her. And ſo it fortuned vppon a tyme that a yonge luſtye man harde tell of the rule and how that the fayre gentyl woman was troublede of her huſbande with the fore named ialouſy, And ſo yt fortuned vpon a tyme that thys yonge luſty man came and met with this fayre gentylwoman, and ſpake to her ſecretly ſaying or tellynge to her his good wyll and intent and made his complaint with heuy ſighes to her that ſhe maryed ſuche a Ialouſe man. And he ſayde to her that he loued her aboue all the women that were in the worlde, and ſhewed her what that he wold doo for her loue, and ſayd yf that it pleaſed you I wyl write it to you in a letter, for becauſe that I may talke nolenger with you, yf I wyſt that my ſymple ſeruyce that cometh out of a good free hart ſhould not be diſdained nor put beſyde but accepted, and that my labour be not ſpente in vayne, and that my hande be not ydle occupyde. And

whan the gentilwoman heard theſe wordes of the yōge gentyl man and marked them well how that they were made with a good wyl and wyth greate deſyre. And for becauſe that ye olde trotte ſtode ſo nygh by her: ſhe gaue the yonge man no good anſwere nor yet no louynge token, but ſhe was contente & deſyred wyth good heart and mynde for to ſee the letter & for to rede it. ❧Than the yonge man tooke hys leue wyth a glad chere for the fayre gentylwoman gaue hym a freendly farewell. And ſo whan he was departed: the olde trotte that ſtoode behynde her, demaunded what he wolde wyth her: Than anſwered her maſtres and ſaid he brought me tidinges of my mother, of the whyche I am very glad, for ſhe is yet in good health and is mery thanked be god. And ſo they went homewarde, And the next day whan the gentyl womā went to churche: her louer came and met wyth her and had made a freendlye and a louynge letter the whyche he put preuely in her hande that the olde trotte knew nothing therof, And whā ſhe was ſecretly alone: ſhe opened the letter and dyd rede howe depelye that he was taken in the loue of her and wythout that ſhe wolde ſhewe grace to hym: he ſhoulde ſuffre death, and deſyred her hertely that it might remayne ſecretly, and that his loue might growe in her like as the loue of her dyd growe in hym. And whan the gentyll woman had red his letter: ſhe tooke compaſſyon vpon hym for her hette brenned in the loue of hym, and wolde gladly haue ſpoken with him, to the ende that his loue ſhould not haue ben vnrewarded, but ſhe was ſo ſharply watched that ſhe could not ſpeake to hym, for ſhe might not go one foote out of her houſe, but whā that ſhe went vnto churche and thā had ſhe auoide totheles whore that

tooke hede to her and neuer went from her. This yonge man the next daye dyd clothe hym in an other taymence and came and met wyth the gentylwoman the whyche knew him wel, and ſhe paſſed ſo nygh by him: that ſhe tooke hym her letter in his hād ſo priuely that no body ſawe it, and he louingly receiued it and dylygently rede it, in the whiche he founde whole contracte and cōpacte in ſo muche that they lacked nothinge but time & place And ſo he was very glad of the confortable letter that he had of her. And ſo he wente to a good frende of hys whyche dwelt in the way as ſhewent to churchward, and ſhewed her all the bondage of his heart how he was ſet in the loue of her, deſyrynge her that ſhe wolde helpe hym in hys cauſe, and in tyme commynge for to doo as muche for her gayne, & ſo ſhe promyſed hym for to helpe hym as muche as lay in her power for to doo, whan he hearde that: he thanked her and ſayd be ye content that I may ſpeake priuely with her in your houſe: yea ſaid the wyfe, ſpeake wyth her as longe as it pleaſeth you if it pleaſe her for to come in my houſe, for I wyll be gladde to ſhewe you all the pleaſure that I can. Than was the yonge man very glad and wrote a letter to his louer in whyche letter was conteyned this folowing. O my moſt fayreſt and gracious louer & comfort of my heart, ye hope of my entent & mynde, the whyche hath ſo ſtrōgly caught my heart in the ſnare of your loue, for ye be among al womē the moſt gracius the moſt comlieſt and one that nature hath not forgotten, pleaſe it you to wytte howe that I your worthy ſeruaunt haue a ſecrete freend the whiche knoweth you well. And ſo ſhe knoweth what a foule vyllayne that ye haue to youre huſband ſhe dwelleth in the way as ye goe to church warde

                     〈2 pages missing〉
                  
                  
and wyth your licence I wil be there in ye one for mere chābers in ſtraunge clothes yt no body ſhal know me, & I wil haue by me a kettell of water mingled wt aſſhes & whā yt ye come therby, I wil pore it vpō your clothes And whan ye be thus fouled? ye ſhall take it ſcornefully, and go into ye houſe for to make you cleane, & than ye ſhal ſende your keper home for other rayment, and in the meane ſeaſō we wil talke together of our loue, whā ſhe had red thys letter: ſhe wrote to hī againe yt ſhe was content wt al ſuch thinges as he had writtē to her. And the next day as ſhe ſhould go to ye church warde: her typet, her raile, her gowne, & al her clothes were al arayed wt aſſhes & water, and than was this gentilwomā angry and ſore amoued, & ſo wēt into ye houſe as yf ſhe had bene aſhamed, but it was but her countenaūce, and thā her keper tooke a knife & ſcraped her gowne, as ſhe thought it beſt. Then ſayd the gentyl woman (no no) let it alone for we doo labour in vaine, for it wil not be incontinent cleane. And therfore ſeynge there is no remedy: run quyckly home & fetche me another gowne: a typet, and a taile, & come quickly agayn, yt we leſe not our maſſe. And thus is the olde trotte gon home for other clothes, and incōtinent ye gentyl womā wēt aboue to her ſwete hert, of the whiche ſhe was louingly receyned, and kiſſed her ſweetly, and louingly embraced eche other, and there was loue by loue, & there loue ſpake to loue a longe tyme together. And whan her keper came home wythout her maiſtres: thā her mayſter demaūded of her where ſhe had left his wyfe. Than ſayde the olde trot gent: I mayſter we haue had a greate myſfortune, and ſo ſhe vp & tolde him all yt was fortuned: and therfore I 
                     •
                  ū for another gowne, & for another typpet for

my maſtres is aſhamed for to goo ſo in the ſtrete. Than ſayd her mayſter is it of a truthe? her keper ſayde ſyr it is as I haue ſhewed you. Than ſayde her mayſter goo to thy maſtres, for I know well what it is. For I haue redde of muche deceyte, myſchefe and manye ſubtil wayes that woman haue to begyle their huſbandes wythal, but thys ſubtyl meanes I neuer ſaw nor red afore this tyme. And therfore he fel in gret melancholy and dyed in ſhort tyme after, for becauſe that he had ſtudied ſo longe in vayne and for becauſe that he was ſo falſelye deceyued and by ſuch ſubtyll meanes. And therfore euery man take heede to his wyfe and beware of deceytfulnes.
            
            
               
                  
                     depiction of Hercules brandishing sword
                  
               
               
               
                  ❧An olde deceyte doone in olde tyme.
               THe ſtronge and worthy Hercules was ouercome in all hys power and ſtrength throughe the loue of a yonge maide, the fayre Yole yt kynges doughter of Calido ny in ye whiche the worthieſt of the worlde could not ouercom & bryng hī to ſhame. This kyng her father had promyſed Hercules that hys doughter Yole ſhould be hys wyfe, the whyche in ſhort tyme after he repented, of the whyche Hercules was very wroth, and tooke warre agaynſt the kyng and ouercame hym, and tooke all the countrey with the fayre yole the whych he ſo entyrely loued. But yole the whyche thought more vpon the death of her father than on the loue of Hercules vnder a colour of falſe loue and with ſubtil meanes ſmylyng and with flatteryng wordes: hath drawē Hercules to ſuch great loue, yt ſhe cauſed him for to do what it pleaſed her and ſo ſhe hath cauſed hym for to do lay a way his yron ſtaffe, wherwith he was wont for to rule the ſtronge moſters and beaſtes wythall. She cauſed hym for to lay a way the lyons ſkynne and cauſed him to be clothed wt ſoft clothes of ſylke, ſhe cauſed hym for to were a crowne of to ſemary vpon his head, and goldē tynges vpon his fyngers, his rough here was kembed and after the beſt maner trymmed, & ſet a crowne vpon his hed and other coſtly ornamentes ſuche as the maydens and women dyd were. She cauſed hys toughe berde to be anoynted with coſtlye oyle of Cypres,
               Thys yole was well feene in deceite & thought in her ſelfe that it was more laudable to deceiue ſuch a groſſe ſtronge man wyth aduoutry, than to kyl hym wyth the ſword of myſchyef, and ſo to reuenge her fathers death

yet (to the diſhonour of ye worthy Hercules, ſhe cauſed hym for to gyue hym ſelfe to womēs buſynes and ydlenes, in ſo muche that he went and ſate among the womē and tolde ryddels and fortunes as the chyldren did, and fate and ſpon yarne at the dyſtaffe as the women dyd.
               
                  ❧Now beholde how the worthy Hercules is brought to femynyne workes thorough the deceyt of yole to his vtter confuſyon, the whych was wont to be ſo manly in all his feares. Now beholde, what myſchyefe, what maruayles and what foly ſhites that the falſe and ſubtil women can brynge to paſſe, yea that ſemeth vnpoſſyble for to be, that can they doo and bryng to paſſe.
            
            
               
                  
                     depiction of man next to woman who is in bed
                  
               
               
               ¶A new deceyte doone of late.
               IN the Ereledom of Henegou dwelt a riche marehaūt the which had a fayre honeſte yonge woman to hys wyfe, which marchaunt was moſt part from home for becauſe of his marchaundyſe, the whiche is not good for yonge womē for women be nyce and ſlypper, & ſpecyally whā they ſeldome ſee yt they loue, for than lightly truneth there minde. Like as it fortuned wyth this marchaūtes wyfe, for the long beyng forth of her huſbande was the cauſe that her hert was ſet a fyre in the loue of an other yonge man, with the which ſhe had had longe her paſtyme ſecretly. And this marchaunte had an vncle the which dwelt ouer agaynſt him and ſaw euery night whan the marchaunt was out of towne, an other came to his houſe and ſawe him goo oute in the mornynge agayne. And ſo when his vncle had ſeene thys manye tymes / he wente and ſhewed the marchant what rule that his wyfe kept whan he was from home aboute hys profyt, for whā he rode in colde and in rayne, his wyfe laye wyth an other yonge man dalieng in the bed, whan the marchaunt heard of this, he was not wel contente and ſo it fortuned vpon a tune the marchaunt was at home and ſhortly made him redy and cauſed his horſe to be ſadled, and ſayd that he wolde ride a greate iourney, and yt it wolde be longe ere that he came agayne, & ſoo he gaue his wite charge of his houſe, and that ſhe ſhould ſe that all thinges were wel and in good order. And in the mornyng erly the marchūt tooke hys iourney and rode forthe, and in the euening whan it was ſomwhat darke he came home into the citie agayne, and ſet his horſe in a ſtable by and by, and than came to his vncles houſe for

to know ye trouth, and for to watche ye wower to whome his wyfe had ſende worde that her huſband was oute of the towne. And whan that the clocke had ſmytten .ix. the yonge man cā walkyng vp & downe before the marchaū
                  tes houſe, watyng if there came any body to the doore, and ſo the yonge man wente walkynge vp & downe to & fro .ii. or .iii. tymes before the marchauntes houſe. The marchaūt ſeing that, boldly went forth on his vnckles houſe and came to the yong mā & ſayd, My maſtres ſayd that ye ſhal go with me here behynd in the barne & there ye ſhal abyde for a ſeaſō, for perchaūce that our mayſter come agayne, & ſo he tooke the yong man & brought him preuely to the barne and locked the doore faſt yt he coulde not come out. And than he went out at the bake ſide and came home agayn to his vncles houſe, and ſaid ye mouſe is in the trap what is now beſte to be doone? Than ſaide his vncles wife, go and fetche her frendes, that they may ſee what an honeſt wife yt ye haue. And then the marchaūt went and fet his wiues father and mother & her two brothers and two of her ſyſters, & cauſed them al for to come to his vncles houſe, & there he ſhewed vnto them what a falſe hore yt he had to his wife & how that he hadde locked her wower in the barne that he coulde not come out, and there deſyred her freendes that they wolde helpe to kyll the falſe knaue, the whiche they all together yt were preſent promiſed for to doo. And the meane whyle that the marchaunt went for to get her freendes together, the gentyl woman his wife wente oute and walked too and fro, for to looke for her louer and ſo as ſhe wente vp and downe, ſhe came to fore the barne vnknowen to her that her louer was there, and whan that he hearde that there

was one about the barne, he encouraged hym ſelfe and ſayde, who is there? the gentyl womā (his wyfe beinge al a frayde āſwered & ſayd I am here your louer, howe cam ye hether? The yongmā ſayd, your ſeruaūt brought me hether, & ſayd yt ye ſayd yt I ſhould tary here, for perchaūce yt your huſbond ſhould come to night agayn. Alas ſayd his wife, yt is not ſo, I am afrayd it hath bene my huſbād. Thā ſayd the yongemā, let me out or els I wyll breke the barne, Thā ſayd yt gētilwomā I require yt do not ſo, for thā were I vtterly diſhoneſted & vtterly ſhamed for euer, & ſhe could not let him out for ſhe had not the key, & ſo ſhe went ſhortly into the houſe & there ſhe foūde a būdel of olde keyes, & amonge ye ſame keyes ſhe foūde a key yt opened the barne dore, & ſo ſhe let out her louer, & in the ſame barne ſhe wēt & ſet an aſſe for to ſaue her honeſty, & than locked the barne faſt agayne, & wyth a kyſſe they departed from thēs & went to his reſt And whan that all her freendes were aſſembled in hys vncles houſe than they toke wyth them burnynge torches and other lyghtes, and ſo thei came before the marchauntes doore wyth halberdes & ſwordes and knocked at the doore, & incontinent the gentylwomā let them in & maruayled greatly and ſayd, O my freend, what meneth this yt ye come ſo late here by night. And incōtinēt the marchaunt her huſband tooke his fiſt and beate her that her noſe and mouth ran a bloud, & ſaid thou whore thou ſhalt know anon wherfore. And ſo forth they wēt al together to the barne and there they ſtoode wyth halberdes and naked ſwordes for to kyll the yonge man wt all. And the marchaunt ſayde to his wyfe vnlocke the barne. The gentylwoman ſayd, I neuer had the key, the key hath euermore bē wt your keyes. And thā he fet hys

keyes & vnlocked the barne. And whā the aſſe ſaw all the light: he cryed very dredfully, in ſo much yt they wer afrayde, & ſaw yt it was an aſſe that ſtoode there of the whiche the frendes were ſore amoued and ſayd, yu art a foule knaue & a ribalde & a diſhoneſter of womē & fals lieng traytour, and yf he had not ron a way: her two fyſters wolde haue killed him. And the marchaunt ſeing yt was whole aſhamed & wiſt not what to ſay, but ſought for grace and mercy. And ſo after that: they ledde theyr life in peace and concorde, And the betrayer was euer more hated & ſo if one ſee & know any ſuche thinges, let him holde hys peace & be ſtyl, & let goddes water go ouer goddes lande and than ye ſhall haue no myſſe thanke.
            
            
               ¶The concluſyon,
               I Should haue wryttē much more of the deceite of womē, for there was ye wtout nūber in the penne And for bycauſe that it ſhould not be to redyous for the reder, and that the women ſhould not be dyſcōtent, and alſo it is agaynſt my owne harte, for the conuerſacion of the women is ſo ſwete, ſo louely and ſo delectable to beholde, for without women may none be full made, further, there as is no women is none made. Alſo beſyde yt (as we finde wryttē, the face and beauty of the women kyndeleth the hart of man. Therfore all ye good honeſt women, and vyrgins be not myſcontent, for yt I haue wryttē heere is of the vntrew and noughty hariots, the whych ſeeke nothing but good chere, and concupyſcēce of the fleſhe, the whych is the way to hel, from the whiche our mercyful lorde Ieſu Chriſt defende vs. Amen,
               FINIS,
            
         
      
      
         
            ☞Imprynted at London in Paules Churche yarde at the ſygne of the Lambe, by Abraham Vele,
         
      
   