
      
         
            
            
            
            
            THE
RAVENS
Almanacke
            Foretelling of a
Plague, Famine, and
Ciuill Warre.
            That shall happen this present yeare
1609. not only within this Kingdome of great
Britaine, but also in France Germany, Spaine, and
other parts of Christendome.
            With certaine remedies, rules, and receipts,
how to preuent▪ or at least to abate the edge of these
vniuersall Calamities.
            LONDON
Printed by E. A. for Thomas Archer, and arto bee solde at
his Shop in the Popes-head-Pallace nere the Royall
Exchange. 1609.
         
         
            
            
            To the Lyons of the Wood (the young
Courtiers) to the wilde Buckes of the Forrest (the
Gallants and younger Brothers) to the Harts of the
field, and to all the whole Countrey that are
brought vp wisely, yet prooue Guls: and are
borne rich, yet dye beggers: the new
English Astrologer dedicateth
his Rauens Almanacke.
            
               O You Lyons of the Wood! (you young Courtiers)
that are kept warme vnder the wings
of Princes and Kings of Christendome, well
may I call you the Lyons of the Wood: for
this yeare of 1609. shall you range vp and
downe the woods, Pa
                  •
               ks, and Chases, which
were left vnto you by your ancestors, full of tall trees: that
stood like so many a
                  •
               medmen to defend your noble houses
from falling, and your Country from the cold stormes of winter:
But now I say and prophecie it (with a Rauen-like voice)
that like Lyons robd of their y
                  •
               ung, shall you goe vp and
downe madding and raging to see your ancient honors defaced
and the memorie of your forefathers buried as it we
                  •
               e
(so far forth as the crueltie of these latert deuowring dayes
could reach vnto) euen vnder the rootes of whose stat
                  •
               ly
Oakes, whose glories they▪ raysed to a full height, but now
haue their heads hid beneath the earth. The propertie of a
Lyon is to feare a Cocke; So likewise shall you this yeare (if
not be afraid) yet be loa
                  •
               h to heare the vo
                  •
               ces of Me
                  •
               cers, tailors,
haberd a sher
                  •
               , Sempsters, &c. who like Cockes, wil (I gather
by the rules of my Arte, stand crowing betimes at your

Chamber dores for mony. And like a Bell-man (with
papers in their hands) watch to strike you downe with
heauy and vnconscionable Items. Gather your selues
therefore together in heards, and like Lyons indeed fright
them with your suttle lookes, or else like Elephants carrie
whole Castles on your backes, and furnish those Castles
with good store of golde and siluer, so will they be affraide
to assault you: let not your strength or courage lye altogether
like the Lyons in your taile, but rather in the pawe:
Stretch forth that boldly, and whatsoeuer it faste
                  ••
                vpp
                  •
               n
(albeit it should be a whole Lordship, yet let it not
goe till you haue torne it in sunder, and made it more leuell
then Salisbury-plaine: and O you the wilde
Buckes of the Forrest (I meane the Gallants and yonger
Brothers of this or any other kingdome) looke that you
p
                  •
               eserue well the hornes of that aboundance, left vnto you
by your scraping and carefull Fathers, least they tall into
the handes of Vsu
                  •
               ers (who c
                  •
               mmo
                  •
               ly are the keepers of
your Lands) as forfei
                  •
               s, or rather (as their fees) make the
pales of their parkes where you run hye: that neither you
breakeout of them, nor others breake them down, and so
sctter you. Suffer no rascall deere to runne amongst you,
that is to say, no Pandars, Buffons, English Guls, nor Parasites:
beare vp your hea
                  •
               s bra
                  •
               ely, and not too proudly,
for I finde by the coniu
                  •
               ction of some planets, that this
yeare many of you 
                  〈◊〉
                hunted by Marshalls men, Bayliff
                  •
               s
and C
                  •
               tch-poles: & that some will be d
                  •
               iuen to take
soile in the bottomeles 
                  •
               uers of the two Counters, they will
so hard
                  •
                be pursued either by Grey hounds of that bre
                  •
               d,
orelse by Flee
                  •
               e-houndes, whose feet 
                  〈◊〉
                swift and sent
as good. I finde likewise that a number of you will fall into
certaine toiles, which shall bee pitched day and night
for you by certaine greedy hunters called Punckes: they
are not m
                  •
               ch differing from witches, for they take vppon
them sometimes the shapes of beasts, and beeing amongst
your heardes are strucke in steed of D
                  •
               es, but they prone

barren Does, yet are they of the nature of Dogs, and more
nimble then Norfolke tumblers, and more eager
then blood-houndes, if they haue their game before
them.
            (O you likewise the hare
                  •
                of the field!) that is to say, the
Pun
                  •
               es and young Frye of the L
                  •
               we, to you among the
rest doth my Rauen open her bill: listen therefore to her
ominous voyce, for shee prognosticateth that many
plagues will fall vppon you. Reade you onely the Dogdaies
of this Almanacke, for when the Sunne enteret
                  •
                into
Leo, and that is in the middle of the yeare, and out of
Terme time, you shall finde it will be exceeding hot walking
vp and downe Fleetstreet or Holborne, especially for
those that all this last Christ
                  •
               uas haue giuen out in Cheapeside
amogst the Mercers, that they must be Reuelle
                  •
               s.
            It is threatned also by those caelestiall influences, that
worke no
                  •
                in heauen for nothing, that you will this yeare
by reason of certaine bitter frosts which shall driue you to
drinke burnt sacke, rather desire to plead at a Tauerne barre,
and wra
                  •
               gle for a reckoning, then at a Westminster barre,
and weare your Gownes thred-b
                  •
               re, by should
                  •
               ing one another
about Clients causes, and that yet notwithstanding
you shall so ply the cases of the common Law that you shall
no
                  •
               e aswell in tearme time, as in the vocati
                  •
               n, till you haue
no feathers left on your backes, howbeit I note and finde it
w
                  •
               itten by an olde jewish Rabben, that you shall be lusty enough
for all your sweating and moilings and so full of
hea
                  •
               th, th
                  •
               t you will scorne to keepe your beds, but for more
securitie▪ put the brokers of Long lane in trust to keepe them
for you. I reade likewise that you will be so 
                  〈◊〉
                with vain
glory, fantasticallitie, Pride, Bragatisme, Apishnes of wit,
Rediculous Manners, swaggering and a thousand such byangles,
that you will be glad to leaue all forme, (like a Hare
being frighted with the ye
                  •
               ping of a kennel of hou
                  •
               ds.) Besides
it is quoted by the best-Star-gazars, and 
                  〈…〉
               
egregiously weather-beaten to this science, 
                  •
               oth as I remember,

consta
                  •
               ly affirme it, that Little ton (for all his lay
                  •
               e),
shall in Mi
                  •
               haelmas Tearme next, be not onely thrust out of
Commons, but being found lying poorely (in a plaine sute of
Sheepes-skin) vpon a Stall, shall not be worth sixe pence.
            As for you that are to be my quarter Patrons, or the fourth
shares in this my dedication, you that are the meet sonnes of
Cittizens, who neuer heard any musicque but the found of
Bow-bell
                     •
                  
                you that al your liues time scarce trauaile to Gra
                     •
                  esend,
because you are sworne to keepe within the compasse of
the freedome: You whose wits rests onely for two waies, mony,
and to beare offices in the parrish. I place you in the latter
end of this preface to the Rauens kalender, though you
deserue to stand like Dominicall letters (at the beginning of
euerie weeke in red, because you a
                  •
               e of the golden age, or rather
you are the Golden number to 1609. Yet giue me leaue
to tell you that this yeare will bring many miseries vppon
your heads, yet shall it happen well inough to many of your
fraternitie, because euen when those stormes are vppon comming,
which by all Astrogicall predictions must happen, you
will be sure and so wise, as to hide your heads, and not put
them out a dores. Beware of combinations, conspiracies,
and copartnerships, knit amongst your selues for th
                  •
                surprising
of Plutus the God of 
                  •
               iches: for let the league be neuer
so strongly tyed, yet it is thought that at the least foure times
in the yeare 
                  •
               ome of you will breake.
            To bring which stratagem the better to passe, I mean that
of vndermining, breaking in vpon you, & blowing you vp,
I finde that not onely Co
                  •
               rtiers but 
                  •
               lso Captaines and your
best men of warre, will neuer giue ouer till they be grea
                  •
                in
your bookes and when you haue put most trust into them,
then will they get the gates of the Cittie, yssue brauely forth
to saue themselues, leauing you to the me
                  •
               cy of your cruell
e
                  •
               en i
                  •
               e, Serieants and Creditors.
            Thus haue I drawne a paire of Indentures. quadrupartite
betwe
                  •
               ne you my worthiest and most openhanded Patron
                  •
               ,
sealing you vp all foure together, in the bondes of my l
                  •
               ue.

I bestowe vppon you this first chicken of mine, hatched out
of my Astronomicall braine-pan: and because euery Almanacke
makes as it were a Stage-play of the yeare, deuiding it
into fourepartes, or rather plaies the executioner with it, by
cutting it into quarters, To each one of you doe I therefore
send a quarter: climbe vp then and behold what nest my Rauen
hath builded (this yeare 1609.) But carrie the mindes
and manhood of true Patrons, neither suffer any critickes to
plucke off her feathers, nor offer you vnto her that indignity
your selues. And thus because much fowle weather is toward
(if any Calender tell no lyes) and that I am loath to
haue you stand in a storme, I bid you farewell, dated
the 1. Ides of the first month of this first great
Platonicall and terrible yeare.
1609.
            
               
                  
                     •
                  . Deckers.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
            THE
Rauens Almanacke.
            
               The Dominion of the Moone in Mans bodie.
Aries The head and face.
               
                  Gemini
Armes &
shoulde
                     •
                  
               
               
                  Leo
Heart &
backet
               
                  Libra
Reines &
lynes.
               
                  Sagitari
the
Thighes
Aquarius
                  
                     •
                  egges.
               
                  Taurus
Neck
                     •
                   &
throate.
Cancer.
Brest stomacke
&
Lunges.
Virgo
                  
                     •
                  uts &
belley,
               
                  Scorpio
secrets &
bladler,
               
                  Caprico
nus the
knees.
               
                  pisces The Feete.
            
            
               AT the beginning of euery Almanacke, it is the
fashion to haue the bo
                  •
               i
                  •
                of a man drawne as
you see and not onely 
                  •
               aited, but bitten and
shot at by wilde beasts and m
                  •
               nsters, And this
fellow, they that lye all the yeare long (that is
to say, those that deale with Kalenders) cal the
Man of the Moone, or the Moones man, or the man to whom
the Moone is mistris But how rediculous a shape do they bestowe
vppon the silly wretch? hee standes as if he had bene
some notorious malefa
                  •
               or, and being stript stark naked, to goe
to execution: do not those Roundels hang about him, sh
                  •
               w like
so many pardons, tyed to the parts of his body with Labels?
or rather does he not looke (when he lyes along) like a thee
                  •
               e
begd for an Anatomie in Surgeons Hall, so many Barbers

figured in those beastes (slashing and slycing, and quartering &
cutting him vp, truely he does.
            But why (in the name of the moon, & the rest of the Planets)
doe both our Neotericall and the more antique Astronomers,
publish euerie yeare in print, that euerie mans body dwells
thus at 12. Signes? Is man such an asse that he cannot finde
his own selfe without ye helpe of so many signes? or were there
none but tradesmen in the world, when Almanacks were first
inuented? for all men know, that Noblemen, Gentlemen, and
those of the best and formost ranckes in any common-wealth
vse to dwell at no signe at all: much labour therefore me thinks
might be saued by the Printers euerie yeare, and much cost by
the Stationers, if they would crosse this poore creature out of
their bookes. For what Cuckold (vnlesse his hornes hang too
much in the light of his wit
                  •
                will not sweare that Aries (which
signifies a Ram) doth gouerne the head? Is he not thereuppon
in mockerie, or rather to put him in minde of the points of the
Rauens Almanack (cald a Ram-headed Cuckold? And what
Butchers wife, (nay almost what Butchers Dog) or what
gamster that loues the Beare-garden, but knowes that Taurus
(the Bul) dominieres ouer the necke, yea, and sometimes
breakes the neck of the strongest Mastiffe that sets vpon him?
Will not the least Fishmongers boy assure you (either in lent
or in the open times) that Cancer the Crab, is very good meat
for the brest, Stomacke and ribs: else wherefore should our
Letchers buy them vp so fast? And I pray ask any Wench if
she once ariue at thirtéene, if Virgo (the Uirgin) beare not a
greate stroke ouer the bowels and the belly? As for the secret
members, it may well be said that Scorpio (the Scorpion) has
to doe with them because many times in the yere they are bitten
as it were with the stings of Scorpions, for their euill dooing.
And wisely did the Moone appoint (in the lowerhouse of
heauen) that Capricornus the Goat, should gouerne the knées
of Gemini
                     •
                  
                for the Goate being of all Beasts most letcherous,
it is a morrall, that those men who run after nothing but wenches,
must (by course of nature) be broght on their knees. Now
that Gemini (the Twins) haue a hand ouer the armes & shoul
               
                  •
               ers,
(either of man or woman:) euerie woman that hath had

two children at a b
                  •
               rth, or euerie countri
                  •
                Nurse that hath giuen
sucke to a couple at one time, will I am sure testifie. Then
doth Leo, the Lyon rule the heart 
                  •
               nd backe: the meaning of
which is, to make men ashamde of cowardice, whose hearts
are no bigger then chickens hearts: But what Gr
                  •
               cer, Silkeman,
Apothecarie, or any other that handles the Scales of Citie
Iustice, but can sweare, and all the world knowes they neuer
sweare but truly, that Libra, the Ballance, holds the measure
of the Reynes and Loyns: for if, those members haue not
their full weight, all the bodie paies for it. As for the Thinges,
ouer which Sagitarius the Archer, carries sway, any Fletcher
in Grub-streete, or any that euer shot in a Long-bows, either
at Buts or at Prickes, will if the case were to be decided, stand
to the proofe thereof. The Legs are next, and that those are gouernd
by Aquarius, the Waterman, any Sculler, whose legs
get his liuing by a Stretcher, will not deny it. We are now as
lowe as the feete, whose steps are guided by Pisces, the two
Fishes, any man that walkes into Fish-streete for a fish dinner,
knowes the morrall of that.
            And thus haue I showne vnto you the right natures and
meaning of these Celestiall gouernors, according to that
true and new doctrine of the Science Astroiogicall, whose
misteries haue bene for the good of this yeare 1609. reuealed
to me: and therefore doe I request you my Countrym
                  •
               n especially,
for whose benefit I haue made onely this priuie search
amongst the Starres, to account al other quarterings of mans
sinfull body, as barbarous and butcherly, and the rules that
teach how to doe it, friuolous and rediculous.
            
               The twelue moneths of this yeare. 1609.
               NOw if I fought vnder the coulors of vulgar Astronomers
should I strike vp my drumme, and leade into the
field the 12. moneths, marching in single File one after another,
euerie moneth wearing in his Cap, insteede of a F
                     •
                  ather,
foure vnha
                     •
                  some rymes, teaching men when to eate hot

meates, and when to drinke n
                     •
                  w wines with euery gull (that
has mony in his purse, and hunts out any 
                     〈◊〉
                  ) can do
                     •
                  
without a Kalender.
               Then shold eu
                     •
                  ry moneth haue his followers, some of them
being thi
                     •
                  tie in n
                     •
                  mber, some 
                     •
                  1. onely one (by 
                     •
                  ailing into decay,
or else because he keepes but a colde house, keeping but 28.
And amongst these Seruingmen or retainers, should I giue
you the names of the Geutlemen who goe in red, and wea
                     •
                  e
Dominicall Letters on their winter and Sommerliueries, as
badges to disti
                     •
                  guish their moneth from the rest: but scorning
to haue a hand in g
                     ••
                  uding such base c
                     •
                  llours, suffer me to cary
vp your thoughts vppon nimbler winges, where (as if you sat
in the most p
                     •
                  rspicuo
                     •
                  s place of the two-penny Gallecy, in a
play-house) you shall cleerely, and with an open eye beholde
all the partes, which I (your new Astrologer) act amongst the
Startes, and those are these:
               The worky-daies of euerie month this yeare, shall not bee
kept as they haue bene in yeares before: for by meanes of certaine
disease that are likely to raigne amōgst trades-men, as
the lazie euill, the Letharg
                     •
                  e, which is a forget fulnesse of our
owne estate: dizines of the head, (caused by the fumes of good
drinke) and such like: Men of occupations shall in spite of order
or the rules of Almanacke-writers, turne wor
                     •
                  y-dayes into
holly-da
                     •
                  es: yea, and women shall this yere holde holy-daies in
such base contempt, that though their husbands doe then shut
vp shoppe, and vtter not their wares, yet shall the wiues fall
to worke in their secret Chambers.
               Amongst Gentlemen that haue full pursses, and those that
crie trillil, let the world slide, the weeke shall run out so quickly
and so merrily, that on the Satterday 
                     •
                  orning it shall be hard
for them to tell whether the day that went before were friday.
               The same losse of memorie will fall vpon many that shal goe
drunks to bed: but to those who shut themselues vp in Counters
and other places of deere reckning, because they hate the
vanities of the world, And to those that shal be whipped either
with French birch, or be strucke with any English disease, the

shortest day in winter shall seeme more teadious, yea, and indeede
shahllaue more hours thyn Saint Barnabies day, which
is the longest in the yeare: The sundaies, (as if it were Leape
years) shall b
                     •
                   a number be leaped ouer, so that a blindenes falling
into their eyes they shal not for foure or fiue, or sire mone
                     •
                  hs
together, be able (by the help of those that make the best
waters to reco
                     •
                  er sight, or to cure sore eyes) to see a Church,
but shall be strucke with such Megrims and turnings of the
braine, that insteed of going to Church, they will (if my Arte
falle me not) stumble into 
                     •
                   
                  
                     ••
                  uerne. The Dog daies will all
this yeare raigne thrice, or twice euerie week at least, & that
verie hotly, but their soarest rage will be about the Beare-garden.
               As touching the r
                     •
                  sing and setting of the Sunne, it will bee
more strange this yeare then euer it was: for albeit hee shine
ne
                     •
                  er so brightly in our Horizon yet there are certaine persons
(& those no small fooles neither) that shall not haue power at
high noone to be
                     •
                  ol
                     •
                  e it. The Moone (like a Bowle) will kéep
her olde byas, onely she will be verie various in her influence:
for as well men as women shall bee more madde in the other
quar
                     •
                  ers then in that wherein are playd such trickes by the
Midsommer Moone.
               I haue a moneths minde to trauell thus through the whole
yeare, but the glasse which time bestowes vpō me, beeing not

                     •
                  ed with many houres, I must he
                     •
                  re hoyst vp new Sailes, &
discouer (as it were foure seuerall coūtries) the foure Seasons
of the yeare.
            
            
               A Description & prediction of the foure quarters of the
yeare. 1609.
               
                  Of Winter.
                  VVInter, the sworne enemie to Summer, the friend to
none but Colliers and W
                        •
                     o
                        •
                     mon
                        •
                     ers: the f
                        ••
                     st-bitt
                        •
                     n
churie y• hangs his nose stil ouer the 
                        〈◊〉
                      dog that bites

                     
                        ••
                     uites, and the deuill that cuts downe trees, the vnconscionable
binder vp of Uint
                        •
                     ers Faggots and the onely consumer
of burnt Sacke and Suger: This Cousen to death, further to
sicknes, and brother to olde age, shall not shew his hoarie baldpate
in this climate of ours according to our vsuall computation,
vpon the 12. day of 
                        •
                     ecember, at the first entring of the
Sunne into the first minute of the signe Capricorn, when the
said Sunne shall be at his greatest South Declination from
the Equinoctiall line, and 
                        •
                     o foorth, with much more such stuffe
then any meere Englishman can vnderstand: no my countriemen,
neuer beate the bush so long to finde out Winter, where
he lies like a begger shiuering with colde, but take these from
me as certaine, and most infallible rules, know when Winterplomes
are ripe & ready to be gathered.
                  When Charity blowes her nailes, & is ready to starue, yet
not so much as a Watchman will lend her a flap of his freeze
Gowne to keepe her warm: when trades-men shut vp shops,
by reason their frozen-hearted Creditors goe about to 
                        •
                     ip them
with beggerie: when the price of Sea-cole riseth, and the price
of mens labours falleth: when euerie Chimney castes out
smoak, but scarce any dore opens to 
                        •
                     ast so much as a maribons
to a Dog to gn
                        •
                     w: when beastes 
                        •
                     ie for want of fodder in the
field; and men are ready to famish for want 
                        〈◊〉
                      in the Citie:
when ye first word that a Wench speaks at your comming
into her Chamber in a morning is, Prethee send for some fagots,
and the best comfort a Lawyer heates you withall is, to
say, what will you 
                        •
                     giue me? when olde men and their wiues
deuide the holy bed of marriage; When gluttons blowe their
P
                        •
                     ttage coole them: and Prentices blow their their nailes to
heate them: and lastly when the Thames is couered ouer
with yce, & mens hearts caked ouer and crusted with crueltie:
Then maist thou or any man be bolde to sweare tis winter.
                  Now because I finde in the Ephemerides of heauen, certain
vnlucky Criticall, and dangerous daies set down, whose foreheads
are full of plagues, and vnder whose wings are hid other
dismall miseries, that threaten this Region: It shall not

be amisse if first I open the bosome of Winter, and shew vnto
you what diseases hang vpon him.
                  I finde therefore that .12. great and gréeuous plagues, shal
e
                        •
                     pecially fall vppon the heads of this our English nation: and
those are these, viz.
                  
                  1. Saint Paulus plague is the first, yea, and one of the heauiest,
& that is, when a man hath neuer a penny in his pursse,
c
                        •
                     edit with his Neighbors, nor a hole to hide his head in: alack,
how many poore people will lye languishing of this disease? how
many that haue bowling Alleys, nay, how many that walke in
the middle Ile of Paules in reasonable good cloathes, will bee
strucke with this plague? it is hardex to reckon them, then to
reckon vp the Uertúes of a woman which are without end.
                  2. Saint Chads plague is next, and that is, when a man
that trauels hath a long iourney, a tyred horse, and little money:
this plague threatens many poore Yorkeshire Clyents,
and, vnlesse they keepe it off with their hooks, some welchmen.
                  3. Saints Benets plague is the third, & that is, colde-cheare,
hot words, and a Scoulding wife: many Coblers wil be subiect
to this disease, but not lye long for it, but euerie day be of the
mending hand, marry it is thought their wiues will prooue
worse and worse.
                  4. Saint Magnus plague is next, but not altogether so
dangerous as the former, and that is, when a man is rich, enioyes
it but a while, and leau
                        •
                     s a foole behinde him to spend it:
It is doubted that some rich Cittizens and others cannot
escape this plague.
                  5. Saint Tronions plague steps into the fift place, and that
is when a man is olde in yeares, yet a childe in discretion: when
his wife is a drunkard, and his daughter a Wanton, and his
Seruant a pilferer, this plague is expected to fall vpon brokers,
their bodies being subiect to much infection, and their consciences
to corruption, So that tis thought Lord haue Mercy vpon
vs will stand on most of the doores in Houns
                        •
                     itch and Longlane,
and that people who loue themselues, will shun those places
and those persons, as being able to poison a whole Citie.
                  
                     6. Saint Bridge
                           •
                        s plague is likely to be verie hot, and that
is, when a Maideis 
                        •
                     aire and has no portion, of ripe yeares, yet
troubled with the greene sicknes, and longs for a husband, yet
nobody woes her. This plague of all the rest, though it will
spred far, yet will it prooue so mortall, because those that shal be
strucke with it, haue a tricke to help themselues.
                  7. The wiues plague followes in the seau
                        •
                     nth rancke, and
that is, when a woman has a husband y• is very poor, yet Iealious
yong, yet a hastie foole. Seruingmens wiues is thought
will die of this disease or if not dye yet lye for it a long time.
                  8. The Blacke plague is when a man hath much to pay,
little to spend, and an vnmercifull Creditor: this blacke plague
will flye ouer into the Low-countries, and sorely trouble our
English Souldiers, who feede vppon prouant, and take more
care how to wipe of Oes in chalke, thē to winne a towne from
the enemy.
                  9. The Fryers plague, is no holy Plague, but a hollowe
plague, and that is when a man sees or smels good cheare, has
an excellent stomacke, but knowes not how to get it: if any cō
                     plaine
of this sicknes, it will be the Guard, and those that are
the bare attandants at Court, or else such as walke snuffing
vp and downe in winter euenings through Pye
                        •
                     corner, yet
haue no siluer to stop Colon.
                  10. The deuils Plague is one of the moste damned plagues
of all, and that is, when a man is marryed to a wanton, must
be beholden to his enemie, yet dares not be reuenged. The tokens
of this plague will stand thicke vpon a number of young
banck
                        •
                     outs, who haue had dealing with Courtiers.
                  11. The Horne plague is too wel knowne, and so comm
                        •
                     n,
that albeit it be incurable, yet none can dye of it: that 
                        ••
                     ing
plague takes a man first in the head, and he 
                        •
                     ickens of it, that is
a Cuckold, a Wittall and a Suff
                        •
                     agan: In verrie many parishes
will there he houses infected with this pestilent disease.
                  12. Gods plague is the last and the most heauie, and that is
when a man hath much wealth and no conscience, cont
                        •
                     nuall
health, but is past grace, and can talke of God, yet keeps company

with the 
                        ••
                     uill This plague sore strikes to the heart, &
will st
                        •
                     cke by many, enen of the better sort: Besides these Capitall
Plagues there be many boyles, Carbunckles and blisters
(not so mortall as the other) that will lye sucking the bones
of the common people▪ For Hackney-men are likely to smart
this yere, in letting out good Horses to Cittizens, & hauing
them turned home like tyred Iades, the reason being that Citizens,
Schollers and Saylers, thinke a horse neuer goes fast
enough, though he run a maine gallop, and no sooner are they
set in the saddle but they ride post.
                  And slthēce vpon Saint Lukes day bitter stormes of winde
and 
                        •
                     aile are likely to happen about Cuckolds hauen, it foresheweth
a strange mortallity amōgst Caterpilliers, especially
towards Catch poles, who this yeare shall dye so thicke, that
in all the 24. wardes in London, nor in all those 109. parishes
that stand in those wards, will there 
                        •
                     ee found one honest
man liuing of that clapping vocation.
                  Take heede you my nimble fingred Gentlemen, that come
to your possessions by fiue and a reach: you Foistes, Nips and
Cony catchers, that sit at Duke Humphreis owne table, and
turn
                        •
                      your commodities into mony vpon the Exchange: I aduize
you all to purge your 
                        •
                     oules, & let blood your consciences,
for otherwise a Hempō plague wil so hang vpon you, that the
pest-cart of Newgate will carrie your bodyes away in heapes
to be buried vnder Tyborne.
                  O you common Fidlers likewise that scrape out a poore liuing
out of dryed Cat
                        •
                      
                     
                        •
                     uts: I prophecie that many of you
shall this yeare be troubled with abominable noises and singing
in your heads, insomuch that agreat part of you shall dye
beggers, and those that suruiue shall féede vppon melody for
wāt of meate, playing by two of the clock in a frostie morning
vnder a 
                        •
                     indow, and then bee mock'd with a 
                        〈◊〉
                      tyed
(through a hole) to a string, which shall be 
                        〈◊〉
                      to make it
Iingle in your 
                        •
                     a
                        •
                     s, but presently be drawn vp againe, whilst
you rake in the 
                        〈◊〉
                      for a largesse.
                  O you generation of Apes without tailes, made so onely to

make 
                        〈◊〉
                     ! you Players that crie out your commodies: you
that féede vpon the hony of other mens wits, yet haue nothing
in your bowels but gall: a pestilent 
                        〈◊〉
                      will run ouer all your
bodies: looke therefore to your selues betimes, and let some
skilfull-water-caster toot vpō your vrinall: cast away a groat
vpon your selues, for many haue beene cast away vppon you:
foure peny worth of phisicke may do you foure pounds worth
of good, for I spye by your colours that you are infected with
pride, loosenes of life, Inconstancy, ingratitude, and such like
crude & indegested humors, & reumaticke diseases▪ So that
both P
                           •
                        olomy and Auicen set this downe as a principle, that
Saint Iulians plague (which is not dreampt amōgst you yet)
shall light on your heads, And that is, you shall weare gay
cloathes, carrie lofty lookes, but a nūber of you (especially the
hirelings be with emptie purses at least twice a weeke. But if
any of you bee so prouident as to Phlebotomize, or to buy pilles
to euacuate these rottē infectious impostumes, yet he shal
not escape this plague, hee shall be glad to play three houres for
two pence to the 
                        •
                     asest stinkard in London, whose breath is
stronger then Garlicke, and able to poison all the 12. penny
roomes: you see a farre of how sharpe a winter wee are like to
haue, let vs now trye if the spring will proou
                        •
                      any more
cheerefull.
               
               
                  Of the Spring.
                  SPring, the Bride of the Sun, the Nose-gay giuer to weddings,
the onely and richest Hearbe-wife in the world: the
rarest Gardner, sweetest perfumer, cunningst Weauer, noblest
Musition, for all sorts of Birdes are her Schollers, this
mother of health, phisition to the s
                        •
                     cke, Surgeon to the wounded:
this daughter of plenty, and Sister to Summer, comes
not in attired in her greene roabes, as tis published in print,
vpon the 10 day of March, as it were in Maies tryumph after
the sun (with an Herculean Uigor) hath cōquered his twelue
labours, and (like a skilfull Charioteere) hath driuen his golden

wagon through the twelue signes, ready on that tenth
day (as some giue out) to begin his race againe, by making his
entrance vpon the first minute of the Equinoctialt signe of the
Ram whose hornes stand in such an euen proportion a sunder
that the day and night take them for their measure, and are
contented to be of an equall length.
                  But shall I tel you at what signe the Spring dwelleth? cast
vp your eies and behold, for by these marks shal you know her
whē she comes. When the nightingale 
                        •
                     its 
                        •
                     inging with a brier
at her brest, & the adulterer (that rauished Philomell) sits
singing at the Thornes which pricke his conscience: When
young teares put on new liueries, and old whoremongers pul
off vizards of their vices: when the earth beares all kindes of
flowers, and the Courts of Princes bring foorth all sorts of
vertue: when Gardens begin to be dressed, and the Church to
be mended: when beastes waxe wanton by nature, (without
violating her lawes,) onely to multiply their kinde for the
good of man: & when men no longer put themselues into the
shapes of beastes. Then and onely then doe the vernall
gates flye wide open, then maist thou be sure to sweare it is
the Spring.
                  But as your fairest faces hath often times the sowlest b
                        •
                     
                     dies,
so this beautifull daughter of old Ianus (who is Maister
Porter to the twelue moneths) is by dealing with some few
vnwholsome Planets, thought not to be free from diseases. A
spice therefore of one plague or other, will lye in her tender
bones, by wt meanes the spring to some people (especially the
French, and as it is thought the English cannot goe scot-free)
proue as fatall and as bus
                        •
                     e in priuie Searches, as the fall
of the Leafe.
                  The brests of this delicate young bed-fellow to the Sunne
will so flowe with the Milke of profitte and plentye, that
(of all other men) players, by reasō they shal haue a hard winter,
and must trauell on the hoofe, will lye sucking there 
                        •
                     or
pence and two pences, like young Pigges at a Sow newly
farrowed.
                  
                     It is like wise thought that in this time of copulation betweene
the planets & the earth, 
                        〈◊〉
                      yeres wil grow vp so thick
that they will scarce liue one by another, & most of them shall
be to their Clients as 
                        •
                     a
                        •
                     es are to a field of Corne, they shall
prosper best when they choake those by whome they are nourished:
yet on the cōtrary side shall maiden-heads be so scant,
that if fiue hundred be to bee had ouer night, foure hundred &
nine teens of those will be strucke of before the next morning.
                  The disposition of this season is to be hot and moist: by which
meanes those moist-handed creatures, whose blouds begin to
feele warmth, when the spring of desire boyles; within them,
shall haue the other qualitie likewise, they shall be hot in their
tongues: But if any woman happen to fall into that pestilent
infirmitie, let the poore man vpō whose handes any such light
commodities lyes, apply this medicine, for it is apresent cure.
                  
                     A Medicine to cure the Plague of a womans tongue, experimented
on a Coblers wife.
                     A M
                           ••
                        y Cobler there was, (dwelling at Ware) who for
ioy that he mended mens broken & corrupted soles, did
continually sing, so that his shop seemed a verrie bird cage, &
he sitting there in his foule linnen and greasie Apron, shewed
like a black bird. It was this poore Sowters destiny not to
be hang'd, but (worse then that) to be marryed: & to what creature
thinke you? to a faire, to a young to a neate delicate coū
                        trie
Lasse, that for her good partes was able to put downe all
War
                           •
                        : but with all this honny that flowed in her, did there
drop such aboundance of gal and poison from her Scorpiō-like
tongue, that monsieur Shoo-mender wished his life were set
vpon the shortest last, and a thousand times a day was ready
to dye Caesars death: O valiant Cordwaynerland to stab himselfe
not with a bodkin, but with his furious Awle, because hée
knew that would goe through stitch: hee neuer tooke vp the

endes of his threed, but he wished those to bee the endes of his
threed of life: he neuer parde his patches, but hee wished his
knife to be the sheeres of the fatall Sisters three, hee neuer
handled his Ball of waxe but he compared them to this wife,
& sighe
                           •
                         to think that he that touches pitch, must be de
                           ••
                        led.
                     Now did his songs as heauily come from him as musick does
from a Fidler, when in a Tauerne he plaies for nothing. Now
did sig
                           •
                        eur Cobler stand no more on his pantofles, but at his
shutting in of shop, could haue bene content to haue had all
his neighbours haue throwne his olde sho
                           •
                        es after him when
hee went home, in signe of good lucke.
                     But alas, hee durst not doe that neither, for shee that plaide
the Deuill in womans apparell (his wife I meane) made her
Caualero Cobler, to giue her account euerie night of euerie
patch that went through his fingers. In this purgatorie did
our graduate in the Gentle craft liue a long time, but at lenght
he was thrust into hell, for his wife (not following the steps of
her husband, who was euer on the mending hand, but growing
from bad into worse) cast as
                           •
                        de her Wedding stockings, &
drew on a paire of yellow hose: then was my miserable Cobler
more narrowly watched thē a Mouse by a Cat, or a debter
by a Catch-pole: he durst not vnlock his lippes afte
                           •
                         a Wēch,
but his teeth were ready to flie out of his head wt her 
                           •
                        eating:
to haue touched any Petticoate but his wife was more dangerous
then for a Cat to eate fire: if any maide brought but
her shooes to mending, his wife swore presently that hee had
the length of her foote, and that he sowed loue-
                           ••
                        itches into euerie
peece, though it were no bigger then a Chandlers token.
                     Wearied therefore with this (worse then a beare-baiting)
and being almost worne to the 
                           •
                        are-bones, his heart fretting
out euen to the elbowes by rubbing vp and downe in this
miserie, At the length my braue boote-haler sifted his wits to
the verie bran, for some hooke to fasten into his wiues 
                           •
                        ostrils,
and the pill which he founde either to choake her or p
                           •
                        rge
her, was this:
                     A Doctor of whome all Ware was affraid, because the Uicar

of the towne suck'd more sweetnesse out of his Patients
whome he sent to him (by reason all that came vnder his
hands, went the way of al flesh (then out of all his tithe-Pigs)
ha
                           •
                        ned to dwell close by this distressed Cobler: to him (hauing
saued his water ouer night) repaires my reformer of decayed
Shoo-leather, betimes in the morning. The Bonjour being
giuen and returned, the Coblers water was looked into, much
tossing and tumbling of it there was for a prettie while, and at
last it was demaunded whose the Urine should bee? Mine
(quoth the Cobler) So it may be replyed our Galenist, for I
spie neither any disease swimming about thy body in this water,
and thy verry lookes shew that thou art sound: Sound,
(cries out the infected Cobler) alas sir I see now that some diseases
haue power to make dunces of Doctors themselues,
Sound (quoth a) why sir I am sicke at heart, I am struck
with the Plague, I haue a Plague sore vppon mee (your
Doctors Capis not able to couer it, tis so broade) it eates and
spreds more and more into my flesh, and if you apply not some
presēt remedie, Ware must & shall trudge to some other, whē
their olde shooes want mending, for the Cobler's but a deade
man.
                     At this the Doctor stood amazed, and wondred that his skil
should shoote so wide as not to finde out a greefe so commō, so
dangerous and so palpable: wherupon hee bidding the Cobler
to open his brest, and not to feare to shew him that Plaguesore,
where of hee so complained: the Cobler presently tolde
him hee would but steppe foorth of doores, and at his return
he should see it: at length the Cobler comes backe againe with
his wife 
                           •
                        orne on his backe like a Sowe new scalded on
the backe of a Butcher, and for all her kicking, rayling, cursing
and swearing, yet to the Doctor hee came with her,
crying looke you heere Maister Doctor, this is my plaguesore
that so torments mee: in the night it keepes mee
from sleepe, in the day it makes me madde: in my bed this serpent
stings me, at my boord shee stabs mee, and all with one
weapon (her villanous tongue, her damnable tongue) If I

reply she fights: if I say nothing shee raues: if you call not
this a plague Maister Doctor, then such a plague light on you
Maister Doctor teach me therefore how to cure it, or else if
you giue me ouer I shall grow desperate and cut mine owne
throate.
                     The Doctor at this laughed, the Coblers wise rayled, the
Cobler himselfe bid her lye still, & held her so long till a number
of his neighbors came about him to beholde this seeane of
mi
                           •
                        th: all of them (knowing how dangerously the Cobler was
infected with this mariage-plague, desiring the Doctor to play
the right phisitian, and to cure their neighbour. The Doctor
heereupon swore hee would doe it, and stepping into his study
hee returned immediately with a paper in one hand, & a faire
cudgell in the other, deliuering both to the Cobler, protesting
that neither Gallen, Auarois, nor Hippocrates can prescribe
any other remedie then this, and that if this medicine cure not
the womās euill, nothing can The Cobler hauing neither the
wrighting nor reading tongue, requested the Doctor to reade
the receipt, as for the cudgell he vnderstood that well enough.
                     The paper therefore after a solemne O yes by all the standers
by was read, & contained thus much:

                           Take this salue Cobler for thy Plague-sore,
                           A crabbed cudgell fits a froward Whore,
                           Beate her well and thrif
                                 •
                              ily:
                           Whilst she cries out lustily:
                           Neuer let thy hand giue ore,
                           Till she sweares to scolde no more.
                        
                     
                     At the end of this, the Audience gaue a plauditie, in token
they liked well of the Doctors phisicke: the Cobler thanked
him, and thus insteede of an Epilogue spake to his neighbors,
neighbors (qd, he) you know, & I know, nay the deuil himselfe
knowes, that my wife hath stucke vppon mee like a Plague
thus many yeares, to apply either the sirrop of a Salt Eele,
or the oile of holly to her shoulders, I heatherto was affraid
                           •
                        ,
because I had no warrant that a man might lawfullye beate
his wife.
                     
                        But now sithence Ma
                           •
                        ster D
                           •
                        ctor, (who wears not a veluet
night cap for nothing) hauing turned ouer his bookes, findes
that no hear
                           •
                        e, mineral, salue, nor plaister, no purging nor any
other blood-letting will cure or take out that worme vnder a
womās tongue, (which makes her mad) but onely a soūd beating:
I will (God willing) giue her the dyet hee sets downe, &
if euer I complaine her
                           •
                        after to any Phisition for the griefe of
this plague, let all Ware laugh at me 
                           •
                        or an asse, & swear that
my wife-weares the breeches.
                     Upon this resolution brauely does the Cobler march home,
his wife (like a furie) following, railing, reuiling and casting
di
                           •
                        t and stones, aswell at him as at the youthes of the parish
that went showting after her heeles. But being within dores
and the lockes made fast by my valiāt Cobler, her tongue serued
as a drum ortrumpet to soūd an alla
                           •
                        um, whilst my braue
desper view prepared for the onset with a good bast
                           •
                        ado: the
assault was not so furious, but the Coblers wife was as ready
to receiue it: to the skirmish fall they pell mell, the Coblers
Co
                           •
                        ecombe, being first broken, but he being no Welchman (to
faint at sight of his owne blood) so plide his businesse, and so
thrash'd out all the Chaffe in his wife (who was nothing but
Rye) that in the end she fell on her knees, cried for the 
                           〈◊〉
                        
of the Coblers mercy, & fed vpon them hūgerly he liuing euer
after more quietly for her scolding, then if hee had dwelt in a
Steeple full of bels, that had lost their claps.
                     Thus much for the vniuersall plagues, that threaten our
kingdome this present yeare 1609. Now let vs arme our
heads to beare of the other miseries that are ready and must
(by decree in the vpper house in the heauenly parliament) full
vpon mankinde.
                  
               
               
                  A prediction of Summer. 1609.
                  SUmmer the Minion of the yeare, and mistris of the earth:
daughter and heyre to the spring, and empresse ouer manye
kingdomes: whose robes are fieldes of standing Corne, and

whose crowne is a garland of all sorts of fruits: Summer, the
reléener of the poore, and Landlady to the rich: the Ploughmans
Goddesse, to whom hée prayes, the Husband mans
Quéene whom he worships: the filler vp of barnes, the féeder
of Birds, the fatner of men and beastes, the treasurer of the
world: the nurse of plentie, the enimie to dearths and famine:
Summer, that is the Saint, to whom Bowyers and Fletchers
knéele, in whose praise Archers send forth show
                        •
                     s, and
Hay-makers merry songs. This high coloured red lip'd,
liuely fac'd creature, comes not by turn to her coronation, (to
take her rule ouer the fourth part of the diuided yeare, vpon
the eleuenth day of Iune (according to common A
                        ••
                     ronomical
computation, when the Sunne (the Coachman of the light)
hath fetcht a carrier vp as hie as the vtmost and loftiest place
of his eare, namely, to the first degrée of the Es
                        •
                     iual Sols
                        •
                     ice
(Cancer) which is his greatest declination to the North, from
the Equinoctiall, &c. But the Buckles of the Girdle (with
12. Studs) which he weares, being this yeare 1609) turned
behinde him, & the celestiall houses, at which he vses to lie (in
his summer progresse) being now remooued and builded in
other places, I find y• he shal enter at other gates, & that these
shall be the harbingers to make way before his comming, or
the Heralds to proclaime the time when he is come.
                  When therefore our aged gran
                        •
                     am (the earth) shall (albeit
in her latter dayes) be great with childe with Corne, flowers
& fruites, & be ioyfully deliuered of them, yet other creatures
(indued with reason) shall be barren of all goodnesse: When
the heat of the Sunne beames, begets golde in the veines of
the earth, yet gold when tis brought forth shall worke a coldnesse
in mens hearts: when Rin
                        •
                     rs shall swel with Springtides,
and the fountaines of Art and learning be drawne dry:
when shéep flie to broad trées, to defend themselues from the
wrath of heauen vnder their shades, and when innocencie is
guarded vnder the wings of greatnes from 
                        〈◊〉
                      rage of oppression,
when cuckows sing merrily, and cuckolds laugh at their
owne hornes: when Courtiers ride the Wilde goose Chase,

whilst farmers stand by and praise their horsemanship: when
haruesters come singing from the field, because the corne lies
in shea
                        •
                     es: and when Citizens wiues walk to their Gardens,
yet bring from thence to their husbands no Nose-gaies stuck
with Rue. These and no other but these are the badges that
Summer weares, and neuer comes in but when she puts on
these li
                        •
                     eries.
                  And albeit this Lady of the yeare, be (like her couzen the
Spring) of a swéet and delicate complection, and that her body
is by nature so fruitfull, that still and anon she is in labour

                        •
                     o bring forth, yet that cursse which at first was laid vpon
the earth, shall now this yeare 1609. fall vpon her, insomuch
that her lusty and strong limbes shall grow weake by want,
and her entra
                        •
                     les be ready to dry and shrinke vp to nothing, by
reason of a strange famine, that most assuredly will féed vpon
her.
                  Many deare yeares are set downe in our abridgements of
Chronicles, but she face of this shall looke more leane then
euer did any: I reade that in Edward the 2. time, there was
such a famine, that Horseflesh was eaten and held as good or
better meate then some mutton now: and that 
                        •
                     at dogs, were
then catched vp as fat pigs at Bartholmew 
                        •
                     ide: yea, that
in many places, they had the dead bodyes of their owne children
to deuoure them, and that théeues in prison made roastme
                        •
                     t
one of another. In other Kings raignes likewise haue
I noted other effects of hunger, as that shéepe haue béene sold
at this price: Hogs, Chickens, Pigs, Géese, Ducks, with all
other broodes of poultry-ware, at such & such excessiue rates,
which haue béene lamentable to endure, and 
                        •
                     ragicall now
to rem
                        •
                     mber. But in this yeare 1609. beasts shall not bée
sold déere, but men, yea men shall be bought and sold like
Oxen and Cal
                        •
                     es in Smithfield, and young Gentlemen shal
be eaten vp (for daintie meat) as if they were pickled Géese,
or baked Woodcocks.
                  Neither shall the féeth of this famine feare out the gu
                        •
                     s of
she poore Farmer alone, nor shall the Country village cry out

vpon this misery, but it shall euen step into Lords, Earles, &
Gentlemens houses: Insomuch y• Cour
                        •
                     iers shall this dismal
yéere féed vpon citizens, & citizēs on the cōtrary side lay about
them like tall trencher-men to deuoure the Cour
                        •
                     iers. The
Clergie in this gréedy-gutted time shal haue thin chéeks, for
euery body shall fléece or rather vnfléece them, and count it
heauenly purchase, to pull feathers from their backs.
                  If any complaint this yéer be made for the scarcity of bread,
let none be bla
                        •
                     ed for it but Tailors, for by al the consent of
the Planets, it is set downe that they will be mighty breadeaters,
insomuch that half a score half-peny lo
                        •
                     ues wil make
no shew vpon one of their stals. But least we make you hungry
that shall read of this mise
                        •
                     y, by discoursing thus of so
terrible a famine, let vs make hast to g
                        •
                     t out of the heart of
this dry and mortall Summer, and 
                        ••
                     ye what wages the
yeare will bestow vpon vs the next quarter.
               
               
                  Of Autumne, or the fall of the leafe.
                  AUtumne, the Barber of the yeare, that sha
                        •
                     es bushes,
hedges and trées the ragged prodigall that consumes al
and leaues himself nothing, the arrantest begger amongst all
the foure quarters, and the most diseased, as being alwayes
troubled with the falling sicknesse, and (like a french man) not
suffring a hair to stay on his head: this murderer of the spring
this théef to summer, and bad companion of Winter, scornes
to come in according to his old custome, when the Sunne sits
like Iustice with a pair of scales in his hand, weying no more
hours to the day then he does to the night, as he did before in
his Uernal progresse, when he rode on a Ram. But this baldpate
Autumnus, wil be séen walking vp & down groues, medowes,
fields, woods, parks and pastures, blasting of fruites,
and beating leaues from their trées, when common highwayes
shall be strewed with bo
                        •
                     ghes in mockery of Summer,
& in triumph of her death, & when the doores of vsurers

shall bée strewed with gréene hearbes, to doe honour to poore
brides that haue no 
                        •
                     dwrie (but their honestie) to their marriage:
when the world lookes like the old Chaos, and that
plenty is turned into penurie, and beautie into vglinesse:
when Men ride (the second time) to Bathe, and carry another
Cornelius Tub with them, and when 
                        〈◊〉
                      flye amongst
hen sparrowes, yet bring home all the feathers they carryed
out, Then say that Autumne raignes, then is the true fall
of the lease, because the world and the yéere turne ouer a new
leafe.
                  You haue heard before of certaine plagues, and of a Famine
that hang ouer our heads in the cloudes: misfortunes
are not borne alone, but like marryed fooles they come in couples,
A Ciuill warre must march at the héeles of the former
miseries, and in this 
                        •
                     uarter will he strike vp his drum.
                  The dissention that hapned once at Oxford,
                     Ed .3. Anno. Reg. 29. betwéene a
Scholler and a Uintner, about a quart of paltry wine, was
but a drie-beating, nay rather a flea-biting to this, for Uprore
and noise will fill all Countries, insurrections or risings vp
will be within the cittie, and much open villany will be without
the walles.
                  The hottest and heauiest Warre the blackest and bitterest
day of battaile that is prognos
                        •
                     icated to happen, shall bée betwéene
Lawyers and their clyants, and Westminster-hall is
the field where it shall be fought: What thundring, what
threatning, what mustring, what marching, what brauing &
out-brauing, with summoning to parlé
                        •
                     s, and what defiance
will there be on both sides? dismall will be these conflicts
to some, deadly to others, and ioyfull to a third sort: It is not
yet doomb'd by the celes
                        •
                     iall arbiters, on whose side the victory
shall flye, but by all Astrologicall likeli-hoods it is thought
that the Lawyers will carry it away (be it but with wrangling)
and they that goe armed with buckram bagges, and
pen and Inkhornes instéede of flaske and touch
                        •
                     boxe, by the
trée sides, you shoote nothing but paper-bullets, will haue
those that march with black boxes at their girdles, and billes

in their hands, in sudden and terrible execution.
                  Another ciuill war doe I finde will fall betwéene players,
who albeit at the beginning of this fatal yéere, they salute one
another like sworne brothers, yet before the middle of it, shall
they wish one anothers throat cut for two pence. The contention
of the two houses, (the gods bée thanked) was appeased
long agoe, but a deadly warre betwéene the thrée houses
will I feare burst out like thunder and lightning. For it is
thought that Flag will bée aduanced (as it were in mortall
def
                        •
                     ance against Flag) numbers of people will also be mustred
and fall to one side or other, the drums and trumpets must
be sounded, parts will then (euen by the chiefest players) bée
taken: words will passe too and fro, spéeches cannot so be put
vp, hands will walke, an Alarum be giuen, fortune must fauour
some, or else they are neuer able to stand: the whole
world must stick to others, or els all the water in the theames
will not serue to carry those away that will be put to flight,
and a third faction must fight like wilde buls against Lions,
or else it will be in vaine to march vp into the field.
                  Yea, and this ciuill mutinie in the Suburbs, and this sitting
vpon the skirts of the Citie, will I doubt kindle flames
in the heart of it: for all Astronomers conclude, and all the
bookes of the Constellations being turned ouer, speake thus:
that vpon the very next day after Simon and Iude, the warlike
drum and 
                        •
                     ife shall be heard in the very midst of Cheapside,
at the noyse whereof people (like mad-men) shall throng
together, and run vp & downe, striuing by all meanes to get
into Merces, Silkemens and Gold-smithes houses, and to
such height shal this land-water swell, that the 12 Conduits
themselues are like to be set one against another, and not only
the Lord Maior, Sheriffes and officers, but also many of the
Nobilitie of the land shall haue much a doe with their troopes
of horse, to breake through the disordered heapes of Tradesmen,
and others that will on that fearful day be assembled together.
In vaine shall it be for any man for to Cry peace, nothing
will be heard but noyse, and the faster that fire-workes

are throwne amongst these perditious children, the lowder
will grow their rage, and more hard to bée appeased. Other
discentions, mutinies, rebellions, battailes, combats, and
combinations could I héere discouer to you my countrimen,
but doubting that I put your hearts out of their right places
already with too much horrour and affrightment, héere doe
I sound a Retreate, intreating all men (with mée) to
draw supplications, and to exhibit them to the whole body of
the celestiall Counsell, who sit in twelue houses of heauen, beséeching
them, that their influences may be more milde, that
men may not bée so mad, and that women may turne from
their euill doing.
                  I haue (if you remember) applyed certaine salues to some of
those plagues set downe before, which I thought curable, It
shall not be amisse, if now likewise I 
                        •
                     eate out a plaine and
leuell path, in which you may walke safely, as well to auoide
the famine threatned, as to escape perishing in the ciuill war.
                  The comfort men haue in a time when victuals grow
déere or scant, is either to be well furnished, or else to haue the
gift of abstinence, and to be content with little: Now because
flesh is a great preseruer of mans life, I will shew you one
Stratagem how you may get much into your owne hands,
how to vse it when you haue it, and how to refraine from
taking of it, albeit your hunger be neuer so great: then will I
set downe other rare medicinable and polliticke receipts, or
rather Warlike engines, by which in time of such ciuill insurrections
as are this yéer like to happen, A man or woman
may inforce themselues from the shot of all danger. For I
would account that surgeon or that phisition, a mad man or
a foole, that comming to me when I am hurt or diseased, and
should onely tell me where my sicknes lyes, or how déep and
dangerous my wounds are, but should not minister phisicke,
or balmes, to recouer me 
                        〈◊〉
                      therfore I haue discouered vnto
you, where and how, and with what weapons you shall bée
smitten, So doe I prepare medicinable compositions to restore
you when you are strucke. And hé
                        •
                     re they follow.
                  
                     An excellent Stratagem, how in the time of Famine, to be
well prouided of flesh, how to preserue it along time from corruption,
and how (when hunger is most sharp set) a man shall
haue no lust to fall too, but may grow abstinent.
                  IN the Cittie of Caliz (being an Iland bordering & belonging
to the kingdome of Spaine) ther was built a Colledge
of Fryers, amongst whom there was one lusty Church-man
aboue the rest, who was better limmed then learned, & could
better skill in composing an amorous sonnet then in soing solemne
dirges. This Fryer notwithstanding bare such a holy
shew, was so demure in his manners, and so couertly cloaked
his holinesse, that he was supposed the holiest fryer of all the
fraternity, and therfore was appointed a confessor to a nunry,
that was famous in this Iland, for women of most seuere
forme of life & godly conuersation. Under the iurisdiction of
the Abbesse, there were some twenty Nuns, all young, lusty,
and full of fauour: very deuout, and yet not such recluses, but
they had eies as other seculer women had, to iudge of beauty,
and hearts to wish wanton thoughts, which after grew to
light (as time is the discouerer of most hidden secrets:) for it so
fel out, amōgst these holy she saints, that one was either more
wise or more wanton then the rest, called Madona barbadora,
issued of good parentage, and only daughter, though not only
child to Signieur Peagnes Bontolus, a man of great reputation
in the Citie of Caliz. This Barbadora comming oftentimes
to be confessed of this fryer, whose name was Father Pedro
Ragazoni, noted that he was a man of comely personage, & so
began somwhat fauourably to conceit of him: til at length frier
Pedro marking her glances, perceiued thē to be amorous,
& with that hearing her sigh sundry times (ere he had confest
her) did straight imagin that either she was a great sinner, &
déeply repentant, or else sore ouer laden wt ye maidens plague,
(which is ouer large chastitie) and therfore so full of outward
sorrow & contrition: the frier taking her one day by the hand
as she was alone with him in a pew, wisht her to vncouer her
face. Barbadora obeying her'ghostly fathers command, threw
off her vaile & blusht, which Fryer Pedro espying, 
                        ••
                     ssing her
chéeke, began to salute her in this manner.
                  
                     fayre Nun, and fayre maid, as I am your confessor, and haue
power to absolue, so if you conceile any sinne from me, it will
cra
                        •
                     e the greater punishment: therfore briefelly and faithfully
answere me to my question. There be many sinnes that trouble
maids which may be eas de, if they be pr
                        •
                     uented by some
friend, or faithfull counsellor: as vnchast wishes, wantō glan
                     
                        •
                     es,
amorous thoughts, and such veniall scapes which are ingrafted
by nature, and therefore craue pardon by course, and
yet all deseruing pennance, but séeing they are but sins of the
minde, they are but motions. What say you Barbadora, are
you troubled with any of these trifling follies? The Nun holding
downe her head, onely answered, she was a woman, and
her mothers daughter.
                  Fryer Pedro smelling a pad in the straw, prosecuted thus
plesantly. And is it swéetmaiden (q
                        •
                     . he) for those sins you sigh?
oh no holy father (quoth she) for they bée déeper pasions that
make me so sorrowful. Why (saies y• Fryer) is it pride, couetousnesse,
gluttony, enuy, wrath, sloath, or any such deadly
sinnes that driue you into those dumps? I would said Ba
                           •
                        badora)
I were as frée from all other as from these: Then said
the Fryer, my life for yours, it is some womans plague you
are troubled with al, and if it be so, take héed, it is dangerous,
the sinne is more easie then the sicknesse.
                  I pray you sir saith she, what tearm you tha plague? marry
answers the frye
                        •
                     , that plague is, when a Maiden is fayre,
young, of ripe yeares, and hath neuer a 
                        •
                     aithfull friend to her
loue, but must to great distresse dye a Uirgin: that, that my
reuerend Confessor, quoth the Nun is my grief
                        •
                     : you haue
censurd right of my sorrow, I am troubled, with that burning
plague, and if your counsell comfort me not, I am like to fall
into greater inconuenience: séeing therefore you are priuie to
my disease, as you are a Ghostly father, and haue care of my
soule to absolue my sins (for I hold you as a surgeon) therefore
yours be the charge to prouide for the health of my body.
The Fryer hearing the Nunne in so good a minde whisperd
in her eare, but what I cannot tel, but I am sure hée applyed

such plaisters to help her, that shée complained no more of the
plague a long time after.
                  
                     Barbadora being thus set frée from her often sighes, could
not kéepe her owne counsell, but shée reuealed it vnto her bed-fellow
(for the closet of a womans thoughts hangs at her
tongues end) in such sort discourst the conceit of her cure vnto
her, that Iulia longed for the confessing day, (for so was the
Nuns bedfellow called) which being once come, and shée in secret
with Fryer Pedro, after hée had questioned her of many
sinnes, and giuen much deuout and holy counsaile, at last shée
burst forth into plaine tearmes, and told him shée was troubled
with the same sicknesse her bed-fellow Barbadora was,
and therfore craued the like assistance at his hands. The Frier
smiling at this, was content to play the Surgeon to cure this
plague, stil vnder the color of auricular confession, shadowing
his villany, till of twenty Nuns, fiftéene were with childe.
                  At last time began to babble, and the Nuns bellies to grow
big, so that before thrée moneths were past, they began to féele
y• for the amēding of their plague, they had a spice of Timpany
not long after, the world was quick, that the Nuns grew big,
and to be briefe, they feard their fellows should perceiue their
fault, and so bewray it to the Abbesse, wherupon with a generall
consent they all agréed at their next confession to bewray it
to the fryer, which was not long before it hapned. So Barbadora
cunningly dissembling the matter, being formost of the
rest, because she was eldest and of greatest account with the
Abbesse, came to confession. And whē fryer Pedro began with
many a smiling looke, and holy kisse to gréet her, and question
her about her sinnes, fetching a great sigh, made him this answere.
Deuout father, to make a rehearsall of my sinnes is
folly; to tell what particular offences haue scapt from me is
néedlesse, because in one briefe word, as he that sinnes in one
of the ten commandements breakes all, so shée that by Frier
is gotten with Childe, hath blemisht all her other vertues.
And sir, therefore I confesse héere that my belly is bigge, and
your swéete sugery hath wrought it, so eyther you must

bestirre your wits to helpe now at a pinch, or else your discredit
will be as great as my dishonour. The Fryer although
this motion had greatly amazed him, yet he would not shew it
in countenance, least he might discourage his faire Lemman,
but bad her be of good chéere, and not to feare, for he would be
charie of her honor and credit, and salue what was a misse to
both their contents. I sir (qd. she) were my selfe onely in this
perple
                        •
                     ities, I would not doubt of your pr
                        •
                     sent deuise, but there
is fourtéene more besides my selfe, all troubled with the like
swelling: what sister, quoth the Fryer, & with that hée fetcht
a great sigh, and saide, I haue made the olde saying true, who
sowes shall reape. I quoth, Barbadora, if it be but a whip and
a white shéete, and therefore good Fryer, take héede that your
pennance be not worse then our punishment, for your ghostly
surgery hath brought vs to this diuellish sicknesse. Feare nothing
Darling (quoth he and smild) Friers haue wit, as w
                        •
                     
                     men
haue willes, and therefore doubt not of any conceit, but
tell me what is your greatest care. Marry (quoth shée) that
the fiue that are frée perceiue vs not, and so discouer our 
                        •
                     aults
to the Abbesse. Leaue that to me (quoth he) I will take order
for that, to your high content, and so with great comfort to his
holy sister, be sent her away with a kind confession, and tooke
himselfe to the rest, who all sung the same song that Barbadora
did, which put the poore Fryer to his shifts, but when hée had
confest them all, subtilly hée went to the Abbesse & saluted her,
and shée returned him as kindely gréetings, questioning how
her twelue Nuns profited in vertue. Truely Madam (sayde
Pedro) well, but amonst twe
                        •
                     ue Disciples, there was one
Iudas, and when Adam had but two Sonnes, one proued a
murderer, in Noahs Arke there was one Cham, and where
God hath a Church, the diuell hath a Chappell.
                  The Abb
                        •
                     sse hearing the holy Father beginning such an
enigmaticall exordium, began to suspect that there was some
mischance amongst her Nuns, and therefore called him into
the Dorter, and desired him to bewray vnto her what was amongst
the Sisters, the 
                        〈◊〉
                      (that had fed vpon so much mutton)

cunningly began to ins
                        •
                     nuate himselfe vnder the shape of Abacuk,
thus Madam you know that it behooues a confessor to
be as secret as seuere, and to conceale offences, as well as hée
appoints correction for sinnes▪ therefore I may not nor bare
not for mine oath reueale what either I know or they haue
confest, but this in priuate I giue you as a Caueate if they
stay long in your Cloister, they will discredit your house, and
bring it in great approbatious question: with that hée named
the f
                        •
                     ue honest Nuns, and with a solemne protestation, admonisht
the Abbesse as spéedily as might be to co
                        •
                     uey them out of
the Nun
                        •
                     y with credit. She thanking the holy father for his
care he had of her honour, gaue him gold for his paines, & bad
him farewell, still imagining what this matter might be, and
examine them she 
                        •
                     urst not, least they should suspect their confes
                        •
                     or
had discouered their confession, and so vpon their complaint
bring the Fryer to further trouble, yet willing to haue
them remoued (so to saue her house from blemish) 
                        •
                     he sent for
their friends, and dealt so couertly and cunningly with them,
that they were taken home for a time, till further tryall of
their fortunes might bée had, their friends and parents sorrowfull
and grieuing, that they aboue the rest should miscarry
yet conceald all, and shadowed their home comming by sundry
excuse; and yet not so cunningly but the common people
began to imagine diuersly of their departure, but none durst
censure openly, though they muttered in secret, so that after
many dayes all was whisht, and the other Nuns were glad,
for all were 
                        •
                     eathered of one wing, and did so closely comfort
themselues, that the Abbesse suspected nothing, and Fryer
Pedro had more frée accesse to Clergi
                        •
                     ie his holy Uirgins
and confessants, and made an agréement that which of them
was brought to 
                        •
                     edde first, should giue him their Childe,
and hée would conuay it away to their content and his
owne credit.
                  Liuing thus as pleasantly as a Cock amongst so many
Hennes, it fell so out at the last that Barbadoraes good
houre was come, and that at such an unhappie time, that

neither the deuise of the fryer, nor the secrecy of the Nuns, nor
her own pollicie could saue her honesty, for rising as their custome
is at twelue a clock at night to sing certaine Himmes.
Barbadora in the midst of the quire fell i
                        •
                      trauell, and though
she sought by all meanes to conceale, and to bide many sore
pangs, yet at last she was faine with a loud alarum to cry hier
then they sung, which the Abbesse hearing, s
                        •
                     aid their Mattins
and went to Barbadora, asking her what she ailde, and what
extreame disease painde her so, that she made such heauy shriking?
the great bellyed Nun, half dead with paine, wold giue
the Abbesse no answere but oh my belly, my belly, Fryer Pedro,
Pedro, oh my belly! the old matron (perhaps in her youth
had ben cured of the maides plague) perceiued straight where
her shooe wrung her, and therefore charged the Nuns to holde
her back, and she plaid so cunningly the Midwiues part, that
Barbadora was deliuered of a pretie Boy, which the Abbesse
séeing, after she knew that all danger was past, she raged and
railed against the poore Nun, laying open not onely the gréeuousnesse
of the sin▪ but also her owne discredit, and chiefly the
blemish that should redound to her, to the house, & all her fellow
Nuns, through her only lightnesse of her life: after she had
almost chast her selfe out of breath, shée questioned who was
the Father, and Barbadora in great contrition of minde. tolde
her how her holy Father Fryer Pedro did it. The Abbesse
swearing a mortall reuenge against the Fryer for the loue she
bare to Barbadoras, father Signior Ideaques Bartolos, and for
the care shée had, least if this fact were knowne, her Nunrie
shold grow in open contempt, she began to salue the matter amongst
the Nuns: I cannot deny sisters quoth she, but as your
how is holy, so the breach of virgin
                        •
                     tie in this case, deserues no
lesse then hell fire, & without repentance can haue no absolute
pardon, for the scape of a Nun is more then of another ordinary
Woman, and for that course onely vpon suspition, I remoued
f
                        •
                     ue of your fellowes which I thought faultie, yet flesh is
fraile, & women are weake vessels, especially tempted by such a
subtill S
                        •
                     rpent as Fryer Pedro is, and therefore the fault is

the lesse, & the more willingly to be shadowed, so that I charge
you héere to conceale the matter both for your own & mine honour:
and if any of you all haue ben by him perswaded to the
like folly, tell it to me now in secret, and I will be as silent as
your selues, to salue and saue your honesties. The Nuns hearing
this; all fourtéene fell down on their knées before the Abbesse
and cried out vpon frier Pedro (letcherous Fryer Pedro)
and curst him: the Abbesse suspecting nothing of the whole 14.
bad them beware not only of him (for he should no more come
within their Dortor) but of all others that hereafter should be
their confe
                        ••
                     ors. Alas Madam (qd Iuliana) it is to late, for we
all 14. are with childe by him, marry God forbid (qd the Abbesse)
and blest her, what (qd she) 15 at a clap with childe, &
onely by one Fryer! Then I sée well the diuell is grown deuout,
when Friers deale their Almes so franckly: but by swéet
S. Anne (said she) I will be reuenged on the Fryer, and all the
Couent shall pay swéetly for ingrossing the market, and buying
so much flesh for his owne dyet.
                  So she fell to more strickt examination of them, whether any
moe fryers came with him or no? and they confest that he had
procured euery one of them a louer, & deliuered their names,
which she taking note of, deferde not reuenge very long, least
suspition might be had, but thus cunningly sought to acquite
the wrongs profered both to her & her house: she sent her steward
abroad to buy great prouision of victuals, & then her own
selfe went to the Abbot, and desired that her confessor and 14.
of his friends might take part of a feast which she had prouided:
the Abbot granted, & the Fryers gaue her great thanks, &
promised to come, all laughing in their sléeues that she should
giue the faire Nuns and them leaue to haue one merry supper
together, séeing in secret they had so many nights lodging with
them. The Abbesse went home smiling, and prouided certaine
tall st
                        •
                     rdy knaues for the purpose, that were tennants, and belonging
to the lands of the Nunry, & conu
                        •
                     ied them all néere
vnto the backe place of the Chappell, and had giuen them her
minde out plainly, to deale with the friers as she had decréed:

and thereupon placed in that back roome fiftéene great blocks
all standing one by another as orderly as might bée.
                  Hauing thus fitted all things to the purpose, she put vp the
Nuns euery one into their Cels, least they should giue any
inckling vnto the Fryers of her determination. At the houre
appointed these frolicke fryers came clad in their coules with
smooth faces, and dissembling hear
                        •
                     s, hauing great shew of
prayers in their eies, and hope of lechery in their thoughts:
but howsoeuer, the old stbbesse gaue them a most courteous &
friendly welcome, telling them that the Nuns were all this
day busie cookes about the Feast, onely her selfe was le
                        •
                     t to
giue entertainement: they gra
                        •
                     ulated her curtesies, and shée
led them all into a great Parlor, where she caused the Steward
to bring them in Wine: then the place being strong, shée
went forth and called the Confessor to her, land then leading
him into the backe roome appointed for the purpose, the tall
knaues laid hold on him, and there stripping him into his shirt
they tooke a great thrée forked, naile, and fastened the Fryers
Dow
                        •
                     ets of dimissories fast to the blocke, to the great paine &
amasing of the Fryer. Well, howsouer hée complained, hée
could not get any answere of the Abbesse, but that she laught
heartely, and thus by one and one shée drew out the Fryers,
and nayled them fast in their shirts to the blockes, then laying
downe by euery one of them a sharp knife, she began to make
her Oration thus: Gentle Father Pedro, and you the rest of
the holy Fryers, you know the smallest sin craues some pennance
in the Lay people, then what doe great offences in Fryers?
hée which knowes his maisters will and doth it not,
must be eaten with many stripes, so you that know lecherie
was a deadly sin, and had all by solemne oathes vowed chastitie,
haue gotten all the Nuns of my house with child. Therfore
I in charitie haue for your soules health appointed you
this pennance At that word all the country fellowes set fire
in the thach, and the house began so burne: you sée (quoth she)
either burn to death, or els héere lye kniues to frée your selues,
now it is at your owne choice whether you will burne or geld

your selues, and hereafter endeuour to kéepe chastitie.
                  The Fryers hearing this hard resolution, began with humble
lookes to intreat her, but in vaine she made them all a low
curtes
                        •
                     e and went her wayes.
                  The Fryers in great perplexitie séeing the house all on fire,
and that they began to fri
                        •
                      in their shirts, and the house ready
to fal about their eares. Fryer Pedro learning first to play the
man: tooke the knife and whipt off his geni
                        •
                     ories, and away he
runs towards the Abbey, and euery frier fearing the fire, plaid
the like part, and away they run bléeding as fast as their legs
would carry them, the fire grew great, and it was perceiued
a farre off, so that Signior Ideaques Bartolos (Barbadoras Father)
espyed it, fearing his daughters mishap, ran thither himselfe.
The Abbot being told the Nunry was on fire, made no
little hast for feare of his Fryers, & an infinite of other people
being deuoutly minded to the Nunry ran thither, and as they
went, Signior Bartolos and the Abbot, met the fryers running
away in their shirts, which amazing thē, the Abbot said what
newes Fryer Pedro? what, the Nunry a fire, and you run away
in your shirts, what meaneth this? I know not, I know
not sir (said 
                        •
                     e) we were there late enough, the diuell burne
house, Abbesse, Nuns and all, and away 
                        •
                     rudged the Couent,
euery man to his lodging, and sending spéedily for a skilful surgeon,
the Abbot with the rest of the townes-men, and Signior
Bartolos came thither, & by y• time the roofe was pulled down,
and all quencht, and they found the Abbesse ready to entertain
them friendly. They wondring at this, demaunded how the
fire came, and what the reason was the fryers run away in
their shirts? The Abbesse recounted vnto them from point to
point, what had hapned, and how fiftéene of the Nuns were
with child vnder the shadow of confession, by those 15. fryers,
and therfore she had sought reuenge to cléere her selfe of that
crime, & because your e
                        •
                     es shal witnes what bitter punishment
I haue appointed them for pennance, come all with me, & so
she led them into the back roome, where she shewed them the
kniues, and what the fryers for feare had left behind them. At
this they all fell into a great laughter, except Bartolos (who
grieued for his Daughter Barbadora) yet hée highlye

commended the Abbesse for her reuenge, & shée was honoured
through the citie: the Nuns banisht ther religious house,
the Fryers put out of these Dortors, and the fiue poore Nuns
that were thrust out (without cause) entertained againe, and
euer after the Nunry was in great fame and credit: now to a
second remedy, how to stop the mouth of a Usurer, when his
couetousnes complaines of famine and cannot bée satisfied.
                  
                     An excellent dyet for an Vsurer, when his conscience
is starued.
                     IN Rauenspurge, in Germany, there dwelled a Iew that
was a vsurer, who liued by ye spoile of his purloining faculty
and reapt with ease what others had purchast with labor, rich
he was, and well monied, & ready to lend vpon any reasonable
assurance: but as he was swéet to pleasure at the first, so at
the last, whosoeuer tasted of his fauors, found them bées with
stings, and faire panthers with deuouring pan
                           •
                        hes, that al his
curtesies were but fowlers gins to bring a bird to the snare,
& then to pray vpon them like Crocodiles aliue, for this miserable
Iew was plyant to the suite of any man, that brought
him either sufficiēt surety or pawne: but if he broke one minut
of his appointed houre, he took the forfeits with all extremitie:
gathering thus infinite treasures into his hands, hée grew by
this extorting qualitie to bée one of the richest men in Rauenspurge,
yet though his wealth was great, & he in debt to none,
his belly sued an action of trespasse (damage fiue hundreth
pounds) against him, as being indebted to it, in so much for hū
                        gry
meales, and hard chéere, that hée had past ouer in his life
time, for he was not only spare in his diet, but miserable, grā
                        ting
himselfe oftentimes, no other then water to quench his
thirst, and féeding vpon nothing but the most refuse meate in
the shambles to satisfie his hunger. This Iew called Ioachlm
Gorion, thus flourished and tooke his onely felicitie in féeding
his eyes with the sight of infinite treasure not respecting the
ruine of many poore men, so he by their miseries might enrich

himselfe. Wherevpon he grew in open contempt, and hatred
of all the people, but as the Fox the more he is 
                           •
                        urst, the better
hee fareth, so Ioachim the more the poore exclaimed against
him, the more his profits and reuenewes came in.
                     At last it fortuned that a Farmer bordering néere vnto Rauenspurge,
being called Hans Van Limericke, hauing a sum of
money to pay, or else to loose certain commodities f
                           •
                        ue times
worth the value, not knowing how to furnish himselfe with so
much coyne, and finding friends 
                           ••
                        acke in time of necessitie, at
length called to minde this wretched Usurer Gorian, and
though he knew him to be a man of no conscience, yet assuring
himselfe how he was able to pay his money that he borrowed
againe at the day, was the better encouraged to deale with
him, so that coueting rather to brooke an inconuenience,
then suffer a mischiefe. He went to the house of Ioachim, and
broke the matter vnto him: the Iew neuer denied but friendly
promised him to lēd him so much, so he might haue sufficiēt assurance
for his mony. Hans hearing this was glad, and said he
ment to lay him his farme, and all his Lands in morgage, with
a letter of defeisance recognised, that al the land should be his,
if either he broke the day or houre. The couetous Iewe was
content, so that taking a déede of guift with a prouis
                           •
                         of him,
he tendered downe the mony, and so fitted and supplyed the
Farmers present want, who went home merily, & dispatched
such Creditors as he was vpon that day to discharge. The
Iew knowing the Farme to be a pretty plot, well scituated
and three times worth the money, wisht Limericke dead, that
he might 
                           •
                        réely enter possession of his goods and landes, but it
fell out contrary to his desire and expectation, for the Farmer
carefull of his day, because he knew the hard conscience of the
Usurer, straind himselfe and his friendes, & prouided the money,
and at the time appointed came and brought it to Gorions
house▪ now the money was to be paide betwéene two and
thrée in the after noone, which Hans knowing, was there halfe
an houre after two to deliuer his money: the Usurer hearing
that he was come, was greatly gréeued that he had kept touch

so well, and therefore thought to ouer-reach him with flat poli
                           •
                        i
                           •
                        ke
co
                           •
                        senage, which he performed thus.
                     The Usurer had a clocke in his house, which went with such
vices and gim
                           ••
                        als, that by letting downe, a pullie, he coulde
make it strike what a clocke himselfe would: so that sending
downe word to him that he would come by and by, hee went
himselfe and straind the pully, and the clocke, presently struck
thrée: wherevppon the Iewe came downe, and demaunded of
Limericke, what hee would haue? Marrie sir (quoth he) I
haue brought you home the mony I borrowed of you, with y•
appoyn
                           •
                        ed loane, and a thousand thanks, besides: promising
for this fauour euer to rest yours whilst I liue. My money
Hans (qd. he) why dost not know y• effects of the recognisance?
I pray thée at what houres was the money to be payde? betwéene
twoo and thrée (quoth Limericke) why so then it is
now past thrée, and therefore Ile none of the money, but stand
to the forfeit of the bands that are l
                           •
                        st to me by morgage: at
this the poore farmer was some thing amazed, yet thinking
tha Iew had but iested, he smild, and began to turne the money
on the boord, to tender it: but Ioachim tolde him flat that
he was in earnest, and would none of the money: why Sir,
(quoth Hans) though your clocke hath strucken thrée, by other
clock as if is little past two, and therefore I hope you will
not so vniustly stand vppon the aduantage: the Usurer answered
him that his clocke went right and he would take none, vpon
which they fell at great debate, till at last other clocks in
the towne strucke thrée also, which when the Iewe heard hée
was glad, and bad him if he could count what it was a clocke,
to be briefe he would not receiue a penny, but stoode to the extreamity
of the morgage.
                     The poore Farmer grieuously perplexed, intreated him
with teares, obiecting that if it were so a minutes breach was
not much: but in vaine all his perswasions were bootelesse
breathed into the ayre, for the Iew that had his hart as flinty
as Adament, felt no remorse, but went into his closset, and left
poore Limericke, with his complaints, who sorrowfully going

home to his wife, bewraide the matter vnto her, who pertaking
her husbands griefe with equall discontent, perswaded
him to patience, and told him he had no better remedy then to
make his complaint to the Signorie and rulers of the Cittie,
which he did and cald the Iew at a Law day before the iudge,
and there reuealed his case at large, for might ouercomming
right, and money peruerting the truth, he went home with a
flea in his eare, vtterly vndone and beggered, and the vsurer
merily tryumphing in the verdite of his reuenues.
                     This past on a yeare or twoo, till at last poore Hans grew to
that extreame want, that he
                           •
                         had neither money, credit, nor
house to put his head in, which so vexed him, that at length
he grew weary of his life, for being falne from a man of some
account to great contempt by his pouerty, hee waxed into a
kind of despairing lunacy, and had oftentimes in his melancholly
humor slaine himselfe, had not his wife preuented him
by her carefull diligence.
                     While thus Limericke liued in beggars estate with his wife
and thrée small Children, this Iew (this Ioachim) this wretched
Usurer, as he 
                           •
                        ryumphed in his wealth, was one day
suddenly stricken with sicknes that he went to his bed, and
there lay till hee grew quesie at the heart, and then 
                           •
                        e sent for
phisitions whome he greased with golde, and 
                           •
                        ad them spare
for no cost, so he might recouer his former health: they applyed
Potions, Electuaries, Glisters, Purgations, and Pilles, but
in vaine. Contra vim mortis, non est medicamen in hortls.
                     
                     They could find out no simple Hearbe, Stone nor Minerall,
Drugge nor compound so comfortable, that any waye
might mittigate his disease, so that growing past helpe
of man, the Phisitiaus left him, and certaine deuout men of
the towne came to perswade him to God, séeing hee was no
man of this world, wishing him to enter with déepe insight
into his owne minde, and to search his conscience for many
wrongs and extorting iniuries hée had offered to poore men
setting before his eyes the paynes of Hell due to sinners,
as condigne punishment. Ioachim hearing all, along

time with patience answered not a word, but only desired thē
to depart, and to trouble him no more for a while: which they
did, and he turning himselfe, lay two or thrée houres in a trāce
considering and repeating in his mind, the infinite wrongs &
palpable iniuries he had offered y• poore, the widdow & fatherlesse,
which striking a remorse into his conscience, séeing hee
must die, and measuring his sins with the instice of God, and
hauing no grace to thinke vpon his mercy, he started vp, and
with his eyes staring, cryed vnto his man and saide, oh the
Plague, the plague, the plague is here my Ben, the plague: his
man thinking he had ra
                           •
                         'de for want of sléep, destred him to be
patient, and to leaue off those franticke exclamations. Oh thou
of my tribe (qd▪ he) I am in my right mind, the plague is here
euen in my conscience, in my inward soule, I am worse then
Cain or Iudas: I haue murdered more then they two by extortion,
and therefore I cannot be saued: the plague in my conscience,
my Ben, the plague: his man (although he hated his maister,)
and wisht him at the Deuill, yet to blind the world with
the opinion of a dutifull seruant, he presently ran for the chiefe
Burgamasters of the towne, who comming hastily to comfort
and counsaile him, found him in this dispairing humor, & could
by no means draw him to any hope of grace, wherevpon they
left him as he liued, and so gaue him ouer to die, he continuing
stil in this melancholly despaire. While thus he languished in
this mad moode, Hans and his family harbored in poore estate
in the Citty, and hearing of this extreame sicknes of the I
                           •
                        w,
was glad that God had so sharply auenged him of his enemy:
but yet this mishap bred him small help, whervpon desirous to
die, he went, & at an Apothecaries shop bought him a mortall
confection, which he purposed to take to rid him from his present
misery.
                     Hauing kept it a long while in a Uioll, at last he sat in a great
studdy vpon his present hard fortunes, and houering betwéen
grace & dispaire, at last he resolued to go try now what this Usurer
would doe, happily (sayd he to himselfe) his sicknes hath
altered his conscience, and his minde is better now toucht

with the doubt of death, then when before hee had no other
thoughts but vpon life, so that I will make experience if hée
will compassionate my miserie, and make some restitution of
that which so wrongfully hee detaineth from mée. In this
minde the poore man went to Gorions house, and knocking at
the doore, be found none there but poore Beniamin, who was
almost wearie of his life, with the extreame trauell that hée
had with his lunaticke Iewish Master, and he poore soule began
to turne Christian, and to pitty the Farmer, and wisht
him to come in.
                     It may be (saith he) grace yet will be sent to him, and the
touch of his extortion will turne his conscience, therfore come
vnto him, and speake face to face with him: The Farmer glad
of this, came into the chamber and saluted him in most humble
manner. Who is that (oh Ben) saies the Iew, that salutes
me? It is sir (quoth he) the poore farmer whose lands you entred
vpon by a forfeit of morgage. At that as wel as he could,
he raised himselfe vp in his bed, and cryed out Uillaine take
héed, he comes to rob me, beware of him, looke to my Coffers,
to my Gold, to my writings: where are my kepes? Sir (saith
Beniamin) they be about your necke: for in his most extreamity,
no, not till his latest gaspe would hée part from them, so
that in a couetous lunacy hee gropt for them, held them fast,
and cryed out the Plague, the Plague, oh Hell, 
                           •
                        ell, the Deuill,
the deuill.
                     So his man Ben perswaded him to be quiet and to remember
the poore man: the poore man, I marrye Ben, well sayd
(quod the Iew) where is he? I will giue him his land again,
I tooke from him wrongfully, and then he stoode staring him
on the face, hee will not liue long saith his man stay you with
him and talke with him, till I go out and call some neighbors
to be with me.
                     The farmer was content, and so Beniamin went out and left
them two together: as soone as hee was gone, the poore man
began to instruct him to God-ward, and séeing he was ready
to dye, to make restitution of such goods or Lands as hee

with-held from any man by extortion.
                     At this the Iew
                           •
                         lookt on him very ghas
                           •
                        ly, and spyed the
Uioll that y• poore man held in his hand vnder his cloak, with
that in a rage hee cryed out what hast thou there in the glasse?
phisicke to coole my conscience that burnes like hell, hath the
Deuill sent to heale me.
                     The Farmer séeing this desperate Iewe voide of all grace
and giuen ouer by God into a reprobate sence, answered him
briefly, he hath sent me to thée, and vild Usurer I haue broght
thée phisicke from the Deuill to helpe thée. Oh welcome, welcome
saies the Iew, what is in it? what is in it? Marie saith
the Farmer, there is in it these simples following.
                     Heere are the teares of poore men, distilled from their eyes
through the anguish of thy extortion, and they are made lukewarm
with the scalding s
                           •
                        ghes that throbs from their sorrowfull
hearts, tempered with the curses of Widdowes and Orphanes,
whom thou hast brought to beggery: these boyld with
the fire of Gods wrath, and put vp by the Deuill into a violl of
despaire & prepared for thée to drinke, that after thou hast takē
this potion, thou maist go to deuill without repentance.
                     Then giue it me (quoth he) and so he snatcht the violl of poisō
out of the poore mans hand, and drunke it off, the confection
being strong began to suffocate his sences, that he lay stil: perceiuing
that he could not liue long, thoght now, séeing no body
was there, to prouide for himselfe: conuey any chests he could
not, steale any goods he might not, for hee had no oportunity,
and therefore God putting it into his mind, hee tooke penne
and paper, and writ a scedule to this effect.
                  
                  
                     The Scedule that the Farmer writ.
                     
                        Ioachim Gorion being whole of minde, though s
                           ••
                        ke in body,
toucht with remorse of conscience for the manifest wrongs
that I haue proffered to insinit poore men, Widdowes, and
Fatherlesse Children, hoping that the mercie of God is more

then my sins, do ordaine Hans van Limericke my lawfull heire
and Executor, as a man whome aboue all I haue most wronged,
conditionally that hee reward my man Beniamin, for his
faithfull seruice: and for the surplu
                           •
                        age let it be to him and to
his 
                           •
                        eires for euer, of all my goods, lands, Cattles and mooueables,
and that this is my last will and testament, I haue
thereto set my seale at armes.
                     
                        Hans Limericke hauing thus cunningly written it, and being
a good pen man, so excellently well counterfeited his hand
that it might not easily be disc
                           •
                        rned, but the Iew himselfe had
written it: so pulling his seale off from his finger, he sealed it,
and then wrapping it vp put it in a purse that hung about the
Iewes necke, for Ioachim was already sencelesse, and lay staring,
but the poison had so suffocated his pipes, that he could
not speake.
                     By that came Beniamin with twoo or thrée poore men and
Women to watch with him, whervpon the Farmer tooke his
leaue, and his man asked him what newes: I can get no other
answere of him than this, that when he is dead, I shall heare
what he will doe. At that the Iew lookt Ben in the face, and
as well as he could pointed to Hans, meaning how he had poisoned
him, but they tooke it that he meant some good should be
done vnto Hans.
                     
                     After his death, as soone as he was gone, the poison came to
the last exigent, and the pangs of death 
                           •
                        rewe on, and they all
perceiued that there was no hope of life, which sorted according
to their expectations, for within one halfe houre after the
Iew died.
                     As soone as Beniamin saw him dead hée shed teares, more
for fashion then for loue, and hauing like a wise Cooke lickt
his owne fingers, that he neede no further legacy to shadowe
the matter, sent one straight to signifie the matter vnto the
Burgamasters, that Ioachim the Iewe was dead, and séeing
that he had neither made will, nor yet had any kindred that
might claime it as his heire, it were best for them to looke for
the disposing of his goods.
                     
                        The Burgamasters comming thither, with a generall consent,
began to suruay euery chest in the house, and to search
each corner putting all into an inuentory that they 
                           •
                        ound, wt 
                        
                           •
                        eing summed together, redounded to an infinite wealth: besides
his lands, leases, and tenements, that he had in the Cittie
and country thereabout: At last missing the keyes of certain
cheste that could not be vnlockt, Beniamin told them they
hung about his necke at his purse, they wondering at the excéeding
couetousnes of such a miserable man, smiled and took
his purse, and searching what was in it, found the scrowle
which Limericke had written, sealed with the Iewes seale at
armes, which when they had well read ouer and determined
vpon, they all censured that God had put some remorse into
his conscience, both to make him heire whome he had so highly
wronged, and that he was in so good a mind to make restitution
of his misdéeds; Upon this they called a conuocation in
their State-house, they sent after Hans, and by a generall decrée,
made him lawfull inheritour to the Iewe, so Hans from a
beggar became richer than any Burgamaster, did many good
d
                           •
                        eds to the poore, made restitution and well rewarded Beniamin,
thanking God that the miserable vsurer had couetously
gathered and had him to be his heire, whom he neuer so much
as once dreamt of.
                  
                  
                     How in a houshold of ciuill warre, a woman may be safe
from a cruell husband.
                     IN the County of Deuonshire, not farre from Exceter, there
dwelled a Rope-maker whose name I conceale: this Rope-maker
(whome I will call Richard) was about the age of
some forty yeres, and he was a parlous sowre fellow, ill loued
of his neighbours because he so vnkindly liked of his wiues:
for this iolly companion had bin maried to thrée wiues in ten
yeares, and had vsed them all so hardly, that he killed them all
with kindnes.
                     This brought him in such hatred amongst all his nieghbors,

that though he were a man of verry good wealth, and besides
his occupation, landed: yet the poorest and basest wench in the
whole country, did disdaine to match herselfe with such a franticke
husband, so that being a widdower, hee had no hope euer
to match himselfe againe, where he was knowne, and therefore
apparelling himselfe hansomely, and putting store of
crownes in his purse, he went into Somersetshire hard by
Tanton, and there was a sutor to a widdowes daughter▪ that
was a good propper maide and wellfauoured, but of no great
wealth, & therfore the easier to be wooed, & won of a stranger.
                     This rope-maker being a good propper man, and of a comely
personage, became a sutor to this maide, whose name was
Mary, a wench of a good bone and a lusty complexion, much
like to Lancashire breed, the maiden entering into consideration
of her mothers estate, and her owne pouertie, and seeing
she had few sutors, because the hope of her dowry was but
small, listened the rather to Richards motion, who beeing of
a smoothe tongue, and could set out himselfe well in talke, as
the tiger when he meanes to prey, then euer hideth his claws,
and where the Foord runnes smoothest, there is it deepest: so
as the olde prouerbe is, the still Sow eates vp all the draffe:
and he could vse such ciuill behauiour, trickt out with such eloquent
and glorious tearmes, that in short time he wonne
the wench and married her, and after that he had remained a
weeke or two at home with her mother, hee tooke his leaue to
carry her home to his owne house: although there was some
sorrow at parting betweene the mother and the daughter, yet
because she loued Richard well, she tooke it patiently, and beeing
hony moone, he seemed so chairy ouer her, that it grieued
him the winde should blowe on her; well, home they went,
and when she came where he dwelt, she found a house well stored
with all things necessary, but she wondered as the custome
was in their country, that none of his neighbors did come to
welcome him to the towne: well, this past on till Sunday,
and then she went to Church: when they of the towne did see

that rich man the Rope-maker had gotten so propper a woman
to his wife, they began to say that the more knaue had euer the
better lucke, and indeed fortune was blinde when she suffered
such a buzzard to light on such a chicken, and to pittie the poore
womans mishappe, that had chaunced on such a froward and
Hare braind Husband: yet foothing all vp with a good countenance,
they after seruice was done, welcommed her vnto the
parrish, and she returned them thankes very ciuillie. It chanced
one wife amongst the rest, whose sister this Rope-maker had
married and kild with kindenes, did long till she spake with
Richards wife, that shee might make her priuy vnto her husbands
vntoward qualities: and tarrying a great while to speake
with her, at last finding oportunitie, discoursed vnto her how
her husband had bene marryed vnto three wi
                           •
                        es, and how cruelly
he had dealt with them all, abusing them so, that they tooke
such griefe, that for verie sorrow they all dyed, telling her from
point to point a number of his ill conditions, which although
they went colde to her heart, yet chearefully made
the Woman answere, that what her husband had done
before, it little toucht her: the woman hearing Richards
wife speake so modestly, and in the defence of her husband,
onely prayed God she might finde it so in the end, and so friendly
they parted.
                     The Rope-makers wife being in a great perplexitie, that she
had made such a choice in hast
                           •
                        , that she might so deepely repent
at leysure, hoping the best, shee went about her huswiferie till
her husband came home, who returning within two daies after,
she welcommed him with all curtesie that a woman could
affoord to her husband: he thanked her, but not with the same
familiar countenance he was wont to doe, which streight made
her suspect that her neighbors tale would prooue a true prophecie,
but patiently brooking some vnkinde Frownes, shee dealt
so carefully, louingly, and kindely with him, that he could find
                           •
                        
no cause to beate her, insomuch that his olde dogged nature
within one halfe yeare began to breake out, so that she easily

perceiued he sought a knot in a rush, and aymed earnes
                           •
                        lye to
finde some Cauell that hee might hansell her bones with a
cudg
                           •
                        ll if shee lookt merrily on him, shee flowted him, and
streight he lent her a boxe on the eare for her fleering.
                     If her countenance were solemnly modest, then she loathed
him, and what he did: and cound about the house he went with
a fayre Holly wand, if shee spoke vnto him she was talkatiue;
and streight she had a blow on the lippes: if shee saide nothing
she was 
                           •
                        ullen: and he wold make her finde her tongue with
a Ropes-ende, which he called a Salt-Eele, and with which against
her will shee broake her fast, dinde, & supt many a time:
whatsoeuer she did huswifly in the house, what meat she drest,
what businesse she performed, al was misconstrued and rewarded
with blowes, which draue y• poor womā into such a quandarie,
that she wisht herselfe out of the world, her estate growing
worse & worse, at last his habit grew to a custom & so she neuer
went vnbeaten to bed, so that as now gentlewomē weare
their Maskes, so shee euerie Sunday went to Church with a
black
                           •
                         Face, which her neighbours espying▪ as they pittied her,
so they smiled, that at length she had found their forewarnings
to bee no other but meere prophecies, but although they had
libertie to les
                           •
                        , so she had occasion to sorrowe, for the miserable
man would driue her into great extremities, and make tryall
of her patient nature, with wondrous contrarieties: for some
time comming home late in the night, hee would bring sundrye
of his Neighbor
                           •
                         with him, and to shewe how hee
could domineere ouer his wife, hee would make her
light a pound of Candles at the great ende, which if either
in iest or earnest shee refusde to doe, str
                           •
                        ight about the house
shee went, and had a gentle remembrance to remember his fingers
a mo
                           •
                        th after.
                     And amongst the rest, one day to haue the world thinke in
what seruile slauerie his wife stood of him, hee caused her to
stand by him, while hée made Ropes, and fill a Siue with
water, a labour as endlesse, as painefull and contemptible,

so that the ne ghbor
                           •
                         and passengers noting it, some praised
the w
                           •
                        m
                           •
                        ns patience▪ that executed her husbands foolish
charge, with so stedfast and resolute a countenance: the poore
wise liuing in this miser
                           •
                        e by the space of some three or four
                           •
                        
yeares▪ so one day being alone by her selfe, looking in a glasse,
and considering aduisedly how her wonted countenance was
blemisht by her husbands vnkindenes, shee fetcht a great figh,
and sware a m
                           •
                        rtall and fatal reuenge, so that a deepe hate of
his ill qualities entring into her thoughts, shee resolu'd to
make him repent those many yeares he had made her leade in
such s
                           •
                        ruile miserie.
                     In this determination she gathered her wits together, and
sought how to crie quit
                           •
                        ance with her husband, yet could shee
finde no certaine meanes speedily to auo
                           •
                        de the shrewish disposition
of such an earthly Deu
                           •
                        ll, but bearing the Crosse with
patience, 
                           •
                        ested the verse subiect of distresse: to run away shee
would not, to withstand him she could not, she shamd to make
complaint to the Iustices: and thus euerie way she was voide
of any remedie, so that she brookt al, and went about her busines,
till on a time fortune smiling vppon her, and intending to
giue truce to this poore woman, it chanced that as shee was
gathering r
                           •
                        she
                           •
                         to make her house cleanly, against the next
Holly-day, sitting & sighing at her vnhappines, she heard one
sing a merrie song, which she gaue eare vnto: The effect wherof,
agreed greatly with her melācholly disposition, for it armed
a salue for that sore, that so pincht her, and applide a medicin
                           •
                        
for her continuall malladie: the contentes of the song were
these.
                     
                        A song sung by an olde Woman in a
Medowe.
                        OF all the plagues which make poore wigh
                              •
                           s,
                        vnhappy and accurst:
                        I thinke a wicked husband is,
                        (next to the Deuill) the worst.
                     
                     
                        
                        But will young women come to mee,
                        ile shew them how they shall:
                        With prettie sleights and priuie tricks
                        streight rid them from such thrall.
                     
                     
                        The husband frownes, & then his fist
                        lights on her tender cheeke:
                        And if she doe reply a word,
                        a Staffe is not to seeke.
                        But will, &c
                     
                     
                        A iealious eye the husband beares,
                        then is he out of quiet,
                        And she must fit her humors then,
                        to feede his braine-sicke dyet.
                        But wil, &c.
                     
                     
                        Else round about the house shee goes,
                        the holy wand must walke:
                        And though his words bee reasonles.
                        yet must she brook his talke,
                        But will, &c.
                     
                     
                        Thus men doe tryumph like to kings
                        and poore wiue
                              •
                            must obey:
                        and though he be a verry foole,
                        Yet must he beare the sway.
                        But will young women come to me,
                        Ile showe them how they shal
                        With pre
                              •
                           tie sleights and priuie trick:
                        streight rid them from such thral.
                     
                     THe olde woman hauing thus ended her song, the poore
wife that with teares for ioy, heard some hope of her redresse,
drew neere to finde out this olde woman, who had sung
such a pleasant Dittie, and finding her foorth, shee saluted her

and after sundry broken sighes, flowen out of a
pensiue conscience, she began to breake with her in this manner.
                     Mother (quoth she) as your age is great, so your experience
is much, and therefore would I willingly discouer some parte
of my griefe vnto you: the 
                           •
                        uld woman seeing the wiues face,
full of sorrow, noting in her the very An
                           •
                        atomie of a pensiue
woman, began to compassionate her fortunes, and therefore
wisht her miloely and friendly, to r
                           •
                        ueal
                           •
                         the cause of her distresse,
& if any way it lay in her power, to satisfie her thoughts,
her cares should be cured with either counsaile or comfort: the
poore wife hearing the old woman speak with such a familiar
relish vnto her, began her complaint thus:
                  
                  
                     The wiues complain
                           •
                        , of the conditions of
an ill husband.
                     MOther I cannot conce
                           •
                        t my 
                           〈◊〉
                         without 
                           •
                        ighes, nor
manifest my sorrowes without 
                           •
                        eares, so bitter is the estate
of my fortunes, and so ha
                           •
                        lesse is the euent of my redresse:
I was once as you haue be
                           ••
                        , a maide, and then the countrie
Farmers reported my beautie to be as great, as now my miserie
is extreame: Fate so appointed that I was woed and wonne
by a rope-maker, a man I think (mother) not vnknowne vnto
your selfe, if for no other cause, yet for the hard vsage of his
wiues, and with that the poore woman bu
                           •
                        st into bitter teares,
and the olde woman began to 
                           ••
                        gh, in vttering her conceit with
an oath, asked if she were the maide that Richard the rope-maker
had maried? I am mother quoth she, that vnfortunate
wife, that was once a maide, whose fortunes are made intollerable,
by the bad nature of a froward husband▪ whose custome
is neither at bed or at boord, to shew me any good countenance:
if I looke so
                           •
                        erly, then I am t
                           •
                        oubled with the sull
                           •
                        ns, and
then he wakeneth me with a hollie w
                           ••
                        and: if I salute any of my
neighbours with good-morrow, he saieth they are my Copesma
                           •
                        es,
and then my bones beares the burthen: If I speake

to none, he saith I scorne such as are his friends, and hee
will make me find my tongue: if in my bed I fall asleepe, beeing
wearied with labor, he pincheth me wickedly, and cals
me drowsie drunkard: if I ouer-wake him, then he puls me
by the haire of the head, and saith I watch to cut his throat,
when he is asleepe: yet mother, these are not the greatest sorrowes,
for he hath a maide at home which he loues better then
mee, and her be setteth on his knee before my face hee, cuts her
the first morsell of the meat, and oftentimes in the night he riseth
from me to goe to her, and in the day if I but wish her to
goe to her worke, if she frowne, then am I most pittifully beaten,
as you may witnes with your eies, and with that shee
discouered her naked bodie to her, which was all brused blacke
and blew, with stripes, and yet mother (quoth she) these are
not the greatest sorrowes.
                     The olde woman colde at the heart, with th
                           •
                         rehearsall of
this poore wiues calamities, made her this 
                           •
                        inde answere:
daughter inough, I knowe by the man much ill, as this
sixteene yeares that I haue knowne him, I haue entred
into many discourses of his villanies, but le
                           •
                        ting him passe
as he is, to the present redresse of thy miseries, what, sayes
shee, hast thou no friends to goe vnto, whose abillitie may
counteruaile his currishnes, and bridle him by the lawe,
for such beastlines? Alas aunswered she, I haue none but
an olde woman and poore like your selfe to my mother, and
it grieues me to make a bootlesse complaint vnto her: why
then (saith the olde woman) hast thou no friend who for the
possession of thy loue may haue him about the pate, and
so reuenge thy iniuries? Alas (mother) better had I dye
miserably, then dishonestly, I haue none, And saith the
olde Matron, I see thou art not strong inough to match
him with blowes, and therefore must I flye for thy succour
to my last phisicke: whose principles be so auth
                           •
                        nticall
and sure, that they neuer misse, therfore tell me, hast
thou any woman, that thou dar'st commit thy secrets vnto?
                     
                        O Mother (saith she) two or three his mortall enemies, and my
greatest friends: then Daughter feare not (replyed the old
                           •
                        
Counsellor) but listen well to my aduise: goe thy wa
                           •
                        es home,
and doe somthing that may displease. Alas (said she) that I
may easily doe, for I cannot doe any thing that can please him:
but what then, shall I seeke my owne destruction to bee beaten?
for once daughter (qd. she) when thou maist for that beating
liue at quiet for euer▪ But as soone as he offers to strike
thee, stand in de
                           ••
                        ance of him, and say thou hast praied vnto
our Lady for helpe, and she hath promised to helpe thee, and to
reuenge all thy iniuries, and therefore bid him if he dares, but
once while he liues touch thee againe in anger. If then he
                           •
                         wil
swinge thee, beare it patiently, and take this powder that I
shall giue thee, and when thou knowst he goes to worke alone
by himselfe, giue it him in drink: the vertue of the powder is to

                           •
                        uffocate and choake vp his sences, so that he shall not haue any
feeling for the space of 
                           •
                        ire honres, but he shall lye like a liuelesse
carkasse, and his dreames shall bée of women, & Angells:
then daughter (& then she whispred many matters in her eares)
whether they were charmes or spelles I cannot tell, but this I
am sure it was some good conceit, for the poore wife wept for
ioy, and on her knees thanked the woman for her aduise, and so
they parted, she promising to bring her word within ten daies
how her phisicke had taken effect: well, to be short, merrily goes
this good wife home, and findes her husband dallying with her
maide, at which sight her stomacke rose, and began to take him
vp sharpely, and to sweare that if she tooke her Maide and him
so suspitiously together againe, she would complaine of him to
the Iustices, and cut off her mades nose for a generall example
to such whor
                           •
                        s as she was.
                     The Rope-maker (this gentle Richard) pondering at his
wiues vnaccustomed brauling, began to start vp, and to séeke
for a 
                           •
                        udgell, with that shée as a woman resolued to follow her
late counsell, made this reply:
                     Nay brain-sicke villaine, strike me if thou darst, for through
thy long abuses I haue hartily praied to our Lady for reuenge

and she hath this day appeared to me, and promised me, that
if thou doost heereafter, but touch the hemme of my vesture in
anger, she will be auenged vppon thee so extreamely, that thou
shalt repent the abuses thou hast proffered me, as long as thou
dost liue. Richard smiling at this reply, made his wife this
answere, huswife (quoth he) if our Lady haue appeared vnto
you, our Lord her sonne hath shewed me a vision, that he that
hath an ill wife and will not 
                           •
                        eat her, shall lead apes in hell
for his labor, and with that he fell vppon her, and pumnield
her so soundly, that he had almost kild her, and she began
halfe to repent that she followed the olde womans counsaile,
yet hoping for time to reuenge, she bare all things with the
more patience, and finding oportunitie vppon a day or two after
to speake with her gossips, she reuealed vnto them the contents
of the ould wiues counsaile, whereat they triumphing
and glorying in this determination, they promised to plague
him, and to performe whatsoeuer should redound to her commoditie,
auowing such secrecie, as that it should neuer come
out by any meanes whatsoeuer.
                     Time passing on thus, it fortuned that our Rope-maker,
and his maide, were wont euery weeke twice, to goe to a
strange house, and there she turned the wheele while he twisted
his ropes, when their busines was done, what excercise
they vsed I knowe not: one day amongst the rest Richard
and his maide going alone to this solitarie place, to make their
ropes, he commaunded his wife to fill them a bottle full of
drinke, for he could not returne before night: she glad of this
oportunitie, put the dormitarie powder that the ould wife had
giuen her into the bottle, which they 
                           •
                        aking went their waies
merrily together, and the drink and the powder with iogging
was made a mere potion, as soone as they were gone▪ she stept
out and went to her 
                           〈◊〉
                        , and discourst vnto them the
whole matter, and with that shee drew out from vnder her
ke
                           ••
                        le two three stringed whippes of sharp and hard twisted
cordes, with 
                           •
                        ound knots vpon the endes, able to cut the slesh
with a small stroak, these she be queathed vnto them, and humbly

vppon her knees, desired them not to spare for pittie to punish
them to the highest extreamitie: they promised to shewe
iustice without mercie & especialy one of thē who was sister to
one of his former wiues, that he had kild with kindenesse, who
for an olde grudge did intend now to bee fully 
                           •
                        euenged, and
so they went to the graunge house, where leauing them consulting
together, and the good wife gone home full of hope, let
vs returne to the Rope-maker (Richard and his maide.)
                     
                        Richard after hee had dispatched some part of his businesse,
would to dinner or drinking, and after his Maide and he had
louingly broken their Fast, they would like Doues fall to billing,
but hauing drunke soundly of the potion, it began to
mortifie their sences, that hee desirous to take a nappe, laying
his head in his Maides lappe, fell fast a sleepe, and shee as heauie
as he, leaning her head on her maisters shoulders was in
a deade traunce.
                     When these two Gossips came and foun
                           •
                         them thus drowsely
tumbled together, although they saw them soundly a sleep,
yet were they aff
                           •
                        aide vntill they had made experience of the
effects of the potion: for they shooke them, prickt them with
pinnes, and vsed all meanes to awake them, but it was impossible,
whereupon they grew 
                           •
                        olde, and pulled off his apparel
not so much as leauing his shirt vppon him, and they fell vnto
belabouring of him with their whips, in such monstrous manner,
that the blood came downe aboundantly from all partes of
his bodie, and they cut him with their lashes to the verie sinewes,
so then at length they ceaste, pulled on his apparell as
it was before, and drest him vp verie mannerly, not so much
as leauing his points vntrust, or any thing vndone, whereby
he might perceiue hee had bene made vnready.
                     Hauing thus drest him in his kinde, they fell to his Maide,
and serued her with the same sauce, that her maister was vsed
with all, and when they had punished her throughly, they drest
her againe, laced vp her cloathes, and laide them together as
they found them, and went their waies merrily to the Rope-makers
house, discoursing vnto their Gossip all what had hapned,

who ioyfull of this newes, made them the best cheere in
her house, and thanked them heartily for their labours, promising
the next day to tell them what her husband would suspend
in this tragedie.
                     Wel, the time of the working of y• potion being at an end, sith
they drunke together, they began to awake together, but the
Maide being youngest, had the strongest sences, and therefore
the operation 
                           •
                        oonest wasted in her, and halfe between s
                           •
                        umber
and awake about to stretch herselfe as drowsie folkes doe, her
smocke so cleaued to her skin▪ that the verie smart thereof made
her not onely awake but to shrieke out, so that when shee was
come to her selfe she wondred what shee ailed, that all her flesh
was so sore, so that pulling vp her petticoate and looking vpon
her thighes, shee found them all in a gore blood, lasht and cut in
with Whip-corde almost halfe an inch deepe, which made her
to stand in a mase, wondring how she should become so greeuouslie
tormented. At last vnlas
                           •
                        ng herselfe, shee found all her
body worse, so that shee could not lift her hands to her head.
Whereupon she cried out▪ and her maister awoke, & being halfe
in a dreame, and his eyes scarce open, as hee was about to
stretch him▪ his shirt claue so to his backe, that hee felt intollerable
paines.
                     Oh Isabell (quoth he) what aile I? or where am I? what
haue I drempt? and what doe I feele? Alas Maister, I am almost
whipt to death since I fell a sleepe. I thinke it is some accursed
Fa
                           •
                        ries that haue done this deede, and shee shewed
him all her body, whereat hee fell into bitter teares, and
then shee tolde him that shee was laced and braced as shee
was before. Alas Isabell (quoth hee) helpe mee 
                           •
                        o vnbutten
mee, for I cannot stirre my hand to my bossome
I am so sore, then vntrussing him hee found himselfe worse
whipt then his Maide, whereupon hee fel into consideration of
the wordes of his wife vsed against him, threatning him that
our Lady would reuenge her wrongs, so that he told his maid,
no doubt it was the Uirgine Marie that had thus punisht

them both for the wrongs hee had proffered against his wi
                           •
                        e,
promising if euer God sent him to his health, hee would neuer
strike her againe, nor misuse her so long as hee liued. So he desired
his Maide to helpe him home, and shee as Lame as hée
could scarse rise, yet one of them helping one another, they went
cra
                           •
                        ping home as well as they could.
                     As the w
                           •
                        nt lamenting home by the way, they mette with
the Uicar of the Parish: this olde Sir Iohn meeting his neighbors
(and one of his friends and parishioners) in this woful perple
                           •
                        t
                           •
                        e
asked him how he fared.
                     Oh Maister Uicar (quoth hee) not as a man in this world,
you seeme weake (quoth the Uicar) sit downe and rest you,
and tell me where your greefe lyes, happily I may gi
                           •
                        e you
some good counsaile. Oh Maister Uicar (quoth hee) I am in
no case to sit downe, I am so beaten with whipps, that I cannot
stirre any ioint of my body without paines. Why what
ayle you? how should it come so to passe? with that the Rope-maker
told him from point to point what had hapned to him,
and to his Maide, and how his wife threatned him the other
day, how that our Lady had appeared vnto her, and promised
reuenge, and I thinke it is she or some of her holy Angells that
hath whipt me and my Maide, for wee slept but a nappe, and
when wee awoke, wee found neither hand nor foote stirred,
nopoint vntrust, no button vnbuttoned, nothing out of order,
and yet our selues so whipt, that I thinke I cannot liue till the
morning, wherefore good Maister Uicar pray for me.
                     Sir Iohn hearing this, was wonderfully astonied, & wisht
him to goe home to his wi
                           •
                        e, to mend his manners, and reconcile
himselfe vnto her, and hee would pray for him the next day
in the Church: so they parted, and hom
                           •
                         stumbles Richard and
his Maide, and comming to the doore found his wife sitting
in the entrieat her wheele, she seeing her husband comming so
simply and weakely with his Maide, although shee tickled at
her heart for ioy that they were so well whipt, yet shee fained
great sorrowe at their present sight, and throwing downe her
wheele for hast
                           •
                        ran and met him, and weeping fained teares,

said alas, alas, what ailes my husband? and offered to take
him by the arme to 
                           ••
                        ay him, he cryed out: oh wife touch mée
not, I am sore sicke and cannot escape death, our Lady at thy
request hath giuen me I feare me my deathes wound, for shée
hath almoste whipt me and my maide to death: oh wife forgiue
vs, and pray for vs, and if we euer hap to liue together, I
will amend my life, and become a new man, and neuer speake
angrie word to thee againe while I haue breath in my bodye,
the Wife séeming passing sorrowfull at this, wisht that our
Lady had giuen her so much, so that he had escaped, so helping
him in, shee laide him downe vppon a soft pallet, and came and
tolde her Gossips what had hapned, and how her husband came
home, and his maide with him So they came with her hastilye
laughing amōgst themselues, but to his face pittying the chance
so that by their helpe his maid and he were holpen to their beds,
where when they had lyen a little, and were come to some
warmth, their flesh 
                           •
                        ell on bleeding a fresh, so that the Surgeon
being sent for to stanch the blood, seeing their woundes, and
hearing the strange case, fel in a great amase with himselfe and
said the dooing of God was wonderfull: much adoe hee had to
stop the Fluxe of the blood, yet at last he got it stauncht, but
they lay in moste miserable perplexitie, almoste slaine with the
whipping.
                     Well, the newes of this (as women are borne blab
                           •
                        ) began
to goe about the towne, yet the two Gossips wondered at it,
as much as the rest, and this hapning vpon a satterday, the next
day being sunday, (good honest Sir Iohn) came to visite his
neighbour, and finding him almost speechles, after some words
of comfort vnto him▪ he went to Church, where after the first
Lesson, he began a certaine prayer for the health of the Rope-maker,
who hee saide lay speechlesse, and at the mercie of
God, and that through a strange and wonderfull fortune, and
therefore desiring all them that were present to pray for
him, he began to take his text out of Saint Peter, how wiues
shold obey their husbands, and husbands cherrish their wiues,
sith they were but one flesh, and therein for an example brogh
                           •
                        
                        
in the strange aduenture of Richard the Rope-maker how hée
had abused himselfe to all his wiues, and so making manifest
the wickednes of his life, did tell them what reuenge our blessed
Lady had taken vpon him in a dreame, and so from point to
point discourst vnto them what had hapned vnto him, wishing
them by his example to amend their liues, least for beating
their wiues the like punishment fall vpon them This text no
little pleased the wiues of the parish, for they tickled at it▪ and
the men they were amazed to heare of such a wonderful chanc
                           •
                        
so that in the after noone, al the parish came to see him and beholde
him, as if Lazarus had bin rizen from the dead, there finding
a more pittifull spectacle then maister Uicar had told them
of, they all saide that as the case was verry strange, so the reuenge
was iust, such as were to shrewes to their 
                           •
                        iues, bit the
lip, and were afraide of our Ladies whipping. At last Richard
gathering his spirits, and his speeches together, exhorted his
Neighbours by his ex
                           •
                        mple, not to abuse and beate their
wiues, telling vnto them th
                           •
                         full 
                           〈◊〉
                         of this Tragedie.
                     This discourse pleased the Wiues, and affrighted the husbands,
so that if any in the towne offered to strike his wife▪ shée
would streight vow to make her complaint at our Ladies
shrin
                           •
                        , and so they scapte many a sharp scoure▪ But to be bréefe▪
                        Richard lay long sicke and his maide, and his wife tended
and comforted them so well, that at length they recouered
some part of their strength▪ and when he was able to walke abroad,
he humbled himselfe to his wife, and 
                           •
                        urst not abuse her
al his life after, & if by chance they had fallen out, she would say
streight, wel, I say no more, but our Lady requi
                           •
                        e my iniuries:
and then would her husband neuer goe abroad till his wife and
hee were reconciled and made friendes, so euer after shee war
                           •
                        
the breeches, & was Maister, and all the Wiues in the parrish
fared the better, and were all greater benefactors to the Shrin
                           •
                        
of our Lady, that rid them from the hands of their iniu
                           •
                        ious
husbands.
                     And thus with a Rauens quill haue I written this Almanacke,
which foretelleth strange, ominou
                           •
                         & most dir
                           •
                         euents,

The plagues whereof I haue spoke shall as certainely fall out,
as the Famin, and the Ciuill wars: all three are dreadfull, all
three are at hand. Make b
                           •
                        n
                           ••
                        res therefore in your streets, (O
you Cittizens) to purge the ayre of all infection, albeit you kéep
the inward houses of your bodies neuer so vn cleane it is no
matter. Open your gates to let in the countrie folkes, with
prouision, to beate backe famin, but let the markets bee looked
vnto as mens consciences are: that is to say, euerie one to racke
it how he listeth, As for ciuill warres there is good hope, they
shall quickly be quenched, because so many hundreds of Constables
watch day and night within the walles to keep the
peace: But by no meanes step you in and bee sticklers when
the Church is at 
                           •
                        arre within he
                           •
                         selfe by schismes or by Temporizer
                           •
                        ,
or when the husband and wife, the Father and Son,
the Maister and Seruant, or when any other limbe of the politicke
body challengeth the combat against him, whome by
nature hee is bound to defend: if any predictions bring thée in
pleasure or proffit, thou wil
                           •
                         encourage mee to play the right
Almanacke maker, and in another yeare to sing mor
                           •
                        ie tunes
of my faire weather, as in this I haue strucke a dull string,
sounbing onely stormes. In the meane time suffer my Rauen
(being wearie) to flye to some tree of rest, and there to
prune her selfe of this s
                           •
                        cke Feathers, which she
hath caught by medling with the diseases
of 1609.
                  
               
            
            FINIS.
         
      
   