
      
         
            
            
            O per ſe O.
            OR A new Cryer of Lanthorne and Candle-light.
            Being an Addition, or Lengthening, of the Bell-mans Second Night-walke.
            In which, are Diſcouered thoſe Villanies, which the Bell-man (becauſe hee went i'th darke) could not ſee: now laid open to the world.
            Together With the ſhooting through the arme vſed by counterfeit Souldiers: The making of the great Soare, (commonly called The great Cleyme:) The Mad-mens markes: Their phraſe of Begging: The Articles and Oathes giuen to the Fraternitie of Roagues, Vagabonds, and ſturdy Beggers at their Meetings.
            And laſt of all, A new Canting-Song.
            
            Printed at London for Iohn Buſbie, and are to be ſould at his ſhop in S. Dunſtans Church-yard in Fleete-ſtreet. 1612.
         
         
            
            
            To my owne Nation.
            
               Readers,
            
            
               AFter it was proclaymed abroad, that (vnder the conduct of the Bel-man of London) new Forces were (once more) to be leauied againſt certaine Wilde and barbarous Rebels, that were vp in armes againſt the tranquilitie of the Weale-publicke: It cannot be told what numbers of voluntaries offred themſelues daily to fight againſt ſo common, ſo bold, ſo ſtrange, and ſo dangerous an enemie. Light horſe men came in hourely with diſcouery where theſe Mutiners lay intrenched: deliuering (in briefe notes of intelligence) who were their Leaders, how they went armed, and that they ſerued both on horſe and foote: onely their Strengths could not be diſcried, becauſe their Numbers were held infinite. Yet inſtructions were written, and ſent euery minute by thoſe that were fauourers of Goodneſſe, ſhewing what militarie diſcipline the Foe vſed in his battailes, and what Forts (if he were put at any time to flight) he would retire to; what ſtratagems he would practiſe, and where he did determine to lye in Ambuſcado. They that could not ſerue in perſon, in this Noble quarrell, ſent their Auxiliary Forces, well armed with Counſell. So that the Bel-man (contrary to his hopes) ſeeing himſelfe ſo ſtrongly and ſtrangely ſeconded by friends, doth now brauely aduance forward, in maine battalion. The day of encounter is appointed to be in this Michaelmas Tearme: the place, Paules Church-yard, Fleetſtreete, and other parts of the Citie. But before they ioyne let me giue you note of one thing, and that is this.
            There is an Vſurper, that of late hath taken vpon him the name of the Bel-man, but being not able to maintaine that title, hee doth now call himſelfe the Bel-mans brother, his ambition is (rather out of vaine-glory then the true courage of an experienced Souldier) to haue the leading of the Van, but it ſhall be honor good enough for him (if not too good) to come vp with the Rere. You ſhall know him by his Habiliments, for (by the furniture he weares) he will be taken for a Beadle of Bridewell. It is thought he is rather a Nevvter then a friend to the cauſe: and therefore the Bel-man doth here openly proteſt that hee comes into the field as no fellow in armes with Him.
            
            Howſoeuer it be ſtrucke, or whoſoeuer giues the firſt blow, the victorie depends vpon the valour of you that are the Wings to the Bel-mans army, for which conqueſt he is in hope you will valiantly fight, ſithence the quarrell is againſt the head of monſtrous abuſes, and the blowes which you muſt giue are in defence of Law, Iuſtice, Order, Ceremonie, Religion, Peace, and that honourable title of Goodneſſe.
            
            Saint George▪
                I ſee the two Armies moue forward: and behold, the Bel-man himſelfe firſt chargeth vpon the face of the Enemy, Thus:
         
      
      
         
            
               
                  
                  A Table of all the matters that are contained in this Booke.
                  
                     
                        Chap. 1.
Of Canting.
                     
                     
                        Chap. 2.
                        
                           1 What matters were tryed at a Tearme that was in Hell.
                           
                           2 The proceedings of that Court.
                           3 A Counſell held in Hell about the Bel-man.
                           
                           4 A meſſenger ſent from thence with inſtructions.
                        
                     
                     
                        Chap. 3. Of Gull-groping.
                        
                        
                           How Gentlemen are cheated at Ordinaries.
                           To furniſh which feaſt, theſe Gueſts are bidden, viz.
                              
                                 The Leaders.
                                 
                                 The Forlorne Hope.
                                 
                                 The Eagle.
                                 
                                 The Wood-pecker.
                                 
                                 The Gull.
                                 
                                 The Gull-groper.
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        Chap. 4. Of Ferreting.
                        
                        
                           How Gentlemen are vndone by taking vp commodities.
                           Which Tragedy hath theſe fiue Acts, viz.
                              
                                 A Tumbler.
                                 Purſenets.
                                 A Ferret.
                                 Rabbet-ſuckers.
                                 A Warren.
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        Chap. 5. Of Hawking.
                        
                        
                           How to catch Birds by the Booke.
                           Which is done with theſe fiue Nets, viz.
                              
                                 A Falconer.
                                 A Lure.
                                 A Tercell-Gentle.
                                 A Bird.
                                 A Mongril.
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        Chap. 6.
Of Iackes of the Clocke-houſe.
                     
                        Chap. 7. Of Ranckeriders.
                        
                        
                           How Inne-keepers and Hackney men are ſadled.
                           To make whom goe a round pace, you muſt haue

                                 A Colt.
                                 A Snaffle.
                                 A Ring.
                                 Prouander.
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        Chap. 8.
                        Of Moone-men.
                     
                        Chap. 9.
The infection of the Suburbs.
                     
                     
                        Chap. 10. Of Iynglers.
                        
                        
                           The villanie of Horſe-courſers.
                           Who conſiſts of—

                                 Iynglers.
                                 Drouers.
                                 Goades.
                                 skip-iackes.
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        Chap. 11.
Of Iack in a Boxe, or a new kind of cheating, teaching how to change gold into ſiluer: vnto which is added a Map, by which a man may learne to trauell all ouer England, and haue his charges borne.
                     
                        Chap. 12.
The Bell mans ſecond Nights walke, in which hee meetes with a number of Monſters that liue in darkeneſſe.
                  
               
            
            
               
                  
                  Lanthorne and Candle-light. OR The Bel-mans ſecond nights walke.
                  
                     Of Canting. How long it hath beene a language: how it comes to be a language: how it is deriued: and by whom it is ſpoken. CHAP. 1.
                     
                        WHen all the World was but one 
                        One language through all the world at the beginning. 
                        Kingdome, all the people in that Kingdome ſpake but one Language. A man could trauell in thoſe dayes neyther by Sea nor Land, but he met his Countreymen, & none others. Two could not then ſtand gabling with ſtrange tongues, and conſpire together (to his owne face) how to cut a third mans throate, but he might vnderſtand them. There was no Spaniard (in that age) to braue his enemie in the rich and loftie Caſtilian: no Romaine Orator to plead in the Rethoricall and Fluent Latine: no Italian to court his Miſtreſſa in the ſweet and amorous Tuſcane: no French-man to parley in the full and ſtately phraſe of Orleans no Germaine to thunder out the high and ratling Dutch: the vnfruitfull crabbed Iriſh, and the voluble ſignificant Welch, were not then ſo much as ſpoken of: the quicke Scottiſh Dialect (ſiſter to

the Engliſh) had not then a tongue, neyther were the ſtrings of the Engliſh ſpeech (in thoſe times) vntyed. When ſhe firſt learned to ſpeake, it was but a broken language: the ſingleſt and the ſimpleſt words flowed from her vtterance; for ſhe dealt in nothing but in Monoſillables, (as if to haue ſpoken words of greater length would haue crackt her voyce) by which meanes her Eloquence was 
                           ••
                        reſt yet hardeſt to learne, and ſo (but for neceſſitie) not regarded amongſt Strangers. Yet afterwards thoſe nobleſt languages Engliſh tongue comparable to the beſt. lent her words and phraſes, and turning thoſe Borrowings into Good husbandry, ſhée is now as rich in Elocution, and as abundant, as her prowdeſt and beſtſtored neighbours.
                     Whilſt thus (as I ſaid before) there was but one Alphabet of Letters for all the world to read by: all the people that then liued, might haue wrought vpon one piece of worke in countries farre diſtant a ſunder, without miſtaking one another, and not néeding an Interpreter to run betwéene them. Which thing Nymrod (the firſt Idolater) perceiuing, and not knowing better how to imploy ſo many thouſand millions of Subiects as bowed before him: a fire of Ambition burned within him, to climbe vp ſo high that he might ſée what was done in heauen. And for that purpoſe, work-men were ſummoned from all the corners of the Earth, who preſently were ſet to build the tower of 
                        Building of Babel.
                         
                        Babell. But the Maiſter-workman of this great Vniuerſe, (to checke the inſolence of ſuch a ſawcie builder) that durſt raiſe vp pinnacles equall to his owne (aboue) commanded the ſelfe-ſame Spirit, that was both bred in the Chaos, and had maintained it in diſorder, to be both Surueyor of thoſe workes, and Comptroller of the Labourers. This Meſſenger 
                        Confuſion deſcribed. was called Confuſion. It was a Spirit ſwift of ſight, & faithfull of ſeruice. Her lookes wilde, ſerrible and inconſtant: her attire careleſly looſe, and of a thouſand ſeuerall colours. In one hand ſhée grip'd an heape of ſtormes, with which (at her pleaſure) ſhe could trouble the waters: in the other ſhe held a whip, to make thrée Spirits that drew

her to gallop faſt before her: the Spirits names were Treaſon, Sedition; and Warre, who at euery time when they went abroad; were ready to ſee Kingdomes in an vproare. She roade vpon a Chariot of clowdes, which was alwayes furniſhed with Thunder, Lightning, Windes, Raine, Haile-ſtones, Snow, and all the other Artillerie belonging to the ſeruice of Diuine Vengeance: and when ſhe ſpake, her voyce founded like the roaring of many Torrents; voyſterouſly ſtrugling together, for betwéene her iawes did ſhe carry 1000000 tongues.
                     
                     This ſtrange Linguiſt ſtepping to euery artificer that Beginning of Languages. was there at worke, whiſpered in his eare: whoſe lookes were there-vpon (preſently) 
                           〈◊〉
                         with a ſtrange diſtraction: and on a ſodaine, whilſt euery man was ſpeaking to his fellow, his language altered, and no man could vnderſtand what his fellow ſpake. They all ſtared one vpon another, yet none of them all could tell wherefore, ſo they ſtared. Their tongues went, and their hands gaue action to their tongues, yet neyther words nor action were vnderſtood. It was a noiſe of a thouſand ſounds, and yet the ſound of the noiſe was nothing. Hée that ſpake knew hée ſpake well: and hée that heard, was madde that the other could ſpeake no better. In the end they grew angry one with another, as thinking they had mocked one another of purpoſe: ſo that the Maſon was ready to ſtrike the Bricklayer, the Bricklayer to beate out the braines of his Labourer: the Carpenter tooke vp his Are to throw at the Caruer, whilſt the Caruer was ſtabbing at the Smith, becauſe he brought him an Hammer, when hée ſhould haue made him a Chizzell: He that called for Timber had ſtones laid before him: and when one was ſent for Nayles, hée fetcht a Tray of Morter.
                     
                     Thus Babel ſhould haue béene raized, and by this meanes Babell fell. The Frame could not goe forward, the ſtuffe was throwne by, the worke-men made holy-day. Euery one packd vp his Tooles to be gone, yet not to goe the ſame way that he came, but glad was hée, that could méete

another whoſe ſpeech hée vnderſtood: for to what place ſoeuer hee went, others (that ran madding vp and downe) hearing a man ſpeak like themſelues, followed onely him: ſo that they who when the worke began were all Countrey-men, before a quarter of it was finiſhed, fled from one another, s from enemies and ſtrangers. And in this manner did men at the firſt make vp nations: thus were words coyned into Languages, & out of thoſe Languages haue others béene molded ſince, onely by the mixture of nations after Kingdomes haue béene ſubdued. But I am now to ſpeake of a People and a Language, of both which (many thouſands of yéeres ſince that Wonder wrought at Babell) the world till now neuer made mention: yet confuſion neuer dwelt more amongſt any Creatures. The Bell-man (in his firſt Voyage which he made for Diſcoueries) 
                        The Bell mans firſt Booke. found them to be ſauages, yet liuing in an Iland very temperate, fruitfull, full of a noble Nation, rarely gouerned. The Lawes, manners, and habits of theſe Wild-men are plainly ſet downe, as it were in a former painted Table. Yet leaſt happily a ſtranger may looke vpon this ſecond Picture of them, who neuer beheld The firſt. it ſhall not be a miſſe (in this place) to repeate ouer againe, the Names of all the Tribes, into which they Diu
                              •
                           de themſelues, both when they Serue abroad in the open fields, and when they lye in garriſon within Townes & walled Cities.
                     
                     
                        And theſe are their Ranckes, as they ſtand in order, viz.
                        
                        RVfflers.
                        Vpright-men.
                        Hookers, alias Anglers.
                        Roagues.
                        Wilde Roagues.
                        Priggers of Prancers.
                        Pallyards.
                        Fraters.
                        Prigges.
                        Swadders.
                        Curtals.
                        Iriſh Toyles.
                        Swigmen.
                        Iarkmen.
                        Patri-coes.
                        Kitchin-Coes.
                        
                           
Abraham-men,
                        Mad Tom, alias of Bedlam.
                        Whip-Iackes.
                        Counterfet Crankes.
                        Dommerats.
                        Glymmerers.
                        Bawdy-Baskets.
                        Autem Morts.
                        Doxies.
                        Dells.
                        Kinchin-Morts.
                     
                     Into thus many Regiments are they now deuided: but in former times (aboue foure hundred yeares now paſt) they did conſiſt of fiue Squadrons onely.
                     
                        viz.
                        
                           
                              1 Curſitors, alias Vagabondes.
                              2 Faytors.
                              3 Robardſemen.
                              4 Draw-latches.
                              5 Sturdy Beggars.
                           
                        
                     
                     And as theſe people are ſtrange both in names and in their conditions, ſo doe they ſpeake a Language (proper only to thēſelues) called canting, which is more ſtrange. Of canting. By none but the ſouldiers of Theſe tottred bandes, is it familiarly or vſually ſpoken, yet within leſſe then foure-ſcore How long, Canting hath bin vſed. The firſt canter hanged. yeares (now paſt) not a word of this language was knowen. The firſt Inuentor of it, was hang'd, yet left he apt ſchollers behind him, who haue reduced that into Methode, which he on his death-bed (which was a paire of gallowes) could not ſo abſolutely perfect as he deſired.
                     It was neceſſary, that a people (ſo faſt increaſing, & ſo daity practiſing new & ſtrange Villanies, ſhould borrow to themſelues a ſpéech, which (ſo néere as they could) none but themſelues ſhould vnderſtand: & for that cauſe was this Language, (which ſome call Pedlers French) 
                        How canting grew to be a language. Inuented, to th'intent that (albeit any Spies ſhould ſecretly ſteale into their companies to diſcouer them) they might fréely vtter their mindes one to another, yet auoide the danger. The language therefore of canting, they ſtudy euen from their Infancy, that is to ſay, from the very firſt houre, that they take vpón them the names of Kinchin Coes, till they are growne Rufflers, or Vpright-men, which are the higheſt in degrée amongſt thē.
                     
                        
This word canting ſéemes to be deriued from the latine verbe (canto) which ſignifies in Engliſh, to ſing, or to make a ſound with words, that is to ſay, to ſpeake. And very aptly may canting take his deriuation a cantando, from ſinging, becauſe amongſt theſe beggerly conſorts that can play vpon no better inſtruments, the language of canting is a king of muſicke, and hée that in ſuch aſſemblies can cant beſt, is counted the beſt Muſitian.
                     Now as touching the Dialect or phraſe it ſelfe, I ſée not that it is grounded vpon any certaine rules; And no meruaile if it haue none, for ſithence both the Father of this new kinde of Learning, and the children that ſtudy to ſpeake it after him, haue béene from the beginning and ſtil are the Breeders and Noriſhers of al baſe diſorder, in their liuing and in their Manners: how is it poſſible, they ſhould obſerue any Method in their ſpéech, and eſpecialy in ſuch a Language, as ſerues but onely to vtter diſcourſes of villanies?
                     And yet (euen out of all that Irregularity, vnhanſomneſſe, and fountaine of Barbariſme) doe they draw a kinde of forme: and in ſome wordes, (aſwell ſimple as compounds) retaine a certaine ſalte, taſting of ſome wit, and ſome Learning. As for example, they call a cloake (in the canting tongue) a Togeman, and in Latin, Toga ſignifies a gowne, or an vpper garment. Pannam is bread: & Panis in Lattin is likewiſe bread, caſſan is chéeſe, and is a word barbarouſly coynde out of the ſubſtantiue caſeus, which alſo ſignifies chéeſe. And ſo of others.
                     Then by ioyning of two ſimples, doe they make almoſt all their compounds. As for example: Nab (in the canting 
                        The Dialect of Canting. tongue) is a head, and Nab-cheate, is a hat, or a cap: Which word cheate, being coupled to other wordes, ſtands in very good ſtead, and does excellent ſeruice: For a Smelling cheate, ſignifies a Noſe: a Prat-ling cheate, is a tongue Craſhing cheates, are téeth: Hearing. cheates are Eares: Fambles are Hands: and there vpon a ring is called a Fambling chete. A Muffling chete, ſignifies

a Napkin. A Belly chete, an Apron: A Grunting chete, A Pig: A Cackling Chete, a Cocke or a Capon: A Quacking chete, a ducke: A Lowghing chete, a Cow: A Bleating chete, a Calfe, or a Shéepe: and ſo may that word be marryed to many others beſides.
                     The word Coue, or Cofe, or Cuffin, ſignifies a Man, a Fellow, &c. But differs ſomething in his propertie, according as it méetes with other wordes: For a Gentleman is called a Gentry Coue, or Cofe: A good fellow is a Bene Cofe: a Churle is called, a Quier Cuffin; Quier ſignifies naught, and Cuffin (as I ſaid before) a man: and in Canting they terme a Iuſtice of peace, (becauſe hée puniſheth them belike) by no other name then by Quier cuffin, that is to ſay, a Churle, or a naughty man. And ſo, Ken ſignifing a houſe, they call a priſon, a Quire Ken, that is to ſay, an ill houſ.
                     Many péeces of this ſtrange coyne could I ſhew you, but by theſe ſmall ſtampes, you may iudge of the greater.
                     Now becauſe, a Language is nothing els, then heapes of wordes, orderly wouen and compoſed together: and that (within ſo narrow a circle as I haue drawne to my ſelfe) it is impoſſible to imprint a Dictionarie of all the Canting phraſes: I will at this time not make you ſurfet on too much, but as if you were walking in a Garden, you ſhall openly plurke here a flower, and there another, which (as I take it) will bemore delightfull then if you gathered them by handfulls.
                     But before I lead you into that walke, ſtay and heare a Canter in his owne language, making Rithmes, albeit (I thinke) thoſe tharmes of Poeſie which (at the firſt) made the barbarous tame, and brought them ciuillity, can (vpon theſe ſauage Monſters) worke no ſuch wonder. Yet thus hée ſing
                           •
                         (vpon demaund whether any of his owne crue did come that way) to which hée anſwers, yes (quoth he.)
                     
                        
                        Canting rithmes.
                        
                           ENough with bowſy Coue maund Nace,
                           Tour the Patring Coue in the Darkeman Caſe,
                           Docked the Dell, for a Coper meke,
                           His watch ſhall feng a Prounces Nab-chere,
                           Cya
                                 ••
                              m, by Salmon, and thou ſhalt pek my Iere,
                           In thy Ga
                                 •
                              , for my watch it is nace gere.
                           For the beene bowſe my watch hath a win, &c.
                        
                        This ſhort Leſſon I leaue to be conſtraued by him that is deſirous to try his ſkill in the language, which he may use by helpe of the following Dictionary; into which way that he may more readily come, I will tranſlate into Engliſh, this broken French that followes in proſe. Two Canters hauing wrangled a while about ſome idle quarrell at length growing friends, thus one of them ſpeakes to the other. viz.
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           A Canter in proſe.
                        
                           STowe you beene Cofe; and cut benar whiddes and bing wee to Rome vile, to nip a boung: ſo ſhall wee haue lowre for the bowſing ken, and when wee beng back to the Deweſe a vile, wee will filch ſome Dudes, off the Ruffmans, or mill the Ken for a lagge of Dudes.
                        
                        
                           Thus in Engliſh.
                           
                              Stowe you beene cofe: hold your peace good fellow,
                           
                              And cut bena
                                    •
                                  whiddes: and ſpeake better words.
                           
                              And bing we to Romevile: and goe we to London.
                           
                              To nip a boung: to cut a purſe.
                           
                              So ſhall we haue lowre: ſo ſhall we haue mony.
                           
                              For the bowſing Ken, for the Ale houſe.
                           
                              And when wee bing back: and when we come backe.
                           
                              To the Dewſe-a-vile: into the Country.
                           
                              Wee will filch ſome dudes: we will filth ſome clothes,
                           
                              Off the Ruffmans: from the hedges,
                           
                              Or mill the Ken: or rob the houſe,
                           
                              For a lagge of Duddes: for a bucke of clothes,
                        
                     
                     
                        
                        Now turne to your Dictionary.
                        ANd becauſe you ſhall not haue one diſh twice ſet before you, none of thoſe Canting wordes that are engliſhed before, ſhal here be found: for our intent is to fraſt you with varietie.
                        
                           The Canters Dictionarie.
                           
                              AVtem, a church.
                           
                              Autem-mort, a married woman.
                           
                              Boung, a purſe.
                           
                              Borde, a ſhilling.
                           
                              Halfe a Borde, ſix pence.
                           
                              Bowſe, drinke.
                           
                              Bowſing Ken, an Ale-houſe.
                           
                              Bene, good.
                           
                              Beneſhip, very good:
                           
                              Bufe, a Dogge.
                           
                              Bing a waſt, get you hence.
                           
                              Caſter, a cloake.
                           
                              A Commiſſion, a ſhirt.
                           
                              Chates, the Gallowes.
                           
                              To cly the Ierke, to be whipped.
                           
                              To cut, to ſpeake.
                           
                              To cut bene, to ſpeake gently.
                           
                              To cut bene whiddes, to ſpeake good wordes,
                           
                              To cut quier whiddes, to giue euill language.
                           
                              To Cant, to ſpeake.
                           
                              To couch a Hogſhead, to lye downe a sléepe.
                           
                              Drawers, Hoſen.
                           
                              Dudes, clothes.
                           
                              Darke mans, the night.
                           
                              Dewſe-a-vile, the country,
                           
                              Dup the Giger, open the dore.
                           
                              Fambles, hands.
                           
                              Fambling Chete, a King.
                           
                              Flag, a Goat.
                           
                              Glaſiers, eyes.
                           
                              Gan, a mouth.
                           
                              
                              Gage, a Quart pot.
                           
                              Grannam, Corne.
                           
                              Gybe, a writing.
                           
                              Glymmer, fire.
                           
                              Gigger, a doore.
                           
                              Gentry Mort, a Gentlewoman.
                           
                              Gentry cofes Ken, a Noblemans houſe.
                           
                              Harman beck, a Conſtable.
                           
                              Harmans, the Stockes.
                           
                              Heaue a bough, rob a Booth.
                           
                              Iarke, a Seale.
                           
                              Ken, a Houſe.
                           
                              Lage of Dudes, a Bucke of Clothes.
                           
                              Libbege, a Bed.
                           
                              Lowre, money.
                           
                              Lap, Butter, Milke, or Whay.
                           
                              Libkin, a Houſe to lye in.
                           
                              Lage, Water.
                           
                              Light-mans, the day.
                           
                              Mynt, Golde.
                           
                              A Make, a Halfe-penny.
                           
                              Margery prater, a Henne.
                           
                              Mawnding, aſking.
                           
                              To Mill, to ſteale.
                           
                              Mill a Ken, rob a houſe.
                           
                              Noſegent, a Nunne.
                           
                              Niggling, companying with a woman.
                           
                              Pratt, a Buttocke.
                           
                              Peck, meate.
                           
                              Poplars, Pottage.
                           
                              Prancer, a Horſe.
                           
                              Prigging, Riding.
                           
                              Patrico, a Prieſt.
                           
                              Pad, a way.
                           
                              Quaromes, a body.
                           
                              Ruff-peck, Bacon.
                           
                              Roger, or Tib of the Buttry, a Gooſe.
                           
                              
                              Rome-vile, London.
                           
                              Rome-bowſe, Wine.
                           
                              Rome-mort, a Queane.
                           
                              Ruffmans, the woodes, or buſhes.
                           
                              Ruffian, the Diuell.
                           
                              Stampes: legges.
                           
                              Stampers? ſhooes.
                           
                              Slate: a ſhéete.
                           
                              Skew: a cup.
                           
                              Salomon: the maſſe.
                           
                              Stuling ken: a houſe to receiue ſtolne goods.
                           
                              Skipper: a barne.
                           
                              Strommel, ſtraw.
                           
                              Smelling chete, an Orchard or Garden.
                           
                              To ſcowre the Cramp-ring: to weare boults.
                           
                              Stalling: making or ordeyning.
                           
                              Tryning: hanging.
                           
                              To twore: to ſée.
                           
                              Wyn: a penny.
                           
                              Yarum: milke.
                        
                        And thus haue I builded vp a little Mint, where you may coyne wordes for your pleaſure. The payment of this was a debt: for the Belman at his farewell (in his firſt Round which hée walk'd) promiſed ſo much. If hée kéepe not touch, by tendring the due Summe, he deſires forbearance, and if any that is more rich in this Canting commodity will lend him any more, or any better, hée will pay his loue double: In the meane time, receiue this, and to giue it a little more weight, you ſhall haue a Canting ſong, wherein you may learne, how This curſed Generation pray, or (to ſpeake truth) curſe ſuch Officers as puniſh them.
                     
                     
                        
                        
                           
                              A Canting ſong.
                           
                              THe Ruffin cly the nab of the Harman beck,
                              If we mawnd Pannam, lap, or Ruff pecke,
                              Or poplars of yarum: he cuts, bing to the Ruffmans,
                              Or els he ſweares by the light-mans,
                              To put our ſtamps in the Harmans.
                              The ruffian cly the ghoſt of the Harmanbeck,
                              If we heaue a booth we cly the Ierke.
                           
                           
                              If we niggle, or mill a bowſing Ken,
                              Or nip a boung that has but a win,
                              Or dup the giger of a Gentry cofes ken,
                              To the quier cuffing we bing,
                              And then to the quier Ken, to ſcowre the Cramp-ring,
                              And then to the Trin'de on the chutes, in the lightmans
                              The Bube & Ruffian cly the Harman beck & harmans.
                           
                        
                        
                           Thus Engliſhed.
                           
                              THe Diuell take the Conſtables head,
                              If we beg Bacon, Butter-milke or bread,
                              Or Pottage, to the hedge he bids vs hie,
                              Or ſweares (by this light) ith ſtocks we ſhall lie.
                              The Deuill haunt the Conſtables ghoaſt,
                              If we rob but a Booth, we are whipt at a poaſt.
                           
                           
                              If an Ale-houſe we rob, or be tane with a Whore,
                              Or cut a purſe that has iuſt a penny and no more,
                              Or come but ſtealing in at a Gentlemans dore,
                              To the Iuſtice ſtraight we goe,
                              And then to the Iayle to be ſhackled: And ſo,
                              To be hangd on the gallowes ith day time: the pox
                              And the Deuill take the Conſtable and his ſtocks.
                           
                        
                        We haue Canted (I feare) too much, let vs now giue eare to the Bel-man, and heare what he ſpeaks in engliſh.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     THE BEL-MANS SECOND Nights walke. CHAP. II.
                     
                        IT was Terme time in hell (for you Qui fixit leges pretio at
                              
                                 
                              
                              que
                            refixit. muſt vnderſtand, a Lawyer liues there aſwell as héere:) by which meanes don Lucifer (being the iuſtice for that Countie, where the Brimſtone mines are) had better dooings and more rapping at his gates, then all the Doctors and unpericall Quack-ſaluers of ten Cities haue at theirs in a great plague time. The hall where theſe Termers A deſcription of the Hall, where matters are tryed in Hell. were to try their cauſes, was very large and ſtrongly built, but it had one fault, it was ſo hot that people could not indure to walk there: Yet to walke there they were compelled, by reaſon they were drawne thither vpon orcaſions, and ſuch iuſtling there was of one another, that it would haue grieued any man to be in the thronges amongſt me. Nothing could be heard but noiſe, and nothing Hine exauditur gemitus, &c. of that noiſe be vnderſtood, but that it was a ſound, as of men in a kingdome, when on a ſodaine it is in an vprore. Euery one brabled with him that he walked with, or if hée did but tell his tale to his Councell, heè was ſo eager in the very deliuery of that tale, that you would 
                           The Iudge of the Court. Haec Radamanthus habet duriſſima regna; Caſtigat
                              
                                 
                              
                              que
                            dit
                              
                                 
                              
                              que
                            dolos, ſubigit
                              
                                 
                              
                              que
                            ſateri, &c. haue ſworne hée did brabble: and ſuch gnaſhing of téeth there was when aduerſaries met together, that the fyling of ten thouſand Sawes cannot yéeld a ſound more horrible. The Iudge of the Court had a diueliſh countenance, and as cruell he was in puniſhingthoſe that were condemned by Lawe, as he was crabbed in his lookes, whilſt he ſat to heare their tryals.
                     
                        
But albeit there was no pittie to be expected at his hands, yet was hée ſo vpright in iuſtice, that none could euer faſten bribe vpon him, for hée was ready and willing to heare the cryes of all commers. Neither durſt any Pleader (at the infernall Barre) or any officer of the Court, exact any Fée of Plaintiffes, and ſuch as —impios vinclis perpetuis domant. complained of wrongs and were oppreſt: but onely they paide that were the wrong dooers, thoſe would they ſée dambd ere they ſhould get out of their fingers, ſuch fellowes they were appointed to vexe at the very ſoule.
                     The matters that here were put in ſute, were more then could be bred in twentie Vacations, yet ſhould a The cuſtomes and condition of the Court. man be diſpached out of hand. In one Terme hée had his Iudgement, for heare they neuer ſtand vpon Returnes, but preſently come to Triall. The cauſes decided here are many; the Clients that complaine many; the Counſellors (that plead till they be hoarſe,) many; the Attornies (that runne vp and downe,) infinite; the Vnde nunquam quum ſemel venit potuit auerti. Clarkes of the Court, not to be numbred. All theſe haue their hands full; day and night are they ſo plagued with the bawling of Clients, that they neuer can reſt.
                     The Inck where-with they write, is the blood of Coniurers: they haue no Paper, but all things are engroſſed in Parchment, and that Parchment is made of Scriueners ſkinnes flead off, after they haue béene puniſhed for Forgerie: their Standiſhes are the Seuls of Vſurers: their Pennes, the bones of vnconſcionable Brokers, and hard-hearted Creditors, that haue made dice of other mens bones, or elſe of periured Excecutors and blind Ouer-ſéeers, that haue eaten vp Widdowes and Orphanes to the bare bones: and thoſe Pennes are made of purpoſe without Nebs, becauſe they may caſt Incke but ſlowly, in mockery of thoſe, who in their life time were ſlowe in yéelding drops of pitty.
                     Would you know what actions are tried here? I will What matters are tryed be fore the Diuell. but turne ouer the Recordes, and read them vnto you as they hang vpon the Fyle.
                     
                        
The Courtier is ſued héere, and condemned for Ryots.
                     
                     The Soldier is ſued héere, and condemned for murders.
                     
                     The Scholler is ſued héere, & condemned for Hereſies.
                     
                     The Citizen is ſued héere, and condemned for the Citieſinnes.
                     
                     The Farmer is ſuedchéere vpon Penal Statutes, and —Qui
                              
                                 
                              
                              que
                            arma ſecuti impia.—Epulae
                              
                                 
                              
                              que
                            ante ora paratae,—furiarum maxima iuxta accubat, & manibus prohibet contingere menſas. condemned for ſpoyling the Markets.
                     
                     Actions of batterie are brought againſt Swaggerers, and héere they are bound to the peace.
                     
                     Actions of Waſte are brought againſt Drunkards and Epicures, and héere they are condemned to begge at the Grate for one drop of colde water to coole their tongues, or one crum of breade to ſtay their hunger, yet are they denyed it.
                     
                        Harlots haue proceſſe ſued vpon them héere, and are condemned to Howling, to Rottenneſſe and to Stench. No Actes of Parliament that haue paſſed the Heauen. Vpperhouſe, can be broken, but here the breach is puniſhed, and that ſeuerely, and that ſuddenly: For here they ſtand vpon no demurres; no Audita Queraela can héere be gotten, no writs of Errores to Reuerſe Iudgement: héere is no flying to a court of Chancery for reléef, yet euerie one —Exercenter paenis, eternum
                              
                                 
                              
                              que
                            malorum. Supplicia expendunt. that comes hether is ſerued with a Sub-poena. No, they deale altogether in this Court vpon the Habeas Corpus, vpon the Capias, vpon the Ne exeat Regnum, vpon Rebellion, vpon heauie Fines (but no Recoueries) vpon writs of Out-lary, to attache the body for euer, and laſt of all vpon Executions after Iudgement, which being ſerued vpon a man is his euerlaſting vndoing.
                     
                     Such are the Cuſtomes and courſes of procéedings in the Offices belonging to the Prince of Darkneſſe. Theſe hot dooings hath hée in his Terme-times. But vpon a day when a great matter was to be tryed betwéene an Engliſhman and a Dutchman, which of the two were the fowleſt Drinkers, and the caſe being a long time in arguing, by reaſon that ſtrong euidence came in réeling on both ſides, (yet it was thought that the Engliſh-man

would carry it away, and caſt the Dutchman) on a ſodaine all was ſtaid by the ſound of a horne that was heard at the lower end of the Hall. And euery one looking back (as wondring at the ſtrangenes) roome, roome, was cryed and made through the thickeſt of the crowde, for a certain Spirit, in the likeneſſe of a Poſt, who made away on a little leane Nagge vp to the Bench where indge Radamanth with his two grime Brothers (Minos and Aecus) ſat. This Spirit was an intelligencer ſent by Belzebub of Batharum, into ſome Countries of chriſtendome, to lye there as a Spie, and had brought with him a packet of letters from ſeuerall Leigiers that lay in thoſe Countries, for the ſeruice of the Tartarian, their Lord and Maiſter. Which packet being opened, all the Letters (becauſe they concerned the generall good and ſtate of thoſe low Countries in Hell) were publikely reade. The contents of that Letter that ſtung moſt, and put them all out of their law caſes, tended to this purpoſe.
                     That whereas ſhe Lord of the Fiery Lakes had his Miniſters in all kingdomes aboue the earth, whoſe A letter againſt the Bel-man. Offices were not onely to win the ſubiects of other Princes to his obadience, but alſo to giue notice when any of his owne ſworne houſhold, or any other that held league with him ſhould reuolt or flie from their allegiance: alſo diſcouer from time to time all plots, conſpiracies, machinations, or vnderminings, that ſhould be laid (albeit they that durſt lay them ſhould digge déepe inough) to blow vp his great Infernall Citie: ſo that if his Horned Regiment were not ſodainely muſtred together, and did not 
                           ••
                        ſtely beſtirre their clouen ſtumps, his territories would be ſhaken, his dominions left in time vnpeopled, his forces looked into, and his authoritie which he held in the world, contemned and laughed to ſcorne. The reaſon was, that a certaine fellow. The Childe of Darkeneſſe, a common Night-walker, a man that had no man to waite vpon 
                        The Bel-man. 
                        him but onely a Dogge, one that was a diſordered perſon,

and at midnight would beate at mens doores, bidding them (in meere mockerie) to looke to their candles, when they themſelues were in their dead ſleepes: and albeit hee was an Officer, yet hee was but of Light-carriage, being knowne by the name of the Bel-man of London, had of late not onely drawne a number of the Deuils owne kindred into queſtion for their liues, but had alſo (onely by the help of the lanthorn & candle) lookt into the ſerrets of the beſt trades that are taught in hell, laying them open to the broad eye of the world, making them infamous, odious, and ridiculous: yea, and not ſatiſfied with dooing this wrong to his diuelſhip, very ſpitefullie hath hée ſet them out in print, drawing their pictures ſo to the life, that now a horſe-ſtealer ſhall not ſhew his head, but a hailter with the Hang-mans nooſe is ready to be faſtned about it: A Foyſt, nor a Nip ſhall not walke into a Fayre or a Play-houſe, but euerie tracke will cry, looke to your purſes: nor a poore common Rogue come to a mans doore, but he ſhall be examined if hée can cant. If this Baulling fellow therefore haue not his mouth ſtop'd, ſhe light Angels that are coynd below, will neuer be able to paſſe as they haue done, but be naild vp for counterfeits, Hell will haue no dooings, and the deuill be no body.
                     This was the lyking of the Letter, and this Letter draue them all to a Non-plus, becauſe they knew not how to anſwere it. But at laſt aduice was taken, the Court brake vp, the Tearme was adiournd, (by reaſon that the Hell houndes were thus Plagu'd) & a common counſell in hell was preſently called how to redreſſe theſe abuſes.
                     The Sathanicall Sinagogue being ſet, vp ſtartes the Father of Hell and damnation, and looking verie terribly, with apaire of eies that ſtared as wide as the mouth gapes at Biſhops-gate, fetching foure or fiue déep ſighes (which were nothing elſe but the Smoke of fire & brimſtone boyling in his ſtomacke, and ſhewed as if hée were taking Tobacco, which be oftentimes does) tolde his children & ſeruants (and the reſt of the citizens that dwelt

within the freedome of Hell, and ſat there before him vpon narrow low formes) that they neuer had more cauſe to lay their heads together, and to grow politicians. Hée and they all knew that from the corners of the earth, ſome did euery houre in a day créepe forth, to come and ſerue him: yea, that many thouſands were ſo bewitched Huc omnis turba with his fauours, and his rare parts, that they would come running quick to him: his dominions (he ſaid) were great, and ful of people, Emperors, and Kings, (in infinit number) were his ſlaues, his court was full of Princes, if the world were denided (as ſome report) but into thrée Innumerae gentes populsqué. parts, two of thoſe thrée were his: or if (as others affirme) into foure parts, almoſt thrée of that foure hée had firme footing in.
                     But if ſuch a fellow as a treble voic'd Bel-man, ſhould be ſuffer to pry into the infernall Miſteries, & into thoſe blacke Acts which command the ſpirits of the Déepe, and hauing ſucked what knowledge he can from them, to turn it all into poiſon, and to ſpit it in the very faces of the profeſſors, with a malicious intent to make them appeare vgly, and ſo to grow hatefull and out of fauour with the world, if ſuch a coniurer at midnight ſhould dance in their circles, and not be driuen out of them, Hell in a few yéers would not be worth the dwelling in. The great Lord of Limbo did therefore command all his blacke guard that ſtood about him, to beſtirre them in their places, and to defend the court wherein they liued: threatning (beſides) that his curſe, and all the plagues of ſtincking Hell ſhould Graucolentis Auerni. fall vpon his officers, ſeruants, and ſubiects, vnleſſe they either aduiz'd him, how, or take ſome ſpéedie order themſelues to puniſh that ſaucie intelligencer, the Bel-man of London. Thus hée ſpake, and then ſat downe.
                     At laſt, a fooliſh Diuell roſe vp, and ſhot the bolt of his aduice, which flew thus farre: That the Black-dogge of New-gate ſhould againe be let looſe, and a farre off, follow the Bauling Bel-man, to watch into what places hée went, and what déedes of darkeneſſe (euerie

night) hée did. Hinc riſus! The whole Synodicall aſſembly, fell a laughing at this Wiſe-acre, ſo that neither he, nor his blacke Dogge durſt barke any more.
                     Another, thinking to cleaue the very pinne with his arrow, drew it home to the head of Wiſdome (as he imagined) and yet that lighted wide too. But thus ſhot his counſell, that the Ghoſts of all thoſe Théeues, Cheaters, and others of that damned crew, (who by the Bel-mans diſcouerie, had béene betraied, were taken and ſent weſtward) ſhould be fetched from thoſe fields of Horror, where euery night they walke, diſputing with Doctor Story, who kéepes them company there in his corner Cap: and that thoſe wry neckt ſpirits ſhould haue charge giuen them to haunt the Bel-man in his walkes, and ſo fright him out of his wits. The Diuell for all his roaring went away neither with a Plaudite, nor with a hiſſe. Others ſtept vp, ſome pronouncing one verdict, ſome another: But at the laſt, it being put into their Diuliſh heads, that they had no power ouer him further then what ſhould be giuen vnto them, it was concluded and ſet downe as a rule in Court, that ſome one ſtrange Spirit, who could tranſport himſelfe into all ſhapes, ſhould be ſent vp to London, and ſcorning to take reuenge vpon ſo meane a perſon as a Bel-ringer, ſhould thruſt himſelfe into ſuch companyes (as in a warrant to be ſigned for that purpoſe) ſhould be nominated: and being once growne familiar with them, hée was to worke and win them by all poſſible meanes to fight vnder the diſmall and blacke colours of the Grand Sophy (his Lord and Maiſter) the fruit that was to grow vpon this trée of euill, would be great, for it ſhould be fit to be ſerued vp to Don Lucifers Table, as a new banquetting Diſh, ſithence all his other meates, (though they fatted him well) were growne ſtale.
                     Hereupon Parmerſiell the Meſſenger was called, a Paſport was drawne, ſigned, and deliuered to him, with certaine inſtructions how to carry himſelfe in his trauell.

                        
                           〈1 page duplicate〉
                        
                        
                        
                           〈1 page duplicate〉
                        
                        
And thus much was openly ſpoken to him by word of mouth.
                     Flye Pamerſiel with ſpéede to the great and populous citie in the Weſt: winde thy ſelfe into all ſhapes: be a Dogge (to 
                           •
                        awne,) a Dragon (to confound,) be a Doue (ſéeme innocent,) be a Deuill (as thou art,) and ſhew that thou art a Iorniman to hel. Build rather thyneſt amongſt willowes that bend euerie way, then on tops of Oakes, whoſe hearts are hard to be broken: Fly with the Swallow, cloſe to the earth, when ſtormes are at hand, but kéepe company with Birdes of greater tallants, when the weather is cléere, and neuer leaue them till they looke like Rauens: créepe into boſomes that are buttond vp in ſattin and there ſpred the wings of thine infection: make euerie head thy pillow to leane vpon, or vſe it like a Mill, onely to grinde miſchiefe. If thou méetſt a Dutchman, drinke with him: if a Frenchman, ſtab: if a Spaniard, betray: if an Italian poyſon: if an Engliſhman doe all this.
                     Haunt Tauerns, there thou ſhalt finde prodigalls: pay thy two-pence to a Player, in his gallerie maiſt thou ſit by a Harlot: at Ordinaries maiſt thou dine with filken fooles: when the day ſteales out of the world, thou ſhalt méete rich drunkards, vnder welted gownes ſearch for thréeſcore in the hundred, hugge thoſe golden villaines, they ſhine bright, & will make a good ſhew in hell, ſhricke with a cricket in the brew-houſe, and watch how they coniure there: Ride vp and downe Smith-field, and play the Iade there: Viſit priſons, and teach Iaylors how to make nets of Iron there: binde thy ſelfe Prentice to the beſt trades: but if thou canſt grow extreame ritch in a very ſhort time (honeſtly) I baniſh thée my kingdome, come no more into hell, I haue red thée a lecture, follow it, farewell.
                     No ſooner was farewell ſpoken, but the ſpirit to whom all theſe matters were giuen in charge, vaniſhed: the clouen footed Orator aroſe, and the whole aſſembly went about their damnable buſineſſe.
                  
                  
                     
                     Gul-groping. How Gentlemen are cheated at Ordinaries. CHAP. III.
                     THe Diuels foote-man was very nimble of his héeles (for no wilde-Iriſh man could out-runne him, and therefore in a few houres, was hée come vp to London: the miles betwéene Hell and any place vpon earth, being ſhorter then thoſe betwéene London and Saint Albones, to any man that trauels from hence thither, or to any Lacky that comes from thence hether, on the Deuils errands: but to any other poore ſoule, that dwells in thoſe low countries, they are neuer at an end, and by him are not poſſible to be meaſured.
                     No ſooner was hée entred into the Citie, but hée met with one of his Maiſters daughters, called Pride, dreſt like a Marchants wife, who taking acquaintance of him, and vnderſtanding for what he came, tolde him, that the firſt thing hée was to doe, hée muſt put himſelfe in good cloathes, ſuch as were ſutable to the faſhion of the time, for that here, men were look'd vpon onely for their out-ſides: he that had not ten-pounds-worth of wares in his ſhop, would carry twentie markes on his backe: that there were a number of ſumpter-horſes in the citie, who cared Auſer imur cultu, Gemmis aure
                              
                                 
                              
                              que
                            tegnutur omnia. not how courſely they fed, ſo they might were gay trappings: yea, that ſome pied fooles, to put on ſatin and veluet but foure daies in the yeare, did often-times vndoe themſelues, wiues and Children euer after. The ſpirit of the Deuils Buttery hearing this, made a legge to Pride for here counſell, and knowing by his owne experience that euerie Taylor hath his hell to himſelfe, vnder his Shop-board, (where he dammes new Sattin) amongſt them hée thought to finde beſt welcome, and therefore into Burchin-lane hée ſtalkes verie mannerly, Pride going along with him, and taking the vpper hand.
                     
                        
No ſooner was hée entred into the rankes of the Linnen 
                        Burchin-lane deſcribed. Taylors at firſt were called Linnen-Armorers. Serieants. 
                        Armorers, (whoſe weapons are Spaniſh néedles) but hée was moſt terribly and ſharpely ſet vpon, euerie prentiſe boy had a pull at him: hee feared they all had bin Serieants, becauſe they all had him by the backe: neuer was poore deuill ſo tormented in hell, as he was amongſt them: he thought it had béene Saint Thomas his day, and that he had béene called vpon to be Conſtable, there was ſuch bauling in his eares, and no ſtrength could ſhake them off, but that they muſt ſhew him ſome ſuites of apparell, becauſe they ſaw what Gentlewoman was in his company (whom they all knew,) Seeing no remedie, into a ſhop hée goes, was fitted brauely, and beating the price, found the loweſt to be vnreaſonable, yet paide it, and departed, none of them (by reaſon of their crowding about him before) perceiuing what cuſtomer they had met with, but now the Taylor ſpying the deuill, ſuffered him to goe, neuer praying that hée wold know the ſhop another time, but looking round about his ware-houſe if nothing were miſſing, at length he found that he had loſt his conſcience: yet remembring himſelfe, that they who deale with the diuell, can hardly kéepe it, he ſtood vpon it the leſſe.
                     
                        The faſhions of an Ordinarie.
                        THe Stigian traueller being thus tranſlated into an accompliſhed gallant, with all acoutrements belonging (as a 
                              •
                           ether for his head, gilt rapier for his ſides, & new boots to hide his polt foote, for in Bed-lam he met with a ſhoemaker, a mad ſlaue, that knew the length of his laſt) it reſted, onely that now hée was to enter vpon company ſutable to his cloathes: and knowing that your moſt ſelected Gallants are the onely-tablemen that are plaid with all at Ordinaries, into an Ordinary did he moſt gentleman like, conuay himſelfe in ſtate.
                        It ſeemed that all who came thether, had clocks in their bellies, for they all ſtrucke into the dyning roome much aabout the very minute of féeding. Our Caualier had all the eyes (that came in) throwne vpon him, (as being a

ſtranger: for no Ambaſſador from the diuell euer dined amongſt them before,) and he aſmuch tooke eſpeciall notice of them. In obſeruing of whom and of the place, he found, that an Ordinary was the onely Randeuouz for the moſt ingenious, moſt terſe, moſt trauaild, and moſt phantaſtick gallant: the very Exchange for newes out of all countries: the only Booke-ſellers ſhop for conference of the beſt Editions, that if a woman (to be a Lady) would caſt away herſelfe vpon a Knight, there a man ſhould heare a Catalogue of moſt of the richeſt London widowes: & laſt, that it was a ſchoole where they were all fellowes of one Forme, & that a country gentleman was of as great comming as the proudeſt Iuſtice that ſat there on the bench aboue him: for hée that had the graine of the table with his trencher, payd no more then he that placed himſelfe beneath the ſalt.
                        
                        The diuels intelligencer could not be contented to fill his eye onely with theſe obiects, and to féed his belly with delicate chéere: but hée drew a larger picture of all that were there, and in theſe collours.
                        The voider hauing cléered the table, Cardes & Dice (for the laſt Meſſe) are ſerued vp to the boord: they that are full of coyne draw: they that haue little, ſtand by & giue ayme: they ſhuffle and cut on one ſide: the bones rattle on the other: long haue they not plaide, but oathes fly vp & downe the roome like haile-ſhot: if the poore dumb Dice be but a little out of ſquare, the pox & a thouſand-plagues breake their neckes out at window: preſently after, the foure knaues are ſent packing the ſame way, or els (like heretikes) are condemned to be burnt.
                        In this battaile of Cardes and Dice, are ſeuerall Regiments and ſeuerall Officers.
                        They that ſit downe to play, are at firſt cald Leaders.
                        
                        They that looſe, are the Forlorne Hope.
                        
                        He that winnes all, is the Eagle.
                        
                        He that ſtands by and Ventures, is the Wood-pecker.
                        
                        The freſh Gallant that is fetcht in, is The Gul.
                        
                        He that ſtands by, and lends, is the Gul-groper.
                        
                     
                     
                        
                        The Gul-groper.
                        THis Gul-groper is commonly an old Mony-monger, who hauing trauaild through all the follyes of the world in his youth, knowes them well, and ſhunnes them in his age, his whole felicitie being to fill his bags with golde and ſiluer: hée comes to an Ordinary, to ſaue charges of houſe-kéeping, and will eate for his two ſhillings, more meate then will ſerue thrée of the guard at a dinner, yet ſweares hée comes thether onely for the company, and to conuerſe with trauailers. It is a Gold-Finch that ſildome flies to theſe Ordinary Neſts, without a hundred or two hundred pound in twenty ſhilling péeces about him. After the tearing of ſome ſeauen paire of Cardes, or the damning of ſome ten baile of Dice, ſteps hée vpon the Stage, and this part hée playes. If any of the Forlorne Hope be a Gentleman of Meanes, either in Eſſe, or in Poſſe, (and that the olde Foxe will be ſure to know to halfe an Acre) whoſe money runnes at a low ebbe, as may appeare by his ſcratching of the head, and walking vp and downe the roome, as if hée wanted an Oſtler: The Gul-groper takes him to a ſide window and tels him, hée is ſorry to ſée his hard lucke, but the Dice are made of womens bones, and will cozen any man, yet for his fathers ſake (whom hée hath knowne ſo long) if it pleaſe him, he ſhall not leaue off play for a hundred pound or two. If my yong Eſtrich gape to ſwallow downe this mettall (as for the moſt part they are very gréedy, hauing ſuch prouander ſet before them) then is the gold powred on the board, a Bond is made for repaiment, at the next quarter day, when Exhibition is ſent in: and becauſe it is all gold, and coſt ſo much the changing, the Scriuener (who is a whelpe of the old Maſtiues owne bréeding) knows what words will bite, which thus he faſtens vpon him, and in this Net the Gull is ſure to be taken (howſoeuer:) for if hée fall to play againe, and looſe, the hoary Goat-bearded Satyre that ſtands at his elbow, laughes

in his ſléeue: if his bags be ſo recouered of their Fallingſicknes, that they be able preſently to repay the borrowed gold, then Monſieur Gul-groper ſteales away of purpoſe to auoide the reccipt of it; hée hath fatter Chickens in hatching: it is a fayrer marke hée ſhootes at. For the day being come when the bond growes due, the within named Signior Auaro, will not be within: or if hée be at home, hée hath wedges enough in his pate, to cauſe the bond to be broken, or elſe a little before the day, hée féeds my young Maiſter with ſuch ſwéete words, that ſurfetting vpon his proteſtations, hée neglects his paiment, as preſuming hée may doe more But the Law hauing a hand in the forfeiture of the bond, laies preſently hold of our yong Gallant with the helpe of a couple of Serieants, and iuſt at ſuch a time when old Erra Pater (the Iew) that lent him the money, knowes by his owne Prognoſtication, that the Moone with the ſiluer face is with him in the waine. Nothing then can frée him out of the phangs of thoſe bloudhounds, but he muſt preſently confeſſe a iudgement, for ſo much money, or for ſuch a Manor or Lordſhip (thrée times worth the bond forfeited) to be paid, or to be entred vpon by him, by ſuch a day, or within ſo many moneths after he comes to his land. And thus are young heires coozend of their Acres, before they well know where they lye.
                     
                     
                        The Wood-pecker.
                        THe Wood-pecker is a bird that ſits by vpon a perch too: but is nothing ſo dangerous, as this Vulture ſpoken of before. He deales altogether vpon Returnes, (as men doe that take thrée for one, at their comming back from Ieruſalem, &c.) for hauing a Iewell, a Clock, a ring with a Diamond, or any ſuch like commoditie, hée notes him well that commonly is beſt acquainted with the Dice, and hath euer good lucke: to him he offers his prize, rating it at ten or fiftéene pound, when happily it is not worth aboue ſix, and for it hée bargaines to receiue fiue ſhillings or ten ſhillings (according as it is in value) at

euery hand, ſecond third, or fourth hand hée drawes: by which means he perhaps in a ſhort time, makes that yéeld him forty or fifty pound, which coſt not halfe twenty. Many of theſe Merchant venturers ſaile from Ordinary to Ordinary, being ſure alwayes to make ſauing Voiages, when they that put in ten times more then they, are for the moſt part looſers.
                     
                     
                        The Gull.
                        NOwifeither The Leaders, or The forlorne Hope, or any of the reſt, chance to heare of a yong Freſh-water ſouldier that neuer before followed theſe ſtrange warre, and yet hath a Charge newly giuen him (by the old fellow Soldado Vecchio his father, when Death had ſhutte him into the Graue) of ſome ten or twelue thouſand in ready money, beſides ſo many hundreds a yeare: firſt are Scoutes ſent out to diſcouer his Lodging: that knowne ſome lye in ambuſh to note what Apothecaries ſhop hée reſorts too euery morning, or in what Tobacco ſhop in Fléet-ſtréet he takes a pipe of Smoake in the afternoone: that fort which the Puny holds, is ſure to be beleaguerd by the whole troope of the old weather beaten Gallants: amongſt whom ſome one, whoſe wit is thought to be of a better blocke for his head, than the reſt, is appointed to ſingle out our Nouice, and after ſome foure or fiue dayes ſpent in Complement, our heire to ſeauen hundred a yeare is drawne to an Ordinary, into which hee no ſooner enters, but all the old ones in that Neſt flutter about him, embrace, proteſt, kiſſe the hand, Conge to the very garter, and in the end (to ſhew that hée is no ſmall foole, but that he knows his father left him not ſo much mony for nothing,) the yong Cub ſuffers himſelfe to be drawne to the ſtake: to fleſh him, Fortune and the Dice (or rather the Falſe Dice, that coozen Fortune, & make a foole of him too) ſhall ſo fauor him, that he marches away from a battaile or two the onely winner. But afterwards, let him play how warily ſoeuer hée can, the damned Dice ſhall

croſſe him, and his ſiluer croſſes ſhall bleſſe thoſe that play againſt him: for euen they that ſeeme deereſt to his boſome, ſhall firſt be ready, and be the formoſt to enter with the other Leaders into conſpiracy, how to make ſpoile of his golden bags. By ſuch ranſacking of Cittizens ſormes wealth, the Leaders maintaine themſelues braue, the Forlome hope, that drooped before, do'es now gallantly come on. The Eagle fethers his neſt, the Wood-pecker pickes vp his crums, the Gul-groper growes fat with good feeding: and the Gul himſelfe, at whom euery one has a Pull, hath in the end ſcarce fethers enough to kéepe his owne backe warme.
                        The Poſt maiſter of Hell, ſéeing ſuch villaine to goe vp and downe in cloakes lined cleane through with Veluet, was glad hée had ſuch newes to ſend ouer, and therefore ſealing vp a letter full of it, deliuered the ſame to filthybearded Charon (their owne Water-man) to be conuaied firſt to the Porter of Hell, & then (by him) to the Maiſter Keeper of the Diuels.
                     
                  
                  
                     Of Ferreting. The Manner of vndooing Gentlemen by taking vp of commodities. CHAP. IIII.
                     HVnting is anoble, a manly, and a healthfull exerciſe, it is a very true picture of warre, nay it is a war in it ſelfe, for engines are brought into the ſteid, ſtratagems are contriued, ambuſhes are laide, onſets are giuen, allarums ſtrucke vp, braue incounters are made, fierce aſſailings are reſiſted by ſtrength, by courage, or by pollicy: the enemy is purſued, and the Purſuers neuer giue ouer till they haue him in execution, then is a Retreate ſounded, then are ſpoiles diuided, then come they home wearied, but yet crowned with honor & victory. And as in battailes there be ſeuerall maners of fight: ſo in the paſtime of hunting, there are ſeuerall degrées of game.
                     
                        
Some hunt the Lyon, and that ſhewes as when ſubiects Hunting of the Lyon, &c. riſe in Armes againſt their King. Some hunt the Vnicorne, for the treaſure on his head, and they are like couetous men, that care not whom they kill for riches. Some hunt the ſpotted Panther, & the freckled Leopard, they are ſuch as to inioy their pleaſures regard not how blacke an infamie ſtickes vpon them: All theſe are barbarous and vnnaturall Huntſmen, for they range vp and downe the deſerts, the Wildernes, and the Mountaines, Others purſue the long-liued Hart, the couragious Stag Hunting of the Bucke. or the nimble footed Déere: theſe are the nobleſt hunters, and they exerciſe the Nobleſt game: theſe by following the Chace, get ſtrength of body, a frée and vndiſquieted minde, magnanimitie of ſpirit, alacritie of heart, and an vnweariſomneſſe to breake through the hardeſt labours: their pleaſures are not inſatiable, but are contented to be kept within limits, for theſe hunt within Parkes incloſed, or within bounded Forreſts. The hunting of the Hare teaches feare to be bould, and puts Hunting of the Hare. ſimplicitie ſo to her ſhifts, that ſhe growes cunning and prouident: the turnings and croſſe windings that ſhée makes are embleames of this lifes vncertaintie: when ſhée thinkes ſhe is further from danger, it is at her héeles, and when it is néereſt to her, the hand of ſafety defends her. When ſhée is wearied and hath runne her race, ſhée takes her death patiently, thereby to teach man to make himſelfe ready, when the graue gapes for him.
                     All theſe kindes of hunting are abroad in the open field, but there is a cloſe Citie hunting, onely within the De magno preda petenda grege. wals, that pulles downe Parkes, layes open Forreſts, deſtroyes Chaces, wounds the Déere of the land, and makes ſuch hauocke of the goodlieſt Heards, that by their wils, (who are the rangers,) none ſhould be leſt aliue but the Raſcalls. This kinde of hunting is baſe and ignoble. It is the meaneſt, yet ſhe moſt miſchieuous, and it is called Ferreting. To behold a courſe or two at this, did the light-horſeman of Hell one day leape into the ſaddle.
                     
                        
                        Citie-Hunting.
                        THis Ferret-hunting hath his Seaſons as other What perſons follow the game of Ferret-hunting. games haue, and is onely followed at ſuch a time of yeare, when the Gentry of our kingdome by riots, hauing chaſed them ſelues out of the faire reuenewes and large poſſeſſions left to them by their anceſtors are forced to hide their heads like Conies, in little caues, and in vnfrequented places: or elſe being almoſt windeleſſe, by running after ſenſuall pleaſures too fiercely, they are glad Dolor ac volupt as inuicem cedunt. (for keeping them-ſelues in breath ſo long as they can) to fal to Ferret-hunting, that is to ſay, to tak vp commodities.
                        No warrant can be graunted for a Bucke in this forreſt, but it muſt paſſe vnder theſe fiue hānds.
                        
                           1 He that hunts vp and downe to finde game, is called, The tragedy of Ferret-hunting diuided into 5. acts. the Tumbler.
                           
                           2 The commodities that are taken vp are called Purſenets.
                           
                           3 The Citizens that ſelles them is the Ferret.
                           
                           4 They that take vp are the Rabbet-ſuckers.
                           
                           5 Hee vpon whoſe credit theſe Rabbet-ſuckers runne, is called the Warren.
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        How the Warren is made.
                        AFter a raine, Conies vſe in come out of their Holes, and to ſit nibling on wéeds, or any thing in the coole of the euening, and after a reueling, when younger brothers haue ſpent all, or in gaining haue loſt all, they ſit plotting in their chambers, with neceſſity, how to be furniſhed, preſently with a new ſupply of 
                              〈◊〉
                           . They Nam illa omnes artes perdecet, vbi quem attigit. would take vp any commodity whatſoeuer, but the
                              ••
                            names 
                              〈◊〉
                            in too many texted letters all ready in Mercers and Soriueners bookes: vpon a hundred poundes worth of Roaſted béefe they could finde in their hearts to venture, for that would away 
                              〈…〉
                            of a hand: but where ſhall they finde Butcher, or a Cooke, that will let any 
                              〈…〉
                            ſo much vpon the ſcore for fleſh onely

Suppoſe therefore that foure of ſuch looſe-fortuned gallants were tied in one knot, and knew not how to faſten themſelues vpon ſome wealthy cittizen. At the length it runnes into their heads, that ſuch a young Nouice (who daily ſerues to fill vp their company) was neuer intangled in any citie limebuſh: they know his preſent meanes to be good, and thoſe to come to be great: him therefore they lay vpon the Anuill of their wits, till they haue wrought him like wax, for him-ſelfe aſ well as for them, to doe any thing in wax, or indéed till they haue won him Dum ſpectant oculi laſos; leduntur & ipſi. to ſlide vpon this Ice, becauſe hée knowes not the danger) he is eaſily drawne: for hée conſiders within him-ſelfe that they are all gentlemen well deſcended, they haue rich fathers, they weare good clothes, haue bin gallant ſpenders, and doe now and then (ſtill) let it flye fréely: hée is to venture vpon no more rockes than all they, what then ſhould hée feáre? hée therefore reſolues to doe it, and the rather becauſe his owne exhibition runnes low, & that there lacke a great many wéekes to the quarter day, at which time, he ſhall be refurniſhed from his father. The Match being thus agréed vpon, one of them that has béene an ould Ferret-monger, & knowes all the trickes of ſuch Hunting, ſéeks out a Tumbler, that is to ſay, a fellow, who beates the buſh for them till they catch the birds, he himſelfe being contented (as he proteſts & ſweares) onely with a few fethers.
                     
                     
                        The Tumblers Hunting dry-foote.
                        THis Tumbler being let looſe, runnes Snuffing The nature of a London Tumbler. vp and downe cloſe to the ground, in the ſhoppes either of Merrers, Gouldſmithes, Drapers, Haberdaſhers, or of any other trade, where hée thinckes hée may méete with a Ferret: and the vpon his very firſt courſe, hée can finde his game, yet to make his gallants more hungry, and to thinke hée wearies himſelfe in hunting the more, hée comes to them ſweating and ſwearing that the Citie Ferrets are ſo coaped (that is to ſay,

haue their lippes ſtitched vp cloſe) that hée can hardly get them open to ſo great a ſum as fiue hundred pounds, which they deſire. This heache being chewd downe Nil habit inf
                                 •
                              
                              lix paupertae durius in ſe, Quam quod ridicules homines facit. by the Rabbet-ſuckers almoſt kils their hearts, and is worſe to them then dabbing on the neckes to Connies. They bid him if hée cannot faſten his tieth vpon plate or Cloth, or Silkes, to lay hold on browne paper or Tobacco, Bartholmew babies, Lute ſtringes or Hobnailes, or two hundred poundes in Saint Thomas Onions, and the reſt in mony; the Onions they coulde get wenches enough to cry and ſell them by the Rope, and what remaines ſhould ſerue them with Mutton. Vpon this, their Tumbler trottes vp and downe againe. And at laſt lighting on a Cittizen that will deale, the names are receiued, and deliuered to a Scriuener, who enquiring whether they be good men and true, that are to paſſe vpon the life and death of fiue hundred poundes, findes that foure of the fiue, are winde-ſhaken, and ready to fall into the Lordes handes: marry the fiſt man, is an Oake, and theres hope that hée cannot be hewed downe in haſte. Vpon him therefore the Cittizen buildes ſo much as comes to fiue hundred poundes, yet takes in the other foure to make them ſerue as ſcaffolding, till the Frame be furniſhed, and if then it hold, hée cares not greatly who takes them downe. In all haſt, are the bondes ſealed and the commodities deliuered, And then does the Tumbler fetch his ſecond carréere, and thats this.
                     
                     
                        The Tumblers Hunting Counter.
                        THe wares which they fiſhed for being in the hand of the fiue ſhauers, doe now more trouble their wits how to turne thoſe Wares into ready mony, then before they were troubled to turne their credits into wares. The Trée being once more to be ſhaken, they know it muſt looſe fruit, and therefore their Factor muſt barter away their Marchandiſe, tho it be with loſſe: Abroad into

the Citie he Sailes for that purpoſe, and deales with him that ſold, to but his owne Commodities againe for ready mony; Hée will not doe it vnder. 30 l. loſſe in the Hunored: other Archers bowes are tryed at the ſame marke, but all kéepe much about one ſcantling: backe therfore comes their Carrier with this newes, that no man will diſburſe ſo much preſent money vpon any 
                              〈◊〉
                            whatſoeuer. Onely hée met by good fortune with one friend (and that friend is himſelfe) who for 10 l. will procure them a Chapman, marry that chapman will not buy vnleſſe hée may haue them at 30. l. loſſe in the Hundred: 
                              •
                           u
                              •
                           h, cry all the Sharers, 
                              〈…〉
                            theſe 
                              〈…〉
                            Curmudgions, giue that 
                              〈◊〉
                            your friend 10. l. for his paines, and 
                              •
                           etch the reſt of the money: within an houre after, it is brought, and powred downe in one heape vpon a tauerne table; where making a goodly ſhew as if it could neuer be ſpent, all of them conſult what ſée the Tombler is to haue, for Hunting ſo well, and conclude that leſſe then 10 l. they cannot giue him, which 10. l. is the firſt told out. Now let vs caſt vp this Account: In euery 100. l. is Dedit hanc contagio labem, et Dabit in plures. loſt 30. which being 5. times 30. l. makes 150. l. that Sum the Ferret puts vp cléer beſides his ouer-priſing the wares: vnto which 150. l. loſt, ad 10. l. more, which the Tumbler guls them off, and other 10. l. which hée hath for his voyage, all which makes 170. l. which deducted from 500. l. there remaineth onely 330. to be deuided amongſt 5. ſo that euery one of the partners ſhall haue but 66. l. yet this they all put vp merily, waſhing downe their loſſes with Sacke and Suger, whereof they drinke that night profoundly.
                     
                     
                        How the Warren is ſpoyled.
                        VVHilſt this weather laſteth laſteth, and that there is any grake to nibble vpon, Theſe Rabbet-ſuckers keepe to the Warren wherein they fatned: but the cold day of repaiment approaching, they retire déepe into their Caues; ſo that when the Ferret makes account to haue fiue before him in chaſe; foure of the fiue lye hidden,

and are ſtolne into other groun vs. No maruell then if the Ferret growe fierce and teare open his own iawes, to ſuck blood from him that is left: no maruaile if he ſcratch what woolhe can from his back: the Purſnets that were Set, are all taken vp & carried away. The Warren therefore muſt be Searched, That muſt pay for all: ouer that does hée range like a little Lord. Sargeants, Marſhals-men, and Baliffes are ſent forth, who lye ſcowting at euery corner, and with terrible pawes haunt euery walke. Inconeluſion the bird that theſe Hawkes ſlie after, is ſeazd vpon, then are his fethers pluck'd, his eſtate look'd into, then are his wings broken, his lands made ouer to a ſtranger: then muſt our yong ſon & heire pay 500. l. (for which he neuer had but 66. l.) or elſe lie in priſon. To kéepe himſelfe from which, he feales to any bond, enters into any ſtatute, morgageth Infelix viris excidit ipſe ſuis. any Lordſhip, Does any thing, Sales any thing, yéews to pay any thing. And theſe Citie ſtormes (which will wet a man, till he haue neuer a dry thried about him, tho he be kept neuer ſo warme) fall not vpon him once or twiſe: But being a little way in, hee cares not how déepe he wades: the greater his poſſeſſions are, the apter he is to Grandia permultos tenuantur Flumina riues. take vp & to be truſted: the more he is truſted, the more he comes in debt, the farther in debt, the néerer to danger. Thus Gentlemen are wrought vpon, thus are they Cheated, thus are they Ferreted, thus are they Vndone.
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     Fawlconers. Of a new kinde of Hawking, teaching how to catch Birds by Bookes.
                     
                        HVnting and Hawking are of kin, and therefore it is Hawking. ſit they ſhould kéepe company together: both of them are noble Games, and Recreations, honeſt and healthfull, yet they may ſo be abuſed that nothing can be more hurtfull. In Hunting, the Game is commonly ſtill before you, or 
                           〈…〉
                         hearing, and within a little compaſſe: In Hawking,
                        
the game flies farre off, and oftentimes out of ſight: A Couple of Rookes therefore (that were birds of the laſt feather) conſpired together to leaue their neſt in Facies ron omnibus 
                              •
                           na, 
                              •
                           ec diuerſatamem. the Citie, and to flutter abroad, into the Countrie: Vpon two leane hackneies were theſe two Doctor doddipols horſt, Ciuilly ſuited, that they might carry about them ſome badge of a Scholler.
                     The diuels Ranck-ryder, that came from the laſt Cityhunting, vnderſtanding that two ſuch Light-horſemen were gone a Hawking, poſts after, and ouer-takes them. After ſome ordinary high-way talke, he begins to queſtion of what profeſſion they were? One of them ſmyling ſcornfully in his face, as thinking him to be ſome Gul, (and * indéed ſuch fellowes take all men for Gulles, who they Qui niſi quod ipſi faciunt, nihilrectum putant. thinke to be beneath them in qualitie) tolde him they were Falconers. But the Foxethat followed them, ſéeing no properties, (belonging to a Falconer) about them, ſmelt knauery, tooke them for a paire of mad raſcals, and therefore reſolued to ſée at what theſe Falconers would let flie.
                     
                        How to caſt vp the Lure.
                        AT laſt on a ſuddaine ſayes one of them to him, Sir, The firſt Noate. we haue Sprung a Partridge, & ſo fare you well: which words came ſtammering out with the haſte that they made, for preſently the two Forragers of the Countrie, were vpon the Spurre: Plutoes Poſt ſéeing this, ſtood ſtill to watch them, and at length ſaw them in maine gallop make toward a goodly fayre place, where eyther ſome Knight, or ſome great Gentleman kept; and this goodly houſe belike was the Partridge which thoſe Falconers had ſprung. Hee being loath to looſe his ſhare in this Hawking, and hauing power to tranſforme himſelfe as he liſted, came thither as ſoone as they, but beheld all (which they did) inuiſible. They both, like two Knights Errant, alighted at the Gate, knocked, and were let in: The one walkes the Hackneyes in an outward Court, as if he had béene but Squire to Sir Dagonet. The other (as boldly

as S. George, when hee dar'd the Dragon at his very Den) marcheth vndauntedly vp to the Hall, where, looking ouer thoſe poore creatures of the houſe, that weare but the bare Blew-coates (for Aquila non capit Muſcas) what ſhould a Falconer meddle with files? he onely ſalutes him that in his eye ſéemes to be a Gentleman-like fellow: Of him he askes for his good Knight, or ſo, and ſayes that he is a * Gentleman come from London on a Et qua non fecimus ipſi, vix ea noſtra voeo: buſineſſe, which he muſt deliuer to his owne Worſhipfull Eare. Vp the ſtaires does braue Mount Dragon aſcend; the Knight and he encounter, and with this ſtaffe does he valiantly charge vpon him.
                     
                     
                        How the Bird is Caught.
                        SIr, I am a poore * Scholler, and the report of your Sen ſtos fuit ille Caducus Frange Puer Calamos & manes deſere Muſas. Quid niſi Monſtra legis? vertues hath drawne me hither, venturouſly bold to fixe your worthy name as a patronage to a poore ſhort diſcourſe, which here I dedicate (out of my loue) to your noble and eternal Memorie: this ſpéech he vtters barely.
                        The Hawking pamphleter is then bid to put on, whilſt his Miſcellane Maecenas, opens a Booke fayrely aparreld in Vellom, with gilt-fillets, and foure-penny ſilke ribbon at leaſt, like little ſtreamers on the top of a March-pane Caſtle, hanging dandling by at the foure corners: the title being ſuperficially ſuruaid, in the next leafe hee ſées that the Author hee, hath made him one of his Goſſips, for the Booke carries his Worſhips name, and vnder it ſtands an Epiſtle iuſt the length of a Hench-mans grace before dinner, which is long inough for any Booke in conſcience, vnleſſe the writer be vnreaſonable.
                        The Knight being told before hand, that this little ſunbeame of Phoebus (ſhining thus briſkly in print) hath his Mite or Atmy wayting vpon him in the outward court, thankes him for his loue and labour, and conſidering with himſelfe, what coſt he hath béene at, and hold farre hee hath ridden to come to him, hee knowes that Patrons and Godfathers, are to pay ſcot and lot alike, and

therefore to cheriſh his young and tender Muſe, he giues him foure or ſixe Angles, inuiting him either to ſtay breakefaſt, or if the ſun-diall of the houſe points towards eleauen, then to tary dinner.
                     
                     
                        How the Bird is dreſt.
                        BVt the fiſh being caught (for which our Heliconian Angler threw out his lines) with thankes, and legs, and kiſſing his owne hand, he parts. No ſooner is he horſt, but his Hoſtler (who all this while walked the iades, and trauailes vp & downe with him (like an vndeſeruing plaier for halfe a ſhare) aſkes this queſtion, Strawes or not? Strawes cries the whole ſharer and a halfe, away then replies the firſt, flie to our neſt: This neſt is neuer in the ſtultus quo
                                 
                                    
                                 
                                 que
                               munere gaudet. ſame towne but commonly a mile or two off, and it is nothing els but the next Tauerne they come to. But the Village into which they rode being not able to maintaine an Iuybuſh, an Ale-houſe was their Inne: where aduancing themſelues into the faireſt Chamber, and beſpeaking How Birds are dreſt after they be caught. the beſt chéere in the towne for dinner, downe they ſit, and ſhare before they ſpeake of any thing els: That done, he that ventures vpon all he méetes, and diſcharges the paper Bullets, (for to tel truth, the other ſerues but as a ſigne, and is méerely no-body) beginnes to diſcourſe, how he caried himſelfe in the action, how hée was encountred: how hée ſtood to his tackling, and how well hée came off: hée cals the Knight, a Noble fellow, yet they both ſhrug, and laugh, and ſweares they are glad they haue Guld him.
                        More arrowes muſt they ſhoote of the ſame length that this firſt was of, and therefore there is Truncke full of Trinckets, that is to ſay, their budget of Bookes is opend againe, to ſée what leafe they are to turne ouer next, which whilſt they are dooing, the Ghoſt that all this ſpace haunted them, and hard what they ſaid, hauing excellent, ſkill in the blacke art, that is to ſay, in picking of lockes, makes the dore ſuddenly flye open (which they had cloſely

ſhut. At his ſtrange entrunce they being ſomwhat agaſt, began to ſhuſtle away their bookes, but he knowing what cardes they plaide withall, offred to cut, and turnd vp two Knaues by this tricke: my Maiſters (quoth he) I know where you haue bin, I know what you haue done, I know what you meane to doe, I ſée now you are Fakoners indéed, but by the (and then hée ſwore a danuiable oth) vnleſſe you teach me to ſhoote in this Birding peece, I will raiſe the Village, ſend for the Knight whom you boaſt you haue guld, and ſo diſgrace you: for your mony I care not.
                        The two Frée-booters ſéeing themſelues ſmoaked, told their third Brother, hée ſéemed to be a gentleman and a boone companion, they prayed him therefore to ſit downe with ſilence, and ſithence dinner was not yet ready, hée ſhould heare all.
                        This new kinde of Hawking (qd. one of them) which you ſée vs vſe, can afford no name vnles 5. be at it. viz.
                        
                        
                           1 He that caſts vp the Lure is called the Falconer.
                           
                           2 The Lure that is caſt vp is an idle Pamphlet.
                           
                           3 The Tercel-Gentle that comes to the Lure, is ſome Knight, or ſome gentleman of like qualitie.
                           4 The Bird that is preied vpon, is Mony.
                           5 Hee that walkes the horſes, and hunts dry-foote is called a Mongrell.
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        The Falconer and his Spaniell.
                        THe Falconer hauing ſcraped together certaine ſmall parings of witte, hée firſt cuttes them hanſomely in pretty péeces, and of thoſe péeces does hée patch vp a booke. This booke hée priúits at his own charge, the Mongrell running vp and downe to looke to the workemen, and bearing likewiſe ſome part of the coſt, (for which he enters vpon his halfe ſhare.) When it is fully finiſhed, the Falconer and his Mongrell, or it may be two Falconers ioyne in one,) but howſoeuer, it is by them deuiſed what Shire in England it is beſt to forrage next:

that being ſet downe, the Falconers 
                              •
                           ea
                              〈…〉
                            either with 
                              •
                            Herauld for a note of all the Knights and Gentlemens names of worth that dwell in that circuit, which they meane to ride, or els by inquiry, get the chiefeſt of them, printing of ſo many Epiſtles as they haue names, the Epiſtles Dedicatory being all one, & vary in nothing but in the titles of their patrons.
                        Hauing thus furniſhed themſelues, and packed vp their wares, away they trudge, like tinckers, with a budget at Strange hawking. one of their backes, or it may be the circle they meane to coniure in ſhall not be out of London, eſpecially if it be Tearme-time, or when a Parliament is holden (for then they haue choiſe of ſwéete-meats to féed vpon. (If a gentleman ſéeing one of theſe bookes Dedicated onely to his name, ſuſpect it to be a baſtard, that hath more fathers beſides himſelfe, and to try that, does deferre the Preſenter for a day or two, ſending in the meane time (as ſome haue done) into Paules Church-yard amongſt the Stationers to inquire if any ſuch worke be come forth, and if they cannot tell, then to ſteppe to the Printers: Yet haue the Falconers a tricke to goe beyond ſuch Hawkes too, for all they flye ſo hie: and that is this: The bookes lye all at the Printers, but not one line of an epiſtle to any of them (thoſe bug-beares lurke in Tenebris) if then the Spy that is ſent by his Maiſter, aſke why they haue no dedications to them, Mounſier Printer tels him, the author would not venture to adde any to them all, (ſauing onely to that which was giuen to his Maiſter, vntill it was knowne whether he would accept of it or no.
                        This ſatiſfies the Patron, this fetches money from him, and this Cozens fiue hundred beſides. Nay there be other Bird-catchers, that vſe ſtranger Quaile-pipes: you ſhall haue fellows, foure or fiue in a country, that buying vp any old Booke (eſpecially a Sermon, or any other matter of Diuinity) that lies for waſt paper, and is cleane forgotten, ad a new printed Epiſtle to it, and with an Alphabet of letters which they cary about them, being able

to print any mans name (for a Dedſcation) on the ſuddaine trauaile vp and downe moſt Shires in England, and liue by this Hawking.
                        Are we not excellent Falconersnow (quoth thrée halfe ſhares?) excellent villaines, cryed the deuils Deputy: by this the meate (for dinnet came ſmoaking in, vpon which they fell moſt firannically, yet (for manners ſake) offring firſt, to the Balife of Belzebub the vpper end of the table, but he fearing they would make a Hauke, or a Buzzard of him too, and report they had ridden himlike an Aſſe, as they had done others, out a doores hée flung with a vengeance as he came.
                        O ſacred Learning why dooſt thou ſuffer thy ſeauen leaued trée, to be plucked by barbarous and moſt vnhallowed handes? Why is thy beantifull Maiden-body, polluted like a ſtrumpets, and proſtituted to beaſtly and ſlaniſh Cur ego ſi ne
                                 
                                    
                                 
                                 que
                               ignore
                                 
                                    
                                 
                                 que
                               Poetae ſalutor. Ignoraike? O then Baſe-broode, that make the Muſes harlots, yet ſay they are your Mothers? You Theeues of Wit, Cheators of Arte, Traitors of ſchooles of Learning: murderers of Schollers: More worthy you are, to vndergoe the Romane Furca, like ſlaues, and to be branded i'th fore-head déeper then they that forge Teſtaments to vndoe Orphants: Such doe but rob children of goods that may be loſt: but you rob Schollers of their Fame, which is déerer then life. You are not worth an Inuectiue, not worthy to haue-your names drop out of a deſeruing pen, you ſhall onely be executed in Picture, (as they vſe to handle Malefactors in France) and the picture (though it were drawne to be hung vp in another place) ſhal leaue you impudently arrogant to your ſelues, and ignominiouſly rioiculeus to after ages: in theſe collours, are you drawne.
                        
                           The true picture of theſe Falconers.
                           —There be Fellowes Proh ſuperi quantum pectora caeca Noctis Habēt.
                           
                           Of courſe and common bloud; Mechanicke knaues,
                           Whoſe 
                                 〈…〉
                               buried then in graues:
                           And indeed 
                                 〈…〉
                               earthy, whoſe creation.
                           
                              
Was but to giue a Boote or Shooe good faſhion.
                           Yet theſe (ſhrowing by the Apron and the Awle)
                           Being druncke with their own wit, caſt vp their gall ſcribimus indocti; docti
                                    
                                       
                                    
                                    que
                                 
                              
                           
                           Onely of yncke: and in patchd, beggerly Rimes,
                           (As full of fowle corruption, as the Times)
                           From towne to towne they ſtrowle in ſoule, as poore
                           As th' are in clothes: yet theſe at euery doore,
                           Their labors Dedicate. But (as at Faires)
                           Like Pedlars, they ſhew ſtill one ſort of wares
                           Vnto all commers (with ſome filde oratlon)
                           And thus to giue bookes now's an occupation. Miſerum eſt aliorum incū
                                 bere famae.
                           
                           One booke hath ſeauen ſcore patrons: thus deſart
                           Is cheated of her due: thus noble art
                           Giues Ignorance (that common ſtrumpet) place,
                           Thus the true ſchollers name growes cheap and baſe, &c.
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Iacks of the Clock-houſe. A new and cunning drawing of money from Gentlemen. CHAP. VI.
                     
                     THere is another Fraternitie of wandring Pilgrims who merrily call themſelues, Iackes of the Clocke-houſe, and are very néere allyed to the Falconers, that went a Hawking before. The Clarke of Erebus ſet downe their names too in his Tables, with certaine bréefe notes of their practiſes: and theſe they are.
                     The Iacke of a Clocke-houſe goes vpon Screws, and his office is to doe nothing but ſtrike: ſo does this noiſe, (for they walke vp and downe like Fidlers) trauaile with Motions, and whatſoeuer their Motions get them, is called ſtriking.
                     Thoſe Motions are certaine Collections, or wittie Inuentions, ſome-times of one thing, and then of an other (there is a new one now in towne, in praiſe of the Vnion.) And theſe are fairely written and engroſſed in Vellum, Parchement, or Royall paper, richly adorned

with compartiments, and ſet out with letters both in gold, and in various coulours.
                     This labour being taken, the Maiſter of the Motion hearkens where ſuch a Nobleman, ſuch a Lord, or ſuch a Knight lyes, that is liberall: hauing found one to his liking, The Motion (with his Patrons name fairely texted out, in manner of a Dedication,) is preſented before him: hée receiues it, and thinking it to be a worke onely vnder-taken for his ſake, is bounteous to the giuer, eſtéeming him a Scholler, and knowing that not without great trauaile, hée hath drawne ſo many little ſtragling ſtreames into ſo faire and ſmoothe a Riuer: whereas the Worke is the labour of ſome other (copied out by ſtealth) by an impudent ignorant fellow, that runnes vp and downe with the Tranſcripts, and euery Ale-houſe may haue one of them (hanging in the baſeſt drinking roome) if they will be but at the charges of writing it out. Thus the liberallitie of a Nobleman, or of a Gentleman is abuſed: thus learning is brought into ſcorne and contempt: Thus men are cheated of their bountie, giuing much for that (out of their frée mindes) which is common abroad, and put away for baſe prices. Thus villanie ſome-times walkes alone, as if it were giuen to Melancholy, and ſome-times knaues tie themſelues in a knot, becauſe they may be more merry, as by a mad ſort of Comrades whom I ſée leaping into the Saddle, anon it will apeare.
                  
                  
                     
                        Rancke Riders, The manner of Cozening Inne-keepers. Poſt-maſters and Hackney-men. CHAP. VII.
                     
                     THere is a troope of Horſemen, that runne vp and downe the whole kingdome, they are euer in a gallop, their buſineſſe is weightie, their iournyes many,

their expences great, their Innes euerie where, their lands no where: they haue onely a certaine Frée-holde called Tyborne, (ſcituate néere London, and many a faire paire of Gallowes in other Countries beſides,) vpon which they liue verie poorely, till they dye, and dye for the moſt part wickedly, becauſe their liues are villanous and deſperate. But what race ſo euer they runne, their they end it, there they ſet vp their reſt, there is their laſt baite, whether ſoeuer their iourney lyes. And theſe horſmen haue no other names but rancke Riders.
                     To furniſh whem foorth for any iourney, they muſt haue Riding ſutes cut out of theſe foure péeces.
                     
                        1 The Inne-kéeper or Hackney-man, of whom they haue horſes, is called, A Colt.
                        
                        2 He that neuer alights off a rich Farmer or country Gentleman, till he haue drawne mony from him, is called, The Snaffle.
                        
                        3 The money ſo gotten, is The Ring.
                        
                        4 He that féedes them with mony is called, The prouander.
                        
                     
                     Theſe Ranck-riders (like Butchers to Rumford market) ſildome goe vnder ſixe or ſeauen in a company, and theſe Caréeres they fetch. Their purſſes being warmely lined with ſome purchaſe gotten before, and they themſelues well booted and ſpur'd, and in reaſonable good outſides, arriue at the faireſt Inne they can chooſe, either in Weſtminſter, the Strand, the Citie, or the Suburbes.
                     Two of them who haue cloathes of purpoſe to fit the play, carrying the ſhew of Gentlemen, the other act their partes in blew coates, as they were their Seruingmen, though indéede they be all fellowes. They enter all durted The manner of Brideling a Colt. or duſtied (according as it ſhall pleaſe the high way to vſe them) and the firſt bridle they put into the Colts mouth (that is to ſay, the Inkéepers) is at their comming in to aſke alowde if the footeman be gone backe with the horſes? tis anſwered yes. Héere, the Ranck-riders lye

thrée or foure daies, ſpending moderately enough, yet abating not a penny of any reckoning, to ſhew of what houſe they come: in which ſpace their counterfeit followers learne what country-man the maiſter of the houſe is, where the Hoſtlars and Chamberlaines were borne, and what other countrie Gentlemen are gueſts to the Inne: which leſſons being preſently gotten by heart, they fall in ſtudy with the generall rules of their knauerie: and thoſe are, firſt to giue out, that their Maiſter is a Gentleman of ſuch and ſuch meanes, in ſuch a ſhire (which ſhall be ſure to ſtand farre enough from thoſe places where any of the houſe, or of other gueſts were borne,) that hée is come to receiue ſo many hundred poundes vpon land which hée hath ſolde, and that hée meanes to Inne there ſome quarter of a yeare at leaſt.
                     This Braſſe money paſſing for currant through the houſe, hée is more obſerued and better attended, is worſhipped at euerie word: and the eaſier to breake and bridle the Colt, his Worſhip will not ſit downe to Dinner or ſupper, till the Maiſter of the houſe be placed at the vpper end of the boord by him.
                     In the middle of Supper, or elſe verie earely in the following morning, comes in a counterfeit footeman, ſweatingly deliuering a meſſage, that ſuch a Knight hath ſent for the head-Maiſter of theſe Rancke-ryders, and that hée muſt be with him by ſuch an houre, the iourney being not aboue twelue or fouretéene miles. Vpon deliuerie of this meſſage, (from ſo déere and noble a friend) hée ſweares and chafes, becauſe all his horſes are out of Towne, curſeth the ſending of them backe, offers any mony to haue himſelfe, his couzen with him, and his men but reaſonably horſt. Mine hoſt being a credulous Aſſe, ſuffers them all to get vp vpon him, for hée prouides them horſes, either of his owne (thinking his Gueſt to be a man of great accompt, and being loath to looſe him, becauſe hée ſpends well) or elſe ſendes out to hire them of his neighbours, paſſing his word for their forthcomming

within a day or two, Vp they get and away Gallop our Ranck-riders, as far as the poore Iades can carry them.
                     The two daies being ambled out of the world, and perhaps thrée more after them, yet neither a ſupply of Horſe-men or Foote-men, (as was promiſed) to be ſet eye vpon. The lamentable In-kéeper (or Hackney man, if hée chance to be Sadled for this iourney too) looſe their Colts téeth, and finde that they are made olde arrant Iades: Search, then runnes vp and downe, like a Conſtable halfe out of his wittes (vpon a Shroue-tueſday) and hue and cry followes after, ſome twelue or fouretéene miles off, (round about London) which was the fartheſt of their iourney as they gaue out. But (alas!) the horſes are at paſture foureſcore or a hundred miles from their olde mangers: they were ſould at ſome blinde drunken théeuiſh faire, (there being enow of them in company to ſaue themſelues, by their Toll-booke,) the Seruing-men caſt off their blew-coates, and cried, All fellowes: the money is ſpent vpon wine, vpon whores, vpon fidlers, vpon fooles, (by whom they wil looſe nothing) and the tyde being at an ebbe, they are as ready to practiſe their ſkill in horſe-manſhip to bring Coltes to the ſaddle in that Towne, and to make Nags run a race of thrée-ſcore or a hundred miles of from that place, as before they did from London.
                     
                        Running at the Ring.
                        THus, ſo long as Horſefleſh can make them fat, they neuer leaue féeding. But when they haue beaten ſo many high-waies in ſeuerall countries, that they feare to be ouer-taken by Tracers, then (like Soldiers comming from a Breach) they march faire & ſoftly on foote, lying in garriſon, as it were, cloſe in ſome out townes, till the foule Rumor of their Villanies (like a ſtormy durty winter) be blown ouer: In which time of lurking in the ſhel, they are not idle neither, but like ſnailes, they venture abroad tho

the law hath threatned to rain down neuer ſo much puniſhment vpon them: & what doe they? they are not bées, to liue by their owne painfull labors, but Drones that muſt eate vp the ſwéetneſſe, and be fedde wilh the earnings of others: This therefore is their worke. They careleſly inquire what gentleman of worth, or what rich Farmers dwell within fiue, ſix or ſeauen miles of the Fort where they are inſconc'd (which they may doe without ſuſpition) and hauing got their names, they ſingle out themſelues in a morning, and each man takes a ſeuerall path to himſelfe: one goes Eaſt, one Weſt, one North, and the other South: walking either in bootes with wandes in their handes, or otherwiſe, for it is all to one purpoſe. And note this by the way, that when they trauell thus one foot, they are no more called Ranck-riders but Ttrowlers, a proper name giuen to Country plaiers, that (without Sockes) trot from towne to towne vpon the bare hoofe.
                        Being ariued at the Gate where the Gentlemen, or Farmer dwelleth, he boldly knockes, inquiring for him by name, and ſteppes into ſpeake with him: the ſeruant ſéeing a faſhionable perſon, tells his Maiſter there is a Gentleman deſires to ſpeake with him: the maiſter coms and ſalutes him, but eying him well, ſaies he does not know him: No Sir, replies the other (with a face bolde ynough) it may be ſo, but I pray you Sir, will you walke a turne or two in your Orchard or Garden, I would there conferre: Hauing got him thether, to this tune he plaies vpon him.
                     
                     
                        How the ſnaffle is put on.
                        SIr, I am a Gentleman, borne to better meanes then my preſent fortunes doe allow me: I ſerued in the field, and had commaunde there, But long peace (you know Sir) is the Cancker that eates vp Souldiers, and ſo it hath mée. I lie héere not far off, in the Country, at mine Inne, where ſtaying vpon the

diſpatch of ſome buſineſſe, I am indebted to the houſe in monies, ſo that I cannot with the credit of a Gentleman leaue the houſe till I haue paide them. Make mée ſir ſo much beholden to your loue as to lend mée fortye or fiftie ſhillings to beare my horſe and my ſelfe to London, from whence within a day or two, I ſhall ſend you many thankes, with a faithfull repayment of your curteſie.
                        The honeſt Gentleman, or the good natur'd Farmer beholding a perſonable man, faſhionably attired, and not carrying in outward coullors, the face of a cogging-knaue, giues credit to his words, are ſorry that they are not at this preſent time ſo well furniſhed as they could wiſh, but if a matter of twentie ſhillings can ſtead him, he ſhall commaund it, becauſe it were pittie any honeſt Gentleman ſhould for ſo ſmall a matter miſcarry. Happily they meete with ſome Chapmen that giue them their owne aſking; but howſoeuer, all is fiſh that comes to net, they are the moſt conſcionable market folkes that euer rode betwéene two paniers, for from forty they will fall to twentie, from twenty to ten, from ten to fiue: nay theſe Mountibanekes are ſo baſe, that they are not aſhamed to take two ſhillings of a plaine Huſbandman, and ſometimes ſixe pence (which the other giues ſimply and honeſtly) of whom they demaunded a whole fifteene.
                        In this manner doe they digge ſiluer out of mens purſes all the day, and at night meet together at the appointed Rendeuouz, where all theſe Snaffles are looſed to their full length, the Ringes which that day they haue made, are worne. The Prouender is praiſed or diſpraiſed, as they finde it in goodneſſe, but it goes downe all, whilſt they laugh at all.
                        And thus does a Common Wealth bring vp children, that care not how they diſcredit her, or vndoe her: who would imagine that Birdes ſo faire in ſhewe, and ſo ſweete in voice, ſhould be ſo dangerous in condition-but Kanens thinke carryon the daintieſt meate, and villaines

eſtéeme moſt of that mony which is purchaſt by baſenes.
                        The Vnder-Shriffe for the county of the Cacodemons, knowing into what arrerages theſe Rank-riders were runne, for horſe-fleſh to his maiſter, (of whom hée farmed the office) ſent out his writs to attach them, and ſo narrowly purſued them, that for all they were well horſt, ſome hée ſent poſt to the gallowes, and the reſt to ſeuerall iayles: After which, making all the haſt hée poſſibly could to get to London againe, hée was way-layd by an army of a ſtrong and new found people.
                     
                  
                  
                     Moone-men. A diſcouery of a ſtrange wild people, very dangerous to Townes and Country Villages. CHAP. VIII.
                     
                        A Moone-man, ſignifies in Engliſh, a mad-man, becauſe the Moone hath greateſt domination (aboue any other Planet) ouet the bodies of Franticke perſons. But theſe Moone-men (whoſe Images are now to be carued) are neither abſolutely mad, nor yet perfectly in their wits.) Their name they borrow from the Moone, becauſe as the Moone is neuer in one ſhape two nights together, but wanders vp and downe Heauen, like an Anticke, ſo theſe changeable-ſtuffe-companions neuer tary one day in a place, but are the onely, and the onely baſe Runnagats vpon earth. And as in the Moone there is a man, that neuer ſtirres without a buſh of thornes at his backe, ſo theſe Moone-men lie vndes buſhes; and are indeed no better then Hedge créepers.
                     They are a people more ſcattred then Iewes, and more hated: beggerly in apparrell, barbarous in condition, beaſtly in behauior, and bloudy if they meete aduantage. A man that ſées them would ſweare they had all thè yellow Iawndis, or that they were To
                           ••
                        y, Moores baſtardes, for no Red-oaker man caries a face of a more

filthy complexion, yet are they not borne ſo, neither has the Sunne burnt them ſo, but they are painted ſo, yet they are not good painters neither: for they doe not make faces, but marte faces. By a by-name they are called Gipſies, they call themſelues Egiptians, others in mockery call them Moone-men.
                     
                     If they be Egiptians, ſure I am they neuer diſcended from the tribes of any of thoſe people that came out of the Land of Egypt: Ptolomy (King of the Egiptians) I warrant neuer called them his Subiects: no nor Pharao before him. Looke what difference their is betweene a ciuell cittizen of Dublin, & a wilde Iriſh Kerne, ſo much difference there is betweene one of theſe counterfeit Egiptians and a true Engliſh Begger. An Engliſh Roague is iuſt of the ſame liuery.
                     They are commonly an army about foure-ſcore His order in marching on foote or ſeruing vpon horſe. ſtrong, yet they neuer march with all their bagges and baggages together, but (like boot-halers) they forrage vp and downe countries, 45. or 6. in a company. As the ſwizer has his wench and his Cocke with him when he goes to the warres, ſo theſe vagabonds haue their harlots with a number of little children following at their héeles: which young brood of Beggers, are ſometimes caried (like ſo many gréene géeſe aliue to a market) in payres of pameres, or in doſters like freſh-fiſh from Kye that comes on horſebacke, (if they be but infants.) But if they can ſtradle once, then aſwell the ſhée roagues as the héeroagues are horſt, ſeauen or eight vpon one iade, ſtrongly pineond, and ſtrangely tyed together.
                     One Shire alone & no more is ſure ſtil at one time, to haue theſe Egiptian-tice ſwarming within it, for like flockes of wild géeſe, they will euermore fly one after another: let them be ſcattred worſe then the quarters of a traitor are after hées hang'd drawne and quartred, yet they haue a tricke (like water cut with a ſword) to come together inſtantly and eaſily againe: and this is their pollicy, which way ſoeuer the formoſtranckes lead,

they ſticke vp ſmall boughes in ſeuerall places, to euery village where they paſſe, which ſerue as enſignes to waft on the reſt.
                     Their apparell is old, and phantaſticke, tho it be neuer ſo full of rents: the men weare ſcarfes of Callico, or any other baſe ſtuffe, hanging their bodies like Morris-dancers, His Furniture. with bels, & other toyes, to intice the countrey people to flocke about them, and to wounder at their fooleries, or rather rancke-knaueryes. The women as ridiculouſly attire them-ſelues, and (like one that plaies, the Roague on a Stage) weare rags, and patched filthy mantles vppermoſt, when the vnder garments are hanſome and in faſhion.
                     The battailes theſe Out-lawes make, are many and His mannes of fight. very bloudy. Whoſoeuer falles into their hands neuer eſcapes aliue, and ſo cruell they are in theſe murders, that nothing can ſatiſfie them but the very heart bloud of thoſe whom they kill. And who are they (thinke you) that thus goe to the pot? Alaſſe! Innocent Lambs, Shéep, Calues, Pigges, &c. Poultrie-Ware are more churliſhly handled by them, then poore priſoners are by kéepers in the counter it'h Pouitry. A gooſe comming amongſt them learnes to be wiſe, that hée neuer will be Gooſe any more. The bloudy trage dies of al theſe, are only acted by the women, who carrying long kniues or Skeanes vnder their mantles, doe thus play their parts: The Stage is ſome large Heath: or a Firre-buſh Common, far from any houſes: Vpon which caſting them-ſelues into a King, they incloſe the Murdered, till the Maſſacare be finiſhed. If any paſſenger come by, and wondring to ſée ſuch a coniuring circle kept by Hel hounds & demaund what ſpirits they raiſe there: one of the Murderers ſteps to him, poyſons him with ſwéete wordes and ſhifts him off, with this lye, that one of the women is falne in labour: but if any made Hamlet hearing this, ſmell villanie, & ruſh in by violence to fée what the tawny. Diuels are dooing, then they excuſe the fact, lay the blame on thoſe that are the actors, a perhaps (it

they ſée no remedie) deliuer them to an officer, to be had to puniſhment: But by the way a reſcue is ſurely laid, and very valiantly (tho very villanouſly) doe they fetch them off, and guard them.
                     The Cabbines where theſe Land-pyrates lodge in the night, are the Out-barnes of Farmers and Huſbandmen, (in ſome poore Village or other) who dare not deny them, for feare they ſhould ere Morning haue their thatched houſes burning about their eares: in theſe Barnes, are both their Cooke-rooines, their Supping Parlors, and their Bed-chambers: for there they dreſſe after a beaſtly manner, what ſoeuer they purchaſt after a théeuiſh faſhion: ſometimes they eate Veniſon, & haue Gray-hounders that kill it for them, but if they had not, they are Houndes themſeiues and are damnable Hunters after fleſh: Which appeares by their vgly-faced queanes that follow them, with whom in theſe barnes they lye, as Swine doe together in Hogſties.
                     Theſe Barnes are the beds of Inceſts, Whoredomes His qualities whilſt he lies intrenched. Adulteries, and of all other blacke and deadly-damned Impieties; here growes the curſed Tree of baſtardie, that is ſo fruitfull: here are written the Bookes of all Blaſphemies, Swearings and Curſes, that are ſo dreadfull to be read. Yet the ſimple country-people will come running out of their houſes to gaze vpon them, whilſt in the meane time one ſteales into the next Roome, and brings away whatſoeuer he can lay hold on. Vpon daies of paſtime and libertie, they Spred themſelues in ſmall companies amongſt the Villages: and when young maids and batchelers (yea ſometimes old doting fooles; that ſhould be beaten to this world of villanies, and forewarn others (doe flocke about them, they then profeſſe ſkil in Palmeſtry, & (forſooth) can What peeces of deſperate ſeruice hee ventures vpon. tell fortunes, which for the moſt part are infallibly true, by reaſon that they worke vpon rules, which are grounded vpon certamty: for one of them will tell you that you ſhall ſhortly haue ſome euill lucke fall vpon you, & within halfe an houre after you ſhall find your pocket pick'd, or your

purſe cut. Theſe are thoſe Egiptian Graſhoppers that eate vp the fruites of the Earth, and deſtroy the poore corne fieldes: to ſwéepe whoſe ſwarmes out of this kingdome, there are no other meanes but the ſharpnes of the moſt infamous and baſeſt kinds of puniſhment. For if the vgly body of this Monſter be ſuffred to grow and fatten it ſelfe with miſchiefes and diſorder, it will haue a necke ſo Sinewy & ſo brawny, that the arme of the law will haue much a doe to ſtricke of the Head, ſithence euery day the members of it increaſe, and it gathers new ioints and new forces by Priggers, Anglers, Cheators, Morts, Yeomens Daughters (that haue taken ſome by blowes, and to auoid ſhame, fall into their Sinnes) and other Seruants, both men and maides, that haue béene pilferers, with all the reſt of that Damned Regiment, marching together in the firſt Army of the Bel-man, who running away from their own Coulours (which are bad ynough) ſerue vnder theſe, being the worſt. Lucifers Lanſprizado that ſtood alooft to behold the muſtrings of theſe Hell-hounds tooke delight to ſée them Double their Fyles ſo nimbly, but held it no pollicy to come néere them (for the Diuell him-ſelfe durſt ſcarſe haue done that.) Away therefore hée gallops, knowing that at one time or other they would all come to fetch their pay in Hell.
                  
                  
                     The infection of the Suburbs. CHAP. IX.
                     THe Infernall Promoter being wearied with riding vp and downe the Country, was glad when hée had gotten Citie ouer his head, but the Citie being not able to hold him within the fréedome, becauſe hée was a Forrener, the gates were ſette wide open for him to paſſe through, and into the Suburbes hée went. And what ſaw hée there? More Ale houſes than there are Tauernes in all Spayne and France. Are they ſo dry in the Suburbes? Yes, pockily dry. What ſaw he beſides?
                     
                        
Hée ſaw the dores of notorious Carted Bawdes, (like Hell gates) ſtand night and day wide open, with a paire of Harlots in Taffata gownes (like two painted poſts) Noctes atque dies patet atri Ianua Ditis. garniſhing out thoſe dores, being better to the houſe then a Double ſigne: when the dore of a poore Artificer (if his childe had died but with one Token of death about him) was cloſe ram'd vp and Guarded for feare others ſhould haue béene infected: Yet the plague that a Whorehouſe layes vpon a Citie is worſe, yet is laughed at: if not laughed at, yet not looked into, or if looked into Wincked at.
                     The Tradeſman hauing his houſe locked vp, looſeth his cuſtomers, is put from worke and vndone: whilſt in the meane time the ſtrumpet is ſet on worke and maintained (perhaps) by thoſe that vndoe the other: giue thankes O wide mouth'd Hell! laugh Lucifer at this, Dance for ioy all you Diuells.
                     
                        Belzebub kéepes the Regiſter booke, of all the Bawdes, Panders and Curtizans: & he knows, that theſe Suburb ſinners haue no landes to liue vpon but their legges: euery prentice paſſing by them, can ſay, There ſits a whore: Without putting them to their booke, they will ſweare ſo much themſelues: if ſo, are not Counſtables, Churchwardens, Bayliffes, Beadels, other Officers, Pillars and Pillowes to all the villanies, that are by theſe committed? Are they not parcell-Bawdes to wincke at ſuch damned abuſes, conſidering they haue whippes in their owne handes, and may draw bloud if they pleaſe? Is not the Land-lord of ſuch rentes the Graund-Bawde? and the Dore-Kéeping miſtreſſe of ſuch a houſe of ſinne, but his Vnder-Bawd? ſithence hée takes twenty pounds rent euery yeare, for a vaulting ſchoole (which from no Artificer liuing by the hardneſſe of the hand could be worth fiue pound.) And that twenty pound rent, hée knowes muſt be preſt out of petticoates:) his mony ſmells of ſinne, the very ſiluerlookes pale, becauſe it was earned by luſt.
                     How happy therefore were Cities if they had no Suburbes, ſithence they ſerue but as caues, where monſters

are bred vp to deuoure the Cities them-ſelues? Would the Diuell hire a villaine to ſpil bloud? there he ſhall finde him. One to blaſpheme? there hée hath choice. A Pandar that would court a matron at her praiers? he is there. A cheator that would turne his owne father a begging? Hée is there too: A harlot that would murder her new borne Infant? She lies in there.
                     What a wretched wombe hath a ſtrumpet, which being (for the moſt part) barren of Children, is notwithſtanding the onely Bedde that bréedes vp theſe Serpente? vpon that one ſtalke grow all theſe miſchiefes. Shee is the Cockatrice that hatcheth all theſe egges of euills. When the diuell takes the Anatomy of all damnable ſinnes, he lookes onely vpon her body. When ſhe dies, he ſits as her Coroner. When her ſoule comes to hell, all ſhunne that there, as they flie from a body ſtrucke with the plague here ſhee hath her dore-keeper, and ſhe her ſelfe is the Diuells chamber-maide. And yet for all this, that ſhée's ſo dangerous and deteſtable, when ſhe hath croak'd like a Rauen on the Eues, then comes ſhe into the houſe like a Doue. When her villaines (like the mote about a caſtle) are rancke, thicke, and muddy, with ſtanding long together, then (to purge herſelfe) is ſhee dreind out of the Suburbes (as though her corruption were there left behind her) and (as a cléere ſtreame) is let into the Citie.
                     
                        What armor a harlot weares comming out of the Suburbes to beſiege the Citie within the wals.
                        VPon what perch then does ſhe ſit? what part plaies ſhe then? onely the Puritane. If before ſhe ruffled in filkes, now is ſhe more ciuilly attired then a Mid wife. If before ſhe ſwaggred in Tauernes, now with the Snaile ſhe ſtirreth not out of dores. And where muſt her lodging be taken vp, but in the houſe of ſome cittizen, whoſe known reputation, ſhe borrowes (or rather ſteales) putting it on as a cloake to couer her deformities. Yet euen in that, hath ſhe an art too, for he ſhal be of ſuch a profeſſion, that all commers

may enter, without the danger of any eyes to watch them. As for example, ſhe wil lie at ſome Scriueners houſe, and ſo vnder the collour of comming to haue a Bond made, ſhe herſelfe may write Nouerint vniuerſi. And tho the law threaten to hit her neuer ſo often, yet hath ſhe ſubtile defences to ward off the blowes. For, if Gallants haunt the houſe, then ſpreds ſhée theſe collours: ſhe is a captaine or a lieutenants wife in the Low-countries, & they come with letters, from the ſouldier her huſband. If Marchants reſort to her, then hoiſtes ſhée vp theſe ſayles, ſhe is wife to the Maiſter of a ſhippe, & they bring newes that her huſband put in at the Straytes, or at Venice, at Aleppo, Alexandria, or Scanderoon, &c. If ſhop-keepers come to her, with what doe you lacke, in their mouthes, then ſhe takes vp ſuch and ſuch commodities, to ſend them to Rye, to Briſtow, to Yorke, &c. where her huſband dwells. But if the ſtreame of her fortunes runne low, and that none but Apron-men lanch forth there, then kéepes ſhée a polliticke ſempſters ſhop, or ſhée ſtarches them.
                        Perhaps ſhée is ſo polliticke, that none ſhall be noted to How a citie puncke Rangeth. board her: if ſo then ſhe ſailes vpon theſe points of the compaſſe, ſo ſoone as euer ſhée is rig'd, and all her furniture on, forth ſhée lancheth into thoſe ſtréetes that are moſt frequented: where the firſt man that ſhée méetes of her acquaintance, ſhall (without much pulling) get her into a Tauerne: out of him ſhe kiſſes a breakefaſt, and then leaues him: the next ſhée méetes, does vpon as eaſie pullies, draw her to a Tauerne againe, out of him ſhe cogs a dinner, and then leaues him: the third man, ſquires her to a play, which being ended, and the wine offred and taken (for ſhe's on Recuſant, to refuſe any thing) him ſhée leaues too: and being ſet vpon by a fourth, him ſhe anſwers at his own weapon, ſups with him, & drinckes Vpſie Freeze, till the clock ſtriking Twelue, and the Drawers being drowzy, away they march arme in arme, being at euery foot-ſtep fearfull to be ſet vpon by the Band of Halberdiers, that lye ſcowting in rug-gownes to cut off ſuch mid-night ſtraglers. But the

word being giuen, and who goes there, with come before the Conſtable, being ſhot at them, they vaile preſently and come, ſhe taking vpon her to anſwere all the Bil-men and their Leader. Betwéene whom and her, ſuppoſe you heare this ſléepy Dialogue, where haue you bin ſo late? at ſupper forſooth with my Vncle, here, (if he be well bearded) or with my brother (if the haire be but budding forth) and hee is bringing me home. Are you married? yes forſooth: what is your huſband? ſuch a Noble-mans man, or ſuch a Iuſtices Clarke, (And then names ſome Alderman of London, to whom ſhée perſwades herſelfe, one or other of the bench of browne billes are beholding:) where lye you? At ſuch a mans houſe: Sic tenues euaneſcit in Auras: and thus by ſtopping the Conſtables mouth with ſugur-plummes (that is to ſay,) whilſt ſhée poiſons him with ſweet wordes, the puncke vaniſheth. O Lanthorne and Candle-light, how art thou made a blinde Aſſe? becauſe thou haſt but one eye to ſée withall: Be not ſo guld, be not ſo dull in vnderſtanding: doe thou but follow aloofe; thoſe two tame Pigeons, and thou ſhalt finde, that her new Vncle lies by it all that night, to make his kinſ-woman on of mine Aunts: or if ſhée be not in trauell all night, they ſpend ſome halfe an houre together, but what doe they? marry, they doe that which the Conſtable ſhould haue done for them both in the ſtréetes, that is to ſay, commit, commit.
                        
                        You Guardians ouer ſo great a Princeſſe as the eldeſt daughter to King Brutus: you twice twelue fathers and gouernours ouer the Nobleſt Cittie, why are you ſo careful to plant Trees to beautifie your outward walks, yet ſuffer the goodlieſt garden (within) to be ouer-run with ſtincking wéedes: You are the proining kniues that ſhould loppe off ſuch idle, ſuch vnprofitable, and ſuch deſtroying branches from the Vine: The beames of your authoritie ſhould purge the ayre of ſuch infection: your breath of Iuſtice ſhould ſcatter thoſe foggy vapors, & driue them out of your gates, as chaffe toſſed abroad by the windes.
                        
                           
But ſtay: is our walking ſpirit become an Orator to perſwade? no: but the Bel-man of London, with whom he met in this perambulation of his, and to whom hée betraied himſelfe and opened his very boſome, (as hereafter you ſhall heare,) is bould to take vpon him that ſpeakers Office.
                     
                  
                  
                     Of Ginglers. Or the knauery of Horſe-Courſers in Smith-field diſcouered. CHAP. X.
                     AT the end of fierce battailes, the onely Rendeuouz for lame ſouldiers to retire vnto, is an Hoſpitall: and at the end of a long Progreſſe, the onely ground for a tyred Iade to runne in, is ſome blind country faire, where hée may be ſure to be ſold. To theſe Markets of vnwholeſome Horſe-fleſh, (like ſo many Kites to f
                           •
                        ede vpon Carion) doe all the Horſe-courſers (that rooſt about the Citie) flye one after another. And whereas in buying all other commodities, men ſtriue to haue the beſt, how great ſo euer the price be, onely the Horſecouſer is of a baſer minde, for the worſt Horſe-fleſh (ſo it be cheape) does beſt goe downe with him. Hée cares for nothing but a fayre out-ſide, and a hanſome ſhape (like thoſe that hyre whores,) though there be an hundred diſeaſes within: he (as the other) ventures vpon them all.
                     The firſt leſſon therefore that a Horſe-courſer takes out, when he comes to one of theſe Markets, is to make choyce of ſuch Nags, Geldings, or Mares, eſpecially, as are fat, fayre, and well-fauor'd to the eye: and becauſe men delight to behold beautifull colours, and thath ſome colours are more delicate (euen in beaſts) then others are, hée will ſo néere as hée can, bargaine for thoſe horſes that haue the daintieſt complexion: as the Milke-white, the Gray, the Dapple-Gray, the Cole blacke with his proper markes (as the white ſtarre in the fore-head, the

white héele, &c.) or the bright Bay, with the like proper 
                           ••
                        arkes alſo. And the goodlier proportion the beaſt carries or the fayrer markes or colour that hée 
                           •
                        eares, are or 
                           ••
                        ght to be watch-words as it were to him that after
                        
                           •
                        ards buyes him of the horſe courſer, that hée be not coozend with an ouer-price for a had peny-worth, becauſe ſuch Horſes (belonging for the moſt part to Gentlemen) are ſeldome or neuer ſolde away, but vpon ſome fowle quality, or ſome incurable diſeaſe, which the Beaſt is falne into. The Beſt colours are therefore the beſt Cloakes to hide thoſe fa
                           ••
                        ts that moſt diſfigure a Horſe: and next vnto colour, his Pace doth often-times deceiue and goe beyond a very quicke Iudgement.
                     Some of theſe Horſe-hunters, are as nimble Knaues in finding out the infirmities of a Iade, as a Barber is in drawing of téeth: and albeit (without caſting his water) hée does more readily reckon vp all the Aches, Crampes, Crickes, and whatſoeuer diſeaſe elſe lyes in his bones: and for thoſe diſeaſes ſeemes vtterly to diſlike him, yet if by looking vpon the Dyall within his mouth, he finde that his yeeres haue ſtruck but fiue, ſixe, or ſeuen: and that he prooues but young, or that his diſeaſes are but newly growing vpon him, if they be outward, or haue but hayre and ſkin to hide them, if they be inward, let him ſweare neuer ſo damnably, that it is but a Iade, yet he will be ſure to faſten vpon him.
                     So then, a Horſe-courſer to the Merchant, (that out of his ſound iudgement buyes the faireſt, the beſt bred, and the nobleſt Horſes, ſelling them againe for bréede or ſeruice, with plainneſſe and honeſty,) is as the Cheator to the faire Gameſter: hée is indéed a meere Iadiſh Nonopolitane, and deales for none but tyred, tainted, dull and diſeaſed horſes. By which meanes, if his picture The picture of a Horſe-courſer. be drawne to the life, you ſhall finde euery Horſe-courſer for the moſt part to be in quality a coozener, by profeſſion a knau, by his cunning a Varlet, in fayres a Hagling Chapman, in the Citie a Cogging diſſembler,

and in Smith-field a common forſworne Villaine. Hée will ſweare any thing, but the faſter hée ſweares, the more danger tis to beleeue him: In one forenoone, and in ſeiling a Iade not worth fiue Nobles, will hée forſweare himſelfe fiftéene times, and that forſwearing too ſhall be by Equiuocation. As 
                           •
                        ée example, if an ignorant Chap-man comming to beatethe price, ſay to the Horſe-courſer your nagge is verie old, or thus many yéeres old, and reckon ten or twelue: hée claps his hand preſently on the buttocke of the beaſt, and prayes he may be damb's if the Horſe be not vnder fiue, meaning that the horſe is not vnder fiue yeeres of age, but that hée ſtandes vnder fiue of his fingers, when his hand is clap'd vpon him. Theſe Horſe-courſers are called Iynglers, and theſe Iynglers hauing laide out theirmony on a company of Iades, at ſome drunken fayre, vp to London they driue them, and vpon the Market day into Smithfield brauely come they prauncing. But leaſt their Iades ſhould ſhew too many horſe-trickes in Smith-field, before ſo great an Audience as commonly reſort thither, their maiſters doe therefore Schooe them at home after this manner.
                     
                        How a Horſe-courſer workes vpon a Iade in his own Stable, to make him ſeruiceable for a couzening Race in Smith-field.
                        THe Glanders in a horſe is ſo filthy a diſeaſe, that he who is troubled with it can neuer kéepe his noſe cleane: ſo that when ſuch a foule-noſed Iade happens How a Horſe-courſer may coozen his chap-man with a horſe that hath the Glanders. to ſerue a Horſe-courſer, hée hath more ſtrange pil
                              •
                            (then a Pothecarie makes) for the purging of his head, he knows that a horſe with ſuch a qualitie, is but a beaſtly companion to trauell vpon the high way with any Gentleman.
                        Albeit therefore that the Glanders haue played with his Noſe ſo long, that hée knowes not how to mend him-ſelfe,

but that diſeaſe being ſuffered to runne vpon him many yeeres together is growne inumcible, yet hath our Ingling Mountihancke Smith-field-rider, a trick to cure him, fiue or ſixe waies: and this is one of them.
                        In the very morning when hée is to be rifled away amongſt the Gamſters in Smithfield, before hée thruſt his head out of his Maiſters Stable, the Horſe courſer tickles his noſe (not with a Pipe of Tobacco) but with a good quantitie of the beſt Néeſing powder that can be gotten: which with a quil being blown vp into the Noſtrills, to make it worke the better, he ſtands poaking there vp and downe with two long feathers plucked from the wing of a Gooſe, they being dipt in the iuyce of Garlicke, or in any ſtrong oyle, and thruſt vp to the verie top of his head, ſo farre as poſſibly they can reach, to make the pore dumbe beaſt auoide the filth from his noſtrils, which hée will doe in great aboundance: this being done, hée comes to him with a new medicine for a ſicke horſe, and mingling the iuyce of Bruzed Garlike, ſharpe biting Muſtard, and ſtrong Ale together, into both the Noſtrils (with a Horne) is powred a good quantitie of this filthy Broth, which by the hand being held in by ſtopping the noſtrils cloſe together, at length with a little néezzing more, his noſe will be cleaner then his Maiſters the Horſe-courſer, and the filth be ſo Artificially ſtop'd that for eight or ten houres a Iade will holde vp his head with the prowdeſt Gelding that gallops ſcornefully by him, and neuer haue néed of wiping.
                        This is one of the Comedies a Common horſe-courſer playes by himſelfe at home, but if when hée comes to act the ſecond part abroad, you would diſgrace him, and haue him hiſſed at for not playing the Knaue well, then handle him thus: If you ſuſpect that the Nagge which hee would Iade you with, be troubled with that or any other ſuch like diſeaſe, gripe him hard about the weſand pipe, cloſe toward the roofe of the tongue, and holding

him there ſo long and ſo forcibly, that hée cough twice or thrice, if then (after you let goe your hold) his chappes begin to walke as if hée were chewing downe a Horſeleafe, ſhake hands with old Mounſier Cauiliero Horſe-Courſer, but clap no bargain vpon it, for his Iade is as full of infirmitie, as the Maiſter Villanie.
                     
                     
                        Other Gambals that Horſe-courſers practiſe vpon Foundred Horſes, old Lades, &c.
                        
                           SMithfield is the Stage vpon which the Mountibanke Engliſh Horſe-courſer aduancing his banner, defies any diſeaſe that dares touch his Prancer: Inſomuch that if a horſe be ſo olde, as that foure legs can but carry him, yet ſhall he beare the markes of an Nag not aboue ſixe or ſeauen yeeres of age: and that counterfeit badge of youth, hée weares thus: The Horſe-courſer with a ſmall round yron made very hot, burnes two blacke hoſes in the top of the two out-moſt téeth of each ſide the out-ſide of the Horſe mouth vpon the nether téeth, and ſo likewiſe of the téeth of the vpper chap, which ſtand oppoſit to the nether, the qualitie of which markes is to ſhew that a horſe is but yong: but if the iade be ſo old that thoſe téeth are dropt out of his head, then is there a tricke ſtill to be fumbling about his old chaps, and in that ſtrooking his chin, to pricke his lips cloſely with a pin or a naile, till they be ſo tender, that albeit be were a giuen horſe none could be ſuffered to looke him in the mouth (which is one of the beſt Calender to tell his age) but a reaſonable ſighted eye (without helpe of ſpectacles) may eaſily diſcouer this Iugling, becauſe it is groſſe and common.
                        If now a Horſe (hauing béene a ſore Trauailer) happen by falling into a cold ſweate to be Foundred, ſo that (as if hée were druncke or had the ſtaggers) he can ſcarce ſtand on his legges, then will his maiſter, before hée enter into the liſts of the field againſt all commers, put him into a villanous chaſing by ryding him vp and

downe a quarter, or halfe an houre, till his limbes be thoroughly heated, and this hée does, becauſe ſo long as hée can diſcharge that falſe fire, or that (being ſo collerickly hatte) hée tramples onely vpon ſoft ground, a very cunning Horſeman ſhall hardly finde where his ſhooe wrings him, or that hée is Fowndred. And (to blinde the eyes of the Chapman) the Horſe-courſer will be euer tickling of him with his wand, becauſe hée may not by ſtanding ſtill like an Aſſe, ſhew of what houſe he comes.
                        If a Horſe come into the fielde (like a lame ſoldier) Halting, hée has not Crutches made for him, as the ſoldier hath, but becauſe you ſhall thinke the Horſes ſhooemaker hath ſerued him like a Iade, by not fitting his foote well, the ſhooe ſhall be taken off purpoſely from that foote which halts, as though it had béene loſt by chance: And to proue this, witneſſes ſhall come in, if at leaſt twenty or thirty damnable oathes can be taken, that the want of the Shooe is onely the cauſe of his Halting. But if a Horſe cannot be luſtie at legges, by reaſon that either his hoofes be not good, or that there be Splents, or any other Eye-ſore about the nether Ioynt, the Horſe-courſer vſes him then as Cheating Swaggerers handle Nouices, what they cannot winne by the Dyce, they will haue by Foule-play: and in that foule manner, deales hée with the poore horſe, ryding him vp and downe in the thickeſt and the durtieſt places, till that durt, like a ruffled boote drawne vpon an ill-fauour'd gowtie legge, couer the Iades infirmitie from the eye of the Buyer.
                        
                     
                     
                        How a Horſe-courſer makes a Iade that has no ſtomach, to eate Lamb-pye.
                        ALbeit Lamb-pie be good meat vpon a table, yet it is ſo offenſiue to a horſes ſtomach, that he had rather be fed a moneth together with muſtie oates, than to taſte it: Yet are not all Horſes bidden to this Lamb-pye-Breakefaſts,
                           
but onely ſuch as are dyeted with no other meate: and thoſe are Dull, Blockiſh, Sullen, and heauie footed Iades, When-ſoeuer therefore a Horſe-courſer hath ſuch a Dead commoditie, as a Lumpiſh ſlow Iade, that goes more heauily then a Cow when ſhée trots, and that neither by a ſharpe bitte nor a tickling ſpurre he can put him out of his lazie and dogged pace, what does hée with him then? Onely hee giues him Lambpie. That is to ſay, euery morning when the Horſe-courſer comes into the Stable, hée takes vp a tough round cudgell, and neuer leaues fencing with his Quarter-ſtaffe at the poore Horſes ſides and buttockes, till with blowes hée hath made them ſo tender, that the verry ſhaking of a bough will be able to make the horſe ready to runne out of his wittes. And to kéepe the horſe ſtill in this mad mood, becauſe he ſhall not forget his leſſon, his maiſter will neuer come néer him, but he will haue a fling at him: If he doe touch him, hée ſtrikes him: if he ſpeakes to him, there is but a word and a blow: if he doe but looke vpon him, the Horſe flings and takes on, as though hée would breake through the walles, or had béene a Horſe bredde vp in Bedlam amongſt mad folkes. Hauing thus gotten this hard leſſon by heart, forth comes he into Smithfield to repeat it, where the Rider ſhall no ſooner leap into the ſaddle but the Horſe-courſer giuing the Iade (that is halfe ſcarred out of his wits already) thrée or foure good bangs, away flies Bucephalus as if young Alexander were vpon his backe. No ground can holde him, no bridle raine him in, hée gallops away as if the Diuell had hired him of ſome Hackney-man, and ſcuds through thicke and thinne, as if crackers had hung at his héeles. If his taile play the wag, and happen to whiſke vp and downe (which is a ſigne that hée does his feates of Actiuitie, like a Tumblers prentice, by compulſion and without taking pleaſure in them (then ſhall you ſée the Horſe-courſer laie about him like a thraſher, till with blowes hée make him carry his taile to his Buttockes:

which in a Horſe (contrary to the nature of a Dog) is an argument that hée hath mettell in him and Spirit, as in the other it is the note of cowardiſe.
                        Theſe and ſuch other baſe iuglings are put in practiſe, by the Horſe-courſer; in this manner comes hée arm'd into the field: with ſuch bad and deceiptfull commodities does he furniſh the markets. Neither ſteps he vpon the diuels ſtage alone, but others are likewiſe Actors in the ſelfe-ſame Scene, and ſharers with him: for no ſooner ſhall mony be offred for a Horſe, but preſently one Snake thruſts out his head and ſtings the buyer with falſe praiſes of the Horſes goodneſſe: An other throwes out his poiſoned hooke and whiſpers in the Chapmans erre, that vpon his knowledge ſo much or ſo much hath béene offred by foure or fiue, and would not be taken: and of theſe Rauens there be ſundry neſts, but all of them as blacke in ſoule as the Horſe-courſer (with whom they are yoaked) is in conſcience. This Regiment of Horſe-men is therefore deuided into foure Squadrons. viz.
                        
                        
                           1 When Horſe-courſers trauaile to country faires, they are called Iynglers.
                           
                           2 When they haue the leading of the Horſe, and ſerue in Smithfield, they are Drouers.
                           
                           3 They that ſtand by and cony-catch the Chapman, either with Out-bidding, falſe-praiſes, &c. are called Goades.
                           
                           4 The hoyes, ſtriplings, &c. that haue the ryding of the Iades vy and downe, are called Skip-iackes.
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     Iacke in a Boxe: Or a new kinde of Cheating, teaching how to change golde into Siluer: vnto which is added a Map, by which a man may learne how to trauell all ouer England, and haue his charges borne. CHAP. XI.
                     HOw many Trees of Euill are growing in this countrie, Terramalos homines nunc educat. how tall they are, how Mellow is their fruit, and how gréedily gathered, ſo much ground doe they take vp, and ſo thickly doe they ſtand together, that it ſéemeth a kingdom can bring forth no more of their nature, yes, yes, there are not halfe ſo many Riuers in Hell, in which a ſoule may ſaile to damnation, as there are Blacke 
                        Noxia mille modis Laceae. bitur vmbra. 
                        Streames of Miſchiefe and Villany (beſides all thoſe which in our Now-two Voyages wée haue ventured ſo many leagues vp, for diſcouerie) in which thouſandes of people are continually ſwimming, and euerie minute in danger vtterly to be caſt away.
                     The Horſe-Courſer of hell, after hée had durtyed him-ſelfe Abuſes of race-running glanced at. with ryding vp and downe Smithfield, and hauing his beaſt vnder him, gallopped away amaine to beholde a race of fiue myles by a couple of Running-Horſes, vpon whoſe ſwiftneſſe great ſummes of money were laide in wagers. In which Schoole of Horſe-manſhip (wherein for the moſt part none but Gallants are the Studients) hée conſtrued but ſtrange Lectures of Abuſes: hée could make large Comments vpon thoſe that are the Runners of thoſe Races, and could teach others how to looſe fortie or fiftie pound pollitickely in the fore-noone, and in the after-noone (with the ſelfe-ſame Gelding) to winne a thouſand markes in fiue or ſixe myles riding. Hée could tell how Gentlemen are fetched in and made younger brothers, and how your new Knight comes to be a Couzen of this Race. Hée could draw the true pictures of ſome fellowes, that dyet theſe Running-Horſes,
                        
who for a bribe of forty ſhillings can by a falſe Dye, make their owne Maiſters looſe a hundred pound a race. Hée could ſhew more craftie Foxes in this wildegooſe chaſe, then there are white Foxes in Ruſſia, and more ſtrange Horſe-trickes plaide by ſuch Riders, then Bankes his curtall did euer practiſe (whoſe Gamballs of the two, were the honeſter.)
                     But becauſe this ſort of Birdes haue many feathers to looſe, before they can féele any colde, hée ſuffers them to make their owne flight, knowing that prodigalls doe but teſt at the ſtripes which other mens rods giue them, and neuer complaine of ſmarting, till they are whip'd with their owne.
                     In euerie Corner did he finde Serpents ingendering: vnder euerie roofe ſome impyetie or other lay breeding: Vix ſunt homines hoc nomine dignis, quam
                              
                                 
                              
                              que
                            lupi laeuae plus feritatis habent. but at laſt perceiuing that the moſt part of men were by the ſorcerie of their own diueliſh conditions tranſformed into Wolues, and being ſo changed were more brutiſh & bloody, then thoſe that were Wolues by nature: his ſpléene leap'd againſt his ribbes with laughter, and in the height of that ioy, reſolued to write the villanies of the world in Folio, and to dedicate them in priuate to his Lord and Maiſter, becauſe hée knew him to be an openhanded patron, albeit he was no great louer of ſchollers.
                     But hauing begunne one picture of a certaine ſtrange Beaſt, (called Iacke in a Boxe) that onely (becauſe the Citie had giuen money already to ſée it) hée finiſhed: and in theſe colours was Iacke in a Boxe drawne. It hath Iacke in a Box deſcribed. the head of a man (the face well bearded) the eyes of a Hawke, the tongue of a Lap-wing, which ſaies heere it is, when the neſt is a good way off: it hath the ſtomacke of an Eſtrich, and can diſgeſt ſiluer, as eaſily as that Bird doth Yron. It hath the pawes of a Beare inſtead of handes, for whatſoeuer it faſtneth vpon it houldes: From the middle downe-wardes, it is made like a Gray-hound, and is ſo ſwift of foote, that if it once get the Start of you, a whole Kennel of Hounds
                        
cannot ouertake it. It loues to hunt dry-foote, and can Scent a Traine in no ground ſo well as the Citie, and yet not in all places of the Citie. But hée is beſt in Scenting betwéene Ludgate and Temple-barre: and it is thought that his next hunting ſhall be betwéene Lumbard-ſtreete and the Gold ſmithes Row in Cheadeſide. Thus much for his outward parts, now you ſhall haue him vnrip'd, and ſée his inward.
                     This Iacke in a Boxe, or this Deuill in mans ſhape, wearing (like a player on a Stage, good cloathes on his His exerciſe. backe, comes to a Golde-ſmithes Stall, to a Drapers, a Haberdaſhers, or into any other ſhop where hée knows good ſtore of ſiluer faces are to be ſéene. And there drawing foorth a faire new boxe, hammered all out of Siluer Plate, hée opens it, and powres foorth twentie or forty Twentie-ſhilling-peeces in New Golde. To which heape of Worldly-Temptation, thus much hée addes in words, that either hee him-ſelfe, or ſuch a Gentleman (to whom hée belongs) hath an occaſion for foure or fiue daies to vſe fortie pound. But becauſe hée is verie ſhortly, (nay hée knows not how ſuddenly) to trauaile to Venice, to Ieruſalem or ſo, and would not willingly be diſfurniſhed of Golde, hée dooth therefore requeſt the Cittizen to lend (vpon thoſe Forty twenty-ſhilling-peeces) ſo much in white money (but for foure, fiue or ſixe daies at moſt) and for his good-will hée ſhall receiue any reaſonable ſatiſfaction. The Cittizen (knowing the pawne to be better then Sitiens fugientia captat Flumina: quid rides? mutato nomine, de te Fabula narratur. a Bond) powres downe fortie pound in ſiluer, the other drawes it, and leauing ſo much golde in Hoſtage, marcheth away with Bag and Baggage.
                     
                     Fiue daies being expired, Iacke in a boxe (according to his Bargaine) being a man of his word, comes againe to the Shop or ſtall (at which hée angles for freſh fiſh) and there caſting out his line with the ſiluer hooke, that is to ſay, pouring out the fortie pound which hée borrowed, The Cittizen ſends in, or ſteps himſelfe for the Boxe with the Golden deuill in it: it is opened, and the army of

angels being muſtred together, they are all found to be there. The Boxe is ſhut agen and ſet on the Stall, whilſt the Cittizen is telling of his money: But whilſt this muſicke is ſounding, Iacke in a Boxe actes his part in a dumb ſhew thus; hée ſhifts out of his fingers another Boxe of the Tame mettall and making, that the former beares, which ſecond Boxe is filled onely with ſhillings and being poized in the hand, ſhall ſéeme to cary the weight of the former, and is clap'd down in place of the firſt. The Cittizen in the meane time (whilſt this Pit-fall is made for him) telling the fortie poundes, mi
                           ••
                        eth thirtie or fortie ſhilling in the whole ſumme, at which the Iacke in a Boxe ſtarting backe (as if it were a matter ſtrange vnto him) at laſt making a gathering within himſelfe) for his wits, hée remembers (hée ſaies) that hée ſaid by ſo much money as is wanting (of the fortie poundes) to diſpatch ſome buſineſſe or other, and forgot to put it into the Bag againe, notwithſtanding, hée intreates the Cittizen, to kéepe his Golde ſtill, hée will take the white money home to fetch the reſt, and make vp the Summe, his abſence ſhall not be aboue an houre or two: before which time hée ſhall be ſure to heare of him, and with this the little Diuell vaniſheth, carrying that away with him, which in the end will ſend him to the Gallowes, (that is to ſay, his owne Gold,) and fortie pound beſides of the Shop-kéepers, which hée borrowed, the other being Multa petentibus deſunt multa. glad to take fortie ſhillings for the whole debt, and yet is ſoundly box'd for his labour.
                     This Iacke in a Boxe, is yet but a Chicken, and hath laide verie few Egges, if the Hang-man doe not ſpoyle it with treading, it will prooue an excellent Henne of the Game. It is a knot of Cheators but newly tyed, they are not yet a company. They flie not like Wilde-Géeſe (in ſtockes) but like Kites (ſingle) as loath that any ſhould ſhare in their pray. They haue two or thrée names, (yet they are no Romanes, but errant Rogues) for ſome-times they call themſelues Iacke in a Boxe,
                        
but now that their infantrie growes ſtrong, and that it is knowne abroad, that they carrie the Philoſophers ſtone about them, and are able of fortie ſhillings to make fortie pound, they therefore vſe a deade March, and the better to cloake their villanies, doe put on theſe Maſking ſuites: viz.
                     
                     
                        1 This art or ſleight of changing golde into ſiluer, is called Trimming.
                        
                        2 They that practiſe it, terme them-ſelues Sheepe-ſhearers.
                        
                        3 The Gold which they bring to the Cittizen, is called Iaſons Fleece.
                        
                        4 The ſiluer which they picke vp by this wandring, is White-wooll.
                        
                        5 They that are Cheated by Iacke in a Boxe, are called Bleaters.
                        
                     
                     Oh Fléete-ſtréete, Fléete-ſtréete! how haſt thou béene trimd, waſhed, Shauen and Polde, by theſe déere and damnable Barbers? how often haſt thou mette with theſe Sheepe-ſhearers? how many warme flakes of wooll haue they pulled from they Backe, yet if thy Bleating can make the flockes that graze néere vnto thée and round about thée, to lift vp their eyes, & to ſhunne ſuch Wolues and Fores, when they are approaching, or to haue them worryed to death before they ſucke the blood of others, thy miſfortunes are the leſſe, becauſe thy neighbours by them ſhall be warned from danger.
                     Many of thy Gallants (O Fléete-ſtréete) haue ſpent hundreds of poundes in thy preſence, and yet neuer were ſo much as drunke for it: but for euerie fortye pound that thou layeſt out in this Indian commoditie (of Gold) thou haſt a Siluer Boxe beſtowed vpon thée, to carry thy Tobacco in, becauſe thou haſt euer loued that coſtlye and Gentleman-like Smoake. Iacke in a Boxe hath thus plaide his part. There is yet another Actor to ſtep vpon the ſtage, and he ſéemes to haue good ſkil in Coſmography for hée holdes in his hand a Map, wherein hée hath layde

downe a number of Shires in England, and with ſmall How to trauaile without charges. prickes hath beaten but a path, teaching how a men may eaſily, (tho not verry honeſtly) trauell from Country to Country, and haue his charges borne; and thus it is.
                     He that vnder-takes this ſtrange iourney, layes his firſt plotte how to be turned into a Braue man, which he findes can be done by none better then by a truſty Tailor: working therefore hard with him, till his ſuite be granted, Out of the Citie, being mounted on a good gelding hée rides, vpon his owne bare credit, not caring whether hée trauell to méete the Sunne at this Ryſing, or at his going downe. Hée knowes his Kitchin ſmokes in euery countie, and his table is couered in euery Shire. For when he comes within a mile of the Towne, where hée meanes to catche Quailes, ſetting Spurres to his Horſe, away hée gallops, with his cloake off (for in theſe Beſeigings of Townes hée goes not armed with any, his Hatte thruſt into his Hoſe, as if it were loſt, and onely an emptie paire of Hangers by his ſide, to ſhew that hée had béene diſarmed. And you muſt note, that this Hot-ſpurre does neuer ſet vpon any places but onely ſuch, where hée knowes (by intelligence) there are ſtore of Gentlemen, or wealthy Farmers at the leaſt. Amongſt whom when hée is come, hée tels with diſtracted lookes, and a voice almoſt breathleſſe, how many Villaines ſet vpon him, what golde and ſiluer they tooke from him, what woods they are fled into, from what part of England hée is come, to what place he is going, how farre hée is from home, how farre from his fornies end, or from any Gentleman of his acquaintance, and ſo liuely perſonates the lying Greeke (Synon) in telling a lamentable tale, that the mad Troianes (the Gentlemen of the towne, beléeuing him, and the rather becauſe hée carries the ſhape of an honeſt man in ſhew, and of a Gentleman in his apparrell) are liberall of their purſes, lending him money to beare him on his iourney, to pay which hée offers either his bill or bond (naming his lodging

in London) or giues his word (as he is a Gentleman) which they rather take, knowing the like miſfortune may be theirs at any time.
                     And thus with the feathers of other birdes, is this Monſter ſtucke, making wings of ſundry faſhions, with which hée thus baſely flies ouer a whole kingdom. Thus doth he ride from Towne to Towne, from Citie to Citie as if he were a Land-lord in euery ſhire, and that hée were to gather Rents vp of none but Gentlemen.
                     
                     There is a Twin-brother to this Falſegalloper, and hée cheats Inne-keepers onely, or their Tapſters, by learning firſt what Country-men they are, and of what kindred: and then bringing counterfeit letters of commendations from ſuch an Vncle, or ſuch a Coozen (wherin is requeſted, that the Bearer thereof may be vſed kindely) he lyes in the Inne till he haue fetcht ouer the Maiſter or ſeruant for ſome mony (to draw whom to him he hath may hookes) and when they hang faſt enough by the gils, vnder water Our Sharke diues, and is neuer ſéene to ſwimme againe in that Riuer.
                     Vpon this Scaffold; alſo might be mounted a number Trauelling Emperickes. of Quack-ſaluing Emperickes, who ariuing in ſome Country towne, clappe vp their Terrible Billes, in the Market-place, and filling the Paper with ſuch horrible names of diſeaſes, as if euery diſeaſe were a Diuell, and that they could coniure them out of any Towne at their pleaſure. Yet theſe Beggerly Mountibanckes are méere Coozeners, and haue not ſo much ſkill as Horſeléeches. The poore people not giuing money to them to be cured of any infirmities, but rather with their money buying worſe infirmities of them.
                     Vpon the ſame poſt, doe certain ſtragling Scribling 
                        Strowling ſchoolemaiſter. 
                        Writers deſerue to haue both their names and themſelues hung vp, in ſtéede of thoſe faire tables which they hang vp in Townes, as gay pictures to intice Schollers to them: the Tables are written with ſundry kindes of hands, but not one finger of thoſe hands (not one letter

there) drops from the Penne of ſuch a falſe wandring Scribe. Hée buyes other mens cunning good cheape in London, and ſels it déere in the Country. Theſe Swallowes bragge of no qualitie in them ſo much as of ſwiftneſſe. In foure and twenty houres, they will worke foure and twenty wonders, and promiſe to teach thoſe, that know no more what belongs to an A then an Aſſe, to be able (in that narrow compaſſe) to write as faire and as faſt as a country Vicar, who commonly reads all the Townes Letters.
                     But wherefore doe theſe counterfeit Maiſters of that Noble Science of Writing, kéepe ſuch a floriſhing with the borrowed weapons of other Mens Pennes? onely for this, to gette halfe the Birdes (which they ſtriue to catch) into their hands, that is to ſay, to be payed halfe the money which is agréed vpon for the Scholler, and his neſt being halfe fild with ſuch Gold-finches, hée neuer ſtayes till the reſt be fledge, but ſuffers him that comes next, to beate the buſh for the other halfe. At this Caréere the Ryder that ſet out laſt from Smith field, ſtop'd: and alighting from Pacolet (the horſe that carried him) his nextiourney was made on foote.
                  
                  
                     The Bel-mans ſecond Night-walke. CHAP. XII.
                     
                        SIr Lancelot of the infernall Lake, or the Knight Errant of Hell, hauing thus (like a young Country gentleman) gone round about the Citie, to ſée the ſights not onely within the walles, but thoſe alſo in the Suburbes, was glad when hée ſawe night hauing put on the vizard that Hell lends Inuidia nigris reſtibus, currum inſilit Nox. her (called darkenes to leap into her Coach) becauſe now hée knew hée ſhould méete with other ſtrange birdes

and beaſts fluttring from their neſts, and crawling out of their dennes. His prognoſtication held currant, and the foule weather (which hée fore-told) fell out accordingly. For Candle-light had ſcarce opened his eye (to looke at the Citie, like a gunner ſhooting at a marke,) but fearefully (their féet trembling vnder them) their eyes ſuſpitiouſly rouling from euery nooke to nooke round Noctis & erebi progenies ſunt Dolus, Metus, Miſeria, Fraus, Querelae &c. 
                              〈…〉
                            3. De Nat. Deorum. about them, and their heads (as if they ſtood vpon oyled ſkrewes) ſtill turning backe behinde them, came créeping out of hollow trées, where they lay hidden, a number of couzning Bankrupts, in the ſhapes of Owles, who when the Marſhall of light, the Sunne, went vp and downe to ſearch the Citie, durſt not ſtir abroad, for feare of being houted at and followed by whole flockes of vndone creditors.
                     
                     But now when the ſtage of the world was hung in blacke, they ietted vp and downe like proud Tragedians. O what thankes they gaue to Darkneſſe! what Non verenda, verenda, &c. ſongs they balladed out in praiſe of Night, for beſtowing vpon them ſo excellent a cloake, wherein they might ſo ſafely walke muffled▪ Now durſt they, as if they had béene Conſtables, rap alowd at the dores of thoſe to whom they owed moſt mony, and braue them with hie wordes, tho they payd them not a penny.
                     Now did they boldly ſtep into ſome priuiledged Tauerne, and there drinke healths, dance with Harlots, and pay both Drawers and Fidlers after mid-night with other mens money, and then march home againe feareleſſe of the blowes that any ſhowlder-clapper durſt giue them. Out of another neſt flew certaine Murderers and Theeues in the ſhapes of Skreech-owles, who, being ſet on by the Night, did beate with their bold and venturous fatall wings at the very dores, whereas in former times, their villanies had entred.
                     Not farre from Theſe, came crawling out of their buſhes a company of graue and wealthy Lechers, in the ſhapes of Glowe-wormes, who with Gold, Iyngling in their

pockets, made ſuch a ſhew in the night, that the dores of Sapiens in munera venit adultor, Praebuit ipſa ſinus. Neo poliſti metuunt Deos nec hos reſpcere Deos opinor. Common Brothelryes flew open to receiue them, tho in the day time they durſt not paſſe that way, for feare that noted Currizans ſhould challenge them of acquaintance, or that others ſhould laugh at them to ſée white heads growing vpon greene ſtalkes.
                     
                     Then came forth certaine infamous earthy minded Creatures, in the ſhapes of Snailes, who all the day time hiding their heads in their ſhells, leaſt boies ſhould with two fingers point at them for liuing baſely vpon the proſtitution of their wiues bodies, cared not now, before candle-light to ſhoote out their largeſt Hornes.
                     
                     A number of other monſters, like Theſe, were ſéene (as the ſunne went downe) to venture from their dennes, onely to ingender with Darkneſſe: but candle-lights eyeſight growing dimmer and dimmer, and he at laſt falling ſtarke blind, Lucifers Watch-man went ſtumbling vp and downe in the darke.
                     
                        How to weane Horſes.
                        EVery dore on a ſudden was ſhut, not a candle ſtood péeping through any window, not a Vintner was to be ſéene brewing in his Cellor, not a drunkerd to be met reeling, not a Mouſe to be heard ſtiring: al the citie ſhewed like one Bed, and al in that Bed were ſoundly caſt into a ſléepe. Noyſe made no noiſe, for euery one that wrought with the hammer was put to ſilence. Yet notwithſtanding when euen the Diuel himſelfe could haue béene contented to take a nap, there were few Inkeepers about the towne but had their ſpirits walking. To watch which ſpirits what they doe, our Spy, that came lately out of the Lowercountries, ſtole into one of their Circles, where lurking very cloſely, he perceiued that when all the gueſts were profoundly ſléeping, when Carriers were ſoundly ſnorting, and not ſo much as the chamberlaine of the houſe The knauery. of Hoſtlars. but was layd vp, ſuddenly out of his bed ſtarted an hoſtler, who hauing no apparrell on but his ſhirt, a paire of ſlipſhooes

on his féete, & a Candle burning in his hand, like olde Ieronimo, ſtep'd into the ſtable amongſt a number of poore hungry Iades, as if that night he had béene to ride poaſt to the Diuell. But his iorney not lying that way till ſome other time, he neither bridled nor ſadled any of his fourefooted gueſts that ſtood there at racke and manger, but ſéeing them ſo late at ſupper, and knowing that to ouereate them-ſelues would fill them full of diſeaſes, (they being ſubiect to aboue a hundred & thirty already) hée firſt (without a voyder) after a moſt vnmanerly faſhion tooke away, not onely all the Prouander that was ſet before them, but alſo all the hay, at which before they were glad to licke their lippes. The poore Horſe looked very rufully vpon him for this, but hée rubbing their téeth onely with the end of a Candle (in ſtéed of a Corrall) tolde them, that for their Iadiſh trickes it was now time to weane them: And ſo wiſhing them not to be angry if they lay vpon the hard boards, conſidering all the beddes in the houſe were full, backe againe hée ſtole to his Couch, till breake of day: yet fearing leaſt the ſunne ſhould riſe to diſcouer his knauery, vp hée ſtarted, and into the ſtable hée ſtumbled, ſcarce halfe awake, giuing to euery Iade a bottle of hay for his breake-faſt, but all of them being troubled with the greazy tooth-ach, could eare none; which their maiſters in the morning eſpying ſwore they were either ſullen or els that prouender pricked them.
                        This Hoſtler for this péece of ſeruice was afterwards preferred to be one of the Groomes in Belzebubs ſtable.
                     
                     
                        Another Night-peece drawne in ſundry collours.
                        SHall I ſhew you what other bottomes of miſchiefe Plutos Beadle ſaw wound vpon the blacke ſpindels of the Night, in this his priuy ſearch? In ſome ſtréetes hée met Mid-wiues running, till they ſweat, & following them cloſe at héeles, hée ſpied them to be let in, at the backe dores of houſes, ſeated either in blind lanes, or in by-gardens:

which houſes had roomes builded for the purpoſe, where young Maides, being bigge with child by vnlawfull Fathers, or young wiues (in their huſbands abſcence at ſea, or in the warres) hauing wraſtled with batchilers Matrona
                                 
                                    
                                 
                                 que
                               rara pudica eſt. or married men, till they caught falls, lay ſafely till they were deliuered of them. And for reaſonable ſummes of ſaepe ſolent auro multa ſubeſſe malâ. mony, the baſtards that at theſe windows crept into the world, were as cloſely now and then ſent preſently out of the Pectora tantis obſeſſa malis. world, or elſe were ſo vnmannerly brought vp, that they neuer ſpake to their owne parents that begot them.
                        In ſome ſtréetes he met ſeruants, in whoſe breſt albeit Non ſunt ictu ſerienda leui. the arrowes of the plague ſtucke halfe way, yet by cruelll maiſters were they driued out of dores at mid-night and conuaid to Garden-houſes, where they either died before Quisprodere tanta relatis Funera. next morning, or elſe were carried thither dead in their coffins, as tho they had lien ſicke there before and there had dyed.
                        Now and then at the corner of a turning hée ſpied ſeruants purloying fardels of their maiſters goods, & deliuering them to the hands of common ſtrumpets.
                        This dore opened, and Luſt with Prodigality were heard to ſtand cloſely kiſſing: and (wringing one another by the hand) ſoftly to whiſper out foure or fiue goodnights till they met abroad the next morning.
                        A thouſand of theſe comedies were acted in dumbe ſhew, and onely in the priuate houſes: at which the Diuells meſſenger laught ſo loude that Hell heard him, and for ioy rang foorth loud and luſtie Plaudities. But being driuen into wonder why the night would fall in labour, and bring foorth ſo many Villanies, whoſe births ſhe practiſed to couer (as ſhée had reaſon) becauſe ſo many watchmen were continually called and charged to haue an eye to her dooings, at length hée perceiued that Bats (more vgly and more in number then theſe) might flye vp and downe in darkeneſſe: for tho with their Letherne Wings they ſhould ſtrike the very billes out of thoſe Watchmens handes, ſuch leaden plummets were commonly

hung by ſléepe at all their eyelids, that hardly they could be awakned to ſtrike them agen.
                        On therefore hée walkes, with intent to haſten home, as hauing fil'd his Table-Bookes with ſufficient notes of intelligence. But, at the laſt, méeting with the Bel-man, and not knowing what hée was, becauſe hée went without his Lanthorne and ſome other implements: for the man in the Moone was vp the moſt part of the night, and lighted him which way ſoeuer hée turned, hée tooke him for ſome churliſh Hobgoblin, ſéeing a long ſtaffe on his necke, and therefore to be one of his owne fellowes. The Bel-ringer Smelling what ſtrong ſcent hée had in his noſe, ſoothed him vp, and queſtioning with him how hée had ſpent his time in the citie, and what diſcouery of Land-villanies hée had made in this Iland voiage: tho Mariner of hell, opened his chart, which he had lined with all abuſes, lying either Eaſt, Weſt, North, or South: hée ſhewed how hée had pricked it, vpon what points hée had ſaild, where hée put in: vnder what height hée kept him-ſelfe: where hée went a ſhore, what ſtrange people he met: what land hée had diſcouered, and what commodities hée was laden with from thence. Of all which the Bel-man drawing forth a perfect Map, they parted: which Map hée hath ſet out in ſuch collors as you ſée, tho not with ſuch cunning as hée could wiſh: the paines are his owne, the pleaſure, if this can yéelde any pleaſure, onely yours, on whom hée beſtowes it: to him that embraceth his labours, hée dedicates both them and his loue: with him that either knows not how, or cares not to entertaine them, hée will not be angry, but onely to Him ſayes thus much for a farrewell.
                           
                              —Si quid Nouiſti rectius iſtis,
                              Candidus imperti: Si non, His vtere mecum,
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  Heere endeth the Bel-man.
               
            
         
         
            
               
                  
                  O per ſe O.
                  
                  LONDON: Printed for Iohn Buſbie, and are to be ſould at his ſhop in Fleeteſtreet in S. Dunſtans Church-yard. 1612.
               
            
            
               
                  
                  
                  O, per ſe O.
                  
                     ANd ſo Good-morrow (Goodman Bel-man of London:) your Night-piece is drawne, and my Day-worke is now to begin. Let my morning therefore I pray you be your midnight, and now when all others riſe to goe to their labours, (who could ſcarce ſléepe by reaſon of the noyſe you made with your Clapper) get you to your bed, and dreame vpon your pillow vpon ſome new discouerie. In that Map of Villanies, which you haue drawne in Print already, I like the handling of your Penſill, but not the laying on of your colours: they are ſmooth enough, but you haue not giuen them their true Swéetning, Heightning, and Shadowing. But I cannot blame you, becauſe nocte latent mendae, Women, Horſes and Colours are not to be choſen by candle-light: and you (Gaffer Bell-man) hauing no better guide, it is a wonder you ſtumbled no wore, conſidering you walked i'th darke. If therefore by my ſpectacles (being clearer then yours) I haue diſcouered more neſts of Blacke-birds, (I meane more Villanies of the Diuels owne hatching) then euer flew to your 
                        ••
                     ſt, and were ſold afterwards to ſing in Shops in Paules Church-yard, it ought not to raiſe vp your coller an inch higher for all that, ſithence in both our Land-diſcoueries our ſailes are hoyſted vp onely to doe good to the Common-wealth, and becauſe the Notes which I ſing may appeare to be of mine owne ſetting, and not eyther borrowed or ſtolne from any other. You ſhall know that ſeruing (in the late Quéenes time) many yéeres together

in the office of an High-Conſtable, in that Countie, wherein I now dwell, I drew from the examination of ſuch lewd perſons as came before mée, the truth of all thoſe villaynes which here I publiſh.
                  In the muſtring of this damned Regiment, I found, that whether they were Roagues taken in Romboyles (that is to ſay, in Watches or Wardes) by the Petty Harman Beck, (who in their Company, ſignifies a petty Conſtable) or whether they were ſuch as in the Canting tongue are called Mawnderers (of begging or demanding,) whether they liued in Bowſing Kennes (Ale-houſes) or what other courſe thread of life ſoeuer any of them all ſpunne, it was euer wound in a blacke bottome of the moſt pernicious making vp that the Diuell could teach them: inſomuch that albeit the very Sun-beames could poſſibly haue written downe the diſcouerie of any groſſe villanies, by them committed, they would as eaſily venture vpon damning, in denyall of it with oates, as if there had beene no hell for ſuch offenders.
                  For my better painting forth theſe Monſters, I once tooke one of them into my ſeruice (being a ſturdy, biglimde young fellow) of him I deſired ſome knowledge in their gibriſh, but hée ſwore hée could not Cant, yet his Roague-ſhip ſéeing himſelfe vſed kindly by mée, would now and then ſhoote out a word of Canting, and being thereupon aſked why with oathes hée denyed it before, hée told mée, that they are ſworne neuer to diſcloſe their ſkill in Canting to any Houſholder, for if they doe, the other Mawnderers or Roagues, Mill them (kill them,) yet hée for his part (hée ſaid) was neuer ſworne, becauſe hée was a Clapperdogeon, that is to ſay, a Begger-borne. This Clapperdogeon ſtaid with mée ſo long as hée durſt, and then bingd a waſte in a darkmans, ſtoole away from mée in the night time. So that what intelligence I got from him, or any other trained vp in the ſame Rudiments of Roaguery, I will briefely, plainely, and

truely ſet downe, as I had it from my Diuelliſh Schoolemaiſter, whom I call by the name of O per ſe O.
                  
                  Of him I learned, that the cauſe why ſo many of this wicked Generation wander vp and downe this Kingdome is, the frée command, and abundant vſe they haue of Women: for if you note them well, in their marching, not a Tatterdemalion walkes his round, (be hée young, be hée olde) but hée hath his Mort, or his Doxie at his héeles, (his Woman, or his Whore) for in hunting of their Raſcall-déere this Law they hold, when they come to ſtrike a Doe, if ſhée will not wap for a wyn; let her Trine for a make, if ſhée will not—O per ſe O for a penny, let her hang for a halfe-penny.
                  And this libertie of Wenching is increaſed by the almoſt infinite numbers of tipling houſes, called Bowſing Kennes, or of Stalling Kennes, that is to ſay, houſes where they haue ready money for any ſtolne goods: vnto which neſts, birds flye of the ſame feather, that the owner is of: for if the Ale-ſeller, be a Horſe-ſtealer, a Cut-purſe, a Robber by the High way, a Cheater, &c. of the ſame coate are his gueſts. Theſe houſes are the Nurſeries of Roagues and Thorues: for how could they beſtow cloakes, ſhéetes, ſhirts, and other garments being ſtolne, if they had not Stalling Kennes to receiue them? Why ſhould Grunters (Pigges) goe whining out of the world, hauing their throates cut by Roagues, if they had not Bowſing Kennes to eate them in? In the Ceremonie of whoſe ragged Aſſemblies, the Bell-man a little miſtooke himſelfe, for Driggers, Filchers and Cloyers being all (in Engliſh) Stealers, vſe neyther roaſtmeate, nor ſpits in their Feaſtings, as hée furniſheth them, but when they entend to ſtrike a hand, they leuie their damnable troopes in the day, but they ſally forth, & ſhare the ſpoyles in the night. For ſome one ſturdy hell-hound aboue the reſt, vndertakes to be the Miller) that is to ſay, the Killer:) I hope this can be no diſgrace to any

honeſt Miller, who is no théefe with a falſe Hopper) And this Killer brings to the flaughter-houſe of the Diuell (viz. a Bowſing Kenne) a Bleating Chete, (a Shéepe) Another, Mils a Crackmans, breakes a hedge, and that wood heates the Ouen, whileſt the Shéepe is dreſſed, cut in pieces, and put into earthen Pots, made for the purpoſe to bake their victuals in. The Ouens mouth being thus dawbed vp, out flye the little Diuels (more dambde then the Ouen) eyther to breake an houſe ſome two or thrée miles off, or to doe as bad a Villanie. The piece of Seruice being performed, a Retraite is ſounded, and about mid-night they returne merrily, fall to their good-cheare manfully, and then diuide their ſpoyles of ſtolne ſhirts, ſmockes, or any thing elſe, moſt théeuiſhly. In which Partnerſhip the Hoſt and Hoſteſſe are chiefe ſharers, but ſuch ſubtill ſhop-kéepers are theſe Habberdaſhers of the Diuels ſmall Wares, that they neuer ſet out to ſell, but when the coaſt is cleare, and that (as théeues doe among Brokers) the Hue and Cryes throate be ſtopt that went balling after them: for about a ſeuennight after, (when all is huſhd) to the Stalling Kenne goes the Duds for Loure, to the théeuing houſe are the ſtolne cloathes ſent roundly for money: which being told out and diuided, away flye theſe Rauens ſcatteringly, the next prey that they light vpon, being euer at ſome Faire, or elſe a market.
                  And now that we talke of Fayres, let my penne gallop ouer a few lines, and it ſhall bring you (without ſpurring) ſwiftlier into Gloceſſer-ſhire, then if you rode vpon Pacolet: there if you pleaſe to alight néere Tewkſbury, at a place called Durreſt-Fayre, (being kept there vpon the two Holy-Roode dayes) you ſhall ſée more Roagues, then euer were whipt at a Carts-arſe through London, and more Beggers then euer came dropping out of Ireland. If you looke vpon them, you would thinke you liued in Henry the ſixt time, and that Iacke

Cade, and his rebellious rag-amuffins were there muſtring. Dunkirke cannot ſhew ſuch ſharkes. The wilde Iriſh are but flockes of wilde-Géeſe to them. And theſe ſwarmes of Locuſts come to this lowſte Fayre, from all parts of the Land, within an hundred myles compaſſe. To deſcribe the Boothes is loſt labour, for let the Hang-man ſhew but his wardrop, and there is not a ragge difference betwéene them. None here ſtands crying, What doe you lacke? for you can aſke for nothing that is good, but here it is lacking. The Buyers and Sellers are both alike, tawnie Sunne-burnt Raſealds, and they flocke in ſuch troopes, that it ſhewes as if hell were broke looſe. The Shoppe-kéepers are Théeues, and the Chap-men Roagues, Beggers and Whores: ſo that to bring a purſe-full of money hither, were madneſſe: for it is ſure to be cut.
                  But would you know what Wares theſe Marchants of Eele-ſkinnes vtter? onely Duds for the Quarrons, that is to ſay, cloathes for the body, which they haue pilfered from hedges or houſes. And this filthy Fayre beginnes before day, and endeth before nine in the ſame morning: at which breaking vp, they doe not preſently march away with their bagges and their baggages, but hée who is choſen the Lord of the Fayre, (who is commonly the luſtieſt Roague in the whole Bunch) leades his 
                        •
                     ottered foote-men and foote-women from Ale-houſe, to Ale-houſe, where being armed all in Ale-of-proofe, and their Ben Bowſe (the ſtrong Liquor) cauſing them to haue Naſe Nabs (drunken Coxecombes) vp fling they the Cannes, downe goe the Boothes, about 
                        ••
                     ye broken Iugges: here lyes a Roague bléeding, there is a 
                        •
                     ort curſing, here a Doxie ſtabbing with her knife: and thus this Fayre which beginnes merrily, ends madly: for Knaues ſet it vp, and Queanes pull it downe.
                  Yet to méete at this aſſembly, (how farre off ſoeuer they be) they will kéepe their day, though they hoppe

thither vpon one crutch: and it is for ſeauen cauſes that thus they beſtirre their ſtumps to be at this vpſitting, which are theſe, viz.
                  
                  1 Euery one as his Roague-ſhippe is of bulke, or can beſt ſwagger, deſireth to be choſen Lord of the Fayrs: or if hée looſe his Lord-ſhip, yet to be a Retayner at leaſt, and to fight vnder his tottered colours.
                  2 To méete with the Siſter-hood and Brother-hood of Whores and Wallet-mongers.
                  3 To ſhare ſuch money as is taken for (Duds and Cheates wonne) cloathes and things ſtolne.
                  4 To know how the world goes abroad, what newes in the Deuſuile, (the Countrey, and where is Benſhip, (Good) or where (Quire) Naught.
                  5 To be Bowſie (drunken) for company.
                  6 To bandy their tawny and weather-beaten forces of Mawderers (being of their owne Fraternitie) againſt any other troope of Mountibankes, at any other Fayre or Market, where the loweſi Randeuouz is to be made.
                  7 Laſtly, to enact new warme orders, for freſh ſtealing of cloathes, &c. with all manner of Armour for the body, but eſpecially, Stamps (Shooes) becauſe (being Beggers) they are ſeldome ſet on horſe-backe.
                  Theſe are the ſeauen halters that draw theſe Hell-hounds to this Fayre, for the leaſt of which ſeauen, they will venture a hanging.
                  The Fayre is broken vp, and becauſe it is their faſhion at the truſhing vp of their packes, to trudge away merrily, I will here teach you what O per ſe O is, being nothing elſe but the burden of a Song, ſet by the Diuell, and ſung by his Quire: of which I will ſet no more downe but the beginning, becauſe the middle is

deteſtable, the end abhominable, and all of it damnable▪
                  
                  Thus it ſounds:
                  
                     Wilt thou a begging goe,
                     
                        O per ſe, O. O per ſe, O.
                     
                     Wilt thou a begging goe?
                     Yes verily, yea.
                     Then thou muſt God forſake,
                     and to ſtealing thee betake.
                     
                        O per ſe, O. O per ſe, O.
                     
                     Yes verily yea, &c.
                  
                  This is the Muſicke they vſe in their Libkens (their lodgings) where thirtie or fourtie of them being in a ſwarme, one of the Maiſter Diuels ſings, and the reſt of his damned crew follow with the burden: In which mid-night Catter-wallings of theirs, nothing is heard but curſing and prophanation, and ſuch ſwearing, as if they were all Knights of the Poſte. Iewes did neuer crucifie Chriſt with more diſhonour, then theſe Rakehels, who with new inuented fearefull oathes teare him in pieces: and no meruaile, for moſt of thoſe who are Beggers borns, are neuer Chriſtened: beſides, they haue in their Canting, a word for the Diuell, or the plague, &c. as Ruffin for the one, and Cannikin for the other: but for God they haue none: onely they name him, but it is not in reuerence, but abuſe: all their talke in their naſty Libk
                           •
                        ns, (where they lye like Swine) being of nothing, but Wapping, Nigling, Prigging, Cloying, Filching, Curſing, and ſuch ſtuffe. Who therefore would pittie ſuch impoſtors, whoſe faces are full of diſſembling, hearts of villanie, mouthes of curſes, bodies of ſoares (which they call their great Cleymes) but laid vpon their fleſh by cunning▪ whoſe going Abram (that is to ſay naked) is not for want of cloathes, but to ſtirre vp men to pittie, and in that pittie to coozen their deuotion: now whereas the Bel-man (in his priuie ſearch) found out the neſts of theſe Scréech-Owles, pulling off

ſome of their feathers, onely to ſhew their vglineſſe, but for want of good and perfect eye ſight, not 
                        ••
                     eaing off their ſkinnes, as I here purpoſe to doe, and ſo to draw bloud. I will finiſh that which the Bell-man (by being ouerwatchd) left lame, and ſhew thoſe abuſes naked to the world, which hée neuer diſcouered.
                  Firſt therefore ſhall you behold the Abram-man in his true colours, his right ſhape, his owne ragges, and then ſhall you heare the phraſe of his Mawnd or Begging.
                  Next him comes marching the Counterfeit Souldier, with his Mawnding note too. At his taile follow Ben-feakers of Iybes, (that is to ſay) Counterfeiters of Paſſe-ports.
                  Then Dommerars.
                  
                  Then Clapperdogeons in their true abiliments, and their true beggerly Rhetoricke they vſe in begging.
                  Then will I ſhew you how they hang together in Fraternities, and what Articles of Brother-hood they are ſworne too: with a note (as good as any Roagues marke they carry about them) how to know theſe Knots of Knaues, or theſe Brother-hoods, their Names, their Libkins, or Lodgins, their Stawling Kennes, to which all ſtolne goods are brought. And laſtly, to ſhew you that euen in their mirth they are Diuels, you ſhall heare their true Canting Songs now vſed among them.
                  In ſetting downe all which hidden villanies, (neuer till this day diſcouered) you ſhall finde a mixture not onely of all thoſe deteſtable ſubtilties, vſed in making thoſe Soares which eate into their fleſh, but alſo the trickes and medicines they haue (without help of Surgeons) to cure them. I will beſides (in their deſcriptions) here and there ſticke words and phraſes of their gibbriſh or beggerly language, giuing them the ſtampe preſently of true Engliſh, which labour I take of purpoſe to procure delight to the Reader.
                  
                     
                     Of the Abram, his deſcription.
                     THe Abram Coue, is a luſtie ſtrong Roague, who walketh with a Slade about his Quarrous (a ſhéete about his body) Trining, hanging to his hammes, bandeliere-wiſe, for all the world as Cut-purſes and Théeues weare their ſhéetes to the Gallowes, in which their Tru
                           •
                        s are to bury them: oftentimes (becauſe hée ſcornes to follow any faſhions of Hoſe,) hée goes without bréeches, a cut Ierkin with hanging fléeues (in imitation of our Gallants,) but no Sa
                           •
                        tin or Chamblet elbowes, for both his legges and armes are bare, hauing no Commiſſion to couer his body, that is to ſay, no ſhirt: A face ſtaring like a Saraſin, his hayre long and filthily knotted, for hée kéepes no Barber: a good Filch (or Staffe) of growne Aſh, or elſe Hazell, in his Famble (in his Hand) and ſometimes a ſharpe ſticke, on which hée hangeth Ruffe-pecke (Bacon.) Theſe, walking vp and downe the Countrey, are more terribly to women and Children, then the name of Raw-head and Blo
                              •
                           dy-bones, Robbin Good-fellow, or any other Hobgobling Crackers tyed to a Dogges tayle, make not the poore Curre runne faſter, then theſe Abram Ninnies doe the ſilly Villages of the Countrey, ſo that when they come to any doore a begging, nothing is deuyed them.
                  
                  
                     
                     Their Markes.
                     SOme of theſe Abrams haue the Letters E. and R. vpon their armes: ſome haue Croſſes, and ſome other marke, all of them carrying a blew colour: ſome weare an iron ring, &c. which markes are printed vpon their fleſh, by tying their arme hard with two ſtrings thrée or feure inches aſunder, and then with a ſharpe Awle pricking or raizing the ſkinne, to ſuch a figure or print as they beſt fancy, they rub that place with burnt paper, piſſe and Gunpowder, which being hard rubd in, and ſuffered to dry, ſtickes in the fleſh a long time after, when theſe markes faile, they renew them at pleaſure. If you examine them how theſe Letters or Figures are printed vpon their armes, they will tell you it is the Marke of Bedlam, but the truth is, they are made as I haue reported.
                     And to colour their villanie the better, euery one of theſe Abrams hath a ſeuerall geſture in playing his part: ſome make an horrid noyſe, hollowly ſounding: ſome whoope, ſome hollow, ſome ſhew onely a kinde of wilde diſtracted vgly looke, vttering a ſimple kinde of Mawnding, with theſe addition of words (Well and Wiſely.) Some daunce, (but kéepe no meaſure) others leape vp and downe, and fetch Gambals, all their actions ſhew them to be as drunke as Beggers: for not to belye them, what are they but drunken Beggers? All that they begge being eyther Loure or Bouſe, (money or drinke.)
                  
                  
                     
                     Their Mawnd, or Begging.
                     THe firſt beginnes Good Vrſhip. Maiſter, or good Vrſhips Rulers of this place, beſtow your reward on a poore man that hath lyen in Bedlam without Biſhops-gate three yeeres, foure moneths, and nine dayes, And beſtow one piece of your ſmall ſiluer towards his fees, which he is indebted there, the ſumme of three pounds, thirteene ſhillings, ſeauen pence, halfe-penny, (or to ſuch effect,) and hath not wherewith to pay the ſame, but by the good help of Vrſhipfull and well diſpoſed people, and God to reward them for it.
                     
                     The ſecond beginnes: Now Dame, well and wiſely: what will you giue poore Tom now? one pound of your ſheepes feathers to make poore Tom a blanket: or one cutting of your Sow ſide, no bigger then my arme, or one piece of your Salt meate to make poore Tom a ſharing horne: or one croſſe of your ſmall ſiluer towards the buying a paire of Shooes, (well and wiſely:) Ah, God bleſſe my good Dame (well and wiſely) giue poore Tom an old ſheete to keepe him from the cold, or an old dublet, or Ierkin of my Maiſters, God ſaue his life.
                     
                     Then will he daunce and ſing, or vſe ſome other Anticke, and ridiculous geſture, ſhutting vp his counterfeite Puppet-play, with this Epilogue or Concluſion, Good Dame giue poore Tom one cup of the beſt drinke, (well and wiſely,) God ſaue the King and his Counſell, and the Gouernour of this place, &c.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     Of Counterfeit Souldiers.
                     THeſe may well be called Counterfeit Souldiers, for not one (ſcarce) among the whole Armie of them, euer diſcharged ſo much as a Caliner: nothing makes them Souldiers but old Mandilions, which they buy at the Broakers. The weapons they carry are ſhort Crabtrée Cudgels: and theſe, (becauſe they haue the name of Souldiers,) neuer march but in troopes two or thrée in a company: of all ſorts of Roagues theſe are the moſt impudent and boldeſt, for they knocke at mens doores, as if they had ſerious buſineſſe there, whereas the doore being opened to them, they beginne this parle.
                  
                  
                     Their Mawnding.
                     GEntle Rulers of this place, beſtow your reward vpon poore Souldiers, that are viterly maymed and ſpoyled in her Maieſties late warres, as vvell for Gods cauſe as her Maieſties and yours. And beſtow one piece of your ſmal ſiluer vpon poore men, or ſomwhat towards a meales meate, to ſuccour them in the way of truth, &c. for Gods cauſe.
                     Theſe Fellowes goe commonly hurt in the left arme, beneath the elbow, hauing a Iybe ierked, (that is to ſay, a Paſſeport ſealed) with licenſe to depart the colours, (vnder which if you rightly examine them, they neuer fought,) yet whereſoeuer the warres are, and how far off ſoeuer, thus can they wound themſelues at home.
                  
                  
                     
                     Their making of their Soares.
                     TAke vnſlaked lime and Sope, with the ruſt of olde yron: theſe mingled together, and ſpread thicke on two pieces of leather which are clap vpon the arme, one againſt the other: two ſmall pieces of wood (fitted to the purpoſe) holding the leathers downe, all which are bound hard to the arme with a Garter: which in a few howers fretting the ſkin with bliſters, and being taken off, the fleſh will appeare all raw, then a linnen cloath being applyed to the raw bliſtered fleſh, it ſtickes ſo faſt, that vpon plucking it off, it bléedes: which bloud (or elſe ſome other,) is rubd all ouer the arme, by which meanes (after it is well dryed o
                           •
                        ) the arme appeares blacke, and the ſoare raw and reddiſh, but white about the edges like an old wound: which if they deſire to heale, a browne paper with butter and ware being applyed, they are cured: And thus (without weapon) doe you ſee how our Mawndering Counterfeite Souldiers come maymed.
                  
                  
                     Of placing their Soares.
                     THe Souldier hath his Soare alwayes on his left arme, (vnleſſe hée be left-handed, for then becauſe of the better vſe of that hand it is vpon the right) betwixt the elbow and the wreſt, and is called by the name of Souldiers Mawnd.
                     
                     When a Soare is placed on the backe of the hand, and that hée ſaith hée was hurt by an horſe, then it is called Foote-mans Mawnd.
                     
                     When the ſoare is aboue the elbow, as if it were broken, or hurt by falling from a Scaffold, it is called Maſons Mavvnd. And thus the altring the place of the ſoare altereth the Mawnd.
                     
                     
                        
Of theſe counterfeit Souldiers, ſome of them being examined, will ſay they were lately Seruing-men, but their Maiſter being dead, and the Houſhold diſperſed, they are compelled to this baſeneſſe of life for want of meanes. Some of them can play the Abram, (be madde Toms,) or elſe begge Rum Mawnd (counterfeit to be a Foole) or elſe that his tongue is tyed, and cannot ſpeake, and ſuch like.
                  
                  
                     Of Ben-feakers of Iybes.
                     THey who are Counterfeiters of Paſſeports, are called Ben-feakers, that is to ſay, Good-Makers: and theſe makers (like the Diuels Hackney-men) lye lurking in euery Countrey, to ſend his Meſſengers p
                           •
                        ſte to hell. The beſt Paſſeports that euer I ſaw, were made in S.-ſhire, with the hand of one M. W. ſubſcribed vnto them. There was another excellent Ben-feaker about P. a Towne in G.-ſhire. In S. dwelt another, who tooke two ſhillings and ſire pence (two Bordes and ſire Winnes,) or two Bordes and a Flagge, for euery Paſſeport that went out of his beggerly Office: hée counterfeited the Seale of L. D.
                     
                     Of theſe Ben-feakers I could ſay much more, if I would be counted a blabbe: but now the very beſt of them are made in L. to carry men from thence vnto W.
                  
                  
                     
                     How to know counterfeite Paſſe-ports.
                     THe Seales of Noblemen, Gentlemen, Iuſtices, or any other who haue authoritie to vſe Seales, are grauen in Siluer, Copper, or ſome hard ſtuffe: and thoſe things which are ſo grauen ſeale the Armes or ſuch like with ſharpe edges, and with a round circle encloſing it, as if it were cut with an inſtrument of Stéele, and it maketh a neate and déepe impreſſion: but theſe counterfeit Ierkes (or Seales) are grauen with the point of a knife, vpon a ſtickes end, whoſe roundneſſe may well be perceiued from the circle of a common turnde Seale: theſe for the moſt part bearing the ill fauoured ſhape of a Buhars Nab, or a Prancers Nab (a Dogges head, or a Horſes,) and ſometimes an Vnicornes, and ſuch like: the Counterfeit Ierke hauing no Circle about the edges. Beſides, in the Paſſeport you ſhall lightly finde theſe wordes, viz. For Salomon ſaith; Who giueth the poore, lendeth the Lord, &c. And that Conſtables ſhall help them to lodgings: And that Curates ſhall perſwade their Pariſhioners, &c.
                     Another note is, let them be in what part of the Land ſoeuer they will, yet haue they an hundred miles to goe at leaſt: euery one of them hauing his Doxie at his héeles. And thus much of Ben-feakers.
                     
                  
                  
                     Of Dommerars.
                     THe Bell-man tooke his markes amiſſe in ſaying that a Dommerar is equall to the Cranke, for of theſe Dommerars I neuer met but one, and that was at the houſe of one M. L. of L. This Dommerars name was W. hée made a ſtrange noyſe, ſhewing by fingers acroſſe, that his tongue was cut out at Cha
                           •
                        ke-hill. In his hand hée carryed a ſticke, about a foote in length, and ſharpe at

both ends, which he would thruſt into his mouth, as if hée meant to ſhew the ſhew of his tongue. But in doing ſo, hée did of purpoſe hit his tongue with the ſtiche to make it bléede, which filling vp his month, you could not for bloud perceiue any tongue at all, becauſe hée had turned it vpwards, and with his ſticke thruſt it into his throate. But I cauſed him to be held faſt by the ſtrength of men, vntill ſuch time that opening his téeth with the end of a ſmall cudgell, I pluckt forth his tongue, and made him ſpeake.
                  
                  
                     Of Clapperdogeons.
                     
                        A Clapperdogeon is in Engliſh a Begger borne: ſome call him a Pallyard: of which ſorts there are two: firſt, Naturall: ſecondly, Artificiall. This fellow (aboue all other that are in the Regiment of Roagues) goeth beſt armed againſt the crueltie of Winter: hée ſhould be wiſe, for hée loues to kéepe himſelfe warme, wearing a patched Caſtor (a Cloake) for his vpper roabe: vnder that a Togmans (a Gowne) with high Stampers (ſhooes) the ſoles an inch thicke pegged, or elſe patches at his Girdle, ready to be clapt on: a great Scue (a browne diſh) hanging at his girdle, and a taſſell of Thrummes to wipe it. A brace of greaſie Night-caps on his head, and ouer them (leaſt hée ſhould catch a knauiſh colde) a hat, (or Nabcheate,) a good Filch (or Staffe) in his hand, hauing a little yron pegge in the end of it: a Bugher (a little Dogge) following him, with a ſmugge Dorie, attyred fit for ſuch a Roaguiſh Companion. At her backe ſhée carryeth a great packe, couered with a patched Saueguard, vnder which ſhée conueyeth all ſuch things as ſhée filcheth: her ſkill ſometimes is to tell Fortunes, to helpe the diſeaſes of Women or Children. As ſhée walkes, ſhée makes bals or ſhirtſtrings, (but now commonly they knit) and weares in her hat a néedle

with a thread at it. An excellent Angler ſhée is: for when her Coue mawnds at any doore, if any Poultrie-ware be picking vp their crummes néere them, ſhée féedeth them with bread, and hath a thread tyed to a hooked pinne, baited for the nonce, which the Chickin ſwallowing is choaked, and conueyed vnder the Caſtor: Chickins, linnen or woollen, or any ſhing that is worth the catching, comes into her net.
                     Vnder this Banner of the patched Clapperdogeon, doe I leuie all Pallyards, as well thoſe of the great Cleyme, (or Soares,) as others, whom I tearme Artificiall Clapperdogeons, albeit they are not Beggersborue.
                  
                  
                     Of their Mawnd.
                     THis Pallyard (or Artifieiall Clapperdogeon, who carryeth about him the great Cleyme) to ſtirre compaſſion vp in peoples hearts, thus acteth his part: Hée ſlides to the earth by his ſtaffe, and lying pittiouſly on the ground, makes a fearefull horrid ſtrange noyſe, through an hoarſe throate vttering theſe lamentable tunes: Ah the vrſhip of God looke out with your mereifull eyne, one pittifull looke vpon ſore, lame, grieued and impudent (for impotent) people, ſore troubled with the grieuous diſeaſe, and haue no reſt day nor night by the Canker and Worme, that continually eateth the fleſh from the bone: for the Vrſhip of God beſtow one Croſſe of your ſmall ſiluer; to buy him ſalue and oyntment, to caſe the poore wretched body; that neuer taketh reſt: and 
                              〈…〉
                            to reward you for it in heauen. Theſe Pallyards walke two or thrée together, and as one giues ouer this note, the ſecond catcheth it at the rebound, vſing the ſelfe-ſame howling and grunting, which ended, they ſay the Lords Prayer, and in many places the Aue, neuer ceaſing till ſomething be giuen them.
                  
                  
                     
                     How they make their great Soares, called the great Cleyme.
                     
                     THey take Crow-foote, Sperewort, and Salt, and bruiſing theſe together, they lay them vpon the place of the body which they deſire to make ſore: the ſkinne by this meanes being fretted, they firſt clappe a linnen cloath, till it ſticke faſt, which plucked off, the raw fleſh hath Rats-bane throwne vpon it, to make it looke vgly: and then caſt ouer that a cloath, which is alwayes bloudy and filthy, which they doe ſo often, that in the end in this hurt they féele no paine, neyther deſire they to haue it healed, but with their Doxies will trauell (for all their great Cleymes) from Fayre to Fayre, and from Market to Market, being able by their Mawnding to get fiue Bordes (that is, fiue ſhillings) in a wéeke, in money and Corne. Which money they hide vnder blew and gréene patches: ſo that ſome-times they haue about them, ſixe pound or ſeauen pound together.
                     The Clapperdogeons that haue not the great Cleyme, are called Farmarly Beggers.
                     
                  
                  
                     Of their Fraternities.
                     THere is no luſtie Roague, but hath many both ſworne Brothers, and the Morts his ſworne Siſters: who vow themſelues body and ſoule to the Diuell to performe theſe tenne Articles, following, viz.
                  
                  
                     Articles of their Fraternities.
                     
                        1 THou ſhalt my true Brother be, kéeping thy faith to thy other Brothers (as to my ſelfe) if any ſuch thou haue.
                        
                           
2 Thou ſhalt kéepe my counſell, and all other my brothers, being knowne to thée.
                        3 Thou ſhalt take part with mée, and all other my brothers in all matters.
                        4 Thou ſhalt not heare me ill ſpoken of without reuenge to thy power.
                        5 Thou ſhalt ſée mée want nothing, to which thou canſt help mée.
                        6 Thou ſhalt giue mée part of all thy winnings whatſoeuer.
                        7 Thou ſhalt not but kéepe true pointments with mée for méetings, be it by day or night, at what place ſoeuer.
                        8 Thou ſhalt teach no Houſholder to Cant, neyther confeſſe any thing to them, be it neuer ſo true, but deny the ſame with oathes.
                        9 Thou ſhalt doe no hurt to any Mawnder, but with thine owne hands: and thou ſhalt forbeare none that diſcloſe theſe ſecrets.
                        10 Thou ſhalt take Cloathes, Hennes, Géeſe, Pigs, Bacon, and ſuch like, for thy Winnings, where-euer thou canſt haue them.
                     
                  
                  
                     How to know their Brotherhoods.
                     VVHen at the end of a Towne, wherein a Fayre or Market is kept, you ſée an aſſembly of them together chiding & brawling, but not fighting, then thoſe Coues are ſworne brothers. If likewiſe two Doxies fall together by the eares, whileſt the Roagues themſelues ſtand by and fight not, that alſo is a Brother-hood: for it is one branch of their Lawes to take part with their Doxies in any wrong.
                  
                  
                     
                     Of their Names.
                     EVery one of them hath a peculiar Nicke-name, proper to himſelfe, by the which hée is more knowne, more inquired after by his brothers, and in common familiaritie more ſaluted, then by his owne true name: yea, the falſe is vſed ſo much that the true is forgotten. And of theſe Nick-names, ſome are giuen to them for ſome ſpeciall cauſe: as Olli Compolli, is the By-name of ſome one principall Roague amongſt them, being an Abram, being beſtowed vpon him, becauſe by that hée is knowne to be the head or chiefe amongeſt them: In like manner theſe Sir-names following belong to other Grand Signiors and Commanders, viz. Dimber Damber, and Hurly Burly, Generall Nurſe, The Hye Shreue, The High Conſtable, and ſuch like: and ſome Nicke-names are eyther vpon mockery, or vpon pleaſure giuen vnto them: as The Great Bull, The little Bull, and many other ſuch like. The great Bull is ſome one notable luſtie Roague, who gets away all their Wenches: for this Great Bull (by report) had in one yéere, thrée and twenty Doxies, (his Iockie was ſo luſtie) ſuch libertie haue they in ſinning, and ſuch damnable and moſt deteſtable manner of life doe they lead.
                     As the men haue Nicke-names, ſo likewiſe haue the Women: for ſome of them are called The white Ewe, The Lambe, &c. And (as I haue heard) there was an Abram, who called his Mort, Madam Wap-apace.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     Of their Libkins or Lodgings.
                     AS theſe fugitiue Vagabonds haue Nicke names to themſelues, ſo haue they Libkins, or Lodgings, and places of méeting: as one of the méeting places (as I haue heard) bring a Shéepe-cote, is by the Queſt of Roagues who nightly aſſemble there, called by the name of Stophole Abbey: ſo likewiſe another of their Lodgings is called by the ſame name. Then haue they others, as the blew Bull, the Prancer, the Buls belly, the Cowes vdder, the gréene Arbour, the blaſing ſtarre, &c. Such like By names giue they alſo to their Stawling Kennes: and note this, that after a robbery done, they lye not within twelue miles at the leaſt of the place where they doe it, but hauing eaten vp their ſtolne mutton (baked as afore-ſaid (away they trudge through thicke and thinne, all the hauens of hell into which they put in, being alwayes for the moſt part of an equall diſtance one from another: for looke howfarre as the one Stophole Abbey ſtands from the other, and iuſt ſo farre is the Buls belly from the Cowes vdder, and ſo of the reſt: ſo that what wayſoeuer theſe night Spirits doe take after they haue done their déedes of darkneſſe, they know what pace to kéepe, becauſe (what ſtormes ſoeuer) fall) they are ſure of harbour, all their iourneyes being but of one length. Yet dare they not but let their Morts and their Doxies méete them at ſome of theſe places, becauſe how cold ſoeuer the weather be, their female furies come hotly and ſmoaking from thence, carrying about them Glymmar in the Prat (fire in the touch-bore) by whoſe flaſhes oftentimes there is Glymmar in the Iocky, (the flaſke is blowne vpto) of which dangerous and deadly ſkirmiſhes the fault is laid vpon Seruing-men, dwelling thereabouts, who like Frée-booters are ſo hungry of fleſh, that a Doxie (if ſhée haue a ſmug face)

cannot péepe out, but ſhée is taken vp for Hawkes-meate. And it is no wonder, there is ſuch ſtealing of theſe wilde Buckes, becauſe there is ſuch ſtore of them: nor is it a meruaile there is ſuch ſtore, ſithence hée is not held worthy to walke, or to be counted one of the foure and twenty Orders, but to be baniſhed (as a ſilly Animall and a ſtinckard) from all good fellowſhip, ſocietie, and méetings at Fayres, Markets, and merry Bowſing Kennes, who when the Trumpet ſounds, (that is to ſay, when the Cuckoe ſings) thruſts not out his head like a Snayle out of his ſhell, and walkes not abroad about the Deuſuile (the Countrey) with his ſpirit of Lechery and théeuing, (his Doxie) at his héeles.
                  
                  
                     Why the Staffe is called a Filch.
                     
                     THus much for their Fraternities, Names, Lodgings, and Aſſemblies, at all which times euery one of them carryes a ſhort ſtaffe in his hand, which is called a Filch, hauing in the Nab or head of it, a Ferme (that is to ſay, a hole) into which vpon any piece of ſeruice, when he goes a Filching; he putteth a hoake of yron, with which hooke hée angles at a window in the dead of night, for ſhirts, ſmockes, or any other linnen or woollen: and for that reaſon is the ſtaffe tearmed a Filch. So that it is as certaine that hée is an Angler for Duds, who hath a Ferme in the Nab of his Filch, as that hée is a théefe, who vpon the high-way cryes ſtand, and takes a purſe. This Staffe ſerueth to more vſes, then eyther the Croſſe-ſtaffe or the Iacobs, but the vſes are not ſo good nor ſo honeſt: for this Filching-ſtaffe being artificially handled, is able now and then to mill a Grunter, a bleating Cheate, a Redſhanke, a Tib of the Buttry, and ſuch like, or to Fib a Coues Quarrons in the Rome-pad, for his Loure in his bung, that is to ſay, to kill a Pigge, a Shéepe, a Ducke, a Gooſe, and ſuch like, or to beate a man by the high-way

for the money in his purſe. And yet for all theſe baſe villanies and others, of what blackeneſſe ſoeuer they be, you ſhall at euery Aſſiſes and Seſſions, ſée ſwarmes of them boldly ventering amongſt the Priſoners: one cauſe of their tempting their owne danger ſo, is, that being ſworne brothers in league, and partnerts in one and the ſame théeuery, it behooues them to liſten to the Priſoners confeſſion (which they doe ſecretly) and ſo to take their héeles, if they ſpye a ſtorme comming. Another cauſe is, to learne what time-twigges caught the Bird i'th Cage, and how he was entangled by the Iuſtice in his examination, that thereby hee abroad may ſhunne the like: but the Diuell is their Tutor, Hell their Schoole, Théeuery, Roaguery and Whoredome the Arts they Study, before Doctor Story they diſpute, and at the Gallowes are made Graduates of Newgate and other Gaoles, (the Hang-mans Colledges.) To ſhut vp this feaſt merrily, (as ſwéete meates are beſt laſt,) your laſt diſh which I ſet before you, to digeſt the hardneſſe of the reſt, is a Canting Song, not fained or compoſed as thoſe of the Bel-mans were, out of his owne braine, but by the Canters themſelues, and ſung at their méetings.
                  
                  
                     
                     The Canting Song.
                     
                        1
                        BIng out bien Morts, and toure, and toure,
                        bing out bien Morts and toure:
                        For all your Duds are bingd awaſte,
                        the bien Coue hath the loure.
                     
                     
                        2
                        I met a Dell, I viewde her well,
                        ſhe was benſhip to my watch:
                        So ſhe and I, did ſtall and cloy
                        what euer we could catch.
                     
                     
                        3
                        This Doxie dell, can cut bien whids,
                        and wap well for a win:
                        And prig and cloy ſo benſhiply,
                        all the Dewſe-auile within.
                     
                     
                        4
                        The boyle was vp, wee had good lucke,
                        in froſt, for and in ſnow:
                        When they did ſeeke, then we did creepe,
                        and plant in ruffe-mans low.
                     
                     
                        5
                        To Stawling Kenne, the Mort bings then,
                        to fetch loure for her cheates:
                        Duds and Ruffe-pecke, rumboild by Harman becke,
                        and won by Mawnders feates.
                     
                     
                        6
                        You Mawnders all, ſtow what you ſtall,
                        to Rome-coues watch ſo quire:
                        And wapping Dell, that niggles well,
                        and takes loure for her hire.
                     
                     
                        7
                        And Iybe well Ierkt, tick rome comfeck,
                        for backe by glymmar to mawnd:
                        
                           
To mill each Ken, let coue bing then,
                        through ruffe-mans lague or launde.
                     
                     
                        8
                        Till Cramprings quier, tip Coue his hire,
                        and quier kens doe them catch:
                        A canniken; mill quier Cuffen,
                        ſo quier to ben coues watch.
                     
                     
                        9
                        Bein darkmans then, bouſe, mort and ken,
                        the bien coue's bingd a waſt:
                        On chates to trine, by Rome-coues dine,
                        for his long lib at laſt.
                     
                     
                        10
                        Bingd out bien morts, and toure, and toure,
                        bing out of the Rome-vile:
                        And toure the coue, that cloyde your duds,
                        vpon the chates to trine.
                     
                     FINIS.
                  
                  
                     
                     Thus for ſatisfaction of the Readers, Engliſhed.
                     
                        1
                        GOe forth (braue girles) looke out, looke out,
                        looke out I ſay (good Connies)
                        For all your cloathes are ſtolne (I doubt)
                        mad ſhauers ſhare the monyes.
                     
                     
                        2
                        I met a Drab, I likde her well,
                        (my bowles did fit her alley:)
                        We both did vow to rob pell-mell,
                        and ſo abroad did ſally.
                     
                     
                        3
                        This bowncing Trull can rarely talke,
                        a penny will make her—:
                        Through any towne which ſhe doth walke,
                        nought can her filching ſcape.
                     
                     
                        4
                        The houſe being raizde aſide wée ſtept,
                        and through the mire did wade:
                        To auoid Hue and Cry, to a hedge we crept,
                        and vnder it cloſe were laid.
                     
                     
                        5
                        Toth' Broakers then my hedge-bird flyes,
                        for ſtolne goods bringing coyne:
                        Which (tho the Conſtable after hies)
                        our trickes away purloyne.
                     
                     
                        6
                        You mawnding rogues, how you ſteale beware
                        for priuie ſearch is made:
                        Take héede thou to, (thou hackney-mare)
                        whone'er art ridden, but paid.
                     
                     
                        7
                        A Licence got with counterfeit Seale
                        to begge (as if vndone
                        
                           
By fire) to breake each houſe, and ſteale,
                        o'er hedge and ditch then runne.
                     
                     
                        8
                        Till Shackels ſoundly pay vs home,
                        and to the Iayle compell vs:
                        Ill may the Iuſtice euer thriue,
                        ſo cruell to Good Fellowes.
                     
                     
                        9
                        Swéet Punck, béere-houſe, & béere, good night,
                        the honeſt Roague's departed
                        To hanging, (by the Iuſtice ſpite)
                        to his long home hée's carted.
                     
                     
                        10
                        Away ſwéete Duckes, with gréedy eyes,
                        from London walke vp Holbourne:
                        Sue him who ſtole your cloathes: hée flyes
                        with hempen-wings to Tybourne.
                     
                  
                  FINIS.
               
            
         
      
   