
      
         
            
            
            No Parliament
POWDER.
            BVT
SHOT AND POWDER
for the Pope.
            
               AND
For all his Cardinalles, Biſhops,
Abbots, Fryers, Monkes; the Maiſters and
great Doctours of Sorbonne.
            
            Sent to his Ʋn-Holyneſſe, and them
all, for a Newe-yeares gift.
1609.
            AT LONDON,
❀Printed by Thomas Purfoot, for Ieffrey
Chorleton, and are to be ſold at the great
North dore of Paules Church.
An. Dom. 1609.
(*⁎*)
         
         
            
            
            TO MAISTER RObert
Harryſon, and Maiſter
Edward Paltocke, Gentlemen;
Two of his Maiesties Curſisters,
of his high Court
of Chauncerie.
            
               THAT this may be reputed
a great boldnes
in me, (Gentlemen)
not hauing ſo
much as ſeene either
of you, to ſtampe
your names in the
fore head of ſopoore
a Pamphlet; I deny
not, and craue fauour
for this preſumption, offending but in an error of
curteſie and honeſt affection, not any wilfull or
peremptory pride, impudently to preiudice your

worth, or any way to procure your miſconſtruction.
Becauſe this faulte (if a fault it may be tearmed)
in former times, hath been deſired of the beſt, and
thought to be the pureſt golde, that beautified the
richeſt Diadems in the world: Schollers to honor
Princes with their painefull labours, and Princes
honouring Schollers, with reſpect and thankefull
acceptation. Beſide, that learned ſaying of diuine
Saint Auguſtine,
               S. Aug. in. Enchirid. ad. ſpeaks ſufficiently vnto you both,
in my iuſt excuſe:Lau. Cap. 10. & De Ciuit. 
               Inuiſa diligere poſſumus, incognita
nequaqam. Vnſeene men may bee beloued,
but vnknowne,Dei Lib. 22. Cap. 1. very hardly. And yet men haue
been very familiarly knowen, to them that neuer
had any ſight of them;Ariſt. Lib. 2. by the ſplendor of their
vertues,Elench. Cap. renowne of their actions, their learned
writings,Vlt. Plato. 4. de legibus. Et in Protag. and ſuch like noat-worthye qualities,
Which (as Sir Thomas Moore was wont to ſay) Doe
make men that are ſundered by many miles,
               Sir Thomas Moore in his Vtop. 
               to haue diſpute,
conference, and louing entercourſe together, euen
as hee ſeemed to haue with Cornelius Agrippa.
            
            And that you both (woorthy Gentlemen) although
as yet vnſeene, are not vnknowne to mee;
let me reſolue you, by this morall enſuing example,
which was the firſt motiue to this preſumption,
and is the only argument, to plead your much
better merite. A yong Grafte, growing ſometime
in an vnkindlye ground, where it neither had the
Sunnes warmth, or the leaſt fauour of any weather,
but, by the enuious Maiſter of the ground,

was not onely vnreſpected, but throwne out (by
his will) to haue proſperitie in no place: Firſt,
by one of you, the poore, though not vnpittied
Plant, was kindly reſpected, and admitted to haue
freſh groweth in his Garden. Vntill ſuch time,
as, finding an other ſoyle, (I will not ſaye more
fertile, but of anſwerable fruitfulneſſe:) with
his owne hand it was thither tranſ-planted, and
there, by the other of you, ſo carefully husbanded;
as I knowe not which of you I ſhould
moſt commend, for humanitie, courteſie, and louing
affabilitie.
            Now, in regard, that (though not at the firſt,
but ſince thoſe tempeſtuous times) that Grafte
hath (by ſome peculyer proprietie) appertayned
vnto mee, and dooth ſtill enioye the fruition
of both your woonted fauours: In ſuch maner
as I could beſt deuiſe, to cleare my ſelfe of
ingratitude, and (in ſome meaſure) to anſwere
your great merit; I haue ſent you a ſillye New-yeeres
gift, better in proofe, than outward apparance,
and more woorth in regarding, then
in the bare reading. It hath no other ſute vnto
you, or further expectation; but that God may
bleſſe the continuaunce of your kindneſſe, where
already it hath beene liberallye beſtowed: And
the poore Plant to thriue no otherwiſe, but as it
may daylye proſper in your good opinions. Then,
you both, to meaſure my loue equally towards

you, in the euen Scale of your friendlie conſtruction;
Which I will further ſtudie to deſerue,
though abilitie can therein
(no way) comprehend my
earneſt deſire.
            
               Yours in all affection,
PHILAGATHVS.
            
         
         
            
            TO THE RELIGIOVS,
deuout, and godly Paſtors, Elders
and Brethren, of the French and
Dutch Churches in London; Grace,
mercie and peace, in our Lord
Ieſus Chriſt.
            
               HAuing had ſome ſmall experience, of
your zealous loue to Gods truth, and
dayly care for preſeruing the ſame, in
moſt Chriſtian and religious maner among
you: I could not but expreſse
ſome fruit of mine vnfained affection
towards you. And, as a true teſtimonie thereof, I ſend
you this learned and worthy labour, as a poore New-yeares
gift, which was firſt written by a brother of yours
in our Lord Ieſus, and by mee instructed to ſpeake our
natiue Engliſh tongue. For I did account it, as a wrong or
iniurie done to you, that a worke of ſuch worth, receiuing
his originall from Gods reformed Cburch among you:
ſhould here bee made publique, and you to haue no acquaintance
at all therewith, or intereſt therein. To
preuent which inconuenience, in the bonds of Chriſtian
loue and amitie, I dutifully haue directed it vnto you,
deſiring (according to the high deſeruing merit therof)
that it may not onely haue acceptation among you, but

that it may likewiſe finde fauour in your houſes and families,
where it may doe more good, then eaſly can bee
imagined. So, entreating your beſt conſtruction, of
this my verie ſudden, yet honeſt boldneſſe: I commit you
all, my ſelfe, and this my poore paynes, to that meaſure
of bleſſedneſse, which it ſhall pleaſe
our Lord God (in mercie) to
beſtowe vpon vs.
            
               Your louing well-willer,
PHILAGATHVS.
            
         
         
            
            To King Abgarus, and to his
worthy Confederates, the Lords GAMALIEL
and IAYRVS, moſt excellent gracious Princes,
faithfull friendes to our ſoueraigne Meſſias and
Reedemer, our Lord Ieſus Christ.
            
               IF at this inſtant wee conſider well,
the estate and condition of Gods
Church, wee may euidently perceiue,
that, what our Lord Ieſus
hath foretold & promiſed, is moſt
truely fulfilled and accompliſhed.
For, hauing warned vs of the afflictions
& troubles of his Church:
yet afterward he promiſed, to be alwayes
with her,Matth. 28. 40. euen to the conſummation
of the world. As for her afflictions, wrapped vp in ſo
many ſeuerall perſecutions, troubles and diuiſions: there is no
mā but doth perfectly know them; &, that our Lord God in his
mercy hath aſſiſted her,The troubles of the church haue beene cruell and terrible in our time. preſeruing her euen in the midſt of all
her enemies. Wherby we plainely ſee, that his promiſe is truely
kept; eſpecially ſince he neuer leaues her vnprouided of his ſeconding
aydes and good means: to the end ſhe may not be deuoured
of Lyons and rauenous Wolues, whom (in his iust iudgement)
he hath permitted, to ruſh in vpon her, as repreſenting
thoſe perſons, which heretofore haue hated, maligned and perſecuted
her.
            Doe we not (at this day) behold many ſucceſſours to Pilate?
               Pilate, Iudas, Cayphas and Simon Magus, ſeem not yet to bee dead: for they haue ſucceſſors inow, that do what they can againſt Ieſus Chriſt.
Others, that are Lieutenants to Iudas? Others, Vizegerents
to Cayphas? And others, the meere Ʋicars to Simon the Sorcerer?
All which together (as it were) doe yet torment and perſecute

the Church of God, intending to exterminate it wholely,
to the end there might bee no more memorie thereof. But
the Lord our God, against whom there is no wiſedome, counſell
or prouidence, knowes how to winke (for a while) at the
impudence of ſuch fooles; And, to the ende his Church ſhould
not ſtagger in the midſt of the way:Prou. 21. hee hath raiſed vp (in our
time) many liuely figures of thoſe auncient friends to his Goſpell.God neuer leaues his Church without friends, and to maintaine the ſame keepeth his promiſe.
I will not compare you to any of the Apoſtles, although
it cannot be denied; But that God hath giuen vs veſſels of
honour, into whoſe mouthes he hath put his ſword, that
cuts on both-ſides.
            
            Concerning the excellencie of your ſelues, I dare boldly ſay,
that one of you doth liuely repreſent,Matth. 22. 9. the good king Abgarus:
who being deſirous to expreſſe his loue to Ieſus Chriſt,
               Hiſio. Eccle. offered
him all aſſiſtance and fauour,lib. 1. when ſo graciouſly he inuited him
into his houſe.King Abgarus a faithfull louer of Ieſus Chriſt. The ſecond hath done the dutie and office of
good Gamaliell, a Prince and Doctor of the Law, alſo a ſecret
diſciple of Ieſus Chriſt, euermore fauouring and furthering
his cauſe.Acts 5. 41. The third is nothing inferiour to prince Iayrus;
on whom,
                  Gameliel, Prince and Doctor, and ſecret diſciple of Ieſus. euen as Ieſus beſtowed the rayſing of his daughter
from death to life: ſo hath hee rayſed vp you, moſt miraculouſly
preſeruing your life, from the blood-thirſtie throates
of wolues.
            Now most renowned and worthy perſonages altogether,Mark. 5 41. hauing
collected a briefe diſputation of the faith,
                  Jayrus a prince of Iſrael, conuerted to the Goſpel, receiued a great benefit from Ieſus-God will not be approoued by mens inuentions. touching the
principall Articles thereof, the more gladly I vndertooke this
Argument, to the ende, that thereby might clearely be diſcerned,
the difference on both ſides, and which of them holds the
iusteſt cauſe before God, who craues no approbation by mens
inuentions, let them be ſhadowed and coloured, by whatſoeuer
ſhewes of ſanctitie and good intention. For his word will not
endure addition, change or diminution: nay, the very Angels
of heauen are to bee ſuſpected in that cauſe. Wherefore,
according to the example of S. Luke,
               Deut. 4. 12. writing his Goſpell to
to the beloued Theophilus:
               Galat. 1. 8. I dedicate and preſent vnto you,
this ſmall Chriſtian reſolution,S. Luke in his Praeface, writes his Goſpell to Theophilus a man of great authoritie. most humbly beſeeching you,
that you would embrace and defend the ſame, as already you

haue most religiouſly begun to doe. For the Lord God hath
choſen you, as his veſſels of honour, and principall members of
his Church, to be ſerued by you, to his honour and glory: to the
end, that his name may be ſanctified, and his kingdome euery
where to come,The Church hath great veſſels of honor at this preſent time, God be praiſed therefore. as we pray dayly it may bee increaſed: and we
to liue vnder obedience and protection thereof. I likewiſe pray
from the bottome of my heart, that you all may proſper in felicitic,
and moſt happy contentment. From Egypt, neere
the red Sea: in expectation of the yeere 666. against Babilon.
               Mat. 6. 10. The Church of God is yet in Egypt, but it is neere to the red Sea, to paſſe from thence, expecting the yeere 666. Apo. 13.
            
            
               Your very meaneſt, moſt humble and obedient
Seruant for euer. Dena Kol, borne
blind, but recouering ſight by Ieſus.
               
            
         
         
            
            To the moſt magnanimous Lord,
and Chriſtian Knight: his most humble
and obedient Seruant wiſheth grace,
peace, and all bleſsedneſſe in our
Lord Ieſus Christ.
            
               HAuing a long time conſidred
the contentious difference,
betweene the
true eternal light, and the
foule horrid darkneſſe of
Beliall:
               Pſal. 19. by grace and aſſiſtance
of him,Math. 25. that giueth
wiſedome to the ſimpleſt,
I boldly vndertooke ſummarily
to gather, a Chriſtian
warlike encounter,
with the proud Romane Praelate, that ſo audaciouſly lifts
vp himſelfe againſt Ieſus Christ. Which when I had accompliſhed,
after I had imparted the ſame, to diuers of
good knowledge and learning, to whom I am vnworthy
to be tearmed a Scholler: their aduiſe ouer-ruled me, not
to hide or burie this poore tallent in the earth. Vpon further
conſideration, to decorate and adorne the labour,
with ſome honorable title and fauour: I dedicated and
preſented it to three moſt illuſtrious Perſonages, very
great and excellent veſſels of honour, and endeared ſeruants
to our Lord Ieſus. Now, becauſe I am not ignorant,
that you are to them all a moſt auncient, loyall & firme
friend: my humble ſupplication to you, is, to receiue likewiſe

this poore penny into your protection, to note with
what coyne it is ſtamped on both ſides, and to try which
of them is falſe or counterfeit, and whether of them is
pure mettall,1. Theſ. 6. and acceptable in the ſight of God. On
whoſe part I pray you may long continue as his Champion,Matth. 24.
and I to remaine in your fauour and good regard:Ephe. 6.
according as the Apoſtle requireth in good ſeruants
toward their maſters.Tit. 1. From Egypt, neere
to the red Sea,Apoc. 13. expecting the yeere
666. againſt Babylon.
            
            
               Your moſt humble and obedient Seruant
for euer. Dena Kol: borne blind, but
illumined by Ieſus.
               
            
         
         
            
            An aduertiſement to the Chriſtian Reader, how
to make vſe of theſe defenſiue Armes againſt Poperie,
how to imploy this Powder and Shot, againſt
the Pope, his Cardinals, Byſhops,
Abbots, Monkes, and Maſters
of Sorbone. &c.
            
               FRiendly Reader, although wee may
(to our griefe) behold, that in many
places of Chriſtendom, the buildings
and labours of the Apoſtles
are much demoliſhed and ruined:Good Miniſters are the Maſons of Gods Church.
yet to comfort vs againe, our Lord
God hath raiſed many good Maſons
and excellent worke-men, to
reeſtabliſh the ſame in the former
forme and eſtate.2. Cor. 11. Whoſe paines (God bee prayſed therefore)
we may dayly ſee, by the plentie of good bookes and learned endeuours,
that ſhew themſelues in this cleare light of the Goſpell,
each man labouring about the building, according to the
gift and meaſure he hath receiued of our Lorde. I am not ignorant
likewiſe, that diuers men of great reading and experience,
haue very amply diſcourſed on the difference, betweene
the Pope of Rome, and our Lord Ieſus Chriſt; deliuering the
true title and right of the one, and as apparantly reproouing
the ſhamefull inſolence of the other:1. Tit. 3. 6. wherefore my paines imployed
in the ſame argument,
                  Neophytes, are as Nouices in faith, or yong beginners, that haue no other defence, put Pa, pa, like yong children. may appeare but as a repetition
of their former actions. But when this ſmall trauaile of mine
with iugement and aduiſe ſhall be conſidered on, thoſe former
labours (perhaps) may be found not ſo apt and commodious for
diuers Neophytes: yong Schollers, newly instructed in matters
of faith, that as children feeding on milke, moſt vſually
can cry but Pa, Pa. As much to ſay, as that they will defend
themſelues alwayes, by the faith of their Fathers and Predeceſſors:

not hauing any other warant or buckler, But thus did
our fathers, being vtterly ignorant, both how they were instructed,
and who were their true Fathers and guiders in the faith.
            In regard whereof, as the weakeſt and moſt vnworthe labourer,
to trauile in the buſineſſe of Gods building, I haue collected
this little Volume, principally applying the ſame to ſuch as are
not for ſtrong meates, but (as children) are to be fed with spirituall
milke, for their better digesting the word of God hereafter.
But if they will not forget their childiſh cuſtome,Such as willingly conuert to the Goſpell, do often cry Pa, Pa. but they are children. or
ceaſe from Infants behauiour, crying yet Pa, Pa: why then,
they ſhall finde, their true fathers and lawfull Seniors, not only
the Apoſtles themſelues, but likewiſe the auncient Fathers and
Doctours of Gods Church, from whom, their bad Nurſes had
good hope to hide and hood-wincke them ſtill, in their old Popiſh
wolues skinnes, but that (God bee thanked) the truth in
them hath clearely appeared, euen to beate theſe pretenders,
with their owne ſtaues and weapons,The Papiſts are beaten with their owne weapons. as wee vſe it for a common
Prouerbe.
            And this is the maine reaſon, of publiſhing this Shot and
Powder againſt the Pope, by way of Antitheſis or compariſon
in oppoſition, for better diſtinguiſhing the right of either part.
And becauſe (in iuſtice) the Apostles doe deſerue the cheefe
and eminent place,The order and methode obſerued in the booke. wee preferre them to lead the way in euery
cauſe, and then the Pope followes with his allegations, vprightly
and without any partialtie. Commend both me and this
worke to God in thy praiers, and deſire his bleſſing on
it for generall benefit. From Egypt, neere
the red Sea, this yeere of grace 1608.
Attending the yeerre 666.
againſt Babylon.
            
         
         
            
            
               Sentences extracted out of the ſacred Scriptures, which
are eſpecially to be noted, for more iustly iudging the cauſe
on both parties.
               
                  Iohn 12. 48.HE that refuſeth mee, and receiueth not my wordes,
hath one that iudgeth him: the word the I haue
ſpoken, it ſhall iudge him in the laſt day.
               
                  Galat. 1. 8.Though that wee, or an Angel from heauen, preache
vnto you otherwiſe, then that which we haue preached vnto
you; let him be accurſed.
               
                  Jam. 1 21.Receiue with meekeneſſe the word that is grafted in
you, which is able to ſaue your ſoules.
               
                  2. Tim. 2. 14. 16. 23.Striue not about wordes, which is to no profit, but to
the peruerting of the hearers. Stay alſo prophane and
vaine babling▪ Put away fooliſh and vnlearned queſtions,
knowing that they ingender ſtrifes.
               
                  Deut. 4. 2.You ſhall put nothing vnto the word which I haue
commanded you, neither ſhall you take ought there from.
               
                  Deut. 12. 8. 32.You ſhall not do after all theſe things that we do heare
this day; that is, euery man whatſoeuer ſeemeth him good
in his owne eyes. Whatſoeuer I command you, take heed
you do it, thou ſhalt put nothing thereto, nor take ought
therefrom.
               
                  Deut. 18. 20.The Prophet that ſhall preſume to ſpeake a word in my
name, which I haue not commanded him to ſpeake; or
that ſpeaketh in the name of other Gods; euen the ſame
Prophet ſhall die.
               
                  Ezech. 20. 18, 19.Walke not in the ordinances of your Fathers, neither
obſerue their manners, nor defile your ſelues with their
Idols. I am the Lord your God, walke in my ſtatutes, and
keepe my iudgements, and doe them.
               
                  Prou. 14. 12.There is a way that ſeemeth right to man, but the iſſues
thereof are the wayes of death.
               
                  Prou. 12. 15.The way of a foole, is right in his owne eyes, but hee
that heareth councell, is wiſe.
            
            
               
               Other notable and important Sentences, collected
out of the holy doctours and auncient Fathers of the
Church, which doe both admoniſh and inſtruct all men
of ſound iudgement and vnderſtanding: how to cenſure
in the cauſe betweene theſe parties, as alſo which
of them ought to be embraced and defended, as the infallible,
beſt and moſt certaine teſtimonie before God.
               
                  Saint Hierome vpon the Prophet Micheas,
Chap. 7. Tom. 6.
                  CHriſt is the head of all men, and Chriſt is head of the
Church.Many are in the Church, that depart not from Jeſus Christ, and yet will ſpeake against him. They that are reputed to be in his houſe, that
is to ſay, in the Church, fall out often times to be his enemies.
And though they part not from the head, yet they
will ſpeake ill of their head; becauſe both without the
Maſter, and without the Lords grace, they dare promiſe
(in their owne iudgement) knowledge of the Scriptures.
Whereas indeed they are but only puft vp, vnderſtanding
nothing; but doe languiſh about queſtions, contentions,
and ſtrifes of words, who if they bee truely in the houſe,
are yet meere enemies to truth and the houſe.
               
               
                  S. Cyprian ad Magnum. Lib. 1. Epiſt. 6.
                  THis ought to be admired, yea, and greiued at with an
holy indignation,There be diuers buſy in the Church, that fight againſt the Church. that Chriſtans ſhould giue aſſiſtance
to Antichriſts: and that preuaricatours and betrayers of
the Church, ſhould hold firme abiding in the Church, againſt
the Church.
               
               
                  S. Chryſoſtome vpon S. Matth. Chap. 24 Hom. 49.
                  ALl hereſies are the army or band of Antichriſt,Antichrist with all his band, holdes ſtrong power in the Church, againſt the the Church. eſpecially
thoſe that get place in the Church, and preſumeth
to be in the holy place, where it would ſeeme to bee
held in reckoning, as if it were the word of truth. But it is
the abhomination of deſolation, euen the battalion of
Antichriſt, which hath yeelded vp the ſoules of many
men, very deſolate of God.
               
               
                  
                  S. Hierome agaiuſt Pelagius.
                  VVIſe Phyloſophers,
                        Ʋ
                        Ʋolrdly wiſdome is enemie to Gods Church. Patriarckes of Heretiques
haue polluted the puritie of the Church by peruerſe
doctrine.
               
               
                  S. Chryſoſtome in his imperfect worke on
S. Matth. Cap. 23.
                  IT is a matter behoouefull, that the people ſhould goe
to all Doctors and teachers,
                        Ʋ
                        Ʋe ought to heare ech one, but to perſeuere in Jeſus Chriſt. and enquire of them, where
pure truth is to be had, and where it is corrupted. For it
is not prohibited to know that which all men do confeſſe,
and to elect the beſt. And the Apoſtle ſaith: Try all
things,1. Theſ. 5. 11. 21. and keepe that which is good.
               
               
                  S. Hierome his Prediction, accompliſhed in our time, as it is
written in his ſixt Tome, on the Prophecie of Nahum,
Chap. 3. vpon theſe words. O King of Aſſur,
thy ſhepheards do ſleepe.
                  AT the comming of Ieſus Christ,
                     There is no one ſo blinde, but he perceiueth this prediction day by day accompliſhed. and of the word of
God, and in the comming of Niniuies conſummation
(heeretofore the faire ſtrompet:) the people ſhall ariſe
and walke, that before had ſlept vnder their Maſters:
And they ſhall goe to the Mountaines of the Scriptures,
and there they ſhall finde the hilles, to wit, Moſes and Ioſua
the ſonne of Nun.
                     The holy and ancient Scriptures, are the hilles towards which the people, fled in this time of deſolation. The hilles, which are the Prophets,
the mountaines of the new Teſtament, namely, the Apoſtles
and the Euangeliſts. And when they ſhall bee fled to
ſuch hilles, and haue conuerſed in reading with ſuch maner
of hilles: there will bee found none to teach (for the
harueſt truely is great, and the labourers very few in number)
then ſhall their ſtudie bee prayſed,The people are praiſed for ſtudying at the Mountaines, and the ignorance of the ſeducing Maſters, is poynted at with the finger. becauſe they fled
vnto the hilles. And the ſloth and ignorance of the other
Maſters ſhall be repooued.
               
               
                  
                  The ſame S. Hierome, on the 86. Pſal. Tome. 8.
                  ALthough any one ſhould be holy (after the Apoſtles)
albeit he ſhould be learned:After the Apoſtles, none haue authoritie. yet hath he no authoritie,
becauſe that the Lord is declared in the Scriptures, of
the people,Galat. 2. and of Princes that haue been, and not by that
which is in themſelues.
               
               
                  The ſame vpon Ieremie, Chap. 6. Tome. 9,
                  THe errour of our Fore-fathers, nor of the greateſt, is
to bee followed, but the authoritie of the Scriptures
ought to be followed, and the commandements; of God,
which only do inſtruct.
               
               
                  The ſame on the Prophet Micheas, Chap. 6. Tome. 6.
                  TRueth begetteth pouertie,It is well ſeen that lyars are rich, and they which heare the word of trueth, are poore and perſecuted. and lying engendereth
riches.
               
            
         
         
            
            The ſeuerall Arguments handled
in this ſmall Volume.
            
               Of the Lords Supper.
               Of one only Mediatour.
               Of Purgatorie.
               Of Confeſsion.
               Of the Church.
               Of Freewill.
               Of Mariage, and of Vowes.
               Of Faſting, and of Meates.
               Of Images.
            
            A Declaration of the great graces, vertues and properties
of the Maſſe: which being well conſidered on,
is much more woorth then an vnualuable treaſure.
            The Sentence of interruption or ſtay of proceeding
betweene both ſides.
            An Antitheſis of Gods Commandements and the
Popes.
            The Approbation of the Popes Commandements,
againſt God and his holy word.
            The Generation of Antichriſt, the Deſolator, and
Sonne of the Deuill.
            The Baptiſme of Antichrist. &c.
         
      
      
         
            
            OF THE LORDS
SVPPER.
            Ieſus Chriſt, Iudge and
PRESIDENT.
            
               Where two or three are gathered together in my Name,
there am I in the midſt of them.
               Matth. 18. 20.
               And as they did eate, Ieſus tooke the bread, and when
hee had giuen thankes, hee brake it, and gaue it to
his Diſciples, and ſayd: Take, eate, this is my body.
Alſo hee tooke the Cup, and when hee had giuen
thanks, he gaue it them, ſaying: Drinke yee all of it.
For this is my blood of the New Testament, that is
ſhed for many, for the remiſsion of ſinnes.
               Matth. 26.
Mark. 14. Luke 22.
            
            
               The APOSTLES of our LORD IESVS
CHRIST, and his CHVRCH.
               
                  AS our Lord IESVS hath done,Iohn 13. 13. ſo
will we doe,Math. 10. 24. without altering any
thing of his holy Inſtitution.Heb. 7. 9. 10. For
the Diſciples are not wiſer then
their Maſter. Wherefore, as we
haue receiued the holy Supper of our Lord, euen

ſo doe we beleeue and teach, and in the ſelfe-ſame
manner will wee receiue and adminiſter the ſame.
As for your Maſſe, it is vnknowne to vs, becauſe it
is your Sacrament and ſacrifice, and not that which
was inſtituted by our Lord. For wee are well aſſured,
that Ieſus Christ hath conſecrated for euer,
them that are ſanctified, by one ſole ſacrifice and
onely oblation of his body.
            
            
               The Pope, and his Church.
               Ovr holy Maſse is the ſame Sacrament,Toto titu. de celebra. Miſſar. & de conſecrat. Diſt. 2. which is
one Sacrifice for the redemption of the liuing
and the dead. For of all ſacrifices, this is the beſt and
moſt excellent: wherein, at the voyce of the Prieſt, heauen
openeth, and thence Ieſus Chriſt with his Angels
deſcendeth downe, who are all there aſsiſtant.
            
            
               The Apoſtles, and Gods Church.
               OVr Lord Ieſus hath long ſince admoniſhed
vs,Math. 14. 7. not to liſten vnto ſuch as ſay; Behold, here
is Chriſt,
                  Galat. 1. 8. 
                  and there is Chriſt. And although an Angel
from heauen ſhould proclaime your newly forged
Tranſubſtantion to vs,John 6. 20. we would hold him for accurſed.
For by faith (truely and onely) do we eate
the bodie of Ieſus Chriſt, and drinke his blood in
ſpirit, which quickeneth, for the fleſh profiteth
nothing. Thus do we receiue theſe words of our
Lord, which hee hath ſaid to be ſpirit and life.
            
            
               
               The Pope, and his Church.
               IT ought to bee beleeued,
                     S. Thomas Aquinas in 3. pars ſummae. vpon paine of euerlaſting
damnation, that (very ſuddenly) the bread and
wine are tranſubſtantiated, and conuerted into the true
body, naturall and precious blood of Ieſus Chriſt: euen
as great, as groſſe, and as large, as it was in the wombe
of his mother, and on the Croſſe.
               
                  The holy Doctors, and Fathers of Gods Church.
                  S. Auguſtine,The Church of our Lord Jeſus Chriſt, with the holy Doctours thereof. Ambroſe, Hierome, Chryſoſtome,
Epiphanius, Cyprian, Ireneus, Origen, Hillarius,
Athanaſius, Tertulian, and many others.
               
               
                  The Lords, Signeurs and maſters of the Popes Church.
                  Gratian with his Decretals;The Popes Church, and my Lords the great Maſters of Sorbone. Gregorie with his Decretals;
the graund master of the Sentences, S. Thomas
of Aquine; Iohn Bonaduenture; Raymondus, Petrus
Comeſtor; Iohannes Scotus, and many others.
               
            
            
               The Apostles, and Gods Church▪
               
               AS the holy Apoſtles did receiue it from our
Lord Ieſus Chriſt;
                  1. Cor. 11. 23. Euen ſo haue they deliuered
it vnto vs. Wherefore we will not demoliſh
or caſt downe their building: wee are ignorant of
your Tranſubſtantiation, being certaine, that ignorance
thereof, is knowledge agreeable vnto
GOD. Nor haue wee any want of teſtimonie
concerning the Apoſtles doctrine, which the
Doctours of the Church receiued from them, as is
eaſily diſcerned by that which they haue written.
Saint Auguſtine, an ancient and faithfull Doctour,

both vnderſtood & beleeued this holy Sacrament,
as you may perceiue by his owne Expoſition, ſpeaking
thus.S. Auguſt cont. Adimā
                     tus. Epiſt. 12. & ſup. Leuit. 7. 9. 57. 
                  I can interprete, that this commandement
conſisteth in a ſigne, for our Lord made no difficultie in
his ſaying; This is my body, when he gaue the ſigne of his
bodie. He inſtructeth theſe things to be ſayd (euen as he
ſpake by figure) in ſigne & by ſignification. For the thing
which is ſignified, of Cuſtome, is to be called by the name
of the thing ſignified. Saint Ambroſe alſo ſaith: Thou
receiueſt the Sacrament,
                  S. Ambroſe, lib. de Sacrā. cap. 1. Et ſuper 1. cor. cap. 11. 
                  for the ſimilitude of the fleſh
and of the blood of Chriſt: But thou obtaineſt the
grace of his true nature, and by receiuing the bread in
this kinde,
                  Et lib. de admiſt. 
                  thou doeſt participate of his diuine ſubſtance.
               
               And euen as in Baptiſme thou haſt receaued the ſimilitude
of death: in like manner doeſt thou drinke in the
Sacrament, the ſimilitude of the precious blood of Chriſt.
Saint Hierome ſaith:
                  S. Hierom. ſuper cap. 28. de S. Matth. Like as Melchiſedech the ſoueraigne
Sacrificer of God, performed in the figure hereof,
offering the bread and wine: euen ſo Ieſus Chriſt, repreſenteth
the veritie of his body and of his blood.
            
            
               The Pope, and his Church.
               ANd ſuch is the alteration, that the bread is no
longer bread; nor is the wine any longer wine,
or do containe any thing of their owne nature: For they
are really conuerted into the ſubſtance of the natural bodie
of Ieſus Chriſt.
                  Theſe are the Popes bombards & artillery thundred againſt Gods inuincible trueth. As more amply and diuinely is
written in our holy Decretals and Canons: and ſpecially
by the venerable Father, S. Thomas of Aquine,
In tertia parte ſummae, & in quarto ſententiarum.
Toto titu. de Celebrat. Miſſar. extra. Et de concrat.

Diſtin. 2. Et in Clement. de reliq. & venerat.
Sanct. And in many other places.
               I Thomas of Aquine,
                  All Poperie hath more liſtened to this man, to renew and ouerthrow the holy Supper, then to maintaine the true inſtitution thereof. Yet you heare what this man ſaith. am conſtrained to ſpeake this
trueth, as I haue written in my Summe, pars 3. in
the 46. addition, Article 6. in this maner. Becauſe
that the Church is founded vpon Faith and the Sacraments;
it appertaineth not to the maſters of the
Church, to make any newe Articles of Faith, or
create any new Sacraments, or remooue or take away
them that are made. For therein is the excellencie
and power, which appertaineth onely to Ieſus
Chriſt, who is the foundation of the Church.
            
            
               The Apostles, and Gods Church.
               
                  D OVR Lord Ieſus Chriſt did neuer teach vs
any ſuch fables, but flatly hath forbidden
vs to giue any credite to them.
                  S. Auguſt. in Quinquag.
                   
                  And S. Augustine,
(well inſtructed in Gods owne Schoole) Saith. Vntill
ſuch time as the world ſhal be finiſhed,Pſal. 54. Et ad Dardā. Epiſt. 67. & in 3. lib. de doctri. our Lord Ieſus
ſhall continually remaine aboue, but his trueth abideth
heere with vs. For it behoueth, that the body wherewith
he is riſen,christi. Et ſup. ſhould be in a certaine place: but his trueth
is euery where ſpread abroad.Joan tract. 30 Et in 2. Quinquag. pſal. 96. For wee muſt not imagine,
that Ieſus Chriſt is euery where diſperſed, according
to the forme and ſubſtance of his body. And wee
ought in ſuch ſort to maintaine his diuinitie, that we doe
not deſtroy his humane nature.
               It enſueth not therefore,All that which is in God, is not God, that is to ſay: the humanitie of Chriſt, is not his diuinitie, neither is his diuinitie, his humanitie. that all that is in God, is
God. For to take and eate his very body, may ſeem, that
he commanded a thing vnlawfull, or an offence. It is then
by a figure commanded vs, how to communicate in the

                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
Paſsion of our Lord, and louingly and profitably to preſerue
in our memorie, that his fleſh was wounded and
crucified for vs: And the wordes of Ieſus Chriſt, are
ſpirit and life,For the word is not made fleſh, as conuerted into fleſh: but it is vnited to the fleſh without confounding the ſubſtance. as if he ſhould ſay: vnderſtand ſpiritually
what I haue ſaid vnto you. You ſhall not eate this bodie
which you behold, nor ſhall you drinke the blood which
ſhall be ſhed, by them that muſt crucifie me. I haue commanded
you a Sacrament ſpiritually vnderſtood: For it
is the ſpirit that quickeneth, the fleſh profiteth nothing.
All this hath this learned Doctour written, and in
many other places very amply.
                  Neuertheleſſe, God and man is but one Jeſus Chriſt, who holdeth alwayes the true nature of man glorious and immortall.
               
               And to the end it may not appeare, that this man
onely was of this opinion: wee are willing to alleadge
the ſayings of many other holy Fathers, as
of S. Chriſoſtome, ſpeaking thus.
               Chriſt hath ordained the Table of his holy Supper, to
the ende,S. Chriſost. ſup. that in this Sacrament, hee might ſhewe vs
daily bread and wine,Pſal. 21. Et ſup. Matth. as the ſimilitude of his body and
blood,Cap. 5. Homil. 8. ad Caeſar. for the nature of the wine remaineth euer.
               The like ſaith,Monach. 
                  S. Dioniſius, Ireneus and Origen,
who haue all with one conſent and accord written
the very ſame:Iren. lib. cont. as is to bee ſeene in the Booke
called the Eccleſiaſticall Hierarchie,
                     Ʋalens. cap. 34 Origen. ſuper Matt. cap. 26. hom. 83. & ſuper Leuit. and diuers
others.
               Moreouer, wee will not conceale the Nicene
Councell,
                  Hom. 7. wherein it was decreed as followeth.
               Wee are not bound to matters heere beneath,The Councel of Nice, taught first, and very diuinely: how we ought to eate the Lords body, and drinke his precious blood. as the
bread and wine propoſed on the Lords table. But wee
muſt (by faith) lift vp your ſpirits on high. Conſidering,
and vnderſtanding, that the Lambe of God, taking away
the ſinnes of the world, is in this holy Table: who is
not offered in ſacrifice by Priests, after the maner of

beaſts. And, in taking his precious body and blood; wee
beleeue, theſe are the ſignes of our reſurrection.
               You ſee heere the teſtimonie of many holy Fathers
and Doctours of the Church: who receiued
this doctrine from the Apoſtles in this manner ſo
truely, as they are not to be gain-ſaid.
            
            
               The Pope, and his Church.
               THe Prieſt hauing an intention to conſecrate,Fabulous Aeſope could recount no merier tales then this ſeducing Scotus doth. ſaying
but foure or fiue wordes (leauing Enim) vpon
all the bread which is in the Market, and vpon all the
wine which is in a Sellar: immediatly, all the breads and
and wines are conuerted and tranſubſtantiated, into the
naturall body and blood of Chriſt. So ſaith our learned
Master, Ioannes Scotus, in quarto ſententiarum.
               
               I Gelaſius Pope of Rome,Gelaſius a man learned, was elected Byſhop of Rome, in the yeere of Chriſt 493. 
                  haue no way approoued
your Tranſubſtantiation. For I will neuer vnſay that
which I haue written againſt Eutichus and Neſtorius,
Heretiques, to wit. The Sacraments of the body
and blood of Ieſus Chriſt, which wee receiue, are
diuine things.We may then well know, that in his time, Tranſubſtantiation was not forged or receiued into Gods church: as he very wel declareth in his owne writings. Therefore, we are made partakers
(by them) of the diuine nature: and yet notwithſtanding,
the ſubſtance of bread and wine doe not
ceaſe to be there ſtill. And ſurely, the Image and ſimilitude
of Chriſts body and blood, are celebrated
in the action of the miſteries. It is then euidently
ſhewen vnto vs, what we ought to vnderſtand in
Ieſus Christ our Lord.
               
                  I Venerable Bede, will neuer receiue your Tranſubſtantiation,
for I will neuer reuoke that which I haue
written, vpon the 22. Chapter of Saint Luke, namely.
                  
Ieſus Chriſt hath left the Sacraments of his fleſh
and blood,Venerable Bede was not altogether popiſh, for he did not beleeue Tranſubſtantiation. vnder the figures of bread and wine, in
ſtead of the fleſh and blood of the Lambe. To the
end, that hee might ſhew himſelfe to bee hee, to
whom our Lord had ſworne, and neuer would repent
him; Thou art the euerlaſting Sacrificer.
               
                  I Drhumatus,This Monke hath written heereon very learnedly. And me thinks that all Benedictines ſhould not defend Tranſubſtantiation. 
                  Monke of the holy Order of S. Benedict,
can no way approoue your Tranſubſtantiation.
For I will neuer deny what I haue commented vpon S.
Matth. to wit. The wine doth cheriſh & augment
our blood, for this cauſe is not the blood of Chriſt
improperly figured thereby. Becauſe, whatſoeuer
commeth of him to vs, doth cheriſh vs with a
true and perfect ioy, and increaſeth all our happineſſe.
Our Lord gaue to his Diſciples, the Sacrament
of his body,For it was not as yet forged in S. Benets time, who gaue them better doctrine then they will follow. in remiſsion of their ſinnes, and
to preſerue charitie among them. To the end, that
keeping this act of his in their remembrance, they
might affixe in figure, what he had done for them,
and neuer caſt this charitie into obliuion, This is
my body, that is to ſay, in a Sacrament.
               
                  I Adrain,This Pope is like vnto Saul, who albeit he could doe nothing. yet he would prophecie among the Prophets. 
                  Pope of Rome, notwithſtanding the ordinances
of my Predeceſſors: yet, as I haue written in my
fourth booke, I confeſſe, that the Church ought to
know, that ſhe is not Miſtreſſe, but Miniſter of the
Sacraments. And that ſhee cannot inſtitute any
forme of Sacraments, no more then ſhee can aboliſh
any diuine Law.
            
            
               
               The Apoſtles, and Gods Church.
               THe Diſciple cannot be more perfect,Matth. 10. 24. or wiſer
then his Maſter: it is ſufficient for him,
that he is as he is. In regard wherof, we will neither
diminiſh,Deut. 4. 2. nor ad any thing to the inſtitution of our
Lord and Maſter, Ieſus Chriſt; whom we will onely
heare,John 13. 15. and following his example (as hee hath
commanded vs) wee will receiue and adminiſter
the holy Sacrament of his Supper, vnder the two
kinds of bread and wine, nor dare wee doe otherwiſe,
without offering ſacriledge.
               The Councell of Baſill vnderſtood our Lordes
will well enough, when they ordained, that Laye
people ſhould communicate in both kindes. And
S. Cyprian directly oppoſeth himſelfe, to any ſuch
contradiction of Ieſus Chriſt, affirming it to be full
of ſacriledge, in his ſermon to repentant ſinners,
and theſe are his words.S. Cyprian Serm. ad peccator. poenitent. 
                  How ſhall we exhort the people,
to ſpend their blood for the confeſsion of Chriſt, if
we doe denie them his blood, for whom they are to combate?
Or how ſhall we make them able, to drinke of the
cup of Martyrdome, except wee firſt admit them to
drinke of our Lords Cuppe? Moreouer, our Lord Ieſus
Christ and his Apoſtles, did neuer teach or
command vs, to hide or keepe cloſe the bread of
the holy Supper, or to cary it about hither and thither.
For the Church hauing beene alwayes obedient
to his doctrine, will neuer doe ſo. And that
full well vnderſtood S.
                  
                     S. Clem. in Epiſt. 2. ad Jacobum. Et in Can. tribus de conſecrat. 
                  Clemens, ſpeaking thus. As
many Hoſtes as will ſuffiſe the people, are to bee offered

at the Altar. If there ſhall any remaine, or be left, they
are not to be kept vntill the morrow: but by diligence of
the Clerks (with feare and trembling) they are to bee receiued
and eaten.
                  Diſt. 3. And Origen alſo oppoſeth himſelfe
againſt this ſuperſtitious vice, which would haue
intruded it ſelfe into the Church in his time, hee
ſaith.Origen. ſup. 
                  Our Lord hath not ordained or appointed, that
the bread ſhould bee kept vntill the morrow,
                  Leuit. Chap. 7. 
                  which hee
purpoſed to giue to his Diſciples; but he ſayd vnto them:
Take, and eate. Behold then, how we will follow
and imitate the Church of God, without declining
to the right hand, or to the left.
            
            
               The Pope, and his Church.
               THe Sacrament of the Altar, ought to bee taken
in bread and wine, of the Prieſts onely. But to
Lay people, it is to bee giuen vnder the kinde of bread
onely. Tit. de conſecrat, Diſtinct. 2. Concerning
them that be ſicke, the body of Ieſus Chriſt ought to be
caryed to them with great deuotion, ſolemnitie and reuerence.
For this is the commandement of God, and of
his Church.
               
                  I Gelaſius,I can hardly number Gelaſius, in ranck of the Romaine Popes: for he hath oppoſed himſelfe againſt a number of their blaphemies. 
                  Pope of Rome, doe oppoſe my ſelfe againſt
your ordinance, and will by no meanes approue it. For I
will neuer contradict that which I haue written in the
Canon Comperimus, de conſecrat. Diſtinct. 2. ſpeaking
thus. Wee haue vnderſtood, that there are
ſome, who receiuing onely the body of our Lord,
doe abſtaine from the Chalice; wherein, becauſe
they ſinne through ſuperſtition, they ought to receiue
the Sacraments together, or elſe to bee reiected

from them quite. For the diuiſion of ſo great
a myſterie, cannot be committed without notorious
ſacriledge.
            
            
               The Apoſtles, and Gods Church.
               IN regard that wormes,The Popes Sacrament had been longer obſerued and adored, if they had knowen cunning to hide aad diſſemble the corruption and wretched ſubiection thereof. But yet the better to compaſſe their purpoſe, they haue kept it in Boxes and Pixes. But God hath permitted all for the best. Mice, Spiders, and other
creatures, may and doe eate your Tranſubſtantiated
bread, which being kept ouer long,
corrupteth and putrifieth of it ſelfe: hereby it may
be manifeſtly knowne, that the ſigne of the Sacrament,
is not the thing ſignified thereby: that is to
ſay. That the bread which is a ſigne (as hath bin ſufficiently
proued already, & according as our Lord
hath willed) cannot thus be conuerted, or tranſubſtātiated
into his natural body. For it were a great
& fearefull blaſphemie, to ſay, that the body of Ieſus
Chriſt ſhould bee ſubiect to putrifaction, corruption,
or the teeth of brute beaſts. Hence would
enſue, that Chriſt ſhould bee leſſe ſufficient, and
more inferiour in power and vertue, then were the
Gods and Idols of the Gentiles. For they defended
themſelues, and ſpake by the cunning of him,
who (thorowe Gods iuſt iudgement) did hoodwinke
and blinde the poore credulous world, rayſing
beleife of ſuch a tranſubſtantiation,Pſal. 16. 4. after hee
had once newly forged it in his owne ſhop.
               Now the Church of God,Mark. 16. 16. being inſtructed by
the ſanctified ſpirit, beleeueth much more wiſely,
namely. That Ieſus Chriſt is riſen from the dead,
being no more ſubiected to death. For he is glorified,
immortall and incorruptible; ſitting now at the

right hand of God his Father: from whence hee
will not deſcend, vntill ſuch time as hee ſhall
come to iudge both quicke and dead, and render
to euery one according to his workes. Then
will hee puniſh moſt grieuouſly, theſe correcters
and falſifiers of his word, that haue changed and
ouerturned the inſtitution forme and true manner
of his Sacraments. And hee will iudge the horrible
ſlaunder of our aduerſaries, who doe vniuſtly
accuſe vs, to doubt of Gods power, and deny that
he cannot conuert the bread into the body of his
ſonne Ieſus Chriſt.
                  The will and power of God doe neuer diſagree in themſelues. But in this Article and difference
of the Supper, we pretend no diſputation
of Gods power: which wee beleeue and confeſſe
to be infinite and incomprehenſible.God can do all things, as being almightie, but he will not vſe his abſolute power, againſt that which hee hath long ſince promiſed, hauing ſo willed and commanded For God is neuer contrary to himſelfe. For heerein
onely lyeth our controuerſie, that the will of God
is ſuch, according to the teſtimonie of his owne
holy word: By the which we prooue clearly, that
we doe receiue and eate by faith, and ſpiritually,
the very body and precious blood of Ieſus Chriſt.
This confeſsion is incorruptible, not ſubiect to
wormes, Mice, Spiders, or to bee burned in the
fire: which being eternall, is prepared for all them,
that ſhall breath, foorth ſuch blaſphemies againſt
our Lord and Maſter Ieſus Chriſt.
               
            
            
               The Pope, and his Church.
               
                  OVr holy Father the Pope, ſupreame head and
Preſident in the Councell of Orleance, hath
ordained and decreed, as it is written in the fift Chapter
to be ſeene. That if the bodie of Ieſus Chriſt, be receiued

and vomited by a ſicke bodie;Moſt horrible words, that our Lords body ſhould be ſubiect to putrifaction, and to bee eaten of beaſts, or to be burned. The Arke of the couenant, which was but a figure of Chriſt, would not ſuffer it ſelfe to be ſo vſed: If (by humane
frailty) no perſon can be found, that will licke
vp and receiue the ſame againe, I meane the ſame
body of Ieſus Chriſt ſo diſgorged: That then that
body of our Lord is to bee burned, and the aſhes
thereof put among the Reliques. Alſo, if the body
of Ieſus Chriſt bee loſt, or rotten, by ouer-bad
ſmell or age; it ſhall be burned, and the aſhes layd
vpon the Altar.
               Moreouer, if the body of Ieſus Chriſt, by the
eating of Mice or Spiders, do become much leſſened,
impaired, or gnawed by byting, or if the very
worme be found in it:For it cauſed all their deaths, that approched neere it▪ 1. Sam. 5. 11. It ſhall bee burned. But if
there doe remaine any part of Chriſts body, which
is not gnawen, or much out of order: it is more
ſafely done, to take and eate that. Neuertheleſſe,
if it be greatly gnawen,Much greater reaſon is there for the bread, what it might doe, if it were conuerted and tranſubſtantiated into Chriſts true bodie. rotten and impaired,
by ſome vermine or putrifaction: It ſhall incontinently
be burned, and the ſacred aſhes, ſhall be reuerently
put and kept among the Reliques.
               Such is our holy ordinance, which we will haue
to be obſerued vpon paine of Excommunication:
As moſt amply wee haue ordained and decreed, in
the ſayd Councell, and cauſed to be written vnder
the title of Conſecration,But we muſt confeſſe, that the ſigne of the Sacrament, being thus abuſed, is not the thing ſignified thereby. the ſecond diſtinction.
And yet much more clearely in the Cautells of our
holy Maſſe.
            
         
         
            
            OF ONE ONELY
MEDIATOVR.
            
               There is one MEDIATOVR between God and man,
which is the man CHRIST IESVS.
               
               1. Tim. 2. 5.
               Wee haue one Aduocate with the Father, IESVS
CHRIST the iuſt. And he is the reconciliation
for our ſinnes, and not for ours onely; but alſo for
the ſinnes of the whole world.
               1. Iohn. 1. 2.
            
            
               The Apoſtles, and Gods Church.
               
                  THat is not the Church of
God,John 14. 10. 1. Iohn 2. 1. 2. which (beſide both
reproouing & changing
his word) cannot ſo content
it ſelfe;Rom. 1. 4. 1. Tim. 4. but alſo diſalloweth
the ſufficiencie
of one onely Aduocate
and Mediatour, ſole
God, and ſearcher of all hearts. For the Apoſtles,
and the whole Church after them, did reiect all other
Aduocates and Mediatours: contenting themſelues

with Ieſus Chriſt onely, who prayeth for vs,
as moſt euidently is teſtified vnto vs in the Scriptures,
and is likewiſe to be ſeene in the writings of
the Doctours and Fathers of the Church.
               
                  And becauſe we are to handle this point ſomewhat
briefly,
                  
                     S. Ambroſe ſup. Epiſt. ad Rom. cap. 1. S. Auguſt. ſup. 1. Epiſt. S. Ioan. tract. 1. & 2. Et cont. Parme. Lib. 2. Chap. 6. 8. Et in Quinquag. Pſal. 94. & 108. 
                  Saint Ambroſe, deliuering the word
for the whole Church, ſpeaketh thus. There hath
beene a miſerable cuſtome, in ſaying; that men might goe
of, and by themſelues, to God, euen as by Earles and
Princes, they can make way to Kings. Is there any man ſo
mad, or forgetfull of his owne ſaluation, to attribute a
Kings honour to a Prince or an Earle? Why, we ſee, that
if any man ſhould dare but to ſpeak this of his own King,
of good right hee ought to bee condemned, as guilty of
treaſon. Shall not they then be held for much more faultie,
as dare attribute the honour of Gods name, to creatures?
And, in leauing our Lord ſhall honour ſuch as are
but ſeruantes with themſelues? Though men in Kings
Courts, are in more eminent place then others: yet in the
King of Kings Court, the greateſt & meaneſt are all but
ſeruantes, and the pooreſt as ſoone heard as the proudeſt,
and ſooner too. For this cauſe, men gaine acceſſe to a
King, by meanes of Princes and Lords, becauſe the king
himſelfe is but a man, and knowes not otherwiſe how to
deale in matters faithfully, concerning his commonwealth.
But, to gaine the fauour of God, from whom nothing
can be hidden; becauſe he knowes the hearts of all
men, their works, wants or whatſoeuer: There needs no
other fauourite, to preſent our ſupplication by, but only
an humble, contrite and repentant heart.
               Theſe are the wordes of this worthy Father.
With him do conſent many other Doctours of the

Church, affirming it to bee blaſphemie and ſacriledge,
to haue any other Aduocate, Mediatour or
Interceſſour, but Ieſus Chriſt onely. If any man ſhall
make doubt hereof, let him read what is learnedly
written by diuers to this purpoſe, eſpecially by S.
Chr
                        •
                     ſoſtome,
                  S. Auguſt. lib. de vera Relig. cap. vlt. Et ſup. Joan. tract. 23 chap. 5. Et de eiu
                        •
                     t. D
                        •
                     i lib. 10. 28. chap. 27. Et in lib. de cur. at
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      mort. cap. 13. Epiphan. lib. 2. Com. 2. & cont. Collyrid. lib. 3. Tom. 2. haereſ. 79. S. Chryſoſt. in his imperfect worke vpon Matth. Chap. 2. Hom. 2. S. Hierom. Com. ſup. Eze
                        •
                     . cap. 16. Eccleſ. Hiſt. lib. 5. Chap. 15. and S. Auguſtine who doe manifeſtly
ſpeake thus. Although wee are full of all euils, poore
and miſerable ſinners: yet notwithſtanding, we haue no
need of any Patrons or Aduocates, but onely Ieſus
Chriſt; by whom our prayers are agreeable before God.
S. Auguſtine teacheth vs, to honour the Saints, as
creatures and veſſels of honour: without attributing
any thing elſe to them, in matters that appertaine
to God onely, he ſaith. We ought by no meanes
to direct our prayers to the Saints which are in heauen:
becauſe they can bee no ſearchers of our hearts, neither
haue they any knowledge of our neceſsities. For it is impoſsible,
that they ſhould in any thing bee helpfull to the
liuing; when they know nothing that is done in this life.
               
               Conſequently them we ſay, that we ought not to
dedicate Temples, Altars or other things to Saints:
for we cannot be made happy or bleſſed by them.
Then the ſumme of all is, that as we haue but one
onely euerliuing God, who will not giue his glory
vnto any other: Euen ſo wee haue but one onely
Sauiour, Mediatour and Aduocate, Ieſus Chriſt, by
whom and in whom, we beg and haue all things,
which are needfull for vs.
            
            
               
               The Pope, and his Church.
               IT is ordained and decreed, by the great high Biſhop,
Head of our holy Mother the Church; that not only
Ieſus Chriſt is our Mediatour:It enſueth then, that creatures deceaſed, know our hearts: which is falſe. But likewiſe the bleſsed
Virgin Marie, and all the Saints that are in heauen. In
regard whereof, we ought to pray and inuoke their helpe
in our wants and neceſsities, as our Mediatours and Interceſſours
betweene God and vs. For, by their prayers
and merites,For there is is none but God onely, who is the ſearcher of all mens ſecrets. we ſhall obtaine heauen.
               Hee that hath any affaires towardes a Prince, prepareth
himſelfe first to ſome perſon of his houſe, to deliuer
the meſsage for him, becauſe by himſelfe alone, he cannot
be heard.Pſalm. 7. 9. Euen ſo, the bleſſed Virgin Marie our Aduocate,
and all the Saints of heauen,Rom. 8. 25. doe cary our petitions
to God,Note, that whoſoeuer will read the Prayer of S. Claude, ſhall finde it moſt ſinguler, and worthy to be learned by heart; to be preſerued from the Feauer Quintain. and humbly intreat him for our neceſsities:
and God doth neuer refuſe the Saints, for their merites
are of great vertue and efficacie; For in ſo doing, we can
neuer faile. As it is written in the title; De reliquis
& venerat. Sanctor. And in many other places of
the holy right Canon. And eſpecially, the prayer of
my Lord S. Claude, is very ſinguler and acceptable to
God, after the holy prayers of the bleſsed Virgin Marie,
our principall Aduocateſse.
               
                  I Iohn Gerſon,This Scholler of Caiphas, hath not bin much ill tutord in his. Schoole. 
                  will neuer gain-ſay that which I
haue written, in my firſt part of the Examination of
doctrines, ſpeaking thus. The firſt truth ſhould bee
ſo firme, that any ſimple man, not authoriſed, may
bee thereby ſo excellently inſtructed in holy Letters:For there is maintained firmely, that Romes great Pontifex is not able to ſinne, and that he can neuer erre.
That a man ought rather to beleeue in his
aſſertion, in the cauſe of inſtruction; then in the

doctrine of the Pope. For it appeareth, that a man
ought rather to beleeue the Goſpell, then the
Pope. If then, ſuch a man doe teach ſome veritie
to be contained in the Goſpell,What ſay yee then to a ſhe-Pope; Hyldebrand a Sorcerer; 2. Syluester▪
                      one a ſecond deuill; And the other held, that our ſoules are mortall, becauſe otherwiſe, a man could tell, that Popes cannot erre. concerning, whether
the Pope doth, or may greatly erre: it is manifeſt,
whoſe iudgement ought to be preferred. And
if it happened, that a generall Councell ſhould be
celebrated, and ſuch a man (ſo well inſtructed)
ſhould be preſent there among them; If it ſhould
chaunce that (either through malice or ignorance)
the greater part ſhould decline, and be oppoſite againſt
the Goſpell: Such a Laye man might oppoſe
himſelfe againſt the ſaid generall Councell. This is
alſo prooued by the Canon Pudenda. 24. Queſt. 1. And
in the Canon, Si Papa. Diſtinct. 40.
            
         
         
            
            OF PVRGATORIE.
            
               Verely verely, I ſay vnto you, he that heareth my word,
and beleueth in him that ſent mee; hath euerlaſting
life, and ſhall not come into condemnation, but hath
paſſed from death to life.
               Iohn 5. 24.
               Wee haue deliuerance through his blood, that is, forgiueneſſe
of ſinnes. Hauing reconciled all things vnto
himſelfe, and to ſet at peace through the blood of his
Croſse, both the things in earth, and the things in
heauen.
               Coloſs. 1. 14. 20.
               God hath ſent his Sonne, to bee a ſatisfaction for our
ſinnes.
               1. Iohn 4. 10.
               To him that loued vs, and hath waſhed vs from our ſins,
in his blood, &c.
               Apoc. 1. 5.
            
            
               The Apoſtles, and Gods Church.
               
                  THE true and faithfull Church of
Ieſus Christ,
                  Matth. 25. 34 knoweth, and vnderſtandeth
his word.Hebre. 1. 10. And it
yeeldeth no other teſtemonie,Coloſs. 1 14. 20.
but of two wayes onely,1. Iohn. 4. 10. heauen
and hell.Apoc. 1. 5. Whoſoeuer therefore
ſhall inuent any other beſide, ſhall neuer enter into

the others happineſſe. For no other Purgatorie do
we beleeue and confeſſe, then the onely and moſt
precious blood, of our Lord and Sauiour Ieſus
Chriſt: who (in himſelfe) hath made a full purgatition
of our ſinnes, and by his blood we haue deliuerance,
and abſolute remiſsion of them. For he
that loued vs, hath waſhed and made vs cleane
from all, being ſent from God his Father, to be the
ſatisfaction for all our ſinnes. Concerning that
which S. Paul ſaith;1. Cor. 3. 13. 
                  That euery mans worke ſhall bee
reuealed by the fire: This fire is very falſely vnderſtood
to bee Purgatorie. For the Apoſtle ſpeaketh
in that place, of the fire of tribulation, of the Croſſe
and perſecutions in this world, whereby our Lord
examineth and tryeth who are is.
               
                  And that it is ſo, S. Auguſtine hath faithfully expounded
this paſſage in many places,
                  
                     S. Auguſt. in Enchirid. ad Lauren. cap. 28 & Lib 21. de Ciuit. Dei. cap. 26. Et in tract. de Fide & O per. chap. 16. 
                  ſaying. Some
doe beleeue, that all thoſe which haue not forſaken the
name of Chriſt, and haue beene baptiſed in his Church,
and haue not beene cut off from it by ſome ſchiſme or
hereſie, that in whatſoeuer ſinnes they haue liued, and
haue not defaced them by repentance, or redeemed
them by almes deeds;They that beleeue the fire of Purgatorie, are deceiued in humane beneuolence, not vnderſtanding the holy Scriptures, which render no other teſtimoni, but of the ſufficient purgation made by the precious blood of Ieſus Chriſt onely. But haue continued in them vſually,
euen to the laſt day of their life: They ſhall be ſaued
by fire. Howbeit, according to the greatneſſe of their
ſinnes, the fire ſhall be but diuturnall and not eternall.
But me thinkes, they which do ſo beleeue, and yet are Catholiques,
are deceiued by humane beneuolence. For if
we doe enquire for ſuch matter of the deuine Scriptures:
they make no other anſwere, but Chriſts death onely,
and the ſhedding of his moſt precious blood. You heare
now what this holy Father ſaith, that they which

beleeue a Purgatorie, being forged againſt the
word of God: are meerely deceiued by the conceit
of humane beneuolence.
               
            
            
               The Pope, and his Church.
               OVr Mother holy Church,Mahomet in his Alchoran, confeſſeth Purgatorie as the Pope doth. doth make no doubt
at all, but that there is a Purgatory fire, burning
for times and limitation, which purgeth and extenuateth
thoſe ſinnes: the guilt whereof is forgiuen, but not the
paine or penaltie.Since both of them then do agree in that faith: it is not to be doubted, but they ſhall both receiue reward alike. Let euery one bee therefore perſwaded,
that the ſacred Scriptures, doe render vs good
teſtimonie of foure places; to wit, Heauen, Hell, Purgatorie,
and the Limboes. And whoſoeuer doth not
beleeue theſe 4. places, he ſhall not eſcape, becauſe he hath
been foretold of them. And holy Saint Paul, the great
witneſſe of this veritie, was not willing to conceale ſuch
a ſecret from vs,1. Cor. 3. 13. for he ſaith. That the fire ſhall approoue
the works of euery one,
                  This venerable Maſter Raymond, was ſo well skild in the holy Scriptures, as he knew not to alleadge any thing, but Canons, and ſuch ſhot. But that which hefi
                        ••
                      ſaith, is better prooued by Eſa. 43. 25 
                  and that they ſhall
be ſaued by fire.
               
               I Raymondus, Preacher of the Papall Church, will
not oppoſe my ſelfe againſt the faith of Purgatorie. Neuertheleſse,
I firmely do beleeue, and without any doubt,
that God doth not vſe to pardon ſinnes by halfes: But by
his grace, he either pardons all, or none at all. I doe not
ſpeake this as of my ſelfe, for it is written, and approued
by the holy Canons: according to the testimonie of the
gloſſe, on the Chap. Maiores cauſas, de Baptiſmo & eius
effectu extra.
                  Mich. 7. 18. Where it is ſaid, that the great goodnes
of God doth not pardon a part or moitie:Iohn 3. 36. For when a
man commeth to God with ſighes and teares,Rom. 8. 6. &c. hee forgiueth
all,where it is proued, that Chriſts blood is the intire & ſufficiēt purging, ſatisfaction & remiſsion of ſins, which God giueth not by halfes, but wholly and fully, for the loue of his ſon Ieſus. or els nothing.
            
            
               
               The Apoſtles, and Gods Church.
               WE read that Sathan being come to tempt
Chriſt in the wilderneſſe, hee propoſed
teſtimonies to him out of holy Scripture, expounding
them falſely, onely to deceiue him. But hee
that could anſwere him ſo well,Matth. 4 4. 1. Pet. 3. 15. hath taught vs alſo
to anſwere in his name,Matth. 5. 16. 25. and to render a reaſon of
our Faith, to all ſuch as ſhall queſtion vs therein.
Wherefore we ſay, that that place in S. Matthew, of
the Priſoner, if he will not agree with his aduerſarie;
is vnderſtood of the reconciliation and agreement
that ought to be,
                     S. Ambroſe ſup. Luc. chap. 12. S. Chriſ. ſup. Matth. chap. 5. Hom
                        •
                     . 10. Hillar. & Theo. in Can. Chryſoſt. ſup. Matth. Chap. 12. homil. 6. Grego. ſup. Job. chap. 29. Et in Moral. lib. 
                        •
                     8. Chap. 17. Et in can. Dist. 14. S. Hierom. in Epiſt. ad Cher. Et in praeſat. de Prouer. Et in Prolog. Galat. between ſuch as are in
ſtrifes of Law and ſuch like variances. And ſo is it
expounded by diuers holy Doctors, without making
any mention at all of Purgatorie. As namely,
S. Ambroſe, Chryſoſtome, Hyllarius and Theophylact.
               
               Touching that text, which ſpeaketh of the ſinne
againſt the holy Ghoſt, S. Chriſoſtome in his Expoſition
thereof, ſpeaketh thus. Becauſe this ſinne can
not be ſaid to be veniall in you: therefore it ſhal be puniſhed
greiuouſly in you, both in this life, and that which is
to come. It is very friuolouſly done then, to fordge
a Purgatorie out of this teſtimonie, which ſpeaketh
onely of the remiſsion of the fault, and not of the
paine. And your Purgatory, is ſo much the rather
inuented, for the paine onely. As for the Bookes
of the Macchabees, they are not authenticall nor receiued
in the Hebrew Canon: For they are numbred
with the Apocripha; As S. Augustine, Hierome,
Gregory, with the Councell of Laodicea, who doe all

confeſſe thoſe Bookes not to bee authenticall, neither
haue they any authoritie, to prooue any thing
by, that is in controuerſie. Moreouer, if wee looke
well into the ſacred Scriptures, it is very eaſie to be
found, that the fire of Purgatorie was firſt of all forged
in the diuels Shop: and he hath ſtretcht it out to
the vttermoſt, onely to annihilate the ſoueraigne
vertue, and merite of Chriſts moſt precious blood.
            
            
               The Pope, and his Church.
               WE haue three euident witneſſes in the Scripture,
that doe make the fire of Purgatorie
moſt certaine to vs. The firſt is, where it is written of
the priſoner,Matth. 5. 25. 26. who not beeing accorded and agreed with
his aduerſarie, ſhould neuer be ſuffered to depart out of
priſon,Luke 12. 59. vntill he had fully ſatisfied, and payd the vtmoſt
farthing. Which cannot otherwiſe be vnderſtood, but
onely of the priſon of Purgatory: wherein full ſatisfaction
is to be made,2. Mac. 12. 27 before any parting thence will be permited.
Moreouer,Behold the ſubtile means, inuented to bring water to the mill of Rome. But the wiſe children of God (accounted to be fooles in this world) will neuer bring their corne to this Mill, becauſe it keeps too bad an noyſe. the ſinne againſt the holy Ghoſt, is neuer
pardoned in this worlde, nor in the worlde to come:
Ergo, it followeth, that ſome ſinne is to be pardoned in
the other world.
               Laſtly, the authenticall booke of the Macchabees,
doth ſay, that it is an holy and wholeſome thing to pray
for the dead, to the ende, that they may bee deliuered
from their ſinnes. Behold here how Purgatorie is diuinely
approued, and by long and auncient Custome receiued
into our Mother holy Church. Wherefore all
theſe being well conſidered, there is not any doubt to be
made thereof: But rather wee ought to pay vnto God,

that hee would ſaue vs by this holy fire of Purgatorie.
Out of which we ſhall be very ſoone deliuered, by the celebration
of Maſſes, Anniuerſaries, Oblations, Vigils,
Commendations, Prayers, and Almes deeds. Amen.
            
            
               The Apostles, and Gods Church.
               
                  K WE wil yet further teſtifie our former ſpeeches,
by the Expoſitions of many ancient
Doctours and Fathers, that neither confeſſe or
make any mention of this Purgatorie fire: but haue
written and taught the contrary. Eſpecially, Saint
Auguſtine,S. Auguſt. lib. 18. de ciuit. Dei. cap. 3 8. Et in lib. 2. de doct. Chriſt. Concil. Laodicea. cap. 59. 
                  writing to Macedonius, Epiſt 54. Theſe
are his words. There is no other place for correction
of manners, but in this life: For after it is ended, euery
one ſhall receiue what he hath purchaſed in this worlde,
there the mercy of God remaineth for them that haue
bin heere repentant. But in the world to come, penitence
doth profite nothing at all. And in the 13. Booke of
the Citie of God, and 9. Chapter, he writeth thus▪
                  
The ſoules of the good, being ſeuered from their bodyes,
are in rest, and no other doubt is to be made thereof. But
the ſoules of the wicked are puniſhed, vntill ſuch time
as their bodies ſhall bee rayſed: and then the good ſhall
goe to life eternall, and the others to euerlaſting death.
S. Cyprian was not of any contrary opinion,
                  
                     S. Cyprian in Serm. de mort. ſapient. 2. 4. 
                  for hee
ſpeakes thus. Wee are not to thinke, that the death of
the wicked, ſhould be of like forme and condition to that
of the good: The good are called to reſt and comfort; the
vniuſt to paines and grieuous torments. On a ſudden,
is ſaftie giuen to the faithfull, and torments to the vnbelieuers.
Moreouer, theſe holy Doctours and Fathers,
                  
S. Ambroſe,S. Ambroſe do bon. de mort. Tom. 1. cap. 2. S. Hierom. ſup. Gal. cap. 6. Et in Eccleſ. Tom. 7. cap. 9. Et ſup. Eſay. ca. 65. Epipha. lib. 1. Tom. 1. haereſ. 69. ſup. Cantic. S. Cyprian cont. Demet. tract. 1. S. Chriſoſt. 2. ſerm. de Lazar. Hierome, and Chryſoſtome, doe
contradict not any point of their precedent opinions,
but are all of the ſame conſent, with Epiphanius,
ſpeaking thus. It is neither Faſting nor Almes, penitence
nor iuſtice, good or euill, that after death doth
hurt or helpe. For then there is no further place for repentance,
nor any more effects of ſatisfaction.
               Behold then, what the faithfull Church doth beleeue,
with her learned Doctours and Fathers; To
hold worthleſſe their iudgement, it were impious
and ſhamefull, or to condemne and curſe them for
Heretiques. Is not this (then) honor done to Saints,
when thus wee remember to imitate their example?
To conclude then, the Councell held at Toledo
can teſtifie, if we doe ill, in reiecting prayers for
the dead: For it was there forbidden as vnprofitable,
and fruitleſſely inuented.
            
            
               The Pope, and his Church,
with the Councell of Toledo.
               NOtwithſtanding all that which hath been ſayde
before, wee hauing aſsembled our ſelues at the
Councell of Toledo: haue ordained and decreed this
preſent ordinance,Singing for dead is vaine, idle, and conſequently grounded on ſinne: for of euery idle word we ſhall yeeld an account before God. which wee will haue to be firmely kept,
and eſtabliſhed for euer, as followeth.
               We command, that ſuch as depart out of this life,
by the diuine vocation; ſhal be caryed to the earth
with Pſalmes ſung before them, and other Songs
of the Singers. For wee doe altogether forbidde
thoſe prayers at Funerals, which were wont to be
comonly ſung for the dead. It ſhall therefore ſuffice,

that you giue to the dead bodyes of Chriſtians,
the ſeruice of diuine Songs, in hope of their reſurrection.
This is written in the 3. 22. and 23. Chapters
of the ſayd Councell of Toledo; And likewiſe
ſtandes allowed in the Decretals of Gratian.
               I Panormitanus,
                  This man is like vnto Cayphas, that ſpake well but not of himſelfe. Cardinall of Rome, will not oppoſe
my ſelfe againſt the Papale Ordinanees. Neuertheleſſe,
in matters that doe concerne Faith, the ſaying
of a Laye man, ought to bee preferred both with the
Popes ſaying, and before it. If it be more probable, and
by better authoritie, both of the old and new Teſtament,
it then goes beyond the Popes opinion and iudgement.
               According as I haue written, vpon the Chapter; Significaſti
extra de elect. And as in other places and
Canons, the very ſame is to be ſeene.
            
         
         
            
            OF CONFESSION
VNTO GOD
ONELY.
            
               I haue acknowledged my ſin vnto thee, and haue not hid
mine iniquitie. I will confeſſe againſt my ſelfe my wickedneſſe
vnto thee Lord, and thou forgaueſt the puniſhment
of my ſinne.
               Pſal. 32. 5.
               Againſt thee onely haue I ſinned, and done euill in thy
ſight.
               Pſal. 51. 4.
               O God be mercifull to me a ſinner. This man departed
to his houſe iuſtified.
               Luke 18. 13. 14.
            
            
               The Apoſtles, and Gods Church.
               
                  THE holy Scripture teacheth
vs very euidently,Pſalm. 32. 5.
that for a man to confeſſe
his ſinne to man,Pſalm. 51. 4. is
not any way neceſſarie,James. 5. 16.
and conſequently,Coloſſ. 4. 2. that
ſuch kinde of confeſsion
is meerely inuented; ouer
and aboue Gods commandement To whom

onely our ſinnes ought to bee confeſſed, becauſe
againſt him onely and his holy commandements,
we haue offended. S. Iames ſaith: Acknowledge
your faultes one to another. But how? not to the
Popes Prieſts, they are not called by the name of
one another. They that are not wilfully blinded,
may well perceiue, that Saint Iames in that place,
ſpeaketh of reconcilation with our neighbour. As
Saint Paul in like maner well vnderſtood the ſame,
ſaying. Forbearing one another, and forgiuing one another,
if any man haue a quarrell to another. Euen as
Chriſt forgaue you, euen ſo doe yee.
               
               Moreouer,It is not aboue three hundred yeers, ſince the Pope of Rome conſtrained his Popelings to confeſſe in the care. we are not ignorant, that Auricular
confeſsion, being only brought in by men, without
any warrant out of Gods word: was put in vſe at
Conſtantinople, vntill ſuch time as it gaue occaſion
of committing whoredome, which made it to be
aboliſhed. And afterward it was renewed againe,
by Nectarius Biſhop of the ſame place.For in the time of Pope Innocent. the third, or very little before, none were obliged to confeſse to Prieſts, about the yere. 1200. Hiſt. tripart. cap. 2. Likewiſe,
the Hyſtories doe declare, before Pope Innocent the
third, no body was bound to confeſſe in the eare
of a Prieſt. Therefore, without building vppon
mens inuentions, we will make no Confeſsion of
our ſinnes, but vnto God onely.
               
                  For the Apoſtles, and the whole Church after
them, did neuer doe any otherwiſe, as many holy
Doctours doe render ſounde teſtemonie. Eſpecily
Saint Auguſtine,
                     S. Auguſt. in lib. 10. de confeſſ. cap. 2. 
                  ſpeaking thus. What haue I
then to doe with men, that they ſhould heare my confeſsions,
as if they could helpe mee of my afflictions? It
is a curious caſe, to know another mans life, and be careleſſe
in correcting our owne. Wherefore ſhould they

demaund to know what I am, when they will not
bee willing to heare what they are themſelues?
Saint Chryſoſtome likewiſe was not forgetfull,
                  
                     S: Chryſoſt, Heb. cap. 12. hom. 3. Tom. 4 & ſupra. Pſa. 52. Tom. 2. E. in Serm. de Poenitent. Tom. 6. Et de incomprehen. Nat. dei, hom. 5. Et & in 4. Tom. de Lazar. Et in hom. 12. de Cananit. 
                  to aduertiſe
vs herein verie amply, to the ende that wee
ſhould not ſubiect our conſciences, vnto ſuch a
ſeruitude, as God himſelfe would neuer haue vs
bound in; and thus ſpeakes he. Confeſſe thy ſinnes,
to the ende that thou maiſt deface them. If thou be confounded
or aſhamed, to tell an other man that thou haſt
ſinned, tell it dayly then to thine owne ſoule. I doe not ſay,
that thou ſhouldest confeſſe to a ſeruant like vnto thy
ſelfe, that ſo he may reproch thee: but tell them to God
onely, that onely can helpe them: It ſufficeth, that God alone
ſees and heares thee. I would not haue thee confeſſe
thy ſinnes to a man,Ezech. 20. 16. who afterward may diſgrace and
defame thee, by publiſhing thy faultes: But ſhewe thy
woundes and ſoares to God, who is the onely good Phiſition.
               You ſee what theſe good Fathers haue taught
vs, yeelding themſelues obedient and conformable
to the doctrine of the Apoſtles: whome onely,
and none elſe beſide them, will we beleeue, allowe
or imitate. For they haue giuen vs the worde of
God holily and purely, which being no way imperfect,
enſtructeth vs ſuificiently in all things neceſſarie
for our ſaluation. Therefore, all men elſe,
bee they neuer ſo holy or wiſe; Nay, were they
Angels of heauen,Galat. 
                        •
                     : 8. they can declare nor command
vs any thing: but what is diuinely written, in the
authenticall Bookes of the holy Prophets and Apoſtles.
            
            
               
               The Pope, and his Church.
               OVr holy father the Pope, enioyneth and commandeth
it to euery one,The Popes Prieſts are Lieutenants to him their God: of whō S. Paul ſpeaketh. 2. Cor. chap. 4. 4. beeing of yeares and diſcretion,
to confeſſe himſelfe to God, and to man Prieſt his
Lieutenant, all his ſecret and manifeſt ſinnes, with good
deuotion, repentance and contrition, and that at the leaſt
once a yeare. Otherwiſe, our ſaid holy father declareth thē
all to be heretiques verie pernicious, wholy rebellious,
and diſobedient to this his preſent ordinance.The Pope is more then his Biſhops, and his Biſhops more then their Prieſts, and all of thē ſhalbe knowē by their fruits Mat. 7, 16. For hereby
he hath reſerued to his holy and Apoſtolicall ſeate, diuers
great and enormous ſinnes, and knoweth, and abſolueth
them by his ſole authoritie and power, more then all
other Biſhops can doe. And to thoſe Biſhops hee hath reſerued
and giuen more might, to know, diſcerne and abſolue
ſinnes; then to other ſimple priestes, who are much
leſſe in authoritie and potencie,It is not read that Chriſt did euer conſtraine any one to beleeue in him, or to confeſſe before him, or his Apoſtles, nor did they euer any ſuch act. then the Biſhops are. As
more amplie is contained and recited, in the holy Canons
and decrees, but eſpecially in the Chapter: Omnis vtriuſque
ſexus de poenitentia & remiſsione extra.
               
               Moreouer, euery Biſhop and Curate ought to conſtraine
and compell euerie one, euerie yeare, at Eaſter at
the least, throughout their Dioceſses and Pariſhes, to
preſent themſelues before them, or their Lieutenants
and vicars,Contrarie to the 19. Pſal. verſ. 12. to make a full, intire and generall confeſsion
of all their ſinnes, ſecret and manifeſt. And then are they
to enioyne them ſuch penance and ſatisfaction, as they
ſhall thinke meet to be expedient and neceſſarie,The Prieſts are not called one another (as in S. Iam.) they receiued no ſuch name in Baptiſme. for the
ſaluation of their ſoules. If it ſhall happen otherwiſe, that
the Pariſhioners wil not be herein obedient to their Prelates:
Our Mother holy church then ſtraitly commaundeth,

that they be chaſed out, and excommunicated like
to Iudas. Becauſe they will not performe the commaundement
of God, declared vnto vs by Saint Iames, ſayding:
Confeſſe your ſinnes one to another.
                  Jam. 5. 16.
               
            
         
         
            OF THE CHVRCH.
            
               The houſe of the liuing GOD, that is the Church, the
pillar and ground of truth.
               2. Tim 3. 15.
            
            
               The Apoſtles, and Gods Church.
               WE beleeue one holy Church, Catholike
and vniuerſall, the houſe of the liuing
God,1. Tim. 3. 15. waſhed and cleanſed in his precious
blood, hee being the onely head and ſpouſe thereof,
euen Ieſus Chriſt. Nor doe we beleeue any other
head, but him onely: for all other that are
founded on him, are members incorporated into
his Church. Now, by his iuſt iudgement, he hath
permitted,Coloſ. 1. 9. that Antechriſt ſhould intrude himſelf,
and ſit in the Temple of God,Epheſ. 1. 12. as God, ſhewing
himſelfe, that he is God; For he exalteth himſelfe
aboue all that is called God, and will be worſhipped
for God. This is the reaſon, why (by the
craft of Sathan) he hath taken ſuch boldneſſe vpon
him, as to diſpenſe againſt the Goſpels, and deſtroy
the holy commaundements of God, and his
worde; which we beleeue (notwithſtanding) ſhall
endure for euer.
               
                  
But he that fighteth againſt ſo ſtrong a foundation,
declareth himſelfe to be Gods enemie, and
Antechriſt manifeſtly.Dan. 7. 21. As, after many teſtimonies
of ſacred Scriptures.Eſay. 42 18. Saint Gregorie himſelfe dooth
giue vs a good aduertiſement,
                     S. Greg. lib. 4 Epiſt. 76. ad Man. & lib 7, Epiſt. 194. & lib. 6. Epiſt. 188. ſaying. It is ſacriledge,
and a foretelling of Antechriſts cōming, t
                        •
                      constitute
an vniuerſall Biſhop of the whole Church. For if he
that nameth himſelfe vniuerſall,
                  S. Hilar. cont. Auxentius. 
                  doe fall, the whole
Church is ouerthrowne.
                  S. Bern. ſuper Ca
                           •
                        tic.
                   And proceeding on ſtill to
the ſame purpoſe,Serm. 33. & in ſerm. de cōuer. S. Paul.
                   he concludeth thus. I boldly ſay,
that whoſoeuer calleth himſelfe vniuerſall B
                        •
                     ſhop, or
deſireth to be ſo named:
                  
                     S. Aug. ſuper Io
                        •
                     n. hom. 50. Or
                        •
                     g. ſuper Matth. hom. 2 Can. Pudenda 24. quaeſt. 1 
                  is the fore-runner of Antechriſt,
in that he preferreth himſelfe (in his owne pride)
before and aboue all other.
               
               Behold now how God hath ſuffered, that theſe
diueliſh Cautelles of the man of ſinne, ſhould be
made manifeſt euen by themſelues:Ca
                        •
                     . St Papa. Diſt. 1. euen thoſe
that he thought to defend & couer himſelf withal.
                     S. Aug. lib. 3. de Baptiſm.
As we could much more amply diſcouer, as well
by the teſtimonie of the worde of God:Cap. 3. &c. as by the
expoſitions of many holy Fathers of the Church.The Pope making himſelfe to bee vniuerſall Biſhop of the Church, declareth himſelfe to be Antechrist:
But the faithfull Reader, making acceptaunce of
this our ſlender trauell, may (if pleaſe him) haue
acceſſe to the Fathers themſelues, as, for his more
eaſe, we haue quoated them in the Margent.
            
            
               The Pope, and his Church.
               OVr holy Father the Pope, is inſtituted of God,
to be head and vniuerſall Prince of his holie
Church, hauing receiued the keyes thereof: with intire,

full and incomprehenſible power,S. Auguſtine ſaith that if Chriſt gaue the keyes to Peter alone, then the Church hath no keyes after him: But as hee anſwered for all, ſo hee receiued the keyes with all. Hom. 11. & 124. & ſuper Ioan. hom. 50. to binde and
looſe, pardon and retaine all ſinnes, yea, in ſuch ſort and
manner, as there is no one that dare ſay to him, wherefore
doeſt thou this, or that? For it is an indubitable
veritie, yea, altogether inuincible, that our holy father
the Pope, the great ſucceſſor of Saint Peter, hath ſuch
power and authoritie, as he may iudge the whole world,
but hee is not to bee cenſured, or iudged by any perſon.
And his power is ſo great and admirable, that he can
diſpenſe againſt the Goſpels, againſt the word of God,
and conſequently againſt all the Apoſtles doctrine, yea,
and againſt the right of nature. As it is moſt amplie
written and recited,The Pope hath in ſuch ſort diſpenſed againſt the Goſpels, as they are buried, & wholy aboliſhed in his Church. In which, we may contemplate the great mercie of God, according to Dan. 7. and 2. Theſ. 2. in the holy Decretales, and in the
Canō Lector, cum Gloſ. 34. Diſt. Canon Presbiter,
cum Gloſ. 82. Diſt. Apoſtolorum, 17. Quaeſt. 4. Canon
Si quis. Diſt. 40. Canon Si Papa Diſt. 26. Et eadem
Canon, ſatis cano. ſimplici. Can. Incipitis.
               
            
         
         
            
            OF FREE-WILL.
            
               Verely, verely I ſay vnto you, that whoſoeuer committeth
ſinne, he is the ſeruant of ſinne.
               Iohn. 8. 34.
               It is God which worketh in you, both the will and the
deed, euen of his owne good pleaſure.
               Phil. 2. 1
                     •
                  .
               Not that wee are ſufficient of our ſelues, to thinke any
good thing as of our ſelues; but all our ſufficiencie is
of God.
               2. Cor. 3. 5.
            
            
               The Apoſtles, and Gods Church.
               
                  IN this matter, wee may iuſtly
anſwere,
                     S. Auguſt. 30. lib. de hom. 41. Et de verb. as S. Hierome did, writhing
againſt Pelagius, ſaying
thus. The Philoſophers, the Patriarches
of Heretiques,
                  Apoſt. 13. ſerm. Et in Enchirid. ad Laurē. Cap. 29. 
                  by peruerſe
doctrine, haue polluted the
puritie of the Church. Moreouer, in regard of our
purpoſed breuitie,
                     S. Hierm. in Com. ſup. Hier. cap. 23. it ſhall ſuffiſe vs to alleadge S.
Auguſtine, with whom do many Fathers conſent,
in deteſtation of the Pelagian hereſie,
                     S. Greg. ſup. Pſal. 7. which our
aduerſaries doe ſo boldely maintaine. Theſe are
his words:
                     S. Bern. in lib. de lib. arbit. & in hom. de Annun. Ʋirg. Ma. 
                  We cannot conſent with them, who by ouer
great pride, do labor to exalt and aduaunce a freedom of
will: for in their ſo doing, they are the cauſe of more euil

then good, and they but striue to ouerthrow men. But
we in humilitie doe conſider that which the Apoſtle
ſaith:Phil. 2. 13. 
                  It is God which worketh in vs, both the will
and the deed,
                  Tit. 3. 6. 
                  according to his owne good pleaſure. And
we render thanks to our Lord and redeemer, who
without any former merits in vs, hath healed our
woundes and vlcers, and reconciled vs to God:
hauing redeemed vs from captiuitie, and hath
brought vs out of darkneſſe into light, and called
vs from death to life.
            
            
               The Pope, and his Church.
               WE doe conſtantly mainetaine and confeſse,Eccleſ. 15. 14. a liberall
and Free-will,S. Auguſtine ſaith in many places, that we haue a Free-will to doe euill. lib. de verb. Apoſt. not onely in the ſtate of
innocencie, but likewiſe in the ſtate of corruption with
ſinne. For it is written; That God made man right,
and left him in the hand of his councell, to doe
what he would.
                  Serm 13. So that man, being richly furniſhed,
with this noble,Free-will is the hereſie of Ariſtotle, and of all them that vſe it as a buckler for their faith. francke and Free-will; might worke of
himſelfe good or euill, euen by his owne motion, and can
merit the firſt grace of congruitie. As more amply is
written and declared, by our Maſter of the Sentences,
and others, in their ſeuerall Expoſitions.
            
         
         
            
            OF MARIAGE AND
OF VOVVES.
            
               It were good for a man not to touch a woman. Neuertheleſſe,
to auoyd fornication, let euery man haue his
wife, and let euery woman haue her husband.
               1. Cor.
7. 12.
               Mariage is honourable among all, and the bed vndefiled:
but Whoremongers and Adulterers God will
iudge.
               Hebrewes 13. 4.
               My praiſe ſhall be of thee in the great Congregation, my
Vowes will I performe before them that feare thee.
               Pſalm. 32. 25.
            
            
               The Apoſtles, and Gods Church.
               
                  
                     SAINT Paul, beeing a veſſell of
Election; doth aſſure vs, that Mariage
is honorable among all,Hebru. 13. 4. and
the bed vndefiled. But your holy
Father telleth vs the contrary, to
wit; that Mariage cannot bee without vncleaneſſe,
and carnall filthineſſe. Now, which of theſe two
ſhall we ſay to be the falſe witneſſe? As for S. Paul,
                  
we are very certaine,
                     Saint Paul can not but be a truer witneſſe, then the Pope. that his teſtimonie proceeded
from the ſpirit of God: in regard whereof, we
will rather giue faith to him, then to your holy Father;
although hee bee ſeated in Gods Temple for
God, and ſhewes himſelfe as if hee were God. Of
whō likewiſe the Apoſtle ſpeaketh.1. Tim. 4. 1. 2. 3 
                  That in the latter
times, there ſhall ſome depart from the faith, and ſhal
giue heed vnto ſpirits of errour, and doctrines of deuils.
Speaking lyes through hypocriſie, and haue their conſciences
burned with an hot yron; Forbidding to marry.
               
            
            
               The Pope, and his Church.
               OVr Mother, holy Church, following our holy
Father her vniuerſall Head,In 4. Sentent. conſidering aduiſedly,
that Mariage could not bee performed without vncleanneſſe,Diſt. 7. cap. 7.
pollution and carnall immundicitie.Can. Cum ſocietas. 27. For this
cauſe,Quaeſt. 2. hath iuſtly and holily prohibited and forbidden,
and ſo doth ſtill forbidde Mariage to Prieſtes, Deacons,
and Subdeacons: for they are tyed and obliged to a vow
of chaſtitie, from which no man can free or deliuer
them.
            
            
               The Apoſtles, and Gods Church.
               THe Church of God did neuer learne of Ieſus
Chriſt, nor of his Apoſtles, to forbid holy
and honourable Mariage to any perſon whatſoeuer:
except to ſuch as are named in the 18. Chapter
of Leuiticus. Therefore we will not receiue any
ſuch doctrine of deuils. For the holy Apoſtles
were diuers of them maried, and ſuch as lawfully

ſucceded after them:Euſeb. 1. 3. according as Saint Clemens
teſtifieth,cap. 2. writing againſt them that contemned
Mariage,S. Clem▪ lib. 7. where he ſaith.Hist. tripart. 
                  Will they likewiſe reprooue
the Apoſtles S. Peter and S. Philip,lib. 2 cap. 14. 
                  for hauing wiues,
and had their daughters married?
                  Can. Nicen. 31. Diſt. Moreouer, many
Councels would not ſo wander from the Apoſtles
doctrine,Can. Si quis Diſt. 28. as at any time to forbid mariage to Prieſts
and Miniſters of the Church:Can. Si quis virorum, Diſt. 30. but rather did excommunicate
all ſuch, as ſought to bring in ſuch
inuentions of deuilliſh doctrine.Can. Quoniam Diſt. 31. As the Councels
of Nice,
                  Can. Qudam. Diſt▪ 27. of Gangres, of Conſtantinople, of Anticira,
and the Canon of the Apoſtles.Can. Apoſt. cap. 6. Shall wee accuſe
or condemne thoſe holy Fathers and Doctours,
with the whole Church,
                     Ʋ
                     Ʋho ſo pleaſeth to read the hiſtories, ſhall finde, that in the time of king Lewes, the ſecond, Prieſts were then maried in France. and their good Councels,
to iuſtifie your vn-holy Pope and his ordinances?
Can you any way prooue him, to be a better man,
or more illumined by God, then all the Apoſtles
and auncient Fathers of the Church were? Or
that he is more able, & can iuſtly condemne them,
to haue erred and loſt the Faith? And that your
great high Prieſt, was therefore ſent of God, to reproue
their doctrine, to ouerthrow and demoliſh
all their ancient and diuine building? Wherefore,
concerning this point of Mariage,
                     Origen. ſuper Matth. hom. 13. by you ſo idely
contradicted; we will conclude with S. Origen,
and S. Ambroſe: That virginitie may bee well wiſhed
and deſired,
                  
                     S. Ambr. Lib. 1. de Ʋirg. 
                  but not commanded. For, as he elſe where
ſaith: Things that are not in our power, are more to be
deſired, then commanded.
               
            
            
               
               The Pope, and his Church.
               MOreouer,Couſins doe lawfully take their Couſins in mariage, as well by permiſsion of diuine right, as ciuill. our aforeſayd Mother holy Church,
hath ordained diuers impeachments, whereby
a man is hindered from mariage, as, in naturall and ſpirituall
affinitie. For Couſins may not mary with their
Couſins, nor kinred their God-children, except by diſpenſation.
Likewiſe there is a certaine time,Leuit. 18. Et Inſtit. de Iuſtin. de nup. filij duorum fratrum. wherein
none at all are permitted to mary. As more at large is
ſet downe and recorded, in our holy Decretals and Canons.
Canon. Affini. Canon. Multum. 35. Queſt. 2.
Canon. Non oportet. Canon. Omnium placet.
Diſt. 32. Canon. Interuenit, Can Placuit. Can. licite.
32. Queſt. 2.
            
            
               The Apoſtles, and Gods Church.
               NOw as concerning inuented vows,Rom. 10. 4. hauing
ſome conformitie with the ceremoniall
vowes of the ancient Law:Acts. 15. 17. It is moſt certaine, that
Ieſus Christ,
                  Galat. 5. 1. being the end and accompliſhment of
the Law,Rom. 14. 23. hath deliuered vs from them, as from all
other ſacrifices.S. Ambr. ſup.
                   Wherefore, according to the doctrine of S. Paul;
                  1. Cor. cap. 7. 
                  Wee will ſtand faſt in the libertie,
wherewith Chriſt hath made vs free,
                  
                     S. Auguſt. Lib. 6. de Confeſs. 
                  and not be intangled
againe with the ſeruitude of meu.
                  cap. 2. Et in Lib. de Virg. If therefore
wee make any Vowes or promiſes to God,cap. 40. they
ought to be orderly grounded vpon his word,S. Cypr. Lib. 1. to
the end that ſo they may be approoued of him.Epiſt. 11. 
                  For
whatſoeuer is not of faith,
                  Concil. Tolet. 8 
                  is ſinne. Which implyeth
thus much,Et Gangre. in Galat. &c. That whatſoeuer we do after our

owne fantaſies, thinking them to be well done, and
haue no warrant or authoritie therefore out of
Gods word: All ſuch things (we ſay) are ſinne, and
diſpleaſing to God. This then being well conſidered,
wee will maintaine this ſaying of S. Ambroſe:
That no perſon is to bee compelled, leaſt by forbidding
things that are lawfull, they fall and offend in matt
                        •
                     rs
vnlawfull.
               
            
            
               The Pope, and his Church,
               COncerning Vowes,Papiſts binde themſelues to God by theſe three vowes, and one of them they will not obſerue, for riches makes them rebell againſt God. our Mother holy Church hath
ordained, and ſtraitely doth command, that they
ſhould be rendered to God faultleſſe. Vowes are great
and many in number, but there are three only principall
and ſubſtantiall, as namely, Pouertie, Chaſtitie, and
Obedience. Whoſoeuer therefore ſhall vowe any one
of theſe three, hee is thereto perpetually bound all his
life time. As very meruailouſly and moſt diuinely it
is declared, by our graund Maſter of the Sentences.
               I Pope Pius,
                  This Pope ſpake as he meant, and as he felt in his owne frailtie. ſirnamed Aeneas Syluius, doe ſay, and
will maintaine, that, in good right, and for good cauſe,
the Mariage of Prieſts was taken away and forbidden:
but ſurely, for better cauſe, it ſhould be reſtored to them
againe, if mens infirmities be duely conſidered.
            
         
         
            
            OF FASTING AND
OF MEATES.
            
               Meate maketh vs not the more acceptable to GOD;
for neither if wee eate, haue wee the more, neither if
we eate not, haue wee the leſse. But take heed, leaſt
by any meanes, this power of yours be an occaſion of
falling, to them that are weake.
               1. Cor. 8. 8. 9.
            
            
               The Apoſtles, and Gods Church.
               
                  THe Church of GOD reprooueth
not Faſting,Luke 11. 39.
when it is done according
to his diuine word.Rom. 14. 9.
For our Lord commandeth
vs,1. Pet. 4. 7. not to offend our
heartes with gluttonie
and drunkenneſſe: And
Saint Peter telleth vs, that ſobrietie is the meanes
to withſtand the deuill. Neuertheleſſe, wee will
not entertaine ſuperſtitious and fantaſtick Faſtings,Gal. 5. 1.
to depriue vs of the libertie that wee haue in Ieſus
Christ.
                  True faſting is approoued of God. We doe vndoubtedly confeſſe, that Ieſus
Christ, his Apoſtles, and the whole Church haue
faſted; but wee finde no time by them defined and

limitted, neither the difference of dayes, or any
interdiction of meates, which to forbidde, is the
doctrine of Deuils,1. Tim. 4. 1. as S. Paul ſaith. For at all times
it is permitted,1. Cor. 10. 9. 15. to eate of all meates that are ſolde
in the Shambles, without inquiring for conſcience
ſake.
               S. Athanaſius ſpeaketh plainely,
                  
                     S Athan lib. de expoſit. ſup. That ſuch as doe
abſtaine from meats,Hebr. cap. 13. do profite as much thereby, as thoſe
that ſeparate themſelues from true Faith.Mat. 15. S. Spiridon
Biſhop of Cyprus,Hiſt. tripart. 
                  ſaith. That hee durſt freely
eate fleſh in the Lent time,lib. 10. cap. 10. when others did abſtaine
from it; becauſe he was a Chriſtian. S. Hierome writeth.
That we ought neither to decline to the right hand,
nor to the left:
                     S. Hier. in Com. ſup. Malach. 1. cap. For to fall frō the right hand, is to abſtaine
from thoſe meates, which God hath created for our vſe.
               Shall we then ſay, that the whole Church hath
erred, and your holy Father is iuſt and perfect only?
The Councels of Bracharenſis,
                  Concil. Brachar. 2. Diſt. 10. the 2. of Toledo,
the 13. And the Popes Martin and Eleutherius, excommunicated
all them,Hiſt. Eccleſ. lib. 5. cap. 3. & 11. that abſtained from eating
any meates whatſoeuer,S. Orige. ſup.
                   which were conuenient
for the nature of man.Leuit. cap. 6. hom. 10. Moreouer, wee are not ignorant,
that the Law and obligation of Faſting,
                     S. Auguſt. de mor. Eccleſ. & ad Jeſul. Epiſt. 86. was
firſt of all impoſed by Montanus the Heretique; as
hee was reprooued thereof, by Apolonius the
Martir of Christ.
               
               Therefore, in conſideration of what hath bin
before alledged, we cannot otherwiſe chooſe, but
conclude with this ſaying of Saint Auguſtine.
                  
                     S. Auguſt ad Jaſulan. Epiſt. 86. 
                  Contemplating
in true heate of zeale, the diuine and Apoſtolicall
writings of the olde, as alſo the whole newe Teſtament:
I ſee that Faſting is recommended, but finde

it no where defined, by the commandement of our
Lord, or of his Apoſtles, either at what time, or on
what dayes, we are to fast, or not to faſt. Wherefore, I
vnderſtand hereby, that the commandement of Faſting
doth gaine vs no righteouſneſse,
                  By Fasting, we cannot be euer the more righteous: but thereby wee may prepare our ſelues onely, for the ſeruice of God the more freely, then when we are filled with meates beyond meaſure. 
                  which inwardly is the
beautie of the Kings daughter. Thus you ſee, how
religiouſly the Church hath vſed to faſt, for our
better preparation to Gods diuine ſeruice: and
this Rule, with glad deſires wee will obſerue and
imitate, reiecting your Popiſh Faſting as ſuperſtitious.
For it is like vnto that Cuſtome of the
Iewes, which our Lorde God held in great deteſtation,
and reprooued them for it by the Prophet
Eſay. To the end therefore, that ſuch reproch
may not fall vpon vs, wee rather couet to
faſt as the Saintes, Prophets, Apoſtles, and holy
Fathers of the Church haue done before vs, then
to decline either to the right hand or left, with
falſe ſeducers.
            
            
               The Pope, and his Church.
               OVR firſt Father ſinned thorow gurmandiſe
or gluttonie. Abſtinence was enioyned him
by GOD, which hee hauing broken and tranſgreſſed,
was excluded and curſed of God. Wherefore, our Mother
holy Church, following the example of God, of
his ſonne Ieſus Chriſt, and of his Apoſtles: commandeth
to Faſt, and vſe abſtinence, vppon ſome certaine
dayes ordained for that purpoſe, vnder payne of
ſinning deadly. And to the end, that no one ſhall

pleade ignorance of this holy Ordinance:Montanus the Heretique was the firſt that compelled men to faſte: Wherein the Pope is his ſucceſſour. Shee giues it
foorth publiquely to bee knowen, that in theſe times,
as of Lent, Vigils, the foure quarterly times, Frydayes
and Saturdayes, ſhee commandeth to bee kept
faſting, and to abstaine from meates, as fleſh, Milke,
Butter, and other white meates, but moſt eſpecially in
the holy time of Lent.Hiſtor. Eccleſia lib. 5. cap. 11. And whoſoeuer ſhall be ſo bold,
as to tranſgreſse her ordinance, hee ſhall bee reputed the
childe of perdition, and by all our holy Fathers ſhall bee
excommunicated. As more at large is declared and
ſet downe in our holy Decretals, and Eccleſiaſticall Canons.
Can. Statuimus. Diſt. 4. Canon. Statui.
Diſt. 75. Et toto titulo de obſeruat. leiunior.
extr.
               
            
         
         
            
            OF IMAGES.
            
               Take heede vnto your ſelues, least you forget the couenant
of the Lord your God, which he made with you:
And leaſt yee make you any grauen Image, or likeneſſe
of anything, as the Lord thy God hath charged
thee. For the Lord thy God is a conſuming fire, and
a iealous God.
               Deut. 4. 23. 24.
               Curſed be the man, that ſhall make any carued or molten
Image, for it is an abhomination vnto the Lord.
               Deut. 27. 15.
            
            
               The Apoſtles, and Gods Church.
               
                  THe Church of God, hath
not ſo ſlenderly profited
in his Schoole, but that
ſhe knoweth verie well;Deu. 4. 23 24
that ſhe ought rather to
obey her GOD,Deut. 27. 15. then
men.Exod. 20. 4. 5. Your Romane
Pope, with his yonger
purple Prieſts, and others of the like condition,
commaundeth to honour, yea, to adore Images.

But our Lord, who aloude hath deliuered himſelfe,
to be a iealous God; forbiddeth vs to make
any manner of Image, in ſemblance or ſimilitude
whatſoeuer, for any reſpect of ſeruice due to him.
To which of theſe two then, ſhal we be obedient?
The Prophet Dauid doth admoniſh, that it is very
daungerous,Pſal. 5
                        •
                     . 5. to obey men rather then God, ſaying:
That he ſcattereth the mouthes of them that are
men-pleaſers. wee will then rather liſten to our
Lords voice, then to the man of ſinne, although he
haue ſeated himſelfe in Gods Temple,2. Theſ. 2. 7. for God,
and ſhewing himſelf euen as if he were God: yet
being become mute, and like vnto his Images, hee
hath quitted and resigned his office of inſtruction
to Images, & hath giuen them his peculiar power
to inſtruct ſuch are ignorant, tearming them to be
Lay-mens bookes. But we, ioyning with the royal
Pſalmiſt,Pſal. 97. 7. doe ſay: Confounded bee all they that ſerue
grauen Images,
                  Pſal. 115. 8. 
                  and glorie in Idols. They that make
them,
                  Pſal. 135. 18. 
                  are like vnto them, ſo are all that trust in them.
               
            
            
               The Pope, and his Church.
               THe great and ſoueraigne high Prieſt of Rome,
hath ſo well ordained in his Church, as well for
the learned as the ignorant; as there remayneth nothing
to be further ordered.The law of God giueth wiſdome to the ſimple, and not dead Images. To ſuch as are Clearks and
of knowledge, he hath permitted to reade, and exerciſe
themſelues in bookes. But for the ignorāt & vnlearned,
that are not able to vnderſtand ſpirituall matters,Pſal. 19. 7. hee
(of his benigne grace) hath permitted, to ſtudie and
practiſe their ſaluation, by Images painted and carued,

which is a matter verie eaſie for them to doe. Wherefore,
according to his holy ordinance,The word of God commandeth altogether the contrarie. it is commaunded, that
all kinds of Images and repreſentations, ſhall be erected
and placed in Chriſtian Temples and Churches; which
it ſhall not be amiſse for the people, to honor, cloath with
garments,Exod. 20. 4. and ſet lights before; yea, and to giue them all
humble reuerence, in honour of thoſe Saints that they
doe repreſent. As it is better, and more diuinely declared,
in the holy Decretalls and Canons, and eſpecially,
In Can. Perlatum, & Can. Imagines de conſecrat.
Diſt. 2.
            
            
               The Apoſtles, and Gods Church.
               YOur holy Father the Pope, would haue
you to bee taught and inſtructed by thoſe
dead Images:Hab. 2. 18. 19 But we haue God and his Prophets,
that make anſwer for vs, ſaying: What profiteth the
Image? For the maker thereof hath made it an Image,
and a teacher of lyes: though hee that made it, truſt
therein, when he maketh dumbe Idoles. Woe be vnto him
that ſaith to the Wood, Awake, and to the dumbe ſtone;
Riſe vp, ſhall it teach thee? And Hieromie ſaith: In
this point onely they doate,
                  Hier. 10. 8. 
                  and are fooliſh, for the ſtocke
is a doctrine of vanitie. What is he then, that would
be inſtructed by ſuch maiſters? As concerning the
ſecond Nicene Councell, which was in the time of
Charlemaigne:
                  Sathan was Preſident in the ſecond Nicene councell. we confeſſe, that Sathan ſate there among
them, and being the head of ſuch an aſſemblie,
hee made his members anſwerable to himſelfe.
To whom verie aptly may be applyed that
ſaying of Saint Paul.
                  Rom. 1. 22. 23, 25. 
                  When they profeſsed themſelues
                  
to be wiſe, they became fooles. For they turned the
glorie of the incorruptible God, to the ſimilitude of the
Image of a corruptible man. And the truth of God,
vnto a lie, and worſhipped and ſerued the creature, forſaking
the Creator.
            
            
               The Pope, and his Church,
               IN our former recited Canons, is declared, how a
Biſhop of Marſeilles,
                  The Biſhop of Marſeilles, was reproued for doing the cōmandement of God. having broken downe and defaced
the Images in his Dioces: was therefore moſt iustly
reprooued and controlled by our holy Father, becauſe
he durſt tranſgreſſe againſt his holy ordinance. Moreouer,
we will not hide in ſecret,VVherein appeareth, that God hath euermore reſerued ſome one or other, to maintaine his faithfull ſeruice, according to his word, and not according to the liking of men. or conceale in ſilence, the
ſecond Nicene Councell, accompliſhed in the time of the
moſt Chriſtian Prince Charlemaigne, & aſſembled by
commandement of Irene, Gouernor of the Empire, who
ordained and decreed: That not onely it was good and
profitable for Christians, to haue Images in their Temples,
but alſo that they ought to honour and adore them
with all reuerence. And to the ende, that it may bee
more perfectly knowne, what fruit and goodneſſe was
gathered by that holy Councell, as alſo, that the vertue
and authoritie there of may the morefully bee vnderſtoode:
we are willing in large and ample manner, to recite
the teſtimonies, ſentences and opinions, alledged by
the holy Biſhops and Doctors aſſembled in that Councell.
According as more at large is contained in the
Booke of Charlemaignes refutation.
               
                  First of all, Iohn, Ambaſſadour of the East Churches,
ſpeaketh thus. God hath created man after his

owne Image: Ergo, we ought to haue Images. For
it is written: ſhew me thy face, for it is faire and
louely. An other Biſhop ſaith: No man lighteth a
Candle, to hide it vnder a buſhell: Ergo, Images
ought to be had.
               
                  An other Doctour ſaith.
                  Heere was an aſſembly of learned iudgements, blinde leaders to the blinde. It was meruaile, that the very ſtones did not ſtart vp at ſo horrible opinions, contrary to the diuine trueth: which they ſeeking to exterminate altogether, laboured but in vaine. For the Lord will preſerue his trueth for euer. Pſalm. 145. 18. Lord, the brightnes of
thy face is imprinted vpon vs: Ergo, We muſt haue
Images. And after many other good aud memorable
verdicts, Theodoſius Byſhop of Mira, concludeth thus.
Theſe teſtimonies are cleare and euident, that not
onely Images are to bee had, but alſo, that they
ought to be adored and honoured. For my Archdeacon
ſo thinketh and beleeueth. I Theodoſius,
Byſhop of Mira doe ſay, that I excommunicate all
ſuch, as will not worſhip Images. And an other Byſhop
ſaith. That all the calamities and aduerſities,
which happened to the Grecians, and people of
the Eaſte, was, becauſe they would not worſhip
Images. Another Byſhop ſaith: Seeing that perfumes
and incenſe is beſtowed on the Images of Emperours:
we ought to beſtow much more vpon the
Images of Saints.
               Conſtance, Byſhop of Conſtance in Cyprus, ſayth
and deliuereth this great and admirable ſentence. Concerning
my ſelfe, I doe proteſt, that wee ought
to giue equall honour and reuerence, and in as
ample manner to the Images of Saintes, as to the
holy Trinitie in Heauen. And whoſoeuer is not
of mine opinion: I excomunicate, and ſend him
among the Manicheans and Marcionites. And aſſuredly,
all the holy Aſſembly of the Councell found this
opinion to be very good, whereupon, they concluded with

him in the approbation thereof, and all together after
him, ſayd, Amen.
               
               Iohn,We may well ſay, that of this holy Aſſembly, which S. Paul ſpeaketh, 2. 
                  Ambaſſadour of the Eaſterne Churches, giueth
this notable opinion. It were much better, to
haue all the Stewes and Brothell-houſes of the
whole worlde, to bee kept in one Cittie, then
to reiect the ſeruice of Saintes Images.Cor. 4. 4. The God of this world hath blinded the vnderſtanding of infidels, that the light of the Goſpel ſhould not ſhine vnto them. And it is
manifeſt, that the Samaritanes were worſe then
Heretiques, but they that reiect the Images of
Saintes, are much worſe then the Samaritanes.
And all concluding with this opinion, the ende and reſolution
of the whole Councell, was determinatly ſet
downe, as followeth. Wee beeing aſſembled in
the Name of GOD, doe will and command, that
this holy Councell and Decretall, ſhall bee perpetually
obſerued in the Church: And doe excommunicate
all gain ſayers, as rebels and diſobeyers
heereof. And to enlarge the treaſure
of our Mother holy Church, wee giue full Iubilie
of Pardons of all ſinnes, to all ſuch as ſhall
dayly haue the Image of IESVS CHRIST, and
doe Sacrifice, honour, and reuerence thereto.
Amen.
               Beholde howe theſe holy Fathers, and religious
Doctours, beeing wholly inſpired with the holy Ghost,
haue gouerned our Mother, holy Church, whom wee
will beleeue and imitate, and in her Faith both liue
and dye.
            
            
               
               The Apostles, and Gods Church.
               LET vs come now and conſider a little on
the ſubiect of this Councell. May it be called
holy? Or can it bee ſaid to bee approoued of
God? Surely, nothing leſſe. For if it were preſented
to Turkes and Saracines, vndoubtedly it
would bee highly deteſted euen of them. Therefore
wee may well ſay, that neuer was that falſe
Propher and Heretique Mahomet,
                  Mahomet the falſe Prophet hath not ſo much blaſphemed in his Alchoran, as theſe Biſhops did in this Nicene Councell. ſo beaſtly blinded,
as theſe groſſe conceited Biſhops concluſions
were in this Councell, to value in equall manner,
the adoration of Images, with the worſhip of one
onely true God in Trinitie of perſons. O poore
miſerable world, plunged in all errour, darkneſſe,
and ignorance! It was wonderfull, that in thoſe
times ſome man was not found, in Gods behalfe, to
whippe thoſe Heretiques, thoſe Marchant-ſellers
of Cockle and Darnell: As Ieſus Chriſt did the
Marchants out of the Temple, that deſerued it
not halfe ſo much as theſe blaſpemers did. But let
them be aſſured, that trueth hath euer preuayled
againſt ſuch impietie practiſed and warranted, in
thoſe diabolicall Councels: and that our Lorde
God will be auenged on the ſonnes of men, deliuering
them ouer in his iudgement, to bee led by
ſtrong deluſions,
                     
                        •
                     . Theſs 2. 11. and to beleeue lyes. That all they
might be damned, which beleeued not the trueth, but
had pleaſure in vnrighteouſnes. Behold what words
are written by that veſſell of Election, proceeding
from the ſpirit of God: which ſhould aſtoniſh and

make them tremble, that dare lift vp their hornes
againſt God; Againſt whom there is no wiſedome,
neither vnder ſtanding nor councell.
                  Prou. 21. 30.
               
               Moreouer, not to digreſſe from our purpoſe, if
ſuch a Monopolie of Sathan, combined with his
whole band (by Gods ſecret permiſsion) did then
get the day for once againſt Ieſus Chriſt: Should it
therefore be concluded, that the whole Church
of God,God for the ſpace of 600. following the doctrine of her maſter and
his Apoſtles, hath erred; in forbidding and pulling
downe all Images and Idols?yeeres ſuffered no Images in Temples: but▪ becauſe they haue ſince been permitted and adored, it folioweth not therefore, that the firſt Church was hereticall, and this is now more illumined by God, beeing altogether contrary to him. Which being permitted
by an vnchriſtian Councell, to bee adored and
worſhipped, ought (neuertheleſſe) to be gain ſayd,
broken & defaced, as appeareth by three other holy
Councels, who in this point differed not frō Apoſtolicall
doctrine. If weread the Councell of Conſtantinople,
celebrated by Constantine the fift; the
ſecond Councell of Toledo, and likewiſe the Elibertine
Councell, the 36. Decretal: it will bee found,
that all theſe three did decree as hereafter followeth.
               It is concluded, that there ſhall be no pictures or paintings
in Churches,The Councells of Constantinople, Toledo 2. and Elibertine, deteſted and forbad Images, and whoſoeuer accepted of thē, were held as strangers to the Church of God. to the ende, that no reuerence or adoration
may be giuen to painted walles. And after followeth.
We are very willing to admoniſh the Faithfull,
that ſo much as in them lyeth, they ſhould hinder the hauing
of any Images in their houſes. And if they feared
their ſeruants yeelding to them: yet at leaſt, they ſhould
keepe themſelues pure, frō being corrupted by thē. Wherin
if they would not be obedient, they ſhould be accounted
as ſtrangers to the Church of God. Thus did theſe
holy Fathers in their Councels, maintaine all pure

Doctrine in the Church, without forging any novell
conſtitutions againſt the word of God.
               
            
            
               The Pope, and his Church.
               
                  COncerning all other differences and queſtions,
beſides the caſe before declared, wee doe wholly
repoſe our ſelues vpon the holy Councells, Decretals and
Canons; as more prolixly and cathegorically they are explycated,
by our Maſters of the venerable Colledge of
Sorbonne; and eſpecially, by the graund Maſter of the
Sentences.
                  The Apoſtles are leſſe and inferiour, to the great Rabines of Sorbo une. 
                  All which together, doe very well deliuer to
euery vnderstanding, the Articles and Questions
propoſed in that holy Councell. With whom, wee haue
iudiciouſly and diuinely concluded and reſolued, to our
great honour and glory,
                  O inſupportable blaſphemie, God hath reuealed more to ſeducers, then to his Apoſtles & Euangeliſts. 
                  and to the confuſion of our aduerſaries.
Notwithſtanding all oppoſitions what ſoeuer,
alleaged on the Apoſtles behalfe, by the Doctours of
the Church. For among vs, we hold it as an indubitable
veritie, and inuincible (according to the
Goſpels teſtimonie;) That all things which were
neceſſarie for our ſaluation,Mahomet in his Alchoran ſaith the ſame: therefore, both theſe do bend themſelues againſt Ieſus Chriſt, who with the ſpirit of his mouth ſhall conſume them both. were not reuealed to
the Apoſtles, neither haue they written them all.
Wherefore it hath followed very neceſſarily, that
thoſe things which the Apoſtles omitted, and left
out; wee ſhould afterward obtaine, and diuinely
finde finiſhed, in the ſupplement of our holy traditions
and ordinances▪ Which we will and command,
to be perpetually obſerued, and as ſincerely
regarded, as thoſe of Ieſus Chriſt, and of his Apoſtles;
and that vnder paine of deadly ſinne, excommunication,
and eternall damnation.
            
            
               
               The Apoſtles, and Gods Church.
               BVt if holy Epiphanius, aman of God, and very
highly renowned in his time,
                     Epiphanius a man of great renowne in the Primitiue Church, defaced the Image of Jeſus Chriſt S Hierome ſpeaking of him, ſa
                        •
                     th. were liuing
in theſe dayes, hee ſhould haue worke enough to
doe, in breaking downe an infinite number of Idols
and Images; as very manfully (in Gods cauſe)
hee did, in the Cittie of Bethell. According as himſelfe
writeth, in an Epiſtle to Iohn Biſhop of Ieruſalem,
his words are theſe.
               And when I entred to pray,That he was ſo reſpected in his time, that euen Heretiques themſelues did him bonour and reuerence. I found there a ſayle, or
great cloth hanging at the doore, figured and painted,
hauing an Image, as of Ieſus Chriſt, or ſome other
Saint, for I could not bethinke me well, whoſe Image it
ſhould bee. But when I beheld in the Church of Ieſus
Chriſt, an Image of a man hanging, againſt the authoritie
of the ſacred Scriptures: Trent it in pieces, and gaue
councell to the keepers of the place, rather to beſtow the
ſame cloth, on ſome poore dead body for buriall, then to
let it ſo offend the conſciences of any.It were better to doe the workes of charitie, then hang vp images in Chriſtian Churches.
               
               What now can your pontificall high Prieſt of
Rome alleadge, againſt ſo many excellent perſons,
as flouriſhed in thoſe dayes in the Church of God?
S. Auguſtine did not forbeare to affirme it conſtantly,
that it was an execrable herefie,
                     S. Auguſt. in Catalog. de haereſ. Et in lib. 4. de Ciuit. Dei. Cap. 9. & 11. Et ſuper Pſal. 113. to giue any
honour to the Images of Ieſus Chriſt, or of the
Saints. For, as hee himſelfe ſayth. In looking vppon
Images, no man can pray or worſhippe as hee ought to
doe: but hee will bee touched, as if his thoughts were
carryed thence, where his hope is to bee heard, and his
ſute granted.
               
               
                  
All theſe things beeing duely and religiouſly
conſidered, to the ouerture of your Romane Prieſts
pride: wee doe and will conclude with the whole
Church of God, That according to his commādement,
we ought to honour and worſhip him in ſpirit
and trueth,Eſay. 40. 18. and not by any inuented viſible
things, commanded without authoritie of his holy
word, the which wee know,Dan. 7. 25. and beleeue ſhall
remaine for euer.2. Theſs. 2. 4. And wee hope ſhortly to ſee,
that thereby the great man of ſinne ſhall be ſmitten
and ouerthrowne, euen hee that exalteth himſelf
againſt God, in his Temple. Which wee humbly
deſire, for the honour and great glory of his name,
to the end it may be ſanctified,Matth. 9. 32. and his Kingdome
come;Iohn. 17. 3. that ſo, all men on earth may learne the way
to life euerlaſting, which is, by knowing and confeſsing
one onely God, and him whom hee hath
ſent, his onely Sonne, Ieſus Chriſt our Lorde and
Sauiour.
               And concerning that falſe couerture, alleadged
by our aduerſaries, that Chriſt reuealed not all
things needfull for our ſaluation,John 16. 13. to his Apoſtles.
This was true, before they had receiued the ſanctified
Spirit, on the day of Pentecoſt. But after
they were filled with the holy Ghoſt,Galat. 1. 12. and inſtructed
of him: the promiſe of Ieſus Christ was accompliſhed,
that the holy Spirite ſhould reueale vnto
them, whatſoeuer hee had ſayd, and ſhould leade
them into all trueth. This being done and accompliſhed,
they wrote the word of God, and haue
left the ſame vnto vs, cleane, holy and pure, ſufficient
to guide and direct vs to euerlaſting life. We

are not bound then to heare any other, but the
Apoſtles: For all men elſe whatſoeuer, bee they
holy, wiſe, or very Angels of heauen: they may
not declare, or command vs any other Goſpell, but
that which is diuinely written, in the authenticall
Bookes of the holy Prophets and Apoſtles. And
no man,S. Hierom. how wiſe or learned ſoeuer he be, hath
any authoritie,Tom. 8. after the Apoſtles, as Saint Hierome
ſaith.Pſal. 86.
               
               Moreouer,Rom. 8. 18. albeit wee ſhould bee vniuſtly reprooued,
perſecuted,Pſalm. 44. 3. condemned, yea, and murdered
of men,1. Pet. 3. 14. in the quarrell of God: yet notwithſtanding,
hauing our onely hope in him,Matth. 5. 10. who hath
called vs to that honour; We are to reioyce and be
glad, when wee are perſecuted and hated for his
Names ſake. Not doubting, but in his good time,
and when hee pleaſeth, his ſtrong and powerfull
arme, ſhall free and deliuer vs, from all ſeruitude of
our aduerſaries. As alwayes hitherto hee hath
done, in fulfilling his promiſe to his holy Prophets
and Apoſtles. Therefore, to that euerliuing Lord
God, bee giuen all honour and glory, praiſe and
power, world without end. Amen.
               
                  Si hoc conſilium out opus ex hominibus eſt,Acts. 5. 38. 39. diſſoluentur.
Si vero ex Deo eſt, non poteritis diſſoluere.
                  If this counſell, or this worke be of men, it will come
to nought.
                  But if it be of God, you cannot deſtroy it.
               
            
            
               
               The Pope, and his Church.
               Now we haue good and great occaſion, to render
thankes to God, who hath made vs victorious
ouer our aduerſaries; whom we doe excommunicate and
curſe, as pernitious and damnable Heretiques: becauſe
they will not be obedient to our holy ordinances, but doe
fondly cleaue to, and ſtand vpon the Goſpels, and the doctrine
of the Apoſtles, who are not able to be vnderſtood
of any man, without our holy Gloſses and expoſitions.
For the reſt, let vs not forget to ſpeake ſomewhat, in the
behalfe of our holy Maſſe, That, looke how much our hereticall
aduerſaries doe labour to confound and ouerthrowit:The way of a foole is right in his owne eyes, but the wiſe will heare the counſell of God: who teacheth a quite contrary way.
So much the more powerfully will we ſtriue, to
defend and maintaine it, euen vnto blood and death. For
which cauſe, we haue commanded to publiſh abroad, the
great graces, vertues and properties of the moſt holy
Maſſe: According to the teſtimonie of that reuerende
man, Maſter Iaques of Spaine, ſolemne Doctour in diuinitie.
               The Copie whereof,Pro. 12. 15. we will haue exhibited and giuen
to euery one, that ſhall continually haue good deuotion
to the moſt holy Maſſe, and ſhall liue and die in the true
faith thereof. Amen.
            
         
         
            
            M. IAQVES
OF SPAINE.
            A Copie containing the great graces, vertues, and properties
of the most holy Maſse: which being well contemplated,
and conſidered on, are more worthie to be
eſteemed, then an vnualuable treaſure.
            
               
                  MAster Iaques of Spaine,
               This Copie is to be approued by Saint Paul. Gal. 5. 2 and by Moſes Deut. 18. 9. and by Juſtinian the Emperor, lib. 1. de ſumma Tri. & fide Cati.
                ſolemne doctor
in Diuinitie, recounteth in his
workes, that Saint Auguſtine and
other Doctors doe hold this concluſion.
That if he which heareth
Maſſe deuoutly, hath either bought, or taken money
for ſo much land, as may be walked on during
the time a Maſſe is ſaying, and ſhall giue that money
to the poore:This dreamer of Spaine, this doctor in all duncerie, is a true imitatour of Zidkiah, the prophet of the Idoll Baal. For euen as with the two hornes of yron, hee deceiued Achab, that miſerable king and his people: In the like manner, with the horn of the Pope, & that other horne of Sorbonne, doth he labour to ſeduce and deceiue kings, people, & nations, making them to doat vpon his Idol Baal. For preſeruation and maintenance wherof, there is nothing elſe taught, but inuented dreames, and lies of hypocriſie & Idolatrie of diuels, which blindeth the poore ſeducers, and by them are others ſeduced, euen by the meanes of greedineſſe rooted in all euill: in coueting of which, they erre in faith. 1. Tim. 4. 6. 1. King. 22. 11. To ſuch men appertaineth properly, that which is written. yet hee ſhall not merit ſo much
thereby, as by his deuout hearing of that Maſſe.
            Secondly, he that as this day heareth Maſſe deuoutly,
and hopeth to heare another to morrow,
with the ſame deuotion: looke what ſinnes hee
committeth betweene thoſe two Maſſes, are pardoned
him by true confeſsion, which our Lord
will graunt him before his death.
            Thirdly, after a man hath heard Maſſe, his feeding
yeeldeth the greater benefit to his bodie, nor
can he want ought all that whole day, but ſhall be
filled with all things needfull to nature.
            
               
Fourthly, All veniall ſinnes newly committed
and falſe oathes ſworne in haſte, or thorow ignorance:
hauing a purpoſe to confeſſe them, they are
blotted quite out, by the merit of hearing a Maſſe
deuoutly.
            Fiftly, euery pace or ſteppe a man takes, in going
to heare a Maſſe, are counted and numbred by
his good Angell, to be rewarded before God.
            
               Saint Bernard ſaith, that our chiefeſt Chriſtian
vertue, is, to heare Maſſe deuoutly. For it is of ſuch
great efficacie and dignitie: as the verie hearing
of a Maſſe, is much more worth to a man, then if
he went in Pilgrimage ouer the whole world, or
gaue all his goods for Gods ſake.
            
               Saint Hierome ſaith: That when wee cauſe a
Maſſe to be ſaid, for a ſoule departed, and in Purgatorie;
ſo long as the Maſſe endureth, ſo long that
ſoule feeleth no paine.
            
               Saint Auguſtine ſaith: That all the while a man
heareth Maſſe, he ſhall not grow olde, neither bee
any iote enfeebled: And beholding the bodie of
our Lord deuoutly, he ſhall not that day die any
ſudden death. But if hee ſhould die, that day, and
were excōmunicated, yet he ſhall not be damned.
            
               S. Paul ſaith; That the prayer of the head, is
more worth then that of the members. If it be ſo
then, that the Maſſe is the prayer of our Lord, being
the head, and we are his members then the
Maſſe is much more auailable, then all the prayers
that we all can make.
            
               Saint Bede ſaith: That if a woman great with
childe, doe heare Maſſe on the day of her trauell,

ſhe ſhall be deliuered without any paine.They are apt to auarice, & haue taken gifts, and are peruerted in iudgement, as is approued by Saint Luke 17. & 1. Sam. 8. Ergo, a man ſhould ſell all his goods, and giue that mony to haue Maſſes ſaid & ſung for him: Which is the ſole Butt they ſhoot at. But S. Hierom was neuer of that mind, to vtter ſuch blaſphemie: The Spaniſh doctor doth be lie him, and finds it in his owne Booke of dreames. For both hee and S. Aug. haue ſaid the contrarie, as you haue read before. The Maſſe is the cauſe to get women with childe, and, in hope of pardon thereby, make ſhipwracke of their ſoules The lier alledgeth S. Luke, who is flatly againſt him, ſaying, That, of men vſed, is abhomination before God. No man, be he neuer ſo learned and holy, hath authoritie after the Apoſtles: Much leſſe Saint Gregorie, being blind in Gods cauſe. And Saint Jerome ſaith, ſup. Prop. Mich. Cap. 7. Tom. 6. ſaith. They that are blowen vp with pride againſt Gods worde, doe make themſelues ſworne enemie to his eternall truth. &c.
            
            
               Saint Luke the Euangeliſt ſaith; That a ſinner,
hauing true contrition for his ſinnes, and a will to
heare Maſſe deuoutly, and (that day) to be confeſſed:
although he die, yet he ſhall be ſaued.
            
               Saint Gregorie ſaith: That euerie Maſſe deuoutly
celebrated, conuerteth a ſinner vnto God, and
deliuereth a ſoule out of Purgatorie: And it is
more worth to him that ſaid it, or procured it to
be ſaid; then a thouſand Maſſes after their death.
            The venerable Maiſters of Sorbonne, haue
granted leaue and permiſsion, to imprint this
ſaid Copie, to Lewes Heruaut, Booke-ſeller,
dwelling at Paris on the Mill-bridge, at the
ſigue of Saint Lewes. Auguſt. 22. 1608.
         
         
            
            The Sentence of Interruption or ſtay of proceeding, betweene
both ſides: taken out of the Regiſters, of the
ſoueraigne high Court of Heauenly Parliament.
            DElay and reſpite is graunted betweene both
theſe parties,Eccleſ. 3. 14. vntil the fulneſſe of time, when
the earth ſhall bee without faith,Dan. 7. 23. 2. Theſ. 2. 7. and hath
reached to the full height of all her vices.Luke. 18. 12. Then
ſhal be euidently ſeene,Apoe. 18. 9. 1. Cor. 7. 11. that the Auncient of dayes
ſhall be the Iudge,Apoc. 22. 5. and the Stone hewen out of
the Mountaine,Apoc. 21. 7. without hands; ſhall bruiſe the
head of the man of ſinne;Dan, 7. 2. who is ſirnamed the
Sonne of perdition,Rom. 11. 7. nouriſhed in the houſe of iniquitie.
And becauſe the time is verie ſhort, ſooner
then can be imagined: he ſhall be caſt downe to
great puniſhments, by the arreſt and irreuocable
ſentence of the Spirit, in the mouth of the Lambe
without blemiſh. And conſequently, peaceable
and powerfull gouernement, ſhall be giuen to the
Saints, by the moſt high for euermore. To whom
be all honour, glorie, praiſe and dominion, worlds
without ende.
            
               Ecce venio cito.
               Veni Domine Ieſu.
            
         
         
            
            An Antitheſis of Gods Commaundements,
and thoſe
deuiſed by the Pope..
            The Commandements of God our Creator,
by Moſes. Exod. 20.
            OPen your eares, lift vp your hearts,
            You people dull and ſlow to heare:
            Liſt the commaundements of thy God,
            Receiue them with all awe and feare.
            I am (ſaith he) thy heauenly God,
            That brought thee from captiuitie:
            And out of Pharaohs ſeruile bonds.
            Thou ſhalt haue n'ere a God but me.
            No grauen Image ſhalt thou make,
            Of any thing what e're it be:
            To honour, reuerence or adore,
            I am a God of iealouſie.
            His reuerend Name take not in vaine,
            Sweare not thereby, or it deſpiſe:
            For guiltleſſe he ſhall not eſcape,
            That wrongs his name in any wiſe.
            Labour fixe dayes, but on the ſeuenth,
            Doe not thy mind with toyle moleſt:
            But thou and thine take quiet eaſe,
            Thy God himſelfe that day did reſt.
            Honour thy Parents that thee bred,
            And brought thee vp ſo carefully:
            That in the Land where thou doſt liue,
            Thy dayes God may prolong thereby.
            
            Kill not, nor murder doe commit,
            From foule Adulterie turne thy face:
            Steale not, nor be a witneſſe falſe
            Againſt thy neighbour, in no caſe.
            Couet not thou thy neighbours houſe,
            His wife, his ſeruants, man or maide:
            His Oxe, his Aſſe, his other goods,
            Or what may not thine owne be ſaid.
            O Lord, theſe heauenly Lawes of thine,
            Effectually let vs embrace:
            To keepe them all, our hearts encline,
            Aſſiſted by thy ſpirit of grace.
            FINIS.
         
         
            The Popes Commandements.
            The Commaundements of our aduerſarie the deuil,
inſtructed and dayly put in practiſe, by his good
Scholler the Pope.
            OPen your eares, listen to mee,
            My people quicke and apt to heare:
            I giue you lawes, was ne're the like,
            Beleeue them, without doubt or feare.
            I am the verie God on earth,
            Nor haſt thou any elſe but me:
            Beleeue it, and no further ſeeke,
            For ſtraitly I forbid it thee.
            Erect all kinde of Images,
            For therein ſhalt thou pleaſe me beſt:
            
               
And ſuch as will not worſhip them,
            With bitter curſes I detest.
            In ſpeciall reuerence hold my name,
            Honour it, and adore it ſtill:
            To ſweare by God, blaſpheme or lie,
            I can abſolue thee, and I will.
            On working dayes, I haue made Feasts
            Of Saints, to giue thee eaſe and reſt:
            Honour thoſe dayes, pray to thoſe Saints,
            Heare Maſſe, and haue thy hearts request,
            Father and Mother both renounce,
            Ere thou from my Religion ſwerue:
            Tis the first rule that I direct
            To Friers and Nunnes, that me doe ſerue.
            Kill, murther, ſteale, lie and defame,
            Commit adulterie, incest, rape:
            Purchaſe thy Pardon, be abſolude,
            And from all Lawes thou ſhalt eſcape.
            Couet thy Neighbours goods, or Wife,
            Or whatſoeuer is not thine:
            Bring gold and ſiluer, Offer them,
            My Pardon cleares thee, for thy Fine.
            All ſuch, as ſhall theſe lawes obſerue,
            And holy Mother Church obay:
            Shall Heauen at my hands deſerue,
            Or, downe to Hell without delay.
            FINIS.
         
         
            
            The triall and probation of the
Popes Commaundements, he being
the enemie to God and
his worde.
            Experience makes the trueſt proofe of all things, and
thereby may eaſily bee diſcerned at the verie firſt
ſight: how the Pope makes warre againſt God, with
his inuented Ordinances, contrary to the Scriptures.
            
               THE Pope commaundeth,
that al his Lawes are to be
embraced by all men, as
proceeding from heauen,
19 Diſt. C. Stomnes. He forbiddeth
alſo, that anie
doubt or queſtion ſhall be
made, or whatſoeuer hee
doth, ſaith or ordaineth, whether it bee good or
lawful. 17. Q. 4. Nemini. Diſt. 3. S. ex perſona. Wherin
he declareth, that his whole drift & intent is, vtterly
to deface and make forgotten, the Lawes of
GOD, to eſtabliſh his owne dreames and idle follies.
Which are more pernicious to men, then any
other plague can bee; becauſe he conſtituteth the
ſaluation of their ſoules, onely vpon merits, and
not vpon the onely grace of God, enlarged vnto vs
in Ieſus Chriſt.
            
               
               The Popes Canons are moſt of them in this
tune. I am Gods Lieutenant vpon earth, C. Quanto.
de tranſlat. Alſo, I am vpon the Chaire of preheminence,
and haue rule ouer all fleſh De ſepul. ſup. Chap.
Alſo, All Romane Princes haue adored my ſeate. De
iureiu. in Clement. Romana in princ. Alſo, I haue the
rule of all the earth. For it belongeth to me, to iudge all
things, and to no man to iudge me, nor my iudgement.
9. Q. 3. C. Cuncta nemo aliorum facta. Hereby may
be obſerued, that moſt falſly he attributeth to himſelfe,
the title of Gods Lieutenant, and yet dooth
notwithſtanding, vſurpe his whole authoritie; yea,
euen aboue God: in that he countermandeth what
God commaundeth, and commaundeth what
God forbiddeth.
            
            His Enſignes or Colours, doe deſcribe both
himſelfe, and his whole armie, euen like vnto Nabuchodonoſor,
who after hee had made and erected
his Idols, commaunded that euerie one ſhould do
honour to them, vpon paine to be throwne into
the fierie furnace, as were Sidrach, Miſach, & Abednago.
Dan. 3. 21. Now, albeit that all the Popes
ſtratagems, wherewith he hath hitherto deceiued
the world, have beene diſcouered, euen as Daniel
reuealed that of the Idoll Bels Prieſts, whereby they
kept the deluded people in their Idolatrie: yet neuertheleſſe,
he ſupporteth his adoration of Images,
by executing his cruellrage againſt them, that
refuſe to worſhip them.
            When the Popes ordinances are receiued of
men, and allowed to be good; it is not to be doubted,
but that God looſeth his right and credit with

them. For no man can ſerue two maiſters, eſpecially,
when they are contrarie one to the other.
Now, wheras God requireth all authoritie in heauen,
and on earth, as his owne in due right: The
Pope oppoſeth himſelfe againſt it, and ſaith: That
euery one is ſubiect to the high Prieſt of Rome, vppon
paine of damnation, and ought to obey what ſoeuer hee
ſaith. Extra de maiori, & ob. Diſt. C. Vnam ſanctam.
Againe, All glorie, honour, magnificence, as well in
dignities as in offices; houſes and abiliments, is giuen vnto
vs, 96. Diſt. Conſtantinus. And as concerning
oathes, he ſaith. We doe abſolue all ſpirituall perſons,
of all oathes that they haue ſworne, 15. Q. 8. Omni. And
yet we ſee for all this, that all, ſwearings, for ſwearings
and blaſphemies, are permitted in Poperie.
            He declareth in deedes, what hee will not confeſſe
in plaine words, to wit; That ſlouth and idleneſſe
is beſt pleaſing to him, wherein hee alloweth
what God expreſſely forbiddeth. But herein hee
proceedeth very cautelouſly, for this commandement
and all other, he buildeth vpon a mans good
will & intention, as if that were more certain, then
that which God hath pronounced with his owne
mouth. Yet hereupon hee eſtabliſhe than other
moſt horrible blaſphemie, worthie to be hurlde
into the loweſt hell; namely, the Maſſe, the verie
height of all euills.
            Herein may you diſcerne, what fruit or benefite
enſueth by this good intention, which is ſaide
to be full of all ſanctitie and Religion. For no one
can obſerue this rule, without renouncing father
and mother, and not onely to renounce or diſauow

them, but likewiſe to ranſack and quite ſtrip
them, of all their goodes and ſubſtance, thereby
to get the young Nouice, or ſweete Siſter Nunne,
into a Cloyſter or Monaſterie, I will not ſay into a
brothel of ſinne. There, to vtter blaſphemie againſt
God, violating his holy, iuſt and lawfull commaundements,
and be detained as a Swine in the Stie,
in looſe lubricities, and wicked impieties, a breuiate
of the Popes Religion.
            We (ſaith the Pope) doo graunt plenarie remiſsion
of all ſinnes, to all ſuch, as in the yeare of Iubilie, ſhall
come to Rome, to gain the ſaid Iubilie, Sixtus. 4. Quemadmodum.
Alſo he ſaith, We will and commaund, that
thoſe things which are not lawfull to bee demaunded,
ſhall be paid vnto vs: For it is lawfull to receiue that,
which is vnhoneſt to be demaunded. 18. Diſt. de culigijs.
13. Q. 2. Quaest. Placuit. &c. Quam pie. But the tribute
and reuenewes, which he receiueth weekely
of the Stewes in Rome, Auignon, and many other
places, as alſo the ranſoms made vnto him, for
murthers, thefts, and other abuſes; exceedeth
computation, but doe witneſſe him, to be the nurſing
father of all iniquities.
            
            He granteth leaue and licence, to diſpence likewiſe
with al inward wicked affections, & all is one
to him, whether they think ill or well, or dayly fall
from bad to worſe; ſo that coyne come in apace
to his Coffers. For he feareth nor to vaunt, that
he can diſpence with whatſoeuer God hath ordained
34. Distin. Lector. & 15. Q. 6. Iuratos & extrauag.
de voto, & voti redempt per totum. Behold
here likewiſe, what other vilde abuſes he diſpēſeth
withall.
            
               
Marriage may bee contracted,Theſe valuations and prices are ſet down, according to the true eſtimate of our Engliſh money here currant. in the third degree
of conſanguinitie, or affinitie: for foure pounds
three ſhillings, foure pence.
            
            A lewe may haue a Synagogue in his houſe, or
erect a new publique Synagogue: for thirty pound
ſeuen ſhillings, ſixe pence.
            
            One may exerciſe the office at the Altar, to
ſay or ſing Maſſe, and adminiſter the Sacrament,
though hee were neuer Prieſted, for nine pounds,
two ſhillings, nine pence.
            
            One may beate a Prieſt, or a Clearke, for ſixe
pounds, two ſhillings.
            
            Parracide is quitted and abſolued, for thirtie
pounds, two ſhillings, eight pence, And Popes do make
greater benefite of ſuch murders, committed vpon
the father or mother, then of beating or wounding,
nay killing a Prieſt or Clearke.
            An Infant may bee murdered, for eight pounds,
foure ſhillings, foure pence.
            
            A woman may receyue a portion, to deſtroy the
childe in her wombe, and bee abſolued, for ſixe
pounds, ſixe ſhillings.
            
            A woman may be a Witch, or Enchantreſſe,
and doe great hurt thereby: for ſeuen pounds, ſixe
ſhillings, foure pence.
            
            Abſolution may be obtained for Hereſie, before
the partie haue abiured it: for thirtie ſixe pounds,
nine ſhillings, foure pence.
            
            A man may bee a Boutefeux, commit Sacriledge,
Theft, rape, periurie and ſuch like ſinnes, for thirtie
pounds, twelue ſhillings, foure pence, ſeuerally paied.
            A Clearke may bee abſolued, for whordome,

yea, though it be with a Nunne, or any woman of
his owne kinred or parentage: for thirtie ſix pound,
three ſhillings, nine pence.
            
            Beſide, ſuch whordome or inceſt committed,
abſolution likewiſe is to be had for Sodomie, or
coupling with a bruit beaſt: It may be diſpenſed
withall, and the partie enioy both his orders, and
holde his benefices: for thirtie ſixe pound, twelue
ſhillings, two pence, ſeuerally paied.
            A Nunne that hath carnally offended with
many men, either in her Cloyſter, or abroad: may
be ree nabled into the dignities of the ſame order,
yea, if it were the Abbeſſe herſelfe: for thirtie
ſixe pound, nine ſhillings, foure pence.
            
            Theſe I am well aſſured of, haue beene diſpenſed
withall, at theſe ſeuerall ſummes of money, being
ſo rateably knowne, and ſet downe, for euerie
ſuch offence. Ouer and aboue which ordinarie
prices, he that carrieth the Pardons and diſpenſations
about, hath another allowance, wherein his
holineſſe likewiſe hath the largeſt ſhare: & the Biſhops,
Abbots, Pardonners, &c. do diuide the other
moitie among them, amounting yearely to no
meane ſumme.
            Many more ſuch ſinnes, and their ſeuerall diſpenſations,
I could ſet downe: but I referre you to
a Booke called, The Popes Shoppe, wherein they are
at large diſcouered.
         
         
            
            The Generation of Antechriſt
the Destroyer: Sonne of
the Deuill.
            THe Deuill begate Darkneſſe;
            Darkneſſe begate Ignorance;
            Ignorance begate Error, and his Brethren;
            Error begate Freewill, Arrogancie, and Selfe-conceite;
            Free-will begate Merit;
            Merit begate Forgetfulneſſe of grace;
            Forgetfulneſſe of grace begate Tranſgreſsion;
            Tranſgreſsion begate Diſtruſt;
            Diſtruſt begate Satisfaction;
            Satisfaction begate the Sacrifice of the Maſſe;
            The Sacrifice of the Maſſe begate Annointing of
Prieſts;
            Prieſts Annointing begate Superſtition;
            Superſtition begate Hypocriſie the King;
            Hypocriſie begate Gaine by Offerings;
            Gaine begate Purgatorie;
            Purgatorie begate the foundation of Anniuerſaries.
            Foundation of Anniuerſaries begate the Churches
Patrimonie;
            The Churches Patrimonie begate Mammon of
Iniquitie;
            
               
Mammon of Iniquitie begate Aboundance;
            Aboundance begate Eaſe;
            Eaſe begate Crueltie;
            Crueltie begate Dominion;
            Dominion begate Pompe;
            Pompe begate Ambition.
            Ambition begate Symonie;
            Symonie begate the Pope and the Cardinals his
Brethren, in the tranſmigration of Babylon.
            The Pope begate the Myſterie of iniquitie;
            The Myſterie of iniquitie begate Sophiſticall Diuinitie;
            Sophiſticall Diuinitie begate Reiection of the holie
Scriptures;
            Reiection of the holy Scriptures begate Tyranny;
            Tyrannie begate Slaughter of the Saints;
            Slaughter of the Saints begate contempt of God;
            Contempt of God begate Diſpenſation;
            Diſpenſation begate Libertie to ſinne;
            Libertie to ſinne begate Abhomination;
            Abomination begate Confuſion;
            Confuſion begate Labour of minde;
            Labour of mind begate Diſputation for the ſearch
of Truth;
            And Truth hath reuealed Ante chriſt the Deſtroier.
         
         
            
            THE BAPTISME
OF ANTECHRIST.
            
               ANTECHRIST beeing bred and
borne in Rome, there was great
pompe and triumphall preparation
made for his ſolemne baptiſing.
And the ſtreetes beeing thicke ſet
with Torch-bearers at noone day, which neere
hand obſcured bright day light, by ſuch an infinite
number being lighted all the way: They marched
a long to S. Peters Church, in this manner. An ancient
graue matrone, named Lady Cuſtome, walked
on foremoſt. After her, with a ſober pace, and
demure countenance, followed Worldly Wiſedome,
bearing the Salte, Creame, and Spittle, to baptiſe
the Infant. Then came Madame Hypocriſie, holding
her head ſomewhat downe, as hauing verie
ſpeciall care of the Childe: And ſhee carried the
water to fit the intended buſines. Subbornation
went next, bearing the Towell, which was all beſet
with precious ſtones, and round imbrodered
with the fires of Purgatorie, which was deſcribed
in very antique great carracters. Then vnder a
ſumptuous Cannopie, came Abuſe the Godfather,
who carried the Childe, being attended on by Hereſie
and Tyrannie, twoo hard-fauoured Ladyes,
and they held vp the corners of the linnen couerture
behinde. Error, an old, thicke, ſquare, goutie

Lord, ſo bigge, as his legs could ſcarſe ſupporte
his body, hee beeing the other Godfather; made
what haſte he could after the reſt. Dame Auarice,
and Dame Symonie, being the appointed God mothers,
followed cloſe after, in a very ſad and ſerious
conſultation. Then came the Romaine Burgeſſes,
named Humaine Traditions; with whome
walked Idolatry and Blaſphemy, and they, with the
reſt of the quiere, ſung very ſolemnly. Now, to glad
the people the more, and in ſigne alſo of liberality,
the Iubilie, which had beene ſold before at a verie
deare rate; was proclaimed freely, and Bulles and
Pardons were now as cheape as ſtrawing hearbes.
            When they came to name the childe, ſtriuing to
haue it a name of immortall renowne; there happened
to growe a great difference among them,
and euery one ſtroue to pleaſe his owne appetite.
One would haue him to bee named Holy Mother;
An other thought it more fit to call him Holy Father.
Hypocriſie would haue him to bee tearmed,
The ſupreme Biſhop: But the Gosſips named him,
The Seruant of Seruants. Idolatry ſaid it were better
to call him, God on earth. When the Preiſt, that was
to performe the ſolemnity, ſaw no likelyhoode of
any other agreement, but the contention ſtill to
grow on more and more: He concluded, to exerciſe
his owne authority, and bethinking him on a
name, that might both fit, and anſwere all their
hope; He Chriſtened him, and named him;
THE POPE.
            FINIS.
            
         
      
   