
      
         
            
            
            A LIBELL OF
Spanish Lies:
FOVND AT THE
Sacke of Caies, discoursing the fight in
the West INDIES, twixt the English Nauie
being fourteene Ships and Pinasses, and
a fleete of twentie saile of the king
of Spaines, and of the death
of Sir Francis Drake. With an answere briefely confuting the
Spanish lies, and a short Relation of the fight according
to truth, written by Henrie Sauile Esquire,
employed Captaine in one of her Maiesties
Shippes, in the same seruice against
the Spaniard. And also an Approbation of this discourse, by Sir
Thomas Baskeruile, then Generall of the English fleete in that seruice:
Auowing the maintenance thereof, personally in
Armes against Don Bernaldino, if hee shall take
exceptions to that which is heere
set downe, Touching the fight twixt both Nauies, or
iustifie that which he hath most falsely reported
in his vaine Printed letter.
            Prouerb. 19. ver. 9.
            A false witnes shall not bee vnpunished, and he that
speaketh lies shall perish.
            LONDON
Printed by Iohn Windet, dwelling by Pauls Wharfe
at the signe of the Crosse Keyes, and
are there to be solde. 1596.
         
         
            
            
               
                  celestial model
               
            
         
         
            
            TO THE COVERteous
Reader.
            
               WHereas, DON
BERNALDINO
DELGADILLO
de AVELLANEDA,
Generall
of the Spanish
fleete, hath by his Printed letters
published to the worlde diuers vntruthes,
concerning our fleete and the
Commaunders thereof, seeking therby
his owne glorie, and our disgrace; I
haue taken vpon me (though of many
least able) to confute the same, the

rather for that the printed Coppie
came first into my hands, hauing my
selfe beene Captaine of one of her
Maiesties shippes in the same voyage:
Take this therefore (gentle Reader)
as a token of my dutie and loue to
my Countrie and Countrie-men, And
expect onely a plaine truth, as from
the pen of a Souldier, and Nauigator:
Which if you take in good parte,
may draw me shortly to a greater labour,
by publishing vnto you our whole
voyage.
            
               Henrie Sauile.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            THe true Coppie of a letter found at
the sacking of Cales, written by
Don Bernaldino Delgadillo de Avellaneda,
Generall of the king of Spaine his
Nauie in the west Indies, sent vnto Doctor
Peter Flores, President of the Contraction
house for the Indies, and by him
put in Print, with priueledge: wherein is
declared manye vntruthes, and false reports,
tending to the disgrace of the seruice
of her Maiesties Nauie, and the Commaunders
thereof, lately sent to the west
Indies, vnder the Commaund of Sir Frances
Drake, and Sir Iohn Hawkins Generals
at the Sea; and Sir Thomas Baskeruile Generall
at land: with a confutation of diuers
grosse lies and vntruthes, contayned
in the same letter: together with a short
relation of the fight according to the
truth.
         
            
               
                  
                     
                        
                        COPIA DE VNA
Carta, 
                              •
                           embio Don Bernaldino
Delgadillo de Auellaneda, General
dela Armada de su Magestad,
embiada al Doctor Pedro Florez
Presidente dela casa dela Contratacion
de las Yndias, en que trata
del sucesso dela Armada de Ynglaterra,
despues que pattio de Panama,
de que fue por general Francisco
Draque, y de sumuerte.
                        
                           DE Cartageua di cuenta
a. V. m. como
sali del puetto dela
ciudad de Lisbona,
en busca de la armada

Ynglesa, aunque por la mucha
priessa, no se pudierou reparar
tambien los Galeones como fuera
necessario, y conel tiempo se perdio
uno, y por desgracia se quemo
un Filibote, y a viēdo andado muchos
dias en busca del enemigo,
hasta quellegue a Cartagena, don
de auiendo tomado el parecer de
Don Pedro de Acuna Gouernador
y capitan general de aquella
ciudad, porque tenia mucha necessidad
de agua, y reparar los
Nauios por que venian faltos della,
me detuue en aquel puerto, a
doude tuve noticia por un Aniso,
que Francisco Draque murio en
nombre de Dios, de pena de auer
perdido tantos Baxeles y gente, aunque

despues se supo mas por estenso,
y aviē do dado a. V. m. cuenta
de lo que hasta alli a sucedido
agora la doy de que sali de aquel
puerto a dos de Março, y tome
la derrota de la Hauana, donde entendi
hallarlo, y aviendo hecho la
diligencia posible. Lunes a onze
del dicho mes, alas dos despues de
medio dia, al salir dela Ysla de Pinos,
enla ensenada de Guaniguanico,
tope cō elque yva con catorze
Nauios muy buenos, fueme arrimādo
a el, aun que tenia el viento
por suyo, y el Almiranta q̄ yua
mas al viento cō orros dos Nauios
commenço arrimarsele, y aunque
vino sobre ella con todos los suyos
tres vezes, no fue parte acei carsele

para quequi siesse enuestir, los
que estauamos mas apartados fuymos
dando bordos acercandonos
hasta jugar la artilleria, Mosqueteria,
y Arcabuzeria delos mas
dellos, en lo qual el recibio m uy
conocido dano, ello hiza conel artilleria
como suele, y particularmente
el Almiranta, y en reconociendo
la volūtad con que a el nos
arrimauamos, con mas diligencia
delo que se puede creer se desembaraço
de todosponiendose en huyda,
dando las velas, dexando en
le mar todas, las Lā chas que traya.
Yole segui con nueve Nauios
toda la noche, y con quatro mas to
do el dia hasta hazerle doblar el
cabo de san Anton, y tomar la derrota

de la Canal de Bahama conforme
alas instruciones de su Magestad,
siruio de poco el verme
con menos numero de Nauios, ni
todas las diligencias que se hizieron,
para que se inclinase a esperar
ni abordar, ni tirar un Arcabuz, ni
una pieça, porque el se dlo la diligencia
que pudo, porque sus Nauios
los ania reduzido a la mitad y
los mejores, y estos acabaua de reparar
en Puerto Belo, donde se estuvo
mas de quarenta dias, y ansi
veniā muy reparados y yo saque
los mios desbaratados, que no me
dio el tiepo lugar para adereçarlos.
A que nauego dos meses y medio,
y traygo la capitana que desde que
parti de Cartagena no an parado

las bombas, y el dia que sali me ie arrimo
ura Zabra con esta necessidad;
la Almirā ta y los demas Nauios
vienen conel mismo trabajo,
perosin embargo, por lo que yo vi
en los enemigos; era muy conocida
la ventaja que nos hazia, y mucha
dicha seria apoderarse delsino
es hallarlo sobre el Ferro. Con todo
esso me an dexado un Nauio
muy bueno en las manos con muy
buena gente, la qual dize como
murio el Draq̄en nombre de Dios
y que va por general dela dicha armada
Ynglesa, el Coronel Quebraran,
y por el poco lugar que se
a dado no an podido tomar: Agua;
lena, ni carne, y van de manera que
no se como an de llegar a Ynglaterra.

Entre la gente deuen de ser
ciento y quarenta, y quinze nobles
capitanes delo mejor de alli, y algunos
ricos segun se echa de ver enellos.
No se ofrece otra cosa: nuestrose
nōr guarde a. V. m. como
puede y yo desseo. 
                        
                           Dela Hauana.
30. de Março; de 1596.
An̄os.
                           
                           Don Bernaldino Delgadillo
de Auellaneda.
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           EL Licenciado Don Iuan
Bermudes ê Figueroa,
Tenientemayor de Assistente
desta ciudad de Seuilla
ysu tierra, que hago
oficio de Assistente della
por ausencia, de su Sen̄oria del Conde de
Priego, Doy licencia a Rodrigo de Cabrera,

para quepueda imprimir la Relaciō
dela muerte de Francisco Draque. I a qual
haga por dos meses, y por ellos no lo imprima
otro alguno. Sopena de diez mil
marauedis para la camara de su Magestad.
                        
                           Fecha en Seuilla a quinze de Mayo, de mil
y quinientos y nouenta y seys an̄os.
                            
                           El Licenciado Don juan Bermudez
e Figueroa. Por su mandado
Gregoria Gutierrez.
Escriuano.
                        
                     
                     
                        
                        
                        THE SPANISH
Letter Englished.
                        The Coppye of a letter, which
Don Bernaldino Delgadillo de
Auellaneda, General of the king
of Spaine his Armie, sent vnto
Doctor Peter Flores, President
of the contraction house for the
Indies, wherein hee maketh
mention of the successe of the
English Armie, after they departed
from Pannama, wherof
was General Frances Drake,
and of his death.
                        
                           FRom Cartagena, I gaue
relation vnto you, how I departed

from the Cittie of Lisbone,
in the pursuite of the English Armie:
although for the great hast the Gallions
could not be so wel repaired as was
needfull, and with foule weather one
was lost, and a Fly-boate was burnt,
and hauing sayled many daies in pursuite
of the enemie, vntill I arriued at
Carthagena, whereas hauing taken
the aduise of Don Pedro de Acunia,
Gouernour of the Cittie, and
Captaine generall; for wee had great
neede of water, and to repaire our
Shippes, we stayed in that port, wheras
I had intelligence by an Indian,
that Frances Drake dyed in Nombre
de Dios, for verie griefe that hee
had lost so many Barkes and men, as
was afterwardes more manifestlye

knowne: And hauing giuen you a relation
of all that happened hitherto:
Now I let you vnderstand, that I left
this Port the second of March, and
toke our course towards the Hauana,
where I thought to haue founde the
English fleete, & also vsed all the diligence
possible: vpon Munday the
eleauenth of the said Month, about
two of the clocke in the afternoone, at
the issue of the Isle of Pinas, in the entrance
of Guaniguanico, I met with
the English fleete, being fourteene verie
good Shippes, I drew towards them
although they had the winde of vs, &
our Admirall who bore vp towardes
the winde, with other two Shippes began
to draw neere them, and although
we set thus vppon them, three times

with all their Shippes, yet would they
not set againe vppon vs, and those of
our men which were farthest off cryed
to them amaine, being both within
shot of Artillerie, Muskats and Caliuers,
whereby they receiued euident
hurt by vs: They shot off now & then
at vs, and especially their Admirall,
and seeing our resolution how sharpe
we were bent towards them, they with
all expedition and speede possible prepared
to flie awaie, hoysing Sayles and
leauing their Oares for hast in the
Sea: but I followed them, with nine
Shippes all the night following, and
with fower more the next daye, till I
made them double Saint Antonies
point, and so I tooke the course towards
La Canet de Bahamet, according

to the instructions from his Maiestie:
It little auailed vs to bee seene, with
lesse number of Shippes, neither yet all
the diligence we could vse, could cause
them to staye or come neere vs, nor to
shoote off one Hargabush or peece of
Artillerie, for they fled away as fast as
they could, and their Shippes were wel
diminished, and that the best parte of
them, the rest they repaired in the port
Bella, whereas they were about fourtie
daies before, and so by that meanes
they were all well repaired, and our
Shippes verie foule, because the time
would not permit vs to trimme them: I
have sailed two Monethes and a halfe
in the Shippe called the Capitana, sithence
we departed from Carthagena,
we haue not repaired their Pumps

nor clensed them: And the same daie I
departed thence, my Shippes were all
foule with Barnacles, our Admirall
and the rest of our Shippes haue the
like impediment, but no great hinderance
vnto vs for ought J could perceiue
by our enemies: It is manifest what aduantage
they had of vs, and by no
meanes was it possible for vs to take
them, vnlesse wee could haue come to
deale with them with fire and sworde.
Neuerthelesse they left vs one good
ship behind for our share, wel manned,
which tolde me that the Drake dyed
in Nombre de Dios, and that they
haue made for Generall of the English
fleete, the Colonell Quebraran,
and also by meanes of the small time
being streightly followed by vs, they

had no opportunitie to take either water,
woode or flesh, and they are also
in such bad case, that J know not how
they will bee able to arriue in England,
the number of men we haue taken
are about 140. and 15. Noble
Captaines of their best sort, and some
of them rich, as well may appeare by
their behauiour: J haue no other thing
to write at this time. Our Lord keepe
you who best can, & as J desire. 
                        
                           From
the Hauana 
                              the 30. of March. 1596
                            
                           Don Bernaldino Delgadillo
de Auellaneda.
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           THe Licenciat Don Iohn Barmudes of Figueroa
Leiuetenant of the Assistantes of
the Cittie of Cyuill, and the prouince
thereof, who doth supplie the Office of the Assistaunt

in the absence of the Right Honourable the
Earle of Priego. Giue license to Roderigo de Cabrierae
to Imprint the Relation of the death of Fraunces
Drake, which onely he may doe for two Monthes,
and no other to Imprint the same within the saide
terme, vpon paine of ten thousand Marauedis for
his Maiesties Chamber. 
                        
                           Giuen in Cyuill 
                              the 15. of
May. 1596.
                           
                           The Licenciat Don John Bermudes of
Figueroa.
By his Assigne Gregorie
Gutierrez Notarie.
                        
                     
                  
               
            
            
               THis letter of the Generall Don
Bernaldino sent into Spaine declaring
the death of Sir Fraunces
Drake and their supposed
victorie; was altogether receiued
for an vndoubted truth, and so

pleasing was this newes vnto the Spaniard,
that there was present cōmandement
giuen to publish the letter in Print, that all
the people of Spaine might be partakers of
this common ioy: The which letter Printed
in Cyuill, bearing date the xv. of May,
1596. came to the hands of Henrie Sauile
Esquire who being employed in that seruice
for the west Indies, and Captaine of
her Maiesties good Shippe the Aduenture,
vnder the conduct of Sir Fraunces Drake,
and Sir Iohn Hawkins, Hath caused the
said Printed letter to bee translated into
English. And that the impudencie of the
Spanish Generall may the more plainely
appeare, the said Henrie Sauile doth answere
particularly to euerie vntruth in
the same letter contained, as heereafter
followeth.
         
         
            
            THE
ANSWERE TO
The Spanish letter.
            
               First whereas the Generall doth say,
that Fraunces Drake dyed at
Nombre de Dios, as he had intelligence
by an Indian.
               
                  THe Generall sente this
newes into his Country
cōfirmed with his hand
and seale of Armes:The Generals first newes, and his best news is in part lying newes. It is
the first newes in his letter,
and it was the best
newes that he could send into Spaine. For
it did ease the stomackes of the timerous

Spaniardes greatly to heare of the death of
him, whose life was a scourge & continuall
plague vnto them: But it was a pointe
of great simplicitie, & scarcely beseeming
a Generall, to tie the credite of his reporte
locally to any place vppon the report of a
silly Indian slaue. For it had beene sufficient
to haue said, that Fraunces Drake was
certainly dead, without publishing the lye
in Print, by naming Nombre de Dios: for it
is most certaine Sir Fraunces Drake dyed
twixt the Island of Scouda, and Porte-bella:
But the Generall being rauished with the
suddaine ioy of this report as a man that
hath escaped a great daunger of the enemie,The Generall seemeth to wante friendes in Courte, sending such great newes to a priuate Doctor.
doeth breake out into an insolent
kind of bragging of his valour at Sea, and
heaping one lye vpon another, doth not
cease vntill he hath drawne them into sequences,
and so doth commende them
vnto Peter the Doctor, as censour of his
learned worke.
            
            
               
               Secondly, The general doth write vnto
the doctor, that Frances Drake
dyed for verie griefe that hee had
lost so many Barkes and men.
               
                  A Thing verie strange that the
General or the Indian, whō
hee doth vouch for his lye,
should haue such speculation
in the bodye of him
whome they neuer saw, as to deliuer for
truth vnto his Countrie, the verie cause or
disease whereof hee dyed: And this second
report of his is more grosse then the first.
For admit the mistaking of the place
might bee tollerable; notwithstanding,
this precise affirming the cause of his

death, doth manifestly prooue that the
Generall doth make no conscience to lye.Don Bernaldino doth lye impudently.
And as concerning the losse of any Barkes
or men in our Nauie, by the valour of the
Spaniard before Sir Fraunces Drake his
death, wee had none (one small Pinnesse
excepted) which we assuredly know was
taken by chaunce falling single into a fleete
of fiue Frigots (of which was Generall,The successe of the kings fiue Frigots.
                  Don Pedro Telio,) neere vnto the Island of
Dominico, and not by the valour of Don
Bernaldino: the which fiue Frigots of the
Kings afterwards had but ill successe, for
one of them we burnt in the harbour of
S. Iohn Portrico, and one other was sunck
in the same harbour, and the other three
were burnt amongst many other Shippes
at the taking of Cales: This I thinke in
wise mens iudgements, will seeme a seely
cause to mooue a man sorrowe to death.The certain cause wherof Sir Frances Drake dyed.
For true it is, Sir Fraunces Drake dyed of
the Flixe which hee had growne vppon
him eight daies before his death, and
yeelded vp his spirite like a Christian to

his creatour quietly in his Cabbin. And
when the Generall shall suruey his losses,
he shall finde it more then the losse of the
English, and the most of his destroyed by
the Bullet: But the death of Sir Fraunces
Drake was of so great comfort vnto the
Spaniard, that it was thought to be a sufficient
amendes, although their whole
fleete had beene vtterly lost.
            
            
               Thirdly, The generall doth say of his
owne credite, and not by intelligence
from any Indian or other,
that on the eleauenth of March
last hee met the English fleete at
the Isle of Pinas, being fourteene
good Shippes, who although they
had the winde of him, yet hee set
vppon them three times with all
their Shippes, but the English
fleete fled, and refused to fight shooting
now and then a shot, but especially
the Admirall.
               
                  THis third lye of the Generall
Don Bernaldino Delgadillo de
Avellaneda, (whose name for
the prolixitie thereof maye
be drawne somwhat neere
the length of a Cable) hath no colour
of protection, but it hath a iust proportion
in measure to the lyes of olde Barnardino
de Mendozza his Countrieman,A payre of Spanish Lyers. concerning
the ouerthrow of her Maiesties
Nauie in the yeare 1588. for except Don
Barnaldino the Generall, did purpose to
winne the whetstone from Don Barnardino
de Mendozza the olde Spanish lyer: I
cannot coniecture why hee should write

to his Countrie for a truth, that hee
chased the English Nauye with nine
Shippes, and did three seuerall times giue
the onset to the English fleete, who being
fourteene good Shippes (as he saith)
did flye and refuse to fight, being that
the Spanish Viceadmiral (if he be liuing)
and manye other,The spanish Viceadmirall a man of vallour. can witnesse the
contrarie, who fighting like a true valiant
man, departed from the fight with a
torne and battered Shippe to saue her
from sinking. Neither can I imagine
that there is any one in the Spanish fleete
(Don Bernaldino excepted) that will saye
they were lesse then twentie sayle of
Shipps when they met the English fleet:
And the Spanish Nauy can witnesse that
they receiued such store of Bullets from
the English fleete, that they were glad to
depart,The number of the Spanish Shippes after the fight. and in despight of them the English
Nauie did holde their determined
course: And taking a view of the Spanish
fleete the next day, their number was not
aboue thirteene Shippes, which did argue

that they were either sunke, or fled
to harbour to saue themselues.
            
            
               Fourthly, The generall saith, that the
English fleete fled awaye, and left
their Oares for haste behind them
in the Sea.
               
                  IT was strange that they
shoulde leaue behinde
them Oares in the Sea,
being there was not in
the English fleete either
Gally or gallyasse,This lie was made in the Generals owne forge. which
required the vse of Oares, as for the Oares
of their ship-boates and other such small
vessels, they had stoed them aboarde
their Shippes, and were no impediment

vnto them, but most necessarie for them
to vse, and therfore not likely they would
cast them ouerboard: But it is most likely,
that the Generall fell into some pleasant
dreame at Sea, wherein hee did see a
false apparition of victorie against the
English, & for lacke of matter did set this
downe in his letter for newes to his countrie:
It is sinne to belye the Deuill, and
therefore the Generall shal haue his right,A commendation of the Generall
the letter is so well contriued, (and yet
with no great eloquence) but with such
art, that ther are not many more lines, then
there are lyes, which sheweth that there
are wonderfull and extraordinarie gifts in
the Generall: But I am perswaded if Don
Bernaldino had thought that his letter
should haue beene Printed, hee woulde
haue omitted many thinges contained in
the letter, for the Doctor did vse him somwhat
hardly in shewing the letter openly,The Generall doth practise to lye, for recreation.
and more in suffering it to be Printed:
for friends may like good fellowes send
lyes one to the other for recreation, and

feed their friends with some small taste
thereof, so it be kept close, without danger
to incurre the tytle of a lying Generall:
But as the matter is now handled throgh
the simplycitie of the Doctor, I cannot
see but the General Don Bernaldino, is like
to carrie the tytle equally twixt both his
shoulders.
            
            
               Fiftly, The generall doth say in his
Printed letter, that notwithstanding
all the diligence he could vse,
hee coulde not cause the English
fleete to staie nor come neere them,
nor discharge one Hargebush or
peece of Artillerie, but fled away
as fast as they could.
               
                  
                  ANd this lie also he doth not
receiue by intelligence from
any other, but himselfe was
an eye-witnesse in the action,
which made him bold
to send this with the rest into his Countrie
for currant newes: But herein Don
Bernaldino was more bolde then wise, for
the torne and battered sides of his Gallyons,
being compared with her Maiestes
Shippes, and others that serued in that
fight,The torne sides of the Spanish Shippes doe condemne Don Bernaldino of lying. doe declare, that his Ships receiued
at least two bullets for one. Neither can it
be concealed but his owne Countriemen
(if any do fauour truth) may easily see the
losse, and late reparations, done vnto the
Kings fleete sithence they did encounter
with the English Nauie, whensoeuer
they that remaine shall arriue in Spaine:
But the Generall seemeth to bee a verye
good proficient in his profession, and

waxeth somewhat bolde, treading the
true steppes of old Barnardino de Mendozza,
and yet Mendozza was somewhat
more warie in his lyes, for he had sometime
the colour of intelligence to shadow
them, but the Generall growing
from boldnes to impudencie, maketh no
scruple to say, that the English Nauie
fled as fast as they could without discharging
any Hargebush or peece of Artillerie,
when as the battered sides of his ships
do returne the lye to his face:Note the valoure of Don Bernaldino. For in this
conflict Don Bernaldino did behaue himselfe
so valiantly, that he was alwaies farthest
of in the fight, & had so great care of
his owne person that he stoode cleare frō
the danger of Muskat or any smal shot, &
durst not approach, whereas our generall
was the foremost, & so held his place, vntill
by order of fight other ships were to
haue their turnes,The order of the English Nauie. according to his former
direction, who wisely & pollitickly had
so ordered his vantgard, & reregarde, that
as the maner of it was altogether strange
to the Spaniard, so might they haue bene

without all hope of victorie, if their General
had beene a man of any iudgement
in Sea fights: I know no reason why the
English Nauie should flye from him,The Spaniard cannot bragge of his gaine. for
the Spaniard may put all the gaine in his
eye that euer he did winne from the English:
Peraduenture some siely nouice of
our country meeting the general in Spaine,
and hearing a repetition of so many sillables
in one name, as Don Bernaldino Delgadillo
de Auellaneda, might thinke them
to be words of Coniuration, & for feare
of raysing a Spirit, might flie from him as
from the Deuill, or some simple Indian
slaue hearing the like repetition of his
long and tedious name, might suppose it
to be an Armie of Spaniards, and for feare
runne awaye: But the commaunders
and Captaines of the English Nauie,Spanish bragges are of no value with the English.
were men of such resolution, that no Spanish
bragges coulde dismaye them, for
they haue often met them with their
Pikes in their Spanish beardes. Nor the
countenaunce of Don Bernaldino quaile

them, although he were acowtred in his
gilt Leather buskins, and his Toledo
Rapyer.
            
            
               Sixtly, The generall saith in his letter,
that notwithstanding their flying
away so fast, the English left
them one good Shippe well manned,
who told him that the Drake
dyed in Nombre de Dios, in
which Shippe were one hundred
and fourtie men, and fifteene noble
Captaines of the best sorte.
               
                  THe Generall Don Bernaldino,
                  Don Bernaldino very resolute,
like a resolute Spaniarde hauing
alreadye gonne ouer his
shoes, maketh no daunger

to wade ouer his Boates also: and as hee
hath begun so he doth conclude, I maruaile
that hee did not in writing his discourse
remember this olde saying; that is,
A lyar ought to haue a good memorie: It
were much better for him in mine opinion
to reuoke the testimonie which hee
saith he had from the English men, concerning
Sir Fraunces Drake his death at
Nombre de Dios, and stande to the intelligence
receiued from the siely Indian slaue,
as it appeareth in his first lye,The Indian slaue, is the best shadow, to the Generals lye for without
al doubt, there is no English man that wil
say (if he haue his right sences) that he dyed
at Nombre de Dios, for they all knowe
the contrarie: Neither can the Generall avouch
that he receiued intelligence from
any English man, that after the death of
Sir Frances Drake they did elect for Generall
Colonell Quebraran,
                  Don Bernaldino his rare gift in coyning a new and straunge name. as he doth most
falsly affirme in the latter end of his vaine
and friuolous letter, being that the name
was straunge, and vnknowne to any in
the English Nauie. Neither doe I imagine

that any of those which the General saith
he hath taken were so forgetfull as not to
remember their generals name. But without
all doubt this addition of so new, and
straunge a name to the English Generall,
doth proue that Don Bernaldino is not vnfurnished
of a forge & storehouse of lyes,The Generals storehouse of lyes.
from whence as from an euerflowing
fountaine, he sendeth forth lyes of al sorts
suffcient for his owne store, and greate
plentie to furnish his friends: The General
was much beholding to his godfathers
who gaue him the name Barnaldino,
which we in English do take to be plaine
Barnard, which name hath as it were a
kind of priueledge from being sharply reprehended
when the party is thought to
erre: for it is a common saying amongst
the Schoolemen that Barnardus non videt
omnia,
                  The schoolemen of modestie do vse this kinde of reprehension, when they doe thinke the Author to erre. viz. Barnard seeth not all thinges,
(when he doth dissent from their opinions)
the which fauour wee coulde bee
content to yeelde to Bernaldino for the
name sake, if he were not taken with so

many manifest and impudent lies, neither
doe I thinke that Signior Bernaldino
will say that he saw all that he hath written,
be it spoken in councell for shaming
the General, for is there any man so voide
of reason as to thinke? That any Englishman
being demaunded of his Generals
name, would write or speake Quebraran
for Baskeruile, so much difference there is
in the sound of the sillables,The difference twixt Quebraran and Baskeruile. as there is no
affinitie at all, or likelihoode of truth: But
such are the Generals rare gifts, (be it spoken
to his small praise) that we Englishmen
must of force confesse that the Generall
hath giuen a proude onset to carrie the
whetstone from Signior Barnardino de
Mendozza: Neither will the 140. men &
15. noble Captaines (which hee saith hee
did take, of whome he might haue beene
rightly informed of their generals name)
acquit him of lying forgerie,The Generall conuicted of lying and forgery. for giuing
the name of Quebraran to the English Generall:
as for the good Shippe well manned,
which he saith the English left them

after the fight, I am perswaded hee hath
no man to witnesse that lye, for the ship
was seperated by weather from the English
fleete in the night thirteene daies before
the fight, with the Spanish Nauie, &
neuer to anye mans knowledge came
more in sight of the English fleete,The Generall maketh great brags in taking a distressed Ship, which is supposed not to strike one blow. if the
Spanish Shippes by chaunce did take the
said wel manned Shippe (as they cal her)
I doubt not but they haue the Shippe, the
140. men, and the 15. noble Captaines to
shew: But euermore I gesse the Spanish
reckoning will fall short when it is examined,
for the fifteene noble Captaines
will proue (as I take it) but three, whose
losse I grieue to thinke on:The fifteene noble Captaines according the generals lying occupation, will proue but three. Neither did
the Spaniards gaine them by valour, or
we loose or leaue them for cowardise, as
most vntruely this bragging lyer hath certified.
But the Generall like a prouident
man, to make his fame and credite the
greater with his Prince and country, doth
take vpon him (amongst other his miracles
perfourmed before the English fleet)

by way of amplification to make small
matters seeme great, as a little shoe to
serue a great foote, and finding that it can
hardly be brought to passe, he doth stretch
the Leather with his teeth that it is ready
to breake, and notwithstanding, all
this will not serue his purpose,The Printing of the letter doth shame the Generall. for the
Printing of the letter doth marr the play,
and bringeth such matter in question, as
the Generall doth wish might be concealed,
and were he not of so dry and cholericke
complexion, as commonly Spaniards
are, he would blush for very shame
in publishing so impudently such manifest
vntruthes.Don Bernaldino of an excellent complexion For sithence his meeting
with the English fleet at the Isle of Pinas,
there hath beene by the worthie English
Generals, an honourable expedition from
England into the Continent of Spaine,The first discouery of the Generals Printed letter.
where amongst other exploits hauing taken
the Cittie of Cales, in the sacke thereof
was found some of Don Bernaldino his
Printed letters: & comming to the hands
of a Captaine that serued in the voyage to

the west Indies, he hath thought very fit
(in regard of the slaunders to the English
Nauie contained in the saide letter) to
quote the errors, that the truth onely may
appeare, to all such as haue a desire to bee
rightly informed of such accidents, as befell
thē in this late voyage to the west Indies:
and this may suffice to shew Don Bernaldino
Delgadillo de Avellaneda his greate
iudgement in amplyfying small matters,The Generals great skill in amplifying.
or of nothing to make in shewe seeme
somewhat. And now hauing thus farre
informed you of the truth in reproofe of
the slaunderous, false, and vntrue reports
of this glorious lying Generall, with a
true disproofe to some of the grossest of
his lyes, I will leaue him with the rest of
his lying letter, and the circumstances
therein contained to your censures: who
in discretion may easily discerne the same.
And have heere following plainely and
truely set downe the course and order of
our whole fight after we met.
            
         
         
            
            THE MEETING
Of our English Nauie and the
Spanish fleete, and the order
of our encounter.
            
               MVnday the first of March,
according to our computation,
wee scryed the
Iland of Pinas, wher haling
in for the westerne
parte thereof, thinking
there to haue watered, being within fower
leagues of it Southerly, we sent in three
of our Pinnasses to discouer the harbour,The first discouerie of the Spanish fleete.
and to sounde afore vs, about one of the
clocke in the afternoone; the same day we
discouered a fleete of twentie sayles, and
deeming them to bee the Spanish fleete,

wee kept our loofe to get the winde but
their Viceadmiral with diuers other ships
went about to cut off our Pinnasses, so
that our Generall with some other of our
Shippes, was forced to tacke about vpon
the larbour tacke, and so ranne in towards
the land keeping the winde, so as
we recouered our Pinnasses, which 
                  •
               orced
the enemies Shippes to tacke about,
and to take the aide of their fleete, and being
come neere vnto them they shot at vs,
wee still approched, hauing our close
fights vp, our flagges, ensignes and s
                  •
               reamers
displayed, our men orderly placed 
                  •
               n
each quarter, but forbare our fight vntill
our Generall began, and gaue vs warning
to come in and fight, by shooting off a
great peece, according to his former directions,
so being within Muskat shot,The incounter twixt the English and the Spanish Ships. the
Viceadmirall of the Spanish fleete came
neerest vnto vs, to whom our Viceadmirall
Iohn Traughton Captaine of the Elizabeth
Bonaduenture gaue fight, betwixt
whome there was the greatest volee of

small shot changed that lightly hath bene
heard at Sea, which cōtinued a long halfe
hower. In which time the Spanish fleete
came into fight, our Generall Sir Thomas
Baskeruile being in the Garland, whereof
Humphrey Reignolds was Captaine, being
the next Shippe vnto the Elizabeth Bonaduenture,
bare vp to the enemie, playing
with her great Ordinance hotly vntill
she came within Muskat shot: Ionas Bodenham
Captaine of the Defiance, and
Henrie Sauile Captaine of the Aduenture,
came likewise into fight with thē: After
the Garland (being within Muskat shot)
played her part and made good fight for
the space of an hower. The Defiance bare
vp likewise and had her turne, after came
the Aduenture again within Muskat shot,
who hauing chaunged many a great Bullet,
with them before, renewed his fight,
and continued it an hower with small
shot. Then came Thomas Drake Captaine
of the Hope, who last of all had his turne.
Thus had all the Queenes Shippes their

course: The Marchants Shippes with other
small vessels being without the
Queenes Shippes shot when they saw opportunitie:
After the enemie finding no
good to be done, (being well beaten) fell
from vs, the Aduenture, playing vppon
them with her great Ordinaunce,The Spanish Viceadmiral can witnesse, what success they had in this fight. made
three of the last shot at them: Their Viceadmiral
with diuers others of their Ships,
were so beaten, that they left off the fight,
and were forced to lye in the winde, for
that they durst not lye of either board by
reason of their many and great Leakes,
which they had receiued by our greate
shot. The Generall with the rest of their
fleete, tacking about fell in our wake,
thinking to get the winde,The English Admirall carried his Creset light, notwithstanding the enemie was vppon his brode side. which in the
beginning we sought to hinder. But our
General seeing that in holding the winde
we should shoote our selues into the Bay,
gaue them the winde. All that night they
kept themselues vppon our broade side,
notwithstanding our Admirall carryed
his Cresset light all night: hauing greate

care of our smallest Shippes: This fight
continued about fower howers til it was
neere night, in the which fight, thanks be
to God, there was slaine so fewe persons
of our English fleete as I thinke the like
conflict hath not beene performed with
so little losse of men: What harme befell
the Spaniards in their fleete I leaue to your
iudgements.The English receiued little losse in this conflict. Yet our eyes can witnesse
their Shippes were sore beaten and raked
thorough, whereby there was such falling
backe and lying by the Lee to stoppe
their leakes, as some of them were driuen
to haste awaye, and rather to runne on
shore to saue themselues then sincke in
the Sea: Besides within two howers after
our fight with them, wee saw one of
their great Shippes on fire which burnt
into the Sea, and all the Sterne of another
of their Shippes blowen vp: And in the
morning a Shippe of our fleete was runne
so neere the land, that to double the Cape
current hee must of necessitie tacke about
& fall in the wake of the enemie, which

caused our Generall in the Garland and the
Defiance to tacke about, which two ships
forced the three Shippes of the enemies
which were put forth to take our Shipp,
or else to cause her runne on grounde) to
returne to their fleete to saue themselues,
hoysing all their sayles for haste: This
morning they were faire by vs hauing the
winde of vs, being but thirteene sayle of
their twentie to be seene,The remainder of the Spanish fleete were but thirteene sayles. then we stroke
our toppe sayles thinking to haue fought
with them again, which they perceiuing
tacked about from vs, & after that neuer
durst nor would come neere vs: What
became of the rest of their fleet we know
not, but true it was that they were in
great distresse mightily beaten and torne,
by hauing receiued many Bullets from vs.
All this day wee had sight of them, but
they shewed little will to fight or come
neere vs, so we keeping our course west,
and by North, about sixe of the clocke
at night lost the sight of them. And this
is a true discourse of our fight with the

Spanish fleete. The which the Author
heereof will iustifie with the aduenture
of his life, against any Spaniard
seruing in that action,
that shal contradict
the same.
            FINIS.
            
               Henrie Sauile.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            THOMAS BASKERVILE
KNIGHT,
His approbation to
this Booke.
            
               
                  I Thomas Baskeruile
Knight, Generall of
her Maiesties late Indian
armado in the late
conflict had betweene
the Spanish fleete and vs, hauing perused
the Spanish letter written by Don
Bernaldino Delgadillo de Auellaneda,
General of the King of Spaines

Nauie, and also hauing perused Captaine
Henry Sauile his answeres vnto
the six exceptions in the Generals
letter with his discourse of the manner
of our fight with the Spanish fleete, do
say, that the said Henrie Sauile hath
answered the letter, and set downe the
order of the fight sincerely according
to truth, for testimonie of which I haue
hereunto set my hand.
            And if Don Bernaldino Delgadillo
de Auellaneda the General
shal take any exceptions to this my approbation,
or stand in the iustification
of his lying letter written to Doctor
Peter Flores, President of the Contraction
house for the Indies, and by
him for Bernaldinoes glorie lately
put in Printe: I then saye that hee

falsely lyed, and that I will maintaine
against him with whatsoeuer Armes
he shall make choyce of. And because
the kingdomes wherein we abide are
enemies, by reason of which there is no
meanes in either of them, to maintaine
that I haue written. Let him make
choice of any indifferent kingdome, of
equall distance from either Realme,
and I will there be ready to maintaine
as much as I haue written: But if by
my imployments into Fraunce, Ibe so
stayed by her Maiesties Commaundementes,
that I cannot out of that
Realme meete him in anye other, I
cannot see why hee shoulde take anye
exception to that, considering the equalitie
of the place, and that the

Armies of both our Princes be there
resident.
            FINIS.
            
               Tho. B.
            
         
         
            
               
                  Galleon
               
            
            
         
      
   