
      
         
            
            
            A LEARNED AND FRVITFVL EXPOSITION vpon the Lords PRAYER.
            By Arthur Dent, ſometime Miniſter of the Word of God at South-Suberry, in Eſſex.
            
               LVKE 11.2.
               
                  When you pray, ſay, Our Father which art in heauen, &c.
            
            LONDON: Printed for Nicholas Bourne, and are to be ſould at the entring into the Royall Exchange. 1613.
         
         
            
            
            THE PRINTER, TO the READER.
            
               COurteous Reader, foraſmuch as deuoute Chriſtians, when they haue found comfort in the labours of any learned man, it cauſeth in them a further deſire, not onely to reuiew what they haue read, but alſo to haue a longing, as it were, after their further paines, vpon any other ſubiect. I doubt not, but am verily perſwaded, that this Expoſition of that Prayer, which our Lord and Sauiour Chriſt Ieſus taught his diſciples; penned by one that hath ſo well deſerued of the Church of God; by publiſhing ſo many good & profitable Treatiſes, ſhal finde ſome

place among thy heauenly meditations, although it be not as I thinke ſo perfect, as the Author intended it if hee had not beene preuented by death. For what wilt thou doe, either for all the benefits that thou haſt receiued, or for thoſe things that are required for thy vſe, or to preuent any dangers, that may be feared? I ſay, what wilt thou doe, if thou wilt not imitate the holy Prophet, and call vpon the name of the Lord? and how canſt thou better call vpon it, then as the Lord hath appointed? and what profit ſhalt thou haue by calling vpon him after that manner, except thou knoweſt the meaning of the ſpirit, in thoſe words which thou poureſt out before him? Wherefore ſeeing (as an auncient Father ſaith) when thou prayeſt for thy ſelfe, neceſſity enforceth thee; and Charity bindeth thee to pray for others: and ſeeing

the holy one of God hath giuen thee in charge, after this manner, pray ye; this ſeruant of God ſhall ſo inſtruct thee, that according to the practiſe of the holy Apoſtle, thou ſhalt pray with the ſpirit, & with vnderſtanding alſo, and this one thing is neceſſary: For all the commandements of the Lord, are ſo full of counſell, that euerie word hath his weight, yea euery ſillable containes a ſecret, ſo that we may all ſay with the Eunuch, Act. 8. How can I vnderstand, except ſome man ſhould guide me? And albeit I am perſwaded that thou art full of goodnes, filled with knowledge, able alſo to admoniſh others: yet thou maieſt be content with skilfull Apollos, ſo eloquent in ſpeach, mightie in the ſcriptures, and feruent in ſpirit, Acts 18. to haue the way of God expounded vnto thee by another man more perfectly. And this is that which I

offer to thy Chriſtian deuotion. Vſe it then as becommeth thee, with holineſſe. Peruſe it often. I hope I am truely informed of the Author, I am but the Miniſter to publiſh it for thy good. Giue thankes to GOD, that hath brought it to light. And the GOD of all power, when thou prayeſt, graunt thee thy harts deſire, and fulfill all thy minde. Amen.
            
               S. T.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            AN EXPOSITION vpon the Lords Prayer.
            
               OF PRAYER: and what it is.
               
                  PRayer, is an earneſt lifting vp of the minde, and calling vpon God, according to his will with faith, by the helpe and worke of his ſpirit. Pſal. 25.1. Rom. 10.13.14. Math. 21.22. Rom. 8.26.27.
               Prayer, is a familiar conference betwixt God and vs.
               Prayer, is as a Letter written vnto God, wherein we deliuer our minde vnto him.
               
                  Onely God is to be called vpon, in whom onely we beléeue. Rom. 10.
               1 Firſt, becauſe hée hath ſo commaunded. Pſal. 50.15.
               2 Secondly, becauſe hée hath ſo taught. 6.9.
               3 Thirdly, becauſe he hath ſo practiſed by example. 26.39.
               4 Fourthly, becauſe he hath promiſed to heare our prayers.
               5 Fiftly, becauſe the holy Ghoſt teacheth vs to cry Abba father. Rom. 8.15.
               6 Laſtly, becauſe none can heare our prayers and grant our requeſts but God onely. Mat. 6.12.
               Wée muſt pray at all times. 1 Theſ. 5.17. It muſt be the Alpha and Omega of all our actions, if wée looke for any good ſucceſſe.
               We muſt pray in all places. 1 Tim. 2.8.
               
                  There be nine things to be obſerued in prayer.
               
               Before prayer.
               Reading, Meditation, and féeling of our Miſery.
               
                  
In prayer.
               Faith, Zeale, and Loue.
               After prayer.
               Watchfulneſſe, Thankeſgiuing, and Practiſe.
               Prayer is as a Bunch of Keyes, wherewith Gods children doe open all the dores of heauen, and enter into euery cloſet.
               The effects of praier are wonderfull, as appeareth by the prayers of Aſa, Iehoſaphat, Moiſes, Ezechias, Dauid, Elias, Paul, and Silas, the Diſciples. Acts 4.31. and 12.5.7.
               The Lords prayer is the perfect patterne of all pr
                     •
                  yers for matter, but not alwaies for words.
               
                  The Lords prayer conſiſteth of three Parts.
                  
                     A Preface.
                  
                  
                     Sixe Petitions.
                  
                  
                     A Concluſion.
                  
               
               
                  The Preface teacheth vs preparation, that wée doe not raſhly, without conſideration, ruſh into the preſence of God, being ſo dreadfull and holy as it is. Eccleſ. 5.1. Pſal. 26.6.
               Thrée of the petitions doe concerne Gods glory, and thrée our ſelues.
               We muſt pray with greater feruencie of the Spirit for the things which concerne Gods glory, then for thoſe which concerne our owne good, as appeareth by the Methode: and for the things which concerne our owne goods, wée muſt pray with more zeale for heauenly, then earthly things, ſith this hath but one petition, the other two.
               Wée muſt pray for the things that concerne Gods glory ſimply▪ aboue any reſpect at all of our owne good, as the Particle (thy) in euery one doth ſhew.
            
            
               
               Our.
               THis word (our) doth teach, that true charitie and brotherly loue toward our neighbours is required in prayer, and that in common wée muſt pray one for another,
                     Iam. 5.14. as wée are euery where taught in the Scriptures. In matters of Faith we ſay (I) but in matters of Prayer (our:) for wée muſt loue our neighbour as our ſelfe, and therefore pray for our neighbour as our ſelfe.
               
                  Our Father, our bread, our treſpaſſes, Lead vs not, Deliuer vs, &c. doe teach a fellow féeling one of anothers good and hurt.
               This word (our) bringeth ſingular comfort to the poore, becauſe Chriſt ſheweth vnto them that God hath no reſpect of perſons, as though he were more father of the rich, then of the poore, of the noble, then of the baſe, but doth account of all alike, for hée is no reſpecter of perſons.
               
                  
                  Queſtion.
                  Héere a queſtion may be moued, whether in our priuate. Prayers wée ſhould pray in generall, or elſe in ſpeciall tearmes, as vs, or me, our father, or my father.
               
               
                  Anſwere.
                  A Chriſtian may in priuate prayer ſay my father, Mat. 26.29. Mat. 27.46. as Thomas ſaid, My Lord, and my God, Iohn 20.28. and Paul, I giue thanks to my God▪ Rom. 1.8. and Gods promiſe is, Ier. 3.19▪ 
                     Thou ſhalt call mee thy father. For wée are not bound vnto the words of the Lords Prayer: but if we pray for our brethren, or for our ſelues, we fulfill the meaning of Chriſt.
                  By the word (Father) is meant the firſt perſon in Trinitie, and ſo it is alwayes taken in the Scriptures when one perſon is conſidered with another, as Math. 28.9. 1 Iohn 5.7.
                  Sometimes it is taken for the whole Trinitie, as Mal. 2.10. Haue we not all one Father?
                  
                  
                     It is not vnlawfull to pray to the Sonne, and the holy Ghoſt, for inuocation belongeth to all the perſons in Trinitie, and not onely to the Father.
                  
                     Stephen prayed, Lord Ieſus receiue my ſpirit, Acts 7.59.
                  
                     Paul prayed, Now God our Father, and our Lord Ieſus Chriſt, guide our iourney vnto you. 1 Theſ. 3.11.
                  
                     The grace of our Lord Ieſus Chriſt, the loue of God, and the communion of the holy Ghoſt, be with you. 2 Cor. 13.13.
                  Men are baptiſed in the name of the Father, and of the Sonne, and of the holy Ghoſt, that is, calling on the name of the Father, the Sonne, and the holy Ghoſt.
               
               
                  Obiection.
                  This Prayer is a perfect platforme of all prayers, and héere wée are taught to direct our prayers onely to the Father, therefore it is not lawfull to pray to the Sonne, or the holy Ghoſt.
               
               
                  
                  Anſwere.
                  The Father, Son, and holy Ghoſt are in diſtinct perſons, yet they are not to be ſeuered or diuided, becauſe they all ſubſiſt in one and the ſame Godhead or diuine nature.
                  Further, in all outward actions, as in the creation and preſeruation of the world, and the ſaluation of the elect, they are not ſeuered nor deuided: for they all worke together, onely they are diſtinguiſhed in the manner of working. Now if they be not diuided in nature or operation, then they are not to be ſeuered in worſhip.
                  In this place expreſly wée direct our prayers to the Father, becauſe he is the firſt perſon in order, yet ſo as then wée imply the Sonne, and the holy Ghoſt. For we pray to the father, in the name of the Sonne, by the aſſiſtance of the holy Ghoſt.
                  To what perſon ſo euer the prayer is directed wée muſt alwayes remember in minde and heart to include the reſt.
                  
                     We may pray vnto Chriſt, not onely as hée is God, but alſo as hée is the Mediatour, that is, as hée is in perſon conſiſting of two natures, yet as the Deity be the obiect or the thing wée ſet before our eyes in prayer.
                  All our prayers ought to be in faith, reſpecting Gods promiſe, and Chriſts mediation: and therefore the perſon that prayeth muſt firſt be accepted in Chriſt, before their prayers and ſacrifices can be accepted. Mar. 11.24. Ioh. 14.13. Heb. 7.25. and 11.4.7.
               
            
            
               Father.
               GOd is the Father of the wicked, and euen of al creatures in reſpect of creation, but in reſpect of reconciliation he is onely the father of the elect: for hée is their reconciled Father in Chriſt: hée is their Father by adoption and grace: and therefore they onely in truth can and may call him Father.
               God will be called by the name of Father, which is a ſwéet and louing

name, rather then by the name of Lord, or Iehouah, which are dreadfull: to allure and entiſe vs to come boldly vnto him, euen as children to their déere, and louing father, to put vp any ſute or complaint vnto him. For Gods children being iniuried & vniuſtly moleſted, haue no remedie but to goe tell their father.
               This word (father) implyes a readineſſe and willingnes in God to heare, Eſ. 58.9. & 65.24. 1 Pet. 3.12. Luk. 11.9▪ 13.
               This word (father) doth aſſure vs wée ſhall be heard: for can a father not heare his childe? can hée deny him any thing? Math. 7.9.
               This aſſurance in prayer is neceſſary. Iam. 16.7. Hebr. 11.6. Luke 18.7. 1 Iohn 5.14.
               God doth alwayes heare and grant the lawfull requeſts of his children, in ſuch time, manner and ſort as hée ſéeth good, and neuer faileth, if not according to their will, yet according to his will, and their beſt good.
               This word (father) doth aſſure vs of our ſaluation: for in truth if we cal vpon

him as our father, as indéed hée is our father, then muſt wée néeds be his children, and being his children how can we periſh? for there is no condemnation to them that are in Chriſt. Rom. 8.1. And it is as poſſible for the Diuell to take away from Chriſt one of the members of his materiall body, being now glorified in heauen, as to plucke away, or cut off any member of his miſticall and ſpirituall body héere in earth.
               Wée may in a holy manner boaſt and reioyce in it that wée haue ſuch a Father, ſo wiſe, ſo mighty, ſo louing, ſo bountifull, to whom wée alwayes may repaire for helpe in time of néede. If one of vs had a father that were the richeſt & the wiſeſt in a realme, would we not excéedingly reioyce in him, and vſe him?
               This word (father) doth note vnto vs the excéeding déepe loue, and fatherly affection which he beareth toward vs his children, paſſing all loue of mothers vnto their children, as Eſay 49.15. Can a woman forget her childe and not haue compaſſion on the ſonne of her womb?

Though they ſhould forget, yet will not I forget thee. The booke of the Canticles doth moſt expreſly and aboundantly lay open the vnſpeakable loue of Chriſt toward his Church, for indéed no louer doth ſo entirely loue his eſpouſed wife as Chriſt loueth vs: for hée loueth vs ſo dearly, and is ſo chary ouer vs, that hée cannot endure the winde ſhould blow vpon vs. If we would eate golde wée ſhould haue it. This loue of his, he doth at all times, and in all things expreſſe, and ſhewes it, as we ſay, and hath alwayes ſhewed it by election, redemption, Iuſtification, ſanctification, adoption, preſeruation, féeding, clothing, delighting, &c. breaking through all our vnkindneſſe to doe vs good, and continuing dayly vnto vs new mercies and fauours, notwithſtanding all our vnworthineſſe and manifold prouokings of him.
               This word (father) doth teach vs obedience: a ſonne honoreth his father and a ſeruant his Maiſter. If I be a father, where is mine honor? &c. Mal. 1.6. Why call yee mee Maiſter, Maiſter,

and doe not the things I ſpeake? Luk. 6.46. And if you call him father, &c. 1 Pet. 1.17.
               By this our obedience wée teſtifie our loue to him againe who loued vs ſo déeply and dearly: as Iohn 14.21. Hee that hath my commaundements and keepeth them, is hee that loueth me.
               
               
                  This is the loue of God, that we keepe his commaundements. 1 Iohn 5.3.
               How can a Childe call him Father whom hée cares not continually to diſpleaſe through his leud conditions? He cannot doe it, neither can any Father delight in ſuch a childe.
               If God be a father who is called vpon, then true prayer is a note of Gods childe, as Acts 9.14. He hath authoritie to binde all that call on thy name: ſo 1 Cor. 1.2. the Saints are noted to be ſuch as call on the name of the Lord: and on the contrary, it is made one of the properties of an Athieſt, not to all on the name of God. Pſal. 14.4.
            
            
               
               Which art in heauen.
               GOD as touching his eſſence is no more in heauen then in this inferiour world, but hée is ſaid to be in heauen, becauſe his glory and Maieſty doth there moſt clearely ſhine out.
               GOD is ſaid to be in heauen, becauſe his Maieſtie, that is, his Power, Wiſedome, Iuſtice and Mercy is made manifeſt from thence vnto vs.
               By the name of heauen is vnderſtood the dwelling place of God, of Angels, and glorified men, where God is more glorious then in this world.
               
                  Pſalme 115.3. Our God is in Heauen, and doth whatſoeuer he will.
               
               
                  Pſalme 2.4. He that dwelleth in Heauen ſhall laugh them to ſcorne.
               
               
                  Eſay 66.2. thus ſaith the Lord, Heauen is my throne, and the earth is my footeſtoole.
               
               1 Reg. 8.27. The heauen of heauens cannot containe him, for hee is alwayes euery where?
               
               
                  Which is all one as if it had béene ſaid of infinite greatneſſe or height, of incomprehenſible power of euerlaſting immortallitie.
               Firſt therefore wée are héere admoniſhed to vſe the action of praier with as great reuerence as poſſibly may be, and not to thinke of GOD in any earthly manner.
               
                  Eccleſ. 5.1. Be not raſh with thy mouth to ſpeake a word before God: for hee is in Heauen, and thou art in earth: therefore let thy words be few.
               
               Therefore ſéeing God is in heauen, away with all drowſie and dead praying, let vs come with reuerence in our hearts before the Lord.
               God is ſaid to be our Father in heauen to diſtinguiſh him from our earthly Fathers: and that wée might vnderſtand how much better hée is then they, and more able to helpe vs▪ as appeareth. Math. 7.11.
               The Fathers of the bodies haue oftentimes a will to helpe their Children, but are not able, either becauſe they are let by pouertie, or diſtance of place, or

ſome other meanes: but God, who is our Father, is rich towards all that cal vpon him, he is preſent euery where, &c.
               Againe, we doe here learne that our hearts in prayer muſt mount vp into heauen, and be lifted vp aboue all earthly and fraile things, how beautifull or goodly ſoeuer, and be wholy fixed vpon the Lord.
               
                  Vnto thee O Lord, lift I vp my ſoule, Pſalme 25.1.
               Héere are condemned all colde courſarie prayers, when mens mindes are occupied about other matters, which is but a plaine dallying and mocking with God.
               Such manner of praying is a very grieuous ſinne, greater then mocking Father and Mother: for it is directly againſt God, the other againſt men. It is a greater ſinne to mocke God, then to mocke men.
               This ſinne becauſe it is againſt the firſt Table, and therefore more hard to be diſcerned (for the light of the ſecond Table ſhineth naturally more cléerely

then the light of the firſt) is lightly eſtéemed, and doth leſſe trouble the conſciences of ignorant men.
               God is in Heauen: therefore hée is able to graunt all our requeſts. Hée is our Father, therefore he is willing and ready.
               This ouerthroweth Popiſh Idolatrie, as worſhipping of Croſſes, Crucifixes, Roodes, running a pilgrimage to worſhip Idols: for the GOD to whom we muſt pray is in heauen, and wée muſt lift vp our mindes thither. How can wée doe this ſo long as our eyes and mindes are poaring vpon an Image, made by the art of man?
            
            
               
               Halowed be thy name.
               THis petition is ſet in the forefront becauſe Gods glory muſt be preferred before all things.
               1 For that is the end of our Creation. Pſal. 103.22. and 147.5.
               2 The end of all creatures. Prouer. 10.4.
               3 The end of all the Counſailes of God. Epheſ. 1.6.
               4 The onely end whereunto all our thoughts, words and déeds muſt be directed. 1 Cor. 10.31.
               Gods glory is a moſt precious thing, and wée muſt be more chary of it then any thing, as wée are more chary of a golden Cuppe, then of an earthen Pitcher. But alas, wée care not for Gods glory:
                     Pſa. 115.1. We are all for our ſelues, our owne glory, credit, name, commodities, &c.
               
                  Herode tooke the glory of God to himſelfe, and therefore the Angel of the Lord ſmote him. Acts 12.
               
                  The name of God in this place is put for God himſelfe, as 1 Kings 5.5. Hee ſhall build a houſe to my Name.
               
               Alſo, for the attributes of God, as his

                     Iuſtice,
                     Mercy,
                     Word,
                     Workes.
                     Prouidence,
                     Power.
                  
               
               For GOD is knowne to vs by all theſe, as men are knowne by their names: and as all mans praiſe & glory lyeth in his name, ſo all the glory of God is in theſe.
               To Hallow, is to ſerue, or ſet apart any thing from common vſe, to ſome proper or peculiar end.
               As the Temple was hallowed, that is, ſet apart to an holy vſe.
               The Prieſts were ſanctified, that is, ſet apart to the ſeruice of God.
               All that beléeue in Chriſt are ſanctified, that is, ſet apart from ſinne to ſerue God.
               In like manner, Gods name is hallowed, when it is put apart from obliuion,

contempt, prophanation, pollution, blaſphemie, and all abuſes, to an holy, reuerent, and honourable vſe, whether we thinke or ſpeake of it.
               
                  Obiection.
How can a ſinnefull man Hallow Gods name, which is pure and holy in it ſelfe?
               
                  Anſwere.
Not as he doth ſanctifie vs, by communicating vnto vs an inherent qualitie of holineſſe: for wée cannot make him holy, or adde any thing to his holineſſe that is moſt holy in himſelfe, and the perfection of all holineſſe: but wée ſanctifie him, when wée acknowledge, and celebrate, and worſhip him ſo in heart, word, and déed, that wée cauſe his glory to be ſpread among men, and make manifeſt to the World, by the right vſage of it, that it is holy, pure and honourable: the like phraſe is vſed, Luke 7.29. Wiſedome is iuſtified of her Children, that is, declared to be iuſt.
               
                  The ſumme of this petition is, that wée may ſo carry our ſelues in all our actions, and the whole courſe of our life, that his holy name be not reproched by our occaſion, but rather be honored and magnified.
               
                  Examples.
                  The children of Iſraell ſung a ſong of victory, vpon Pharaoes ouerthrow.
                  
                     I will ſing vnto the LORD for he hath triumphed gloriouſly: the Horſe and him that rode vpon him hath hee ouerthrowne in the Sea, Exod. 15.1.
                  
                     Dauid extolleth the maieſtie of God by his works in the heauens, Pſal. 19.1. And eſpecially in man, both in his creation and redemption by Chriſt, Pſalme 135. and 136.
                  
                     O Lord, how excellent is thy name in all the earth, which ſetteſt thy glory aboue the heauens? Pſalme 8.
                  
                     The very Angels of heauen at the birth of Chriſt, doe ſound out the prayſes of God.
                  
                     Glory be to God in the higheſt heauens, and in earth peace, good-will towards men, Luke 2.13.14.
                  The Saints of God haue magnified his great and holy name, not onely in reſpect of his great workes of Election, Creation, Redemption, Iuſtification, Sanctification, &c. but euen for his iudgements and chaſtiſements alſo, as Iob, The Lord giueth, and the Lord taketh away, bleſſed be the name of the Lord, Iob 1.21.
                  And Dauid, Pſalme 119. It is good that thou haſt humbled me.
                  
                  And the Apoſtles went forth of the Councell, reioycing that they were counted worthy to ſuffer reproach for the name of Ieſus Chriſt. Acts 4.
                  According therefore to the example of theſe ancient worthies, euery one of vs muſt zealouſly ſtriue to glorifie God as Heb. 12.1.
                  
                     And that eſpecially in performing the duties of our ſeuerall callings, as Magiſtrate, Miniſter, Gentleman and Tradeſman: for it is a thing acceptable to God and man, to be a good man in our place. A good Magiſtrate, that ruleth well: a good Miniſter, that teacheth well and diligently: a good Gentleman, that diſtributeth liberally: a good Tradeſman, by whom a man may liue quietly, peaceably, ioyfully and comfortably.
               
               
                  Abuſers of this Petition.
                  All thoſe which are proud,
                        Ioh. 5.44. Pſa. 115.1. and ſéeke glory to themſelues, being ſo iealous of their owne honour, that to magnifie and lift vp themſelues, they will tread downe the name of God.
                  All thoſe which profeſſe the Goſpell,
                        Rom. 2.24. 1 Pet. 3.15 16. Act. 19.9. 1 Tim. 1.13. Exo. 20.7. and ſtaine it with their wicked liues.
                  All ſuch as delight to raiſe vp and ſpread ſlanders againſt the profeſſion of Religion.
                  All ſwearers and blaſphemers of Gods moſt holy name.
                  
                     For all theſe ſay and babble with their mouth, Hallowed be thy name, but their hearts neuer careth for any ſuch matter.
               
            
            
               Thy kingdome come.
               THeſe Petitions haue a very good coherence in them: for then is Gods name indéede honored, when his Kingdome is erected in the hearts of men. Here therefore wée pray for the meanes of the aduancement of Gods name.
               This word (thy) doth note a difference betwixt the kingdome of Chriſt, which is ſpirituall, as hée himſelfe ſaith, My kingdome is not of this World, and all earthly kingdomes.
               Secondly, it putteth vs in minde that there are two Kingdomes, one Gods, and hat is the Kingdome of Heauen, another the Diuels, which is

called the kingdome of darkneſſe.
               The pillers of the Diuels kingdome are, Ignorance, Errour, Idolatry, ſuperſtition, Sinne, and diſobedience to God.
               The Subiects of this kingdome are all prophane Atheiſts, carnall worldings, and all vnregenerate men whatſoeuer: for hée raigneth and ruleth ouer them at his pleaſure: hée is their God and King, and they doe very hadtely and willingly ſubmit themſelues vnto his ſcepter and gouernment, fight vnder his Standard, againſt God and their owne ſaluation, Epheſ. 2.2. 2 Cor. 4.3.4. 2 Tim. 2.26. Yet theſe vngodly men ſpit at the naming of the Diuell, and ſay they defie him.
               This word (kingdome) is taken thrée manner of wayes in the ſcripture.
               Firſt, for that abſolute & ſoueraigne power of God, whereby hée ruleth all things, yea, euen the diuels themſelues, as Pſal. 103. The Lord hath prepared his Throne in heauen, his kingdome is ouer all.
               
               
                  Againe, The Lord raigneth, let the earth reioyce. Pſal. 97.
               Secondly, for the kingdome of Grace, as Rom. 14.17. The kingdome of GOD is not meate and drinke, but Righteouſneſſe, Peace, and Ioy in the holy Ghoſt. Where, by Righteouſneſſe he meaneth the aſſurance of our Iuſtification before God, in the righteouſnes of Chriſt, Peace of Conſcience, which procéedes from this aſſurance, and Ioy in the holy Ghoſt which commeth from them both, So Marke 2.15. The kingdome of God is at hand, repent and belieue the Goſpel.
               
               In a kingdome there are fiue things to be conſidered:

                     1 A King.
                     2 Subiects.
                     3 Lawes.
                     4 Authoritie.
                     5 Officers.
                  
               
               1 In this kingdome Chriſt is king, It is hee to whom the Father hath giuen all authoritie, both in heauen and earth. Math. 28.20
               
                  2 Subiects are all the elect, which doe willingly ſubmit themſelues vnto his gouernment, as Pſalme 110.3. and ſerue the Lord in feare and trembling, or at leaſt make an outward profeſſion of it, though their harts be not ſound.
               3 Lawes are the old and new Teſtament, wherin is ſet downe his whole will: This is his Statute booke.
               4 Authoritie is the compelling power of his Word & Spirit, whereby hée forceth the Rebels of the world to come in, as it is written, Compell them to come in. Such a conqueſt wée read of Acts 2.17.18. And in very déede the Word and the Spirit, are the very meanes whereby Chriſt ruleth and raigneth ouer his: and therefore the Word is called the Scepter of his power, Rom. 1.16. Mark. 1.14. The arme of God, Pſal. 110.2. Eſay 53.1. The rodde of his mouth, Eſay 11.4.
               
                  Reaſons.
                  Becauſe by it hée doth ſet vp his Throne in the harts of men.
                  
                     By it he doth draw men into heauen as with a moſt mighty arme.
                  By it he doth ouerthrow and deſtroy the power of darkneſſe.
                  5 Officers of this Kingdome are, the Paſtors and Miniſters of the Church, vpon whom this charge is layde, that they preach the Word, gouerne the Church, and ſée the execution of the Kings lawes.
                  Thirdly, the kingdome of Glory is that happineſſe which Gods choſen ſhall for euer inioy, as it is written: Come yee bleſſed of my Father, receiue the Kingdome prepared for you from the beginning of the world. And againe, It is well done thou good ſeruant and faithfull, enter into thy Maſters ioy. Math. 25.
               
            
            
               
               Come.
               GOds Kingdome commeth when it takes place, and is eſtabliſhed and confirmed in mens hearts, & made manifeſt to all people, the impediments being remoued.
               
                  The Summe of this Petition.
                  That Chriſt would raigne ouer vs by his Word and Spirit.
                  That wée may be ſubiect to his kingdome in word and déede, in holines and righteouſneſſe.
                  That hée would preſerue and increaſe his Church.
                  That hée would deſtroy the power of the Diuell, and the workes of darkneſſe.
                  That hée would fruſtrate and bring to nought, all the Counſels of the wicked, againſt his Truth, Kingdome and people.
               
               
                  
                  Things prayed for in this Petition.
                  That Chriſt may guide vs, and gouerne vs by his holy Spirit, in all our particular actions, that hée may haue a kingdome within vs.
                  
                     Pſalme 51.
                     Create in mee a cleane hart O God, and renue a right Spirit within mee, &c.
                     Stabliſh me with thy free Spirit.
                  
                  Héere alſo wée doe pray for the proſperous eſtate of the Church.
                  
                     Pſalme 122.6.
                     Pray for the peace of Ieruſalem, they ſhall proſper that loue thee.
                     Eſay 62.7.
                     Yee that are the Lords remembrancers, giue him no reſt vntill hee ſet vp Ieruſalem, the praiſe of the world.
                  
                  Wée doe pray for Chriſtian Kings and Princes, that God would proſper their gouernment: for they are nurſing Fathers, and nurſing Mothers to the Church, Eſay 49.
                  
                     1 Timothie 2.2.
                     Let Prayers and Supplications, with

giuing of thankes, be made for all men, for Kings, and for all that are in authorritie.
                  
                  We are alſo to pray the Lord of the harueſt to ſend forth labourers into his harueſt, that is,
                        Math. 9.38. faithfull and zealous Miniſters and Preachers of the Goſpell, which are the principall Studs and pillers to vphold the Kingdome of Chriſt, and moſt notable inſtruments both for the beating downe of the kingdome of Sathan and Sinne, and for the ſauing of the ſoules of his people.
                  
                     2 Theſ. 3.1.
                     Brethren, pray for vs, that the Word of the Lord may haue a free paſſage, and be glorified, &c.
                     Prou. 29.18.
                     Where viſion fayleth the people are left naked.
                  
                  Furthermore, wée are to pray for all Chriſtian Scholes of learning, becauſe they are as it were Seminaries and nurſeries of Gods Church.
                  Laſt of all, wée are to deſire that the Lord would haſten the ſecond comming of Chriſt, as the Saints pray, Come

LORD Ieſus, come quickly, Romanes 22.20.
                  Therefore the godly are ſaid to loue the comming of Chriſt. 2 Tim. 4.8.
               
               
                  True Petitioners.
                  Firſt, they that mourne and lament to ſée the dominion and power of the Diuell to be to great as it is.
                  Secondly, they that deale earneſtly with God euery day, that it may be diminiſhed.
                  Thirdly they that pray earneſtly day and night, that God would multiply the number of his Children.
                  Fourthly, they that long for the day of Chriſt, wherein hée ſhall put downe all rule, and all authoritie, and power, &c.
               
               
                  Counterfait Petitioners.
                  Such as ſcorne at the Miniſterie of the Church.
                  Such as hinder the frée courſe of the Goſpell.
                  
                     Such as oppoſe themſelues againſt godly Preachers, and good men.
                  Such as take part with the wicked, and defend bad cauſes.
                  Such as labour to quench and ſmoother all good matters in their harts.
                  Such as put farre from them the day of euill, and waite not, nor prepare themſelues for his comming.
               
            
            
               Thy will be done, &c.
               
                  Senſe.
                  GRaunt that wée and all men, renouncing our owne will, may readily, and without murmuring, obay thy will, and ſo may chearfully execute whatſoeuer the Angels doe in heauen.
               
               
                  Coherence.
                  In the former petition wée prayed, that hée onely might be our King and raigne ouer vs: now wée deſire that

being his Subiects, wée may obay him, and doe his will.
                  
                     Mal. 1.6.
                     If I be a Father where is my honor?
                     If I be a Maſter where is my feare?
                  
               
            
            
               Will.
               HEere it ſignifieth Gods word, for in his word his will is reuealed.
               Of the whole will of God, there be thrée ſpeciall points, which are in this place meant.
               
                  1 Faith in the promiſes.
                  2 Sanctification.
                  3 Patient bearing of the Croſſe.
               
               
                  Proofe of the firſt.
                  This is then his commaundement, that we belieue in the name of his Sonne Ieſus Chriſt. 1 Iohn 3.23.
                  
                     This is the will of him that ſent mee, that euery one which ſeeth the Sonne, and belieueth on him, ſhould haue euerlaſting life. Iohn 6.40.
               
               
                  Proofe of the ſecond.
                  This is the will of GOD, euen your Sanctification. 1▪ Theſ. 4.3.
               
               
                  Proofe of the third.
                  
                     Whoſoeuer will be my Diſciple muſt forſake himſelfe, and take vp his croſſe and follow me. Mat. 16.24.
                  The Apoſtle prayeth, Phillip. 3.10. that hée might know him, and the vertue of his reſurrection, and the fellowſhip of his afflictions, and be made conformable to his death.
                  
                     Thy will, not mine: for ſince the fall of Adam, mans will is wicked and corrupt, yea, it is flat enmitie to GOD, Rom. 8.7. But Gods will is moſt holy, right and pure, and therefore all our loue ought to be vpon it.
                  
                     Done, that is, obeyed and accompliſhed

of men. Then the effect of the praier is this: O Lord, ſéeing thou art our King, giue vs grace to ſhew our ſelues good Subiects in obaying thy will. For obedience is better then ſacrifice, and to hearken is better then the fat of Rams. 1 Sam. 15.22.
                  
                     Not euery one that ſaith Lord, Lord, ſhall enter into the kingdome of heauen, but he that doth the will of my Father, which is in heauen. Mat. 7.22.
                  
                     Whoſoeuer doth the will of GOD, is my Brother, my Siſter, and my Mother, Mark. 3.35.
                  
                     Hee that fulfilleth the will of God abideth for euer. 1 Ioh. 2.17.
               
            
            
               
               In Earth, as it is in Heauen.
               THis clauſe ſheweth the manner of dooing Gods will.
               By heauen here is meant the ſoules of faithfull men departed, and the elect Angels.
               
                  Praiſe the Lord yee his Angels, that excell in ſtrength, that doe his commaundements, in obaying the voyce of his word, Pſal. 103.20.
               By earth is vnderſtoode nothing but men on earth: becauſe all other creatures, in their kindes, obay God, onely man is rebellious and diſobedient.
               The word (as) doth imply a ſimilitude not an equalitie.
               
                  Senſe.
                  Let thy will be done by vs men on earth, as the Angels and Saints departed,

doe thy will in heauen, that is,

                        1 Willingly,
                        2 Spéedely,
                        3 Faithfully and continually.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Ezek. 1.Therefore they are ſaid in the Scriptures to be winged.
               
               
                  Things prayed for.
                  Deniall of our ſelues, our owne wils and affections.
                  Knowledge of Gods will, for otherwiſe how ſhould we doe it?
                  A feruent deſire of obedience, to doe his will in all our particular actions.
                  Patience, and a willing ſubmitting of our ſelues to the will of God in all things.
                  So did Elie the Prieſt, It is the Lord, let him doe what ſeemeth him good, 1 Sam. 3.18.
                  So did Dauid, 2 Sam. 15.26. But if hee thus ſay, behold I haue no delight in thee: behold, here I am, let him doe to me as ſeemeth good in his eyes.
                  
                  So Chriſt himſelfe, Father take this cup from me, yet not as I will, but as thou wilt, Mark. 14.36.
                  
                     So the Diſciples, and holy Chriſtians, Acts 12.14. The will of the Lord be done.
                  
                  Therefore Saint Iames calleth Patience by the name of Wiſedome, becauſe mans chiefe wiſedome ſtandeth therein, that in his aduerſities and troubles, he patiently ſubmits himſelfe to the will of God.
                  But on the contrary, it is extreame fooliſhneſſe and madneſſe, if any dare reſiſt & ſet himſelfe againſt it. For what good doth hée by it, Can hée change the will of God? No verely, Nay rather he maketh his owne caſe worſe, as well with inward griefe, that tormenteth him, as alſo becauſe hée pulleth the wrath of God vpon himſelfe: for by our ſtubberneſſe hée is compelled to lay more grieuous puniſhments vpon vs. On the other ſide, by our patience hée is moued vnto pittie, euen as good Parents are wont, when they perceiue that their Children are brought into good order by their correction.
               
               
                  
                  Who prayeth this Petition aright.
                  They which bewayle the ſinnes of the world, as Ignorance, Error, Schiſmes, Pride, Couetuouſnes, Contempt of the word, Oppreſſion, Swearing, Lying, &c.
                  They which are gréeued for their Impatience and diſquietneſſe of minde,
                  For their coldneſſe in Gods ſeruice.
                  For their vnperfect obedience, and wants euen in their beſt actions.
               
            
            
               Giue vs this day our daily bread.
               THe thrée former Petitions doe immediatly concerne God, theſe thrée laſt our ſelues: which teacheth that we muſt prefer God and his glory before all things.
               
                  
                  Coherence.
                  In the firſt we were taught to pray, that GODS name may be hallowed, which is done, when God reigneth in our hearts, and his will is done:
                  Now further his will is obeyed in thrée things.
                  Firſt, by depending on his prouidence, for the things of this life.
                  Secondly, for depending on his mercy for the pardon of ſinnes.
                  Thirdly, by depending on his power and might in reſiſting temptations: and thus is the will of God obeyed.
               
            
            
               Bread.
               
                  BRead, ſignifieth all things whereby this life is preſerued, as Meate, Drinke, Clothing, Health, Peace, Libertie: yea, Goates milke. Pro. 27.27. and the fruit of Trées. Ierem. 11.19.

                  Geneſ. 1.29. And all things that paſſe too and fro in trafficke. Pro. 31.14.
               
                  In the ſweate of thy face ſhalt thou eate thy bread. Gen. 3.19.
               
                  Man liueth not by bread onely, &c. Math. 4.
               Ieſus entred into the houſe of a certaine Phariſie, to eate bread, Luk. 14.
               Chriſt vſeth this word (Bread) rather then Fleſh, Victuals, Meate, Dainties, Varieties, &c. to inſtruct vs to chriſtian Sobrietie and moderation in our diet, houſes, &c. and to teach vs to be content with a little, and to be content if wée haue no more but Bread, that is, things neceſſary to preſerue life: and moreouer, that wée ſhould take that fare thankfully, how thinne ſo euer it were, which hée of his mercy hath prouided for vs, not murmuring againſt it, nor fretting through impatience, as the Iſraelites did, who loathed Manna, which they had receiued of God for their preſent neceſſitie. Phil. 4.12. 1 Tim. 6.8. Heb. 13 5.
               Wee may vſe things not onely for neceſſitie, but alſo for honeſt pleaſure,

                  Pſal. 104.15. Iohn 12.3. But notwithſtanding if wée haue to defend neceſſities we muſt be content. 1 Tim. 6.8.
            
            
               Daily.
               THe word in gréeke, ſignifieth, vnto our Eſſences or Subſtances: the meaning is, giue vs ſuch Bread as may nouriſh our ſubſtances, ſuch as is fit and profitable for our nature and conſtitution, and wherewith our life may be maintayned.
               
                  Foure Reaſons may be alledged why Chriſt vſeth this word Daily.
                  
                  Firſt, as hath béene ſaid before, that wée ſhould not ſéeke after varieties and dainties, but that which may ſatiſfie the neceſſities of Nature.
                  Secondly, to bridle all inordinate care, and immoderate deſire of Riches,

and therefore Saint Luke calleth it, bread for the day, that is, bread ſufficient for to preſerue vs for the preſent day.
                  Although then we be willed to aſke all outward things of God, yet we may not aſke them to ſpend them vpon our luſts, Iames 4.3. Neither may wée make prouiſion for the fleſh, to fulfill the luſts therefore. Rom. 13.14.
                  Our money is giuen vs for bread, as it is written: Wherefore doe you lay out your money, and not for bread? Eſay 55.2.
                  Thirdly, that wée ſhould deſire no more but a competencie of theſe things, as did wiſe Salomon, who onely deſired the meane eſtate, as the moſt ſafeſt and beſt. Pro. 30.8.
                  Fourthly, that wée ſhould eate to reſtore vitall humour, which ſpendeth euery day by ſtrength of natural heate.
                  Laſtly, we muſt aſke it euery day, to the end wée may take pleaſure in this cuſtome, of louing & fearing God.
               
            
            
               
               Our.
               IN reſpect of Chriſt, bread is called (ours,) for hauing giuen Chriſt vnto vs, hée doth in him, and by him, giue all things elſe vnto vs, ſo that in Chriſt we haue a proper intereſt in them, as it is written: All things are yours,
                  
                     Rom. 8.32 
                  and yee are Chriſts. 2 Cor. 3.22. and then indéede are they moſt of all ours, when they are ſanctified vnto vs by the word and Prayer. 1 Tim. 4.4. that is, when wée vſe them aright, according to the rules of Gods word, calling vpon his name for a bleſſing, before and after the vſe of them.
               Furthermore this word (our) doth teach vs that euery man muſt liue of his owne calling, and his owne goods truely gotten, by his owne ſweat, and not another mans: not by Robberie, Oppreſſion, Deceipt, Lying, Fraud,

and ſuch other vnlawfull meanes, for ſuch goe to the Diuell for bread, and not to God: for God giueth no bread after ſuch ſort.
               Againe, it is called, Our bread, becauſe we ſhould not eate it alone, but diſtribute it to them that haue néed, as it is written, Breake thy bread to the hungry, Eſay 58. And againe, Caſt thy bread vpon the waters, for after many dayes thou ſhalt finde it. Eccleſ. 11. And Iob ſayth, I haue not eaten my morſels alone. Iob 31.
            
            
               This day.
               THeſe words condemne all immoderate deſire of riches, and diſtruſtfull care for time to come, and doe teach vs to reſt on his fatherly goodneſſe from day to day. This is noted vnto vs, where the Iſraelites were commanded to gather no more Manna, then would

ſerue for one day: for if they did, it putrified: whereby God taught them to reſt on his prouidence, euery particular day, and not on the meanes.
               Yet is it lawfull in good manner, to prouide for dayes, yéeres, and times to come, as Ioſeph in Egypt, in the ſeauen yéeres of plentie, ſtored vp againſt the yéeres of famine. The Apoſtles prouided for the Church in Iudea, againſt the time of dearth, foretould by Aggabus, Acts 11.28. Salomon ſaith, He that gathers in Summer is the ſonne of Wiſedome, but hee that ſleepeth in Harueſt is the ſonne of Confuſion. Pro. 10.5. So then onely the diſtruſtfull care, that diſtracteth the minde, is héere forbidden.
            
            
               
               Giue vs.
               NOT mée: this ſerues to teach vs that a man muſt not onely regard himſelfe, or pray for himſelfe, but alſo be mindefull of others. 1 Cor. 13. True loue ſeekes not her owne things.
               
               The branches of the Vine are laden with cluſters of grapes, not for themſelues, but for others. The Candle ſpends it ſelfe, to giue others light: The eye ſéeth not for it ſelfe, but for the whole body.
            
            
               Giue.
               THis ſheweth that God is the authour and giuer of all earthly bleſſings, and therefore wée muſt begge them at his hands. If you that are euill

know how to giue good gifts vnto your Children, how much more ſhall your Father which is in heauen, giue good things to them that aske them of him? Math. 7.11.
               
                  I am not worthy of the leaſt of the mercies which thou haſt ſhewed to thy ſeruant: for with my ſtaffe came I ouer this Iordane. Geneſ. 31.10.
               
                  Iacob aſked bread to eate, and garments to put on. Gen. 28.20.
               The Iewes were commaunded to bring of the firſt of all their fruit in a baſket, and to profeſſe that they had receiued them of the Lord, as the author and giuer of them. Deut. 26.2.
               All ſuch deny God to be the Author and giuer of theſe things, as ſéeke them by vnlawfull meanes, as Theft, Oppreſſion, Deceit, conſulting with wiſards, &c. they acknowledge the Diuell to be the author of them.
               
                  Obiection.
                  The rich néede not ſay, giue vs this day, for they haue aboundance already, & what néede they aſke that they haue?
               
               
                  
                  Anſwere.
                  Though a man had all the wealth in the world, and want nothing that can be deſired, yet all is nothing without Gods bleſſing: if hée wants Gods bleſſing, in effect hée wants all: wherefore euen Kings and Potentates are as much bound to vſe this Petition as the pooreſt. For though a man haue aboundance, yet his life ſtandeth not in his riches, Luke 12.15. Bread of it ſelfe cannot nouriſh and ſuſtaine our life, no more then a ſtone, or a chip, but the ſtaffe of bread, Eſay 3. that is, a bleſſing vpon bread.
                  
                     Hagg. 1.6.
                     Thou maiſt eate, and not haue inough; be cloathed and not warme; earne wagges and put it into a broken bagge, if God doe not bleſſe thee.
                     Prou. 20.22.
                     The bleſſing of the LORD maketh rich, and it doth bring no ſorrow with it.
                  
                  
                     Laſtly, héere wée ſée, that all labour and toyle, taken in any kinde of calling auaileth not, vnleſſe God giue his bleſſing. Pſal. 127.1.
               
               
                  A Reaſon of the Order.
                  The reaſon why this Petition, concerning things of this life, is ſet before the other following, concerning a better life, is not becauſe bread is more excellent then remiſſion of ſinnes, and ſtrength againſt temptations, but becauſe men muſt haue a being, and a ſuſtentation by bread in this life, before they can deſire forgiueneſſe of Sinnes, and ſtrength againſt temptations. And becauſe by earthly things wée may lift vp our mindes, and climbe vp, as it were, to the conſideration of heauenly.
               
            
            
               
               Forgiue vs our treſpaſſes.
               IN this & the next Petition, we craue ſpirituall bleſſings, where wée note, that ſéeing there are two petitions which concerne ſpirituall things, and but one for Temporall, that the care for our ſoules muſt be double more, then the care for our bodyes.
               
                  Coherence.
                  Gods will is done, when wée truſt in his prouidence for things of this life, and in his mercy for the pardon of our ſinnes.
                  
                     Reaſon of the order, that firſt vvee craue things for the body, and aftervvards for the ſoule, as though the body were more excellent then the ſoule.
                  
                  
                     The reaſon hereof is, that hée will traine vs by degrées, and draw vs on by little and little to beléeue the forgiueneſſe of ſinnes, which is a great matter, and a very high poynt: he conſidereth our dulneſſe and backwardneſſe, and therefore dealeth with vs as a ſchoolemaſter with his dull ſchollers; which firſt teacheth them eaſie things, and after carryeth them to higher points. For the former petition is a ſtep or degrée to theſe two following, for he that will reſt on Gods mercy, for the pardon of his ſinnes, muſt firſt of al reſt on Gods prouidence, for this life: for hée that cannot put his affiance in God for the prouiſion of meat & drinke, how ſhall hée truſt in Gods mercy, for the ſaluation of his ſoule?
                  The ruler, by the healing of the body of his child, was brought to beléeue in Chriſt. Iohn 4.53.
                  By debts, ſinnes are meant, as Luk. 11.4. where it is ſayd, Forgiue vs our ſinnes: and in Matthew 6.12. where it is ſayd, Forgiue vs our debts.
                  They are ſo called, becauſe of the reſemblance

betwéene them: for euen as a debt doth binde a man, eyther to make ſatiſfaction, or els to goe to priſon: ſo our ſinnes bindes vs, eyther to ſatiſfie Gods iuſtice, or elſe to ſuffer eternall damnation. Vnder the name of debts is contayned both actuall and originall ſinnes.
                  They are called our debts, becauſe they are of our ſelues, and not of God, as Geneſ. 6.5.
               
            
            
               Forgiue.
               TO forgiue ſinne, is to couer it, or not to impute it. Pſal. 32. When our ſinnes are imputed to Chriſt, and his righteouſneſſe to vs, then are wée fully cleared and diſcharged.
               
                  Through whom is forgiueneſſe?
                  Forgiuenes is onely through Chriſt,

                     Rom. 3.24. Epheſ. 1.7. Col. 1.14. Hebr. 9. Zech. 13.1.
                  Vnder this one benefit of remiſſion of ſinnes, all the reſt of the ſame kinde are vnderſtood: as namely, Iuſtification, Sanctification, Redemption, Regeneration, Glorification.
                  This word (forgiue) teacheth that all men are ſinners, and haue néed of forgiueneſſe, as 1 Kings 8.46. There is no man that ſinneth not.
                  
                  
                     Surely, there is no man iuſt in the earth that doeth good and ſinneth not, Eccleſ. 7.22.
                  
                     Who can ſay, I haue purified my heart I am cleane from my ſinne? Prouerbs.
                  
                  
                     Enter not into iudgement with thy ſeruant, for no man liuing ſhall be iuſtified in thy ſight, Pſal. 143.2.
                  
                     If thou O God, marke our iniquities, who ſhall be able to ſtand? Pſal. 130.3.
                  
                     O cleanſe me from my ſecret ſinnes. Pſal. 19.12.
                  Séeing we pray for frée forgiueneſſe, wée are to hold that there is no ſatiſfaction made by vs to Gods iuſtice for ſinne: for to forgiue, and to ſatiſfie, be

contrarie: here falleth downe the doctrine of ſatiſfaction, taught in the Church of Rome.
                  
                  Séeing we ſinne daily, and therefore pray dayly for forgiueneſſe, wée note the great patience and long ſuffering of God, that ſuffers and forbeares ſtill, and doth not powre downe his wrath vpon vs, and it doth teach vs to vſe the like patience towards our brethren that offend vs.
                  Againe, wée may obſerue, that our ſanctification in this life, is neuer perfect, becauſe we craue pardon euery day for ſinne, it is alwayes in perfecting, but neuer perfected here.
                  Where it is brought as a reaſon taken from the compariſon of the leſſe to the greater, thus: if we which haue but a ſparke of mercy, doe forgiue others, then doe thou, which art the fountaine of mercy, forgiue vs: but we forgiue others, therefore doe thou forgiue vs.
                  The Papiſts make our forgiuing a cauſe, for the which God is mooued to forgiue vs: but it is no cauſe, but onely a ſigne or effect, that God doth forgiue

vs, for our readineſſe and willingneſſe in forgiuing others, is a liuely token of the pardon of our owne ſinnes: wée muſt therefore be ready to forgiue others, that we may haue teſtimonie in our owne conſciences that God forgiueth vs: Bleſſed are the mercifull, for they ſhall obtaine mercy.
                  
                  
                     If you forgiue men their treſpaſſes, your heauenly Father will alſo forgiue you: but if you doe not forgiue men their treſpaſſes, neither will your heauenly Father forgiue you your treſpaſſes. Matth. 6.14.
                  A man doth neuer fréely, franckly, and from his heart forgiue others, till hée doe inwardly féele that God hath forgiuen him: but when hée once féeleth that, then doth hée eaſily and readily forgiue his brother, that thereby he may haue more and more teſtimony to his owne heart of Gods loue towards him: for a man is towards his neighbour, as hée féeleth God to be towards himſelfe: he reboundeth vpon his neighbour that which he hath receiued from God, therefore hée which féeleth not

God to be mercifull to himſelfe, will neuer be mercifull to his neighbour. A ſeale doth not ſet any print into the waxe, before it hath it in it ſelfe. A coale doth not warme others, till it be hot it ſelfe: ſo we doe not willingly forgiue, till we be forgiuen.
                  But after a ſeale hath receiued his impreſſion, and is grauen, it doth imprint the ſame vpon the waxe: and after the coales be hot, they heat others, ſo after we féele God to be good to vs, we are good to others.
               
               
                  The manner of forgiueneſſe.
                  Our Sauiour ſayth, Matth. 18. that it muſt be from the heart: therefore wicked are they which ſay, I may forgiue him, but I will not forget him: he may come into my Pater-noſter, but he ſhall neuer come into my Créed: behold the Diuels logick, which maketh Malice to be Charitie.
                  Blinde people play with the Lords Prayer, as the Flie doth with the Candle, till ſhe be burnt: for the more

they pray theſe words, the more they call for vengeance againſt themſelues.
                  For if we be ſo cruell, that we cannot forgiue the offences which men commit againſt vs, which are but as the debt of one hundred pence, with what face can we require of God to be forgiuen the offences which wée haue committed againſt him, which are as the debt of tenne thouſand talents?
                  Looke how often therefore a man doth vtter this petition with a mind deſirous of reuenge, ſo often doth he call vnto the Lord, to take vengeance vpon him for his ſinnes.
               
               
                  Obiection.
                  How can any man forgiue treſpaſſes, ſéeing God onely forgiues ſinnes?
               
               
                  Anſwere.
                  In euery treſpaſſe which any man doth to his neighbour, there be two offences.
                  
                     
                        One to God.
                     
                     
                        Another to man.
                     
                  
                  
                     In the firſt reſpect, as it is againſt God and his Law, it is called a ſinne, and that God onely forgiueth.
                  In the other reſpect, it is called an iniurie or damage, and ſo man may forgiue it.
                  So in the caſe of theſe, as it is a ſinne againſt God, God onely doth forgiue it: but as it is a wrong to our neighbour, man doth forgiue it.
               
               
                  Obiection.
                  Whether a man may lawfully pray this petition, and yet ſue him at the Law who hath done him wrong.
                  A man may in an holy manner ſue another for an iniurie, as a Souldier in lawfull warre may kill his enemie, and yet loue him: ſo a man may forgiue an iniurie, and yet ſéeke in a Chriſtian manner the remedie.
                  But in doing of this, wée muſt obſerue fiue things.
                  Firſt, we are to take héed of a priuate reuenge & inward hatred, which if we doe not conceiue, we not forgiue.
                  
                     Secondly, we muſt take héed of offence, and haue care that our doings be not ſcandelous to the Church.
                  Thirdly, our ſutes muſt be taken in hand to maintaine godly peace: for if all iniuries were put vp, there would be no ciuill ſtate or gouernment.
                  Fourthly, that the parties offending may be chaſtiſed, and brought to repentance for his fault: for if many were not repreſſed, they would grow worſe.
                  Fiftly, law muſt be the laſt remedy, as Phiſitions vſe deſperate remedies, when weaker will not ſerue, euen ſo muſt we vſe law, as the laſt meanes, when all other fayle.
                  
                     The ſumme of this Petition.
                     1 All men are ſinners.
                     
                     2 God onely forgiueth ſinnes.
                     
                     3 He forgiueth it through Chriſt.
                     
                     4 He forgiueth it to them that confeſſe and forſake it.
                     
                     5 We may know in our ſelues, that our ſinnes are pardoned.
                     
                     6 The enuious man can haue no pardon.
                     
                  
               
            
            
               
               Lead vs not into Temptation.
               
                  The Coherence.
                  THis Petition is ioyned with the former, to teach vs, that as wée muſt carefully pray for pardon of ſins paſt, ſo alſo wée muſt endeuour to preuent ſinnes to come: wée muſt not fall againe into our old ſinnes, neither muſt we be ouertaken with new ſinnes.
                  Hauing obtained forgiueneſſe of our ſinnes, we deſire of the Lord to be preſent with vs, that we fall not againe into them
                  Though God forgiue vs our ſinnes, yet he doth not frée vs of naturall corruption, but that ſtill remaineth and is left behind as the very ſéede & ſpawne of new ſinnes: ſo that in reſpect of this,

euery one of Gods children hath his hands full, and inough to doe, to withſtand ſinne, after he is iuſtified and ſanct
                        •
                     fied.
                  Therefore, whereas it may be obiected, what need hée care for temptations that hath the pardon of his ſinnes?
               
               
                  Anſwere.
                  Becauſe forgiueneſſe of ſinnes, and grieuous temptations be vnſeparable companions, for there is no man in this world ſo beaten and buffeted with temptations, as the penitent ſinner, that cryeth for the pardon of his ſinnes.
                  This is the eſtate that few men in the world are acquainted with, for many are neuer troubled with temptations, but liue in all peace and quietneſſe, both in body and ſoule: for when the ſtrong man armed, kéepeth his houſe, the things that hée poſſeſſeth are in peace, Luke 11.2.
                  Whereby is ſignified that the wicked of the World, being poſſeſſed

of Sathan, are not a whit moleſted by him with any temptations, neither néed he trouble them, ſéeing he hath them at commandement to doe what he will.
                  But when a man once begins at make conſcience of ſinne, and to ſue vnto the Lord for pardon of his offences, and ſtill continueth in diſlike of ſinne, and Sathan, then the enemie beſtirreth him, and vſeth all meanes to bring that man to confuſion.
               
               
                  Obiection.
                  Some Chriſtian conſcience may reaſon thus, no man is ſo troubled with ſinne and Sathan as I, therefore I am not in Gods fauour, but am a plaine caſt-away.
               
               
                  Anſwere.
                  If pardon of ſinne and temptations goe together, all is contrary: if thou hadſt no griefe for ſinne, no buffeting of the enemies, the Fleſh, the World, and the Diuell, thou couldſt not be in

Gods fauour, but vnder the power of Sathan: now this great meaſure of ſpirituall temtations is a ſigne rather of Gods loue: for whom God loueth, the Diuell hateth: and where God worketh in loue, the Diuell worketh in malice.
               
               
                  Sence.
                  Theſe words be but all one Petition, which hath two parts, the latter being a declaration of the former, Lead vs not into temptation, how is that done? by deliuering vs from euill.
               
               
                  Temptation.
                  Temptation is all wicked motions, which intice vs vnto ſinne.
                  Temptation is nothing elſe but the entiſement of the ſoule or heart, eyther by the corruption of mans nature, or the allurements of the world, or the Diuell to any ſinne.
               
               
                  
                  Kindes of Temptations.
                  Temptations are of diuers ſorts, eyther of the Diuell, the World, or the Fleſh.
                  Firſt, the temptations of Sathan are not onely innumerable, but alſo moſt ſlie, ſubtile, and pitched in method againſt vs, and framed to euery mans humor.
                  Therefore he is called, the tempter, of his diſpoſition, ſtudy and care, Matth. 4.1. The Apoſtle alſo ſayth, He was afrayde leaſt the Tempter had tempted them▪
                      1 Theſ. 3.5.
                  Our firſt parents had tryall, with the great loſſe of all mankinde.
                  Chriſt was tempted by him, Matth. 4.1.
                  
                     2 Sam. 24.2.Hée draue King Dauid into that minde, that of pryde hée commaunded the children of Iſrael to be numbred.
                  
                     1 Pet. 5.8. Luke 22.32.He is our profeſſed aduerſarie, the roaring Lyon that goeth about, &c. he ſéeketh to winnow vs.
                  Therefore we had néede to take héed

of the traines and traps of this deadly enemie.
                  In the ſecond place commeth the World with her two breſts, profit and pleaſure: and with theſe ſhe carrieth away thouſands.
                  Thirdly, our Fleſh continually fighteth againſt vs, and is our capitall enemie, and moſt deadly foe: hereof the Apoſtle ſaith, I ſee another law in my members, rebelling againſt the law of my minde, Rom. 7.23. Againe, the fleſh luſteth againſt the ſpirit, Galat. 5. From hence ſprings all euill motions.
                  
                     (Lead vs not) or carry vs not into temptation: to be led, is to be ouercome of the temptation when it preuaileth, and wholy gets the victory: ſo as men tempted are brought to perdition, the meaning is this, when we are mooued or inticed to ſinne: Lord kéepe vs that we be not ouercome, and giue thou an iſſue with the temptation.
                  To be led into temptation, is by the iuſt iudgement of God to be deliuered ouer, as bondſlaues to the Diuell, and to our owne luſts, and that oftentimes,

eyther for our vnthankefulneſſe, contempt of his word, ſocietie, nouriſhing of ſecret ſinnes, pryde, preſumption, or ſuch like.
               
               
                  Obiection.
                  God is iuſt, and cannot ſinne: but if he leade men into temptation, then is he the author of euill.
               
               
                  Anſwere.
                  Many fearing to charge God with ſinne, reade the words thus, Suffer vs not to be led: but the Text is méerely playne, Lead, or carry vs not.
                  The Scriptures elſewhere vſe the like phraſes of God: for God is ſayd to harden the heart of Pharaoh, Exodus 7.3. And againe, GOD mooued Dauid to number the people.
                     2 Sam. 24.1. And againe, GOD ſent ſtrong deluſions, that men might beleeue lyes. 2 Theſſ. 2.11.
                  Therefore as God heardened Pharaohs heart, mooued Dauid to number

the people, deliuered the Gentiles into a reprobate minde: and ſo, in the ſame ſenſe, hee leadeth men into temptation.
               
               
                  Obiection.
                  God tempteth no man, Iames. 1.15. therefore he leadeth no man into temptation.
               
               
                  Anſwere.
                  True it is, that in S. Iames ſenſe, God tempteth no man, that is, mooueth no man to ſinne, but as hée ſayth, euery man when hée is tempted is led away, and ſnared of his owne concupiſcence.
                  Gods tempting of men, is after two ſorts, reſpecting the praiſe of his iuſtice, and the prayſe of his mercy.
                  Touching the firſt, he doth ſomtimes, for former euils, throw vs to the Diuell, yet hée is not the author of euill when after this ſort hée leadeth vs into temtation, for he doth it iuſtly for ſome

notable euill which he ſéeth in vs.
                  Touching the ſecond, he tempteth vs for the prayſe of his mercy, when he tryeth and prooueth vs by corrections and chaſtiſements, as pouertie, reproches, contempt, afflictions, &c. In which reſpect,
                        Pſal. 26.2. 
                     Dauid ſaith, Proue me, O Lord, and trie me▪
                      and S. Iames ſaith, Bleſſed is the man that endureth temptation: for after he is tried, he ſhall receiue the crowne of life, which God hath promiſed to them that loue him, Iames 1.
                  In this ſence Abraham and Iob were tempted, that is, tryed.
                  Then we ſée how God tempteth after one ſort, & Sathan after another. God for our good, by humbling and trying of vs. The Diuell for our hurt and vtter deſtruction. Therefore, though God lead men into temptation, yet is he not the author of euill.
                  There be foure reſpects, in which God may be a worker in temptations, and yet frée from ſinne.
                  Firſt, he tempteth by offering occaſions and obiects, to trie whether a man will ſinne or not, as a maſter that layeth

a purſe of money in his ſeruants way, which he ſuſpecteth. This triall is no ſinne in the Maiſter, though the ſeruant ſinne in ſtealing: Thou ſhalt not hearken vnto the words of the Prophet, or dreamer of dreames, for the LORD thy GOD prooueth thee, whether thou loue the LORD thy GOD with all thy heart, Deut. 13.
                  Secondly, God leadeth into temptation, by withdrawing of his grace: neither can this be a ſinne in God, becauſe he is bound to no man to giue him grace, and here is a difference betwéen
                        •
                      the tempting of God, and of Sathan: God holds backe grace when he tempteth, the Diuell ſuggeſts euill motions.
                  Thirdly, euery action, ſo farre forth as it is an action, is good, and of GOD, for in him we liue, mooue, and haue our being: Therefore God is a worker in temptations, ſo farre foorth as they are actions. One man kils another, the very moouing of the body in the doing of this villany is of God, but the wickedneſſe of the action, is from man and the Diuell: a man rideth vpon a lame horſe

and ſtirs him, the rider is the cauſe o
                        •
                      the motion, but the horſe himſelfe o
                        •
                      the halting in the motion: ſo, God is th
                        •
                      author of the action, but not of the euil
                        •
                      in the action.
                  The fourth way, is in regard o
                        •
                      the end, for God tempts his ſeruants to correct and humble them for their ſinnes, to trie their patience, faith, and loue, &c.
                  
                     (Deliuer vs from euill) that is, frée vs from the power of the World, the Fleſh, and the Diuell: ſo euill in this place is onely from the Diuell, but we may take it more largely, for all ſpirituall enemies, as S. Iohn ſayth, the whole world liueth in euill, vnder the power of Sathan and ſinne: our Lord Ieſus likewiſe ſayth, I pray not that thou wouldſt take them out of the world, but that thou wouldſt keepe them from euill. Iohn 17.
                  Theſe wordes therefore, as hath béene ſayd, are an explanation of the former, for when a man is deliuered from euill, he is not led into temptation: the cauſe being taken away, the

effect ceaſeth.
                  The ſumme of all, is this, that for as much as we are by nature ſo féeble and weake, that we are not able of our ſelues to ſtand one minute of an houre againſt our ſpirituall enemies, that therefore God would vphold vs, and ſtrengthen vs by the power of his ſpirit, that wée faint not in this ſpirituall combat: therefore our Sauiour ſayth, Watch and pray, that you enter not into temptation: for the Spirit is willing, but the Fleſh is weake.
                  
                  That there is nothing more weake then man, ſo ſoone as he is left of the hand of God, we haue many teſtimonies and examples in the Scriptures: for thus ſayth the Prophet, The Lord knoweth whereof we are made, he conſidereth that we are but duſt.
                  
                  Chriſt alſo ſayth,
                        Iohn 15.1. 
                     Without mee you can doe nothing.
                  
                  
                     Dauid, Peter, and all the Apoſtles were examples of many infirmities.
                  
                     Dauid, when hauing a little reſt from continually warre, he, by and by, fell into adulterie. 2 Sam. 11.3.
                  
                     
                     Peter, when being afrayd of a Damſell, he denied Chriſt.
                  The Apoſtles, when they forſooke their maſter.
                  If this befell them which were indued with ſo notable graces, what ought euery one of vs to thinke?
               
            
            
               For thine is the Kingdome.
               THis concluſiue reaſon, containeth the cauſe, for the which wée craue all the former things, namely▪ for that they concerne his Kingdome, Power, and Glory: for by the firſt thrée, his Kingdome is made manifeſt, and by the laſt thrée his Power is exerciſed: whereupon followeth the increaſe of his Glory.
               Furthermore, this concluſion is added to encourage vs with boldneſſe,

and aſſurance, to come vnto GOD in Prayer: for firſt, wée know, that hée is able to graunt all theſe Petitions, becauſe hée is a God of Kingdomes and Power. Secondly, we know, that he will graunt them, becauſe they concerne his owne Glory: and ſo is our faith and aſſurance confirmed.
            
            FINIS.
         
      
   