
      
         
            
            
            CHRISTES MIRACLES, Deliuered in a Sermon.
            
            By ARTHVR DENT, Preacher of the word of GOD, at South-Shoobery in Eſſex.
            AT LONDON Printed by G: E. for Iohn Wright, and are to be ſould at his ſhop at Chriſt-church Gate. 1608.
         
      
      
         
            
            CHRISTES Miracles.
         
            
               
                  Iohn. 9. 16.
               Then ſaid ſome of the Phariſees: This man is not of God, becauſe he keepeth not the Sabboth: others ſayd; How can a man that is a ſinner doe ſuch miracles? And there was a diſſenſion among them.
            
            
               IN this verſe is ſet downe a double opinion which the Phariſees held concerning Chriſt, and eſpecially concerning the workes which hee had wrought among them. Some of them haue peremptorilie, and flatly condenmed him, ſaying, that hee was a man that was not of GOD: and they render a reaſon, or rather a ſhadow of a reaſon; namely becauſe he kéepeth not the Sabboth, but their opinion was raſhe, and their iudgement falſe and erronious, procéeding from the malice and hatred of the perſon of Chriſt. Alſo that which they

haue vſed for a reaſon, we haue ſhewed that it is likewiſe falſe: for Chriſt was ſo farre from breaking the Sabaoth, or any part of the law, that he did in full perfection fulfill the whole law of God.
            Now followeth the opinion of the ſecond ſort of Phariſees, which ſayd; How can a man that is a ſinner, do ſuch miracles? as if the holy Ghoſt ſhould ſay, If our Sauiour Chriſt were ſuch a prophaner and breaker of the Saboth, as you ſurmiſe him to be, then it were impoſſible for him, to doe ſuch ſtrange and wonderfull miracles, as we ſée he hath wrought: of this wee haue ſpoken before, & ſhal ſpeake more hereafter, when we haue ſpoken generally of Miracles, of the workes of them, & therefore of the power of God, in working them, & alſo of the power of Angels, of Satan, & of men therein.
            Whereas it is ſaid; How can a man that is a ſinner doe ſuch miracles? theſe men doe inſinuate, that ſinners can do ſome wonderfull miracles in the ſight of men, but to doe ſuch a miracle, as

to cure a man being blinde from his birthe, was impoſſible for them. It is impoſſible that any ſinner ſhould doe this or any ſuch miracles which Chriſt did, wee are therefore to ſhew, firſt, what a miracle is, that euery one vnderſtanding the nature thereof, may make ſuch proper and peculiar vſe of the ſame, as he ought.
            A miracle is nothing elſe but a rare worke, apparently wrought by the ſole omnipotent power of God, cleane contrary to the order and inſtinct of nature, farre aboue nature or naturall cauſes. I vſe ſo many words, that I may ſpeake to the capacity of all the people, wheras otherwiſe I might vſe fewer, we are therefore firſt to know y• it is a worke, for indéed it muſt be in it ſelfe a true worke, déed, or fact, otherwiſe it cannot in it ſelfe, and of it ſelfe, make men to muſe and maruell at it: at leaſt it cannot make wiſe men to maruell at it. If therefore it be a miracle, it muſt be a ſenſible worke, not a worke in ſhew, illuſion or deceit, but a worke in nature, indéed, and in trueth▪
               
If it be but an apparance of a worke, it is no miracle. If it be onely in illuſion of the ſenſes, it is no miracle. It is then true that the illuſions of Satan, are no miracles, for he doth nothing but delude the ſenſes of men, neither is it the celeritie or agilitie of mens hands which are miracles, as of Juglers, which deceiue the people by an actiuitie in continuing the thing which they doe. For they doe not any true worke, but by their dexterity deceiue mens ſenſes. Theſe therefore are no miracles, for euery miracle muſt be a true worke, and fact indéed. I therefore firſt call a miracle, a worke, to ſeparate it from thoſe that ſéeme to be miracles, and yet are not, as be the workes of Satan, and his members, and alſo thoſe that are done by agility of man, which are workes in ſhew, but not indéed. This kind of miracle which is a true worke, hath béene wrought by diuers of Gods children, as Moſes when he was ſent to deliuer the people of Iſraell out of Egipt, did worke many miracles, to teſtifie that he was

ſent of the Lord. He made Frogs, not in appearance, but indéed: he turned the water of the riuer into bloud, not in appearance, but in déed. So alſo Elias wrought myracles, not in ſhew but in déed. So Chriſt wrought miracles not in ſhew, but in déed. For Lazarus being dead indéed, he raiſed him vp againe in déed: when the wine wanted at the mariage, he turned water in déed into wine in déed, as pure wine as any iſſued out of the Uine, and ſo were all the miracles which he did, workes in déed, and not only in appearance. When therefore wee ſée any wonderfull thing come to paſſe, wee muſt examine it, whether it be a worke in déed, or onely in appearance. If it be not a worke in déed, as be the illuſions of Satan, and of men, which deceiue the ſenſes, and do not bring any worke to paſſe, then is it not a true miracle. For euery true miracle which the Lord hath wrought himſelfe, or any of the Prophets, or our Sauiour Chriſt, haue béene true workes.
            Secondly, I call it a rare worke of

God, for of the workes of God, there be ſome which are vſuall, common, & ordinary: as the preſeruation of mankind, is an ordinary and vſuall worke of God, and it is truly ſaid of the holy Ghoſt, that we liue, mooue, and haue our being in the Lord: yet becauſe this is vſuall, ordinary, and common, yea dayly and hourely, (for the Lord doth ordinarily euery day and houre, preſerue men, otherwiſe they could not liue) I ſay becauſe it is ordinary, dayly, and hourely, we cannot properlye call it a miracle, for it doth make men to maruell, to muſe, to be amaſed and aſtonied at it, ſéeing it is ſo vſuall and ordinary among them. For it is the nature of miracles, to make men, muſe and maruell at them: and therefore when as in the Euangeliſts, any miracle which our Sauiour Chriſt wrought, is ſet downe, there alſo immediatly followeth, that the people were aſtonied: therefore that which is vſuall, and common, cannot properly be called a miracle. A miracle therefore muſt be a rare worke of God ſildome

brought to paſſe, and for this cauſe we cannot ſay, that repentance, or regeneration is a miracle, for although repentance be wrought in few, yet is it not properly a miracle, becauſe it is ordinarily, & vſually at one time or another, wrought in the hearts of all Gods children. There be alſo many ſtrange and wonderfull workes of nature, yet becauſe they are not rare but vſuall, and ordinarie, they be no miracles. An Adamant ſtone (wee know not by what force) will drawe Iron to it ſelfe: Iron is heauy of it ſelfe, and of it ſelfe cannot poſſibly mooue from place to place, yet an Adamant if it be aboue it will draw it to it ſelfe, which is very ſtrange and admirable, yet becauſe it is vſuall and common, it cannot be called a miracle. So we may ſée the nature, and power of ſome water, to turne that which in nature is gold, into ſtone: that is knowne to be true by experience, yet no man can ſhew any reaſon, why that water ſhould rather doe it, then any other. Although this be ſtrange &

wonderfull, yet becauſe it is vſuall and ordinary, yet in thoſe waters, it is no miracle: for euery miracle is a rare worke that commeth to paſſe, not ordinarily, but very ſildome.
            This worke is called rare, either in regard of the thing wrought, or in regard of the manner of working it. Firſt in reſpect of the thing wrought: as when the Lord ſent downe Manna from heauen, to féed ſuch a great number of people as the Iſraelites were, this was very rare in regarde of the thing wrought. So when the Lord made the Sunne to ſtay in the element: ſo likewiſe (as we may read) when the Lord made the ſhadow of the Diall to go back.
            Secondly, a miracle is rare in regarde of the maner of working it, as when the water was turned into bloud, it was not a rare thing to ſée blond, but the manner of working it, as namely with a Rod, was moſt rare and was neuer ſeene before. So we do ſée that Chriſts manner of healing the blind man was very rare. Therefore

a miracle: if it be a miracle indéed, firſt it muſt be a true worke, Secondly a rare worke, either in regarde of the thing it ſelfe, or in regard of the manner of dooing it.
            
               Apparantly wrought, &c.
            
            Thirdly, a miracle muſt haue this annexed vnto it: for it muſt not be obſcure, but apparent I meane not to the reaſon and iudgement of man, but to mans ſenſe, that is, to ſome of his ſenſes, or to all of them, without controuerſie or doubting. This we ſhall ſée in all true miracles wrought by god, to be of this nature, namely cleare and euident to mans ſenſes: for either men did féele them, as the darkneſſe in Egipt, or elſe they might touch them, taſte them, or ſmell them. When the Lord brought his people of Iſrael from Egipt, all the miracles which hee by his power had wrought among them were moſt apparent vnto mans ſenſe. As namely when they went through the redde Sea, there he made the waters to deuide themſelues, and to ſtand like mighty mountaines on each ſide

of them, in ſuch ſort, that they did moſt mauifeſtly ſée, and behold the ſame. So likewiſe they ſaw, when Moſes ſtroke the ſtony Rock, ſo that thereout guſhed water. So they ſaw moſt euidently the walls of Iericho fall downe: and therefore if there be any miracle which is not apparent of itſelfe, it is no miracle. Likewiſe what workes ſo euer be done by Satan or any of his Angels, if it be not euident and to bee diſcerned by mans ſenſe, hence wee know that it is no miracle. Let vs by this property of a-true miracle, examine the miracle of the Altar of the Church of Rome, for in the Sacrament of the Altar, after the Prieſt hath ſaid a few words as theſe, (Hoc eſt corpus meum) they teach that there a ſtrange worke is brought to paſſe, for the ſubſtance of the bread which was on the Altar, is gone and is changed into the body of Chriſt: if it were ſo, then indéede it were a miracle: but if it be a miracle, then men may diſcerne it by one ſenſe or other: For let them ſhew me an inſtance where the lord wrought

any miracle which he did not ſubiect to the ſenſes of man, but in this there is no miracle, which may be diſcerned by the ſenſes: for the bread in the iudgment of al the ſenſes ſeemeth the ſame, that it was before to ye ſight, it ſéemeth to be the very ſame in ſubſtance, of the ſame quality and colour that it was of before, it hath the ſame taſte it had before, to the handling it appeareth the ſame that it was before, and hath the ſame ſmelling that it had before, there is not any ſenſe that iudgeth now otherwiſe of it, then it did before, & therfore it can be no true miracle. Indéed if before I ſéeing it to be bread, taſting, ſmelling, and touching it, do iudge it to be bread, ſhould now, ſéeing, ſmelling, taſting, and féeling it, perceiue it to be the body of Chriſt, it were a true miracle: But ſéeing to all the ſenſes, it appeareth one & the ſame that it was before, it cannot be a miracle: but they ſay the outward forme & external accident of ye bread yet remaineth, but the ſubſtance of it is turned into y• body of Chriſt, which though we cānot perceiue

by our ſenſes, yet we are to beléeue by faith. But how did Chriſt himſelfe deale with Thomas, when he doubted of his reſurrection: he ſayd; Thruſt thy finger into my ſide, and feele whether I haue not fleſh & bones, for a ſpirit hath not as thou feeleſt me to haue; he taketh away his doubt by the ſence of féeling: and if this true naturall body of Chriſt were there in the bread, then might we feele it as Thomas did, for Chriſt ſtill retaineth that his true and naturall body, although he be now glorified. In-ſo-much therefore that in the bread there is no miracle apparent to the ſenſes, there is no miracle at all. But this is the difference (in Gods Church) that before it was common bread, ordained, and ſanctified by the Lord, for the nouriſhment of our bodies, but now it is the holy bread, appointed, and ſet apart, and ſanctified by the Lord, not ſo much for the nouriſhment of our bodies, but eſpecially for the confirmation of our faith, and the foode of our ſoules. The ſame alſo is to be ſaid of the Wine.
            
               Fourthly I adde: Wrought by the ſole omnipotent power of God. Wherin I note the workers of miracles. The Lord himſelfe worketh miracles, but peculiarlie and properly by his power, and not by his wiſdom, though both be infinite, and that a miracle is wrought by the power of GOD, I prooue by theſe reaſons. Firſt a miracle is a worke of great power farre paſſing the power of all creatures, therefore it muſt néeds be wrought by the power of the Creator.
            Secondly, it is apparent by diuers places of the word of God, as Ioel. 2. 21. 30. there the holy Ghoſt aſcribeth the working of miracles to the Lord himſelfe. I will ſhew wonders in heauen and earth, ſaith the Lord, feare not O land, for I will do great things.
            
            Thirdly, the holy Ghoſt vſeth this as an argument to prooue, that Iehouah is the Lord, and is onely to bee ſerued. Leuit. 26. Deut. 28. Albeit the Magitians of Egipt could worke many admirable wonders by their owne Arte, and by the inſtruction of the Diuill,

yet they confeſſed that the workes of Moſes were not done by Moſes power, nor by any actor ſkill that was in Moſes, nor yet by naturall cauſes, but by the finger of God, which is nothing elſe but his power. By this argument doth Chriſt prooue, that his miracles were not done by the power of Belzebub: If I by the finger of God caſt out Diuils, by whom doe your children caſt them out.
            
            Laſtly, this may alſo appeare by the conſideration of the meanes which the Lord vſeth in working of miracles. As the ſhadow of Peter to cure diſeaſes. Can any mans ſhadow cure another? No, but the Lord would haue that this meanes ſhould ſhew that the things were wrought by his power. So the Handkercher of Paul did cure diſeaſes, not that there were any ſuch vertue in it, but that it came from the Lord: So alſo did the hem of Chriſts garment: is there any power in the hem of a mans garment to cure diſeaſes? Surely no, but the Lord vſeth that meanes to teach vs thereby that

his power onely doth worke it. Here then we muſt acknowledge, that miracles are wrought only by the Lord, and ſerue greatly to the aduancing of his glory.
            Laſtly we muſt conſider, that a miracle is contrary to the inſtinct of Nature.] Nature had neuer any ſuch inclination, as to bring to paſſe any miracle, as when the water ſtood on two parts, nature had a deſire to make the waters runne, when as then the waters ſtoode, it was contrarie to nature.
            
               The vſe.
               The vſe that we muſt make hereof, is to giue to God that which is his owne, that wee ſhould acknowledge him to be the ſole author and worker of miracles, that either haue béene or ſhall be in the world. If thou giue them to Satan, then doeſt thou conſtitute him, inſtéed of the Lord himſelfe. Art thou the Lords? then know, that

neither Sathan, nor any creature, is able to worke any miracle againſt thée. If thou be his, rather then his name ſhould be diſhonoured by thée, hee will worke miraculouſly, for thy good and preſeruation.
               Further, this ſerueth to ratifie our faith in the power of God. The Diuill is his ſeruant, whether he will or not, he can do nothing but that which the Lord willeth.
               And hereby we hold that our bodies ſhall be raiſed againe at the laſt day. For God is able to worke all miracles: although there be neither bone, ſkin, nor fleſh left, yet hee is able to ioyne fleſh to fleſh, ſinew to ſinew, and raiſe vs vp againe with the ſame bodies, we had before.
            
         
         
            The ſecond part of this Sermon.
            
            Now remaineth ſome-thing to be ſpoken more plainely and particularly of miracles. For as in all other things, ſo alſo in miracles, the Lord vſeth

diuerſe and ſundry wayes of working. For eyther himſelfe alone, and of himſelfe alone, or elſe he vſeth ſome creature in the working of the ſame. As in the creation of the world, hee vſed not any thing out of himſelfe, but in himſelfe, by himſelfe, and of himſelfe alone, he created all things of nothing. So likewiſe in the working of ſome miracles, it pleaſeth him not to admit the vſe of any creature whatſoeuer. As when hée ſtayed the ſunne in the firmament, hee did it of himſelfe without the helpe of any other. So alſo he turned back the ſhadow of the Dyall of Azah by himſelfe alone without the vſe of any other. But neuertheleſſe in working ſome miracles, he vſeth meanes, but eſpecially man for the meanes thereof. As in all the myracles wrought in Egipt, the Lord did worke them indéed, but by the hand of Moſes and Aaron. He deuided the redde Sea ſo, that Iſrael paſſed through on drye foote, but it was done by Moſes. So alſo hee wrought many miracles in the wilderneſſe before the

Iſralites, but by the hands of Moſes and Aaron. So ſome miracles were done by Judges, ſome by Elizaeus, and others of the Prophets. So alſo God wrought miracles afterward, not only by his ſonne, but alſo by the hands of the Apoſtles. So that it is a true point of religion, to holde, that the Lord in working of miracles, doth oftentimes vſe the meanes of man therin. In this doctrine wee are to take héede of theſe two dangerous points. Firſt, that we derogate nothing from the Maieſtie of God, although hee vſe meanes in the working of many miracles. Secondly, that we do not magnifie the Creature, which the Lord vſeth aboue that which is conuenient, Into which many haue fallen heretofore. For the auoyding therefore of them, it is neceſſary to hold theſe two points of Religion: firſt to beléeue and know that the omnipotent power of God cannot be communicated to any creature. For the Lord ſaith, as of his wiſedome, iuſtice and mercy, ſo alſo of his power. I will not giue my

glory to another. We are therefore to hold, that the power of God cannot beſéeme any creature whatſoeuer, no though it bee an Angell of Heauen. Secondly, that wee muſt know, remember, and conſtantly beléeue, that albeit the power of GOD could be communicated to any creature, either in heauen or in earth, yet that there is no creature capeable thereof, no creature is able to beare it. This is euident in the example of Peter, before whome when CHRIST had wrought a miracle, and hee had ſéene ſome ſmall ſight of his glory, he ſayd, Depart from mee Lord, for I am a ſinfull man. If Peter could not abide the glimmering of his glory, and if it brought his ſinnes to memory: inſomuch that hee thought himſelfe vnworthy of his preſence: how much more vnable had hee béene to bears the weight thereof.
            But (may ſome ſay) if this bee ſo, why then doth the Lord vſe meanes in working of miracles? why doth hee vſe men Prophets, Apoſtles,

yea and thoſe alſo which haue no iuſtifying faith, and alſo other creatures? I anſwer, the Lord vſeth them, not becauſe he ſtands in néed of them (for he can worke all things of himſelfe) neither vſeth he them, that men ſhould aſcribe leſſe to him, and more to the creatures which he vſeth, but for to teach vs theſe thrée things.
            Firſt to teach vs, how his Maieſtie doth approoue the meanes whereby things are brought to paſſe: for if the Lord vſeth meanes when as they be of leſſe vſe, much more wil he approoue when the meanes are vſed which haue ſome power to bring things to paſſe. This then is the firſt cauſe why the Lord vſeth meanes, to ſhew that he would haue vs kept, maintained and liue in this world, but ſo, as by vſing ſuch meanes, as his Maieſtie ſhall appoint. Therefore no man ought to neglect and contemne the meanes, leaſt hee oppoſe himſelfe againſt the Lord
            Secondly, the Lord vſeth creatures in working miracles, to ſupport and

vphold mans weakneſſe, who is not able to looke on his Maieſtie, when hee worketh himſelfe. This is plaine in the example of the Iſraelites. Exod. 19. when they came to Mount Sinai, to heare the Lord, there was ſuch thunder and lightning, and the ſound of a Trumpet excéeding lowd, and the Mount all of a ſmoake, becauſe the Lord came downe by fire, they were ſo bereft of their ſences, and were ſo afraide, that afterward they deſired the Lord not to ſpeake to them himſelfe any more, but that they might haue Moſes to ſpeake vnto them, and they would heare him.
            Thirdly the Lord vſeth meanes for the tryall of our faith, of our religion, and conſcience, whether wee will aſcribe the worke that is wrought to the worker thereof, or to the meanes, or partly to the worker, and partly to the meanes, or as ſome doe, all to the meanes, and none to the worker. The Lord tryeth whether we will be conſtant, to aſcribe the power that is in miracles vnto his Maieſtie, for in

the miracles of Chriſt, we ſée how diuerſly they were expounded, albeit they were effected by the finger of God, yet the Phariſees would not aſcribe them to the worker, but ſayd, that hee wrought miracles by Belzebub the Prince of Deuils. This is the corruption of man and want of faith: they are ready to aſcribe though not all, yet at the leaſt ſome part of the miracle to creatures, which are but the meanes, and not wholy to the Lord, who is the onely worker of miracles; for theſe cauſes the Lord vſeth meanes in working miracles, to teach vs theſe things thereby, for all miracles are wrought not for him, but for our cauſe.
            The meanes which the Lord vſeth are of diuers ſorts, but eſpecially thrée. Firſt, ſome meanes which the Lord vſeth in working of miracles, are ſuch as may ſéeme to men to haue ſome power in them, for the working of the miracle. As when Moſes came to the red Sea, he lift vp his Rod, and ſtretched out his hand ouer the waters. So

when he came to the Rocke to get water for the people, he ſtrooke the Rocke with his ſtaffe, which ſéemed to haue ſome power in it, to make the water guſh out of the Rock, as afterward it did.
            The ſecond ſort of meanes which the Lord vſeth, are ſuch as haue not ſo much as an appearance of any force or power, or vſe, in the working of the miracle. Such was the hem of Chriſts garment, the hem of a garment hath not ſo much as an appearance, that it ſhould heale any that are diſeaſed. Such was the handkercher of Paule to cure diſeaſes, what are handkerchers or ſwadling cloutes (as we may aſwell ſay, for the curing of diſeaſes) ſuch was the ſhadow of Peter, where vnto ſome comming were healed of their diſeaſes. Theſe were wrought when the Apoſtles were ignorant thereof, and when they were occupied about other matters. But yet it pleaſeth the Lord to vſe ſuch means, although they haue not any appearance of any power in the working of a miracle.
            
               Thirdly, the Lord vſeth ſuch meanes as are not auaileable for the worke, but ſéeme to hinder it, as in curing of the blinde man, the claye which was made, and layde vpon his eyes, this CHRIST (who was God and man) vſed, though it ſéemed to containe in it a naturall hinderance to the Miracle. Theſe thrée ſorts of meanes the Lord vſeth, to teach vs thrée notable points.
            Firſt he vſeth the firſt meanes to trie the trueth of our faith, to ſée whether we be ſo firme in faith, and whether we will ſo wholy relie vpon him, as that hée will giue all glory to him for the working of the miracle, though the meanes vſed doe ſéeme to haue ſome power of bringing it to paſſe, wee muſt therefore learne to giue all glory to the Lord whatſoeuer.
            Secondly, the ſecond ſort of meanes that the Lord vſeth, is to teache vs, that it is he alone that worketh miracles, and not the creature which is vſed, his ſole omnipotent power doth worke it: Let the meanes doe or bee

what it will, whether it be any creature what-ſo-euer, or no creature, as was the ſhadowe of Peter which was nothing, but the abſence of light. Let vs acknowledge the LORD to bee the onely cauſe and worker of the miracle.
            Thirdly the third ſort of meanes, teacheth vs to giue nothing to the creature it ſelfe which is vſed, which is contrary to the opinion of many ſuperſtitious people, and contrarie to all Coniurers, Sorcerers, or caſters of Figures: Sathan maketh them to thinke that the miracle is brought to paſſe by him, or the meanes which hee appointeth, and not by the power of GOD. But wee muſt acknowlegde that all Creatures what-ſo-euer, that albeit the power of Angels be great, yet if all theſe were ioyned together, yet they were not able to worke the leaſt miracle that could be. This doctrine hath ſingular vſe. Firſt it teacheth vs what a miracle is. Secondly, what a miracle is not: as all manner of appearances are no miracles, whether

they bee illuſions of Sathan, or procéed from the deceipt, ſubtilty, and agilitie of man, none of them are miracles. So the preſeruation of mankind, albeit it bee a true worke wrought by God onely, yet becauſe it is a true vſuall and ordinary worke, it is no miracle, for euery miracle is a rare worke of God.
            Thirdly, it teacheth vs that no worke is a miracle which cannot bee felt, ſmelled, or perceiued by ſome of the ſenſes: when men therefore hold vs in hand that there is a myracle, yet if wee cannot ſée any thing, feele, ſmell, or taſte any thing, contrary to the ordinary manner, there is no miracle wrought. Therefore let the malignant Church of Rome, teach, write, and decrée in their counſels, that there is a miracle wrought in the Sacrifice of their Altar; yet becauſe I can neyther ſée, touch, ſmell, nor taſte any thing but the ſame that was before, it cannot bee any Miracle.
            Fourthly, euery miracle is wrought

by the ſole omnipotent power of GOD.
            If any worke bee done by the power of Sathan, or of any man: or any thing bee done wonderfully by the power of Nature, it is no miracle. If Sathan hath power to doe any ſtrange thing, it is a naturall worke, and therefore no miracle. So alſo of the good Angels. So likewiſe if we ſée ſtrange things come to paſſe in the Heauens by Naturall cauſes, wee are not to thinke they are any miracles.
            Laſt of all, if any thing fall out according to the rare ſtrength and power of ſome Waters, or other creatures, if it fall out by Nature, or if partlye by Arte, and partlye by Nature, it is no miracle. Whatſoeuer therefore is not brought to paſſe by the ſole omnipotent power of God, and that is not contrary to Nature, it is no miracle.
            It followeth now to ſée, how many ſorts and kinds of miracles there be. I meane not how many ſorts there be

in Nature (for ſo there is but onely one true miracle) but in name, and as they are called, for ſo there may be diuerſe, and this I gather out of the words of theſe Phariſees. How can a man that is a ſinner doe ſuch miracles? inſinuating thereby, that there bee ſome miracles which ſinners may doe, yet not ſuch as CHRIST had done: Out of this place then wee gather that in name there bee two ſorts of miracles. One is a true and diuine miracle, which is that whereof wee haue ſpoken before, which is an vnbeceaueable miracle, for it is not done to deceiue any, but to magnifie the worke thereof, and for the good of them for whom it is wrought, and for the profit of thoſe which behold it, it is called diuine becauſe it is wrought by the ſoule omnipotent power of God. Beſides this there is a falſe vaine and deceiueable miracle, falſe I ſay becauſe it is not this, for whatſoeuer is not this, is a falſe Miracle, and vaine, becauſe it cannot haue any good, Godly, profitable and holy vſe to the conſcience

of man, and deceiueable, becauſe it deludeth men that are to diſcerne and iudge of it. This is the miracle which the Phariſees here ſpeake of, the which is granted to bee done by the wicked. Elſewhere in the ſcriptures wee read, who are the workers of this miracle, as namely Sathan himſelfe doth often-times worke it. So alſo his Miniſters do often-times worke the ſame, for the holy Ghoſt teacheth vs, Math. 24. 24. That in the latter dayes there ſhall come falſe Chriſts and falſe Prophets, and ſhewe great ſignes, and wonders, ſo that if it were poſſible they ſhould deceiue the very Elect. Wée muſt not imagine that the falſe Chriſts ſhall worke true miracles, but they ſhall worke ſuch ſtrange and wonderfull things, that they ſhould carry away many after them: nay if the Lord had not decréed in his ſecret counſell to ſaue them that they ſhould neuer fall away, they would alſo deceiue them. Whereby wee may bee admoniſhed, that ſéeing wee are in the laſt age of the world,

that fearefull times are at hand, wherein falſe Chriſts ſhall ariſe and deceiue many. And is not Satan now ſtrong in the hearts of the reprobates? that they will teach falſe doctrines. Now what if Heretickes and Sciſmatickes ſhould haue power to confirme their doctrine by miracles and ſtrange wonders? would not many beléeue in them? Let vs therefore (as Paule taught the Galathians) prepare our hearts, that if an Angell from Heauen teach vs any other doctrine then that which wee haue receiued in the written word of GOD, let him bee accurſed. The Holy Ghoſt alſo foretelleth vs, 2 Theſ. 2. 9. That before the comming of CHRIST to iudgement, ſhall appeare Antichriſt with all power, with ſignes, and lying wonders. The Holy Ghoſt doth before admoniſh vs hereof, That wee ſhould not wauer at euery motion, nor fall away at euery tryall, but bee conſtant, and hold faſt the Doctrine which wee haue receiued from the Lord, by his Prophets, his Sonne, and his Apoſtles: then although

wee bee tryed with Hereticks and Sciſmatickes, and ſéeme to ourſelues and to others to be loſt, yet wee ſhall bee reſerued to eternall ſaluation.
            But ſome man may ſay. If Sathan can worke ſuch miracles, and the Lord would haue falſe Chriſts to ariſe and worke wonders, how ſhall wee iudge of a miracle that is done: whether it proceed from the Lord, or from Sathan and his Miniſters, from a good cauſe and worker, or from an euill, and what wee are to holde and thinke of the power of Sathan, how farre it reacheth, and what it is able to doe. I anſwer, that this is a very neceſſary point to bee knowne, and ſéeing wee haue entred into the handling of miracles, wee will ſhew what miracles can bée wrought by Sathan, what is his power, where it beginneth, and where it endeth.
         
         
            
            The third part of this Sermon.
            
            Now therfore it remaineth to ſpeake of the power of Sathan.
            Certaine it is, and wee are to beléeue it by faith, that the power of Sathan is not equall to the power of GOD: it is not ſo ſtrong, ſo large, and ſo wide: it is euery way infinitly leſſe; there is no compariſon betwéene that which is infinite and that which is finite. If wée compare it with good Angels, it will be leſſe then ſome, and greater then other ſome, as afterward we ſhall more plainely ſée: but if wee compare it with the power of man, it is farre greater euery way: but yet wee muſt know that is a finite and naturall power, not ſupernaturall; for then none could bee ſaued: it is mightie, but yet not Almightie: but that we may better conceiue of it: let vs lée wherein it lyeth.
            All the power that Sathan hath conſiſteth in two points: Firſt in his

knowledge or vnderſtanding. Secondly, in his déed, action, or worke. For according as a mans knowledge is, ſuch is his déed: ſo is Sathans: as his knowledge is great, ſo alſo his worke great. For his knowledge it is to bee conſidered whence it ariſeth, and how hee commeth by it, ſo ſhall wee better iudge of the greatneſſe thereof. Hee hath his knowledge by theſe meanes that follow.
            Firſt from his ſpirituall Nature, for by Nature hee is a ſpirit, and therfore by nature hath the meaſure of knowledge giuen by GOD to a ſpirit which is great. Wee know that there is a greater meaſure of knowledge in man, then is in a brute beaſt, by reaſon of that nature which the Lord hath giuen to man aboue beaſts. So the Diuill is made of a ſpirituall ſubſtance, and of that onely: ſo that hee hath not a body which might hinder him to ſée into the nature, quality, and operation of a ſpirite, and therefore being a ſpirit, he hath the knowledge of a ſpirit. In that therefore he

is a ſpirit, hee hath a greater famili, aritic with our ſpirites, then otherwiſe hee could haue. In regarde therefore of his Nature his knowledge is great.
            Secondarily; the meaſure of his knowledge may bee diſcerned by his creation. GOD created him a good Angell, and gaue him the ſame meaſure of knowledge that hee gaue to other Angels: Looke therefore what knowledge is in a good Angell by creation, the ſame knowledge is in Sathan by his creation. It may bee that hee retaineth ſtill that meaſure of knowledge which hee then receiued, albeit as it may bee thought, that as man by his fall, loſt a great meaſure of that knowledge which hee had by his creation: ſo the Diuill loſt a great meaſure of his knowledge by his Apoſtacie from the Lord. Further it is to be knowne, that the diuil being now fallen, is not of the conſultation of the Lord, as the good Angels are, for they ſtand alwaies before his face, ready to doe any thing that hee ſhall command

them, for the good of the Elect, and therefore they are of the conſultations of the Lord, but Sathan is not ſo, and therefore hee cannot haue ſo great knowledge as they haue, which is a great comfort to thoſe that be the true children of GOD, that the good Angels, by the meaſure of their knowledge, are more able to ſaue and defend vs, then the Diuill is by the meaſure of his knowledge to harme vs.
            Thirdly, the Diuill ſince his fall, hath increaſed his knowledge, both on the things on earth, and of the wayes of God, by long obſeruations and continuall experience, who hath alwayes had experimentall knowledge of the nature of man: for he is well acquainted with the age of men, he knoweth what be their affections, what is their nature, and what is their diſpoſition, hee knoweth what things be offenſiue to men, hee knoweth alſo what pleaſeth them beſt in their young age, what in their middle age, and what in their olde age. And as in theſe things, ſo alſo hath hee experience in

ſupernaturall things. For he remembreth by whom he hath béene reſiſted, and who will not yéeld to him. This then muſt greatly amplifie his knowledge, ſéeing he hath alwayes had ſuch long experience of all things that come to paſſe. As put the caſe there were one man aliue which were perfect in ſenſe, in body, in minde, in reaſon, and memory, and in all the faculties, both of the body and the minde, that had liued from the beginning of the world vnto this daye, and had obſerued all things that had fallen out heretofore: this man would tell ſuch wonderfull things, both paſt and to come, by naturall cauſes, and continuall obſeruation, that I feare me leaſt many would worſhip him as a GOD: therefore the Diuill muſt néedes haue great knowledge, ſéeing that he hath had all theſe. But he knoweth more then any man could haue done: for hee doth not onely know thoſe among whom he liueth, and the things that falleth out amongſt them, but hee goeth about into euery familie and countrie, obſerueth

what is done, and is well acquainted with their conuerſation.
            Fourthly, beſides this hee hath alſo another meanes to increaſe his knowledge. When the Lord commandeth him to appeare before him to render accounts of all the workes that hee hath done, Iob. 1. 16. When the children of GOD, that is the good Angels came before the Lord, Sathan ſtood amongſt them, and the Lord ſaid vnto him, Whence commeſt thou? and hee anſwered, From compaſſing the Earth too and fro: and the Lord ſayd. Haſt thou not conſidered my ſeruant Iob, how there is none like him in the earth, an vpright and iuſt man? Sathan anſwered: It is not for nothing that Iob feareth thee, haſt thou not made a hedge about him and his houſe, and about euery thing which hee hath on euery ſide? but touch all that hee hath, and then ſee whether hee will not blaſpheme thee to thy face. Sathan knew well enough, that man will make ſhew of religion in proſperitie, but in aduerſitie, by impatience would fall

away: For herevpon the Lord gaue him libertie to afflict Iob, in viſiting his body with ſickneſſe, in taking away his children, and his goods: but whence hath hee this knowledge? from the reuelation of the Lord: hee knew that Iob ſhould bee viſited with great ſickneſſe, and looſe his children, and his goods, when he heard it from the Lord, and ſo he knoweth many other things which are to come to paſſe, and after hee once knoweth them, hee goeth to Witches or ſuch like, and tels them thereof, who like wiſe tell others of the ſame before it comes to paſſe, and ſo deceiue men thereby, making them to thinke that they knowe it of themſelues: but neither they, nor the Diuell know it of themſelues, but by reuelation of the LORD vnto Sathan.
            Fiftly, Sathan hath another excellent meanes to increaſe his knowledge which the Lord hath alſo granted vnto men: for they know what is to come by the Reuelation of the Prophets: for if there be any curſe belonging to

the people, the Prophets do denounce the ſame, & make the people to know thereof, by the preaching of the word: whereas therefore the worde is preached, there is Sathan preſent: he obſerueth the doctrine, whether it be of power to bring men from the kingdome of darkeneſſe, to the Lord: from ſinne vnto repentance. If it bee, then is he muſt buſie, either to ſtep it from the Care, or to pull it out of the heart, if they haue once receiued it, as Math. 13. 19. By this meanes therefore hee increaſeth his knowledge, that hee may worke more couertly, and bee the leſſe diſcerned: for hee can turne him-ſelfe into an Angell of light.
            Sixtly, he hath yet another meanes to increaſe his knowledge, and that is by the obſeruation of naturall cauſes. If you ſpeake of an Aſtronomer, he can tell that beſt: if yée ſpeake of an Aſtrologer, he is moſt cunning there in. Yea that which men geſſe at, and as it were groape at in the darke, hee beholdeth and knoweth moſt certainlie, and

can tell any thing that is to come to paſſe by the courſe of the Starres, and other naturall cauſes. If we ſpeake of knowledge in the Artes, there is none comparable to him: hee is moſt ſkilfull in all the tongues, and there is no time that is hid from him. So that by theſe meanes hee hath wonderfully increaſed his knowledge. But ſome may ſay: Hath hee knowledge in any thing, in which the good Angels haue no knowledge? No for they are as diligent for the ſaluation of the godly, as he is for their deſtruction. Pſal. 91. 11. GOD giueth his Angels charge to kéepe Chriſt and all that are his, in all their wayes: nay they pitche their tents about him that feareth the Lord to kéepe him on euery ſide, that no harme befall him any way. And therefore as ſoone as Sathan had left off tempting Chriſt, the good Angels came and miniſtred vnto him all things that were requiſite for him in this life. But doth not Sathans knowledge ſerue to the working of a miracle? No: for it is a finite knowledge,

and therfore cannot produce any miracle, for euery true miracle is wrought by an omnipotent power.
            The ſecond thing wherein Satans power doth conſiſt in his action, or his déed, which as his knowledge is great, ſo it is likewiſe great. Let vs therefore ſee his actions. The déede of perſwading is great, for hee mooued Cam contrary to his knowledge, and contrary to Nature, not onely to reuile his brother, but to kill him, hee talked not with Caine, but by motions and perſwaſions in his heart did allure him therevnto. But it appeareth more great in his firſt action againſt mankinde, as when he came to our firſt parents in the forme of a Serpent (which argueth his great power, that hee can tranſforme himſelfe into ſuch a creature, and abuſe the tongue of a Serpent to that end.) So wee read of his actions alſo in Exodus, when Moſes wrought miracles before Pharaoh by the finger of God. Satan alſo by his Enchanters did worke the ſame miracles, yet not true miracles, becauſe

they did them not by the finger of God, but by the power of Sathan. So alſo 1. Samuel. 28. Sathan comes to a witch, and would alſo tell the witch what ſucceſſe Saule ſhould haue in his battell, that hee tooke in hand, hee came in the ſhape of Samuel, ſo that Saule thought he had béene Samuell. So alſo would hee talke familiarly with men: therefore the Lord gaue a law, that if any one conſulted with a familiar ſpirit, he ſhould dye, which law had béene in vaine, if none had conſulted familiarly with him. So hee was a lyer in the mouth of all the falſe Prophets, although they themſelues did not at that time perceiue it. So he poſſeſſed mens bodies, as in the Goſpell, when our Sauiour had caſt him out of a man, hee ſtraight way went into a heard of Swine, and euen ſo he is able to draw mens bodies after him. Wée may alſo ſée his power by a compariſon with the good Angels. 2. Kings. 19. An Angel of the Lord ſlew an hundreth and 85000. men of Zenacheribs Hoſt in one night. Now the ſame power is in

Sathan by his creation, which hereby appeareth to be very great. So when he carried Chriſts body vpon a Pinacle of the Temple, and vp into a Mountaine to tempt him. And Acts 16. 19. there were exoreiſtes that would caſt forth Diuils in the name of Ieſus, but the euill ſpirit in the man, ranne on them, and ouer-came them, ſo that they ſled out of the houſe naked, and wounded. It is therefore certaine, that Sathan is of a wonderfull power, and that the children of God haue oftentimes tried, both in themſelues, & alſo in others. Among many other I remember one that is worthy remembrance. There was a man in Geneua who féeling ſome-thing to fall out contrary to his minde, and for diuers cauſes which is not néedfull to repeate, blaſphemed God, & deſired that if there were any Diuils they might come and take him away, who was preſently in the ayre, and neuer heard of after, ſaue only that his cap fel off his head, which ſheweth that Satan hath great power: This teacheth vs that mē muſt not be

careleſſe, but muſt looke to themſelues: For Sathan is a roaring Lion ſeeking whom hee may ſooneſt deuoure: watch therefore and pray, leaſt yee fall into temptation. But if Satans power be ſo great, how comes it to paſſe, that many men doe ſo well in this world? I anſwer this power is barred and limitted by the Lord, and that by two eſpeciall limits.
            The firſt limite, is his Nature, for hee is not able to doe any thing then that which his naturall diſpoſition will permit and ſuffer. The ſecond limit is, the will of GOD: for hee can doe nothing againſt the will of GOD. Except the Lord doe eyther permit him or command him, hee is not able to doe any thing at all. As it is alſo in other creatures, the waters ſhould by nature ouer-flowe the whole earth, yet they doe not becauſe it is the will of God. So alſo is it with Sathan, as appeareth, when the Lord gaue him power of all Iobs goods, beyond the Lords will he could not go, for the Lord will not ſuffer him to doe any

thing to his children: but onely th
                  •
                which ſhall tend to their good. Ar thou in miſery, or in any dangerous diſtreſſe, wherein thou art moſt ſubiect to the cruelty of Sathan? bee of good comfort, Sathan is limited, hée cannot doe any thing to thée, but onely that which the Lord commandeth him. But may not Sathans knowledge and power bee vſed? I anſwere it may. God vſeth it in puniſhing, trying, and correcting his children. Againe the Apoſtles vſed his power for they haue deliuered men to Sathan as Paule did. 1. Tim. 1. 20. Himeneus and Alexander, and as hee would haue done the inceſtuous Corinths. But may not la man vſe it in familiar ſort, in talking, barganing, and conſulting with Sathan? No. This is forbidden Deut. 18. Leuit. 20. and wee are commanded to reſiſt the Diuill, and to flie from him, wee muſt not therefore conſult with him. He may oftentimes tell the trueth, but wee muſt not accept it. Chriſt gaue vs example hereof, for hee

ſayd, that Chriſt was the Sonne of God, which was a trueth, yet Chriſt commanded him to bee ſilent, to teach vs, that the truth is not to be receiued from him, for he is the Father of lyes. Héere then all men are forbidden to ſéeke vnto Sathan, to know any trueth whatſoeuer. And therefore hereby wee condemne thoſe that vſe witcherie, by the counſell of Sathan: and in the former places, the very action of conſulting with Sathan, though no harme come thereby, is flatly death to the partie: I would this law were eſtabliſhed in all Chriſtian Churches, then there would not be ſo many witches in that kinde, as now there are. I confeſſe indéed, there be ſome which be counted witches, which indéed are not, as namely thoſe which hurt Cattell, as Oxen, Horſe, Swine, or ſuch like, or elſe children, not from the counſell of Sathan, but by the traditions of other women, by poyſoning them, in dooing nothing but vſing the naturall cauſes thereof. Thoſe I would haue

puniſhed, yet not in the name of witches, but in the name of murtherers. Some men thinke that they may ouerrule Sathan by coniuration, in vſing this preparation, which is ſet downe by ſome of late, that they muſt make a Circle, and in it make Triangles, Quadrangles, and Croſſes, and ſpeake certaine words, as ſaying the Paternoſter, and many other ſuch like things that they may call vp Sathan in what ſhape they will, and hee will appeare and doe for them, that which they deſire. But is Sathan a friend of theirs? can any ſuch things make him obedient to man? Doeſt thou thinke that y• canſt ouer-rule him by this means? No ſurely, but hee rather by this meanes deceiueth thée, and all that are of thine opinion. And thus hée deceiueth them that vſe Characters. So there bee Charmes vſed to get away the Head-ache, and Tooth-ache. But doth the Charme get it away? No, Sathan knoweth before that thy headache ſhall goe away, and therefore

cauſeth thée to vſe that Charme, and thereby would mooue thée to aſcribe it to the Charme.
            But when Sathan whiſpereth men in their eares: how ſhall they know whether it bée hée, or a good Angell that ſpeaketh to them? I anſwer: there be diuerſe manifeſt tokens, whereby thou mayeſt diſcerne this.
            Firſt the Lord doth not now vſe ſuch meanes to reueale his will vnto men: thou art therefore alway to ſuſpect it to be of Sathan.
            Secondly, if it be a good Angell, thou maieſt know by this: for if it bee a good Angell, it will tell thée, eyther at firſt or at laſt, what it is, and for what it commeth, and from whence, as in times paſt the good Angels ſhewed themſelues to Abraham and Lot.
            
            Thirdly, if it bee a good Angell, hee will allure thee to kéepe the written word of God, if hee doe not, then ſuſpect him.
            
               
               The vſe.
               The vſe of all this doctrine is to lead vs vnto God, to acknowledge him to bee our onely Lord and Sauiour, and to embrace the Sonne of God, as our King. In all things therefore wee muſt goe vnto him.
               But whereas it is ſaid: How can a man that is a ſinner doe ſuch Miracles? it may bee aſked whether Gods enemies can worke any miracles? I anſwer: hee that worketh is not againſt Chriſt, but with him: and wee ſée that thoſe which indeuoured Acts. 16. to worke a miracle could not.
               
                  And there was a diſſenſion among them.
               
               Herein we ſée that the Lord doth ſo worke, that Chriſt and his doe finde fauour among their enemies, and that by their diſſenſion among themſelues. Here wee ſée that Schiſme is neither a note of a falſe Church, nor yet of a true Church, heere it is in a falſe

Church. Schiſme ariſeth of the diuerſitie of knowledge and iudgement of men: for all men haue not one knowledge and iudgement, and all ſée not the trueth, and if they ſhould, yet all haue not the like yéelding affection therevnto. Wee are therefore to prepare our ſelues to méet with ſchiſmes, for it is neceſſary that there ſhould be Hereſies, 1. Cor. 11. 10. & that in the Church of God, that thoſe which are approoued might be knowne.
            
            FINIS.
            
         
      
   