
      
         
            
            Strange Hiſtories OR, Songs and Sonnets, of Kinges Princes, Dukes, Lords, Ladyes, Knights, and Gentlemen: And of certaine Ladyes that were Shepheards on Salisburie plaine. Very pleaſant either to be read or ſonge, and a moſt excellent Warning for all eſtates.
             By Thomas Delone.
            
            
               Haud curo inuidiam.
            
            At London printed by R. B. for W. Barley. and are to be ſold at his Shoppe ouer againſt Cree-church neere All-gate. 1612.
         
         
            
            
            THE TABLE
            
               
                  Cant 1. A mournefull Dittie on the death of faire Roſamond, King Henrie the ſeconds Concubine.
               
                  Cant 2. The Kentiſh-men with long tayles.
               
                  Cant 3. Of King Henrie the firſt, and his Children.
               
                  Cant 4. The Dutcheſſe of Suffolkes calamitie.
               
                  Cant 5. King Edward the Second crowning his Sonne King of England.
               
                  Cant 6. The impriſonment of Queene Elinor.
               
                  Cant 7. The death of King Iohn poyſoned by a Frier.
               
                  Cant 8. The impriſonment of King Edward the ſecond.
               
                  Cant 9. The murthering of King Edward the ſecond, being kild with a hot burning Spit.
               
                  Cant 10. The Lamentation of the Lord Matreuers, and ſir Thomas

                  Gurney, being baniſhed the realme.
               
               Cant 11. A new Song of King Edgar.
               
               Cant 12. Of King Edward the third, and the Counteſſe of Salisburie.
               
               Cant 13. The winning of the Ile of Man, by the Earle of Salisburie.
               
               Cant. 14. The Rebellion of Watte Tiler and Iacke Straw againſt King Richard the ſecond.
               
               Cant 15. A Dialogue betweene Troylus and Creſſida.
               
               Cant 16. A Mayde in prayſe of her Loue.
               
               Cant 17. A Louer bewayling the abſence of his Loue.
               
               Cant 18. A ſpeech betweene Ladyes being Shepheards on Salisburie plaine.
               
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
               A mournefull Dittie on the death of faire Roſamond, King Henrie the ſeconds Concubine.
               
                  Cant. 1. 
               To the tune of Flying Fame.
               
                  WHen as King Henrie rul'd this land,
                  the ſecond of that name,
                  (Beſides the Queene) he dearly lou'd
                  a faire and princely Dame:
                  Moſt peareleſſe was her beautie found,
                  Her fauour and her face:
                  A ſweeter creature in this world,
                  did neuer Prince imbrace.
               
               
                  Her criſped Lockes, like threedes of Gold,
                  appear'd to each mans ſight:
                  Her comely Eyes like orient Pearles,
                  did caſt a heauenly light:
                  The Bloud within her chriſtall Cheekes,
                  did ſuch a collour driue,
                  As though the Lilly and the Roſe,
                  for maiſterſhip did ſtriue.
               
               
                  
                  Yea Roſamond, faire Roſamond,
                  
                  her name was called ſo.
                  To whom Dame Elinor our Queene,
                  was knowne a cruell foe:
                  The King therefore for her defence,
                  againſt the furious Queene,
                  At Woodſtocke buylded ſuch a Bower,
                  the like was neuer ſeene.
               
               
                  Moſt curiouſly that Bower was buylt,
                  of Stone and Timber ſtrong:
                  A hundered and fiftie Doores,
                  did to that Bower belong:
                  And they ſo cunningly contriu'd
                  with turnning round about,
                  That none but with a Clew of Threed,
                  could enter in or out.
               
               
                  And for his Loue and Ladyes ſake
                  that was ſo faire and Bright,
                  The keeping of this Bower he gaue
                  vnto a valiant Knight.
                  But fortune that doth often frowne,
                  where ſhe before did ſmile,
                  The Kings delight, the Ladyes ioy.
                  full ſoone ſhe did beguile.
               
               
                  For why, the Kinges vngratious ſonne,
                  whome he did high aduance,
                  Againſt his Father rayſed warres,
                  within the Realme of France:
                  
                     But yet before our comely King
                  the Engliſh land forſooke,
                  Of Roſamond his Lady faire,
                  his fare well thus he tooke.
               
               
                  My Roſamond, my onely Roſe,
                  that pleaſeth beſt mine eye:
                  The faireſt Roſe in all the world,
                  to feed my fantacie:
                  The Flower of my affected heart,
                  whoſe ſweetneſſe doth excell
                  My royall Roſe a hundred times,
                  I bid thee now farewell.
               
               
                  For I muſt leaue my faireſt Flower,
                  my ſweeteſt Roſe a ſpace,
                  And croſſe the Seas to famous France,
                  proud Rebels to abaſe:
                  But yet my Roſe be ſure thou ſhalt
                  my comming ſhortly ſee.
                  And in my heart while hence I am,
                  Ile beare my Roſe with mee.
               
               
                  When Roſamond, that Lady bright,
                  did heare the King ſay ſo,
                  The ſorrow of her greeued heart,
                  her outward lookes did ſhow
                  And from her cleare and chriſtall eyes,
                  the teares guſht out apace,
                  Which like the ſiluer pearled dew,
                  ran downe her comely face.
               
               
                  
                  Her lips like to a Corrall red,
                  did wax both wan and pale,
                  And for the ſorrow ſhe conceiu'd
                  her vitall ſpirits did fayle,
                  And falling downe all in a ſound,
                  before King Henries face,
                  Full oft betweene his princely armes,
                  her corpes he did imbrace.
               
               
                  And twenty times with waterie eyes,
                  he kiſt her tender cheeke,
                  Vntill ſhe had receiued againe
                  her ſenſes milde and meeke.
                  Why grieues my Roſe my ſweeteſt Roſe?
                  (the King did euer ſay)
                  Becauſe (quoth ſhe) to bloudy warres
                  my Lord muſt part away.
               
               
                  But ſith your Grace in forraine coaſtes,
                  among your foes vnkind,
                  Muſt go to hazard life and limme,
                  why ſhould I ſtay behind?
                  Nay rather let me like a Page
                  your Shield and Target beare,
                  That on my breaſt that blow may light,
                  which ſhould annoy you there.
               
               
                  O let me in your royall Tent,
                  prepare your Bed at night,
                  And with ſweete Bathes refreſh your Grace,
                  at your returne from fight,
                  
                     So I your preſence may enioy,
                  no toyle I muſt refuſe:
                  But wanting you my life is death,
                  which doth true loue abuſe.
               
               
                  Content thy ſelfe, my deareſt friend,
                  thy reſt at home ſhall bee:
                  In Englands ſweete and pleaſant ſoyle,
                  for trauaile fits not thee.
                  Faire Ladyes brooke not bloudy Warres,
                  ſweete Peace their pleaſures breede,
                  The nouriſher of hearts content,
                  which Fancie firſt doth feede.
               
               
                  My Roſe ſhall reſt in Woodſtocke Bower,
                  with Muſickes ſweete delight,
                  While I among the piercing Pikes,
                  againſt my foes do fight,
                  My Roſe in Robes and Pearle of Gold,
                  with Diamonds richly dight,
                  Shall daunce the Galiards of my loue,
                  while I my foes do ſmite.
               
               
                  And you ſir Thomas whom I truſt,
                  to beare my Loues defence,
                  Be carefull of my gallant Roſe,
                  when I am parted hence:
                  The Flowers of my affected heart,
                  whoſe ſweeteneſſe doth excell,
                  My royall Roſe a hundred times,
                  I bid thee now farewell.
               
               
                  
                  And at their parting well they might,
                  in heart be grieued ſore,
                  After that day faire Roſamond
                  
                  the King did ſee no more:
                  For when his Grace did paſſe the ſeas
                  and into France was gone,
                  Queene Elinor with enuious heart,
                  to Woodſtocke came anone.
               
               
                  And foorth ſhe cald this truſtie Knight,
                  which kept the curious Bower,
                  Who with his Clew of twined Threed,
                  came from that famous Flower.
                  And whē that they had wounded him,
                  the Queene his Threed did get,
                  And went where Lady Roſamond
                  was like an Angell ſet.
               
               
                  But when the Queene with ſtedfaſt eye,
                  beheld her heauenly face,
                  She was amazed in her minde,
                  at her exceeding grace.
                  Caſt off from thee thy Robes (ſhe ſaid)
                  that rich and coſtly bee,
                  And drink thou vp this deadly draught
                  which I haue brought for thee,
               
               
                  But preſently vpon her knees,
                  ſweete Roſamond did fall,
                  And pardon of the Queene ſhe crau'd,
                  for her offences all.
                  
                     Take pittie on my youthfull yeares,
                  (faire Roſamond did cry)
                  And let me not with Poyſon ſtrong,
                  inforced be to dye.
               
               
                  I will renounce this ſinfull life,
                  And in a Cloyſter bide:
                  Or elſe be baniſht, if you pleaſe,
                  to range the world ſo wide,
                  And for the fault which I haue done,
                  though I was forſt thereto:
                  Preſerue my life and punniſh me,
                  as you thinke good to doe.
               
               
                  And with theſe words her lilly hands,
                  ſhee wrongfull often there:
                  And downe along her louely cheekes,
                  proceeded many a teare.
                  But nothing could this furious Queene,
                  therewith apeaſed bee.
                  The cup of deadly Poyſon fild,
                  as ſhe ſat on her knee.
               
               
                  Shee gaue the comely Dame to drinke,
                  who tooke it in her hand
                  And from her bended knee aroſe,
                  and on her feete did ſtand:
                  And caſting vp her eyes to heauen,
                  ſhe did for mercie call,
                  And drinking vp the Poyſon then,
                  her life ſhe loſt withall.
               
               
                  
                  And when that Death through euery lim,
                  had done his greateſt ſpight.
                  Her chiefeſt foes did plaine confeſſe,
                  ſhe was a glorious wight,
                  Her body then they did intombe,
                  when life was fled away,
                  At Godſtow, neere Oxford towne,
                  as may be ſeene this day.
               
               FINIS.
            
            
               The valiant courage and policie of the Kentiſhmen with long tayles, whereby they kept their auncient Lawes and Cuſtomes which William the Conquerour ſought to take from them. Cant. 2. 
               To the tune of Rogero.
               
                  WHhen as the Duke of Normandie,
                  with gliſtring Speare and Shield,
                  Had entred into faire England,
                  and told his foes in fielde:
                  On Chriſtmas day, in ſoleme ſort,
                  then was he crowned heere,
                  By Albert Archbiſhop of Yorke,
                  with many a noble Peere,
               
               
                  Which being done he changed quite,
                  the cuſtome of the land.
                  And puniſht ſuch as dayly ſought,
                  his Statutes to withſtand:
                  And many Citties he ſubdude:
                  faire London with the reſt:
                  
                     And Kent did ſtill withſtand his force,
                  which did his Lawes deteſt.
               
               
                  To Douer then he tooke his way,
                  the Caſtle downe to fling,
                  Which Aruiragus builded there,
                  the noble Brittaine King:
                  Which when the braue Arch-biſhop bold,
                  of Canterburie, knew,
                  The Abbot of S. Auſtins eke,
                  with all their gallant crew.
               
               
                  They ſet themſelues in Armour bright,
                  theſe miſchiefes to preuent
                  With all the Yeomen braue and bold,
                  that were in fruitfull Kent.
                  At Canterburie they did meet,
                  vpon a certaine day,
                  With Sword and Speare, with Bill and Bow
                  and ſtopt the Conquerors way.
               
               
                  Let vs not liue like Bond men poore,
                  to Frenchmen in their pride:
                  But keepe our auncient libertie,
                  what chaunce ſo ere betide:
                  And rather die in bloudy fielde,
                  in manlike courage preſt,
                  Then to indure the ſeruile yoake,
                  which we ſo much deteſt.
                  Thus did the Kentiſh Commons cry,
                  vnto their Leaders ſtill:
               
               
                  
                  And ſo marcht foorth in warlike ſorte,
                  and ſtood at Swanſcombe hill.
                  Where in the Woodes they hid themſelues,
                  vnder the ſhady greene:
                  Thereby to get them vantage good,
                  of all their foes vnſeene.
               
               
                  And for the Conquerors comming there,
                  they priuily layde waite
                  And thereby ſodainely appald
                  his loftie high conceite:
                  For when they ſpyed his approach,
                  in place as they did ſtand,
                  Then marched they to hemme him in,
                  each one a Bough in hand,
               
               
                  So that vnto the Conquerours ſight,
                  amazed as he ſtood.
                  They ſeem'd to be a walking Groue,
                  or elſe a moouing Wood.
                  The ſhape of men he could not ſee,
                  the Boughes did hide them ſo:
                  And now his heart with feare did quake,
                  to ſee a Foreſt goe.
               
               
                  Before, behinde, and on each ſide,
                  as he did caſt his eye:
                  He ſpide theſe Woodes with ſober pace,
                  approch to him full nye.
                  But when the Kentiſhmen had thus
                  incloſed the Conquerour round,
                  
                     Moſt ſodainely they drew their ſwords,
                  and threw their Boughs to grownd.
               
               
                  Their Banners they diſplaide in ſpight,
                  their Trumpets ſound a charge:
                  Their ratling Drummes ſtrike vp Alarume,
                  their troopes ſtretch out at large
                  The Conquerour with all his traine,
                  were hereat ſore a gaſt:
                  And moſt in perill, when he thought
                  all perill had beene paſt.
               
               
                  Vnto the Kentiſhmen he ſent,
                  the cauſe to vnderſtand.
                  For what intent, and for what cauſe,
                  they tooke this Warre in hand?
                  To whom they made this ſhort reply,
                  for libertie we fight:
                  And to enioy K. Edwards Lawes,
                  the which we hold our right.
               
               
                  Then ſayd the dreadfull Conquerour,
                  you ſhall haue what you will:
                  Your auncient Cuſtomes and your Lawes,
                  ſo that you will be ſtill:
                  And each thing elſe that you will craue,
                  with reaſon at my hand:
                  So you will but acknowledge mee,
                  chiefe King of faire England.
               
               
                  The Kentiſhmen agreed hereon,
                  and layd their Armes aſide:
                  
                     And by this meanes, King Edwards Lawes,
                  in Kent, doth ſtill abide:
                  And in no place in England elſe,
                  thoſe Cuſtomes doe remaine,
                  Which they by manly pollicie,
                  did of Duke William gaine.
               
               FINIS.
            
            
               How King Henrie the firſt, had his Children drowned in the Sea, as they came out of France. Cant. 3. 
               To the tune of the Ladyes daughter.
               
                  AFter our royall King,
                  had foyld his Foes in France,
                  And ſpent the pleaſant Spring,
                  his Honour to aduance:
                  Into faire England he return'd,
                  with fame and victorie:
                  What time the ſubiectes of this Land,
                  receiu'd him ioyfully.
               
               
                  But at his home returne,
                  his children left he ſtill
                  In France, for to ſoiorne,
                  to purchaſe learned skill.
                  Duke William his brother deare,
                  Lord Richard was his name,
                  
                     Which was the Earle of Cheſter then,
                  who thirſted after fame.
               
               
                  The Kings faire Daughter eke,
                  the Lady Mary bright.
                  With diuers noble Peeres:
                  and many a hardy Knight.
                  All thoſe were left togeather there,
                  in pleaſure and delight,
                  When that our King to England came,
                  after the bloudy fight.
               
               
                  But when faire Flora had,
                  drawne foorth her treaſure dry,
                  That Winter cold and ſad,
                  with hoarie head drew ny:
                  Thoſe Princes all with one conſent,
                  prepared all things meete,
                  To paſſe the ſeas for faire England,
                  whoſe ſight to them was ſweete.
               
               
                  To England let vs hie,
                  thus euery one did ſay,
                  For Chriſtmas draweth me,
                  no longer let vs ſtay:
                  But ſpend the merry Chriſtmas time,
                  within our Fathers Court:
                  Where Lady Pleaſure doth attend,
                  with many a Princely ſport.
               
               
                  To Sea thoſe Princes went,
                  fullfilled with mirth and ioy:
                  
                     But this their merriment,
                  did turne to deare annoy:
                  The Saylers and the Shipmen all,
                  through foule exceſſe of Wine,
                  Were ſo diſguiſ'de that at the Sea,
                  they ſhewd themſelues like Swine.
               
               
                  The Sterne no man could guide,
                  the Maiſter ſleepeng lay:
                  The Saylers all beſide,
                  went reeling euery way:
                  So that the Ship at randome rode,
                  vpon the foaming Flood:
                  Whereby in perill of their liues,
                  the Princes alwaies ſtood.
               
               
                  Which made diſtilling teares
                  from their faire eyes to fall:
                  Their hearts were fild with teares,
                  no helpe they had at all:
                  They wiſh themſelues vpon the land
                  a thouſand times, and more:
                  And at the laſt they came in ſight
                  of Englands pleaſant ſhore.
               
               
                  Then euery one began,
                  to turne their ſighes to ſmiles:
                  Their colours pale and wan,
                  a chearefull looke exiles:
                  The Princly Lordes moſt louingly,
                  their Ladyes did imbrace:
                  
                     For now in England ſhall we be,
                  (quoth they) in little ſpace.
               
               
                  Take comfort now, they ſayd,
                  behold the Land at laſt;
                  Then be no more diſmayde,
                  the worſt is gone and paſt.
                  But while they did this ioyfull hope,
                  with comfort entertaine,
                  The goodly Ship vpon a Rocke,
                  on ſunder burſt in twaine.
               
               
                  With that a greeuous ſhreeke
                  among them there was made,
                  And euery one did ſeeke
                  on ſomething to be ſtayde:
                  But all in vaine ſuch helpe they ſought,
                  the Ship ſo ſoone did ſinke,
                  That in the Sea they were conſtrain'd,
                  to take their lateſt drinke.
               
               
                  There might you ſee the Lords,
                  and Ladyes, for to lie,
                  Amidſt rhe ſalt Sea foame,
                  with many a grieuous crie:
                  Still labouring for their liues defence,
                  with ſtretched armes abroade
                  And lifting vp their little hands
                  for helpe with one accord.
               
               
                  But as good Fortune would,
                  the ſvveet young Duke did get.
                  
                     Into the Cocke-boate then,
                  where ſafely he did ſit:
                  But when he heard his Siſter cry,
                  the Kinges faire Daughter deere,
                  He turnd his Boat to take her in,
                  whoſe death did draw ſo neere,
               
               
                  But while he ſtroue to take,
                  his ſweete young Siſter in,
                  The reſt ſuch ſhift did make,
                  in ſea as they did ſwimme,
                  That to the Boat a number got,
                  ſo many, as at laſt,
                  The Boat and all that were therein,
                  were drowned and ouercaſt.
               
               
                  Of Lordes and Gentlemen,
                  the Ladyes faire offace:
                  Not one eſcaped then?
                  which was a heauie caſe.
                  Three-ſcore and ten, were drownd in all
                  and none eſcaped death,
                  But one poore Butcher, which had ſwome
                  himſelfe quite out of breath.
               
               
                  This was moſt heauie newes,
                  vnto our comely King;
                  Who did all Mirth refuſe,
                  this word when they did bring:
                  For by this meanes no Child he had,
                  his Kingdome to ſucceed▪
                  
                  
                     Whereby his ſiſters Sonne was King,
                  as you ſhall plainely read.
               
            
            
               The Dutcheſſe of Suffolkes calamitie. Cant. 4. 
               To the tune of Queene Dido.
               
                  WHen God had taken (for our ſinne)
                  that prudent Prince King Edward away
                  Then bloudy Bonner did begin
                  his raging malice to be wray:
                  All thoſe that did the Goſpell profeſſe,
                  He perſecuted more or leſſe.
               
               
                  Thus when the Lord on vs did lower,
                  many in Priſon did he throw,
                  Tormenting them in Lolards Tower,
                  whereby they might the trueth forgoe.
                  Then Granmer, Ridley, and the reſt,
                  Were burnt in fire, that Chriſt profeſt.
               
               
                  Smithfield was then with Fagots fild,
                  and many places more beſide.
                  At Couentrie was Sanders kild,
                  at Gloceſter eke good Hooper dide:
                  And to eſcape this bloudy day,
                  Beyond-ſeas many fled away.
               
               
                  Among the reſt that ſought reliefe,
                  and for their Fayth in danger ſtood,
                  
                     Lady Elizabeth was chiefe,
                  King Henries daughter of Royall bloud
                  Which the Tower priſoner did lie,
                  Looking each day when ſhe ſhould die.
               
               
                  The Dutches of Suffolke ſeeing this,
                  (whoſe life likewiſe the Tyrant ſought,
                  Who in the hope of heauenly bliſſe,
                  which in Gods word her comfort wrought,
                  For feare of death, was faine to flie,
                  And leaue her Houſe moſt ſecretly.
               
               
                  That for the loue of Chriſt alone,
                  her Landes and Goods ſhe left behind:
                  Seeking ſtill for precious Stone,
                  the Word of trueth, ſo rare to finde:
                  She with her Nurſe, her Husband, and Child,
                  In poore aray their ſightes beguild.
               
               
                  Thus through London they paſt along,
                  each one did paſſe a ſeuerall ſtreete.
                  Thus all vnknowne, eſcaped wrong,
                  at Billings gate they all did meete:
                  Like pleople poore in Graue ſend Barge,
                  They ſimply went with all their charge.
               
               
                  And all along from Graueſend towne,
                  with eaſie iournies on foote they went,
                  Vnto the Sea-coaſt they came downe,
                  to paſſe the Seas was their intent:
                  And God prouided ſo that day,
                  That they tooke Ship and ſayld away.
               
               
                  
                  And with a proſperous gale of winde,
                  in Flaunders ſafe they did ariue:
                  This was to their great eaſe of minde,
                  which from their heartes much woe did driue:
                  And ſo (with thankes to God on hie)
                  They tooke their way to Germanie.
               
               
                  Thus as they traueild thus diſguiſde,
                  vpon the high way ſodainely,
                  By cruell Theeues they were ſurpriſde,
                  aſſaulting their poore company:
                  And all their Treaſure and their ſtore,
                  They tooke away, and beate them ſore.
               
               
                  The Nurſſe in middeſt of their fight,
                  laid downe the childe vpon the ground,
                  And ran away out of their ſight,
                  and neuer after that was found.
                  Then did the Dutches make great mone
                  With her good Husband all alone.
               
               
                  The Theeues had there their horſes kild,
                  and all their mony quite had tooke:
                  The prettie Babie almoſt ſpild,
                  was by their Nurſe likewiſe forſooke:
                  And they far from their friends did ſtand,
                  All ſuccourleſſe in a ſtraunge Land.
               
               
                  The Skies likewiſe began to ſchoule,
                  it hayld and raind in pitteous ſort?
                  The way was long, and wondrous foule
                  then may I now full well report.
                  
                     Their griefe and ſorrow was not ſmall,
                  When this vnhappy chance did fall.
               
               
                  Sometime the Dutcheſſe bore the child,
                  as wet as euer ſhe could be:
                  And when the Lady kind and mild
                  was wearie, then the Child bore he:
                  And thus they one another eaſ'd,
                  And with their fortunes were well pleaſ'd.
               
               
                  And after many weary ſteppes,
                  all wet-ſhod both in durt and myre,
                  After much griefe, their harts yet leapes,
                  for labour doth ſome reſt require:
                  A Towne before them they did ſee.
                  But lodg'd therein they could not bee.
               
               
                  From houſe to houſe they both did goe,
                  ſeeking where they that night might lie.
                  But want of Mony was their woe,
                  and ſtill the Babe with cold did cry,
                  With cap and knee they courtſie make,
                  But none on them would pittie take,
               
               
                  Loe heere a Princeſſe of great bloud
                  did pray a Peaſant for reliefe,
                  With teares bedeawed as ſhe ſtood,
                  yet few or none regards her griefe
                  Her ſpeach they could not vnderſtand,
                  But gaue her a penny in her hand,
                  When all in vaine the paines was ſpent,
                  and that they could not houſe-rome get,
                  
                     Into a Church-porch then they went,
                  to ſtand out of the raine and wet.
                  Then ſaid the Dutcheſſe to her deere,
                  Oh that we had ſome fire heere.
               
               
                  Then did her Husband ſo prouide,
                  that fire and coales he got with ſpeed:
                  She ſat downe by the fiers ſide,
                  to dreſſe her Daughter that had need:
                  And while ſhe dreſt it in her lap,
                  Her Husband made the Infant Pap.
               
               
                  A non the Sexton thither came,
                  and finding them there by the fire,
                  The drunken Knaue all voyd of ſhame,
                  to driue them out was his deſire:
                  And ſpurning foorth this noble Dame,
                  Her Husbands wrath it did inflame.
               
               
                  And all in furie as he ſtood,
                  he wrong the Keyes out of his hand,
                  And ſtroke him ſo, that all of bloud
                  his head ran downe where he did ſtand:
                  Therefore the Sexton preſently,
                  For helpe and ayde aloude did cry.
               
               
                  Then came the Officers in haſte,
                  and tooke the Dutcheſſe and her Childe,
                  And with her Husband thus they paſt,
                  like Lambes beſet with Tygers wilde:
                  And to the Gouernour were they brought,
                  who vnderſtood them not in ought.
               
               
                  
                  Then Maiſter Bartue braue and bold,
                  in Latine made a gallant ſpeech,
                  Which all their miſerie did vnfold,
                  and their high fauour did beſeech:
                  With that a Doctor ſitting by,
                  Did know the Dutcheſſe preſently.
               
               
                  And thereupon ariſing ſtraight,
                  with minde abaſhed at this ſight,
                  Vnto them all that there did waight,
                  he thus brake foorth in wordes aright
                  Behold within your ſight (quoth hee)
                  A Princeſſe of moſt high degree.
               
               
                  With that, the Gouernour and the reſt,
                  were all amaz'd the ſame to heare:
                  And welcommed their new-come Gueſte,
                  with reuerence great, and princely cheare:
                  And afterward conueyd they were
                  Vnto their friend, Prince Caſſemeer.
               
               
                  A Sonne ſhe had in Germanie,
                  Peregrine Bartue cal'd by name:
                  Surnam'd the good Lord Willughbie,
                  of courage great and worthie fame:
                  Her Daughter young, which with her went,
                  Was afterward Counteſſe of Kent.
               
               
                  For when Queene Mary was deceaſt,
                  the Dutcheſſe home return'd againe:
                  Who was of ſorrow quite releaſt
                  by Queene Elizabeths happy raigne
                  
                     For whoſe life and proſperitie:
                  We may prayſe God continually.
               
               FINIS.
            
            
               How King Henrie the ſecond crowning his Sonne King of England in his owne life time, and was by him moſt grieuouſly vexed with warres. Cant 5. 
               To the tune of Wigmores Galliard.
               
                  YOu Parents whoſe affection fond,
                  vnto your Children doth appeare:
                  Marke well the ſtorie now in hand,
                  wherein you ſhall great matters heare,
                  And learne by this which ſhall be told,
                  to hold your Children ſtill in awe,
                  Leaſt otherwiſe they prooue too bold,
                  and ſet not by your ſtate a ſtrawe.
               
               
                  King Henrie, ſecond of that name,
                  for very loue that he did beare
                  Vnto his Sonne, whoſe courteous fame
                  did through the Land his credite reare:
                  Did call the Prince vpon a day,
                  vnto the Court in royall ſort:
                  Attyred in moſt rich array,
                  and there he made him Princely ſport,
               
               
                  
                  And afterward he tooke in hand,
                  for feare he ſhould deceiued be,
                  To crowne him King of faire England,
                  while life poſſeſt his Maieſtie.
                  What time, the King in humble ſort,
                  like to a ſubiect waighted then
                  Vpon his Sonne, and by report
                  ſwore vnto him, his noble-men.
               
               
                  And by this meanes in England now
                  two Kinges at once together liue:
                  But Lordly rule will not allow
                  in partnerſhip their dayes to driue.
                  The Sonne therefore ambitiouſly.
                  doth ſeeke to pull his Father downe,
                  By bloudy warre and ſubtiltie,
                  to take from him his Princely Crowne.
               
               
                  Sith I am King (thus did he ſay)
                  why ſhould I not both rule and raigne.
                  My heart diſdaines for to obey,
                  yea all or nothing, will I gaine.
                  Hereon he rayſeth Armies great,
                  and drawes a number to his part:
                  His Fathers force downe right to beate,
                  and with his Speare to pierce his heart
               
               
                  In ſeauen ſet Battles did he fight
                  againſt his louing Father deare:
                  To ouerthrow him in deſpight
                  to win himſelfe a Kingdome cleare:
                  
                     But nought at all could he preuaile,
                  his Armies alwayes had the worſt:
                  Such griefe did then his heart aſſaile,
                  he thought himſelfe of God accurſt.
               
               
                  And therefore falling wondrous ſicke,
                  he humbly to his Father ſent:
                  The worme of Conſcience did him pricke,
                  and his vile deedes he did lament:
                  Requiring that his noble Grace,
                  would now forgiue all that was paſt:
                  And come to him, in heauie caſe,
                  being at poynt to breath his laſt:
               
               
                  When this word came vnto our King,
                  the newes did make him wondrous woe
                  And vnto him he ſent his Ring,
                  where he in parſon would not goe.
                  Commend me to my Sonne, he ſayd,
                  ſo ſicke in bed as he doth lie:
                  And tell him, I am well appaide,
                  to heare he doth for mercie crie.
               
               
                  The Lord forgiue his foule offence,
                  and I forgiue them all, quoth he,
                  His euill, with good, Ile recompence,
                  beare him this meſſage now from me
                  When that the Prince did ſee the Ring
                  he kiſſed it in ioyfull wiſe,
                  And for his faultes his hands did wring
                  while bitter teares guſht from his eyes
               
               
                  
                  And to his Lords that ſtood him nie,
                  with feeble voyce then did he call,
                  Deſiring them immediatly
                  to ſtrip him from his garments all:
                  Take off from me theſe Robes ſo rich,
                  and lap me in a cloth of Haire:
                  Quoth he, my grieuous ſinnes are ſuch,
                  Hell fiers flame. I greatly feare.
               
               
                  A Hempton Halter then he tooke,
                  about his necke he put the ſame:
                  And with a grieuous pittious looke,
                  this ſpeech vnto them he did frame,
                  You reuerend Biſhops more and leſſe,
                  pray for my Soule to God on hie:
                  For like a Thiefe (I doe confeſſe)
                  I haue deſerued for to die.
               
               
                  And therefore by this Halter heere,
                  I yeeld my ſelfe vnto you all:
                  A wretch vnworthy to appeare
                  before my God Celeſtiall:
                  Wherefore within your Hempton Bed,
                  all ſtrew'd with aſhes as it is,
                  Let me be lay'd when I am dead,
                  and draw me there vnto by this.
               
               
                  Yea by this Halter ſtrong and tough,
                  dragge foorth my carkas to the ſame:
                  Yet is that Couche not bad enough
                  for my vile body wrapt in ſhame:
                  
                     And when you ſee me lye along,
                  be powdered in aſhes there,
                  Say there is he that did ſuch wrong
                  vnto his Father euery where.
               
               
                  And with that word, he breath'd his laſt
                  wherefore according to his minde,
                  They drew him by the necke full faſt,
                  vnto the place by him aſſign'd:
                  And afterward in ſolemne ſort,
                  at Roan in Fraunce buried was he,
                  Where many Princes did reſort,
                  to his moſt Royall obſequie.
               
               FINIS.
            
            
               The impriſonment of Queene Elinor, wife to King Henrie the ſecond, by whoſe meanes the King Sonnes ſo vnnaturally rebelled againſt their Father, & of her lamentation, being xvi. yeares in Priſon, whom her Sonne Richard when he came to be King, releaſed: and how at her deliuerance, ſhe cauſed many Priſoners to be ſet at libertie. Cant. 6. 
               To the tune of Come liue with me, &c.
               
                  THrice woe is me vnhappy Queene,
                  thus to offend my princely Lord:
                  
                     My foule offence to plaine is ſeene,
                  and of good People moſt abhord:
                  I doe confeſſe my fault it was,
                  Theſe bloudy Warres came thus to paſſe.
               
               
                  My iealous minde hath wrought my woe,
                  let all good Ladyes ſhun miſtruſt:
                  My enuie wrought my ouerthrow,
                  and by my mallice moſt vniuſt,
                  My Sonnes did ſeeke their Fathers life,
                  By bloudy Warres and cruell ſtrife.
               
               
                  What more vnkindneſſe could be ſhowne,
                  to any Prince of high renowne,
                  Then by his Queene and loue alone,
                  to ſtand in danger of his Crowne:
                  For this offence moſt worthily,
                  In dolefull Priſon doe I lie.
               
               
                  But that which moſt tormentes my mind,
                  and makes my grieuous heart complaine
                  Is for to thinke that moſt vnkind,
                  I brought my ſelfe in ſuch diſdaine,
                  That now the King cannot abide
                  I ſhould be lodged by his ſide.
               
               
                  In dolefull Priſon I am caſt,
                  debard of Princely companie:
                  The Kings good will quite haue I loſt,
                  and purchaſt nought but imfamie:
                  And neuer muſt I ſee him more,
                  Whoſe abſence grieues my heart full ſore.
               
               
                  
                  Full fifteene Winters haue I beene,
                  impriſoned in the Dungion deepe,
                  Whereby my ioyes are waſted cleane,
                  where my poore eyes haue learn'd to weepe,
                  And neuer ſince I could attaine,
                  His Kingly loue to me againe.
               
               
                  Too much in deed (I muſt confeſſe)
                  I did abuſe his royall Grace,
                  And by my great malitiouſneſſe,
                  his wrong I wrought in euey place:
                  And thus his loue I turn'd to hate,
                  Which I repent, but all too late.
               
               
                  Sweete Roſamond that was ſo faire,
                  out of her curious Bower I brought,
                  A poyſoned Cup I gaue her there,
                  whereby her death was quickly wrought,
                  The which I did with all deſpight,
                  Becauſe ſhe was the Kings delight,
               
               
                  Thus often did the Queene lament
                  and ſhe in priſon long did lie,
                  Her former deedes ſhe did repent,
                  with many a watery weeping eye:
                  But at the laſt this newes was ſpread,
                  the King was on a ſodaine dead.
               
               
                  But when ſhe heard this tydinges told,
                  moſt bitterly ſhe mourned then:
                  Her wofull heart ſhe did vnfold,
                  in ſight of many Noble men.
                  
                     And her ſonne Richard being King,
                  from dolefull Priſon did her bring.
               
               
                  Who ſet her for to rule the Land,
                  while to Ieruſalem he went:
                  And while ſhe had this charge in hand,
                  her care was great in gouernment:
                  And many a Priſoner then in hold,
                  ſhe ſet at large from yrons cold.
               
            
            
               The lamentable death of king Iohn, how he was poyſoned in the Abby of Swineſted, by a Frier. Cant. 7. 
               To the tune of Fortune.
               
                  A Trecherous deed foorth-with I ſhall you tell,
                  Which on King Iohn on a ſodaine fell:
                  To Lincoln-ſhire proceeding on his way,
                  At Swinſted Abbey one whole night he lay.
               
               
                  There did the King appoſe his wellcome good,
                  But much deceipt lies vnder an Abbots Hood.
                  There did the King himſelfe in ſafety thinke,
                  But there the King receiued his lateſt drinke.
               
               
                  Great cheare they made vnto his royall Grace,
                  While he remaind a gueſt within that place:
                  But while they ſmilde and laughed in his ſight,
                  They wrought great treaſon ſhadowed with delight
               
               
                  
                  A flat fact Monke comes with a gloſing tale,
                  To giue the King a Cup of ſpiced Ale
                  A deadlier drought was neuer offered man:
                  Yet this falſe Monke vnto the King began.
               
               
                  Which when the King (without miſtruſt) did ſee,
                  He tooke the Cup of him moſt couragiouſly:
                  But while he held the poyſoned cupe in hand,
                  Our Noble King amazed much did ſtand.
               
               
                  For caſting downe by chance his Princely eyes,
                  On pretious Iewels which he had full nye:
                  He ſaw the culloure of each Pretious ſtone,
                  Moſt ſtrangely turne, and alter one by one.
               
               
                  Their orient brightneſſe, to a pale dead hue,
                  Were changed quite, the cauſe no perſon knew:
                  And ſuch a ſweate did ouer ſpread them all,
                  And ſtood like dew which on faire flowers fall.
               
               
                  And hereby was their pretious natures tride,
                  For Pretious-ſtones foule poyſon cannot bide,
                  But through our King beheld their colour pale,
                  Miſtruſted not the poyſon in the Ale.
               
               
                  For why, the Monke the taſte before him tooke,
                  (Nor knew the King how ill he did it brooke)
                  And therefore he a harty draught did take,
                  Which of his life a quicke diſpatch did make.
               
               
                  Th'infectious drinke fumde vp into his head,
                  And throught the Veines in the heart it ſpread:
                  Diſtempering the pure vnſpotted braine,
                  
                     That doth in man his memorie maintaine.
               
               
                  Then felt the King an extreame griefe to grow,
                  Through all his intrails, being infected ſo:
                  Whereby he knew through anguiſh which he felt
                  The Monke with him moſt traiterouſly had delt.
               
               
                  The grones he gaue did make all men to wonder'
                  He caſt as if his heart would burſt in ſunder:
                  And ſtill he cald, while he thereon did thinke,
                  For the falſe Monk which brought ye
                      deadly drinke.
               
               
                  And then his Lords went ſearching round about.
                  In euery place to find the Traytor out:
                  At length they found him dead as any ſtone,
                  Within a corner lying all alone.
               
               
                  For hauing taſted of that poyſoned Cup,
                  Whereof our King the reſidue drunke vp:
                  The enuious Monke himſelfe to death did bring,
                  That he thereby might kill our royall King,
               
               
                  But when the King with (wonder) heard them tell,
                  The Monkes body did with poyſon ſwell:
                  Why then my Lords, full quickly now (quoth he)
                  A breatleſſe King you ſhall among you ſee.
               
               
                  Behold he ſaid, My Vaines in peeces cracke:
                  A grieuous torment feele I in my backe:
                  And by this poyſon deadly and accurſt,
                  I feele my heart ſtringes ready for to burſt.
               
               
                  With that his eyes did turne within his head:
                  A pale dead coulour through his face did ſpread:
                  
                     And lying gaſping with a colde faint breath,
                  The royall King was ouercome by death.
               
               
                  His mournfull Lords wich ſtood about him then,
                  With all their force and troups of warlike men,
                  To Worceſter the Corpes they did conuey:
                  With drum and trumpet marching all the way.
               
               
                  And in the faire Cathedrall Chuch I finde,
                  They buried him according to their minde:
                  Moſt pompeouſly beſt fitting for a King,
                  Who were applauded greatly for this thing.
               
            
            
               The cruell impriſonment of King Edward the ſecond, at the Caſtle of Barkeley the 22. of September. 1327. Cant. 8. 
               To the tune of, Labandela ſhot.
               
                  WHen Iſabell faire Englands Queene
                  in wofull warres had victorious beene:
                  Our comely King, her husband deare,
                  ſubdued by ſtrength as did appeare,
                  By her was ſent to priſon ſtrong,
                  for hauing done his crountry wrong,
                  In Barkeley Caſtle caſt was he,
                  denyed of Royall dignitie:
                  Where he was kept in wofull wiſe,
                  
                     his Queene did him ſo much deſpiſe.
               
               
                  There did he liue in vvofull ſtate,
                  ſuch is a Womans deadly hate;
                  vvhen fickle fancie follovves change,
                  and luſtfull thoughts delight to range,
                  Lord Mortimer was ſo in minde,
                  the Kinges ſweete loue was left behinde:
                  And none vvas knovvne a greater foe,
                  vnto King Edvvard in his woe,
                  Then Iſabell his crowned Queene,
                  as by the ſequell ſhall be ſeene.
               
               
                  While he in Priſon poorely lay,
                  a Parliament was held ſtraight way:
                  What time his foes apeace did bring
                  billes of complaint againſt the King,
                  So that the Nobles of the Land,
                  vvhen they the matter throughtly ſcand,
                  Pronounced them theſe ſpeeches plaine,
                  he was vnworthy for to raigne,
                  Therefore they made a flat decree
                  he ſhould foorthwith deſpoſed be.
               
               
                  And his Sonne Edward young of yeares
                  was iudged by the noble Peeres
                  Moſt meete to weare the Princely Crowne,
                  his Father being thus puld downe.
                  Which words when as the Queene did heare,
                  (diſſemblingly, as did appeare)
                  She wept, ſhe waild, and wrong her hands,
                  
                     before the Lords whereas ſhe ſtands,
                  Which when the Prince her Sonne did ſee,
                  he ſpake theſe words moſt curteouſly.
               
               
                  My ſweete Queene Mother weepe not ſo,
                  thinke not your Sonne will ſeeke your woe:
                  Though Engliſh Lords chooſe me their King,
                  my owne deare Father yet liuing:
                  Thinke not thereto I will conſent,
                  except my father be content,
                  And with good will his Crowne reſigne
                  and graunt it freely to be mine:
                  Wherefore Queene mother thinke no ill
                  in mee, or them, for their good will.
               
               
                  Then diuers Lordes without delay,
                  went to the King whereas he lay,
                  Declaring how the matter ſtood,
                  and how the Peeres did thinke it good
                  To chooſe his Sonne, their King to be,
                  if that he would thereto agree:
                  For to reſigne the Princely Crowne,
                  and all the title of renowne:
                  If otherwiſe, they told him plaine,
                  a ſtranger ſhould the ſame attaine.
               
               
                  This dolefull tidinges (moſt vnkind)
                  did ſore afflict King Edvvards minde,
                  But vvhen he ſavv no remedie,
                  he did vnto their vvilles agree:
                  And bitterly he did lament,
                  
                     ſaying the Lord this Plague hath ſent,
                  For his offence and vanitie,
                  which he would ſuffer patiently:
                  Beſeeching all the Lords, at laſt.
                  for to forgiue him all was paſt,
               
               
                  When thus he was depriued quite,
                  of that which was his lawfull right
                  In Priſon was he kept full cloſe,
                  without all pittie or remorce:
                  And thoſe that ſhewd him fauour ſtill,
                  were taken from him with ill will
                  Which when the Earle of Kent did heare,
                  who was in bloud to him full neere,
                  He did intreat moſt earneſtly
                  for his releaſe and libertie.
               
               
                  His wordes did much the Queene diſpleaſe,
                  who ſayd he liu'd too much at eaſe,
                  Vnto the Biſhop ſhe did goe,
                  of Hereford, his deadly foe,
                  And cruell Letters made him write
                  vnto his Keepers with deſpight,
                  You are to kind to him quoth ſhe.
                  hence foorth more ſtraighter looke you be:
                  And in their wrighting ſubtilly,
                  they ſent them word that he ſhould die.
               
               
                  The Lord Matreuers all diſmayd,
                  vnto ſir Thomas Gurney ſaid,
                  The Queene is much diſpleaſ'd quoth hee,
                  
                     for Edwards too much liberty:
                  And by her Letters doth bewray,
                  that ſoone heſt all be made away.
                  Tis beſt (Sir Thomas then replide)
                  the Queenes wiſh ſhould not be denide:
                  whereby we ſhall haue her good will,
                  and keepe our ſelues in credite ſtill.
               
            
            
               How the King was poyſoned, and yet hee eſcaped: and afterward how when they ſaw thereby he was not diſpatched of life they locked him in a moſt noyſome filthy place, that with the ſtincke thereof he might be choaked: and when that preuailed not, how they thruſt a hotte burning Spitte into his Fundament till they had burnt his Bowels within his Body, whereof he dyed. Cant. 9. 
               To the tune of, How can the Tree.
               
                  THe Kings curſt Keepers ayming at reward,
                  hoping for fauour of the furiours Queene,
                  On wretched Edward had they no regard.
                  far from their hearts was mercy mooued cleene,
                  Wherefore they mingle Poyſon with his meate,
                  which made the man moſt fearefull for to eate.
               
               
                  For by the ſtate he often times ſuſpected,
                  the venome couched in a daintie diſh:
                  Yet his faire Body was full ſore infected,
                  ſo ill they ſpiced both his Fleſh and Fiſh,
                  But his ſtrong nature all their craft beguiles,
                  
                     the Poyſon breaking forth in Blaines and Biles.
               
               
                  An vgly ſcabbe ore-ſpreads his lilly ſkinne,
                  foule Botches breake vpon his manly face,
                  Thus ſore without, and ſorrowfull within,
                  the diſpiſ'd man doth liue in wofull caſe,
                  Like to a Lazer did he then abide,
                  that ſhewes his ſores a long the high waies ſide.
               
               
                  But when this practiſe proou'd not to their minde
                  and that they ſaw he liu'd in their deſpight:
                  An other damnd, deuice then did they finde,
                  by ſtinking ſauours for to choake him quite:
                  In an odde corner did they locke him faſt,
                  hard by the which, their Carrion they did caſt.
               
               
                  The ſtinck whereof might be compar'd wel-nie,
                  to that foule Lake where curſed Sodome ſtood,
                  That poyſoned Birdes which ouer it did flie,
                  euen by the ſauour of that filthy mudde:
                  Euen ſo the ſmell of that corrupted Den,
                  was able for to choake ten thouſand men.
               
               
                  But all in vaine, it would not doe (God wot)
                  his good complexion ſtill droue out the ſame:
                  Like to the boyling of a ſeething Pot,
                  that caſtes the ſcamme into the fiery flame,
                  Thus ſtill he liu'd, and liuing ſtill they ſought,
                  
                     his death, whoſe downefall was already wrought.
               
               
                  Lothing his life, at laſt his Keepers came,
                  into his Chamber in the dead of night,
                  And without noyſe, they entred ſoone the ſame,
                  with weapons drawne, & torches burning bright,
                  Where the poore priſoner faſt a ſleepe in bed,
                  lay on his belly, nothing vnder's head.
               
               
                  The which aduantage, when the murderers ſaw,
                  a heauie Table on him they did throw,
                  Wherewith awakt his breath he ſcant could drawe
                  with vvaight thereof they kept him vnder ſo,
                  And turning vp the cloathes aboue his hips,
                  to hold his legges a couple quickly skips.
               
               
                  Then came the Murtherers one a horne had got,
                  which far into his fundament downe he thruſt,
                  An other with a Spit all burning hot,
                  the ſame quite through the horne he ſtrongly puſht
                  Among his intrailes in moſt cruell wiſe,
                  forcing heereby moſt lamentable cryes.
               
               
                  And vvhile vvithin his body they did keepe,
                  the burning ſpit ſtill rovvling vp and dovvne,
                  Moſt mournefull the murthered man did vveepe.
                  vvhoſe vvailefull noiſe vvakt many in the tovvne
                  Who geſſing by his cries, his death drevv neere,
                  tooke great compaſſion on the noble peere.
               
               
                  And at vvhich bitter ſcreeke vvhich did make,
                  
                     they praid to God for to receiue his ſoule:
                  His ghaſtly grones inforſt their hearts to ake,
                  yet none durſt goe cauſe the Bell to towle.
                  Ha mee poore man, alacke, alacke he cryed,
                  and long it was before the time he dyed.
               
               
                  Strong was his heart, and long it was God knowes,
                  ere it would ſtoope vnto the ſtroke of Death:
                  Firſt was it wounded with a thouſand woes,
                  before he did reſigne his vitall breath:
                  And beeing murdred thus as you do heare,
                  no outward hurt vpon him did appeare.
               
               
                  This cruell murder being brought to paſſe
                  the Lord Matreuers to the court did hie:
                  To ſhew the Queene her will performed was.
                  great recompence he thought to get thereby,
                  But when the Queene the ſequell vnderſtands,
                  diſembling ſhe weepes and wrings her hands.
               
               
                  Accurſed traytor, haſt thou ſlaine (quoth ſhe)
                  my noble wedded Lord in ſuch a ſort,
                  Shame and confuſion euer light on thee,
                  oh how I greeue to heere this vile report:
                  Hence curſed catiue from my ſight (ſhe ſaid)
                  that hath of mea wofull widdow made.
               
               
                  Then all a baſht, Matreuers goes his way,
                  the ſaddeſt man that euer life did beare:
                  And to Sir Thomas Gurney did bewray,
                  What bitter ſpeech the Queene did giue him there
                  Then did the Queene outlaw them both together,
                  
                     and baniſht them faire Englands bounds for euer.
               
               
                  Thus the diſſembling Queene did ſeeke to hide,
                  the heynous act by her owne meanes effected:
                  The knowledge of the deed ſhe ſtill denide,
                  that ſhe of murder might not be ſuſpected:
                  But yet for all the ſubtilty ſhe wrought.
                  the trueth vnto the world was after brought.
               
               FINIS.
            
            
               The dolefull lamentation of the Lord Matreuers, and Sir Thomas Gurney, being baniſhed the realme. Cant 9.
               To the tune of Light of loue.
               
                  ALas that euer that day we did ſee,
                  that falſe ſmiling fortune ſo ficke ſhould be,
                  Our miſeries are many, our woes without end:
                  to purchaſe vs fauour we both did offend:
                  Our deedes haue deſerued both ſorrow and ſhame,
                  but woe worth the perſons procured the ſame,
                  Alacke, and alacke, with griefe may vve cry,
                  that euer vve forced King Edvvard to dye.
                  The Biſhop of Hereford, ill may he fare,
                  he vvrot vs a letter rare
                  To Kill princely Edvvard: feare not it is good,
                  thus much by his letter vve then vnderſtood,
                  
                     But curſt be the time that we tooke it in hand,
                  to follow ſuch councell and wicked commaund,
                  Alacke and alacke, with griefe we may crye,
                  that euer we forced King Edward to dye,
               
               
                  Forgiue vs ſweete Sauiour tha
                        •
                      damnable deed,
                  which cauſeth with ſorrow our harts for to bleed
                  And take compaſſion vpon our diſtreſſe,
                  put farre from thy preſence our great wickednes
                  With teares all bedewed for mercy we cry,
                  and do not the penitent mercy deny.
                  Alacke, and alacke, with griefe we may ſay,
                  that euer we made King Edward away.
               
               
                  For this haue we loſt our goods and our land,
                  our Caſtles and Towers ſo ſtately that ſtand:
                  Our Ladies and babies are turn'd out of doore,
                  like comfortleſſe caitiues both naked and poore,
                  Both friendleſſe and fatherleſſe do they complaine,
                  for gone are their comforts that ſhould them maintaine
                  Alacke, and alacke and alas may we cry,
                  that euer we forced King Edward to dye.
                  & while they go wringing their hands vp & downe:
                  in ſeeking for ſuccour from towne to towne
                  All wrapped in wretchedneſſe do we remaine,
                  tormented, perplexed in dolour and paine▪
                  
                  Deſpiſed, diſdained and baniſhed quite,
                  the coaſte of our country ſo ſweete to our ſight,
                  Alacke, and alacke alas may we cry,
                  that euer we forced King Edward to die.
                  
                     thē farevvell faire England vvherein vve vvere borne
                  our friends & our kindred vvill hold vs in ſcorne,
                  Our honours and dignities quite haue vve loſt,
                  both profit and pleaſuere, our fortune hath croſt,
                  Our parkes and our chaſes our manſions ſo faire
                  our Iems and our Ievxels moſt precious and rare,
                  Alacke, and alacke, and alas may vve cry,
                  that euer vve forced King Edvvard to die.
               
               
                  Then farevvell deere Ladyes and moſt louing vviues
                  might vve mend your miſeries vvith loſſe of our liues
                  Then our ſilly children vvhich begs at your hand
                  in griefe and callamities long ſhould not ſtand:
                  Nor yet in their Country deſpiſed ſhould bee,
                  that lately was honored of euery degree,
                  Alacke, and alacke, and alas we may crie.
                  that euer we forced King Edward to die.
               
               
                  In Countries vnknowne we range too and fro,
                  cloying mens eares with report of our vvoe▪
                  
                  Our food is vvild berries, greene banks are our beds,
                  the Trees ſerue for houſes to couer our heads,
                  Brovvne bread to our taſt is dainty and ſvveete,
                  our Drinke is cold vvater tooke vp at our feete:
                  Alacke, and alacke, and alas vve may crie.
                  that euer vve forced King Edvvard to die.
               
               
                  Thus hauing long vvandred in hunger and cold,
                  deſpiſing liues ſafety moſt deſperate and bould:
                  Sir T. Gurney tovvard England doth goe,
                  for loue of his Lady diſtreſſed vvith vvoe,
                  
                     Saying how happy and bleſſed were I,
                  to ſee my ſweet Children and wife ere I die:
                  Alacke, and alacke and alas we may cry,
                  that euer we forced King Edward to die.
               
               
                  But three yeares after his wofull exile,
                  behold how falſe fortune his thoughts doth beguile
                  Comming toward England, was tooke by the way
                  and leaſt that he ſhould the chiefe murderers bewray
                  Commaundement was ſent by one called Lea.
                  he ſhould be beheaded foorthwith on the Sea,
                  Alacke, and alacke, and alas did he crie,
                  that euer we forced King Edward to die,
               
               
                  Thus was Sir Thomas diſpatched of life,
                  in comming to viſit his ſorrowfull wife:
                  Who was cut off from his wiſhed deſire,
                  which he in his heart ſo much did require:
                  And neuer his Lady againe did he ſee,
                  nor his poore children in their miſery,
                  Alacke, and alacke, and alas did he cry,
                  that euer we forced King Edward to dye.
               
               
                  The Lord Matreuers (the Story doth tell)
                  in Germany after long time did he dvvell,
                  In ſecret manner for feare to be ſeene,
                  by any perſons that fauoured the Queene:
                  And there at laſt in great miſery,
                  he ended his life moſt penitently,
                  Alacke, and alacke, and alas did he ſay,
                  that euer vve made King Edvvard avvay.
               
            
            FINIS.
         
         
            
            The ſecond part of Strange Hiſtories, or Songs and Sonnets.
            
               A new Song of King Eegar of England, how he was depriued of a Lady which he Loued by a Knight of his Court. Cant 10. 
               To be ſung in the old ancient ſort: or elſe to the tune of Labandalaſhot.
               
                  WHen as King Edgar did gouerne this land,
                  a downe, downe, downe, downe downe,
                  And in the ſtrength of his yeares did ſtand,
                  call him a downe a.
                  Much praiſe was ſpread of a gallant Dame,
                  which did through England carry fame,
                  And ſhe is a Lady of high degree,
                  the Earle of Deuonſhires daughter was ſhe.
               
               
                  The King which lately had buried the Queene,
                  and that long time had a widdower beene,
                  Hearing the praiſe of that gallant maide,
                  vpon her beauty his loue he laid,
                  And in his ſighes he would often ſay,
                  I will go ſend for that Lady gay,
                  Yea I will ſend for that Lady bright,
                  
                     which is my treaſure and hearts delight.
               
               
                  Whoſe beauty like Phoebus beames
                  doth gliſter through all chriſtian realmes
                  Then to himſelfe he would reply,
                  and ſay how fond a Prince am I,
                  To caſt my loue ſo baſe and low:
                  and on a Girle I do not know:
                  King Edgar will his fancy frame,
                  to loue ſome princely peareleſſe dame.
               
               
                  The Daughter of ſome royall King.
                  that may a worthy Dowry bring:
                  Whoſe matchleſſe beauty brought in place▪
                  
                  may Eſtrelds colour quite diſgrace.
                  But ſenceleſſe man what doe I meane,
                  vnto a broken Reede to leane,
                  And what fond fury doth me mooue,
                  thus to abaſe my deareſt loue.
               
               
                  Whoſe viſage grac'd with heauenly hue,
                  doth Helens honour quite ſubdue:
                  The glory of her beauties pride,
                  ſweete Eſtrelds fauour doth deride,
                  Then pardon my vnſeemely ſpeech,
                  deere loue and Lady I beſeech.
                  And I my thoughts henceforth will frame▪
                  
                  to ſpread the honour of thy name.
               
               
                  Then vnto him he called a Knight,
                  which was moſt truſty in his ſight:
                  And vnto him thus did he ſay,
                  
                     to Earle Orgarus goe thy way:
                  And aſke for Eſtrild comely dame
                  whoſe beauty runnes ſo farre by fame:
                  And if thou finde her comely grace,
                  as fame hath ſpread in euery place.
               
               
                  Then tell her father ſhe ſhall be,
                  my crowned Queene if ſhe agree:
                  The Knight in meſſage did proceede,
                  and into Deuonſhire went with ſpeede,
                  But when he ſaw the Lady bright,
                  he was ſo rauiſhed at her ſight:
                  That nothing could his paſſions mooue,
                  except he might obtaine her loue.
               
               
                  And day and night while he there ſtaid,
                  he courted ſtill that gallant maide,
                  And in his ſuite did ſhew his skill,
                  that at the length wonne her good will,
                  Forgetting quite the duty tho,
                  which he vnto the King did owe:
                  Then comming home vnto his grace,
                  he told him with diſſembling face,
               
               
                  That theſe reporters were too blame,
                  that ſo aduanſt the maidens name:
                  For I aſſure your Grace quoth he,
                  ſhe is as other women be,
                  Her beauty of ſuch great report,
                  no better then the common ſort.
                  And farre vnmeete in euerything,
                  
                     to match with ſuch a noble King.
               
               
                  But though her face be nothing faire,
                  yet ſith ſhe is her fathers heyre,
                  Perhaps ſome Lord of high degree,
                  would very glad her husband be:
                  And if your Grace would giue conſent:
                  I could my ſelfe be well content,
                  The Damſell for my wife to take,
                  for her great land and liuings ſake,
               
               
                  The King whom thus he did deceaue,
                  incontinent did giue him leaue:
                  For in that point he did not ſtand,
                  for why he had no need of land.
                  Then being glad he went his way,
                  and wedded ſtraight that Lady gay:
                  The fayreſt creature bearing life,
                  had this ſame Knight vnto his wife.
               
               
                  And by that match of high degree,
                  an Earle ſoone after that was hee:
                  Ere they long time had married beene:
                  others that had her beauty ſeene:
                  Her praiſe was ſpread both farre and neere
                  the King thereof againe did heare:
                  Who then in heart did plainely prooue,
                  he was betrayed of his loue.
               
               
                  Though therewith he was vexed ſore,
                  yet ſeemd he not to grieue therefore:
                  But kept his countenance good and kinde,
                  
                     as though he bare no grudge in minde.
                  But on a day it came to paſſe,
                  when as the King full merrie was:
                  To Ethelwood in ſport he ſaid,
                  I muſe what cheere there ſhould be made
               
               
                  If to thy houſe I ſhould reſort
                  a night or two for Princely ſport:
                  Hereat the Earle ſhewed countenance glad
                  though in his heart he was full ſad,
                  And ſaid your Grace ſhould welcome be,
                  if ſo your grace would honor me.
                  When as the day appointed was,
                  before the King did thither paſſe.
               
               
                  The Earle beforehand did prepare▪
                  
                  the Kings comming to declare:
                  And with a countenance paſſing grim,
                  he cald his Lady vnto him.
                  Saying with ſad and heauy cheere,
                  I pray you when the King comes heere,
                  Sweete Lady if you tender mee,
                  let your attire but homely bee.
               
               
                  And waſh not thou thy Angels face,
                  but doe they beauty quite diſgrace,
                  And to my geſture ſo apply,
                  that may ſeeme loathſome in his eye,
                  For if the King ſhould heere behold,
                  thy glorious beauty ſo extold:
                  Then ſhould my life ſoone ſhortned be,
                  
                     for my deſert and trechery.
               
               
                  When to thy father firſt I came,
                  though I did not declare the ſame,
                  Yet was put in truſt to bring
                  thee ioyfull tidings from the King.
                  Who for thy glorious beautie ſeene,
                  did thinke of thee to make his Queene,
                  But when I had thy beautie found,
                  thy beauty gaue me ſuch a wound.
               
               
                  No reſt or comfort could I take,
                  till your ſweete loue my griefe did ſlake:
                  And thus though duty charged me,
                  moſt faithfull to our Lord to be,
                  Yet loue vpon the other ſide,
                  bad for my ſelf I ſhould prouide:
                  Then to my ſuit and ſeruice ſhowne,
                  at length I won thee for my owne.
               
               
                  And for your loue in wedlock ſpent,
                  your choyce I need no whit repent,
                  And ſince my griefe I haue expreſt,
                  ſweete Lady grant me my requeſt:
                  Good words ſhe gaue with ſmiling cheare,
                  muſing at that, that ſhe did heare:
                  And caſting many things in minde.
                  great fault therewith ſhe ſeem'd to finde.
               
               
                  And in her ſelfe ſhe thought it ſhame,
                  to make that foule which God did frame:
                  Moſt coſtly robes full rich therefore,
                  
                     in braueſt ſort that day ſhe wore.
                  And did all thinges that ere ſhe might,
                  to ſet her beautie forth to ſight
                  And her beſt skill in euery thing,
                  ſhe ſhewed to entertaine the King.
               
               
                  Whereby the King ſo ſnared was,
                  that reaſon quite from him did paſſe:
                  His heart by her was ſet on fire,
                  he had to her a great deſire,
                  And for the lookes he gaue her then,
                  for euery one ſhe ſent him ten.
                  Whereby the King perceaued plaine,
                  his loue and lookes were not in vaine.
               
               
                  Vpon a time it chanced ſo,
                  the King he would a hunting goe,
                  And into Horſe-wood he did ride,
                  the Earle of Horſe-wood by his ſide.
                  And there the ſtorie telleth plaine,
                  that with a ſhaft the Earle was ſlaine.
                  And when that he had loſt his life.
                  the King ſoone after tooke his wife.
               
               
                  And married her all ſhame to ſhunne,
                  by whom he did beget a ſonne:
                  Thus he which did the King deceaue,
                  did by deſert his death receaue.
                  Then to conclude and make an end,
                  be true and faithfull to your friend.
               
               FINIS.
            
            
               
               Of Edward the third and the faire Countes of Salisburie, ſetting forth her conſtancie and endleſſe glorie. Cant. .11
               
                  WHen King Edward the third did liue,
                  that valiant King:
                  Dauid of Scotland to rebell,
                  did then begin.
                  The towne of Barwicke ſuddenly
                  from vs he won:
                  And burnt Newcaſtle to the ground,
                  thus ſtrife begun.
                  To Rookes borrow caſtle marcht he then,
                  And by the force of warlike men,
                  beſiedged therein a gallant faire Lady,
                  While that her husband was in France,
                  His countries honour to aduance,
                  the noble and famous Earle of Salisburie.
               
               
                  Braue Sir William Montague,
                  rode then in poſt,
                  Who declared vnto the King,
                  the Scotchmans hoaſt,
                  Who like a Lyon in a rage,
                  did ſtraight prepare.
                  For to deliuer that faire Lady
                  from wofull care.
                  But when the Scotchmen did heare ſay,
                  
                     Edward our king was come that day.
                  they raiſ'd their ſiedge and ran away with ſpeed,
                  So that when he did thither come,
                  With warlike trumpets fife and drume,
                  none but a gallant Lady did him grreete,
               
               
                  Which when he did with greedy eyes,
                  beholde and ſee:
                  Her peareles beautie ſtraight inthral'd,
                  his Maieſtie.
                  And euer the longer that he lookt.
                  the more he might,
                  For in her onely beautie was,
                  his harts delight,
                  And humbly then vpon her knee,
                  She thankt his royall Maieſtie:
                  that thus had driuen danger from the gate,
                  Lady (quoth he) ſtand vp in peace,
                  Although my warre doth now increaſe,
                  Lord keepe quoth ſhe all hurt from your annoy.
               
               
                  Now is the King full ſad in ſoule,
                  and wot you why,
                  All for the loue of the faire counteſſe,
                  of Salisburie.
                  She little knowing his cauſe of griefe,
                  doth come to ſee:
                  Wherefore his highnes ſate alone,
                  ſo heauily.
                  I haue beene wronged faire dame quoth he,
                  
                     Since I came hither vnto thee,
                  now God forbid my Soueraigne ſhe ſaid,
                  If I were worthy for to know,
                  The cauſe and ground of this your woe,
                  it ſhould be helpt, if it doe lie in me.
               
               
                  Sweare to performe thy words to me,
                  thou Lady gay,
                  To thee the ſorrow of my heart▪
                  
                  I will be wray
                  I ſweare by all the Saints in heauen,
                  I will quoth ſhee:
                  And let my Lord haue no miſtruſt,
                  at all in mee.
                  Then take thy ſelfe aſide he ſaid,
                  And ſay thy beauty hath betraid,
                  and wounded a king with thy bright ſhining eye,
                  If thou doe then ſome mercy ſhew,
                  Thou ſhalt expell a princes woe,
                  ſo ſhall I liue or elſe in ſorrow die.
               
               
                  You haue your wiſh my Soueraigne Lord,
                  effectually:
                  Take all the loue that I may giue,
                  your Maieſtie,
                  But in thy beauty all my ioyes,
                  haue theire abode:
                  Take then my beauty from my face,
                  my gratious Lord.
                  Didſt thou not ſweare to graunt vnto my will?
                  
                     All that I may I will fulfill.
                  then for my loue let thy true loue be ſeene
                  My Lord your ſpeech I might reproue,
                  You can not giue to mee your loue
                  for that alone belongs vnto your Queene
               
               
                  But I ſuppoſe your grace did this,
                  onely to try,
                  Whether a wanton tale might tempt,
                  dame Salisbury,
                  Not from your ſelfe therefore my liege,
                  my ſteps doe ſtray:
                  But from your tempting wanton tale,
                  I goe my way.
                  O turne againe thou Lady bright,
                  Come vnto me my hearts delight,
                  gone is the comfort of my penſiue heart,
                  Here comes the Earle of Warwicke he,
                  The father of this faire Lady,
                  my minde to him I meane for to impart.
               
               
                  Why is my Lord and ſoueraigne King,
                  ſo grieu'd in minde:
                  Becauſe that I haue loſt the thing,
                  I cannot finde:
                  What thing is that my gratious Lord,
                  which you haue loſt?
                  It is my heart which is neere dead,
                  twixt fire and froſt,
                  
                     Curſt be that froſt, and fire too,
                  Which cauſeth thus your highnes woe,
                  O Warwicke thou doſt wrong me wondrous ſore,
                  It is thy Daughter Noble Earle,
                  That heauens bright lampe that peereles pearle,
                  which kills my heart, yet doe I her adore.
               
               
                  If that be all my gratious king,
                  that workes your griefe,
                  I will perſwade that ſcornefull dame,
                  to yeeld reliefe.
                  Neuer ſhall ſhe my daughter be,
                  if ſhe refuſe,
                  The loue and fauour of a King,
                  may her excuſe,
                  Thus wylie Warwicke went his way.
                  And quite contrarie he did ſay,
                  when as he did the beautious Counteſſe meete,
                  Well met daughter deare quoth hee:
                  A meſſage I muſt doe to thee:
                  our Royall king moſt kindely doth thee greet.
               
               
                  The king will die leaſt thou to him,
                  doe graunt thy loue.
                  To loue the king my husbands loue,
                  I ſhould remooue
                  It is true chaſtitie to loue,
                  My daughter deare,
                  But not true loue ſo charitably,
                  for to appeare,
                  His greatnes may beare out the ſhame,
                  
                     But his Kingdome cannot buy out the blame,
                  he craues thy loue that may bereaue thy life,
                  It is my dutie to vrge thee this
                  But not my honeſtie to yeild I wis,
                  I meane to die a true vnſpotted wife.
               
               
                  Now haſt thou ſpoke my daughter deare,
                  as I would haue:
                  Chaſtitie beareth a golden name,
                  vnto her graue.
                  And when vnto thy wedded Lord.
                  thou proue vntrue.
                  Then let my bitter curſes ſtill,
                  thy ſoule purſue.
                  Then with a ſmilling cheere goe thou,
                  As right and reaſon doth allow.
                  yet ſhow the king thou beareſt no ſtrumpets minde
                  I goe deare father with a trice,
                  And by a ſleight of fine deuiſe,
                  Ile cauſe the King confeſſe that I am kinde.
               
               
                  Here comes the Lady of my life,
                  the King did ſay:
                  My father bids me ſoueraigne Lord,
                  your will obey
                  And I conſent if you will graunt▪
                  
                  one boone to me.
                  I graunt it thee my Lady faire,
                  what ere it be:
                  My husband is a liue you know,
                  
                     Firſt let me kill him ere I goe,
                  and at your commaund I will euer be,
                  Thy husband now in France doth reſt,
                  No no, he lies within my breaſt,
                  and being ſo nigh he will my falſhood ſee
               
               
                  With that ſhe ſtarted from the king,
                  and tooke her knife,
                  And deſperately ſhe ſought to rid,
                  her ſelfe of life:
                  The king vpſtarted from his chaire,
                  her hand to ſtay:
                  O noble king you haue broke your worde,
                  with me this day:
                  Thou ſhalt not doe this deede quoth he,
                  Then will I neuer lie with thee:
                  no liue thou ſtill and let me beare the blame.
                  Liue thou in honour and high eſtate,
                  With thy true Lord and wedded mate,
                  I neuer will attempt this ſuite againe.
               
            
            
               The winning of the Ile of Man, by the Noble Earle of Salisburie. Cant 12. 
               To the tune of the Kings going to the Parliament.
               
                  THe Noble Earle of Salisbury,
                  With many a hardy knight,
                  
                     Moſt valiauntly prepar'd himſelfe,
                  againſt the Scots to fight.
                  With his Speare and his ſhield.
                  making his proud foes for to yeeld,
                  Fiercely on them all he ran,
                  to driue them from the Ile of man
                  Drumes ſtricking on a row,
                  Trumpets ſounding as they goe,
                  tan ta ra ra ra tan.
               
               
                  Theire ſilken Enſignes in the field,
                  moſt gloriouſly were ſpred
                  The Horſemen on their prauncing Steedes
                  ſtrucke many a Scotch-man dead,
                  The Browne-bils on their Corſtlets ring,
                  the bowmen with the Gray-gooſe whing
                  The luſtie Launces the pierceing Speare,
                  the ſoft fleſh of their foes doe teare,
                  Drumes ſtricking on a row.
                  Trumpets ſounding as they goe,
                  tan ta ra ra ra tan.
               
               
                  The Battell was ſo fierce and hot,
                  the Scots for feare did flie,
                  And many a famous knight and Squire,
                  in goerie bloud did lie.
                  Some thinking to eſcape away,
                  did drowne themſelues within the ſea,
                  Some with many a bloudy wound,
                  lay gaſping on the clayie ground:
                  
                     Drumes ſtricking on a row,
                  Trumpets ſounding as they goe,
                  tan ta ra ra ra tan.
               
               
                  Thus after may a braue exployt,
                  that day performd and done,
                  The noble Earle of Salisburie,
                  the Ile of Man had wonne,
                  Returning then moſt gallantly,
                  with honour fame, and victorie,
                  Like a Conquerour of fame,
                  to Court this warlike Champion came,
                  Drumes ſtricking on a row
                  Trumpets ſounding as they goe,
                  tan ta ra ra ra tan.
               
               
                  Our King reioycing at this act,
                  incontinent decreed,
                  To giue the Eearle this pleaſant Ile,
                  for his moſt valiaunt deed,
                  And foorthwith did cauſe him than,
                  for to be crowned King of Man,
                  Earle of Salisburie.
                  and King of Man by dignitie.
                  Drumes ſtricking on a row.
                  Trumpets ſounding as they go
                  tan ta ra ra ra tan:
               
               
                  Thus was the firſt King of Man,
                  that euer bore that name,
                  Knight of that princely garter blew,
                  
                     and order of great fame:
                  Which braue King Edward did deuiſe
                  and with his perſon royally
                  Knights of the Garter are they cald;
                  and eke at Winſor ſo inſtald,
                  With princely royaltie,
                  great fame and dignitie,
                  this knight-hood ſtill is held.
               
               FINIS.
            
            
               Cant. 13. Of Venus and Adonis. 
               To the tune of Crimſon veluet.
               
                  VEnus faire did ride,
                  Siluer Doues they drew her
                  By the pleaſant Lawndes,
                  ere the Sunne did riſe.
                  Veſtaes beauty rich,
                  opened wide to view her:
                  Philomel records
                  pleaſant harmony:
                  Euery Bird of ſpring,
                  Chearefully did ſing:
                  Papos Goddeſſe they ſalute.
                  Her loues Queene ſo faire,
                  
                     Had of mirth no care,
                  for her ſonne had made her mute:
                  In her breſt ſo tender,
                  He a ſhaft did render,
                  when her eyes beheld a boy:
                  Adonis was he named,
                  By his mother ſhamed,
                  yet is he now Venus ioy,
                  Him alone ſhe meets.
                  ready pre
                        ••
                      for hunting:
                  Him ſhe kindly greetes,
                  and his iourney ſtayes:
                  Him ſhe ſeekes to kiſſe,
                  no deuices wanting:
                  Him her eyes ſtill woo'd,
                  him her tongue ſtill prayes:
                  He with bluſhing red,
                  Hangeth downe his head,
                  not a kiſſe can he afford:
                  His face he turn'd away,
                  Silence ſayd her nay▪
                  
                  ſtill ſhe woo'd him for a word,
                  Speake (ſhe ſayd) thou faireſt,
                  Beauty, thou impayreſt,
                  ſee me, I am pale and wan▪
                  
                  Louers all adore mee,
                  I for loue implore thee:
                  chriſtall teares with that downe ran.
                  
                     Him herewith ſhe forſt,
                  for to ſit downe by her;
                  She his necke embrac'd,
                  gazing in his face:
                  He like one tranſformed,
                  ſtir'd no looke to eye her:
                  Euery Hearbe did woe him,
                  growing in that place.
                  Each Bird with ditty,
                  Prayed him for pittie,
                  in behalfe of Beauties Queene,
                  Waters gentle murmure
                  Craued him to loue his;
                  yet no liking could be ſeene.
                  Boy (ſhe ſayd) looke on me,
                  Still I gaze vpon thee,
                  ſpeake I pray thee, my delight,
                  Coldly he replyed
                  And in briefe denyed,
                  to beſtow on her a ſight.
                  I am now to young,
                  to be wonne by Beauty:
               
               
                  Tender are my yeares,
                  I am yet a bud.
                  Faire thou art (ſhe ſayd)
                  then it is thy duety,
                  Wert thou but a bloome,
                  to effect my good:
                  
                     Euery beautious flower,
                  Boaſteth in my power
                  Birds and beaſtes my lawes effect.
                  Mirrha thy faire Mother,
                  Moſt of any other,
                  did my louely heſts reſpect.
                  Be with me delighted,
                  Thou ſhalt be requited,
                  euery Nimph on thee ſhall tend:
                  All the Gods ſhall loue thee,
                  Man ſhall not reproue thee,
                  Ioue himſelfe ſhall be thy friend.
               
               
                  Wend then from me, Venus,
                  I am not diſpoſed;
                  Thou wringeſt me too hard,
                  pray thee let me goe:
                  Fie, what a payne it is,
                  thus to be incloſed:
                  If loue begin with labour,
                  it will end with woe,
                  Kiſſe me, I will leaue,
                  Here a kiſſe receiue,
                  A ſhort kiſſe I doe it finde.
                  Wilt thou leaue me ſo?
                  Yet ſhalt thou not goe,
                  breath once more thy balmy winde,
                  It ſmelleth of the Mirth-tree,
                  That to the world did bring thee,
                  neuer was Perfume more ſweete,
                  
                     When ſhe had thus ſpoken,
                  She gaue him a token,
                  and their naked boſomes meete
               
               
                  Now (ſaid he lets goe:
                  Harke the Hounds are crying,
                  Griſly Bore is vp,
                  Huntſman follow faſt,
                  At the name of Bore,
                  Venus ſeemed dying:
                  Deadly colour pale,
                  Roſes ouer caſt,
                  Speake (ſaid ſhe) no more▪
                  
                  Of following the Bore,
                  th'art vnfit for ſuch a chaſe:
                  Courſe the fearefull Hare,
                  Veniſon do not ſpare,
                  if thou wilt yeeld to Venus Grace,
                  Shunne the Bore I pray thee.
                  Els I ſtill will ſtay thee
                  herein he vow'd, to pleaſe her mind,
                  Then her armes enlarged,
                  Loth ſhe him diſcharged,
                  foorth ſhe went as ſwift as winde.
               
               
                  Thetis Phoebus Steedes,
                  in the Weſt retayned;
                  Hunting ſport was paſt:
                  ſhe her Loue did ſeeke.
                  Sight of him to ſoone,
                  
                     gentle Queene ſhe gayned:
                  On the ground he lay,
                  bloud had left each cheeke.
                  For an orped Swine,
                  Smit him in the groyne,
                  deadly wound his death did bring,
                  Which when Venus found,
                  She fell in a ſound,
                  and awakt her hands did wring.
                  Nimphs and Satyres skipping,
                  Came together tripping,
                  Eccho euery cry expreſt:
                  Venus by her power,
                  Turn'd him to a flower,
                  which ſhe weareth in her creſt.
               
            
            
               The Rebellion of Wat Tyler and Iacke Straw: with others againſt K. Richard the ſecond. Cant 13. 
               To the tune of the Miller would a woing ride.
               WAt Tyler is from darford gan,
               and with him many a proper man,
               And hee a Captaine is become,
               marching in field with Phife and Drumme,
               Iacke Straw, an other in like caſe,
               from Eſſex flockes a mighty pace,
               
                  Hob Carter with his ſtrangling traine,
               Iacke Shepara comes with him amaine
               So doth Tom Miller in like ſort,
               as if he ment to take ſome Fort:
               With Bowes and Bils with Speare and Shield
               on Blacke-heath haue they pitcht their Field
               An hundred thouſand in all
               whoſe forch is accounted ſmall:
               And for King Richard did they ſend:
               much euill to him they did intend
               For the taxe the wich our king
               vpon his Commons then did bring:
               And now becauſe his royall Grace
               denyed to come within their Chaſe,
               They ſpoyled South warke round about
               and tooke the Marſhalls Priſoners out
               All thoſe that in the Kings bench lay,
               at libertie they ſet that day.
               And they marcht with one conſent,
               through London with a lewd intent,
               And for to fire their lewd deſire,
               they ſet the Sauoy all on fire,
               And for the hate that they did beare
               vnto the duke of Lancaſtere.
               Therefore his houſe they burned quite:
               throuh enuie malice and deſpight
               Then to the Temple did they turne:
               the Lawyeres Bookes they did burne:
               
                  And ſpoyld their Lodgings one by one
               and all they could lay hand vpon
               Then vnto Smithfield did they hie,
               to Saint Iones Place that ſtands thereby,
               And ſet the ſame on fire flat.
               which burned ſeauen dayes after that▪
               
               Vnto the Tower of London then,
               faſt trooped theſe rebelious men,
               And hauing entred ſoone the ſams,
               with hidious cryes and mickle ſhame,
               The graue Lord Chauncelor thence they tooke,
               amaz'd with fearefull pitious looke,
               The Lord high Treaſurer likewiſe they,
               tooke from that place that preſent day:
               And with their hooping lowd and ſhrill
               ſtrooke off their heads on Towerhill.
               Into the Cittie came they then,
               like rude diſordered franticke men.
               They rob'd the Churches euery where.
               and put the Prieſtes in deadly feare.
               Into the Counters then they get,
               where men in priſon lay for debt:
               They broke the doores and let them out
               and threw the Counter Bookes about.
               Tearing and ſpoyling them each one,
               and Records all they light vpon
               The doores of Newgate broke they downe,
               that Priſoners ran about the towne:
               
                  Forcing all the Smiths they meete,
               to knocke the Irons from their feete,
               And then like Villaines void of awe,
               following Wat Tylor and Iacke Straw.
               And though this outrage was not ſmall,
               the King gaue pardon to them all,
               So they would part home quietly:
               but they his pardon did defie
               And being all in Smithfield then.
               euen threeſcore thouſand fighting men
               Which there Wat Tyler then did bring,
               of purpoſe for to meete our King.
               And therewithall his royall Grace,
               ſent Sir Iohn Newton to that place,
               Vnto Wat Tyler willing him,
               to come and ſpeake with our young King
               But the proud Rebell in deſpight,
               did picke a quarrell with the Knight.
               The Maior of London being by.
               when he beheld this vilainie,
               Vnto Wat Tyler rode he then,
               being in midſt of all his men:
               Saying Traytor yeeld tis beſt,
               in the Kings name I thee arreſt,
               And there with to his Dagger ſtart,
               and thruſt the Rebell to the heart:
               Who falling dead vnto the ground,
               the ſame did all the Hoaſt confound:
               
                  And downe they threw their weapons all:
               and humbly they for pardon call:
               Thus did that proud Rebellion ceaſe,
               and after followed a ioyfull peace.
               FINIS.
            
            
               Cant 14. A Louers wonder.
               
               
                  I Muſe how I can liue and lacke my heart:
                  Without my heart yet do I liue, and loue:
                  Louing the wound that procureth my ſmart
                  And hartleſſe liue in hopes forlorne be hoofe,
                  And on this hope, my hapleſſe fancy feedeth,
                  And with this wound my hartleſſe bodie bleedeth.
               
               
                  I muſe how I can ſee and yet am blinde:
                  Blinded I am, yet ſee, and ſigh to ſee,
                  I ſigh to ſee my Miſtres ſo vnkinde,
                  And ſee no meanes my ſighing ſore to free,
                  Vnkindly blindnes thus doth aye diſmay me,
                  Since that vntimely ſight did firſt betray me.
               
               
                  But when my ſight ſhall ſee two hearts in one.
                  Both linke in loue, to liue in others breſt.
                  Then ſhall no wound procure my ſighs of mone,
                  But hearts returne procure my happy reſt:
                  No blindnes; ſore, or ſigh; no wound ſhall grieue me,
                  But hope, and life, and loue relieue me.
               
               FINIS.
            
            
               
               Cant 15.
The Louer by gifts thinkes to conquer Chaſtity,
And with his gifts ſends theſe verſes to his Lady.
               
                  WHat face ſo faire, that is not crackt with gold?
                  What wit ſo worth, but hath in gold his wonder
                  What learning, but with golden lines doth hold;
                  What ſtate ſo high, but gold will bring it vnder?
                  What thought ſo ſweete, but gold doth bitter ſeaſon
                  And what rule better, then a golden reaſon?
               
               
                  The ground is fat, that yeeldes a golden fruite:
                  The ſtudie high, that fits the golden ſtate:
                  The labour ſweete, that gets the golden ſute:
                  The loue reckoning rich, that ſcornes the golden rate
                  The loue is ſure, that golden hope doth hold,
                  And rich againe, that ſerues the God of Gold.
               
               FINIS.
            
            
               
               
                  A new Dialogue betweene Troylus and Creſſida. Cant 16. 
               To the tune of, Lacaranto.
               
                  Troylus
                  THere is no pleaſure voide of paine,
                  faire Lady now I ſee:
                  Fell Fortune doth my ſtate diſdaine,
                  the frowning fates agree,
                  To baniſh my pleaſure and that without meaſure, away
                  That woe is me, that euer I ſee,
                  This dolefull diſmall day.
               
               
                  Creſſida
                  What is the cauſe my Troylus true,
                  of this thy inward ſmart?
                  What motions do thy minde moleſt
                  what paines doe pearce thy heart?
                  Then ſhew I requeſt thee, what griefe doth moleſt thee ſo neare:
                  I am thy ioy, thou prince of Troy,
                  Thy loue and Lady deare.
               
               
                  Troylus
                  The Greekes 
                        •
                     ue ſent Embaſſads▪
                  
                  by meanes of father thine:
                  To craue a pledge for priſoners,
                  
                     in moſt vnhappie time,
                  And as they demaunded counſell hath granted euen ſo:
                  O greefe to heare, my Lady deare,
                  For Authenor muſt go.
               
               
                  Creſſida
                  Although the ſame accorded be,
                  yet baniſht care away,
                  For what the King commands we ſee,
                  the ſubiects muſt obey.
                  Then let it not grieue thee, but rather relieue thee from paine:
                  Sith that I may in halfe a day,
                  Come vnto Troy againe.
               
               
                  Troylus
                  The nearer that thou ſhalt remaine,
                  the more twill breed my ſpight
                  When I ſhall ſee an other obtaine,
                  the thing that is my right.
                  The Greekes will flatter, and tell thee much matter. and ſay:
                  The towne of troy they will deſtroy,
                  Ere they depart away.
               
               
                  Creſſida.
                  You know the talke doth dayly run,
                  as likely it will be.
                  While truce is held the Greekes will come,
                  with Troyans to agree:
                  
                     And they with Queene Hellen will quickly be winding away
                  Then preſently my father and I.
                  Will come to our friends in Troy,
               
               
                  Troylus.
                  Now ſith thy father Calcas hath,
                  ſo fooliſhly loſt his name:
                  He dares no more approach the walles,
                  of Troy for very ſhame,
                  But he will thinke rather King Priam my father indeed
                  Should him reward without regard,
                  And giue him a traitors meede.
               
               
                  Creſſida.
                  In vaine theſe words we do but waſte,
                  ſince ſo it is decreed:
                  That Anthenor muſt here be plaſte,
                  and I for him proceed:
                  What would you deſire, your father a lyer to be;
                  Then ſhew your minde what way could you find
                  To hinder the Greekes of me.
               
               
                  Troylus.
                  Alas my loue Creſſida cleare.
                  you know you haue my heart
                  And if thou fauoureſt me my deare,
                  then let vs both depart:
                  In ſecret manner away we muſt wander,

from Troy:
                  For fathers lye, I paſſe not a flye,
                  So I may haue my ioy.
               
               
                  Creſſida.
                  Now God forbid my onely Lord,
                  thou ſhouldſt vs ſo defame:
                  In ſuch a ſort to blemiſh and blot,
                  our honour and our good name,
                  The world will heareafter, declare Calcas daughter, vntrue
                  And they will ſay you ran away,
                  For feare of the Grecian crue,
               
               
                  Troylus.
                  What need you paſſe for peoples report,
                  or ought that they can ſay:
                  So I may paſſe the time in ſport,
                  with thee my Lady gay.
                  If Greekes ſhould attaine thee; they ſoone would conſtraine thee to yeeld:
                  And Calcas he would ſooner agree,
                  For feare of their force in field.
               
               
                  Creſſida.
                  Nay rather marke my Troylus true.
                  what meanes I minde to frame:
                  How I may keepe my promiſe due,
                  and garde vs both from blame.
                  With Grecians together, I meane to ride thither but you:
                  
                     Ere fiue dayes twaine ſhall ſee me againe,
                  As I am a Lady true.
               
               
                  Troylus.
                  Alas my Loue and Diamond deare,
                  what wayes could you deuiſe:
                  To blind their ſights that be ſo cleare,
                  and wits that are ſo wiſe,
                  If ten dayes they keepe you, they will ſhame to ſeeke you be ſure:
                  Then Troylus I in dolor muſt dye,
                  Paſt hope of any recure.
               
               
                  Creſſida.
                  He is not worthy for to haue,
                  a Lady to his loue:
                  That for her ſake will not vouchſafe,
                  ſome bitter paine to proue.
                  If ten dayes abſenting you cannot be willing to take:
                  Then would you ſure, ſmall paines indure,
                  for your falſe Ladyes ſake.
               
               
                  Troylus.
                  For ten dayes ſpace to looſe thy ſight,
                  would grieue my heartfull ſore,
                  Yet for thy ſake my Lady bright,
                  I would bide ten times more.
                  But thus much I feare mee, the Greeke will deceiue thee, alone:
                  Then Troylus he forgotten ſhall be,
                  
                     As one that had neuer beene borne.
               
               
                  Creſſida.
                  It hen perceiue thy Lady and loue,
                  thou dooſtfull ſore miſtruſt:
                  What doe you thinke the Greekes could moue,
                  to make me proue vniuſt?
                  Nay then I deſire the Gods with wilde fire, and flame:
                  Conſume me may without delay,
                  Or put me to greater ſhame.
               
               
                  Troylus.
                  I doe not thinke my iewell of ioy,
                  thou wouldſt be found vntrue:
                  But at thy parting out of Troy,
                  to giue thee warning due,
                  Remember thy promiſe, thy faith and aſſurance, to me:
                  And thou ſhalt ſee, that I will be,
                  As truſty a Knight to thee.
               
               
                  Creſſida.
                  
                     The Sunne ſhall want his burning armes,
                     the Moone ſhall looſe her light:
                     And Simois with her ſiluer ſtreames,
                     that runs through Troy ſo bight
                     Shall backward be turning, where firſt it was ſpringing againe.
                     Ere I to thee vnfaithfull will be,
                     Or faile of my promiſe ſo plaine.
                     
                        Another.
                     And thus at laſt they parted both,
                     vnto their griefe and paine,
                     But Creſſida ſhe brake her oath,
                     ſhe neuer came againe,
                     But as ſhe deſerued, ſo God he rewarded her pride:
                     For ſhee full poore, from doore to doore,
                     A loathſome Leper dy'de.
                  
                  
                     When Troylus did perceiue and ſee,
                     his Lady was vntrue:
                     And that ſhe falſe rendered had,
                     to diomed his due.
                     With heart diſtreſſed, himſelfe he addreſſed to fight:
                     Through her diſdaine there was he ſlaine,
                     By fierce Achilles might.
                  
               
               FINIS.
            
            
               Cant 17. The Gentle womans reply.
               BVſhes haue tops, but the Cedar higher,
               A haire caſts ſhadow leſſe then Pharoes tower:
               The ſparkes haue heat but greater heat the fire:
               
                  A Bee can ſting, not like the Scorpions power:
               Seas haue maine courſe, & flouds haue little ſprings foords,
               Rough are deepe Seas, when ſmooth run ſhallow
               The lacke makes noyſe before the Diall moues,
               The firmeſt Faith is ſtill confirm'd with words,
               The Turtles mourne in loſing of their Loues,
               If hearts haue eares and eyes then tongue to ſpeake,
               They'le heare, and ſee, and ſay before they breake.
               FINIS.
            
            
               Cant 18. The Louers thankes to his beloued, ſent and incloſed in a Cockle ſhell.
               SWeete loue, the ſweete deſpoyles of ſweeteſt hand
               Faire hand the faireſt pledge of faithfull heart
               True heart, whoſe truth yeeldeth the trueſt band,
               Chiefe band (I ſay) that binds my chiefeſt part:
               My chiefeſt part wherein doth chiefely ſtand,
               Thoſe ſecret ioyes which heauen to me impartes,
               Vnite in one my ſtate thus ſtill to ſaue,
               You haue my thankes, let me your comfort haue.
               FINIS.
            
            
               
               
                  A new Sonnet made by a Maiden in praiſe of her Louer, in whoſe truth and conſtancy ſhe doth triumphe. Cant 19. 
               To the tune of Crimſon Veluet.
               
                  WElcome be the dayes,
                  of my loue and liking,
                  Venus muſt I praiſe,
                  for her fauours ſhowne,
                  Where I ſet my heart,
                  well it is rewarded:
                  Neuer will I ſtart,
                  for I am his owne,
                  Like the Diamond pure ſo will I endure,
                  neuer will I giue, while that I doe liue
                  from my loue his proper right:
                  Faithfull ſhall he find me,
                  As true loue doth binde me,
                  ſo my promiſe I haue paſt,
                  What in words I vowed,
                  In my heart, I allowed,
                  be true while life doth laſt,
                  If I doe reſpect.
                  
                     fauour and affection,
                  Needs I muſt affect,
                  ſuch a proper man,
                  If I way his wit,
                  or his braue behauiour,
                  Pallas ſeemes to ſit,
                  all his deeds to ſcan,
                  All the prudent ſort, may full well report,
                  what in him they doe behold:
                  Nature and the reſt ſeated in his breſt,
                  all the graces crownd with gold,
                  Troylus may be ſtained,
                  Priamus aſhamed,
                  to behold his conſtancy:
                  Many ſitteth ſorry,
                  Onely I may glory,
                  of my happy deſteny.
               
               
                  If that Hellen faire,
                  for her wanton Paris:
                  Did not trauell ſpare,
                  to poſſeſſe his ſight:
                  Setting quite aſide,
                  both her fame and honour:
                  For the beauties pride,
                  of that gallant knight.
                  Bringing vnto Troy, ſorrow and annoy,
                  by a long and weary warre
                  So that Priams reed may well rue the dead:
                  
                     that did cauſe ſo great a iarre.
                  Well may I with pleaſure,
                  For my ioyfull treaſure▪
                  
                  Suffer paines and hard diſtreſſe,
                  Seeing loue and honour,
                  Doth aduance their banner,
                  ioyfull of my good ſuceſſe.
               
               
                  Flora ſitteth ſweete,
                  in her gallant coullour,
                  Ready for to greete, Ceres doth preſent,
                  gifts of ſtore and plenty,
                  Hearts eaſe and content.
                  grant a bleſſed end
                  All the Muſes nine, with their muſicke fine
                  doth delight our ſweete deſire:
                  Cupid he doth dance, fortune, feare and chance,
                  doth his company repaire,
                  All the Gods together,
                  Hand in hand comes thither,
                  honoring our mariage day,
                  Himen ſtandeth watching,
                  For your happy matching;
                  In her golden rich aray.
               
               
                  All you louers true,
                  ſhew your ioy and gladneſſe,
                  Take a pleaſant view,
                  of my ſweet delight,
                  In your dainty ſongs,
                  
                     ſound my louers peaiſes,
                  Set aſide the wrongs
                  of each wofull wight.
                  On your liuely Lutes, ſhew the braue diſputes,
                  that contented Louers binde,
                  Laud the faithfull heart, that Will neuer ſtart,
                  gratifie the gentle minde,
                  Say that men are treaſure,
                  Say that men are pleaſure,
                  Say that men are womens ioyes
                  Whereſoere you mooue it,
                  I my ſelfe will proue it:
                  Gainſt the maides that are moſt coy.
               
               
                  Venus riding forth,
                  Valewing the worth,
                  Of my peereleſſe praiſe▪
                  
                  From her gallant Coach,
                  ſodainely ſhe leaped:
                  Sweetely to Paradice,
                  Flowers faire of hue, pleaſant as they grew,
                  did ſhe gather ſpeedily:
                  Roſes white and red, which the ſpring had ſpred,
                  on the branches franke and free,
                  Garlands thereof making,
                  Gilliflowers taking,
                  to adorne my Louers head,
                  Strewing hearbes moſt dainty,
                  Brought ſhe alſo plenty,
                  
                     wherewithall the ſtreetes ſhe ſpread.
                  Well I may reioyce,
                  and triumph in pleaſure,
                  Lifting vp my voyce,
                  to the lofty ſkies:
                  Iuno hath ordaind,
                  welfare to my fancy,
                  My deſire is gaind,
                  which may well ſuffice,
                  Maydens faire and free hearken vnto me,
                  loue where you are loued againe:
                  Be not coy and nice, if that you be wiſe,
                  miſchiefe followes fond diſdaine,
                  Try and prooue your fauours;
                  Men of good behauiour,
                  ſo will I for euer ſay,
                  Such as doe deceiue you.
                  Knaues they are I tell you,
                  men they are not any way.
               
            
            
               
                  A Louer bewailing the abſence of his Loue Cant 20. 
               To the tune of Where is the life that late.
               
                  YOu louing wormes that linked be,
                  in Cupids clogging chaine,
                  Behold I poore and ſilly man,
                  lye languiſhing in paine
                  
                     Come helpe with dolefull tunes▪
                  
                  to waile my wofull ſtate,
                  And blame me not ſith worthily,
                  I curſe my cruell Fate,
                  Ah wo is me what hap,
                  what hatefull hap haue I,
                  Sith I am ſeuered thus from her,
                  that loues me tenderly.
               
               
                  Dame fortune brought me to a ſtand,
                  where I eſpied a Dame:
                  That doth deſerue to be beloued,
                  the world will ſay the ſame,
                  Whom when at firſt I ſaw,
                  ſo well ſhe pleaſd mine eye▪
                  
                  That fancy wild me yeeld my ſelfe,
                  with her to liue and dye,
                  And then the blinded boy,
                  ſo grac'd me with his glee:
                  That with a dart he wounded her,
                  and forc'd her yeeld to me.
               
               
                  Dame pleaſure in a moment then,
                  gaue way to our repueſt.
                  And we enioy'd but ah not long,
                  the thing which we likt beſt:
                  For as the Summers day,
                  at length comes to an end,
                  So he became our enemy,
                  that whilom was our friend,
                  
                     The while that we poſſeſt,
                  our paſtime was but ſmall,
                  For when I cald for Ipocras.
                  the drawer brought me gall.
               
               
                  God knowes the griefe my ſoule ſuſteines,
                  for her that is my deere:
                  For ſince I ſaw my ſweeting laſt,
                  I thinke it twentie yeere,
                  When I ſhould walke abroad,
                  to ſpend the lightſome day,
                  Huge heapes of care moleſt my minde,
                  for her that is away.
                  When darkeſome night drawes on,
                  to bed with teares I goe,
                  And If I chance to ſleepe a while,
                  it doubleth then my woe.
               
               
                  Or when I walke I doe perceiue,
                  my choyſe to be away:
                  Remembring oft in folded armes,
                  how we full ſweetely lay,
                  Then ruſh forth ſighing ſobbes,
                  then, then, renewes my care:
                  I toſſe and turne and tumble then,
                  and mad-men like I fare,
                  No world, nor wordly things,
                  my ſorrowes can appeaſe:
                  Vntill mine eies ſhed ſtreames of teares,
                  and then I finde ſome eaſe.
               
               
                  
                  Then roſe I vp as one forlorne,
                  and leaue my reſtles bed:
                  A thouſand fits of fancies then,
                  torment my troubled head.
                  Each morning doe I pray,
                  the Gods vpon my knee,
                  That I may neuer ſheepe againe
                  if fates would ſo decree:
                  Then put I on my clothes,
                  as one bereft of ioy,
                  And curſe and ban moſt bitterly,
                  the meanes of mine annoy.
               
               
                  When I for ſport ſhould trudge abroad,
                  the fearefull Hare to traile:
                  Which was ſometime my moſt delight,
                  then gin my ſenſes faile.
                  When I ſhould eate or drinke.
                  my nature to ſuſtaine:
                  The meate receiu'd will not diſgeſt,
                  but turneth backe againe.
                  Then thinke I in my minde,
                  all hope of helpe is paſt.
                  And oft I ſay vnto my ſelfe,
                  would God this were my laſt.
               
               
                  You youthfull lads that know not yet,
                  the force of Cupids dart;
                  Beware and wiſe, retire in time,
                  for feare of further harme,
                  
                     Conſider well the end,
                  before you ought begin:
                  And then you may your ſelues aſſure,
                  to finde no lacke therein,
                  Before you ſnared be,
                  to flye you may be bold.
                  But ſure reſiſtance will not ſerue,
                  when once you are in hold.
               
               
                  The valiant ſouldier when he doth,
                  addreſſe him to the field:
                  Doth rather wiſh with fame to dye,
                  then either flye or yeeld,
                  Euen ſo my faithfull heart,
                  doth ſickeneſſe ſo deteſt.
                  Liue or dye I will not change,
                  while breath is in my breaſt.
                  If I were ſure to be
                  of Gods and men accurſt,
                  Yet I will neuer change my choiſe,
                  let fortune do her worſt.
               
               FINIS.
            
            
               
               A Speech betweene certaine Ladies being Shepheards on Salisburie plaine.
               TRuly (ſaid the Ladyes) this was a moſt hardy and couragious Mayor, that durſt in the middeſt of ſo mighty a multitude of his enemies, areſt ſo impudent and bold a Traytor, and kill him in the face of all his friends: which was a deede worthy to be had in euerlaſting memory, and highly to bee rewarded Nor did his Maieſty forget ſaid the Lady Oxenbridge to dignifie that braue man for his hardy deede for in remembrance of that admired exployt his Maieſtie made him knight & 5. Aldermen more of the city: ordaining alſo that in remembrance of Sir William Walworthes deede againſt Wat Tyler, that all the Mayors that are to ſucceed in his place ſhould bee knighted: and further hee graunted that there ſhould bee a Dagger added to the Armes of the citty of London in the right quarter of the ſhield, for an augmentation of the Armes.
               You haue told vs (q. the Ladies) the end of Wat Tyler. But I pray you what became of Iack Straw and the reſt of that rebellious route? I will ſhew you (quoth ſhe) Iack Straw with the reſt of that rude rabble, being in the end apprehended (as Rebels neuer floriſh long) was at the laſt brought to be executed at London, where he confeſſed that their intent (was if they could haue brought their moſt vilde purpoſe to paſſe) to haue murthered the King and his nobles, and to haue deſtroyed (ſo neare as they could) all the Gentility of the land, hauing eſpecially vowed the death of all the Biſhops Abbots, and Monkes: then to haue inriched themſelues: they determined to ſet London on fire, and to haue taken ſpoyle of that honorable cittie, but the gallowes ſtanding betwixt them and home, they

were there truſt vp before they could effect any thing. And ſuch ends (ſaid the Ladies) ſend all Rebels, and eſpecially the deſperate Traytor, which at this preſent vext the whole ſtate.
               With that word one of their ſeruants came running, ſaying, Madam, the Rebels are now marched out of Wiltſhire & Hampſhire, making haſty ſteps towards London, therefore now you neede not feare to come home, and commit the flockes to their former keepers. The Ladies being ioyfull thereof appointed ſhortly after a banquet to be prepared, where they all met together againe: by which time the Kings power (hauing incountred the Rebels on Blackeheath) ouerthrew their power, where the Lord Awdly was taken and committed to Newgate from thence he was drawne to the tower-hill in a Coate of his owne Armes painted vpon a paper, reuerſed and all to torne, and there was he beheaded the 24. of Inne, & ſhortly after Thomas Flamocke and Michael Ioſeph the Blackeſmith were drawne hanged and qurtered after the manner of Traytors. But when the husbands to theſe faire Ladies came home and heard how their wiues had dealt to ſaue themſelues in this dangerous time they could not chuſe but hartily laugh at the matter, ſaying that ſuch ſhepheards neuer kept ſheepe vpon Salisbury plaine before.
               FINIS.
               
               
               
            
         
      
   