
      
         
            
            A proper newe sonet declaring the lamentation of Beckles in Suffolke, which was in the great winde vpon S. Andrewes eue last, past most pittifully burned with fire, to the losse by estimation of twentie thousande pound and vpwarde, and to the number of foure scoredwelling houses. 1586. To Wilsons tune.
            
               WIth sobbing sighes and trickling teares my state I doe lament
               Perceiuing how Gods heauie wrath against my sinnes is bent
               Let all men viewe my woefull fall and rue my woefull case
               And learne hereby in speedy sort repentaunce to embrace.
            
            
               For late in Suffoclke was I seen to be a stately towne
               Replenished with riches store and had in great renowne
               Yea planted on a pleasant soyle so faire as heart could wish
               And had my markets once a weeke well storde with flesh and fish
            
            
               A faire fresh Riuer running by to profite me withall
               Who with a cristall cleered streame about my bankes did fall
               My fayres in somer welth
                     •
                  ly for to increase my store
               My medowes greene and commons great what could I wish for more.
            
            
               But now beholde my great decay which on a sodaine came
               My sumptuous buildings burned be by force of fires flame
               A carelesse wretch most rude in life his chymney set on fire
               The Instrument I must confesse of Gods most heauie ire.
            
            
               The flame whereof increasing stil the blustering windes did blowe
               And into diuers buildings by disperst it to and fro
               So kindling in most grieuous sort it waxed huge and hie
               The Riuer then was frozen so no water they could come by.
            
            
               Great was the crye that then was made among both great and small
               The wemen wept and wrong their handes whose goods consumed all
               No helpe was found to slacke the fyre theyr paines was spent in vaine
               To beare theyr goods into the fieldes for safegarde they were fayne.
            
            
               And yet amid this great distresse a number set theyr minde
               To filtch and steale and beare away so much as they could finde
               Theyr neighbors wealth which wasted lay about the streetes that time
               They secretly conuayde away O most accursed crime.
            
            
               Thus from the morning nyne a clocke till foure a clocke at night
               Fourescore houses in Beckles towne was burnd to ashes quite
               And that which most laments my heart the house of God I say
               The Church and temple by this fyre is cleane consumde away.
            
            
               The market place and houses fayre that stood about the same
               Hath felt the force and violence of this most fearefull flame
               So that there is no christian man but in his heart would grieue
               To see the smart I did sustaine vpon saint Andrewes eue.
            
            
               Wherefore good christian people now take warning by my fall
               Liue not in strife and enuious hate to breed each other thrall
               Seeke not your neighbors lasting spoyle by greedy sute in Lawe
               Liue not in discord and debate which doth destruction draw.
            
            
               And flatter not your selues in sinne holde not Gods worde in scorne
               Repine not at his Ministers nor be not false forsworne
               For where such vices doth remaine Gods grace will neuer be
               And in your health and happie state haue yet some minde on me.
            
            
               Whose songes is changd to sorrowes sore my ioyes to wayling woe
               My mirth to mourning sighes and grones the which from griefe doth growe
               My wealth to want and scarsetie my pleasure into payne
               All forthe sinne and wickednesse which did in me remaine.
            
            
               If then you wish prosperitie be louing meeke and kinde
               Layrage and rancour cleane aside see malice from your minde
               And liue in loue and charitie all hatefull pride detest
               And so you shall with happie dayes for euermore be blest.
            
            
               And thus I ende my wofull song beseeching God I may
               Remaine a mirrour to all such that doe in pleasure stay
               And that amongest their greatest mirth and chiefest ioye of all
               They yet may haue a heart to thinks of Beckles sodaine fall.
            
            FINIS.
            
               T. D.
            
         
      
      
         
            AT LONDON, Imprinted by Robert Robinson for Nicholas Colm
                  •
                of Norwich, dwelling in S. Andrewes Church yard.
         
      
   