
      
         
            
            THE RVINE OF ROME: OR AN EXPOSITION vpon the whole Reuelation.
            
            Wherein is plainly ſhewed and proued, that the Popiſh Religion, together with all the power and authoritie of Rome, ſhall ebbe and decay ſtill more and more throughout all the Churches of Europe, and come to an vtter ouerthrow euen in this life before the end of the world.
            Written eſpecially for the comfort of Protestants, and the daunting of Papists, Seminary Prieſts, Ieſuites, and all that curſed rabble.
            Publiſhed by Arthur Dent, Preacher of the word of God, at South-Shoobery in Eſſex.
            
            
               Apoc. 18. verſ. 7.8.
               She ſaith in her heart, I ſit as a Queene and am no widow, and ſhall ſee no mourning:
               Therefore ſhall her plagues come at one day, death and ſorrow, and famine: and ſhee ſhall be burned with fire: for that God which condemneth her is a ſtrong Lord.
            
            LONDON
         
         
            
            
            THE EPISTLE TO THE Chriſtian Reader.
            
               BEing often requeſted (gentle Reader) and much importuned by ſundry, both learned and godly, to publiſh that doctrine of the Apocalyps, which diuers of them with liuely voyce heard publikely deliuered: I did at laſt, vpon my moſt mature deliberation, yeeld vnto their reaſonable requeſt; I meane the reaſons of their requeſt. Indeed I doe ingeniouſly confeſſe, that I am the vnmeeteſt of many, which this age (God be thanked) doth afford, to deale in a matter of ſo great importance, or any wiſe to be imployed in ſo great and honourable a ſeruice as this is. But if I doe induſtriouſly vſe my ſmall talent, and be found faithfull in a little; I hope it ſhall haue both chearefull and comfortable acceptation with the Church of God. For this I preſume will bee granted of all, that hee which hath but a little ſtrength, and yet putteth it forth to the vttermost to doe good withall, is more to be commended, then he which hath thriſe his ſtrength, and vſeth it not to the helpe and benefit of others. And true it is indeed, that ſundry worthy labours of diuers excellent men vpon the Apocalyps, are already extant: ſo as he may ſeeme to powre water into the Sea, or goe about to mend the crowes eyes, that will attempt to adde any thing to that which is already publiſhed. But know this (O Christian Reader) that the Lords garden is ſo large and plentifull of all moſt ſweete and pleaſant flowers, that where any one hath gathered a Noſegay most fragrant and delectable, another may come after, and gather another not to be contemned. For the wiſedome of God is ſuch an vndrainable fountaine and head-ſpring, that where one hath

drawne much before, another may come happely, and draw as much afterward: yea though thouſands doe ſucceede, yet can this fountaine neuer be drawne drie. Be it farre from me to arrogate any thing to my ſelfe, aboue others: for I am priuy inough to mine owne meanes, and do freely confeſſe, that in this worke, I haue receiued much light from others: and therefore do not as a iudge, giue ſentence vpon other mens workes: but as one that would furniſh the ſame feast, bring in my diſh among them. Or as one that in the ſame cauſe would come in as a third, or a fourth witneſſe to teſtifie and confirme the ſame thing. And verily through the gracious aſſiſtance of Gods ſpirit, my ſimple purpoſe and indeuor is to giue a lift to the vttermoſt of my power, to further that which is already happily begun, and to prouoke others of greater gifts, to come after with their great lights, and Lanternes in their hands, to diſcry and diſcouer whatſoeuer in this Propheſie is not yet fully ſeene into. I am not ignorant that ſome would not haue this booke medled withall, nor in any wiſe to be expounded among the common people, becauſe (ſay they) it is ſo darke and hard to vnderſtand. But let all ſuch leaue their owne opinions, and hearken what the holy Ghoſt ſaith.
                  Apo. 1.3.
                
               Bleſſed is he that readeth, and they that heare the words of this Prophecy, &c. What can be ſaid more? or more effectually to ſtirre vs vp to heare and reade, and with all gladneſſe to embrace this booke, then to tell vs, that in ſo doing we ſhall be bleſſed? For the thinges contained in this booke, be no trifles: they be not things onely for a ſhew to mooue wonderment, or to delight the curious minds of men: but ſuch as indeed do giue true bleſſedneſſe vnto all thoſe that are well inſtructed in them. What thing is greater, then to bee bleſſed for euermore? If we be not exceeding dull, yea, euen like ſtockes and ſtones, it must needs moue vs & ſtir vs vp. For who will wittingly & willingly looſe his own bleſſednes, or ſuffer it to be taken from him when as he may haue it? If any will obiect that a man may be bleſſed well inough without the knowledge of this booke, and that there bee bookes inough in the Scripture, to procure our bleſſedneſſe, without this: and that thouſands are now in heauen, which neuer knew what this booke meant: I anſwere, that all this doth

not take away the neceſſary vſe of this booke: for the holy Ghoſt doth pronounce a bleſſing vpon the heads of thoſe that reade and ſtudie this booke, not becauſe a man cannot be ſaued without it: but becauſe of the great comfort which it miniſtreth vnto vs of this age, and hath miniſtred vnto all the Churches ſince the Apoſtles times. For it is the Propheſie of this age, and the Propheſie of all the ages ſince Chriſt: wherein is fully ſhewed what ſhall be the eſtate and conditiō of the Church in the ſeuerall ages thereof, vnto the ende of the worlde. For God according to his admirable wiſdome & mercy, hath neuer from the beginning left his church without a Propheſie, for the great comfort thereof. For we know, that immediately after the fall of our first parents, God himſelfe, for the great comfort of his Church, did foretell and forepropheſie long before of that reſtauration which ſhould be made by the Meſſias his ſonne,
                  Gen. 3. Gen. 15.
                according as it came to paſſe in the fulneſſe of time. Afterward he did foretell his people of Iſrael, of their great ſeruitude, and intollerable bondage in Egypt, and alſo of the ende and full determination thereof, after foure hundred and thirtie yeares. After all this he foretold by his ſeruants the Prophets of the captiuitie in Babylon, and the full expiration thereof at the end and tearme of ſeuentie yeares.
                  Ier. 25.
                And yet further for the comfort and conſolation of his people,
                  Dan. 7. Ezech. 38.
                he foretold by Daniel and Ezechiel, of the great afflictions & troubles which his Church ſhould endure by the perſecutions of the diuided Greeke Empire: (I meane Alexanders poſteritie,
                  Dan. 8.
                eſpecially the Kings of Egypt and Siria, which deſcended of Ptolomeus and Seleucus,
               
                  Dan. 9.
                
               
                  Dan. 11.
                whom the ſcripture calleth the Kings of the North and of the South) by the ſpace of 294 yeares, and of the preciſe determination thereof at the comming of the Meſſias. Loe then what care God hath had of his Church in all ages before the comming of his ſonne in the fleſh, ſo to foretell both of the affliction it ſelfe, and alſo of the iust period and determination thereof. And ſhall we not thinke that God hath the like care now for his church which then he had: or hath he not as great and as prouident care for the good of his Church ſince the promiſed Meſſias was actually exhibited as before? Yes aſſuredly, and much more too: for if his care and

prouidence was ſo great for his Church being in her ward-ſhip and minoritie: then much more now being come to her ripeneſſe and full age: If when it was leſſe glorious, then much more now, being farre more glorious. Therefore now vnto vs he foretelleth by his ſeruant Iohn what ſhall be the eſtate of the Church vnto the end of the world: and therefore Bleſſed is hee that heareth and readeth this booke: ſith it foretelleth of the Churches afflictions in this age by the whoore of Babylon, and of the full end and determination thereof. It ſheweth iuſtly and preciſely what the Church hath ſuffered ſince the Apoſtles times in ſeueral ages, and what it ſhall ſuffer: and alſo how all the enemies thereof ſhall ſhortly be troden vnder foote. What can be more ioyfull or comfortable to all the people of God, then to know afore-hand that Babylon ſhall fall: Rome ſhall downe: Antichriſt the great perſecutor of the Church, ſhalbe vtterly confounded and conſumed in this world; notwithſtanding all plottes and policies, crafts and deuiſes to the contrary; notwithſtanding all forces & armies cunningly contriued and raiſed vp againſt the Church by Seminary Prieſts, Ieſuites, Pope, Cardinall, and King of Spaine? For all theſe in this age do very buſily beſtirre them, and ranſacke all corners of their wits to repaire the ruines of Rome, and to make vp the breaches which are made in the walles of Babylon their great citie. But alas all in vaine, for it ſhall fall: It ſhal fall: It ſhal fall as Dagon before the preſence of the Arke, do what they can, ſpight of their hearts, maugre their beards: it ſhall fall finally: it ſhall without all hope of recouery: for hath the Lord ſpoken it, and ſhall it not come to paſſe? or can any word of his euer fall to the ground? Sith therefore the Ieſuits and Secular Prieſts do ſo fiske about, and croake in euery corner, as greatly fearing the fall of their Babylon, and the drying vp of their Euphrates, it ſtandes vs all in hand to be as reſolute for Chriſt, as they are for Antichriſt; and as ſtudious to vphold the kingdome of God, as they are to vphold the kingdome of the diuel. And for this purpoſe it is very requiſite and neceſſary, that all the Lords people ſhould be acquainted with this booke, and armed againſt them with the things reueald in this Propheſie. For this booke is a moſt precious Iewell

which God hath beſtowed vpon his Church in this laſt age: and it is great pitie that all the ſeruants of God are not better acquainted with it, eſpecially in theſe times, for now in this age is and ſhall be the very heate of the warre, and brunt of the battell betwixt Papiſts and Proteſtants; betwixt God and Belial; betwixt the armies of Chriſt, and the armies of Antichriſt. Now this Propheſie laieth all open, and plainly telleth vs what ſhalbe the iſſue and ſucceſſe in the day of battaile: which ſide ſhall haue the victory, and which ſide ſhall goe downe. And therefore very needfull it is that it ſhould be expounded againe and againe, and all the Lords people made throughly aaquainted with it. For in this age wherein we liue, this Propheſie can neuer be inough opened and beaten vpon, that all good Proteſtants may bee armed with it againſt future times, euen as it were with an armour of proofe. S. Iohn plainly telleth the people of his time, euen the Churches of Aſia, that they ſhould be bleſſed by reading and ſtudying this booke, becauſe they ſhould thereby be both forewarned, and forearmed againſt many eminent troubles and future dangers. For ſaith he, The time is at hand: that is to ſay, ſome things were euen then to be fulfilled. For ſome matters foretold in this booke, did begin to be fulfilled, euen preſently after they were ſhewed vnto Iohn, for the miſtery of iniquitie did euen then begin to worke. The Church in the Apoſtles time had her conflicts. The ten great perſecutions began euen then to be raiſed vp. Hereſies ſhortly after beganne to ſpring and ſprout. Afterward by degrees, the great Antichriſt did approach towards his curſed ſeate. And after all this, S. Iohn foretelleth how hee ſhould take poſſeſſion of his abhominable and moſt execrable ſeate and ſea of Rome: How he ſhould raigne and rule for a time as the Monarche of the world: How he ſhould preuaile againſt the Church, and make warre againſt the Saintes: How he ſhould raigne but a ſhort time, and afterward come tumbling downe, as faſt as euer he roſe vp, and decreaſe as faſt as euer he increaſed. Therefore Bleſſed is he (ſaith S. Iohn) that diligently readeth and peruſeth this booke, that thereby hee may foreſee all theſe thinges, and bee armed againſt them. For as the Heathen man ſaith; Leuius laedit quicquid praeuideris antè, Foreſeeing daungers do leaſt hurt. Now to apply all this to our

times, I ſay they are twiſe happie that are ſtudious and painfull in ſearching out the true ſenſe and meaning of this Propheſie, that thereby they may be ſtrengthned againſt all the aſſaults of the Papiſts our profeſſed enemies, and the enemies of Gods Church, and ſtick faſt to the euerlaſting truth of God, knowing for a certaintie that theſe ſonnes of Belial ſhall not long preuaile. The date of their raigne is almoſt out, and the time draweth on apace, wherein both they and their king Abaddon ſhalbe laide in the duſt. But I will now proceed to a new reaſō,
                  Apoc. 9 11.
                to proue that this booke of the Reuelations ought not to be concealed: but openly preached and publiſhed to the whole Church of God in this age. My reaſon is taken out of the 22. chapter of this booke, ver. 10. in theſe words. Seale not the words of the Propheſie of this booke, for the time is at hand. Here is a flat commandement from God, that this booke and the doctrine of it may not be ſealed vp; that is to ſay, kept cloſe from the knowledge of Gods people: but it muſt lie alwaies vnſealed, that all men may open it, read it, and ſee what is in it: for it is a borrowed ſpeech, taken from ſealing of Letters. For we all knowe, that when Letters are ſealed, none may open them, or reade them, but onely thoſe whom it doth concerne: but if they be of purpoſe left vnſealed, then any man may reade them without daunger: So the Lorde willeth and commaundeth, that this booke of the Reuelations ſhould of purpoſe be left vnſealed, that all the people of God might reade it, ſtudie it, and knowe it. If any man doubt whether the Metaphor of Sealing be thus taken in the ſcripture, let him reade the places quoted in the margent,
                  Eſa. 29 11. Dan. 12.9. Apoc. 4.1. Apoc. 10.4.
                and in all theſe places hee ſhall finde it taken in this ſenſe. Whereby it doth euidently appeare, that the minde and meaning of God is, that this booke ſhould be proclaimed and publiſhed in all the Churches. And vpon this grounde, I holde that euery Miniſter of the Gospell ſtandeth bounde as much as in him lyeth, to Preach the doctrine of the Apocalyps to his particular charge and congregation: for euery Minister of the Gospell muſt ſhewe vnto his people all the counſell of God, and keepe backe nothing: as Paul testifieth that hee did, to the great comfort of his conſcience. But the doctrine of the Reuelations is a part and parcell of the counſell and will of God: therefore it

muſt not be concealed or kept backe from the knowledge of the people of God. And in theſe dayes I thinke it not only meete and conuenient that it ſhould be ſo, but in truth abſolutely neceſſary.
            But now me thinketh I heare ſome man ſay: what? muſt this book of the Apocalyps be preached & made knowne to the commō people? alas, what ſhould they do with it? It is not for them to meddle withall: It is not for their diet. I anſwere, and yet not I, but the holy Ghoſt: that this booke muſt be made knowne to all the ſeruāts of God. For Saint Iohn calleth it the Reuelation of Ieſus Chriſt which God gaue him to ſhew vnto all his ſeruants.
                  Apoc. 1.1.
                It is plaine therefore, that al the ſeruantes of God, both men and women, yong and old, rich and poore, muſt be made acquainted with this booke. Moreouer, Iohn is commaunded by the God of heauen, to ſet downe all the viſions which the Angell ſhewed him: and to write them all in a booke, and ſend them to the ſeuen Churches of Aſia: that is, to people of all ſortes, and conditions:
                  Apoc. 1.11.
                And therefore this booke doth not only concerne preachers, and deep diuines; but euen all the Lords people whatſoeuer: for it doth miniſter great comfort and strength of faith to all the people of God, that liue in this age. But here the Papists obiect that this booke is full of darkeneſſe and obſcuritie, and therefore not for the common people to meddle withall: nay, (ſay they) there are as many miſteries, as words in it, and therefore what ſhould men trouble their heads about it. But no maruell though the Papists ſay ſo much, for it is the wound of their kingdom, and the battery of their Babylon. As for others, both learned and godly, which in this point are almoſt of the ſame mind, that they will not meddle with this booke of the Reuelations: I cannot but maruell at it. The modeſty and humility of ſome, very rare and reuerend men for learning, & great variety of gifts (which notwithſtanding ſcotch much at this book) is greatly to be commended: But if I were worthy to giue them aduice, I would wiſh them, in this behalfe to change their minde, and to be of another reſolution: for I dare auouch it, that there is nothing in this Propheſie, which ſtudy and diligence, with prayer and humility, may not ouercome. True it is indeed, that the ſhell is thicke, and hard to breake: but being broken, the kernell is moſt

ſweet and pleaſant. If any be diſcouraged with the darkeneſſe & obſcurity of it, let him hearken to theſe reaſons following. Firſt it is called a Reuelation, which is as much to ſay, as an vncouering of things which did lie hid: if it be an vncouering, and reuealing of things, then no doubt it may be knowne and ſeene into. For reuealed thinges are for vs and our children.
                  Deut. 19.
                If it be a Reuelation, how ſay ſome that it cannot be vnderſtood? For, it is contrary to the nature of a Reuelation, to be ſo darke that none can vnderſtand it. But ſhall we ſay that the holy Ghoſt which is the ſpirit of truth, hath giuen a wrong name vnto it? God forbid. For if it hide matters, or ſo ſet them forth that it cannot be vnderſtood, then it is not rightly called a Reuelation. If this booke be ſo myſticall that it cannot be vnderſtood: If the interpretation of it be vncertaine: If the common people cannot be taught to vnderſtand it: how then ſhould the holy Ghoſt ſay, Bleſſed is he that readeth the words of this Propheſie?
                     Apoc. 1.
                           •
                        . Apoc. 22 7.
                   &c. Let any man iudge that hath common ſenſe: Can any man be bleſſed by hearing and reading thoſe things which he vnderſtandeth not? I trow no. Then it followeth, that this booke may be vnderſtood, and no doubt is vnderſtood of many: and might bee better vnderſtood of many moe, if they would bend their wittes and ſtudies vnto it. The holy Ghoſt as I ſaid before,
                  Apoc. 22.10.
                willeth and commaundeth that the words of this Propheſie ſhould not be ſealed vp. Whereby it is euident, that he would haue them read and made knowne to all. Then I reaſon thus: That which is open and vnſealed, may be read and knowne: But this booke is open and vnſealed: Therefore it may be read and knowne. If men ſay the matters of this Propheſie are ſealed and hid, and God ſay they be vnſealed and open, whether ſhall we beleeue men or God? If any ſhall reply & ſay, we feele & finde by experience, that the words of this booke are hard to be vnderſtood: I anſwere, that the fault is in our ſelues, becauſe we are ſo negligent in the ſearch and ſtudy thereof. For if we did with that humilitie, and reuerend care that ought to be in vs, ſearch after the things reuealed in this booke, we ſhould finde that they be not ſealed vp, but lie open to bee read and knowne. True it is indeed, that if any man light vpon ſome peece, and take it by it ſelfe, he ſhall finde it very darke: But if he looke vpon the whole courſe of matters throughout the booke, and marke and obſerue diligently

how things be iterated, hee ſhall finde no ſuch darkneſſe as he feareth, for there is a notable coherence of matters, and courſe of times obſerued in this booke, euen from the first chapter vnto the laſt, as God willing ſhall more fully & plainly appeare in the particular opening and interpretation thereof. One great obiection againſt this Propheſie is, that the Fathers confeſſe it is full of myſteries, and that they could not vnderſtand it. If they could not vnderſtand it ſay ſome, how, how ſhall we vnderſtand it? Is it not great arrogancy for vs to ſay wee vnderſtand it better then they did. I anſwer no. For a man of meane learning in compariſon, may now in theſe daies more eaſily vnderſtand & expound this booke, then the learnedeſt Doctors and Fathers in auncient time. The reaſon is this, we liue in an age wherein the moſt of the things propheſied in this booke are fulfilled. Now the fulfilling of a propheſie is the beſt expoſition of it. But as for the Fathers, they liued in a time wherein many of theſe things were not come to paſſe, nor fulfilled, and therfore more hard for them to interprete and vnderſtand: for thoſe things in this Propheſie which are not yet fulfilled, are hardeſt for vs of this age to vnderſtand and reſolue of. But when a Propheſie is fulfilled, it is an eaſie matter to ſay this was the meaning of the Prophet. Some things in this booke were fulfilled before the daies of the Fathers, and ſome thinges in the daies wherein they liued: and both thoſe they did clearely vnderſtand. Some things were fulfilled after their daies, as the riſing and raigning of the great Antichriſt, which they did not ſo clearly ſee into. Hereupon it commeth to paſſe, that many things which vnto them were very obſcure, are vnto vs moſt cleare & manifeſt: as being already fulfilled: inſomuch that all which are not wilfully blinded, may ſee and vnderſtand them, yea the moſt vnlearned. Be not therefore diſcouraged (gentle Reader) at the darkneſſe & difficultie of this booke. Doe not preiudicially reſolue and ſet downe with thy ſelfe, that the naturall ſenſe of this booke cannot be giuē, nor the true meaning found out, but that we muſt be faine when we haue done all that we can, to reſt in vncertaine coniectures, ſome following one ſenſe, and ſome an other, as ſeemeth moſt like and probable. But no man can ſay confidently and preciſely this is the meaning of the holy Ghoſt. Oh be not of that minde good Chriſtian brother: for if we haue not an vndoubted

certainty for the ſenſe & meaning of this Propheſie, we are neuer the nearer: and that is it which the Papiſts would driue vs vnto. But know for a certainty, that the naturall ſenſe of this booke, is to be found out, as well as of other bookes of the Scripture. And that we might not be left to our ſelues in the darke, and to our vncertaine coniectures, and doubtfull interpretations; Behold the mercifull goodneſſe of God to his Church, who himſelfe doth expound the darkeſt, and most miſticall things in this Propheſie, or at leaſt ſo many of them, and ſo far, as the reſt are thereby laid open, and made manifest. The Lord himſelfe expoundeth ſome things in the firſt Chapter, which giue cleare light to the firſt viſion: The Angell expoundeth diuers other things. In the 17. Chapter, which is the key of this propheſie, the Angel doth of purpoſe, open and interpret all the greateſt doubts of this booke: as who is the Whore of Babylon, who is the beaſt, what be his ſeuen heads, what be his 10. hornes, what be the waters which the woman, that is, the Whore of Rome, ſitteth vpon. Moreouer, for the better vnderſtanding of this Propheſie, we muſt note, that the writings of Moyſes and the Prophets, vnto which there bee ſundry alluſions, and from the which ſundry things are drawne, do cleare diuers things in this Reuelation. The knowledge of antiquities, miniſtreth much aide to the vnderſtanding of this Propheſie. The knowledge of the hiſtories of the Church, and the particular ſtate thereof in diuers ages, bringeth great light. The obſeruation of the phraſes and maner of ſpeech, vſed by the old Prophets, doth helpe alſo not a little. The ſerious and deepe weighing of all the circumſtances of the text, & conferring one thing with another the cōſequents with the antecedents, & the antecedents with the conſequēts, furthereth greatly for the bolting out of the true & natural ſenſe. And furthermore, as the ſpirit of God is the author of this propheſie, ſo the ſame ſpirit is the beſt interpreter of it, & doth opē and reueale it to all ſuch, as vſing al other good meanes are earneſt and humble ſuters vnto God, for the illumination thereof: whereby they may vnderſtand both this, and all other the myſteries of his will: which the Apoſtle ſaith, God hath reuealed vnto vs by his ſpirit:
                  1. Cor. 2.
                For the ſpirit ſearcheth all things, yea, the deepe things of God. To all this may be added the knowledge of artes, tongues, and the learned writings, and interpretations of ſundry

excellent men, which all do bring great furtherance to the vnderſtanding of this Propheſie. Sith then there be ſo many helpes for the opening and expounding of this Reuelation: why ſhould any be diſcouraged from the reading and ſtudy thereof? But if any man demaund a reaſon, why Saint Iohn writeth this Reuelation in ſuch miſticall and allegoricall maner: I anſwere, that there may be diuers reaſons yeelded hereof. Firſt, that the world being blinded, might fulfill the things herein ſpecified. Secondly, becauſe Iohn was to publiſh this Reuelation, in ſuch maner and forme as he had receiued it from Ieſus Chriſt, which was figuratiue and allegoricall. Thirdly, becauſe it was much more wiſedome, to foretel the deſtructiō of the Romaine Empire, which al that time bare the ſway, almoſt ouer all the world, vnder couert and figuratiue ſpeeches, then in plaine tearmes, leaſt the Romaine Princes ſhould rage more againſt the Chriſtians, euen in that reſpect. The like alſo may be ſaid, for Daniels darke maner of deliuering his Propheſie. For if he had vttered thoſe things in plaine tearmes, which he ſpake darkely and allegorically, it might haue coſt him his life. For the heathen enemies would neuer haue endured to heare that all their Empires glory and renowne ſhould fall one after another, and one by another: and that the Iewes were the onely holy people whome God did defend, and to whome in the ende, God would not onely giue a quiet poſſeſſion of their owne land and kingdome: but alſo a kingdome euerlasting, & that through their Meſſias and great deliuerer. But to grow to a concluſion (gentle Reader) thou ſhalt find in this poore trauell: Firſt, an expoſition of the firſt 13. Chapters: after thou ſhalt find the next 6. Chapters, vnto the twentith, reduced all to one head, which is to proue the 5. points propounded: and laſt of all the 3. Chapters following briefely and plainely expounded. If any through lazineſſe will not, or through want of leiſure cannot read ouer this ſhort trauel: yet for his cōfort, let him read thoſe things only which are written vpō the 14. Chapter. And thus (Chriſtian Reader) hoping that thou wilt not neglect that which may be for thine owne good, I commēd thee to God, & to the word of his grace, which is able to build further, and to giue thee an inheritance among all them that are ſanctified.
            
               Thine in the Lord, Arthur Dent.
            
         
         
            
            Vpon the 14. Chapter of this Booke, theſe fiue points are handled.
            
               Firſt, that Babylon in this Booke of the Reuelation is Rome.
               
               Secondly, that Rome ſhall fall, and how.
               Thirdly, that Rome ſhall fall finally, and come to vtter deſolation in this life, before the laſt iudgement.
               Fourthly, by whom, and when it ſhall be ouerthrowne.
               Fiftly, the cauſes of the vtter ruine and ouerthrow thereof.
            
            
               
                  
                     Apoc. 18. verſ. 4.
                  I heard a voice from heauen ſay: Goe out of her my people, that ye be not partakers of her ſinnes, and that ye receiue not of her plagues.
               
            
         
      
      
         
            
            THE RVINE OF Rome, or an Expoſition vpon the Reuelation.
            
               Wherein is plainly ſhewed and proued, that the Popiſh Religion, together with all the power and authoritie of Rome, ſhall ebbe and decaie ſtill more and more, throughout all the Churches of Europe, and come to an vtter ouerthrow, euen in this life.
            
            
               
                  BEfore I enter into the expoſition of this Propheſie, I thinke it not amiſſe to handle ſixe circumſtantiall points, which may giue ſome light to the whole matter following, and they be theſe.
               
                  Firſt the inſtrument that writ this booke.
                  Secondly, the time when he writ it.
                  Thirdly, the place where he receiued it.
                  Fourthly, the perſons to whom he writ it.
                  Fiftly, the ende and vſe of his writing this Propheſie.
                  Laſtly, the authoritie of it.
               
               As touching the firſt, it is agreed vpon amongſt

the ſoundeſt Diuines, that Iohn the Apoſtle or Euangeliſt; Iohn the Diſciple, whom Ieſus loued, was the Authour and Inſtrument of penning this Propheſie:Apoc. 22. verſe 8. Apoc. 1. verſe 19. as hee himſelfe teſtifieth, ſaying: I am Iohn which ſawe theſe things and heard them. And he receiueth a commaundement from Ieſus Chriſt which hath the keies of hell & death, that hee ſhould write the things which hee had ſeene and heard,Apoc. 1. verſe 11. and ſet them all downe together in a booke. Now we all know that the teſtimony of Iohn is of great weight, though hee be but a man: for hee is ſuch a man as is firmely to be beleeued in all that he ſpeaketh. Hee is an Apoſtle, an Inſtrument of the holy Ghoſt, and ſo guided by the ſpirit of God, that he ſpeaketh & vttereth nothing that is his owne. He was well knowne to the Churches to be one of Chriſts Apoſtles, his authoritie among all the faithfull was throughly knowne and approued. For we muſt conſider, that what an Apoſtle did vtter, hee did vtter it as the inſtrumēt of the ſpirit, which cannot erre. For the prophets & Apoſtles did not write the holy ſcriptures as they were men only, nor yet as they were Miniſters of the church only, but as they were the immediate & certain inſtruments of the holy Ghoſt, of purpoſe choſen & ſet apart to pen & publiſh the holy bookes of God.2. Pet. 1. verſe 21: This S. Peter confirmeth ſaying: Propheſie came not in old time by the wil of man, but holy mē of God ſpake as they were moued by the holy Ghoſt. The Apoſtle Paul alſo affirmeth the ſame touching his Goſpell, which ſaith,Gal. 1. ver. 12. 
                  he was not after man, neither receiued hee it of man, but by the reuelation of Ieſus Chriſt. Therefore whē this our Apoſtle ſaith, I am Iohn, which ſaw theſe things, and heard them, hee giueth vs to vnderſtand, that hee was both an eye and an eare witneſſe. Hee

bringeth not matters which he hath heard by vncertain report: he deliuereth this book to the churches: they which receiued it at his hāds, did know him to be a moſt faithfull ſeruant of the Lord, euen a great Apoſtle, which deliuereth not any thing but that which he had receiued of the Lord, and therfore he teſtifieth, that he ſaw & heard al the things which he hath written in this booke. And moreouer he teſtifieth of himſelfe, that he was called and authoriſed by Ieſus Chriſt, to write this Propheſie, & did nothing herein of himſelfe, or of his own brain. For ſaith he, I Iohn, heard behind me a great voice,
                  Apoc. 1. ver. 10.11. 
                  as it had bene of a trompet, ſaying, I am Alpha & Omega, the firſt and the laſt, & that which thou ſeeſt write in a booke, & ſend it vnto the Churches. Here we ſee how Iohn is called & authoriſed, by Alpha and Omega, that is Ieſus Chriſt, to write this doctrine of the Apocalyps. But may ſome man ſay, was not Iohn called before? was he not one of the Lambes 12. Apoſtles? had he not now many yeares executed the office of the Apoſtleſhip right faithfully? muſt hee now haue a new calling, & a ſecond calling? what needs he being an Apoſtle, to be called & authoriſed again? To this I anſwer, that this matter now in hand, was a new & a ſpecial work, and therfore requires a new & ſpecial calling. It is a ſtrāge reuelation, & therfore requireth a new authoritie to meddle in it. For in this propheſie God dealeth with Iohn, as he did with the old prophets in like caſes. For whē he wold foreſhew vnto any of thē ſpeciall matters, he called them by glorious viſions, as we may read what a goodly viſiō 
                  Eſay had:Eſay 6. what a viſion ful of glory Ezechiel had: & what a viſiō 
                  Daniel had,Ezech. 1. Dan. 10. euē in maieſtie like vnto this which Iohn hath here. Thus then it is to be conſidered.
               
                  
                  Iohn now is as one of the old Prophets, to foreſhew things to come: therefore the Lord appeareth vnto him in viſion, and calleth him, and authoriſeth him therevnto, as he appeared vnto them & called them. Let this then ſuffice for a reaſon of Iohns new calling to his new worke and office. And thus much touching the firſt circumſtance.
               Now followeth the ſecond circumſtance, which is the time whē 
                  Iohn receiued this Propheſie, which is noted to be vpon a Lords day.Apoc. 1.10. It is the day which S.
                  1. Cor. 6.2. 
                  Paul to the Corinthians calleth the firſt day of the weeke: in which the Churches did meete for the holy exerciſes in religion: which is alſo euident, becauſe hee ſaith they came together to breake bread. Now the obſeruation of a ſeuenth day is of diuine inſtitution,Act. 20.7. euen from the beginning. It is naturall, morall, and perpetuall: for God bleſſed the ſeuenth day, and ſanctified it. We are therfore to thinke, that although Iohn now in his exile was abſent in bodie from the church aſſemblies, yet he was preſent with them in ſpirit, commending them moſt earneſtly vnto God in his holy praiers, and meditations: and therefore it is ſaid, that hee was rauiſhed in the ſpirit vpon the Lords day. So we reade, that the like befell vnto Daniel,
                  Dan. 7.2. Ezec. 3.12.14. when hee was priſoner in Babylon: the like alſo vnto Ezechiel, who was taken by the ſpirit in the viſions of God, and carried to Ieruſalem: The like to Peter,
                  Act. 10.10. 2. Cor. 12.2. the like to Paul. But the ſpeciall reaſon of Iohns rauiſhment in the ſpirit at this time was, that thereby hee might be made more fit and capable to receiue and vnderſtand all thoſe great myſteries and heauenly viſions, which now ſhould be ſhewed vnto

him. And withall, let vs obſerue, that all men are alwaies moſt capable of heauenly things, when they are moſt in the ſpirit: for God doth euermore moſt reueale himſelfe to ſuch as are moſt in praier, reading, and meditation; and to ſuch as make greateſt conſcience to ſpend his Sabaoths Chriſtianly, and religiouſly, according to his great commandement. And let vs alwaies be ſure of this, that the more feruent & zealous we are in religious duties, the more familiar acquaintance we ſhall finde with God, and he will at all times be the more open-hearted vnto vs, and will hide nothing from vs that may be for his glorie, and our good. For ſuch as are much in heauenly contemplatiō, he doth reckē not amongſt his ſeruants, but amongſt his deareſt friendes;Iohn 15.15. to whom he will make knowne all things that he hath heard of his Father. But now let vs proceed to the third circumſtance.
               The third circumſtance is the place where Iohn receiued this Propheſie, and that is ſet downe to be the Ile of Pathmos: which (as the Geographers write) is a litle deſart Iland lying in the Aegean ſea, wherein it is reported that Iohn the Apoſtle was baniſhed by the Emperour Domitian, about the yeare of our Lorde 96. and there receiued, and writ this booke of the Apocalyps: where note by the way, that there is no place ſo obſcure or vaſt, wherein a godly mind may not aſpire vp vnto heauen, and receiue a great largeſſe of ſupernaturall things: for Daniel in priſon, Peter in a Tanners houſe, Paul in a broken ſhippe receiued a ſuperabundant meaſure of grace, more to be eſteemed then all the golde of

                  India. Some write, that this Ile of Pathmos is accounted amongſt the Ilands called Sporades, which lye ouer againſt Aſia, and the Citie of Epheſus, and was in the ſight both of Europe and Affrica, ſo that it ſeemed to bee as it were as middle ſeate or holy chaire, out of the which Chriſt preached by Iohn from heauen to the whole world. And indeed the counſels of God are wonderful, and his goodneſſe vnſpeakeable, which reuealeth ſo great myſteries to his faithful, as it were out of the Romiſh priſon, and Babylonicall captiuitie.
               Moreouer, Iohn declareth the cauſe of his comming into the ſame Iland; for hee ſaith, he was there for the word of God,Apoc. 1.9. and the teſtimonie of Ieſus Chriſt: that is, for the preaching and conſtant profeſſion of the Goſpell of Chriſt.
               Hiſtories doo report, that Iohn was apprehended in Aſia, and by ſouldiers ledde to Rome, that hee might pleade his cauſe before the Emperour Domitian, who moſt ſauagely and cruelly condemned the innocent, and cauſed him to bee put into a cauldron of hotte boiling Oyle, out of the which when hee by miraculous prouidence eſcaped without harme, hee was carried and conueied into the Ile of Pathmos.
               
               But immediately after Iohns baniſhment, God met well inough with this perſecuting Emperour Domitian. For in the fifteenth yeare of his raigne hee was moſt cruelly and ſhamefully murthered by his owne ſeruants. And thus much for the third circumſtance.
               Now it followeth to ſpeake of the fourth circumſtance,

which is, the perſons to whom this propheſie is written,Apoc. 1.1. and that is ſet downe in the firſt chapter and firſt verſe, to bee all the ſeruants of God. As many therefore as be the ſeruants of God, muſt attend vnto this booke, heare it, reade it, and remember it: for to all ſuch it is dedicated by the holy Ghoſt, to all ſuch it belongeth, for all ſuch it is written and recorded.
               Some do falſely and fooliſhly imagine, that it was giuen onely to Iohn, and that it might likewiſe bee giuen to ſome ſpeciall men, as to ſome great ſchollers or deepe diuines, which could tell how to vſe it, and how to weld it. But wee ſee how groſſely they erre: for the holy Ghoſt ſaith, it belongeth to all the ſeruants of God. And moreouer, 
                     chapter 1.11. 
                  Iohn is willed and commaunded to write all the things which hee ſawe in ſundrie viſions in a booke together, and to ſend it to the ſeuen Churches which are in Aſia, becauſe the Lorde would haue it remaine in perfect record vnto the vſe of the whole Church, both that the Church might haue the cuſtodie of this booke, and alſo that it might bee a faithfull witneſſe vnto the ende of the world, that this booke was written and penned by Iohn the Apoſtle, of whoſe truth and ſinceritie the church had ſufficient experience.
               True it is indeede that there are but ſeuen churches named, but vnder theſe ſeuen Churches all others are comprehended. It had bene an infinite matter to recken vp all the particular Churches which were then in the world, and to haue

opened their ſeuerall eſtates: therefore vnder theſe ſeuen Churches of Aſia, and their particular and ſeuerall eſtates, the ſtate of the vniuerſall Church militant is laid open. I conclude therfore, that the whole doctrine of S. Iohns Reuelation, appertaineth to the vniuerſall Church of Chriſt throughout all the world, and in all times and ages, ſince it was written and recorded. And that as all ſcripture is written for our inſtruction and comfort:Rom 15.4. 2. Tim. 3.16. and as all ſcripture giuen by diuine inſpiration, is profitable to teach and conuince, &c: ſo this booke of the Apocalyps is written for the ſpeciall comfort and inſtruction of the Church in theſe laſt daies. And ſo I do conclude this fourth point.
               The fift circumſtantiall point is, the end and vſe of this Propheſie, 
                     chapter 1.1. which is to publiſh and blaze abroad the things which muſt ſhortly come to paſſe, that is, all things propheſied in this booke, and to be fulfilled euen to the end of the world. And whereas he ſaith, that theſe things muſt come to paſſe, hee doth vs to vnderſtand how great the ſtableneſſe, and aſſuredneſſe of Gods determination is. For looke what things are foreappointed by Gods determinate purpoſe, they are altogether vnchaungeable: for the Lord is God, and he is not chaunged. And he ſaith:Mal. 3.6. Eſa. 46.10. Math. 24.35. 
                  My determination ſhall ſtand, and all my will ſhall come to paſſe. And Chriſt ſaith: Heauen and earth ſhall paſſe away, but my word ſhall not paſſe. It is therefore moſt certaine, that euery particular thing contained in this propheſie, ſhall bee fulfilled in Gods appointed time. For God hath diſcloſed theſe things to his ſonne Chriſt, not to the end he ſhould

ſhut them vp againe in himſelfe, but that he ſhould ſhewe them forth to the godly, that the whole Church might fare the better by them. It doth then ſtand vs all vpon to enquire and ſearch into theſe things which muſt ſo ſhortly come to paſſe, that thereby wee may bee ſtrengthened and comforted againſt all future dangers. And Chriſt ſaith:Apoc. 22.7. 
                  Beholde I come ſhortly. Bleſſed is hee that keepeth the words of the Propheſie of this booke. But how ſhall we keepe them except wee knowe them? and how ſhall wee know them except wee reade them, and ſtudie them? If therefore we meane to bee partakers of this bleſſedneſſe, wee muſt not onely eſteeme this booke to bee very profitable, but abſolutely neceſſarie for all the ſeruants of God to be exerciſed in. And if euer there were any time wherein it behoued to ſet forth, to vrge, and to beate in this doctrine to all the people of God, then is it chiefly neceſſarie to bee done in this our time. For this age of ours hath in the Popes kingdome, many ſharpe and quicke wits, which commend with maruellous praiſes both the Pope, and the Popiſh Church, and buzze into the eares of the common people, and vnlearned ſorte, many things cleane contrarie to the doctrine of the ſcriptures. The Ieſuites & Prieſts are growne exceeding craftie and cunning. The Papiſts are rich, wealthy, and full of armour and munition. Poperie ſeemeth to make a head againe, and the Papiſts looke for a day. It ſtands vs then all vpon which loue Chriſt and his Goſpell, that wee ſhould be well appointed, and throughly armed againſt them. And for this purpoſe the Reuelation of S. Iohn, is of great vſe & neceſſitie.
               
                  As I ſaid before, ſo I ſay againe, that it is the Propheſie of our time, written to this ſpeciall ende, that by it wee might bee both fore-warned and fore-armed. If wee doo conſider the whole matter of this booke, wee ſhall eaſily finde out the vſe and end of it. For the excellent matter of it doth argue the excellent ende and vſe of it.
               Now then, as concerning the generall matter of this booke, here are to bee founde very large and liuely deſcriptions of the moſt glorious perſon of Chriſt, 
                     chapter 1 and all his excellent offices, both of King,Cap. 2. Cap. 3. Cap 7. Cap. 12. Cap. 7. Cap. 8. Cap. 15. Prieſt, and Prophet: and alſo moſt notable deſcriptions of the Church, and of the Miniſters of it: and of the perſecutions and afflictions, which it muſt of neceſſitie paſſe through in this world. Alſo of Gods mercifull prouidence for his Church, and moſt vigilant care ouer it in the middeſt of all extremities.Cap. 12. Cap. 1
                        •
                     . Cap. 9. Here are ſet before our eyes very liuely deſcriptions of the Churches deadly enemies; both of Sathan himſelfe, and his three great inſtruments, the Romaine Emperour, the Pope, and the Turke.
               
                  Cap. 18. Cap 19. Cap. 14. Cap 20.Here are ſet downe all their cruell perſecutions of the Church, and their vtter ouerthrowe in the ende. Here are deſcribed hell, death, the reſurrection, and the laſt iudgement. Here alſo the very kingdome of heauen is at large deſcribed, with all thoſe great rewards,Cap. 21. Cap. 22. infinite glory, and endleſſe felicitie, which remaine for all the faithfull worſhippers of God.
               I conclude therefore, that for as much as this Propheſie is of ſuch excellent contents, therefore

the vſe and neceſſitie of it muſt needes bee verie great. And for this cauſe Iohn is willed and commaunded by Alpha and Omega, 
                  
                     chapter 1.19. to write the things which hee had ſeene, the things that were, and the things that ſhall come hereafter. By the things which he had ſeene, is meant that glorious viſion mentioned in the firſt Chapter, 
                     verſ. 13, 14, 15, 16. wherein Ieſus Chriſt did appeare vnto him in the middeſt of the ſeuen golden Candleſtickes, in moſt glorious manner, as is there deſcribed. And all this was in the Ile of Pathmos, where Iohn was firſt called, and authoriſed to this worke, and therfore he is willed firſt of all, to record this viſion which hee had alreadie ſeene.
               By the things that are, hee meaneth the preſent ſtate of the ſeuen Churches of Aſia, which were then the moſt flouriſhing Churches in the world, as they are deſcribed in the ſecond and third Chapters, and in them the eſtate of all other Churches.
               By the things that ſhalbe, he meaneth all the propheſies of this booke, which were to bee fulfilled in their time, & al thoſe ſtrange accidents, which ſhould come to paſſe in proceſſe of time, and the ſeuerall ages of the Church, euen vnto the end of the world. Thus we ſee how Iohn receiueth a preciſe commandement from the ſonne of God, to write things paſt, preſent, & to come, that they might ſtand in record vnto all poſterities, from generation to generation. Thus much touching the fift circumſtance, which is the ende and vſe of this booke.
               Now followeth to ſpeake of the laſt circumſtantiall

point, which is the authoritie of this Propheſie, which is ſtrongly confirmed from the Author of it, which is Ieſus Chriſt; and therefore it is called the Reuelation of Ieſus Chriſt, which God gaue vnto him. 
                     chapter 1.1. And againe it is written: I Ieſus ſent mine Angell to teſtifie theſe things in the Churches. 
                  
                     chapter 22 16. Here wee ſee plainely, that Ieſus Chriſt the very ſonne of God, the Alpha and Omega, is the Author of this booke, for hee ſubſcribes his name vnto it, and ſets his hand and ſeale vnto it. Needes therefore muſt the authoritie of it bee very great, which commeth from ſo great a perſonage: for looke what dignitie and authoritie he is of, from whom the booke commeth, of the ſame dignitie & authoritie is the booke it ſelfe.
               An other ſtrong argument to confirme the authoritie of this booke, may be taken from the proteſtation of Ieſus Chriſt in theſe words: I protest vnto euery man that heareth the words of the Propheſie of this booke, 
                  
                     chapter 22 18. 
                  if any man ſhall adde vnto theſe things, God ſhall adde vnto him the plagues that are written in this booke. And if any ſhall diminish of the words of the booke of this Propheſie, God shall take away his part out of the booke of life. Here wee ſee how Ieſus Chriſt maketh the authoritie of this booke equall to all other the Oracles of God, to the which it is not lawfull for any man to adde or detract vnder paine of condemnatiō. It maketh much alſo for the authoritie of this booke, that S.Cap. 1.1. Cap. 1.4. Cap. 1.9. Cap. 22.8. 
                  Iohn doth ſo often repeate, reiterate, and inculcate his owne name; I Iohn, I Iohn, I Iohn: I Iohn the Apoſtle; I Iohn the Euangeliſt; I Iohn the Diuine. Shewing by all theſe repetitions, how needfull a thing it was

that the faithfull ſhould bee throughly inſtructed who he was, euen one of the Lambes twelue Apoſtles, and therefore to be voide of all ſuſpition and doubt concerning the authoritie of this booke, and not once to imagine it to bee any inuention of man, or faigned deuice, ſith it was penned by ſo great an Apoſtle.
               Moreouer, the authoritie of this Propheſie is confirmed by foure reaſons in the laſt chapter. The firſt is the affirmatiō of the Angell, who ſaith: 
                     chapter 22.6, 7, 8. 
                  Theſe words are faithfull & true. The ſecond is the authoritie of the moſt high God himſelfe in theſe wordes: 
                     verſ. 6 
                  The Lorde God of the holy Prophets ſent his Angell to ſhewe vnto his ſeruants the things which must ſhortly bee fulfilled. The third is the teſtimonie of Ieſus, who pronounceth them bleſſed which keepe the words of this Propheſie. For ſaith he, Behold I come shortly: 
                  
                     verſ. 7 
                  Bleſſed is hee that keepeth the words of his Propheſie. The fourth and laſt is the witneſſe of Iohn in theſe words: I am Iohn which heard and ſawe theſe things. 
                  
                     verſ. 8 Now it may bee demaunded, what is the cauſe that here are ſo many things heaped vp for the confirmation of the authoritie of this booke. Surely wee muſt thinke there is ſome ſpeciall cauſe and reaſon of it. For the holy Ghoſt dooth not vſe to deale ſo much and ſo earneſtly in a matter, but vpon great cauſe. We may eaſily gather what the cauſe is. This booke painteth out the whore of Babylon, and the whole kingdome of the great Antichriſt, together with all Sathans cunning and ſleight therein, and for this cauſe Sathan hath laboured eſpecially to weaken the credit and authoritie of this booke. Hee by ſome meanes

in olde time preuailed thus farre, that euen among ſome Churches of true Chriſtians, the authoritie and truth of it was doubted of. The holy Ghoſt did well foreſee this practiſe of Sathan, and therefore bringeth the moe reaſons for the confirmation therof. If the credit and authoritie of this booke ſhould neuer haue bene impugned, there needed not any ſuch ſpecial confirmatiō. But now (God be thanked) there is no queſtion or controuerſie concerning the authoritie of this Propheſie. It is receiued as authenticall by the common conſent of all the Churches. Almoſt all the auncient Fathers do acknowledge it to bee Canonicall. The new writers doo with one voice giue their conſent & approbation vnto it. The Papiſts themſelues do acknowledge it to bee the ſacred & vndoubted word of God, though of al ſcriptures they cannot endure it ſhould be medled withall, becauſe it cutteth them ſo neare the bone. Moreouer, it may not be omitted, that God is called the Lord God of the holy Prophets, 
                     chapter 22. verse 6. which proueth, that this Propheſie is of equall authoritie with the Propheſies, which were of olde, in as much as the ſame God is the Author of it. And this booke is to be held in the ſame account with the bookes of Moſes, and of the Prophets; for all things contained in it ſhall as certainly be fulfilled in their time, as theirs were. In Eſay, in Ieremie, in Ezechiel, in Daniel, and in the reſt, we find many things, which the Lord ſhewed by thē lōg before they came to paſſe. Euē ſo there be many things foreſhewed & fore-propheſied in this booke, which in their time ſhalbe aſſuredly fulfilled. Nay, we ſee and know, that many things here fore-tolde,

are already fulfilled, & ſome things are come to paſſe euen in theſe our daies. Hee that ſhall looke into the times that are paſt, ſince this Propheſie was giuē; ſhal finde that all things haue fallen out agreeable to the Propheſie of this booke. And ſurely if there were none other thing to perſwade vs touching the authoritie thereof, this might ſuffice, that euery thing hath fallen out iuſt and iumpe, as this Propheſie did foreſhewe. It is our great negligence, that we do not clearely ſee ſo much. And I do humbly entreate all the people of God to looke more diligently and narrowly into it in all time to come. And thus much concerning the circumſtances.
               Now, as concerning the booke it ſelfe, it may very fitly be deuided into three viſions, as it were into three generall parts. The firſt viſion is contained in the three firſt Chapters. The ſecond viſion is contained in the next eight Chapters following, from the 4. to the 12. Chapter. And the laſt viſion is contained in all the Chapters following, from the 12. to the ende.
               As concerning the firſt viſion, my purpoſe is not to ſtand much vpon it, becauſe it is plaine and eaſie to vnderſtand, and becauſe it containeth no Propheſies of things to come, but onely openeth the preſent ſtate of the Church at that time, & alſo becauſe I haue alreadie touched the ſumme of it in handling the circumſtantiall points, I will therefore content my ſelfe with a very briefe opening and reſolution of it, beginning at the firſt Chapter.
            
            
               
               CHAP. I.
               
                  The ſumme of the firſt Chapter.
                  THe firſt Chapter containeth foure principall things.

                        The Title of the booke.
                        The ſalutation of the Churches.
                        The maner of Iohns calling to receiue this Propheſie.
                        The deſcription of Chriſt, the perſon that calleth him.
                     
                  
               
               
                  The Title of the booke is ſet downe in theſe words: The Reuelation of Ieſus Christ which God gaue him.
                  
                  
                     
                        verſ. 1 It containeth three things: Firſt the Author of the booke, which is Ieſus Chriſt, receiuing it from God the Father.
                  
                     
                        verſ. 1.2. Secondly, the end and vſe of this booke, which is, to ſhewe vnto all the ſeruants of God the things which muſt ſhortly be done.
                  
                     
                        verſ. 3 Thirdly, the ſingular fruite and benefite which the Church ſhall receiue by it, in theſe words: Bleſſed is he that readeth, and they that heare the words of this Propheſie, &c.
                  
                  
                     
                        verſ. 4 The ſalutation is in theſe words: Iohn to the ſeuen Churches which are in Aſia, Grace bee with you, & peace, &c. It containeth a deſcription of the Trinitie, or three perſons in the God-head. The Father is deſcribed

of his eternitie, namely, to be he which is, which was, and which is to come.
                  
                     
                        verſ. 4 The holy Ghoſt is deſcribed of his diuerſe gifts and operations, and therefore is called the ſeuen ſpirits which are before the Throne, or which proceed from the Throne: but S. Iohn ſpeaketh here of the holy Ghoſt, according to the viſion ſhewed him in the fift chapter, where Chriſt is ſaid to haue ſeuen eyes, which are the ſeuen ſpirits of God, ſent into all the the world. Of the which afterward.
                  
                     
                        verſ. 5 6. Ieſus Chriſt is deſcribed of his three great offices, of King, Prieſt, and Prophet, and alſo of his glorious power and eternitie. 
                        verſ. 7.8. 
                  
                  Firſt, touching his kingly office, hee is called the Prince of the Kings of the earth, that is, 
                        verſ. 5 King of Kings, for he is King of Sion. He is a King to rule and gouerne his Church. Hee muſt raigne ouer the houſe of Iudah for euer. Hee muſt raigne ouer all his enemies, and in the middeſt of all his enemies, euen till he haue trode them all vnder his feete. And this benefite we haue by it, that we are made Kings in him, in this life to raigne ouer our corrupt affections, and after this life to raigne as crowned kings foreuer with him, in infinite glorie, and endleſſe felicitie.
                  Secondly, touching his Prieſt-hood, 
                        verſ. 5 hee is ſaid to loue vs, and waſh vs from our ſinnes in his bloud. For hee is our onely high Prieſt, which by his owne bloud hath once entred into the holy place, and obtained eternall redemption for vs. Hee onely it is,Heb. 9.12. which through the eternall Spirit, offered himſelfe without fault to God,Heb. 9.14. to purge our conſciences

from dead workes to ſerue the liuing God. So then by vertue of his Prieſt-hood and ſacrifice, wee are reconciled vnto God, haue free acceſſe vnto the throne of grace, and are made Prieſts in him to offer vp ſpiritual ſacrifices acceptable to God through him. 
                        verſ. 6 For hee hath made vs Kings and Prieſts vnto God, euen his Father.
                  
                  Thirdly, concerning his Propheticall office, hee is called that faithfull witneſſe. For hee ſaid to Pilate: 
                     
                        verſ. 5 
                     Iohn. 18 37. 
                     For this cauſe was I borne, and for this cauſe came I into the world, that I might beare witneſſe vnto the truth.
                     1. Tim. 6.13. And the Apoſtle ſaith: Hee witneſſed vnder Pontius Pilate a good confeſsion. So then Ieſus Chriſt is one of thoſe three great witneſſes which beare record in heauen.
                     1. Iohn. 5. Ieſus Chriſt is the Prince of Prophets, euen that great Prophet that ſhould come into the world, through whom all the counſels of God are reuealed vnto vs: he is that only begotten ſon which is come downe from the boſome of his Father, and hath made knowne vnto vs whatſoeuer he hath receiued of his Father. Hee both by his doctrine, life, and miracles, hath borne witneſſe vnto the truth, and by the vertue of his Propheticall office, the whole will of God is made knowne vnto vs. For God hath ſent him as the great Prophet to inſtruct the world in righteouſneſſe, and hath reuealed himſelfe to vs in him:Coll 1.1
                           •
                        . Heb. 1.3. and therefore hee is called the Image of the inuiſible God, the brightneſſe of his glorie, and the ingrauen forme of his perſon. And therefore hee ſaid to Philip: Hee that hath ſeene mee, hath ſeene my Father alſo.
                     Iohn. 14.7. 
                     And if you had knowne mee, you ſhould haue knowne my Father alſo.
                  
                  
                     And againe: No man knoweth the Father,
                     Math. 15.27. 
                     but the Sonne, and hee to whom the Sonne will reueale him. Thus then wee ſee that Ieſus Chriſt is that faithfull witneſſe, and Prince of Prophets, in whom the will of God, and all the counſels of his Father are reuealed vnto vs.
                  The manner of Iohns calling to receiue this Propheſie, is ſet downe in theſe wordes: 
                        verſ. 9 
                     I Iohn euen your brother and companion in tribulation and in the kingdome and patience of Ieſus Christ, was in the Ile of Pathmos for the word of God, and for the witneſsing of Ieſus Christ: 
                     
                        verſ. 10 
                     And I was rauiſhed in the ſpirit on the Lords day, and heard behinde mee a great voice, as it had bene of a trumpet, ſaying: I am Alpha and Omega, 
                        verſ. 11 
                     that first and that last, and that which thou ſeest, write in a booke, and ſend it vnto the ſeuen Churches which are in Aſia, &c.
                  
                  Now out of theſe three verſes fiue things are to be obſerued.
                  Firſt, that Iohn is commaunded by the voice of Chriſt, which he heard behinde him as loude as a Trumpet, to write and record the viſions which he ſawe, and being ſo written and recorded, to commend them to all the Churches, for the common benefite and vſe thereof. So that herein Iohn doth nothing of himſelfe, nothing of his owne braine, but all things by ſpecial warrant and authoritie from Ieſus Chriſt, that Alpha and Omega, which doth call him and authorize him to this great buſineſſe which now he is ſet about.
                  Secondly, Iohns rauiſhment in ſpirit, to the ende

he might be made more capable of all theſe heauenly viſions which were ſhewed vnto him.
                  Thirdly, his great humiliation, whereby alſo hee was fitted to receiue and vnderſtand theſe great myſteries.Pſal. 25. For God will guide the meeke in iudgement, and teach the humble his wayes; yea, his ſecrets are with them that feare him. Therefore although Iohn was a great Apoſtle, and had ſeene wonderfull viſions, yet hee is not thereby puft vp with pride and conceit of himſelfe, but in the greateſt humiliation of his ſoule, calleth himſelfe a brother and companion of all the faithfull, 
                     
                        verſ. 9 
                     but ſpecially of ſuch as patiently ſuffer for Ieſus Chriſt and his kingdome.
                  
                  Fourthly, the time when Iohn was called, which was the Lords day.
                  Fiftly, and laſtly, the place where he was called, which was the Ile of Pathmos, as formerly hath bene ſhewed.
                  The deſcription of Chriſt, the perſon that calleth Iohn to this new office, is ſet downe in the next fiue verſes following, wherein the excellent glorie of Chriſtes perſon is deſcribed. 
                        verſ. 13 Firſt, from the place where Chriſt did appeare vnto him. Secondly, from the ſeuerall parts and members of his royall perſon. 
                        verſ. 14.15. 
                  
                  
                     
                        verſ. 16 Thirdly, from his prouident care ouer his true miniſters, and all his faithfull people.
                  Touching the place where Chriſte in a viſion did appeare to Iohn, hee ſaith it was in the middeſt of the ſeuen golden Candlestickes. For ſaith hee, I turned backe to ſee the voyce that ſpake with mee, and when I was turned, I ſawe ſeuen golden Candlestickes,

and in the middest of the ſeuen Candleſtickes one like the ſonne of man, &c. The 7. 
                        verſ. 12 
                     
                        verſ. 13 golden Candleſticks are interpreted by Chriſt himſelfe, in the laſt verſe of this Chapter, to be the ſeuen Churches. The Churches are ſaide to be of golde, becauſe Chriſt delighteth in them as much as we do in golde; he valueth euery true member thereof as we do golde:Pſal. 45.13. Cant. 4.1. Can. 1.9.10. Can. 6.9. for euery beleeuer is all glorious within: euery true Chriſtian is faire and beautifull: euery regenerate man is all as golde, euen as moſt pure golde.
                  It is ſaid afterward, that Chriſt walketh in the midſt of theſe ſeuen golden Candleſtickes: that is, he is alwaies preſent with his Church, to feed it, gouerne it, defend it, & comfort it. The Prophet ſaith that Chriſt hath ſeuē eies which goe through the whole world:Zach. 4.10. Zach. 3 9. whereby is ſignified his watchfull prouidence for his Church: for hee is alwaies looking out for the good of it, to defend and protect it againſt all aduerſary power whatſoeuer. Which thing was figured in the Rammes skinnes, & Badgers skinnes, wherewithall the Arke was couered,Exod. 2.6. to defend it againſt all violence of winde and weather. Euen ſo the mercifull protection of Chriſt, is as it were the continuall couering of his Church.
                  As touching the parts and members of his royall perſon, hee is deſcribed of his head and haire, 
                        verſ. 13.14.15. of his face, of his eyes, of his voice, of his feete, of his garments, and of his girdle.
                  As concerning his head and haire, they are ſaid to be as white as wooll, and as ſnowe, 
                     
                        verſ. 14 which ſignifie his great wiſedom & knowledge, to performe all things in his Church, for wiſedome and knowledge for

the moſt part do accompany white heads, and gray haires.
                  
                     His face ſhineth as the Sunne in his ſtrength. Which ſignifieth that Chriſt is the ſame to his Church, that the Sunne is to the world. For as the Sunne lighteneth the whole worlde with his brightneſſe; So Chriſt with the brightneſſe of his face lighteneth his whole Church.
                  
                     His eyes are like a flame of fire, that is, exceeding bright, and piercing into all places, yea the very harts of men: for nothing is hid frō his ſight, with whom we haue to do. He hath Egles eyes to foreſee all dangers intended and plotted againſt his Church, that he may in due time preuent them.
                  His voice is compared to the ſounde of many waters, becauſe it ſhould ſounde throughout all the world by the preaching of the Goſpell. Waters is expounded Chapter 17. verſe 15. of multitudes, nations, and tongues. Chriſts voice therefore is like many waters, becauſe his voice ſhould goe through many countries, and kingdomes.
                  His feete are compared to fine braſſe: to ſignifie both the perfectiō of all his waies, and alſo his mightie power to treade downe all his enemies.
                  
                     He is cloathed with a garment downe to the ground, to ſignifie that he walketh as King and Prieſt in the midſt of the ſeuen golden candleſtickes. For Kings and Prieſts in olde time did weare long garments, ſpecially in the execution of their offices.
                  
                     He is girded about the pappes with a golden girdle: for as Kings and Prieſts did gird their garments cloſe vnto them, leaſt otherwiſe they might be hindred in

the execution of their offices. So Chriſt girdeth himſelfe cloſe to his buſineſſe: for he is no idle beholder of the ſtate of his church: but one that continually worketh out the good thereof.
                  Concerning his prouident care ouer his faithfull Miniſters, he is ſaid to carry them in his right hand: for hee had in his right hand ſeuen ſtarres: that is, 
                        verſ. 16 
                     
                        verſ. 20 the Miniſters of the churches. As Chriſt ſaith; the ſeuen ſtarres are the Angels; that is, the Miniſters of the ſeuen churches. Miniſters are compared to ſtarres, becauſe they ſhould ſhine as bright ſtarres in this darke world, both by life and doctrine.
                  Chriſt is ſaid to hold them in his right hand, becauſe he alwaies defendeth them againſt the malice & fury of the world, which of all others is moſt outragiouſly bent againſt them, and their fauorites. But let men take heed of ouer bold preſuming to pul the ſtarres out of Chriſts right hand, leaſt they ſmart for it. The world is very buſie this way, they thinke to wring them out of his hands; but alas poore ſoules they are not able, he holdeth them too faſt, who can pull them out of his right hand? If they continue bold and buſie this way, they may hap at laſt take a beare by the tooth, and peraduenture pull an olde houſe vpō their heads. An other reaſon why Chriſt is ſaid to holde the 7. ſtarres in his right hand is, becauſe he worketh by them, and their miniſtrie, as an Artificer with his toole in his right hande. The things which Chriſt hath done by theſe inſtrumēts are glorious and admirable. For by the miniſtery of the Goſpell he hath cōuerted many ſinners, & ſaued many ſoules, then the which nothing can be more

honorable & wonderfull: and therfore the word of God which is the Miniſters weapō, is compared to a ſharpe two edged ſword, 
                     
                        verſ. 16 
                     which came out of Chriſts mouth.
                  
                  Now vnto all this may be added that Chriſt ſaith; he was dead, but now aliue, becauſe hee died, and roſe againe. And alſo that he ſaith; Hee had the keyes of hell and death: that is, authoritie and power ouer hell and damnation. For he hath abſolute power to open and ſhut, binde and looſe; and therefore it is written, 
                        chapter 3.7. 
                     He hath the key of Dauid, which openeth, and no man ſhutteth; and ſhutteth, and no man openeth. All this ſetteth forth the great power & glory of Chriſts perſon, and all aimeth at this marke & end, to commend vnto vs the authoritie of this booke, becauſe it commeth from a perſon of ſo great dignitie & excellēcy.
                  Laſt of all, it remaineth to ſhewe how Iohn was affected with this viſion, wherein Chriſt did ſo gloriouſly appeare vnto him: 
                        verſ. 17 for he ſaith; When I ſawe him I fell at his feete as dead. Wherein hee ſheweth how greatly hee was amazed and daunted with the ſight of Chriſts moſt glorious perſonage. Hee was ſtriken with ſuch an aſtoniſhment & feare, that there was almoſt no life, or ſpirit left in him, and all this was to humble him euen to the ground, in as much as by it, he findeth his owne weakeneſſe and imperfection, not capable of ſuch a ſight, ſo farre as to endure it. It was no doubt profitable, or rather neceſſary, that this holy ſeruant of God, ſhould thus be humbled and made fit to receiue this reuelation with the greater reuerence from his great Lorde and maiſter. And alſo it maketh much for our profit, as appeareth, in that euery part of this viſion is

rehearſed in the Epiſtles to the Churches. But to conclude, Iohn being thus humbled and caſt downe in himſelfe, is comforted and raiſed vp by Chriſt, who laid his right hand vpon him, and willed him to feare nothing. For ſaith he: I am the firſt and the last, 
                     
                        verſ. 17 
                     and am aliue, but I was dead, behold I am aliue for euermore. In which wordes hee dooth greatly cheare vp Iohns heart, and telleth him plainely, that this might and terrour of his perſon is bent onely againſt the wicked enemies of his Church, nothing at all againſt the friends thereof: but contrariwiſe, that all this power and glorie, might and maieſtie, is wholy and altogether for the good of his Church. Wherein wee may all clearely ſee and knowe to our great comfort, that the ſame arme of God which caſteth down the wicked, raiſeth vp the godly: the ſame power wich woundeth them, healeth vs: the ſame hand which deſtroieth them, ſaueth vs: the ſame might and maieſtie wich hurteth them, helpeth vs. For whatſoeuer is in God, is wholly for his, and wholy againſt thoſe that are none of his. And thus much concerning the firſt Chapter.
               
            
            
               CHAP. II. and III.
               I Haue thought good to handle theſe two Chapters together, and in a generall and compendious maner to ſet downe the moſt ſpeciall matters contained in them both: not meaning to inſiſt vpon euery particular, both becauſe theſe two chapters are plaine, and eaſie to vnderſtand, & alſo becauſe they haue bene ſufficiently beaten vpon by many.
               
                  Theſe two Chapters doo generally containe ſeuen Epiſtles, written to the ſeuē Churches of Aſia: wherein the preſent eſtate of the Churches of Asia is very liuely deſcribed, and in them the ſtate of all other churches then militant vpon the face of the earth.
               Euery one of theſe ſeuen Epiſtles containeth foure things.
               
                  Firſt, an Exordium or entrance into the matter.
                  Secondly, a generall propoſition.
                  Thirdly, a narration.
                  Laſtly, a concluſion.
               
               The Exordium or entrance of euery Epiſtle containeth two things; namely, the perſon to whom the Epiſtle is written, and the perſon from whom the Epiſtle is written.
               The propoſition is one & the ſame in all theſe Epiſtles contained in theſe words: I know thy workes.
               
               The narration containeth the matter of each Epiſtle, and cōſiſteth of commendations and diſcommendations; of admonitions, reprehenſions, threats and promiſes.
               The concluſion of euery Epiſtle, is one and the ſame, in theſe words: Let him that hath an eare heare what the ſpirit ſaith to the Churches.
               
               Firſt, concerning the perſon to whom theſe Epiſtles are ſent, he is named in the beginning of euerie Epiſtle, To be the Angel of ſuch a Church.
               
               By this word Angel, he meaneth not the inuiſible ſpirits which we call the Angels of heauen; for the

things attributed to theſe Angels, can in no wiſe agree to the inuiſible ſpirits, as to be Angels of ſeueral churches: to be neither hotte nor cold, to leaue their firſt loue, to repent and amend, and ſundry ſuch like attributes throughout all theſe Epiſtles. But by the word Angell, he meaneth the Miniſter or Paſtor of euery church: which therefore is called an Angell, becauſe he is the Miniſter of God, as the word ſignifieth: As alſo becauſe euery faithfull Miniſter ought to be receiued and regarded as an Angell of God, as the Apoſtle witneſſeth of the Galathians, that they receiued him as an Angell of God,
                  Gal. 4.14. 
                  yea as Chriſt Ieſus. And he giueth many admonitions in his Epiſtles to this effect: for hee would haue all faithfull and painfull Miniſters to be greatly reuerenced and had in double honour: to be acknowledged,1. Tim. 5.17. 1. Theſſ. 5.12. 1. Cor. 16.18. 1. Cor. 16.10. Phil. 2.29. Tit. 3 13. & had in ſingular loue for their workes ſake: to be cared for, to be made much of, and to want nothing. For indeed a good Miniſter is a Iewel of price. A good Miniſter is as a friend in court, which we ſay is better then penny in purſe. A good Miniſter is like a candle, which ſpendeth it ſelfe to giue light to others. A good Miniſter is like a cocke, which by the clapping of his wings awaketh himſelfe, and by his crowing awaketh others. For a good Miniſter by his priuate ſtudies, praiers, & meditations, awaketh him ſelfe, and by his publike preaching awaketh others.
               The ſcripture affirmeth a good Miniſter to be the very glory of Chriſt. And againe,2. Cor. 8.23. that a good Miniſter is a ſingular bleſſing of God. For the Lord himſelfe ſaith; I will take you one of a citie,
                  Ier. 3.14. 
                  and two of a tribe, and will bring you to Zion: and I will giue you

Paſtors according to my heart, which ſhall feede you with knowledge & vnderſtanding. Now then, if a good Miniſter be ſo great a bleſſing of God, and ſo peareleſſe a pearle, how great is the ſinne of thoſe which contemne them, and treade their Miniſtrie vnder foote, as vile and nothing worth. Our Lord Ieſus ſaith of all ſuch:Luk. 10.16. 
                  He that deſpiſeth you, deſpiſeth me. Let thoſe ſcoffers and ſcorners therefore take heede how they deſpiſe Chriſt, for aſſuredly he wil not long put it vp at their hands.
               If any man demaund a reaſon why all theſe Epiſtles are ſpecially ſent and directed to the Angels or Paſtors of the Churches, ſeeing Iohn before, chap. 1. verſe. 11. is commanded to write them to the Churches of Aſia, I anſwer, that he writing to the Paſtors, excludeth not the Churches, but in them, or vnder them, he writeth to the whole Churches, as it plainely appeareth in the concluſion of euery Epiſtle, when hee ſaith: Let him that hath an eare, heare what the ſpirit ſaith to the Churches. Then that which is ſpoken to the Angell of the Church, is ſpoken to the Church. The reaſon why the ſpeech is ſpecially directed to the Paſtor of euery church, is, becauſe the good or bad eſtate of the church, for the moſt part, dependeth vpon the Miniſter. For commonly we ſee it commeth to paſſe; Such a Paſtor, ſuch people: Such a ſhepheard, ſuch ſheepe: Such a builder, ſuch building: Such a husbandman, ſuch husbandrie.Hoſ. 4.9. And as the Prophet ſaith: Like Priest, like people. For we may obſerue in all theſe Epiſtles, that where the Miniſter is commended, the people are cōmended; and where the Miniſter is diſcommended, the

people are diſcommended alſo. So that they ſtand and fall, ſinke and ſwim together.
               As concerning the perſon from whom theſe Epiſtles are ſent, it is Ieſus Chriſt, who is very gloriouſly deſcribed of his diuerſe qualities in the entrance of euery one of theſe Epiſtles. Firſt, in the Epiſtle to the Church of Epheſus, it is ſaid: Theſe things ſaith he that holdeth the ſeuen ſtarres in his right hand, and which walketh in the middest of the ſeuen golden Candlestickes. Secondly, in the Epiſtle to the church of Smyrna: Theſe things ſaith hee that is first and last; which was dead, & is aliue. Thirdly, to the church of Pergamus: Thus ſaith he which hath the sharpe ſword with two edges. Fourthly, to Thyatira: Theſe things ſaith the ſonne of God, who hath eies like a flame of fire, and his feete like fine braſſe. Fiftly, to the church of Sardis: Theſe things ſaith he that hath the ſeuen ſpirits of God, and the ſeuen ſtarres. Sixtly, to the church of Philadelphia, it is thus ſaid of Chriſt: Theſe things ſaith he that is holy and true, which hath the key of Dauid, which openeth, & no man shutteth, & shutteth, and no man openeth. Laſtly, to Laodicea it is thus ſaid: Theſe things ſaith Amen, the faithfull and true witneſſe, the beginning of the creatures.
               
               Now then wee doo plainely ſee how gloriouſly Ieſus Chriſt is deſcribed of his ſeuerall properties in euerie one of theſe Epiſtles, and what honourable and magnificent titles are giuen vnto him: and all to this ende, to moue attention, and to worke in vs a reuerence of ſo great a perſonage, that wee might more ſeriouſly regarde, and deepely ponder the things which proceede from ſo great a maieſtie. For we ſee and know by cōmon experience, that almoſt

euery mans words are heeded and regarded according to the opinion & reuerence which is had of his perſon. Sith then that euery one of theſe Epiſtles is fronted with this great authoritie; Thus ſaith the ſonne of God: Thus ſaith Christ▪ Thus ſaith Alpha & Omega; therefore wee ought to giue diligent heede to the things herein contained. So likewiſe we reade in the Epiſtle to the Hebrewes, that after the holy Ghoſt had very notably deſcribed the perſon of Chriſt,Heb. 1.4.5. and extolled him far aboue the Angels & all other creatures, hee giueth the vſe of it in the beginning of the ſecond chapter,Heb. 2.1. ſaying: Therfore we ought to giue more diligent heede to his doctrine. And thus much concerning the Exordium or entrance of theſe ſeuen Epipiſtles, touching the perſon to whom, and the perſon from whom theſe Epiſtles are ſent.
               Now it followeth to ſpeake a word or two of the generall propoſitiō contained in theſe words; I know thy workes. We read in all theſe Epiſtles, how the Son of God doth praiſe ſome of the churches, & diſpraiſe others: commend ſome of the Paſtors, and diſcommend others. Now, hee that will praiſe or diſpraiſe, muſt ſpecially looke to this, that he be vpon a good ground: and therefore Ieſus Chriſt before he enters into any praiſing or diſpraiſing, commending or reprouing, doth firſt proteſt that hee knoweth their workes, & is priuie to all their particular actions, yea, their very thoughts, and therefore cannot erre or be deceiued in his cenſures. True it is indeed, that men may erre in their opinions & cenſures of others, becauſe they know not mens harts, & with what affections things are carried. Men I ſay, may praiſe or diſpraiſe

too much or too little. But Ieſus Chriſt whoſe eies are as a flame of fire, and which ſearcheth the raines, cannot faile one iot, nor erre a haire breadth, as we ſay, either in commēding or diſcommending, and therefore he ſtoppeth their mouthes at the firſt daſh, ſo as they can haue nothing to reply, when he ſaith: I know thy works; I know wel inough what thou art, & what thou haſt bin; I am not deceiued in thee; I know thy ſitting downe & riſing vp, & am accuſtomed to al thy waies; And this briefly of; propoſitiō.
               The narration (as is aforeſaid) cōtaineth the matter of the Epiſtles, conſiſting of praiſes & diſpraiſes, admonitions, reprehenſions, threates, and promiſes.
               Touching the firſt, we find that ſome churches are wholy commended, others wholy diſcommended: others partly commended, partly diſcommended. As for example, the Paſtor & people of Smyrna and Philadelphia, are generally commēded for all things, and diſcommended for nothing; there is no fault found with them; that is, no groſſe fault, as in others: for they were not without commō corruptions and infirmities. The Miniſter of Smyrna was a very rare & excellēt man, although a poore man to the worldward. For Chriſt ſaith thus vnto him: I know thy pouertie: but thou art rich; that is, rich in grace,Apoc. 2 9. and the manifolde gifts of the ſpirit. Thou haſt done great ſeruice to the church. Thou haſt imploied thy gifts to the good of many. Thou takeſt great pains in thy miniſtrie, & art greatly bleſſed in thy labors: for thou haſt an excellent flocke, a notable good people, and therefore I cannot but greatly commend both thee and them. The Miniſter of Philadelphia was alſo a very worthy and notable man.
               
                  For although his gifts were not ſo great as ſome others, yet was he very painefull and faithfull in a little:Apoc. 3.8. of whom it is ſaid, Thou haſt a litle ſtrength, and haſt kept my word, and haſt not denied my name: that is, thou art very conſtant in the profeſſion and practiſe of Chriſtian religion. And therevpon Chriſt promiſeth to bleſſe his labours. For ſaith hee: I will make them of the ſinagogue of Sathan which call themſelues Iewes, and are not, but do lye: Beholde I ſay, I will make them that they ſhall come and worſhip before thy feete, and ſhall knowe that I haue loued thee. Here we do plainely ſee how Chriſt promiſeth to bleſſe this mans miniſterie, for his painefulneſſe and diligence, although hee was not of the greateſt gifts. For men of greateſt gifts are not alwaies moſt bleſſed in their labors. For God doth commonly worke the greateſt things by weake meanes, that all glory might redound vnto him, and no fleſh might boaſt in his ſight. For otherwiſe, if men of greateſt gifts ſhould alwaies bee moſt bleſſed in their labours, and winne moſt ſoules vnto God, then wee would be readie to aſcribe that to men, & their gifts, which is proper vnto God, and ſo this praiſe and glorie ſhould be ſomewhat eclipſed. Thus wee ſee what excellent men the Miniſters of Smyrna and Philadelphia were, and what excellent people they had in their charges. But on the contrarie, the Paſtor and the people of Sardis and Laodicea, are diſcommended for all things, and commended for nothing. Indeede the Miniſter of Sardis had a great name for learning and other good gifts, but he was growne very idle & negligent, & did little good with his gifts.Apoc. 3.1. Of whom it is ſaid: Thou haſt a name

that thou liuest, but thou art dead. That is, there was no ſpirit in him, no life of grace, his gifts waxed ruſtie for want of vſe: hee was fallen aſleepe: he was fallen away from the grace of God: hee was nothing the man which he had bene. Therefore hee is admoniſhed to awake and ſtrengthen the things which remaine, which were readie to die.
               The Miniſter of Laodicea, & the people alſo, were growne luke-warme, neither hot nor colde;Apoc. 3.16. they were become careleſſe and ſecure, not caring greatly which end went forward in Gods matters, ſo they might enioy the preſent profits and pleaſures of this life.
               Concerning the Paſtors and people of Epheſus, Pergamus, and Thyatira, they are partly commended, and partly diſcōmended. Theſe three were reaſonable good Miniſters, & had many good parts in thē, and tooke paines in their charges, although there be ſome faults found with them. For the Miniſter of Epheſus is commended for ſixe things; for labour, for patience, for zeale, for wiſedome, for ſinceritie, & for courage: but diſcōmended for leauing his firſt loue;Apoc. 2.5. that is, for reuolting, or ſomewhat going back, or rather indeed, for cooling in the loue & zeale of God. The Miniſter of Pergamus, & people alſo, are greatly commended for their conſtant profeſſion of the truth in the middeſt of manifolde troubles, & the very heate of perſecution. For the rage of the enemies grew ſo fierce againſt the profeſſion and profeſſors of the Goſpell, that Antipas the Paſtor of Pergamus (as ſome ſuppoſe) was put to death. For Chriſt ſaith thus of this church:Apoc. 2.13. 
                  Thou dwelleſt where Sathās throne

is, and yet thou keepeſt my name, and haſt not denied my ſaith, euen in thoſe daies when Antipas my faithful Martyr was ſlaine among you, where Sathan dwelleth.
               
               But yet notwithſtāding this church is found fault withal for ſome few things, that is, two groſſe faults: the one for ſuffering the doctrine of Balaam to be broached there by the inſtruments of Sathan: the other, that they maintained the doctrine of the Nicolaitans. The doctrine of Balaam did vphold the lawfulnes of eating things ſacrificed to Idols,Apoc. 2.14. & of committing fornication: for he taught Balac the King of Moab, thus to put a ſtumbling blocke before the children of Iſrael. The doctrine of the Nicolaitanes did vphold the common vſe of women, that is, that women might be made common. Theſe two moſt groſſe and abſurd doctrines, were ſuffred and maintained in the church of Pergamus.
               
               
                  Apoc. 2.19.As concerning the church of Thyatira, they are greatly commended for the loue and ſeruice to the church, for their faith, patience, & manifold workes, and eſpecially for their conſtant proceeding in religion and godlineſſe, and that with increaſe. For of this church it is ſaid; I knowe thy loue, and ſeruice, and faith, and thy patience, and thy workes, and that they are moe at the laſt then at the firſt. But this church is diſcommended for ſuffering the wicked woman Iezabel, (that is, a falſe Propheteſſe, which was craftily crept into this church) to teach & ſeduce the people of God in that congregatiō, teaching the ſame falſe doctrine that Balaā
                   did at Pergamus:Apoc. 2. Verſe 20. which was, that it was lawfull to commit fornication, and to eate meates ſacrificed vnto Idolls. Hitherto concerning the praiſes and diſpraiſes of the churches.
               
                  Now followeth to ſpeake of the admonitions.
               Firſt the Church of Epheſus hauing fallen from their firſt loue, is admoniſhed to remember from whence they were fallen, to repent, and to do their firſt workes. Alſo the church of Smyrna is admoniſhed and exhorted to ſtand faſt in the midſt of thoſe perſecutions & troubles, which ſhould be raiſed vp againſt it, by the Emperour Traianus, and continue for the ſpace of tenne yeares. They are therefore exhorted and encouraged by our Lorde Ieſus, not to feare the things which they ſhould ſuffer: for although the diuel and his inſtruments ſhould haue ſcope to perſecute and impriſon them for ten daies, that is ten yeares, according to prophetical account; yet if they did continue faithfull to the death, they ſhould haue the crowne of life. The church of Pergamus ſuffering and maintaining the doctrine of Balaam, and the Nicolaitanes, is admoniſhed to repent and amend. The Church of Thyatira, which ſuffered the falſe doctrine of Iezabel, is admoniſhed to looke to her ſelfe, and to hold faſt the truth of Religion. Sardis being dull and dead, is admoniſhed to awake, and ſtrengthen the things which remaine, that were readie to die. Philadelphia is admoniſhed to holde that which they had, that no man take their crowne. Laodicea being neither hotte nor colde, but luke-warme, is admoniſhed to be zealous and amend. And although they thought their ſtate good inough, being puft vp with conceitednes, yet are they charged to be poore, naked and blinde, and therevpō counſelled & admoniſhed to buy ſpiritual gold, that they may be rich: and ſpirituall garments

to hide their nakedneſſe and ſpirituall eye-ſalue, to annoint their eyes that they might ſee.
               Concerning reprehenſions, Epheſus is reproued for going backward. Pergamus and Thyatira for ſuffering and maintaining corrupt doctrine, as formerly hath bene ſhewed. Sardis for dulneſſe, deadneſſe, and vnſoundneſſe in their manner of worſhipping God. Laodicea for lukewarmneſſe and conceitednes.
               Touching threats, Epheſus is threatned, that except they repent and do their firſt workes, their candleſticke ſhould be remoued out of his place; that is, the Church ſhould bee tranſlated to ſome other place, but not deſtroied. For God doth remoue, but not deſtroy his Candleſtickes. Pergamus is threatned, that vnleſſe they did ſpeedily repent, Ieſus Chriſt would come ſhortly, and fight againſt them with the ſword of his mouth. Thyatira is threatned, that except they repent them of their workes, they ſhould be caſt into a bed of affliction, and all their fauourites ſhould be ſlaine with death. Sardis is threatned, that if they did not watch and awake, Chriſt would come ſuddenly vpon them as a thiefe, and they ſhould not knowe what houre hee would come.
               Concerning promiſes, they be very great & large for euerlaſting ioy, and the very fulneſſe of glory is promiſed to all that fight the good fight of faith, and ouercome in the ſpirituall battell againſt the fleſh, the world, and the diuell. Epheſus is promiſed, that if they fight it out couragiouſly and conſtantly to the ende, they ſhould eate of the tree of life, which is in the middeſt of the paradiſe of God.
               
                  
                  Smyrna is promiſed in like caſe, that they ſhould not be hurt of the ſecond death. Pergamus likewiſe is promiſed to eate of the Manna that is hid, and to haue the white ſtone of victorie giuen them. Thyatira is promiſed to haue power giuen them to rule ouer Nations, & to be lightned with heauenly brightneſſe, like the morning ſtarre. Sardis is promiſed to be cloathed with white aray; that is, with heauenly glorie, and to haue their name continued in the booke of life. Philadelphia is promiſed to haue a pillar made in the Temple of God; that is, a firme and vnmoueable place of eternall glory. Laodicea is promiſed to ſup with Chriſt, and to ſit with him vpon his throne for euermore.
               Thus wee ſee what great and precious promiſes are made to all Churches that fight and ouercome in this their ſpirituall battell and conflict.
               Concerning the concluſion, it is one & the ſame to all theſe ſeuen churches. Wherein they are exhorted, that ſuch as haue eares to heare, ſhould heare, ponder, and conſider all the foreſaid praiſes and diſpraiſes, admonitions, reprehenſions, threates, & promiſes. And it is therefore ſaid, ſuch as haue eares, becauſe there are very fewe to be found that haue circumciſed and ſanctified eares, to heare and vnderſtand heauenly things. This is proper to the elect, this is but, to whom it is giuen. And thus briefly and generally we ſee what was the preſent ſtate of euerie one of the Churches of Aſia, vnto which this Propheſie was to be ſent: ſo that by them we may ſee in what eſtate the vniuerſall Church militant was at that time. For as ſome of theſe ſeuen as yet ſtood

firme, and others had much declined, ſo was it with all other churches.
               Hitherto concerning the firſt viſion, containing generally the inſcription of this booke: Iohns ſalutation to the Churches: Iohns new calling: The excellencie of Chriſt which called him: And the preſent eſtate of the Church. Now we are to proceed to the ſecond viſion, contained in the next 8. chapters to the 12. wherein is ſhewed, what ſhould be the future eſtate of the Church in all ages, euen vnto the ende of the world.
            
            
               CHAP. IIII.
               
                  THe principal things contained in this 4. chapter, is a deſcription of the perſon of God, the Author of this booke, who is moſt gloriouſly deſcribed of that excellent glorie that is in himſelfe, and of his royall throne which he ſitteth vpon, & of his goodly retinue, and troupes of Saints and Angels attending about his moſt glorious throne. Wherevnto is added the diuerſe qualities, both of Angels and Saints, both in themſelues and their owne natures: as alſo in their manner of praiſing and worſhipping of God. This is the generall ſumme and ſenſe of this chapter.
                  But for the better clearing and more full opening of it, I will come to the words of the text, and open them as they lie in order.
               
               
                   
                     
                        verſ. 1 After this I looked, and beholde a doore was open in heauē, and the firſt voice which I heard, was as it were of a

trumpet, talking with me, ſaying: Come vp hither, and I wil ſhew thee the things which muſt be done hereafter.
                  Theſe words (After this) haue relation to the firſt viſion ſpoken of before, as if hee ſhould ſay, after I had receiued the former viſion, concerning the preſent eſtate of the Church, now I had an other viſion concerning the future eſtate therof; and therfore he ſaith, a doore was open in heauen, that he might come in and ſee al theſe things which ſhould be reuealed vnto him. For the opening of the doore in heauē doth here ſignifie the vnlocking of heauenly things vnto Iohn, or his entrance into them: for ſo the word doore is taken. 2. Cor. 3.12. Apoc. 3.8. After the opening of the doore, hee is called vp with a loude voice, like a trumpet, ſaying: Come vp hither. For although the doore was opened, yet durſt hee not enter in till hee was called and commanded to come in. For in theſe caſes he doth not preſume in any thing as of himſelf, without ſpeciall warrant and direction: As the ſcripture ſaith: No man taketh this honour vnto himſelfe,
                     Heb. 5.4. 
                     but he that is called of God, as was Aaron. The voice that calleth him, is like a trumpet that is loude and ſhrill, that he might be ſtirred vp more diligently to attend vnto the contemplation of theſe great ſecrets which ſhould be reuealed vnto him. This voice commandeth him to come vp hither: which ſheweth that Iohn was rapt vp in the ſpirit vnto the heauens to ſee this viſion. This voice promiſeth to ſhewe him things which must bee done hereafter: that is, that hee ſhould be made acquainted with the future eſtate of the church, as alreadie he was with the preſent eſtate thereof.
                  
                      
                     
                        verſ. 2 And immediately I was rauished in the ſpirite, and beholde a Throne was ſet in heauen, and one ſate vpon the Throne.
                  Vpon this ſuddaine and extraordinary calling by ſo heauenly and loude a voice, Iohn was forthwith rauiſhed in ſpirit. For as the Prophet Ezechiel was by the ſpirite in the Viſions of God, carried from Chaldea to Ieruſalem: So this holy Apoſtle is carried by the ſpirite in the Viſions of God into heauen, and by the ſame ſpirite is made fit and capable of all theſe heauenly Viſions which ſhould be ſhewed him. So that in all this we doo plainly and clearly ſee, that Iohn hath as it were a further calling and admittance from heauen, to beholde and ſee theſe wonderfull ſecrets which now are to be imparted vnto him.
                  
                     
                        verſ. 2 
                     Behold a Throne, &c. Here beginneth the deſcription of the moſt high and glorious maieſtie of God, who is deſcribed after the maner of earthly Kings and Iudges ſitting vpon their Thrones and iudgement ſeates. For he is king of Zion, and Iudge of all the world.
                   
                     
                        verſ. 3 And he that ſate, was to looke vpon like vnto a Iaſper ſtone, and a Sardine, and there was a Raine-bowe round about the Throne like an Emeraud.
                  God for his admirable glory and beautie, is here compared to two moſt precious ſtones. The one which is the Iaſper, being of a perfect green colour,

as Philoſophers write: the other, which is the Sardine, being of a moſt bright redde colour. Nothing can ſufficiently reſemble the glory of God, being infinit: But theſe things, being of the moſt pretious vnder the Sunne, do after a ſort ſhadow it vnto vs.
                  There was a raine-bowe round about the throne, which may ſignifie, that Gods throne in glorie and beautie doth farre excell all other thrones of mortall Princes; yea, euen that of Salomō, which was of moſt pure Iuorie: or rather it may ſignifie, that although God in himſelfe is moſt glorious and admirable, yet he keepeth promiſe & couenant with the ſonnes of men. For the Raine-bowe was a ſigne of his couenant, as appeareth, Gen. 9. and aſſuredly God will be mindful of his couenant to a thouſand generations. This Rain-bowe is ſaid to be like an emeraud, which is alwaies of a freſh greene colour, ſignifying that Gods couenant of grace and mercie towardes his Church, is alwaies freſh and greene, & his goodnes towards his people perpetuall and vnchangeable.
                  Moreouer, God is deſcribed of his glorious retinue, & heauenly company about him. For it is ſaid: Round about the Throne were 24. ſeates, 
                     
                        verſ. 4 
                     and vpon the ſeates 24. Elders: Which ſignifie the whole church, both militant & triumphant, both of Iewes & Gentiles, and are therefore called 24. becauſe the church of the Iewes grew out of the 12. Patriarches: & the church of the Gentiles out of the 12. Apoſtles. And as the glory and pompe of mortall kings is ſet out by their troupes and traines of nobles, and other excellent perſonages: So the glorie of God (which in it ſelfe can receiue no encreaſe) is to our capacitie cō
                     mended

and ſet forth by his goodly companies of Saints and Angels.
                  
                     
                        verſ. 4 Theſe 24. Elders are cloathed in white raiment, which ſignifieth their righteouſnes, as it is expounded, chap. 9. ver. 8. not inherent, but imputatiue: For they hauing no righteouſnes of their owne, Chriſts righteouſnes is imputed vnto them through faith, & through faith is made theirs:Rom. 4. 
                     For Abraham beleeued, and it was imputed vnto him for righteouſnes.
                  
                  Theſe 24. Elders had on their heades crownes of gold, which ſignifie their victories ouer the world: for all the elect ouercome the world through faith, as S.Iohn. 5. 
                     Iohn teacheth▪ and not the world only, but euē the fleſh & the diuel alſo. And therefore the crowne and garland of victory belongeth vnto them as moſt valiant conquerors.
                  
                     
                        verſ. 5 Moreouer it is ſaide, that out of the throne proceed lightnings, and thunderings, and voices, which ſignifie his terror and fearefull power in the preaching of the lawe: for the preaching of the lawe, is as it were a voice of lightning and thundring. The powerfull preaching of the lawe, is the very thundring of hell, and lightning of the wrath of God vpon all impenitent ſinners: and therefore at the deliuery of the lawe, there were lightenings and thunderings, and mount Sinay it ſelfe did tremble and ſhake.
                  
                     
                        verſ. 5 Further it is ſaid, there were 7. lampes of fire burning before the throne, which are the 7. ſpirits of God. Theſe ſeuen lampes which are interpreted to be the ſeuen ſpirits of God, do ſignifie the preaching of the Goſpell, and the manifold graces and gifts of the ſpirit; which are giuē to the church by the meanes therof.

For the Goſpell giueth a cheareful and comfortable light, being the miniſterie of the ſpirit,2. Cor. 3. as the Apoſtle ſaith, and therefore is reſembled by ſeuen lampes. So then from the throne, that is, from the preſence of God, proceedeth both lawe and Goſpell, & the miniſtrie of them both for the ſauing of ſoules. And all this maketh much for the ſetting forth of Gods glory and maieſtie, being the marke here aimed at.
                  And before the throne, there was a Sea of glaſſe, 
                        verſ. 6 like vnto Chriſtall.
                  This Sea of glaſſe is the world, which is fitly compared to a Sea, becauſe it is full of ſtormes, tempeſts, and waues, that are continually raiſed vp in it. It is full of rockes, vpō which many daſh, and make ſhipwracke. It is compared to a Sea of glaſſe, for the brittleneſſe, chaunges, and vncertaintie of all things in the world. It is ſaid to be before the throne like Chriſtall, becauſe the all-ſeeing God doth as clearely beholde from his throne all the thoughts, words, and workes of the ſonnes of men, and all other particular actions of all his creatures vnder the Sunne, as wee beholde our face in a Chriſtall.Heb. 4 13. For all things are naked, and as it were laide out in an anatomy vnto his eies, with whom we haue to do.
                  
                  Moreouer it is ſaid, that in the middeſt of the throne, 
                     
                        verſ. 6 
                     and round about the throne, were foure beaſtes, full of eies before and behinde. Theſe foure beaſtes do ſignifie the Angels of heauen, the inuiſible and elect Angels, as it is expounded, Ezech. 10. verſe, 20. where

the Prophet in a viſion ſeeth foure beaſts, as it were bearing vp and drawing Gods chariot of triumphe. And at the 20. verſe he ſaith expreſſely, that he at laſt vnderſtood they were the Cherubins. The firſt and tenth chapter of Ezechiel being throughly looked into, do make this plaine. The reaſon why the Angels are called by the name of beaſts, is, becauſe in the next verſe they are compared to beaſts, for their qualities of certaine beaſtes. They are named foure in number, being otherwiſe innumerable, becauſe they are likened to foure ſeuerall beaſtes.
                  The Angels are ſaid to haue eies before and behind, for their great vigilancie ouer the Church, and euery member therof, and becauſe they are endued with knowledge of things paſt, and things to come: and laſt of al, becauſe they ſee and diſcerne almoſt all actions vnder the Sunne, vpward and downeward, backward and forward.
                   
                     
                        verſ. 7 And the firſt beaſt was like a Lyon, the ſecond like a calfe, &c.
                  Here the Angels are compared to foure ſeuerall beaſts: to a Lion for ſtrength and courage: to a calfe, or an oxe, for ſeruice and vſe: to a beaſt hauing the face of a man, for wiſedome: to an Eagle, for ſwiftneſſe and readineſſe to execute the will of God. And moreouer, becauſe the Eagles ſoare aloft, and flye a very high pitch, we are giuen to vnderſtand, that the heauenly ſpirits are much in celeſtiall contemplation, and do receiue the knowledge of hid ſecrets and counſels, for they are much aloft about the throne of God, and many high and deepe ſecrets are opened vnto them.
                  
                     And the foure beaſts, had each of them ſixe winges about him, and they were full of eyes within, &c. 
                        verſ. 8 
                  
                  This maketh it very plaine, that by theſe beaſts are vnderſtood the ſixe Angels, becauſe he aſcribeth vnto euery one of them ſixe wings a piece. For the Angels are deſcribed with winges, both in the firſt and tenth of Ezechiel before mentioned: and alſo in the ſixt Chapter of the propheſie of Iſaias, where the Seraphins are ſaide to haue ſixe wings a piece: two to couer their faces: two to couer their feete: and two to flie withall; becauſe they haue two wings to couer their faces withall, becauſe they are not able to endure the vnconceiuable brightneſſe and glory of God, for he dwelleth in vnapproachable light.1. Tim. 6.16. They haue two wings to couer their feete withall, becauſe mortall men are not able to looke vpō the brightnes that is in them. For we read that many haue bin aſtoniſhed & dazeled with the glory & brightnes of Angels, ſo glorious creatures are they. They haue two wings to flie withall, to note the prompt obedience and readineſſe to execute the commandements of God, as formerly was ſhewed. Moreouer, the angels are ſaide to haue winges and to flie ſwiftly: becauſe God by them doth ſpeedily diſpatch many purpoſes, actions & ſeruices here below: and for this cauſe the ſcripture affirmeth,Pſal. 18.10. that he rideth vpon the Cherubins: that he dwelleth betweene the Cherubins:
                     Pſal. 80.1. 
                     and that he maketh the cloudes his chariots,
                     Pſal. 104 2. 
                     and walketh vpon the winges of the winde. For as earthly Kings are in their progreſſes carried in their moſt ſumptuous coaches,

drawne by the moſt excellent coach-horſes, to diſpatch great buſineſſes, and many waightie affaires within their dominions: ſo the viſions in Ezechiel doo ſhewe that the immortall king is carried moſt ſwiftly in his chariot of triumph, drawne by the Cherubins, as it were by beaſts, to direct and ouerrule all actions vnder the Sunne.
                  Moreouer, theſe Angels are ſaid to be full of eies within, 
                     
                        verſ. 8 to note not only their fulneſſe of knowledge, but alſo their inward ſight into all heauenly things; yea, euen ſuch as are moſt ſecret and hid: for they are of all other creatures moſt inward with God. None of his children know ſo much of his counſell as they.
                  Furthermore, the Angels are here ſaid to praiſe God vnceſſantly, 
                     
                        verſ. 8 
                     day and night, ſaying: holy, holy, holy, Lord God almightie, which was, which is, and which is to come. Where wee may clearely ſee, that the Angels praiſe and worſhip God in a burning zeale without wearineſſe. For they are not as men, which through their great corruption, are full of dulneſſe and wearines in Gods worſhip; but they do alwaies ſerue him with infatigable deſires, and therefore are called Seraphins, becauſe they burne in the zeale of God, and Cherubins, becauſe their delight is to approach neer vnto him, and to be alwaies about his throne; yea, euen in his chamber of preſence. They do double and treble this word (holy) and warble much vpon it, becauſe they know full well, that hee is righteous in all his waies, and holy in al his workes; and that all his proceedings & iudgemēts, are euen then waighed in the ballance of iuſtice and equitie, when to

mans ſence, & the iudgement of reaſon,Pſal. 36. they ſeeme nothing leſſe. For his Iudgements are as a great depth which mans reaſon cannot found.
                  Further, wee ſee that when theſe beaſtes, that is, 
                        verſ. 9 the Angels, gaue glory, and honour, and thankes to God, &c. 
                     
                        verſ. 10 
                     the 24. Elders alſo fell downe before him, and worſhipped him that liueth for euermore. Where we may plainely ſee, that both Saints and Angels doo iointly praiſe and magnifie God, and him alone, Euen that God that liueth for euermore, euen that God which was, which is, and which is to come; that is, the eternall and euerlaſting God. For the ſcripture ſaith:Pſal. 1.2.16. Pſal 149.5. Pſ. 103.20. 
                     Praiſe him ô yee Saints, and praiſe him ô yee Angels that excell in ſtrength. And the 24. Elders cast their crownes before the throne, ſaying: Thou art worthy ô Lord, to receiue glory and honour, &c. Wherein wee ſee, that all the elect doo emptie themſelues of all worthineſſe, to haue any glorie, acknowledging that their crownes of glorie are Gods free gift, & that the praiſe therof belōgeth onely to him, and nothing to themſelues. And this in very deede is the right manner of worſhipping God, frankely to aſcribe all glorie to him, and all ſhame to our ſelues, to giue all to him to whome all is due, and nothing to our ſelues, which haue nothing; for nothing can bee giuen or taken out of nothing.
                  Now then, to conclude and winde vp this fourth chapter, wee doo clearely ſee the ſumme and drift of all is, that heauen doore was opened vnto Iohn, and that hee was let in, and called vp into the Chamber of preſence by a very loude

voice, there to take notice of the future eſtate of the church: and that the perſon which thus called him vp, was the very immortall God himſelfe, who is ſo gloriouſly deſcribed of his throne, his troupes and traines of Saints & Angels, as we haue heard. And all this is to commend & ſet forth the authoritie of this booke, whoſe Author is ſo excellent, yea, ſuperexcellent.
               
            
            
               CHAP. V.
               AFter this Viſion containing the glory of the diuine maieſtie was ſhewed vnto Iohn, that hee might knowe from what fountaine this Propheſie was deriued, now in this fift chapter is taught and ſhewed by what meanes, and by whoſe mediation, the knowledge of ſuch hidden myſteries were reuealed vnto the church; namely, by the meanes and mediation of Ieſus Chriſt, in whom only the counſels and ſecrets of God the Father are opened, and made knowne vnto men. For hee is the great Prophet & Doctor of the church, which is come downe from the boſome of his Father, and hath made knowne vnto vs whatſoeuer he hath receiued of his Father,
                  Ioh 15.15. Math. 3. Math. 17.5. 
                  as hee himſelfe testifieth. And the church is commaunded by a voice from heauen to heare him, and him alone.
               
               
                  
                     ver. 1.2.3.4. This fift Chapter containeth three things generally. Firſt a deſcription of the booke, which was in the right hand of God.
               
                  
                     ver. 5.6.7. Secondly, a deſcription of Ieſus Chriſt, which receiueth it at the hande of his Father, and openeth it.
               
                  Thirdly, a deſcription of thoſe moſt glorious praiſes which are giuen to Chriſt by the Angels, 
                     verſ. 8.9.10.11.12.13.14. Saints, and all the creatures in heauen and earth.
               I ſawe in the right hand of him that ſate vpon the throne, 
                     verſ. 1 a booke written within, and on the backe ſide ſealed with ſeuen ſeales.
               By this booke here mentioned, is meant this preſent booke of the Apocalyps, or Reuelatiō, as it ſhall plainely appeare in the next chapter, when wee come to the opening of the ſeuen ſeales thereof. For the things which fall out vpon the opening of the ſeuerall ſeales, do plainely declare, that all is meant of the particular matters contained in this preſent booke.
               This booke is ſaid to be in the right hand of him that ſitteth vpon the throne, becauſe all the ſecrets reuealed in it, come from the counſell and decree of the moſt high God, and are ordered by his meere direction and prouidence.
               It is called a written booke, to ſhewe that the things contained in it, are ſo firmely decreed in the counſell of God, that none of them ſhall faile, but come to paſſe, and bee fulfilled in their ſeaſon. They are ſuch as wee may write of, as wee vſe to ſay: and therefore for the certaintie of them, they are here ſaid to be written in a booke.
               This booke is ſaid to bee written within and without, for the multitude and varietie of matters contained in it. For there were both many and great things which ſhould fall out in the world from the

time that Iohn receiued this Propheſie, vnto the end of the world.
               This booke is ſealed with ſeuen ſeales, that is to ſay, perfectly ſealed, becauſe the things contained herein, are counſels and ſecrets, onely knowne to God, til it pleaſed him to reueale them to his church by his ſonne. The elect Angels knew nothing of the things written in this booke, before the ſeales were opened.
                
                  
                     verſ. 2 And I ſawe a ſtrong Angell, which proclaimed with a loude voice; Who is worthy to open the booke, and to looſe the ſeales thereof?
               Here is proclamation made to all creatures, that if there were any manner of perſons in heauen or earth, among men or Angels, that would take vpon them to open and expound this booke, that they ſhould come forth and ſhewe themſelues, and bee very willingly and gladly heard. But alas, the next verſe doth ſhewe, 
                     verſ. 3 that none in heauen or earth was able to open the booke and expound it, wherevpon Iohn wept very much, 
                  
                     verſ. 4 
                  becauſe no man was found worthy to open and interpret this booke.
               
               The cauſe of Iohns weeping and lamenting, was for feare the Church ſhould bee depriued of ſuch profitable and excellent things as hee knew were contained in this booke. Such was his loue to the Church: ſuch was his zeale and care for the people of God. An example worthy of all imitation, to mourne and weepe for the concealing of the booke of God, and to reioyce in the opening of it. But Papiſts

and Atheiſts are of a contrary minde, for they reioyce in the concealing and keeping cloſe of the ſcriptures, and are much grieued with the opening and reuealing thereof; becauſe thereby their hypocriſie and villany is detected and diſcarded.
               Vpon this, one of the Elders ſaid vnto Iohn: Weepe not, 
                     verſ. 5 Beholde, the Lion which is of the Tribe of Iudah, the roote of Dauid, hath obtained to open the booke, and to loſe the ſeales thereof.
               Here we ſee how Iohn is comforted and cheared vp by one of the Elders, being now very penſiue and ſad, and is willed to plucke vp a good heart, and to bee of good cheare, for hee could tell him good newes; to wit, of one that could open and expound this booke, and all the ſecrets in it, and that is Ieſus Chriſt, the great reuealer of ſecrets, and onely expounder of all riddles, and hidden myſteries, as before hath bene ſpoken.
               Ieſus Chriſt is here ſaid to be of the Tribe of Iudah, becauſe he is lineally diſcended of that Tribe, according to the fleſh, and his humane nature.
               He is compared to a Lyon, by alluſion vnto Iacobs words in his laſt will and teſtament concerning Iudah, namely, that hee ſhould couch as a Lyon,
                  Gen. 49.9. 
                  and as a Lioneſſe, & none ſhould ſtirre him. He is fitly compared to a lion, for his great & admitable power & ſtrēgth, for he raigneth and muſt raigne ouer al his enemies, and in the middeſt of all his enemies, yea, till he hath troade all his enemies vnder his feete.
               He is called the roote of Dauid, both here, and alſo

in the 22. chapter of this booke, verſe 16. becauſe he ſprung out of Dauid the ſonne of Iſhai, as a braunch out of his roote,Eſay. 11.1. as the Prophet did foretell, that A rod ſhould come forth of the ſtocke of Iſhai, and a graft ſhould growe out of his rootes.
                  Rom. 1.3. And the Apoſtle ſaith, that Christ was made of the ſeede of Dauid, according to the fleſh.
               
                
                  
                     verſ. 6 Then ſaith Iohn, I beheld, and loe, in the middeſt of the throne, and of the foure beaſtes, and of the Elders, ſtood a Lambe, as though he had bene killed, which had ſeuen hornes, and ſeuen eies, which are the ſeuen ſpirits of God ſent into all the world.
               Here Iohn taketh a view and ſight of Ieſus Chriſt, from the verie middeſt of the throne, & of the foure beaſtes and the Elders. Chriſt doth not appeare about the throne, as do the Saints and Angels, which are but miniſters and miniſtring ſpirits: but in the verie middeſt of the throne, and the foure beaſtes, &c. becauſe hee is God euerlaſting, coequall and coeternall with the Father, in whom (as the Apoſtle ſaith) dwelleth all the fulneſſe of the Godhead, bodily or eſſentially. And here afterward the ſame worſhip and honour is aſcribed vnto him both by the Saints and Angels, which before is aſcribed vnto God the Father.
               Chriſt is here compared to a Lambe, for his innocencie; for the ſcripture ſaith: He was as a ſheepe, dumbe before his ſhearer.
                  Eſa. 53.7. Iohn. 1.29. 
                  Hee is the Lambe of God that taketh away the ſinnes of the world. He is the Lambe ſlain from the beginning of the world.
                  Apoc. 13.8. Hee is compared to a Lyon,

for his great & incomparable ſtrength in cōquering hell, death, and damnation, and all infernall power. And to a lambe, becauſe he hath diſpatched all this vpon the Croſſe, by the ſacrifice of himſelfe once offered: for hee neuer did more liuely ſhewe forth his Lyon-like power, then when hee was as a lambe ſlaine and ſacrificed vpon the Croſſe.
               This Lambe Chriſt, is here ſaid to haue ſeuen hornes, which ſignifie his manifolde power, or fulneſſe of power, or perfect power, according as this metaphor or borrowed ſpeech of horne is vſually ſo taken in all the ſcriptures. This Lambe alſo is ſaid to haue ſeuen eies, which are interpreted to be the ſeuen ſpirits of God: that is, the manifolde graces and gifts of the Spirit, which hee giueth vnto his Church. Now then to conclude this point, for as much as the number of ſeuen in this booke is a number of perfection, and alwaies noteth perfection, therefore by Chriſts ſeuen hornes, and ſeuen eies, wee may, and that ſoundly, vnderſtand his perfect power, and his perfect ſight and knowledge in all things. For his ſeuen eies are ſo taken in the third chapter of the Propheſie of Zacharie, where it is ſaid:Zach. 3.9. 
                  Vpon one ſtone ſhall be ſeuen eies. Meaning, that Ieſus Chriſt, the corner ſtone of the Church, ſhould be full of eies, to looke out for the good of his Church, and to giue light to all others: for hee is the life and light of the world.
               And he came and tooke the booke out of the right hand of him that ſate vpon the throne. 
                     verſ. 7 
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
                  Here Ieſus Chriſt taketh the booke out of his Fathers hand, purpoſing both to open it, and expound it: For he is the onely expounder of the law, and the beſt interpreter of his Fathers will.
               
                  
                     verſ. 8 Herevpon it is ſaid, that the foure beaſtes, and 24. Elders fell downe before the Lambe, to teſtifie their thankfulneſſe and inward ioy and reioycing that the Son of God would take vpō him this office, which none other would or could performe.
               Moreouer, by their falling downe and worſhipping him, they doo plainely teſtifie, that hee is God ouer all, to be bleſſed for euer. For otherwiſe the Angels of heauen, both Cherubins and Seraphins, would not thus fall downe, and worſhippe him, aſcribing vnto him, both deitie and diuine honour. Conſider then how great hee is, of whom it is ſaid: Let all the Angels of God worſhip him.
                  Pſal. 97.7. Heb. 1.6.
               
               Moreouer, theſe Angels and Saints are ſaid to haue euery one harpes and golden viols, full of odours, which are the praiers of the Saints. 
                  
                     verſ. 8 
               
               Theſe harpes doo ſignifie the ſweete concent and harmony both of men and Angels, in ſounding forth the praiſes of the Lambe. For herein the whole Church,Apoc. 14.2. both militant and triumphant doo accord and tune together, as many harpers harping with their harpes; as it is written alſo in an other place.
               Hereby alſo they do plainely teſtifie that inward peace and ſpirituall ioy, which all the faithfull haue through Chriſte, which is more ſweete and delightſome to the ſoule, then any muſicke is vnto the eares.
               
                  
                  The viols full of odours, are expounded to bee the praiers of the Saints, which are therefore compared to odours, becauſe they ſmell ſweete in the noſthrils of God, and are more fragrant then any noſegay or perfume whatſoeuer: for hee taketh great pleaſure in the praiers of his people; eſpecially when they come out of golden viols, that is, ſanctified hearts and conſciences: for euerie ſanctified heart is a golden heart in the ſight of God; and euerie regenerate conſcience is a iewell of price, guilt with golde, and enameled with pearle. For this cauſe the holy man Dauid wiſheth earneſtly that his heart might bee ſo renewed and cleanſed inwardely, that his prayer might bee directed as incenſe in Gods ſight,
                  Pſal. 14 1.2. 
                  and the liſting vp of his handes as a ſweete ſmelling ſacrifice.
               
               Furthermore, 
                     verſ. 9 
                  theſe Saints and Angels doo ſing a new ſong. That is, they do ſing to the praiſes of the Lambe with renued affections, & vnwearied deſires: Their inward ioy continueth alwaies freſh and greene, as the Bay-tree: They neuer wither or waxe wearie of the ſeruice of God: Their ſong is euermore new, and therefore euermore delightſome. For the more new any thing is, the more pleaſant and delectable: for men are not affected with olde, but altogether with new things.
               Now then, Ieſus Chriſt hauing taken this booke into his hande to open and expounde, is applauded vnto by the general conſent and voices of the whole church: For ſay they, Thou art worthy to take the booke, 
                  
                     verſ. 9 
                  and to open the ſeales thereof. Wherein they doo all with cōmon conſent, giue their voices vnto Chriſt,

acknowledging him to be the only fit perſō in heauē or earth, to take vpō him this functiō of opening a booke ſo cloſed, ſo claſped, ſo ſhut, ſo ſealed, and they do yeeld a reaſon of their proceedings, becauſe (ſay they) thou waſt killed, and haſt redeemed vs vnto God by thy blood, out of euery kindred and tongue, and people, and nation. Meaning hereby, that he was put to death to pay the price of our redemptiō, in whom all the beleeuers, both of the Iewes and Gentiles, are ſaued. Their reaſon then is this: he that hath died, and riſen againe, and is now exalted farre aboue all principalities and powers, &c. is the moſt fit Inſtrument to open and interpret this booke. But thou ô Chriſt the Lambe of God, art ſuch a one, therefore thou of all others, art moſt meete to take this matter vpon thee, and to enter into this buſineſſe. Further, they amplifie their reaſon thus: that hee hath made vs of ſlaues and ſeruants, 
                  
                     verſ. 10 
                  Kings; and of prophane perſons, Priests vnto the moſt high God. And laſt of all, that we ſhall raigne vpon the earth. Not meaning heereby, that we ſhall raigne as earthly kings, or only enioy an earthly kingdome. For out of all doubt, the Saints ſhall raigne with Chriſt in the heauens for euermore. But heere is mention made of raigning in the earth, becauſe after this life, Gods children ſhall haue the fruition and inheritance both of heauen and earth:Pet. 3.12. that is to ſay, that new heauen and new earth wherein dwelleth righteouſneſſe: for the heauens and the earth being redintegrated, and purged from corruption, ſhall be the portion of the Saintes, and the habitation of the elect, for euermore.
               
                  After all this, 
                     verſ. 11 
                  Iohn heareth the voice of innumerable Angels, beſide the foure beaſtes. That is, the Cherubins and Seraphins, or chief Angels; that is, Angels deputed to chiefe offices, round about the throne, which all with a loud voice do acknowledge the Lambe which was killed, to be worthy of all honor, glory, & praiſe, &c. 
                  
                     verſ. 12 And not onely theſe innumerable Angels, being twentie thouſād times ten thouſand, but alſo all other creatures both in heauē and earth: as the Sun, Moone, & Starres, the fiſhes in the Sea, and the beaſtes in the earth, do all in their kinde ſing the ſame ſong, 
                     verſ. 13 acknowledging all honour and glory, praiſe and power, to belong vnto him that ſitteth vpon the throne, and vnto the Lambe, for euermore. For although the creature is as yet ſubiect to the bondage of corruption, and therefore groneth and trauelleth in paine, waiting when the ſonnes of God ſhalbe reuealed, yet it ſtādeth in aſſured expectation of reſtitution to libertie & incorruption; and therefore here all the creatures do praiſe the Lambe for that reſtauration which they doo ſo longly and wiſhly looke for. And the foure beaſts ſaid Amen. That is, they do ſubſcribe to thoſe praiſes which the creature yeeldeth to their Creator. And not onely the Angels do ſubſcribe and conſent vnto it, but the 24. Elders alſo, who fall downe, & worſhip him that liueth for euermore. So that the Lambe is praiſed and worſhipped of all hands, both of men and Angels, and all other creatures, as God euerlaſting, and bleſſed for euermore.
            
            
               
               CHAP. VI.
               IN the fourth chapter we haue heard the deſcription of God the Father, which holdeth the ſealed booke in his right hand. In the fift chapter wee haue had the deſcription of Ieſus Chriſt, the opener and interpreter of this ſeuen ſealed booke. Now in this ſixt chapter wee are to vnderſtande of the matter and contentes of this booke, and of the ſtraunge accidents and euents which followed vpon the opening of euerie ſeuerall ſeale. For in this chapter ſixe of the ſeales are opened by the Sonne of God, and the myſteries thereof diſcloſed vnto Iohn, that he might declare thē to the Church, for the comfort and inſtruction thereof.
               This chapter containeth ſixe principall things, ariſing from the ſeuerall opening of the ſix ſeales; and they are theſe:

                      
                        
                           verſ. 1.2. 
                        
                           verſ. 3.4. 
                        
                           verſ. 5.6. 
                        
                           verſ. 7.8. 
                        
                           verſ. 9.10.11. The ſpreading of the Goſpell.
                     Great perſecutions following therevpon.
                     Famine.
                     Peſtilence.
                     Complaints of the Martyrs.
                      
                        
                           verſ. 12.13.14.15.16.17. Fearefull vengeance vpon the worlde, for ſheading the bloud of Gods Saints.
                  
               
                
                  
                     verſ. 1 After, I beheld, when the Lambe had opened one of the ſeales, and I heard one of the foure beaſtes ſay, as it were the noiſe of thunder: Come and ſee.
               
                  Now, after all theſe former matters, Iohn did verie intentiuely fixe his eye vpon the Lambe, being now about to open and vnclaſpe the firſt ſeale of the booke, and all on the ſudden hee was admoniſhed and ſtirred vp by one of the Cherubins, that he ſhould drawe neare and come vp, and take knowledge of theſe great and important matters, which were now to be reuealed vnto him. And to the end that he might be throughly awaked, and ſtirred vp to attention in ſo waightie matters, it is ſaide, that the voice of the Angell which ſpake vnto him, was like the voice of a thunder: So that hereby Iohn was throughly rowſed, fitted and prepared, to receiue theſe heauenly viſions.
               Therefore I beheld, and loe, there was a white horſe, 
                     verſ. 2 and he that ſate on him had a bowe, and a crowne was giuen vnto him, and he went forth conquering, that he might ouercome.
               
                  Iohn keeping his eye ſteadie vpon the Lambe, hauing now opened the firſt ſeale, doth in a viſion ſee a white horſe, &c.
               By this white horſe, is meant the miniſterie of the worde of God, and the firſt preaching of the Goſpell by Chriſt and his Apoſtles, and the ſucceſſors in the Primatiue Church. 
                     chapter 19.11. 
                  The white horſe is taken in this ſenſe in the 19. chapter of this Propheſie; where our Lorde Ieſus beeing vpon this white horſe, beateth downe all his enemies before him: For who is able to reſiſt his worde, and the miniſtrie of it?
               
                  
                  Zach 1.8.In the firſt chapter of the Propheſie of Zacharie, our Lord Ieſus purpoſing to build vp his church, being in a very ruinous eſtate after the captiuitie, is brought in by the Prophet on horſebacke, both for the reedifying of his Church, and alſo for the puniſhment of the Babilonians, his enemies, and the enemies of his people. In the 45. Pſalme the church the ſpouſe ſaieth thus to her beloued husbande Chriſt:Pſal. 45. 
                  Gird the ſworde vpon thy thigh, ô thou mightie one, the ſworde of thy glorie and comely beautie, and with thy comely beautie ride on proſperouſly for the buſineſſe of truth, and of meeke righteouſneſſe, &c.
               
               Now in all theſe places of the ſcripture, wee do plainely ſee, that when Chriſt goeth about either to broach his Goſpell, or build vp his Church, or to be reuenged on the enemies thereof, hee is brought in on horſebacke. And this doth ſtrongly confirme and warrant this expoſition, ſeeing it is not any imagined ſenſe, or new deuice of mans braine, but ſuch a ſenſe as other places of ſcripture will verie fully beare out.
               Moreouer, if wee doo ſeriouſly conſider, and deepely weigh the purpoſe and intendment of the holy Ghoſt in all this, it will not a little helpe and further this expoſition. For the chiefe ſcope and drifte of all is, to deſcribe the ſtate of the Church from the Apoſtles time to the ende of the worlde. 
                     chapter 1.1. For this Propheſie ſerueth to ſhewe vnto Iohn the thinges that must ſhortlye come to paſſe.
               
               Now, wee all knowe by bleſſed experience, that the firſt eſtate of the Church did conſiſt in

the preaching of the Goſpell by Chriſt and his Apoſtles: and therfore this muſt needs be vnderſtood of that time & eſtate of the church. For Ieſus Chriſt is he that ſitteth vpon this white horſe, that is, by the miniſtery of his Goſpell he conquereth and ſubdueth the nations vnder him.
               There may bee three reaſons alledged why this horſe is ſaide to be of a white colour. Firſt, becauſe the doctrine of the Goſpell which was preached by Chriſt and his Apoſtles, was pure and ſincere, being without all ſpots and blots of error and hereſie. For the white colour in the ſcripture doth ſignifie puritie, ſinceritie, innocency, ioy, glory, and beautie.
               Secondly, becauſe the doctrine of Chriſt and his Apoſtles, was full of ioy and comfort: As it is ſaide of Samaria, after Phillip had ſet the Goſpell abroache there,Act. 8.8. that there was great ioy in that Citie.
               
               Thirdly, becauſe the miniſtery of Chriſt and his Apoſtles was very glorious and beautifull, as it is written:Rom. 10.15. 
                  How beautifull are the feete of them which bring the glad tydings of peace, &c. And againe,Pſal. 45. 
                  with thy comely beautie ride on proſperouſly, for the buſineſſe of truth, &c.
               
               If any man demaund a reaſon of Chriſts ſitting on horſe-backe, and riding forth on horſe-backe: I anſwere, that it doth moſt fitly repreſent that maruellous ſwiftneſſe wherewith the light of the Goſpell ſhould be carried and ſpread, not only throughout all Iudea, Samaria, and Galile, but alſo throughout all the kingdomes of the world. For is it not a wonder, to conſider how ſwiftly, and as it were on

horſeback, and alſo how farre ouer the Heathen nations, within a fewe yeares after Chriſts aſcention, the doctrine of the Goſpell was preached, and of multitudes imbraced. He rode forth indeed proſperouſly and ſwiftly vpon this white horſe, euen the miniſtrie of the Goſpell, for the buſineſſe of truth, and of meeke righteouſneſſe; and his right hande wrought fearefull things, as ſaith the Pſalmiſt.
               Moreouer, it is here ſaide, that Ieſus Christ hath a bowe in his hand. And in the 45. Pſalme, from whence it ſeemeth all theſe phraſes and ſpeeches are borrowed, hee is ſaide to haue sharpe arrowes in his hande, whereby he pierceth the heart of his enemies.
               Now this bowe and arrowes doo ſignifie the piercing power of the Goſpell, whereby the world hath bene ſubdued vnto Chriſte. For all the arrowes of the Goſpell which Chriſt ſhooteth out of this bowe, which is euen the tongue of his miniſters, doo ſticke in the hearts of men; yea, they pierce into all the ſecret places of the ſoule. For the miniſtrie of the Goſpell is liuely,
                  Heb 4. 
                  and mightie in operation, ſharper then any two edged ſworde, and entreth through, euen vnto the deuiding aſunder of the ſoule and the ſpirit, of the ioynts and the marrowe, and is a diſcerner of the thoughts, and the intents of the heart.
               
               Heere is yet further mention made of a crowne which was giuen vnto Chriſt, and that hee went forth conquering, that hee might ouercome.
               
               This crowne ſignifieth the victorie which he getteth ouer the worlde with his bowe and arrowes. For the Pſalmiſt ſaieth: By thy ſharpe arrowes in the

hearts of the kinges enemies, the people ſhall fall vnder them.
               
               We reade in the ſecond of the Acts of the Apoſtles, that 3000.Act, 2.37. of the Kings enemies were at once ſhot thorough with this bowe, and theſe arrowes, and did fall vnder him. We reade of many other at other times, and in other places. For the Apoſtle ſaith plainely, that the weapons of our warfare are not carnall, but ſpirituall,
                  2. Cor. 10. 
                  mightie through God to caſt downe holdes, caſting downe the imaginations, and euery high thing that is exalted againſt the knowledge of God, and bringing into captiuitie euery thought to the obedience of Chriſt.
               
               Thus we ſee how Chriſt and his Apoſtles and all their true ſucceſſors riding vpon this white horſe which is the miniſtery of the Goſpell, haue gone ouer all the worlde, conquering and ouercomming.
               I am not ignorant that ſome doo expound this otherwiſe: but my purpoſe is not to meddle with other mens opinions, and iudgements, but to ſet downe that which God hath giuen me to ſee, and which in mine owne conſcience and perſwaſion, I ſuppoſe to be the truth, referring all to the iudgement of the church, and ſuch therein as are indued with the ſpirit of God. For the ſpirit of the Prophets is ſubiect to the Prophets. And be it knowne vnto all men, that my chiefe indeuour throughout this whole booke, ſhall be to ſeeke the ſenſe that is, and not the ſenſe that is not: to meddle only with truth and let falſhood goe.
               
                   
                  
                     verſ. 3 And when he had opened the ſecond ſeale, I heard the ſecond beaſt ſay, Come and ſee.
               As before at the opening of the firſt ſeale, ſo now againe at the opening of the ſecond ſeale, Iohn is called vpon by an other Angell to giue attention: and ſo afterwards at the opening of the third and fourth ſeale. Wherein we may obſerue the heauineſſe and drowſineſſe of mans nature in all heauenly thinges, which is euermore readie to ſinke and fall aſleepe, except it be awaked by many meanes, and ſtirred vp by ſpeciall grace.
                
                  
                     verſ. 4 And there went out an other horſe that was redde, and power was giuen to him that ſate thereon, to take peace from the earth, and that they ſhould kill one an other: and there was giuen vnto him a great ſword.
               This redde horſe, repreſenteth the cruell perſecution, and bloodie warres which followed the preaching of the Goſpell. For the red colour in the ſcripture, doth note blood, crueltie, and warres. The rider vpon this horſe is the diuel himſelfe: for who but he and his inſtruments delight in blood, perſecutions, and warres? hee hath power giuen him to take peace from the earth, (for hee could haue no power except it were giuen him) and to this purpoſe a great ſword was giuen him, to murther and kill withall.
               All this is to be vnderſtood of the ſtate of the

church vnder the tenne great perſecutions, raiſed vp againſt it by the perſecuting Emperours, Domitian, Traianus, Nero, Antoninus, Decius, Diocleſian, Maxentius, Licinius, and other cruell tyrants, euen vntill the times of Constantine the great.
               Stories doo report, that theſe cruell perſecutors did in moſt ſauage and horrible manner, torture, torment, and ſhead the bloud of innumerable multitudes of Gods people. So that as the firſt eſtate of the Church, vnder the preaching of the Goſpell, was ioyfull and peaceable; ſo this ſecond eſtate of the Church, vnder ſuch outragious perſecutions, was troubleſome and tragicall: and yet for all that, in the middeſt of all theſe ſwordes, bloud and flames of perſecution, the Church did ſtill preuaile and encreaſe.Tertul. For the bloud of the Martyrs is the ſeede of the Goſpell. And the Church oftentimes beeing ſowne in the bloud, yet ſpringeth vp, and groweth in bloud. And as for the cruell and bloud-ſucking Emperours, which could not endure the light of the Goſpell, but ſtroue by tirannie to ſuppreſſe it, the iuſt God which taketh vengeance of all iniquitie, and ſpecially of the perſecution of his children, was euen with them well inough: for he gaue thē ouer, ſome to be ſlaine in the warres, ſome to be tortured with horrible diſeaſes, ſome to be poiſoned, ſome to bee murthered, and ſome to murther themſelues. Thus did God the auenger, ſhewe himſelfe from heauen, as the ſtories report, and pay home to the full theſe bloud-ſuckers of his Church, making them examples of his wrath, and ſpectacles of his vengeance to all nations.
               
                   
                  
                     verſ. 5 And when he had opened the third ſeale, I heard the third beaſt ſay; Come and ſee. Then I beheld, and loe a black horſe, and he that ſate on him, had ballance in his hand, &c.
               By the blacke horſe, famine and dearth is ſignified: for the blacke colour, is a mournfull and ſad colour: and what maketh men more penſiue & ſad then famine and extreame hunger. For it is a thing vntollerable: and therefore the holy Ghoſt ſaith; They be better that are killed with the ſword,
                  Lament. 4.9. 
                  then they that die of famine. He that ſitteth on this horſe hath a ballance in his hand, which ſignifieth great penury and ſcarſitie of all things, but ſpecially of victuall: in ſo much that men muſt be pittanced & ſtinted in their victualls, and their bread and drinke muſt be deliuered out by waight and meaſure, as it fareth in ſtraight & ſore ſieges of cities, when victualls waxe ſcarſe.Leuit. 26. Ezec. 4. & 5. This is it that God threatneth in Leuiticus and Ezechiel, that hee would breake the ſtaffe of bread, and that tenne women ſhould bake in one ouen, and deliuer bread by meaſure. Now to declare the greeuouſnes of this famine, a voice commeth from the throne, and from the Angels, 
                     verſ. 6 that a meaſure of wheate ſhould be for a penny, and three meaſures of barly for a penny: the meaſure here ſpoken of is a Chenix, which ſome writers ſay, was ſo much as would ſerue a man for bread corne for one day. And the Romane penny vnder Domitian, was almoſt ſeuen pence of our mony. And at that time the labouring man did worke for a penny a day, which would do little more then

buy him bread corne. How then ſhould his wife and children do? Whereas it is ſaid: Wine and Oyle hurt thou not, I take it that it ſhould rather he tranſlated, In Wine and Oyle thou ſhalt not do vniuſtly: as the word will beare it. And the ſenſe is, that in the ſtate of corne and vittaile, they ſhall deale conſcionably and mercifully, not ſelling at the higheſt, but rather at the loweſt rate now in the times of extreame ſcarcitie.
               Now, all this is to bee vnderſtood of that moſt grieuous famine which wee reade to haue bene about the yeare of the Lord, 316. and ſundrie times afterward. And all this for the contempt of the Goſpell preached by Chriſt and his Apoſtles vpon the white horſe, and the murdering of Gods Saints by him vpon the redde horſe, and his inſtruments. So grieuous and fearefull a thing is the contempt of the Goſpell, and the perſecuting of the Saints. And God did moſt iuſtly cauſe the worlde to ſmart for it, and make them with ſorrowe inough to feele the puniſhment of the Goſpell reiected.
               
                  And whē he had opened the fourth ſeale, 
                        verſ. 7 I heard the voice of the fourth beaſt ſay: Come and ſee.
                  And I looked, and beholde a pale horſe, 
                        verſ. 8 and his name that ſate on him, was Death, and hell followed after him, &c.
               
               This pale horſe ſignifieth the peſtilence and other contagious diſeaſes, which God moſt iuſtly brought vpon the world for the contempt of the Goſpel, and the murthering of Chriſte and his Apoſtles, and

as I noted before out of the ſcriptures, that when God commeth either in mercy or iudgement, he is ſaid to come on horſebacke, to note his expedition, and ſwiftneſſe, both in the one and the other: ſo, as before Chriſt is vppon the white horſe, the diuell vpon the red horſe, famine vpon the black horſe: ſo here death and hell are ſaid to be vpon the pale horſe: for peſtilence and death maketh men looke pale: but being dead, hee ſaith hell followed. For aſſuredly hell doth alwaies followe the death of the bodie, excepting thoſe onely whom Chriſt hath deliuered from hell and damnation by the power of his death.
               Thus then it is: the redde horſe with blood, the blacke horſe with famine, the pale horſe with peſtilence, haue power giuen them ouer the fourth part of men, to murther, kill and ſlea, as all ſtories doe ſhewe, that for the reiecting of Chriſt and his Goſpell, theſe plagues were carried as it were on horſebacke, ouer a great part of the worlde. Now as touching this famine and peſtilence which fell out vpon the opening of the third and fourth ſeales, they are to bee referred vnto thoſe times eſpecially, wherein the Hunnes, Gothes, and Vandales, and other barbarous nations which were the waſters of the world, did waſte & decaie the Romane Empire both farre and neare. Wherevppon grew this famine, ſcarſitie, and peſtilence, and ſtraunge diſeaſes heere ſpoken of, about ſome 300. yeares after Chriſt, and ſomewhat more.
               
                  And when hee had opened the fift ſeale, I ſawe vnder the Aultar the ſoules of them that were killed for the word of God, and for the testimonie which they maintained, &c.
               Heere is diſcouered the ſtate of the Martyrs after this life, and the condition of the ſpirits of all iuſt and perfect men. For whereas it might bee demaunded, what became of all thoſe heapes and multitudes of men which were ſlaine for the teſtimonie of Ieſus in the tenne great perſecutions: it is here anſwered, that they were vnder the Aultar. Iohn in a Viſion ſeeth them vnder the Aultar. That is, vnder the mercifull protection of Chriſt in heauen, who for them and for vs all, was made both Aultar, Prieſt, and Sacrifice. This Aultar Chriſt, is afterward called the golden Aultar, which is before the throne of God. 
                  
                     chapter 8.3. So then it is cleare, that the ſoules of the Martyrs were with Chriſt in glory. For hee ſaith to his diſciples: Where I am, there ſhall you be alſo.
                  Ioh. 14 3.
               
               And in an other place he ſaith: If I were lift vp from the earth, I will drawe all men vnto me, that is,
                  Ioh. 12 32. 
                  all beleeuers. Then it followeth, that the ſoules of theſe iuſt and righteous men were in Paradiſe, and in Abrahams boſome, which is the very port and hauen of ſaluation. For although the perſecuting Emperours, and other tyrants of the earth, had power to kill theyr bodies, yet had they no power ouer theyr ſoules, as our Lorde Ieſus affirmeth.Math. 10.
               
               
                   
                  
                     verſ. 10 And they cryed with a loude voice, ſaying: How long Lord holy and true, doeſt thou not iudge and auenge our bloud on them that dwell vpon the earth?
               Here wee ſee plainely, that the ſoules of the Martyrs doo very vehemently crye for vengeance vpon theſe cruell tyrants which ſhead their bloud. Moreouer, they crie for it ſpeedily, and ſeeme to be impatient of delay. But it is to be obſerued, that they doo not this in any hatred, or priuate deſire of reuenge, in reſpect of any wrong or crueltie ſhewed to them; but in a very loue and burning zeale of the Kingdome and glory of Chriſt, and whatſoeuer deſire they haue, it is wholy to that ende. Wherefore they are here vnder a figure brought in crying for vengeance, rather to expreſſe what iudgement of God tarrieth for the cruell perſecutors, then to ſhewe what minde they beare towards them. For it is indeede their cauſe that cryeth for vengeance. And as Abels bloud: ſo theyr bloud cryeth aloude in the eares of the Lorde of Hoaſtes for reuenge.
               Moreouer, wee may not imagine or gather out of this loude crying of the Martyrs in heauen, that they haue any diſturbance, impatience, diſquietneſſe, or any diſcontentment there. But this they do in a feruent deſire of that fulneſſe of glorie which they aſſuredly hope for and looke for in the conſummation of all things, when both their ſoules and bodies ſhall be ioyned together.
               
                  And long white robes were giuen vnto euery one; 
                     verſ. 11 and it was ſaid vnto them, that they ſhould reſt for a little ſeaſon, vntil their fellow ſeruants & their brethren which ſhould be killed euen as they were, were fulfilled.
               Theſe white robes do ſignifie that honour, glory, and dignitie, wherevnto not onely the Martyrs, but alſo all other faithfull beleeuers are aduanced in the chambers of peace: for ſo white robes are to bee vnderſtood in ſundrie other places of this booke.Chap. 3.18. Chap. 7.13. Chap. 19.8. And this doth plainely proue, that the Martyrs were now in glory with Chriſt.
               Now, as concerning the anſwere to their complaint and crie, it was this, that they ſhould be content, and haue patience for a little ſeaſon, (for the time remaining, to the ende of the worlde, was but as a day with God, and as a moment in compariſon of eternitie) and the reaſon of the delay is yeelded, which is this, that there were numbers of others, their bretheren in the worlde, which ſhould bee martyred and ſlaine for the truth, as well as they vnder the great Antichriſt of Rome, and the bloudie Turke, at and vpon the opening of the ſixt and ſeuenth ſeale. And therefore in conſideration that the moſt wiſe God had decreed and fore-determined with himſelfe in his moſt ſecret and hid counſell, to bring multitudes of others to glory by the ſame way and meanes that they themſelues were brought, that therefore in the meane time beeing ſo ſhort a time, they ſhould reſt ſatisfied and contented. And hereby the way, we ſee what ſtaieth the

comming of Chriſt vnto iudgement; namely this, that the number of his Martyrs and Saints, and all ſuch as he hath choſen vnto life, are not yet accompliſhed.
               
                  
                     
                        verſ. 12 And I behelde, when hee opened the ſixt ſeale, and loe there was a great earthquake, and the Sun was as black as ſackcloath of haire, and the Moone was like bloud.
                  
                     
                        verſ. 13 And the ſtarres of heauen fell vnto the earth, as a figge-tree caſteth her green figges, when it is ſhaken of a mightie winde.
                  
                     
                        verſ. 14 And heauen departed away as a ſcrole when it is rolled, and euery mountaine and Ile were moued out of their place.
               
               Vpon the opening of this ſixt ſeale, very dolefull and fearefull things which doo followe: As earthquakes, the darkening of the Sunne, the obſcuritie of the Moone, the falling of the Starres, the rolling together of the heauens, the remouing of mountaines & Iles out of their places, the howlings and horrors of kings and captaines, & other great potentates of the earth, which all are things very terrible and fearefull to beholde: and all theſe do repreſent and figure out vnto vs the moſt fearefull tokens of Gods high diſpleaſure and moſt heauie indignation againſt the wicked world. Very grieuous things fell out vpō the opening of the 2.3. & 4. ſeales: but they are farre more grieuous which followe vpon the opening of this ſixt ſeale: for this ſixt ſeale containeth an aggrauation and encreaſe of all the former iudgements. For now after the crie of the Martyrs for vengeance, GOD the auenger of the bloude of the righteous doeth ſhewe

himſelf from heauen, and declare his wrath in more fearefull manner then before, euen to the great aſtoniſhment of all the creatures in heauen and earth. So horrible a thing is the ſheading of the bloud of the Chriſtians. For now we ſee plainely, that God heareth the cries of his Martyrs, and commeth as a Giant, or as an armed man, to take vengeance of all their enemies. For Pretious in the ſight of the Lorde,
                  Pſal. 116.15. 
                  is the death of his Saints: and hee is much mooued with the crie of their bloud, as here wee ſee. And therefore now threatneth to holde a generall Aſſiſes, wherein hee will make inquiſition after bloud, and arraigne and condemne all ſuch as are founde guiltie thereof: according as the perſecuting Emperours and many others, did finde and feele by wofull experience. For if God be angry but a little, who may endure it?
               Now, although the Stories do report, that in thoſe dayes, which was aboue 300. yeares after Chriſt, there were many great and fearefull Earthquakes in diuers nations and cities of the world: yet it is apparant, that the Earth-quake here ſpoken of, cannot bee taken literally, nor any of the reſt here mentioned. For there was neuer any time, neither is it mentioned in any Chronicle, that euer the Sunne was as blacke as ſacke-cloth of haire; or the Moone turned into bloud; or the Starres fell from heauen; or the Heauens rolled together like a ſcrole; or that Mountaines and Ilandes were mooued out of their places. Therefore of neceſſitie all this muſt bee vnderſtood metaphorically; that is, that God did in ſo ſtraunge and fearefull a manner manifeſt

his wrath from heauen by tumults, commotions, ſeditions, & alteratiōs of kingdomes, as if theſe things of the Sun, Moone, and Starres, had bene viſibly repreſented to the eye. An earth-quake in this booke, and other bookes alſo of the ſcriptures, doth by a borrowed ſpeech ſignifie commotions of commonwealth, troubles, tumults, vprores, and great alterations of ſtates & kingdoms. The darkning of the Sun, Moone, and Starres, & rolling together of the Heauens, do by a metaphor in the ſcriptures, ſignifie the fearefull wrath and angrie face of God; which they being not able to endure, are ſaid here to bluſh at, to couer themſelues, to hide themſelues, to be aſhamed of thēſelues, to remoue out of their places, no more to do their offices, &c. For as birds doo hide themſelues, and thruſt their heads into buſhes when the Eagle commeth abroade: And as all the beaſtes of the forreſt doo tremble and couch in their dennes when the Lyon roareth: And as that ſubiect doth hide himſelfe, and dare not ſhewe his head, with whom the King is diſpleaſed: So here it is ſaide, that the whole earth doth tremble, and all the celeſtiall creatures are amazed and confounded with beholding the angry face of God againſt the worlde, in ſo much that they do as it were, drawe a canopie ouer them, hide themſelues vnder a cloude, and ſurceaſe to do their offices.
               The darkning of the Sunne and Moone is taken in this ſenſe in the ſecond of Ioel, and alſo in the ſecond chapter of the Acts of the Apoſtles. For there God promiſing and foretelling, that in the laſt dayes he would abundantly powre forth of his ſpirit vpon

all fleſh (which is to be vnderſtood of the plentifull preaching of the Goſpell in the Apoſtles time, and the aboundance of grace that was giuen with the ſame) addeth, that for the contempt of ſo great grace and mercie, he would ſhewe wonders in heauen aboue, and tokens in the earth beneath. Bloud and fire, and the vapour of ſmoake; the Sunne ſhall bee turned into darkeneſſe, and the Moone into bloud, before that great and notable day of the Lord come. The meaning of the Prophet is,Act. 
                        •
                     . as Peter alſo dooth expound it, that God from heauen will ſhewe ſuch apparant ſignes of his wrath againſt the worlde, that men ſhould bee no leſſe amazed, then if the whole order of nature were inuerted. And this was performed, when as the Iewes for the contempt of Chriſte and his Goſpell, were moſt miſerably deſtroied by the Romanes.
               Euen ſo here, vnder the opening of the ſixt ſeale, God dooth threaten, that for the murdering of his ſonne Chriſt, and his Apoſtles, and innumerable Chriſtians, hee would bring ſtraunge iudgements and extraordinarie calamities vpon the worlde, according as all ſtories do ſhewe, that thoſe times were full of bloud-ſheads, commotions, famines, peſtilence, and miſeries of all ſortes. I am not ignorant, that the darkening of the Sunne and Moone, and the falling of the Starres from heauen, are ſometimes in this booke put for the obſcuritie and corruption of pure doctrine, and the falling away of the Paſtors of the Church from their ſinceritie and zeale. But in this place the circumſtances will not beare that ſenſe: Firſt, becauſe heere the darkening

                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
of the Sunne and Moone, &c. is ioyned with an Earth-quake, the rolling together of the Heauens, and the mouing of Mountaines and Ilands out of their places, which argueth a moſt horrible confuſion and concuſſion of all things. Secondly, becauſe afterward in the eight chapter, hee doth of purpoſe ſpeake of the corrupting of pure doctrine, & the falling away of the Miniſters, referring it to that chapter, as his proper place. Thirdly, becauſe the kings and captaines of the earth here immediatly mentioned, would neuer haue bene caſt into any ſuch perplexities and horrours vpon any corruption of doctrine and the miniſtrie, as here we reade of. For commōly men are not any whit touched or moued with that, or ſuch like things. Laſt of all, becauſe the ſcope and drift of the holy Ghoſt, vnder the opening of this ſixt ſeale, is to deſcribe corporall, not ſpirituall; viſible, not inuiſible iudgements. For he doth orderly and of purpoſe; handle them in the next chapter.
               Now, whereas it is ſaid in the laſt three verſes, that the Kings of the earth, and the great men, and the rich men, 
                  
                     verſ. 15 
                  and the chiefe Captaines, and the mightiemen, and euery bond-man, and euery free-man, hidde themſelues in dennes, 
                  
                     verſ. 16 
                  and amongst the rockes of the mountaines, and ſaid to the rockes and mountaines, 
                  
                     verſ. 17 
                  fall on vs, &c. the ſenſe and meaning of all is this, that theſe viſible iudgements ſhould bee ſo horrible and extraordinarie, that all ſorts of men then liuing vpon the face of the earth, ſhould euen wiſh themſelues buried quicke, or that they might runne into a mouſe-hole or awger-hole, to hide themſelues from the

wrath of the Lambe. For being both outwardly terrified with theſe ſenſible iudgements, and inwardly griped and tormented with the furie of their owne conſciences, they were at no hande able to endure it.
            
            
               CHAP. VII.
               
                  THis chapter dooth wholy appertaine vnto the opening of the ſixt ſeale. It ſheweth generally how God in the middeſt of all the broiles which happened vnder the opening of the ſixt ſeale, yet did preſerue his church, and mercifully prouide for his owne people.
                  This ſeuenth chapter may very fitly bee deuided into three parts.
                  Firſt, it ſheweth, that as God did moſt fearefully puniſh the world with viſible & ſenſible iudgemēts, as we haue heard before: ſo now he would ſet vpon them with inuiſible and ſpirituall plagues, which are of all other moſt grieuous and intollerable. 
                        verſ. 1 
                  
                  Secondly, it ſheweth the ſtate and condition of the Church militant here in earth, as before was ſhewed vnder the opening of the fift ſeale the ſtate of the Church triumphant in the heauens; 
                        verſ. 2.3.4.5.6.7.8.9. namely, that it is ſealed and ſet in ſafetie from all daungers.
                  Thirdly, it ſheweth the bleſſed and happie eſtate of all Gods elect, 
                        verſ. 10.11.12.13.14.15.16.17. and their feruent praiſes and zealous worſhip of God, who thus mercifully did prouide for their ſecuritie in the middeſt of greateſt perils and extremities.
               
               
                  
                      
                     
                        verſ. 1 And after that, I ſaw foure Angels ſtand on the foure corners of the earth, holding the foure winds of the earth, that the windes ſhould not blowe on the earth, neither on the ſea, neither on any greene tree.
                  Theſe foure angels are angels of darkneſſe, or foure diuels, which is proued by this reaſon, that they holde the foure windes from blowing on the earth: that is, ſtop the courſe of the Goſpell, which is a ſpirituall plague.
                  They are ſaid to ſtand vpon the foure corners of the earth, becauſe power was giuen them to plague not ſome one or two countries, but the vniuerſall world, both Eaſt, Weſt, North and South.
                  The blowing of the windes, doth very fitly repreſent the preaching of the Goſpell, and that heauenly inſpiration and breathing of the holy Ghoſt which goeth with it. Winde is ſo taken, Ioh. 3. where our Lord Ieſus ſaith; The wind bloweth where it liſteth, &c:
                     Cant. 4.16. 
                     So is euery man that is borne of the ſpirit. And again in the 4. of the Cantic. in theſe words; Ariſe ô North, and come ô South and blowe on my garden, that the ſpices thereof may flowe out. Where it plainly appeareth, that the Church craueth the inſpiration of the ſpirit, that her fruites may abound: For what can be meant by theſe windes which ſhe wiſheth to blow vppon her garden, but the heauenly breathings of Gods holy ſpirit and word. It followeth then, that if the blowing of the windes in the ſcriptures doo ſignifie the breathing of Gods grace, and holy ſpirite, that the ſtopping of the windes by a reaſon of the contraries

doth here ſignifie the ſtopping of the ſame, and the depriuation of all heauenly bleſſings. So that it is cleare, that a ſpirituall plague is heere repreſented, which alſo is the more apparant, becauſe here is ſuch ſpeciall prouiſo and care had for the churches ſafetie, that it might not be infected with this ſpirituall contagiō. Now all this doth plainly fore-propheſie, not only the ſtopping of the courſe of the Goſpell: but euen the vtter taking of it away from the world, for their great contempt thereof, and the horrible murthering & maſſacring of all the true profeſſors of it: according as it came to paſſe afterward in the preuailing firſt of hereſies, and afterward of the Popiſh and Mahometiſh religion, as in the two next Chapters following ſhall plainly appeare.
                  
                     And I ſawe another Angell come vp from the Eaſt, 
                           verſ. 2 which had the ſeale of the liuing God, and he cried with a loud voice to the foure angels, to whome power was giuen to hurt the earth and the ſea, ſaying:
                     Hurt yee not the earth, neither the ſea, 
                           verſ. 3 neither the trees, till wee haue ſealed the ſeruants of our God in their foreheads.
                  
                  This Angell is Ieſus Chriſt, who by the Prophet is called the Angell of the couenant.
                     Mal. 3.1. That Angels do repreſent & ſuſtaine the perſon of Chriſt their head, is ſo common & vſuall a thing in the ſcriptures, that I ſhall not neede to ſtaie in it.
                  That this Angell is Chriſt, it doth plainly appeare by the things heere attributed vnto him, which can agree to none other. Firſt, in that he hath the ſeale of

the liuing God (which is the ſpirit of adoption) to ſet vpon all the elect, for hee is the onely keeper of this great ſeale, and this priuie ſeale. Hee onely hath authoritie to ſet it vpon whom he will.
                  Secondly, becauſe hee is ſaide to come vp from the Eaſt: that is, hee is the onely ſonne of righteouſnes which ariſeth vpon his Church euery morning, and with his bright beames expelleth all darkneſſe from it.Luk. 1.78. According to that of Zacharias in his propheticall ſong: Through the tender mercy of our God the day ſpring from an highe hath viſited vs.
                  
                  Thirdly, becauſe he holdeth a ſoueraigntie and commaund ouer the diuels: for he chargeth them here to ſtaie their hands from doing any hurt, till he had prouided for his elect.
                  
                     
                        verſ. 2 Whereas it is ſaide, that power was giuen to theſe diuels to hurt the earth, the ſea and the trees: that is, the number of reprobates, we may note, that the diuels haue no abſolute power, but only by permiſſion: as appeareth in this,Iob. 1. Math. 8. that they could neither touch Iob, nor enter into the heard of ſwine, without leaue and licence.
                  
                     
                        verſ. 3 Whereas it is ſaid, Till we haue ſealed the ſeruants of our God in their foreheads, it doth plainely ſhewe that the puniſhments of the wicked are deferred till prouiſion be made for the elect.Gen. 7. 
                     The floud came not vppon the olde worlde till Noah and his family were receiued into the Arke.
                     Gen. 19. Exod. 12. 
                     The Angels deſtroyed not Sodome till Lot was ſet in ſafetie. The plaguing Angell ſpared the first borne of Egipt, till the poſtes of the Iſraelites houſes were ſprinkeled with the blood of the paſchall

Lambe. The ſixe Angels ſent to deſtroy Ieruſalem,Ezech. 9. 
                     are charged to ſtaie the execution, till the ſeruaunts of God were marked in their fore-heads.
                  
                  All theſe examples do manifeſtly declare what tender care the Lorde in all ages hath had of his owne people, that they might be deliuered and ſet in ſafetie in the midſt of all extremities. Euen ſo heere we ſee that God is verie carefull, that his owne children might not be infected with thoſe damnable hereſies which now alreadie vppon the ſtopping of the courſe of the Goſpell beganne to be hatched, and afterward did ſpring and growe vp in the Church both thicke and three-folde.
                  And I heard the number of them that were ſealed, 
                        verſ. 4 and there were ſealed an hundred fortie and foure thouſande of all the Tribes of the Children: Of the Tribe of Iudah were ſealed twelue thouſand, &c.
                  Now Iohn heareth the number of them that were ſealed, and hee reckeneth vp the whole Church militant, conſiſting both of the Iewes, and Gentiles. Hee ſaith, that of the Church of the Iewes there were ſealed 144000. Wherein he putteth a certaine number for an vncertaine, and a definite number for an indefinite: for his meaning is not that there were iuſt ſo many, and neither moe nor leſſe ſealed: but this number doth ariſe of twelue times twelue, in that hee ſaith of euery Tribe twelue thouſande: for twelue times twelue thouſande make an hundred fortie and foure thouſand. Neither

yet may we thinke, that of euery Tribe there were an equall number ſealed, not moe nor leſſe of one Tribe then an other: but this number of twelue, is vſed as the perfect and full number; in as much as the Church of the Iewes was founded vpon the twelue Patriarkes: vnto which our Sauiour had reſpect, when for to gather the diſperſed and loſt ſheepe of the houſe of Iſrael, he choſe twelue Apoſtles.
                  Now here we are to obſerue, that notwithſtanding the horrible perſecutions and calamities which fell out vpon the opening of foure of the ſeales; yet God had his Church euen of the Iewes, which in the iudgemēt of reaſon, a man would haue thought long ere now, had bene vtterly extinct and aboliſhed.Rom. 11. But the Apoſtle ſaith: God hath not caſt off his people which he had choſen: that is, vtterly caſt them off.
                  It is therefore a moſt ſure and certaine poſition in diuinitie, that God hath alwaies his; that is, in all ages, in all times, in all places, in all countries, euen in the middeſt of all troubles and flames of perſecution, yet God hath his hidde and inuiſible Church euen vpon the face of the earth. As it was in the daies of Elias.
                     1 King. 19.18. Math. 27. As was in Chriſts time, when the ſhepheard was ſmit, and the ſheepe ſcattered. And as it was in the daies of the great Antichriſt; as afterwarde wee ſhall ſee.
                  Moreouer, it is to be obſerued, that in the enumeration of the 12. Tribes, the Tribe of Dan is left out, and the Tribe of Leui taken in. The cauſe of the omiſſion and skipping of the Tribe of Dan, was their continuance in Idolatrie from the time of the

Iudges,Iud. 18. (at what time the firſt fell into it) euen vnto the captiuitie. This Tribe is alſo omitted in the Catalogue of the Tribes mentioned 1. Chron. chap. 2.3.4.5.6.7. Then the reaſon of this omiſſion, is firſt their vnworthineſſe. And ſecondly, that there might be a place and roomth for the Tribe of Leui to be taken in: which in this Catalogue, for ſingular reaſon, & a ſpeciall myſterie, might not be pretermitted. For although the Tribe of Leui had no portion or inheritance amongſt the other Tribes in the earthly Canaan, yet now the Prieſt-hood being transferred vnto Chriſt, the holy Ghoſt doth expreſſely affirme, that the Tribe of Leui, as well as others, hath his part and portion in the heauenly inheritance, and the celeſtiall Canaan.
                  
                  After theſe things, I behelde, and loe a grat multitude which no man could number, of all nations, 
                        verſ. 9 and kindreds, and people, and tongues, ſtood before the throne, and before the Lambe, cloathed with long white robes, and palmes in their hands; 
                        verſ. 10 and they cried with a loude voice ſaying: Saluation commeth of our God, &c.
                  This is to bee vnderſtood of the Church of the Gentiles, & they are ſaid to bee an innumerable multitude of all countries & natiōs. For although the church of God in reſpect of the reprobates, is very ſmall, and as an handfull vpon the face of the earth: yet in it ſelfe ſimply conſidered, it is very great and large: for euen out of Adams curſed race, God hath choſe many thouſands to life. And here ſtill we are to obſerue the great goodnes and mercie of God, that notwithſtanding; former perſecutions, & the great blindnes

which afterward did inuade the Church in the preuailing of errours and hereſies: yet Iohn heareth and ſeeth ſuch an huge number ſealed vp to ſaluation through Chriſt, both of the Iewes and Gentiles.
                  The Church of the Gentiles exceeding in number the Church of the Iewes, are here ſaid to haue lōg whiterobes, in token of their puritie and innocencie; and Palmes in their hāds, in ſigne of their victorie ouer the world, fleſh, and the diuell. For Palmes in auncient time were enſignes and badges of victorie.
                  After this, is ſet downe how the whole Church of the Gentiles do praiſe & worſhip God freely, 
                        verſ. 10 acknowledging ſaluation to be onely of him, through Chriſt. 
                        verſ. 11 
                     
                        verſ. 12 And all the Angels of heauen do applaude, ſubſcribe, & ſay Amen to the ſame: as we haue heard before in the 4. chapter.
                  
                     
                        verſ. 11 The 4. beaſts are here mentioned againe, whereby is meant the Angels, both becauſe they are ſaid to haue wings, chap. 4. which agreeth to none but Angels, Eſa. 6. and alſo becauſe they are expreſſely named & interpreted to be the Cherubins, Ezech. 10.
                  
                  If any man muſe why the Angels ſhould bee called beaſts, let him be reſolued with theſe 4. reaſons. Firſt, becauſe they are compared to beaſtes before, as the Lyon,Ezech. 1. Calfe, &c. Secondly, becauſe Ezechiel calleth them ſo; in as much as they draw Gods charriot of triumph.Zach. 1.8. Thirdly, becauſe the Prophet Zacharie compareth them to red, ſpeckled, and white horſes. Fourthly,Zach. 6.2. Zach. 6.1. becauſe the ſame Prophet calleth them Gods coach-horſes, and the multitudes and ſocieties of them, hee calleth Gods chariots, which came out of two mountaines of braſſe: that is, they went forth

at his decree (which ſtandeth as faſt & vnmoueable as a mountaine of braſſe) to comfort and deliuer his Church out of the captiuitie of Babilon:Zach. 6.6. Zach. 6.8. and alſo to ſuccour and helpe the remnant which were left behinde in Iudea. Now in the Prophets, theſe chariots and chariot-horſes are ſaide to carrie the Almightie moſt ſwiftly throughout all the world. And therfore in Zacharie it is ſaid of the Angels: Theſe are they which goe through the whole world. In Ezechiel it is ſaid,Zach 1.10. Ezech. 1.14. 
                     that the beastes ranne, and returned like lightning. And againe, 
                        verſ. 7 that they ſparkled like the appearance of bright braſſe: and the wheeles of Gods chariots were moued with vnconceiueable ſwiftneſſe, euen as faſt as the Angels did flye. Let theſe reaſons and ſcriptures then ſatisfie vs touching this, that the Angels are called beaſtes.
                  After all this, one of the 24. 
                        verſ. 13 Elders asketh Iohn what they were, & from whence they came, which were thus araied in long white robes? Which queſtion is asked of the Elder, not as being ignorant thereof; but to ſtirre vp Iohn, being ignorant, to enquire of the matter, that he might inſtruct him therein. And therfore when Iohn confeſſed his ignorance, deſiring to be inſtructed therein, the Elder telleth him the whole matter; namely, 
                        verſ. 14 
                     that they were ſuch as were come out of great tribulation. For none can enter into life, but through many afflictions:Act. 14.22. as the Apoſtle ſaith.
                  After this againe, the militant and viſible church is deſcribed and ſet forth, not according to their preſent ſtate, but according to that which is to come: 
                        verſ. 16 
                     
                        verſ. 15 for they are here ſpoken of, as if they were alreadie in the poſſeſſion of heauen, and that for infallible

certaintie and aſſurance thereof. Therfore the Apoſtle ſaith, that euen already they do ſit together in heauenly places.
                     Epheſ. 26. And here they are ſaid to be in the preſence of the throne of God, 
                     
                        verſ. 16 
                     &c. to hunger and thirst no more, &c. to haue all teares wiped from their eyes, 
                     
                        verſ. 17 
                     and to be ledde by the Lambe vnto the fountaines of liuing waters. All which dooth very plainely and plentifully expreſſe that infinite glory and endleſſe felicitie which is prepared for all the true and faithfull worſhippers of God. Many good leſſons and obſeruations might be gathered out of all this. But I do of purpoſe omit them, becauſe in this worke I do chiefly and almoſt altogether aime at interpretation, therein alſo ſtudying breuitie, ſoundneſſe, and plaineneſſe.
               
            
            
               CHAP. VIII.
               WE haue heard out of the ſeuenth Chapter how the diuels and their inſtruments, the Romaine Emperors, did ſtop the courſe of the Goſpel. Now in this chapter we are to heare the woeful effects of the ſtopping thereof, which was the ſpringing vp, & preuailing of manifolde errors & hereſies in the worlde. So that the principall ſcope and drift of this chapter, is to ſhewe, that God for the contempt of his Goſpel, and great indignities offered to the true profeſſors thereof did giue vp the worlde to blindneſſe, to errour, to ſuperſtition and hereſie: and as the Apoſtle ſaith;2. Theſſ. 2. 
                  Becauſe they receiued not the loue of the truth, therefore God ſent them ſtrong deluſions, that they ſhould beleeue lies. For, as before we haue heard how the worlde was moſt fearefully puniſhed with

externall plagues and iudgements: So here we are to vnderſtand how the ſame was puniſhed with iudgements ſpirituall and internall, as formerly hath bene ſaid, vpon the ſtopping of the foure windes. For although that ſpirituall plague was very great, yet theſe ſpirituall plagues which follow vpon the opening of the ſeuenth ſeale, are farre greater. For now we are to heare and vnderſtand, not onely of the errours and hereſies, whereby a way and paſſage was made by degrees, as it were by certaine ſtaires, for Antichriſt to climbe vp into his curſed chaire, and to take poſſeſſion thereof: but alſo wee are to vnderſtand of his very tyrannie and kingdome it ſelfe: and alſo of the kingdome of the Turke, and the laſt iudgement. For the things contained vnder the opening of the ſeuenth ſeale, do reach vnto the ende of the worlde. For the booke ſealed with ſeuen ſeales containeth all the whole matters which were to bee reuealed.
               This chapter containeth foure principall things, as it were the foure parts thereof.
               Firſt, the reuerent attention and ſilence, 
                     verſ. 1 with admiration which was in the Church, at and vpon the comming forth of this moſt horrible vengeance.
               Secondly, before the execution of theſe moſt execrable plagues, 
                     verſ. 2.3.4.5. the Church is remembred and ſet in ſafetie with all her children, by her great mediator Chriſt Ieſus.
               Thirdly, the execution of this vengeance, 
                     verſ. 6 which commeth forth at the blowing of the ſeuen trumpets by ſeuen Angels.
               Fourthly, the vengeance it ſelfe contained in the

preuailing of errour and hereſie: 
                     verſ. 7.8.9.10.11.12.13. the falling away of the Paſtors of the Church, and the vniuerſall darkeneſſe that followed therevpon.
               And when hee had opened the 7. ſeale, there was ſilence in heauen about halfe an houre.
               By heauen in this place he meaneth not the kingdome of glory after this life: but by heauen is meant the Church here vpon earth: as it is ſo taken, chap. 12. verſe 1. and chap. 14. verſe 2. There may bee three reaſons yeelded, why the church is called heauen.
               Firſt, becauſe the birth thereof is from heauen; for it is borne of God.
                  1. Iohn. 51.
               
               
                  Col. 1.12.Secondly, becauſe the inheritance therof is from heauen, and therefore is called the inheritance of the Saints.
               
               
                  Phil. 3.20.Thirdly, becauſe the conuerſation therof is in heauen, as the Apoſtle ſaith.
               To this may be added, that our Lorde Ieſus in his Goſpell dooth ſo often call his viſible Church the Kingdome of heauen by a trope,Math. 13. becauſe Chriſt beginneth his raigne in the faithfull therein, whom afterward he tranſlateth actually into the very kingdome of glory.
               By ſilence here is meant the great attention of the church, becauſe great things were now in hand. For now vpon the opening of the 7. ſeale, farre greater matters are threatned then any before: and therfore the Church doth liſten vnto them in deepe ſilence, & as it were in horror and trembling through

admiration: for now there appeare ſuch dreadfull iudgements of God to be executed vpon the earth, that all the heauenly company are aſtoniſhed, and amazed to behold it, and do as it were quake and tremble to thinke vpon it. For as when heauie newes commeth downe from the Prince, to bee proclaimed in open markets, all good ſubiects doe liſten and giue eare with ſilence and trembling: ſo it fareth in this caſe.
               By halfe an houre, hee meaneth that ſhort time, wherein the minds of the godly were prepared, fitted and diſpoſed, wiſely to conſider of theſe matters, and to make good vſe of them. I know right well, that this Verſe is farre otherwiſe interpreted of ſome: but I take this to bee moſt ſound, and ſimple, and beſt agreeing to all that followeth: for the next Verſe is ioyned vnto this by a coniunction copulatiue, to note a coherence of the matter, and to draw the ſenſe together: for he ſaith. And I ſaw 7. 
                  
                     verſ. 2 
                  Angels, which ſtood before God, and to them were giuen ſeuen Trumpets.
               
               Theſe ſeuen Trumpets ſignifie, that God would proceede againſt the worlde in fearefull hoſtilitie, and come againſt it as an open enemie vnto battell, proclaiming open warre againſt it, as it were with ſound of Trumpet and Dromme, ſetting vp the flag of defiance againſt it. And hereupon groweth this ſilence and trembling in the Church, which onely is mooued with the ſignes of Gods wrath,Chap. 1.
                        •
                     . when as all others ſit ſtill in ſecuritie, as the Prophet Zachary ſaith in a like caſe.
               To ſtand in this place, ſignifieth to adminiſter, as

it is ſaid of the Prieſts & Leuites, that they ſtand before God,Heb. 1.1
                        •
                     . and before the Aultar, that is, Miniſter. So here the Angels doo ſtand before God, as readie to adminiſter and execute theſe iudgements. For they are miniſtring ſpirits, and here they do ſound the alarum at the commandement of God.
               Theſe Angels are propounded as 7. in number, becauſe it pleaſed not God at once to powre downe his wrath vpon the rebellious worlde, but at diuers times, and by peecemeale.
               
                  2. Sam. 24.16. 2. Kin. 19.35.Whether theſe were good or bad Angels, it is not material to diſpute, ſeeing God executeth his iudgements both by the one and the other.
               Moreouer, it is ſpecially to be obſerued, that the blowing of theſe ſeuen trumpets, doo all belong to the opening of the ſeuenth ſeale, and are as it were the ſeuen parts thereof: for the things which fall out vpon the blowing of theſe ſeuen trumpets, do reach euen vnto the laſt iudgement, as the Angell ſweareth, chap. 10.6.7.
                
                  
                     verſ. 3 Then an other Angel came, & ſtood before the Aultar, hauing a golden Cenſor, & much odours was giuen vnto him, that hee ſhould offer with the praiers of all Saints vpon the golden Aultar, which is before the throne.
               We heard before, that whē the courſe of the Goſpell was ſtopt by the diuell and his inſtruments, yet God was very carefull for the ſafetie and ſealing vp of his owne ſeruāts: ſo likewiſe we are now to heare of the like care and prouidence. For now, that errors and hereſies were to be ſowne in the world, whereby

many were corrupted: and that he himſelfe from heauen dooth proclaime open enmitie againſt the deſpiſers of his Goſpell, by giuing them vp to blindneſſe and error: hee doth double his care and prouidence to all his faithfull worſhippers. For here wee do plainely ſee, that the Church hath a mediator, and that he which keepeth Iſrael, neither ſlumbreth nor ſleepeth. And therfore when the wrath of God doth moſt of all breake forth vpon the world for the contempt of his graces, yet the Church is remembred, and ſet in ſafetie, with all her children. For her praiers come vp before God, and are accepted through the ſame mediator. And this is the ſenſe and drift of this third verſe.
               By this Angell is meant Ieſus Chriſt, the Angell of the couenant, as we haue heard before: who is not an Angell by nature, but by office.
               It is manifeſt, that in the olde lawe there was a golden Aultar, and a golden Cenſor, in which the Prieſt did burne ſweete incenſe before the Lorde, which did figure the mediation of Chriſte, in whome the prayers of the Saintes are accepted.
               Now heere the holy Ghoſt alludeth to that ſacrificing Prieſt-hood of the olde Teſtament, where incenſe was offered at the Aultar, which now is the ſweet ſauour of the death of Chriſt, through whom both we and all our ſacrifices are ſeaſoned & ſweetned.
               Who therefore is this Angell but Chriſt? Who is the golden Aultar but Chriſt? What are the ſweete odours with the which the prayers of all Saintes

come before God, but the moſt ſweet mediation of the Lord Ieſus? What is meant by the ſmoake of the odours, which with the praiers of the Saints, went vp before God out of the Angels hand? Surely the ſweete incenſe of Chriſts mediation, wherwith our praiers are ſpiced and perfumed, that they might be as ſweete ſmelling ſacrifices in the noſthrils of God. For, as water caſt into a fire, raiſeth a ſmoake: ſo the teares of the faithfull, beſprinkeled in their praiers, make them as ſweete incenſe, acceptable to God through Chriſt. The ſumme of all is this, that in the midſt of all theſe hereſies, and thoſe helliſh troubles which ſhould be raiſed vp by the Pope & his Cleargie, the Turke and his armies, as in the next chapter wee ſhall ſee, the elect haue their praiers heard for their preſeruation by the merits of Chriſt.
                
                  
                     verſ. 5 And the Angell tooke the Cenſor, and filled it with the fire of the Aultar, and caſt it into the earth, and there were voices, & thundrings, & lightnings, & earthquakes.
               Here we ſee how Ieſus Chriſt taketh the Cenſor and filleth it with the fire of the Aultar; that is, the graces and gifts of the ſpirit: for ſo the fire of the Aultar is taken in Eſay.
                  Eſay. 6.6.
               
               
                  Math. 3 11.In this ſenſe it is ſaid, that our Lord Ieſus ſhould baptiſe with fire and the holy Ghoſt; that is, the gifts and graces of the holy Ghoſt. In this ſenſe alſo the holy Ghoſt did reſt vpon the Diſciples, in the likeneſſe of clouen tongues like fire,Act. 2.3. wherevpon they were all filled with gifts and graces.
               The holy Ghoſt is compared to fire, becauſe hee

burneth out our droſſe, purgeth the hearts of the faithfull, and ſetteth them on fire with the burning loue and zeale of Gods glorie. So then it followeth, that as before there was prouiſion had for the ſafetie of the Church, by her Mediator: ſo here many heauenly giftes and graces are beſtowed vpon her. For Chriſte caſteth this fire of the Aultar vpon the earth; that is, vpon his elect dwelling in the earth.
               Herevpon it is ſaide, that there were voices and thundrings, &c. that is, all manner of broiles, tumults, vprores, ſlaughters, and diuiſions. For after the Goſpell was ſounded forth in the Church by the power of the holy Ghoſt, the diuell is diſturbed, and the worlde moleſted. And hence ſpring all theſe broiles and tumults, thundring and lightning: and wee muſt looke for ſuch ſtirres after the preaching of the Goſpell, whileſt there is a worlde and a diuell.
               Therefore our Lord Ieſus ſaith, hee came not to bring peace into the earth, but fire and ſworde, and to ſette a man at variance againſt his father,
                  Math. 10.34. 
                  and likewiſe the daughter againſt her mother, &c. for diuiſions and ciuill diſſentions doo alwaies followe the preaching of the Goſpell; which thing yet is not ſimply in the nature of the Goſpell, which is a Goſpell of peace, but accidentally through the frowardneſſe and corruption of mans nature, which will not yeelde vnto it, but moſt ſtubbornely rebelleth againſt it.
               
                   
                  
                     verſ. 6 Then the ſeuen Angels which had the ſeuen Trompets, prepared themſelues to blowe.
               Now beginneth this open warre to be proclaimed againſt the world, for their great vngodlineſſe and rebellion againſt the truth.
                
                  
                     verſ. 7 So the first Angell blew the Trompet, and there was haile and fire mingled with blood, and they were caſt into the earth, and the third part of trees was burnt, and all greene graſſe was burnt.
               It were abſurd to imagine that any thing in this Verſe is to bee taken literally: ſeeing in the literall ſenſe there was neuer any ſuch matter. Therefore of neceſſitie it muſt be expounded myſtically, and allegorically: therefore by this haile and fire mingled with blood, is meant errours and hereſies. For as haile doth beate downe corne, and deſtroy the fruits of the earth, fire doth conſume, and blood doth corrupt and putrifie: So falſe doctrine and hereſie doth annoy, conſume, and corrupt the ſoules of men. For it is ſaide, that all theſe being mingled together were caſt vpon the earth: that is, the inhabitants of the earth,Math. 7. and the third part of the trees, that is,Pſal. 1. numbers of men, or a verie great part of the worlde was corrupted. For trees in the ſcripture, ſignifie men,Eſay 40. and all greene graſſe was burnt: that is, the freſh fruites of grace did wither apace and drie vp: for as error and hereſie did preuaile, ſo truth

and godlineſſe did decaie. All this hath relation to the hereſies of Sabellius, Manicheus, Marcion, Fotinus, Paulus Samoſatenus, Nestorius, Nouatus, Diodorus, Appollinaris, Pelagius, and many others, which about this time, which was foure hundred yeares after Chriſt, beganne to ſpring vp and grow apace.
               And the ſeconde Angell blew the Trumpet, 
                     verſ. 8 and as it were a great mountaine burning with fire was caſt into the ſea, and the third part of the ſea became blood, &c.
               Vppon the blowing of the ſeconde Trompet by the ſeconde Angell, heere appeareth a great mountaine burning with fire. Whereby is meant ſome great and notable hereſies, as that of Arrius, which troubled and waſted the Church, for the ſpace of three hundred yeares, being greatly fauoured of ſundrie Emperours, and other great Potentates in the earth; by meanes whereof, it continued and ouerſpread ſo long. Alſo this may be referred to other great and notable Arch▪hereſies: as that of Donatus, Macedonius, Eutiches, Valentinus, and ſuch like: which all are heere compared to a mountaine for their hugeneſſe and greatneſſe, and to a burning mountaine, becauſe the Church was almoſt burnt vp thereby.Luke 3.5. For this word Mountaine, is ſometimes in the ſcripture put for any let or hinderance to true Religion, as is error and hereſie. Zach. 4.7. Luk. 3.5.
               
               
                  Therefore it is ſaide, that it was caſt into the ſea, that is, theſe great hereſies were caſt vppon the worlde in Gods wrath and heauie indignation: for the ſea is put for the worlde: Chapter 4. Verſe 6. Chapter 13. Verſe 1. Chapter 21. Verſe 1. for as the ſea is full of rocke ſands, ſyrts, waues, ſtormes and tempeſts: ſo it fareth with this preſent euill world.
               Moreouer it is ſaide, that the third part of the ſea became blood: that is, all Europe, or ſome great part of the worlde was corrupted and infected with theſe great hereſies. 
                     verſ. 9 And hee ſaith in the next verſe, that the third part of the ſhippes were deſtroyed: that is, a great number of Marriners and ſhip-maiſters, as well as land men were infected with theſe hereſies, and died of them, and in them.
                
                  
                     verſ. 10 Then the third Angell blew the Trompet, and there fell a great ſtarre from heauen, burning like a torch, and it fell into the third part of the riuers, and into the fountaines of waters.
               Starres in this booke are put for the Miniſters of the Goſpel, as we haue heard out of the firſt Chapter, and the reaſon why. Then it followeth that the falling of this ſtarre from heauen, doth moſt fitly ſignifie and ſet foorth the declining and fall of the Paſtors of the Church, and their corrupting of the true doctrine: which is meant by the freſh riuers, and pure fountaines into which it fell. This ſtarre hath his name of the effect: 
                     verſ. 11 for it is called Wormewood; becauſe through the fall of it, the ſweete

waters into which it fell, were turned into bitterneſſe, and men died of them: that is, the pure doctrine was corrupted, which turned to the deſtruction of many.
               And the fourth Angell blewe the Trumpet, 
                     verſ. 12 and the third part of the Sunne was ſmitten, and the third part of the Moone, and the third part of the ſtarres, ſo that the third part of them was darkned, &c.
               This darkning of the Sunne, Moone, and ſtarres, doth ſignifie that great darknes which was brought vppon the Church by ſuch teachers as did daily more and more degenerate.
               Three things are generally to be obſerued in the blowing of theſe firſt foure trumpets.
               Firſt, that the plagues here mentioned, are ſpecially to be vnderſtood of ſpirituall plagues.
               Secondly, that there is a progreſſion from leſſer to greater in theſe plagues.
               Thirdly, that in euery one there is mentioned but a third part deſtroyed; which plainly ſheweth, that although the Church was greatly annoyed and peſtred with theſe errors and hereſies, yet it was not deſtroyed and brought to vtter deſolation: for the full ſetting vp of Antichriſt was not yet come. All theſe errors and hereſies which were thus caſt vpon the world, and did ſpring and grow apace in all places, did (as it were) make way for Antichriſt, and (as it were ſtirrops) hoiſt and helpe him vp into his curſed chaire.
               
                  By the ſtories of the Church, and courſe of times, it ſeemeth that the holy Ghoſt pointeth at thoſe manifolde hereſies which ſprung vp in the Church after the firſt three hundred yeares, eſpecially after the death of Constantine the great, who procured peace to the Church, deſtroied Idolatrie, and ſet vp true religion in his daies.
               Now, after his raigne, and the raigne of Theodoſius that good Emperour, Constantius, Iulianus, Arcadius, Honorius, and many other wicked Emperours ſucceeded; by whoſe meanes all thinges in the Church grew worſe and worſe: yet this one thing is to bee obſerued, that all truth of religion was not vtterly extinct and put out, till the full looſing of Sathan, which was a thouſand yeares after Chriſt, as wee ſhall plainely ſee when wee come to the 20. chapter, concerning the binding of Sathan for a thouſand yeares. For ſure it is, that the maine principles and groundes of Religion, continued in the Church till this full looſing of Sathan; which was about the time of Pope Siluester the ſeconde, that monſter, as afterwarde wee ſhall heare.
               But now in the meane time, wee ſee what hereſies ſprung vp, what corruption grew and encreaſed more and more, what darkneſſe began to ouerſpread a third part of the world: & theſe things grew worſe and worſe, euen vntill by theſe meanes the great Antichriſt came to bee poſſeſſed of his curſed ſeate and Sea of Rome, which was about ſome 600. yeares after Chriſt.
               
                  And I behelde, and heard one Angell flying in the middeſt of heauen, ſaying with a loud voice: Woe, woe, 
                     verſ. 13 woe to the inhabitants of the earth, becauſe of the ſounds to come of the three Angels which were yet to blowe the trumpets.
               Becauſe the iudgements which were to be executed hereafter, vpon the blowing of the next three trumpets, were farre more dreadfull and horrible then any that went before: therefore here is a ſpeciall Angell or meſſenger of God, ſent of purpoſe to giue warning thereof, and to proclaime openly in the Church, three fearfull woes, which ſhould come vpon the inhabitants of the earth; that is, all earthly minded men, as worldlings, Papiſts, and Atheiſts, at ſuch time as the next three Angels ſhould blowe the trumpets.
               The firſt of theſe three great woes, is to bee vnderſtood of the Papacie. The ſecond of Turciſme. The third of the laſt iudgement. As if hee ſhould haue ſaid: Woe vnto the worlde, becauſe of Poperie. Woe vnto the worlde becauſe of Turciſme. Woe vnto the world becauſe of the laſt iudgement. Woe vnto the worlde for Poperie, becauſe thereby men ſhould be puniſhed in their ſoules. Woe vnto the world for Turciſme, becauſe thereby thouſands ſhould bee murdered in their bodies by the Turkiſh armies. Woe vnto the world, becauſe of the laſt iudgement, for thereby all worldlings ſhall bee plagued both in body and ſoule in hell fire, for euermore.
               
                  Sith then theſe three laſt plagues which were to come vpon the worlde, are more fearefull and terrible then any of the other foure, no maruell though here is ſent of purpoſe a ſpeciall meſſenger to giue intelligence thereof, that euery man might looke to himſelfe, ſeeing ſuch great dangers were at hand. And for this cauſe alſo it is ſaide before, that there was ſilence in the Church for the ſpace of halfe an houre.
            
            
               CHAP. IX.
               THe principall ſcope and drift of this Chapter, is to paint out both the Pope and his Cleargy, and alſo the kingdome of the Turke, and his cruell armies. For hauing alreadie ſet downe how a way and paſſage was made for the Pope to climbe vp into his curſed chaire by the preuailing of hereſies, the falling away of the Paſtors of the Church, and the great ouerſpreading of darkneſſe & ignorance: now hee commeth to deſcribe the Pope in his full height and greateſt exaltation, being now vniuerſall Biſhop, and in full poſſeſſion of his ſeate and ſea of Rome, which was about ſome ſixe hundred yeares after Chriſt, as formerly hath bene ſhewed. At what time Pope Boniface obtained of the Emperour Phocas that murther, which ſlew his maiſter Mauritius the Emperour, that the Biſhop of Rome ſhould be called the vniuerſall Biſhop, and the church of Rome, the head of all churches.
               
                  This ninth Chapter may very fitly be diuided into two partes.In the firſt 12. verſes. The firſt is a liuely deſcription of the Pope himſelfe, his kingdome, and his cleargie. The ſecond, is a deſcription of the kingdome of the Turke, and his moſt ſauage armies:In the laſt 9. verſes. ſo that this chapter is a full opening of the firſt two great woes mentioned before, concerning the Papacie, and Turciſme.
               And the fift Angell blew the trumpet, 
                     verſ. 1 and I ſawe a ſtarre which fell from heauen, and to him was giuen the key of the bottomeleſſe pit.
               Warning was giuen before, that when this 5. Angell ſhould blowe the trumpet, a moſt fearefull woe ſhould come vpō the world, ſurpaſſing all that went before, which is the ſetting vp of Antichriſt in his pride; that man of ſinne, that ſonne of perdition.
               The Pope is here compared to a ſtarre, as well as other godly Miniſters in this booke, becauſe the Biſhops of Rome at the firſt were godly and excellent men: for amōgſt the firſt thirtie of them, there were ſome Martyrs. But it is here ſaid, that now this ſtarre was fallen from heauen vnto the earth; that is, the Biſhops of Rome were greatly degenerated & fallen cleane away from heauenly things to earthly: for they declined from time to time, & grew worſe and worſe, ſo farre as to become the great Antichriſt.
               But ſome man may ſay, why may not this ſtarre falling frō heauen vnto the earth, be vnderſtood of other Paſtors falling from the truth, as well as the Pope, as it is taken in the former chapter, & in the 12.

chapter, verſe 4. I anſwere, that the circumſtances will not here beare it. Therefore to perſwade euery honeſt mans conſcience, that this muſt needs be vnderſtood of the Pope in his pride, let vs giue eare to thoſe three reaſons following.
               Firſt, wee are to conſider, that the maine drift of the holy Ghoſt in the opening of the ſeuen ſeales, and blowing of the ſeuen trumpets, is to lay out the ſtate of the church in all ages, till the comming of Chriſt. Further, wee are diligently to obſerue, that the things contained vnder the opening of the ſeuenth ſeale (wherof the blowing of the ſeuen trumpets are as it were parts, and do all belong vnto it) do ſtretch euen vnto the ende of the worlde; ſo as there is no ſtraunge accident, or any wofull condition of the Church in any age, but it is ſet forth vnder the opening of theſe ſeales, and blowing of theſe trumpets. But the Papacie was a ſtate of the Church, and that moſt wofull and lamentable, therefore it is deſcribed vnder the opening of theſe ſeales, and blowing of theſe trumpets. But it is not deſcribed vnder the opening of any other ſeale, or blowing of any other trumpet: therefore of neceſſitie it muſt be referred to this ſeuenth ſeale, and fift trumpet: And this is my firſt reaſon. If any man obiect, that the Pope and his kingdome are moſt liuely deſcribed in the chapters from the 12. to the laſt: I anſwere, that all thoſe chapters belong to a new viſion, wherin ſome things propounded vnder the opening of the ſeuen ſeales, are more fully opened & expounded. But this I ſay, that in this 2. viſion, the whole eſtate of the Church in euery age is laid opē, euen vntil the laſt iudgemēt:

and therfore when the 7. Angel here doth blow the 7. trumpet, immediatly followeth the laſt iudgemēt; as appeareth, cap. 10. ver. 6.7. & cap. 11. ver. 15.16.
               My ſecond reaſon is drawne from the courſe and conſideration of times: for the great preuailing of errors and hereſies mentioned before, which made way for Antichriſt, was from the firſt 300. yeares, vntill the 600. yeare, and ſo forwarde. But now, immediately vpon this great encreaſe of error & darkneſſ, commeth the deſcription of a ſpeciall ſtarre fallen from heauen at this time, which was about 600. yeares after Chriſt, and therfore it muſt needs be vnderſtood of the Pope. And this is my ſecond reaſon.
               My third and laſt reaſon is drawne from the deſcription of the Pope and his Cleargie in the firſt eleuen verſes of this chapter. For he is ſo liuely deſcribed & painted out in particulars, that all men that know him, or euer heard of him, muſt needes ſay it is he. For this deſcription here ſet downe by the holy Ghoſt, can fitly agree to none other.
               The Papiſts themſelues do cōfeſſe, that this ſtarre here mentioned, muſt needs be vnderſtood of ſome Arch-hereticke. And full wiſely forſoothe they apply it to Luther and Caluin. But wee affirme, that it is to be vnderſtood of the Pope: For was there euer any ſuch Arch-hereticke as he? which oppoſeth and exalteth himſelfe againſt all that is called God,
                  2. Theſſ. 2.4. and againſt all imperiall powers, as the Apoſtle ſaith. But now let vs proceed to the deſcription of him.
               Firſt, he is ſaid to haue the keie of the bottomeleſſe pitte, which agreeth well to the Pope: for hee hath power giuen him to open hell gates, to

let in thouſands thither: but no power to open heauen gates, to let in any thither: for he furthereth many to hell, none to heauen. Hee doth indeed falſely challenge vnto himſelfe the keies of the kingdome of heauen, to let in, and ſhut out at his pleaſure. But here wee ſee the holy Ghoſt doth attribute no ſuch power vnto him, but onely telleth vs, that his power and iuriſdiction is in hell, and ouer hell, & as for heauen, he hath nothing to do with it. It were needleſſe to ſhewe how this metaphor of keies is taken for power and iuriſdiction in the ſcriptures, as hath bene proued before, cap. 1. ver. 18. & as needleſſe to proue that by the bottomeleſſe pit, is here meant hell, as appeareth, chap. 11.7. chap. 20.1.
                
                  
                     verſ. 2 And hee opened the bottomeleſſe pit, and there aroſe the ſmoake of the pit, as the ſmoake of a great furnace, & the ſunne and the aire were darkned by the ſmoake of the pit.
               Here we ſee how the Pope openeth hell gates with his key, & a moſt horrible, groſſe, & ſtinking ſmoake aſcendeth vp into the ayre preſently vpon it, in ſo much, that both the Sunne & the aire were darkned with it. Which all is to bee vnderſtood of that ſpiritual darkneſſe, ignorance, ſuperſtition, and Idolatry, wherewith the whole church was ouerſpread, after the great Antichriſt came to the poſſeſſion of his curſed chaire, & was in his pride & height, ruling & raigning ouer the kings of the earth. For thē indeed the ſun was darkned and eclipſed; that is, the light of the Goſpell was almoſt cleane put out. For that which is ſpoken here of the darkning of the aire & the Sun, is

to be vnderſtood of a greater and more general darkneſſe, then that which was mentioned in the former chapter, wherein but a third part of the worlde was darkened. But now that Antichriſt inuadeth the church, all is ouerſpread with groſſe and palpable darkneſſe, all is as darke as pitch: no man can ſee where he is, or which way hee goeth. For the whole aire is filled with this moſt odious and thick ſmoake, which came out of hell pit.
               And there came out of the ſmoake Locuſts vpon the earth, 
                     verſ. 3 and vnto them was giuen power, as the ſcorpions of the earth haue power.
               By theſe Locuſts, is meant the Popes Cleargie, as Abbots, Monkes, Friers, Prieſts, Shauelings, & ſuch like vermine; which are therefore compared to Locuſts, becauſe they waſte and deſtroy the Church, euen as Locuſts deſtroy the fruites of the earth. For both Hiſtoriographers & trauellers do affirme, that whole fieldes of greene corne new come vp, haue bene waſted and eaten vp in one night as bare as the earth, by ſwarmes of Locuſts in the Eaſt-countries. For in thoſe parts of the world,Ioel. 2. multitudes of this litle vermine are to be found: euen ſo the Popiſh Cleargie cōſumeth and deuoureth all greene things in the Church.
               Moreouer, it is to bee noted, that theſe Locuſts came out of the ſmoake of the pit; that is, they were bred out of it: for Monkes, Friers, Prieſts, & ſuch like caterpillers, were bred of ignorance, error, hereſie, ſuperſtition, & the very ſmoake of hell: for from hell

they came, & to hell they wil. They are diſcended of the black houſe of hell, & thither they will returne.
               Moreouer, it is ſaid, that power was giuen them to ſting like ſcorpions. For whom haue they not ſtung with their moſt venemous ſtings? I mean their damnable errors, and diueliſh deuices. Whom haue they not wounded with their corrupt doctrine, & diuelliſh authority? They are the ſoreſt ſoule-ſtingers that euer the world had, who haue left their venimous ſtings in the ſoules of thouſand thouſands, wherewith they haue bene poiſoned and ſtung to death.
                
                  
                     verſ. 4 And it was commaunded them, that they ſhould not hurt the graſſe of the earth, neither any greene thing, neither any tree, but onely thoſe which haue not the ſeale of God in their foreheads.
               It may be demanded, what became of the church when as the whole earth was full of theſe crawling and ſtinging Locuſts. This queſtion is now here anſwered; to wit, that theſe Locuſts are charged and commaunded, that they ſhould not hurt any of the elect: for this woe and this plague, extendeth no further then to the inhabitants of the earth, as wee haue heard before. Their power is limited only to the reprobate, they haue nothing to do with Gods choſen people. And here againe we ſee what great care God hath for his in the midſt of the greateſt dangers, as hath bene twiſe noted before, chap. 7. chap. 8. For now Antichriſt raigning in his ful pride, yet his elect are preſerued in the midſt of theſe ſcorpion Locuſts, flying about their eares like ſwarmes of Hornets, not

one of them is ſtung to death. Chriſts litle flocke is alwaies defended, and ſet in ſafetie.
               And to them was commaunded, that they ſhould not hurt them, but that they ſhould be vexed fiue monethes, 
                     verſ. 5 and that their paine ſhould be as the paine that commeth of a ſcorpion when he hath ſtung a man.
               Some write, that ſuch as are ſtung of a ſcorpion, do not die forthwith, but haue a lingring paine, wherewith they are miſerably vexed three or foure dayes before they die of it. Now, vnto this lingring paine is this ſpiritual ſtinging compared: for theſe Locuſts are commanded of God, that they ſhould not kil the very reprobates outright, & at once, but torment thē with a lingring death for the ſpace of fiue moneths, that is, 500. yeares: for ſo long did the Papacie continue in his height & pride, full ſtrength and vertue: and ſo long did the Pope & his Cleargie ſting men with lingring and ſcorpion-like paine.
               Therefore in thoſe daies ſhall men ſeeke death, and ſhall not finde it, and ſhall deſire to die, and death ſhal flie frō thē. 
                     verſ. 6 
               
               This verſe doth ſhewe, that all Papiſts being thus ſtung and tormented in their conſciences with this lingring paine of Popiſh doctrine, ſhall wiſh themſelues out of the world, and buried quicke, that they might be ridde of their ſpirituall ſtinging, and helliſh torments which they had in their cōſcience. For the Popiſh doctrine hath no ſound comfort in it, it leaueth men in deſperation in ſickneſſe, and vpon their death-beds.
               
                  For alas, what comfort can a poore diſtreſſed conſcience haue in Popes pardons, Indulgences, Maſſes, Dirges, Merits, Workes, Pilgrimages, Purgatory, Croſſes, Crucifixes, Agnus deis, & ſuch like traſh and trumpery? theſe alas are too weake remedies for any ſpirituall diſeaſes: they are not ſufficient to procure pardon at Gods hand for any ſinne. Alas, the poore blinde Papiſts did know & feele that they were vile ſinners: they knew they muſt come to iudgement: they knew that the reward of ſinne was death, euen the ſecond death: they knew all this full wel, & therfore had horrible convulſions in their conſciences, and knew no way nor meanes how to winde out of them. For the doctrine of free iuſtification in the bloud of Chriſt, was hid frō them, they knew it not: and therefore all aſſurance of Gods fauour, all peace of conſcience, & all ioy in the holy Ghoſt, was vtterly taken from them, & therefore many of them died in moſt deſperate & vncomfortable maner. And for this cauſe it is here ſaid, that they ſought death, and deſired to be rid out of the worlde one way or an other: for a tormented conſcience who can beare it, it is a kinde of he
                     •
                   torment.
               
                  
                     
                        verſ. 7 And the forme of the Locuſts was like vnto horſes prepared vnto battel, & on their heads were as it were crownes like vnto gold, & their faces was like the faces of men.
                  
                     
                        verſ. 8 And they had haire as the haire of women: and their teeth were as the teeth of Lyons.
               
               Hitherto we haue heard of the petigrew & poiſoned ſtings of theſe vile Locuſts, and how they vexed

the inhabitants of the earth all the time of the great Antichriſt. Now we are to vnderſtand of their form and likeneſſe: for the ſpirit of God dooth here paint them out in their colours, that all men may diſcerne them, and beware of them. Firſt, it is ſaid that they were like vnto horſes prepared vnto battell: that is, they were as ſtrong and fierce as barred horſes, to ruſh and run vpon all ſuch as ſhould but once mute or mutter againſt them, or their authoritie. Moreouer, they haue crownes of golde vpon their heads, which ſheweth and ſignifieth, that they were the conquerors of the earth, & Lords of the world, and who but they? for in thoſe daies no man, nay, no Lord or King, durſt quitch againſt a Monke, a Frier, or a pild Prieſt: for if any did, they were ſure to ſmart for it. They had alſo faces like the faces of men; that is, they ſet faire faces vpon matters, and pretended great deuotion in religion, flattering the people, and making them beleeue that they could giue them pardon of all their ſinnes, and bring them to heauen; when as in very truth, for their bellies, and for their gaine, they did cunningly ſmoothe with the nobles, the rich, & the mightie, ſetting faire faces vpō al their proceedings; and as S. Peter ſaith, Through couetouſnes with fained words, they made merchandiſe of mens ſoules,
                  2 Pet. 2.3. and did cloſely winde themſelues into the hearts of the ſimple people, by their fawning inſinuations, being in very deede moſt notable flatterers and hypocrites. They had haire, as the haire of women; that is, they were altogether effeminate, being giuen to delicacie, luſt, and wantonneſſe; they were drowned in whoredome & al kind of beaſtlineſſe, being a ſhoale

of moſt filthy villaines. Their teeth were as the teeth of Lyons, to catch & ſnatch all that they could come by. They deuoured all the fat morſels euery where: they got the church-liuings into their hands: they firſt made impropriations: they incroached vpon temporall mens lands: they ſwallowed vp all euerie where. If we looke vpon the Abbeys, Priories, and Nunneries, wee may eaſily iudge what teeth they had. Moreouer, it is ſaid they had Habbergions, like to Habbergions of Irō; that is, they were ſo ſtrongly armed with the defence & countenāce of the Pope, that no ſecular power durſt once quitch againſt thē. Their wings were like the ſounde of chariots, when many horſes runne vnto battell: that is, with fluttering noiſe, & terrible threatnings, they ſtroue to vpholde their kingdome. Alſo in Churches and Pulpits, they make a roaring noiſe, and take on terribly to maintaine their abhominable Idolatry. They had tailes like vnto ſcorpions, and there were ſtings in their tailes. 
                     verſ. 10 For with their poiſoned doctrine & ſtinging authoritie, like adders & ſnakes they ſtung many to death. Moreouer, power was giuen them to hurt men fiue moneths, that is, all the time of Antichriſts raigne, as before hath bene ſhewed.
                
                  
                     verſ. 11 They haue a king ouer them, which is the angell of the bottomeleſſe pit, whoſe name in Hebrew, is Abaddon, and in Greeke he is named Apollyon, that is, deſtroying.
               As the foules haue a king ouer them, which is the Eagle; & the beaſtes, the Lyon; & mortall men ſome chiefe gouernour, vnder whoſe protection and ſubiectiō they liue: ſo here theſe helliſh Locuſts are ſaid

to haue a king ouer them, which is the Angell of the bottomleſſe pit; that is, the diuell or the Pope, which you will, vnder whoſe enſigne they fight, and vnder whoſe defence they liue. Their kings name in Hebrew is called Abaddon, and in Greeke Apollyon. The words are both of one ſignification, that is, deſtroying: for both the diuell himſelf, & his vicar the Pope, are deſtroiers and waſters of the Church of God.
               One woe is past, And beholde yet two woes come after this. 
                     verſ. 2 
               
               Wee haue heard at large what this firſt woe is, namely, the plague of the worlde, by the Pope and his Cleargie. Now wee are to heare of the ſeconde woe, which is the moſt huge and murthering army of the Turkes, wherein the third part of men were ſlaine.
               Some do expound this ſecond woe of the kingdome of Antichriſt, and his armies: but that it is not ſo, may appeare by theſe reaſons following.
               Firſt, the Angell denouncing woe, woe, woe, denounceth three ſeueral woes, and therefore it is ſaid; One woe is past, and behold yet two woes come after this. It followeth then, that this is a diſtinct and ſeueral woe from the former, and therfore cannot be the ſame.
               Secondly, this woe containeth ſpecially a bodily ſlaughter of the third part of the world, and of the wicked reprobates: but the firſt woe was ſpecially a plague of mens ſoules, as we haue heard, and therefore this cannot be the ſame with the firſt.
               Thirdly, we are to vnderſtand, that this booke deſcribeth all the greateſt calamities and plagues that

ſhould come vpō the world in any age after Chriſt: and therfore we may iuſtly think that the kingdome of the Turkes is not left out, ſeeing it was one of the greateſt plagues that euer came vpon the world. But the kingdome of the Turkes is deſcribed in no other part of this Reuelation, and therefore muſt of neceſſitie be here deſcribed.
               
                  
                     
                        verſ. 13 Then the ſixt Angel blew the trumpet, and I heard a voice from the foure corners of the golden Aultar which is before God:
                  
                     
                        verſ. 14 Saying to the ſixt Angell which had the trumpet, looſe the foure Angels which are bound in the great riuer Euphrates.
                  
               
               Now we are come to the deſcription of the ſecond woe, which followeth vpon the blowing of the ſixt trumpet, by the ſixt Angell. And firſt of all hee ſaith; He heard a voice frō the foure corners of the goldē Aultar.
               
               
                  
                     chapter 8.3. By the golden Aultar, is meant Chriſt, as before hath bene ſhewed, with the reaſons thereof. Frō this Aultar the voice commeth to the angel which blew the ſixt trumpet, that wee might knowe it is the voice of the mighty God, & the cōmandemēt of our Lord Ieſus.
               The voice commandeth the ſixt Angell to looſe the foure Angels which are bound in the great riuer Euphrates. By theſe foure Angels which are thus bound at Euphrates, is meant many diuels, or angels of darkeneſſe, as we heard before, chap. 7. verſe 1. Their binding ſignifieth their reſtraint, by which they were helde backe from doing that miſchiefe which they deſired to do. Their looſing, ſignifieth that power was giuen them to performe that which they wiſhed.

They are ſaide to bee foure in number, becauſe they ſhould raiſe an horrible plague in the foure corners of the earth, both Eaſt, Weſt, North, and South. The ſenſe is, that the diuels haue yet further and greater ſcope giuen them to plague and deſtroy the inhabitants of the earth. Theſe diuels had exceeding great power in the kingdome of Antichriſt, but they are vnſatiable in miſchiefe, and ſo after a ſorte lie ſtill bound till they haue their deſire. The place where they lie bounde, is Euphrates, wherein is a myſterie: for Euphrates literally taken, is a great Riuer, which ranne ſo nigh the citie Babylon in Chaldea, that it was a mightie defence vnto it, ſo that the citie could not be taken, vntill they that laide ſiege vnto it, cut out trenches, and deriued the waters an other way. Now for the myſterie, it is this: Rome in this booke is called Babylon. By a metaphor, and after the ſame manner, the great Riuer Euphrates, as wee ſhall ſee afterward, chap. 16. ſignifieth the power, wealth, and authoritie, which that citie Rome, euen this weſterne Babel, hath to defend it ſelfe. Then it followeth, that in this power, authoritie, and ſtrength of Rome, the diuels lie bounde: for they waited through the power of Rome, to worke yet farre greater miſchiefe, and therefore are ſaide to bee bounde, ſo long as they were reſtrained. The miſchiefe which they plotted, and purpoſed to bring to paſſe by the authoritie and power of Rome, was the hatching and bringing forth of the Mahometiſh religion, which in very deed did ſpring from the darkneſſe of Rome, as from his proper roote and originall cauſe.
               
                  The diuels did foreſee, that out of the ſuperſtitions and Idolatries of Rome, defended by their great power and authoritie, Mahometiſh religion, might very well bee framed, and therefore not being content to plague the Weſt part of the worlde with Poperie and Idolatrie, they do greedily deſire alſo to plague the Eaſt part of the worlde with the falſe religion of Mahomet. They are not ſatiſfied with plaguing and poiſoning all Europe with abhominable Idolatries, except alſo they plague and infect all Aſia & Affrica with the Turkes moſt execrable religiō: ſo inſatiable are the diuels in working miſchiefe. Now in the meane time they think thēſelues too much ſtraightned, bound and tied vp in Rome, & Romiſh religion, except they may be looſed, and proceede further to ouerſpread the whole world with all impieties, and moſt horrible abhominations. A man would thinke that when the diuels had preuailed ſo far, as to place Antichriſt in his curſed chaire, and to breede the ſwarmes of Locuſts out of the ſmoake of hell, they might haue bene ſatiſfied: for then, as wee ſay, hell ſeemed to be broken looſe. But yet all this cannot ſatisfie the vnſatiable diuels, but they will haue the religion of Mahomet eſtabliſhed, to poiſon and plague all the Eaſt parts of the world in their ſoules: and alſo they will haue the moſt huge, cruell, and ſauage armies of the Turkes raiſed vp, to murder and maſſacre milliōs of men in their bodies, in the weſt parts of the world, as preſently we ſhall heare.
               Now till all this bee effected, they are ſaide to lie bound at Rome. But here we ſee, that this ſixt Angell hath a preciſe commaundement from Ieſus Chriſt,

to looſe theſe diuels which lay bound at the great riuer Euphrates, that they might plague the whole world farre and neare, at their pleaſure: ſo now all the diuels of hell are let looſe, and let vs heare what followeth.
               And the foure Angels were looſed, which were prepared at an houre, at a day, at a moneth, and at a yeare, 
                     verſ. 15 to ſlay the third part of men.
               Now the diuels being looſed and vnbounde by ſpeciall commandement from Chriſt, were in a readineſſe to execute their miſchiefe. This aſcending by degrees from a ſhort time vnto longer & longer; From an houre to a day, &c. dooth ſignifie, that as the diuels were preſt, & at hand at an houres warning, as we ſay, to put in practiſe whatſoeuer they had plotted: ſo they were as forwarde to continue the ſame, From an houre to a day, from a day to a moneth, & from a moneth to a yeare, that is frō time to time, vntil the date of their commiſſiō was out: for their time was limited, and their commiſſion bounded, as afterward we ſhall ſee. And this is our comfort, that both the Papacie is limited to fiue monethes, and the Turciſme to houres, daies, monethes, and yeares. The diuels power is limited, though it grieueth them full ſore. They cannot doo what they liſt: they cannot continue as long as they would.
               After the number of horſemen of warre were twentie thouſand times ten thouſand, for I heard the number of thē. 
                     verſ. 16 
               
               
                  Now, vpon the looſing of theſe diuels, here followeth the deſcription of a moſt horrible plague which they raiſed vp; and it is a huge army, a murthering army, an army in number exceeding great: for he ſaith, They were twentie thouſand times ten thouſand; that is, two hundred millions, or two hundred thouſand thouſands. But we may not think that this army was euer all at one time, or in any one age, but here are the armies of many ages reckened vp, and the full plague of many yeares ſet forth. How could Saint Iohn number ſuch an army, may ſome man ſay? He anſwereth this doubt, and ſaith, Hee heard the number of them. Hee did not number them: but the number was tolde him.
               Moreouer, it is to be noted, that as this army did exceed in number, ſo alſo in terror and ſtrength: and therefore they are ſaid to be all horſemen. For an army of horſemen are both more ſtrong and more terrible, then any arm of footemen.
                
                  
                     verſ. 17 And thus I ſawe the horſes in a viſion, and them that ſate on them hauing firy Habbergeons, and of Iacinth, and of brimſtone, and the heads of the horſes were as the heads of Lyons, and out of their mouths went forth fire, and ſmoake, and brimſtone.
               Heere is the deſcription of theſe horſemen and horſes, as they appeared to Iohn in a viſion. Firſt, touching the horſemen, it is ſaide that they were very well armed with Habbergions; that is, coates of Maile, Corſelets, or Curets, and that of a fiery colour, and of the colour of Iacinth; that is, of ſmoake, as appeareth in

the laſt clauſe of this verſe, and alſo of the colour of Brimſtone. For as horſemen in compleate armour were wont to weare in their breaſt-plates and targets certaine enſignes and colours, whereby they might be made terrible to their enemies: So theſe Turkiſh warriours and horſemen do holde out their colours of fire, ſmoake, and brimſtone, as it were flagges of defiance againſt the whole world, threatning preſent death to al that ſhould withſtand them; or as if they meant to ſpet fire and flame▪ them, or to choake them with ſmoake and brimſtone, & then burne them vp with fire & brimſtone. All this their colours and enſignes in their breaſt-plates and Habbergions did portend. Now, as concerning their horſes, no doubt they were as fierce as the horſmen. They were great Launces, they had heads like Lyons; that is, they were full of ſtomack & fiercenes, and out of their mouthes went forth fire, & ſmoake, and brimſtone; that is, they had the ſame colours and enſignes vpon them that their riders had.
               Of theſe three was the third part of mē killed, that is, 
                     verſ. 18 of the fire, & of the ſmoake, and of the brimſtone which came out of their mouthes.
               Here is ſet downe the great ſlaughters and maſſacres which theſe martiall horſmen & Turkiſh armies made throughout the moſt part of Europe. For hee ſaith: the third part of men, that is, great numbers in Europe were ſlaine by the fire, the ſmoake, and the brimſtone, which came out of their mouthes: that is, by their bloudy crueltie, & barbarous immanitie; ſome being

murthered in their bodies by cruell death, & others violently drawne to the wicked religiō of Mahomet. For partly by externall violence, and partly by a ſubtill ſhewe of religion and deuotion, they deſtroied thouſands both in their ſoules & bodies. And therefore it is ſaid, 
                     verſ. 19 
                  Their power is in their mouthes, and in their tailes. For their tailes were like vnto ſerpents, and had heads wherewith they hurt. But for the better vnderſtanding of theſe things, I thinke it not amiſſe a little to open and lay forth the riſing vp, and encreaſing of the power of the Turke.
               About the yeare of our Lord, 591. was Mahomet borne in a certaine village of Arabia, called Itrarix, for ſo Hiſtories do report. This Mahomet by fraude and couſenage, grew into great credit and fame among the ſeditious Arabians and Egyptians, in ſo much that they made him a captaine ouer them, to warre againſt the Perſians.
               After this, hee married a rich wife, and by that meanes he wonne the hearts of many with gifts. In the daies of Heraclius the Emperour, which was in the yeare of our Lord, 623. he grew to be very mightie. After this, he faigned himſelfe to be a Prophet, and ſaid, that he had viſions and reuelations, and talked with Angels. And ſo by the helpe of Sergius a Monke, hee framed a new worſhip and religion, patched partly out of the olde Teſtament, partly from the Papiſts, and partly from the Heathen. Hee raigned nine yeares, and ſo died.
               After him, ſucceeded in the kingdome of the Saracens Ebubezer, who raigned two yeares. Haumar, who raigned twelue yeares. Muhauias who raigned

24. yeares. All theſe made great warres againſt the Perſians, and ſundrie other nations, and ouercame them, and ſet vp the religion of Mahomet amongſt them, and ſo the kingdome of the Saracens grew mightie: but in proceſſe of time the kingdome of the Turkes grew great, and the kingdome of the Saracens diminiſhed. Within a ſhort time after this, the Tartarians, a barbarous people, waxed ſtrong, and made warre againſt the Turkes, and preuailed greatly for a time. But about the yeare of our Lord 1300. the Empire of the Tartarians was ouerthrowne, and the Empire of the Turkes did flouriſh more then euer before: For now come the greateſt monſters, and moſt ſauage and cruell tyrants of all. The firſt of them was Ottomanus. The ſecond Baiazethes. The third, Amurathes. Theſe made bloudie warres againſt the Chriſtians; I meane the Papiſts in Europe, and enlarged the Turkes dominions very farre.
               They did from time to time ſo cruelly murther and maſſacre the inhabitants of the Weſt, with their huge and bloudie armies, that at laſt both the Pope, the Emperour, the King of Hungary, the King of Polonia, the King of Fraunce, the Duke of Burgundie, and the Duke of Venice, and almoſt all the Potentates in Europe, did ioyne together to make warre againſt the Turkes, and did leuie huge armies, but yet could not preuaile: ſo ſtrong were the Turkes: ſo huge and dreadfull were their armies. Then wee ſee that verified which here was foretolde, to wit, that the monſtrous armies of the Turkes, with their horſes and horſemen, should ſlay the third parte of men: that is, the

Idolaters in Europe by heapes and infinit numbers. To ſet downe the particular battailes betwixt the Turkes and the Chriſtians in Europe, and their horrible bloudſheaddings, would require a volume: but this which I haue briefly ſet downe, may ſerue to giue ſome light vnto it, & may ſuffice for the vnderſtanding of this text. 
                     verſ. 20 Now, it is ſaid in the next verſe, that notwithſtanding this heauie hande of God which was vpon the Papiſts in Europe, and theſe fearefull iudgements and maſſacres, they repented not of their Idolatries, but waxed worſe and worſe: for no iudgements, no plagues can make the wicked any whit the better, as wee ſee in the examples of Pharaoh and Saul. 
                  
                     verſ. 20 And here it is ſaide, that the remnant of men which were not killed by theſe plagues, repented not of the workes of their handes, that they ſhould not worſhip diuels and Idols of gold, and of ſiluer, & of braſſe, and of ſtone, and of wood, which neither can ſee, nor heare, nor goe. 
                  
                     verſ. 21 
                  Alſo they repented not of their murther, and of their ſorcery, neither of their fornicatiō, nor of their theft. And thus we ſee how the diuels which were bound at Euphrates, being let looſe vpon the world, in the wrath and iuſt iudgement of God, did fearefully plague both the Turkes in their ſoules, and the Papiſts in their bodies. The one with falſe religion, the other with bloudie ſwordes: and ſo was the deſire of the diuels fully ſatisfied.
            
            
               
               CHAP. X.
               HAuing opened and expounded the two firſt woes which fel out vpon the blowing of the fift and ſixt trumpet, containing the two great plagues of Poperie and Turciſme, wherewith the world was puniſhed many hundred yeares: now in this chapter we are to heare of good newes, and great comfort, after ſo much ſorrowe. For here Ieſus Chriſt commeth downe from heauen to relieue his poore afflicted Church, and to be reuenged of all his cruell enemies. For now, before the 3. and laſt woe, containing the greateſt plague of al vpon the world, which is, the laſt iudgement; wherein the wicked ſhall bee tormented in hel fire for euer, both in body & ſoule, I ſay, before the blowing of the 7. trumpet, by the ſeuenth angel, of which we ſhal heare in the next chapter. Now in the meane time is ſhewed in this chapter, what care God had for his little flocke, which no doubt were hid in thoſe daies, and did not appeare, and yet were ſcattered in corners, euen in the middeſt of the darkneſſe of Poperie, and the moſt furious & helliſh rage of the Turkiſh armies. And therefore the principall ſcope and drift of this chapter, is to ſhewe how the Goſpell ſhould bee preached in many kingdomes, now after this generall darkneſſe, for the diſcouering and ouerthrow, both of Poperie and Turciſme, and to ſhewe what ſhould fall out in the church now in the middle time, before the 7. & laſt trumpet blow: for then commeth the laſt iudgement, as the Angel ſweareth in this chapter, ver. 6.7.
               
                  This chapter dooth containe foure principall parts.
               
                  
                     verſ. 1 The firſt is a deſcription of Chriſt and his glory.
               
                  
                     verſ. 2 The ſecond ſheweth how the Goſpell ſhould be preached in many nations and kingdomes, by the Miniſters of this laſt age, whereby all aduerſarie power ſhould be ouerthrowne.
               
                  
                     verſ. 6.7. The third is a watch word, giuen to the world by Chriſt, that when the ſeuenth Angell ſhould blowe the trumpet, the world ſhould ende.
               
                  
                     verſ. 9.10.11. The laſt doth ſhewe, how all faithfull Preachers being called and authorized by Chriſt, ſhould trauell and take paines in the ſtudie of Gods booke, and afterward ſhould publiſh the knowledge thereof far and neare.
                
                  
                     verſ. 1 And I ſawe an other mightie Angel come downe from heauen, cloathed with a cloude, & the Raine-bowe vpon his head, and his face was as the Sunne, and his feete as pillars of Braſſe.
               This Angel of might is Chriſt, as appeareth by the deſcription of him, & by all the conſequents following:Math. 24. for he is ſaid to be cloathed with a cloud, which ſignifieth his great glory and maieſtie: For he shall come in the cloudes of heauen to iudge the world: that is, with great pompe and glory. The Raine-bowe was vpon his head, which ſignifieth the couenant of peace with his church, as before, chap. 4.3. His face was as the Sunne, which ſignifieth comfort and deliuerance to his church, & the diſpelling of all the ſmoake of the bottomeleſſe pit, as the Sun ſcattereth and driueth away the thicke miſts.
               
                  
                  His feete are as pillars of Braſſe; which ſignifieth that he ſhould tread downe all his enemies vnder his feete, both Pope and Turke:1. Cor. 15. 
                  for hee muſt raigne till hee haue deſtroied them all. The Pope a long time kept all the kings of Europe in awe. The Locuſts were of great power. The Turkes preuailed exceedingly. But what are they all to this mightie and glorious Angell Chriſt? What is their power to withſtand him? What can Abaddō
                   the king of the Locuſts do againſt this mighty king of Sion? What can the Turkes moſt terrible horſes and horſemen do againſt this Angell which ſitteth vpon the white horſe? Alas, alas, they are able to do nothing. They muſt all bee troden downe vnder his feete of braſſe.
               And hee had in his hand a little booke open, 
                     verſ. 2 and hee put his right foote vpon the ſea, and his left vpon the earth.
               This little booke ſignifieth the Bible.
               It is called little, in reſpect of the great and huge volumes of Popiſh bookes, though in it ſelfe it bee large.
               It is ſaide to bee open, that all men might looke into it, becauſe it had bene ſhut a long time before, euen during all the time of the darkening of the Sun and the Ayre, by the ſmoake which came out of the bottomleſſe pit. But although it was long ſhut vp in the time of Poperie, and lay buried in a ſtraunge tongue: yet now it is opened, and publikely preached vnto all the ſeruants of God. And all this

no doubt is to be vnderſtood of Luthers time, and all the times euer ſince the Goſpell was ſpread abroade after the great darkeneſſe. For ſome hundred yeares agoe it was hard to finde an Engliſh Bible: but now God be thanked, there are thouſands to be found in the hands of Gods people. And therfore the things here propheſied of, are fulfilled in our daies: for wee liue vnder the opening of the ſeuenth ſeale, and the blowing of the ſixt trumpet, and the powring forth of the ſixt viall, as here doth partly appeare, and ſhall God willing, be made more manifeſt whē we come to the 16. chapter. Now wee are diligently to obſerue, that as the opening of this booke, & the preaching of the Goſpell by Luther & his ſucceſſors, hath diſperſed the former darkeneſſe, and beaten downe Poperie: ſo alſo hath it driuen backe the Turke, and taken from vs all feare of him, which in former ages, was the terrour of the worlde: for ſince men haue looked into this booke, repented of their Idolatrie, and turned vnto God with all their hearts.
               The Turke and his power hath not bene feared, eſpecially in theſe parts where the Goſpell is preached. For God in his mercifull prouidence towards his Church, hath diuerted his power an other way, and ſet him aworke elſe-where. So that if men cannot be brought to beleeue, that God raiſed him vp as a ſcourge for Idolaters, and a plague for Idolatrie and other foule ſinnes, according to the wordes in the former chapter; where it is ſaid, They repented not of the workes of their hands, &c. yet when they ſee, that at the opening of the booke of God, and forſaking Idolatrie, the feare of him is remoued, let them beleeue

it. What can be more plaine, then that this opē booke in the hand of the Angell, hath deliuered vs from the Pope, and from the Turke: A moſt happie opening of this bleſſed booke.
               Moreouer it is ſaid, that hee put his right foote vpon the ſea, and his left on the earth. The ſetting of Chriſts right foote vpon the ſea, ſignifieth that he is ruler of the ſea, and ſtandeth as firmely vpon the ſea, as vpon the land. The ſetting of his left foote vpon the earth, doth ſignifie, that he is Lord of the earth, and true heire to all things in it.
               And cried with a loude voice, as when a Lyon roareth, 
                     verſ. 3 and when he had cried, ſeuen thunders vttered their voices.
               This crying with a loude voice, like the roaring of a Lyon, doth ſignifie the manifeſtation of the wrath of Chriſt againſt all his enemies: for now hee beginneth to roare againſt them, as a Lyon whē he is hungry, roareth for his pray. Therefore now both the ſcorpion, Locuſts, & the fierce horſes and horſemen are like to goe to the pot.
               By the 7. thunders which vttered their voices, is meant thoſe perfect and exquiſite iudgemēts which now were to be infflicted both vpon the kingdome of the Pope and of the Turke. We haue heard before, that 7. is a perfect number in this booke: & that thunder is put for the thundring of Gods wrath, and all ſuch broiles and plagues as follow therevpō. And this is the reaſon of this interpretation.
               And when the ſeuen thunders had vttered their voices, 
                     verſ. 4 I was about to write, but I heard a voice from heauen, ſaying vnto me: Seale vp thoſe things which the ſeuē thunders haue ſpoken, and write them not.
               
                  It ſhould ſeeme theſe ſeuē thunders did ſo ſpeake, as they might be vnderſtood; for Iohn was about to write the things which they ſpake, thinking that they were vttered for that ende and purpoſe, that he ſhould deliuer them in writing to the churches. But he receiueth a commandement to the contrarie, for he is willed, not to write them, but to conceale them vntill the appointed time.
               But ſome man may ſay; Why were they vttered, ſeeing they muſt be concealed, and kept cloſe? I anſwere, it was not in vaine: for firſt, though the particulars bee not expreſſed what the thunders ſpake: yet here we are taught, that there remaine moſt fearfull iudgementes againſt all the oppreſſors of the Church, which Chriſt hath thundred out with terrour againſt them. And when the time determined is come, they ſhall be ſeene and vnderſtood: but in the meane time, they bee ſealed vp and kept cloſe; according to that of Iob: Why ſhould not the times bee hid of the Almightie,
                  Iob. 24.1 
                  ſo as they which know him, ſhould not perceiue the times appointed of him; and that of Daniel:
                  Dan. 12.9. 
                  Theſe things are ſealed vp vntill the time determined.
               
               
                  
                     
                        verſ. 5 And the Angell which I ſawe ſtand vpon the ſea, and vpon the earth, lift vp his hand to heauen,
                  
                     
                        verſ. 6 And ſware by him that liueth for euermore, which created heauen, and the things that therein are; and the earth, and the things that therin are; & the ſea, & the things that therein are, that time ſhould be no more.
                  
                     
                        verſ. 7 But in the daies of the voice of the ſeuenth Angel, when he ſhall begin to blowe the trumpet, euen the ministrie of

God ſhall be finiſhed, as he hath declared to his ſeruants the Prophets.
               
               The ſumme of theſe three verſes is, that Chriſt giueth warning of the laſt iudgement, that men might awake and looke out in time. And becauſe men for the moſt part are careleſſe and ſecure,Amos. 6.1▪
                   
                  putting the euill day farre from them, as the Prophet ſpeaketh. Therefore here Chriſt bindeth it with a ſolemne oath, and ſolemne geſtures therevnto annexed, as was the lifting vp of the hand in auncient time, Gen. 14.22. The thing that our Lord Ieſus depoſeth, is, that Time ſhall be no more; that is, Time as it is now, or the ſtate of things as they be now: but he telleth vs flatly, that as ſixe Angels haue alreadie blowne their trumpets, ſo when the 7. Angell should blowe, the myſterie of God shall be finished: that is, the time of puniſhing the wicked, and rewarding the godly, ſhould come, which is therefore called a Myſterie, becauſe the world vnderſtandeth it not: They thinke there is no ſuch matter.
               
                  They imagine there is no reward for the iust,
                  Mal. 3.14.1
                        •
                     . 
                  or punishment for the wicked, as the Prophet ſaith. But the holy Ghoſt ſaith: Verily there is a reward for the righteous: Doubtleſſe there is a God which iudgeth the earth. And here it is ſaid,Pſal. 58.11. that God hath declared it to his ſeruants the Prophets.
               
               
                  And the voice which I heard from heauen, 
                        verſ. 8 ſpake vnto mee againe, and ſaid, Goe and take the little booke which is open in the hand of the Angel, which ſtandeth vpon the ſea, and vpon the earth.
                  
                      
                     
                        verſ. 9 So I went vnto the Angell, and ſaid vnto him, giue me the little booke· And he ſaid vnto me, take it, and eate it vp, and it ſhall make thy belly bitter, but it ſhall bee in thy mouth as ſweete as honey.
                  
                     
                        verſ. 10 Then I tooke the little booke out of the Angels hand, and ate it vp, and it was in my mouth as ſweete as honey: but when I had eaten it, my belly was bitter.
                  
                     
                        verſ. 11 And hee ſaide vnto mee, Thou must propheſie againe among the people, and nations, and tongues, and to many kings.
               
               The briefe ſenſe of theſe foure verſes is, that the Preachers of the Goſpell being called, allowed, and authoriſed by Chriſt vnto their miniſtry, ſhould ſtudy the ſcriptures with great diligence, euē vntil they had eaten vp the booke of God, & then they ſhould preach & publiſh vnto all nations & kingdomes that truth of God, & doctrine of the Goſpell, which now a long time had lien hid in the raigne of Antichriſt.
               It is to be obſerued, that Iohn in this place repreſenteth the perſon of all the miniſters of the Goſpell which ſhould be raiſed vp in theſe laſt dayes, for the ouerthrowe of Antichriſt, and the reſtauration of true religion: for Iohn himſelfe did not liue to theſe times.
               Further, it is to be noted, that all godly Students and zealous Miniſters do eate vp the booke of God by reading, ſtudy, praier, & meditation, & they finde it ſweete in their mouth, that is, they finde and feele

great ioy and comfort in the ſtudie and meditation thereof, eſpecially whē God reuealeth therby great and hid ſecrets vnto them, & giueth them to vnderſtand the myſteries of the Goſpell, & counſels of his will, which are locked vp from the wiſe and prudent of this world. This I ſay, is ſweeter vnto their mouth then hony, and the hony combe. Concerning this phraſe of eating vp the booke, looke Ezech. 2.9. for here the holy Ghoſt alludeth therevnto.
               This booke being ſo ſweete in the mouth, yet being eaten and digeſted, is bitter in the belly.
               There may bee three reaſons yeelded of this bitterneſſe.
               Firſt, becauſe it being once taken downe into our ſoule by godly meditatiō, doth mortifie our corrupt nature, & bring vnder our luſts, & therefore ſeemeth bitter to fleſh and bloud.
               Secondly, becauſe afflictions & trials do alwaies neceſſarily followe the ſounde digeſtion of the Goſpell.
               Thirdly, becauſe the doctrine of the Goſpel being ſwallowed by the Miniſters therof, muſt not be kept to themſelues, as it were cloſed vp in their ſtomacks, but they muſt out with it againe, as if it were ſome loathſome & bitter thing, which muſt needes be caſt vp again. And for this cauſe it is ſaid in the laſt verſe, that they must propheſie againe among the people, and nations, and tongues, and many kings. Now bleſſed be the name of the Lorde our God, who hath giuen vs to liue in this age, wherein we do with our eies behold and ſee the fulfilling of all theſe things: let vs therefore praiſe God for this great worke which wee ſee

wrought in our daies, and let vs ſtill more and more magnifie this l
                     •
                  ttle booke, which will vtterly deſtroy Popery, and bring downe the proude Antichriſt, do all that fight for him what they can.
            
            
               CHAP. XI.
               WE haue heard that the little Booke ſhould be opened, and the Goſpell preached and publiſhed to many nations and kingdomes, after the great darkeneſſe of Popery: and that this was done by Luther, Melancton, Caluin, Peter Viret, Peter Martir, Bullinger, Bucer, and all their faithfull ſucceſſors vnto this day. Now in this Chapter we are to vnderſtand of the effect & good ſucceſſe of their preaching and publiſhing the Goſpell, which was, that the Church ſhould be reſtored, reformed, and built vp thereby, which a long time had bene waſted and oppreſſed by the tyrannie of Antichriſt: and that many ſhould imbrace the Goſpell, forſake their Idolatries, and turne to God with all their hearts: yea whole nations and kingdomes in Europe ſhould be conuerted to the faith, as we ſee this day God be praiſed. So then the principall drift of this Chapter is, to ſhewe thoſe thinges which yet remaine to be fulfilled vnder the blowing of the ſixt trumpet, which is the preaching and preuailing of the Goſpell, euen vnto the worldes ende: and alſo the thinges which follow vppon the blowing of the ſeuenth trumpet, which is the reſurrection & laſt iudgement.
               This Chapter containeth ſixe principall things, as it were the ſixe parts thereof.
               
                  Firſt, 
                     ver. 1.2. it ſheweth how the true Church ſhould be gathered together and built by the preaching of the Goſpell, and all the wicked refuſed and caſt out.
               Secondly, it deſcribeth the builders; that is, 
                     ver. 3.4.5.6. all the faithfull Miniſters which had and ſhould reſiſt Antichriſt.
               Thirdly, 
                     ver. 7.8. it ſheweth how Antichriſt ſhould perſecute the Preachers and profeſſors of the Goſpell vnto death, and murther them by heapes.
               Fourthly, it ſheweth that Papiſts, Atheiſts, and wicked worldlings, 
                     ver. 9.10. ſhould reioyce in the death of Gods people, and not vouchſafe them ſo much as the honor of buriall, but ſend gifts one to an other for ioy that they were rid out of the earth.
               Fiftly, 
                     ver. 11.12.13. it ſheweth that notwithſtanding the rage and fury of the world in perſecuting them to death, God would not onely receiue their ſoules to glorie, but alſo raiſe vp others endued with the ſame ſpirit, which ſhould preach, profeſſe, & witneſſe the ſame truth conſtantly & continually, euen vnto the ende of the world.
               Laſtly it ſheweth, 
                     verſ. 14.15.16.17.18.19. that after the preaching of the Goſpell ſome good time in this laſt age, the ſeuenth Angel ſhould blowe the trumpet, and the worlde ſhould end.
And there was giuen me a reede like vnto a rodde, 
                        verſ. 1 and the Angel ſtood by ſaying, Ariſe and meaſure the temple of God and the aultar, and them that worſhip therein.
Here Ieſus Chriſt giueth a reede vnto Iohn like vnto a rodde, and thervpon he is commanded by an Angell to goe about the meaſuring of the temple, the aultar, &c.
               
                  By this meaſuring with a reede like a rodde, is ſignified the reſtoring and building vp of Gods houſe, which now was greatly ruinated and runne into decay through the long preuailing of Poperie.
               
                  Ezech. 40.5. Zach. 1.16. Zac. 2.1.2. Apoc. 21.15.Meaſuring with a reede, is taken for the building vp of Gods Church, after the decaied eſtate thereof, both in Ezechiel, Zachary, and this Propheſie.
               
                  Iohn in the perſons of all faithfull Miniſters, hath this meaſuring rodde giuen him, becauſe the church was to be reſtored and built vp by the Miniſters and Miniſtrie of the Goſpell.
               The thing to be meaſured, is the Temple, the Aultar, and them that worſhip therein.
               This is an alluſion to the legall worſhip, whereby our ſpirituall worſhip is repreſented. For by the materiall Temple, is meant the ſpirituall Temple, or Church of God. By the Aultar of ſtone, is meant the ſpirituall worſhip. By them that worſhip therein with carnall ſacrifices, is meant all the true members of the Church, which worſhip God in ſpirit and truth.
               Now then, both the Church, the true worſhip and worſhippers, were all to be meaſured, repaired, and built vp by the miniſtrie of the word, which all were decaied and almoſt laide waſte, by the Popes tyrannie.
But the court which is without the temple caſt out and meaſure it not, for it is giuen to the Gentiles; and the

holy citie ſhall they treade vnder foote two and fortie moneths.
                  Iohn is heere forbidden to meaſure and build vp the court which is without the tēple. Wherby is ment all heretikes, hypocrites, worldlings, & all ſuch as haue a place in the Church, but are not of the Church. This phraſe of ſpeech is taken from the olde ſhadowiſh worſhip as the reſt before. For in the temple of Ieruſalem there was an outward court which was common to all, good & bad: the holy place which was proper to the Prieſts and Leuites: and the holy of holieſt, or moſt holy place, where none might come but the high Prieſt onely.
               Here is a reaſon added why the Lord God refuſeth all Papiſts and hypocrites, and all ſuch as belong to the outward court onely, and it is this: that this outward court is giuen vnto the Gentiles; that is, to all falſe Chriſtians and counterfaits in Religion, which are members of the viſible Church, but haue nothing to do with the inuiſible. Theſe are compared to Gentiles in two reſpects. Firſt, in regard of prophaneſſe, for they are as prophane as the Heathen. Secondly, in reſpect of perſecuting the truth: for hypocrites and Atheiſts are as forward in perſecuting the people of God as the Heathen Emperours, which perſecuted the Church by the ſpace of 300. yeares. All comes to this, that when the Church ſhould bee gathered and built by the Preaching of the Goſpell, God would haue all Papiſts, Atheiſts, and hypocrites ſhut out.
               
                  Moreouer, here is the ſecond reaſon yeelded, why the outward court ſhould be caſt out, and not meaſured: to wit, becauſe they should tread the holy Cittie vnder foote, forty and two monethes: That is, they ſhould perſecute the Church all the time of Antichriſts raigne. For forty two moneths in this verſe: and 1260. dayes in the next verſe, and three dayes and a halfe verſe 9. and time; times, and halfe a time, in the 12. Chapter, verſe 14. and 1260 dayes, Chapter 12. verſe 6. doe ſignifie all one thing, which is, the ſhort raigne of Antichriſt: for theſe moneths, theſe dayes, and theſe times, doe euery one of them make three yeares, and a halfe. For who knoweth not that 42. monethes make iuſt three yeares, and an halfe, and that 1260. dayes, maketh euen ſo much alſo: and by time he meaneth a yeare, by times, two yeare, and by halfe a time, halfe a yeare. Now the reaſon, why Antichriſts raigne is numbred by dayes, monethes, and halfe times, & all amounting but to three yeares and a halfe, is to note the ſhort continuance thereof,Chap. 12.12. Chap. 17.10. Chap. 20.3. for the comfort of the Church, as appeareth more fully and plainely, in ſundry places of this Propheſie, where it is ſet downe in plaine wordes, that Antichriſt ſhould raigne but a ſhort time: for what is fiue or ſixe hundred yeares, in compariſon of eternitie.
               But here the Papiſts doe ſhew themſelues moſt ſottiſh and ridiculous, in that they would gather frō hence, that the Pope is not Antichriſt: for (ſay they) Antichriſt ſhall raigne but three yeares and an halfe, but the Pope hath raigned many yeares: therefore the Pope is not Antichriſt.
               
                  Now to anſwer the propoſition of their argumēt taken from this place. Firſt, it may bee anſwered that this place is not to be vnderſtoode litterally, but miſtically: as many other things in this booke.
               Secondly, here is a certaine number put for an vncertaine, a definit number for an indefinit, which alſo is vſuall in this booke, as we heard before, 
                     chapter 7 concerning the ſealing of the Tribes, of euery Tribe 12000. which maketh 144000. Now no man is ſo mad as to thinke there were iuſt ſo many ſealed, and neither more, nor leſſe.
               Thirdly, here is an alluſion to Daniels weekes,Dan 9. and other propheticall computatiōs, wherin ſometimes a day is put for a yere, a weeke for 7. yeares, as in Daniels ſeauens, and a moneth for 30. yeares. So then I conclude, that it is extreame folly to interpret this place litterally. The curious and friuolous interpretations of this place, and ſuch like in this booke, by ſome writers, I do of purpoſe omit, as matters vntrue, vnſound, & vniudiciall: for I only in this booke ſeeke the ſenſe that is, and not the ſenſe which is not, as hath beene ſaid before.
               But I will giue power vnto my 2. witneſſes, 
                     verſ. 3 and they shall propheſie 1260. dayes cloathed in ſackcloth.
               Hauing ſet down how Antichriſt & his company, being thoſe Gentiles which poſſeſſe ye outward court ſhould tread downe the holy citie, that is, the true churh of God for a ſhort time: now he commeth to ſhew, that euen in the height and pride of the Popes power, and gouernment, yet the Church was not

vtterly extinct, God did neuer vtterly forſake it, but in all ages, and at all times, God did raiſe vp one or other to withſtand all Popiſh proceedings, which is here meant by the two witneſſes. For aſſuredly theſe two witneſſes do not ſignifie Enoch, and Elias, as the Papiſts and ſome others do dreame: but they ſignifie all the faithfull Preachers and profeſſors of the truth, which in all ages both former and later, haue oppoſed themſelues againſt the Pope, his Cleargie, his doctrine, his religion, and all his abhominable proceedings.
               They are called Witneſſes, becauſe they ſhould beare witneſſe vnto the truth.
               They are ſaid to be two in number, for three reaſons.
               Firſt, becauſe they were very fewe in thoſe dayes when Popery did ſo generally preuaile: for two is the ſmalleſt number.
               
                  Deut. 19.15. Iohn 8.17. Hebr. 10.28.Secondly, becauſe the law of God doth admit of no leſſe number in witneſſe-bearing, as it is written; In the mouth of two or three witneſſes ſhal euery word ſtād.
               
               
                  Hagg. 2.5.Thirdly, it is an alluſion to Zorobabel, and Iehoſhua, which were the two reſtorers and builders of the temple after the captiuitie.
               Chriſt ſaith here, that hee will giue power to his two witneſſes: for no man hath any power in heauenly things, except it be giuē him from aboue: and eſpecially to ſtand faſt to the truth in the heate of perſecutions and troubles.
               It is ſaid, that theſe two witneſſes ſhall Propheſie: that is,1. Cor. 14.3. Preach, declare, and ſpeake. For ſo Propheſie is taken in the former Chapter,2. Theſſ. 5.20. and laſt verſe: ſo alſo in other places of the ſcripture.
               
                  The time of their propheſieng being 1260. daies, hath bene expounded before.
               Theſe two witneſſes are cloathed in ſackcloth, which ſignifieth that they ſhould lead a ſorrowfull life here in this world. For in old time when men did faſt and mourne, they did vſe to put on ſackcloth. It followeth then that theſe faithfull Preachers and witneſſes of the truth, did not ſpend their daies in mirth, iolitie and worldly pompe and brauery, as did the Popes Cleargie, and pompous prelates of Antichriſt.
               Now if any man wil demaund how this may appeare that there haue beene alwaies ſome raiſed vp of God, to write, preach, declare, and ſpeake againſt the whoore of Babylon, euen then when ſhe was aloft and raigned as the Queene and Lady of the world; I anſwere, that Hiſtories are verie plentifull in this point: which at large do ſhewe that in all countries and kingdomes of Europe, there were euer ſome ſtirred vp to impugne and reſiſt the whoore of Babylon: As,

                     In England.
                     
                        Robert Grosted, Biſhop of Lincolne. Anno. dom. 1293.
                     
                        Iohn Wickliffe, ſupported by Edward 3. and diuers of the Nobilitie in England. An. 1400.
                  
                  
                     In Germany.
                     
                        Taulerus a Preacher. An. 1354.
                     
                        Franciſcus Petrarcha. 1356.
                     
                        Iohannes de rupe ſciſſa. 1357.
                     
                        Conradus Hager. 1359.
                     
                        Cerhardus Rhidor. 1359.
                     
                        
                        Petrus de Corbona. 1360.
                     
                        Iohannes de Poliaco. 
                     
                     
                        Iohn Ziſca. 1420.
                  
                  
                     In Bohemia.
                     
                        Iohn Huſſe. An. dom. 1414.
                     
                        Ierome of Prage. 1416.
                     
                        Mathias Pariſienſis. 1370.
                  
                  
                     In Spaine.
                     
                        Arnoldus de noua villa. An. 1250.
                  
                  
                     In Italy.
                     
                        Ierome Sauonarola, a Monke. An. 1500.
                     
                        Siluester a Friar. 
                  
                  
                     In France.
                     
                        Waldus, of whome came the Waldenſes, or poore men of Lions in France. An. 1160.
                     
                        Guilienus de ſancto amore. An. 1252.
                     
                        Robertus Gallus. An. 1292.
                     
                        Laurentius. An. 1290.
                  
                  
                     In Ireland.
                     
                        Armachanus, an Archbiſhop. An. 1362.
                  
                  
                     In Sueuia.
                     Many Preachers at once. An. 1240.
                  
                  
                     
                     In Grecia.
                     All the Churches of Grecia renounced the Church of Rome for their abhominable Idolatry. An. 1230.
                  
               
               It were too tedious to recite all which the ſtories do report to haue withſtood both Pope & Popery, euen when it did moſt of all beare the ſway: theſe may ſuffice for the vnderſtanding of the Text. As for thoſe which haue bene raiſed vp ſince the decay and fall of Popery: I meane ſince Luthers time, they are ſo many, and ſo well knowne, that I need ſay nothing.
               Theſe are two Oliue trees, 
                     verſ. 4 and two candlestickes ſtanding before the God of the earth.
               Here the two witneſſes are compared to two Oliue trees; becauſe that as the Oliue tree doth drop down his Oile and fatneſſe:Exod. 30.31. Pſal. 45.7. 1. Iohn 2.20. ſo the faithfull Miniſters doe drop downe vpon the Church the ſweet oile of the ſpirit, which is all heauenly and ſpirituall graces: as the Metaphor of Oile is often ſo taken in the ſcriptures.
               They are alſo compared to two candleſtickes, becauſe that as the candleſticke beareth vp the candle ſet vpon it, ſo the Miniſters of the Goſpell beare vp and hold forth the light of Gods word, euen in the greateſt darkneſſe.
               Theſe candleſtickes are ſaid to ſtand before the God of the earth: becauſe God beareth rule, not onely in heauen, but in earth alſo: euen then when all things in the earth ſeem to be moſt troubled, & the church militant vnder greateſt perſecutions as now it was.
               
                  
                  
                     
                        verſ. 5 And if any will hurt them, fire proceedeth out of their mouthes, and ſhall deuoure their enemies: for if any will hurt them, ſo muſt he be killed.
                  
                     
                        verſ. 6 Theſe haue power to ſhut heauen that it raine not in the daies of their propheſying, and haue power ouer waters to turne them into blood, and to ſmite the earth with all maner of plagues as oft as they will.
               
               Here is ſhewed, that if any deſpiſe the ſimplicitie of theſe two witneſſes, and offer them wrong becauſe of their baſeneſſe, and contempt in the world, that there is a fire cōmeth out of their mouth, that is, the firy & mighty power of the word of God, vttred out of their mouthes, which ouerthroweth, & ouerturneth their enimies: nay as fire it conſumeth them to aſhes: for the Miniſters of the Goſpell are armed with ready vengeance againſt all diſobedience.
                  2. Cor. 10.6. Therfore they be ſtarke madde, and know not what they do, which oppoſe themſelues againſt the true Miniſters of Chriſt. For the ſword which they fight with, ſlaieth the reprobates in their ſoules, though not in their bodies: for the miniſtery of the word, is the ſauour of death to all vnbeleeuers.
               That which is here ſpoken of ſhutting the heauens that it raine not, and turning the waters into blood, is an alluſion to Elias and Moſes.
                  1. King. 17. Exod. 4. Whereof the one by his praier ſhut the heauens, the other by his rodde turned the waters into blood. Now the faithfull Miniſters of the Goſpell are compared to theſe two, not becauſe they ſhould worke ſuch outward miracles as they did, but becauſe they ſhould be furniſhed

with ſpirituall power, which is farre greater. For moſt ſure it is, that the inuiſible & ſpirituall power wherewith the Miniſters of the Goſpell are armed, is very great and glorious, though the world ſee it not, nor know it not. For the Apoſtle ſaith; The weapons of our warfare are not carnal but ſpiritual,
                  2. Cor. 10.6. 
                  mightie through God to caſt downe holdes, caſting downe the imaginations, and euery high thing that is exalted againſt the knowledge of God, &c.
               
               And when they haue finished their testimony, 
                     verſ. 7 the beaſt that commeth out of the bottomeleſſe pit, shall make warre againſt them and kill them.
               Here is ſet downe the great crueltie and bloudie tyrannie which Antichriſt ſhould vſe againſt theſe faithfull witneſſes of our Lord Ieſus. For although they ouercome him with the ſpiritual ſword, which is the fire that commeth out of their mouthes: yet for a time power was giuen to this beaſt that commeth out of the bottomleſſe pit, that is, the Pope and his adherents to murder Gods Saints with the materiall ſword: but yet note that Antichriſt can doe nothing till the two witneſſes haue finiſhed their teſtimony; ſuch is Gods care and prouidence for all his faithfull ſeruants.
               And their corps shall lye in the ſtreetes of the great citie, 
                     verſ. 8 which ſpiritually is called Sodome, and Egypt, where our Lord alſo was crucified.
               By the great citie, here is meant Rome, & yet not the citie only of Rome, but all the Romane Empire,

power and iuriſdiction, as afterwarde ſhall be made manifeſt. Now the corpſes & dead carkaſſes, which were murdered and maſſacred in all nations, by Antichriſts tyrannie, are here ſaid to lie in the ſtreetes of Rome, that is, to be caſt forth into the open fieldes, as not worthy the honour of buriall in all places, countries, & kingdomes, within the Romaine Empire, or iuriſdiction of Rome, as we read to haue bene in England, Scotland, France, Ireland, Germany, and Spaine. And as the holy Ghoſt ſaith,Pſal. 79.2. 
                  The dead bodies of thy ſeruants haue they giuen to be meate to the foules of the heauē, and the fleſh of thy Saints vnto the beaſtes of the earth.
               
               Moreouer, it is to be obſerued, that Rome is here compared ſpiritually, or by a trope, to Sodome and Egypt. To Sodome for filthines; for what citie euer was, or is more filthy then Rome, 
                  
                     chapter 17.5. 
                  the mother of whoredomes and abhominations of the earth? And to Egypt, for Idolatrie, & keeping Gods people in ſpirituall bondage.
               Laſt of all, it is here ſaide, that our Lord Ieſus was crucified at Rome, which may ſeeme ſtraunge, ſith all men knowe, that Chriſt was crucified at Ieruſalem. But to anſwere this doubt, wee are to vnderſtand, that in reſpect of the place, our Lord Ieſus was crucified at Ieruſalem: but if we reſpect the power and authoritie that put him to death, hee was crucified at Rome: for Chriſt was put to death by a Romane Iudge, by Romane lawes, by Romane authoritie, by a kinde of death proper onely to the Romanes; and in a place which then was within the Romane Empire. And for this cauſe it is here ſaid, that Chriſt was crucified at Rome.
               
               
                  And they of the people, and kindreds, and tongues, & Gentiles, ſhall ſee their corpes three dayes and an halfe, 
                     verſ. 9 & ſhal not ſuffer their corpſes to be put in the graue.
               Hitherto we haue heard of the rage of Antichriſt againſt the two witneſſes. Now further we are to vnderſtand of the malice and furie of all his adherents; that is, all Papiſts, Atheiſts, and the reſt of the blinde people, and ſeduced multitude, which all did allow the Popes crueltie in ſheading the bloud of the Martyrs; and they do teſtifie the allowance & approbation of the Popes fact, and alſo their owne malice and madneſſe againſt them in this, that they will not vouchſafe them the honour of buriall, but caſt out their dead bodies as carrion, or as the dead bodies of dogges or ſwine; thereby ſhewing that they eſteemed them no better then ſo. Nay, we read, that their helliſh rage and madneſſe was ſo great & outragious, that they wracked their malice vpon the dead bones and carkaſſes of Gods Saints and Martyrs. For their bloudie & moſt malicious minds could not be ſatisfied except they digged vp the bodies of Gods witneſſes out of their graues, & then burnt thē to aſhes. Wheras it is ſaid, they ſhal ſee their corpes, the meaning is, that all the blind people within the Romane Empire ſhould be eyewitneſſes of theſe things; and not only ſo, but euen great Agents alſo in the ſlaughter of Gods people.
               By 3. daies & an halfe, which is halfe a week, he meaneth all the time of Antichriſts raigne, & tyrannicall gouernment, as before hath bene ſhewed. For theſe 3. daies & a halfe, being in propheticall cōputation three yeares and a halfe, ſignifie the ſame thing that

the 42. monethes, and a thouſand, two hundred and three ſcore daies before.
                
                  
                     verſ. 10 And they that dwell vpon the earth, ſhal reioyce ouer them and be glad, and shall ſend giftes one to an other: for theſe two Prophets vexed them that dwelt on the earth.
               Here we ſee how the inhabitants of the earth, that is, the ſeduced multitude and blinde people in the time of ignorance, do greatly inſult & triumph ouer the death of the Lords witneſſes, & they do expreſſe their ioy by ſending gifts & preſents one to another, as if they had receiued ſome great benefites, or had heard the moſt ioyfull newes in the world. And the reaſon is added, becauſe they vexed and tormented them; meaning thereby, that the preaching of the truth, & the reprouing of their errors, Idolatries, and manifolde impieties, was a dagger, & a corſey vnto them, they could at no hand endure it: for the preaching of the Goſpel is the torment of the world, and the Preachers the tormēters. Theſe fewe Preachers thundring againſt their ſuperſtitions, and abhominable ſeruice of Antichriſt, did vexe euery veine in their heart, and inwardly ſo wound and launce their conſciences, that they could haue no reſt til they had rid them out of the world. But now hauing diſpatched them, and made riddance of them, they are very cranke and iocund.
               But after three daies and a halfe, the ſpirit of life comming frō God, 
                     verſ. 11 shall enter into them, and they shall ſtand vpon their feete, and great feare shall come vpon them which ſawe them.
               
                  Notwithſtanding the rage and ſauage fury of the Pope & his followers; yet heere is ſhewed, that they could not preuaile as they deſired: for within three daies & a halfe, that is, when the date of Antichriſts raigne was expired, and the time come that Popery muſt be diſcloſed by the light of the Goſpell breaking forth; there followeth a great alteration. For theſe two Prophets or witneſſes are raiſed vp again. For he ſaith, the ſpirit of life which came from God, ſhall enter into them, and they ſhall ſtand vpon their feete.
               This may ſeeme ſomewhat ſtraunge; but it is not to be vnderſtood that they ſhould be raiſed vp bodily in their perſons till the laſt reſurrection: but that God woulde raiſe vp others endued with the ſame ſpirite, which ſhould mightily defend both the doctrine, cauſe and quarrell, which their predeceſſors had maintained, and ſealed with their blood; in whom they ſhould after a ſort reuiue & liue againe, euen as Elias did reuiue, and as it were liue againe in Iohn Baptiſt; who is ſaide to be endued with the power and ſpirit of Elias, as it was foretold by the Prophet, and as our Sauior himſelfe doth auouch.Luk. 1.17. Mal 4. 5. Math. 17.12. Now bleſſed be God, that we liue in theſe daies wherein we ſee with our eyes all theſe things fulfilled. For when the Pope & his Cleargy had murthered Gerhardus, Dulcimus Nauarenſis, Waldus, Nicolaus Orem, Iohn Picus, Iohn Ziſca, Viſilus Groningenſis, Armerius, Wickliffe, Huſſe, Ierome of Prage, and many Preachers in Sueuia, and one hundred holy Chriſtians in the countrey of Alſatia, and many others in all countries, and of all conditions of men: yet for all that

ſpight of their hearts, God raiſed vp others in their ſtead, as Luther, Caluin, Zuinglius, Peter Martir, Peter Viret, Melancton, Bucer, Bullinger, and their ſucceſſors; yea the thouſands of excellent Miniſters, and Preachers which are diſperſed ouer all Europe at this day: In whom all the former witneſſes do reuiue, and as it were ſtand vppon their feete againe. And now a great feare is come vpon the Pope and his Cleargy, and all his fauorites: for they did neuer ſo much as dreame of ſuch an alteration: but this is the Lordes doing, and it is maruellous in our eyes.
                
                  
                     verſ. 12 And they ſhall heare a great voice from heauen ſaying vnto them, come vp hither: and they shall aſcend vp to heauen in a cloude, and their enemies shall ſee them.
               Here the Lordes witneſſes whom Antichriſt had murdered, are called, and taken vp into heauen, that they may be crowned with glory and immortalitie, hauing in the earth fought ſo excellēt a fight of faith as they had: for euen as Chriſt their head was taken vp in a cloud into the heauens: Euen ſo his faithfull members are here taken vp in a cloud to raigne with him for euer. Moreouer, it is here ſaid, that their enemies ſhall ſee them aſcending vp, they ſhall as it were aſcend vp in their ſight: for from the fire and faggot, ſwords and ſpeares of their enemies, they went directly vnto God, and the very conſciences of their perſecutors did witneſſe ſo much; nay ſome of them being in horrible convulſions of cōſcience, did not ſticke to vtter it; auouching the innocency of Gods

Martirs: as ſometimes Pilat,
                  Math. 2
                        •
                     . and the Centurion did of Chriſt. But though they had not bene iuſtified by their enemies, yet are they here iuſtified by a greater teſtimony: for the voice from heauen, the voice of God doth iuſtifie them, & cleare them; accounting them worthy to be called vp from the earth to heauen, and receiued to eternall glory. For howſoeuer the Pope & his Cleargy condemned them for heretikes and ſciſmatikes; yet here they are iuſtified and cleared by a voice from heauen, which is more then the voices, ſuffrages, and approbations of all men in the world.
               And the ſame houre there ſhalbe a great earthquake, and the tenth part of the citie ſhall fall, and in the earthquake ſhalbe ſlaine in number ſeuen thouſand, and the remnant were ſore feared, and gaue glory to the God of heauen.
               As hee hath ſhewed before that the world was very ioyful & iocond, when they had made diſpatch of Gods witneſſes; but afterward full of feare & terror, when they ſawe what followed: So here in this verſe is ſhewed, that at the ſame houre, that is about the ſame time whē they haue perſecuted the Saints, and ſee thouſands of others raiſed vp in their ſtead, and as it were out of their aſhes, or rather out of their blood, that there ſhould immediately follow a great earthquake; that is, horrible commotions, ſeditions, tumults and open warres among the kingdomes and nations of the worlde, and amongſt all people which ſhould liue after the breaking forth of the light of the Goſpell, as this day we ſee with our eyes. For who now in theſe dayes dooth not ſee

and feele this Earthquake? who knoweth not what ſtirres there haue bene and are euery where about Religion? Who is ignorant that all the warres, ſeditions, treacheries, treaſons, and rebellions that are this day in Europe betwixt one kingdome and an other, are ſpecially concerning the matter of religigion? But marke what followeth. Beholde the effect of this Earthquake. It is ſaide, that the tenth part of the citie ſhall fall. By the citie here, he meaneth the great citie Rome, mentioned before verſ. 8. which is therefore called the great citie, becauſe it was the chiefe citie of the Romane Empire, and the verie ſeate of Antichriſt. Now then the ſenſe and meaning of the holy Ghoſt is, that when there once beginneth to be an earthquake, that is, broiles, contentions, alterations, queſtions & diſputations, about religion: and that the popiſh doctrine which had ſo long preuailed in the world, ſhould be called in queſtion, yea openly preached againſt, conuicted and cōdemned, that then Rome ſhould begin to fall, and Romiſh religion to ſuffer a great eclipſe, yea the tenth part; that is, ſome part of the citie of Rome: I meane the doctrine and authoritie of Rome ſhould be ouerthrowne. Now this falling of the tenth part of Rome, was fulfilled within ſome fewe yeares after the broaching of the Goſpell by Luther, and his immediate ſucceſſors; but ſince it is gone backe many degrees, and hereafter it ſhall ſtill ebbe & conſume away by degrees, euen till it come to nothing: as God willing ſhalbe plainly proued hereafter.
               Moreouer, here is ſet downe another effect of this earthquake: which is, that thereby ſhall be ſlaine in

number ſeuen thouſand, that is, many thouſands; for the number of ſeuen is a perfect and vniuerſall number, as formerly hath bene declared. But the ſenſe of this clauſe is, that all ſuch as wil not yeeld to the Goſpell after matters once come in queſtion, and the light therof breaketh forth, but continue ſtill in their blindneſſe and hardneſſe, ſtanding out ſturdily againſt the truth, ſhall feele the heauie iudgements of God vpon them, and come to miſerable and wretched endes, as did here in England Stephen Gardiner, bloudie Bonner, and many other ſuch open perſecutors in other nations and countries, as the booke of Martyrs doth plentifully witneſſe.
               Laſt of all it is ſaid, that the reſt were terrified, & gaue glorie to the God of heauen: that is, the elect of God ſeeing theſe horrible iudgements vpon the perſecutors of the Goſpel, and hauing their eies opened through theſe contentions and broiles about religion, ſhould repent of their former Idolatries, blindneſſe, and ignorance, ſhould yeeld to the truth, and giue glorie to the God of heauen, as at this day we ſee thouſands doo, God be thanked. 
                     chapter 9 Wee heard before in the time of the Turkes murthering army, when the third part of men were ſlain, that the reſt repented not of their Idolatrie. But now (God be praiſed for it) many doo repent euery day, and turne from dumbe Idols, to ſerue the liuing God. And therefore although the times wherein we liue, bee ſinfull and troubleſome, yet are they golden times and daies, in compariſon of former ages, wherein Antichriſt did raigne and rule ouer all. Moreouer, from this place may plainly and ſtrongly be concluded, that the Goſpel ſhal preuaile

more and more in all the kingdomes of Europe, euen vntill the ende of the world. For here we ſee it foretolde and propheſied, that in this very laſt age of the world, & euen as it were, a litle before the blowing of the ſeuenth trumpet, which preſently herevpon is ſounded, as in the next verſes appeareth, many ſhould repent, and giue glory to God.
               
                  
                     
                        verſ. 14 The ſecond woe is paſt, behold the third woe wil come anon.
                  
                     
                        verſ. 15 And the ſeuenth Angell blew the trumpet, and there were great voices in heauen, ſaying: The kingdomes of this world are our Lords, and his Christs, and he ſhall raigne for euermore.
               
               Now commeth the third, the laſt, and the greateſt woe, which is the woe of eternall death vpon all the vngodly, both in their ſoules and bodies for euer in the laſt iudgement. The firſt woe was the Papacie. The ſecond woe was Turciſme. And this third woe is the laſt iudgement. For it now followeth, that the ſeuenth Angell bloweth the laſt trumpet: as our Lord Ieſus ſware before, that when the ſeuenth Angell ſhould blowe the trumpet, 
                     chapter 10.6. there ſhould bee no more time. Therefore when we ſee all things fulfilled which do belong vnto the ſixt trumpet, it remaineth that wee ſhould euery houre expect and looke for the blowing of the ſeuenth trumpet, and the end of the world. For the holy Ghoſt telleth vs, that whē the kingdome of the Pope and the Turke ſhall fall, and the Goſpell bee preached in many nations and kingdomes, that then the third woe will come anon; that is, the laſt iudgement followeth preſently vpon it.
               
                  Now at the blowing of this ſeuenth trumpet, there were great voices in heauen, ſaying; the kingdomes of this world are our Lords, and his Chriſts, and he ſhall raigne for euermore.
               Theſe voices in heauen are the triumphing voices of Gods elect, who do exceedingly reioyce and triumph, that the kingdome of Sathan and Antchriſt is ouerthrowne, and that the kingdome of God and of Chriſt is ſet vp, and ſhall ſtand for euermore. For now all aduerſary power being ouerthrowne, Chriſt doth deliuer vp a peaceable kingdome to his father, as it is writtē; Then shalbe the ende, when he hath deliuered vp his peaceable kingdome to God the Father:
                  1· Cor. 15.24. For he muſt raigne ouer the Church militant, till hee haue troade downe all his enemies vnder his feete, and when the Sonne of God hath ſubdued all things to himſelfe, then ſhall he be ſubiect to his Father, as he is the mediator of the Church, and yet raigne with his Church triumphant for euermore.
               
                  Then the 24. 
                        verſ. 16 Elders which ſatte before God on their ſeates, fell vppon their faces, and worshipped God,
                  Saying: Wee giue thee thankes ô Lorde God almightie, 
                        verſ. 17 which art, which wast, and which art to come: for thou haſt receiued thy great might, and haſt obtained thy kingdome.
               
               Theſe 24. Elders doo ſignifie all the elect, 
                     chapter 4 both of Iewes and Gentiles, as we haue heard before; which all in moſt ſuppliant manner, doo worſhippe the onely euerlaſting God, euen in the Church triumphant, and do greatly reioyce, and giue all praiſe

and glorie vnto him, becauſe now he had receiued the kingdome, the power and the glory, both Pope, and Turke, and Emperor, and all his enemies, being ſubdued vnder his feete.
                
                  
                     ver. 18 And the Gentiles were angry, and thy wrath is come, and the time of the dead, that they ſhould be iudged, and that thou ſhouldeſt giue reward vnto thy ſeruants the Prophets, and to the Saints, & to them that feare thy name, and to ſmall and great, and ſhouldeſt deſtroy thē which deſtroy the earth.
               Now he mentioneth the wrath and vengeance which is to bee powred forth vpon all the wicked at the laſt day, and alſo the reward of the godly. For whereas he ſaith, The Gentiles were angry, & thy wrath is come, and the time of the dead, that they should be iudged, the ſenſe and meaning is, that all the prophane enemies of the Church, which haue had their time in which they were angrie with Gods people, and in their wrath did afflict and vexe them very ſore, ſhould now bee iudged and condemned in Gods wrath: for now the day of his wrath and vengeance is come, wherein he wil deſtroy them that deſtroied the earth, and ſeemed to carrie all before them; and where alſo hee will giue a full recompence of rewarde to all his faithfull worſhippers, both ſmall and great, both Preachers and profeſſors of his Goſpell.
               
                  
                  Then the temple of God was opened in heauen, & there was ſeene in the Temple the arke of his couenant, and there were lightnings, and voices, and thundrings, 
                  
                     ver. 19 
                  and earthquakes, and much haile.
               
               This is a further amplification of that which is ſet downe in the former verſe. For now he ſaith, that the temple of God ſhould be opened in heauen: That is, an opē doore and paſſage ſhould be made through Chriſt, for al the elect to enter into Gods euerlaſting kingdome, and raigne with him, and his Angels for euermore.
               By the arke of the couenant, is meant Chriſt, who is ſaide heere to be ſeene in the Temple or kingdome of glory, becauſe through his mediation only (in whom the couenant of peace is eſtabliſhed with his church) the 24 Elders are made partakers of their Crownes, and enter in with him, and his Angels into the euerlaſting Temple made without handes, and eternall in the heauens. But on the contrary heere is ſaid, that there were lightnings, thundrings, &c. That is, moſt horrible vegeance and wrath poured downe vpon al reprobates in hel-fire for euermore. For when it ſhal be ſaid to al the faithful: Come ye bleſſed, &c. then alſo ſhal it be ſaid to al vnbeleeuers: Goe ye curſed into hell fire, &c.
               
               Now for warrant of this expoſitiō of the laſt verſe, that the Temple in heauen is to be vnderſtood of the kingdome of glory, looke Chap. 15. ver. 5.6.8. Chap.Apoc. 15.5.6.8 Apoc. 16.1. 16. ver. 1. The reaſon hereof is, that as the doores of the Temple of Ieruſalem being ſet open, Gods people entred in and worſhipped: ſo the euerlaſting gates of the new Ieruſalem, and celeſtial Temple being ſet

open by Chriſt al the elect do enter in, and worſhip God without wearineſſe, euen as the Angels for euermore.
               
                  2. Sam. 6.2 Pſalm. 78.61That the arke of the couenant is taken for Chriſt, ſee 2. Sam. 6.2. Pſal. 78. ver. 61.62. This arke of the couenant, that is, Chriſt, is here ſeene in the Temple, becauſe Chriſt hath already taken poſſeſſion of heauē as mediator and head of the Church, and now doth ſet open the kingdome of heauen to al beleeuers, that through him they may haue free acceſſe thereunto, as it is written,Eph. 2.18 
                  that thorough him only we haue an entrance vnto the Father.
               
               That by thundrings, lightnings, earthquake, haile, is ment that horrible vengeance and wrath, which is powred forth vpon al the vngodly,Pſalm. 11 verſ. 6. ſee Pſal. 11. verſe 6. Let this briefely ſuffice to ſatisfie the conſcience of the reader. And thus much concerning the ſecond viſion contained in theſe eight chapters going before, wherein we haue heard al things expounded that doe belong vnto the opening of the ſeuen ſeales, and the blowing of the ſeauen trumpets, that is, al notable things which were to fal out frō the Apoſtles times, vnto the end of the world.
            
            
               CHAP. XII.
               
                  NOw hauing finiſhed the ſecond viſion, we are come vnto the third, contained in al the chapters following, euen vnto the end of this book. Wherin diuers things, which were obſcurely and darkely ſet downe in the former viſion, are more plainly and fully opened and expounded: So that this third viſion is as

it were a commentary or more cleare expoſition of ſundry things contained in the ſecond viſion. 
                        chapter 6 But eſpecially of the perſecuting Roman Empire mentioned in the opening of the ſecond ſeale, and alſo of the papacy mentioned at the blowing of the fift trumpet. But the general ſumme of this third viſion, 
                        chapter 9 is a liuely painting out of the malignant Church, and the great vpholders thereof, the diuel, the Romane Emperour, and the Pope. It ſheweth alſo the riſing and falling of the Romane Empire, and the riſing and falling of the papacy. It ſheweth alſo the vtter ouerthrow of both, together with the eternal condemnation of the diuel, which ſet them al a worke to fight againſt the Church. Laſt of al, it ſheweth the eternall felicity of the Church, and the vnconceiueable happines of al Gods choſen in the heauens for euermore.
                  The principal drift of this 12 Chapter, is to ſet forth the nature of the true viſible, and militant Church here in earth, whoſe head is Chriſt Ieſus. And alſo the falſe malignant church, whoſe head is the diuel, together with the continual enmitie and war, which is alwaies betwixt them.
                  This Chapter may very fitly be diuided into fiue parts.
                  The firſt is a deſcription of the true Church. 
                        verſ. 1.2 
                  
                  The ſecond is a deſcription of the diuel the Churches enemie. 
                        ver. 3.4.5 
                  
                  The third containeth the Churches battaile with the diuel, and her victorie. 
                        ver. 7.8.9 
                  
                  The fourth ſheweth the ioy and triumphes of the godly, in the churches victory ouer Sathan. 
                        ver. 10.11.12 
                  
                  The fift and laſt ſheweth the fury, 
                        ver. 13.14.15 16.17. and malice of

Sathan, who, although he was foiled in battell by the Church, yet would not giue ouer, but continued perſecuting the church in her members, and making war againſt the remnant of her ſeede.
               
               
                  Text.
                  
                     
                        ver. 1 
                     And there appeared a great wonder in heauē: A woman clothed with the ſunne, and the moone was vnder her feete, and vpon her head a crowne of 12 ſtarres.
                  
                  Firſt the Holy-ghoſt calleth the matters of this chapter a great wonder, to ſtir vs vp to attention. For men are much mooued with wonders; and a wonder indeede it is in the literall ſenſe to ſee a woman clothed with the ſunne, &c. but a farre greater wonder in the ſpiritual ſenſe, as we ſhal heare; and the greateſt wonder of al, that a poore weake woman ſhould encounter with a great red dragon, and ouercome him.
                  It is ſaid to be a wonder in heauen, becauſe the church here in viſion appeareth not vpon the earth, but in heauen, in aſmuch as her birth is from heauen, her inheritance in heauen, and her conuerſation in heauen.
                  The Church is here compared to a woman, as in the 45 Pſalme, and the whole booke of the Canticles, and that for three reaſons.
                  Firſt, as a woman is weake and feeble, and in lawe can do nothing of herſelf without her husband: ſo we of our ſelues are weake and feeble, and in matters of Gods lawe and worſhip can doe nothing without our husband Chriſt, as he ſaith: without me ye can do nothing.
                     Iohn. 15
                  
                  Secondly, as a woman thorough the company of

her husband is fruitful, and bringeth forth children: ſo the Church by her coniunction with Chriſt, and his word, doth bring forth many children vnto God.
                  Thirdly, as the loue and affection of a woman is to her husband, as Gen. 2.16. ſo the loue and affection of the Church is altogether to Chriſt, and Chriſt to her.
                  
                     This woman is clothed with the Sunne: that is,Mal. 4.2. the Church is clothed with Chriſt the Sunne of righteouſnes, as the Prophet ſpeaketh.
                  
                     The Moone was vnder her feete. Whereby is meant, that the church treadeth vnder her feete al worldly things, which are compared to the moone for their often changes, waxings, wanings, increaſings decreſings, and continual mutations, and vncertainties.
                  The church treadeth al tranſitory things vnder her feet: that is, ſhe maketh light account of them; ſhe regardeth them not in compariſon of heauenly things. For he that is clothed with the ſunne, careth little for the light of the moone.
                  
                     She hath vpon her head a crowne of 12 ſtarres: which ſignifieth that the church is adorned, and beautified with the doctrine of the twelue Apoſtles, that is, the doctrine of the Goſpel, as it were with a crowne of gold, of pearle, and pretious ſtones. For the doctrine of the Goſpel is the crowne of the church.
                  
                     And ſhe was with child, and cried trauailing in birth, 
                     
                        ver. 2 
                     and was pained readie to be deliuered.
                  
                  The church is ſaid to be with child after ſhe hath conceiued the immortal ſeede of the word, by the miniſtery of the Goſpel, as the Apoſtle ſaith. In Chriſt Ieſus I haue begotten you through the Goſpell.
                     1. Cor. 4.15. And to

the Galatians: O ye little children of whom I trauaile in birth againe, till Chriſt bee formed in you.
                  
                  
                     Galat. 4.19It is not onely ſaid that this woman was with child, but alſo, that ſhe was very neere her time ready to bring forth, and to be deliuered, and that ſhe crieth in trauaile. Now the child which ſhe bringeth forth, is Chriſt Ieſus, as appeareth verſe 5. for there it is ſaid of him, that he ſhould rule all nations with a rodde of iron.
                  
                  Now although Chriſt was borne but of one member of the church, which is the Virgin Marie: yet may it be ſaid that the whole church, which was before his cōming, did euen trauaile with paine to bring him forth, becauſe they had through faith in the promiſes a longing, & feruent deſire & expectatiō of his comming. For from the firſt promiſe made to Adam, and afterward renewed to Abraham and his poſterity; the church ſtood in a continual expectation of the promiſed Meſſias, looking wiſhely euery day when he ſhould be actually exhibited to the world. For which cauſe here ſhe is ſaid to cry trauailing in birth. And not vnſauerly alſo may ye church be ſaid to cry trauailing in birth, when through many perſecutions, & afflictions ſhe bringeth forth children vnto God by the miniſtery of the word. For the church bringeth forth no children at eaſe, but with hard trauaile, and much adoe, hauing ſo few friends to helpe her, and ſo many enemies againſt her, as anon we ſhal heare.
                  
                     And there appeared another wonder in heauen. For behold a great red dragon, 
                     
                        ver. 3 
                     hauing ſeuen heads, and ten hornes, and ſeuen crownes vpon his heades.
                  
                  
                     
                        ver. 4 
                     And his taile drew the third part of the ſtarres of heauen, and caſt them to the earth. And the dragon ſtood

before the woman, which was ready to be deliuered.
                  
                  Now we are come to the deſcription of the Churches great & capitall enemie, which is the diuel: who becauſe he ſtudieth and laboureth continually to impeach the good eſtate of the Church in heauenly things, to deiect her from her dignitie, and diſpoſſeſſe her of her inheritance, therefore here in viſion hee is ſaid to appeare in heauen. For he medleth with the Church, in and about heauenlie things, practiſing to pull her out of heauen, from whence ſhe came, and whither ſhe muſt returne, euen to caſt her into hell, and condemnation with himſelfe, if it were poſſible.
                  The diuell is compared to a dragon for his furie & felneſſe; to a great dragon for his power & might; and a red dragon, for his bloudy crueltie, malice, and madneſſe againſt Chriſt, and all his mmbers.
                  His ſeuen heads ſignifie his manifold ſleights, and ſubtilties, wherein he is a crafts-maiſter.
                  His ten hornes ſignifie his dreadful power. For who knoweth not that he is ſtronger then anie other creature, hauing not loſt his ſtrength by his fall, but remaineth as ſtrong as an Angell of light.
                  His ſeuen crownes vpon his heads, do ſignifie his manifold victories ouer the world. For hee hath from time to time, and from age to age, got ſo many conqueſts of the world, through his ſleights and power, that now he is the god of the world, as the Apoſtle ſaith, and raigneth as king ouer them.
                  
                  This dragon hath a mōſtrous taile both for length and ſtrength. For it is ſo long, that it reacheth vp to heauen, & ſo ſtrong that it bruſheth downe the ſtarres from thence. That is, the diuel through ambition and

couetouſneſſe, and other fleſhly luſts, doth pul down manie Miniſters, which ſhined in doctrine and life, as the ſtarres of heauen, euen vnto the earth, where they haue loſt their brightneſſe and glorie, and ſhine as much as the Moone in a miſt.
                  
                     
                        verſ. 4 Moreouer it is ſaid, that the dragon ſtood before the woman in trauaile, to deuoure her child as ſoone as it was borne. Wherein we are to obſerue the malice and furie of Sathan, in that he watcheth ſo narrowly to deuoure the bleſſed ſeed, euen the Sauiour of the world, ſo ſoone as he was borne. And for this cauſe he ſtirred vp Herod the king,Matth. 2. ſubtilly to ſeeke him out by the wiſe men, that he might kill him: and afterward moſt cruelly practiſed the ſame, by murthering ſo manie innocents. But this is alwayes a generall truth, that Sathan ſeeketh to ſmother not onely Chriſt, but euerie member of his in the cradle; yea to blaſt them in the bud, before euer they come to fruit or flower.
                  
                     
                        verſ. 5 
                     So ſhe brought forth a man child, which ſhould rule all nations with a rod of iron, and that her child was taken vp vnto God, and his throne.
                  
                  Notwithſtanding the malice and watchfulneſſe of Sathan, yet the Church bringeth forth Chriſt, which ſhould rule and ouer-rule all nations with a rod of iron: that is, the ſcepter of his word, as it is in the ſecond Pſalme,Iſa 11.4. and with the rodde of his mouth, as the Prophet ſpeaketh.
                  Moreouer it is ſaid, that this child was taken vp vnto God and his throne. That is, Chriſt by his reſurrection did take poſſeſſion of his chaire of eſtate, in deſpite of Herod, Pontius Pilate, the Prieſts, the Phariſees, and all other his enemies, which ſought to keepe

him down: and now he being aſcended into heauen, doth drawe all his members vnto him, in deſpite of the diuel and all his imps.
                  
                     And the woman fled into the wilderneſſe, 
                     
                        verſ. 6 
                     where ſhee hath a place prepared of God, that they ſhould feede her there a thouſand two hundred and threeſcore dayes.
                  
                  Now after the womans child was ſet in ſafetie, here is ſhewed what became of the woman her ſelfe: To wit, that ſhe was ſo ſore purſued by the Scribes and Phariſees, and by the Prieſts and Elders, that ſhe was faine to flie into the wilderneſſe. The naturall ſenſe & plaine meaning of this place is, that when the church began to grow, after Chriſts aſcenſiō, & the number of the Diſciples to increaſe exceedingly, as we reade in the 2. of the Acts; Sathan did ſo greatly maligne it, and began to bee in ſuch a rage, that he would haue eaten them vp all at a bit, and rooted them out at once, that ſo the woman might haue no more being in the earth. And therefore we reade, Act. 8. that after the ſtoning of Steuen, there was ſuch a perſecution raiſed vp againſt the Church by the high Prieſts, the Princes of the Iewes, the Phariſees, and all that curſed crue, that all the Apoſtles and Diſciples of Chriſt were ſcattered, and diſperſed here and there in the Heathen countries, and among the heathen people, which here are called the wilderneſse, that is to ſay, a ground vntilled, deſolate, and barren of all fruits of godlineſſe.
                  But now may ſome man ſay, how ſhal the Church doe in the wilderneſſe? how ſhal ſhe liue? how ſhall ſhe be ſuſtained? There is no tilling, no ſowing, no planting, there groweth no corne, there is nothing to

be had either for food or raiment. Here it is anſwered, that God prepared a place for her, where ſhe ſhould be fed. God tooke vp an Inne for her. She wanted neither food nor raiment in her perſecutions & troubles. Which teacheth that God doth alwayes prouide for his owne, euen in greateſt miſeries, ſcarſities, famines, baniſhments, and perſecutions. As ſometimes he did for Elias in the time of dearth,1. King. 17. Numb. 11. Numb. 14. and for the children of Iſrael in the wilderneſſe.
                  The time, wherein the Church was fed in the wilderneſſe, was a thouſand two hundred and threeſcore dayes: that is, during the time of her perſecutions, as before hath been ſhewed, 
                        chapter 11.2. chap. 11. verſ. 2.
                  
                     
                        verſ. 7 
                     And there was a battell in heauen, Michael and his angels fought againſt the dragon, and the dragon and his angels fought.
                  
                  
                     
                        verſ. 8 
                     But they preuailed not, neither was their place found any more in heauen.
                  
                  Now we are come to the third part of this chapter, which is the battell betwixt Chriſt and the diuel. For whereas the dragon could not ſmother Chriſt in the cradle, as he indeuoured, & ſo depriue the Church of all her happineſſe for euer: now he proclaimeth open warre, both againſt Chriſt, and all his members, plotting and purpoſing to oppugne the very ſaluation of the church, though it bee founded in Chriſt. Wherein he ſheweth both his impudencie and furious madneſſe.
                  
                     Dan. 10.13. Iud. 9.
                     Michael here ſignifieth Chriſt, as Dan. 10.13. Iude v. 9. This name is giuen to Chriſt in Daniel, becauſe he is the firſt of the chiefe Princes: that is, he is the head of the Angels,Col. 1.16. who are chiefe Princes, as the Apoſtle

affirmeth.
                  That Chriſt hath his Angels ioyned with him, is not to note any weakeneſſe or want of ſtrength in Chriſt, alone to ouercome his enemies, but to ſhew, that as Chriſt doth effect great wonders in the world; ſo for the moſt part hee doth it by inſtruments, and meanes: as ſometimes Angels, ſometimes men. But here he ſpecially meaneth the Apoſtles and their ſucceſſours, yea and at this day all chriſtian kings, princes and potentates of the earth; and all others, which take part with Chriſt againſt the diuel, & his inſtruments.
                  Well, here wee ſee that theſe two Generals, and grand captaines Michael and the Dragon, do muſter both their armies, ioyne battel, and fight a pitched field, the euent and ſucceſſe whereof is this, that the Dragon and his Angels goe downe. Oh bleſſed ſucceſſe, may we ſay! For if the diuel had preuailed, it had beene woe to vs; ſith this battel was about, and concerning the verie ſaluation of mankind by chriſts death and reſurrection. We know how the diuel ſet vpon Chriſt alone to tempt him vnto ſinne, that ſo he might ouerthrowe the worke of our redemption, ſuppoſing in this combate or Monomachie to haue got the day: but he preuailed not. Afterward how ſtrongly did he oppugne him by his Angels? I meane the Scribes and Phariſe
                        ••
                     
                     ▪ the high Prieſts and Elders of the people, yea all the diuels in hel, and his whole infernal armie, not onely in murthering and crucifying his natural bodie, but alſo in vſing all forcible and cunning meanes to keepe him downe, that he might neuer riſe vp againe; as the great ſtone vpon his tombe, the ſealing of it, the watch ſet to keepe it.

for the diuel knew right wel, that if Chriſt roſe again, hee ſhould loſe the field. For the reſurrection of Chriſt is our actuall iuſtification,Rom. 4.25. Rom. 1.3. 
                     And Chriſt was mightily declared to be the Sonne of God by his reſurrection from the dead. Wel, do the dragon and his Angels what they can, yet Chriſt is riſen againe, and hath ſpoiled principalities and powers; yea al the infernall armie, and hath made a ſhew of them openly, and hath led them all in triumph vpon his croſſe: So that we ſee in this firſt and greateſt battell, the diuell hath the foile. And it is further ſaid, that the diuell and all his Angels were caſt out of heauen, and their place was no more found: which is not to be vnderſtood of their firſt caſting out of heauen, immediately after their creatiō. For at that time they were no diuels, nor enemies to the church, but Angels of light: but nowe ſince their fall, and ſince they were diuels; they are ſaid to be caſt out of heauen, not becauſe they euer came in heauen ſince they were diuels, but becauſe they can no longer impeach the church touching her bleſſed eſtate in heauen. They are without all hope to diſpoſſeſſe her of her inheritance: for that is ratified, and made ſure vnto her in the death and reſurrection of Chriſt. And for this cauſe it is ſaid, that the diuell hath no more to do in heauen: that is, he cannot for his heart ouerthrow the ſaluation of Gods children. For who can lay any thing to the charge of Gods choſen? It is God that iuſtifieth,
                     Rom. 8.33. 
                     who ſhall condemne? It is Chriſt which is dead, yea or rather which is riſen againe, &c. True it is indeed that this battell is ſaid to be in heauen, that is, about heauenly things, yea about the higheſt points of heauen, which is ſaluation or damnation:

for the diuel vpon this very point, & theſe very termes, hath frō the beginning mightily wreſtled and ſtrugled with ye church, & doth euen vntil this day: but bleſſed be God, that he cannot, nor ſhall not preuaile againſt any one of gods elect. For our lord Ieſus ſaith, I giue vnto thē eternal life, & they ſhal neuer periſh,
                     Ioh. 10.28. 
                     neither ſhal any take them out of my hand: my father which gaue thē me is greater then all. Neither ſhal any pluck thē out of my hand. And againe.Ioh. 6.37. Ioh. 6.40. 
                     All that the Father giueth me, ſhal come vnto me. And this is the fathers will which hath ſent me, that of all which he hath giuen me, I ſhould loſe nothing, but ſhould raiſe it vp againe at the laſt day.
                  
                  Now further we are to obſerue, that as Chriſt in his owne perſon hath once preuailed in the maine battell againſt the diuell: ſo his church militant ſhal likewiſe alwayes preuaile through him. For it is written,Matt. 16. 
                     The gates of hell ſhall not preuaile againſt it.
                  
                  
                     And the great Dragon, that old ſerpent, called the diuel and Satan, was caſt out, which deceiueth al the world: 
                     
                        verſ. 9 
                     He was euen caſt into the earth, & his Angels were caſt out with him.
                  
                  Now becauſe the diuel cannot ouerthrow the ſaluation of Gods elect, hee is ſaid to be caſt out of heauen into the earth: that is, amongſt earthlie and carnall men, that he may exerciſe his tyranny, and wrecke his malice vpon them. For he hath power giuen him to tyranniſe ouer them at his pleaſure,Epheſ. 2.2. 2. Tim. 2.21. and the Apoſtle ſaith, he worketh in the children of diſobedience, and taketh them captiue to do his will.
                  
                  
                     Then I heard a loud voice in heauen, ſaying: 
                     
                        verſ. 10 
                     now is ſaluation, & ſtrength, and the kingdom of our God, & the power of his Chriſt: for the accuſer of our brethren is caſt

downe, which accuſed them before God day and night.
                  
                  Here is the triumphant ſong of victorie, which al the Saints & Angels do ſing vnto God, prayſing and magnifying his power, and the power of his Sonne Chriſt, for ouercomming the dragon, and giuing the victory to the church through Chriſt. For now with great ioy and loude voices they ſing and ſay, that the churches ſaluation is ſealed, and made ſure vnto her for euer. It can neuer be ſhaken. The diuel is foiled and caſt down into the earth.
                  Theſe ſongs of ioie after great victories, are of great antiquity in the church: as we read of the children of Iſrael,Exod. 15 Iudg. 5. 1. Sam. 18 after the ouerthrow of Pharaoh and his army in the red ſea: of Deborah, after the great victory ouer Siſara: of the women, that ſung after the victory of Goliah by Dauid.
                  
                  The deuil is called the accuſer of the brethren for two cauſes. Firſt becauſe he accuſeth Gods elect of much ſinne, and calleth for iuſtice againſt them day and night at Gods hands, that they might be condemned vpon ſuch articles, as he is able to proue againſt them: for he knowing right well that the iudge of al the world is a iuſt God, and muſt needs deale vprightly, doth daily vrge him to doe iuſtice vnto ſinners, being willingly ignorant that al Gods People, though ſinners, are cleared and diſcharged in Chriſt.
                  Another reaſon is, becauſe of the calumniations, reproches and ſlaunders, which in al ages, at al times, and in al places and countries, hee hath alwaies vniuſtly raiſed vp againſt the true worſhippers of God.
                  
                     
                        ver. 11 
                     But they ouer came him by the bloud of the Lamb, and by the worde of their teſtimony; and they loued not their

liues vnto the death.
                  
                  Heere is ſhewed that the churches victory ouer Sathan and hel, is not thorough any power or might of her own, but by the bloud of the Lamb, and the word of their teſtimony, that is, the worde of God, which they witneſſe, profeſſe, loue, & ſtick vnto euen vnto death.
                  
                     Therfore reioice ye heauens, and ye that dwel in them. 
                     
                        ver. 12 
                     Woe to the inhabitants of the earth, and of the ſea: for the diuel is come downe vnto you, which hath great wrath, knowing that he hath but a ſhort time.
                  
                  Here againe the ſaints, and Angels, and al the bleſſed company of heauē, are called vpon, & exhorted to reioice, becauſe the diuel and his Angels are caſt out, and the elect haue the victory ouer him thorough the bloud of the Lamb, and becauſe the ſaluation of the church is ſealed vp, and God onely reigneth through Chriſt. Which al are matters of ſo great momēt, that not onely the church militant is ſtirred vp to reioice herein, but euen the church triumphant alſo, that is, the ſpirits of iuſt, and perfect men. But on the contrary, here is feareful woe denounced againſt the inhabitants of the earth, and of the ſea: that is, all Papiſts, Atheiſts, worldlings, and reprobates. For ſith he cannot haue his wil of the church, yet hee wil haue his will and wite his malice vpon them, by hardening their hearts, and blinding their eyes, & making them his ſlaues and vaſſals, to fight for his kingdom againſt Chriſt, againſt his church, againſt all goodneſſe, and all good men. The reaſon is added, why the diuel is in ſuch a rage with the world, and commeth vpon them in ſo great wrath and furie, to wit, becauſe hee hath but a ſhort time: that is, becauſe his kingdome

draweth toward an end, therefore he dooth ſo beſtir him.
                  
                     
                        ver. 13 
                     And when the Dragon ſaw that he was caſt vnto the earth, he perſecuted the woman which had brought forth the man child.
                  
                  Now the diuel ſeeing himſelfe caſt out of heauen, ſo as he cannot impeach the ſaluation of the church, he raiſeth vp horrible perſecutions againſt her by his inſtruments here in ye earth, labouring to root her out if it were poſſible: for being ouercome of the head, he doth now with might and maine, ſet vppon the body; and what horrible ſtormes and tempeſts he hath in al ages, ſpeciallie in theſe laſt daies raiſed vp, and daily doth raiſe vp againſt the church, both the ſcriptures and al church ſtories do abundantly declare.
                  
                     
                        ver. 14 
                     But to the woman were giuen two wings of a great eagle, that ſhe might fly into the wilderneſſe, into her place, where ſhe is nouriſhed for a time, and times, and halfe a time, from the preſence of the ſerpent.
                  
                  Theſe two wings do ſignifie al the waies & meanes of euaſion, which God gaue vnto his church, when he deliuered her from the hands of her purſuers and perſecutors: and alſo her ſwift flight from them, and al their malicious practiſes. For although the church cā
                     not abſolutelie fly from the preſence of the diuel, with her Eagles wings, being ſo vnſpeakably ſwift as he is: yet after a ſort ſhee is ſaid to fly from him, and his preſence, when the power of the tyrants and perſecutors which he raiſeth vp, cannot ouertake her to murder, and kil her. But as touching her flight into the wilderneſſe, and her lodging and nouriſhment there, by Gods prouidence, in the middeſt of al penury and

extremity, wee haue ſufficiently heard before ver 6. and therefore here I ſurceaſe to ſpeake any further of it. As concerning the ſpace and continuance of her nouriſhment in the wilderneſſe, which is heere ſet downe to bee a time, and times, and halfe a time, it is the ſame that the thouſand two hundred and threeſcore daies, mentioned in the ſixt verſe; and the 42 monethes, mentioned Chap. 11. verſe 2. and the three daies and a halfe, mentioned Chap. 11. ver. 9. as before hath bin ſhewed.
                  
                     And the ſerpent caſt out of his mouth water after the woman, like a floud, 
                     
                        verſ. 15 
                     that he might cauſe her to be caried away of the floud.
                  
                  Now the church being ſecretly hid and nouriſhed by Gods prouidence in the wilderneſſe, ſo as the diuel and his inſtruments cannot find her out, nor come at her, he taketh another courſe, and caſteth about another way to annoy her; & that is by caſting a floud of water after her to drowne her withal. Whereby is meant, the innumerable lies, reproches, & ſlaunders, which he raiſed vp by ſundry hereticks againſt her in al ages; as the Arrians, Donatiſts, Papiſts, and ſuch like, and al to bring her into the hatred of Princes; Potentates, and al that were in loue with her; that ſith otherwiſe he could not preuaile againſt her, yet at leaſt he might vtterly ſinke her in this gulfe of reproches.
                  
                     But the earth holpe the woman, 
                     
                        ver. 16 
                     and the earth opened her mouth, and ſwallowed vp the floud, which the Dragon had caſt out of his mouth.
                  
                  The ſame God which firſt deliuered the church from the violence and fury of Sathan, and afterward caſt him out of heauen, and gaue her the victory ouer

him; & after that againe miraculouſly hid hir & preſerued her in the wilderneſſe, doth not now at a dead lift forſake her, nor ſuffer her to be drowned in this floud of reproches, & vniuſt calumniations, which the dragon caſt vp after her. But cauſeth the earth to help her, & to ſwallow vp the floud: That is, he vſeth al creatures in the earth to helpe his church: and not onely ſo, but alſo he ſtirreth vp many earthly and carnal men to befrend the church, and to take part with her againſt her enemies. As ſometimes he did Cyrus, Ebedmelech, Nebuzaradan, Gamaliel, and ſundry others, whoſe power and policy he vſed for the good of his church, and for the drying vp of that flood of reproches, which Sathan hath in al ages caſt vp againſt her. And God be thanked, we ſee at this day that this floud of ſlaunders and calumnies, which papiſts & atheiſts caſt out againſt the church, and her particular members, do dry vp dayly, and ſhal dry vp more and more, being drunk in by the earth. And the church doth ſtil ſtand vnmooueable, and ſhal ſtand and continue euen vnto the end of the world.
                  
                     
                        ver. 17 
                     Then the dragon was wroth with the woman, and went & made war with the remnant of her ſeede, which keep the commandements of God, and haue the teſtimony of Ieſus Chriſt.
                  
                  Here we ſee there is no end of the diuels malice. He is infatigable in miſchief: though he haue neuer ſo many foiles, yet he wil not giue ouer, but begin againe. For wheras he could not preuaile againſt the woman, to caſt her out of heauen, by impeaching her election and ſaluation in Chriſt, nor yet root her out the earth by perſecutions, being hid in the wildernes,

and locked vp in the priuy chambers of Gods prouidence, as ſometimes yong Ioaſh was locked vp in the prieſts chamber from the fury of Athaliah:King. 11.2 now he goeth another way to worke, and ſetteth vpon her in her ſeed and poſterity, which remaine in the earth vnto this day. So that now ſith he cannot do what miſchiefe he would againſt the church; yet wil he doo what he can: ſeeing he cannot wound her in her head, yet wil he bite, and pinch at her heele: as it is written, that he ſhould bruiſe her heele.
                     Gen. 3.15. And as is the malice of Sathan againſt the church; ſo is the rage and fury of al his members, euen al the wicked and vngodly, againſt the true worſhippers of God. They are reſtles in malice and in miſchiefe: if they cannot vex them one way, they wil try another: if they cannot touch them in their liues, yet will they moleſt them in their goods and good name: if they cannot do what they would, yet wil they do what they can: they wil neuer giue ouer: if they can ſpite them in the leaſt thing that is, they ſhal be ſure of it. For they are as ful of venime as a toad, and as full of malice to Chriſt, as an eg is ful of meate.
                  
                     And I ſtood on the ſea ſand. 
                     
                        ver. 18 
                  
                  Now Iohn affirmeth that he ſtood vpon the ſea ſand, to behold the beaſt which riſeth out of the ſea in the next Chapter; or elſe becauſe the greeke word may be of the third perſon, which is, he ſtood, that is,
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . the dragon ſtood, it may beare this ſenſe, that the diuel ſtood vpon the ſea ſand, as it were working and framing out of the ſea his chief
                        •
                      inſtrument, which is the beaſt now following to be ſpoken of.
               
            
            
               
               CHAP. XIII.
               
                  WEe haue heard in the former chapter the deſcription of the church, and of her archenemie the diuel, and of the battell betwixt them, with the ſucceſſe thereof. Now in this chapter wee are to heare of the dragons two great inſtruments, whereby he fighteth againſt the woman: that is, the Romane empire, and the Papacie. For by theſe two, as it were his two hands, he hath in all ages, from the Apoſtles time to this day, moſt cruelly aſſailed, and afflicted the church. Therefore the maine drift of this chapter is, to deſcribe at large theſe two beaſts, together with all their beaſtly proceedings. So that this chapter may fitly be deuided into two principal parts.
                  The firſt is a deſcription of the Roman monarchy, when it was at the higheſt pitch, vntil the 11. verſe.
                  The ſecond, is a deſcription of the Papacie, when it was in his pride, and exaltation; in all the verſes following vnto the end of this chapter.
                  In the firſt of theſe two maine branches, the Romane Empire is diuerſly deſcribed.
                  Firſt, of the petigree thereof.
                  Secondly, of her ſeuen ſeuerall gouernments.
                  
                     
                        verſ. 1 Thirdly, of her great and outſtretched power.
                  Fourthly, of her victories.
                  Fiftly, of her blaſphemies.
                  
                     
                        verſ. 2 
                     
                        verſ. 3 Sixtly, of her furie, rapine, and pride.
                  After this is ſet down the wound, which was made in the Empire, with the curing of the ſame.
                  
                     
                        verſ. 4.5.6.7.8 9.10. Laſtly, is ſet down the great and admirable power, and authority of the Roman empire, which ruled ouer

a great part of the world, and had many nations ſubiect vnto it, eſpecially, when the Popes were the heads thereof.
                  In the ſecond maine part is the Papacie very liuely deſcribed.
                  Firſt, frō the petigree thereof, which is of the earth. 
                        verſ. 11 
                  
                  Secondly, from the ciuil and Eccleſiaſticall power thereof, which is pretended to come from Chriſt, although in truth it is of the diuell.
                  After this is ſet downe that the Papacie ſhould be as mightie, 
                        verſ. 12.13.14. and performe as much in the ſeruice of the Dragon againſt God, as euer the Empire of the heathen could do, both by authoritie and force, and eſpecially, by lying wonders.
                  Then is ſhewed, that as the Papacie did in ſubſtance of matter ſet vp and reſtore againe the old Roman tyrannie, to be worſhipped, and wondred at; 
                        verſ. 14 ſo hath it framed an Hierarchie or Eccleſiaſticall gouernment, after the verie forme and preſident of the ancient Romane tyrannie; which is indeed ſo like it, that it is called the liuely image thereof: 
                        verſ. 15 and he hath by his Clergie and their iuriſdiction, put ſuch life and ſpirit into this image, that it ſpake with authoritie and power in all countries and kingdomes; 
                        verſ. 16.17. in ſo much that whoſoeuer would not ſubmit himſelfe thereunto, and both profeſſe and practiſe poperie, and yeeld himſelfe wholy to the papacie, he ſhould die for it.
                  Laſt of all, 
                        ver. 18 is deſcried and diſcouered from the numeratiue letters of the name of the ſecond beaſt, both who hee was, and from whence hee ſhould ſpring.
               
               
                  
                  Text.
                  
                     
                        verſ. 1 
                     And I ſaw a beaſt riſe out of the ſea, hauing ſeuen heades, and tenne hornes, and vpon his hornes were tenne crownes, and vpon his heads the name of blaſphemie.
                  
                  Firſt, we are to vnderſtand that a beaſt in the Scripture doth ſignifie a kingdome, or monarchie; and that not in reſpect of the ciuil power therof, which is of God,Rom. 13. as it is written, There is no power but of God: but in reſpect of the tyrannie, crueltie, ambition, pride, and other ſuch like beaſtly qualities thereof, which are of the diuell: and therefore this beaſt is ſaid to aſcend out of the bottomleſſe pit, chap. 17.8.
                  This word beaſt is thus taken in the ſeuenth of Daniel,
                     Dan. 7.4.5.6. where the three great Monarchies of the Babylonians, Medes and Perſians, and of the Grecians, are compared for their pride, rapine and cruelty, to a Lyon, a Beare, and a Leopard. The Angell in that chapter ſaith expreſly,Dan. 7.17. that theſe beaſts were kings, that is, kingly gouernments or Dominions.
                  By the beaſt in this place is meant the Romane Monarchie, not in regard of the ciuill power thereof, but eſpecially in reſpect of the tyranny of it, in oppreſſing the Church.
                  By the ſea here is meant the troubleſome ſtate of the nations: as it is taken chap. 4. verſ. 6. and chap. 21. verſ. 1. For from the boyling, and broyling eſtate of the former kingdomes and heathen nations, which were as a raging ſea, did the Roman Empire ſpring vp, as all ſtories do witneſſe. And the Prophet

                     Daniel doth flatly teach that through the diuiſion of the Greeke Empire,Dan. 10. which fell out in the poſteritie of Alexander the Great,Dan. 11. eſpecially betwixt his two ſonnes Ptolemeus and Seleucus, this Romane monarchie by degrees made a head, till at laſt it came to this pitch, which now we ſhall heare of.
                  By the ſeuen heads of this beaſt, are meant the ſeuen ſeuerall gouernments of the Roman Empire. Firſt, by Kings. Secondly, by Conſuls. Thirdly, by Decemuiri. Fourthly, by Dictators. Fiftly, by Triumuiri. 
                        chapter 17.9. Sixtly, by Emperours. And laſtly, by Popes, as heereafter ſhal more plainly appeare.
                  By the tenne hornes of this beaſt, is meant the great power and large dominion of the Roman Empire, or as the Angell himſelfe doth expound it, 
                        chapter 17.12. thereby is meant tenne kings, that is, manie kingdomes, which ſhould be ſubiect to the Roman Monarchie, and wherein in verie deede the power and ſtrength of the Empire did conſiſt. For by theſe hornes the Roman Empire did not only puſh downe other nations: but eſpecially doſſe againſt the Church, and as it were, cruelly gore the ſides thereof.
                  Nowe then we ſee that the Roman Emperours both in homes and heads, were like their Father the diuel or the dragon.
                  By the tenne crownes vpon his tenne hornes, are meant his great and manifolde victories ouer other countries and kingdomes.
                  The hornes of this beaſt are ſaid to be crowned, & not his heads, becauſe the Roman Empire hath alwayes more preuailed by power then by policie, by ſtrength then by ſubtilty. But the Dragon hath his

heads crowned, and not his homes, becauſe he hath alwayes done more hurt by policie, then power; by ſubtiltie, then ſtrength. One thing in all this is greatly to bee heeded, that the holy Ghoſt in this chapter doth ſpecially ſpeake of the Roman monarchie, as the Popes were heads thereof; or as it was vnder the dominion of the Popes in their pride, when as the Emperours were almoſt troden vnder foote: and not ſimply and ſoly, as the Emperours were heads thereof.
                  Moreouer it is ſaid, that vpon the ſeuen heads of this beaſt was written the name of blaſphemie. For beſides the blaſphemies of Caligula, Nero, Domitian, Diocleſian, Iulianus, and the other old heatheniſh, and perſecuting Emperours, which haue arrogated vnto themſelues diuine honour, wee ſhall anon heare of the ſurpaſſing blaſphemies of the Popes againſt God, 
                        ver. 5.6. and all goodneſſe.
                  
                     
                        verſ. 2 
                     And the Beaſt which I ſaw was like a Leopard, and his feete like a Beares, and his mouth as the mouth of a Lyon, and the Dragon gaue him his power, & his throne, and great authoritie.
                  
                  Here the Roman Empire is deſcribed of the likelihood of qualities, which it had with the other three Empires going before it. For firſt, it is compared to a Leopard, for ſwiftneſſe to pray vpon others; and alſo for firceneſſe, and ſubtiltie, as did the Greeke monarchie. Secondly, it is compared to a Beare for rapine and rauening, as the monarchie of the Medes and Perſians. Thirdly, it is compared to a Lyon for pride and inſolencie, as the monarchie of the Chaldaeans. So then by this deſcription it is

verie cleere, that this beaſt ſignifieth the Roman monarchie, becauſe it containeth in it the whole power of the other three Empires: and is here deſcribed as a compound of diuers beaſts, yea as a verie monſter of monſters, hauing the body of a Leopard, the feete of a Beare, and the mouth of a Lyon.
                  Moreouer it is ſaid, that the Dragon gaue him his power, and his throne, and great authoritie. Which plainely ſheweth, that the power and authoritie of the Roman Empire is of the diuell, in reſpect of the euill qualitie thereof, that is, fraud, rapine, 
                        chapter 17. v. 8. and oppreſſion: In which reſpect it is ſaid to aſcend out of the bottomleſſe pit, as was declared before. But the ſubſtance of it, and the gouernement it ſelfe, was of God. For the powers that be, are ordained of God,
                     Rom. 13.2. as ſaith the Apoſtle.
                  
                     And I ſaw one of his heads, 
                     
                        verſ. 3 
                     as it were wounded vnto death: but his deadly wound was healed, and all the world wondred, and followed the beaſt.
                  
                  Heere Iohn in a viſion ſeeth one of the ſeuen heads of the beaſt, almoſt wounded vnto death. There bee diuers and differing opinions of the learned touching this wound of the Empire, both when it ſhould bee, and howe, and by whom. Some vnderſtand it of the death of Iulius Caeſar: ſome of Nero: ſome of the oppreſſion of the Gothes and Vandales: ſome of the great preuailing of Iohn Huſſe, and Ierome of Prage in the greateſt part of Bohemia. But to let all theſe paſſe, if wee do wiſely conſider and weigh with our ſelues, that by a beaſt in this place, is not meant anie lawfull adminiſtration of gouernement: but a tyrannicall

power in perſecuting the Church, wee ſhall find that a head of the beaſt was then wounded, when Conſtantine the Great ſlew Maxentius and Licinius, the two laſt perſecuting Emperours, ſet vp true religion, and brought peace to the Churches. For hereby the Roman Empire was greatly wounded, as touching the tyrannie of it. The holy Ghoſt doth not ſet downe which of the ſeuen heads were thus wounded, but in generall ſaith, one of them. Nowe it is verie probable, that he meaneth the ſixt head: For we doe not reade of anie ſuch wound in the former fiue which were paſt. Neither can it be vnderſtood of the ſeuenth head, which was the Papacie, becauſe it receiued no ſuch wounde as yet. It followeth then, that the wound was in the ſixt head, that is, in the Empire. But we reade of no Emperour that did ſo wound the beaſt, as did Conſtantine the Great. And therefore it is verie probable, nay, an hundred to one, that the holy Ghoſt here pointeth at him.
                  But it followeth, that his deadly wound was healed, to wit, by theſe wicked Emperours which ſucceeded Conſtantine, as Conſtantius, Iulianus, Valentius, and others, which afreſh did ſet vp Idolatrie, and perſecuted the Church. Nowe vppon the healing of this wound, it is ſaid, that all the world wondred, and followed the beaſt: that is, manie nations, or the greateſt part of the world did ſubmit themſelues to the Roman tyrannie. For ſure it is, ſome kingdomes were neuer ſubiect to the Empire of Rome, as ſome part of Aſia, and ſome part of Africa.
                  
                     
                        verſ. 4 
                     And they worſhipped the Dragon which gaue power

vnto the beaſt, and they worſhipped the beaſt, ſaying: Who is like vnto the beaſt, who is able to warre with him!
                  
                  Now is ſhewed how all the ſubiects of the Roman Empire, did worſhip the Dragon: that is, they maintained that worſhip, which he liked and loued, that is, the worſhip of idols, which the Apoſtle calleth the worſhip of diuels. And it is ſaid alſo,1. Cor. 10.20.21. 
                     they worſhipped the beaſt: that is, they did all with one accord ſubmit themſelues both to the religion, and authoritie of the beaſt: that is, to the Popes, as they were the ſeuenth head of the Empire. For, as I ſaid before, ſo I ſay againe, the holy Ghoſt heere ſpeaketh of the Empire, when it was in the greateſt glorie and exaltation; yea when all the worlde wondred and followed the beaſt; yea, when all admired the great and large dominion of the Roman empire; and ſaid within themſelues, who is like vnto the beaſt? who is able to warre with him? Now, the Empire of Rome was neuer ſo great and powerful, as when the Popes were heads thereof, I meane when they executed the whole ciuill iuriſdiction of the empire, beſides their Eccleſiaſticall power, which now did both meete in one. For now the Papacie was aloft, and the Roman Empire ioyned with it: ſo that the eyes of the world were dazeled with the pompe and magnificence thereof, and they ſaid, What is like vnto it? or who is comparable to the Pope, the ſeuenth head thereof? For then the blinde worlde thought that the power of the Popes, was not onely aboue all things in this world, but alſo did reach euen vnto heauen and hell. For they imagined that

the Pope might carie to heauen whom hee would; and whom he would, he might caſt downe to hell: and therefore who could warre with the beaſt? And thus wee ſee the reaſon of their wonderment, and of their ſpeech. All ſtories and experience it ſelfe doe ſhew, that there was neuer anie power in the world ſo wondred at, as the vſurped power and maieſtie of the Pope, after he came to bee the head of the Roman monarchie. For then the world ſuppoſed that hee had power, euen as God: and that he might depoſe, and ſet vp kings and Emperours at his pleaſure. Then it is cleere, that vnder the dominion of the Popes, Rome hath beene in her higheſt exaltation and glorie. For the Papacie was the ſeuenth head of the beaſt, whereby the whoore of Babylon was ſupported in her moſt magnificall pompe and pride.
                  
                     
                        
                           verſ. 5 And there was giuen vnto him a mouth that ſpake great things, and blaſphemies, and power was giuen vnto him to do 42. moneths.
                     
                        
                           ver. 6 And he opened his mouth vnto blaſphemy againſt God, to blaſpheme his name, and his tabernacle, and them that dwel in heauen.
                  
                  Here are ſet down the proud and blaſphemous ſpeeches both of the old, and new Romane Empire; and of the old, and new Romane Emperours. For this beaſt (as I ſaid before) comprehendeth al the Roman Empire, both vnder the Heathen Emperours, and the Popes. Touching the great things, and blaſphemies, which the old perſecuting Emperours haue belched out againſt the God of heauē, it wold require

a volume to ſet them downe in particulars. I wil therfore only mention two or three for exampels ſake: As firſt that of Caius Caligula, which would haue his image ſet vp in temples to be worſhipped as God, and that the people ſhould ſweare by his name. Nero alſo did openly blaſpheme the name of Chriſt, and required diuine honour to be giuen vnto him. Domitian commanded that he ſhould be called God and Lord. Many others required the like things: and ſo al the world woondred and worſhipped this blaſphemous beaſt. Now as the ſixt head, which was the old empire of Rome, was ful of the names of blaſphemy; ſo the ſeuenth head, which is the new Empire vnder the dominion of the Popes, which he here chiefely ſpeaketh of, did moſt of al blaſpheme. For the Pope did challenge vnto himſelfe al power both in heauen and earth: he would be worſhipped as God: he vſurped authority ouer the worde of God: he did take vpon him to forgiue ſinnes. He did moſt blaſphemouſly incroach vpon all the offices of Chriſt, as king, prieſt, & prophet. He hath commāded the Angels. He hath erected blaſphemous images, and cauſed pictures to be made of the Godhead. He boaſteth and craketh great things of his Papal power, of Peters keies, of Peters chaire, of Peters ſucceſſion, of his miracles, of his two ſwords, and of his manifold praerogatiues roial. One of the Popes poiſoned his God: another caſt his God into the fire: another would eate his peacocke in deſpite of God. Some of thē counted the religiō of Chriſt a tale or a fable: ſome drank to the diuel: ſome ſaid, they could doe as much as God. It were infinit to ſet downe al their blaſphemies: for it is ſaide of the

whoore of Babylon, that ſhe was full of the names of blaſphemy. Let this ſuffice for the vnderſtanding of this text, that as the olde heatheniſh Emperours did blaſpheme, ſo the Popes being heades of the Empire, did moſt of al blaſpheme. And as it is here ſaid, they did not only blaſpheme the name of God, but alſo did open their black and blaſphemous mouthes againſt his tabernacle, that is, his church, calling it a cō
                     pany of heretickes, ſchiſmatickes, apoſtataes and ſuch like; and alſo againſt them that dwell in heauen, that is, the ſpirits of iuſt and perfect men, which are in heauē, as Luther, Caluin, Melancthon and ſuch like.
                  Moreouer it is to be noted, that this mouth was giuen vnto this monſtrous beaſt, thus to blaſpheme and ſpeake great things. But this is to be vnderſtood, that it was giuen in the wrath and iuſt iudgement of God vpō the world, to plague them withal, becauſe they regarded not the knowledg of the truth. But it is added, that this power of the beaſt thus to worke his actions, was limited vnto 42. monethes; ſo that although he rule and rage for a time, yet ſhal he not long continue.
                  
                     
                        ver. 7 
                     And it was giuen vnto him to make war with the Saints, and to ouer come them; and power was giuen vnto him ouer euery kindred, and tongue and nation.
                  
                  
                     
                        ver. 8 
                     Therefore all that dwell vpon the earth, ſhall worſhip him, whoſe names are not written in the booke of life of the Lambe, which was ſlaine from the beginning of the world.
                  
                  Theſe two verſes do ſet forth the great power which was giuen vnto this beaſt, both in fighting againſt Gods people, and alſo ouercomming of them, and murdering of them by heapes. As we reade of thouſands

murdered in the firſt ten great perſecutions, and ten thouſands by the Popes, ſince they came to exerciſe the ciuill authority and iuriſdiction of the Romane Empire, and that in al countries and kingdomes of Europe; as it is here ſaid, that power was giuē vnto him ouer euery kindred▪ and tongue and nation. And it is added, that all that dwell vpon the earth, that is, al the ſubiects of the Roman monarchy, ſhal worſhip the beaſt, and make a God of him; as we read they haue don. And the chiefe motiue therof, was his blaſphemous mouth, boaſting & threatning great things if any did withſtand him: and alſo his mighty power and authority, whereby he bare downe al before him. For if any did but mute againſt him, he was ſure to ſmart for it. And thus through his tyrannicall power he ſubdued al nations vnder him, and made them ſtoupe and fal downe and worſhip him. But it followeth, that for al this, none of Gods elect did worſhip him, or ſubmit themſelues to his religion, and authority, but only thoſe that dwell vpon the earth, that is, earthly men: as papiſts, atheiſts, and reprobates, and al ſuch, whoſe names are not written in the booke of life.
                  
                  Chriſt is called the Lambe ſlaine from the beginning of the world, becauſe the ſauing power of his death was from the beginning to all beleeuers, although hee was not actually exhibited vntil the fulneſſe of time.
                  
                     Yf any man haue an eare, let him heare.
                  
                  
                     Yf any lead into captiuity, he ſhall goe into captiuity: 
                     
                        ver. 9 
                     
                        ver. 10 
                     yf any kill with a ſword, he muſt be killed by a ſword. Here is the patience and the faith of the Saints.
                  
                  Here is ſhewed, that the things ſpoken of this great

beaſt, are very ſecret and myſtical, and can be vnderſtood of none but thoſe onely, whoſe eares and eies God openeth to heare, & ſee, and vnderſtand, that is, the very elect of God: as for al papiſts and worldlings, their eares & eies are ſealed and ſhut vp, they cannot vnderſtand them, but doe ſtil worſhip the beaſt, aſcribing vnto him diuine power and honor.
                  In the 10. verſe the iudgement and vengeance of God is denounced againſt the Romane monarchie, both former and latter; which, as it hath long oppreſſed the church with cruel bondage, and drawne thouſands into perpetual captiuity; ſo it ſelfe alſo ſhould be caſt downe, with al the adherents thereof, both in this life and that which is to come. For as the Romane Empire did tyranniſe ouer the world, and led millions into ſpirituall captiuity and bondage: ſo here it is auouched, that according to the iuſt lawe of quittance, it ſelfe ſhould be brought to the ſame lore. And as this beaſt had murdered many by the ſword; ſo he him ſelfe muſt be murdered by the ſword alſo: As the Apoſtle ſaith,2. Theſ. 1.6 
                     God is iuſt, and therefore will recompenſe tribulation to them that trouble his Church. Now al this ſeemeth vnto me, to be a cleere prophecy of the fal and final deſtruction of the Romane Empire, which indeede conſidering the pitch that it was at, may ſeeme a thing ſtrange and incredible: and therefore the Holy-ghoſt ſtirreth vs vp to attention in the ninth verſe, as to a thing of great woonderment, and admiration: for if the Romane monarchie fall, the Papacy muſt of neceſſity fal with it. For the Romane Empire is that beaſt, 
                        chapter 17. verse 3. which beareth vp the whoore of Babylon, as appeareth in the 17. Chapter of this prophecy,

where we ſhal (God willing) plainely, and at large heare of the ioint deſtruction of them both together.
                  It is added: Heere is the patience and faith of the Saints. That is, here is required great patience of al Gods children, to waite, and carry til the performance and accompliſhment of thoſe things; and alſo faith and ful aſſurance to beleeue, that they ſhal in Gods appointed time come to paſſe. For few doo beleeue theſe things, and therfore wait not with patience for the accompliſhment thereof.
                  
                     And I beheld another beaſt comming out of the earth, 
                     
                        ver. 11, 
                     which had two hornes like the Lamb, but he ſpake like the dragon.
                  
                  Hauing deſcribed the firſt beaſt which is the Roman Empire: now the Holy-ghoſt commeth to deſcribe the ſecond beaſt, which is the Papacy, or the kingdome of the great Antichriſt: for although hee bee deſcribed before in regard of his monarchy, that is, the ciuill iuriſdiction, which hee exerciſed as he was the ſeuenth head of the beaſt, and head of the Empire; yet here he is deſcribed after another ſort, that is, according to his eccleſiaſtical authority: and therfore he is called another beaſt, or a beaſt differing from the former, in that he exerciſeth an other power, beſides the power of the heathen Emperours of Rome, which is his ſpirituall iuriſdiction,Chap. 16 Ver. 13. Chap. 19. Ver. 20. in which reſpect he is called the falſe prophet.
                  This ſecond beaſt riſeth out of the earth, as the former roſe out of the ſea: then it appeareth that Antichriſt is, by his breed, a ſonne of the earth; obſcurely borne, & by little and little creeping vp out of his abiect

eſtate; as did the Turke. It is here moſt truly ſaid, that the kingdome of Antichriſt ariſeth out of the earth, & is the very breed of the earth: for aſſuredly it neuer came from heauen. It was firſt hatched out of couetuouſneſſe, ambition, pride, murders, treaſons, poiſonings, ſorceries, enchantments, and ſuch like. For al ſtories do ſhew, that from theſe roots the Papacy grew to his exceeding height and altitude.
                  This ſecond beaſt hath two hornes, like the Lambe: Whereby is meant his ciuil and eccleſiaſtical power, or his kingdome, and Prieſthood; which he falſly pretendeth to come from the Lamb: and therefore he giueth in his armes two keies, and hath two ſwords carried before him. So Boniface the eight ſhewed himſelfe one day in apparrel as a Pope, and the next day in armour as the Emperour; and the two hornes in the Popes miter are ſignes hereof. But the Holy-ghoſt here telleth vs, that theſe two hornes are not the hornes of the Lambe, but only like the hornes of the Lamb: for he receiued not his power from the Lamb Chriſt; but from the diuel, that is, the dragon with ten hornes. Then thus it is, the Papacy is the ſeauenth head of the firſt beaſt, that is, the Empire; & yet a beaſt by it ſelfe, with two hornes like the Lamb, in reſpect of his ioint power and authority, both eccleſiaſtical and ciuil, in which reſpect he is called euen the eight: and one of the ſeuen, Chap. 17. ver. 11.
                  Although this ſecond beaſt haue two hornes like the Lamb, yet he ſpake like the dragon, that is, al his words and workes, practiſes and proceedings, lawes and decrees, are for the dragon, of whom he hath his power and throne, and great authority. So that whatſoeuer

he pretendeth in religion, and matters of Gods worſhip, as though he would be like the Lamb; yet aſſuredly hee is altogether for the dragon and the diuel: he is aſſured vnto them, as al experience doth manifeſtly witneſſe.
                  
                     And he did all that the firſt beaſt could doe before him: & he cauſed the earth, & them that dwel therin, 
                     
                        verſ. 12 
                     to worſhip the firſt beaſt, whoſe deadly wound was healed.
                  
                  Here is ſhewed, that this ſecond beaſt was as mighty and ſtronge as the firſt beaſt, and could doo as much as he, euen in his preſence. Whereby is noted the great power, and authority of the Papacy, in performing as much in the ſeruice of the dragon againſt God and his church, as euer the Empire of the heathen, and thoſe wicked Emperours could doo: yea he did much more againſt Chriſt and his religion, then euer the perſecuting Emperours could do, euen then when they were at their higheſt pitch. And al this he did in his preſence, that is, in the ſight and open view of the whole Empire, or whole world.
                  
                     And he cauſed the earth, and them that dwell therin, that is, al Papiſts, and worldlings, to worſhip the firſt beaſt, that is, to receiue the worſhip and religion of the old Roman tyranny, which ſet vp and maintained Idolatry. So then, although the power in the Papacy came vnder the name of Chriſt, yet in truth it was the ſame that the power of the perſecuting Empire: for the heathen emperours condemned the true worſhip of God, and ſet vp falſe worſhip, euen the worſhip of diuels, which is Idolatry, and ſo do the Popes alſo. So then we ſee, that this ſecond beaſt is al for the firſt beaſt, that is, he leuieth al his power and authority,

to ſet vp the worſhip and religion of the old Romane tyrants; and to force al men by cruel lawes and decrees, to receiue and embrace the ſame. So this ſecond beaſt is nothing better thē the firſt; nay in truth a great deale worſe.
                  
                     
                        verſ. 13 
                     And he did great woonders, ſo that hee made fire to come downe from heauen on the earth, in the ſight of men.
                  
                  
                     
                        verſ. 14 
                     And deceiued them that dwell on the earth, by the ſignes which were permitted him to doo in the ſight of the beaſt, ſaying to them that dwell on the earth, that they ſhould make the Image of the beaſt, which had the wound of a ſword, and did liue.
                  
                  Theſe two verſes do containe two ſpecial things: The one is, the falſe & fained miracles of Antichriſt. The other is, the curſed effect thereof.
                  Touching the firſt, which is the woonders and miracles which Antichriſt ſhould worke, it is here ſaid that he ſhould make fire come downe from heauen, as Elias did. The meaning whereof is not, that the Popes could indeed cauſe fire to come downe from heauen, as Elias did: but in the opinion of the blind world, they ſeemed to haue as great power as euer had Elias. For partly by counterfeit miracles, and partly by ſome ſtrange things done by the power of Sathan, the ſeduced world hath verily beleeued, that the Pope and his clergie had as great power to worke miracles, as euer had Elias.
                  
                  Touching the ſecond thing, which is the effect of theſe woonders: It is here ſayd that the inhabitants of the earth, that is, Papiſts and Worldlings, were groſſelie deceiued and deluded by them, euen by

thoſe lying woonders, which were permitted him to doo in the ſight of the beaſt, that is, in the face and open view of the Empire: According as the Apoſtle foretolde, that the comming of Antichriſt ſhould be by the effectuall working of Sathan,
                     2. Theſ. 2. 
                     with all power and ſignes, and lying woonders, and in all deceiueableneſſe of vnrighteouſneſſe among them that periſh, &c. But concerning the Popiſhe counterfeit ſignes and woonders, it is needeleſſe to write, beeing ſo wel knowne to al men, as they are, and ſo common and notorious in al ſtories.
                   
                     
                        ver. 14 Saying to them that dwel on the earth, that they ſhould make the image of the beaſt, which had the wound of a ſword, and did liue.
                  Now Antichriſt hauing gotten the world vnder him, by his counterfeit miracles, dooth lay his commandement vpon thē, to make the Image of the beaſt. Now what is here meant by the image of the beaſt, is ſomewhat hard to diſcuſſe: ſome thinke, that by the image of the beaſt, which had the wound of a ſword, and did liue, is meant the repairing, and the reſtoring of the decaied eſtate of the empire, by the Popes, to his ful ſtrength and vertue. We doe read that the ſtate of the empire vnder Nero, Otho, Galba, and Vitellius, was weak & feeble, in compariſon of that which it was before, vnder Auguſtus, Tiberius, & Claudius. We doo reade alſo that the Gothes and Vandales made horrible rents and diſſipations in the Romane empire. We doe further reade, that the empire was deuided and rent in peeces; ſo that there was the emperour of the Eaſt, & the emperour of ye Weſt; yea at

laſt, the empire of the Weſt fel quite downe: ſo that for the ſpace of three hundred yeares and more, there was no Emperour of the Weſt, vntill the Biſhop of Rome Leo the third made Charles the Great, the king of France, Emperour: Then was the empire of the Weſt againe erected, and in time grew to as great an height vnder the dominion of the Popes, as euer before; yea and farre greater. Now I ſay, ſome do take this reſtoring of the decayed eſtate of the Empire, by the Popes, to his former ſtrength and power, to be the making of the image of the beaſt, which had the wound of a ſword, and did liue. But for mine owne part I cannot be of that opinion; and my reaſon is, that the reſtoring of the decaied eſtate of the empire to his former condition, was the ſetting vp of the beaſt himſelfe: for the empire is the beaſt, and not the Image of the beaſt: for we muſt needes graunt, that the beaſt, and the image of the beaſt, are two ſeueral things. But the Popes in recouering the empire to his priſtinate eſtate, ſet vp the beaſt againe: and therfore not the image of the beaſt. Therefore the image of the beaſt, cannot be vnderſtood of the reſtauration of the decaied eſtate of the empire. Beſides this, it is here ſaid, that the inhabitants of the earth had a great hād in making of this image. But the inhabitāts of the earth bare ſmal ſway in the recouering and erectiō of the empire. (For therein the Popes were al in al, after it came into their hands) Therfore this cannot be vnderſtood of ye Empire, but of ſome other thing: let vs then diligently ſearch out what may be the true meaning of this place. It muſt needes be graunted, that by the beaſt, which had the wound of a ſworde,

and did liue, is meant the recouered eſtate of the empire, as before verſ. 12. and by the image thereof, I vnderſtande the forme of gouerment: for an image doth ſignifie a likenes, a ſimilitude, a figure or forme of a thing. And as in all ciuil and eccleſiaſticall regiments, there is both a ſubſtance and a forme; a matter and a manner: ſo here, 
                        verſ. 12 hauing before ſet downe that Antichriſt had erected the ſubſtance and matter of the old Romane tyranny; now he ſheweth, that he ſhould alſo ſet vp the image and forme of the ſame. For before ver. 12. it is ſaid, that Antichriſt this ſecōd beaſt, cauſed the world to worſhip the firſt beaſt, that is, to receiue and imbrace the lawes, worſhip, and religion of the olde heatheniſh Romane tyrants, as before hath bin ſhewed: and now here is added, that hee did not content himſelfe with cauſing the inhabitants of the earth to worſhip the old beaſt, in the ſubſtance of his religion; but alſo he laieth commaundements vpon them, to make his Image, that is, to erect an externall forme of Eccleſiaſticall gouernment, after the verie patterne and forme of the gouernement of the old Empire; yea ſo like it, that it is called the verie image of the ſame. For as the forme of gouernement vnder the old Emperours, was cruell and tyrannicall, and altogether bent againſt the Church: ſo the forme of Eccleſiaſticall gouernement vnder the Popes, was cruell and tyrannicall, and altogether bent againſt the Church; and therefore heere it is called the Image of it▪ for it is as like it as it can looke. Then it followeth, that Antichriſt hath ſet vp that externall forme of worſhip, which the Idolatrous Romans of old vſed;

and that he hath renewed the perſecuting Empire, not onely in ſubſtance of matter, but alſo in forme of gouernement: and therefore I conclude, that the Popiſh Church-policie, and externall regiment, is the verie Image of the beaſt.
                  Heere the inhabitants of the earth are ſaid to make the Image of the beaſt, becauſe they gaue their conſent to the making of it: for indeede the Popes themſelues were the chiefe agents and doers in it.
                   
                     
                        ver. 15 And it was permitted vnto him, to giue a ſpirit vnto the Image of the beaſt; ſo that the Image of the beaſt ſhould ſpeake, and ſhould cauſe that as many as would not worſhip the Image of the beaſt, ſhould bee killed.
                  Heere is ſhewed, that this image of the beaſt was not a dead image, but a liuing image: for Antichriſt put a ſpirit into it; that is, life and power, and great authoritie; inſomuch that this Image could ſpeake; and not onely ſpeake, but ſpeake with great authoritie and terrour: ſo as whoſoeuer would not worſhip this Image, that is, ſubmit himſelfe to the Popiſh Hierarchie, ſhould bee put to death. But may ſome man ſay, How did this image ſpeake? I anſwer, by the Popes Clergie. For the Romiſh rabble of Cardinals, Abbots, Monks, Prieſts, Friers, and all that curſed corporation, were the verie breath, life, and ſpirit of this image: I meane, that the lifebloud of their externall regiment, did lie in the execution thereof by the Clergie, as it were in certaine arteries and veines. For what was their outwarde

forme of gouernement, without this cruell execution of their ſtinging Clergie men, but as a dead Image without life? But when Antichriſt had once conſecrated and erected his Romiſh prieſthood, then did hee put life into his Image, which before he had cauſed to bee made and erected. Then wee doe plainely ſee, that the popiſh Hierarchie is not a bare reſemblance of the old Roman policie, to ſtand as a picture on a wall, but hath a ſpirit put into it by the falſe Prophet, and ſpeaketh with ſuch power and terrour in all kingdomes, that it cauſeth all to bee put to death that will not ſubmit themſelues vnto it, and fall downe and worſhip the beaſt. Who knoweth not this, that as manie in all countries, as would not embrace poperie, and the old Roman tyrannie; the Popiſh Clergie, their inquiſitors, and other Officers, did condemne them in their Courts, as heretikes, ſchiſmatikes, and deliuered them ouer, being condemned, to the ſecular power to bee put to death.
                  
                     And he made all both ſmall and great, 
                           verſ. 16 rich and poore, bond and free, to receiue a marke in their right hand, or in their foreheads.
                     And that no man might buy or ſell, 
                           verſ. 17 ſaue he that had the marke, or the name of the beaſt, or the number of his name.
                  
                  Antichriſt is not content to murder and maſſacre all in all countries, which will not worſhip the Image of the beaſt; that is, ſtoupe to his gouernement and authoritie: but hee will goe yet a ſteppe further, and will haue all ſorts of people brought in

bondage vnto him, as his marked ſeruants. For as men vſe to ſet a brand vpon their ſheepe and other cattell, and to eare-marke them, that it may openly and manifeſtly appeare to whom they appertaine: ſo doth Antichriſt this Romiſh beaſt, cauſe all men in all kingdoms to carie in open viewe his marke or brand, whereby all may ſee that they do appertaine vnto him.
                  It is heere ſaid, that all the vaſſals of Antichriſt, of what degree, eſtate, or condition ſoeuer, muſt receiue his marke in their right hand, or in their forehead: that is, they muſt openly profeſſe and practiſe the worſhip and religion of the beaſt. For the forehead is put for the profeſſion; and the right hand, for the action: ſo that in one of them at the leaſt, euery man muſt openly declare, that hee acknowledgeth the Pope of Rome to be Lord of his faith.
                  Moreouer it is added, That no man might buy or ſell, ſaue hee that had the marke, or the name of the beaſt, or the number of his name: the meaning is, that no man might traffique in the world, or haue anie doings amongſt men; nay, hee might not be ſuffered to liue, except hee had the marke of the beaſt in his forehead, or in his right hand; that is, vnleſſe he did profeſſe and practiſe the worſhip, the religion, the lawes, and decrees of the Pope. For the marke of the beaſt is put for his worſhip, religion, lawes, decrees, regiments, and policie.
                  Moreouer the Popes vaſſals haue not onely his marke vpon them, whereby they may be knowne, but alſo the name of the beaſt; for they muſt bee named after him, euen as children beare the name of their

Fathers, and muſt bee called of the Pope, or Papa, Papiſts. And not onely ſo, but alſo they haue another priuie marke vpon them, and that is the number of his name, which is Latinos, or profeſſours of the Latine religion, Latine kingdome, and Italian Church, as ſhall by and by appeare.
                  Now then to grow to a concluſion, and to make a briefe recapitulation of all thinges heere ſpoken concerning the ſecond beaſt, which is Antichriſt: Let vs conſider what increaſings and proceedings hee hath made, as it were by degrees.
                  Firſt, although he haue two hornes like the Lamb, that is, ciuill and eccleſiaſticall power; yet he ſpeaketh like the Dragon, that is, he bendeth all his power and authoritie, words and works for the diuell.
                  Secondly, he doth as much as the firſt beaſt could do in the ſeruice of the Dragon.
                  Thirdly, he cauſeth the firſt beaſt to be worſhipped, that is, eſtabliſheth the ſubſtance of his religion.
                  Fourthly, he maketh the image of the beaſt, that is, addeth a forme to the ſubſtance.
                  Fiftly, hee putteth life into his Image by his Clergie.
                  Sixtly, he will haue this Image worſhipped, and yeelded vnto, on paine of death.
                  Laſtly, he will haue all men of all conditions to weare his liuerie, and to receiue his marke, as it were his hired and couenant ſeruants.
                  Heere is wiſdome: Let him that hath wit, count the the number of the beaſt: for it is the number of a man,

and his number is ſixe hundred theeſcore and ſixe.
                  Now laſt of all the holy Ghoſt telleth vs that it is a verie high point of wiſedome and vnderſtanding, to count the number of the beaſt, and requireth a ſharpe and pregnant wit; and withall telleth vs, that it is the number of a man; that is, ſuch as a man endued with Gods Spirite may finde out. Then wee are encouraged to ſearch into it, ſith it is within the compaſſe of mans reach. It is no impoſſible thing. If therefore wee could find out his name, wee would deſire no more; then the field were wonne: for his name would diſcouer him, and deſcrie him to all the world, and quite ſtoppe the mouthes of the Papiſts, ſo as they ſhould neuer haue anie thing more to ſay. For if Saint Iohn had ſaid expreſly and in plaine tearmes, that the Popes of Rome are this ſecond beaſt, and the verie Antichriſt himſelfe, then the Papiſts had beene put to perpetuall ſilence, all matters quaſht, and all controuerſies ended betwixt them and vs for euer. But heere the holy Ghoſt doth not tell vs his name plainely, but myſtically, as manie other things in this booke, that the worldlings which ſhould fulfill them might be blinded, whileſt the eyes of Gods elect are opened to ſee into the truth of all theſe matters. Well, to come to the point: Saint Iohn doth onely heere ſet downe the numeratiue letters of the beaſts name. Hee wrote in Greeke, and he onely ſetteth downe three Greeke letters or characters, which in Greeke numeration make ſixe hundred ſixtie ſixe.
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        
                      Now further wee are to note, that the

numeratiue letters of the Greeke word 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      doe make iuſt this number. And yet further we are to obſerue as a verie ſpeciall thing, that Irenaeus,
                     Iren. lib. 5. contra haereſ. an ancient Father of the Church, who liued verie neere vnto the Apoſtles times, mentioneth this worde Lateinos, as the name of the beaſt. And moreouer affirmeth, that it was a common receiued opinion in his time, and before, that the Beaſt ſhould be ſo called. Now then let vs conſider how this fitteth. Firſt, we know that the numeratiue letters of Lateinos doe iuſtly fit Saint Iohns Greeke numeratiue letters. Secondly, we know that Antichriſt is the head of the Latine Church, or Latine Empire: and therefore this verie Lateinos. For here we doe not enquire after the name of anie particular man, but about the name of a kingdome; for the beaſt is a kingdome, and a ſucceſſion of men. Now Italy in old time was called Latinum, & the Italians Latini: which noteth of what countrey the beaſt ſhould come. Moreouer, the beaſts name, or name of the Romane Empire is Lateinos, becauſe the Empire both vnder the heathen tyrants, and the Popes eſpecially, had all their religion, ſeruice, prayers, lawes, decrees, writings, and tranſlations in Latine: all was in Latine, Latine. The Pope preferred his Latine tranſlation of the Bible, before the Hebrue and Greeke originals.
                  Thus then it is. Saint Iohn telleth vs flatly, that the number of the beaſt is ſixe hundred ſixtie ſixe: Irenaeus ſaith, that Lateinos is his name, which containeth iuſt that number. Therefore heere wee haue his name, heere hee is found. For if his name bee Lateinos, wee neede ſearch no further, wee

know who it is, we know who is meant: for is not the Pope Lateinos? are not the ſucceſſion of them Latini? are they not the heads of the Latine Church, and Latine Empire? Haue they not all their worſhip and ſeruice in Latine? Are they not Latines? for what is the name of the Romane Empire but Lateinos? And what is the name of the Popiſh Hierarchie but Lateinos? True it is indeed which the papiſts ſay, that manie names may bee inuented, whoſe letters make this number: but the Spirit of God ſpeaketh not of fained names, for thereof can come nothing but vncertaintie: but he willeth vs to count the number of his name, which then the beaſt had, that is, Lateinos. I doe thus then conclude. The beaſt is a kingdome, and the Papacie is the kingdome of the Latines: Therefore the Papacie is the beaſt. The papacie is Lateinos, and containeth the number of the beaſt. For what other monarchie can bee ſhewed ſince this Reuelation was giuen, whoſe numeratiue letters containe this foreſaid number? Aſſuredly none. And therefore out of all doubt Saint Iohn pointeth at the Roman Empire, and monarchie of the Popes. For Lateinos doth both containe the number of the beaſt, according to Saint Iohns computation, and alſo his name, which is the Latine Empire, or Romane Empire. And thus haue wee heard the deſcription of theſe two huge and monſtrous beaſts, the ſea beaſt, and the land beaſt; which both from the Apoſtles times hitherto haue indeede played the beaſts againſt Chriſt and his Church, and ſtill doe play the beaſts, and will neuer ceaſe playing the beaſts, till their hornes, and hoofes, heads, and

bodies be cleane cut off, which will be ſhortly, as we ſhall heare anon.
               
            
            
               CHAP. XIIII.
               
                  WE haue heard in the former chapter the deſcription of the two great and dreadfull beaſts. We haue alſo heard how mightily they haue preuailed now manie yeeres, & raigned as monarches of the earth. Now in this chapter wee are to heare of the fall and ruine of them both. So that the maine drift and ſcope of this chapter, and all the chapters following, vntill the twentith chapter, is to ſhew, that both the Roman Empire, and the Papacie ſhall ebbe as faſt as euer they did flow, ſhall wane as faſt as euer they did waxe, ſhall decreaſe as faſt as euer they did increaſe, and fall downe as faſt as euer they did riſe vp, euen vntill they come to vtter ruine and deſolation.
                  This Chapter containeth ſeuen principal things.
                  Firſt, 
                        verſ. 1 it ſheweth that God had his Church vpon the earth euen then, when it ſeemed to bee vtterly extinct by the preuailing of the two outragious beaſts.
                  Secondly, 
                        verſ. 2.3.4.5. it ſheweth that the poore perſecuted Church did ſincerely & zealouſly worſhip God euen in the fire and flames of afflictions.
                  Thirdly, 
                        ver. 6.7 it ſheweth that the Goſpell ſhall be preached with great ſucceſſe in theſe laſt daies throughout manie kingdoms.
                  Fourthly, 
                        ver. 8 it ſheweth that Rome ſhall fall downe at the preaching of the Goſpell.
                  
                      
                     
                        ver. 9.10.11. Fiftly, it ſheweth that all Papiſts ſhal be condemned, and caſt into hell fire for euer.
                  
                     
                        ver. 12.13. Sixtly, it ſheweth that it ſhall go well with Gods elect, which hauing refuſed the worſhip of the beaſt, do liue and die in the Lord.
                  
                     
                        ver. 14.15.16.17.18.19.20. Laſtly, it deſcribeth the day of iudgement, wherein all both good, and bad ſhall haue according to their deſerts.
               
               
                  Text.
                  
                     
                        ver. 1 
                     Then I looked, and behold a Lambe ſtood on mount Sion, and with him an hundred fourtie and foure thouſand, hauing the Fathers name written in their foreheads.
                  
                  Nowe at laſt the holy Ghoſt bringeth in Ieſus Chriſt vpon the Theater of the world, as it were to play his part in this tragedie, and to helpe the poore weake woman, which we heard of before, againſt the Dragon, and the two monſtrous beaſts, which would haue torne her in peeces, and vtterly deuoured her, if this Lambe Ieſus Chriſt had not ſtept in and reſcued her. Well, now commeth in our Lord Ieſus, and beginneth to ſtirre in theſe matters, and to take vpon him the protection and defence of the poore helpleſſe woman, againſt both the dragon, & the dragons two great inſtruments. But may ſome man ſay, What is a poore Lambe to encounter with a dragon, with a Lyon, with a Leopard, and a Beare? I anſwer, that although Chriſt be a lamb to his church, euē the Lamb of God that taketh away the ſins of the world, and the Lamb that was a ſlaine ſacrifice from the beginning,

for the redemption of his elect: Yet to all his enemies he is a moſt ſtrong and terrible Lyon, euen the Lyon of the Tribe of Iuda, as he is called before. 
                        chapter 5.5 Now this moſt terrible Lyon, euen the Lord of hoſts, the Lord mightie in battell, commeth forth to protect and defend his Church againſt all her enemies, who is of ſuch infinite might and puiſſance, that neither the old Dragon, nor his young imps, nor all the curſed helhounds that barke and bite, and take their part, ſhall euer bee able to ſtand in his hands: For rage they neuer ſo much, hee will hamper them all well enough. For though he haue giuen them the reine a long time, and let them alone, and ſuffred them to play the tyrants with the woman his ſpouſe; yet now he will no longer put it vp at their hands, but will vp and maintaine the womans cauſe, and beare her out againſt them all: nay, hee will make readie his bow, that he may ſhoote off, and make his arrowes drunke in the bloud of her and his enemies, and will whette his glittering ſword, that hee may ſheath it in the heart of Antichriſt and all his adherents. Therefore now let both the great beaſts and their Sire looke to themſelues: for heere comes in one that will knocke them all downe, and lay them in the duſt, that they ſhall neuer riſe vp againe. For this cauſe now at length Saint Iohn in a viſion ſeeth a Lambe ſtand vpon mount Sion; that is, Chriſt preſent with his Church. For mount Sion was an ancient figure of the Church; as it is written: Mount Sion lying Northward is faire in ſituation:Pſal. 48.2. it is the ioy of the whole earth, and the citie of the great king. And againe, The law ſhall goe forth of Sion,
                     Mich. 4.2. 
                     and

the word of the Lord from Ieruſalem.
                  
                  Moreouer, Saint Iohn ſeeth heere with the Lambe an hundred fortie and foure thouſand: that is, the particular members of the Church, putting a certaine number for an vncertaine, and ſpecially alluding to the ſealing of the twelue tribes of Iſrael, as before hath beene ſhewed. For it might bee demaunded, where the Church was, 
                        chapter 7.4. when all the world wondred, and followed the firſt Beaſt? and alſo when all, both ſmall and great, rich and poore, receiued the marke of the ſecond Beaſt? Saint Iohn anſwereth, that euen then in the middeſt of the heate of perſecutions God had his hid & inuiſible church, whom Ieſus Chriſt did protect and preſerue euen in the verie flames of perſecutions, being alwayes preſent with them, and amongſt them, as he ſaid to his Diſciples a little before his bodily departure from them. Lo, I am with you euen vnto the end of the world. And heere hee is ſaid to ſtand vpon mount Sion with his hundred fortie and foure thouſand. And it is added, that this number of Gods faithfull elect children had the Fathers name written in their foreheads: That is, they did profeſſe, and practiſe the doctrine and religion of God their Father onely, vtterly renouncing and abhorring the worſhip and religion of the Beaſt. For the Fathers name in this place is ſet oppoſite to the marke of the Beaſt; to ſignifie, that as the worſhippers of Antichriſt receiued his marke: ſo the true worſhippers of God receiued his brand, which is his Spirit, and the fruits therof, whereby they were perfectly diſcerned from thoſe which had the beaſts

marke. So then it cleerely appeareth from this place, that God preſerued many thouſands of his true worſhippers, euen in the daies of the great Antichriſt, when there ſeemed to bee verie fewe or none remaining vppon the earth, as it was in the dayes of Elias. In vaine therefore doe the Papiſts aske vs, where our Church was before Luthers time, ſith the holy Apoſtle heere ſtoppeth their mouth, and telleth vs plainely, that Chriſt had his little flocke in the wilderneſſe, euen then, when it was in greateſt ſtreightes, and as wee ſay, driuen to the wals. And therfore viſibilitie is no ſound note of the Church, as the Papiſts doe moſt ignorantly diſpute. For it is a fond and abſurd kind of reaſoning, to ſay there is no Church at all, becauſe it doth not viſibly appeare: as if a man ſhould reaſon that there is no Moone in the heauens, becauſe ſometimes there is none ſeene, as in the change.
                  And I heard a voice from heauen, 
                        verſ. 2 as the ſound of manie waters, and as the ſound of a great thunder: and I heard the voyce of Harpers harping with their harpes.
                  Heere is ſet forth how this companie of true worſhippers doe magnifie and praiſe God, for his great mercies towards them. Firſt, Iohn heareth a voyce from heauen, that is, an heauenly voice, or the voice of the Church praiſing and glorifying God. For wee haue heard before, 
                        chapter 8.1 that heauen in this Booke is ſometimes put for the Church vppon

the earth, and the reaſons thereof: Wherſoeuer therfore the Church is aſſembled to heare the word, and to pray, and giue thanks; there is a voice from heauen, or an heauenly voice. Now this voice is compared to three things: firſt, to the ſound of manie waters. Secondly, to the ſound of a great thunder. Thirdly, to ye 
                     voice of harpers, harping with their harps. It is likened to manie waters, becauſe it proceedeth from ſundrie ſorts of people, of ſundrie nations, countries, and kingdomes, as the word Waters is taken afterwards in this Propheſie.Chap. 17.1. Chap. 17.15. It is compared to Thunder, becauſe the prayers and inuocations of the true Church are as loud in the eares of God as any thundercracke. It is compared to Harpers harping with their harpes, both becauſe their ſpirituall worſhip and ſeruice is as ſweete vnto God, as any muſicke vnto men: as alſo becauſe all Gods faithfull people doe tune together among themſelues, and in their worſhip, as the ſtrings of a well tuned inſtrument of muſicke, or as manie muſitians playing together, which make a ſweete harmonie, and moſt melodious dittie.
                   
                     
                        verſ. 3 And they ſung as it were a newe ſong before the throne, and before the foure beaſts, and the Elders, and no man could learne that ſong, but the hundred fourtie and foure thouſand, which were bought from the earth.
                  Now is ſhewed how this holy ſocietie of the faithful do continue their praiſing and glorifying of God. They are not weary of well doing, but hold on conſtantly in the courſe of Gods worſhip, hauing new ſongs of thankſgiuing in their mouthes, and ſeruing

God dayly with renewed affections, as men inflamed with the zeale of Gods glory: and all this they doe performe before the throne, before the foure beaſts, and the Elders; that is, in the preſence of God, and his Angels, and his holy congregation. And no man could learne that ſong, but the hundred fortie and foure thouſand, that is, none of the reprobates and vngodly worldlings could inwardly feele and vnderſtand this ſpirituall worſhip, but onely the elect, to whom it is giuen to vnderſtand the ſecrets of God, and the myſteries of his ſonnes kingdome.
                  
                     Theſe are they, 
                           verſ. 4 which are not defiled with women: for they are virgins: theſe follow the Lambe whereſoeuer he goeth: theſe are bought from men, being the firſt fruits vnto God, and to the Lambe.
                     And in their mouthes was found no guile: 
                           verſ. 5 for they are without ſpot before the throne of God.
                  
                  This holy cōpany are not defiled with women, that is, with groſſe & diuers ſins, or rather with idolatrous pollutions. For they are virgins, that is, chaſt worſhippers of God, which are not polluted with the defilemēts of Antichriſt. Theſe follow the Lamb Chriſt wherſoeuer he goeth. They heare his voyce, they profeſſe his worſhip, and obey his doctrine; they abhorre Antichriſt, they followe not the beaſt, nor receiue his marke. They are bought from men, and bought from the earth, as it is ſayd before, that is, they are redeemed and bought with a price from the corrupt lumpe of mankind, and curſed race of Adam, that they might bee the firſt fruits vnto God, and to the Lambe, that is, wholy conſecrated to his worſhip, and to ſerue him

in righteouſneſſe and true holineſſe all the dayes of their life. In their mouthes was found no guile: That is, they doe declare their innocencie and vprightneſſe both in their words, and works, as thoſe which Chriſt hath choſen out of this world, and bought with a price thorough his bloud, in whom they are without ſpot or ſpeck before God.
                  
                     
                        
                           verſ. 6 Then I ſaw another Angell flie in the middeſt of heauen, hauing an euerlaſting Goſpell, to preach vnto them that dwell on the earth, and to euery nation, and kinred, and tongue, and people:
                     
                        
                           verſ. 7 Saying with a loud voice, Feare God, and giue glorie vnto him: for the houre of his iudgement is come, and worſhip him that made heauen and earth, and the ſea, and the fountaines of waters.
                  
                  Hitherto the holy Ghoſt hath taught vs how the Church was preſerued vnder the tyrannie of Antichriſt, and greateſt waues of perſecutions; and that euen then they did purely and faithfully worſhip the true God. Now he proceedeth to foreſhew the ruine and downfall of Antichriſt, and plainely to propheſie the vtter decay of the kingdome of Babell. This doctrine therefore we are to hearken vnto with great attention and cheerefulneſſe, becauſe it doth ſo much concerne our good, & the good of the whole church, alſo becauſe we liue in the dayes, wherin we ſee it is in part fulfilled.
                  Firſt therefore wee are to vnderſtand, what is meant by this Angell heere mentioned, to wit, not anie celeſtiall Angell, or inuiſible ſpirit, as it is ſundrie

times taken before: but by this Angell, and the two Angels following, are meant all the faithfull Miniſters of the Goſpell, which ſhould bee raiſed vp in theſe laſt dayes, for the ouerthrow of Rome, and the deliuering of the Church from vnder the captiuitie of Antichriſt: which may plaine
                        •
                     y appeare by this, that it is ſaid, this Angell preacheth the euerlaſting Goſpell vnto them that dwell on the earth, which cannot properly agree to the celeſtiall ſpirits. Wee haue heard out of the tenth chapter, that Ieſus Chriſt did open the little booke, which is the Bible, and did giue authoritie to his faithfull Miniſters to goe preach and publiſh the doctrine thereof to manie nations, countries, and kingdomes: 
                        chapter 10.11. nowe vnto that agreeth this which is heere ſpoken of, and is a further opening and declaring of that which is there ſet downe. For as there Ieſus Chriſt commeth downe from heauen, and openeth the little booke, which had beene long ſhut vp vnder the darkneſſe of Poperie, and the ſmoake which came out of the bottomleſſe pit: ſo heere Chriſt Ieſus raiſeth vp his faithfull Miniſters and preachers, to publiſh and proclaime the doctrine of the Goſpell, which had long lyen hidde vnder the outragious perſecutions of the two monſtrous and moſt hideous beaſts. 
                        chapter 18.1 To this alſo agreeth that which is written in the eighteenth chapter of this Booke, where Saint Iohn ſeeth an Angell come downe from heauen, hauing great power, ſo that the earth was lightened with his glorie. By which Angell is meant all the Preachers of this age. And the Angell is ſaide to haue great power: For what is more powerfull then the

miniſterie of the word. And moreouer it is ſayd, that the earth was lightened with his glorie, that is, with the brightneſſe of the preaching of the Goſpel, whereby the darkeneſſe of Poperie was diſperſed and driuen away, and Babylon falleth vpon it, as there you may reade, and as heere we ſhall ſee the like effect by and by.
                  Moreouer it is heere ſayd, that this Angell flieth in the middeſt of heauen: that is, verie ſwiftly carrieth this euerlaſting Goſpell thorough all the Churches. For when Gods appointed time was come, wherein he would goe about the ouerthrowe of Poperie, he cauſed his euerlaſting Goſpell to be ſet abroach, and to ſpread ouer many kingdoms and nations, as wee ſee this day. Now becauſe theſe kingdoms, where God would haue the knowledge of his Goſpell diuulged, were manie and great, therefore heere is expedition required: and this Angell doth carie it, not ſtanding but flying. And all this we ſee perfectly fulfilled with our eyes, when God raiſed vp Luther, Zuinglius, Melancthon, Peter Viret, Caluin, Bucer, Bullinger, Peter Martyr, and all their worthy ſucceſſours vnto this day, which haue ſpred the euerlaſting Goſpell verie farre, and caried it verie ſwiftly ouer England, Scotland, Germanie, Denmarke, Polonia, Sweuia, Ruſſia, and many parts of France and Flaunders. Another reaſon why this Angell is ſaid to flie in the middeſt of heauen, is becauſe no power of man ſhall euer be able to ſtay the courſe of this euerlaſting Goſpel which this Angel carieth abroad, no more then men are able to ſtoppe the courſe of the Sunne in the heauens, or a cloud in the skie. For this

Angel flyeth in the midſt of heauen, far aboue the reach of the beaſt, and al Kinges and Potentates that ſtand for the kingdom of the beaſt: Therefore let them doe al what they can, they ſhal neuer be able to ſtop the courſe of the Goſpel. For it is called the arme of God, & his very arme holdeth it forth to the world, and who is able to bend it in, or to turne it backward?
                  There be three reaſons, why the Goſpell is called euerlaſting.
                  Firſt, becauſe it is in his owne nature euerlaſting,1. Pet. 1.25. as it is written, the worde of the Lord indureth for euer.
                  
                  Secondly, becauſe it putteth vs in poſſeſſion of euerlaſting things. As it is written; Thy word, O Lord,
                     Pſal. 119. 
                     endureth for euer in heauen.
                  
                  Thirdly & principally, becauſe as it was long before Antichriſt was hatched: ſo it ſhal continue, when he and his kingdome is dead and rotten.
                  
                     Saying with a loud voice; Feare God, 
                     
                        ver. 7 
                     and giue glory vnto him, &c.
                  
                  Here is ſette down the doctrine, which this Angel preacheth with a loud voice, that is, with great zeale. The ſumme whereof is this, Feare God, and giue glory vnto him, and worſhip him that made heauen and earth, &c. The ſenſe is, that the true and euerliuing God ſhould only be feared, and worſhipped, and all glory ſhould be giuen to him alone through Chriſt, and none to Antichriſt, none to Cardinals, and Legats; none to Angelles, none to Saintes, none to images, roods, croſſes, and crucifixes. Here then is ſet downe an abridgement of the doctrine of this euerlaſting Goſpell, namely that men

ſhould onely feare God and worſhip him, and giue all glory to him alone, and not to any creatures. And the reaſon is yeelded, becauſe the houre of his iudgement is come,Deut. 33 10 Iſay 42.4 Zeph. 2 3. Pſal. 119.13 that is, the time of the manifeſtation of the Goſpel, or lawes of the moſt high God: for ſo the word iudgement is often taken in the ſcriptures.
                  Here we are to obſerue one ſpeciall thing, to wit, that the Goſpel, which this Angel flyeth withal, containeth the briefe ſumme of al the doctrine which Luther, Caluin, Peter Martyr and the reſt haue taught out of Gods word, & agreeth in al points with it. For what other thing did they al preach, teach and write, but that men ſhould turne from idols to the liuing God? from fearing, glorifying, & worſhipping creatures, to feare, worſhip, and glorifie God alone which hath made al things? What other thing doo all the Preachers of this age publiſh & proclaime in al their ſermons, but this; Feare God and giue glory onely to him? Is not this the Epirome and ſhort ſumme of the doctrine of all the Preachers of England, Scotland, Germany, Fraunce, Denmarke, and all the reſt? and therefore I conclude, that this Angel muſt needes be vnderſtood of the preachers of this laſt age, which now theſe foureſcore yeares haue founded the Trumpet of the Goſpell againſt all the inuentions of Popery. And bleſſed bee God, wee ſee theſe thinges fall out in our daies, and are eye-witneſſes of the fulfilling of them.
                  
                     And there followed another Angell, ſaying, It is fallen, it is fallen, Babylon that great City: for ſhe gaue to all nations to drinke the wine of the wrath of her fornication.
                  
                  
                     Here is ſet downe the bleſſed effect of the preaching of this euerlaſting Goſpel, which is the downefall of Babylon. For as when the cleere ſunne ariſeth vppon the earth, the thick miſts and cloudes are diſperſed: euen ſo when the bright beames of the Goſpel do ſhine forth vnto the world, Babylon that darke kingdome vaniſheth away incontinently. And as it is writtē in the eighteenth Chapter: 
                        chapter 18.1.2. 
                     So ſoone as the earth was lightened with the glory of this euerlaſting Goſpell, Babylon immediately falleth. Therefore now before I goe any further, my purpoſe through the aſſiſtance of God, is to prooue theſe fiue points out of this verſe, and that which follweth vnto the twentith Chapter, to wit:
                  Firſt, that Babylon here ſignifieth Rome.Fiue maine points.
                  
                  Secondly, that Rome ſhal fall, and how.
                  Thirdly, that Rome ſhal fal finally, and come to vtter deſolation in this life.
                  Fourthly, by whom, and when it ſhall be ouerthrowne.
                  Laſtly, the cauſes of the vtter ruine and ouerthrow thereof.
                  But before I go about to prooue that Babylon here is Rome, I would haue it carefully obſerued,How Rome is to be taken. what is meant by Rome, viz. not the topographie of Rome, that is, ſo much groūd only as is compaſſed within the wals of that City, but the regimēt, gouerment, & prerogatiue that is claimed by vertue of that monarchie, whereof Rome is the head. By Rome is meant the power and authority of Rome: or to ſpeake plainelie, by Rome is meant the Romane monarchy. Further, we are here to obſerue the reaſon why the Holy-Ghoſt

calleth Rome Babylon: for Rome litterally & properly taken, is not Babylon, in as much as they were two diuers Cities, one in Italy, the other in Chaldaea: But Rome is called Babylon myſtically, figuratiuely, &, as the Holy-ghoſt ſpeaketh, ſpiritually, and by a kind of alluſion.Chap. 11 Verſ. 8. A reaſon why Rome is called Babylon. For as the old Eaſterne Babylon did a long time oppreſſe the church of the Iewes: ſo Rome this Weſterne Babylō, hath long oppreſſed the church of the Chriſtians. As the Eaſterne Babylon did many yeeres hold downe the people of God, in miſerable bondage and ſeruitude: ſo the Weſterne Babylon did a long time keepe the Chriſtian Church, in ſpiritual thraldome and miſery. In which reſpectes Rome is ſpiritually compared to Sodome and Egypt: 
                        chapter 11.8. To Sodome for filthineſſe, and to Egypt for idolatry, and keeping Gods Church in ſpirituall bondage, and ſlauery. And thus we ſee the reaſon why Rome is called Babylon, which is not ſimply, and properly, but after a ſort, that is, by a phraſe of ſpeech, or trope which they call a Metonymie, or changing of names, when that is giuē to one thing, which is proper to another, for the likeneſſe of quality that it hath with it, or adioined vnto it.
                  Now hauing ſhewed the reaſon why Rome is called Babylon, and what is meant by Rome; we are to proceed to the firſt point, which is, to prooue that Babylon in this place ſignifieth Rome, which although it bee granted of all ſound diuines, and auouched in the writings of the beſt learned both new and olde, ſo as it ſhal need no great proofe: yet I wil ad three or foure reaſons out of this booke, to make it more plaine and apparant. Firſt therefore, I doe thus reaſon out of

the ſeuenteenth Chapter and laſte verſe: 
                        chapter 17.18. 
                     Babylon is that great City which reigneth ouer the Kinges of the earth: but there was no other City which did reigne ouer the Kings of the earth, when Iohn writte this book, but only Rome: Therefore Rome is Babylon. For as for Ieruſalem, it was at that time made an heap of ſtones. The firſt propoſition is auouched by the Angel of God, expounding vnto Iohn what is meant by the great whoore, 
                        chapter 17.1. whoſe damnation he had ſhewed him before; and by the woman which ſate vppon a ſcarlet coloured beaſt. The woman which thou ſaweſt, ſaith the Angel to Saint Iohn, is the great City, which raigneth ouer the Kinges of the earth, That is to ſay, Rome, or the Romiſh ſynagogue, and malignant Church. For the Angel could not ſpeake more plainely, except he ſhould haue named Rome, then to ſay thus, The woman the great whoore of Babylon is the great City, which raigneth ouer the Kings of the earth. For if one ſhould ſay, the great City of Englād, euery man knoweth that thereby is meant London; if one ſhould ſay, the great City of France, euery one knoweth that thereby is meant Paris: ſo when the Angell ſayth, the great city which raigneth ouer the Kings of the earth; all that liued in thoſe times knew that,Babylon is Rome. therby was meant Rome. For Rome was the chiefe City of the monarchie, and is put in this booke for the whole monarchie, and the religion thereof, as hath beene ſayd before.
                  My ſecond reaſon is this. 
                        chapter 17 verse 5. 
                     Babylon is the mother of whoredomes, and abominations of the earth. Babylon is that great whoore, with whom haue cōmitted fornication the Kings of the earth, 
                     
                        chapter 17. verse 2. 
                     & the inhabitants of the earth

made drunke with the wind of her fornication.
                  
                  But Rome, & none but Rome is ſuch a one. Therfore Rome is Babylon.
                  My third argument is this. Babylon is that City which hath had ſeuen ſeuerall gouerments. But only Rome hath had ſeuen ſeueral kind of gouermēts: therfore Rome is Babylon.
                  The propoſition is prooued from the words of the Angel, expounding vnto Iohn what is meant by the ſeuen heads of the ſcarlet coloured beaſt, whereupon the woman ſate. 
                        chapter 17 9. 
                     The ſeuen heads (ſayth he) are ſeuen Kings, that is, ſeauen orders, or ſtates of kingly gouerment: for ſeuen Kings in this place are not put for ſeuen ſeueral men, which were Kings, as ſome do take it:Dan 7.17. but for ſeuen ſeueral gouerments, as it is taken in Daniel. The foure great beaſtes, ſayth the Angel there, are foure Kinges, that is, foure kingdomes, gouerments, or monarchies, as al men know. So here by ſeuen Kinges is meant the ſeuen ſeuerall regiments of Rome: That is to ſay, by Kings, Conſuls, Decemuiri, Dictators, Triumuiri, Emperours, and Popes, wherof the firſt fiue were then fallen when Iohn wrote, one was, 
                     
                        chapter 17.10 that is, the Empire, and one was to come, that is, the Papacy.
                  My laſt argument is this. Babylon is that City which is ſituate vpon ſeuen hilles: but onely Rome of all Cities in the world is ſituated vppon ſeuen hilles: therefore Rome is Babylon.
                  The propoſition is auouched by the Angel, which ſaith in the ſeuenteenth chapter, that the ſeuen heads of the ſcarlet coloured beaſt, are ſeuen mountaines, whereon the woman ſitteth, that is, ſeuen hilles whereon

the City of Rome is ſcituated, whoſe names are theſe: Capitolinus, Palatinus, Auentinus, Exquilinus, Celius, Viminalis, and Quirinalis, as al Poets, and Hiſtoriographers doo teſtifie. One ſayth thus of Rome.
Septem quae vna ſibi muro circundedit arces.
                           Virg. Georg.
                        
                     
another thus.
Septem vrbs alta iugis toto quae praeſidet orbe.
                           Propert.
                        
                     
Another calleth Rome 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , the City with ſeuen heades, that is, ſeuen hilles. It is cleere then by theſe reaſons, that Babylon in this place ſignifieth Rome. As for the expoſition of the Papiſts, which affirme that Babylon here ſignifieth the vniuerſall ſociety of the wicked, it is fond & ridiculous: for the Holy ghoſt ſayth,Chap. 17. Chap. 18. 
                     Babylon is that City which raigneth ouer the Kings of the earth. But to ſay that the vniuerſall ſociety of the wicked raigneth ouer the Kinges of the earth, is abſurd and ridiculous. Therefore to ſay that Babylon is the vniuerſall ſociety of the wicked, is abſurde and ridiculous. The diſtinction of the Ieſuits here is alſo as friuolous as their expoſition: for they ſay, if Babylon be Rome, then it muſt be vnderſtood of Rome vnder the heathen Emperours: but not vnder the Popes. But the Angel ſayth, the woman, that is, the whoore of Babylon, or Antichriſt ſitteth vpon ſeuen mountaines: ergo ſhee ſitteth at Rome, and Rome is the ſeat of Antichriſt; and conſequently Rome vnder the Popes is Babylon. Moreouer, we may reaſon thus againſt the Popiſh diſtinction: That which was Babylon vnder the heathen Emperours, is the ſame which is here prophecied to bee the chiefe City and ſeat of Antichriſt. But Rome was then Babylon:

                     ergo Rome is now Babylon: for Rome is that City which the Angel ſayth ſhoulde bee the ſeat of Antichriſt: And this book doth ſhew, that the great Antichriſt ſhoulde raigne in the ſame City, where the heathen Emperours had raigned: & therfore it ſtandeth firme, that Rome vnder the Popes is Babylon.
                  This then beeing graunted, that Babylon here is Rome; it followeth that Rome ſhall fall: for the Holy-Ghoſt ſayth, Babylon is fallen, ſpeaking in the preſent tenſe, as the maner of ye ſcripture is in prophecying of things to come. For whatſoeuer God hath determined to cōe to paſſe, is, as it were, already don, becauſe of the certainty of it:Rome ſhall fall. and for this cauſe alſo the word is doubled: It is fallen, It is fallen. Wee ſee then moſt cleerly, that almoſt 1500. yeers before Rome began to fal, the certaine fall thereof was foretold. This place of it ſelfe, is cleere inough to prooue my ſecond point, which is, that Rome ſhal fal. But my purpoſe is to reduce and gather all the fiue Chapters following to certaine heades, to prooue the maine points which I haue propounded: firſt then I reaſon thus to proue the ſecond point, that Rome ſhall fall. That City and kingdome which hath the ſeuen vialles of Gods wrath emptied and powred downe vppon it, cannot ſtand, but muſt needes fall. But Rome is that City, which hath the ſeuen vialles of Gods wrath powred downe vppon it: Therefore Rome cannot ſtande long, but muſt needes fall. The propoſition is manifeſt, and not to bee denied. The aſſumption is prooued throughout al the ſixteene Chapter, and eſpecially in the tenth and the twelfth verſes, 
                        chapter 16. Ver. 10 Verſ. 12 where the vials of Gods wrath are expresſlie ſaide to be powred

downe vpon the throne of the beaſt: and in the ſecond verſe of that Chapter it is auouched, 
                        ver. 2 that the ſecond viall was powred down vpon the men which had the marke of the beaſt, and vppon them which worſhipped his image: Howe then can the throne of the beaſt hould out? or how can they which haue receiued the beaſtes marke ſtand vp long? For there is a great Emphaſis or vehemency in the manner of ſpeeche. For he dooth not ſimply ſay, the wrath of God, 
                        chapter 15. verse 7. but the fulneſſe of Gods wrath: he dooth not ſay, ſhould bee a little ſprinkled, but powred downe as it were by pailefulles vppon the kingdome of the beaſt. How then can the kingdome of the beaſt ſtande, which hath ſo many great ordinances, and ſo many double cannons diſcharged and ſhot off againſt it? Surely it muſt needes fal.
                  My ſecond reaſon is this. The beaſt that was, and is not, and yet is, ſhall go into perdition. 
                     
                        chapter 17 But Rome is the beaſt that was and is not, and yet is: Therfore Rome ſhal goe into perdition. The aſſumption is ſet downe Chapter. 17. verſe. 8. For the Romane monarchie was great in the daies of Iulius Caeſar, Auguſtus, Claudius, Tiberius; and therefore it is ſaid, that it was. But in the raigne of Nero, Otho, Galba, and Vitellius, it was greatlie decayed: and therfore it is ſaid, it is not; meaning ſo great as it had beene: and yet in ſome ſort it was: and therefore it is ſaid, and yet is. Now this beaſt ſhall go into perdition. Therefore the Romane monarchie ſhall bee deſtroyed; and conſequently, the Papacie. For the Romane Empire holdeth vp the Papacie, as it is written, that the woman or whoore

of Babylon ſitteth vppon the Scarlet▪ coloured beaſt, which had ſeuen heades and tenne hornes: that is, the Roman monarchie, which beareth vp the whoore, and beareth vp the Papacy: but the Holy-ghoſt ſayth, this beaſt, that is, the Romane Empire, ſhall go into perdition. 
                     
                        chapter 17. verse 8. Then it followeth that the papacy ſhal follow after: for if the beaſt that ſhe ſitteth vpon, & which beareth her, fal vnder her, then ſhee muſt needes fall together with him. But we ſee, God be thanked, that the Roman monarchie is in a manner quite fallen, therefore the Papacy cannot ſtand long.
                  My third argument is this.
                  
                     The beaſt that was and is not, being euen the eight, & one of the ſeuenth, ſhall go into deſtruction. But Rome is the beaſt that was and is not, being the eight, and one of the ſeuenth: 
                        chapter 17. verse 11 therefore Rome ſhall go into deſtruction. The aſſumption is ſet downe Chapter 17. verſe 11. For the Papacy or dominion of the Popes, is the ſeuenth head of the beaſt in reſpect of their ciuil power; and yet a beaſt by themſelues, that is, an eight in reſpect of their eccleſiaſticall power. Nowe the Angel ſayth flatly, they ſhall both together go into deſtruction, that is, both the Empire and the Papacy. For as the dominion of the Popes goeth downe, ſo alſo their worſhip and religion, goeth downe with it, and for this cauſe it is expreſly ſet downe in the nineteenth Chapter, 
                        chapter 19. verse 20 that the beaſt and the falſe Prophet, that is, the Romane Empire, and the Papacy, were both deſtroied together.
                  
                  Sith then the Holy-Ghoſt hath ſpoken it twiſe for failing, that Rome ſhall goe into perdition, and ſhall

goe into deſtruction; I take it to be a very ſound conſequence, that Rome ſhall fall, and ſhall be deſtroyed. But how ſhall it fall, may ſome man ſay? or wherein ſhall it fall? I anſwer, that it ſhall fall in the credite and eſtimation of her doctrine: It ſhall fall in wealth and riches:How Rome ſhall fall. It ſhall fall in power and authoritie. And in all theſe it ſhall fall by degrees, as it did riſe vp by degrees: It ſhall not fall at once, as it did not riſe vp at once.
                  This is ſet downe in the ſixteenth chapter, 
                        chapter 16. v. 12 where the fall of Rome is compared to the drying vppe of the riuer Euphrates, which was dried vp by degrees: Thus it is: Euphrates was a great Riuer, which did runne very neere vnto the olde Babylon in Chaldaea, and it was the wall and fortification of the Citie; in ſo much that Cyrus and Darius the kings of the Medes and Perſians, laying ſiege againſt it, could not take it till by policie they digged great trenches, and deriued the waters another way, and ſo dried them vppe, that the Holie Ghoſt ſaith, The vvay vvas prepared for them to paſſe ouer. Now, as this Euphrates was the ſtrength and fortification of old Babylon: ſo the honour, wealth, riches, power, and authoritie of Rome, is the verie fortification of it. 
                        chapter 16.12. But the puniſhing Angell is commaunded to poure downe the Viall of wrath vppon this Euphrates: that is, vppon all that vpholdeth Rome, or fortifieth Rome, and foorthwith it dried vppe; that is, all the credite, power, riches▪ and authoritie of ROME did diminiſh daylie vppon it, doeth diminiſh, and ſhall diminiſh

by degrees vnto the end of the world. For the vtter deſtruction of Rome is not yet come, but it is greatly decayed from that it was foureſcore yeares ago: And if it continue decaying foureſcore yeeres mo, as aſſuredly it ſhall, then will it bee brought to a lowe ebbe. Since Luthers time wee knowe how the Popes Euphrates hath dried vp; but there is yet much water left, and it is yet too deepe for the kings of the earth to paſſe ouer and take it. But it ſhall ebbe ſo lowe, that the kings of Europe ſhall eaſily paſſe ouer, and take it, as wee ſhall heare anon. But in the meane time we ſee that it falleth, and that it is in falling, and the worke of God goeth forward euerie day. For now in this age, God bee thanked, manie kings and princes, with great multitudes of their ſubiects, haue their eyes opened to behold, that the Romiſh religion is abominable;The kings of the earth in this age renounce the Pope. and that the Papacie is the verie kingdome of the great Antichriſt. And whereas before they worſhipped the beaſt, now they holde vp their hands onely to the God of heauen, and glorifie him in his ſonne Ieſus Chriſt. Now wee ſee that manie lawes are made in ſundrie kingdoms and prouinces to aboliſh that vſurped power of the Biſhop of Rome: Manie acts, edicts, and iniunctions are ſet forth in ſundrie nations and kingdomes of Europe to deſtroy, roote out, and deface all monuments of Idolatrie and ſuperſtition, which Antichriſt had erected in all kingdoms.
                  Now the Popes which were honoured as Gods in the earth, are accounted, and adiudged as the moſt vile and abominable creatures that liue vpon

the earth. Doth not all this experimentally ſhew that Babylon is fallen, and that Babylon doth fall by degrees? It is very palpable: we need no further proofe for this ſecond point. But heere wee are further to obſerue, that the Ieſuits perceiuing the great decay of Rome,The Ieſuits beſtir them, and why. and the continuall drying of their Euphrates, doe beſtirre them to ſtoppe the leake, that it might not drie vp altogether. Euen as when men let out the waters of great fiſh-ponds, ſo as the water waxeth lowe, wee ſee the fiſhes skip and plunge, and take on wonderfully: So the Ieſuits perceiuing the waters of their Romiſh Euphrates to emptie and drie vp daily, doe mightily take on, digging and ſearching euerie day to open the ſprings, and to find out ſome freſh fountaines to maintaine their great fiſhpond, and to keepe the waters deepe enough, that there may be no ſafe paſſage ouer, for the kings of the earth to come and take their great Babylon. All this doth appeare out of the ſixteenth Chapter of this Propheſie: where Saint Iohn in viſion ſeeth three vncleane ſpirits like Frogges, 
                     
                        chapter 16. v. 13. 
                     comming out of the mouth of the Dragon, and out of the mouth of the beaſt, and out of the mouth of the falſe Prophet. By which frogges the holy Ghoſt meaneth the Ieſuits and Seminarie Prieſts,The Ieſuits compared to frogs, and why. which are compared to frogges for three reaſons. Firſt, that as frogges delight in filthie lakes, and puddles; ſo the Ieſuits delight in the filthie puddles of idolatrie and ſuperſtition. Secondly, as frogges make a great croaking in their mariſh grounds; ſo the Ieſuits make a great croaking in kings courts, in Noblemens houſes, and Gentlemens

houſes, and almoſt euery where, where they can get any entertainment, croaking and craking of the Popes ſupremacie, the popes holineſſe, the Popes bleſſing, the popes keyes, the popes power, Peters chaire, Peters ſucceſſour, Chriſts Vicar, and many good morowes, I knowe not what. Thirdly, as frogs are all of one nature and qualitie, delighting in croaking, and liuing in puddle: ſo the Ieſuits are al of one mind and diſpoſition in euil, croaking euerie where to maintaine their Euphrates, and liuing dayly in whoredome, Sodomitrie, and al kind of outragious beaſtlineſſe. But that I may more fully perſwade the cōſcience of the reader, that by theſe frogs are meant the Ieſuits & ſeminarie prieſts: let vs ſeriouſly weigh that which goeth before, and that which followeth after in this text, and wee ſhal diſcerne it to be verie cleere and apparant. Firſt, it is ſaid, verſ. 10. that when the fift Angell poured out his viall of Gods wrath vppon the throne of the beaſt, 
                     
                        chapter 16. v. 10. 
                     by and by his kingdome waxed darke: that is, the maieſtie, power, pompe, credite, and eſtimation of Antichriſt beganne to bee diminiſhed, obſcured, and to ſuffer a great Eclipſe: which thing was fulfilled ſhortly after Luthers preaching. And preſently it followeth, that they gnawed their tongues for ſorrow: that is, they were ful of furie and rage, 
                        ver. 10 barking and grinning like mad dogs, or rather like helhounds againſt all ſuch as ſet the Goſpel abroach, wherby their Babylon began to ſhake. For at the firſt, when the Goſpel began to peep forth, they did deſpiſe it, as a thing which they could eaſily ſuppreſſe; but within a ſhort time they found that neither

by excommunications, wherewith in former times they had euen as it were with lightening and thunder cauſed kings and nations to tremble; neither by force of warres and bloudy ſlaughters; neither by anie skill in learning; nor by treacheries, they could any thing preuaile, but that the Goſpell did ſtill more and more lay open their filthineſſe and ſhame: then did they become, and ſo do they continue til this day, euen as mad men in ſorrow and rage, which the holie Ghoſt expreſſeth, in ſaying, 
                        chapter 16. v. 11. that they gnawed their tongues for ſorrowe, and blaſphemed the God of heauen, &c. Wherby it is euident that the beaſt, and all that haue receiued his marke are full of firie hatred and malice, and cannot tell which way to be reuenged. For the more they ſtriue, the more they loſe dayly. Faine would they haue Poperie reſtored to his ancient credit and dignitie: and they deuiſe what they can to bring it about; but it will not be. For their kingdome waxeth darker and darker, weaker and weaker: and that is a dagger vnto them, & a griefe of all griefes, which maketh them gnaw their tongues, and gnaſh their teeth for ſorrow. But yet for all this, 
                        chapter 16. v. 11. 
                     they repented not of their works, ſaith Saint Iohn, and therefore God is more incenſed againſt them, and cauſeth the ſixt Angel to poure out another vial vpon the great riuer Euphrates, and the water therof dried vp: as wee haue heard. Now then obſerue carefully, and note it diligently, that the frogges come forth vpon the darkening of the kingdome of the beaſt,Note this. & the drying vp of their Euphrates. For who knoweth not that the pope & his cōplices perceiuing ye weakning & diminiſhing

of their kingdome, haue ſent out theſe Ieſuits and Seminarie Prieſts into all parts of Europe, to repaire the ruines of Rome, if it were poſſible. And this is one circumſtantiall reaſon to proue theſe three frogges be vnderſtood of the Ieſuits. But let vs proceede to open the whole deſcription of the holy Ghoſt, that it may yet more plainely appeare. Firſt, theſe frogges are called vncleane ſpirits, 
                     
                        chapter 16. v. 13. becauſe they are the verie limmes of the diuell, full of all filthineſſe and vncleanneſſe. Secondly, they are called ſpirits, becauſe they come out of the mouth of the Dragon, 
                        •
                     he beaſt, and the falſe Prophet. Thirdly, they are called three in number, being in the truth neerer vnto three thouſand, becauſe they proceed out of three ſeuerall mouthes the Dragon, the beaſt, and the falſe Prophet: that is, the diuell, the Roman Empire, and the Papacie. Three horrible monſters, three terrible bugbeares, which with one conſent conſpire together againſt the Goſpell, to vphold their Babylon, and to ſtop the leake of their Euphrates. Nowe theſe three Frogges are ſaid to come out of the mouth of the Dragon, the beaſt, and the falſe Prophet, becauſe they come with the verie mind and meſſage of the Pope, and the Roman Empire, and ſo conſequently with the verie mind and ſpirit of the Dragon. For they are the verie breath of the Pope, and the ſpirits of the diuell, as like him, as if they had beene ſpitte out of his mouth. They are ſent on the diuels errand, and the Popes embaſſage into all countries and kingdomes, and are taught their leſſon what they ſhall ſay, and inſtructed what they ſhall doe, and what courſes they

ſhal take with all ſorts of men, both Kings, Nobles, and the meaner ſort: and for this cauſe the holy Ghoſt ſaith, they came out of the verie mouth, the verie heart, and the very bowels of the Pope, and of the diuell. And although theſe Ieſuits and ſeminarie prieſts are called of their fauorits, Catholike doctors,The holy ghoſt calleth the Ieſuits the ſpirits of diuels Chap. 16.14. holy fathers, &c. yet the holy Ghoſt ſaith flatly, they are the ſpirits of diuels, working falſe and fained miracles, and with great efficacie of errour, deluding and deceiuing the ſimple and blind multitude. Wee ſee then, that the holy Ghoſt in al this deſcription, doth plainly note out the Ieſuits and ſeminary prieſts. For to whom can theſe things here ſpoken of agree, but only to thē? And do not we which liue in theſe daies, ſenſibly ſee and diſcerne the fulfilling of al theſe things? Surely we can not but ſee & feele thē, vnles we be wilfully blind, and do of purpoſe blindfold and hoodwink our ſelues. But the holy ghoſt goeth yet futher, and doth more fully, & as it were demonſtratiuely point them out vnto vs, deſcribing thē by their office, which is, to go vnto the kings of the earth, & of the whole world; 
                     
                        verſ. 14 
                     to gather thē to the battel of that great day of God Almighty. Who is ignorāt that the Ieſuits & ſeminary prieſts are ſent out to al kings & Nobles of the whole world, that fauour thē & their proceedings? Are they not croking in corners thicke and threefold in all parts of this land? Are they not practiſing of treacheries & treſons againſt our moſt gratious Queene and the whole ſtate? are they not plotting the deſtruction & ſubuerſion of this Church & common wealth? Nay, as the holy Ghoſt ſaith, the chiefe end of their comming abroad, is to ſollicite & gather ye kings of the earth vnto battel againſt

God, againſt Chriſt, and againſt all true profeſſours of religion. The bettell betwixt them is heere called, The battell of the great day of God Almighty: that is, that Battell, wherein the Almightie God will haue the day, and goe away with the victorie. For it followeth, that the Ieſuits and ſeminarie Prieſts did preuaile with the ſeduced kings of the earth ſo farre, as to gather them together to place,The Ieſuits by their craftie perſwaſions ſhall bring the popiſh kings, and their armies to a place where they ſhal be deſtroied. Numb. 11. which in Herbrue is called Armageddon: that is to ſay, a place where they ſhall be deſtroyed, and that with ſuch horrible ſlaughter, that the place ſhall take a name thereof. For it was an vſuall thing among the Hebrues, to call the place where anie famous thing fell out, by a name which did report ye ſame vnto all poſteritie, as Kibroth Hataanah, the graues of Concupiſcence; Hamon Gog, the multitude of Gog; and diuers ſuch like. And ſo here Armageddon,
                     Ezech. 39. the deſtruction of an armie, becauſe the kings of the earth, and their armies which ſhall fight againſt the Church, at the inſtigation of the Ieſuits, ſhall come to a place, where they ſhall haue a notable ouerthrow. This word Armageddon may fitly bee deriued of two Hebrue words, that is to ſay, Cherem, which ſignifieth deſtruction, and Gedudh, which ſignifieth an armie; that is, the deſtruction of an army; or as ſome ſay, & that verie iudicially, it may come of Gnarmah Gidnon, which ſignifieth the ſubtiltie of deſtruction; becauſe the blinde kings and Nobles of the earth ſhall by the ſubtiltie and craftie perſwaſions of the Ieſuits and Seminarie Prieſts, be entiſed to fight againſt the Proteſtants, in a place where they ſhall haue a famous foile.

Some deriue Armageddon of Har, which in Hebrue ſignifieth a mountaine, and Megiddo, which is the place where the godly king Ioſias was ſlaine: and ſo this place ſhould be called Armageddon, the mountaine of Megiddo, for the ſlaughter of kings that ſhall be there.Zach. 12.11· To the which the Prophet Zacharie alludeth, ſaying: In that day there ſhall be a great mourning in Ieruſalem, as the mourning of Hadadrimmon, in the valley of Megiddo. Well, we doe ſee that all theſe ſignifications and deriuations of Armageddon come to one thing in effect; which is, that the great armies which aſſemble themſelues in battaile againſt the Lord, ſhall bee deſtroyed: and therefore it is not much materiall to diſpute, which is the more likely ſignification of the Word. But this let vs obſerue for our comfort, that whenſoeuer wee ſhal ſee the kings & Captaines, Nobles and Potentates of the earth, being ſolicited by the Ieſuites, prieſts, and the falſe Prophet, to leuy great armies, and make great powers to fight againſt the Goſpell, and the true profeſſours thereof, for the maintenance of great Babylon, they ſhall not preuaile, but bee vtterly ouerthrowne and deſtroyed. As in part wee ſee fulfilled in the yeare of our Lorde 1588. when the great and inuincible Armado of the Spaniards, as they thought, which was long in preparing againſt vs, and at laſt, by the inſtigation of the Ieſuites, brought vpon vs, came to Armageddon, as we know, God be praiſed. And in all time to come, in the like caſe, let them look for the like ſucceſſe. Well, now to grow to ſome concluſion of this point; wee doe plainely ſee that Rome

falleth, their kingdome waxeth darke, their Euphrates drieth vp, they eſpie it. The Dragon, the beaſt, & the falſe Prophet ſend out their frogs into all countries and kingdomes, hoping to preuent it by the help of the kings of the earth, and eſpecially the king of Spaine: but alas all in vaine! for they muſt come to Armageddon, when they haue done all that they can. For God fighteth from heauē againſt them, God bringeth them downe, and no power of man is able to vphold them.
                  But now let vs proceede to prooue the third maine point; which is, that Rome ſhall fall finally, and come to vtter deſolation. For all ſound Diuines are perſwaded of the fall of Babylon, and doe graunt that it falleth, and is in falling: but all are not ſo thoroughly perſwaded of the finall fall thereof in this life. Therefore now I wil proue by manifeſt Scripture, that Rome ſhall fall for a doo.Rome ſhall fall finally. Firſt, if the things be deeply conſidered and narrowly looked into, which Saint Iohn ſaith ſhall fall out vpon the pouring forth of the ſeuenth vial of Gods wrath, by the ſeuenth Angel, they doe fully portend a deadly downfall, and vtter ouerthrowe of Rome. For the ſeuenth vial is not poured vpon the earth, or ſea, or fountaines of waters, or on the Sunne, as the firſt foure vials were, which ſignified ſome particular iudgements; but it was poured forth into the verie aire, 
                        chapter 16.17. which ſignifieth the vniuerſalitie of it, and containeth the moſt general▪ and moſt grieuous iudgment, and vengeance of Almightie God, vpon the whole bodie of the kingdome of Antichriſt, a little before the laſt day. The

text ſaith, that vpon the pouring forth of this viall, there was a loud voice heard out of the temple of heauen from the throne: that is, 
                        verſ. 17 from the verie preſence of God, ſaying: It is done. It is diſpatched. The vtter ouerthrowe of Rome is fully concluded of, and all things finiſhed which belong to the pouring forth of the ſeuen vials, which containe the ſeuen laſt plagues, wherein the whole wrath of God is fulfilled, as appeareth chap. 15. as before it is ſaid, Babylon is fallen, 
                     
                        chapter 15.1. becauſe it ſhould certainly fal: So heere God himſelfe ſaith, It is done, becauſe it ſhal certainly be done. For whatſoeuer God hath determined to be done, is as it were alreadie done, becauſe it ſhall moſt certainlie be effected. Sith then the Lord hath pronounced this of Rome, there remaineth nothing but a dayly accompliſhment of it: and let all the papiſts know for a certaintie, that they muſt go to their geare, they muſt come to their paiment, there is no way of euaſion. For hath the Lord ſpoken it, and ſhall it not come to paſſe? Now vpon this that God ſaith, It is done, followeth preſentlie, that there vvere voices, and thunderings, and lightenings, 
                     
                        chapter 16.18 
                     and there vvas a great earthquake, ſuch as was not ſince men were vpon the earth, euen ſo mightie an earthquake. What is meant by thundrings, lightenings, and earthquakes in this Booke, I haue before ſhewed: to wit, 
                        chapter 6.12. commotions ſeditions, tumults, vprores, and alterations of ſtates, kingdomes, and common-wealths: and then the meaning of this place, is that there ſhall be horrible ſhakings, cōcuſſions, tumults, & great alteration of ſtates in al ye kingdoms which are ſubiect to Antichriſt, none

of them ſhall eſcape. For this ſeuenth viall of Gods wrath vpon the kingdome of the beaſt, is compared to a moſt horrible and bluſtering tempeſt, raiſed vp in the whole aire, that is, in all places of Antichriſts dominions. And it is ſpecially to be noted, as a thing of great moment, that the holy Ghoſt ſaith, There was neuer ſuch an earthquake as this, ſince the world beganne, and ſince men were vpon the earth. For aſſuredly, ſo ſoone as the ſeuenth Angell poureth forth his viall, the kingdome of Poperie ſhall go downe a maine, which ſhall not belong before the end of the world, as all circumſtances heere doe ſhew. After all this, Saint Iohn telleth vs the effect of this thundering, lightning, and extraordinarie earthquake; which is, 
                        chapter 16.19. 
                     that the great citie was diuided into three parts; that is, there ſhall bee a moſt horrible rent and diuiſion in the citie of Rome, and throughout all the Popes dominions. What this rent and diuiſion is, and how it ſhall bee, I cannot determine, being a thing to come, as all the reſt comprehended vnder the pouring forth of the ſeuenth viall. But this I am ſure of, that Rome ſhall go downe; and there ſhall be ſuch tumults, vprores, rents, diuiſions, diſſipations, and concuſſions in Rome, and throughout all the Romiſh iuriſdiction, as neuer was heard of, nor read of, ſince the world began. For Saint Iohn addeth, that Babylon came in remembrance before God, 
                     
                        verſ. 19 
                     to giue vnto her the cup of the wine of the fierceneſſe of his wrath: That is, God doth now at length call to mind all the wrongs done to his people, & all the righteous bloud ſhed, for the ſpace of ſeuen or eight hundred yeers, by

the whoore of Babylon, that he may be fully reuenged, and execute the fierceneſſe of his wrath both vpon her, and her whole kingdome: yea, and that in ſuch terrible and wrathfull maner, that there ſhall bee no place of refuge, no place to flie vnto for ſuccour. 
                        verſ. 20 For Saint ſaith, Euerie Ile fled away, and the mountaines were not found: Meaning, that the Papiſts in that day ſhall haue neither moutaine, nor Iland to flie vnto. And laſt of all, the holy Ghoſt ſaith, that there fell a great haile like talents out of heauen vpon the Idolaters: 
                     
                        chapter 16.21. 
                     inſomuch, that they blaſphemed God, becauſe of the plague of the haile. For the plague thereof was exceeding great. A talēt was about the weight of threeſcore pound, as ſome write. Then it followeth, that this haile of Gods wrath vpon the Papiſts, ſhal be moſt terrible and fearfull, and beate them all downe to the ground, as it were an haile of milſtones, or plough-irons. Nowe, when this haile of talents commeth, as aſſuredly come it ſhall, then ſhall the kingdome of Poperie bee beaten to duſt and powder: and therfore no maruell though the idolaters, ſeeing all this, bee in a moſt horrible rage, and blaſpheme God, as Saint Iohn ſaith, 
                        verſ. 21 becauſe of this exceeding and moſt extraordinarie plague, which ſhall then come vpon them. But nowe to conclude and wind vp all together: For as muc
                        •
                      as this laſt viall is powred into the aire (God ſaith, it is done) an extraordinarie earthquake followeth; the great citie of Rome is rent; Babylon called into queſtion; and feareful haileſtones of wrath poured down vpon the Idolaters: I do conclude, that Rome ſhal fall finally, and come to vtter deſtruction in this life.
                  
                     Nowe let vs proceede to further proofe. In the eighteenth chapter of this booke, the whoore of Babylon ſaith in her heart: 
                        chapter 18.8.9. 
                     Iſa. 47. 
                     I ſit, being a Queene, and am no widowe, and ſhall ſee no ſorrowe. Therefore ſhall her plagues come at one day, death, and ſorrow, and famine: and ſhee ſhall be burnt with fire. For that God which condemneth her, is a ſtrong Lord.
                  
                  Firſt, here Rome is deſcribed, as ſhee was in the height and toppe of her pride and ſecuritie, when ſhee held the dominion of the kings of the earth, and boaſted that ſhee was the head of the Catholike Church, carying her ſelfe very inſolently aboue all kings and Emperours, treading vppon their neckes, and making them attend at her gates barefoote in the middeſt of winter, as the ſtories report. Yea, and that ſhee was no widow; that is, no ſolitarie or deſolate perſon, but one that had manie louers, which were ſtrong to defende her, ſo as ſhee ſhould feele no want, nor ſee any ſorowe. But the time will come, and draweth on apace, wherein ſhee ſhal be throughly puniſhed for her haughtineſſe, and intolerable pride & ſecurity. For the holy Ghoſt ſaith, her plagues ſhal come at one day, that is, ſodainly, ſhortly and ſpeedily, euen death, ſorow and famine, and ſhe ſhall 
                           〈◊〉
                         burnt with fire. For that God which condemneth her, 
                           ••
                         a ſtrong Lord.
                  
                  If this bee not plaine enough to proue an vtter ouerthrow of Rome, I know not what can be plaine enough. For if death, famine, and fire will not pul her downe, I knowe not what ſhal pul her downe. But Saint Iohn ſaith flatly, that God himſelfe who

is a ſtrong Lord, will oppoſe himſelfe againſt Rome, and condemne her. If this ſtrong God take againſt her, who can vpholde her? Can the king of Spaine? can the Cardinalles? can the Emperour? can all the Dukes of Italy, and al the potentates of the earth, that take part with her? No, no,Iob. 23. they are al too weake. For if God take againſt a man, who can reclaime him, ſayth the Holy-Ghoſt? For he dooth whatſoeuer he will. And againe, God is wiſe in heart,
                     Iob. 9. 
                     and mighty in ſtrength, who euer hardened his hart againſt him and proſpered? If God call not backe his anger, the moſt proud helpes are bowed vnder him. And God ſayth by the Prophet: Can thy hands be ſtrong,
                     Ezech. 22. 
                     or can thy hart endure in the day that I ſhal haue to do with thee? Then it followeth, that though Babylon ſit as a Queene, & al her louers take part with her, yet becauſe the ſtrong Lord is againſt her, therefore ſhee ſhal come to vtter deſtruction. Some of good iudgement in the truth, haue gathered from this place, that the very City of Rome ſhal be burnt with fire;Amos. 1. ver. 4.7.10.14. Amos 2. ver. 2.5. which aſſuredly may wel bee. But this I am ſure of, that the phraſe of burning with fire, doth in the Prophets alwaies ſignifie an vtter deſtruction and deſolation of a City, or a kingdome, and therefore it followeth that Rome ſhal be vtterly deſtroied.
                  But behold yet ſtronger, and plainer proofe. 
                        chapter 18. verse 2. For Saint Iohn ſayth, a mighty Angel tooke vp a ſtone like a great milſtone, and caſt it into the ſea, ſaying, with ſuch violence ſhal that great City Babylon be caſt downe, and ſhal be found no more. Al men know, that old Babylon in Chaldaea was deſtroied by the Medes, and Perſians,

long before Saint Iohn writte this booke: and therefore that is not here meant, but the new Babylon which is Rome, as afore hath bin prooued. The Phraſes of ſpeech, and the ſignes which the Prophets vſed to declare the deſtruction and deſolation of olde Babylon, are heere alluded vnto in the deſtruction of Rome. For we reade in the prophecy of Ieremy, that the Prophet hauing written in a booke al the euil that ſhould come vpon Babel, for holding Gods people ſo long in moſt miſerable captiuity, ſayd to Seraiah, When thou commeſt vnto Babel,
                     Ier. 51. ver. 61 62.63.64. 
                     thou ſhalt reade all theſe words, and when thou haſt made an end of reading this book, thou ſhalt bind a ſtone to it, and caſt it into the middeſt of Euphrates, and ſhalt ſay: Thus ſhall Babel be drowned, and ſhall not riſe vp from the euill that I will bring vpon her, although they wearie themſelues. Now let vs conſider how this agreeth with the ſame which is heere ſet downe, and wee ſhal finde, that all thinges are here ſet downe, with greater force, to expreſſe, as it were, a deeper vengeance, and a more heauie (and vnrecouerable deſtruction). Firſt, there is a man, here is a mighty Angel: there the man taketh vp a ſtone, heere the Angell taketh vp a great ſtone, like a milſtone: there the ſtone is caſte into the riuer, here into the deepe ſea. Al theſe circumſtances being applied to Rome, doo greatly aggrauate the matter,Rome ſhall fall without all hope of recouery. and verie plainely ſhewe, that it ſhal fal, Without al hope of recouery. For the Lorde declareth by this forcible ſigne, of caſting a milſtone into the ſea, that the City and kingdome of Antichriſt ſhal bee caſt deepe downe into perdition,

and ſhall lie ouerwhelmed, and drowned in the ſame for euer. For if olde Babylon was vtterly deſtroied, and came to a final deſolation in this life; much more ſhal Rome, as the Holy Ghoſt diſputeth. But olde Babylon came to vtter ruine and deſolatition in this life, as both Iſay and Ieremy doe witneſſe: Therefore newe Babylon; that is, Rome, ſhal come to vtter deſtruction: and as the Holy-ghoſt here ſayth, ſhall be found no more, or ſhal fal without all hope of recouery. Stories doe report that Rome hath beene ſundry times deſtroied by the Gothes and Vandales, and others, yea once fired and quite burnt vp, but afterward built and raiſed vp againe by the Emperours: But here the Holy-ghoſt ſayth expreſlie, that it ſhal haue a final fal, and an vnrecouerable deſtruction. For can a milſtone, caſt into the bottome of the ſea, euer be gotte vp againe? no, no, it is impoſſible. Therefore, let the Ieſuits, and Seminarie Prieſts, doe what they can, they ſhal neuer ſet vp Rome againe; they ſhal neuer reſtore her to her former ſtate and dignity; they ſhal neuer repaire her credit againe. Let he Pope, and Cardinals, and the King of Spaine, and al the world, and al the diuels in hel, ioyne together, they ſhal neuer get vp this milſtone out of the bottome of the ſea. For the Angel hath caſt it in with ſuch a violence, that no power of man ſhal euer fetch it out againe. True it is indeede, that the Ieſuits beſtir them, and the Seminary Prieſts, and Papiſts doe worke apace in al landes, and aduenture themſelues in moſt deſperate manner, to recouer againe the credit of Popery, and to ſet vp againe

the dignity and the power of the Pope, and the glory of their Church and City, and their bold enterpriſes, doe make many euen to doubt that they wil againe one day preuaile. But aſſuredly wee are to make ful reckoning, that although heere and there they may ſupport for a time, ſome ruinous partes of their rotten frame: yet doo what they can, it ſhal in the end downe vpon their heades, and come to vtter deſolation. Indeede, Rome ſtandeth yet, and Popery is not quite fallen downe. But they are diſcloſed, their credit is cracked, their power decaieth: and ſo this thinge is begunne, and the time draweth on when it ſhal bee fully accompliſhed. He that had beheld the Power, the Pompe, the riches and eſtimation of the Church of Rome aboute ſome foureſcoure yeeres paſte, and looketh vpon it now, ſhal ſee a woonderfull alteration. It ſeemed then to bee without al daunger of ſhaking: for the Emperour and the Kinges of the earth ſtoode foorth with al their force and might, power and pollicy, to vphold it: but God be thanked, we ſee how it is already come down, and ſhal come down euery day more & more, whoſoeuer ſayth nay to it.
                  But beholde yet more, and more plaine proofe for the vtter deſolation of Rome. For Saint Iohn deſcribeth the eternal deſolation thereof, by denial of thoſe things which are in Cities inhabited: Firſt hee ſayth, there ſhall be no more any voice of harpers, Muſitians, 
                     
                        chapter 18.22.23.24. 
                     Pipers, and Trumpeters, heard in Rome, that is, al muſick ſhal ſurceaſe, which argueth an vtter deſolation. For what inhabited cities are without muſicke?
                  
                     Secondly, hee ſayth there ſhall be no craftes man of what trade ſoeuer found in Rome;Rome ſhall come to vtter deſolation. which argueth an vtter deſolation. For what flouriſhing City is without artificers?
                  Thirdly, he ſayth, no light of a candle ſhall any more ſhine in Rome, which argueth an vtter deſolation. For what inhabited Citie is without candles?
                  Fourthly, hee ſayth, no ſounde of a milſtone ſhal bee heard in Rome, which argueth an vtter deſolation. For what Citie is without milles to grinde their corne?
                  Laſtly, hee ſayth, the voice of the Bridegroome and of the bride ſhall be heard no more in Rome, which argueth an vtter deſolation: for what Citie is without bride and bridegroome? and without mariage for procreation ſake? Then I conclude from al this, that Rome ſhal fal finallie, and come to vtter deſtruction.
                  But behold yet more plaine and pregnant proofe drawen from the pitiful mournings, and moſt woful lamentations of the Kinges of the earth, the Merchantes, and the Mariners, who al doe iointlie lament and mourne, for the deſtruction and deſolation of Rome, crying, alas, alas, 
                     
                        chapter 18. ver. 10. Verſ. 17. Verſ. 19. 
                     that great City Babylon, that mighty City: for in one houre is thy iudgement come: In one houre ſo great riches are come to deſolation In one houre ſhe is made deſolate. What can bee more plainely, and fully ſpoken, to prooue an vtter deſolation of Rome? What can bee more required, then to haue it ſet downe in expreſſe tearmes? as here we ſee. For nowe the Holy-Ghoſt vſeth no figure, no

hardneſſe, no circumlocution, no obſcurity: but telleth vs plainely, and thriſe for failing, that Babylon, that is, Rome, is made deſolate, is come to deſolation. 
                        ver. 10 
                     
                        ver. 15 
                     
                        ver. 18 Moreouer it is ſaid that the Kinges, Merchants and Mariners, ſhall ſtand a far off for feare of her torment, and they ſhall weepe and waile, when they ſhall ſee the ſmoake of that her burning, ſignifying that the torment, and plague of Rome ſhal be ſo great, that Kinges for al their might ſhal not dare to come nigh to reſcueher: no not the Kinge of Spaine with al his great might and power, hee ſhal bee faine to ſtand a far off, or rather vtterly to forſake her, weeping and wailing as wel as others, for her moſt feareful, and vnrecouerable deſtruction.
                  But wee are to obſerue in al this, that the holy Ghoſt vſeth a figure or kinde of ſpeech, which they cal a Proſopopoeta or fayning of a perſon, whereby the Popiſhe Kinges beeing dead and rotten are brought, in lamenting, and bewailing the fal of Babylon, as if they were aliue againe: or elſe it may bee vnderſtood of the Cardinalles, and Legates, which are euen as Kings vppon the earth. But it cannot be vnderſtood of chriſtian Kinges, for they ſhal be the inſtruments of God to pul down great Babylon, as wee ſhal heare anone. Furthermore, let vs conſider the cauſes of this great lamentation, for the deadlie downefal of Babylon, by the Popiſh Kings, Merchants, and Marriners. Firſt the Kings, they mourne and lament, ſayth Saint Iohn, becauſe they had committed fornication with the great whoore of Babylon, 
                     
                        ver. 9 
                     and liued in pleaſure with her. That is, they

had liued long with her in abominable idolatry, and pleaſed her that waie: and therefore ſhee gaue them diſpenſations to liue in wantonneſſe and al carnal pleaſures, and euen to doe what they liſt, ſpending their dayes in ſenſuality and al kinde of fleſhlie delightes.
                  Secondly, the Merchants do weepe and waile, 
                        ver. 12.13.14. becauſe no man buyeth their ware any more. Theſe Merchants are not named, but they may eaſily be knowne by their wares, which the holy-Ghoſt deſcribeth, to witte, that they be the Popiſh Merchants, the ſhauen Merchants, who are heere brought in mourning and lamenting for the loſſe of their gaine. The Monks, Friers, & Prieſts cannot haue that vtterance of their wares, that in times paſt they haue had; their wares are nowe out of requeſt; their markets wax deade, and they haue colde takings. When theſe fellowes paſſe by the great Monaſteries and Abbeyes, and ſee them made ruinous heapes, and withal remember the fatte reuenewes, the good cheere, the pleaſure and delight which ſometimes they haue had in thoſe places, it cuts their heartes, and maketh them ſhake their heads at it, ſaying, alas, alas, that great City that was clothed in fine linnen and purple and ſcarlet, and gilded with gold, 
                     
                        verſ. 16 
                     and pretious ſtones, and pearles, for in one houre ſo great riches are come to deſolation. Marke then that the ruine of their great City, with al the pompe, pleaſure and riches thereof, is that which yet ſticketh in their ſtomackes.
                  Thirdly, the Mariners doe greately mourne and

lament, 
                        chapter 18. verse 17.18.19. for the loſſe of their profit and commodity. For while Rome had dominion ouer the kingdomes, and the Pope ruled ouer al, euen as a God vppon the earth, there was nothing but trudging ouer the ſeas to Rome out of al landes, and againe from thence, there was carrying and recarrying; in ſomuch that multitudes of Mariners and Shipmaſters were continually ſet on worke, & gained greately therby. No maruaile then though theſe Mariners are brought in among other friends of Rome bewailing her deſtruction, euen with duſt vpon their heads weeping, and crying, and ſaying, 
                        verſ. 19 
                     Alas, alas, that great City, wherein were made rich all that had ſhips on the ſea by her coſtlines. For in one houre ſhe is made deſolate. Thus we ſee how the Kings and Merchants and Mariners ſhal bewaile the vtter ruine and great deſolation of Rome, for the loſſe of their pleaſure, their gaine, and their profit.
                  Moreouer wee are to obſerue, that that which is ſpoken by the old Prophets Iſay and Ieremiah, touching the vtter deſolation of olde Babel, is applyed by Saint Iohn to newe Babel, which is Rome. Touching the olde Eaſterne Babylon, the Prophet ſayth thus:Iſay. 13.19 
                     Babel the glory of kingdomes, the beauty and pride of the Chaldeans, ſhall be as the deſtruction of God in Sodome and Gomorrah. It ſhal not be inhabited for euer, neither ſhall the Arabian pitch his tent there, neither ſhall the ſheppeheardes make their foldes there. But Ziim ſhall lodge there, and their houſes ſhal be ful of Ohim: Oſtriches ſhall dwell there, and the Satyres ſhall dance there, that is, Fairies, Hobgoblins,

Night-ſpirits, and ſuch like, whereby is ſignified the vtter deſolation of olde Babylon. 
                        chapter 18. v. 2. Now Saint Iohn applyeth al this to Rome ſaying, Babylon that great City is become the habitation of diuels, and the hold of al foule ſpirits, and a cage of euerie vncleane and hatefull bird. Noting heereby both the filthineſſe of Rome, and alſo her vtter deſolation.
                  But nowe let vs proceede to our laſt and greateſt argument, to prooue the finall fall, and vtter deſtruction of Rome, and all Romiſh power and authoritie. In the nineteenth chapter of this Propheſie our Lord Ieſus is deſcribed, ſitting vpon his vvhite horſe, 
                     
                        chapter 6.2. which is the miniſterie of the Goſpell, as hath before beene proued; and is moſt gloriouſly brought in by Saint Iohn, as graund Captaine and Generall of the field, fighting with all his armie againſt Antichriſt and his ſouldiers. Saint Iohn giueth him goodly names and titles, calling him the word of God, the King of kings, and Lord of lords: 
                        chapter 19. v. 12.13.14.15.16. and ſaith, that hee hath a name written that no man knew but himſelfe; which is his infinite glorie and maieſtie. And moreouer, that his eyes were as a flame of fire, and on his head manie crownes, and a ſharpe ſword in his mouth, and clothed with his warlike garment dipt in bloud, and all his heauenly ſouldiers followed him vpon white horſes: meaning thereby all Chriſtian Kings, Dukes, Lords, Nobles, Captaines, Preachers and Profeſſours of true religion. This graund Captaine with all theſe worthie ſouldiers, ſaith Saint Iohn, ſhall muſter together, and prepare themſelues to fight againſt

the beaſt, and the falſe Prophet, and all their forces, and at laſt hee ſeeth them ioine battaile. 
                        verſ. 19 
                     I ſaw (ſaith Saint Iohn) the Beaſt and the kings if the earth, 
                     
                        verſ. 19 
                     and their armies gathered together to make battell againſt him that ſate vpon the vvhite horſe, and againſt his armie. Now all this is to be vnderſtood of the battels betwixt the Papiſts and the Proteſtants in theſe laſt dayes. But, may ſome man ſay, who ſhall haue the victorie? what is the ſucceſſe? what was the iſſue? Let vs heare of that. The holy Ghoſt anſwereth, that the Beaſt and the falſe Prophet vvere taken, foyled and ouercome:The Proteſtāts ſhal haue the day. vſing a warlike phraſe, becauſe in the warres they vſe to take the greateſt Captaines and Commaunders aliue, and to put them to their raunſoms. The like vnto this wee haue in the ſeuenteenth Chapter, where Saint Iohn telleth vs, that when the Popiſh kings and Potentates ſhall make warre againſt Chriſt and his Goſpell, they ſhall haue the like ſucceſſe vnto this. For, ſaith hee, Theſe haue one mind, 
                     
                        chapter 17. v. 13.14. 
                     and ſhall giue their power and authoritie vnto the beaſt, they ſhall fight with the Lambe, and the Lambe ſhall ouercome them: for hee is Lord of Lords, and king of kings.
                  
                  But, may ſome man ſay, when the Leaders and commanders of the Popiſh armies ſhal be taken captiue and ſet at their ranſomes, what ſhall become of the inferiour Captaines and ſouldiers? The holy Ghoſt anſwereth, that the remnant were ſlaine with the ſword of him that ſitteth vpon the horſe: That is, they were put to the ſword, 
                        chapter 19. v. 21. and al the foules were filled full with their fleſh. And for this cauſe S. Iohn

ſaith, that he ſaw an Angell ſtand in the Sunne, 
                        chapter 19. v. 17. who cried with a loud voice, ſaying to al the foules that did flie by the middeſt of heauen, Come and gather your ſelues together vnto the ſupper of the great God.
                  Now to make this plaine. Wee know, that they which proclaime anie matter, ſeeke ſome market croſſe, or high place to ſtand in, where they may beſt be heard: So this Angell, which proclaimeth the victorie againſt Antichriſt, before anie ſtroke bee ſtricken, becauſe of the certaintie of it, ſtandeth in the Sunne, as it were in the Theater and middeſt of the world, as in a place moſt fit for his purpoſe, that hee may bee heard throughout all the earth. Now this proclamation is directed to all the foules of the aire, to bid them to a ſupper, which is here called the ſupper of the great God. But it may be demanded, what cheare ſhall they haue? The holie Ghoſt anſwereth, that they ſhal eat the fleſh of kings, and the fleſh of great Captaines, and the fleſh of mightie men, 
                        verſ. 18 and the fleſh of horſes, and of horſmen, and the fleſh of all freemen, and bondmen, and of ſmall and great.
                  This we knowe, that when men are ſlaine in great numbers in the warres, their bodies lie ſcattered, as meat for the foules of the aire. And therefore heere all foules are inuited and bidden to a great ſupper, made them by the great God, whoſe hand is in all this; their cheare, and their dainties are reckoned vp to bee the fleſh of kings and Captaines, &c. Now out of all this may be ſtrongly concluded, that heereafter in all time to come, when the armies

of the Pope, which is the beaſt, the armies of the king of Spaine, who hath giuen his power and authoritie vnto the beaſt, & is his great vpholder; when the Armies of the Cardinall his great confederate; whē the armies of the Leaguers, his great adherents; yea whē al theſe, & all other Popiſh armies ſhall ioyne & band thēſelues together againſt the chriſtian kings and defenders of the Goſpell: they ſhall haue a notable ouerthrow, inſomuch that their dead carkeſſes ſhall euen couer the earth, and the foules of the aire ſhall come to their great ſupper, which the Lord of hoſts will make readie for them. For aſſuredly, and out of al doubt, they that liue ſhall ſee the fulfilling of all this,The popiſh armies ſhal go down by heaps and ſhall ſee the popiſh armies go downe by heapes in all countries and kinſtdomes, and be made meat for the foules of the aire. For the holy Ghoſt ſaith, 
                        chapter 16. v. 16. 
                     They ſhall come to Armageddon, that is, the place where their Armies ſhall be deſtroyed. And againe, If anie leade into captiuitie, 
                     
                        chapter 13. v. 10. 
                     he ſhall goe into captiuitie. If anie kill with a ſword, he muſt be killed with a ſword: For as the Popiſh forces haue in former time taken captiue the people of God, and cruelly murdered them: ſo nowe the time draweth on apace wherein they themſelues ſhall be taken and put to the ſword. And therefore now at laſt I conclude, that Rome ſhal fall finally, and come to vtter deſtruction in this life. For as Rome did riſe vp by degrees in this life, ſo Rome ſhall fall by degrees in this life: As Rome grew vp to her full height and higheſt pitch in this life; ſo it ſhall come to her loweſt ebbe and greateſt declination in this life: I meane before the comming

of Chriſt vnto iudgement. For the falling downe of haile like talents vppon the kingdome of the beaſt, ſhall bee in this life: The extraordinarie earthquake vpon the dominions of Antichriſt, ſhall be in this life: The comming of the Popiſh Armies to Armageddon, ſhall bee in this life:Rome ſhal be vtterly deſtroied in this life. The mourning of the kings, merchants and marriners, for the ouerthrowe of Babylon, ſhall bee in this life: The great battaile betwixt the beaſt and him that ſitteth vpon the white horſe, ſhall be in this life, before the day of iudgement: The pouring foorth of al the ſeuen vials of Gods wrath vpon the kingdome of the beaſt, ſhall bee euen in this life. For it were an abſurde thing to ſay, anie of theſe things ſhal bee after this life; or to ſay that theſe things ſhal not bee til the verie comming of Chriſt; for they are all things to be effected heere in this earth: and the holy Ghoſt doth deſcribe them as things to be done vpon the face of the earth: for otherwiſe wee could haue ſmall comfort in anie of theſe things, if they ſhould not bee done heere in earth, or if they ſhould all bee deferred till the verie comming of Chriſt, and in the meane time Antichriſt ſhal ſtil preuaile.2. Theſſ. 2. An obiection anſwered. But it wil be obiected, that Saint Paul ſaith, The Lord ſhall conſume Antichriſt with the ſpirit of his mouth, and aboliſh him with the brightneſſe of his comming: Therefore before his comming he ſhall not be vtterly aboliſhed. True it is indeede, hee ſhall not vtterly be cut off in all his members, til the verie comming of Chriſt. For there will bee ſome Papiſts remaining in all countries, euen vnto the end:

there be ſome, nay, manie, that will carie the beaſts marke euen til the laſt day. But the holy Ghoſt in this Propheſie ſpeaketh of the reuolting and falling away of kingdoms, and countries from the ſea of Rome; whereby it ſhal come to paſſe, that it ſhal bee exceedingly weakened, and brought ſo lowe, that the kings of the earth ſhall eaſily take it; or as the holy Ghoſt ſpeaketh, ſhal eaſily paſſe ouer their Euphrates, 
                        chapter 16. v. 12. being dried vp▪ and enter their Babylon. But then wil ſome man ſay, Shal there be no Pope at all a little before the comming of Chriſt? I anſwer, and not I, but the holy Ghoſt for mee. Hee ſhall bee a poore Pope, 
                        chapter 17. v. 16. 
                     The Pope ſhall be brought very low. 2. Sam. 3. a naked Pope, a deſolate pope, a Pope whoſe fleſh ſhal be torne, whoſe fleſh ſhal wither, as wee ſhall heare anon. He ſhal be ſuch a Pope, as Iſhboſheth was a king, when Abner and all Iſrael fel away from him. He ſhal bee ſuch a Pope, as the king of Portugall is a king.
                  But it will be obiected, How knowe you this? are you a Prophet? can you foretel of things to come? I anſwer, Saint Iohn was a Prophet, and indued with a prophetical Spirit in this matter of his viſions and reuelations; and I ſpeake no more then Saint Iohn hath ſet downe. And therefore I hope I ſpeake within compaſſe: for I do but relate Saint Iohns words, and explaine them in ſuch meaſure as I am able. This Propheſie doth plainely declare, that Babylon ſhall fall; Rome ſhall come downe, the Pope ſhall neuer be eſteemed againe. And I doe beleeue it to bee ſo; I beleeue God; I beleeue his word; I beleeue all that is ſpoken in the Scriptures: and I doe endeuour

to perſwade others alſo. For ſith the holy Ghoſt hath ſo plainely, and ſo fully foretold it, why ſhoulde we not beleeue it? Why are we ſo ſlowe to beleeue all that is written in the Scriptures? Hath God ſpoken it, and ſhal it not come to paſſe? Shall any iote of his word faile? Shall wee thinke hee ieſteth with vs, when hee doth ſo often and ſo ſeriouſly tell vs of the downefall of Rome? Surelie, ſurelie, the cauſe why men are not fully perſwaded of the finall fall of Rome, is, becauſe they doe not diligentlie peruſe this booke of the Apocalypſe. But let men be ſtudious and diligent in this booke, and they ſhall bee out of al doubt, that Rome is the great whoore of Babylon; that the Pope is Antichriſt, and the Papacy the beaſt.
                  But nowe mee thinketh I heare ſome man ſay, how is it like that Popery ſhal fal downe more and more heere amongſt vs, ſith it hath ſo many friends, backers, and vpholders, and ſeemeth to gather ſtrength, and make an heade againe? I anſwere, that al is but a lightening before death. I anſwere, that al is but the ſtopping of a water-brooke, or making a damme ouerthwart it, which wil cauſe it to ſwel more, and breake ouer with greater violence. I anſwere, that all is no more then is foretolde, that 2the Ieſuits ſhal come forth like frogges out of their puddles, and mariſh groundes, and keepe a croaking for a time, til they haue croaked their owne deſtruction, and many others. For they ſhal neuer ſet vp Popery here in England, to ſtand and continue, doe what they can. I muſt needes confeſſe, that our

ſinnes, beeing ſo horrible and outragious, as they are, and being grown to ſuch an height, and ripeneſſe, do deſerue ſome fearefull vengeance, and that God hath a iuſt controuerſie againſt vs, as ſometimes he had againſt Iſrael, becauſe there vvas no mercie, nor truth,
                     Hoſ. 4. 
                     nor knowledge of God in the land: but ſwearing, lying, killing, ſtealing, and whooring, and bloud toucheth bloud, and therefore ſaith God, the land ſhal mourn, &c. But yet I hope for his couenant ſake, for his great mercies ſake, for his names ſake, for his glory ſake, and for his Church ſake, he will be gratious and fauorable vnto vs, & not bring vpon vs that vēgeance which our ſins haue deſerued: or at leaſtwiſe though he correct vs, as indeed he hath iuſt cauſe, & we may iuſtly feare it; yet he will doe it in mercie, for our amendment, and not in wrath to our deſtruction, as he ſaith by his Prophet:Ier. 30.11. Ier. 46.28. Ier. 10.24. 
                     I will not vtterly deſtroy thee, but I vvill correct thee by iudgement, and not vtterly cut thee off. But howſoeuer it ſhall pleaſe the moſt wiſe God to deale with vs; yet this I ſay, and am perſwaded of, that Poperie ſhall neuer bee eſtabliſhed againe in this kingdome; my reaſon is, becauſe the euerlaſting Goſpell caried abroad by the Angell that flieth in the middeſt of heauen, ſhall ſpread ſtill more and more throughout all the kingdoms of Europe, 
                        chapter 14.6. 
                     Rom. 11.24. as appeareth Chap. 14. ver.6. for otherwiſe how ſhal Rome fal? how ſhal the Iewes euer be conuerted? how ſhall fire come downe from heauen, and deuour both Gog and Magog, 
                     
                        chapter 20.9 as the holy Ghoſt foretelleth ſhall come to paſſe: and as we ſhal heare more anon? Moreouer Saint Iohn telleth vs plainly, that in theſe

laſt dayes the Goſpell ſhall bee preached to many people,
                     Apoc. 10. ver.11 Apoc. 11. ver. 13 
                     and nations, and tongues, and to many kings. And further he ſaith, that in this age wherein wee liue, many ſhall renounce Idolatry, repent and giue glorie to the God of heauen. But ſome man may ſay, how proue you that this kingdom is one of them which S. Iohn ſpeaketh of, and which he meaneth, wherein the goſpell ſhall be preached vnto the end of the world? I anſwere,Apoc. 17 ver. 12.13.16. that it is prooued out of the 17. chapter of this propheſie, where the holy ghoſt telleth vs flatly, that thoſe ten kingdomes of Europe which had a lōg time ben the ten hornes & ſtrength of the beaſt, 
                     
                        chapter 17. verse 13 
                     & being of one minde, had giuen their power & authority vnto the beaſt, ſhould now in theſe laſt daies riſe vp againſt the whore of Babylō, make war againſt her, hate her & make her deſolate. But this kingdome is one of thoſe ten hornes, 
                        ver. 16 and one of thoſe ten kingdomes, which a long time had giuen her power & authoritie vnto the beaſt. Therefore as this kingdome hath happily begun to hate the whore, and to make her deſolate and naked: ſo vndoubtedly ſhee ſhall continue vnto the end of the world. For if this kingdome,England and other kingdomes which haue forſaken the beaſt, ſhall ſo continue vnto the end of the world. and other kingdomes which now hate the whore, doe not continue, how ſhall ſhee bee made deſolate and naked &c? Then it ſhould ſeeme, the beaſt ſhall reuiue and recouer himſelfe againe, and ſo S. Iohn ſhall be found a falſe prophet. But God is true, and all men are liers, & Saint Iohn ſhall bee found a true prophet: and therefore theſe kingdomes of Europe which haue begun to hate the whore, ſhal cōtinue, & neuer giue her ouer,

till (as the holy ghoſt ſaith) they haue eaten her fleſh, & burnt her with fire: that is, till they haue vtterly deuoured her. But heere it will be obiected, that in the latter daies iniquitie ſhall haue the vpper hand. I anſwere firſt, that I finde no ſuch place of ſcripture. But this I find, that our Lord Ieſus foretelleth his diſciples, that very ſhortly after his death & reſurrection, many ſeducers and falſe teachers ſhould ariſe, which ſhould deceiue many, and draw them away from the loue of the goſpell: and ſaith hee, becauſe iniquitie ſhall bee increaſed,
                     Math. 24.12. 
                     the loue of many ſhall bee cold. But this ſpeech of our ſauiour, doth not properly concerne our times. But yet it muſt needes be granted, that the wicked ſhall wax worſe and worſe, & the world ſhall not amend, but ſtill bee worſe and worſe, 
                        chapter 14. ver. 1 14 & 18. and grow to a greater height and ripeneſſe of ſinne, as appeareth in this propheſie. Yet for all this wee muſt note withall, that the number of true beleeuers in thoſe laſt daies, 
                        chapter 11. ver. 1 ver. 11. ver. 13. ſhall bee very many, as this booke doth alſo teach. But it may bee obiected, how can this geare ſtand together, that in the laſt daies there ſhall bee multitudes and millions of reprobates, and moſt wicked & abhominable perſons, and yet withall, a great increaſe of true beleeuers? I anſwere, that the world will bee alwaies like it ſelfe, impious and vnbeleeuing. But the church ſhall purely worſhip God, and that with daily increaſing, euen vnto the end.
                  But now me thinketh I heare ſome man ſay, what likelyhood is there of all this which you write touching

the ouerthrow of Rome? Doe wee not ſee, that Rome is yet ſtrong? Doth not Italy, Spaine, the greateſt part of France, and Netherland, and Germany, ſtand for her defence? Hath not the whore ſtill many and great bearers, and vpholders, what likelyhood is there thē, that euer ſhe ſhal be brought ſo low as you ſpeake of? I anſwere,Wee may not ſay, what likelyhood is ther of this? that in this caſe we muſt not aske this queſtion what likelyhood. We muſt not conſult with fleſh and bloud. Wee muſt not take counſell of humane reaſon. For God is maruellous in his deuiſes, and when hee hath once decreed and determined of any future euent, he will compaſſe it by meanes far ſurpaſſing all humane reach and capacitie: yea by ſuch plots and deuiſes, as mans wit could neuer haue once dreamed of. For hee hath all meanes in heauen & earth in his hands, and is admirable in all his proceedings, and therefore we may not aske this queſtion, what likelyhood, or how can it bee, or how can it poſſiblie come to paſſe? What likelyhood was there an hundred yeeres paſt, when Rome was in her height, and all the kingdomes of Europe ſtood for her, that euer ſhe ſhould haue been forſaken of ſo many of her old friends, as at this day ſhee is? What likelyhood was there, that when the Pope could commaund the Emperor, and all the kings of Europe, and their kingdomes, that euer hee ſhould haue beene brought ſo low as at this day hee is, God bee thanked? What likelyhood was there that euer poore Martin Luther ſhould ſtand out with the euerlaſting goſpell in his mouth

againſt the Pope, Emperour, & as it were the whole world, & yet dye in his bed in a good old age? What likelyhood was there that Henry the eight, of famous memory, ſhould renounce Rome, oppoſe himſelfe againſt the Pope, and ſuppreſſe the Abbies, Priories, and Monaſteries in this kingdome, and take their lands and liuings into his owne hands? Therefore I conclude, that when God hath decreed the vtter ouerthrow of Rome, wee muſt not aske this queſtion, how can it be? or which way ſhall it be brought about? For the ſcriptures doe teach that God in all ages, hath done the greateſt exploits, either by himſelfe alone without meanes, or elſe by weake meanes, or contrary to all meanes.
                  
                     2. Chro. 20.
                     By himſelfe without meanes hee ouerthrew the Moabits, Ammonites, and them of mount Seir, which made warre againſt good king Iehoſaphat.
                  
                  
                     Exod. 14.
                     By himſelf he deſtroied Pharaoh, & his army in the red Sea.
                  
                  
                     Ioſ. 6. 2. King. 19.
                     By himſelfe hee ouerthrew Iericho, that great citie.
                  
                  
                     By himſelfe hee ſlew the huge army of the Aſſyrians, that made warre againſt Ezechias.
                  
                  
                     2. Chro. 14.
                     By himſelfe hee ſmote the great and dreadfull army of the Ethiopians before Aſa, and before Iudah.
                  
                  
                     2. King. 6.
                     By himſelfe hee ſmote the Syrians, which beſieged Dothan the citie where the prophet Eliſha was.
                  
                  
                     Iud. 7.
                     By weake meanes hee ouerthrew the innumerable army of the Midianites, euen by Gedeons three hundred.
                  
                  
                     1. Sam. 14.
                     By weake meanes he ſlew a garriſon of the Philiſtines, euen by Ionathan and his armour-bearer.
                  
                  
                     Gen. 14.
                     By weake meanes he ouerthrew the kings of Sodome &

thereabouts, euen by Abraham, & his family.
                  
                  
                     He ouerthrew Goliah by Dauid: Siſera by Iael:
                     1 Sam 17· Iud 4. Iud. 9. Dan. 3. 
                     Abimilech by a woman.
                  
                  
                     Contrary to meanes, hee ſaued the three children from burning, being in the fire.
                  
                  
                     Contrary to meanes, hee ſaued Ionas from drowning,
                     Ion. 2. 
                     being caſt into the ſea.
                  
                  
                     Contrary to meanes,
                     Dan. 6. 
                     hee preſerued Daniel from deuouring, being caſt into the Lions denne.
                  
                  
                     Contrary to meanes, hee kept the Iſraelites from drowning, being in the bottome of the ſea.
                     Exod. 14.
                  
                  
                     Contrary to meanes,
                     Ioſ. 10. 
                     and to all expectation hee cauſed the Sunne to ſtand ſtill at noone day, whileſt he overthrew the fiue kings of Canaan by Ioſuah.
                  
                  Therefore I conclude, that foraſmuch as God in all ages hath effected the moſt ſtrange and admirable things, either by himſelfe without meanes, or by very weake meanes, or contrary to all meanes, therefore it is in vaine to aske this queſtion,The vtter ouerthrow of Rome concluded of. how or by what meanes ſhall Rome bee deſtroyed? for it is inough for vs to know that it ſhall be deſtroyed, and come to vtter deſolation. And in my iudgement the holy ghoſt hath ſo often, & ſo plainely affirmed this, that no man ſhould any more make any doubt of it,Apoc, 14.8. Apoc. 16 2. Apoc 17.8. Apoc. 17.11. Apoc. 18.21. Apoc. 18.8. Apoc. 17 16. Apoc. 18 22. Apoc. 18.9. or once call it into queſtion. For what can bee more plaine, then to ſay, Rome is fallen: Rome ſhall fall. Great haileſtones like talants ſhall fall vpon it. It ſhall goe to perdition: It ſhall fall to deſtruction: It ſhall bee caſt downe like a great milſlone into the bottome of the ſea. It ſhall be burnt with fire: It ſhall bee made deſolate and naked: It ſhall bee

without inhabitants. All the popiſh ſort both high & low, ſhall with great mourning & lamentation bewaile the deſolatiō therof.
                     Apoc. 16.16. Apoc. 19.20. 
                     Their armies ſhall come to Armageddon. The beaſt & the falſe prophet ſhall bee taken, & their captaines & ſouldiours ſlaine by infinit heapes, & their carkaſes made meate for the foules of the aire. If all this be not plaine inough, I cannot tell what can bee plaine inough. True it is indeed, the holy Ghoſt doth not name Rome, but it is apparant by the circumſtances, that all theſe places muſt needes bee vnderſtood of Rome, of Romiſh power, and of the Romiſh armies. For there can be no other ſoūd ſenſe giuen of them, as all diuine writers, and interpreters doe affirme, both new & olde. And therefore I conclude, that S. Iohn in this propheſie could not ſpeake more plainly, except hee ſhould haue named Rome. For hee nameth Babylon. He nameth the great citie, which then raigned ouer the kings of the earth. He nameth the citie ſituate vpon ſeauen hils. Hee nameth the citie which had ſeauen ſeuerall gouernments. And therefore out of all doubt hee meaneth Rome.
                  
                  Well then, ſith it is ſo that Rome and all Romiſh power and authoritie ſhall fall flat downe, and come to vtter deſtruction and deſolation in this life, let all men take heed how they ioine with Rome: how they ioyne with the Romiſh Church, and how they receiue the beaſts marke, for aſſuredly they ſhal al be deſtroyed together, both in this life, & in that which is to come, as wee ſhall heare by and by.
                  Let all wiſe men therefore, and all ſuch as haue any

care of their ſaluation, follow the wholeſome counſell and aduiſe of the holy ghoſt, which ſaith, Goe out of her my people,
                     Apoc. 81.4.5. 
                     that yee be not partakers of her ſinnes, and that yee receiue not of her plagues: for her ſins are come vp to Heauen, and God hath remembred her iniquities. Our onely wiſdome then wilbe to ſeperate our ſelues from the whore of Babylon, that is, from the Church of Rome, and to ioyne our ſelues with all ſpeed to the true Church of God, that is, the Church of the Proteſtants, for this ſhall ſtand and floriſh: the other ſhall fall downe and periſh.
                  But what then,Gods people are to reioice in the ouerthr
                           •
                        w of Rome. Apoc. 18.20. ſhall wee bee ſory for the fall of Babylon and the ruine of Rome? No no. The holy Ghoſt counſelleth vs greatly to reioyce in her deſtruction and ouerthrow, ſaying, O Heauens reioyce ouer her, and ye holy Apoſtles & Prophets, becauſe God hath giuen your iudgement on her. We are therefore to be ſo far from mourning & lamenting for the deſolation of Rome, as the kings, merchants, mariners & other her friends, as that it ought to be the very ioy and reioicing of our hearts. For S. Iohn ſaith, that not onely the holy Angels, Prophets, Apoſtles & Martyrs ſhall reioyce at the deſtruction of Rome: but alſo all the Saints, and the whole bodie of the Church. And therfore he ſaith, that after the vtter ouerthrow of Rome, He heard a great voice of a great multitude in Heauen, ſaying, Hallelu-iah, that is, praiſe yee the Lord,
                     Apoc. 19.1.2. 
                     for hee hath condemned the great whore, which did corrupt the earth with her fornication, and hath auenged the bloud of his ſeruants ſhed by her hand. And againe ſaith S. Iohn,
                     
they ſaid, Hallelu-jah, Hallelu-jah, Hallelu-jah, thriſe together, therby expreſſing the great ioy, & thākſgiueing, for the deſtruction and ouerthrow of the great whore: and euen ſo ought all that loue God, that loue the Church, and that loue the truth, greatly to reioyce in the deſtruction of Rome: becauſe this monſter ſhall no longer oppreſſe the Iſraell of God. And ſure it is, that the more zealous & godly that a man is, the more he will rejoice at the deſtruction of Popery: for a man cannot loue God and his church, that doth not laugh in the deſtruction of that Antichriſtian and bloudy kingdome. Let no man heere ſay, this is crueltie: this is want of charitie: and want of pittie, to laugh in the deſtruction of any, or to reioice at other mens harmes.Apoc. 8.6. But the moſt wiſe God ſaith, Reward her, euen as ſhe hath rewarded you, and giue her double, according to her works, and in the cup that ſhee hath filled to you, fill her the double. In aſmuch as ſhee glorified her ſelfe, and liued in pleaſure, ſo much giue yee to her torment and ſorrow. And therfore I affirme, that no man ought to be moued with any compaſſion or pittie,Pſal 137. for the ouerthrow of Rome. But heerein that ſaying of the Prophet is true: Bleſſed is hee that taketh and daſheth her children againſt the ſtones: and againe bend thy bow,
                     Ier. 50.14. 
                     ſhoot at her, ſpare no arrowes. For ſhe hath ſinned againſt the Lord. Moreouer wee are to obſerue, that foraſmuch as the Lord willeth & commandeth all men to reward Rome, as ſhee hath rewarded vs, & to giue her double according to her works, therefore wee ought euery one of vs, as much as in him

lieth, and as his calling will beare, to doe his vttermoſt to pull downe Rome, the Magiſtrate by the ſword, the Miniſter by the word, and the people by their prayers. For euen Chriſtian kings and princes, and all the nobles of the earth, muſt not bee negligent to fight againſt Rome. For heerein that ſaying is true:Ier. 48.10. 
                     Curſed is hee that doth the worke of the Lord negligently, and curſed is hee that keepeth backe his ſword from bloud. For this cauſe, I doe vpon my knees night and day, moſt humbly and inſtantly intreate the God of heauen, that as hee hath put into the heart of our moſt gratious and excellent Queene, to hate the whore of Babylon, and to be his greateſt inſtrument in the whole world, for the weakening and ouerturning of Rome, and defence of his moſt glorious goſpell (which is her crowne and glory in all the Chuches, and her great renowne in all Chriſtian kingdomes) ſo ſhee may conſtantly continue, and neuer ceaſe drawing out the ſword of Iuſtice, till ſhe haue vtterly rooted out of her dominions, all the curſed crew of popiſh Iebuſits, and all ſuch as haue receiued the beaſts marke, and eſpecially the Ieſuits and ſeminary prieſts which are the diuels brokers, the popes agents, and the king of Spaines factors in all kingdomes. Here alſo I doe moſt humbly euen vpon my knees, with dropping eies, yea if it were poſſible with teares of bloud, beſeech and intreate the learned and reuerend fathers of our Church, that they would bend all their power and authoritie, with might and maine againſt the Romiſh
                     
ſtrumpet, and the rather becauſe in theſe dayes ſhee ſeemeth to make a head againe, hauing ſo many and great fauourers, that ſhee and her complices dare perke with their nebbs, and very boldly and confidently prate of a tolleration. Heere alſo I doe moſt humbly and earneſtly intreate, all my learned and godly brethren, the miniſters and preachers of this Church of England, that in all their publike teachings, and priuate proceedings, they would make ſtrong oppoſition againſt Rome, and Romiſh religion. And I beſeech the God of Gods, that wee may all ioyne together, with vnited forces, to march on valiantly againſt the armies of Antichriſt, and to ſpread the euerlaſting Goſpell far and neere, to the vtter ouerturning and beating downe of this weſterne Babylon, and that howſoeuer wee may amongſt our ſelues differ in iudgement in ſome things, yet that there may bee no breach of loue, or alienation of affections amongſt vs, but that wee may all goe together hand in hand, and arme in arme, to preach Gods euerlaſting truth, and to ſet our ſelues againſt the common aduerſaries. For if wee will not ſet our ſelues againſt them, yet they will be ſure to ſet themſelues againſt vs. And thus much concerning the third maine point, which is the finall fall of Rome, euen in this world.
                  Now it followeth to ſpeake of the fourth maine point, which is, by whom, and when Rome ſhall bee ouerthrowen. But for the better vnderſtanding

of this point concerning the perſons that ſhall ouerthrow Rome, wee are to obſerue that S. Iohn deſcribeth the whore of Babylon,
                     Apoc 17.4. 
                     ſitting vpon a ſcarlet coloured beaſt, hauing ſeauen heads, and tenne hornes, whereby is meant the Romane monarchie, as hath beene ſhewed before. After this the Angell expoundeth vnto Iohn, what the heads, and hornes of the beaſt meane, and ſaith, that the ten hornes are ten kings, or ten kingdomes, 
                     
                        ver. 12 
                     which yet haue not receiued a kingdome, but ſhall receiue power as kings, at one houre, with the beaſt. The ſenſe is, that theſe tenne kingdomes, had not receiued ſuch power and authoritie, vnder the Emperours, as they ſhould vnder the Popes, for there was great difference in theſe kingdomes vnder the Popes, from that which they had beene vnder the Emperours. For they receiued far greater power, and they carried an other minde toward the papacy, then the nations did before toward the empire, for they did ſubmit themſelues to the papacy for conſcience, and loue, euen as to the holy Church, which they neuer did to the Empire. And this is the reaſon, why the holy ghoſt ſaith, they had not receiued a kingdome, but ſhould receiue power as kings, at one houre with the beaſt. Which is not to be vnderſtood ſimply, but after a ſort, for they had receiued kingdomes, vnder the Emperors, but not in ſuch ſort as afterward they did vnder the Popes. For the Romane monarchie vnder the dominion of the Popes, was in his greateſt height, and altitude, and the kings of Europe grew vp together

with the papacie in power, might and dominion. And S.Cap. 17. ve. 13. 
                     Iohn addeth, that theſe ten kings or kingdomes were all of one minde, and did giue their power and authoritie vnto the beaſt, that is, they did with might and maine, labour to vphold the Babylonicall ſtrumpet. But the Angell telleth Iohn flatly, that the ten hornes, that is, the ten kingdomes of the empire, which before had giuen their names, their power, and authoritie to the beaſt, to vphold her and defend her, ſhould now in theſe laſt daies all change their mindes, and turne againſt her. For ſaith the Angell to Iohn: 
                     
                        chapter 17.36. 
                     The ten hornes which thou ſaweſt vpon the beaſt, are they that ſhall hate the whore, and make her deſolate, and naked, and ſhall eate her fleſh, and burne her with fire. Heere then it doth plainely appeare, who they bee that ſhall ouerthrow Rome, and by whom it ſhall bee deſtroyed. To wit, by the tenne kings of Europe, or kingdomes of Europe, which ſome very learned doe reckon vp to bee theſe, England, Scotland, Germany, France, Spaine, Denmarke, Sweueland, Poland, Ruſſia, and Hungary. 
                     If the holy ghoſt by the ten hornes, do not meane a defi
                           ••
                        t number, that is iuſt ten: yet aſſuredly he meaneth all the kingdomes of Europe, and whatſoeuer elſe did once vphold the beaſt. S. Iohn words are plaine, that theſe kingdomes which tooke part with the beaſt, ſhall take againſt her, & pull her downe. But we know, that all the kingdomes of Europe did take part vvith her, therefore it followeth that all the kingdomes of Europe ſhall take againſt her. And therefore it is very probable, that in time France, Spaine, and Italy,
                     It is probable that France, Spaine, and Italy ſh
                           •
                        ll f
                           •
                        rſake the whore ſhall turne againſt the beaſt. Wee know that the reſt of the kingdomes are already turned againſt the beaſt, and the beaſt hath loſt ſeuen of his

hornes: the eight, which is France, beginneth to be ſomewhat looſe, and to ſhake a little, which if it fall off, the reſt will follow after a pace. The reſon why the kingdomes, which were ſubiect to the Romane empire, are compared to hornes, is, becauſe that as hornes are the ſtrength & defence of a beaſt, wherewith alſo hee puſheth downe other creatures: ſo the ſtrength and defence of the Romane empire, and the papacie, was in the kingdomes which were ſubiect vnto them, and tooke part with them, whereby alſo they did mightily puſh at other nations and kingdomes. Moreouer wee are to obſerue, that whereas S. Iohn ſaith, the ſame hornes which did vphold and defend the whore, ſhall pull hir downe, it is not to be vnderſtood of the ſame men, but of their ſucceſſors in the ſame kingdomes. For the kings of England, Scotland, Denmarke, Polonia, and other countries, which gaue their power and authoritie vnto the beaſt, are dead and gone. If vvee reſpect the perſons of the men, and thoſe which ſucceed them novv in theſe kingdomes, and pull downe the whore, are other perſons: but becauſe they ſucceed & gouerne in theſe kingdomes, they are ſaid to bee thoſe ten hornes of the beaſt. Then thus it is: theſe ten kings which novv hate the harlot, are called the ten hornes of the beaſt, not becauſe they bee any defence and ſtrength vnto him, but becauſe they ſit vpon the ſame thrones of their aunceſtors, which did vphold and maintaine him But this one thing is very cleare and apparant out of the interpretation of the Angell,

that the ſame kingdomes which haue maintained Popery, ſhall put it downe, as we ſee alredy fulfilled in England, Scotland, Denmarke, & the reſt which haue embraced the Goſpell. And it is very likely that the other kingdomes which as yet haue not embraced the Goſpell, ſhall Gods good time embrace it. For this ſeemeth vnto mee, to bee a very good argument taken from the words of the interpreting Angel. Thoſe tenne kingdomes which haue vpheld Rome, ſhall pull downe Rome: but France, Spaine, and Italy, haue vpheld and doe vphold Rome: Therefore France, Spaine, and Italy, ſhall pull downe Rome. To this may be added for confirmation: that the euerlaſting Goſpell ſhalbe preached in theſe laſt dayes,
                     Apoc. 14.6. 
                     to euery nation, and kindred, and tongue, and people. Which I vnderſtand of all the nations of Europe, which were ſubiect to the Romane Empire, and the Papacie. And further that the holy ghoſt ſaith, that the preachers of the Goſpell from Luthers time, ſhall publiſh Gods truth among people and nations, and tongues,Apoc. 10.11 and many kings: which I vnderſtand as before.
                  I am not ignorant that ſome good diuines make it doubtfull, whether Rome ſhalbe ouerthrowne by the Kings of Europe onely, or by the Turke alſo, and the kings of the Eaſt. For mine owne part, I dare not reſolutely determine of it, being a thing to come, but the euent ſhall declare, and they that liue ſhall one day ſee it. It may be the Turke, and the Eaſterne princes may haue ſome hand in this buſineſſe. For

the Romane Monarchie did ſtretch far that way, whē it was in his higheſt eleuation. But that which is alledged of the drying vp of the waters of Euphrates,
                     Apoc. 16 12. 
                     that the way of the Kings of the Eaſt might be prepared: Proueth nothing, becauſe it is an alluſion to Darius and Cyrus, which were kings of the Eaſt; and tooke old Babylon by drying vp the vvaters of Euphrates, and leading ouer their armies, as we haue heard before. I doe thus then reſolue and conclude, that the Turke and the Eaſterne Kings may happely haue ſome ſtroke in this work. But it ſeemeth moſt probable vnto mee,The kings of Europe ſhall ouerthrow Rome. that the kings of Europe ſhalbe the greateſt agents in this action. For the vvords are plaine, that the Kings of the earth vvhich ſometimes were ſubiect to that monſtrous beaſt, ſhould now at laſt ſhake of the yoke of her ſeruitude, and vvithdraw the obedience of their ſubiects from her, 
                        chapter 17.16. 
                     And ſhould hate and abhorre the harlot of Rome, and ſhould make her deſolate. By vvithdrawing their ſubiects from her obedience, and naked, by ſpoiling her of her treaſures, and ſhall eate her fleſh, and teare her in peeces for pure hatred, and burne her with fire: that is, bring her to vtter deſtruction.
                  So that ſhe vvhich beefore at her pleaſure might commaund all Princes to beegin vvarre, to ceaſe from vvarre: to defend her quarrells, and to annoy her enemies, now is glad to flatter a few ſeduced Princes to take her part, that ſhee bee not vtterly forſaken of all men. Or elſe to practiſe by treaſon, and treacherie, ſubborning the Ieſuits,

thoſe rogues and vagabonds, to ſtir vp tumults among the people, and to trouble godly eſtates, and commonwealthes, that deſpiſe her dominion, but aſſuredly vvithout all hope, euer to recouer her auncient tyrannie. But heere it may bee obiected, that the preaching of the goſpell, is the greateſt and ſtrongeſt meanes to ouerthrovv Babylon. And therefore hovv can it bee done by the Chriſtian princes. I anſwere that it is true indeede, that of all other meanes, the goſpell is the ſtrongeſt, but the thing is this. Firſt the goſpell beeing ſet abroach, ſhall detect and diſcouer the vvhore of Rome, and all her abhominable doctrine, and filthineſſe, which the Chriſtian princes eſpying, ſhall renounce her, make vvar vpon her, and ſlay in the field thouſand thouſands of her ſouldiers, as vvee haue heard before. And hitherto concerning the perſons, that ſhall ouerthrovv Rome.
                  
                  Novv it followeth to ſpeake of the time vvhen it ſhall bee deſtroyed. Which of all the reſt is a thing moſt hard to bee decided. For the holy ghoſt faith,Iob. 24.1. 
                     why ſhould not the times hee hid of the Almightie: So as they which know him, ſhould not forſee the times appointed of him.
                     Dan. 12.9. And againe, the words are cloſed and ſealed vp,
                     Act. 1.7. 
                     vntill the time determined. And againe, it is not for you to know the times or the ſeaſons, which the father hath put in his owne power. Yet euen in this point, I vvill by Gods aſiſtance, ſet downe ſo much as is reuealed, and ſo much as God hath giuen me to ſee. Firſt I doe confeſſe that God in his vvord,

hath ſet downe the iuſt period, and preciſe determination of all the greateſt afflictions & perſecutions, that euer came to his Church, before the comming of his Son in the fleſh, for the comfort thereof, as that of Egipt, after the expiration of foure hundred and thirtie yeeres: that of Babylon, after the date of ſeuentie yeeres: that of the Medes & Perſians,
                     Dan. 8. after the determination of an hundred & thirtie yeeres: that of Alexanders ſtate after ſixe yeeres:Dan. 11. that of Magog and Egipt, after 294 yeeres. So likewiſe that of Chriſts death and reſurrection, after ſeauentie ſeauens, or ſeauentie weekes, which make 490 yeeres, as the Angell Gabriell foretold, vnto the prophet Daniell.
                     Dan. 9 42. But concerning the iuſt period and preciſe determination, of the perſecutions of the Church, ſince Chriſt by the Romane Empire, and the papacy, we find not the like ſet downe: & heere of there may be two reaſons yeelded. Firſt becauſe the Church of the Iewes were not vnder ſo cleere, and pretious promiſes as we are, therefore it was needfull, for the better ſtrengthning of their hope & cōfort in afflictiōs, that they ſhould know the very time determined: but becauſe the Church of the chriſtians liueth vnder moſt cleere & comfortable promiſes of deliuerance, therfore God according to his deepe wiſedome would haue our faith exerciſed in an aſſured expectation of the accō
                     pliſhment therof, though the preciſe time be concealed. An other reaſon may bee this: the vtter ouerthrow of Rome, falleth out to bee, but a little before the comming of Chriſt to iudgement, as appereth in

this propheſie. Now then, if wee knew the day or yeere certainely, when Rome ſhould fall finally, it would giue vs too much light, vnto the knowledge of the laſt day, which God in great wiſedome, hath of purpoſe hid from the knowledge of all men: yea, and of Angels. I know right well, that a certaine learned writer, doth preciſely determine the vtter deſtruction of Rome to fall out, in the yeere of our Lord 1639.Napier in Apo. 14. page. 183. But by the fauour of ſo excellent a man bee it ſpoken, I ſee no ſufficient ground thereof. But touching this matter, of the time of Romes finall fall, I will deliuer mine opinion, and my reaſons, ſubmitting my ſelfe to the iudgement of the learned, for I would bee loth, in this or any other thing, to goe beyond my compaſſe, or to paſſe the bounds of modeſtie, and humilitie, and therefore doe refer all to bee tryed by the ſicle of the ſanctuary. I doe therefore thus iudge, that the vtter ouerthrow of Rome, ſhall bee in this age, I meane within the age of a man: my reaſon is this. We of this age, liue vnder the opening of the ſeauenth ſeale, the blowing of the ſixt trumpet, and the powring foorth of the ſixt vial. For the firſt it is manifeſt, becauſe the opening of the ſeauenth ſeale, containeth all things, that ſhall fall out to the end of the world: as hath beene ſhewed and proued before.Apoc. 8.1. For the blowing of the ſixt trumpet, that alſo is plaine, becauſe vnder the blowing thereof, the little booke was opened, and the goſpell preached, as wee ſee in this age.Apoc 10.2. ver. 10.11. For the powring downe of the ſixt viall

of Gods wrath, that alſo is moſt cleere, becauſe thereupon the great riuer Euphrates drieth vp, and the Ieſuits are ſent out, to ſollicit the kings of the earth to battaile againſt the Church, as wee ſee fulfilled in theſe our daies. Then I reaſon thus, Rome muſt fall downe finally,Apoc. 14. voc. 6.8. in that age wherein the little booke is opened, and the euerlaſting goſpell preached: but in this age, the little booke is opened, and the euerlaſting goſpell preached, therfore in this age, Rome muſt fall downe finally. And againe I reaſon thus: Rome muſt fall downe finally, in that age, wherein the riuer Euphrates, that is,Apoc. 16.16. the fortification of Rome drieth vp, and the Ieſuits are ſent forth, to ſtop the leake thereof: but all this falleth out in this age, as wee ſee with our eies. Therefore in this age Rome ſhall fall downe finally.It is very probable that Rome ſhall fall finally in this age. Apoc. 10.6.7. The reaſon of the propoſition is, becauſe in this age the popiſh armies ſhall come to Armageddon.
                  
                  Moreouer this I ſay, and not I, but the Lord, when the ſeauenth Angell bloweth the ſeauenth trumpet, then commeth the end of the world: But the ſixt Angell, hath ſounded the ſixt trumpet long agoe, as appeereth by the effects: Therefore it cannot be long ere the ſeauenth Angell blow. But Rome muſt fall downe finally, before the ſeauenth Angell blow, as hath beene ſhewed before. Therefore the vtter fall of Rome cannot bee long deferred. I doe not determine either of day, month, or yeere, becauſe it is not reuealed. But I gueſſe at an age, becauſe the holy ghoſt pointeth vs vnto an agent.
                  
                     
                     If any man ſee further I will eaſely yeeld vnto him, and thanke God for his light.But all theſe things I ſet downe for the comfort of Gods Church, not deſiring to vnderſtand aboue that vvhich is meet to vnderſtand: but to vnderſtand according to ſobrietie.
                  Now it reſteth to ſpeake of the laſt maine point vvhich is the cauſes of Romes vtter ruine, and ouerthrow: 
                        chapter 14 8. Chap. 18.3. Chap. 19.3. Chap. 17 2. vvhich firſt of all are ſet downe foure ſeuerall times for falling, to be, becauſe ſhe made all nations drunke with the wine of the wrath of her fornication. They which outwardly make others drunke, or commit fornication vvith others, are vvorthie to be ſeuerely puniſhed.
                  How much ſorer puniſhment are they vvorthie of, vvhich doe the ſame ſpiritually: and therfore vvoe be to Rome.
                  
                  An other cauſe of the deſtruction of Rome is, for that ſhe hath ſhed the bloud of all the Prophets, Martyrs, 
                        chapter 16.6. Chap. 18.24. and Saints: as it is vvritten. In thee was found the bloud of the Prophets, and of the Saints, and of all that were ſlaine vpon the earth.
                     The cauſes of Romes vtter downefall. What is he vvorthie to haue, that is a moſt cruell bloudſucker: nay vvhat is he vvorthie to haue, that ſhal murther a kings children: yea, that ſhall murther his eldeſt ſonne and heire apparant to the crowne.
                  But Rome hath murthered thouſands of the king of Heauens children. Yea, Rome hath murthered the great heire of Heauen and earth, I meane the very ſonne of God. For Chriſt vvas put to death by the Romane power and authoritie, and by a Romane Iudge, 
                        chapter 11.8. as before hath bene ſhewed. Therefore let all

men iudge vvhat Rome is vvorthie to haue.
                  Moreouer, S. Iohn telleth vs, that Rome with her enchantments hath deceiued all-nations. 
                     
                        chapter 18.23. Then let the matter be referred to the iudgement of any indifferent man, to determine and ſet downe vvhat puniſhment ſorcerers, and enchanters, are vvorthie of: eſpecially ſpirituall ſorcerers, and enchanters.
                  Beſides all this, the holy ghoſt ſaith, 
                        chapter 18.2. that Rome is the habitation of diuels, and the hold of all foule ſpirits, and a cage of euery vncleane, & hatefull bird. What think you is like to come of an habitation of diuels, What trow yee vvil be the end of a ſhoule of foule feends, & a company of moſt vgly & mōſtrous helcats. What is like to become of a cage of Howles, Rauens, and Vultures. Yea, a neſt of Vipers, Toades, Snakes, Adders, Cocatrices, & all the moſt ſtinging ſerpents and venemous vermin in the world. What wilbe the end of pild Prieſts, filthie Friers, maungy Monks, roguing Ieſuits. Are not theſe a cage of vncleane birds. What doe they ſtudie, what doe they plot, what doe they practiſe euery daye, but ſeditions, periuries, murthers, cōſpiracies, treacheries, treaſons, & all maner of villanies. If I had no other reaſon to perſuad me that Rome ſhal fal, & come to a miſerable end, yet this onely would make me ſo to think, that theſe villanous Ieſuits do teach & conclud in their curſed conuēticles, yt it is not onely lawful but alſo meritorious, to murther any chriſtiā prince yt is not of their catholike religiō: oh mōſtrous villains: ô moſt hideous helhoūds: haue not theſe monſters ſuborned diuers deſperate

caitiffes, to embrue their hands in the bloud of chriſtian princes. How many haue beene their plots? now deſperate haue beene their practiſes, to murther & poiſon our gratious and noble Queene, the French king, the king of Scots, and other Chriſtian princes. But can ſuch proceedings proſper? can ſuch courſes bee bleſſed? can a man bee eſtabliſhed by iniquitie? No no, let them know for a certaintie, that God will croſſe and curſe all ſuch diuelliſh proceedings, as hitherto hee hath done, his moſt holy name be praiſed. But if any man liſt to know more of the proceedings, and practiſes of Ieſuits, let him read maſter Doctor Sutclieffe his anſwere, to Parſons wardword, a booke worthie to bee read and knowen of all men. But now to grow to a concluſion of this point, and to winde vp together, all the reaſons and cauſes of Romes ruine, thus I doe determine, that foraſmuch as Rome is the great whore, 
                        chapter 17.2. 
                     with whom haue committed fornication all the kings of the earth: foraſmuch as Rome hath made all nations drunke, with the wine of her fornication: foraſmuch as Rome hath deceiued all nations, with her inchantments: foraſmuch as Rome is a denne of diuells, and a cage of all vncleane birds: foraſmuch as Rome hath ſhed the bloud of Apoſtles, Martyrs, and Saints: foraſmuch as Rome hath murdered the ſonne of God. Therfore it ſhall at laſt, come to moſt miſerable deſtruction,Nomb. 24. ver. 24. being that Chittim, which in the end muſt needs periſh: for what puniſhment, what paine, vvhat torture, vvhat torment can be inough for this damnable whore, which hath committed ſuch execrable and

moſt outragious villanies?
                  Bee it therefore knowen vnto all men by theſe preſents, that Rome for all her moſt monſtrous and prodigious ſinnes, ſhall fall ſtill more and more, and come to a fearefull deſtruction, euen in this life. But ſome man may ſay, what ſhall become of Rome, and of all her friends after this life. S. Iohn anſwereth,Apoc. 14. ver. 9 
                     that if any man worſhip the beaſt and his image, and receiue his marke in his forehead, or on his hand,
                     10. 
                     the ſame ſhall drinke of the wine of the wrath of God, and hee ſhall bee tormented in fire and brimſtone, before the holy Angells, and before the Lamb. And the ſmoake of their torment ſhall aſcend, and they ſhall haue no reſt, day nor night,
                     11. 
                     which worſhip the beaſt, &c. Heere is ſentence of eternall damnation, paſſed vpon all the friends of Rome. Oh that all papiſts would conſider this in time, & think with themſelues, what a wofull thing it is to bee a papiſt, for they and their kingdome muſt goe downe in this life, and in the life to come, they muſt bee tormented in hell fire for euer. For Saint Iohn ſaith flatly, that all papiſts ſhall bee caſt into the great wine preſſe of the wrath of God, where they ſhall bee ſtrained and tread,
                     Apoc. 14. ve. 20 
                     till bloud come out of the wine preſſe, vnto the horſe bridles, by the ſpace of a thouſand and ſixe hundred furlongs. And againe hee ſaith, that the beaſt and the falſe prophet were taken aliue, and caſt into a lake of fire, 
                     
                        chapter 19.20. 
                     burning with brimſtone. Let all men therefore take heed, how they ioyne with the papiſts, for wee ſee what ſhall bee their end, both in this life, and the life to come. Therefore let all Gods people, come out of Babylon,
                     
and haſten out of Sodome, leaſt they bee wound vp in their iudgements. Let all wiſe men practiſe the pollicie of the Gibeonits, who when they ſaw that Ioſuah did ſo mightely preuaile againſt the Cananits,
                     Ioſ. 
                           •
                        . & beare downe all before him, did very pollitikely prouide for their owne ſafety, and by ſubtile meanes enter into league with Ioſuah, and the Iſraell of God. So let all that haue any care of their owne ſaluation, ſpeedely forſake Babylon, which otherwiſe will fall vpon their heads, and flie to Zion, which ſhall ſtand faſt for euermore. And thus hauing reduced all the fiue Chapters following, to proue theſe foreſaid points, I will proceede vnto the twentith Chapter: for there is almoſt nothing of any moment or difficultie in the 15.16.17.18. and 19. Chapters, but it hath beene already opened and expounded.
               
            
            
               Chap. 20.
               
                  
                     SAint Iohn hauing in the former chapters, plainely and plentifully ſet down the vtter ouerthrow both of the beaſt & the falſe prophet, that is, the Romane empire, and the papacie, doth now in this chapter ſet forth the condemnation of the dragon, their graund captaine, which ſet them all on worke. For there hath as yet, beene no motion of him, which hath beene the beginner and raiſer vp of the reſt, and the great worker of all miſchiefe, therefore now commeth his iudgement and

condemnation, now becauſe hee hath beene a more generall worker, and his miſchiefe hath extended larger then the kingdome of Antichriſt, therefore in this 20. chapter ther is an hiſtorie of him, ſet foorth by it ſelfe. Firſt how he ſeduced the nations before the comming of Chriſt: afterward how Chriſt at his comming bindeth him, by the light of his Goſpell, from ſeducing the nations, and ſo holdeth him ſhut vp, for the ſpace of a thouſand yeeres, in which the Church did flouriſh greatly, and many were raiſed vp, vnto the ſpirituall life. But when the thouſand yeeres were expired. Sathan was let looſe and went foorth againe to ſeduce, and by the great Antichriſt, & the Turk, gathered innumerable multitudes into his armies, to fight againſt the Church, which armies are called Gog and Magog.
                  
                  But they are all ouercome and deſtroyed, and that olde ſerpent himſelfe is caught, and together with his inſtruments the beaſt, and the falſe prophet is caſt into hell fire, to bee tormented for euer. And this is the ſumme and principall drift of this Chapter.
                  It containeth fiue principall things, as it were the fiue parts thereof.
                  The firſt is, the binding, 
                        ver. 1.2.3. and chaining vp of Sathan, by our Lord Ieſus, for the ſpace of a thouſand yeeres.
                  The ſecond is, the flouriſhing of the Church, 
                        ver. 4 5.6. during the time of Sathans captiuitie.
                  The third is, 
                        ver. 7 8.9. the looſing of Sathan after the

thouſand yeeres expired, and the wofull effects thereof.
                  
                     
                        ver. 10 The fourth is, the caſting of the Diuell into a lake of fire and brimſtone, where the beaſt and the falſe prophet were.
                  
                     
                        ver. 11.12.13.14.15. The fift is a glorious deſcription of the laſt iudgement, wherein euery man ſhall bee iudged according to his workes.
               
               
                  The text.
                  
                     
                        ver. 1 
                     AND I ſaw an Angell come downe from heauen, haueing the key of the bottomleſſe pit, and a great chaine in his hand.
                  
                  
                     
                        ver. 2 
                     And he tooke the dragon that old ſerpent, which is the diuell and Sathan, and bound him a thouſand yeeres.
                  
                  
                     
                        ver. 3 
                     And caſt him into the bottomleſſe pit, and hee ſhut him vp, and ſealed the doore vpon him, that hee ſhould deceiue the people no more, till the thouſand yeeres were fulfilled: ſo after that hee muſt bee looſed for a little ſeaſon.
                  
                  This Angell heere ſpoken of, is our Lord Ieſus, who is therefore ſaid to haue the key of the bottomleſſe pit, becauſe he hath power and authoritie ouer hell and death, as we haue heard before.
                  
                     
                        chapter 1.18. By the chaine in his hand, is meant the doctrine of the goſpell.
                  The time when Sathan was thus taken & bound, was, when Chriſt firſt preached the Goſpell, and his Apoſtles after him, to all nations.
                  
                     The cauſe why hee was now bound and chained vp, was, for that hee had a long time ſeduced all nations, and raigned as King and Lord ouer the Gentiles, and greatly ſeduced the Iewes alſo.
                  The time of his impriſonment is ſet downe, to be a thouſand yeeres, that is, all the time frō the preaching of Chriſt, and his Apoſtles, vntill Gregory the ſeauenth, & other monſtrous Popes, which did let Sathan looſe againe. Which ſpace of time is gueſſed by the learned, to be a thouſand yeeres or thereabouts. But heere it is to bee obſerued, that this binding of Sathan, is not to bee taken ſimply, and abſolutely, as though Sathan was ſo bound and chained vp, for this thouſand yeere, that hee could not ſeduce at all, or doe no miſchiefe at all, after the preaching of the Goſpell by Chriſt, and his Apoſtles: I ſay this is not to bee taken ſimply, but afrer a ſort, that is, that hee could not ſo generally and vniuerſally ſeduce all nations, as hee had in former time, before the comming of Chriſt. For otherwiſe it is well knowne, that euen after Chriſts time, hee did greatly perſecute the Church, bring in many errors and hereſies, and harden and blind many mens hearts: but yet all this was nothing, in compariſon of that which hee had wrought in former ages, when hee was euen as it were the god of the world, and the Gentiles worſhipped him as God, as the Apoſtle teacheth,1. Cor. 10. 
                     that all the worſhip of the heathen nations, was the worſhip of diuels. And againe, that God in times paſt ſuffered all the Gentiles to walke in their owne waies.
                     Act. 14.16. And then was

                     Sathan a great prince indeede.Luke. 10.18. But now commeth a chaine for him: For Chriſt preacheth the Goſpell, and ſendeth foorth his diſciples vvith power, and therevpon ſaith, I ſaw Sathan fall downe like lightning: For the preaching of the Goſpell, beateth downe the kingdome of Sathan and ſinne.
                  Moreouer, it is to be noted, that notwithſtanding all Sathans power and might, craft and ſubteltie, yet this Angell vvhich hath the key of the bottomleſſe pit, doth apprehend him and ſhut him vp, and ſeale the dore vpon him: ſo that he cannot get abroad to ſeduce ſo generally, as in former time.
                  But S. Iohn ſaith, that after a thouſand yeeres, he muſt be looſed for a little ſeaſon: that is, the time vvherein the great Antichriſt ſhould beare the ſway: vvhich vvas ſome 4. or 5. hundred yeeres. For the Goſpell did preuaile in ſome meaſure, in the world, a thouſād yeeres after Chriſt, & the principles & groūds of true religion cōtinued in the church, vntil the ful looſing of Sathan, though vvith many blotts, corruptions, and abuſes. For after the firſt ſix hundred yeeres, the cleere ſinceritie of the truth vvas much dimmed vvith errors and hereſies: but yet the maine grounds dyd remaine till the full expiration of the thouſand yeeres. Now vve know that the Goſpell hath bene preached in theſe laſt daies, aboue three ſcore yeeres. Therefore it followeth, that the ſtrength of Popery continued not much aboue 500. yeeres: Which heere the holy Ghoſt for our comfort, calleth a little ſeaſon: 
                        chapter 11.2. of vvhich vve haue heard before, and

therefore I doe heere omit it.
                  
                     And I ſaw ſeates, and them that ſate vpon them, 
                     
                        ver. 4 
                     and iudgement was giuen vnto them. And I ſaw the ſoules of them that were beheaded for the witneſſe of Ieſus, and for the word of God, and which did not worſhip the beaſt, neither his Image, neither had taken his marke vpon their foreheads, or on their hands, and they liued and raigned with Chriſt a thouſand yeere.
                  
                  
                     But the reſt of the dead men ſhall not liue againe, 
                     
                        ver. 5 
                     vntill the thouſand yeeres be finiſhed: this is the firſt reſurrection.
                  
                  
                     Bleſſed and holy is he that hath part in the firſt reſurrection. For on ſuch the ſecond death hath no power. 
                     
                        ver. 6 
                     But they ſhalbe the Prieſts of God, and of Chriſt, and ſhall raigne with him a thouſand yeere.
                  
                  Heere now is ſet foorth the ſtate of the Church millitant, for the ſpace of the thouſand yeere, wherein Sathan vvas chained vp. For it is ſayd heere, that the Church dyd grow and flouriſh: yea, and greatly exerciſe her power and aucthoritie, during that time. And therefore Saint Iohn ſaith, that he ſaw ſeates, and they ſate vpon them, and iudgement was giuen vnto them. Whereby he meaneth, that the Apoſtles and their ſucceſſors, had their chaires, ſeates, and conſiſtories, vvherein they did both preach the vvord, and execute the Church cenſures: as the Scribes and Phariſeies beefore had ſit in the chaire of Moiſes, and I take it, the latter part of the fourth verſe, is to be referred to the firſt clauſe, to vvit, that the Church dyd liue and raigne with Chriſt, a thouſād

yeeres. Which is not to be vnderſtood of the Church triumphant, as ſome doe take it, & all the reſt of this fourth verſe, but of the flouriſhing eſtate of the Church militant, during the time of Sathans captiuitie: for all the faithfull do after a ſort liue, & raigne with Chriſt, euen heere in the earth, when they ouercome the world by faith, and ſubdue Sathan & ſinne, by the power of grace.
                  Now where it is ſaid that Iohn ſaw the ſoules of them that were beheaded, for the witneſſe of Ieſus, &c. It is to bee vnderſtood of thoſe, which in the time of the perſecuting empire, and growing of the papacie, vvere ſlaine for the truth. For the ſecond beaſt, which is the dominion of Popes, raigned not in thoſe thouſand yeere, in the which Sathan vvas bound, but yet did grow by degrees towards their height, and vſed great tyrannie againſt the ſeruants of God, before Sathans full looſing.
                  The Chiliaſts or Millenaries, doe fondly gather from this ſcripture, that after the ouerthrow of Antichriſt, the Lord Ieſus would come & raigne vvith the faithfull, heere a thouſand yeeres vpon the earth, and that in this time, that Chriſt ſhould ſo raigne, as a great and glorious king vpon the earth, his ſubiects ſhould enioy all manner of earthly pleaſures, and delights. This fooliſh error is confuted by the words that follovv in the text; as wee ſhall ſee afterward.
                  Whereas hee ſaith, the reſt of the dead ſhall not liue againe. It is to bee vnderſtood, of ſuch as were ſpiritually dead, that is, ſuch as did deſpiſe the Goſpell,

which vvas preached thoſe thouſand yeeres, & were not thereby reuiued and quickened vnto eternall life, but did ſtill remaine, as men dead in ſinnes, and treſpaſſes.
                  Therefore the meaning of S. Iohn is, that as in the thouſand yeeres, many that heard Chriſt and his Apoſtles, and their ſucceſſors, were raiſed vp from the death of ſinne, to the life of righteouſneſſe, ſo many others were not quickened by their doctrine, but ſtil dwelt in their ſinnes, whom hee calleth the reſt of the dead: and hee ſaith, theſe ſhall not liue againe, meaning the life of God, or the life of grace, and whereas hee addeth vntill the thouſand yeeres be finiſhed, he meaneth neuer, or not at all, for ſo the word vntill, is often taken in the ſcriptures: and it is ſure, that after the expiration of the thouſand yeeres, they did not liue the life of God, and the life of the ſpirit. For then the diuell was let looſe vpon the world, to worke his pleaſure, and to ſeduce with all efficacie of error and iniquitie.
                  Whereas it is ſaid, this is the firſt reſurrection, he meaneth the riſing from ſinne, to the life of righteouſneſſe, which was in the thouſand yeeres, of the goſpells preaching, and therefore hee addeth, that he is bleſſed that hath part in the firſt reſurrection, &c. and ſaith, that all ſuch ſhall raigne with Chriſt a thouſand yeers. Which is meant of the raigne of the faithfull, euen vpon earth, for the ſpace of that thouſand yeeres, in which Sathan was bound: but yet excludeth not their eternall glory in the heauens.
                  
                      
                     
                        ver. 7 
                     And when the thouſand yeeres are expired, Sathan ſhall bee looſed out of his priſon.
                  
                  
                     
                        ver. 8 
                     And ſhall goe out to deceiue the people, which are in the foure corners of the earth, euen Gog and Magog, to gather them together to battaile, whoſe number is as the ſand of the ſea.
                  
                  
                     
                        ver. 9 
                     And they went vp vnto the plaine of the earth, and they compaſſed the tents of the Saints about, and the beloued cittie: But fire came downe from God out of heauen, and deuoured them.
                  
                  Now S. Iohn telleth vs, that after the determination of the thouſand yeeres, Sathan ſhall be let looſe vpon the world, for their vnthankfulneſſe, and contempt of the Goſpell, to ſeduce and deceiue, euen as much as euer hee did. No maruaile therefore, that the two great and monſtrous hereſies of Popery and Mahometrie, did now beginne mightely to grow and increaſe in the world. For what other thing can bee looked for, after this letting looſe of Sathan.
                  
                  But wee are to obſerue, that as Sathan was bound by degrees, through the miniſtery of Chriſt, and his Apoſtles, and their immediat ſucceſſors: ſo alſo he was looſed by degrees, by the preuailing of hereſies, till the great Antichriſt was hatched, and brought into the poſſeſſion of his curſed chaire. For Sathan was not fully looſed, till the yeere of our Lord 998. At what time Silueſter the ſecond, came to bee Pope, who was in league with the Diuell. Stories doe report, that at his death hee called for the Cardinals,

and confeſſed that hee had familiaritie with the Diuell, and how hee had giuen himſelfe vnto him body and ſoule, ſo that hee might come to the papall dignitie.
                  After him ſucceeded ſundry other Popes, which were notorious monſters, ſome of them murderers, ſome poiſoners, ſome ſorcerers, ſome coniurers. By whom the diuell was fully looſed, all light of the goſpell, and true religion being in a manner cleane put out, & moſt abhominable Idolatrie, & all manner of villany ſpreading ouer the face of the earth, & therefore S. Iohn ſaith, that Sathan being thus fully looſed, hee went forth to deceiue the people, which were in the foure corners of the earth, euen Gog and Magog, &c. This ſeducing by Sathan, heere ſpoken of, is the ſame with that which is ſpoken Chapter 13. onely this excepted, that this of Gog and Magog is more generall. Wee reade there how all nations, kindreds, and tongues, were made to worſhip the image of the beaſt, and to receiue his marke: but that is to bee extended no further, then to thoſe kingdomes which were ſubiect to the papacie. But heere by theſe armies of Gog and Magog, are vnderſtood all the chiefe enemies of the Church, in theſe laſt daies, ſince the looſing of Sathan, both open and ſecret, both Turk and Pope: for the Turk is an open enemie: the Pope a more cloſe enemie. Gog ſignifieth couered, Magog vncouered, wherby is noted the Pope & the Turk. For the Pope cōmeth couered vnder the name of Chriſt, and Chriſts vicar, Peters ſucceſſor &c. But

the Turk commeth vncouered, for hee openly denieth, and impugneth Chriſt.
                  
                  Moreouer the names of Gog and Magog, are heere ſet downe to note of what countries theſe chiefe enemies ſhould ſpring: to wit, out of Scithia, Siria, Arabia, Italy, and Spaine. For Magog was the ſonne of Iapheth, Gen. 10. ver. 2. of whom came the Sythians. Gog was the name of a great Captaine in the leſſer Aſia, which built a citie, and named it after his owne name Gogkartah, that is, the citie of Gog. And it is put in the propheſie of Ezechiel,
                     Ezechiel. 38. for the whole region of the leſſer Aſia, and Siria. Whereby the prophet did foretell, that the great enemies of the Church ſhould ariſe out of thoſe coaſts. As in very truth they did, for out of Egipt, Scithia, Siria, and the leſſer Aſia, did ſpring vp Ptolomeus, Silencus, Antigonus, Caſſander, and the reſt of Alexanders poſteritie, which vexed and oppreſſed the Iewes, by the ſpace of 294. yeeres, euen vntill the comming of the Meſsias, at what time the deuided Greeke empire was ouerthrowen, and tranſlated to the Romanes.
                  
                  Furthermore it is to bee noted, that the prophet Ezechiell ſaith, that Gog is the chiefe prince of Meſech, and Tuball.
                     Gen. 10.2. By Meſech hee meaneth Arabia, and by Tuball Italy and Spaine: noting thereby the countries and kingdomes from whence the great perſecutors of the Church, from the returne out of the captiuitie of Babylon, vntill the comming of the Meſsias ſhould ariſe. For aſſuredly thoſe enemies, were collected of diuers nations, but ſerued chiefely vnder the princes

of Aſia the leſſer, of Siria, and of Scithia. Now then to conclude: Gog and Magog in Ezechiell, are put for the princes of thoſe coūtries, which were the chiefe Captaines in gathering great and mightie armies vnto battaile, againſt the children of Iſraell, after they were come out of the captiuitie of Babylon. And the prophet there in one ſumme vnder the armies of Gog and Magog, comprehendeth all the enemies that fought againſt them, from time to time, after the captiuitie, vnto the comming of Chriſt. And now for the application of this, vnto the enemies of the Church, vnder the Goſpell, wee muſt firſt note, that through this booke, the figures and phraſes of ſpeech are taken out of the law & the prophets. Now therefore, when the Lord would ſet foorth in one ſumme all the enemies of the Church, which Sathan muſtereth, after the time of his looſing out of priſon, before the comming of Chriſt to iudgement: there is no one place more fit, to ſet foorth all theſe armies, then thoſe armies of Gog and Magog, & therefore the names, euen Gog and Magog are heere brought in, to ſet foorth theſe huge ar
                        •
                     ies of the Turk, and of the Pope, and of all the enemies of the Church, in theſe laſt daies, which ſhould gather thēſelues to battaile, being in number as the ſand of the ſea: as S. Iohn ſaith, yea, did couer the whole face of the earth with their multitudes, and compaſſe the tents of the Saints about, and the beloued citie, that is, did make warre againſt the Church and people of God, which in compariſon of them, were but as a few tents, or ſome little citie.

But marke vvhat followeth, and conſider the iſſue of the battaile. The holy ghoſt ſaith expreſſely, that fire came downe from God out of Heauen, and deuoured them. Which doth plainely ſhew that the armies of Gog & Magog, though neuer ſo huge, ſhalbe deſtroyed by the fire of Gods vvrath.
                  Now from this I gather, that as the armies of the Pope ſhall goe downe ſtill more and more, as formerly hath bene ſhewed, and as experience in the laſt yeeres good ſucceſſe both in Ireland, Netherland, and againſt Spaine alſo, hath partly prooued, (Gods moſt holy name be praiſed) ſo alſo the armies of the Turk ſhalbe ouerthrowen, ſo farre foorth as they fight againſt the true Church, or at leaſt be ſo kept back, that they ſhall not be able to compaſſe the tents of the Saints, as vve ſee and feele this day, God be thanked.
                  
                     
                        ver. 10 
                     And the Diuell that deceiued them, was caſt into a lake of fire and brimſtone, where that beaſt, and that falſe prophet are and ſhalbe tormented, euen day and night, for euermore.
                  
                  Heere is ſet downe the Diuells doome: to vvit, that he ſhalbe caſt downe into the infernall pit, as vvell vvorthy both for his ſeducing all nations, and ſtirring vp the armies of Gog and Magog, againſt the Church, euen to roote it vp, if it vvere poſſible. Therefore Saint Iohn telleth vs, that foraſmuch as he is the author of all miſchiefe, and he that hath ſet all the reſt a vvork, therefore both he and his inſtrumens the beaſt, and the falſe prophet, Gog and

                     Magog, ſhall all drinck of the ſame cup of Gods eternall vvrath, and be all throwne downe together into one cloſe priſon, vvhich is that gaſping gulfe and infernall lake, that burneth vvith fire and brimſtone, for euer.
                  Loe then, vvhat ſhalbe the end of the diuell, the Pope, the Turk, the Emperour, the King of Spaine, the Cardinall, and all other the diuels inſtruments, vvhich heere in earth haue perſecuted the Church, and compaſſed the tents of the Saints, and the beloued Cittie.
                  Now after all this in the fiue laſt verſes, Saint Iohn entreth into a liuely and cleere diſcription of the laſt iudgement. Firſt noting the terror and maieſtie of the Iudge himſelfe, in this, 
                        ver. 11 that from his face both Heauen and earth fled away: that is, no creature ſhalbe able to endure his angry countenance, in that daye: and yet vvithall ſetting downe the puritie and vprightneſſe of his iudgement and iudgement ſeate, calling it a white Throne. 
                     
                        ver. 12 And after this, the generall citing and perſonall appearing of all men before him, of vvhat degree, eſtate, or condition ſoeuer. For both death and hell, ſea and graue, did deliuer vp their dead. And all vvithout exception, came to iudgement. And the bookes of their conſciences vvere opened, (for euerie mans vvorke is engrauen vpon his cōſcience, as it vvere in letters of braſſe, or vvith the point of a Diamond:Ier. 17.2. Ver. 13. as the Prophet ſpeaketh.) And they were iudged of thoſe things which

were written in the bookes, according to their workes, and according to the teſtimonie of their owne conſciences: And death and hell, 
                     
                        ver. 14 that is, all the heires of death and hell, euen all the ſocietie of reprobates, both papiſts, Atheiſts, and all vnbeleeuers, yea, whoſoeuer were not found written in the booke of life, were caſt into the lake of fire, 
                     
                        ver. 15 which is the ſecond death. Now, heere I would haue it dilligently obſerued, that the holy ghoſt hath three ſeuerall times in this booke, deſcribed the laſt iudgement, to wit, in the latter end of the 11. Chapter, in the latter end of the 14. Chapter, and now in the latter end of this Chapter. And moreouer I would haue the order and cauſes of theſe deſcriptions, well waighed. For in the 11. Chapter hauing before deſcribed the kingdome of the Pope, and the Turk, with their ouerthrow, and alſo the preaching and preuailing of the Goſpell in theſe laſt daies: hee commeth to deſcribe the laſt iudgement In the 14. Chapter hauing ſet downe, that the euerlaſting goſpell ſhould be plētifully preached in this laſt age, & the ouerthrow of Babylon, immediately following, forthwith hee proceedeth to the diſcription of the laſt day. In this Chapter hauing before concluded of the vtter ouerthrow of Rome, of the beaſt, and the falſe prophet, of Gog and Magog, and all aduerſary power, at length hee proceedeth to this deſcription of Chriſts ſecond comming, which wee haue heard of. And out of all this, I do gather, that the vtter ouerthrow of the Pope, & all his adherents, ſhall be in this life, a little before the comming of Chriſt vnto iudgement.
               
            
            
               
               Chap. 21.
               
                  AS wee haue heard before of the vtter ouerthrow of the beaſt, and the falſe prophet, and all their adherents, and alſo of the euerlaſting condemnation of the dragon, that old ſerpent, which ſet them all a worke. So now in this Chapter, wee are to heare of that moſt happy and bleſſed eſtate, which the faithfull ſhall dwell in for euermore: ſo that the maine drift of this Chapter is, moſt fully to deſcribe that infinit glory and endleſſe felicitie, to the which all the 144000, that is, all the elect of God, ſhalbe aduanced, when both the beaſt, and all that haue receiued his marke, ſhall be caſt downe into the infernall lake.
                  This Chapter may very fitly bee deuided into foure parts.
                  The firſt is, a deſcription of the renouation of the world, and the reſtauration of the creature. 
                        ver. 1 
                  
                  The ſecond is, 
                        ver. 2.3.4. a laying foorth of the moſt glorious eſtate of the Church, when it ſhall bee freed from all miſery.
                  The third is, a proteſtation of God himſelfe, 
                        ver. 5.6.7.8. concerning the renouation of all things, the felicitie of his elect, and the endleſſe torment of all reprobates.
                  The fourth is, 
                        ver. 9.10.11.12.13.14.15.16.17.18.19.20.21.22.23.24.25.26.27. a liuely deſcription of the very kingdome of God, and the vnſpeakeable ioyes of heauen, vnder the figure of a great citie called the

holy Ieruſalem. Which citie is heere moſt gloriouſly deſcribed of his walles, gates, foundations, ſtreets, height, length, breadth, brightneſſe, matter, forme, perſons, and inhabitants.
               
               
                  The text.
                  
                     
                        ver. 1 
                     AND I ſaw a new heauen, and a new earth, for the firſt heauen and the firſt earth were paſſed away, and there was no more ſea.
                  
                  
                     
                        ver. 2 
                     And I Iohn ſaw the holy city new Ieruſalem come downe from God out of heauen, prepared as a bride trimmed for hir husband.
                  
                  
                     
                        ver. 3 
                     And I heard a great voice of heauen, ſaying, behold the tabernacle of God is with men, and hee will dwell with them, and they ſhall bee his people, and God himſelfe ſhall bee their God.
                  
                  
                     
                        ver. 4 
                     And God ſhall wipe all teares from their eies, and there ſhall bee no more death, neither ſorrow, neither crying, neither ſhall there bee any more paine. For the firſt things are paſſed.
                  
                  By a new heauen and a new earth, is meant the renued eſtate of heauen & earth, after this life in their qualitie, not in their ſubſtance. For wee doe beleeue according to the ſcripture, that this viſible heauen, and this viſible earth ſhall continue for euer, as touching their matter and ſubſtance. But ſhall bee greatly altered and changed in condition, and qualitie.2. Pet. 3. For S. Peter ſaith, wee looke for new heauens, and a new earth, according to his promiſe, wherein dwelleth

righteouſneſſe, that is, ſuch heauens, and ſuch a earth, as is free from all corruption & ſinne. Which thing alſo the Apoſtle S. Paul doth plainely teach, ſaying, that the creature doth feruently expect,
                     Rom. 8 19. 
                     when the ſonnes of God ſhall be reuealed, that is, when Gods children ſhall be made knowen to be as they are, the very heires of infinit glory, which in this life doth not appeare. And hee yeeldeth two reaſons of this deſire of the creature: one is, becauſe in the meane time it is ſubiect to vanitie and corruption: the other is, that then it ſhall bee free from both. And for this cauſe the Apoſtle ſaith, that the creature groneth with vs,
                     Rom. 8. 
                     and earneſtly deſireth, and longeth after that day, wherein it ſhall bee ſet free from the bondage of corruption, and redintigrated and reſtored to that priſtinate eſtate, wherein it was before the fall. But whether this is to be vnderſtood of heauen & earth onely, or of heauen and earth with their adiuncts & particular creatures, I wil not heere goe about to diſcuſſe: howbeit I do greatly incline to their opinion, which hold, that heauen and earth, with all their furniture being redintigrated & reſtored to their firſt eſtate, ſhall remaine for euer, to ſet foorth the glorie of the creator, & for that vſe of glorified men, which now the Angels haue of them.
                  Now whereas Saint Iohn addeth, that there ſhall bee no more Sea. Hee meaneth that there ſhall bee no more any troubleſome and confuſed eſtate of this world, no moe broiles, waues, tempeſts,Chap. 4.6. Chap. 8.8. Chap. 13.
                           •
                        . and ſtormes, as it falleth out in this life. For the word Sea is ſo taken twiſe or thriſe before.
                  
                     By the holy citie new Ieruſalem, hee meaneth the Church triumphant, which therefore is ſaid to come downe from God out of heauen, becauſe it hath all his newneſſe and holineſſe from God, and from heauen, whereby it is now prepared and made ready to bee maried vnto Chriſt, 
                     
                        ver. 3 
                     euen as a bride tricked and trimmed vp for her husband. And for this cauſe S. Iohn heareth a voice from heauen, ſaying, the tabernacle of God is with men, and hee will dwell with them, and they ſhall bee his people, and hee will bee their God. Meaning therby that Ieſus Chriſt will keepe houſe with his glorified ſpouſe, and be at bed and bourd with hir for euer in the heauens, at what time ſhee ſhall bee freed from all teares woe and miſerie, 
                     
                        ver. 4 as the next verſe declareth, yeelding alſo a reaſon heereof, which is, that the firſt things are paſſed, that is, the ſtate wherein the world is now, being ſubiect to many afflictions, temptations, vanities, and corruptions.
                  
                     
                        ver. 5 
                     And hee that ſat vpon the throne ſaid. Behold I make all things new, and he ſaid vnto mee. Write: for theſe words are faithfull and true.
                  
                  
                     
                        ver. 6 
                     And hee ſaid vnto mee, it is done, I am Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the end. I will giue to him that is a thirſt, of the well of the water of life freely.
                  
                  
                     
                        ver. 7 
                     Hee that ouercommeth, ſhall inherit all things, and I will bee his God, and hee ſhall bee my ſonne.
                  
                  
                     
                        ver. 8 
                     But the fearefull and vnbeleeuing, and the abhominable, and murtherers, and whoremongers, and ſorcerers, and Idolaters, and all liers, ſhall haue their part in the lake which burneth with fire and brimſtone which is the ſecond death.
                  
                  
                     Heere the omnipotent God, which ſitteth vpon his moſt glorious throne, doth proteſt, that hee will make all things new, that is, reſtore the world to that execellent eſtate wherein it was before Adams fall, and his elect to a ſtate and condition farre more excellent in heauen, and for the greater certainely and aſſurance of it, willeth and commandeth Iohn to write it, 
                     
                        ver. 5 
                     and record it as a thing moſt certaine and infallible, and to ſet it downe as a thing already done. For things to come which are decreed in the counſell of God, are as certaine, as if they were paſt: for God cannot erre, alter, nor change, and therefore he ſaith, I am Alpha and Omega, the firſt and the laſt, the vnchangeable, and immutable God. And addeth, 
                        ver. 6 
                     that hee will giue freely to euery one that is a thirſt, of the well of the water of life, that is, without all regard of our deſarts, hee will giue to euery one, that earneſtly ſeeketh after heauen and heauenly things, his full fill thereof. And moreouer, that whoſoeuer ouercommeth, in the ſpirituall battaile, ſhall haue the full fruition of all good things, both in this life, and the life to come, as hauing ſpeciall right and intereſt therein through Chriſt, God being his father, and hee his ſonne and heire. 
                     
                        ver. 7 But on the contrary, hee willeth it to bee written, and recorded as a thing moſt certaine and ſure, that all reprobates, all Atheiſts, worldlings, 
                     
                        ver. 8 
                     and all vnbeleeuers ſhall haue their part an portion, in the lake which burneth with fire and brimſtone for euer.
                  
                  
                     And there came vnto mee one of the ſeauen Angels, 
                     
                        ver. 9 
                     which had the ſeauen vials, full of the ſeauen plagues, and talked

with mee, ſaying, I will ſhew thee the bride the Lambs wife.
                  
                  
                     
                        ver. 10 
                     And he carried mee away in the ſpirit to a great and an high mountaine, and ſhewed mee that great Citie, that holy Hieruſalem, diſcending out of Heauen from God.
                  
                  
                     
                        ver. 11 
                     Hauing the glory of God, and her ſhining was like vnto a ſtone moſt pretious as a Iaſper ſtone, clere as Chriſt all.
                  
                  Heere one of the Angels mentioned in the 16. Chapter, which had a Viall full of Gods vvrath: Talketh vvith Iohn, and telleth him that he will ſhew him the bride the Lambs wife: that is, the triumphant Church, or the Church in her glorified eſtate, beeing vnited, and married vnto Chriſt, in the kingdome of glory. And therefore Saint Iohn ſaith, that this Angell carried him away in the ſpirit, to a great and high mountaine, and ſhewed him that great Citie holy Ieruſalem. &c.
                  
                  
                     
                        chapter 17.1.2.3 Wee reade in the 17. Chapter, that when this Angell ſhewed Iohn the great whore of Babylon, he carried him away into the wilderneſſe in the ſpirit: becauſe the vvhore of Babylon ſhould make the Church barren and deſolate, as a vvilderneſſe. But now that he is to ſhew him the ſpouſe of Chriſt in her glory, and to deſcribe the euerlaſting Ieruſalem, he carrieth him in the ſpirit, vnto a very high mountaine, that he might take a ſight of it, as Moiſes was carried vp to the top of mount Nebo, that from thence he might take a view of the holy Land. Which teacheth, that none can take a right view of Heauen and heauenly things, but onely ſuch as fly an high pitch, and mount far

aboue this earth in holy affections, and heauenly contemplation.
                  Moreouer, Saint Iohn telleth vs, that aſſone as hee tooke a ſight of this new Ieruſalem, far paſsing all Sinai ſights: foorthwith he eſpied in it the very glory of God. If he had ſaid, he had eſpied the glory of a King, it had bene much. If he had ſaid, he eſpied the glory of an Angell, it had bene more. But that he eſpieth the very glory of God, it is moſt of all. For vvho can conceiue or expreſſe, vvhat the glory of God is, beeing infinit. The Apoſtle ſaith, that God dwelleth in vnacceſsible light,
                     1. Tim 6. or ſuch light as none can approch vnto.
                  Then this is one vvord for all, touching the beautie and ſuperexcellencie of the new Ieruſalem, that it comprehendeth in it, the very glory of God: but yet for amplifications ſake, it is compared to a Iaſper ſtone, for neuer fading greenneſſe: and to a Chryſtall ſtone, for bright ſhining and glittering for euer.
                  
                     And had a great wall and high, and had twelue gates, 
                     
                        ver. 12 
                     and at the gates twelue Angels, and the names written which are the twelue tribes of the children of Iſraell.
                  
                  
                     On the Eaſt part, there were three gates: and on the Northſide three gates: on the Southſide three gates: 
                     
                        ver. 13 
                     and on the Weſt ſide three gates.
                  
                  
                     And the wall of the citie had twelue foundations, 
                     
                        ver. 14 
                     and in them the names of the Lambs twelue Apoſtles.
                  
                  Now Saint Iohn procedeth to the deſcription of the wall & gates of this great citie. This we all know,

that a ſtrong wall ſerueth for the ſafety and defence of a citie, and for the ſecuritie of ſuch as dwell in it. For if it bee ſo high that none can it ſcale, & ſo thick that none can batter it, then is it indeed impregnable, and the Citizens in great ſecuritie. But the wall of heauen is ſo high, as none can ſcale it, as is ſet downe in this twelfe verſe, and ſo thicke, that no double Cannon can pierce it, as appeareth verſe 17. therefore all the inhabitants of this new Ieruſalem are out of all feare of dangers.
                  Moreouer this citie hath twelue gates, to ſignifie an hard acceſſe for enemies to breake in: and an eaſie paſſage, for the Citizens themſelues to goe in and out. And at thoſe twelue gates twelue Angels, at euery gate an Angell, as it were a porter, to ſee that none bee let in, but the true Citizens, and free deniſons, and ſuch as haue to doe there, which are heere named to bee the twelue tribes of Iſraell, that is, all the elect of God, both of the iewes and gentiles.
                  Moreouer it is ſaid, that there were three gates on euery ſide the citie, both Eaſt, Weſt, North, and South, to note that out of all quarters of the earth, the redeemed ſhould bee gathered, and as our ſauiour ſaith, many ſhall come from the Eaſt, and the Weſt, the North, and the South,
                     Math. 8. 
                     and ſit downe with Abraham, Iſaac, and Iacob, in the kingdome of God. So that it is not materiall, what countrey or nation a man is of, whether Engliſh, Scottiſh, French, or Spaniſh, ſo hee bee a beleeuer, for then he ſhall be ſure to be let in, at one gate, or another, either at the Eaſtgate, or the Weſtgate, the Northgate,
                     
or the Southgate. Moreouer the wall of this citie, hath twelue foundations, that is to ſay, it is ſurely founded. And in euery gate, the name of an Apoſtle, ſo that all the gates had the names of the Lambs twelue Apoſtles, to ſignifie, that the groundſell & foundation of this citie, is laid vpon the doctrine of the Apoſtles and Prophets,
                     Ephe. 2. 
                     Ieſus Chriſt himſelfe beeing the chiefe corner ſtone.
                  
                  
                     And he that talked with mee, had a golden reed, 
                     
                        ver. 15 
                     to meaſure the citie withall, and the gates thereof, and the wall thereof.
                  
                  
                     And the citie lay foure ſquare, 
                     
                        ver. 16 
                     and the length is as large as the breadth of it, and hee meaſured the citie, with the reed twelue thouſand furlongs, and the length and the breadth, and the height of it are equall.
                  
                  
                     And hee meaſured the wall thereof, an hundred forty and foure cubits, by the meaſure of man, 
                     
                        ver. 17 
                     that is of the Angell.
                  
                  Now S. Iohn telleth vs, that the Angell which talked with him, had a golden reed to meaſure both the citie, and the gates and walls thereof. Meaſuring with reeds was a thing of great vſe in ancient times, as wee read in the propheſie of Ezechiell and Zachary,
                     Ezechiel. 40. Zacharie. 2. and as wee heard before in the eleauenth Chapter. But becauſe all things belonging to this celeſtiall Ieruſalem, are ſuper excellent and glorious, therfore the very meaſuring rod and reed, is of pure gold. This great and glorious citie is ſaid to lye foure ſquare, to note vnto vs, that it ſtandeth faſt, and vnmoueable, for round things are eaſily rolled, & mooued this way or that way, hither and thither. But ſquare things are not apt

to rolle or mooue. This euerlaſting Ieruſalem therfore lieth foure ſquare, becauſe it can neuer be moued, but ſtandeth faſt for euer. As the Apoſtle ſaith: Seeing we receiue a kingdome which cannot be ſhaken,
                     Heb. 12. ve. 28 
                     let vs haue grace whereby we may ſo ſerue God, that we may pleaſe him with reuerence and feare.
                  
                  The Angell with his golden meaſuring rod, meaſureth the ſquare ſides of the citie, both the length, breadth, height and depth of it, and findeth each of them to bee 12000 furlongs, which after eight furlongs to the mile, maketh in our accompt 1500 miles, and ſo the whole ſquare of this great citie, commeth to ſixe thouſand miles, which is a goodly compaſſe, & noteth vnto vs the great largeneſſe of gods kingdome, & that there is romth inough for all the inhabitants thereof. Yea, moſt pleaſant & commodious roomes, as our Lord Ieſus ſaith: in my fathers houſe are many dwelling places.
                     Iohn. 1.4. 
                     If it were not ſo I would haue tolde you: for I goe to prepare a place for you.
                  
                  After this, hee meaſureth the thickneſſe of the wall, and findeth it to be an hundred forty and foure cubits, which after our common accompt of two cubits to a yard, amount to ſeauentie and two yardes, which is a iolly thickneſſe, euen ſo thick as no Cannon can pierce, and therefore altogether in expugnable, as hath beene ſaid before.
                  
                     
                        ver. 18 
                     And the building of the wall of it, was of Iaſper, and the citie was pure gold, like vnto cleere glaſſe.
                  
                  
                     
                        ver. 19 
                     And the foundations of the wall of the citie was garniſhed with all manner of pretious ſtones. The firſt foundation

was Iaſper, the ſecond of Saphire, the third of a Chalcedonie, the fourth of an Emeraud, the fit of a Sardonix, 
                     
                        ver. 20 
                     the ſixt of a Sardius, the ſeauenth of a Chryſolite, the eight of a Beryll, the ninth of a Topaze, the tenth of a Chryſopraſus, the eleauenth of a Iacinth, the twelft of an Ametheiſt.
                  
                  
                     And the twelue gates were twelue pearles, 
                     
                        ver. 21 
                     and euery gate is of one pearle, and the ſtreet of the citie is pure gold, as ſhining glaſſe.
                  
                  As we haue heard of the forme of this goodly citie: ſo now wee are to heare of the matter of it, that is to ſay, of what ſtuffe it is made. Firſt, S. Iohn telleth vs, that the whole Citie is of moſt pure and glittering gold, like vnto glaſſe: and that the wall was of Iaſper moſt greene and flouriſhing, and alſo that the very foundation of the wall was beautified and adorned with twelue ſundry kindes of pretious ſtones, which hee reckoneth vp. We count it a great matter heere below, to compaſſe and cloſe in our houſes with a wall of bricke, and none can do it but men of place: but alas, what is that to his wall? what is bricke to precious ſtones: & pibbles, to pearle. But S. Iohn addeth that the gates were of pearle, and the ſtreete of the citie of pure gold! Oh how braue, how beautifull, how glorious, how glittering, how gorgeous, how admirable, a citie is this: for if the gates be of pearle, & the ſtreets of gold, then what are the inner roomes, what are the dining chambers, and what are the lodging roomes. But heere we may not groſſely imagine, that the kingdome of God is

of ſuch mettall and matter inded, as is heere deſcribed. But the holy ghoſt would giue vs ſome taſt of it, and after a ſort ſhadow out vnto vs vnder theſe things vvhich are in moſt pretious accompt amongſt men, vvhat the glory and excellencie of the immortall kingdome is. For otherwiſe there is no compariſon betwixt gold, pearle, and pretious ſtones, and thoſe heauenly, inuiſible, & immortall things which vve looke for, and hope for thorough Chriſt: vvhich in very deed are ſo great, ſo glorious, and ſo vnconceiuable, that gold, pearle, & pretious ſtones, are ſcant ſo much as any ſhew, ſhadow, or reſemblāce thereof.
                  
                     
                        ver. 22 
                     And I ſaw no Temple therein, for the Lord God almightie, and the Lamb, are the Temple of it.
                  
                  
                     
                        ver. 23 
                     And this Citie hath no need of the Sunne, neither of the Moone to ſhine in it: for the glory of God did light it, and the Lamb is the light of it.
                  
                  
                     
                        ver. 24 
                     And the people which are, ſaued, ſhall walke in the light of it: and the kings of the earth ſhall bring their honor & glory vnto it.
                  
                  
                     
                        ver. 25 
                     And the gates of it ſhall not be ſhut by day, for there ſhalbe no night there.
                  
                  
                     
                        ver. 26 
                     And the glory and honour of the Gentiles ſhalbe brought vnto it.
                  
                  
                     
                        ver. 27 
                     And there ſhall into it no vncleane thing, neither whatſoeuer worketh abhomination or lies: But they which are written in the Lambs booke of life.
                  
                  In this new Ieruſalem there is no Temple, as was in the olde Ieruſalem: For there ſhalbe no neede of any, no neede of doctrine, of Sacraments, of prayer,

as in the olde Temple, wherein the law was taught, ſacraments adminiſtred, ſacrifices offered, and many other rites and ceremonies obſerued.
                  But Saint Iohn ſaith, that now God and Chriſt ſhalbe all in all. They ſhalbe the Temple of this moſt holy Citie. And all they elect ſhall fully know them, and dwell with them for euer.
                  And as this Citie hath no neede of any Temple, ſo hath it no neede of any light either of Sunne or Moone. For the glory of God and the brightneſſe of the Lamb doe light it for euer: vvhoſe incomprehenſible brightneſſe doth as far excell the brightneſſe of the Sunne and Moone, as they doe excell a little candle at noone day. But it may be demaunded vvho ſhall dwell in this ſo glorious a Citie, and in this ſo great a light. Saint Iohn anſwereth, that the people that are ſaued ſhall walke in it: that is, all the Iſraell of God, all true beleeuers, vvhich are happy that euer they vvere borne, that they may come to the poſſeſsion of ſuch a kingdome, as is heere deſcribed. For Saint Iohn ſaith, that the reſplendent brightneſſe of this Citie is ſo great, that euen the kings of the earth ſhall bring their glory and honour vnto it. And alſo, that the glory and honour of the Gentiles ſhalbe brought vnto it.
                  
                  Oh how vnſpeakeable is the glory of this citie, that Kings ſhall throw downe their Crownes and Scepters beefore it: counting all theyr pomp and glory but as duſt, in reſpect of it. And the magnificence and pomp of all the potentates of

the earth ſhall heere bee laide downe. And albeit none of the kings, and nobles of the gentiles, might bee admitted into the old Ieruſalem, yet all of the gentiles that beleue, ſhall be admitted into this new Ieruſalem, & made free deniſons therof for euer. And although the gates of this citie alwaies ſtand open both night and day, as not fearing any danger of enemies: yet no vncleane thing ſhall enter into it, but onely they which are written in the Lambs booke of life. Thus wee ſee how gloriouſly the holy ghoſt hath deſcribed vnto vs, this citie of the Saints, and habitation of the iuſt, for euermore. He muſt needes bee a very blocke, that is not moued with the conſideration of this endleſſe felicitie. For this citie is deſcribed vnto vs, in ſo glorious & admirable a manner, to bring vs into loue with it, and to worke in vs an vnquencheable thirſt & deſire after it. Oh therefore let vs ſpend many thoughts vpon it: let vs enter into deepe meditations, of the ineſtimable glory of it: let vs long till wee come to the fingering and poſſeſſion of it, euen as the heire longeth till hee come to the poſſeſſion of his lands. Let vs thinke euery day tenne, and euery yeere twenty, till wee bee in poſſeſſion: let vs with the Apoſtle ſigh and grone, deſiring to be clothed with our houſe,
                     2. Cor. 52 
                     which is from heauen: let vs in the meane time, caſt away all things, that may hinder vs in our chriſtian courſe: let vs ſhake off euery burden, and run with patience, the race that is ſet before vs: let vs as they which prooue maſteries abſtaine from all lets and hinderances. And ſith wee ſtriue

ſo exceedingly for a corruptible crowne: how much more ought wee for an vncorruptible. For what paines, what coſt, what labour, can bee inough for a kingdome: let vs therefore ſtriue and ſtraine, to get into this golden citie, where ſtreets, walles, & gates, and all is gold, all is pearle: yea, where pearle is but as mire and durt, and nothing worth. Oh what fooles are they, which depriue themſelues willingly of this endleſſe glory, for a few ſtinking luſts Oh what mad men are they which bereaue themſelues of a roome in this citie of pearle, for a few carnall pleaſures and delights. Oh what bedlames and ſtraught beaſts are they, which ſhut themſelues out of theſe euerlaſting habitations, for a little tranſitorie pelfe. Oh what intollerable ſots and fops are all ſuch, as will willingly be barred out of this pallace of infinit pleaſure, for the ſhort fruition of worldly lucre and traſh. Let vs therefore in all time to come, make more reckoning of heauen, and leſſe reckoning of the earth. Let vs minde heauenly things, & deſpiſe earthly things, let vs preaſe hard, vnto the things that are before, and forget the things that are behind. Let vs ſtriue hard for the price of the high calling of God, and contemne euen the glory of this world.
               
            
            
               Chap. 22.
               
                  IN this Chapter S. Iohn proceedeth yet more largely, to deſcribe the bleſſed eſtate of all Gods Saints in the kingdome of glory, and the principall ſcope

and drift of this Chapter is yet more to enlarge the ioyes of Gods people, after this life, and to ratifie the authoritie of this propheſie.
                  This chapter containeth foure principall parts.
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        er. 1.2.3.4.5.The firſt, is an amplification of the ioyes of Gods kingdome.
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        er. 6.7.8.9.16.19.The ſecond, is a confirmation of the authoritie of this booke.
                  
                     
                        ver. 9.10 11.12 13.14.15. The third, is an exhortation both to ſpread abroad the knowledge of this booke: and alſo for euery man to prepare himſelfe for the comming of Chriſt vnto iudgement.
                  
                     
                        ver. 17 20. The fourth, is the feruent deſire of the Church, for the ſecond appearing of Chriſt.
                  
               
               
                  The text.
                  
                     
                        ver. 1 
                     AND hee ſhewed me a pure riuer of the water of life, cleare as Chriſtall, proceeding out of the throne of God, and of the Lambe.
                  
                  
                     
                        ver. 2 
                     In the middeſt of the ſtreete of it, and of either ſide of the riuer, was the tree of life, which bare twelue manner of fruits, and gaue fruit euery moneth, and the leaues of the tree, ſerue to heale the nations with.
                  
                  
                     
                        ver. 3 
                     And there ſhall bee no more curſe, but the throne of God, and of the Lambe, ſhall bee in it, and his ſeruants ſhall ſerue him.
                  
                  
                     
                        ver. 4 
                     And they ſhall ſee his face, and his name ſhall bee in their foreheads.
                  
                  
                     
                        ver. 5 
                     And there ſhall bee no night there, and they neede

no candle, neither light of the Sunne: For the Lord God giueth them light, and they ſhall raigne for euermore.
                  
                  
                     The Angell doth yet further ſhew vnto Iohn a pure riuer of the water of life. Whereby is ſignified the ouerflowing aboundance of all good things, which the righteous ſhall enioy, in the kingdome of glory.
                  This riuer is ſaid to proceede out of the throne of God, and of the Lambe, becauſe God in Chriſt is the originall of all this life and happineſſe.
                  Further it is added, that in the midſt of the golden ſtreet of this new Ieruſalem, and of both ſides the riuer, there was a tree of life. Which repreſenteth Chriſt, now in this heauenly paradiſe: as in former time, it repreſented Chriſt in the earthly paradiſe: and alſo that eternall and bleſſed life, which our firſt parents ſhould enioy, if they did continue in the obedience of God.
                  This tree ſtandeth not in an out corner of the citie, but in the very middeſt of the ſtreete, and of both ſides the riuer, that all the Citizens of the new Ieruſalem, might haue free acceſſe vnto it, and taſt of the moſt daintie fruits thereof, in great varietie: for it beareth twelue manner of fruits, that is, in Chriſt all varietie of pleaſure and endleſſe delight, is to bee found.
                  This tree beareth fruit euery moneth, as well in winter as in ſommer: for heere euery moneth is Autumne. The ſenſe is, that in Chriſt the new and

freſh fruits of immortall ioy, without any ſatiety or loathing, are for euer to be found.
                  The leaues of this tree are very medicinable and ſauatiue. For they ſerue to heale the nations with, that is, to preſerue them from all diſeaſes, and griefes: which argueth a moſt bleſſed life, not ſubiect to ſickneſſe, or any other infirmitie. For Chriſt is our neuer failing phiſition, which in this life healeth all our ſpirituall diſeaſes, and infirmities. And after this life, will preſerue vs in perpetuall health and happineſſe.
                  
                     There ſhall bee no more curſe, that is, in the heauenly paradiſe, we ſhall no more be ſubiect to any curſe, as Adam was in the earthly paradiſe. Which alſo argueth the perfection of happines after this life, & yet for further amplification of this moſt glorious eſtate: it is ſaid, that the throne of God, & of Chriſt ſhall be erected in the middeſt of this golden ſtreet, and all his choſen people ſhall there accompany him, dwell with him, bee alwaies about him, yea and ſerue him without wearines for euer. Yea, all his faithfull worſhippers, ſhall come ſo neere his throne, that they ſhall ſee his very face, and bee rauiſhed with his glory, hauing his image, his name, his wiſdome, and mercie imprinted in their foreheads: yea, his vnconceiuable light and glory, ſhall bee ſo reſplendent, that there ſhall bee neither night, nor neede of candle: but in his glittering and moſt glorious chamber of preſence, ſhall all his elect raigne, and triumph with him, for euermore, in infinit felicitie: and the very fruition of eternall delectation, where ſhall bee mirth without

meaſure, and ſolace without ſorrow: as the Prophet ſaith:Pſal. 16. 
                     in thy preſence is the fulneſſe of ioy, and at thy right hand there is pleaſure for euermore.
                  
                  
                     And hee ſaide vnto mee, 
                     
                        ver. 6 
                     theſe wordes are faithfull and true, and the Lord God of the holy Prophets, ſent his Angell to ſhew vnto his ſeruants, the things which muſt ſhortly bee fulfilled.
                  
                  
                     Beholde I come ſhortly. Bleſſed is hee that keepeth the words of the propheſie of this booke. 
                     
                        ver. 7 
                  
                  
                     And I am Iohn, which ſaw and heard theſe things, 
                     
                        ver. 8 
                     and when I had heard and ſeene, I fell downe to worſhip before the feete of the Angell, which ſhewed me theſe things.
                  
                  
                     But hee ſaid vnto mee, ſee thou doe it not, for I am thy fellow ſeruant, and of thy brethren the Prophets, 
                     
                        ver. 9 
                     and of them which keepe the wordes of this booke: worſhip God.
                  
                  In theſe foure verſes, are foure ſpeciall reaſons brought, to confirme and ratifie the authoritie of this booke.
                  The firſt of them is, the affirmation of the Angell.
                  The ſecond, the authoritie of the moſt high God.
                  The third, the teſtimonie of Ieſus, pronouncing them bleſſed, which keepe this propheſie.
                  The fourth, the teſtimonie of Iohn, who heard and ſaw theſe things. But beecauſe in the epiſtle to the Reader, I haue more at large handled this argument, and theſe ſame verſes: therefore

heere I doe of purpoſe relinquiſh them. And that alſo of Iohns adoration, and the Angels refuſall, beeing thinges moſt manifeſt and eaſie to vnderſtand.
                  
                     
                        ver. 10 
                     And hee ſaid vnto mee, ſeale not the words of the propheſie of this booke, for the time is at hand.
                  
                  
                     
                        ver. 11 
                     Hee that is vniuſt, let him bee vniuſt ſtill, and hee which is filthie let him bee filthie ſtill, and hee that is righteous, let him bee righteous ſtill, and hee that is holy, let him be holy ſtill.
                  
                  
                     
                        ver. 12 
                     And behold I come ſhortly, and my reward is with mee, to giue euerie man, according as his worke ſha
                           •
                        l bee.
                  
                  
                     
                        ver. 13 
                     I am Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the end, the firſt and the laſt.
                  
                  
                     
                        ver. 14 
                     Bleſſed are they that doe his commandements, that their right may bee in the tree of life, and may enter in through the gates into the citie.
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        er. 15.
                     For without ſhall bee dogges, and enchanters, and whooremongers, and murtherers, and Idolaters, and whoſoeuer loueth or maketh lies.
                  
                  Heere is firſt an exhortation, to publiſh and proclaime the knowledge of this booke to all people, and in no wiſe to conceale it, or keepe it cloſe, as formerly hath beene ſhewed in the epiſtle.
                  Heere is a further admonition, that they which are vnrighteous ſhould bee vnrighteous ſtill, &c. Which is no allowance or encouragement granted vnto wicked men, to continue in their euill waies, but is

rather a terrible threat, if wee take all the wordes together, in this and the next verſe, as if he ſhould ſay, if men will needes continue in their filthines, yet certainely Chriſt will come ſhortly and reward them according to their workes.
                  Or elſe it may bee a phraſe of ſpeach, which they call an ironicall conceſſion: as in another place the holy ghoſt ſaith to the young man.Eccleſ. 11. 
                     Walke in the wayes of thine owne heart, and in the ſight of thine eies: but know that for all theſe things,
                     1 King. 22.15. Math. 
                           •
                        6.45. 
                     God will bring thee vnto iudgement: So likewiſe in other places.
                  After this, heere is bleſſedneſſe pronounced vpon all ſuch as keepe the commandements of God, and it is ſaid, that there right is in the tree of life, not meaning thereby, that their keeping of the commandements is the cauſe of their right in Chriſt: but onely an effect or conſequence. For our good works doe not goe beefore, as cauſes of our iuſtification: but follow after, as declarations of the ſame. For by doing wee are not made iuſt, in the ſight of God, but onely declared to bee iuſt, in the ſight of men.
                  And as for the keeping of the commandements, wee doe it not in ſuch perfection as Gods iuſtice requireth, but in ſuch meaſure, as his mercie accepteth through Chriſt. And heere the holy ghoſt ſaith, that all they which haue a right in Chriſt, which is the tree of life, and indeauour to keepe the commandements, ſhall enter in through the gates, into the new Ieruſalem: but on the contrarie, all

the rout of reprobates, whom hee calleth dogges, enchanters, whooremongers, &c. ſhall bee vtterly ſhut out, as hauing nothing to do, in this euerlaſting citie, their portion, beeing allotted in the infernall lake.
                  
                     
                        ver. 16 
                     I Ieſus haue ſent mine Angell, to teſtifie vnto you theſe things. I am the root, and the generation of Dauid, and the bright morning ſtar.
                  
                  
                     
                        ver. 17 
                     And the ſpirit and the bride ſay Come. And let him that heareth, ſay Come: and let him that is a thrift come: and let whoſoeuer will, take of the water of life freely.
                  
                  
                     
                        ver. 18 
                     For I proteſt, vnto euery man that heareth the words of the propheſie of this booke. If any man ſhall adde vnto theſe things, God ſhall adde vnto him, the plagues that are written in this booke.
                  
                  
                     
                        ver. 19 
                     And if any man ſhall diminiſh of the wordes of the booke of this propheſie, God ſhall take away his part out of the booke of life, and out of the holy citie, and from thoſe things, which are written in this booke.
                  
                  
                     
                        ver. 20 
                     Hee which teſtifieth theſe things ſaith, ſurely I come quickly. Amen. Euen ſo come Lord Ieſus.
                  
                  
                     
                        ver. 21 
                     The grace of our Lord Ieſus Chriſt, bee with you all. Amen.
                  
                  The authoritie of this booke is heere againe ratified from the perſon of him vvho is the author of it, that is, Ieſus Chriſt, vvho is heere called the root and generation of Dauid: both becauſe he is diſcended of the houſe of Dauid, according to the fleſh: and alſo becauſe the eternall kingdome vvhich all

the prophets did foretell, ſhould ſpring out of the houſe of Dauid, vvas indeed and in truth eſtabliſhed in Chriſt, vvho is our true Dauid, and our righteous braunch, and as it is heere ſaid, the bright morning ſtarre, vvhich hath moſt gloriouſly riſen vpon the vvorld, to diſpell all darkneſſe, and to bring the great and euerlaſting light.
                  Moreouer, heere is great proteſtation made in the eightene and ninteene verſes, of great plagues to bee inflicted vpon all ſuch as ſhall adde any thing vnto this booke, or take away any thing from it. Which alſo maketh greatly for the confirmation of the authoritie of this booke, for that to the which nothing may be added, and from the which nothing may be taken away, muſt needes bee abſolute and perfect. But this booke is ſuch a one: therefore this booke is abſolute and perfect, being a part of Gods euerlaſting truth.
                  Laſt of all, heere is ſet downe the feruent deſire of the bride, after the bridgrome, for ſhee being inflamed with the ſpirit, deſireth him to come, and make vp the match betwixt them, that ſhee may bee ioyned to him in marriage, celebrate the ſolemnization, and liue together with him in the eternall triumph. Which is the ſence of theſe words, the ſpirit, and the bride ſay come, and let him that heareth, ſay come. For it is proper and peculiar onely to the brid, to heare, waite, and long for the comming of Chriſt. And let him that is a thirſt, come. That is, all ſuch as thirſt after righteouſneſſe, may truely ſay, come ſweet

                     Ieſus. For they are allowed freely, to drinke of the water of life. The plaine menaing of all this is, that the Church being directed by the holy ghoſt, moſt vehemently prayeth and longeth for the comming of Chriſt, that ſhee may haue her topfull happineſſe, and full fruition of all thoſe ſuper excellent things, which are prouided and purchaſed for her through him. And therefore to ſatisfie her deſire, Ieſus Chriſt the heauenly bridegroome ſaith, I come ſhortly. To the which the bride ſaith, Amen, Amen. Euen ſo be it. Come Lord Ieſus, come quickly, and make an end of theſe ſinfull and conflicting daies, that all thy deer ones may haue and enioy, their long 
                        ••
                     
                     ked for happineſſe, and felicitie in the heauens, for euer and euer.
               
            
            FINIS.
         
      
   