
      
         
            
            
            A
PLATFORME,
MADE FOR THE
PROOFE OF
Gods prouidence:
            That is, for examining of the truth
of this doctrine, whether God
by his prouidence rule all
things generally, and euery
creature and
action particularly.
            By Arthur Dent
            LONDON.
Printed by Ed. Allde for Henry Goſſon,
and are to be ſolde in Paternoſter-rowe,
at the ſigne
of the Sunne.
1608.
         
      
      
         
            
            
            A platforme made for

                  •
               he proofe of Gods prouidence:

                  •
               hat is, for the examining of the truth
of this doctrine, whether God by
his prouidence, rule all things
generally, and euery creature,
and action particularly.
            
               IT were to be wiſhed
that all Chriſtians did
vnderſtand, that, which
with mouth they confeſſe,
when they rehearſe
the articles of their faith,

                  •
               thered out of the Apoſtles doctrine.
            The Confeſſion is breife, and euery

                  •
               orde in it very ſignificant, and well

                  •
               nderſtood, would roote all hereſies out

                  •
               our mindes.
            
               
The principles of Religion are therein
contayned, and if hee bee but a weak
                  •
               
Philoſopher, that is ignorant in th
                  •
               
principles of Philoſophy, and it bee a
ſhame for all artificers to bee ignoran
                  •
               
in the groundes of thoſe arts they profeſſe,
it is a greater ſhame for vs Chriſtians
to make ſhew of chriſtianity, an
                  •
               
yet to bee ignorant in the rudiments o
                  •
               
our Religion.
            I would to God that euery one, tha
                  •
               
hath the name of a chriſtian, did throughly
vnderſtand, and were fully inſtructe
                  •
               
in them, then needed not I labour 
                  〈◊〉
               
much, for the proofe of this doctrine.
            For euery one of vs, when we do confeſſe
God to bee almightie, do acknowledge
that hee by his prouidence rule
                  •
               
euery thing: and that wee may kno
                  •
               
what wee ſay, I purpoſe cheifly to hand
theſe two points:
            Firſt that Chriſt the Sonne 
                  〈◊〉
               
God, hath the ſelfe ſame prouiden
                  •
               
that God the Father hath: Second
                  •
               
that the prouidence of God, doth g
                  •
               
               uerne
all things generally, and eue
                  •
               
ſpeciall thing ſpecially.
            And yet in handling theſe two, I 
                  〈◊〉
               
               
not recite all that may be ſaid touching
this matter, but onely touch ſome chiefe
pointes, ſummarily which may helpe
you the better to vnderſtand the large
and learned tracts, that many notable
men haue written hereof. For the firſt:
            
               That Chriſt the Sonne of God
doth gouerne all things as well, as
God the Father, is proued by
reaſon, example, and
aucthoritie.
               BY reaſon, if God by his wiſdome
made the worlde: that is, if that the
Eternall wiſdome of God, which is his
worde, the euerlaſting Sonne of God,
was preſent with God, when he made
the worlde: he is alſo with him in gouerning
the worlde: but he was with God

                     •
                  hen made the worlde, therefore he is

                     •
                  ith him in gouerning of it.
               The equity of the firſt propoſition is

grounded vpon moſt ſtrong reaſon:
               For as God created the worlde by
his wiſdome, ſo it is not to be beleeued,
that God gouerneth the worlde without
his wiſdome, otherwiſe he ſhould
gouerne by chance.
               The ſecond propoſition is proued by
the teſtimony of the Apoſtle Hebr. 1.
by whom alſo he made the worldes.
               
               
                  By example, Gen. 48. verſe 13. 14.
15. Then tooke Ioſeph them both, Ephraim
in his right hand towards Iſraels
left hand, and Manaſſeh in his
left hande towarde Iſraels right hand,
ſo he brought them vnto him.
               But Iſraell ſtretched out his right
hand, and laid it on Ephraims head,
which was the yonger, and his left
hand vpon Manaſſehs head (directing
his handes on purpoſe) for Manaſſeh
was the elder.
               Alſo he bleſſed Ioſeph, and ſaid, the
God before whom my fathers Abrahā,
& Izack did walk, the God which hath
fed me all my life longe vnto this day.
               In which wordes Iacob acknowledgeth
Gods prouidence to ſtretch to
particuler men, euen to himſelfe.
               
                  
Then it followeth as verſ: 5. 16. The
Angell which hath deliuered me from
all euill, bleſſe the children, and let my
name be named vpon them, and the
name of my fathers Abraham, and Izack,
that they may growe as fiſh, into
a multitude in middes of the earth. In
theſe wordes, the holy Patriarke Iacob
giueth that particular prouidence to the
Angell, which in the former verſe hee
had giuen to God: And that by the
name of Angell he vnderſtandeth no

                     •
                  reature, is hereby proued, in that he affirmeth,
that this Angell had power to
bleſſe: ſaying to him, Bleſſe the children:
Hee then is the Angell, whome
Iacob was wont to call, the Angell of
the Lord, that is the Sonne of God.
               Therefore in this place Iacob attributeth
a prouidence ouer all things and
perſones, to the Angell: that is the
Sonne of God, as well as to God the
Father.
               By authoritie Iohn. 5. verſe 17. My
Father worketh and I worke: This
worke that Chriſte ſpeaketh of, is not to
be vnderſtood of the creation onely, but
alſo of ye gouerning of al things created.
               
                  
For this particle (hitherto) ſheweth
that he ment not onely that firſt worke
of his in creating all things with his
Father, but alſo another worke, which
he dayly excerciſeth, which cannot be vnderſtood
of any other, then of gouerning
all things with his Father.
               But here wee muſt obſerue this rule,
that the workes of the Trinitie are vndeuided.
               Therefore that which is the Fathers
worke, is the worke alſo of the Sonne,
and of the holy Ghoſt.
               That the Sonne of God doeth the
ſame workes that the Father doeth, is
alreadie proued: the ſame is to be affirmed
alſo of the holy Ghoſt, by the warrant
of Gods worde, as by that I reade
in the 139. Pſalme Whether ſhall I goe
from the Spirit? or whether ſhall I
flie from thy preſence? If I aſcende
into Heauen, thou art there: If I lie
downe in Hell thou art there: let me
take the winges of the morning, and
dwel in the vttermoſt partes of the Sea,
yet thether ſhall thine hand leade me,
and thy right hand holde me: Thus
is the firſt point breifly proued, that

Chriſt the Sonne of God, and the holy
Ghoſt, doe gouerne all things as well as
God the Father.
            
            
               Now to the ſeconde: that God by his
prouidence gouerneth all and euery
thing.
               There are very many that can willingly
graunt, that God by his prouidence
gouerneth all things in generall,
but that euery particular thing is ruled
by the ſame, they denie: with theſe men
therefore I minde to deale ſomewhat
largely, though not ſo learnedly, as the
cauſe requireth: (& who is able to hādle it
worthily?) Philoſophers haue in this
point had ſundry opinions: Epicurus
ſaid, that all things were ruled by
chaunce and fortune, and that God liued
idlely, and at eaſe in the Heauens:
which opinion, as impious, all men in
wordes condemne, and yet ſo we liue
that our liues are euident proofes againſt
vs, that in heart and ſoule
wee embrace it.
               For ſurely if wee thought better
of God then Epicurus did, wee
would not walke ſo directly in Epicurus
pathes as we do, or liue ſo licentiouſly

as though God regarded vs not.
               The Peripatetickes, and other ſort
of Philoſophers, broched another opinion,
teaching that thoſe things which
are aboue the Heauens, are moued,
guided, and gouerned by God himſelfe:
but thoſe things that are vnder the circle
of the Moone, are gouerned partly by
chance and fortune, partly by the counſailes
and deuiſes of men, and partly
by a brutiſh, or ſenceleſſe force of nature.
               Ther is a third opiniō of the Stoickes,
which is that all things are ruled by
fate or deſtinie, that is by a ſecret order,
and linke of cauſes: in which chaine, all
things are ſo ſurely tied, that both God
himſelfe and man are ſtraighted within
thoſe boundes.
               This was a very dainty opinion in
the iudgement of the Poets: who to excuſe
the weakneſſe of their God Iupiter,
fained that he wept, for that he was ſo
hindered by the force of deſtinie, that
he could not ſet Sarpedo at liberty.
               The fourth opinion is Platoes, who
graunteth that God by his prouidence
ruleth all things in generall, which afterward
God commiteth to petty Gods,

halfe Gods, and Deuils, who haue the
charge and care of particular things:
From theſe foure opinions, ſpring all other
whatſoeuer, touching Gods prouidence:
and there is no one opinion,
which may not eaſily be reduced to one
of theſe.
               But ſome of vs (euen of vs Chriſtians)
flying one danger, runne into another:
and for that they dare not deny that
God by his prouidence ruleth all things,
yet will they not graunt, that by it, he
gouerneth euery particular thing, leaſt
they ſhould thereby be driuen (as they
thinke) to ſome abſurdities: thus whilſt
they would auoide abſurditie, they
commit impiety and fall away from the
truth moſt dangerouſly: But farre be
this from your heart (Right worſhipful)
and that it may neuer poſſeſſe you: auoide
the cauſe that worketh it in them,
which is ignorance of the word of God:
and for that God in great mercy hath
kindled in your heart a deſire of knowledge,
quench not that godly deſire in
you, but purſue hotely with harty and
feruent prayer, after knowledge, and
you ſhall finde it. And if you ſhall finde

it, you ſhall certainly know, that there
will no abſurdity be inforced vpon any
doctrine grounded vpon Gods worde,
and that you need not feare this doctrine,
as they do: I wil firſt diſcourſe briefly of
the truth of it, and will proue, that God
gouerneth by his prouidence all things
generally, and euerie particular thing
particularly: then will I anſwere to all
thoſe chiefe obiections which are brought
againſt it, and by which ſome vaine men
thinke to make the doctrine abſurde.
To the firſt:
               For that this argument hath bene
diuerſly handled, and men haue bene
verie curious in diſcourſing thereof: eſpecially
ſince what way ſoeuer they
winde themſelues, many abſurdities
do ſeeme to follow them: it will be beſt
I thinke for me to keepe me in the high
beaten way, leaſt ſeeking by wayes, I
wander out of the way: I meane to
diſcourſe ſo of this doctrine, as I am
taught in the worde of God, and then
diligently to remooue all thoſe things
what ſoeuer they be, not beſeming ye moſt
pure nature of God, which in ye iudgement
of men, ſhall ſome hereof to follow.
               
                  
But if my ignorance were ſo great,
that I could not remoue theſe inconueniences:
yet not withſtanding, are you
and all Chriſtians bounde to receiue
with all humilitie this true doctrine:
and to blame me not, the doctrine, if I
be not able to cleare it of all thoſe things,
which in the iudgement of man may
ſeeme abſurde: And although it is not
my purpoſe, to examine all, that Philoſophers
and others ſay againſt the gouerning
of euery thing by the prouidence of
God, yet in my minde, all that they can
ſay againſt it, may by this one argument
be eaſily ouerthrowne. If he be a
God (which they all confeſſe, & though
they would denie it, yet may it eaſilie
be proued againſt them) hee is a moſt
perfect thing: but that which is moſt perfect,
hath nothing perfecter then it ſelfe,
neither can we imagine any thing to be
more perfect, then that which of it ſelfe,
is truly and abſolutely moſt perfect:
therefore there is nothing, neither can
we imagine any thing to be more perfect
then God: here vpon I inferre, if God did
not gouerne al things in general, & euery
thing in particular, wee might well

imagine that there was ſomething more
perfect then God: euē ſuch a diety, which
had charge and care of euerie particuler
thing: but it is ſhewed that no ſuch diety
or God-head cau be imagined.
               It is falſe therfore, that they hereupon
would infer that God by his prouidence
ruleth not euerie particular thing,
& the contrarie is true, which we teach:
for elſe ſurely that God, which they
dreame of to liue idleis, & at eaſe, and to
haue no care of any thing, as they babble,
is not in truth a God, but as Tullye
ſometime ſaid of their maiſter Epicurus,
ſo ſay I of them, that they in wordes acknowledge
a God▪ but in truth deny that
there is any. But leauing Philoſophers,
let vs ſee what the Scripture teacheth
vs: the firſt place I wil vſe for the proofe
of this Doctrine, I take out of ye Epiſtle
to the Hebrues the 1. Chapter. verſe.
3. where it is ſaide of the Sonne of
God, that He beareth vp, that is, mooueth
and gouerneth all things by his
mightie worde: he that granteth that he
ruleth all thinges, excepteth no one thing
from his gouernement: wee may then
well conclude out of this place of

God, that God gouerneth all, and euery
thing.
               But leſt I ſhould leaue any ſtarting
hole for the aduerſarie to winde out at,
let vs further ſee what the Scripture
teacheth vs of the gouerning of euery
particular thing by Gods prouidence.
               Neither will I heape vp many places,
but content my ſelfe with a few examples,
out of which the truth of this doctrine
may be gathered.
               And thus I do endeuour to proue it
breifly: All the creatures of God are either
indued with the gift of free choiſe, or
els want this libertie of choiſe: they that
haue it, are Angels, both good and euill,
and men alſo both good and euill: they
that want this libertie of choiſe, are all
other liuing things created by God, and
alſo thoſe his creatures which haue no
life: and yet of all theſe creatures, God
hath a ſpeciall care, ſo as hee diſpoſeth of
euery one of them according to his pleaſure.
               The booke of Iob, and the Pſalmes,
do very often handle this argument, ſo
that if I ſhould gather out of them all
their proofes, I ſhould write out almoſt

their whole bookes: yet ſome I will
bring, and leaue the reſt for you to gather,
hoping it will be a meanes to bring
you to the often reading of them.
               In the 147. Pſalme the Prophet
ſaith thus of God, that the couereth the
Heauen with cloudes, and prepareth
raine for the earth, and maketh the
graſſe to growe vpon the mountaines:
But the cloudes, the raine, and the
graſſe are things without ſoule and life,
and yet by his wonderfull prouidence
he driueth, and ruleth at his pleaſure
the cloudes in the aire: he ſendeth the
raine downe vpon the earth, and he maketh
the graſſe to grow: In the 148.
Pſalm. the Prophet ſaith, that fire
and haile, ſnow, and vapours, ſtormie
windes do execute his worde, and
what is it to execute the worde of God,
but to be ruled and gouerne by his
worde, it is to be at his becke and
pleaſure: Againe, in the 135. Pſalme, it
is ſaid, that whatſoeuer pleaſed the
Lord, that did he in heauen and in
earth, in the Sea, and all the depthes:
he bringeth vp the cloudes from the
endes of the earth, and maketh the

lightnings with the raine, he draweth
forth the windes out of his treaſures:
and Chriſt our Sauiour in the 6. of
Math. biddeth vs learne how the Lillies
of the field do growe, they labour
not neither ſpin: and a little afterward
he telleth vs, that God doth cloath the
graſſe of the field: theſe fewe places
proue that God hath a prouident care,
to keepe and gouerne euen his lifeleſſe
creatures, not onely generally, but
alſo particularly: as cloudes, raine,
windes, graſſe, fire, haile, ſnow, vapours,
lillies, and ſuch like: the like
prouident care he hath for other of his
creatures, whome hee hath indued
with the life and ſence, but not with reaſon
and that libertie of choiſe, whereof I
ſpake before: Wee reade in the 147.
Pſalme that God giueth to beaſts
their foode, and to the yong Rauens
that crie: and in the 104. Pſalme verſ.
14. the Prophet ſaith, that God cauſeth
graſſe to growe for the cattell,
and afterward in the 27. verſe hee ſaith,
that all beaſts, foules, and fiſhes, waite
vpō thee O Lord that thou maiſt giue
them food in due ſeaſon: thou giueſt

it to them, and they gather it, thou openeſt
thy hand and they are ſilled
with good things: This alſo our Sauiour
Chriſt affirmeth in the 6.
of Mathew, ſaying, beholde the foules
of the Heauen, for they ſowe not, neither
reape, nor carye into the barnes:
yet your heauenly Father feedeth
them. And in the 10. of Math. Are not
two Sparrowes ſold for a farthing,
and one of them ſhall not fall on the
ground without your Father? meaning
God: by theſe few places you may
ſee it ſufficiently proued, that God hath
a prouidēt care of euery particular creature,
vpō whom he hath not beſtowed y•
free libertie of choiſe, whether they haue
not life, or haue life and ſence and want
reaſon. Now as for thoſe creatures to
whom God hath giuen that gift of free
choiſe, which I ſaid were Angels and
men, ſome do thinke, that God in truth
hath a ſpeciall prouident care ouer man,
whom hee made after his owne Image
and likenes: but not ouer other
creatures: which opinion how falſe it is,
you may eaſily gather out of that I
haue already written. Others do make

this to be the difference betweene man
and man, that God taketh a ſpeciall care
of the godly, but caſteth away all care of
the wicked: but the worde of God doth
manifeſtly ouerthrow this opinion: In
the 5. of Math. Chriſt our Sauiour
teacheth vs, that our heauenly Father
maketh his Sun to ariſe on the euil and
on the good, and ſendeth raine on the
iuſt and vniuſt: And Paul in his firſt
Epiſtle to Timothy the 4. chapter, ſaith
that God is Sauiour of al men, ſpecially
of thoſe that beleue: wherof I gather
that God hath a ſpeciall care of thoſe
that are his, but yet not ſo, as that hee
leaueth ye wicked to be ruled by chance
& fortune: for if God haue a care of thoſe
things and creatures that the wicked
poſſeſſe, as of their cattell, graſſe, and
corne, and ſuch like: ſurely hee prouideth
alſo for them, the owners & maſters
of thoſe creatures: neither can he be
prouident & carefull for the godly, but he
muſt alſo gouerne, and rule the wicked
according to the pleaſure of his diuine
power. For as a Prince
and Generall of an armie is not
onely carefull for the troupes and

companies of Souldiers that be in his
hoſt: but alſo for munitiō & vittaile neceſſarie
for thē, that hee may haue his army
ſo furniſhed, that it may be a terror to
the enemie, and may keepe them amongſt
whome he lieth incamped in
ſuch dutifull obedience, that they may
be ready to doe whatſoeuer his Captaines
and officers commaund them: ſo
can it not be that God doth prouide for
his Church, but he muſt alſo moderate
and gouerne all thoſe things, without
which his Church cannot be here vpon
the earth.
               Such things as appartaine to the
nouriſhment, cloathing, ſafe and quiet
harboring of the members of the
Church: They therefore who are
not of the true Church, are yet, for the
benifit of Gods Church, to be ruled by
his prouidence, ſo are the Patriarches
ſaide to haue founde fauour in the eyes
of infidelles, for that the Lord did rule
and moue the hearts of infidelles, which
way it pleaſed him.
               Now how God ruleth not onely euery
particular man, but alſo all the
ſeuerall actions of men, is proued by

that which is in the 16 of the Prouerbs,
Commit thy workes vnto the Lord,
and thy thoughts ſhall be directed:
And by that alſo which is in the 4. of
Iames: goe to now ye that ſay, to day
or to morrow wee will goe into ſuch
a Citie, and continue there a yeare,
and buy and ſell and get gaine: and
yet ye cannot tell what ſhall be to
morrow: for what is your life? it is euen
a vapour, it appeareth for a little
time, and afterward vanquiſheth away:
for that we ought to ſay, if the
Lord will, and if wee liue we will doe
this or that: Thus Iames ſpeaking of
the actions or doings of men, affirmeth
that God ruleth them all, ſo that without
his will wee can doe nothing, no
not ſo much as paſſe from one place to
another: and Paul coufeſſeth that hee
was often hindred and ſtaied by God,
that he could not goe to thoſe Churches
hee purpoſed, vntill hee had his iourney
graunted him by the will of God: God
therefore ruleth all the ſeuerall actions
of all men. I will vſe onely two examples,
to illuſtrate and make plaine this
moſt true doctrine, that God gouerneth

the ſeuerall actions of all men, both good
and bad: In the hiſtorie of Ioſeph
many things to this purpoſe are to bee
founde: the end of that hiſtorie was
that which Ioſeph ſpake of, Geneſis 50.
you thought euill againſt me ſaith hee
to his brethren, but God diſpoſed it to
good: In this hiſtorie theſe men and
their ſeuerall actions are to be wayed:
Firſt father Iacob, then the brethren
of Ioſeph, Ioſeph himſelfe, the Iſhmaelites
to whom hee was ſold, that light
huſwife his miſtris Putiphars wife,
Pharao and his ſeruants: the actions
of all theſe perſons are diuers and very
different one from another, ſome of
them were laudable, others deteſtable,
and yet ſome of thoſe better then others,
and ſome of thoſe actions neither
to be altogether allowed nor diſpraiſed,
& yet as Ioſeph witneſſeth, God by his
prouidence ruleth & diſpoſeth them all,
both men and their actions to Ioſephs
good.
               So as Dauid ſaith, Pſalme 105. that
God ſent a man before them, Ioſeph
was ſold for a ſlaue: For ſo God gouerneth
the wicked actions of thoſe

men, that the moſte peruerſe practiſes
of Ioſephs brethren, the ſhameleſſe
and beaſtly part of Putiphar
                        •
                     
                   wife,
and other heauie actions, had a moſt
happie ende: ſo that euen thoſe things
that they did to Ioſeph, purpoſing by
them vtterly to deſtroy him, brought
Ioſeph to great honour: ſo mightie
and wonderfull is God, that he is able
to make the light to ſhine out of darkneſſe
more-ouer in the laſt chapter of
the propheſie of Ionas, wee ſhall ſee
how wonderfully God doth not only gouerne
men, but alſo all manner of creatures
ſenſible & vnſenſible: for I reade
that Ionah went out of the Citie of Niniueh,
& ſat on the Eaſt ſide of ye Citie,
& there made him a booth & ſat vnder it
in the ſhadow till he might ſe what ſhold
be don to the Citie: and the Lord prepared
a Gourd, & made it to come vp ouer
Ionah, that it might bee a ſhadow ouer
his head, and deliuer him from
his griefe: ſo Ionah was exceeding
glad of the Gourd. But God prepared
a worme when the morning
roſe the next day, and it ſmote
the Gourd that it withered: and

when the Sunne did ariſe, God prepared
alſo a feruent Eaſt winde, and the
Sunne beate vpon the head of Ionah,
that hee fainted, and wiſhed in his
heart to dye, and ſaid It is better for
mee to dye then to liue: in this that I
haue written out of Ionas wee haue
theſe things to waye: Firſt Ionah a
man, the moſt excellenteſt creature,
the other baſer creatures, as the
Gourd, the worme, and the winde:
The worme is a creature that hath life
in it, and is of that kinde of beaſts that
be deuided in their bodies, the head and
breaſt from their belly and taile, the
Gourd and the wind they are creatures
without life, and yet you ſee how God
by his prouidence ruleth and moueth at
his pleaſure all theſe creatures. If Epicurus
had bene at this ſight, hee would
haue aſcribed all to chaunce: if Ariſtotle,
to naturall cauſes: if Chryſippus
or Zeno Stoicks, to fate and to deſtinie:
if Plato to ſome petty god: and amongſt
them all there had not bene one worde
of the trueth of God.
               But the holy Ghoſt attributeth the
courſe of gouerning all theſe things to

God alone, who prepared them all for
Ionah his good: for by theſe meanes,
Ionah that was wandring, was ſet in
the right way, as if you will reade the
chapter you may ſee more fully of that
which I haue already written. I may
ſafely conclude, that both all the creatures
which want the gift of choiſe, and
all they that haue it, are gouerned and
ruled by God, by his moſt high and
mightie prouidence.
               Of the Angels, which I placed at
the firſt amongſt thoſe creatures, that
haue the libertie of choiſe, I will write
now the leſſe, hoping that I ſhall haue
this backe againe to view, poliſh, and
enlarge: but their name teacheth vs
that they are ruled by God him ſelfe,
for they are called Angeli Angels, that
is, meſſengers ſent from God: and in
the Epiſtle to the Hebrues are called
the miniſters, and ſeruants of God.
               
               Thus much for the firſt parte, that
is for the truth of this doctrine, that
God by his prouidence ruled all things
in generall, and euery particular thing
in particular.
               Now come I to that I promiſed to

handle in the ſecond place, namely to
the vnfolding and anſwering of thoſe
arguments which are made againſt
this doctrine. The firſt argument
they make is this: God cannot gouerne
all things generally, and euery
creature and action without exeeding
toile and griefe of minde: But if agreeth
with the nature of God, that he
reſt in quiet and be free from all labours:
Therefore God doth not gouerne
all and euery particular thing.
               To this argument drawne thus
from the nature of God, I anſwere,
that their firſt propoſition is falſe,
which is that God cannot gouerne all
things generally and particularly
without exceeding foile, and greife of
minde: but for that I will not onely denie
it as falſe, but ſhew the reaſons
that mooue me ſo to doe, you muſt know
that there are diuers kindes of actions,
ſome are naturall, ſome are violent other
ſome meane: that is neither altogether
naturall, nor altogether violent:
naturall actions are they that doe flowe
from the principles of nature it ſelfe,
without any helpe elſewhere: ſuch are

the round motions of the heauens, the
flowing and ebbing of the ſea, that
light things doe of their naturall lightneſſe
mount vpward, heauie things fal
downeward, that we breath and ſuch
like: theſe actions are done without any
labour, becauſe they mooue of themſelues
without any other helpe: Other
actions there are, which are done by
force, and therefore are called violent,
as by force to make a ſtone mount vpward,
whoſe nature is to fall downeward.
And ſuch like violent actions,
which cannot longe laſt as Ariſtotle
teacheth, becauſe they are done with

                     •
                  orce. There is another ſort of actions
which I called meane, whoſe beginnings
are of nature, but yet
they cannot be done vnleſſe they be
helped by ſome other meanes, as to
eate, to drinke, to walke, and ſuch
like. But now that, that God doth,
hee doth without labour, becauſe
hee doth it naturally, and therefore
moſt freely: againe, there is no
force that can compell God, and
therefore hee worketh of himſelfe
freely without any compulſion:

neither is hee troubled with greifes, but
gouerneth all things according to the
rule of his will: neither is there any
thing more agreable to the nature of
God, then to gouerne, and preſerue
the whole worlde, euen with the
worde of his power.
               A ſecond argument of theirs is this,
It is an vnmeete thing for God, and
cleane repugnant to his nature, to entermeddle
in filthy, and vncleane
matters but hee cannot gouerne euery
ſeuerall creature, and their actions, but
hee muſt entermeddle with many vncleane,
and filthie matters: therefore
hee doth not gouerne them.
               I denie the ſecond propoſition, which
is, that God cannot gouerne euery ſeuerall
creature and their actions, but he
muſt mingle himſelfe with many vncleane,
and filthy matters: For that
amongſt the creatures, and their actions,
there are many vncleane things:
this conſequence, though it bee the
grounde of the propoſition is falſe, for
although the power of God is in all his
creatures, and ruled all, yet doth it
not therefore follow, that the nature

of God doth entermeddle with the vnpure
actions of his creatures, which
may be made plaine by this ſimilitude:
the Sunne of all viſible creatures moſt
excellent (man onely excepted) doth
moſt ſet forth the glory of God▪ it doth
ſhine in euery place, ſo that it ſhineth often
vpon the dunghill, and though the
beames thereof do heat the dunghill, as
they do all other places, and thinges
which they peirce, Yet for all that the
Sunne is not polluted with the defilements
and vncleaneſſe of it, neither
doth the ſubſtance of the beames of the
Sunne mingle it ſelfe with thoſe
things which it pearceth.
               When one laid this in Diogenes
his diſh, that he went into a ſtewes or
brothels houſe, why ſaith hee the Sun
commeth thither alſo, and yet is not
defiled therewith: therby ſhewing, yt
a wife & godly man though he enter into
vncleane and filthie places, and come
into the companie of filthie perſons,
doth not forthwith toyne himſelfe to
their filthineſſe, neither is infected with
their vices: If therefore this Philoſopher
could enter into the ſtewes, and

come forth againe vnſpotted with their
vncleaneſſe, ſo that their filthineſſe
could not faſten vpon him: much loſſe
is God (whoſe nature is moſt pure and
ſimple in gouerning of his creatures)
inſected with their filthineſſe. There
is a third obiection, which they thus
frame: Euery wiſe and good gouernour,
vnleſſe hee be greatly hindred▪
bringeth his worke that hee frameth,
and that thing that he ruleth to a good,
perfect and wiſhed ende: this may bee
proued by many examples, as by the
example of a ſkilfull Pilot, who directeth
and bringeth his ſhip to the purpoſed
hauen, and ſuch like: but nothing can
let God from perfecting his workes,
and yet many of his creatures, as many
monſters, mad men, lame, are imperfect.
Therefore God ruleth not euery
generation and conception: to vnloſe
this knot wee muſt remember this diſtinction
of order: there are two ſorts of
orders or courſes that God taketh in gouerning
all things: the one of them wee
may call ordinary, which God doth often
vſe, the other extraordinary, with
which order though we be not acquainted,

yet doth God himſelfe know the
cauſe why he ſo worketh: & yet of this
may we not conclude, that God in his
workes is contrarie to himſelfe: for if
to vs there appeare ſome dinerſitie and
difference in the gouernement of all
things by God, certainely that difference
is not of Gods rule, but of the vnſtable
iudgement of our troubled
mindes: for Gods workes are not to be
balanced by our iudgements, which
are deceauable, and for the moſt part
vntrue: Auguſtine propoſed the example
of two children, one of which is dutifull
and louing to his father, the other
is a wicked ſtubberne childe: both their
fathers are deadly ſick, the good childe
prayeth earneſtly vnto God, to deliuer
his father from his ſicknes: the graceles
graft thinketh euery hour twenty vntil
his father be breathleſſe: both their fathers
died and that according to Gods
appointement and direction.
               But now that childe that prayed for
the prolonging of his fathers life,
highly pleaſed God: and yet it
pleaſed not God, that his father
ſhould liue any longer: and againe,

that childe that longed for his fathers
death, as highly diſpleaſed God, and
yet it was Gods pleaſure that his father
too ſhould dye: how commeth it to
paſſe, that that which pleaſeth God
may diſpleaſe him alſo, and that which
diſpleaſeth him, pleaſe him? as he was
pleaſed with the good childs kindneſſe,
but not pleaſed that his father ſhould
liue: and again diſpleaſed with ye vnnaturall
part of the lewd childe, and yet
pleaſed with his fathers death.
               Surely there is in God a certaine
ſecret ordinaunce which yet is iuſt, and
a certaine ordinance open and manifeſted,
which alſo is righteous: But
certaine idle companions to draw both
Auguſtine and vs into hatred, for this
doctrine, obiect againſt vs, that they
cannot perceiue in God this double wil,
which we ſpeake of, to witte, a ſecret
and a reuealed will: for they ſay we all
know and you confeſſe, that God is
moſt plaine without all ſhew of doubleneſſe,
and therefore his will muſt
be alſo as plaine, and euen ſo is it,
though wee cannot comprehend it: but
let them firſt anſwere to that which

                  Auguſtine and wee haue propoſed, and

                     •
                  ill they, nill they, they muſt ack
                  
                     •
                  owledge
with vs, that this difference

                     •
                  f will, of which I haue ſpoken, is not

                     •
                  roperly in God, but in vs, who ac
                  
                     •
                  ording
to our reach and capacity mea
                  
                     •
                  ure
diuine matters: and therefore in

                     •
                  eſpect of vs and of our capacity, there ſe
                  
                     ••
                  eth
to be this difference in the will of
God: According to our cenſure and

                     •
                  udgement, we will iudge the birth of

                     •
                  onſters, mad men, and crooked men,

                     •
                  o be an vnperfect worke of God: but in

                     •
                  he iudgement of God their creation is
moſt perfect and abſolute.
               If Ariſtotle were asked what the

                     •
                  auſe were of their imperfections and

                     •
                  e formities, he would anſwere yt they

                     •
                  roceeded of a defect, and wāt in nature.
But Chriſt ſaith otherwiſe of the man
that was borne blinde in the 9. of Iohn.
Neither hath this man ſinned, nor his
parents, but that the workes of God
ſhould be ſhewed on him: that is, that

                        •
                     od might be glorified by him. Now
ſince the laſt end of al things is the glory
of God, and ſince all thoſe things are to
bee accounted perfect, which attaine to

their deſired end, and ſince the glorie of
God more appeareth by the imperfections
of ſome of his creatures, then if
hee had made them all in one forme and
perfection, ſurely we may not iudge any
of his workes vnperfect: I graunt
that if they be conſidered in themſelues,
there will appeare in them ſome imperfection:
but when they are referred
to the glorie of God, if they illuſtrate
and ſet it forth, they are euen therefore
to be accounted perfect: for if no man
ſhould be mad, if none deformed, none
lame, none blinde, wee would aſcribe
the perfection of our birth, which wee
perceiued that all men haue neceſſarily
either to nature or to our parents: and
we would eaſily ſlip into this opinion,
that wee had our ſolues alſo of our parents:
but ſince there appeareth ſuch a
diuerſitie in the outward ſormes of
creatures, the prouidence of God doth
more clearely appeare by that their difference
in ſhape. In the iudgement of
man, many flies and wormes, and all
ſort of ſerpents are reputed not onely
vnprofitable but alſo hurtfull: But
the Lord (as Moſes ſheweth in his

ſong) calleth them his treaſures, out
of which, hee draweth vengeance for
his enemies, as arrowes out of a quiuer.
               Theſe were the ſhafts hee ſhooke
Pharao with: with theſe Antiochus,
with theſe Herode was puniſhed:
who therefore will account them vnprofitable,
or who ſuperfluous, ſince
the Lord him ſelfe hath ſuch vſes to
put them to?
               There are alſo in thē many profitable
things for man, whereof ſome we know
not, other ſome the Phiſitians know,
as Nicander & others haue very learnedly
written of them: Ancient learned
Chriſoſtome in his tenth Homily
vpon Geneſis, vſed this ſimilitude:

                     
                        •
                     f (ſaith hee) in earthly matters when
wee ſee theſe things that be done, approued
by graue and mightie men,
wee miſlike not their cenſure nor
gainſay it, but preferre their iudgement
before our own: how much more
ſhould we carry the ſame minde of all
viſible creatures, which we know that
God the creator of all thinges made?
That ſince wee haue receaued his

cenſure of them all, that all that hee
made was wery good, let vs ſuſpende
our iudgements & bury them in ſilence,
and let vs not dare to prefer the iudgements
of all men before the Lords: and
wee may perſwade our ſelues with
ſtrong and ſufficient arguments, that
the Lord made all things in great wiſdome
and mercy, and in a worde, that
the Lord made nothing vnaduiſedly
or without cauſe: but though we know
not the cauſes of his workes, becauſe
of the weakeneſſe of our vnderſtandings:
yet hath hee made all things according
to his wiſdome and moſ
                     •
                  
mightie mercy.
               Thus farre Chriſoſtome: If therefore
by the teſtimonie of Ariſtotle, nature
made nothing in vaine, As that m
                     •
                  
who was vtterly ignorāt of true religiō
affirmed of nature, which he yet iudge
                     •
                  
to be both blinde and brutiſh: how
much more are we bound to attribut
                     •
                  
vnto the moſt wiſe creator of all thing
                     •
                  
this perfection in his creation, that he
made nothing in vaine, but all thing
                     •
                  
in great wiſdome: ſince all his worke
                     •
                  
redounded to his glory, which is th
                     •
                  
                  
laſt, and the cheifeſt end of all things,
and by the common conſent of all men,
euery thing is iudged either perfect or
vnperfect, by the attaining of his ende?
There is a fourth argument, thus made
againſt the prouidence of God: If God
who is moſt wiſe and righteous in his
iudgements, doe gouerne all things,
& euery particular thing there ſhold not
be ſo great troubles in cōmon wealths,
and ſpecially in the Church, whereof
the Lord hath a ſpeciall care, for that it
is his Sanctuarie: but both in Church
and common-wealth there is great vnquietneſſe,
ſo that all lawes both diuine
and humane are openly violated: good
men moſt cruelly are delte withall, euill
men do reioyce and triumphe in
their wickedneſſe without controlement:
God therfore gouerneth not all
things that are in common-wealths and
in the Churches.
               This argument thus drawne from
the nature of Gods iuſtice (which ſemeth
to be contrary to his gouernement
by his prouidence, if he ſhold ſee, moderate,
and ſuffer all theſe outrages and
diſorders) is one of the cheifeſt proppes

of Epicurus his opinion: And this argument
troubleth many that now liue, &
dayly labour to bringe Epicurus name
in obloquie with all men, & yet are content
to liue like Epicures: and this argument
alſo the Turkes, and our capitall
enemies (the papiſts) obiect moſt againſt
vs: and ſure it carrieth ſuch
waight with it, that Dauid confeſſeth
that he was ſo aſtonied, that his feete
were almoſt gone: & his ſteppes had welnere
ſlipt, when hee ſaw the proſperitie
of the wicked, and puniſhments and
hard entertainement of the godly, vntill
he went into the ſanctuarie of God:
then vnderſtoode he their ende, that is
vntil Dauid entered into Gods ſchoole,
& learned by his worde & holy ſpirit, that
he ordered all things moſt wiſely, & iuſtly.
After Pomp
                        •
                     y had bene put to the
worſt in the battaile fought betwixt
Caeſar and him, in the confines of Pharſalos,
and eſcaped by flight to Mytilene,
he went to Cratippus, and diſputed
with the Philoſopher in his garden,
whether he thought there was any God
which by his prouidence ruled in earth:
and for that before in very bad quarels

                  
                     •
                  ee had had moſt proſperous ſucceſſe, as
when he had ſubdued, and in battaile
vanquiſhed the inhabitants of the Eaſt
part of the worlde, and was now in a
moſt good cauſe ouercome, ſtripped of
his armie, and forced to flie away himſelf
alone moſt ſhamefully: he hereof gathered
that God regarded not what was

                     •
                  one amōgſt men, but yt all things were

                     •
                  one by chāce. Thus doth the wiſe mē of

                     〈◊〉
                   world iudge & ſpeake of ſuch euents.
But the holy ghoſt teacheth vs to iudge

                     •
                  ar otherwiſe of them: When Moſes in
his ſong Deut. 32. was to deliuer to the

                     •
                  eople the threatnings of God, if they
were diſobedient, which afterward the

                     •
                  ebellious Iſraelites felt, he vſeth this
preface: Perfect is the work of the migh
                     
                        •
                     ie
God: for all his waies are iudgement:
God is true & without wickednes,
iuſt and righteous is he: teaching
hereby that whatſoeuer the world
doth prate of the cauſes of afflictions,
that God with great wiſdome,
doth ſende forth of his treaſures
all ſortes of calamities:
ſome-time by them to puniſh the
wicked, ſometime to exerciſe the godly

with them. For the ſinnes of the peopl
                     •
                  
the hipocrite doth raigne: that is, tirant
                     •
                  
ſit in the throne of Iuſtice, which
vnder pretence of executing iuſtice, ar
                     •
                  
but hipocrites and oppreſſe the people:
Iob 34. verſe 30.
               
                  Woe be to thee (ſaith the Prophet
Iſaiah) which ſpoileſt, for thou
ſhalt be ſpoiled: And indeed, one tyrāt
plagueth another, & though tyrants
be a plague to all nations & Kingdomes
yet are they themſelues in due time
in like ſort puniſhed by other tyrants▪
In the perſon of Sennacherib the iudgements
of God are very liuely ſet
forth by the prophet Iſaiah in the tenth
Chapter of his propheſie: The Lord
ſtirreth vp the King of the Aſſirians to
puniſh the eaſtern people: Sennacherib
was a wicked man, and he is a ſcourge
to wicked people, yea hee cruelly vexed
the people of God, hee ſpoileth almoſt
all Paleſtina, he beſeigeth Ieruſalem
the cheife Citie of that country:
And thus ſaith God of him by the Prophet
in that place: O A ſhur the rod of
my wrath and the ſtaffe in their hands
is mine indignation: I wil ſend him to a

diſſembling nation, and I will giue
him a charge againſt the people of my
wrath, to take the ſpoile, and to take
the pray, and to treade them vnderfoote
like the mire in the ſtreete. But
he thinketh not ſo, neither doth his
heart eſteeme it ſo: and ſo forth. And a
little after, thus ſaith God by the Prophet
of him: But when the Lord hath
accompliſhed all his worke vpon
Mount Sion and Ieruſalem, I will viſit
the fruite of the proude heart of the
King of Aſhur, and his glorious and
proud lookes, Becauſe hee ſaid, by the
power of min own hand haue I done
it, and by my wiſdome, becauſe I am
wiſe: And a little after this, thus ſaith
the Prophet, Shal the axe boaſt it ſelfe
againſt him that heweth therewith? If
Pompey had looked on this example,
thus laide forth by the Prophet, hee
might haue bene better occupied & inſtructed,
thē he was by his toying with
Cratippus: and this would haue
taught him, that thought the Lord ſuffereth
tyrantes to bee for a time a
plague to any nation, yet in his appointed
time hee ſuffereth them to bee puniſhed

by other tyrantes, and to haue
the ſame meaſure that they meaſured
vnto others: Now if wee compare
Sennacherib, and Pompey that gloried
in this Litle The greate: which
name Silla gaue him for his victories:
wee ſhall finde many things a like in
their hiſtories. Both of them was an
are in the hand of God to ſtrike the
people of the Eaſt: both of them deſtroyed
Paleſtina, and afflicted the people
of God: Sennacherib deſeiged Ieruſalem,
Pompey tooke it, the Aſſirian
was put to flight by an Angel, and was
ſlaine in his temple, that is in his ſanctuarie,
by his owne Sonnes: Pompey
was put to flight by Caeſar, and flying
to Ptolomie King of Egipt, whoſe father
being diſpoſſeſſed of his Kingdome,
he had reſtored againe to his crowne, &
therefore Ptolomie ſhould haue bene as
a ſonne vnto Pompey, was there in Egipt
with him miſerably ſlaine. So
vnſearchable are the waies of Gods
iudgements: for that which Michah
ſpeaketh of the Caldeans in the 4. chap.
of his propheſie: They know not the
thoughts of the Lord, they vnderſtand

not his counſell, therefore they
ſhall be thraſhed as ſheaues in the
barne, may be ſpoken of all theſe
Giants and proude tyrantes, who for
that they know not the counſaile of the
Lord, ſhall in his appointed time beare
the puniſhement of their pride: Neither
doth the holy Ghoſt teache vs,
that the wicked onely are puniſhed, but
that the Church of God is alſo afflicted
though for another ende and purpoſe:
And there may many reaſons be
brought, to ſhew why the Churche of
God is ſubiect to ſo many calamities,
but I will at this time alleadge onely
three, by which as by many other wee
may know, that the Lord in truth and
iudgement, doth exerciſe his Churche
with afflictions. The firſt is that ſo long
as we cary about with vs this burthen
of corruption, we are not onely ſubiect
to ſinne, but doe continually by
ſinning prouoke the Lorde to deals
in iuſtice with vs: And therefore
it is agreeable to the iuſtice of God,
that wee bee chaſtened of the Lord
with a fatherly rod, which may kéepe
vs in obedience: yea wee muſt all

ſay with Ieremy in the third chapter of
his Lamentations, verſe 22. It is the
Lords mercies, that wee are not conſumed,
becauſe his compaſſions faile
not.
               
               My ſeconde reaſon is this: It is
beſt for vs to bee humbled vnder the
mightie hand of God: for wee know
how feirce and haughty minded we are
by nature, ſo that it is neceſſarie for vs,
that God keepe vs vnder his ſchooling,
and ſo haue vs in ſome awe: Therefore
Dauid ſaith in the 119. Pſalme, ver. 67.
Before I was afflicted I went aſtray:
but now I keepe thy word. And ver.
71. It is good for me that I haue bene
afflicted, that I may learne thy ſtatutes.
The third reaſon is deliuered by
Paul in his firſt Epiſtle to the Corinthians
the 11. Chapter verſe 32. When
wee are iudged wee are chaſtned of
the Lord, becauſe wee would not be
condemned with the world: Therefore
let vs conclude this whole diſcourſe
with Moſes thus: The iudgements of
the Lord are true and righteous,
neither let vs meaſure them according
to our own cōceit & iudgemēts which

are very deceauable, but let vs know
that the godly are puniſhed for their
ſinnes they dayly commit, that they
may be humbled, and that they periſh
not with the wicked: but God in puniſhing
the wicked, doth ſhewe and open
the treaſures of his long ſufferance,
patience and iuſtice: but when hee afficteth
vs, he maketh vs like to his
owne Sonne Chriſt, and ſtirreth vp
in vs an earneſt deſire to be diſſolued
and to be with Chriſt.
               Let vs in the meane time giue
our ſelues to harty and
earneſt prayers, praying
continually
with the
Saints of
God:
               Come Lord Ieſus, yea come quickly.
Amen. Amen.
               
               
            
         
      
   