
      
         
            
            
            Reaſons why the Bill againſt the Cuſtomary Tenth of Lead Oare gotten within the County of Darby ſhould not paſſe in the Honourable Houſe of Commons.
            THe maine Reaſons ſuggeſted by the Minors for the paſſing of this Bill, is, That the paying of this Cuſtomary Duty of the Tyth or Tenth of Lea
                  •…
                Oare, waſhed and clenſed from earth and Rubbiſh, being allowed onely one penny for the waſhing of euery tenth Diſh or Meaſure, will diſcourage the Minors from working, and that this Duty is but lately exacted from the poorer ſort of Minors.
            
               Both theſe Suggeſtions are meerely vntrue, as by the Reaſons following may appeare.
               1. FIrſt this is an ancient cuſtomary Duty, and hath time out of mind beene payed in the high Peake and all other places where Lead Oare hath beene gotten in that County to the ſeuerall Miniſters and Proprietors in right of their Churches, as may appeare by Deeds without Date, ancient Acc
                     •
                  unts and Leaſes, in the ſeuerall Reignes of E. 2. E. 3. R. 2. H. 6. E. 4. H. 7. H. 8. E. 6. and ſince by depoſitions of witneſſes vntill this time.
               2. The Miniſters and Proprietors of the ſaid Cuſtomary Tythe, or Duty of Lead Oare in that Country haue paid and doe pay to his Maieſty firſt Fruits and other Duties accordingly, for this Cuſtomary Duty of Tythe Oare, in particular, as by their ſeuerall compoſitions in the firſt Fruites Office ſhall appeare.
               3. The King hath alwayes had and hath an ancient Officer ouer the Myne, called a Barre-Maiſter, whoſe Office amongſt other things is to ſee this 
                     •
                  uty paid, as appeares by Record in the Dutchy.
               4. Of late time ſome Minors being encouraged by men of great power, for their owne particular intereſt haue denyed to pay this ancient Duty.
               5. Vpon which denyall a Bill was exhibited into the Exchequer Chamber for a Proprietor of this Duty, and a Decree thereupon obtained vpon f
                     •
                  ll Hearing againſt the ſaid Minors, and another Bill was exhibited into the Court of Wards in right of a Ward, Farmer to the Deane and Chapter 
                     〈◊〉
                   Lichfield, where the Poſſeſſion of this Duty was eſtabliſhed likewiſe by Iniunction of that Court againſt the Minors.
               6. The Minors vpon the ſame pretence which they now alledge in this Bill in Parliament obtained Order at the Counſell Table to retaine the ſaid Cauſe there, and to ſtay all further proceedings at Law: And their Lordſhips after ſeuerall Hearings at the Councell Table, referred this Cauſe to a Tryall at the Common-pleas Barre, which accordingly was had, and after full and long Euidence giuen of both Parties, the Verdict paſſed againſt the Minors in Eaſter Terme, 1620.
               7 The Minors not yet ſatisfied obtained of their Lordſhips to haue a ſecond Tryall at the ſame Barre of the Court of Common Pleas, which alſo was had, and after full and long euidence againe giuen of both Parties, another Verdict paſſed againſt the Minors for the Proprietor of the ſaid cuſtomary Duty, in Michaelmas Terme, 1620.
               8. His Maieſty then being petitioned in this Cauſe, referred the conſideration of it to the Right Reuerend Father in God, the Lord Arch-biſhop of Canterbury, and Right Honourable the Lord Preſident of the Councell, who after full Examination of all former proceedings had in this Cauſe in Iuly 1621. certified his Maieſtie that they thought fit that the ſaid Tythe or cuſtomary Tenth of Lead Oare ſhould bee eſtabliſhed according to the ſaid 
                     •
                  wo Trials at Law, and the ſaid Decree had in the Exchequer.
               9. His Maieſty againe referring the whole Buſines concerning the Tyth or cuſtomary Tenth of Lead Oare vnto the Councel Table: their Lordſhips vpon due conſideration taken of all former proceedings in the Cauſe, did by their Order of the 5. of October 1621. cleerely diſmiſſe and diſcharge the whole Cauſe concerning the ſaid Tythe or Tenth of Lead Oare, from the Board, and left it to the full fruition and benefit of the Law, with this Direction, that becauſe the Proprietors and Owners of the ſaid Tythe or Tenth had receiued loſſe by being ſtayed at the Board vpon pretence from the Minors of ſome poynt of State which their Lordſhips there declared to be otherwiſe. Therefore their Lordſhips in an Honourable reſpect of them the ſaid Miniſters and Proprietors, did wiſh that they might haue all the ſpeed and expedition that the Law in Iuſtice might afford them, as by the ſaid Order may appeare.
               10. Since which diſmiſſion two ſeuerall Bills were exhibited into the Chancery touching the right of the ſaid Tythe or Tenth of Lead Ore; wherevpon after examination of Witneſſes and Publication of the Depoſitions, and other due proceedings, two ſeuerall Decrees were made in the ſaid Court againſt the Minors, the one in Michaelmas Terme, 1622. and the other in Michaelmas Terme laſt paſt.
               11. During the Dependancie and continuance of all which Suites and contentions, the Minors in the Pariſhes where, and when great men meddled not, did all the time of theſe Suits, and ſtill doe conſtantly pay the ſaid Tythe or Tenth of Lead Ore.
               12. The Lords of the Soyle and their Farmours haue two ſeuerall Duties from the Minors, the Cope which in ſome places is foure pence, and in others ſixe pence for euery Load, and the Lot which is euery thirteenth Diſh, for which the Lords are to allow the Minors Wood for their Groues, or holes where they get their Oare, as by the cuſtome of the Mine appeares, which allowance the Lords of the Soyle of late haue refuſed to make the Minors, in recompence of which loſſe they are ready to further the Sute againſt the Miniſters and Propriators of the Tythe or Tenth.
               By all theſe proceedings it appeares that in poynt of Law the Title is cleered againſt the Minors in Law, by the two Verdicts: in poynt of equity it is likewiſe cleere againſt them, by the ſeuerall Decrees in Courts of equity, one in the Exchequer Chamber and two in the Chancery, and for matter of State, it is alſo cleered by the Order and proceedings of the Councell Table. Therefore this being the Inheritance of the ſaid Miniſters and Proprietors; and hauing in a manner paſſed all the Courts of Iuſtice at Weſtminſter and the Councell Board, they hope this Honourable Houſe will not diſinherite them.
               All the Premiſes the Miniſters and Proprietors of the ſaid Tythe or Tenth of Lead Oare doe auerre to be true vpon their Houſe, and are ready prepared to proue the ſame by the ſeuerall Records and proofes by them alleadged.
            
         
      
   