
      
         
            
            
               ❧ An Epitaph vpon the death of the right honorable Edward Earle of Darby, Lorde Stanly and Strange of Knocking, Lord and Gouernour of the Iſles of Man, Knight of the Noble order of the Garter, and one of the Queenes Maiesties moſt honorable priuie Counſell. Deceaſed the. xxiiij. of Nouem. 1572.
            
               SHall ſhaking hande with drilling teares, deliuer rural verſe?
               my mourning Muſe doth bid me ſtaye, vnable to reherſe.
               The noble actes of Derby Earle, that late had breath and life:
               who was through Realme and forren land, beloued of man and wiſe.
               But ſure as teares doe caſe the heart, that plunged is in paine:
               and Sorrow ſhée will belch foorth ſobbes, in ſéeking reſt againe.
               Can countrie now at once refuſe, with dolors thus oppreſt?
               To ſhed foorth teares, ſith Darbye Earle, is thus now clapt in cheſt.
               Who though in yeres he was, more fitter for the graue,
               then long to liue, yet may wée ſaye, to ſoone did death depraue.
               This noble valiaunt Earle, of his aſpiring breath:
               whoſe ſage aduiſe thus loſt may be, his countries ſeconde death.
               Though hee in Ormeſchurch lye, incloſed now in ſlime:
               yet ſhall his factes inforce his fame, vp to the ſkies to clime,
               Though ougly Mors with ſpight, haue reft him of his life:
               yet ſhall his worthy déedes declare, his knowledge was full rife.
               That hée in ſetting ioynt and bone, as ſtanching bloodie wounde,
               to fewe that Chirurgery doth profeſſe, ſo much doth vnderſtande.
               Let Sicophantes that nolve doe ſéeke, by this his death to rayſe:
               yet let them knowe his worthy factes, hath merited great prayſe.
               No fines no time he rayſde, but Tenauntes were content:
               and yet ye ſhall not heare of worlde, hée greatly rayſde his rent.
               No toyler in the lawe, though he had profred wrong:
               nor yet would ſéeme to 'ppreſſe his foe, though he was mightie ſtrong.
               But hée by méekeneſſe made, his foe to be his friende:
               the wiſeſt way, all wiſemen ſaye, all quarrels ſo to ende.
               You nobles doe beholde, your péere doe not forget:
               who did not long in Marchauntes booke, delight to ſtande in det.
               Who knewe the Marchauntes trade, his money was his plow:
               and would not payment long delaye, that diſhonour ſhould not grow.
               Oh noble Earle of ſtature meane, but yet of manly hart:
               in Scotland thou, with Northfolke Duke, at Kelzey playde thy part.
               Of Darby Earle, as Lorde of man, and of the Garter Knight:
               and one that in his Princes grace, had very much delight.
               Both for his fayth the which, vnto hir grace he owde:
               and alſo for his wiſdome graue, in counſayle often ſhowed.
               A mind that did delight, in yelding Juſtice dewe,
               an eare ſtill bending downe to heare, poore Sewtors that did ſewe.
               A hart that rude the plight, of thoſe that were oppreſt:
               a knee to bende to Princely throne, to haue their cauſe redreſt.
               A foote that readie was, to ryde, to runne, or go:
               to helpe the weake that Mydas might, was like to ouerthro.
               An eye that ſingle was, and not with lucre ſtaind:
               a hande to helpe the hungrie poore, he in nowiſe refraind.
               How many now ſhall want, to haue wherewith to féede?
               their hungrie corpes which in his life, receyued reliefe at néede.
               What mourning make his friendes, of him that are bereft?
               what mourning make his yomen all, that he behinde hath left?
               How doth his neyghbours all, that dwell in Lancaſhire?
               with ſobbes and teares they doe deplore, this death of his to heare.
               With teares we all are forſt, this noble Earle to wayle:
               although that death hath brought to him, a life of greater vayle.
               Though Mors his corpes haue ſeaſt, that daunger none coulde daunt:
               yet in his ende a ſubiect true, as fame ſhall aye auaunt.
               No Traytor coulde him traine, at no time to rebell:
               nor Papiſt coulde him ought perſwade, he liked them not ſo well.
               To deale by their deuice, to holde with Scottiſh dame:
               nor Duke thats dubd, nor Percies pride, that ſought their countries bane.
               Though Papiſtes him extoll, and make the worlde beléeue:
               yet at his death he them renounſt, and to his Chriſt did cleaue.
               Hée knewe their traſh be ſuche on, Maſſe he did not builde.
               but onely calde one Jeſu Chriſt, to helpe him win the fielde.
               And thus hée died in Chriſt, no helpe he ſought from Pope:
               but in the death and bloud of Chriſt, he put his fixed hope.
               Though ſlowe of tongue to talke, of curious queſtions fine:
               yet one that read the Scriptures much, no doubt a good Deuine.
               He practizd that in life, that he in Scriptures founde:
               and ſo he built vpon the rocke, and not on ſhiueling ſonde.
               No bloode he brought in Maries dayes, to burne or for to broyle:
               nor well he likt of Spaniſh pride, that ſought this Realme to ſpoyle.
               Now is this Earle from Lathum gone, tourne horſe another awaye:
               the ſaint is fled, though ſhrine remaine, where he was woont to ſtaye.
               Let Lancaſhyre, and Cheſſhyre both, with teares bring Corpes to graue:
               For loe, his happie ſoule in heauen, the bleſſed Aungels haue.
               As hée in honour runne, a happie race to ende:
               So to his ſonne now Noble Earle, God graunt him grace to bend.
               To treade his Fathers trace, to ſtaye in Goſpell pure:
               ſo ſhall he liue in fathers fame, that euer ſhall endure.
            
            
               
                  Ʋiuat post funera Virtus.
            
            
               ¶Iohn Denton Miniſt.
            
         
      
      
         
            ¶Imprinted at London by VV. VVilliamſon, dvvelling in Diſtaffe Lane.
         
      
   