
      
         
            
            
            An Anſweare to the Supplication.
            Againſt him, who ſeeming to giue the King counſel to become a Catholike, indeuoureth to ſtirre vp his good Subiectes vnto rebellion.
            Faithfully translated out of French by E. A.
            LONDON Printed by Iohn Wolfe, and are to be ſolde at his ſhop right ouer againſt the great South doore of Paules. 1591.
         
      
      
         
            
            
            An Anſvvere to the Supplication exhibited vnto the King.
            
               IHaue read the aduice giuen vnto the K. vnder the name of a Supplication, that he woulde vouchſafe to become a Catholike, wherein I haue found nothing concerning a Supplication, but the bare title. The reſt is euen the ſame that the Authour doth promiſe. Sir, It is a ſecond warre that lighteth on your armes, by thoſe who imitating the firſt chriſtians, haue acknowledged you to be their King. Whereto he ſhould haue added, that ſuch a ſecond was of more dangerous conſequence then the firſt, bicauſe in the firſt, they that tooke part were only the fooles, doltes, ideots and wicked perſons. The commons by the furious inducement of a heape of Friars and monkes, that fight rather for their wallet then for their faith, and the great ones to make way to their ambition. But in this they that terme themſelues the kings faithfull and good ſeruants, doe furniſh inſtructions and remembrances wherewith vnder the pretence of a requeſt to wythdrawe the vertuous from their vowed obedience and fidelitie. Examine this diſcourſe by péece meale, and you ſhall finde many braue points: and examine it in general, and you ſhal finde as many ſtabs wyth a dagger to ouerthrowe the King, and ſo conſequently the ſtate. The Author termeth himſelfe a Catholike, the kings good ſubiect, zealous for the common wealth, all this, to pleaſure him, I am content to beléeue. But had he béene a frée catholike, he ſhould haue addreſſed his requeſt to God, not to the King. Or if a good ſubiect deſirous of publike peace, he ſhould haue opened his reaſons vnto him particularly, and not haue ſpread them amongeſt the people, whereas contrariwiſe this requeſt neuer came to his handes for whome it is ſaide to be made, but runneth amongeſt thoſe

that néede no praying, of whom one ſort are rebels, another, ready to rebellion, & the thirde, ſuch as are of a timorous conſcience. The firſt, ſeeing the king is not yet become a Catholike do delight in theſe remonſtrances as a parcell iuſtificatory of their rebellion: the ſecond notwithſtanding whatſoeuer their ſemblant are nothing ſory for them: and the laſt doeth hang in ſuſpence, as men neuer brought vp in the auncientie of the church, ſo that whether it be by art, or by hap, this Supplication hath courſe among vs, and the fruit thereof tendeth not to edefie the king, but to make ſome of his folowers malecontents, and ſo aduenture to cauſe them to change their copies.
            
               He may, will you ſay, ſaue him ſelfe by becomming a Catholike. But I tel you, it is not a matter to be caſt in a mould. But he had promiſed his Nobilitie that he would take ſome paines therein within ſixe moneths, who may be greeued to ſee thoſe moneths turned into ſixe yeares. Good God, is not this a méere ſlaunder? made he that promiſe ſimply? No truely. What then? That he would ſummon eyther a generall or nationall counſell wythin ſixe moneths, or ſooner if poſſibly he coulde, to the ende to followe and obſerue whatſoeuer ſhould therein be decréede. Haue his ennemies ſince affoorded him one quarter of an houres reſpite to tende thereto? While they were buſie would you haue wiſhed him to haue tended to diſcourſes, and in the meane time to haue vndone and loſt himſelfe, as Hieruſalem was loſt while the Iewes buſie about the exerciſe of the ceremonies of their ſabbaoth, not willing or daring to defend themſelues, fell vppon the edges of the Rom
                  ••
               nes ſwordes? Hath he not a readie example of this fault before his face? For if after the death of the two brethren the late king had reſolutely taken armes, and ſo giuen the rebels no leaſure to bethinke themſelues, the affaires of our France had béene in better ſtate by the one halfe. But, O hard hap, we loytered about the goodly Orations at the cloſing vp of the ſtates at Bloys, wyth magnifical preparation, and while we ſet our whole delight vpon this theatre, we perceiued not that 7. dayes before the citie of Paris through the inducements and practiſes of the Sorboniſts had abandoned the kings obedience. Howbeit you the good and faithfull ſeruant of the king (you would thinke I ſhould

mocke in terming you ſo) haue quietly ſhipped in theſe two wordes, That the Nobilitie would grieue to ſee their ſixe moneths turned into ſixe yeares, as if through friuolous delayes the king longed after ſuch lingering. After the ſame maner as you ſéeke to make him beléeue, that in his deſired conference he ſeeketh to be perſwaded by fiue or ſix, who within theſe three daies departed from our church, moſt of them ſhamefully: Theſe be your owne wordes, a matter that he neuer imagined, as hauing referred the concluſion of this cauſe to ſuch a counſell as is aforeſayde. But certainely ſith ye would néedes haue this warre to light vpon our kings neck, it had bin your part to haue fought with good weapons, and not with déedes which you haue ſlaunderouſly inuented.
            But who be thoſe noble men that haue giuen you commiſſion to vſe this ſpéech to the king? Are they the ſame that were at the camp at S. Clauds the 14. of Auguſt 1589. in whoſe hands the K. promiſed within ſixe months to aſſemble a good, frée and lawfull counſell, to the end to follow whatſoeuer ſhould therein be concluded? They are bound to the king by worde, ſigned, ſealed and exemplified in the Parliament, and are not ſimply gentlemen onely, but euen the Princes of the bloud, dukes, péeres, officers of the crowne, and many other notable perſonages. Al who haue promiſed him all ſeruice and obedience vpon his othe and promiſe, that within the time by him preſcribed he would make this aſſembly. A promiſe which in itſelfe implyed a quiet condition of poſſibilitie, for no man euer meant to bind himſelfe to a thing vnpoſſible, neyther is there any ſo ſenſeleſſe, as not to ſée that the lingering which now appeares in the execution of this promiſe, is not by him ſought or deſired, but ſpringeth out of theſe troubles. But why ſhould we ſuppoſe that theſe doe complayne, conſidering we yet ſée them continue in the ſame deuotion, & that not they only haue imbraced the kings iuſt querrell, but alſo many other dukes, marqueſes earles, barons and lords, who in reſpect of their abſence hauing not ſigned, haue notwithſtanding haſted to come vnto him with great trains and concourſe of people, to haſard their bodies, liues, and goods in his ſeruice. Al theſe doe know that the ſixe moneths are expired, yet do not thereupon impute any thing to the king, neither are ſo farre deuoide of conſideration as to wiſh him to

enter into our Church by anie other way then was capitulated amongſt them, and to the ſame end alſo was the lord of Luxembourg choſen to go to the Pope to giue him to vnderſtand of al that was paſſed, which he acknowledged to be iuſt, holy, and moſt lawfull. I doe not here tell you of thoſe houſedoues and dormice, who in their houſes doe watch on which ſide the ſtorme may light, to the ende to apply themſelues to the other: for theſe men I account as cyphres, ſo that if you haue no other then thoſe, you might much better for your honours ſake haue ſuppreſſed your requeſt.
            Well, on, to you do I now denounce warre euen as you haue done to the king, for I am of the number of thoſe Catholikes whome you ſpeake of in the beginning of your petition, who imitating the ancient chriſtians, do continue in his obedience. If you be as you ſay, ſo catholike, ſo good a ſubiect vnto the king, ſuch a louer of publike peace (for I muſt yet returne to our firſt point) ſith you will reade a leſſon to our maiſter of that which you thinke to appertayne to his duetie, ought you not alſo to haue done the like to the people of that that belonged to them? It is a matter that you forgot not for lacke of notice, for it is one of the firſt diſhes where with you haue ſerued our king, when you tolde him that his good ſubiects did imitate the ancient Chriſtians: yet ſtayed you ſo ſodainely that your word dyed ſo ſoone as it was borne: and ſuch a word, as being wel diſgeſted in good mens conſciences, would procure a generall peace throughout the realme. Let vs therefore beginne here by our ſelues: let vs reade to our ſelues a lecture of our dueties to our king, ſo being growen wiſe in our owne dueties, we may the better indeuor by ſupplications, aduice, or other faire ſpéeches, to teach him that which we thinke méete for him to do.
            Firſt, I am of opinion, that euery good citizen ſhoulde wiſh there were but one religion in ouery well ordered common wealth, and euery good Chriſtian that there were no exerciſe of any other theuthecathol. apoſt. religion. That is the ſame wherein we haue béene of all antiquity brought vp in France: the ſame wherein we were baptiſed: the ſame wherin we ſhould liue and die, as being the ſpring and aſſurance of our ſaluation vnder the banner of our ſauior Ieſus Chriſt. God hath giuen vs a king of an other religion then ours, yet

a vertuous, valeant, noble, wiſe and iuſt prince, ſuch a one as accompanyeth all his actions with the feare of God. Where the Wiſe man ſayth, that the feare of the Lorde is the beginning of wiſedome, I ſuppoſe he meant, that the feare of God is the ground of all religion. Neuertheleſſe, if he were other, if a Nabuchod
                  •
               nozer, who was the greateſt ſcourge vnto the houſe of God, ye
                  •
                were it our partes to doe for him the ſame that the Prophet Baruch exhorted the children of Iſraell to do for the ſaid Nabuchodonozer, that is, to loue, honour, and obey him, and to remember him in our prayers: and whie▪ Becauſe God hath giuen him vs, and will haue vs to haue ſuch a one, whether to be reuenged of vs for our ſinnes, or to proue the ſtedfaſtneſſe of our faith, or vpon any other reaſon which he will not any ſhould know but himſelfe. When our Lord ſaid, Giue vnto Caeſar that belongeth vnto Caeſar, &c. Peter in one of his Epiſtles &c. Paule to the Romans, and to Titus commaunded the chriſtians to pray to God for the earthly powers and to obey them, they knewe that all the kings, monarches, and princes of thoſe dayes were heathen, as were all the other the emperours from Auguſtus to Conſtantine the great, yea Conſtance the ſonne of Conſtantine, albeit a chriſtian, was infected with the hereſie of Arriux, and Iulian his ſucceſſor from chriſtianitie returned vnto his Idolatrie, all which notwithſtanding, we ſtil obeyed them. For the propoſition of our Chriſtianitie imported that wée ought rather to obey the vice-emperour then the inferiour iudge, the emperour then the vice-emperour, and God then the emperour, becauſe vpon the one depended onely the loſſe of goodes and life, things periſhable and tranſitorie: on the other, eternall damnation of our ſoules: to be briefe, that the good chriſtian ſhould make a buckler of his life againſt ſuch aſſaults as might be deliuered him by the emperour, when he contrarieth the honour of God, but that in all other things we owe him our obedience. This was the trophée erected by our fathers. Reade S. Cyprian, S. Hierom, S. Auguſtine, and eſpecially Tertullian the ancienteſt of them all, where he writeth to Scapula the gouernour of Affrike. We, ſaid he, do in all, and through all obey the emperour, we acknowledge him to be our ſoueraigne Lorde, we willingly pay him tributes, aides, and ſubſidies. One onely thing we deſire to

obtaine of him, that is, that he will permit vs to line in peace of conſcience. The like ſaith he in his Apologie: and aboue all things in this generall obedience, he will not that the chriſtian ſtray one tittle from the common courſe of his religion, but that rather he ſhould abide all kind of forments: and this is it that he doth at large diſcourſe vpon in his treatie of the crowne of a ſouldier. And to the ende you ſhould not thinke that they liued ſo becauſe force ſo commaunded, you ſhal find that T. of Aquine, one of our chiefe ſchoole diuines diſcourſing vpon this article, is of opinion, that of whatſoeuer religion the prince be, yet the ſubiect ought to obey him, alſo that there is one only cauſe that may diſpenſe with the othe of ſidelitie. vz. when from chriſtianity the prince declineth to paganiſme, wherein likewiſe he is gaineſaide by antiquity: for it is certaine that the chriſtians neuer doubted to obey Iulian the Apoſtata. Yea that great Saint Martin the holy buckler of our Fraunce was vnder his pay fiue whole yeares while he was a Catechiſt, that is, during the time of his probation, wherein ſuch as were diſpoſed to make profeſſion of our religion were ſtricteſt in their actions. This is, in my opinion, the leſſon you ſhoulde haue taught the French nation, and which now I do deliuer in manner of a ſupply to the ſecond line of your Supplication: for being ſo carefull for the ſaluation of the kings ſoule, you ſhould not haue neglected the reſt of France. A leſſon as catholike and holy as the hereſie is deteſtable, that hath courſe among the Leaguers, vz. to vpholde that becauſe our kings religion is contrary to ours, we lawfully may not onely deny him our obedience, but alſo leauy warre againſt him. For were their opinion true, wée muſt condemne the whole doctrine of the primitiue Church, we muſt condemne S. Peter and S. Paule, yea we muſt condemne the great patron and foundation of our religion Ieſus Chriſt: yet it is ſuch an hereſie as ſlideth into the harts of thoſe that are taken to be the honeſteſt men: for your ſelfe do ſeeme to be ſomewhat ſpotted there with, ſith of ſet purpoſe you omitted this principall peece, which would greatly haue enriched your worke. How then? Will I diſſwade the king from becomming a Catholike, becauſe I teach his ſubiects to obey him? God forbid. The tipe of all my deſires tend to ſée him vnited in the ſame religion with vs: but to tel you true,

I could wiſh that neither you nor I had vndertaken the vnweauing of this webbe. It is very daungerous to become an arbitrator in the cauſes and opinions of a mighty king, eſpecially in an argument of ſo great conſequence as this, withall conſidering the diuerſity of humours amongſt vs at this day. Stand you vpon this, that the king ought to become a catholike? In haſt poſt haſt, as you do, vnles he follow your counſell, ſundry tickeliſh ſoules will ſtrait imagine that it procéedeth of want of deuotion, and mindeth to féede his faythfull ſubiects with delaies in reſpect of his promiſe at his comming to the crowne, and ſo ſhall you perhaps be the cauſe of a new commotion againſt him. But let me vpholde the contrary, and I ſhall prouide ſome conceit for diuers ſlippery mindes, that by his conſent I am vnder hand taught by thoſe of his religion to play this part: which will be a newe preparation to miſtruſt, a matter no leſſe dangerous then the other: and wythall it will be thought that in heart I profeſſe an other religion then the ſame that outwardly I exerciſe. Neyther you nor I are Liſippus or Apelles, that we ſhould repreſent Alexander in imagery or picture. I meane we are not ſufficient to diſcourſe vpon this high point that aimeth both at religion and the ſtate: neuertheleſſe, ſith you, abuſing the liberty of the tyme wherein euery one thinketh it lawfull to doe what he liſt, ſéeming to bring a medcine for the ſtate, do bring poyſon: I beléeue the better ſort will not miſlike that I alſo do take leaue to bring in a counterpoyſon. I will tell you then, that I am of opinion that the K. become a catholike, and that as ſoone as it may pleaſe God to giue him grace (for it is a bleſſing that procéedeth from God, not from vs) but that he ſhould ſo become vpon the mould that you preſcribe him, I do not thinke that any good ſeruant to God or the king can ſo thinke good. I pray thée Reader haue patience to the end, and be not dated at this firſt ſtep. Our religion is the holieſt, &c. I will beginne wyth this word Holie, which is the firſt point of your reaſon: for as for the reſt which concerneth the reputation, profit and neceſſity thereof, al your ſubtilties are vaine in the ſight of God, which notwithſtanding I will diſcourſe vpon in their places as I thinke méete.
            Our king muſt become a catholike becauſe our religion is the beſt: I tell you againe he muſt, but not a ſtate Catholike,

ſuch a one as you would frame him, that is to ſay, a Prince that ſhall abandon his religion, that ſhall hencefoorth goe to maſſe. that vpon the ſolemne feſtiualles ſhall communicate wyth vs in the holy ſacrament, ſo to content his people wyth faire ſhews, but in heart ſhall ſcorne all our ceremonies, for ſo ſhall you forme vs a king without religion, who before in the profeſſion of his own repoſed his whole confidence in God. For why ſhoulde not I imagine that you woulde make hym ſuch a one, euen you who tearme his zeale and deuotion in this behalfe, when he offereth to ſubmit himſelfe to the ordinances and decrées of a good counſell which hymſelfe wil procure, ſometimes ceremoniall, ſometimes courtizanicall. In the religion that he profeſſeth he doth with his whole heart confes one God, and abhorreth by geſtures only to acknowledge him. Vpon a requeſt exhibited by his princes and great lords that he would vouchſafe to become a Catholike, hée beſought them not to wiſh in him a raſh alteration of his religion, but rather that wyth rype deliberation he might be by our men inſtructed, not in groſſe, as you wiſh, but particularly and by péece-meale. A matter that he deſired, not vppon courtezany or ceremony, but for that he coulde not ſo eaſely as you, ieſt wyth his conſcience, for, if néede be, vpon his conuerſion, he will do open penance for his error. This manner of dealing do you miſlike, and would haue him at vnawares and blinfolde take our part, and this do you terme a miracle. But for my part my ſpirite is ouer dull to diſgeſt this great metamorphoſis of the conſcience. Yet knowe I that God wrought a greater miracle in the conuerſion of S. Paul: but in our church there neuer was but one S. Paul, whom God had eſpecially choſen to be his trumpet to all the nations of the Gentiles. Thus may we ſée how euery man miſconſtrueth the Scriptures, and for the moſt parte applyeth them to couer his owne impietie. To this purpoſe I remember that in the time of S. Cyprian ſundry eccleſiaſticall perſons admitted to lodge wyth them, ſome of their kindred to guyde, and as they ſayde, to ouerſée their houſeſholde affayres. But this great and holy parſon miſliking this vſe, as knowing the inconuenience that in proceſſe of tyme might growe thereof, they for their defences alleadged the example of the Virgins Mary and S. Iohn, who dwelt together after the death and

paſſion of our ſauior Ieſus Chriſt. Oh wretches (cryed this holy man) dare you gather any conſequence of the particular bleſſing of theſe two excellent ſoules, therewyth for to couer your impudicities. There is no example to be taken of thoſe examples. Bring in the myſtery of the conuerſion of Saint Paule to ſtrengthen your aduice, and al Macheuellian princes ſhall hereafter become S. Paules.
            But, the people (ſay you) are troubled with a ſicknes of mind: they feare leaſt the king continuing in this ſtate wherein he now is, ſhould ſuppreſſe the Catholike religion: and therefore there is no other remedy for that diſeaſe, but that he become a Catholike. Firſt, who is the people that you ſpeake of? Haue you ſearched into the hearts of all the kings good and loyall ſubiects? You will grant mée as I ſuppoſe, that all theſe Princes and great Lordes that haue ſubſcribed the aforementioned declaratiō that he made, are none of them: as alſo that they are not thoſe who ſince wythout ſubſcribing haue come to yéelde hym their due ſeruice, neyther ſuch as accompanyed them. Procéede throughout the reſt of the people which are many, and howe knowe you that they are troubled with this diſeaſe of the mynd, that you ſhould ſo boldly aſſure our king thereof? If you ſhould be diſaduowed what would you ſay? And ſéeke you any greater diſaduow them thrée anſwers written againſt you? The quiddities of your Supplication might peraduenture bréede this miſchiefe in ſome weake mindes, but not in any ſuch as haue any more certayne information of the affaires both of God and the worlde: and wythall thinke that for euery one that is of your mind there be an hundred of a contrary opinion. And to tell you the trueth, you flatter your ſelfe, and do meaſure others by the mete▪ wand of your opinions: yet God grant I do ſay truth, and that it be your opinion, and not rather a ſlie ſubtilty to wythdrawe the good and loyall Catholikes from their vowed obedience to the king. Moreouer, you go about to daunt the king wyth an imaginary feare of the people, whereas he in his ſoule is ſufficiently terrefied wyth the feare of God. He feareth, and in good reaſon, leaſt if hée ſhould mocke his Maiſter, as you wiſh him to do, his Maſter would afterward mocke him: he who otherwhiles hath receyued ſuch fauour and graces of God, that all the harmes of

others haue turned to his profite. You may make of your conſcience a cameleon, that turneth into as many colours as it ſeeth obiectes. But the kings conſcience is not made after any ſuch faſhion: he thinketh that man to haue no ſoule that can ſo eaſily play wyth his ſoule: that he is vtterly voide of religion, that can frame his religion according to the diuerſity of raignes: to be briefe, that he is the ſame Ecebolius mentioned in the Eccleſiaſticall hiſtory.
            
               But you haue none (ſay you) but the nobilitie to take your parte, your enemy hath the Communaltie, and yee knowe that one Iulius Caeſar with the aſsiſtance of the Communaltie defeated Pompey and all the Nobilitie of Rome. Oh ſtay man, you iudge boldely of our eſtate, and do not conſider that the policie of our France, heretofore called Gall, doth farre differ from that of the Romanes. For euermore, euen in the dayes of your Caeſar, and that by his owne teſtimony the force of this nation depended vppon the Nobilitie. A cuſtome which by ſucceſſion of time and age is conuerted into nature, ſo that at this day the Duke of Mayenne wyth all his rebellious townes and popular power, doth but warde our blows, and is driuen to the end to raigne in France to become the Spaniards ſlaue: yet do I make no accompt of this worldly pollicy. Our king buildeth not his hope vpon eyther the Nobility or the communalty, but vpon God only: he is his buckler, his fortreſſe, and his vpholder, yea he is all in all vnto him, and hée beléeueth that wythout him all the forces of the worlde are but winde.
            But let vs graunt all the faſhions poſſible to the argument that we entreate of, for to ſay trueth, it is the higheſt point, and muſt not be weakely handled. As the Diuell the father of diſſention hath within theſe thirty yeares party-coloured vs with religions, vnder theſe two words Catholike and Huguenot, ſo are we our ſelues alſo as well in the one as in the other parti-alized. For ſome take part for the ſtates ſake, others for religion onely. I will therefore ſtand vppon the tearmes of Catholike, which we will here forme vs, and will ſay that we haue two kindes of Catholikes, the one, catholikes of eſtate, the other, catholikes in religion. The firſt are worldly catholikes, and ſo conſequently the diuels Catholikes. The ſecond are the true catholikes in our church,

and ſo conſequently the children of God. If we conſider the firſt ſort, you are not, in my iudgement, of ſufficient practiſe in the eſtate to ſhape vs a Catholike prince by your patterne: If the ſecond, then albeit you haue learning, yet haue you not catholike religion enough in your head to make a prince catholike by religion.
            Now let vs ſpeake of the eſtate catholike, as of him who peraduenture as at this day beareth greateſt ſway throughout all chriſtendome, I meane of him that hath no conſideration of the ſaluation of his ſoule in the ſight of God, but of the aduancement of himſelfe or his ſtate, wherein I beſéech thoſe that ſhal ſpend ſome houre in the reading of this my diſcourſe, to thinke that I do not in any wiſe alow of ſuch catholike policies, but doe vtterly condemne, abhorre and deteſt them as abhominable in the ſight of God. Howbeit, in as much as now we are to giue the people to vnderſtand that there was neuer counſaile more pernitious, then that which the Supplication importeth, alſo that it is a marchandiſe fetcht out of the leaguers backe ſhop, who vnder a falſe ſhew of ſéeking to huſband the peace of the realme, doe practiſe a new diſunion between the king and his good ſubiects, I beſéech you giue me leaue to ſtrike vpon this tenour which hath recourſe vnto the ſtate, and afterward I will touch the baſe that hath relation to the catholike church when I come to ſpeake of the catholike in religion. I vpholde, that if the king become a catholike wythout that which you terme ceremony or courtezany, and I call moſt holy wel ordered deuotion, he looſeth his reputation among all men, and wythall, aduentureth the loſſe both of himſelfe and his realme. There is nothing of like importance to the mighty as honor. That is it that may moſt perſwade them. Our king hath from his infancy bin brought vp in the doctrine that he yet followeth: he hath as a man ſhould ſay euen ſucked in with his nurſes milke, his religion, together wyth the expreſſe commandement that his mother the Q. of Nauarre at her deceaſe gaue and lefte vnto him, as it were a teſtamentarie legacie, namely, that he ſhould perſeuere therein vnto the death. He hath ſince defended it againſt all worldly indeuors, with the price of his bloud and life, and hath had good ſucceſſe. He that being ſimply king of Nauarre, with a handfull of men hath vpon this opinion braued his ennemy

that was armed with the pretence of the holy ſea of Rome, with the authority of the late king and of the king of Spaine, ſhall now being king of France, and aſſiſted wyth ſo many princes, dukes, péeres, marqueſſes, earles and barons ſtoope for a weake ſtripe with a réede to him that doth but warde his blowes? This was not the opinion of Pope Sixtus laſt deceaſed, as may witnes ſome honorable perſonages, whom he charged to tell the king, that as well in reſpect of his conſcience toward God, as of his reputation among men, it ſtoode him vpon to take great héede of altering his religion, vnleſſe with ſuch order as he had taken with his Nobilitie. I do expreſly alleadge vnto you the authoritie of this great perſon, as well in reſpect of his degrée of dignity oner vs, as for the wiſedome that his age and long experience had purchaſed. We other men are but ceremonies. Baniſh the ceremonies of our vows in matters of greateſt cōſcience, as religion, and ye ſhall ere ye be aware baniſh a great part of all religions. There is nothing that a great king ought ſo much to feare, as to incurre an opinion of lightneſſe and inconſtancie. The which to eſchue he muſt vſe all poſſible means in any alteration that he purpoſeth in matters of cō
               ſequence. If when there ariſeth any queſtion or argument about the giuing of the lie to a Gentleman, or one that profeſſeth armes, when they goe about agréement men vſe to bring all kindes of formalities to couer the honor as well of the giuer as of the taker, will you not ſuffer a mighty king to vſe ſome ceremony whereby to ſhunne the lie which you doe imagine he giueth to our Church, thinking to doe well? If it ſtand vpon his reputation (I ſpeake now as a worldly wiſe man) you muſt treade vnder foote both the profite and neceſſities by you alleadged: for not only princes but euen meane gentlemen doe account nothing profitable or neceſſary that may any what impeach their honor.
            
               But (ſay you) this ſhall be a great conqueſt for the K. ouer himſelfe: nay contrariwiſe, it ſhall be a braue victorie that his ennemies ſhall haue obtained againſt him. So that were I in pay with them. I would alſo procure the like ſupplication as yours. The feare nothing ſo much as that, ſay you: you ſay it, but for my parte I thinke the contrarie. For were I of their counſel, God knows what rate I would

ſet vpon the merchandiſe, and how much I would thinke to gaine by truſting it foorth. The miſchiefe is; that they be deſtitute of I wote not what hired lack-lattine Preachers, whome in their pulpits they cauſe to play what perſons they pleaſe. My counſel is (ſay you) of ſuch efficacie, that by one ſole Edict, by one skinne of parchment wel penned, the king ſhal obtaine that at his peoples handes, that fiftie thouſand corſlets can not obtaine. If the Pope doeth gain-ſay him, a faire appeale as of abuſe may do him reaſon. So ſoone as his ſubiects ſhal ſee their king returned into the boſome of the Church, they wil immediatly fall downe at his feete, as hauing the feare that held them in ſuſpence baniſhed away. Indeede you are a great Noſtrodamus, that doe prognoſticate vnto vs wonderfull thinges: what pledge or ſurety haue you for your promiſe? Are you yet to learne, that betwéene ligue and guile an olde French word that ſignifieth deceit, there is no difference but the tranſpoſition of a ſillable? Whereupon do you ground your prediction? Are you a Sindicque Atturny for all the rebellious townes? Are your remembrances ſigned, wherby you think you ſhall not be diſadnowed? But grant you haue them, doe you take the Leaguers to be ſo honeſt men that they will not infringe their faith? A woman that hath once abandoned her honor, doth afterward with time ſell to others good cheape. And I ſhall neuer thinke that man to haue any faith, that hath ſo eaſily diſpenſed with his fidelity to his prince. But let vs argue euen by common ſenſe, whether there be any likelihoode to beléeue that the townes wil ſubmit themſelues to the kings obedience. The Iudiciall Aſtrologers that deale with caſting our natiuities, after they haue erected their figures, do ſtand aſſured of their predictions to come, in caſe they find they haue hit right in that which is paſt: and therein indéede there is ſome likelihoode, albeit I be not of opinion that we ſhould beléeue ſuch fantaſticall prognoſticators: ſith therefore that you do meddle with iudging of that that is to come, it is requiſite that your iudgement be not fixed vppon ſome vaine imagination, eſpecially in matter of ſo great importance as this is: but you ought to ground it vppon ſome correſpondence and couplement of thinges paſt with ſuch as are to come. You thinke that nothing but religion doth continue

warres in France. When the townes armed themſelues againſt the late king, was it religion that inuited them thereto? Was there euer prince more ſted faſt in Romiſh religion then be? For euen abandoning many times the degrée of his royalty, he framed his actions to his ſubiects, ſomtimes ſhewing himſelfe openly a penitent, ſomtimes making himſelfe halfe a Monke in cloiſters, ſo to exerciſe his deuotion: neither néed we any greater teſtimony then this, that he had in trueth bin yet aliue, had he not repoſed too much confidence in monkes and friars. Let vs leaue nothing at home that may tend to the fauour of your opinion. For in ſo high an argument as this I ſight for the trueth, not for victory. You may reply, that the reaſon that raiſed their armes againſt the other king do ceaſe in this: for the murder committed againſt the two brethren in the aſſembly of the ſtates, together with the extraordinary collections and exactions againſt his people cried to God for vengeance. For theſe be the two common places where with they ſhrowd themſelues: but neither of theſe conſiderations haue place in the king now raigning. A ſolution indéede not all amiſſe. But tell me: when the D. of Guiſe openly without all order of law went about by the eſtates holden at Bloys, to cauſe the king of Nauarre vnheard to be declared vtterly vnworthy and vncapable of the crowne of France, there was neither vengeance to be executed, neither had the king of Nauarre conſented to all the corruptions of the others raigne. But contrariwiſe the houſe of Guiſe had had good parte therein: for they had gotten for themſelues fiue or ſixe Edicts to the oppreſſion of the people: but eſpecially that great reformer of tyranny, the Duke of Mayen. I know well enough that the duke of Guiſe ſhronded his arme vnder the viſard of religion. Yet if thou being lieutenant of France but in parchment onely, he ſollicited this wrong againſt the king of Nauarre, think you the duke of Mayenne, that ſo thinketh himſelfe to be indéede, were ſo fond as not to proſecute his firſt point? Doe you yet ſuppoſe that ſuch parte of the people as in euery towne, by ſlacking the bridle to all miſchiefe, haue enriched themſelues with the ſpoiles of good men (for to ſpeake truth, there is no towne but hath his Roſsicux or Buſſy le Clerc) that they, I ſay, that haue the ſtrength in their owne handes, wil ſuffer the reſt in

the towne houſes to propound the yéelding into the kinges obedience, or if any ſhoulde be ſo bolde woulde not lodge him betwéene foure darke walles? Haue they not twenty tormentors in their conſciences that accompany them in al places? Is this word Relaps, wherewith the duke of Guiſe armed himſelfe dead with him? You will tell me that the pope ſhall diſpenſe, and I tel you your preachers wil not beléeue it, no more then they haue attended his decrée and authority to ſound out warre againſt the late king. Can not they adde, that the king hauing ſet ſo ſmall a price of his conſcience wil proue a Catholike for a vantage, I meane of worſe condition then before, and ſo haue no religion? May they not haue a good argument to aduow it? If they haue bin ſo wicked as in their pulpits to proclaime the late king to be of no religion, and to giue out his abſtinence from meates and other the auſterities by him vſed to be but mocks & hypocriſies wherewith to abuſe the peoples ſimplicity, what may they ſay of him that ſo ſlightly may haue turned his coate? You thinke they will not do it: if you thinke ſo, euen in common ſenſe you are deceiued. Or you imagine that albeit they ſhould ſo do, yet their Sermons woulde be of too ſmall effect with the people, to turne away this their new vow and deuotion, that you aſſure the king of. But I am of a contrary opinion. Thus you ſée vs of contrarie mindes, and vpon this contrariety of hopes and opinions would you haue the king hazard his perſon and ſtate? You may ſay, If I were king I would: and I wil anſwere for him, That if he had made the Supplication now in queſtion, peraduenture he would do it: but being K. he muſt looke well that he do it not. My good friend, I vnderſtand but one Lattin word, Tanti poenitere non emam, and I thinke it were good for the kings ſeruice that he ſhould remember it in French. If the king agreeing to your opinion by this his new beléefe had loſt all his beléefes of his antient ſeruants that haue wyth him borne the quarrell, as taking it to be Gods quarrell. And the princes that fauoured him for the communion of their religion rather then of their callings ſhould growe luke warme in his behalfe: And on the other ſide, if the rebels ſhould perſeuere in their rage, into what diſorder, or rather diſpaire ſhould you bring his affaires? He ſhould finde himſelfe lurched ere he were aware,

and you ſhall prooue but a bad warrant for your counſell. Neither your parchment nor your appeale as of abuſe, to be briefe, all the petyfoggeries of France woulde not ſuffice to warrant him. His ennemies haue a newe production, I ſay weapons, the which conioyned wyth I wot not what coloured title, which the ſtrongeſt do neuer want, when the queſtion concerneth a kingdome, they will eaſily by the meanes thereof winne their cauſe. For as for the conſiſtory of Rome, which in ſuch affaires is of ſome waight in the ballance, as being compoſed of ſundry lordes, who through their long experience do ordinarily conioyne religion with the ſtate, and neuer diuide humane wiſedome from holines, it wil alwaies incline to the ſtrongeſt.
            But is not this the parte of a very Scholler in State matters, to wiſh that a prince ſhould alter his religion, vpon a vaine conceipt thereby to winne the hearts of thoſe whome he would conquere? If your Machiauell nowe liued, who taught you that a king ought to be of like religion as his ſubiects, he would tell you that a wiſe prince neuer made ſo vnclarkly a ſtep, as to alter his religion, ſo long as he ſtood vpon the conqueſt. But hauing atchieued all his enterpriſes, hee ſhould then conſult with his friends, whether it were good for him to embrace his ſubiects religion, to the ende the better to like them. You, and ſuch as be like your ſelfe doe relie onely vpon the catholike religion of the French kings, namely, for that king Clouis altered his Paganiſme into Chriſtianitie, which in thoſe daies was diſperſed ouer all the Galles. Let vs reſt vppon this example, which may be a good guide to leade vs in the path that we are to paſſe. Did this great king (for I account him for the greateſt that euer raigned in France without exception, either of Charlemaine, or of Philip the conquerour) become a chriſtian-ſo long as he ſtoode vpon his conqueſts? or did he it without any ceremony? No verely. For when he was to receiue the ſacrament of Baptiſme, it was performed with ſuch dignity by his great counſeller S. Remy, that afterward the poſterity conuerted al the ceremonies thereat obſerued into miracles. Beſides be abandoned not his heathen religion to ſtoupe to oures, vntill he had fréed his eſtate from the bondage of the Romanes, ſubdued the Bur
               
                  •
               uinion who occupied part of our Galles: chaſed the Viſigot

that poſſeſſed the country of Septimany, ſince called Languedoc, into Spaine, and through the great battell of Tolbiac brought vnder his obedience al Germany, whereby Theodorike king of Italy became a ſuter vnto him, 
                  〈◊〉
                which performed, he receiued Chriſtendome: yet can I not hereupon inferre, that for all this he became a ſtate Chriſtian: but thus much is certaine, that he vſed this diſcretion at his new purpoſe, that he turned not from his religion vntill he found him ſelfe to haue the vpper hand.
            I will vſe your owne examples: you ſay that the Macedonians abated I wot not how much of their ancient deuotion to their king Alexander, becauſe he attired himſelfe after the Perſian maner. This ſtory will I faithfully and at large rehearſe, as greatly ſeruing my turne, but not yours. So long as Alexander was buſied about the conqueſt of Aſia, he forbare to vſe either the habite or cuſtomes of the kings of Perſia. But hauing once conquered it, imagining that hée wanted no more for the accompliſhement of his victories but the conqueſt of the hearts of his new ſubiects, whoſe Country which he had ſubdued was in extent fiue or ſixe times as great as all Macedonia, he had recourſe vnto the pollicie we ſpeake of. He tooke both the attire and diademe of the kinges of Perſia, and from thenceforth beganne to cauſe himſelfe to be adored by ſuch as came to ſalute him. A matter vnaccuſtomed among the Grecians, yet ſuch as made the conquered ſo pliable to his obedience, that he kept them in peace ſo long as he liued. Hereupon a certaine philoſopher, or rather a Scholler named Caliſthenes, who meaſured a mightie kings imaginations by his owne, began to murmure among the ſouldiours, ſhewing them, that it was the way to bury the Grecian liberty in the bondage of the Perſians, in the conqueſt whereof they had borne a great parte and portion with Alexander: and if néede had ſo required, had he thought vpon it, he would haue exhibited a like Supplication as yours, wherby to bring Alexanders behauiors into miſlike. Theſe complaints paſſing from mouth to mouth among the Macedonians was like to haue ſtirred vp a great ſedition. Whereupon the king put the ſchoolemaiſter to death, not vpon any iniurious wrath, as ſome fooliſh Hiſtoriographers haue written, but to the end to ſtoppe th
                  •
                fluxe of this new commotion, and

withal to make him an example to the poſteritie, againſt ſuch as licentiouſly abuſing their tongues or pennes, before they haue ſerued their apprentiſage in ſtate affaires, doe in their ſtudies meddle with controuling the actions of their king among his people and ſubiects.
            This example haue I ſet you downe to two endes. The firſt, to ſhew you that a ſoueraigne prince ought neuer to alter his faſhions, maners, or religion for the contentation of a people before he hath gotten the maiſtery ouer them. The other to let you vnderſtand that we are not ſo eaſily or openly to controll the behauiours of our kings, eſpecially in matters concerning the eſtate. For not to penetrate into the botome of their thoughts, and yet to publiſh againſt them ſuch ſpéeches or diffamatory libels as may moue their ſubiectes to reuolt, is a matter of death: and you may peraduenture haue deſerued the ſame puniſhment as Caliſthenes: he for complayning fooliſhly, and out of ſeaſon of Alexanders new alteration of the auncient faſhions of Gréece: you for complaining of the king for not altering his olde religion for an other that ſhall be new vnto him. For to tell you plainely what opinion many haue of you, they ſay that it is the very counſel of one, who ſeeming to loue the king, loueth him not, or ſtudying vppon his preſeruation, endeuoureth to deſtroy him. And at one word, that your Supplication is the counſell of a wicked Leaguer: yet for my part, I doe for your excuſe tell them, that if it includeth any miſchiefe, the ſame procéedeth not of any your hatred againſt the king, but of too much loue to your ſelfe. Had I acceſſe to the kings eare, and were I as a ſtate man to counſel him, I would not wiſh him to become a Catholike yet, but to ſtay vntill hée had ouercome his affaires. Neither is there any better meane to lincke vnto vs a Countrey that we haue but lately conquered, then by purchaſing fauour of the people, which may be kept by embracing their religion, vnleſſe we be ſo ſtrong as without alteration we may commaund the ſame. This is the counſel that (ſpeaking as a worldly wiſe man) I woulde giue my king. But let vs, I pray you, returne vnto God, who ſhould be our Weathercocke, and without whom we cannot arriue in any good hauen. I haue ſuffered my ſelfe at vnawares to be carried away with the waues of this world. All this

worldly wiſedome is but folly before God. Where you doe wiſh the king to become a Catholike, without laying his hand vpon his heart, you doe it to no other end, ſay you, but to procure him to raigne in aſſurance ouer his people, and to bring peace to his realme, though not to his ſoule. What wil you ſay if I ſhew you both with the finger and eye, that through euen palpable and viſible miracles of God, al things haue gone againſt the haire with ſuch Catholikes? I wil not ſéeke out of France, neyther from the quarrell that hath béen among vs theſe thirty yeares: and the liuing God I take to witneſſe, that no paſſion maketh me to vtter that which I do mind to ſpeake, but euen a deſire to open the eies of the blind.
            It can not be denied but that the duke of Guiſe father to the laſt deceaſed, alſo the laſt deceaſed were great warriors, bolde, and as valiant as might be, Lordes that accompanied their valour with al humane wiſedome, wherein both they and the Duke of Mayenne alwayes lodged this propoſition: That they woulde not vſe our religion any further then the commodity of their affaires did commaund, for their owne aduancement and greatneſſe. I wil beginne with the father and his brother the Cardinall of Loraine. So ſoone as King Henry the ſecond was dead, ſeized vpon his ſonne the young king Frances, by a title of 
                   _____ 
                becauſe he had married their neece, and withall eſtranged from his preſence the princes of his blood and officers of the Crowne, namely, that wiſe Conſtable Montmorencie, who was in ſo great fauour with the former king his maſter: from whom not content with that diſgrace, they tooke the ſtate of great Maiſter, which he had inioyed euer ſince the deceaſe of René of Sauoy his father in law. This tyranny was euident, for all the affaires of France paſſed through the hands of theſe two brethren, who abuſed the kings name and youth at their pleaſures. Many good Frenchmen vnable to beare that tiranny, conſpired againſt them. The King then ſoiourned ſometimes at Chenonceau, ſometimes at Ambois. The whole communalty ſwarmed thither, inſending to baniſh theſe our newe Maiſters, and to preſent a Supplication to the king for the eſtabliſhing of a lawfull counſell of the Princes of the bloud, and officers of the crowne about his perſon. I thinke there was I wot not what of the newe religion among (for I

will not in any wiſe falſifie this hiſtorie. Their miſhap was ſuch that they were diſcouered by one Deſauenelles an aduocate, who was of that faction, by whom the Guiſes were aduertiſed that the peoples quarrell was againſt them. The enterprize thus diſcouered, the principalles were apprehended at the Caſtell of Noiſé, and the common people vpon the hie waies, who had their directions to méete at Ambois. Nowe I beſéech you vnderſtand what wisedome in mans ſenſe theſe two brethren vſed, to maintaine themſelues in their vſurped authoritie. Alſo how in the end God turned al their deuiſes into ſmoke. Becauſe this hiſtory deſerueth to be knowen to al:ſo ſoone as theſe poore men were taken, they are made to beléeue that they came with intent to ſeize vpon the kinges perſon, and to take him priſoner. Their proceſſe is by and by made and briefly finiſhed by a Maiſter of requeſtes. Mazere, Caſtelnaw, Noize, and Renne the principall enterpriſers are beheaded in the market place of Amboiſe. Renaudy whome Pardillan ſlew in the fieldes, after his death is quartered and made an example: and of their followers an infinit number, ſome drowned by heapes, others hanged ouer the Caſtell walles. This firſt ſtone thus caſt for a foundation to their building, they conſidered that this enterpriſe muſt procéede from ſome higher hand. Alſo that in ſuch affaires after they had put in vre the firſt exemplary puniſhement againſt the chiefeſt offendors, it was requiſite to pardon the reſt of the commons, and yet in any wiſe not to ſpare the heades of the greateſt and Authors. That if any had cauſe to miſlike the then gouernement, it was the princes of the bloud, to whom this charge appertained, during the minoritie of the king, whome a marriage could make no wiſer then his age: and therefore by a braue pollicy they were wiſe enough for propounding their owne intereſt: ſo that laying downe only the honor of God and the king, after the executions at Amboiſe, they publiſh a generall pardon to all the common people that had conſented to this conſpiracy, wherby no man ſhould afterward be moleſted therefore. They create a new guard of French harquebuziers about the kings perſon, whoſe Capitains being at their deuotion, was an ordinary aſſurance for them to and againſt all men. Vnderhand they gather informations againſt the heades of this conſpiracy, not naming any.

They fortefie the high wayes to Ambois and Orleance with men of armes, ſo to preuent all newe commotions that might ſpring out of Guyenne, becauſe at that time the late Lord prince of Conde was retired into Bearne with his brother the king of Nauarre, who were the men againſt whom they layde all their ſnares. At Fountain-bel-eau they procure the creation of 17. new knights of the order of ſaint Michael, therein violating all auntient order, for before they neuer created aboue one or two at the moſt at once, and that very ſeldome, and with great conſideration. But theſe were ſo many bound vnto them, and props for their tyranny in time to come. Thence they lead the king to Paris, where they do cauſe him to take aſſurance of fidelitie of the prouoſt of Merchants and Sheriffes of the towne to himſelfe. Al theſe preparatiues thus made, they bring him to Orleance, where they decrée vpon commaundementes throughout all France for the aſſembly of the eſtates, as knowing very well that the deputies do neuer yéelde but where force and authority commandeth them, albeit men be perſwaded that the ſame is the vpholding of the peoples libertie. Withall they diſpatch many miſſiues in the kings name to the king of Nauarre, the Prince of Conde, the Conſtable, and the Admirall, to come to him to Orleance, pretending theſe commaundements vpon his deſire that they ſhould be aſſiſtant to this aſſembly. Euery wiſe man iudged that there was ſome notable tragedis to be played at the coſtes of theſe poore lords, for the perpetuall eſtabliſhment of the houſe of Guiſe. The Conſtable hauing ſome inkling, made but ſlowe haſte. The king of Nauarre, and the lord prince after many reiterated commandements arriued at the towne of Poytiers, where they had the firſt aduertiſement of the kings diſcontentmēt againſt them, but withall at the ſame inſtant, they were ſo inueſted by the Marſhall of Lermes with two companies of men of armes, that they could not poſſibly returne backe againe. At their comming to Orleance the lord prince was committed to ſafe cuſtody, and certaine Iudges were expreſſely ſent for from Paris to frame his inditement. As for the king of Nauarre, they ſearched ſo narrowly into his actions, that there was no great difference betweene Garde and Regarde. The prince perceiuing that it was a match ſet in hand by the Lorraines

for his deſtruction vnder the borrowed name of the king, beganne to linger matters, craued diſtribution of counſell: alleadged, that he being a prince of the bloud, was not to bée iudged by Commiſſioners, but by the whole body of a Court of Parliament. But they ſpurred him ſo neare, that the defences which he propounded were taken for an affected contumacie. In the meane time the deputies came in apace, which was ſo prouided, to the end, that after the indictment had bin fully framed, this poore prince, who had erred in nothing, but in neglecting to withſtand their tyranny, might haue bin condemned to death, not only by a Parliament, that ſhould haue béene brought for the nonce, but alſo by the thrée eſtates of France. This once obtained, I wote not what ſhould haue become of the king of Nauarre, whome at that time all men ſo forſooke, that ſuch as in heart were his humble and affectionat ſeruants, durſt not ſo much as by a winke of the eie be acknowne thereof. Was there euer enterpriſe guided with more worldly wiſedome then this? Let vs therefore ſée the ende. Euen when they were ready to ſmite, and that to that effect they were about to remoue the king out of that towne to Chenonceau, to the ende he being abſent, the ſaid L. prince might haue no recourſe to his mercy: The king booted and ſpurred, and ready to take horſe, beganne to finde himſelfe ill at eaſe, and to be ſhorte, died within leſſe then 4. daies. Then, euen in the twinkling of an eie, all the purpoſes of theſe two brethren were turned to nothing. The bondmen to the court gaue them ouer and drewe to the K. of Nauarre. Him did the eſtates pronounce the kings lieutenant generall ouer all France, during the minority of king Charles the 9. Alſo the L. prince, plainetife in a declaration of innocencie, by a decrée of Parliament in ſcarlet robes, obtaineth his ful demaunde. All that the two brethren had as yet compaſſed were ſtate blowes, but this was a maiſters blowe. I ſpeake of that maiſter who laugheth thoſe to ſcorne, that with mans wiſedome make a ſcorne of him. For had they not, euen with holberds fetcht the king of Nauarre, euery man iudgeth, that conſidering his nature, he would hardly haue come vnto the court, or if he had come, it would haue bin with ſuch delaies, that in the meane time the others might very eaſly haue continued their authority about the Q. mother, a forren princeſſe,

who without the aſſiſtance of the princes of the blood had had no great power to withſtand them. Now will you aſke me what correſpondence this example hath with the ſtate catholike whome I deteſt? Very great: for I aduow, and aduowing am not deceiued, that neyther of theſe two brethren troubled his head with any other religion, then ſuch as they thought might ſerue to the aduancement and progreſſe of the greatneſſe of their famely. For they were the firſt that counſeled king Henry the ſecond to become protector of the Dutch Nation, that is, of the Germans religion againſt Charles the fift, and forced the parlement to verefie this braue title. This that I ſay is no fable hatched with my quil: for there is none that liued in thoſe daies but knew it, neyther concealed they it, but accompted it as a matter that they thought might turn to their honor. If theſe our Maiſters had bin ſo zealous to the Romiſh church, as ſince they would haue made vs beléeue, would they haue iuſtified this iourney into Germany, which was the firſt ruine of our Fraunce? Woulde they not rather haue gaineſaide it, by humble Supplications, declaring vnto the king, that ſuch a protection was formally as they thought repugnant to the honour of God and his Church. But they maintained the contrary as weening ſo both to purchaſe their maſters fauour, and withal to benefit themſelues about him, as indéede they did. For the Duke of Guiſe the father neuer purchaſed ſo much honour as in the Towne of Metz when hee withſtoode the fiege againſt the Emperour Charles the fift.
            This is the reaſon that I haue noted this example againſt all Macheuels ſchollers (I will not beléeue you to be anie) who care not what the kings religion be, ſo he may content his people. I will yet ſtay vpon the ſame example: for how long ſoeuer I make this diſcourſe, yet wil it be but too briefe to roote out this wretched opinion. It is a principle of eſtate, that you neuer ſuffer a Prince your neighbour to growe too mighty: but if your ſelfe be not ſtrong enough to withſtande him, you muſt enter league with other princes and commonwealths weaker then your ſelfe. A principle very familiar with the princes of Italy, which they haue bin ready enough to put in practiſe, all and euery time that we haue paſſed the Mounts for the recouery of the ſtate of Naples or Millaine.

In thoſe dayes did we ſée the Emperor Charles the fift grow mighty by the ouerthrow of all the proteſtant princes, whom he had diſcomfited in a pitcht fielde, and had taken priſoners the D. of Saxony, and the Lantgraue of Heſſe. Hereupon had they recourſe to our K. and put themſelues into his protection. He tooke their quarrell in hand, to the ende to ſtoppe the courſe of the Emperours purpoſes, albeit againſt all pollicie and worldly reaſon. That he that made profeſſion of the catholike religion, ſhould ſupport hereticall ſubiects (as they were then tearmed) againſt their ſoueraigne Lord, who warred vpon them only in hatred of their new religion. In this voyage al things ſmiled vpon vs: for ſo ſoone as the emperor had intelligence that the king was in armes to paſſe ouer the Rhine, he pacified all things with his ſubiects and graunted them the Interim, ſo that the onely ſounde of our comming made them obtaine whatſoeuer they demaunded, and at our returne from that voyage we gaue for our badge the imperiall towns of Metz, Thoule, and Verdare. But hath this paſſed vnpuniſhed? The penaunce for this ſin was not inflicted during the life of Henry the ſecond, but of his children. As alſo we reade of many like puniſhments in the hiſtorie of the Kings in the olde Teſtament. Thou Catholike king (ſaith this great god) haſt mainteined the German Proteſtants, to the encreaſe of their opinions, ſo to keep downe thy corronal, but I will make thine of-ſpring to féele howe I am offended herewith: For I will chaſtice them with the ſame roddes, and ſuffer like diuiſion to take holde of thy kingdome. I will raiſe vp ſome of thy owne that ſhal harry thee vpon the ſame argument, and withall call in the Proteſtantes to their ſuccour, in reuenge of that ſuccor that you meant to giue them, whereof ſhall at length enſue the deſolation of your eſtate. Do you not thinke it to be a méere puniſhment of God which tooke roote in this voyage into Germany? For my parte I do not doubt it. The ancient heathen ſaid that the gods had féet of wooll. and armes of yron, thereby to teach vs, that they were ſlow to vengeance, but when they beganne, they recompenced that ſlackneſſe with wonderfull rigor. Nowe will I come to the Duke of Guiſe laſt deceaſed.
            Was there euer L. better beloued among the people? Euen beloued, I ſay, becauſe he entituled himſelfe Protector

generall of our religion againſt the heretikes▪ and withall, that there muſt be no reconcilement with them. A propoſition with him in ſuch recommendation, that euery man of a contrary opinion was ſtraight accurſed, yet was he alwaies of this aduice? No: for in the yere 1572. after he had procured the death of his capitall ennemy the Admirall, his houſe was a ſanctuary to a number of Huguenotes, euen vnto the lordes of Gamach, Acier, and the vicount of Borniquet principalles of the other party: yet at that time were they all Amalekites: for proclamation by ſound of trumpet and common crie was made throughout al the quarters of Paris, not to ſaue or pardon any Huguenot wythout exception.
            Let vs now come to the D. of Mayenne. When the late king ſent him to retire into his obedience al Daulphine, moſt of whoſe towns the Huguenots poſſeſſed, was he ſo religious as to enter no compoſition with them? He ſuffered them to liue in peace of their conſciences, whereupon without blowes they rendred al their towns. Alſo ſo long as he was in Daulphine his court was fuller of Huguenot Gentlemen then of Catholikes. How commeth it that in ſelfe ſoules ſhould harbour two ſo contrary opinions? So long forſooth as their ambition was brideled vnder the kings obedience, they thought themſelues moſt happy in hauing many friends and ſeruants of each religion. But after they had caſt off that, they imagined, that for the attaining in time to their laſt point, it was requiſite, not onely to haue weapons at hand, but euen neuer to be diſeazed of them. Otherwiſe, hauing bin mighty in commāding ouer armies, in their opinion they ſhould afterward haue bin brought down, when by means of peace they might haue bin returned to their owne houſes. And to ſay the truth, it is the very counſell of Caeſar, whereby in the end he became ſoueraigne ouer the ſtate of Rome. Now let vs conſider, I pray you, the ſucceſſe of their purpoſes: for you ſhall finde, that all that they did to the confuſion of the king of Nauarre (giue me leaue, I pray you, ſo to call him when I ſpeake of thoſe daies) turned to his aduancement.
            They armed themſelues againſt him with the power of the French king, with the king of Spaines double piſ
                  •
               olets, with the cenſures of the court of Rome, and with the peoples fauour: beſides, they had all the preachers, the trumpets of

their hypocriticall paſſions at their backe. Since the years 1586. they brought fiue armies into the field, to the end, quite to haue cut downe the king of Nauarre, thrée in Guyen and Poictow, and two in Auergne and Daulphine. In the yere 1587. they ſent againſt him the D. of Ioieuſe with a braue choice of Nobility, and a great troope both of horſemen and footemen, with expreſſe commaundement to ſet vpon him, at whatſoeuer price. In the yeare 1588. all things wretchedly ſmiled vpon the duke of Guiſe: he became Maiſter of Paris without any blowes: cauſeth his king to flie ſhamefully away: eſtabliſheth what policie he liſt, changeth al the ancient captaines of the towne, to the end, to be aſſured of the new: purchaſeth abolition at the kings hand vnder the name of vnion for all that is paſt: adioyneth to his eſtate of greate Maiſter, the function of lieutenaunt generall to the king in matters of armes. The eſtates being holden at Bloys, in the face of all the world he commandeth the deputies, and commaunding, he ſeeketh by all ſorts of purchaſe to denounce the king of Nauarre incapable of the crowne. Was there euer high enterprize guided with greater ſenſe then this? What was the Cataſtrophe? All theſe fiue armies returned with ſhame from whence they came. The king of Nauarre ſhieldeth the blowes, as a man ſhould ſay, with a rebated ſword. The greateſt honour that the D. of Mayenne got was when he tooke Caſtillon that belonged to his wife, where he ſpent France 60000. crowns, and lay ſixe wéeks: a towne which the Huguenots afterward recouered with ladders that coſt them not ſixe franks. The D. of Ioyeuſe was ouerthrowne in ſet battell at Coutraz. The D. of Guiſe vpon the king of Nauarres birth day ſlaine in the middeſt of the eſtates without any conſent of the ſaid king or his partakers. The death of him and of his brother the Cardinall conuerted al the common malice againſt the late king. The Townes rebelled againſt him, and choſe the D. of Mayen to be their lieutenant general ouer the royall eſtate and crowne of France. In this newe rage of the people he wanted no money, and ſo conſequently no men. The late king was forced to call vnto his aide the king of N
                  •
               . who came in. Being arriued, he deliuereth him together with the Cittie of Toures, which is at this day the repaire of the ſoueraigne courtes of France. For

at the onely ſound of his approach, the ennemy who with a great Rhodomontade or brag had wonne a ſuburbe, retired the ſame night that they won it, hauing ſcarce leiſure to take breath. Then is the king ſlaine by a Monke, which was one chéeſe péece of ſeruice of the holy vnion: the preachers in their pulpits exclaimed that that Prince was of no religion: Oh very God, if they thought him ſuch a one (this I ſpeake by the way) why did they chooſe a monke to execute ſo wretched a purpoſe, vnles they were aſſured that vnder that habit, the murderer might without difficulty haue acceſſe to this poore princes cloſot? They then imagined that by this vnexpected death all the affaires of the realme woulde chaunge countenance, alſo that the king of Na. vpon hatred to his religion ſhould be abandoned of al men: howbeit againſt this curſed counſell GOD otherwiſe prouided: for the valiant bloud of the French Nobility did wholly vowe it ſelfe to our natural and lawfull king. And as by the death of the D. of Guiſe al the leaguers gaue ouer their quarell againſt theſe of the new religion, to ſet themſelues againſt their king, ſo vppon this ſecond murder executed on the perſon of our late king all the French Nobilitie, forgetting their mallice againſt the ſame religion, aymed onely at reuenge of this death againſt the Leaguers: hauing neuertheleſſe firſt ſworne the king to enter into our religion, if once he were well inſtructed therein.
            Thus our king by two deaths whereto he neuer conſented, the one, of his mortall enemy, the other, of his greateſt friend, attained the Crowne, and at a time appoynted came before the head city of France (which had profeſſed greateſt hatred againſt him) enuironed with all the Princes of the bloud, officers of the crowne, and as braue an army as hath of late béene séene in France. Whom is he now to thanke for ſo many bleſſings? Firſt God onely, next his enemies, whom God made the principall inſtruments for al that is aforeſaid, as being more beholding to them then euer he was to all his ſeruants and friends: for, had they without wakening his weapons by anticipation of time, ſuffered him to haue liued cloſe and quiet (as he did) in an out-corner of France, at the length both his minde and weapons had béene ouergrowen with ruſt: but they forced him to ſtand vppon his defence, wherby at one inſtant of an apprentiſe they made him a perſite

maiſter. He who otherwiſe had beene vndone, had not his enemies ſought his vndoing: for as well his religion, as the ſmall knowledge that we had had of his maners, woulde not eaſily haue ſuffered vs to fauour him after the late kings deceaſe. But he hath this gift, that ſo ſoone as we do but ſmel him, he maketh euery one to loue, honour, and regarde him, yea euen his very enemies. Moreouer, where could he haue found the paſſages ouer the riuers open to haue come to Paris? Where ſhould he haue found ſuch an army? To be ſhort, he is indebted both of his crowne and forces to thoſe who by all worldly pollicies ſought to bring him into miſery. Yea, he is ſo indebted albeit he brought no more with him but a ſtedfaſt hope that he hath in his great God. I doe here omit his victory at Diepe: his entry into the ſuburbs of Paris which doth counteruaile the beſt Towne in Fraunce, where God, to the ende, euen to leade him by the hand, diſperſed a thicke miſt to blinde the Pariſtans eyes. I will alſo leaue his Conqueſtes which after this he obtained in the middeſt of winter in the Countries of Vendoſme, Mayenne, and almoſt all Normandie: his two victories that he had in one day, at Yurie and in Auuergne: the ſhamefull retraict of the D. of Parma: his glorious recouery of Corbeil with the turning of a hand, where this great beater downe of walles had ſoiourned fiue weekes with eighteene canons before he could take it: and finally, that which of late memorie chanced miraculouſly in the towne of S. Denis: for I haue not vndertaken this, to trace you an hiſtory. To what then is al this? for now it is time for me to end this argument. Peraduenture to turne the king from abandoning his religion, wherein he hath receiued ſo many fauours at Gods hand? I would not wiſh you ſo thinke, for I haue done it onely to ſhew to al Macheueliſts, that God rather aſſiſteth princes, of whatſoeuer chriſtian profeſſion, when in al their aduerſities they call vpon him with their whole heartes, and repoſe their whole confidence in him, then ſuch as ſaining themſelues to be Catholikes, haue no religion in their ſoules, and do referre their ſtay to the pollicie that they gather out of the viſard of religion. Let vs therefore blot out of our papers that that you ſeek to teach the king: that is, that ſo long as he was ſimply king of Nauarre he might vſe the new religion, but being king of

France, he muſt play an other part; as if his ſoule that was then king of Nauarre were other then his that is nowe king of France. Let vs not therefore deſire him to become a Catholike by groping, and march onely in darkeneſſe.
            Now do I come to my catholike in religion, ſuch a one as I wiſh our king to be. Now that he may ſo be, I thinke there be three things requiſit: firſt to make him capable: next to poure forth our praiers to GOD for that end: and laſtly, that we be penitent. To make him capable, he muſt of neceſſity be inſtructed: I ſay inſtructed, not by Miniſters, as you do falſely preſuppoſe he will, but by a generall or nationall counſell. I tell you againe, he muſt, for ſo haue we agreed in the middeſt of his army, and we may not ſhrincke from our conſent, ſith it is euident that the fault is not in him that he performeth not his promiſe. Are you eyther wiſer or honeſter then all theſe great princes and lordes that were of that opinion, that now you ſhould propound an other? Yea, admit we had not conſented, yet were it his part to feele him ſelfe, and not finding himſelfe ſtrong enough to embrace it without being taught, our petition were wretched and wicked if we ſhould intreat him to the conerary. Yet thinke not that I would wiſh this inſtruction to conſiſt onely in words, our Biſhops, Abbots, and other prelates of the church muſt bring example. Our L. Ieſus Chriſt, to winne the Iewes hearts, began firſt by well doing, and afterward he taught. The firſt point requiſite in an aduocate to perſwade his Iudges, is honeſty: the reſt of his arte is but eloquence, and the more he vſe it, the more wary the iudge is, ſpecially if he miſtruſt the ſpeaker. Therefore to perſwade our K. let vs ioine the word and the effect. Why, I pray you, haue we not prepared him matter ſufficient to deſire to be inſtructed? There was neuer church (with great griefe I muſt ſay it) more rent then ours: I will not ſpeake of the abuſes. A matter that almoſt no religion can diſpenſe withall, the reaſon, becauſe no religion can be exerciſed without outward ceremonies to make the peoples hearts intentiue. And it is very difficult, yea, euen vnpoſſible, but in ſucceſſion of time there will bee mixed among the ceremonies I wot not what of man, and ſo conſequently, euill cuſtomes. I ſpeake not therefore of abuſes, one of the quarrels of our new commers: but I ſpeake of

the impiety that harboured in our Church, ſo ſoone as the name of League was brought in. I will not tel you, that abandoning the goſpell ſhe would needes preuaile by armes, which I may well ſay by the way is an hereſy. Our Lorde Ieſus Chriſt, after whoſe patterne we are to frame all our actions, his Apoſtles and Diſciples, and after them the martyres did neuer eſtabliſh our Church by this meanes. They planted our religion by preching and exhortations, and with their blood ſealed the chriſtian faith in the magiſtrats hands: out of the fountaine whereof ſprang a ſea of true Chriſtians which ouerflowed the whole earth. Afterward, when wée, taking our ſelues to be more wiſe, would néeds extend our religion by armes in our voyages ouer the ſea, we thereby reaped no other fruit, but that the Eaſt in the end was made the toombe both of vs and our religion. This article doe I purpoſely paſſe ouer, as being a fault which at this day is accounted no fault. Let vs come to that which within theſe two yeares only hath paſſed before our faces. Shal I not call this impiety, that a college of Sorbonne abuſing the name of the holy-ghoſt, ſhall aduiſe the ſimple people to arme themſelues againſt their king? ſhall I not call it impiety, that neuer expecting the popes decrée, whereto theſe our Maiſters referred themſelues, the nexte day after ſuch aduiſe they proclaymed warres all ouer? ſhall I not call it impiety, that wretchedlie murdered their king, and hauing no other miniſters of their ſlaughter but monkes? ſhall I not call it impiety that they haue canonized the wretched Iacobin? ſhall I not call it impiety (pardon me O good God though I preſume to ſmite euen at the head) that in the great conſiſtory of Rome Pope Sirtus compared that wretches entry into the kings cabine to the comming of the Angell Gabriel, when he announced to the virgine the future myſtery of the natiuitie of our Lord Ieſus Chriſt? I wil not affirme that he ſo did, but ſure I am, that ſuch his Oration was printed in Paris & flyeth all ouer France, importing more erroneous propoſitions then this. Our king is wiſe, and hath ſeene all theſe thinges: for whie ſhould not he haue ſéene them, ſith the Leaguers haue ambitiouſly ſought to make them their trophée? After al this hath he not reaſon to deſire to be inſtructed in our religion, before he come into our Church? I thinke him the honeſter man

for deſiring it, and if he ſhall doe otherwiſe I woulde ſay hée hath no ſoule.
            Where I ſet downe that he ought to be inſtructed, yet is not that enough, for withall we are to addreſſe our prayers and ſupplications to God, not to the king. When I deſire to obtaine ſome gift of the king, I deliuer him my petition: but in this caſe, it dependeth vpon Gods grace, not vppon his. Him therefore we muſt beſéech to touch our kings heart. Among ſo many thouſand perſons as be in Fraunce, we néede not paſt a dozen good & deuout ſoules to obtaine our deſires. S. Aug. in his youth was greately infected with hereſie. S. Cyprian before he became a Chriſtian doated greately in the loue of a diſcréete chriſtian lady, yea, he ſo doated, that to the end to ſeduce her he learned tha Arte Magicke. S. Monique S. Auguſtins mother neuer intreated her ſonne to giue ouer his hereſie, for it had bin loſt labour, becauſe the ſame is a leproſie of the ſoule which is not healed by mans hand. But ſhe directed her prayers to God, as did alſo the other lady for S. Cyprian. Their prayers were heard with ſuch aduantage that afterwardes theſe two perſons grewe to be two of the greateſt doctors of our Church. Let vs vſe the like, and I doubt not but the K. wil be on our ſide, conſidering how wel he is borne. He commendeth himſelfe to the prayers of our church, as taking the prayers, as I ſuppoſe, of all good men of either religion to be of great force with God, as already he hath in part felt the effects. For the ſame day that he obtained the two great victories in two ſeuerall partes of France, the one at Yurie, the other in Auuergne, there was a generall proceſſion in Toures, wherein all the inhabitants were preſent, euen the litle children, who in their virgin-like deuotion cried, God ſaue the king round about the towne. And while we were yet in our prayers, the king grewe to handie ſtrokes, and his miraculous victory wherein he was chieflie aſſiſted by the catholike nobility continued ſo long as the proceſſion laſted. Our prayers were the prayers of Moſes when the children of Iſrael fought, and his victory was the victorie of Aaron. Thinke you he marked not this chace? Peraduenture in heart he is the ſame that we deſire. The moſt catholike king that euer we had in France, and not onely a founder of an infinit number of Churches and Hoſpitals, but alſo

a wonderfull reformer of the abuſes in thoſe dayes in our religion was S. Lewis. Thinke not then that after ſo many reuolutions of yeares, God hath reſerued the crowne of France to this great and noble race of Burbon (the laſt ſprig of this holy ſtocke) but onely to the ende to renew the ſame piety wherewith that great king was poſſeſſed.
            It is therefore requiſite that toward this worke, we not only addreſſe our prayers to heauen, but alſo that withal we bring repentance. Why? ſhal we be ſo vnwiſe, as to imagine that God is not diſpleaſed with our Church for ſo many the impieties by me afore rehearſed, whereof the prieſtes and monkes haue béene the chiefe Miniſters. And who knoweth whether in reuenge of the ſame he hath ſent vs a king of a contrary religion to ours? Were it not a iuſt iuſtice of God, and ſuch a one as a certaine French ſpirite durſt promiſe to himſelfe in this Lattin Epigramme.
            
               Henricus monachi manu periuit,
               Qui conſortia, cellulaſue fratrum,
               Totus ex animo ſuo petebat,
               Et quem vel monachum putes fuiſſe:
               O caedem miſeram, impiam, nefandam!
               Regno nunc lacero potitur alter
               Henricus, monachis acerbus olim,
               Rex purus ſceleris, boniue cuſtos,
               Infandae necis acer vltor idem.
               Quid mors haec tibi parturit requiris
               Excors Gallia, pacis omnis expers?
               Te niſi immeritam Deus iuuabit,
               Poenas perfidiae lues cruentae.
               Occîdit monachus pium monarcham,
               Occîdet monachos pius monarcha.
            
            Who euer made this hold epigram, ſpake not as one that knew that the K. was willing to entertaine all monaſteries & religious houſes in their ancient fréedomes and liberties, as he hath plainely ſhewed in all the places where he hath paſſed, but as he that feared leaſt a greater King then he, being wroth at the horrible and abhominable murder of the King, committed by a monke, would be reuēged vpon the reſt. For this is a caſe wherin the good do ſometimes ſuffer for the bad. None is hurt but by himſelfe: God reuengeth himſelfe by his

enemies. Why ſaiſt by his enemies? Nay he will be reuenged of vs by our ſelues. Let vs therefore vſe the ſame remedie wherewith good Ieremy counſelled the children of Iſraell to appeaſe the wrath of God. We may well preach vnto the K. we may inſtruct him in our religion, we may to that ende furniſh him of great diuines. All this will nothing aduance our affaires. Theſe are but plaiſters laid vpon the wounde to ſupple it, but they cannot take away the cauſe of euil, that proceedeth of our impieties that cannot be vncommitted, albeit we thought to bury the remembrance of them with God by publike repentance of vs all. I do expreſly ſay, of vs all, becauſe I wiſh him that thinketh himſelfe innocent in this reſpect, may alſo be a party as well as he that hath conſented thereto. Our church is compoſed both of good and bad, and when the body of a communalty doth tranſgres, as we haue done in all that hath bin done in France, euery one by the rigour of the law is puniſhable. The wicked haue intangled the good: if therefore we do otherwiſe, albeit God yéeldeth to our prayers, yet in the end it will turne to our confuſion by ſome meane, to vs vnknowne. One familiar example bred in the calamitie of this time, I will ſet before you. There was neuer king that fought with ſo much religion and diſcretion againſt the new religion, as did the late king. The gate of the gouernement of the prouinces was ſhut againſt the profeſſors thereof: None of them was admitted to his order of knighthoode of the holy ghoſt: none into the functions of iudgement or treaſury: for all comfort they liued in ſome quiet in their owne houſes, which was a very warre to conquer without weapons thoſe whom we ſée to be of a contrary religiō to ours. Thus by a wiſe diſcourſe he chaſtiſed the Huguenot, or pretended reformed (terme him as you liſt) who by this meanes could not be prouoked to any new rebellion, and yet in his family founde the contrary effectes of that hée moſt deſired: for there is nothing that the great Lordes of France ſo much deſire, as to be neare their king, neither is there any thing that ſo moueth the mindes of the commons, as a deſire to attaine to offices. It is a ſickneſſe of the mind that deſtroyeth the French man. So ſoone as a marchant or citizen hath gathered any reaſonable ſtocke of money, hée longeth after nothing ſo much as to imploy it in the purchaſe

of ſome office of iuſtice or treaſure for his childe: ſo that this new religion in the iudgement of the wiſeſt ſubuerted it ſelf: and peraduenture ſuch as for ſhame perſiſted in it, becauſe they would not ſéeme vnconſtant, were no whit ſory to ſée their children taught in our Schooles, and ſo conſequently in the diſcipline of our religion. By theſe meanes all thinges grew among vs from bad to good, and from good to better. The plowman followed his oxen, the artificer his trade, the marchant his traffike, the aduocate and proctor their practiſe, euery one in his calling with ſome conſent, the citizen enioyed his renenues, the magiſtrate his fées, preheminences, and honours, the catholike exerciſed his religion without diſturbance throughout all France, the 
                  •
               uguenot liued ſequeſtred from among vs in ſome corner of the realm without commotion, or at the leaſt, ſo as he made no ſemblant of any. All this could not the Pariſian be content with: he longed for nothing but to ſee the auntients wauing all ouer France vpon a vaine conceit to ouercome religion wyth temporal weapons onely, which God alwayes miſliked. All his deſires tended but to that end: God heard his requeſt, but to his condemnation. Thus we ſée France couered with men of armes. Thus we ſée a generall deſolation of the eſtate: and in lieu of rooting out hereſie, we do thus ſée atheiſme lodged in the middeſt of vs. The Pariſian longed after nothing ſo much as the death of the late king, at whatſoeuer price. A frantike reuenge that he noriſhed in his bowels was his onely god. Vpon this opinion he procured proceſſions in his ſhirt: he receiued (as he ſuppoſed) his creator euery Sonday: vpon the feſtiuall dayes he remained at ſeruice from morning till night, not to the end to appeaſe Gods wrath, but to prouoke him againſt the king and his partakers, as being at that time poſſeſſed of no other religion but paſſion, not paſſion of Ieſus Chriſt, but his owne. God yet once againe heareth him: the K. is ſlaine: a wicked monke is for the ſame placed in the kalender of Martyres, and for a teſtimony of their fury, theſe bedlems do weare the gréen ſcarffe ouer their ſhoulders. But what fruit do they reape thereby? This death ſet the crowne vpon this our kings head, who troubleth their braines more then the deceaſed, firſt, as being of another religion thē theirs, next, in that he is a prince, ready vpon occaſion, warlike, valiant,

and one who in foure moneths hath done more feates of armes then the late king, conſidering his nature which was ſlowe, and better diſpoſed to diſcourſe then to execution, could haue performed in foure yeares. Againe, they haue wiſhed that our king might not take them, who onely tooke care to preſerue them, in taking them as their king and a true Frenchman. They call to their ſuccour the Spaniard, an auncient enemy to France, who raiſeth the ſiege, and in preſeruing them hath vtterly loſt them. Paris being at this day the carcaſſe of a towne gouerned, or rather deuoured by ſome ſcore of raſcalles, whoſe chiefeſt callings before were but clarks of the rolles, notaries, commiſſaries, proctours in the parliament, chatelet, and cleargy courts. What? do you not thinke them to be gods paſtimes, who in granting them their demandes, doth at this day make them beare the ſharpeſt and moſt violent puniſhment for their faults that euer were ſpoken of? For my part, albeit I wiſh not the deſtruction of that miſerable towne, which can not come to paſſe but that as the haile from heauen it will light vpon the good as the bad togither, yet did I to my great griefe ſtedfaſtly perceiue, that as the gréene ſcarffe that the Pariſians put on for the death of the late king, was a moſt aſſured teſtimony of their accurſed folly, ſo the red which ſince they borrowed from the Spaniſh Marrane is a moſt certaine prognoſtication of the bloody puniſhment that God kéepeth in ſtore for them.
            Let vs therefore direct our vowes and prayers to God, wythout diſſimulation or hypocriſie, neyther let vs intermeddle any worldly matters, nor let vs imagine that GOD wil be charmed wyth wordes. He is not wonne wyth our mouthes, but wyth our hearts, wherein he hath eſtabliſhed the true ſeate of our deuotions: the offences of the Miniſters of our Church haue attayned their laſt period, let vs therefore earneſtly and in equall ballance purge them. Let vs wrap our heads in ſackeloth, our bodies in haire, and our heartes in contrition, and with teares crie vnto God, that he will vouchſafe to forget all the offences that I doe abhorre to remember: let that great K. and prophet Dauid be our guide, whome God vouchſafed to giue vs for an example of one of the greateſt ſinners among all the kings of Iſraell, as alſo for one of the greateſt penitents, one, who vpon his repentaunce

obtained all his petitions at Gods handes. When we ſhall take the ſame courſe, God who is our true father, will embrace our prayers, and make our king ſuch a one as we deſire.
            It is therefore in thy ſight that I doe nowe humble my ſelfe: it is thou (O Lord) who with all my heart I call vpon to be our helpe: I knowe the tranſgreſſions that againſt thy Maieſty we haue committed euen from the higheſt to the loweſt both generally and particularly, there is none of vs that can exempt himſelfe. If thou liſt to poize our cauſe in the balance of thy iuſtice, who dare appeare in thy ſight? Thou, I ſay, who by thy eſpeciall titles haſt reſerued vengeance to thy ſelfe: but (O Lord) I know alſo that thou art the GOD of mercy. We preſent our ſelues before thy face, not to be iuſtified, but in our ſhirts bringing a pardon, which it may pleaſe thée of thy holy grace to allow of. Thy word is true. Thou haſt ſaid: If in Sodome and Gomorrha there were but ten good men, the reſt of the wicked ſhoulde for their ſakes haue no harme. Alas, are there not an infinit number of thy faithfull ſeruants that neuer conſented to all theſe impieties, who notwithſtanding at this day doe beare the penaunce of other mens wickedneſſe, driuen out of their houſes, depriued of the view of their wiues whome thou haſt comanded vs to cleaue vnto, baniſhed from the preſence of their parents and children, and whatſoeuer they loue beſt? Euen they that haue béene the authours of theſe calamities, doe they not ſuffer, if not penance, yet at the leaſt moſt grieuous puniſhment for their offences? Theſe deaths, theſe pouerties, theſe extraordinary ſickneſſes, this famine, this generall ruine of Paris, this ſecond deſolation of Ieruſalem, let them be (O Lorde God, let them be accounted as penance in thy ſight. Albeit there be ſome among vs moſt wickedly hardened in their fellonies, yet be there alſo many in the Towne, who in their ſoules do wéepe, howle, and lament for all that is paſt. Grant O good God, that they may be thoſe ten whom thou deſiredſt to finde in Sodome, and hauing nowe with thy roddes chaſtized vs in our bodies and goodes, ſuffer not our ſoules to be loſt. We all are thy lawfull and naturall children through the regeneration of the holy Sacrament of Baptiſme: and we do beléeue, that through thy paſſion we be inheritours of

thy Paradiſe. Thou (O Lord) who of a heauy and greate lumpe diddeſt in the beginning of the world bring all things into good order, doeſt exerciſe the ſame liberality ouer thy Church. After this miſerable Chaos that haue diſordered all the affaires of thy religion, reunite vs all vnder the banner of thy Church: ſuffer not the diuell the father of diuiſion to ſeparate the head from the members, vouchſafe to illuminate our king with the beames of thy holy ſpirit, ſo to reduce him into thy catholike apoſtolike and Romiſh Church, to the end that to the honour and exaltation of thy holy name, euery man may acknowledge thée to be the Father of concorde and peace. O moſt eternall goodneſſe, this we do moſt humbly beſéech thée, as taking this to be thy wil, whereto we wil referre al our Prayers and Supplications.
            FINIS.
         
      
   