
      
         
            
            
            A
Sermon of repentaunce.
            
               A very godly and
profitable Sermon, preached
at Lee in Eſſex, by Arthur
Deut, Miniſter of
Gods word. And publiſhed
at the requeſt
of ſundrie Godly and
vvell diſpoſed perſons.
1581. the 7. of March.
            
            Ionah. chap. 2. ver. 8.
            They that waite vpon lying vanities,
Forſake their owne mercie.
            Imprinted at London for John
Hariſon, and are to bee ſolde
at the white Greihound in
Paules Church-yard▪
1582.
         
         
            
            
            To the Reader.
            
               ALthough I was moſte vnwilling
that this poore Talent
and trauaile of myne,
ſhould euer haue bene broched
abroade, and come to
light: both becauſe it maye
ſeeme as a Candle lighted at no one day: as
alſo becauſe many other mennes doinges
might more worthely a great deale haue
ben publiſhed, and committed vnto letters:
Yet becauſe diuers which heard it preached
with a liuely voice, were very inſtant, yea,
and more then importunate with mee to
haue it publiſhed, vſing ſuche reaſons as I
coulde not well gaineſay, I did at the laſt
yeelde to their requeſt, and ſo this vntimely
fruite is come abroade, to be ſolde in open
markettes. Let no man be offended
that I haue not ſtrained my ſelfe to flye an
high pitch, to fome out the froth of mans
wiſdome, and to make a great ſhew of learning,
by blowing the bladder of vanity, till
it burſt with ſwelling. For that is not my
vſe. I ſeeke eſpeciall the ſaluation of the

ſimple and ignorant, and therefore ſtoupe
downe to their reach and capacitie. Therefore
I beſeeche thee gentle Reader, accepte
my good meaning: Reade this without
preiudice, like it as thou
profiteſt, ſo ſhalte thou
haue praiſe of God, &
comforte in thy
conſcience.
            A. D.
         
      
      
         
            
            The Text.
            
               Luke. 13. 5.
               I tell you nay: but except you repent you
ſhall likewiſe periſh.
            
            
               THE occaſion of theſe wordes
of our Lorde and Sauiour
Ieſus Chriſte, was bicauſe
there were certayne
that ſhewed him of the Galileans,
whoſe bloud Pilate
had mingled with their owne Sacrifices:
That is, murthered them as they were
ſacrificing: and ſo their bloude was mingled
with the bloud of the beaſtes whiche
were ſacrificed. Thoſe men therefore,
though that theſe Galileans were greater
ſinners then all other Galileans, becauſe
they had ſuffered ſuche thinges. And that
thoſe xviii. alſo, vppon whome the Tower
in Siloam fell and ſlue them, were ſinners
aboue all men, that dwelte in Hieruſalem.
Wherein they did vtter a ſecret corruptiō
naturally ingendred in all men, that is verie
ſharply to ſee into the ſinnes of others,
& seuerely to cenſure thē: but in the meane

while to flatter themſelues, & to bée blindfold
in ſéeing their owne ſinnes. For theſe
men thought, becauſe the like iudgmentes
did not fall vpon them, therfore they were
ſafe inough, they were not ſo great ſinners
but rather highly in the fauour of GOD.
According as many doe falſly ſuppoſe, that
thoſe are alwayes the worſt ſort of people
whome God doeth moſte ſtrike, and preſſe
with his puniſhing hande, hauinge forgotten
that God doeth not kéepe an ordinarie
rate here belowe, to puniſhe euery man as
he is worſt, or to fauour and cocker him as
he is beſt, but onely taketh ſome examples
as he thinketh good, for the inſtruction and
aduertiſement of all others, and to be as it
were looking glaſſes, wherein euerie man
may ſée his owne face, yea, and his owne
cauſe handeled, & that God is a ſeuers reuenger
of ſin, that all men maie learne by
the example of ſome, to tremble & beware,
leaſt peraduenture they bée worthily conſtrayned
to kéepe their owne turnes, and
to knowe what they haue deſerued. Theſe
men whiche broughte theſe newes to our
Sauiour Chriſt, had not taken foorth this
leſſon, wherevpon our Sauiour in iuſtlye

occaſioned to correcte their erroneous, and
ſiniſter Iudgement, and to teach them that
they muſt not reioice at the iuſte puniſhement
of others, but rather to bée inſtructed
thereby to repentance.
            And further to ſignifie, that God doeth
not alwayes moſt puniſhe the moſte notorious
offenders, as Murtherers, Théeues,
Robbers, Whoremaiſters, Blaſphemers,
Quarrellers, Scoffers, and ſuche like, but
reſerueth them vnto the iudgement of the
greate daie, and as it wéere fatteth them againſt
the daie of ſlaughter: and therefore
he anſwereth them negatiuely, and ſayeth
nay, or not ſo, but excepte you repente, you
ſhal all likewiſe periſh: as if he ſhould ſay,
are you of this opinion indéede, that onelie
monſtruous Sinners are puniſhed in this
worlde, & others let alone: or that the Galileans,
and theſe eightéene vppon whome
the Tower in Siloā
                fel, were greater ſinners
then all others? Or doe you thinke
becauſe the ſame Iudgementes haue not
light vpon you, therefore you ſhal ſteale away
in the darke, & eſcape the Iudgement
of God? No, no, you are deceyued. For I
ſaie vnto you, that, except you mourne and

lament for your ſinnes, and fall to ſome agreement
with God in time (you I ſay, euen
you whiche are ſo readie to condemne
others, and iuſtifie your ſelues) ſhall not
onely periſh with the like iudgementes in
this preſente worlde, but be euerlaſtingly
condemned in the world to come. So that
our Sauiour in ſo ſaying, doeth thunder
downe a moſte dreadfull ſentence vpon all
our heades: for he concludeth and ſetteth it
downe, that all men liuing vpō the face of
the earth, whether they bee highe or lowe,
rich or poore, young or olde, noble or vnnoble,
learned or vnlearned, ſimple or polyticke,
of what eſtate, degree, and condition
ſoeuer they bee liuing, and dying without
repentaunce, ſhall periſh: and bee damned
in hell fire for euer: The Scriptures are
full of ſuche Thunderboltes: Iohn. 3. 18.
Hee that beleeueth not is damned alreadie.
And 2. Cor. 13. verſe. 5. Prooue your ſelues
whether you are in the Fayth, examine
your ſelues. Knowe yee not your owne ſelues
that Ieſus Chriſt is in you, except yee
bee reprobates? Where the Apoſtle flatlie
ſetteth downe, that all thoſe whiche haue
not Chriſt dwelling in their harts by faith

which is the houſhold ſiſter of repentance,
are no better then reprobates, caſtawayes,
and condemned perſons. But becauſe the
moſt people in thoſe dayes are groſlye deceiued
in repentaunce, both concerning
what it is, what it meaneth, what it woorketh,
what bee the qualities, & conditions
of it, which be the cauſes, and which be the
lets and hinderances, and alſo why, when,
and wherefore we ſhould repent. Therfore
I haue in preſēt infent to teach firſt what
is repentaunce. Secondly, which bee his
qualities and effectes. Thirdly, when wee
ſhould repenſe. Fourthly, wherefore wee
ſhould repent. And laſt of all what letteth
vs from Repentaunce: whiche order, and
methode of teaching although ſome maye
miſlike (as indeede with me it is not ordinary,)
yet conſidering the matter I haue in
hand, I thinke it not inconuenient. But
the matter. Repentance is an inward ſorrowing,
and continuall mourninge of the
heart and conſcience for ſinne ioyned with
fayth and both inwarde, and outwarde amendement:
Inward I ſay in chaunging
the thoughtes and affections of the hearte:
and outwarde in chaunging the woordes,

and woorkes from euill to good. This repentaunce
no doubte was in Dauid, who
whē he was couertly reproued by the prophet
Nathan, and his ſinnes laid before his
eyes, did not ſtubbornly defende them, and
ſo iuſtle againſt God: nor yet ſecretlie excuſe
them, and daube them ouer, but cryed
out in the bitterneſſe of his hearte: I haue
ſinned, and thervpon made the 51. Pſalm.
A Pſalme indéed full of dolour and heauines:
Wherein the Prophet bewayleth his
falles, lamenteth his ſinnes, and praieth euen
for a newe hearte, and a newe ſpirite,
newe thoughtes, newe affections, newe
purpoſes of amendment of life. So that in
Dauid wée maie ſée an inward ſorrowing,
a laſting griefe (as the booke of Pſalmes
doeth euerie where declare, whiche layeth
him out as it were in an Anotamie) yea,
and greate reformation, both in inwarde,
& outward ſinnes. Héere therefore beholde
what is Repentaunce. Likewiſe S. Peter
through infirmity hauing denied his Lord
and Mayſter Chriſt, and béeing punched of
his owne conſcience, & wakened with the
alaram of a poore Cockes crowing, wente
out of the Courte of Pilate with a heauie

heart wéeping bitterlie, & euer after ſtoutlie
profeſſing Chriſte euen vnto the death.
Sée then what is Repentaunce. The Prophetes
in the olde Teſtament exhortinge
ye rebellious Iewes vnto Repentance, vſe
commonly an Hebrew verbe which ſignifieth
turne ye, or returne yee & come backe
again, by the which Metaphore is meant,
that like as a man that is ſtrayed farre out
of his way, muſt turne quite backe againe
the contrary way: So thoſe yt haue ſtrayed
from the wayes of Godlineſſe, to the
way of ſinne, muſt come backe againe, as
faſt as euer they went forwarde, & altogether
change the courſe of their life: ſo that
Repentaunce is an earneſt turninge vnto
God with all our hearte, ſoule, and minde.
Saint Iohn Baptiſt, and the Apoſtles in
the Newe Teſtament exhorting vnto Repentaunce,
vſe a Gréeke woorde which ſignifieth
a chaunging of the minde afterwarde,
or afterwitte, ſo that thoſe whiche
through their follie & want of former wit,
haue ſlipped into the déepe pit, and daungerous
gulfe of ſinne, when they come to
themſelues, & haue recouered their wits,
will bée wiſe afterward, & take héede they

neuer come there againe according to the
Proneth: The burnt childe will take heed
of the Fire. By this time I hope you ſee
what is repentaunce. It is not euery ſorrowe,
but ſorrowe for ſinne, not for ſome
ſinne, but for all ſinne, not for an houre, but
for euer, not for a day, but continually, not
for a week, but as longe as we liue. Some
thinke euerie ſorrow is repentance: but ſo
ſhould worldlinges repent. Some thinke
euery litle pante for ſinne is repentaunce:
ſo ſhould Pharaoh repente. Some thinke
all weeping and lamenting for ſinne is repentaunce:
ſo ſhould Eſau, Iudas & Caine,
repent. Some thinke euery litle humbling
of our ſelues is repentaunce: but ſo ſhould
Achab repent. Some think yt good woords,
and good purpoſes is Repentaunce: but
ſo ſhoulde euerie ſicke man repent. Some
thinke ye reformation of words and deeds,
is Repentaunce: but ſo ſhoulde ciuill men
repent. Some thinke that crye God mercie
is repentaunce: and ſo ſhoulde euerie foole
repent. You ſee therfore hows many are deceiued
in repentaunce: but if you will ſee
what it is indeede, looke backe to yt which
hath beene ſaid afore. For hee that will repent

in good earneſt, muſt not hang down
his head like a Bulruſhe for a daye onely,
and ſo haue doone, nor crie from the teeth
outwarde, Lord haue mercie on me, and ſo
away: but he muſt make a back reckoning
with diligente conſideration of his former
life. As did the Prophet Dauid. Pſal. 119.
ver. 59. I haue conſidered my wayes and
turned my feete vnto thy teſtimonyes.
So muſt euerie one that meaneth to repēt
ſinke aſide into ſome corner or out place,
that there hee may haue roome enough to
beate his owne conſcience, & to make his
heart ſmart for his ſinnes, by aggrauation
thereof, & weighing all the circumſtances,
as in the 9. of Daniel: The Church of God
confeſſeth her ſinne, not lightlye but with
woonderfull great exaggeration, and heaping
of one thinge to another. So that it
is not enough to ſay I haue ſinned, but to
ſay I haue moſt traitrouſly ſinned, I haue
moſt obſtinatly, careleſly, and rebelliouſly
ſinned, I haue mōſtrouſly offended in ſuch
a place, in ſuch a houre, in ſuch companie,
in ſuch a day. In ſuche a corner in the
darke I committed adulterie cloſly, when
I thought none had ſeene mee: In ſuche a

Chamber I defiled my neighbours wife?
mine owne conſcience doeth accuſe me of
it. In ſuche and ſuch companie I haue
bene dronke, I haue ſpoken and railed againſt
Gods worde, I haue mocked the
preachers, I haue ſpared no othes, nor filthy
ſpéech, and now O Lorde, Lorde, what
an vgley monſter, and wretched villaine
am I. Here I ſtand before thy preſence all
naked, blinde, wounded, poore, wretched,
and miſerable, hauing deſerued a thouſand
damnations, if thou ſhouldeſt enter into
iudgement, and trie the lawe with me.
Therefore I beſéeche thée ſhewe pitie, and
compaſſion vpon me. Ancient my woundes
with the oyle of mercy: reſtore mee my
ſight, cloath my nakednes, enrich me that
am poore, ſtrengthen me that am weake:
helpe mee that am fallen: oh bid me not
farewell. The infant ouercōmeth his mother
with crying, the child his father with
wéeping, & the ſeruant his maſter by entreaty,
& wilt not yu be intreated O Lord?
Thus I ſay if euerie man would ſpeak in
his conſcience to God, & thus narrowly or
more narrowly, examine himſelf, vndoubtedly
he were in the way of repentaunce.
            
               
But alas it is a worlde to ſée how the
blinde Buſſards, and crooked cancrewormes
of this worlde, go awrye from this
rule, deceiuing themſelues with the bare
title and naked name of repentance. Many
in déede can talke of it: but few walke
it it. Many ſpeake of it: but fewe féele it.
Many deſcribe it: but fewe know it. It is
hidde and locked vp from the worlde, and
reuealed onely to Gods children. Many
think they haue caught it, when they haue
but the ſhadow of it. It is ſo high that few
can reache it. It is ſo déepe that few can
come to the bottome of it. It is ſo narrow
that fewe can pearce into it. So wide that
few can comprehend it. So ſlippery that
fewe can holde it. So ſcerete that few can
finde it. Therefore my deare brethren, I
beſéech you let vs pray vnto our God, that
hee woulde reueale vnto vs this myſtery
which is hid from the world, that we may
truly ſée it, and know it, find it, & féele it to
our endles comfort, through Chriſt Ieſus:
which grace he graunt vs.
            But now to the ſeconde point concerning
the qualities, and fruites of repentance.
One ſpeciall qualitie of repentance

is alwayes to bringe with it remiſſion
ſinnes: for where true repentance 
                  〈◊〉
               
before, there remiſſion of ſinnes muſte 
                  ••
               
               ceſſarily followe after, not that repentance
deſerueth remiſſion of ſinne: but becauſe
where God worket
                  •
                repentance, there hee
pardoneth ſin becauſe of his promiſſe. At
in Ezech. 1827. When the wicked turneth
awaye from his wickedneſſe that hee
hath committed, and doeth that which is
lawfull and righte, he ſhall ſaue his ſoule aliue.
And againe, Eſay. 55. 7. Let the wicked
forſake his wayes, and the vnrighteous
his owne imaginations, and returne vnto
the Lorde, and hee will haue mercy vppon
him. So here we ſee to whom forgiueneſſe
of ſinnes, and the mercies of God belongeth:
Namely to the penitent ſinners, to
thoſe that leaue ſinne, and imbrace Godlines:
to thoſe that forſake his owne waies,
and imaginations, & turne vnto the Lord.
And as for ſuch as walk on in their owne
wayes, and follow ye delightes of ſin without
any ſorrow, or purpoſe to leaue them,
they haue nothing to doe with the mercie
of God: & though Ieſus Chriſte had 
                  •••
               
               
               
                  •
               red
an hundred deathes (which could not

bee) yet ſhal no vnpenitent ſinner haue remiſſion
of his ſinnes by his death, nor any
other benefites of his Paſſion, for they belong
onely to his Churche, and choſen people
here vpon the earth. He therefore that
is not of the Church, he that is not grafted
into Chriſt by fayth, he that is not a member
of his myſtical hody, can inioy nothing
by Chriſtes death. If any man abide not in
me, he is eaſt foorth as a braunch, and withereth,
and men gather them, and caſte
them into the fire, and they burne. Iohn 15.
9. We reade in the 29. of Deuteronomie,
Howe God barreth all ſtubburne ſinners
from his mercie, and doeth moſt terrible
ſhoote out againſt them. Hee that heareth
the wordes of this curſe, and bleſſeth him
ſelfe in his heart, ſaying, I ſhal haue peace
although I walke according to the ſtubburnnes
of our owne heart, thus adding
dronkenneſſe to thirſte: the Lord will not
be mercifull vnto him, but then the wrath
of the Lorde, and his iealouſie ſhall ſmoke
againſt that manne, and euery curſe that
is written in this booke, ſhal light vppon
him. So that God ſaith playnely, hee hath
no mercie for ſuch as walke in the vayne

delights of ſinne, and in the ſtubbornes of
their owne heart, adding drunkenneſſe to
thirſt, that is one horrible ſin to another.
Yet for all this it is a wonder to ſée, how ye
blind wormes of this earth deceiue thē ſelues.
For they thinke whatſoeuer they ſay,
whatſoeuer they doe, be it good, be it euill,
whether they repēt, or not repent, yet they
ſhalbe ſaued by chriſts death, as thogh they
would make it a baud to their ſinnes, & ſo
worke that villany againſt Chriſt. I hope
to be ſaued by Chriſts death, aſwell as the
beſt of them all ſayth ſome. But where is
thy repentaunce thou miſerable wretche?
Doeſt thou thinke that Gods mercy is
common to all? and Chriſts death a baude
for thy ſinnes? No no, when it conuneth to
the vpſhotte, thou ſhalt ſtoppe ſhorte. For
it will proue farre otherwiſe: for thou ſhalt
finde Gods mercye turned into Iuſtice:
and Chriſtes death into Wormwood: becauſe
thou hatedſt knowledge, and chooſedſt
not the feare of the Lorde. Thus you
ſée my deare brethren, that Repentaunce
muſt néedes go before forgiueneſſe of ſinnes,
& where it leadeth not the way, there
the gates of Gods mercie are ſhutte vp,

and this is the firſt qualitie of repentance.
It hath alſo another condition and that is,
to alter and chaunge men from that they
were before, not in the ſubſtance and proportion
of the body: but in the qualities &
conditions of the minde. For whoſoeuer
hath truely repented, you ſhall by and by
ſée a moſte marueilous, and wonderfull
chaunge in him, ſo that he will not doe as
he hath done, nor ſpeake as he hath ſpokē,
nor companie as he hath companied, nor
play the good fellowe (as they terme it) as
he was wont to do, nor runne to the ſame
exceſſe of riot he was wont. And this is it
that amazeth the world, and cauſeth them
to briſtle and fome at the mouth like wild
Bores, and to ſpeake euil of them that are
turned vnto God. For the worlde loueth
his owne, and cannot abide that GOD
ſhould plucke one feather frō his Wings,
But repentaunce doth violently pull men
out of the clawes of Sathan, and chaunge
them from the conditions of the world, for
it maketh of proude, humble, of hurtefull,
harmeleſſe, of cruell, méeke, of Wolues,
Lambes, of Lions, Sheepe, of adulterers,
Chaſte liuers, of Drunkardes, ſober men,

of Swearers, reuerent ſpeakers, of Haters,
Louers, of Deſpiſers, Imbracers,
of Scoffers, Followers, of Earthly, Heauenly,
of Deuils, Sainctes. All this worketh
Repentance. Paul trauelled towards
Damaſcus, a Woolfe, a Perſecuter, a
bloodſucker, an hater, a deſpiſer: but ere
he came there, he was quite chaunged, and
cleane of an other mind. So mighty was
he that met him by the way: When Ieſus
Chriſt ſent downe the holy Ghoſt vpon his
Diſciples, according to his promiſe, there
were ſome ſcoffers at Hieruſalem, which
mocked and ſaid, they are ful of new wine:
But the ſame men cryed out by and by after,
men and brethren, what ſhal we doe
to be ſaued. Here was a moſte wonderfull
and ſodaine chaunge. See then the
force of Repentaunce, when God ſtriketh
it into the heart of man, and driueth the
nayle to the head as they ſay. It effecteth
that which all the wiſedome and policie of
man, is not able to bring to paſſe, no when
they haue prolled he
                  •
               her and thether, and

                  ••
               ide their heades together, and ſought al
the corners of their wits, yet can they not
tell which way to turne their hande, or

where to begin to chaunge the hearte of
a man, and to conuerte him to God. Therefore
Repentaunce is ſtronger then all the
whole worlde, and woorketh that whiche
all men with their naturall wittes, 
                  〈◊〉
               
heades, and deepe deuiſes can not compaſſe
for the conuerſion of a Sinner, is a
woorke ſupernaturall. Here then we haue
a glaſſe to beholde our ſelues in, whethereuer
we haue Repented or no. For if wee
find not this change and alteration in vs,
we haue not repented, and ſo conſequently
remaine vnder Damnation. Therefore,
let euerie man looke vnto himſelfe, for
marke how muche he is chaunged, and altred
from his former euill wayes, ſo much
hath he repented. And he that is the ſame
man he was three, foure, eight, nay thictie
yeares agoe, ſurely, ſurely, hee hath not
repented, and therefore abideth in damnation.
I maruell then howe thoſe menne,
which neuer felt anie change, or alteration
wrought in them, nay, whoſe conſciences
tell them, that they are not chaunged,ne
knowe what it meaneth, can have any
hope of ſaluation: Vnleſſe peraduenture
they beléeue not this doctrine, or think it to

be falſe. But I will ſende ouer theſe men
to ſuche as haue bene in the like caſe they
nowe are, and yet thought they might doe
well enough for all that, although both
blinde in Iudgement, and corrupt in conuerſation.
I haue knowen and doe knowe
men, which before their conuerſion, and
inward chaunge, were counted as honeſte
men, as euer brake breade, and as ſubſtantiall
men as any coulde bée, as true
dealers, vpright liuers, & good houſekéepers
as any of their neighboures, yea, and
they had the ſame opinion of them ſelues
too: And yet notwithſtanding when they
haue felte Repentaunce woorkinge this
chaunge and alteration in them, through
the power of the Spirite, at the preaching
of the woord, and when they haue had new
heartes giuen then to diſcerne better, and
newe eyes to ſée better, as men come out
of a dampe, haue wondered and marueiled
at the palpable and groſſe darkeneſſe they
were in before, and haue burſt foorth into
theſe woordes, that they woulde not bee in
the ſame caſe they were afore, no not for al
the worldes goodes, for if they ſhould haue
died in that caſe, they were ſure they ſhold

haue béene damned: But I pray you what
caſe were they in before, were they not
good honeſt men, & well accounted of, and
honeſt liuers, and well taken whereſoeuer
they came? Surely they were ſo taken in
the world, but nowe they thinke far otherwiſe
of thēſelues, their eyes being opened,
and their Iudgementes enlightened, for
nowe they ſée that they ſawe not before,
nowe they vnderſtand yt God condemneth
many, whome the worlde iuſtifieth. Mée
thinketh this example ſhoulde make ciuill
and worldely men ſée and ſuſpecte themſelues,
and knowe their owne miſerie before
God. For theſe men were as good
as they before their conuerſion, and yet afterwarde
confeſſe yt they were plunged in
the Bottome of Hell, and drowned in the
deapth of Damnation. He that hath eares
to heare, let him heare, and he that hath
eyes to ſée let him ſée: For if menne wil
ſtill ſooth them ſelues for all this, that they
ſhalbe ſaued without féeling any chaunge,
or worke of repentaunce:
            It will coſt them full deare in the ende,
for Chriſt
                  •
               s woordes will proue true, that
whoſoeuer repenteth not ſhal bée damned,

that is, whoſoeuer doeth not feele in him
ſelfe what is Repentance, and find in him
ſelfe the qualities thereof that he condemned.
For where Repentaunce is, there be
the qualities of Repentaunce, and where
the qualities be abſent, there is no true repentaunce.
So that where Chryſt ſayeth,
Except ye repent yee ſhall all periſh? It is
all one, as if he had ſayde, except ye knowe
the truth of Repentaunce, excepte yee can
proue vnto your conſciences the forgiueneſſe
of your ſinnes, excepte you feele a
chaunge and alteration in the bottome of
your heart, of all your former lewd waies
and miſdemeanour, you ſhall ſurely periſh
and be damned. But let vs yet a little further
ſearch out ye qualities of Repētaunce,
the Apoſtle in the ſeuenth Chapiter of the
ſecond Epiſtle to the Corinthians ſetteth
downe ſeuen natable qualities, and
effects of Repentaunce. The firſte of them
he nameth Care. For beholde ſaith he, this
thing that you haue byn godlie ſorie what
Care it hath wrought in you, that is, an
earneſt ſtudie, and as it were a takinge
thoughte to pleaſe God. For where true
Repentance hath once wrought, there followeth

great care afterward. Care I ſay
to liue in the obedience of God, Care to
keepe a good conſcience, Care to reforme
our houſholdes: Care to inſtruct Wyues,
Children and Seruauntes in the knoweledge
of GOD: Care to pray with them
Morning and Euening: and generallye
Care to perfourme all dueties belonging
vnto God, ſo that Repentaunce is not a
careleſſe, but a carefull thinge. Let not
men thinke therefore, that although they
welter in the careleſneſſe of the fleſhe, and
ſlepe in ſecuritie all the dayes of their life,
yet their repentance is good inough, yea
and though they ſpend whole dayes, Hightes,
Monethes and Yeares in vanities,
Playes and paſtimes, in Idleneſſe, fonde,
delight, pleaſure, and voluptuouſneſſe, in
negligence of all dueties, forgetfulneſſe of
God, and contempte of all good thinges:
Yet for all this they repēt for their ſinnes,
and hope to be ſaued as well as any other.
But alas how can theſe thinges ſtand together,
to repent for ſinne, & to delight in
ſinne, to hate ſinne, and loue ſinne. to flie
from ſinne, and to follow after ſinne. But
theſe men I perceiue, would fayne make

Saint Paule a lyar. For he ſayeth, a m
                  ••
               
hath neuer repented, except he bée carefull
afterwarde to pleaſe God. They ſay they
do repent, & haue repented: although they
liue neuer ſo wretchedly, & careleſly. But
when all licencious and leud liuers, filthie
whoremongers, beaſtly belligoddes, and
careleſſe caitiffes, come to the kingdom of
God, and are ſaued: then ſhall theſe men
alſo come with them to be ſaued by careles
repentaunce.
            The next qualitie and effect of Repentaunce
is named, clearing of our ſelues,
that is, diſcharging of our ſelues, when
ſinne doeth accuſe vs, and laye thinges to
our charge, for when ſinne and Sathan
doeth terrifie the conſcience of ye poore penitent
ſinner, by and by he fléeth vnto God
and aſketh forgiueneſſe throughe Ieſus
Chriſt, and ſo cleareth himſelfe, and maketh
his Apologie againſt ſinne, and Sathan,
like as a man that is preſented into
the Court, vppon ſuſpicion of whoredome,
or any other notorious crime, muſte cleare
himſelfe by witneſſes, of that whiche is
layde to his charge. So the conſcience that
is cited by Sathan before the Iuſtice, and

Iudgement of ſeate of God, cleareth it ſelfe
by Repentaunce, and aſketh forgiueneſſe
through Ieſus Chriſt. So that héere wee
may ſee a wonderfull fruite of a penitente
conſcience, it cannot abide the accuſations
of ſinne: It can not be quyet till it bée reconciled
vnto God: & ſo haue peace within
it ſelfe. For this is to bée noted in the
godly man, that when hée hath committed
any ſinne, and his conſcience telleth him
of it, by and by hée féeleth Leade within
him, and is all heauie, and can not fléepe
quietly, till hee haue got into ſome corner,
where hée may mourne, and lament to the
ful, and confeſſe, and lay open himſelfe vnto
God, and ſo cleare him ſelfe through
Chriſt Ieſus, his conſcience bearing him
witnes that his ſinne is forgiuen. Whereas
contrariwiſe the vngodly man, when
his conſcience accuſeth him of ſinne, he diſpatcheth
away all ſuche thoughtes, and
treadeth them vnder foote, and by and by
calleth for a paire of Cardes, or Tables,
and ſome merrie companion to driue away
the time, and to put out all ſuche thoughtes
out of his heade, and ſo indéede hee increaſeth
them more and more, and cauſeth

them rankle inwardly.
            The thirde qualitie is called indign
                  •••
               |
on, that is, a mortall and deadly hatred 
                  •
               
               gainſt
ſinne, as when a man doeth ſhu
                  •
               
               der
and ſhake, and as it were grynde h
                  ••
               
teeth at the remembraunce of his ſinnes
for this is alwayes in the penitent perſon
to loth and abhorre all ſin from his heart
both his owne ſinnes, and the ſinnes of 
                  •
               
               ther,
and to hate it as the Diuel himſelfe,
which is the Author of it, and to flie from
it, as from the very cutthroate, and hang
                  •
               
man of his ſoule, and to know it to be the
onely thing that blindeth, that hardeneth,
that ſeparateth from God, and procureth
all plagues, and diſeaſes, both of bodye
and ſoule againſt vs. Therefore he ſpitteth
at it in defiance, and diſdaineth it, and ſtoppeth
his noſe at the ſtincke of it, whereſoeuer
he ſmelleth it.
            The fourth thing is feare, whiche is a
certaine awe of God, when a man is afraide
to diſpleaſe him. For the penitente
perſon feareth alwaye, and beeing priuie
to his owne infirmity and weakneſſe (whē
God neuer ſo litle withdraweth his grace,
and leaueth him alone) worketh his Saluation

with feare and trembling. He will
not preſume vpon former grace to commit
any ſinne, nor flatter himſelf in the mercy
of God, and in the thinges that he hath alreadie
taſted of God, to yeeld to ſome litle
ſinne, thinking he may doe that, and bee
the child of God wel enough, becauſe ſome
of Gods children haue fallen into greater,
but rather he trembleth at the leaſt motion
of ſinne, and is afraid of the temptations,
whiche Sathan trumpeth in his waye,
and is afraide when the temptations of
ſinne are vppon him▪ to ſatisfie the hunger
of ſinne, but rather he fighteth againſt ſin,
when ſin fighteth againſt him, and preſenteth
the feare of God before his eyes (as
godly Ioſeph in the aſſault of Putiphars
wife) to be as it were a Tower of defence
& Welſpring of life, to auoide the ſnares
of Death.
            The fift thing is Deſire, that is a hungring,
and thirſting after righteouſneſſe.
            For the penitent man is rauiſhed with
deſire of good thinges. Hee deſireth to be
euery day better then other: He deſireth
to leaue euery day ſome ſinne: He deſireth
to praye. He deſireth newe knoweledge,

and newe vnderſtanding of heauenly
things. He deſireth to heare Sermons,
and wil ſtraine himſelfe to heare thē. He
deſireth the company of the godly, he thinketh
him ſelfe in heauē, when he is emongeſt
them. He deſireth the ſaluation of his
very enemies, and prayeth for them. All
theſe and many other ſuch like deſires are
in the penitent man.
            The firſt qualitie is zeale, which conſiſteth
in the earneſt imbracing of vertue,
and hatred of vice, ſo that the penitent perſon,
is zealous in euery good thing. Zealous
of Gods glory in all places, in all cō
               panies,
and emongeſt all perſons, hee cannot
abide that Gods honour ſhould be impeached,
or his name blaſphemed, or his
glory trampled vnder foote by wicked mē,
but he will open his mouth to reproue the
wicked, and ſtand ſtoutly in the defence of
Gods glorie. Hee is not like theſe Atheiſtes,
and diſſemblers, which are alwayes
as is the companie, that is godly emongſt
the Godly: A Proteſtant emongeſt Proteſtantes:
wicked amongeſt the wicked, a
Papiſt emongeſt Papiſtes, a worldling
emongeſt worldlinges, and a Swearer

emongeſt Swearers, a Weathercocke
that turneth with euery wynde. The penitent
man I ſay, is not of this ſtampe,
but he is conſtant and zealous in all good
things. Hee is zealous both againſt the
pleaſures and profites of ſinne, though he
might winne a whole worlde, or pleaſure
himſelfe neuer ſo much, by committing
a ſinne againſt God, yet will he refuſe it,
for he hath learned from Chriſtes mouth,
that it ſhall not profite a man to winne all
the whole worlde, and to looſe his owne
ſoule.
            The laſt thing is Reuenge, that is, the
penitent perſon is ſo offended, with the
ſinne he hath committed, that hee will be
reuenged of himſelfe for it. As for example,
if he haue offended in gluttony, he wil
Reuenge himſelfe by faſting two or thrée
daies after: If he haue offended in whoredome,
hee will be reuenged of his luſtes,
by haltring, and bridling them euer after:
If he haue offended in couetous catching
and polling of other mens goodes, he
will he reuenged of himſelfe by reſtitution,
as was godly and penitent Zacheus,
and this in déed is a ſpeciall fruite of Repentaunce,

to reforme our ſelues in 
                  〈◊〉
               
thinges, wherein we haue moſte offended.
Nowe then you ſee (my deare brethren)
what lieth in the bellie of repentance, and
which be her inwardes, ſo that wee muſt
needes now come to the vnlaſūng, and vnbowelling
of Chriſtes wordes. Except ye
repent ſayth he, ye ſhall all periſhe, that is:
except ye haue this forenamed care, you
ſhall all be damned: Except ye haue this
clearing of your ſelues, you ſhall be damned:
Except you haue this indignation,
you ſhall all he damned: except you, haue
this feare, you ſhalbe damned: Except you
haue this deſire, you ſhal a
                  •
                be damned: Except
you haue this zeale, you ſhall all be
damned. Except you haue this reuenge,
you ſhall all be damned.
            For our Sauiour Chriſte doeth not
ſpeake of the bare name of Repentaunce▪
But of Repentance withal his 
                  •
               urn
                  •••
               re,
and appurtenances: ſo that who ſo euer
hath not Repentaunce with all his qualities
and effectes, or at leaſte ſome meaſure
of them, he hath no Repentaunce indeed,
and therefore ſhall be damned. For
except ye repent ye ſhall all periſhe. But

me thinketh I here ſome man ſay. Here is
nothing but damnation, damnation.
            You preach nothing but the law: Let vs
heare of the Goſpell. My brethren I proteſt
vnto you, that I ſpeake of loue, whatſoeuer
I ſpeake, I deſire the ſaluation of
you all, if I could win but two in all this
congregation, I woulde count my ſelfe
happy, & thinke that God had greatly bleſſed
my labours.
            And vndoubtedly, if I knewe any neerer
way to bring you vnto GOD, then by
preaching the Lawe, to make you knowe
your ſelues, ſurely, ſurely, I would vſe it.
Or if I could be perſwaded, that the preaching
of the Goſpel, and mercie would doe
you more good: you ſhoulde heare of nothing,
but Goſpel, Goſpel, mercie, mercie:
But alas, I ſée that euerie careleſſe, and
euerie ignorant man preſumeth vppon
Gods mercy, I ſée that euerie filthy liuer,
and notorious blaſphemer abuſeth Gods
mercy, in applying it to him ſelfe without
Repentaunce, ſo that they woulde make
Gods mercie a cloake for their ſinnes, I
ſée that euerie man would faine be flattered
in his ſinne, & heare of it no more, but

haue the Goſpell preached, which in déed
belongeth not vnto them, continuing in
their ſtubburnes: but only to the penitent
ſinner, which forſaketh himſelfe, and groneth,
and panteth vnder the burden of his
ſinne. Therefore, when I ſée you humbled
with the conſcience of your ſinnes, and
grone and pant vnder the burden of them,
when I ſée your faces blubbered with weping,
and your hearts mollified, and ſorrowing
with care, then will I comforte you,
and ceaſe to preach the lawe. But I praye
you, will you ſteale, murther, and commit
adultery, and yet heare of mercy? Will ye
Mocke, Sweare, blaſpheme, and Rayle,
and yet heare of mercy? Will you ſerue
ſinne, hate vertue, and followe your owne
luſts, and yet heare of mercy? Would you
haue Plaiſters before you haue woundes:
Would you haue Phiſicke, before you bee
ſicke? Would you be let bloud, before you
haue néede? Would you not account him
a fooliſh Phyſitian, that wil miniſter Phiſicke
to a whole man? Woulde you not
thinke him an vnſkilfull Surgion, that
will applie a gentle ſalue to an olde feſtered
ſore, and not rather Corſie it? Then

knowe my brethren, that becauſe you are
ful of groſſe humors, you muſt haue ſtrong
purgations: Becauſe ye are full of olde feſtered
woundes, you muſte haue Coraſiue
Salues, for that is the beſte for you, and
the ſpeedieſt way to recouer your healthe,
and for as muche as you bée rough Horſes:
you muſte haue a rough rider: And harde
knobbie timber, muſt haue harde wedges,
and hard ſtrokes with a béetle. We preach
the Lawe to driue you to Chriſte, Wee
preach Iudgementes, to make you ſéeke
Mercie: Wée preach damnation, to bring
you to ſaluation. But to preache Mercie
and forgiueneſſe, before men ſee their ſinnes,
or knowe their miſeries by the preaching
of the Lawe, is to preach the Goſpell
vnprofitably. For, he that is ignorant
of the Lawe, knoweth not what miſery is
in himſelfe: nor what mercie is in God.
            What father is there, who if his childe
ſhould play the ſtubborne boy, and diſobey
him in euery thing he commanded, would
ſtroke his heade, and ſay hee were a good
boy, and not rather ſeuerely correcte him,
and whippe him with a rodde? What maſter
will commende his ſeruant for doing

what he liſt, and not what he commaundeth
him? euen ſo wee may not diſobey
and do euill, and looke to he flattered too,
and not rather chidden. Let vs know then
that although God vſe ſearing, launcing,
corzing, and ſearching of the bones, and
other violent remedies, yet in the meane
while hee procureth our health by them.
And let vs further vnderſtand, that foraſmuche
as there is none other meanes to
drawe vs vnto ſaluation, but by cleanſing
of al our vices, and the ſame cleanſing can
not be done, but by violence, when we be
warned by the doctrine of the Lawe, ſo as
our owne conſciences accuſe vs.
            Although we like well to be nowe and
then flattered, and ſoothed, yet let vs ſéeke
to be ſpoken vnto earneſtly, and to haue
our faultes tolde vs, and to be made aſhamed
of them, and to haue our vnhoneſty
diſcouered, & not deſire to be pleaſed. For
it were the next way, to make vs rotte in
our own filthines, if we ſhould holde it ſo
in ſecret: & it would coſt vs deare the ſetting
on, if wee ſhoulde be ſo flattered by
men, and in the meane ſeaſon the heauenly
Iudge ſhall thunder downe vppon vs.
            
               
Therefore, when anie man commeth to
a Sermon, let him firſt and formoſt make
his reckoning to be rebuked, as méete is,
and let him vnderſtande, that it is for his
profit that he is not ſoothed. And if he haue
itching eares, let him laye them awaye
from him, aſſuring himſelfe that elſe he is
forecloſed, ſo as hée ſhall neuer receiue the
doctrine to his profite and inſtruction. And
let him be content to haue his ſoares rubbed
and bewraied, that he may be brought
to that, which is for his welfare. If a man
pleaſe a ſicke bodie, what ſhall become of
him, ſhall hee giue him drinke euerie minute
of an houre? Shall he giue him wine
whereas he ſhould giue him water? Shall
hee giue him Sallets? It were the nexte
way to poyſon him. To bée ſhorte, it is certayne
that a man doeth alwayes ſeeke his
owne death, when hée would haue men to
ſooth him. But nowe which is better eyther
that hée whiche hath the ordering of a
ſicke man, ſhould yéelde to all his deſires,
or that hée ſhould bridle him, notwithſtanding
that hee chafe and gnaſhe his teeth,
becauſe he may not haue his owne will in
his deſires? You ſee therefore how daungerous

a thing it is to flatter, and rayſe vp
men with the preaching of mercie: before
they haue bin caſt downe with the ſenſe of
Gods Iudgements. Ceaſe therefore to open
your mouthes to make hue and crie ouer
the Countrey, ſaying: they preach nothing
but the Law, the Lawe, damnation,
damnation, vnleſſe yée will take in Chriſt
too, and make him one of the number, and
accuſe him of wante of wiſedome, becauſe
he preacheth & cryeth out, that whoſoeuer
repenteth not, ſhalbe condemned. For my
part I preache the Goſpell, to whome the
Goſpell belongeth, and the Law to whom
the Lawe belongeth. I preache Mercie to
whom Mercie belongeth, and Iudgement
to whome Iudgement appertayneth. And
therefore holde your peace, and be content
to bee ruled by the wiſedome of God. But
nowe let vs procéede to the third generall
point, which is the time when we ſhoulde
Repent.
            The holie Ghoſte in the Scriptures
pointeth vs to the preſent time, and exhorteth
vs to make that the time of our Repentaunce,
as Ioell. 2. 12. Therefore alſo
nowe the Lord ſayeth, turne you vnto mée

with al your heart, with faſting, with weying
and with mourning. Likewiſe in the
3. Chap. to the Hebrues, exhorte one another
while it is called to daie, leaſte anie
of you bée hardned, through the deceiptfulneſſe
of ſin. And in the ſame Chapiter. To
day if you will heare his voice, harden not
your harts as in the prouocation. So that
now, euen now, euē now, is ye time of our
Repentaunce. Nowe whileſt hée calleth,
now whileſt he ſpeaketh, now whileſt hee
knocketh, let vs now therefore heare: let
vs now therefore obey: Let vs now therefore
redeeme this daie this preſent Wedneſday,
whiche haue foreſlowed ſo manye
dayes, whiche haue ſo longe hardened our
heartes, which haue let ſo many good thinges
run out, and ſpill beſides. Let vs take
vp this daie and make it the day of our repentaunce.
Although we coulde neuer bée
moued with any Sermon hitherto, yet let
vs now be moued once at laſt. Let vs now
ſay, this ſhall bee my day of Repentaunce,
I wil deferre it no longer. But now wil I
turne vnto my God, and forſake all my
former wicked waies, and mine own imaginations, I will now chaunge the courſe

of my life, and beginne all newe againe. I
will be acquainted with Gods woord, and
take counſell there how to doe, and how to
behaue my ſelfe in euery action. I will not
onely reforme my ſelfe, but alſo my whole
houſhold, Wife, Children, and Seruauntes,
according vnto the ſame. Thus my
deare Brethren, I beſéeche you purpoſe
in your heartes without anye further delaye,
and bée not like to Epicures, and
ſla
                  •
               ckgraces, whiche ſay youth will bee
youthfull, and youth will haue his courſe, &
what ſhould we make it ſo holy, when we
are young, tuſhe, there needs but a ſigh an
houre before death, let vs be merrie nowe,
we ſhall neuer bee younger, wée will Repent
when wee are olde. As though poore
ſoules, they had repentance in their ſléeue,
and at their commandement, and that they
could repent when they liſte. No, no, theſe
fellowes ſhall paye for their preſumption.
For God will giue them ouer to hardenes
of hearte, and impenitencie, becauſe they
tooke ſo muche vppon them, and made ſo
long delaies, that in the mean ſeaſon they
might enioye the profites and pleaſures of
ſinne. Therefore good brethren, let vs not

put it off from day to day, but let vs nowe
ſéeke the Lord whileſt hée maie bée found,
and cal vppon him whileſt hée is néere: let
vs take time while time is, for time and
tyde tarrieth for no man. Let vs knowe
this to bée the time of our viſitation. Our
Sauiour Chriſte wepte ouer Ieruſalem,
becauſe they knew not the time of their viſitation.
Hée reproueth the Iewes, becauſe
they coulde diſcerne the face of the Skye,
but could not diſcerne the ſignes of the times.
And ſurely in the ende it will turne
to our deſtruction, if wée will not knowe
this to bee the daie of mercie, the time of
Grace, wherein God ſtretcheth foorth his
hande vnto vs, and wiſedome crieth out in
the ſtréetes.
            Therefore, nowe whileſt wée haue the
light, let vs walke as children of the light:
the nighte commeth when no manne can
woorke. It ſhall be too late to call for mercie
after this life, when the gates of mercy
are ſhut vp, and Repentaunce will bée too
late. Oh deare chriſtians, let vs remember
the fiue fooliſhe Virgins, whiche becauſe
they forſlowed the time, had heauen gates
barred vp againſt them. Let vs alſo remē
               ber

the fearefull & dolefull example of the
riche Glutton, which beeing in Hell torments
yelled, and yelped for the leaſt eaſe
and help that might be, and could not haue
it. An hundred thouſande times therefore,
better it is for vs to leaue our ſinnes now
to mourne for them now, and now to Repente,
then hereafter alas when it ſhall be
too late. Better nowe a great deale to take
ſome paine, to ſtrayne our ſelues to leaue
our ſinnes, and to make our hearte ſmarte
for them, then to bee condemned for euer,
and to cry in the bottome of Hell, we haue
wearied our ſelues in the way of wickedneſſe
and Deſtruction, and wee haue gone
through daungerous waies: But we haue
not knowen the way of the Lorde. What
hath pride profited vs? Or what profite
hath the Pompe of riches brought vs? All
theſe thinges are poſſed awaie like a ſhadowe,
and as a Paſte that paſſeth by. We
haue ſet our ſelues againſt the children of
God, we had them in deriſion, and in a parable
of reproch: Wée fooles thought their
life madneſſe, and their ende without honour:
but loe they are counted emongſt
the children of God, and their portion is

emonge the Sainctes. Therefore let vs
knowe the tyme of our calling, and let vs
not be worſe thē the foules of the ayre, the
Storke knoweth her appointed tyme: the
Turtle, the Crane, and the Swallowe obſerue
the time of their comming. The
Huſbandman taketh his times. The Mariner
watcheth his tide. Therefore let vs
alſo take the time, & turne vnto the Lorde
whileſt it is ſaide to day, which grace God
graunt vs.
            Nowe let vs returne vnto the fourth
pointe, concerning the cauſes which may
moue vs vnto Repentance. Herein I haue
obſerued nine eſpeciall thinges. Firſt, the
great mercie of God, leadeth vs vnto Repentaunce.
As Rom. 2. The bountifulneſſe
of God leadeth vs vnto Repentance, ſayth
the Apoſtle. God doth continually followe
vs with his mercies and benefites, both
concerning our ſoules & bodies, wée haue
no good thinge which wee haue not receyued
at his hands, we hold all that we haue
of him, and to him wee are beholding for
all. Great is his mercie towarde our bodies,
but much greater towardes our ſoules,
and euerie mercie and benefit, eyther

towarde ſoule or body, calleth vs to repenaunce.
Hée giueth vs meate, drinke, and
clothing, theſe call vs to repentaunce: Hée
kéepeth vs at his owne coſtes and charges
here below, this calleth vs to Repentance:
the Sunne, the Moone, and the Starres,
calleth vs to Repentance. The birdes of
the ayre, the fiſhes of the Sea, & the fruites
of the yearth crie out vpon vs, both loude,
and ſhrill: Repent, repent. All creatures
mooue vs to Repentaunce. Our creation
calleth, our redemption crieth, our ſanctification
knocketh, and our Election mooueth
to Repentaunce. What could God do
more for his vineyard, y• he hath not done?
Therefore let vs repent.
            Secondly, the iudgements of God moue
vs vnto repentance, for al ye thunderbolts,
plagues, and puniſhments which God hath
throwen downe vppon obſtinate ſinners,
from the beginning of ye world, are ſo manie
warning péeces vnto vs, to awake vs
out of the dead ſléepe of ſinne, & to prick vs
to Repentaunce. As in the 1. Cor. 10. When
the Apoſtle hath cited diuers greate iudgementes
of God againſt the olde Iſraelites
for diuers ſinnes,

he concludeth: now all theſe things came
vnto them for examples, and were writtē
to admoniſhe vs, vppon whome the endes
of the worlde are come. So that all the
Iudgementes wee reade of in the Scriptures,
are ſo many admonitions, and as it
were carteropes to drawe vs to Repentaunce.
All the iudgementes we haue read
of, heard of, do ſée and heare of euery day,
knocke & with mayn ſtrokes beate downe
right vpon our conſciences to repentance.
The vgly monſters, ſtraunge byrthes,
fiery conſtellations, vnknowen Cometes,
ſodaine deathes, marueilous droughtes,
vnwonted ſnowes, horrible inundations,
forraine wonders, ſtraunge apparitions,
threatning of heauen aboue, we ſtreaming
and ſhooting fire, trembling of the earth
vnder our féete, and our houſes ouer our
heades, as of late dayes. What are al theſe
but as it were great Cranes with beams,
and Cable Ropes, to drawe vs vp to the
Lord by Repentance.
            Thirdly, the word of God haleth vs to
repentance. For as God in olde time ſent
his Prophets both early and late, to call
the rebellious Iewes to Repentaunce: ſo

he ſendeth abroad his preachers, and meſſengers
in thoſe daies, to ſounde vp the
trumpe of his word, & to ring the ſwéet bel
of Aaron emongſt thē to awake thē to repentance,
but alas how lightly are they regarded?
Who heareth their voice? But
ſurely this is the laſt remedie yt God hath
apointed, & if this wil not moue vs to repentance,
if this wil not cure vs, then are
we altogether vncurable.
            Fourthly, the infinite number of ſinnes
we haue committed, ought to be ſo manie
ſpurres in our ſides to pricke vs to repentaunce.
It is ſufficient ſaith Saint Peter,
that we haue ſpēt the time paſt of our life
after the luſtes of the Gentiles, walking
in wantonneſſe, luſtres, drunkennes, gluttonie,
drinkinges, and abominable Idolatries.
Therfore it is time now to repent.
Oh that men would looke backe to themſelues,
and conſider themſelues as they
were fortie, thirtie, twentie, or ten yeares
ago. Oh that they would call to mind theyr
open & ſecret ſins, & me thinketh it ſhould
make their heart bléed within their belly
to thinke vpon them. Oh yt they would conſider
how much time they haue miſpent, &

how many good things they haue neglected,
and altogether omitted.
            Fiftly, the ſhortneſſe of our life calleth
earneſtly vpon vs to repent. The time of
our life is ſixtie yeares, & ten, & if they bee
of ſtrength eightie yeeres, yet the ſtrength
is but labour and ſorrowe, ſo it is cut off
quickly, and we flie away ſaith the Prophet
Dauid, we haue ſpent our yeres as a
thought, Therefore he addeth. Teach vs
to number our dayes, that wee may apply
our heartes vnto wiſdome. Our life for
the ſhortneſſe and inconſtancie of it in the
ſcripture is compared to graſſe, to a vapour
to ſmoke, and to a Weauers ſhuttle
which glideth away ſwiftly. Euen ſo the
daies of man paſſe away no man knoweth
how. Man is of ſhort continuaunce ſaith
Iob, & full of trouble. Experience teacheth,
that to day a man to morowe none. Hence
away we muſt al, here is no abiding place
for vs, how ſoone we know not. Therefore
let vs repent.
            Sixtly, the ſmall number of thoſe which
ſhal be ſaued: ought to thruſt vs forward to
repentance. Striue to enter in at the narrow
gate, for many I ſay vnto you, will

ſéeke to enter in, and ſhal not be able ſaith
Chriſte Luke. 13. 24. And in an other
place he ſaith, the gate is ſtraight, and the
way narrowe that leadeth vnto life, and
fewe there be that finde it. If men would
conſider of this, it would make them looke
better about them, and trie with them ſelues,
whether they be of that ſmall number
or no.
            Seuenthly, Death threatneth vs, who
is very terrible to the fleſh, and the remembraunce
of it very bitter to a man that is
ſouſed, and ſoked in the pleaſures of this
worlde. It flattereth no man, it regardeth
not perſons, it weigheth not friendſhip, it
careth not for rewardes, it is very grim,
vglie, and cruel, and killeth downe right
where it hitteth. Therefore let vs repent.
            Eightly, the day of iudgement and
ſeconde appearing of the Sonne of man
ought to quicken vs. The day of the Lord
will come as a Théefe in the night, in the
whiche the heauens ſhal paſſe away with
a noyſe, and the Elements ſhall melt with
heate, and the earth with the workes that
are therein ſhal be burnt vp, ſéeing therefore
that all theſe things muſt be diſſolue
                  •
               
               
what manner of perſons ought ye to be in
holy conuerſation and Godlines ſaith S.
Pet. 2. 3. The Lorde Ieſus ſhall ſhewe
himſelfe from heauen, with his mighty angelles
in flaming fire, rendering vengeaunce
vnto them that know not God, and
obeye not vnto the Goſpell of our Lorde
Ieſus Chriſt, ſaith the Apoſtle. 2. Theſ. 1.
I ſawe ſaieth Saint Iohn. Apoc. 20. A
great white Throne, and one that ſate on
it, from whoſe face fledde away both the
earth and the heauen, and their place was
no more founde. And I ſawe the deade
both great and ſmall ſtand before GOD:
and the bookes were opened, and another
booke was opened, which is the
booke of life, and the dead were iudged
of thoſe thinges, which were written in
the bookes according to their woorkes.
And the Sea gaue vp her deade, whiche
were in her, and death and hell deliuered
vp the deade, which were in them, and
they were iudged euery man according
to his woorkes. In theſe places we ſée
both the ſodainneſſe, the fearefulneſſe, and
glory of Chriſts comming. For he ſhall
not come poorely, and contemptuouſly as

in his firſt viſitation, but he ſhall come very
princely, royally, and triumphantly, to
the great terrour of all his enemies, when
a conſuming fire ſhall goe before him, and
ten thouſand thouſands of Angels waite
vpon him: at what time the Kinges of the
earth, & the great men, and the rich men,
and the chiefe Captaines, and the mightie
men, and euery bondman, and euery fréeman
ſhall hyde themſelues in dennes, and
amongeſt the rockes of the mountaines
and ſay to the rockes and mountaines fall
on vs, & hide vs from the preſence of him
that ſitteth on the throne, and from the
wrath of the Lambe, for the great day of
his wrath is come, and who can ſtand? Apoc.
6. Therfore let vs repent.
            The laſt thing is Hell tormentes then
the which nothing is more vntollerable.
Therefore ſaith Chriſte, Marke. 9. If thine
hand cauſe thee to offende, cut it off: It
is better for thee to enter into life maymed,
then hauing two handes to goe into
Hell, into the fire that neuer ſhall bee
quenched, where the worme dieth not, and
the fire neuer goeth out. The Scripture
ſpeaketh very terribly to our ſenſes, concerning

the eſtate of the damned perſons
calling it hel fire, damnation, the lake that
burneth with fire & brimſtone for euer. In
30. cha. of the propheſie of Eſai, it is called
Tropheth, and it is euen prepared of old, it
is euen prepared for ye king: he hath made
déepe & large, ye burning therof is fire and
much wood: the breath of the Lorde like a
Riuer of Brimſtone doeth kindle it: theſe
ſpéeches are terrible to our ſenſes, & may
maruellouſly amaze vs. But if I had the
tongue of an hundred men nay of an hundred
Angels, yet were I not able to vtter
them, as ſome ſhall one day féele them,
much leſſe were you able to conceiue thē.
If al the tortures and cruel torments that
can be deuiſed by the wit of man, were
executed vpon ſome one, yet were it nothing
to this. We poore wretches thinke
there is no paine to a Collike, or a cruell
Ague. But if all Collikes, Agues, and all
other ſtrange diſeaſes could poſſibly light
vpon one man, yet were it but a fleabiting
to that which is to come. The pain is endleſſe,
eaſeleſſe, and remedileſſe. The daies
of their helliſh torments ſhal neuer weare

                  •
               ut, nor their yeares come to an ende, the

longer they continue, the leſſe hope haue
they. When as many yeres are expired, as
there be men in the world, & ſtarres in the
heauens, when as many thouſand yeares
are ended, as there be ſtones, and ſands by
the Sea ſhore, yet ſtill there be ten hūdred
thouſande times ſo many moe to come:
Thoſe that wil not now be moued in hearing,
ſhall then be cruſhed to péeces in féeling.
Al dronkards, ſwearers, whoremongers,
vſurers, extortioners, liers, mockers,
contemners, ſecure perſons, iolly felowes,
roiſting ruffians, luſtie bloudes, the braue
laddes of this world, and all other vnbeleuers
ſhal one day be apprehended, and arraigned
before the barre of Gods tribunal
ſeate, where the Maieſty of GOD ſhall
ſtand aboue them, with a naked ſworde of
vengeance, and a ſcepter of Iuſtice. The
Deuil that olde Satanas ſhal ſtand on the
one ſide to accuſe them, and their own conſcience
on the other ſide to condemne thē,
and the gaſping gulfe of Hell vnderneath
them, ready to ſwallow them vp for euermore,
Then ſhall the dreadfull ſentence of
eternall woe, and damnation procéede againſt
them▪ Go, ye curſed into hel fire, &c.

There they ſhall drinke as a iuſte recompence
for their iniquitie, the bitter cup of
Gods eternall wrath and indignation, in
the kingdom of darknes, and in the fearefull
preſence of Sathan, & all the curſed enemies
of Gods grace, where the dolefull
Droome of Gods anger ſhall euer ſounde
through their eares, where ſhalbe wéeping
& gnaſhing of téeth, where ſhall bée confuſion,
woe, and endles lamentation. Their
gripes ſhall bée ſo greate, their groanes ſo
déepe, and their garboiles ſo vntollerable,
that they ſhall grinne like a Dog in their
infernall conu
                  •
               lſions, and with howling,
and yelling crie out, woe, & alas that euer
I was borne: Oh that I had neuer béene
borne, or that my mother had borne mee a
Tode. For then ſhould my condition haue
bin better then it is. Curſed was the time
I was begot in. The houre I was conceiued
in, and the day that I ſucked my mothers
paps. Curſed I was alwayes, curſed
I am, & curſed I ſhall be for euermore.
Woe, woe, howe greate is my tormente,
whoſe heart doeth not melte, whoſe eares
doe not glowe, whoſe haires doe not ſtānd
vppon his heade, to heare theſe thinges.

Therefore déere brethren let vs repent. If
the mercie of God cannot allure vs; let his
Iudgements ſcarre vs. If his Iudgementes
cannot ſcarre vs, let his woorde moue
vs: If his woorde cannot moue vs, let our
ſinnes amaze vs: If our ſinnes cannot amaze
vs, let the ſhortnes of our life dampe
vs: if the ſhortnes of our life cannot da
                  •••
               e
vs, let the ſmal number of thoſe that ſhal be
ſaued affray vs: if that cannot affray vs, let
death terrifie vs: if death cānot terrifie vs,
let the daie of Iudgement ſhake vs: if that
cannot ſhake vs, yet let Hell tormentes
ſhudder vs, & rente vs in yeeres. For verily
verily my brethrē, if none of al thoſe cā
preuaile, if we wil not for all this repent,
but be obſtinate, then wée ſhall all peri
                  ••
               e
and be damned, according to Chriſts wordes.
Now let vs procéede to ſpeake of thoſe
thinges, which let and 
                  •
               inder vs from Repentaunce,
whiche indéede although they
bée in number infinite, yet at this tyme I
will laie foorth ſeuen eſpeciall lettes; and
hinderances vnto Repentance.
            The firſt is vnbeliefe, that is, when men
will not beléeue thoſe things thāt are ſpoken
and proued vnto them, out of the word

of God. This is it yt vomiteth vp all good
thinges, and poyſoneth the very intrals of
a man, & kéepeth all good graces from vs.
As appeareth. Math. 13. 58. Hee did not
manye greate woorkes there for their vnbeleefes
ſake. And the 4. to the Hebrues,
it is ſaide, Vnto vs was the Goſpell preached,
as alſo vnto them, but the worde that
they hearde profited not them, becauſe
it was not mixed with fayth in thoſe that
heard it. So that here we may ſée, although
we heare neuer ſo muche, yet if wée bringe
not faith with vs, wée ſhall neuer profite
vnto Repentaunce. For vnbeliefe taketh
vp our hartes for Sathan, and refuſeth all
the wholeſome doctrine of ſaluation, and
doth ſo harden them in the waies of ſinne:
that in the ende they become paſte feeling,
and cānot be touched one whit, either with
the iudgementes or mercies of God: But
count the one as blaſts of wynd: and make
the other a couert for their filthineſſe. You
ſhall note ſome men, who when they haue
heard their ſinnes ſtraightlie ripped vp by
the woord of God, and their iuſt damnatiō
proued by the ſame, without ſpéedie, & earneſt
repentance, will breake out into theſe

words of vnbeléef. If it be as the ſaith God
helpe vs, I hope it is not ſo, I truſt I ſhall
doe well inough for all this, as longe as I
haue a good faith in God, and doe in bodie
no harme, ſhall I leaue my pleaſures, and
my profites for their ſayinges? What, doe
they thinke none ſhalbe ſaued, but ſuch as
read the Scriptures, and heare Sermons?
God forbid but thoſe which doe not goe to
heare ſermons, ſhould bée ſaued as well as
they. Why may not one ſerue God as wel
at home in his houſe, hauing good Bookes
and good Prayers, as by comming to the
Church to heare ſermons, and ſeruice? Alas
theſe men ſtand too much in their own
light, and betray what folly and ignoranc
                  •
               
is in thē. For they do thinke to be ſaued by
any other means thē God hath appointed.
Or when God hath auouched anie thinge
in his word, will they accept againſt it, &
ſo make God a liar? When God hath once
ſet down a thing, and proued it to their faces
will they yet reply? When God hath
told vs that the preaching of the worde, is
the ordinary meanes of our ſaluation, ſhal
we hope to be ſaued although we contemn
it, and neuer or verie ſeldome heare it? Is

not this plaine infidelity & vnbeliefe, that
when God ſaith one thing, we will ſay another:
when God ſaith, yea, we will ſay no
I hope not ſo. Yes ſurely, that is it, that
ſtoppeth the way vnto Gods graces, and
barreth vs out from repentance.
            The ſeconde let is the preſumption of
Gods mercie, for if men be ſharply reprooued
for their ſinnes, and exhorted vnto repentance,
by & by they take couert, ſaying.
God is mercifull, God is mercifull, as
though God were made all of mercie, and
that ther were no iuſtice in him at al: and
thus the wicked make Gods mercie an occaſion
to ſinne, which thinge the Prophete
Nahum in the firſt of his Propheſie doeth
ſharply reproue. The Lord ſaith he, is ſlow
to anger, but he is great in power, and will
not ſurely cleare the wicked. But becauſe
I haue ſpoken afore of this preſuming and
miſapplying of Gods mercie, I will héere
paſſe it ouer, willing you to note it as one
ſpecial let vnto repentance.
            The third hinderance is the example of
the multitude, for that doth harden, & imbolden
men vnto ſin. As when many birdes
flicker and flocke together, they fall vpon

the net without any feare, but one or
two alone wilbe afraid. Euen ſo the example
of manie, and many ſinne companions
do imbolden men to run through ye ſnares
of Sathā without any miſtruſt. Therefore
it is ſaid in Exod. 23. Thou ſhalte not followe
a multitude to doe euill. This is the
thinge that hindreth a great number from
God, for they neuer looke vp vnto God, or
to his worde, but ſtare vppon the common
doinges of moſt men, and examples of the
world, thinking if they do as the moſt men
doe, as their forefathers haue doone before
them, they are Cockſure and of an euē
groūd. And herevpon ariſeth their diueliſh
Prouerbe, doe as the moſte men doe, and
ye feweſt will ſpeake of you, but they haue
forgotten S. Paules rule. Rom, 12. Faſhion
not your ſelues like vnto this world. Theſe
fellows that ſtand vpon the multitude wil
reaſon thus: We ſée none of ye great ones
of the world, none of the noble, none of the
rich, none of the wiſe, and prudent receiue
this doctrine, but onely a fewe ſhackrags
& beggerly raſcals, and therefore it is a token
that it is nothing worth, and that it is
doubtfull, and not for vs to 
                  〈◊〉
                withal.

Lote what thoughts may créep in our head

                  •
               es, and how ſlily Sathan maie trumpe in
our way, & blindfold vs, and lead vs away
in ye darke, by doting vs with the example
of ye multitude: Therfore let vs take héede
of thoſe pitfalles, which Sathan layeth in
out way, & not be carried away with theſe
thoughtes and reaſons. The wicked beare
themſelues in hand that they ſhal win the
game, & that the goale goeth on their ſide,
and there is nothing but crowing long before
it bee daye, and greate triumphing emongſt
them before any ſtroke be ſtriken,
& that becauſe wée be but a handful of people,
and they a great multitude, & that in
a maner the whole world agréeth we them
to practiſe our death. Thus the diuell doth
caſt a miſt before their eies, and cloſly lead
them away from repentaunce. Therefore

                  •
               éere brethrē, let vs ſtand faſt in the word
of the Lord, and not be caried away, or bowed
quite down with this raging ſtream
of the multitude: but let vs knowe it to be
one ſpeciall engine of Sathan, whereby he
driueth vs from repentaunce.
            The fourth let vnto repentance is long
cuſtome of ſinne. For that taketh away all

ſenſe & féeling of ſinne, & making it as 
                  〈◊〉
               
were another nature vnto vs: So that we
may aſwel alter nature as ſhake it of, whē
it is once thus ſoldred vnto vs through lōg
cuſtome. Therefore it is ſaide Iere. 13. 23.
Can the blake-More chaunge his skin? or
the Leopard his ſpots? thē may ye alſo doe
good that are accuſtomed to do euil. Here
the Prophet affirmeth, that it is as hard to
cure an old diſeaſe that is bred in the bone
and to remedie a ſinne that hath béene hatched,
and brought vp with vs, as to waſhe
a black-more white, or to change the ſpots
of a Leopard, which cannot be with out deſtroying
of nature. And ſurely, trie it who
will, hee ſhall finde it as harde a matter to
leaue an old cuſtom, whether it be of ſw
                  ••
               
               ring,
of gaming, of lying, of whoring, of euill
company, or of any other ſinne, as to
waſh an Aethiopian. Therfore it is written,
Prou. 27. Though thou ſhouldeſt
bray a foole in a morter, emonge whea
                     •
                  e
brayed with a peſtell, yet will not his fooliſhnes
depart from him. So that as longe
as we are in cuſtome with ſinne, the doore
of repentance is barred vp againſt be.
            The fifth hinderance is long eſcaping of

puniſhmēt for the wicked therby are ſta
                  •
               
               
               
                  ••
               ed
in ſinne, and driuen of from repentance,
euen as an olde théefe that hath ſtollen a long time, and eſcapeth both priſon,
and gallows, is animated more boldely to
procéede in his wickedneſſe, thinking he
ſhall ſo alwayes eſcape. So many filthy &
looſe liuers go forward in their abhominations
without repentaunce, thinking that
becauſe God doth not incontinētly puniſh
them, and ſhew ſome manifeſt iudgments
& ſigne of his wrath vpon them, therefore
they ſhalbe acquited for altogether. Wheras
contrariwiſe, if God ſhould by and by
ſtrike th̄ down aſſone as they had ſinned
by thundering vpon one, and lightning vpon
another, and raining fire, & brimſtone
vpon the third it would make them afraid.
Hereupon it is ſaid in Pet. 2. 3. 4. This
firſt vnderſtand that there ſhal come in the
laſt dayes mockers, which will walke after
their luſtes, and ſay where is the promiſe
of his comming? For ſince the fathers
died al things continue alike from the beginning
of the creation. But let theſe men
well knowe, that when God hath delayed
along time, & prolonged the terme, of the

wicked, at length he will ſhew yt although
                  •
               
he waited for their repentance, yet he fo
                  ••
               
               gate not their miſdéedes, but regiſtre
                  •
               
them before him, and packed them vp 
                  〈◊〉
               
a great heape, to increaſe the terrour o
                  •
               
his wrath.
            The ſixt hinderance is the beholding 
                  〈◊〉
               
other mens endes. For when ſome me
                  •
               
that haue liued a wicked, & an vngratiou
                  •
               
life, and haue bene notorious ſinners euen
to the worldward, ſo that euery man cou
                  •
               
point at them: yet, if vpon their death 
                  〈◊〉
               
they can ſay a fewe good wordes, and crye
God mercy, and ſay their praiers, and for|
giue al the world, and ſo die quietly: It is
merueilous to heare howe the fooliſh people
of the world will exalt them, & iuſtifye
them ſaying, hee made a very good ende,
as any man could make, and died as qui
                  ••
               
as a Lambe, & ſet all things in good or
                  •••
               
before he died. Herevpon an other w
                  ••
               
               ked
& monſtrous verlet is encouraged 
                  〈◊〉
               
ſinne. For thinketh he, ſuch a man liued 
                  〈◊〉
               
looſely as I, or any man elſe, and yet 
                  〈◊〉
               
made a verie good ende, and why may not
I do ſo too? But alas theſe mens eye
                  •
               
are bleared. For to die quietly is no to 
                  〈◊〉
               
               
               
                  〈◊〉
               , to crie God mercie for faſhion, is
not to haue God mercifull, to ſay a fewe

                  •••
               yers with téeth outwarde, is not to die
in the faith of Chriſt, for many may doe all
this, and yet die miſerably.
            The laſt let is hope of long life, for while
men féede, and beſette them ſelues in this
hope, they waxe dronken in ſin, and defer
the day of Repentance. As the riche man
in the Luke. 12. dreaming of his long life
caſt off all thought of God, and of the other
life, and of Chriſtes comming, and of Repentaunce,
and all good thinges, and ſayid
within himſelfe: Soule thou haſt muche
goods laid vp for many yeres, liue at eaſe,
eate, drinke, and take thy paſtime. Thus
the bleareyed men of this world, choke vp
Repentance, & quite ſmother it, by doting
themſelues with hope of long life. Therefore
my deare brethren, I beſéech you by
the mecies of God in the bowels of Ieſus
Chriſt, that none of all theſe common lets
may ſtay you from ſpéedy, and vnfeigned
Repentance. But that you may ouerſtride
them all, leaſt vnhappily you being found
without Repentance, and taken tardie in
your ſinnes, ſhould all periſh, and be damned

according to Chriſts ſentence. Wh
                  •••
               
fore in concluſion, let vs with godly E
                  •
               
               chias
be afraide of Gods threateninges,
ſorrow aforehand, ſtand in awe of GOD
examine our conſcience, mourne for our
ſinnes, & lament inwardly, that when the
wicked which haue ſwimmed in pleaſures
here belowe, ſhall enter into their eternal
paynes, we may then, I ſay there, haue euerlaſting
peace, & reſt, that when Ieſus
Chriſt ſhall appeare from heauen with all
his holy Angels, we may haue crownes of
glory, and victory clapped on our heades,
and raigne with our God, & our ſauiour
his ſonne, and all his Sainctes and Angels,
in the middeſt of all ioy▪ in the heauens
for euermore. To the which ioy he
bring vs all, which hath ſo bearely bought
vs, Ieſus Chriſt the righteous: to whom
with the father & the holy Ghoſt, be all honour,
glory, praiſe, power, empire, and dominion,
now and for euermore. Amen.
            FINIS.
            
         
      
   