
      
         
            
            
            The true diſcription of two monſterous Chyldren Borne at Herne in Kent. The .xxvii. daie of Auguſte In the yere our of Lorde. M. CCCCC. LXV. They were booth women Chyldren and were Chryſtened, and lyued halfe a daye. The one departed afore the other almoſte an howre.
            
               
                  depiction of conjoined twins
               
            
            
               THe Monſterous and vnnaturall ſhapes of theſe Chyldren & dyuers lyke brought foorth in our dayes (good reader) ar not onelye for vs to gaſe and wonder at, as thyngs happenyng either by chaunce, or els by naturall reaſon, as both the old, and our Phyloſophers alſo holde now a dayes: and without anye farther heede to be had therto, or els as our common cuſtome is, by & by to iudge god onely offended wyth the Parentes of the ſame, for ſome notoryous, vyce or offence reygning alone in them: But they ar leſſons & ſcholynges for vs all (as the word monſter ſhewith) who dayly offende as greuouſly as they do, wherby god almyghtye of hys greate mercy and longe ſufferaunce, admonyſheth vs by them to amendmente of our lyues. no leſſe wycked, yea many times, more then the parentes of ſuche myſformed bee. That this is true they ſhal wel perceyue, yt ryghtly wey and conſider the aunſwere of oure Sauiour Chryſte vnto hys Dyſcyples, aſkyng hym whether weare greatter ſinners, the blynde hym ſelfe, either els hys parentes, that he was ſo borne: To whom our ſauyour Chryſt aunſwered, that neyther he, neyther they were faultye Iohn ix. therin, but that he was therfore borne blynde, to thend the glory of God myghte be declared on hym, and by him. The ſame alſo appereth in another aunſwere made by our ſauyour Chryſte to them, whyche tolde hym of the Galleyans, whom Pontius Pylate put to death for theyre rebellyon agaynſte Auguſtus Luke xiii. theyr Emperoure, wherein he declareth (as alſo by thoſe .xviii. perſons on whom the Towre by Sylotell) that there were as great offenders remaynynge alyue, as any of them were. Wherfore he eftſones admonyſhed them to amendment of lyfe in generall: or els by their examples threatened them with as greauous dyſtructyon, as fell vppon any of them. Theſe examples moued me (good reader) in conſideracyon of theſe dayes of our forgetfulnes of duty, wherin we ſet ſo lyght the greate bounty and goodnes of God, callyng vs by theſe and ſuch lyke examples to repentaunce and correction of manners, and not ſtyll to flatter our ſelues whyle we iudge others and winke at oure owne faultes, to cauſe theſe twynnes thus to be portractured. And ſure to hym that conſidereth as he ought to do, the great decay of harty loue and charytie (among many other wantes that the world is nowe fallen in,) and had vewed and behelde the two babes, the one as it were imbraſynge the other, and lenynge mouth to mouth, kyſſyng (as you wold ſay, one another:) it myght ſeeme that God by them eyther dooth vpbraide vs, for our faulſe dyſſemblynge and Iudas condycyons & countenaunces, in freyndly wordes, couerynge Caynes thoughtes and cogytacions, or els by theyr ſemblaunte and example, exhorte vs to ſincere amytie and true frendſhyp, voyde of all counterfeytinge, or els bothe. Neyther let any man thynke thys an obſeruacyon ouer curyous, for as much as Chriſt him ſelfe hath by chyldren taught vs, that vnleſſe we become lyke Chyldren, wee ſhall Mark x. not come in the kyngdome of heauen. God make vs all chyldren in thys wyſe, and perfect and well lerned men-to note and obſerue to what ende he ſendeth vs ſuch ſightes as theſe, that here by (put in remēbraūce the rather of our duties both to hym and our neyghbours) we may atteyne to lyfe euerlaſtyng by Chryſte our Lord. To whom with the holy Ghoſte for thys and all other hys workes, be all maieſty, powre glory and domynyon, now and euer. Amen.
         
      
      
         
            Imprinted at London in Fleteſtreat by Thomas Colwell: For Owen Rogers dwelling at S. Sepulchers Church doore.
         
      
   