
      
         
            
            
            A diuine deſcant full of conſolation, Fitting a ſoule plung'd in deſolation.
            
               NO fitter Fountaine for my ſoule to bathe her,
               Then in thoſe drops of grace from God—Our Father
               
               Nor ſweeter ſolace to her can be giuen
               Then thoughts lift vp to thee—Which art in heauen,
               
               Such heauenly comforts doe my heart inflame
               And cauſe my tongue ſing—Hallowed be thy Name.
               
               The wicked loue the world, earth is their ſomme
               But we doe long vntill—Thy kingdome come.
               
               For then though earth and earthly things be gone,
               Yet ſure we are to ſee—Thy will be done,
               
               Which we poore creatures by our ſinfull birth,
               Are all vnable to fullfill—In earth,
               
               Oh Lord lift vp our hearts, lumpiſh as leauen,
               To doe thee homage heere,—As it is in heauen.
               
               And then we will confeſſe, as well we may,
               That 'tis thy goodneſſe to—Giue vs this day
               
               The ayre to breath in, earth whereon to tread
               Cloth for our backes, nay more,—Our daily bread.
               
               Since in our bodies thou doeſt thus relieue vs,
               Fauour our ſoules (Lord) pardon—And forgiue vs
               
               Moſt hapleſſe elſe, yea, hopeleſſe were our caſes,
               If thou in Chriſt forgiue not—Our treſpaſſes,
               
               But thy Sonnes merits doe vs this hope giue,
               That thou wilt pardon vs—As wee forgiue
               
               Corrupt we are and yet thou not diſdayn'ſt vs,
               So make vs pardon—Them that treſpaſſe againſt vs.
               
               Oh that our pathes were made direct, to tread vs
               The way to life, Lord be our guide—And leade vs
               
               Into all heauenly contemplation
               And peace of mind, but—Not into temptation,
               
               Let not diſpaire, nor yet preſumption euer
               Barre vp heauen gate againſt vs,—But deliuer
               
               Yea, as our Captaine, ſhield vs from the deuill,
               So ſhalt thou keepe and ſaue—Vs from all euill.
               
               No ſtrength at all, no fortitude doth come
               But from thee all,—For thine is the kingdome,
               
               Protect thou vs therefore, each day, each houre,
               From dangers heere, for thou haſt—The power
               
               Mans life is but a blaſt, a bloome, a ſtory,
               Lord giue vs heauens ioy,—And the glory,
               
               Let neither life, nor death, nor any croſſe diſſeuer
               Vs from thy preſence, Lord,—For euer and euer.
               
               To thee, for theſe, and to no Saint, nor men,
               We come, Lord grant them. So be it.—Amen.
               
            
         
      
   