
      
         
            
            
            A Deſcription of a new kinde of Artificiall Bathes lately inuented.
            
               WHich are euery way anſwerable vnto the ancient Bathes of the Graecians, and Romans for the diuers vſes, though no way comparable to them for the exceſſiue charges▪ 
               
                  ••
               d vaine oſtentation thereof; becauſe thoſe were built like Princes Pallaces, hauing diſtinct parts or offices, but theſe take vp no more roome then is neceſſary, which is not aboue ſixe yardes in compaſſe, for the outward forme, like the body of a ſmall Coach, either round or ſquare couered all ouer with leather, veluet, or other ſtuffe, partly to keepe out the better cold ayre, and partly to keep in the hot vapours, and partly to adorne it; being framed with no great coſt, and may daily be vſed vpon halfe an houers warning without any tedious comberſomnes vnto the party bathing, or trouble to the ſeruants neare attending: which being placed in any chamber for the purpoſe cloſe by the bed ſide yeeld forthwith at pleaſure, foure kinds of ſeuerall heats, either altogether well mixed, or ſome of them apart more, or leſſe, of the one, or of the other, whereby to augment, diminiſh, or correct any one of the firſt qualities, either actiue or paſſiue, and ſo conſequently any one of the ſecond, as occaſion ſhall require by the counſell of the preſent Phiſition.
            1 Firſt, a drie ayrie heate warming the cold moiſt ayre, and preparing the body for ſweate by a cleane fire in one ſide.
            2 Secondly, a moyſt vaporous heate, by a ſweet boyling perfume.
            3 Thirdly, a drye vaporous heate, by a ſweet burning perfume.
            4 Fourthly and laſtly, but cheifely a moyſt heate by water, milke, oyle, or any other liquor ſimple or compound, which commeth at pleaſure from all parts powering downewards, flying vp wards, ſprinkling round about with many trickling ſtreames like ſtrong ſhowres of raine by a continuall circular motion, and therefore penetrating and working more powerfully vpon all parts of the body, except the head; which is onely free for the benefit of freſh ayre, ſo couertly, that neither the party bathed, nor the attendants in the chamber can either ſee, heare, or well perceiue, how, from whence, or by what direct meanes the warme water, or liquor commeth, and goeth with ſuch a manifold diſtribution, and ſpeedy conueyance:
            Beſides fiue gallons of any deere liquor will bathe any man this way, as well as ſixeſcore gallons otherwiſe, if not far better, and ſhall worke far ſooner the intended effects, by reaſon that the water thus mouing without any labour or paines to the party bathed, actuateth more ſpeedily, then when it ſtandeth dull and vnmooued about the body.
            Againe, all theſe rayning ſhowres, by the turning of a key, may bee contracted into one maine currant; either directed vpon any part of the body within the balniatory, or vpon the head without, if bucketing be needfull, or otherwiſe diuerted from all parts for the benefit of the hot vapours onely.
            Againe, ſo great a ſtreame (which is moſt profitable, and may be accounted a fift diſtinct heate) doth continually ariſe by this ſwift motion, that one gallon of the water, or more, in one houre, or leſſe will euaporate vpon the body within inſenſibly.
            All this while nature imbracing with delight theſe ſoft and pleaſant imbracements, the party bathing, if he be weake by ſicknes, may moſt eaſily without loſſe of ſtrength, yeeld to and from the fire, or ſtrong ſtreames any part moſt affected turning himſelfe by a ſmale inclination, or rather be turned by the circular motion of the turning ſtoole, on which with a Corke cuſhion, a large ſpunge, or a linnen bran-bag faſtned, hee ſitteth eaſily: if he be ſtronge, he may ſtand vpright with more pleaſure and turne himſelfe with more eaſe.
            And if towards the end a ſhort ſprinkling of water ſomewhat cold, or luke warme be needfull, as for ſome reſpects it is much auailably, it may be done this way in a moment all ouer the body without feare of catching cold.
            And laſtly, the water ceaſing his courſe, and at pleaſure ſuddainly, as it were van
                  ••
               iſing by the touch of a ſmall ſtring, as before it came by the like touch, he may ſoone, ſafely, and eaſily be rubd, and made dry with warme clothes put in vnto him, and vpon him, and ſo ſt
                  •
               ep into the warme bed adioyning.
            Such as neuer were hitherto inuented, or put in practize by any Phiſition or other whatſoeuer, if we conſider all things which ſo plentiouſly euery way concurre to the making vp of theſe bathes, that for diuers peculiar reſpects they may ſeeme to deſerue diuers peculiar names.
            1 As firſt, from the circular motion of the bathing liquor, they may be called, Balnea Circularia, circular bathes.
            2 Secondly, from the manifold ſtreames, and trickling ſhoures, Balnea Plv
                     ••
                  alia, rayning bathes.
            3 Thirdly, from the contraction of all the little ſtreames into one currant Balnea Embrocati
                     •
                  a, embrocatiue, or ſpout-bathes.
            4 Fourthly, from the triplicity of the praedominant ſteames, and hot vapours Balnea Vaporoſa, vaporous bathes.
            5 Fiftly, from the multiplicitie of heats, and variety of matter, Balnea Diacatholica, diacatholike bathes.
            6 Sixtly, from the diuers faculties, and contrary effects Balnea Catholica, catholike or vniuerſall bathes.
         
      
   