
      
         
            
            ¶The description of a monstrous Pig, the which was farrowed at Hamsted besyde London, the. xvi. day of October this present yeare of our Lord God. M.D.LXII.
            
            
            
               THis present yeare of our lord GOD, a thousand, fyue hundred, three score and two, one Robert Martin of Hamsted, in the countie of Mid. besyde London, had a Sow the which brought forth. viii. Piggs, the. xvi. day of October, where of. vii. were of right shape and fassion, but the eight was a wonderous Monster, and more monstrous then any that hath bene seene before this time, as you may se by this picture. It hath a head contrary to all other of that kynd, it hath a face without a nose or eyes, sauing a hole standing directly betwen the two eares which eares be broad and long, lyke the eares of a bloude hound, and a monstrous body, lyke vnto a thing that were 
                  •
               lean, without heare. It hath feet very monstrous, with ye endes of them turning vpwards, lyke vnto forked endes, as it is playnely set foorth here by these two pictures, the one being the backe part, and the other the fort part. This monster lyued two houres, and the rest of them lyued about halfe a day.
            ¶These straunge and monstrous thinges, almighty GOD sendeth amongest vs, that we shuld not be forgetfull of his almighty power, nor vnthankeful for his great mercies so plē
               tifully powred vpon vs, and especially for geuyng vnto vs his most holy word, whereby our lyues ought to be guyded: and also his wonderful tokens, wherby we ought to be warned. But if we will not be instructed by his worde, nor warned by his wonderfull workes: then let vs be assured that these straunge monstrous sightes do foreshew vnto vs, that his heauy indignation wyl shortly come vpon vs for our monstrous liuyng. Wherefore let vs earnestly pray vnto GOD that he wyll geue vs grace spedely to repent our wickednesses, faithfully to beleue his holy Gospel, and cencerely to frame our lyues after the doctrine of the same to whome be all prayse, honour, and glory. Amen.
         
      
      
         
            ¶Imprinted at London by ALEXANDER LACY for GARAT DEVVES, dwellyng in Poules church yarde, at the East end of the Church.
         
      
   