
      
         
            
            A direction concerning the Plague or Peſtilence, for Pooore and Rich.
            
               THe Plague which is called of the Greekes Epidemia, and in Latine Lues peſtis or peſtilentia, and I a ſtranger and a German who many times haue beene imployed in this ſicknes, as at Cullen, Oſtend, Amſterdam and many other Townes more, may with great credit beare me witneſſe of it; ſo I can ſay & write of this fearefull diſeaſe more then any other can. The cauſe is euident, that it is a puniſhment from God, whereof many examples may be ſet downe, which I leaue for breuity ſake: for it is a matter which belongs to Diuines; the other cauſe is, that the vpper parts haue infected the Aſtris with a Diſtemperature where through the Plague hath his domination into our bodies, whereof we leaue this beſides to our learned Philoſophers. Now to come to my intent which is out of loue, more then for gaine, for to take ſuch a dangerous matter vpon me in mine old age (The which God be thanked haue no great need of, but beeing firſt mooued to it, by diuers of this City, for to do ſomething in this time of ſickneſſe, I haue ſayd nothing all this while (but finding the ſicknes increaſing more and more, do determine to ſhew my beſt skill for it, thus through my experience, where I haue in former times (putting my truſt in God & with his helping hand) ſaued many a mans life. Firſt, pray to God to forgiue your ſinnes, and after vſe the naturall meanes which God hath ordained to euery ſicknes, and as well for this ſicknes, as for any other, I haue a preſeruatiue which euery body ſhall find by me. Alſo a certaine precious Pill, to keepe in your mouth, when you goe abroad or perceiue any danger.
            1. Firſt ſeuerall Antidotes for the preſeruation of mans body from the Plague with certaine directions.
            2. Secondly a certaine Elixar, or a water for them that are infected, beſides certaine orders and directions for the perfuming of their houſes, chambers & roomes; for to alter the ayre, to preſerue their houſes; beſides for thoſe houſes that are already Infected to cleanſe them, with certaine directions, waſhing them with waters wherein certaine hearbs are boyled, and after ſtroying the houſe with hearbs, fitting for this ſicknes, and perfume. Now after many and ſeuerall medicines both in Phyſicke and Chirurgery, which are neceſſary in this ſicknes, as Cordials, Iulips, cooling waters Conſerues, Oyles, Oyntments, ſmelling or ſmooking balls, as Pomanders, Quilts, with other Chirurgicall medicines for Carbonckles, Antraxs or other ſwelling as Byles, and Impoſtumes. The Profeſſor hath Poulteſſes, Balſomes, Oyles, Plaiſters & all things elſe belonging to this diſſeaſe, beſides it is neceſſary for euery one to be ſolible in his body, or to take ſome conuenient purge by directions from the Phyſitions. Likewiſe Fountenell or Iſſues, are very commendable, the which I haue made in Germanie and other places, in vehement Plagues, as a preſeruatiue againſt Infection. Such people are not apt to be Infected that haue any running ſores, as Vlſers, nor thoſe which are troubled with other maladies which run. There are certaine rules to be obſerued, as to forbeare to go in ſtinking places, & not too goe abroad till the Sun be vp, principally in moiſt and foggy weather; in the euening auoyd the ſtreets, & goe not to late abroad, which is principally hurtfull for Children, and yong people, ouerfill not your bodies with meat which is hard of diſgeſture, for it breeds ill humors. All theſe medicines euery body may haue in his owne houſe for a reaſonable price, with certaine directions in print. This I take out of ancient writers, which haue bin many times approoued; this I do through & with counſell of diuers learned Phyſitions, ſome of the Kings Maieſties, & others of my friends, although there will be ſome Calumniating night-Oules, perhaps, will ſpeake againſt my intent. Let them ſhow a better or elſe let this alone.
            Viuat Rex.

            
               The Profeſſor hereof dwelleth in Great Woodſtreete at the Signe of the Meere Mayde neere the corner of Mayden Lane.
            
         
      
   