
      
         
            
            
            CERTAIN
REASONS
OF A PRIVATE
CHRISTIAN
AGAINST CONformitie
to kneeling in
the very act of receiving
the Lords
Supper.
            
            
               By Tho: Dighton Gent.
            
            GAL. 6. 9.
            Let us not be weary of wel-doing;
for in due ſeaſon we shall reape
if we faint not.
            Anno 1618.
         
         
            
            
            TO AL PRIVATE
CHRISTIANS VNfaignedly
deſiring to ſerue the
Lord Chriſt, and preparing themſelues,
gird up the loines of their
mind, & wait for his appearing,
grace and peace be multiplied
for euer.
            BRETHREN, hearing what paines
and labour many of your reverend and
learned Paſtors (who ſometimes were otherwiſe
minded) doe lately vndertake in many
places, by their publick teaching and example,
by their priuate conference, and all other
meanes poſsible, to perſwade to conformitie; I
am bold (leſt they ſhould reioyce in your fleſh)
to preſent this my poore mite vnto your
godly conſideration, as caſting it into our
Lords Treaſurie, moſt humbly beſeeching
thoſe that are rich in grace, and haue ſiluer,
gold, and precious ſtones conferred vpon
them, to offer them freely and ſeaſonably for
the ſeruice of his Sanctuary, euen to build vp
the decayed places of the gates, barres, and
walles of the moſt holy Citty. Alwayes prouided,
that nothing be done confuſedly, or at
a very venture; vpon the warrant of no ill

meaning, or a ſuppoſed liberty, as if it had
been ſufficient to bring wood and timber,
ſtone and morter, and all other needfull prouiſion
in all abundance, of any kinde or fashion,
length, bredth, thickneſſe or temper,
even as the moſt learned and wiſe of thoſe
times thought meet, and not to haue every
thing fitted and prepared by the Lords owne
direction, ſo as there may need neither axe nor
hammer, nor any toole of Iron to be heard to
reform and amend the ſame;1. King. 6. 7. but if any thing
be not well, to put to or take from as occaſion
ſhall require: No, no, all Gods outward
worſhip,Deut. 12. 32. & 32. 47. and publicke or divine ſeruice, muſt
in every part and ceremony or geſture thereof,
bee ſo pure and free from all kinde of mixture
of any humane invention, as all things of the
very leaſt moment whatſoever, being directly
ordered according to the patterne ſhewed in the
Mount of Gods holy word, every beleeuing
heart may reioyce at the most comely order
and holy beauty of Gods own Ordinances, and
adiudge it high preſumption to tender any innovation
by farre-fetcht devices and novelties,
or ſome old Tradition, or worme-eaten Ceremony,
full of incertainty, to the direct diſabling
of the all-ſufficient truth, and offence of
tender conſciences. In all humilitie therefore
labour to be able to giue good and ſound reaſons
why you dare not conforme to the queſtioned
geſture and ceremonies, nor to any thing
elſe which is not within the compaſſe of the
moſt vn-erring patterne, the holy word of the

all-commanding God, and bee ſure to build
your refuſall ſafely upon the rocke, and not
upon the ſand; vpon the commandement of
Chriſt, and not upon your owne humours, or
any mens iudgement and practiſe, be they never
ſo learned, zealous and holy: yea, in whatſoever
you haue not Gods word for your warrant
(Thus ſaith the Lord, thus did our
Lord, or the Lord never tequired this at
our hands) therein ſubmit your ſelues lovingly
and peaceably, yea most readily to them
that are over you in the Lord. And in any
caſe nourish not that moſt pestilent humour
of that man of Sinne, a delight in oppoſition
to ſuperioritie, but in all humility, in matters
that are but meerely grounded on opinion, and
not on the Scriptures, thinke better of other
mens iudgements then your owne: for God
giues no ſaving grace but to the humble, to
the humble in deed, not to the humble in
shew. Get this vertue therefore my brethren,
for then the yooke of Chriſt,Math. 11. 29. 30. which now you
are to draw in, will be moſt eaſie and without
griefe; and his burden, part whereof you are
preſently to beare, light and full of comfort:
yea, though you be made the gazing-ſtockes
of the world, and be hated and ſcorned of all
men, as the very off-ſcouring of the earth, for
bearing witneſſe to this part of the truth, yet
shall you by humility bee inabled with much
cheerefulneſſe and ſpirituall conſolations, to
endure all things, and to ſuffer all things; yea,
conſider I pray you, that the very true and

moſt direct way to reigne with Chriſt hereafter,
is of neceſsitie to ſuffer for him in this
evill world; and to ſuffer for any part of the
truth in Gods worship, is to ſuffer for
Chriſt. Beleeue it therefore as verily as you
doe any other thing, that God hath purpoſely
predeſtinated you to theſe particular trials,
euen in every circumſtance and inſtrument
thereof. Seeing then you muſt drink of this
Cup, pray heartily that his name may be glorified,
and then what matters it though wee
be deſpiſed, diſgraced, ſcorned and derided, ſo
long as our Lord and maſter may haue honour
thereby? Will not every true hearted
ſubiect ſuffer and endure any paines, trauell,
or loſſe of goods and life for his King and
Soueraignes ſake, yea and that moſt cheerefully
with a manly and valiant courage? And
shall not we much more doe the like for the
King of Kings, who hath done and ſuffered
a hundred thouſand of millions more for vs?
he loſt not an eye, a hand, or a foot for vs,
but was content to giue his whole body and
ſoule alſo, yea he ſpared not his whole perſon
for vs, and that alſo when we were his enemies;Rom. 8. 5. 10.
he ſuffered diſgrace, not onely before
the Princes, but all manner of contempt by
the vileſt, and of torment by the cruelleſt,
yea and the moſt grievous paines that the
fierce wrath of God in all extremity of his
iuſtice, could poſsibly inflict upon his ſoule
and body. Doe you think he hath forgotten
theſe things? No my deere brethren, in that

hee ſuffered and was tempted,, he is able to
ſuccour them that are tempted; yea aſſure
your ſelues he puts euery one of your teares
into his own bottle, obſerues every hidden device
and cloſe practiſe of your adverſaries,
keepes a Regiſter (not to be corrupted) of every
word, preſentment, information or certificate,
that is made, ſigned, put up, exhibited
or uttered againſt you, and ſets downe alſo
every diſgrace and contempt that is caſt vpon
you, and keeps a iuſt reckoning of every penny
for fees that is exhauſted from you for
exactions, excommunications, abſolutions,
and of whatſoeuer other open or under-hand
proceedings practiſed againſt you, and will
aſſuredly call to iudgement both you and
all your aduerſaries, and backe or hollow
friends, euery one to giue a particular and
moſt ſtrict account of all theſe things, and
to them that haue done well herein, hee will
giue everlaſting life and glory; but they that
haue done ill and unconſcionably, rather ſerving
the time then the Lord, shall certainly
goe into eternall fire.1. Pet. 1. 13 Gird vp therefore the
loynes of your minde, and feare not them
that haue onely power to impriſon your bodies,
and take away your goods or liues, let
neither their perſwaſions nor threatnings
cauſe you to conforme to errour (of which
nature is every thing not warranted by the
word of truth) but feare him, who when hee
hath done as much as they poſsibly can, is
able alſo to caſt body and ſoule into hell fire,

Chriſt ſaith vnto vs all,Luk. 12. 4. 5. 
               Him feare, even feare
to do any thing in his worship & ſeruice, but
what you haue good warant for, under his
hand and ſeale in the ſacred Scriptures that he
will not be offended at it, but acceptably receiue
it at your hands, and ſo bleſſe the uſe
thereof unto your ſoules. For elſe (at the very
best that can bee ſayd for it) is not this
directly to tempt the Lord, and to dare him
to his face, when in his publick worship wee
dare doe ſome things of ſpeciall note, which
hee moſt carefully obſerues, and that before
his face and most aſſured preſence, yet onely
upon the Canons or perſwaſions of ſinfull
men not conſulting with the word whether
God will be pleaſed or offended therewith or
no?Deut. 18. 19. 20. There is difference (I confeſſe) betwixt
that which the Lord hath expreſly forbidden,
and that which he hath not directly nor by
any good conſequent commanded, but yet it is
onely ſecundum magis & minus, to conform
to the latter is to do wickedly, but to ſubſcribe
to the other, is to become abhominable.
Therefore in ſuch caſes of extremity, the
chuſing of the leſſe ſinne may very well argue
a most wiſe and carnall diſcretion, but not any
honest heart or ſincere affection. You know
brethren, that in the begining the Lord put
an everlasting enmitie betwixt the ſeed of the
Woman and the ſeed of the Serpent, diſtinguished
afterwards into the Citty or Kingdom
of God, where himſelfe is pleaſed to
dwell as ſupreame Lord and King peramount,

ruling & governing his people eſpecially in his
owne ſervice) by his owne Spirit according to
his owne Lawes in his owne Word; and into
the Synagogue of Sathan, where he alſo
ſits upon a Royall throne (indeed not in his
owne likeneſſe, but moſt exactly trickt vp
and transformed into the ſimilitude of an
Angel of light) teaching by his ſeruants many
things, commendable by the light of nature,
yea and commanding with great authority
(of all poſsible learning, reaſon, diſcretion,
wiſedome and Philoſophicall vnderſtanding,
garnished with the pretious ornaments of
moſt admirable Oratory) many diuine and
excellent truths of the word, but enterlacing
ever and anon ſome doctrines of darkneſſe,
yet very covertly, alwayes in outward shew for
holy ends and godly purpoſes, and never vndertaken
but upon moſt graue and good advice,
yea very learned, ſound, and divine deliberation,
renouncing the Divell (forſooth)
moſt directly and profeſſedly, out upon him
naughty meat, what did ever any body meane
to beſtow the ſealding and plucking of him,
the very ſavour or ſent of him is death irrecoverable;
but retaining the broth wherein he
was ſodden, or the principall brewiſſe, or ſome
ſpeciall part thereof, oh it is very good and
most wholeſome diet indeed, (the holy father
his benedicite light upon them that ſaved
it, for elſe all the fat had been in the fire)
yea I tell you this with good houshold bread
is even Angels food, (full glad would they

be the proudeſt of them to lick their lips after
the leavings of it) though indeed every
common underſtanding cannot diue into the
deepe mystery thereof: Separating from and
quite banishing for euer and a day, the groſſer
doctrines of Popery, the reall preſence,
praying to the Saints departed, the ſupremacy
of the Apoſtolike Sea, and ſuch like, fie for
shame, that any body should ſo much as once
name them, ſeeing without all question they
are most damnable, and came verily from
hell; but yet retaining diuers gestures and
ceremonies thereto appropriated, and thereby
first begotten, oh here be many rare bits and
ſweet morſels, euen admirable and most excellent
uſes of, ſuch as the Holy Ghoſt could
never for his life foreſee or thinke of, and
therefore indeed it never came into the minde
of the Lord to require them, euen becauſe he
did not prouidently enough conſider what decency
and comelineſſe, what vnity and much
other vndiſcerned goodneſſe their generall
conformity would inſtantly produce. For
ſeeing the Diuels to deceiue the world with
greater eaſe, and to be more free from ſuſpition,
will put upon them the likeneſſe of Gods
holy Angels, why should not theſe againe to
bee revenged on their enemies, transforme
themſelues into the likeneſſe of Diuels,
by conforming to ſome of their ceremonies,
that ſo more powerfully they might draw the
ſeruants of Sathan vnto God? What if the
damned crue were guld a little, and ſome

other fooles made faine a while, yet were not
this an admirable peece of ſeruice, and do they
not deſerue all the packe of them to be hangd
up, yea by the very heeles, that will not ſubſcribe
to the lawfulneſſe hereof? All which
premiſſes being moſt grauely pondered, and
carefully conſidered, certaine nice and nimble
wits, of a very deepe diuing reach, and most
high ſoaring humour, are lately riſen vp, and
now growen full ripe, who haue vndertaken,
not to diſpatch all the labours of Hercules in
one houre, nor by their ſweet melody to make
the wilde beasts, the ſea hideous monſters,
the fell fowles of heaven, and all the huge
mountaines of the earth in one inſtant to bee
ſilent, and at a trice to conforme to their
meaſures of most indifferent mildneſſe; but
with great facilitie (though it be a very
ſtrange wonder I tell you, yet do not thinke
it incredible) to reconcile euen theſe two ſo
contrary ſeeds, and by divine appointment directly
oppoſite Citties, (O what a bleſsing
are theſe peace-makers worthy to haue?) for
the ſpeedier and more ſafe accomplishment
whereof, they haue moſt wiſely provided and
diſcouered to all our horizon; the full perfection
of their ſo learned ſufficiency, for they
haue most ſtrongly builded and highly erected
(euen in the very aire) a very great, yea without
all question the goodlieſt castle that euer
mortall eye beheld, called Saint Neuter-hall,
or as the baſe vulgar ſpeak. Newt-hall, which
is furnished with all ſtore of every kinde of

warlicke munition either for offence or defence,
ſo that by the place it is inacceſſable,
and by the power of it utterly impregnable,
(all their aduerſaries may caſt their caps at
it) the conſtituted Regent hereof is a moſt
ſage and honourable graue perſon, Lorded out
of their owne loynes, one Grando, Magnifico,
Cavileiro, Segnioro Indifferento,
whoſe colours vnder the conduct of two great
commanders they haue made full (not a man
miſsing I warrant you) with moſt able followers
of an invincible temper, and indefatigable
conſtitution, neither hot nor cold, neither
fleſh nor ſpirit, but indifferently diſpoſed
(I do not ſay for God or the Divell, but)
as times and occaſions do beſt ſerue for their
purpoſes. Now this is the man, and theſe
bee his forces and arguments my brethren,
that make ſtrongeſt head againſt you: hee
perhaps will faigne hypocritically, that hee is
at vtter defiance with all the ſeed of the Serpent,
and would not for a world be a meanes
to perſwade you to conforme to any of his
damnable devices, no not in the leaſt circumſtance
whatſoever, becauſe they all come from
one root, and flow from the ſame fountaine;
and to make this good, he will not ſticke by
Drum and Trumpet to proclaime open and
inteſtine warres againſt all their damnable
courſes and diſſembling proceedings; yea, to
giue you full ſatisfaction, hee will take his
corporall oath that his iudgement is directly
contrary to them, though for ſome ſpeciall

conſiderations him thereunto moving, his
practiſe in outward shew carries ſome image
or reſemblance of them: yea and at the very
worſt he proteſts to take neither part, but being
of a moſt quiet and peaceable diſpoſition,
too too unwilling to diſturbe the reſt and
eaſe of the Church in which he was bred and
liues, but rather to bee conformable to the
times, he pretends onely to ſtand indifferently
minded, and equally diſpoſed till matters be
ſetled, and in the meane ſeaſon looke which
way the moſt take,1. King. 
                     ••
                  . 6. 8. he will encline, preſuming
they are abſolutely in the right; yet
truſt him not my brethren, for he that is not
with Chriſt, will eaſily be hired by this great
mans two gallant commanders knight marshall
Feare, and Lord generall Favour (men
of exceeding proweſſe, and great experience)
to take Armes againſt Chriſt; yea all that are
not profeſſed and publick friends to the Citty
of God, wil be content (under pretence of preſerving
the Churches peace) at their requeſt
ſecretly to labour, and underhand cloſely, yea
moſt ſtrongly to practiſe for Sathans Synagogue,
and when time and opportunity
ſerues to shew forth yea openly to profeſſe
their diſſembled malice. In the meane ſeaſon
learned ſubtilty, and great shewes of peaceable
honeſty, do but quite cover over groſſe
deformity, and moſt cleanly conceale vile
and abhominable hypocriſie. Stand faſt therefore
and quit your ſelues like men,Eph. 6. 10. take unto
you the whole armour of God, but in any caſe

beware of the weapons of the Synagogue,1 Cor. 2. 1. 4. 6. 
               Excellency
of words, entiſing ſpeeches of mans
wiſedome, and the wiſedome of this world,
which will, ſeeme moſt learnedly and fully to
giue any man ſufficient ſatisfaction, if he tie
not himſelfe preciſely to the word of God:
for they haue in them as intiſing allurements
hereunto, as any beautifull harlot in the
world. Looke you therefore unto Ieſus
Chriſt our Lord, who is the authour and finisher
of our faith, and of all the meanes
ſubſtantiall or ceremoniall thereof, or any
way circumstantially conducent thereunto,
and is gone up on high, and given gifts unto
men, according to his word, even whatſoeuer
in calling, in doctrine, in ceremony, or in
gesture is to be conformed unto: he is gone
I ſay to prepare a kingdom and an eternall
weight of glory to beſtow upon every one of
his Cittizes, who haue fought the good fight
of faith, ſuch honour shall all his Saints haue
in the very preſence and ſight of all your Synagoguish
aduerſaries that now ſo moleſt and
trouble you, who ſtanding neither on the
right hand nor on the left, but aloofe off in
their ayrie Castle, even indifferently diſpoſed
betwixt both, shall finde to their coſt, that
whoſoever is not in the right is verily in the
wrong (be it doctrine or geſture) and not being
of the Citty of God, is certainly for the
Synagogue of Sathan (be it for calling or
ceremony) and he that is not directly for the
truth ſo farre as he ſees, is (at the very beſt)

indifferently for errour and falſehood: yea
and therefore whatſoever they pretend, all
that loue not the Sheepe of Chriſt, but woorry
his Lambs, and perſecute his ſeruants, shall
haue their full portion with the filthy goats.
And as for my Lord Indifferent, who will
not looſe his preſent wages of unrighteouſneſſe
for the moſt aſſured hope of future
glory, vnleſſe his honour very nimbly beſtirre
himſelfe, and retire quickely into the old, or
ſome new erected Purgatory; ten thouſand to
one, his portion will be fearfull in the euerflaming
furnace, though now for the preſent
he triumphes and makes a moſt glorious florish.
Looke therefore my brethren to the
laſt end of theſe things, and then shall you
never doe amiſſe. Now the God of peace,
who will shortly ſend our Lord Ieſus to make
triall of every mans worke, preſerue and keepe
you, and make you wiſe according unto godlineſſe,
that you may diſcerne things that differ,
and ſo be of one minde and of one practiſe,
and ſo may haue peace, not with the
world, for all that will liue godly, and conforme
onely to him, muſt haue tribulation
therein; but with God, and amongst your
ſelues having your conſciences pure within,
and liues outwardly unſpotted in the world,
for nothing is availeable but a new creature,
godlineſſe is the morter whereby the houſe of
God is builded: all the gifts of Art and nature
without this, do pull downe and not ſet
vp; yea, though they haue both zeale and

knowledge. I beſeech you therefore let this be
well tempered before any ſtone be layd, and
then may we ſafely fall to building, yea then
shall the worke proſper in our hands, let Tobiah,
Shamballet, and all the diſſembling enemies
of the truth doe what they can. Therefore
my brethren, whatſoever in the worship
of God, helpes not by his owne appoyntment
unto holineſſe, cannot poſſibly be of Chriſt.
For is it not the fruit of the Spirit? (if it be
conformed unto) then muſt it needs be a
fruit of the flesh, and therefore luſteth
(though perhaps cloſely and ſecretly, yet moſt
naturally and conſtantly) againſt the ſpirit,
               Gal. 5. 17.
for theſe two ever were, are, and will be contrary
one to the other: yea all the Lord Indifferents
in the world with all their learned
trickes, and artificiall devices, can never reconcile
them. Keepe that therefore which by
the faithfull miniſtery of our godly and zealous
paſtours hath been committed to you,
take heed of curious, vaine, and unmortified
ſpirits, nimbleneſſe of wit is no helpe to ſanctification
of the ſpirit. Seeing then you
know the truth of the things in queſtion, beware
leſt yee alſo be 
                  •
               lucked away with the
bewitching errours of them that are carnally
minded, and ſo by little & little, conforming
firſt to this, then to that, at length by degrees
you fall from your former ſtedfaſtnes, rather
ſtriue to grow in grace, and in the knowledge
of our Lord Ieſus Chriſt, by cleaving more
and more to Gods owne ordinances, and hating

more and more all humane Inventions
as moſt vaine devices and falſe wayes.
               Pſal. 129. 128. Conforme
therefore to nothing in Gods publicke
worship, but what is revealed in the word,
which if you deſire to know,Math. 7. 7. 
               ſeeke and you
ſhall finde, knocke and it ſhall be opened
unto you, for to him that hath and uſeth it
well,Mat. 25. 29. & 13. 12. more shall be given, yea he ſhall haue
abundance. Decline not therefore, hide not
your knowledge, or any other Talent upon any
cauſe or conſideration, ſeeme it never ſo reaſonable,
but abſtaine from all things wherein
there is any appearance or likeneſſe of evill;
ye
                  〈…〉
               forme to nothing, be it geſture, action,
or ceremony in Gods publicke worship, (if it
be not the commandement of Chriſt) which
hath any reſemblance of Idolatry in it, though
the Idolatry it ſelfe be ſent packing, for verily
ſuch inventions haue in them (though purified
never ſo often) an Idolatheous diſpoſition.
Haue you no fellowship therefore with
them: and ſo I pray that the peace of God
may be with you all that are in Chriſt Ieſus.
Now unto him that is able to keepe you that
you fall not in theſe times of triall, and to
preſent you faultleſſe before the preſence of
of his glory, with ioyes unſpeakeable and
glorious, even to God onely wiſe, bee
glory and maieſty, dominion,
and power both now and
for evermore,
Amen.
            
               T. D.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
            CERTAIN REASONS
OF APRIƲATE
Chriſtian against Conformitie
to keeling in the very act of
Receiving the Lords
Supper.
            
               THE Eternall ſonne of God
our bleſſed Lord ſpake alwaies
to his church euen
from the beginning and
directed all his ſeruants
for their manner of worſhip
as well outward as
inward, even to the fathers before the
flood, to the Patriarks, Prophetts and
holy men of God after, and this he did in
diuers and ſundry manners, but now
ſince his comming in the fleſh he hath tyed
all Churches and all perſons that deſire
to haue eternall life to the ſole direction of
his word,Ioh. 5. 39. which is his owne and onely
perſonall voyce and doth teſtifie of him
whatſoever is profitable for the Church to
conforme vnto,2 Tim. 3. 16 either for doctrine or

gouernment, or for whatſoeuer elſe
that is any way or in any degree helpfull
vnto godlineſſe, for this and this
onely is the immortall ſeede or the ſeede of
immortalitie,1. Pet. 1. 23. all other doctrins for any
Religious vſes raiſed els where, are meerly
mortall, or ſeeds of death and therefore
vtterly vncapable of any good vſe in the
publicke worſhip of God. Seing then we
muſt wholy and onely depend vpon the
ſcriptures for direction in all the actions
of Gods publick worſhip, which are to
be conformed unto, let us in theſe controverſies
about kneeling in the very act of
receaving the Lords ſupper, & whatſoever
elſe is in queſtion being of Religious uſe,
diligently give heed,
               Heb. 2. 1. to the things wee haue
heard and learned therein, being truely or
evidently grounded thereon, and by no
means approove in any degree of any
thing elſe, for that will make us one time
or other, in one thing or other to run out
and fall from our firſt love yea doe what
poſſibly we can to decline & ſcatter.Reu. 2. 4. Harken
therefore to that which the Lord Ieſus
himſelfe did purpoſely ſpeake in this
his own voice concerning this very point.
I thanke thee ô father Lord of heauen and
earth becauſe thou haſt hid theſe things from
the wiſe & haſt opened or (as Luk renders it)
revealed them to babes,
               Mat. 11. 25 
               euen ſo father becauſe
it ſo pleaſed thee.
               Luk. 19. 21 VVhence he gives all his

                  •
               ervants plainly to underſtand, that all the

wit, learning, diſcretion, experience, and
Iudgement in the whole world is not poſſibly
able to find out the myſteries of Religion,
or to determine with what ceremonies,
actions, & geſtures Gods publick
worſhip & ſervice is to be performed, no
though they be Rabbies & Doctors or the
moſt abſolute teachers in Iſrael, but that
this is a ſpeciall & peculiar priviledge or
grace treaſured up in the word and reſerved
purpoſely for ſuch perſons as will dig
and ſearch for it and rather deſire and labor
to have dominion over all their known
corruptions and ſo to bee glorious within
then to exerciſe any outward glorious &
pompous domination in the world,Pſa. 45. 23. for
thoſe that reſt them ſelves and depend on
Gods holy & own ordinances,Luk. 24. 45 ſhall have
their hearts or underſtanding thereby opened
or inlightned & ſo made able to know
the hope of their calling,
               Act. 16. 14. 
               the riches of the
glorious inheritance of the ſaints & the exceeding
greatnes of Gods power towards al which
beleeue,
               Eph. 1. 18. 19. but thoſe that depend upon the
wiſdom and learning of men can not poſſibly
attain hereunto; becauſe Gods own
ordinances, (though they do enjoy them,
yet) are not eſteemed of them further then
the excellēcy of the outward gifts therin
give cōtent to their ſenſes;Ezek. 33. 32 for though they
heare yet they will not do or obey, & all ſuch
bee they never ſo wiſe and learned are in
the flesh and therefore,Rom. 8. 8. cannot poſſibly

               pleaſe God,
               1. Cor. 2. 15 but thoſe in whom the Spirit of
God doth dwell ſhal be enlightned and made
able to diſcerne all things, which the other,
though of never ſo great learning, & moſt
admirable parts having even the very
ſpirit of the world,
               verſ. 12. 13 in them, can not do, becauſe
they have but mans wiſdom, & that
perceiveth not the things of God,
               14 
               nay they
are foolishnes unto him, here, therefore for
diſtinction ſake and that every one might
iudge his own heart whether he be of that
number to whom God hath revealed theſe
things or no, our Saviour cals them Babes,
not in ſanctification of life and power of
Gods ſpirit, but in their ſence & feeling
being privy to their manifold weakneſſes
& ignorances, & therfore in all humblenes
of mind and meeknes of ſpirit they renounce
their owne wiſedom, and ſubmit
themſelves to the word of God; as alſo
being in the accompt & eſteeme of the
world, when they are compared with
thoſe that be contrary minded, no better
then very Babes, even baſe & contemptible
perſons not worthy ſo much as to carry
their books after them, & yet theſe are the
people and thus muſt they find themſelves
quallified, men, women or children, whom
Chriſt hath choſen to Reveale his holy and
divine myſteries unto. So that howſoever
learning and wiſdom are highly to bee reverenced
as being very excellent gifts of
God ordeyned for ſpecial helps in the miniſterie

of the Church both for the finding
out of the truth, & alſo for the deviding
of it aright (therefore they that deſpiſe
them cannot bee of God,1 King. 22. 6. 10. 11. 12. yet many times
men of Belial doe enjoy them, even falſe
Prophets & profane preachers who are
many of them of moſt excellent parts,Mat. 7. 22. ſo
that from this place,Note. it is moſt evident,
that very often and not unuſually, learned
and wiſe, grave and underſtanding men,
yea famous and of principall note, even
Chiefe Rulers and principall pillars in the
Churches of Chriſt, having as much in
them for all manner of learning in humanity,
in divinitie, and in whatſoever as nature
and induſtrie can poſſibly attaine unto
are (notwithſtanding all this & more then
this, if more can be) teachers, defenders
maintainers of many groſſe and horrible
errors yea viſe and damnable hereſies,
which yet Babes do ſeparate and fly from,
if any be pleaſed to reſtraine theſe words
of Chriſt to the doctrines of faith and Iuſtificatiō
(though every branch haue intreſt
in the priviledges of the tree) I wil not contend
about it, but onely preſuming on their
patience be bould to conclude that if ſuch
worthy and reverent men euen maſters in
in Iſrael may not ſimply bee relied on,
or truſted unto, in thoſe great things of
the Law. VVherein they are moſt exerciſed
and take greateſt paines, much
more probable it is that they may

erre in matters of ceremony which they
count triviall, and therefore do not halfe
ſo carefullie look into, ſo that undeniably
it follows, that it is no ſufficient argumēt
to bind the conſciences of Chriſtians to
conform to this or that geſture in Gods
worſhip becauſe many grave and learned
divines doe hold it indifferent and
lawful, yea (as the cauſe ſtandeth) moſt fit
and convenient: ſeing as wiſe, reverend,
and learned as they are, have donne as
much for moſt horrible errors, as the
doctrine of Purgatory, Freewill, merit; yea
& that moſt damnable hereſie of depriving
of Princes. Neither is it any diſparagement
to the trueth, becauſe thoſe that
profeſſe it, and will not betray it, to conforme
to error (even mens meere devices)
are but Bibes, ſome of them miniſters and
perhaps preachers, but of no Reputation
or account in the world) ſeing theſe, yea
theſe onely do ſee and beleeve the trueth
when it is hid from the wiſe and men of underſtanding.
Vnleſſe therefore thoſe Reverent
and learned perſons (the patrons of
conformity) doe make it apparant, that
they ground their perſwaſions & practiſe
not barely (though in ſeeming moſt
ſtrongly upon wit and reaſon, antiquity
wiſdom or learning, but ſoundly and evidently
upon the word of God, there is
no force to move or bind the conſcience
in all their arguments or reaſons whatſoever,

yea much rather and more ſafely
they are at the very beſt) to be but eſteemed
of that number from whom the
Lord hath as yet hidden theſe things.
            In this caſe therefore, that moſt excellent
and primcely ſaying of his majeſtie
concerning his lawes may verie fitlie
in my vnderſtanding be vſed,His Maieſties ſpeech in the ſtar-chamber, Pag. 17. 
               that ſpeciall
care is to be had to purge them from two corruptions
Incerteintie and Noueltie. For if our
church gouernment or lawes eccleſiaſtical
were freed from theſe, that we might be
certaine which are the true callings and
which be the true ceremonies, then let all
peruerſe, and froward ſpirites, that upon
meere peeviſhnes or other refractarie humor
will not conforme and ſubſcribe, be
irreuocably adiudged vtterly vnworthie
the gratious protection of ſo ſingular a
ſouerainty. But ſurely if in his moſt princely
care to ſettle his ſubiects eſtates, and to
prevent the miſeries of endles & impoueriſhing
ſuits, he truly foreſees the abſolute
neceſſitie of reforming theſe two corruptions
in the Ciuill government; Lett our
lamentation finde fauour in his eares who
are daily ſubiect to be moſt violencly traduced,
ſcornfully intreated and verie greevouſly
fined, even in the triple valew of
our whole perſonall eſtates, yea and to be
perpetually impriſoned without baile or
main priſe, onely becauſe wee dare not in
Gods publicke worſhip conforme vnto
mens Inventions, nor bowe downe vnto

theſe devowring Cankers that do ſecretly
conſume the ſpeciall and moſt principall
miniſteriall members of the Churches of
Chriſt,2 Tim. 2. 17 yea and haue hitherto fed vpon
and are much ſtrengthned or confirmed,
by euerie remedie which hath beene applied
for their cure or remouall, for if religion,
or the outward parte thereof conſiſting
in Religious rites be ſubiect to theſe
two Corruptions: Alas how can poore
Chriſtians with any comfort or aſſurance
of faith, order their outward ſerving of
God ſeing they haue no certeine rule for
their actions, geſtures, & Ceremonies therein
and appropriated thereunto, but muſt
either forſake the felowſhippe of the
Churches, or conforme to the orders, canons
and directions which the Eccleſiaſticall
gouernors in euerie age ſucceſſiuely
ſhall in their wiſedome and diſcretion
thinke to be moſt fit for the times, and
meet or conuenient for the occaſions. Are
not the outward actions and ceremonies
ordained by the Lord him ſelfe for his
publicke worſhip, moſt certaine ſeales,
and aſſured evidences of his verie true
and eſſentiall preſence hath our holy faith
any other help from the ſences but by this
means: and do not all they that hinder the
magiſtrate from eſtabliſhing them, ſay
unto God departe from vs wee will none of
theſe thy waies? and from the contrarie,
are not the Inventions or traditions of

men eſtabliſhed in Gods outward worſhip
infallible evidences, and vnerring
teſtimonies of the real preſence of Sathan
and do not they then that hinder the
magiſtrate from caſting them out fall
down and worſhip him.
            The Reverent Biſhops in King Edwards
dayes, and all the firſt times of the moſt
famous and bleſſed Qu. Eliz. of holy and
verlaſting memory held it neceſſarie that
the Ancient and primitive diſcipline
ſhould bee reſtored and therefore theſe
controverted ceremonies to be onely for
a time retained, as by the publick decree
of the whole ſtate more at large doth appeare
(which bleſſed be God,Preface to the booke of com. prayer. is moſt religiouſly
by our dread and ſoveraine Lord
ſtill retained and kept in force.) Now
the moſt learned & grave Biſhops of this
age profeſſe, that the King and ſtate ſhall
commit a greevous ſin againſt the Lord
if they do remooue any one of theſe
things in queſtion whatſoever, and their
Reaſon is undeniable, if they can make it
good, viz. becauſe they are every one of
them ordeyned by God, for ſo much directly
doth their Iure divino and no Ceremony
no Bishop being put together neceſſarily
imply.
            Now let our adverſaries ſearch all the
the reporrs of the Common lawes, and
ſee if it bee poſſible to find any one caſe
ſo full of contradiction and manifeſt Incertainty
               
for ſuppoſe the next ſucceſſion of
theſe ſeas (a thing I tell your greatly to
be feared) ſhall think it fit upon certaine
good cauſes and conſiderations, to bring
in Images into our churches, preſſing only
the old pretence ornamenti gratia, and
the croſſe into the Lords ſupper for Reverence,
ſpittle and ſalte into Baptiſme only
for ſignificancy and myſterie, where
ſhal Incertainty have an end, unleſſe of abſolute
neceſſity an unerring power be eſtabliſhed,
for whoſe ſafe foundation they
have in theſe things moſt wiſely provided;
for can any doubtful matter poſsibly bee
of Faith, & may any thing of religious uſe
which is not of faith be conformed vnto
in the worſhip of God? and can any thing
of this nature have certainty for the lawfulnes
of it, unleſſe it bee evidently warranted
by the word of God? I conclude
therefore that to conforme to any thing
of religious uſe, which is not commanded
in the word of God, or (which is all one)
truely grounded thereon and ſo warranted
thereby, is to conforme to meere
Incertainty & Novelty,
               Ioh. 4. 22. even to I know not
what, which at the very beſt muſt needs be
an ignorant worſhip a geſture at Random
and a ceremony at all a very venture;Mat. 12. 36
            
            And if it be ſin to vſe Idle words in our
ordinary talke,Eph. 5. 11. and if thoſe civill workes
of our callings (be they geſtures or other
actions) if they be vnfruitfull, not ſauouring

of the ſpirit of Chriſt, are to be
eſteemed,Eph. 5. 11. even the leaſt of them in their
degree, meere workes of Darknes; muſt it
not needs followe even by infinite degrees
that much more, it is horrible
iniquite to conform to or vſe idle words
or geſtures not comely in the moſt ſpecial
preſence of our moſt holy God,Eccleſ. 5. 1. even
when wee are at his owne holy table;
and is not euerie thing Rash, haſtie,
Idle & uncomely which is not warranted
by the word of God?Pſa. 101. 1 muſt not the heart be
prepared before the body or any part
thereof can bring forth any word action
or geſture which is good,Mat. 12. 35 and can the
heart poſſibly bee prepared any way but
by conforming to the ſpirit of God according
to the ſcriptures? yea is not every
other conformitie parcell of that Evill
treaſure? Incertainty therefore and Novelty
are very evill yea moſt deadly corruptions
and being thus iuſtified in the publick
worſhip of God, will corrupt and eate
into all the civill procedings of the ſtate
whatſoever.His Maieſties ſpeech. pag. 18. If then it bee ſubiect to his
non fuit ſic ab initio, though it be of never
ſo great antiquity, yea therin may be coryval
with the real preſence and though the
ordeyners thereof and pleaders for it had
all the wit and learning of whole univerſities
and the moſt abſolute wiſdom of a
nationall Synode,Math. 5. 32. 48. & 1
                     •
                  . 
                     •
                  
                yet hee that could not
erre hath adjudged it to bee a meare Novilty,
was it not ſo from the beginning

of the ſacrament, did this geſture or theſe
ceremonies, creepe into the worſhip of
God, after the Apoſtolicall times mentioned
in the ſcripture? then with out
all queſtion though all the learned men
in the whole world, hold it and them
lawfull, yet it is a Novelty and they meere
and idle Incerteinties, for nullum tempus
occurrit Regi, wherefore as our ſaid ſoveraine
Lord and moſt learned King ſayd to
the grave and learned Iudges of the land,
Remember you are no makers of law,
               Pag. 19. 
               but interpreters
of the Law, according to the true
ſence thereof; even ſo I beſeech al godly paſtors
and learned divines (if they ſincerely
deſire to build up the houſe of God and
not to breake down the carved work thereof
with axes and hammers) bee pleaſed to
remember that they are not to make
rules or lawes, cannons or conſtitutions in
the Churches of Chriſt to bind the Conſciences
of Chriſtians withall, but onely
to interprete and divide the word of God
aright, being the onely Cannon and ſole
rule of the Conſcience, and that not after
this fathers or that Counſels opinion or
Iudgement, or the practiſe of later or
more ancient Churches, but according
to the true ſence of the ſpirit, alwayes and
onely evident in the ſcriptures.Pag. 7. And is it
the Kings office to protect and ſettle the
true interpretation of the law of God within
his Dominions? (oh bleſſed and for ever

bleſſed ſhall ſuch bee) then queſtionles
will our Lord and maſter, the great King
of heaven and earth protect all thoſe that
ſtand for the true interpretation thereof
and are readie to conforme to any thing
that is evidently grounded thereon, and
refuſe not conformity unto anithing but
what is not warranted thereby. Therefore
brethren all that ſeeke the Lord with
upright and honeſt hearts, let them in
theſe caſes of Controverſie not Runne into
this or that Corner or country after an
old Rabbie or a new Doctor but goe directly
and plainly to the Law and to the teſtimonie,
               Eſay 8. 20.
for, reſolution truely given
by the word of God doth onely bind
the conſciences of men: And all Fathers,
or Counſels, Doctors, or Canons, how
Ancient and univerſall ſoever, which
Command or perſwade to Conforme
to any thing in Gods worſhip of Religious
uſe, and do not ſpeake according to
this word, it is moſt certain they have no
light in them.
               Obiect.
            
            But here my Lord indifferents light horſmen
offer a light skirmiſh, and ſay that
theſe things not being forbidden in the
word, Chriſtians have liberty to uſe or not
to uſe as they think good, or as the magiſtrate
is pleaſed to command.Anſw.
            
            No ſaith the holy Ghoſt, whoſoever
ſpeaks not according to the word, that is
according to the doctrine of the word, or

practiſe of the Church mentioned in and
approved by the word there is verily nothing
but darknes in them, for Chriſt is
that light even the whole and onely light
of the whole univerſall Church,Ioh. 8. 12. and is
not the light of his word in theſe things
which are ſo preſſed and urged? then
whoſoever followes or conforms unto
them walks in darknes, even as thoſe that
conforme to any thing truely grounded
on the word, follow Chriſt and ſo do not
walk in darknes. Is not his light of the
word then, but the darknes of mans wiſdom
and humane learning onely, in theſe
things? then verily is the Prince of darknes
ſtrongly and moſt firmely for them,
oh how fearefull (if he prevail which the
Lord of light forbid) muſt needs that
darknes be, and who dare conforme therunto;
will the pretence of not being forbidden
ſhift off theſe things? If therefore
your paſtors cannot make it appeare, that
the things which they perſwade you to
conform unto are according to the word
of God, you are bound in conſcience not
to yeeld unto them, becauſe you may
not have any kind of fellowſhip with
any actions geſtures or other works which
have no light but Darknes in them,Eph. 5. 11. and all
things are made manifeſt onely by the light
of the word,13. lykewiſe you know that Jeſus
Chriſt is that faithfull and true witneſſe
we may more falſely depend on his TeſtimonyReu. 1. 5. & 3. 14.
               
then on all the fathers and Counſels,
Cannons and Doctors in the whole
world.
            But they ſay that all theſe do ſweare
directly that kneeling even as it is vrged
(and ſo all things els in controuerſie) is
both lawfull and Convenient; but what
ſaith that vneerring witnes, heere our
aduerſaries reply that as he ſaith nothing
for the geſture ſo he hath not one word
againſt it or any of the reſt. I demand
then, whether this geſture be a true geſture
or a lying geſture, they muſt needs
ſay a true geſture; or els they ſhame all
but can it poſſibly be ſo, and that faithful
and true wittnes never gaue any kind of
teſtimony vnto it, and wee haue a direct
comandement to heare him in all things,
               Acts. 3. 22. not
in doctrines of faith only, but in doctrins
of geſtures and ceremonies alſo, yea in
whatſoeuer is in any degree of religious
vſe? (do not ſtumble at the next wordes,
for they are all plain to him that will,
               Pro: 8. 8. 9 
               vnderſtand)
for wherein conſiſts the faithfullnes
of Chriſt his Teſtimony but in revealing
or making knowne all things concerning
faith or gouernmēt geſtures or ceremonis,Ioh. 15. 15.
yea whatſoeuer the father would
haue the Churches at any time in his
worſhip and ſervice to conforme vnto?
but to vſe onely his owne wordes All
things that I haue heard of my father, I haue
made knowne vnto you, but he made

knowne unto them that a table geſture
was the onely true geſture in
the adminiſtration of this ſacrament,
(which at this very inſtant he immediatly
inſtituted and delivered, for elſe he would
never have uſed it.) Therefore by this
his own action, hee hath made known to
all true Churches for ever, that he heard
or learned the table geſture of the father,
and therefore they may not in any caſe or
upon any terms conforme to any other▪
unles in like manner it be apparant that it
comes alſo from the father: alſo he never
made known unto them, that kneeling
as it is urged was lawfull therfore he never
learned or heard it of his father. And
becauſe the diſciples ſhould not forget
this or any thing els which by precept
or practiſe he had told them, he promiſed
to ſend the holy Ghoſt unto them,
               Ioh. 14. 26. both to
teach and alſo to bring all things to their remembrance
which he had told them, now ſeeing
they never uſed any other (for it is
that moſt fearefull ſin of preſumption the
mother of final Apoſtacie to ſuppoſe they
uſed any thing of Religious uſe needfull
for the Churches afterward to uſe and
Conforme unto which the ſcriptures do
not directly mētion & approue) it is more
then evident, that they never heard of
Chriſt that any other geſture was lawfull
or mght in any reſpect be conformed unto
in the act of receving the ſacrament, eſpecially

ſeing he bears witnes to the truth,
               Ioh. 18. 37. even
to the whole truth & not to ſome ſpeciall
parts onely, if then this bee a geſture of
trueth, and the other bee ceremonies
of trueth, though in the loweſt degree of
Religious uſe Chriſt doth certainly beare
witnes in the word that they are good
and lawfull, and then indeed wee ought
to conforme unto them, ſeeing Every
one that is of the trueth heareth his
voyce, that is obeyeth his will, and is not
the word his voyce or hath he any other.
All therefore that conforme to any thing
of Religious uſe, without ſafe warrant
from the word, are not of the trueth, but
directly of error. If then Chriſtians are
bound to conforme to any thing, yea for
conſcience ſake, which yet Chriſt hath
not made known in the Scriptures to bee
good and lawful then do your Adverſaries
of neceſſity inferre that Chriſt hath not
made known, All things of neceſſary uſe
(at ſome times and in ſome caſes at leaſt)
in the worſhip of God unto his Churches
and ſervants, and ſo denying the faithfulneſſe
of his propheticall office in this particular,
they come neere to that Apoſtaticall
hereſie,1. Ioh. 2. 22 even to deny that Ieſus is that
Chriſt, or that anovnted prophet whom we
muſt heare in all things, yea by this their
ſtricte preſſing of conformitie they doe
intimate that he is not the Lord, not Lord
or author of the whole trueth for they

ſay kneeling and the other things in controverſie,
are not lies or novelties, fantaſies
or Incerteinties, but of the trueth and
and therefore to be conformed unto, and
yet for their hearts cannot proove that
Chriſt is Lord or author of them.
            And even as he which denies the divine
providence in the particular government
of all things even to the falling of the hairs
of our head,
               Luc. 12. 7, doth ſay in his heart there is
no God,
               Pſal. 14. 1. or frames his affections and diſpoſes
of his Courſes, as if God were otherwiſe
then he hath in his word revealed
himſelfe to bee, and ſo denying
his particular providence, ſets up in
his heart the Gods or Idols of Chance and
Fortune good or evill: ſo they that affirme
that becauſe Chriſt hath not particularly
or expreſly forbidden theſe things in the
word therefore wee may, yea and being
cōmanded ought to conform unto them,
though there bee no warrant in ſcripture
for thē; do in effect in theſe hairs (as I may
ſay) or ceremonies of his worſhip or as
they count them the ſmall and triviall
matters of his ſervice deny that he is Lord
in his Church, that is not ſuch an abſolute
Lord as the ſacred Scriptures deſcribe
him to bee, and ſo ſet up in their harts
the Idols of Novelty and Incerteinty, or the
Gods of humane Inventions and worldly
traditions, or the precepts and pleaſures
of men, and ſo diſpoſe of Religious ceremonies
in Gods publick worſhip as

their occaſions may happen or chance to
move them unto: ſo that though without
any ſtop they readily take the oath
of allegyance unto Chriſt, yet by a mentall
reſervation, they intend and meane
that Iure divino their callings with theſe
appurtenāces are not ſubiect to the ſupremacy
of his word. Therefore let all Gods
ſervants rather reaſon thus, what profiteth
the Image or any humane Invention▪
               Abac. 2. 18. Verely
they are teachers of lies. Doe they no
good then do they much hurt? teach they
not the truth? (if they doe then Chriſt in
the word bears witneſſe unto them) then
do they confirme errour & falſhood. Woe
therfore unto him that ſaith, that theſe devices
are ſufficient to teach the Churches &
that ſome good leſſon or inſtructiō may be
gottē by them,verſ. 19. no, no, though they be laid
over with gold & ſilver and have the moſt
excellent and learnedeſt wits in the world
to Iuſtifie and defend them, yet when
they haue done all that poſſibly they can
there is no breath in them, they cannot for
their liues make them of any profitable
uſe for the ſervice of the Church in the
worſhip of God, but the Lord is in his holy
temple onely in his own ordinances,verſ. 20. 
               there is
the bleſſing for evermore, & not in mens devices,
therefore let all the earth keepe ſilence
before him, & hereafter hold their peace,
and never open their mouthes in the defence
or excuſe of theſe vanities.

But why I pray you will ſome ſay,Obiect. ſhould
not Images, or this geſture, and theſe ceremonies
or other like humane Inventions,
yeeld as much comfort and ſtir up as true
devotion in our conformitie to them, as
well as the Ark & Cherubins, or the table
geſture and other of the like nature?
            Even becauſe the Lord in his infinite
wiſdom and love hath deviſed and commanded
theſe,Anſwer. and therefore how ſilly or
contemptible ſoever they ſeeme to the
wiſdom of the world, yet his divine power
is alwayes preſent, and doth inſeparably
work in the holy uſing & partaking of his
own divine ordinances, but he never ordayned
the other, and therefore all the
power which is in them is from Satan, &
ſtirs up to errour and ſuperſtition, or to
ſchiſme and Apoſtacie. All the teaching
and preaching therefore and other payns
whatſoever undertaken for their iuſtification
and upholding is but in vayne, utterly
unprofitable for the Churches of Chriſt,Math. 15. 9
for all the devotion Reverence and ſeemlineſſe
which theſe do beget is but vaine
and deceitfull, even onely in ſeeming not
in ſubſtance. For what are the opinions
and imaginations of the moſt wiſe and
learnedſt men in the whole world not
being truely grounded on the word of
God, are they not abſolutely Evil? and
that not now and then,Gen. 6. 5. or onely in ſome
damnable poynts of Machiaveliſme,
               Ier. 17. 9. Mahometiſme,

Poperie, or Arianiſme, but
continually even in all things, eſpecially
much more in thoſe that concerne the
worſhip & ſervice of God, till he have opened
their vnderſtandings.
               Luk. 24. 25. To Conform then
to any thing of Religious uſe without
warrant from Gods word, though learned
and wiſe men, yea grave and godly preachers
are verily perſwaded, that rather thē
the Churches ſhould be untaught, or Chriſtians
want and be deprived of the ſacrament
and other exerciſes of Religion wee
very ſafely may ſo do, is abſolutely (notwithſtanding
the ſayd opinion of very
worthy men) to conforme to Evill. Therefore
it were far better for the true Churches
of Chriſt in this caſe,Reu. 12, 6, to bee driven
into the wildernes, & ſo deprived of all publick
viſibility in the world (for even there
is a place prepared of God, yea they ſhall
verily be fed there) then thus by conforming
to Incerteinties and Novelties to bee
either quite ſtarved or moſt groſly infected.
Every thing therefore of Religious
uſe which hath not warrant from the
word of God is directly Evill, and to contend
and to be zealous for it, is to goe a
whoring after our own Inventions.
               Pſa. 106. 39
            
            But here it may be ſayd, there is as
much verrue,Obiect. reverence and deuotion (if
the affections bee rightly ordred) in one
geſture as in another, in that of kneeling as
in a table geſture, and ſo in the other queſtioned:

Ceremonies as well as in any other
whatſoeuer.
            Sure
                  •
               y matters being ſimply conſidered
by them ſelues,Anſw. and ſo compared together
theſe men ſpeak to verie good ſence
and reaſon, yea with verie great iudgement
and vnderſtanding?Act. 10. 15 but yet The things
which God himſelf hath purified or ſet apart
for Religions uſes,Mark. 10. 9 
               let no man pollute
or ſeperate by mixing any humane inventions
therewith: And from the Contrarie,
let no man 
                     〈…〉
                  urifie or enioyne for religious
vſe in the worſhip of God any thing which
(not being warranted in the word) God
hath polluted▪
                for they may as well defend
and that with as good colour and ſhew
of naturall reaſon and humane vnderſtanding,
that there is as much divine vertue
in beere, ale or water, as in wine in the
ſacrament, and therefore alſo rather, then
to breake the peace of the church in
which wee liue, and not to haue the bleſſed
ſacrament adminiſtred; miniſters and
people were better to cōform & ſubſcribe
to the vſe of them if they in like manner
ſhould be inioyned. And with as good
probabilitie they may avow there was
as much vertue in any other rodd as in
that which was in the hand of moyſes,
               Exo. 4. 2. and
in any other ſalt as in that wherewith the
prophet healed the waters;2. king. 2. 21. yet at the verie
beſt this is but a meere carnall or a
prowd Syrians argument,2. king. 5. 1. 12. and though it
ſeeme verie probable, yea and to ſome

the more they ponder on it the more
vnanſwerable it is, yet is it exceedingly
leaprous and infections. To make which
good let them be pleaſed to conſider the
argument and maner thereof which in
the verie like caſe the lord him ſelf framed
and preſſed, yea and purpoſely no
                  •
                contingently
but in the moſt abſolute perfection
of his divine wiſedome committed
the ſame not to tradition but to writing,
for the uſe and direction of all poſterity
in the like occaſions, to be their preſident
for ever.2. Tim. 3. 16. For the whole Scripture,
(and therefore alſo this part) is given by
inſpiration of God, and is profitable to teach
and defend all truth which is to be conformed
unto, either concerning faith or
godlineſſe, and to convince or diſproue all
errour for doctrine or ceremonie, to correct
all vice, and to inſtruct in all righteouſneſſe,
and therefore why ſhould I
feare to profeſſe that I verily beleeue that
even this place which I urge, and every
other portion of ſacred writ, was even
therefore written that we might beleeue that
Ieſus is the Chriſt (being ſome way helpfull
thereunto) and that in beleeving wee
might haue life tbrough his name,
               Ioh. 20 31. as helping
much therefore for the confirmation
of our faith in the holy Scriptures abſolute
and moſt perfect ſufficiency, and for
the aſſuring of our hearts that wee may
not conforme to any thing of religious

uſe in the publicke worſhip of God, but
what is truely grounded on them.
            Marke I pray you reverently and religiouſly
the true reaſon why Nadab and
Abihu were ſo fearefully and miraculouſly
conſumed and devoured;Leu. 10. 1, 2 would not
the fire thinke you, which they brought
in their Cenſors, haue ſerued well enough
to haue burnt up the incence? was there
not as much naturall vertue in that fire,
and as ſufficient power (in any mans reaſon)
to performe that ſervice, as in any
other, yea and as in that which was upon
the Altar? yes verily, no indifferent man
that heares and knowes the matter, will
ſay otherwiſe: why then what need the
Lord to haue made ſo exceeding much adoe
about a little fire, or others about a
poore geſture, as if the very foundations
of religion had thereby been grievouſly
ſhaken? Fire muſt be abſolutely had,
and ſo they uſe it reverently, and carry
themſelues decently and orderly (and
here is no mention to the contrary) what
can any peaceable minded man ſay againſt
them? Even this is ſaid againſt
them by the Lord himſelfe, the very God
of peace, They put fire: what? which the
Lord had forbidden? No, the Lord purpoſely
refuſes to reaſon in that manner,
to make us able to meet our adverſaries
in the gate, and ſaith, Tbey offered ſtrange
fire before the Lord, that was a ſtrange and

remarkable preſumption indeed, and full
worthy of a ſtrange and remarkable puniſhment,
to teach all poſteritie for ever,
whether Councels or Churches, particular
or generall, to take ſpeciall heed, that
they never preſume to bring any ſtrange
fire, ſtrange geſtures, ſtrange callings, or
ſtrange ceremonies into the publick worſhip
and divine ſervice of our moſt holy
and iealous God, eſpecially in the cleare
ſun-ſhine of the Goſpell.
            But was this fire made by Philoſophy,Object.
Alchimy, or Necromancy? For then it
muſt needs be confeſſed that this were a
very foule fault in any, and moſt worthy
of deprivation ipſo facto? No ſuch matter;
how ſhall we then know which fire or
callings, which ceremonies or geſtures
are ſtrange, that we may take heed (whatſoever
come of it) wee never conforme
unto them▪ ſeeing Nadab and Abihu, and
men of eminent place and excellent parts,
doe ſtand very confidently for the abſolute
lawfulneſſe, yea and direct fitneſſe of
theſe things of this nature queſtioned amongſt
us?Pſal. 119. 18 
               (Lord open thou our eyes, that
we may ſee theſe wonderfull things in thy
Law.
            
            To help us in this caſe againſt all cūning
queſtioniſts & ſubtill diſputers,Anſw. which the
Lord foreſaw would even peſter this laſt
age of the world, he is pleaſed to ſpeake
in words and ſillables, that the ſimpleſt

may underſtand if they will not ſtop their
eares, and moſt eaſily diſcerne if they will
n
                  •
               t winke with their eyes, and ſaith in
the firſt verſe which he had not commanded
them, what could it advantage them to
plead (as theſe men do) the Lord hath not
forbiddē it, therefore we may conform unto
it, & ſeeing there is no ill meaning nor
any the leaſt purpoſe to bring in Idolatrie,
or to confirme any therein, but the cleane
contrary, as it is well enough known, why
ſhould any bee ſo preciſe to abridge us of
our libertie? But the Lord foreſeeing that
all the other eight commandements
would not haue halfe ſo much oppſition
as this of his outward worſhip, yea
knowing that all the witty obiections,
and the very quinteſcence of all the ſubtill
diſtinctions that the bottomleſſe pit
could poſſibly affoord, would bee ſet abroach
in theſe laſt times under colour
of unity and decency for the more eaſie
making way to the breach thereof, this
being the very key to all the other following:
for keepe this ſincerely, and faithfulneſſe
and truth will flouriſh in all the
reſt; but ſuffer wicked men by carnal devices
to make a breach in this, and to iuſtifie
the ſame, and there will bee nothing
but carnall policie and diſsimulation in
all the reſt. Now to prevent this miſery
which all callings and conditions elſe wil
feele the ſmart of, he teaches Magiſtrates

by his owne practiſe how to deale with
their Nadabs & Abihues (for every age
wil haue ſome ſuch) and by this his argument,
o
                  •
                maner of reaſoning, teaches al private
Chriſtians how to behaue themſelues
in theſe occaſions, as if he had ſaid, That
fire which the Lord hath not cōmanded,
is ſtrange, or a novelty; that geſture in Gods
worſhip, that ceremony or calling in the
Church which the Lord hath not ordained,
is ſtrange, and a meere Innovation. Is
it a matter of religious uſe? yes. And hath
not the Lord in the word commanded it?
no. Then it is ſtrange, and thou mayſt not
in any caſe ſubſcribe or conforme unto it.
            And leſt the impudent importunity of
theſe indiffrent ones ſhould prevaile in his
Churches, the Lord is pleaſed for our better
confirmatiō, to afford us this invincible
reaſon,Ier. 29. 23. 
               Thoſe that teach words in my name
(he doth not ſay which I haue forbidden;
but) which I haue not commanded, teacblying
words; ſo that whatſoever is miniſterially
taught and expreſſed in the Churches
of Chriſt which God hath not commanded,
is of a lying diſpoſition, even of no
other vſe but to oppoſe the truth, and to
iuſtifie errour. Thoſe callings then which
the Lord hath not commanded, are lying
callings. Thoſe ceremonies and geſtures
which the Lord hath not commanded, are
lying ceremonies & geſtures, & ferue for
no other end, but under colour to thruſt

out Gods holy ordinances and to bring in
by degrees even any of mens Inventions.
            But here me thinks I heare one crying
out,Obiect. this is not to the point though they
graunt all that I haue ſaid, for Nadab and
Abihu were violent and vnſtaied yong
men and that which they did was the
friute of raſh and greene heads and they
were neuer Inioyned by Moyſes to take
any other fire then that which was of
Divine inſtitution, and came downe
from heaven but voluntarily & preſumptuouſly
without any dāger of loſing their
liuings, or having any Eccleſiaſticall ordinance
or allowance for the ſame, they
very vnadviſedly, yea deſperatly ventred
on it: whereas otherwiſe if they had been
graue and diſcreete perſons, the action
not being forbidden by God, & the magiſtrate
commaunding it, and that otherwiſe
they might not haue miniſtred at
the Altar, but ſhould haue beene deprived
both of their places and maintenance? In
ſuch a caſe rather then the daily ſacrifice
ſhould ceaſe and the people be untaught,
it were better a thouſand times to
take any fire, yea and to weare a
fooles or a red pyde Coate in ſteed of
the Prieſts garments and to conforme or
ſubſcribe to any thing whatſoever in caſes
of ſuch deſperate extremitie; and ſo
there appeares an exceeding great difference
betwixt ther caſe and ours.
            
               
I muſt needs confeſſe this to be true,Anſw. and
hee were worthy of a fooles Coate and
cox-combe too, that will not acknowledge
this ſo great a difference in many of
you. But is it any other then that, which
was betwixt Ioabs killing of Abner in his
owne private quarrell,2 Sam. 3. 27 voluntarily,1 Sam. 22. 9. 18. preſumptuouſly,
and of malice forethought.
And of Doeg, that Edomite, his running
upon and ſlaying foureſcore and fiue perſons
that did weare a linnen Ephod, by the
direct, but moſt uniuſt commandement
of Saul the annointed of the Lord? Hee
that voluntarily makes himſelfe a Foole
and a Knaue, is worthy of reproſe: but he
that is commanded to doe wickedly, and
damnably, as to take away a mans living,
good name, or life, by ſome Canon-ſhot,
poyſon, or other damnable practiſe, is not
to be held any ſtrange man, but by this
ſtrange inference of theſe ſtrange diſputers,
to bee iuſtified, becauſe though to
breake any of Gods leaſt commandements,
               Math. 5. 19.
even the leaſt branch of anie of them wilfullie
againſt knowledge, and to teach others
ſo to do, or to perſwade them to conforme
thereto, in caſes of extremitie, will
certainlie keepe out of the kingdom of God,
in the iudgement or opinion of Chriſt; yet
if the magiſtrate will haue it ſo (ſaith our
learned maſters ſweet inference) then any,
even the greateſt commandements of
Gods Law in anie branch thereof, may

very ſafely be broken, & without all danger
conformed unto. Is not this moſt
horribly though moſt cloſely to vilify ſupreame
authority? let no ſonne of Eſau or
curſed Amalekite gather that from hence,
which was never ſo much as Intended, as
if I inferred that either ſuch an unlawfull
decree may in any faſhion be reſiſted,
ſeing, all the ſervants of Chriſt though in
in ſuch caſes they cannot be obedient becauſe
it is not in the Lord, yet of abſolute
neceſſity they muſt bee ſubiect; for the
Lords ſake, or becauſe David a man after
Gods own heart, gave forth a commandement
(occaſionally wicked) which yet
being meerly civill,2. ſam. 24. 2. 3. 4. 
               Ioab (unwillingly) obeyed,
that therefore David is to be eſteemed
a Saul, a perſecutor, an hypocrit & a
reprobate? God forbid, if it be a ſin of the
ſecond table (though great and filthy)
yet with Shem and Iaphet couer it,Dan. 9. 6. 7. 8 10. 11. but if
directly againſt God, confeſſe it if ever we
looke for mercy. Not, but that God himſelfe
may diſpence with any of his Commandements,
but for us to give this his
glory or a ſpeciall prerogative to any other
is to blaſpheme him that made us.
Moyſes therefore knowing the abſolute
neceſſity (in the ordinarie way to ſalvation)
of the knowledge in this principall
and fundamentall poynt of faith and
Religion, viz. that the Lord will be ſanctified
(both by uſing his own ordinances
reverently and holily, and eſpecially or

principally in having nothing in his publicke
worſhip of religious uſe but what
hee hath Commaunded) in them that come
neere him (and can we poſſibly come neerer
him, then when we are with him and
he by his ſpeciall preſence with us at his
own table) and before all the people will bee
glorified, by an open and manifeſt declaration
of our conformitie to him and not
to mens devices. Doth it not moſt plainly
declare to all generations for ever, that
to do or conforme to any thing of Religious
uſe in Gods publick worſhip, which
he hath not commanded is a moſt feareful
ſin which he will greevouſly puniſh, yea
cleane contrary even to profane the Lord:
for when we do not herein tie our ſelves
preciſely to keepe and do all the word of the
Law (and thoſe onely) which are written
(not in mens cannons and conſtitutions
but) in this booke (even the ſacred and inſpired
ſcriptures) we doe moſt plainely
manifeſt,Deut. 28. 58. 59. that whatſoever outwardly wee
profeſſe, yet in our hearts, wee doe not
ſtand in awe of, or feare that glorious and
fearefull name▪ The Lord thy God, yea and
notwithſtanding our ſaying (or often repeating)
Lord Lord,
               Mat. 7. 21. and making a moſt
open profeſſion of all fundamental poynts
concerning the act of Iuſtification, nay,
though it be graunted that thoſe excellent
devices of pompe and ſtate and all variety
of delicacies & moſt pleaſing Inventions

ordeyned to haue ſtate in Gods publick
worſhip, doe exceedingly worke upon
the affections of carnall men, and
draw them by theſe means to come neere
unto God (in the place of his publik worſhip)
with their lips (making outward ſemblance
of great devotion and reverence of
his majeſty which before they never regarded;Eſa. 29. 13.
yet ſeeing this feare of God (or religion)
is begotten in them, not by Gods
own ordinances but by conforming to the
precepts and cannons of wiſe and learned
men, it is onely carnal and worldly (what
holy devout and charitable ſhewes ſoever
it makes) and is ſo far off from knitting
or ioyning our ſoul to God which is our
greateſt happineſſe, as it Removes ou
                     •
                   heart
(more and more) from him which is our
greateſt miſery. So that this Chriſtian liberty
which theſe men do ſo boaſt of that
if God have not forbidden it, then we
may ſafely conforme unto it and ſo not
tying our ſelves ſtrictly to that onely
which is commanded or written in the
word, is a meere ſlavery and bondage, and
the very next, yea moſt direct way to
bring us back again in theſe ships of humane
Inventions into ſpiritual Egypt,
               Deut. 28. 68. where under
colour of moſt learned prophecying,
Iezabel playes falſe even cloſely profeſſeth
ſpirituall bawdry the moſt abominable
mother of that damnable Idolatry.
            All will worſhip then, euen whatſoeuer

God hath not commanded, though it be
ordeined by men of neuer ſo great wiſdom,
vnderſtanding and diſcretion, and all other
moſt excellent parts, and vpon moſt wiſe
conſiderations, good purpoſes and holy
Intentions, is notwithſtanding nothing in
all the world but meere alluring enticementes
to make the way plain for ſpirittuall
filthines, and therefore by no means
upon any terms to be cōformed vnto, but
to be held and adiudged moſt vnlawfull
yea execrable and therefore to ſubmit
our ſelues thereunto eſpecially in theſe
daies of knowldge, muſt nedes at the verie
beſt (though not in euerie one in the ſame
degree) be but Nadabs and Abihues caſe.
For if will worſhip or mens Inventions
bee tollerable in theſe, why not vpon
like conſideration in any other? if in new
Ceremonies, why not in new ſacraments?
for if wee acknowledge man to haue priviledge
or prerogatiue diuino Iure, in
deviſing ſome Religious actions or geſture
in Gods publicke worſhip, do what they
can, out of this ſeed by degrees, of abſolute
neceſſitie will the popes ſupremacie
ariſe, ſeing all the other Eight Commanments
haue a kind of dependancie (for ſo
much as concerns the outward man) upon
the ſecond, as all the duties of the inward
man haue of the firſt, and therefore the
conforming to, and ſo Iuſtifying the lawfulnes
of the ſeed, muſt needs give ſtrong

approbation to the goodnes of the fruit.
Seing then the warrantie, vertue or
power of everie Religious calling, action,
ceremonie or geſture, comes not from
the doer but from the ordainer, and that
all the good Intentions or learned Imaginations
in the whole world can neither
deviſe them nor make them lawfull or
profitable; let us acknowledge that God
onely can take a Ribbe out of Adam and
make it a fit helpe for man, and that hee
onely can ordeine callings Ceremonies &
geſtures for his Church & worſhip, yea &
make them profitable helps for his ſervāts
therein, though he take them any where,
and from whence ſoever he pleaſeth, yea
though they had formerly been Idolized
or made blind, & lame, or leaprous, yet he
(yea he onely) can cleanſe them and make
them holy,Luc. 6. 44. for is it poſſible that an evil tree
(humane wiſdom) should bring forth good
fruit (any acceptable ſervice?)Luc. 18. 19. or is there
any primarily good but God,
               Iam. 2. 17. 
               from whom
Every good gift doth come; Either the Lord
is the author of the calling, geſture and
Ceremony or elſe of abſolute neceſſity
it follows, there cannot poſsibly in any rereſpect
or to any intent & purpoſe be any
goodnes therein at all. And therefore the
Churches of Chriſt have no promiſe of a
bleſsing but abſolutely of a Curſe by conforming
thereunto, eſpecially ſeing all
humane Inventions or traditions (of this

nature,) aſſume by little and little yea at
length without bluſhing chalendge to
themſelves euen by divine right, that holy
reſpect & religious reverence wch is only
due to Gods ordinances, which ſin al they
doe commit who teach for doctrines (concerning
the governmēt of the Church,Mat. 1 
                     〈…〉
                  9▪
                or
the ceremonies and geſtures in publick
worſhip of God) mens precepts (even the
meere opinions or authorities of fathers,
the grave Counſels or cannons of learned
men,) and not one divine drame of the
holy and inſpired ſcripture, and thus by
the alluring contentments which alwayes
accompany theſe humane devices, they
ſteale away the heart, and make it goe a-whoring
after them, with a moſt violent
delight in, and approbation of thē far beyond
Gods owne ordinances, even as the
filthy (though ſnout faire or painted)
harlot, ſteales away the affection of the
husband from his wife to her ſelfe, and
therefore conformity muſt needs bee at
leaſt acceſſarie unto this ſacriledge; are
you not much bound to your learned paſtors,
who take ſuch paines to perſwade
you to it?
            Now in the act of receiving the Lords
ſupper at the Lords owne table, ſome geſture
is abſolutely and (for the former as I
may ſay eſſentially) neceſſarie, but a
wrong and a falſe geſture is utterly unlawfull
(will any in his right minde deny

either of theſe?) Therefore in the act of
receiving we may onely conforme to the
true geſture, and not indifferently to anie,
unleſſe they can prooue by Gods
word, that every geſture warranted onelie
by the precepts of men, is the true and
lawfull geſture, the want of which warrant,
and yet preſſing conformitie to
them, is abſolutely to make the commandements
of God (concerning theſe things in
queſtion) of none authoritie) and to ſet
up and exalt in their ſteads mens meere
traditions and devices.
                  
                     •
                  er. 6.
            
            The maine queſtion then is, which is
the true geſture; for on all ſides it will be
granted, that that onely is to be conformed
unto? Shall we take the Reede of
reaſon, or the Rule of mans wiſedome
and learning to meaſure this withall?Rom. 8. 5. 7.
verily no, for theſe ſavour not the
things of the ſpirit, neither are they, neither
can they be ſubiect to the Law of God.
Let us looke therefore what was in the
beginning, Our Lord and Saviour uſed
(without all queſtion) in the firſt inſtitution
of the Supper, whatſoever was eſſentially
neceſſarie either for ſubſtance or
decēcie, but a geſture, yea & a tru geſture
in the inſtitution was eſſentially neceſſarie
(for a falſe geſture had been ſinne, and
without a geſture it could neither be delivered
nor receiued) therefore that
which hee uſed, was and is without all

contradiction the true geſture; and therefore
alſo that which was and is onely and
for the action eſſentiallie neceſſarie. Seeing
then he uſed a table geſture, and all
they that did repreſent the whole, univerſall,
and particular ſucceeding Churches
to the end of the world, did receiue
the bleſſed Sacrament of the moſt
pretious body and bloud of our Lord,
with a table geſture, unleſſe like Divine
authoritie for another geſture (as well as
for altering the time, place, and number
of communicants) can bee produced;
Gods holy word, and my bleſſed Saviours
and his Apoſtles example, are ſufficient
and ſound warrant for my faith to beleeue,
that a Table geſture is the onely
true and lawfull geſture, and that no other
in any reſpect ought to be conformed
unto.
            But here ſtarts out a gallant company
of moſt braue fellowes, that haue laine
cloſe in ambuſh till fit opportunitie ſerved,
and they ſet verie hotlie upon the
hinder parts of the truth, with a terrible
noiſe crying out,Obict. That this is utterly
againſt the current of the Scripture, yea
directly againſt that libertie wherewith
Chriſt hath made us free.
               gala. 5. 
                     •
                  . For howſoever
to conforme to the Iewiſh ceremonies, is
not onely to be intangled againe with the
yoake of bondage (for looke whoſe ceremonies
we uſe or conforme to, we make

our ſelues thereby his bondmen) but to
looſe the whole profit and benefite of all
Chriſt his merits,ver. 2. yea even to be utterly abolished
from Chriſt,
               ver. 4. 
               and to fall from grace;
(how fearfull a thing therefore is conformity
to unwarranted ceremonies) yet
notwithſtanding in caſes of conveniencie
(though nothing of the like extremitie
as ours) and for the preſervation
of the Churches peace (as verie now it
fares with us) the ſame Apoſtle was content
for a time to conforme himſelfe
to divers of thoſe verie ceremonies,
and therefore where the like cauſes
doe concurre,Acts. 16. 13. we may yeeld to the like
effects.
            Here of neceſſity wee muſt make a
ſtand, they come on ſo hotly, as if they
meant to ſhare the ſpoyle forthwith,
and making ſtrong head againſt them,
as with a valiant crue of Targetteers of
good proofe. VVee referre therefore to
their learned conſideration, firſt, that the
Iewiſh ceremonies here ſpoken of, were
in their firſt original good and holy, being
ordained by God himſelfe, ſo was never
any of theſe things in controverſie, but at
the very firſt unwarrantable, and therfore
wicked and ſinfull; and ſecondly we giue
them to underſtand out of the Engliſh
long bow, that though theſe ceremonies
were indeed to be aboliſhed, yet the time
of their enduring was not fully expired

till that the Goſpell was planted: and laſtly,
by the report of a Canon, their ſecurity
is to be admoniſhed, and themſelues
informed, that the ceremonies of the Law
were to be buried with honour, and entombed
in princely ſepulchres; but theſe of mens deviſing
with all poſſible reproch, contempt,
and diſgrace, ſo that here is no proportion
betwixt the liberty of Paul, and that
which they pretend and brag of: unleſſe
therefore they can ſhew that in ſome
place where the Goſpel was planted, Paul
did conforme to ſome of the ſaid ceremonies,
as of religious uſe in Gods publicke
worſhip, they may verie well lay
down their weapons; and betake them to
their heeles. VVhat needs that (quoth a
bold Corporall) when a better man then
ever Paul was, did abſolutely conforme
in the firſt famous Church that was called
Chriſtian, even Peter the Prince of all
the Apoſtles:
               Galat. 2. 11▪
                but good ſir, the Holie
Ghoſt his directly reproving him by
PAVL for the ſame, doth fully anſwer
all obiections of that kinde.
            But here fearing a foil,Obiect. they wynd about
and make two half circles, and with one
wherin the principal of their force cōſiſts,
they make quick reply and ſay,Deut. 17. 8. that God
commaunded that in all matters too hard
for vs to iudge,
               9. 10. 11. 
               we muſt repaire to the magiſtrate
& preiſt & cōform according to that
which they shall inform & not decline to the

right hand nor to the left, now both theſe
they ſay in this controuerſie about the
geſture and the other ceremonies do directly
determine, that kneeling euen as it
is urged, is abſolutely the true and beſt
geſture, and all the other things in queſtion
both lawfull and moſt convenient
and therefore all that will do preſumptuouſly
and not conforme to theſe things ex animo
ought not to be fined in thouſands
and committed to perpetuall impriſonment,12.
but even to looſe their liues, for
that is to take away Evill from Iſraell.
            
            Hereunto keeping our firſt ground
without any alteration or diſorder in our
Ranks,Anſw. we do ſay, that the Prieſthood is
quite remooved out of the Church, and
ought not ſo much as once to be mentioned
in theſe dayes of the cleere light of
the Goſpell, as a title in any reſpect unbefitting
the miniſters of the word, yea
ſeing that goverment is abſolutely taken
away, this law, being meerely politicall
is utterly repealed.
            The other 2 quarters or half circles having
by this time well refreſhed themſelves,
thinking they had us now at a great advantage
and in a ſtrait, ioyn with the former,
& ſo make one full & compleat body
and making great ſhew of a Reſolution
even to ſet their reſt upon it,Object. they come
forward with great courage and in very
good order, and reply that the Equitie

of that law is morall and binds perpetually
and therefore by direct conſequent obligeth
us to conformity: Here the Corporal
cries yeeld, yeeld.
            But to this,Anſwer. knowing that there is not
one iot of manhood or true valour in
them, and that when it comes to the
puſh indeed, they dare not for their liues
abide the triall by dint of the ſword of the
ſpirit,
               Eph. 6. 17. wee ioyne with them and receive
their ſhock moſt ioyfullie, and tell them
that this is very true, and we do moſt readily
ſubſcribe thereunto; ſeeing then, theſe
and all other types were removed to
Chriſt,Math. 17. 5. this Equitie being morall doth
perpetually bind all Chriſtian Churches
in matters too hard,
               Act 3. 23. 
               and difficult, to heare
him,
               Mark. 1. 11. yea in all things, ſeeing hee is that
beloved Sonne in whom God is well (even
fully and perfectly and onely) pleaſed; look
what he determines that is good and pleaſeth
God: but look what he doth not approve
(though he doe not forbid it) God
will never accept it, ſo that now by their
own Doome we muſt go to Chriſt in this
ſo hard a controverſie, to know which
callings and ceremonies are lawfull in the
adminiſtration of the Church, and which
geſture in the act of receiving the Lords
ſupper is unlawfull or wicked, and every
ſoul that will not harken and be obedient
unto him in theſe and all other things,Aa. 3. 23. wee
confes ought to be cut off & deſtroyed out

of the people, as well as he that ſpeakes in
the name of other Gods,
               Deut. 18. 20. or (which is all
one) preſumeth to ſpeake a word in the name
of the Lord which hee never commanded
him to ſpeake, that is which teacheth the
lawfulneſſe of Conformity to ſome things
of divine or religious uſe in the publicke
worſhip of God, which the Lord never
commanded. Doth not this full charged
Canon moſt evidently threaten utter and
unavoydable deſtruction to him that deſperately
or preſumptuouſly without warrant
from Gods word, will come in the
very mouth of it, to aſſault the Cittie or
ſanctuarie of our God, by preſſing conformity
to ceremonies and actions, callings &
geſtures of religious uſe in the worſhip of
God, which the Lord never commanded.
            
            Here they are pleaſed to come to parlee,
& would fain perſwade vs that there ſhall
be a final peace cōcluded, and to that end
a truce is taken and afterwards yea diuers
times renewed, till ſpying ſome ſpeciall
advantage (which they wil neuer ouerſlip
they preſently pyke quarrells at ſome
thing publickly taught or privatly practiſed,
pretending forſooth that it is a violent
and moſt dangerous breach of the
peace of holy Church, and then by ſome
ſtratageme (wherein they are admirable)
by one deviſe or other, they put out by
prefermēt the eyes of ſome (moſt iudicious)
cut out the learned tongues of other

by ſuſpenſion and the reſt that will not
winke and be as mute as fiſhes, ſhall be
certainly caſt into darke and noyſome
dungeons, or into the deepe and dangerous
ſeas, or expoſed to a thowſand other
miſeries, as wofull and verie late experience
doth manifeſtly teſtifie, therfore
what hope is there of all their faire offers
yet that the world may take notice that
wee deſire peace vpon any outward
terms whatſoeuer though neuer ſo vnequall
or preiudiciall, ſo that wee may
hold our inward peace with God we do
moſt reuerently & reſpectiuely yeeld them
audience. Now they being well acquainted
(through their continuall experience)
with our reſolution, and being privie to
their owne conſciences that they are not
able to ſtand before us, if the cauſe come
once to be tried by the Scriptures, yet
beeing very unwilling that the world
ſhould take notice hereof, they make ſolemne
proteſtation, that they are moſt
ready to referre the cenſure of this cauſe
in queſtion unto Chriſt himſelfe. And
therefore having ſubmitted themſelues
unto him according to the Fathers appointment,
they doe moſt diligently attend
unto every word hee hath ſpoken,
and ſearch everie ſillable, examine euerie
letter, yea and try everie root by the very
originall: and yet cannot finde (as they
offer to ſweare upon all the books in the

world that he hath forbidden kneeling (no
not as it is urged) in the very act of receiving
the Lords ſupper in any place of
holy Scripture, nor any other of the
things in controverſie and therefore conclude
that we may very lawfully, and being
commanded ought moſt readily (or
elſe we ſinne greevouſſy if wee refuſe) to
conforme thereunto.
            This had been a verie prettie and wittie
ſhift in a yong ſophiſter,Anſw. and in controverſies
of their element tollerable, if not
commendable; but beeing in the holy
matters of the eternall God, ſhifts and
trickes of wit, ſubtill evaſions and nice
diſtinctions, are in matters I ſay of religious
uſe) but like the wittie excuſes of the
whooriſh woman in the cloſe carriage
of her moſt filthie practiſes, and therefore
I will even referre it to the Lords owne
cenſure, and for anſwer do ſay, that it is
moſt true, that all that do ſincerely deſire
to take away evil from Iſrael (or the Church)
muſt of neceſſitie take away all knowne
preſumptuous offenders,Dut. 17. 12. either in the civill
or Eccleſiaſticall eſtate, whether they
be Hearers or Teachers:
               Ver. 11. For if they teach
& urge that which the Lord never cōmanded,
               Deut. 18. 20.
or is not warranted by the Scriptures,
and yet hold that for theſe and thoſe politicke
conſiderations, it may upon ſuch
and ſuch tearmes or limitations, be conformed
unto, they ſpeake in the name of

other Gods, even that golden God Pollicie,
not that there is any intendment in preſſing
conformitie to humane inventions in
Gods worſhip, to draw any from beleeving
in the true & everliving God, but that the
Lord that made mans heart, and therefore
knowes what means are beſt to reforme
it hath ordeyned in the ſecond commandement
and the branches thereof, the
moſt abſolute and effectuall means, which
in his wiſdom hee ſaw to bee beſt for the
holy Ghoſt to work in, and by, and with,
for the effecting of this new creation or
regeneration of the heart unto which only
(as I may ſay) he hath entailed by his
faithfull covenant the effectuall working
of his ſpirit, for that very end & purpoſe.
As therefore thoſe that maintaine and
teach theſe things purely and unmixed doe
ſet up the Lord to be their God,
               Deut 26. 17. and by their
holy partaking of them they may be aſſured
of his love and favour even to be ſealed up
againſt the day of redemptiō: ſo they that do
not tye themſelues preciſely hereunto, do
verily ſerve other Gods, and have no promiſe
of any grace but what the Devill
(whoſe power onely doth work where
the Lords is wanting) can beſtow upon
them, becauſe they do not ſerve the true
God deſcribed in the firſt commandement
for either he is God in every commandement
or in no commandement, therefore
to teach the doctrine of the firſt commandement

never ſo ſoundly and purely,
and to corrupt the doctrine of the ſecond
cōmandement which concernes all things
in the publick worſhip of God needfull
in any reſpect for being or well being of
the Churches of God, (by enioyning any
Novelty or Incerteinty meere Inventions
and deviſes of men,) is directly to
teach in the name of other Gods, and ſeeing
the Lord never made promiſe to bee in
ſuch a worſhip no more then hee hath
done to the devotions of the Turks and
Indians I would faine ſee a ſound reaſon.
How any of good Indgement and ſincere
hearts knowing the unwarrantablenes of
theſe things dare conforme in any reſpect
unto them, but rather to ſubſcribe that
they that will take evill away from Iſrael
muſt of abſolute neceſſity take order, that
all ſuch proud Prophets or ambitious
preachers, and all ſuch profane and preſumptuous
hearers as dare teach and will
coform to mens inventions, be not fined in
thouſands or perpetually impriſoned, but
utterly deprived not only of their livings
and liberty but even of their lives alſo.
And till this & the other lawes of Chriſt
(ordeined in the ſecond commandement)
bee in force; all the good that the moſt
wholeſome lawes of moſt godly princes
and Religious ſtates can effect; is onely to
make Ambition a little more wary and
ſubtill, more Cawtelous and diſſembling,

or elſe more arrogant, even to deviſe new
and more ſecret practiſes to hinder all
means or purpoſes of reforming any thing
in the worſhip or Church of God, yea by
propoſing one thing or other by one or
other to have ſtill in ſtore ſuch variety of
freſh and moſt urgent occaſions, as there
ſhall not bee the leaſt breathing time ſo
much as to think of Reformation. Much
crying out there is (and that iuſtly) of fearful
depopulations, & how can it be otherwiſe,
ſeeing the howſe of God lieth waſte
and is troden vnder foot, his faithfull miniſters
ſuſpended, his faithfull ſeruants
traduced and cenſured, Gods ordinances
neglected, and mens Inventions erected?
Clients do greivouſly complain of delaies,
altring of orders, reuerſing of Iudgments
and the like, ſo that poore ſouls, they cannot
tel whē they are ſure of any thing they
haue, or that their ſuits wil receiue an end.
VVoe is me for them, but how can this be
amēded ſeing the publick worſhip of God
is ſo 
                  •
               ul of direct Incerteinties and abſolute
Nouelties. One ſayes they are indifferent
and may be tollerated, another comes and
proues them neceſſary becauſe they are
commanded by humane authority, but at
laſt ſtarts one up and with his divino Iure,
makes all club ſure that there is not a
a word now to bee uttered againſt conformity
to them, thus look what is ſowen
in the firſt table will bring forth fruit in

the branches of the ſecond. VVhoredom
and drunkenes do euery where abound, yea
are grown to be but civill recreations, and
doth not ſuperſtitious Atheiſme adulterate
the holy things of God? yea is it poſſible
but that baſe and beaſtly geſtures and
and Carnall ceremonies in Gods publick
worſhip, will fill the civill eſtate full of all
uncleaneſſe and baſtardies? is it not become
the glory of many to ſporte with
Religion, even to ſcoffe at ſinceritie and to
ierke and gybe at the upright in heart,
haue not the baſtard poets and players
and like profane humours a great pride
to be ſinguler in this paſtine? Theft and
deceite, oppreſſion and couſenage, are
growen to be great trades and profeſſed
occupations, and can all the world tell
how to mend it, till the ſpirituall theeves
who have ſecurely made their dens in the
very houſe of God bee driven from their
unlawfull Callings and courſes? great
lamentation is made as for a moſt evill
preſage, that offices of Iuſtice are bought
and ſould (muſt not ſuch of neceſſity proceed
accordingly even for hyre or reward?)
but doth not the buying of all
ſpirituall promotions Iuſtifie and cleare
all ſuch Courſes?
            But to come to you that have ſo painfully
ſearched all the words and ſillables
of Chriſt, not to find out that which hee
hath commanded (which is the ſtudy and

               meditation of all that are ſincere in hart,
               Pſal. 119. 77. 97. 98. and
therefore the whole word of God is often
called the cōmandements of God,
               Deut. 4. 6. & 6. 6. inferring
directly that there ought to be no cōformity
to any thing but to that which is
commanded) but to ſee what he hath not
forbidden for therein lies all the perill,
are not theſe thinke you worthy ſubjects
that never care for not ſo much what their
ſoveraine Lord would haue done, as very
curiouſly inquire & moſt painfully ſearch
out, what he hath forbidden that ſo being
out of his reach and danger, they may
follow their own devices. If any man will
not conforme to their precepts, how
is he reproched and Reviled; but to ſpeak
againſt the lawfulneſſe of them is pettie
treaſon. I hartely pray them therefore to
conſider from the Lords own mouth
whether it bee not high preſumption to
ſpeake a word (miniſterially) which he hath
not commanded ſuppoſe hee hath not forbidden
it in particular or expreſſe terms
yet doth hee not directly in the former
verſ requi
                  •
               e abſolute obedience to whatſoever
that great Prophet and ſheepheard
of our ſoules shall teach us?
               Deut. 18. 20. and doth hee
not moſt plainly forbid upon paine of
death in this verſe, to teach any thing
which in the word hee hath not commanded?
            
            How dare you then oh you men of
learning, how dare you (I ſay) hazard

your pretious ſouls in conforming
to ſuch things? doe not object that you
haue good warrant from the word ſo to
do, becauſe you are commanded to acknowledge
them that are over you and labour
among you,
               1. Theſſ. 5. 12. 13. for I confeſſe, wee muſt have
them in ſingular loue for their works ſake, ſo
it bee in the Lord, yea if they teach no
thing but what hee hath commanded
them,Hebr. 13. 17. we will obey, ſubmit, and conforme
unto them, but if they will preach and
preſſe things which Chriſt never commanded
though they cover them in ſheeps cloathing,
               Math. 7. 15.
even with words full of all excellent
wiſdome, and admirable learning, able to
raviſh the hearers and to entiſe any man,1. Cor. 2. 1. 4.
that hath reaſon and underſtanding
and is able to Iudge wiſely and diſcreetly
of matters, to conforme unto
them, yet not being in plain evidence of the
ſpirit and of power, wee muſt eſteeme of
them as wolues and falſe prophets rather
watching all opportunity to maintaine
their pompe, ſtate and glory, and to feed
their own bellies by this conformitie, then
to feed the flocks or churches of Chriſt
over which he hath made them overſeers.
If they ſay they are greatlie wronged by
ſuch imputations and no man whoſoever,
dare iuſtifie this to their faces; for my
part, I confeſſe it will bee much againſt
my will if ever I come before them,
but yet as good a man, as great a ſcoller,

as wiſe, & as worthy, as holy and as godly
(though perhaps not ſo great and Lordly)
as any of them be, hath ſo taught and
preached, and I will beleeve him before
all of them, yea I will ſet down his own
words whatſoever come of it, and will
not alter one ſillable, beware of falſ prophets
(alas how can wee tell which are they
you ſhall know them by their fruits,
               Math. 7. 15. 16. or doctrine
which they teach, which not being
the commandements of God are abſolutelie
evill, even of a woolviſh and devouring
diſpoſition in all the Churches of Chriſt;1. Tim. 3. 14
for the word or comandements of God or
writings of the holy Ghoſt were ſufficient
to teach Timothy (a man not much inferiour
to the moſt of them for the inward
glory of the ſoule) how to behaue himſelf in
the houſe of God which is the Church of the
living God,
               Pſ. 45. 13. verſ. 15. even what doctrins to teach &
what callings, ceremonies, and geſtures to
preſſe conformitie unto, if then in their
cannons or conſtitutions they will behaue
themſelves otherwiſe then the word
doth require, can there poſſiblie bee
any ſafetie in conformitie to them? And
as this concerns all our teachers, ſo our
bleſſed Lord and Saviour leſſons all hearers
that as hee hath manifeſted his love
unto them in inviting them to his holie
ſupper at his own table, to partake
of ſuch heavenly comforts as the eye of

man never ſaw; ſo if they will prove them
ſelves to bee his Friends indeed and not
onely in ſhew,Iohn. 15. 10. their carriage and behaviour
muſt in all things, but eſpecially in
the actions and geſtures of this ſacrament
(being at the very time of this intimation
inſtituted) be onely as hee hath commanded
and that muſt bee donne whatſoever it
be,14. ſo that not to doe all that which hee
commands, or to conforme to any thing
which he hath not commanded, is to make
our ſelves his enemies,
               Luc. 19. 27. whereof a ſtrange
carriage or geſture is more then a moſt
ſtrong preſumption.
            But hereto they ſay that not onely men
whoſe fruits and doctrins may yeeld ſome
preiudice or give cauſe of ſuſpitiō,Object. but evē
holy and godly men ſuch as have approved
thēſelues in Gods houſe to be faithfull,
yet for the peace ſake of the Church
wherein they liue, and becauſe they
would not offend others though they
wiſh with all this hearts that all theſe
things were quite taken away and do publicky
teach that they ſin in it, they are
content notwithſtanding (under going it
as a heavy burdē) to conform to the ceremonies
of Rome when they are there, and
elſe where as they find them eſtabliſhed;
and therefore much more we ought to do
the ſame rather then to diſturbe the quiet
eſtate of the peers of the Church, who
haue long lived at eaſe and reſt.
            
               
As though the practiſe of Gods owne
ſervāts or true conſtituted Churches,Anſw. were
a ſufficient warrant to my conſcience to
conforme to ceremonies and geſtures of
Religous vſe in the publick worſhip of
God? no, if Peter himſelfe that ſo loving
& ſo much regarded an Apoſtle, will conforme
to geſtures, actions or ceremonies
not warrantable (though a thouſand
times more as wee heard might haue beene
ſaid for him then for our miniſters) yet
muſt he be withſtood openly,Galat. 2. 11. euen to his
face, yea in his ſo doing to be cōdemned becauſe
howſoeuer fleſh and bloud can produce
many ſtrong reaſons of indifferencie,
liberty, and (as matters ſtand) conueniencie,
eſpecially in reſpect of peace and
vnity: yet the holy Ghoſt ſaith plainly,
that whatſoeuer men pretend by preaching
and manintaining many excellent truths
and ſincerely confuting many groſſe errors,
yet this conformitie to ceremonies of
Religious vſe, (though it were not in the
face and preſence of God at his own table)
is not the right way to the truth (or
power) of the Goſpell:
               ver. 14. vnleſſe therefore
wee haue warrant from the word of
God for our ſo doing, Conformitie to
the things in queſtion is without all contradiction
the wrong way to the truth of
the goſpell▪
                thou go the readieſt way in
the world to any ſpirituall promotion)
and 
                  〈…〉
                hinder the efficacy and effectual

working of the holy Ghoſt in the miniſteriall
functions of the Goſpell, yea in
the Godly and beſt quallified ſervants of
God (it is not my collection but the plaine
evidence of the ſpirit of truth) this kind
of conformity (let the motiues bee what
they poſſibly can) ſavour moſt ſtrongly
of dangerous Hypocriſie;
               verſ. 13. becauſe nothing
can by any means be warrantable in Religion,Act. 10. 33.
but that which is commanded by
God.
            
            And therfore the crowne of all miniſters,
yea the honour of all Chrſtians
conſiſts not in ſtudying how to
giue content to the world,Acts 17, 11 but in ſearching
the Scriptures (not once or twice
ouer, but) daily, whether the things bee
ſo or no, for that may be diſcerned at
the ſeventh conſideration or peruſing,
which was thought before to be impoſſible
(to bridle that vnruly conceite
which naturally, excellencie of gifts doth
alwaies beget.) Neither haue any paſtors
(if they be ſent of Chriſt) warrant to
teach to their charges or Churches,Mat. 28. 20. and to
exhort them to conforme to, or obſerue
any thing of Religous vſe but what Chriſt
hath commanded, If they do, he tels them
plainly he is not with them, and therefore
will not bleſſe the miniſtery of ſuch in
their teaching (teaching and commanding
being indifferently taken in the Scriptures:)Math. 11. 1.
for if Chriſt haue not commanded

it, that is, if it be not taught in the ſcriptures,Gala. 1. 6.
it is directly (whatſoever pretences
are ſet upon it) in the nature of another
Goſpell, and the teachers, and iuſtifiers
or excuſers thereof doe no leſſe in effect
(take every one in his degree) then they
that teach the Goſpell of Saint Thomas.
And therefore as thoſe that
taught his Goſpell, ſo certainely theſe
that teach and maintaine the lawfulneſſe
of theſe unwarranted ceremonies
and geſtures) intend to pervert the
Goſpell of CHRIST IESVS,
               verſ. 7.
though not in doctrine of Iuſtification,
yet in the doctrines of Church government,
and other matters of religious
uſe in the worſhip of God, and theſe
are they that trouble the Church, or
breake the peace thereof, though they
are moſt like unto him that is onely
guiltie of the Fellonie, yet in the purſuit
cries out as mainlie as ever hee can,
Stoppe Thiefe, ſtoppe Thiefe, not caring
who is apprehended or impriſoned,
yea and condemned as troublers of the
Churches peace, ſo they may goe away
with it undiſcerned.
            Is not here ſufficient warrant then,
not onely to refuſe conformitie to theſe
things,verſ. 8. but even to hold thoſe preachers
accurſed,
               Rom. 9. 3. or ſeparated from Chriſt?
who goe about to preſwade us in the
leaſt meaſure to conforme thereunto, yea

though their gifts be moſt heavenly or
Angelicall; but on the other ſide to think
moſt reverently of our Religious paſtors,
who haue moſt ſincerely, though to the
loſſe of all that ever they haue, taught vs
to the contrary? when therefore they
ſay Chriſt never forbad it, if you haue no
other or better place of Scripture, remember
this, that it is written, that whatſoever
is otherwiſe then that which the
word preacheth or commands, is to bee
held an accurſed doctrine or opinion,
concerne it faith or government, ceremonies
or geſtures, or any thing of religious
uſe whatſoeuer: yet doe I not ſay, that
all preachers that perſwade, rebus ſic ſtantibus,
rather to conforme in ſome things,
then to ſtand out, do this out of malice,
or anie purpoſe to cauſe their hearers to
decline, and ſo by degrees to fall from
grace; but that whatſoever fleſh and
bloud, wiſedom and learning can deviſe
for their defence or excuſe, yet the holy
Ghoſt teacheth us plainly, that though it
cannot be denyed, but that theſe moſt
ſtrong and vehement perſwaſions proceed
from true and ſtrong affections of
carnall loue, and (as it is to bee hoped)
that many of them are the deere ſervants
of God; yet in this particular of perſwading
to conformitie, wee are to eſteeme
them as Adve
                     •
                  ſaries unto Chriſt,
               Mat. 16. 22. yea and
all their wiſe and learned arguments▪ ſo

full of diſcretion, and all their conceited
unanſwerable ſatisfactions,ver. 23. to bee notwithſtanding
of a verie Sataniſh diſcent,
and meere divelliſh diſpoſition, a moſt
ſenſible ſavouring the things that are of
men, as how we ought to pitty our ſelues,
our wiues and children, and ſo prevent
the unavoidable evils of non-conformitie,
but yet they underſtand not (in this
poynt) the things that are of God, namelie,
that rather then we ſhould conforme to
anie thing in his worſhip which he hath
not in the word commanded, we muſt forſake,
yea we muſt hate (or denie in this
caſe all affection of dutie, reverence, loue,
tender care, or whatſoever to) father and
mother,
               Luc. 14. 26. 
               and wife and children, and brethren
and ſiſters, yea and our owne liues alſo, or
elſe we cannot bee the diſciples of Chriſt.
Muſt not theſe graue and learned perſwaders
then, of abſolute neceſsitie bee an
offence unto every faithfull and tender
heart? Goe on therefore my brethren,
and be of good courage, and aſſure your
ſelues that in ſuffering for not conformitie
to kneeling, you ſuffer for the Lord
Chriſt, and to yeeld againſt the light of
your hearts,Mar. 8. 38. is to be aſhamed of him, ſeeing
theſe things doe directly follow from his
own words, even whē for feare of men ſpiritually
adulterated, we will conforme to
things of divine uſe in his worſhip which
he never commanded, but are onely warranted

to our conſciences by the adviſe
of the learned or the precepts of men, the
traditions of the Elders and other like
humane authorities. All which, without
warrant from the word even euery one
of them in particular,Rom. 3. 4. and generally altogether,
are Lyars: and therefore all
the geſtures or actions, ceremonies or
or callings of religious uſe in the worſhip
of God which they perſwade
unto without warrant from the word
are lying geſtures, lying actions, lying
ceremonies, and lying callings, not but
(like the Divel) they may ſpeake, profeſſe,
and acknowledge ſome excellent
truths, but that the maine thing they
aime at, is to maintaine ſome errour or other;
and therefore all the volumes in the
world, filled with all the Art, learning,
wiſedome, and diſcretion of the whole
world, compared with, or ſet againſt one
verſe in the ſacred Scriptures, are to bee
eſteemed moſt filthy and ſtinking dung.
            But haue we but one ſentence in the
Bible for a table-geſture? which (yet
were ſufficient againſt all humane opinions
and authorities whatſoever) haue we
the firſt inſtitution onely or barely mentioned?
do not everie one of the Evangeliſts
make mention of a ſupper, or a table,
of riſing from ſupper, and ſitting down,
and of ſitting even in the act of adminiſtring
and receiving the ſacrament? yea

doe not diuers places in the Acts, and Epiſtles,
plainly inferre the continuance of
a table geſture, and therefore to bee the
direct ordinance of Chriſt? But it ſeems
an impudent generation is come up, who
dare affirm that the Sunne of the Church
muſt, (if they make ſuch a charme or Canon)
ſtand ſtill continually and not ſtir at
all, as once it did for one whole day in
Gibeon,Ioſua. 10. 12. 13. 14. but the Moone eſpecially not to
moue one inch, as for that time it did
not, in the valley of Aielon, further then
they in their diſcretion ſhall thinke to
bee fit, and ſo by their wit and learning
are bold to defend that the earth is in circular
motion, all the world and the creatures
therein turning round continuallie,
yea they are moſt confident, if they may
haue audience, to make any indifferent
hearer that comes without preiudice, to
conforme and ſubſcribe to 
                  •
               his opinion.
Doth not the ſpirit of giddineſſe
poſſeſſe the heads of theſe men; are not
theſe the true ſucceſſors of thoſe learned
Divines, graue Rabbies, & great Doctors
that ſtill cried out to Chriſt,Iohn. 2. 12. 
               Shew us a
ſigne, make it appeare that there is a Sun
in the firmament, proue unto us that there
is a God, or (which was as evident) that
thou art the Meſſias.
            Seeing then all things whatſoeuer of
religious uſe, which the father would haue
the Church to know and conforme unto

are treaſured up in the word though
every one indeed can not come at them
(deny this if they dare) it muſt needs follow
that either the geſture of kneeling
as it is urged is a a humane Invention,
or as you would ſay in playne termes, a
very ſtarke lie, though hanſomlie lapped
up: and therefore of the divell the father
of lies, though artificially painted perhaps
by ſome of his limmers with the very beſt
Italian beauties;) or elſe if it bee a trueth
and therefore to bee conformed unto,
then there be ſome unwritten trueths or
vereties which the Churches are bound of
conſcience to beleeve and conform unto,
and yet not commanded in the word
of truth, then it muſt needes follow,
beſides the ſcriptures, and either let our
learned adverſaries make this large breach
for the Ieſuites at pleaſure to enter by, or
elſe for ſtarke ſhame diſcharge no more
ſuch furious Cannon ſhot againſt our bullet-beaten
fortreſſe, The ſcriptures ſufficiency.
Is it not high time to take away
theſe preſumptuous cauſes (which purpoſely
teach and perſwade Conformity to
ſuch blaſphemous doctrins) out of Iſrael,
being the beſt ſeeds of the verie worſt
evils thereof? I conclude therefore it is
farre better to expoſe our eſtates and bodies
to the greateſt malice of our greevous
adverſaries by ſtanding for a geſture
without all exception then by conforming

to one which that Prophet never taught,Act. 3. 23.
no nor ſo much as once mentioned (in
that manner and forme as it is urged and
ſo to be by him Deſtroyed out of the people.
For muſt we have his warrant, and
heare him onely in the doctrine of the ſacrament,
and ſhall wee not care for his
warrant nor regard what his word ſaith
for the geſture of the ſacrament?
            And for thoſe who in theſe matters
of God concerning his publick worſhip,
inſiſt ſo much and with ſuch violence
upon prohibitions (a ſervice ſometimes
not very acceptable to them) crying out
unto us, ſhew one place where the Lord
forbids theſe things and wee will yeeld
that it is a damnable ſin to conforme unto
them. I am bould (with their good
leave) to Remember them of one other
argument, of the Lords own making, concerning
this very ſubiect of the actions, ceremonies
and geſtures in this publick worſhip
and ſervice, which he purpoſely framed
and committed alſo to writing for
the uſe of all poſterity even to bee a lanthorne
of our feet,
               Pſalm. 119. 105. 
               and an unerring light to
our paths in theſe very occaſions, and in
moſt plain evidence of the ſpirit it ſtands
thus: By the light of nature all mankind
knows that there is a God, & therfore everie
one wil worſhip him as wel as he cā,
though it bee not according unto knowledge
to glorifie him as God,
               Rom. 1. 91. for that is impoſsible

without direction from his ſpirit
according to the ſcriptures) but though
they have excellent wiſdom and admirable
underſtanding, yet even the learnedeſt
of them when they profeſſe themſelves
greateſt Clarkes, proue themſelues the
verieſt fooles,verſ. 22. 23. becauſe they become vain in
their thoughts, & their foolish hearts are full
of darknes; for they turn the glory of the incorruptible
God (even the glory of his wiſedom
and loue, of his goodnes and power,
of his mercy and truth, in deviſing & ordaining
the ceremonies callings and geſtures
appropriated to his own outward
worſhip, & making the ſame powerful &
effectuall to draw mans heart unto him
by working effectuall faith) into ſuch Images,
ſimilitudes, reſemblances and likeneſſes
as they in their diſcretion thought
fitteſt to ſtir up devotion, to beget reverence,
or to ſhew humility & thankfulnes;
by which in time by degrees will get a
reverent eſtimation of Gods ordinances,
euen his own attributes and titles, yea
and will preſume to profeſſe that Iure divino,
theſe are thy Gods O Iſrael, that is, this
is the true outward worſhip of the God
of Iſrael, theſe be true callings, geſtures
and ceremonies which by divine inſtitution
are ordeined to helpe to draw men
to God through faith and ſanctification of
the ſpirit and ſo to be eſteemed.
            Therefore the Lord makes it an ordinance

for ever, that al his true Churches
and true ſervants muſt onely conforme to
ſuch things in his worſhip and ſervice
as he hath in his word Required,
               Eſa. 1. 12. but the
Lord never required kneeling as it is urged,
nor the other things in controverſie,
therfore Gods true Churches and faithfull
ſervants may not upon any neuer ſo
reaſonable termes conforme thereunto.
And here is either by direct conſequent
a manifeſt prohibition, or elſe the Lord
reaſons moſt abſurdlie, which is fearefull
blaſphemie to thinke or inferre, for elſe
they might, (with the perſwaders to
conformitie of theſe dayes) haue replied,
thou haſt not forbidden it, therefore wee
may doe it, and thou haſt no reaſon to
find fault with it, ſeeing wee doe it to
good intents and holy purpoſes. But grant
that the things which there are reproved
were forbidden, yet the manner
of Gods reaſoning remaines immutable.
Is there no commandement in the word
for it, or (which is all one) doth not
the Lord require it? then doth hee
abſolutly forbid conformitie unto it,
for the Lord hates whatſoever in the word
is not required,ver. 14. as theſe words being ſpoken
with deteſtation do moſt manifeſtly
declare. Seeing then there is not one
word of God for kneeling in the very act
of receiving the ſacrament, nor any example
of any Apoſtolick or Primitive

Church for the practiſe thereof,Math. 19. 8. 
               but from
the beginning it was not ſo, and ſeeing wee
haue Chriſt his own example for a table
geſture, and the examples of all the
bleſſed (and now glorious) Apoſtles who
even after his aſcention delivered that which
they received of the Lord (which muſt needs
be granted was a table geſture) and ſeing
wee haue a direct commandement from
the holy Ghoſt to follow them as they follow
Chriſt,
               1. Cor 11. 23. it being their ſpeciall care ſo to
carrie thēſelves in all actions (of religious
uſe eſpeciallie) as they might bee Examples
for all Churches and Chriſtians to follow
(for ſo I take this place to be underſtood
and not to bee reſtrayned to that Church
onely,verſ. 1. or to any particular occaſion therein.)2. Theſſ. 3. 9.
Yea ſeing this geſture as it is urged,
is not onely the Invention of man, but
in the verie firſt originall eſtabliſhment
of it in the publicke worſhip of God,
the direct commandement of that man
of ſin; I referre it to everie godlie heart
to conſider whether with ſafetie of
conſcience wee may leave a table geſture,
for the uſe whereof we haue Chriſt
and his diſciples in the Inſtitution for a
patterne, and the Apoſtles during their
time, and all Apoſtolicke Churches after
them for 220. years for example and conforme
to the geſture of kneeling, never
heard of in this kind, till the Reall preſence
was eſtabliſhed. Is this to walke ſo

as having the Apoſtles of Chriſt for an enſample;
               Philip. 3. 17.
or is there not Iuſt cauſe of lamentation
and weeping to ſee ſo many worthie
men and of moſt excellent parts for
ſome worldly reſpects to become hereby
the enemies of the croſſe of Chriſt conforming
now to that which formerlie they
taught was to be abhorred?verſe. 18.
            
            You do verie ill therfore moſt Reuerent
and learned men, in offering to deale with
vs poore and private Chriſtians, after the
ſcholerlike manner of reaſoning both in
your publicke teaching, preſſing vs continually
with arguments and that with
ſuch vehemencie as if nothing were wanting
to our perfection but this conformitie
to kneeling, and in your private ſpeeches
tendring diſputation, when alas for pittie
all our faithfull paſtors hauing giuen vp
their liues for the name of Chriſt, are
taken from vs, and if any remaine, yet
there is no ſafetie to ſpeake or write
of thoſe things. If therefore you cannot
procure libertie for ſuch a courſe,
neuer yet obtained whatſoeuer you may
pretend, wherein freely and fully theſe
queſtions may be handled according to
that modeſt offer of diſpute long agoe
tendred, then I humbly beſeech you,
bee pleaſed either to confute that (or
the ſubſtance of it) which hath been
written and publiſhed againſt this ceremonie,
or els to ſet downe with the like

conditions as the learned and godly men
our late paſtors haue offered, your own
arguments and reaſons for this conformitie
which you ſo eagerly preſſe and
purſue; and (freeing the ſame from deceiueable
ſubtilties of that diſſembling
ſophiſtrie and vaine philoſophie, the ſpeciall
ornaments of that ſo affected kinde
of teaching, that wee of the vulgar may
ſee and conceiue the force of them, and
whence it is drawen, from God or men,
from the holy and inſpired ſcriptures: or
from the writings and Canons of Councels,
or Teſtimonies of Fathers.)
            VVee do ſolemnly pofeſſe (I dare ſpeak
in the name of all) that in whatſoeuer
wee haue no more for our warrant: but
the graue counſell, learned opinion and
holie practiſe of our moſt reuerent paſtors
(which yet being ſealed with their great
and conſtant ſufferings, ought highly to be
regarded of us, for whatſoeuer they be to
others or to your ſelues, they are to vs the
moſt faithfull meſſengers, true and powerfull
miniſters of Ieſus Chriſt, ſince
whoſe deprivations wee neuer heard men
ſpeake like them in that euidence of the
Spirit, and mightie power of the Holy
Ghoſt, to draw from ſinne vnto holineſſe.
O yee men of God, you are in our
very hearts to liue and die with you, your
memoriall is pretious, would God all
that we haue might redeeme the libertie

of the Goſpel in your miniſterie, notwithſtanding
(I ſay) we will freely for peace
ſake conforme unto you. But if we can
evidently produce one word of God againſt
you, or that you doe not bring his
ſacred warrant with you, let it not ſeeme
ſtrange unto you, that we runne not for
company into the broad and eaſie way with
you (which none in this poynt Papiſt or
Athieſt will ever unfainedly oppoſe) but
rather expoſe our ſelues by this our refuſall,
to open contempt, grievous bands,
and perpetuall impriſonment, profeſſing
publickly thereby our willingneſſe, and
moſt ready minde, yea heartie deſire
that that fire which our Lord and maſter
brought with him,Luc. 12. 49. 10. 54. and with his own
hands, and mouth kindled, might never
bee quenched, ſeeing the unerring and
burning light thereof is our onely
preſervatiue through the effectuall working
of the Holy Ghoſt, againſt that
feare of our adverſaries:
               Math. 10. 28. to the end. Philip 1. 28. 29. this grace of God
being given unto us not onely to beleeue
in Chriſt, but to ſuffer alſo for his ſake in
bearing witneſſe to this part of the truth,
and not daring to conforme to any other
though it coſt us full deerely▪
For thus onely in ſuch times of triall
are all (that bee called thereunto)
preſerued againſt all the powers and
Principalities, Lordly Dominions, and
other ſpirituall wickedneſſes in the

whole and moſt unholy (though moſt
learned) kingdome of darkneſſe.
            Thus am I bold to preſent my poore
endevours and private labours concerning
theſe things unto publick view, private
I ſay, not in regard of the truth generally
in all true Chriſtian Churches received
& profeſſed, but by reaſō of the danger
of the times, I durſt not receiue direction
from any who otherwiſe might
haue been a great helpe unto me. Onely
to this end haue I done it (not to be famous
in my perſon, for that were to bee
infamous in their priſon) but to giue
ſome taſte that the Lord hath many who
haue not bowed the knee in this kinde as it
is urged, as alſo to publiſh to all that feare
the Lord, and yet do not ſee the ſufficiency
of our warrant for ſo reſolute a refuſall
to conformitie, that it is not faction or
humour, nor the iudgement or practiſe
of good men (no not of our ſo endeered
Paſtors) or of the moſt holy and beſt reformed
Churches, nor of all theſe together,
which we wholy reſt or depend
upon, but that our conſciences dare not
conforme to any thing of religious uſe,
eſpecially in the publicke worſhip of
God, but what is ſafely and ſoundly warranted
by the word of our God; and likewiſe
to ſtirre up others who haue receiceived
more, and more worthy Talents,
to put their helping hands to the

worke of the Lord.
            But mee thinkes I heare ſome black
mouth roaring out,Object. That this is neither
ſo, nor ſo, but onelie an old patcht Cloak
to cover a peeviſh ſpirit withall, for (ſay
ſuch) you haue the ſubſtance, yet through
frowardneſſe becauſe you may not have
your wils you are not content, but inſnare
your mindes, and bring your conſciences
into a needleſſe bondage about geſtures
and ceremonies or matters of Indifferencie
which Chriſt hath fried us from.
            I moſt humblie pray and doe hartelie
beſeech even by the mercies of God in
Ieſus Chriſt,Anſw. all ſuch ſeriouſly to weigh &
conſider, whether any thing of divine
uſe in the publick worſhip of God can be
indifferēt; or if God haue left it indifferēt;
whether any mortall power can poſſibly
make it neceſſarie, was it not the practiſe
of that man of ſin, firſt under pretence of
Indifferencie to make things common, to
be of Religious uſe, then to bring them
(in ſome civill reſpects) into Gods publick
worſhip, and at length to haue a neceſſarie
ſtate therein, and ſo at laſt to bee
of Apoſtolicall inſtitution?Pro. 14. 12. yet euen this
way ſeemeth right to our graue and learned
adverſaries, though the iſſues thereof bring
forth moſt deadly (what if I ſaid damnable)
effects,Pſ. 2. 2. 3. euen in all theſe Churches of
Chriſt Ieſus.
            Breake not, oh ſuffer not (you Chriſtian

princes) theſe men, thus ſcornfullie
to breake the ſacred bonds of the firſt table,
leſt you take away al cōſcience of the
duties of the ſecond, for Chriſt hath in
them tyed you and all under you moſt
ſtrictlie to preciſe and ſincere obedience
in all things belonging to his publick
worſhip yet hath he left full ſcope, even
large enough (ſo farre as is fit for any
mortall power) in the other ſix Commandements
for your Regall powers ad pl
                     •
                  citum
to exerciſe, your high prerogatives
moſt ſupreamelie in: Bee well content
therewith, they that perſwade you to incroach
upon him, under colour of inlarging
your ſoveraintie, do giue that which
you ought not take, being directly againſt
the crown and dignitie of the
Lord Chriſt, & in liew thereof are bould
to challenge that from you (even of divine
right) which by no means upon any
terms you ought to parte to them, they
being withall perſons utterly uncapable
thereof.
            And as for our adverſaries, I intreat all
that are godlie minded adviſedly to bethink
themſelues, whether that ſubſtance
which God be bleſt, we haue being holy (&
for which I confeſſe wee are nor ſufficientlie
thankfull) can make that ſame
Ceremonie alſo holie, which in it firſt
originall was impure and unwarrantable,
yea moſt vile therefore and

abominable; can any thing which is
primarilie evill ever poſſiblie bee made
good, but onelie by the primarie goodneſſe
himſelfe? To make then that geſture,
action, calling, or ceremonie, or the
ſimilitude and likeneſſe of them good,
which had their beginning, from Antichriſt
and not bringing Gods word for it, and
yet to hold it upon theſe terms neceſſarie
in Gods publick worſhip, even conſcience
to be conformed unto, is directly to ſet up
another God who muſt impart this goodnes
unto it. Doth it not plainlie appeare
by this, that their Divino Iure did never
diſcend from Divine Iehovah but from
ſome black limping Vulcan or Olimpian
Iupiter, the naturall patrō of all ſuch durty
Dianaes, yea I beſeech them rather to obſerue,
whether more probablie the ceremony
being thus known to be of human
invention, and therefore of abſolute neceſsitie
filthie and polluted (as everie thing
of religious uſe is, which is not commanded
by God, in the word) doe not
make that holy ſubſtance which we haue
unprofitable and ſo uncleane, alſo unprofitable
(I ſay) though not for information
of iudgement,Hagg. 2. 13. 14. yet for ſanctification of life
to the obedience of faith. For if holy fleſh
under the Law could non legallie ſanctifie
everie thing (no nor any thing which was
ioyned unto it) by touching of it; no more

can the doctrines of faith and iuſtification
under the Goſpell truely taught,
and publikly profeſſed in all the Churches
of Chriſt amongſt us, ever by any
poſſible meanes make the callings, ceremonies,
or geſtures in controverſie, lawfull
or indifferent, ſeeing theſe are not ordained
by God, and therefore that miniſtery
that ſpends it ſtrength for the iuſtification
of them, though it may perhaps continue
ſome meaſure of knowledge in the
hearers, yet is it greatly to be feared, that
all thoſe who freely conforme thereunto,
and wholy depend thereon, ſhall rather
ſcatter then gather any ſaving grace or
ſanctification thereby.
            But to this it is ſaid that theſe ceremonies
callings and geſtures are not thoſe of
poperie
               Object. (for nullum ſimile eſt Idem) but the
graue and adviſed ordinances of the holy
Catholicke Church that hath come from
amongſt them, and cleane ſeparated from
Antichriſt, at leaſt in all fundamentall
points of doctrine concerning our Iuſtification,
and therefore without all queſtion
ought by everie obedient Childe to bee
conformed unto.
            Alas what means then the lowing of
theſe Oxen and bleating of the ſheepe?
               Anſw. Yea I
do friendly intreate theſe Merchants of
experience in and with theſe true weſt
Churches of Chriſt,1. Sam. 15. 14. adviſedly to view and
take particular notice of theſe pleaſantRevel. 18. 11. 14.
               
               wares ſo full of delicacy, which their ſouls
by reaſon of their excellent fatnes, do ſo
greedily yea moſt violently thirſt or luſte
after, and ſincerely to conſider whether
they be not ſo like to thoſe of poperie as
one naughtie egge can poſſibly be like another,
though perhaps one be but addle,
and the rottenneſſe of the other moſt offenſiuely
ſtinkes; the one moſt noyſome,
the better very unholeſome.
            But here our adverſaries will confeſſe,Object.
that for the forme they are alike indeed,
as one partridge is to another, but in their
uſe and intention moſt oppoſite, even
cleane contrary.
            But is not this I pray you,Anſw. ſome ſmall
parcell of the voyce of that beaſt, yea is
it not an apparant branch of his great
blaſphemie, to aſſume authoritie, to ordaine
ceremonies and callings for the
publicke worſhip of God, and to
appropriate unto them holy or religious
uſes, and ſpirituall intentions,
which power is onely proper and peculiar
unto God himſelfe; and yet even
this divine authoritie doe they dare to
aſſume, as their divino iure hath publicklie
proclaimed to all the Churches in the
world. But to leaue this to their better
conſideration, and to aſſume that which
which they muſt needes bee willing to
grant, that the things in queſtion are in
their outward forme like unto thoſe of

popery, but not in their uſe (at leaſt as
it is preached.) I humbly deſire them to
conſider whether this bee not (without
any turning or winding) a direct and
manifeſt breach of the ſecond commandement,
where the Lord forbids all
Churches under what climate or government
ſoever, (not ſimply as I may ſay
to haue, but) to make Images, or any
viſible repreſentations of the eternall
loue of God the Father, and of
the incomprehenſible, and inviſible
grace of IESVS CHRIST ſhed abroad
in our hearts by the Holy Ghoſt;
but as if the Lord had ſaid, I know
it is abſolutelie neceſſarie in my outward
and publicke worſhip, to haue
certaine viſible ſignes and formes (ſubiect
to common ſence and reaſon) which
muſt haue this heavenlie uſe, even
to repreſent to the minde and underſtanding
by the eye of faith, theſe ſpirituall
graces, for elſe the imagination
beeing left at libertie, and not
preciſelie tied to theſe ſet formes, and
divine ordinances, will bee ſo full
of wandring fantaſies, in hearing, ſeeing,
taſting, handling, and meditating,
as the ſoule can never poſſibly bee edified:
But yet (ſaith the Lord.) Thou
ſhalt not make or deviſe theſe: I doe reſerue
that glory to my ſelfe, and will
not under Law or Goſpell, giue it (no

not in the leaſt circumſtance of publicke
and religious uſe in my worſhip and ſervice
to any other.
            But (ſay our adverſaries) wee doe not
take that glory to our ſelues,Object. therefore
wee haue not broken this commandement.
            I confeſſe between the theife and the receauer,Anſw.
the whore and the bawd there is
indeed ſome manifeſt difference, and therfore
to auoide all manner of contention
herein, it is as if the Lord had ſaid in plainer
termes, Thou whoſeuer thou art generall
counſell, or nationall ſynode, ciuill
magiſtrate, or eccleſiaſticall Ruler, or both
together ſhalt not make, or being made,
ſhalt not command, or teach any to conforme
vnto any thing of Religious vſe,
pertaining to my worſhip and ſervice,
which I may ſelf haue not commanded,
no nor the liknes of any ſuch thing, either
in forme or vſe ſo that if theſe things in
queſtion be but like popiſh devices and be
not cōmanded by God, we may not for any
cauſe or conſideration or in any reſpect
whatſoeuer bowe downe vnto them, that is
intertaine or ſhewe forth any reuerent
eſtimation of them and ſo onely in a good
meaning, for peace and quietnes ſake
coform vnto them in the worſhip of God.
Vnleſſe therfore the verie touching of holy
things in or by the ſoundnes of ſome doctrines
in our Church and ſo as it were

carrying a part of holy fleſh in the ſkirt
of our garment or divine ſervice be a ſufficient
warrant to make any ceremonie
lawful,Hag. 2. 13. yea though it be taken from the
heathen poets, from the Turkiſh Alcaron,
or the Popes maſſebook, yet vpon intentionall
altering of the vſe, they may be,
very ſafely cōformed vnto in the publick
worſhip of God? their argument of haueing
the ſubſtance, hath no iot of ſubſtance
in it at all. Therefore vnleſſe their words,
reaſons, and arguments whereby they perſwade
to cōformitie,Ezek 3. 17. come from the mouth
of God we haue ſufficient forewarning, no
not in any caſe to conform unto the, but
to eſteeme them as verie chaffe huft and
puft up perhaps into a verie great bulke
making a goodlie ſhew in outward appearance,Ier. 23. 28.
by excellencie of words and art, but
being winnowed or tried by the fanne of
the Lord no corne of grace or one grain
of goodneſſe can be found therein, and
this is the verie cauſe why the Lord
threatens to bee or to come againſt ſuch
ſweet tongued preachers that labour chiefly
for a ſweet deliverie,verſ. 31. and to that end
ſteale the word,verſ. 30. never applying it to the
right end and uſe, but as it were by force
and armes doe take and carrie away the
true ſcence, intent and meaning of the
ſcriptures ordeined onely to maintain the
truth, & by tricks of wit, & tearms of art,
they enforce thē (at leaſt to ſeem) to maintaine

errors even the meere Inventions of
men, and this, in ſome falſe; in many
flattering, and in moſt a dreaming kind of
preaching, is the onely and main cauſe of
error and ſchiſmes,verſ. 32▪
                diverſitie of opinons &
ſects that are among the people, not bringing
any other profit in the world unto
their hearers, but either to nuzle them ſtill
in ignorance, or to bee utterlie out of
loue with the trueth, from hence then
haue wee good warrrant to adjudge all
their doctrins which are not according to
the word of God to be verie lies, though
they ſhew never ſo great art and learning
and thereby giue all good content to
their auditorie. For that high (or large)
commiſſion of all the true miniſters
of Chriſt extendes onelie to Teach the
Churches to obſerue and conforme unto all
things (not which they in wiſdom and
diſcretion ſhall adjudge meet and fit,Mat. 28. 2
                     •
                  
                or
think not to be forbiden but onely) what-whatſoever
Chriſt in the word hath commanded,
(and we will abjure whatſoever we
cannot prove to be his commandement) if
then they preſſe any thing which is not
the commandement of Chriſt they goe
beyond the limits of their commiſſion,
yea doe more then ever our Lord himſelfe
would do, for though indeed his 
                  〈…〉
               
               ctrines
ſeemed verie ſtrange yea impoſſi
                     ••
                  e
to ſome and others marveiled or were aſtonied
not at his allegation of fathers or patriarkes,Ioh. 3. 4. Ioh. 7. 15. Mat. 7. 28.
               
of Councels or Rabbies and other
learned authors, nor at his excellencie of
gifts: but at his knowledge in the Scriptures
for he taught as one having authority & not as
the learned Scribes, which he ſhewed in opening
the ſence and meaning of the holy
Ghoſt deliuering fit doctrines and making
profitable uſes and applications from the
word, ſo that he ſpake to the hearts and
conſciences of his hearers in the power of
his miniſterie which they doe not, who
teach the precepts of men, but ſpeak only
to the ears of their hearers, yet alwayes
the motives that he uſed to perſwade thē
to conformity was (not theſe things are
not forbidden, or they are the traditiōs of
our godlie Elders, or they are moſt fitting
this ſtate and preſent government, or it is
the pleaſure of the civill magiſtrate, or
the Church Rulers hold it meet, though
indeed divers learned men at that verie
time uſed ſuch kind of arguments in their
miniſterie and teaching for that ſubſcription
which they required, but) his Doctrine
which hee preached and the things
he urged and preſſed was not his own but
his that ſent him,
               verſ. 14. it was not of his humane
Invention (which yet was a great deall
freer from errour then all the fathers and

                  〈…〉
               cels in the world) but onelie ſuch as

                  〈◊〉
                (that ſent him to preach and teach
the glad tydings of ſalvation) was the authour
of.
            
               
As whereas ſome might object unto
him, theſe are thine own ſpeaches, and in
the pulpit you haue libertie to ſay what
you liſt, and to gird at whom you pleaſe,
make it playn to our capacities, how we
may know who is of God, and who is
ſent of the Devill, for thou and the Scribes
and Phariſees teach both of you verie
learnedlie and zealouſly but in verie manie
things, eſpecially in the ceremonies
and callings, actions, and geſtures of Religious
uſe in the publick worſhip of God
directlie contrarie one againſt the other,
and therefore moſt certaine, that both of
you cannot poſsiblie be of God, he therefore
giues them a playn and an unerring
Rule, whereby the ſimpleſt in a congregation
may diſcerne which preacher
teaches the doctrine that comes from
God, and which ſpeaks onely from men or
the deuill,verſ. 17 firſt do the will of God, get a good
and an honeſt heart, free from preiudice
and profaneſſe, readie to doe whatſoeuer
the Lord requires of thee in generall as
thou art a Chriſtian, or in particular as
thou art a magiſtrate or ſubiect, miniſter
or hearer, huſband or wife, parent or
child, maſter or ſeruant, bond or free, old
or young, rich or poore, maried or ſingle,
or of what condition ſoeuer, for els if
thou haue neuer ſo much wit & learning,
vnderſtanding & diſcretion, & haſt not reſpect
vnto all his cōmandemēts, though thou

               feare and reuerence the faithfull miniſters of
God,Mark. 6. 20. 
               yea heare them gladly, and reforme
thy ſelfe in doing many things which
they make plaine to thy conſcience,
is not the will of God, yet if thou
wilt not captivare thy Iudgment, and
ſubdue thy will and affections to be obedient
vnto all that God requires, it is impoſſible
for thee to diſcerne the truth or
to be preſerued from error: but if thou
wilt be ſincere (which is Euangelicall
perfection) & free thy heart from hypocriſie
(and be that thou wouldeſt ſeeme
to be) then if thou wouldeſt know indeed
which preachers are worthy of double
honour, and which deſerue ſhame & contempt;
looke not at their ſpruce neatneſſe
in their attire, or excellencie of gifs or degrees
of learning, for herein perhaps there
will appeare no great difference, both
being graue, wiſe, and underſtanding men,
but hee that is ſent of God ſeeketh his glory
that ſent him.
               Iohn. 7. 18. Yea, but which is that? the
ſame is true, you ſhall never heare him
preſſe or teach novelties or incerteinties,
but onely ſuch things as are plainlie
grounded on the word of trueth, whatſoever
they concern, faith or government,
godlineſſe or ceremonies, yea there is no
unrighteouſneſſe in him nor any unrighteous
inference, in his miniſterie, but Chriſtians
may moſt ſafelie commit their ſouls
to ſuch a one, even to depend upon his

miniſterie as a moſt powerfull means ordeined
by God to bring them to ſalvation;
the other ſeeks his own glory, that is a foule
fault and he is a very prowd fellow I warrant
him, what ſhew ſoever he make, but
how may we take true notice of him? he
ſpeaketh of himſelfe, and ſeeketh his own glory
his manner of preaching is in one kind or
other verie vaine glorious uſing all
poſſible means (though in ſome verie
covertly) to ſet forth himſelfe and
to make known his great reading or Iudgment,
his wit, art, and underſtanding in all
manners or kinds of deepe learning and
true ſchollerſhip, and therefore he comes
in Excellencie of words,
               1. Cor. 2. 1. and ſtudies moſt
painfullie and carefullie for ſuch Intiſing
ſpeeches wittie and well ordred ſayings,verſe 4.
pleaſing paſſages, pithy ſentences, and elegant
phraſes even whatſoeuer might raviſh
the hearers, and by the admiration
of the excellencie of his gifts and exquiſitneſſe
of his Art might ſo prevaile, that
their faith might be in the wiſedom of men,
               verſ. 5.
even to beleeve onely ſo much as fleſh
and blood can diſcloſe, a man by nature
may perceive, which kind of preaching
with words and manner of handling, which
mans wiſdom teacheth,
               verſ. 13. cap 1▪ 17. 
               makes the croſſe of
Chriſt of none effect, and when excellencie
or grace of words is more affected then
the dignitie or worthineſſe of the matter
which is intreated, then are their ſermons

beautified with moſt glorions ſpeeches
wherein the focre and power of eloquence
doth ſhew it ſelfe, to allure and
delight the hearers, but he that is ſent of
God, labours and ſtriues to ſpeake in ſuch
words and phraſes) ſeeme they never
ſo plaine, baſe or contemptible) wherein
the power of God may bee made manifeſt
to the conſciences of their hearers;Verſ. 18.
honour and reverence ſuch, but it
is moſt dangerous to commit thy ſoul unto
and to depend upon the miniſterie of
the other, though he be as great a ſcholler
and as wiſe a man as is in all the
World.
            Theſe courſes therefore all thoſe that
deſire to uſe their talents profitablie in
the miniſterie of the Church muſt purpoſely
avoid, even as they would the golden
legend,2. Pe. 1, 16. or like Deceiveable fables, not but
that thoſe to whom God hath given a
beautifull forme of ſpeaking may uſe
it, as well as they that have comely ſhape
or fairefaces, but as they that bee black
muſt not paint themſelues, ſo preachers
may not affect oratorie to the eare but
to the heart, nor yet, that rude and groſſe
phraſes are the onely powerfull manner
of ſpeaking, but that every one is to uſe
that gift which God hath given him to
the edification of his auditorie, which
conſiſts in delivering the ſence plainly in
the evidence of the ſpirit, and applying it

powerfully to the conſcience, and this
deuiding the word aright that euerie one may
haue his portion ſeaſonably, ought to be
ſtudied for and affected of all faithfull
miniſters, & not a painted or penſild maner
of ſpeaking. But thoſe that ſcorn this mā
               ner
of handling the word, are to bee eſteemed
vaineglorious teachers, though
their mouths even runne over whith all
manner of art, eloquence, and learning.
And as for thoſe that preach any thing
which God hath not commaunded, or
perſwade to conforme to any thing
which is not grounded on the ſcriptures,
from theſe words of Saint Peter, wee may
ſafely eſteeme them (whether they ſpeake
elegantly or rudely) but fabulous fellowes
and Deceiueable doctors, in taking vpon
them like young maſters,
               Iam. 3. 1. or old Rabbies,
               Mat. 23. 8. to
teach, defend, or maintaine any thing
in Gods worſhip, which Chriſt the ſole
Doctor of all thinges whatſoeuer of Religious
vſe, and which his Churches vpon
any cauſe and in any reſpect may conform
vnto, neuer commanded, taught, or in the
ſcriptures publiſhed, or ſo much as once
mentioned by precept or preſident, yea
obſerue them wel, and take heed of them,
theſe are the teachers of falſe Chriſts, for
they may as well teach,Luc. 21. 8. & Mat. 24. 5. 23. 24. 26. that here is Chriſt,
or loe he is there, as preſſe Chriſtians to cō
               forme
to this ceremonie or that geſture,
of religious uſe in the publicke worſhip

of God, which Chriſt neither here nor
there, nor any where, ever taught, or in
any degree or reſpect commanded; ſo
that if you heare any preachers teahing
things with great zeale and learning,
which are not the direct commandements
of Chriſt, or grounded plainly in
the evidence of the ſpirit upon the unerring
rocke of the ſacred Scripture; I will
not deny but ſuch may ſpeake in the power
of a Spirit, but certainly not of Gods
Spirit,Iohn. 16. 13. 
               For he even the Spirit of truth, teaches
nothing of himſelfe (though he be
the very fountaine of all truth) but onely
what he hath heard in the word of the
Father, not that he needs any inſtructer or
direction, but that the moſt glorius and
bleſſed Trinitie (as the ſole and onely
way to preſerue all true Churches or
congregations in holy and heavenly unitie)
hath tied himſelfe (as it were) or
covenanted, that though there be many other
things of moſt admirable excellencie,Iohn. 21. 25▪
               
yet to require conformitie to nothing but
thoſe things which are written in the ſcriptures;Iohn. 20. 31.
ſeeing they are fully and perfectlie
ſufficient unto faith or beliefe, and therefore
unto all manner of godlineſſe, the
fruits of faith, and ſo to eternall life, the
end or reward of faith through his name.
            
            If any man therfore undertake to teach
the Churches of Chriſt let him ſpeake as
the words of God,
               1. Pet. 5. 11. and not as the cannons

and precepts of men do enioyne, for as
God is glorified by thoſe, ſo is hee
much diſhonoured by theſe▪ yea though
they ſpeak the wiſdom of this world which
the great ones Commend,1. Cor. 2. 6. the learned approue,
and all doe generallie admire: for
the kingdom of God (or preaching) conſiſts
not in word,
               1. Cor. 4. 20. in phraſes, in elegancie of
ſpeach, excellencie of uttrance, or in any
other endowments of Art & nature, but
in the evidence of the ſpirit & of power,
               1. Cor. 2. 4. when
the coſciences of the hearers by the right
handling of the word ſhall bee wrought
upō, by making manifeſt the verie ſecrets
of their hearts and ſo enforced to humble
their ſouls and worſhip God, and
confeſſe not that great learning or reading
is in the preacher,1. Cor. 14. 25. but plainlie that
God is in that miniſterie indeed, becauſe it
caſteth down (and doth not lift up as the
word or doctrine of men doth,1. Theſ. 2. 13. becauſe
their manner of teaching is meerly carnall
euen ſuch as is approved by men but not
warranted by the word) ſtrong holds or
the Imaginations and Inventions of men
which in a high degree do exalt themſelves
againſt the knowledge of God,2. Cor. 10. 14. even
againſt thoſe doctrines of ceremonies
callings & geſtures which God,verſ. 5. hath made
known in the word, and ſet mens thoughts
and conſciences at libertie from the obedience
of Chriſt, according to the ſcriptures
concerning theſe things onelie under

pretence of not being forbidden, and
ſo by their conformitie to that which
Chriſt hath not commanded doe moſt
ſtrongly repaire and fortifie t
                  •
               oſe ſtrong
holds of humane devices concerning voluntary
religions, or ceremonies, which the
Lord by all meanes labours (as being the
greateſt hinderers of the peace of his
kingdome, and foſterers of his rebellious
enemies) to haue utterlie ruinated: yea,
and as Chriſt hath ordained,Epheſ. 5. 26. to ſanctifie
and cleanſe his Church by the obedience
of faith, which is the true conformitie of
the doctrines of the word: ſo theſe men
by preſſing conformitie to ceremonies,
callings, and geſtures, which haue no
warrant in the word, do directly intimate
(though they pretend the cleane contrarie)
that their religion is but a doctrine
of the tongue, and not of the reformation
of the life. For if they ſubſcribe and haue
underſtanding of the heauenly doctrines,
and be able to retaine them in memorie,
and ſo at a trice can diſcourſe or reaſon
of them, then are they abſolutely qualified
and excellent Divines, though they
make no conſcience of that which they
know and profeſſe, further then they ſee
cauſe, & ſo indeed do moſt beaſtly pollute
and by plain intimation both of their doctrine
and life, perſwade their hearers
to defile the Church of Chriſt, and
to take away the beautie & glorie of it,verſ. 27.
               
which is to be free frō human inventions▪
& to fill it with all horrible ſpots and
wrinkles of worldly traditions, that ſo it
may never be holy, but full of blame.
            
            Are you not aſhamed you deceitfull
guides,Pro. 26. 18, 19. to caſt abroad theſe firebrands and
mortall inſinuations in your lectures, ſermons,
or writings & cōverſations, and yet
proteſt you meane no hurt? is not your
fiery heat in theſe courſes a fained madnes,
or doe you make any more conſcience
thereof, then of your play or ſporte?
            Yea (ſay they) our purpoſe in ſo doing
is to do much good,Object. for we teach & preſſe
that in this conformitie which we ſo perſwade
unto, every one ſhould come with
a good & honeſt heart to perform theſe actions
& geſtures withal,Pro. 23. 26. for that is it which
the Lord requires, yea hee will paſſe by
much infirmitie where he findes true ſinceritie.
            So that belike if men ſeem to haue good
affections,Anſw. that ſhall be ſufficient warrāt to
iuſtifie any ſtrange or vncommanded geſture
or ceremonie in the publicke worſhip
of God; yea though it be never ſo
wickd (at leaſt in appearance) and Idolatrous
an action yet if they meane well
and beleeue as the Church beleeues, that
theſe things are indifferent and lawfull, or
not forbidden all ſhall be exceeding well:
and what I pray you, if the Iewes with
good and honeſt hartes even ſincerely

purpoſing and verely intending to winne
them vnto God do marrie wyues of Aſhdod
Amon and Moab,
               Nehens. 13. 23. 24. dare you ſay theſe mariages
are lawfull? or can their Children
euer poſſibly (for all this good meaning)
ſpeake the language of Canaan ſincerely
or trewly? no verely; though you charge
them vpon paine of death to prepare them
ſelues therevnto neuer ſo hartely, yet doe
you but preſſe them to a thing impoſſible,
be not wiſer then God leaſt it proue your
confuſion. Henceforth therfore I beſeech
you perſwade no man to conformitie to
religious actions without a Religious
warrant; no not upō any good meaning or
holie intention but Reproue them rather
and profeſſe your diſlike of them,verſ. 25. yea curſe
and ſmite them and pull of their heare, and
take an oath of them by God, not to make
any ſuch marriages, but manifeſtlie ſhew
your contempt of them, and howſoever
the wiſdom of this world will cenſure
ſuch proceedings for moſt uncivill parts
and indiſcreet actions, full of dangerous
violence and unſeemlie raſhnes, readie to
tumble down and overthrow all things
that diſlike you; yet you may remember
that you haue good Nehemiah a moſt
zealous and godly prince, and Chriſt leſus
the meekeſt of all the Lambes of God
for your patterns and preſidents and therfore
moſt worthie patrons of ſuch zealous
courſes for and in the cauſes of the

houſe of God. Oh, how ſilly a part was
it, (crie theſe Coole, temperate diſcreete
and indifferent perſons) and verie much
unbeſeeeming the gravitie of his perſon,
and holineſſe of his profeſſion, yea rather
Child then Chriſt-like with a ſcourge,
               Ihon. 2. 15. and
that alſo (a hundred to one) of his own
making to driue ſo many graue, Ancient,
and moſt Reuerend fathers out of their
holie offices and moſt honorable functions,
which they and their predeceſſors
before them had long even time out
out of minde to the comfort of many
godlie and well affected people peaceably
and commendablie enioyed; greevouſlie
and moſt dangerouſly diſturbing thereby
the quiet & ſettled peace of the Church,
which principally conſiſteth in theſe ſpirituall
callings and outward condition
thereof, which were largelie allowed and
highly approved of by the publick cōſent
of the whole Empire as moſt fitting for
that preſent gouernment, yea and not content
herewith, to uſe them with moſt baſe
unreverent and diſpitefull termes calling
them (I meane theſe graue ſpirituall and
reverent men) arrant theeues,
               Math. 21. 13. & theſe their
eccleſiaſticall callings verie dens of theft, as
if they had harbored the verieſt knaues
and moſt greedie devowring cormorants,
that regarded nothing neither religion
nor honeſtie but their 
                  •
               own profit) in all
the world, yea as if theſe proceedings and

courſes did waſte more of the ſubiects
eſtate and ſubſtance of the comminaltie,
then all the taxations or impoſitions of the
civil magiſtrate (and yet I tell you in your
eare, for I would be loth to be brought to
rehearſall for it, a great deale more might
be ſaid for the iuſtifying of the worſt of
theſe human inventions, & to proue them
farre more convenient and everie way
by many degrees more tollerable then
the verie beſt of theſe in controverſie
amongſt us:) henceforth therfore (I adviſe
you) unleſſe you will openly profeſſe your
delight in, and therefore deſire to haue the
ſpeech of Aſhdod ſtill ſounding in your
eares, or dare reproue the holy Ghoſt for
inſerting in the ſacred Scriptures by way
of propheſie, his divine warrant (which alwayes
carries in it what forme ſoever it
bee of, the nature of a precept) for the
zeale of all Gods ſervants in theſe cauſes
of his houſe or publick worſhip,Pſ. 69. 9. I ſay for
ever hereafter hold your peace and teach
your people that they muſt bind themſelues
by an oth by God neuer to make any
ſuch marriages,Nehem. 13. 25. I meane to Conforme
any more to any ſuch mixtures in the geſtures
or ceremonies of religious uſes in
the publick worſhip or divine ſervice of
our holie God, for do not theſe words,
for I the Lord thy God am a Iealous God, inferre
plainly that ſtrange ceremonies and
callings uncommanded geſtures or actions

having ſtate in Religious worſhip, are no
more allowed of him but even as hatefull
and abominable at leaſt, as theſe ſtrange
mariages? Though therfore your miniſtery
abound in all excellent & admirable gifts
that amongſt many nations, there be none
like unto you for your multitude and all
maner of learning and other worthy endowments,
yet as ſtrange women cauſed even
Salomon himſelf moſt fearfully to ſin?
ſo theſe unlawful ceremonies & callings,verſ. 26.
and the amiable but moſt ſtrange preferments
which in & by conformity to them
are obtained, do ſo intice and allure you,
as they cauſe you (even many that are
of moſt excellent parts) to ſuſcribe
to verie ſtrange poſitions and practiſes
for the upholding the Reputation
and credit of theſe Courſes to put in practiſe
ſtrange cōcluſions. Shall we then obey
you,
               verſ. 27. 
               and doe all this great evill and to tranſgreſſe
againſt our God even to marrie ſtrange
wiues, or to conforme to theſe ſtrange
or uncōmanded ceremonies & geſtures in
the worſhip of God; ſeing though the Lord
promiſeth to ſhew mercie unto thouſands
yet it is only to thoſe that keep his commā
                  dements;
ſo that unleſſe theſe ceremonies,
callings and geſtures, be the commandements
of God, the Church hath no promiſe
of him for a bleſſing, what affectiōs ſoever
they uſe thē with all, but rather of a curſe
though their intētions be never ſo good in

their owne perſwaſions) by conforming
unto them. VVhat then, though it were
true, that they be not forbidden, yet I
beſeech you conſider whether not being
commanded, they be not (at the verie
beſt that can poſſibly be made of them)
a ſpice of Ephraims baſe mixture.
               Hoſe. 7. 8.
            
            Indeed our ſubſtance or doctrine of the
Church publickly profeſſed, is as one ſide
of a cake upon the hearth, very wel baked,
but the other ſide of our worſhip conſiſting
of ceremonies and callings, actions
or geſtures, is very dough, and was never
yet throughly turned; who dare then haue
ſo baſe an opinion of the Almighty, as to
conſent or conforme in any reſpect to offer
ſuch unſavoury bread in the divine
worſhip of our holy God, ſeeing all the
wit, Art, and learning in the whole world
can never make it holeſome? VVhat, are
his eyes growne dimme, that hee cannot
ſee both ſides? or is his taſte ſo decayed,
that he cannot perceiue our halfe-baked
ſervice? or is he no better, or no more to
be regarded, but that any thing is good
enough for him in his ſervice? The watch,
men of Ephraim ſhould bee with my God,
               Hoſe. 9. 8.
and teach nothing but what he hath commanded,
but the Prophet or Preacher is as
the ſnare of a fowler in all his wayes, all his
ſtudy and care is how hee may prevaile
with his hearers to enſnare their mindes
by conformitie to mens Inventions in

Gods worſhip, and ſo bring hatred into the
houſe of his God.
            
            O fooliſh people, how long will ye be
ignorant,verſ. 
                     •
                  . and commit your ſoules to ſpirituall
men, that are mad, even without any
government of Gods ſpirit, or direction
of the ſcriptures: for is all the learning
and wiſedome in the world without theſe
any better then lunacie? what louely
grapes did your fathers times bring forth?verſ. 10.
how many ſweete cluſters did flaming
ſtakes affoord? but you haue ſeparated
your ſelues by conformitie unto the
ſhame or ſimilitude of the inventions of
Baal Peor, which are the Abhomination as
well as the idolatry it ſelfe, therefore Ephraim
thy glory decayes,verſ. 11▪
                yea flies away
like a bird, there is none that do ſincerely
reverence thee,Hoſe. 7. 9. 
               gray haires are upon thee,
though thou conſider it not. Doe not all
men ſee that thou haſt nothing but devices
(meere tricks of wit though never ſo
diſhoneſt) to defend their owne Invention
many altars thou doeſt make (great
ſhewes of devotion,Hoſe. 8. 11. and exceeding care
of religion thou doeſt pretend) but all
that thou doeſt is to defend thy ſinne even
to gaine eſtimation to thy carnall devices,
which haue no warrant from the
Lord; nay thoſe that dare not comforme
to thy Canons or courſes,verſ. 12. becauſe the great
things of Gods law, written in the Scriptures
doe not require it (for all other

writings are ſmall in reſpect of theſe and
and to bee regarded but as trifles) thou
counteſt them ſtrange men, it being a
ſtrange thing with thee to looſe any
thing for Chriſts ſake, but to forſake their
livings and liberties, to looſe their Credits
and reputations, rather then to conforme
to theſe humane Inventions, yea
thereby to expoſe themſelues by their deprivation
to open cōtempt, miſerable povertie,
bands and impriſonment, ſeemes
to be one of the ſtrangeſt wonders of the
world, that any of ſound iudgment ſhould
euer haue ſo little wit in them, thus doeſt
thou glorifie thy ſelf, though thou committeſt
iniquity in Gilgal, for there is the cauſe
why the Lord doth hate thee, even for the
wickedneſſe of thine Inventions in his worſhip
which there thou haſt ſet up in great
pomp & ſtate,Hoſe. 8. 15. therefore will the Lord caſt
thee out of his houſe, or Church becauſe
all they ſpiritual Lords or princes are Rebels,
               verſ. 7.
iuſtifying theſe carnall deviſes againſt the
plaine evidence of the ſcripture, Increaſing
daily errors and lies, which in the end
will be their own Deſtruction,
               Hoſe. 12. 1. which yet
they hope to prevent by making a covenant
or contract with Aſhur and carrying
oyle into Egypt, Refining and ſo refreſhing
their old Imagerie with new painted
devices, yet thou feedeſt thy ſelfe
with this winde and art very confident
that theſe ſecret and hidden plots of thy

cloſe and ſubtill fetches, ſhall maintaine
thy greatneſſe, though thou grow graceleſſe
perſwading Chriſtians yea compelling
ſome to conforme to offer uncleane
bread upon the Lords Altar and yet would
haue us ſubſcribe that this is not contrary
to the word of God.Mala. 1. 7.
            
            And in great diſdaine they demand
wherein haue wee polluted the Lord, or the
worſhip or ſeruice of God? alas when you
preſſe vs to a geſture at the Lords owne
table, which is not warranted by the
word do you not ſay or directly inferre,
the table of the Lord is not to be regarded:
               verſ. 8.
for it matters not what geſture we vſe no
ſay you, though our ceremonies be lame,
               Object.
and our callings blind, and our geſtures
ſicke, yet it is no euill, for they are ordeined
and haue been long eſtabliſhed by
publick decree, to be the offrings and
ſacrifices of the Lord, and therfore ought
with all reverent reſpect to be conformed
unto of all, rather then to diſturbe the
quiet poſſeſſion and peace of the Church,
               Luc. 11. 21.
(which by a ſtrong hand theſe armed men
haue obtained and keepe as the onelie entrance
or rather maintenance of their
glorious pallaces.)
            Is it no matter then for the outward
worſhip,Anſw. ſo the inward bee intended and
profeſſed to be good and ſound? why do
you then condemne the papiſts for taking
away the ſecond commandement quite

out of the table, and you letting it ſtand
take the effect quite away? giue them but
the ſame libertie which your ſelves exerciſe,
and they will quickly agree with
you for the ſubſtance of that which is inward
I warrant you, for who can udge
the mentall reſervation, and you require
no more but an outward profeſſion and
ſubſcription, at leaſt though you teach
the neceſſity of inward ſinceritie, yet
your own practiſes doe manifeſt that the
other without this, will ſerue the turne
wel enough, but be pleaſed I pray you (if
any thing poſſibly be able to ſatisfie you)
to heare the Lords own anſwer, go your
wayes and when you haue any purpoſe to
ſhew your loue, and tender your ſervice
yea in a moſt ſpeciall manner unto your
prince, offer him ſuch preſents, will he bee
content with thee, or accept thy perſon ſaith
the Lord of hoſts? yea when thou inviteſt
thy friends or neighbours to thy own table,
do but ſerue them with ſuch dainties
and diet-bread, and marke how they
like it; nay ſee if thy horſe will not blow
upon it and refuſe it, though perhaps thy
greedy dogges or grunting hogges will
accept it, yea though neither ſide were
ever baked on the hearth; yet you teach
and preach, you profeſſe and perſwade,
and ſpend a great deale of time (which
you had need to redeeme) by many long
and (as you thinke) learned arguments

and wiſe reaſons, to proue that this is
good enough for the Lord, that is, that he
will verily accept ſuch a publicke worſhip
and ſervice at our hands, though no
body haue any care to ſhut the doores,
               Mal. 1. 10. to
make due triall of that which is brought
for an offering (as theſe things in controverſie)
whether it ought to enter into the
Lords houſe, as being commanded or required
by him, or whether it bee the
meere invention or wil-worſhip of men,
and ſo (what goodly and golden ſhewes
ſoever it make) to haue the doores ſhut
againſt it, and not to offer abhomination
before the Lord: but come who will
come, and bring with him what hee will,
though it be not according to the commandement
and holy ordinance, yet if
he will but come and conforme, preſently
you receiue him, and moſt readily kindle
a fire, and offer up that which he hath
brought, though there be never ſo evidēt
appearance, ſimilitude or likeneſſe of Idolatry
in it: Is not this directly to worſhip
God in vaine? even to kindle a fire vpon
his altar to no purpoſe?verſ. 1▪ 
                  
                     •
                  
                yea you grow
weary of the Lords own ordinances, they
doe not giue full content to your ſenſes,
and therefore yee ſnuffe at them as being
too baſe for your greatneſſe, wanting
pompe and ſtate, and I know not what,
and approue rather of any thing never ſo
abſurd, ridiculous, and popiſh, even that

which is torne, lame and ſick, ſhould I accept
this of your hand ſaith the Lord?
               verſ. 14. but curſed
be the deceaver, you that haue my ſervants
(the males in your flocks) whom I haue
fullie quallified to make the truth of
theſe things known, and who haue faithfullie
ſpoken my word in my name and in
this behalfe, and will depriue them, and
purpoſely maintaine (though if need require
you know how to make ſhew of
the cleane contrarie) Brokers of Corrupt
doctrines, perſwaders to, and defendors
of unwarrantable ceremonies,
callings, and geſtures, and ſo deall deceitfullie
with the Lords people in theſe great
things of his law or publick worſhip,Hoſ. 8. 12.
teaching them in ſteed of theſe to ſacrifice
unto the Lord, a corrupt thing, you
I ſay,Mala. 1. 14. ſhall certeinly bee accurſed, for
I am a great King ſaith the Lord of
hoſts and my name is terrible among the
heathen.
            
            Seeing then everie David (Churches
or particular perſons after Gods own heart)
doth baniſh ſuch lame ceremonies blind
callings,2. Sam. 5. 8. and ſicke geſtures from all the
parts of Gods publick worſhip, as things
which his ſoule hateth; Oh thou ſonne of
David ſmite them and deliver us from
them for our verie ſoules doe abhorre them,
and put it into the faithfull heart of thy
friend and ſervant Iacob,
               Gen. 35. 1. 2▪ 3. 4. 
               to put away

theſe ſtrange Gods and earings, and ſo to
cleanſe all his kingdoms, by burying theſe
humane Inventions under the oke which
is by Shechem.
               Iohn. 2. 15.
            
            And you the faithfull ſervants of
that ſonne of David, though the driving
out of the temple (or place or callings appointed
for Gods▪ publicke worſhip) not
onely the more groſſe abuſes (which had
been they will confeſſe no more then was
fit and convenient) but even All humane
Inventions which he found therein, with
the ſheep and oxen (things commanded by
God to be uſed in his ſervice, yet this maner
of providing them and making them
readie for the people of God, not being
commanded by the Lord made them abominable)
and powring out the changers mony,
thereby diſcovering the gainfulnes of
thoſe places, which onely kept and held in
theſe abuſes) and overthrowing the tables.
And the reſt of our Saviours cariage (who
is Lord and bleſſed for ever) when he would
manifeſtly and mightly declare himſelfe to
bee the onely and ſole king or ſupreame
head of his Church: in generall, and of
all the nationall▪ or ſeverall congregations
therein in particular by exerciſing dominion
not onely in the fundamentall
points of faith and juſtification, but
in everie things of Religious uſe ſeeme
it never ſo ſmall even in theſe circumſtances
or appurtenances ſeemed

unto fleſh and bloud ſomething rude and
indiſcreet, and that the buſineſſe was not
ſo carried as the peace of that Church
wherein he was borne and bred required,
or as the reverence of the Eccleſiaſticall
perſons in authority deſerued, yea ſeeing
as carnall reaſon doth think and cenſure)
theſe matters were but things indifferent;
though there was queſtionles many excellent
parts in him, yet his diſcenting from
the Church government, ſo ancient & ſo
reverent, yea and by generall conſent uppon
moſt graue and learned conſultation
with all poſſible wiſdom, with ſuch good
ſucceſſe ſo long eſtabliſhed, muſt needs
argue exceeding great weaknes in him (by
our learned adverſaries louely oratory) becauſe
hee was ſo violent in theſe ſmall triviall
matters as if the verie ſubſtance of
Religion had conſiſted in them, ſurelie
(goodmen) they ſeeme to be hartelie ſorie
that he overſhot himſelfe more in this
then all the things that ever he did in his
whole life, and did not performe this action
with ſuch moderation and diſcretion
as was fit, and as a matter of ſuch high
conſequence deſerved, notwithſtanding all
this, and whatſoever had been or ſhall be
ſaid againſt ſuch proceedings, I humblie
beſeech all ſuch as unfeinedlie deſire to
ſerve the Lord Chriſt to Remember,
               verſ. 17. that
it is as a perpetuall law to bind Gods ſervannts
even all poſteritie for ever, that,

when the outward and publick worſhip
of God is thus corrupted and defiled by
mens Inventions in the ceremonies,
               Pſ. 69. 9▪
                
               callings
geſtures and actions thereof, all thoſe in
whom the ſpirit of true Zeale doth abide
muſt be ſo far of from conforming upon
any termes unto theſe things, or any of
them as upon pain of Gods high diſpleaſure
(according as it is written of them)
they muſt in one degree or other manifeſt
their Iudgement in the diſlike of them
and everie of them yea though they expoſe
their perſons, their credit and reputations
to the like diſgraces and Rebukes
by ſo doing.
            Finallie you reverend and learned adverſaries,
ſeing civill policie is the ſtrongeſt
argument that can be preſſed for that
conformitie, which with might and main
you doe ſo eagerly perſwade unto; Conſider
I beſeech you the iſſue of the verie
like courſe (a remarkable preſident) againſt
our Lord and Saviour Ieſus Chriſt. The
Scribes and Phariſees, you know, though
ſtill they cried out for arguments, and
miracles,
               Iohn. 2▪ 18. reaſons and ſignes to prove his divine
authority,Iohn. 3. 2. yet it was well knowen
among themſelues, though they made
outward ſhew of the contrary that hee
was a teacher come from God, but yet conſidering
that his doctrine (though holy
and divine in all things) tended directly
to the overthrow of their Eccleſiaſtall

pollicie and government, ſo that their authoritie
and dignitie, their reputation
and greatneſſe, muſt of neceſſitie come
downe, if the truth which hee taught
were once received; they concluded,
(meerely at firſt in civill pollicie) that
though hee were a holy man in life,
and of great power in his miniſterie, and
did exceeding much good thereby, yea
and held nothing but what was truelie
grounded on the word of God, yet of
abſolute neceſſitie (upon the cauſes and
conſiderations aforeſaid, he muſt be oppoſed;
even becauſe hee muſt: and ſo
from this ſeeming ſmall beginning, they
fell to plots and devices how to bring
his opinions into diſgrace with the
ſtate in generall, and with ſome ſpeciall
perſons that were of greateſt and higheſt
account therein in particular, perſwading
them that they were his verie purpoſed
plots, and craftie devices to croſſe
their deſignes, and ſo by degrees they
came to a politicke mallice of his perſon
(ariſing onely from the hatred of his
doctrine) which was the mother of
their moſt fearefull and finall apoſtaſie,
never reſting themſelues till by flattering
inſinuations, falſe accuſations, open
ſlanders, falſifying mens teſtimonies
or depoſitions, and like abhominable
practiſes (the particulars whereof
are a moſt worthy worke to diſcover, and

at length by falſe witneſſes, and plaine
periurie, they not onely brought his doctrine
and perſon into open and generall
hatred, but moſt maliciouſlie
practiſed, and perfidiouſly procured
his cruell and bloudie death. If then
in your ignorance you haue ſpoken aagainſt
the Sonne of man in this cauſe
of his ſervants (who dare not conforme
to humane inventions,Luc. 12. 10. but labour for
reformation, that by the Magiſtrates authority
al theſe novelties might bee driven
away, and their favourers whipped out
of the Temple) upon your repentance it
ſhall bee forgiven; but if when you haue
conſidered their arguments and reaſons
againſt conformitie, you ſee the euidence
of the ſpirit according to the Scriptures
appearing therein, and yet for theſe or
ſuch like politike cōſiderations you thereunto
moving,Hebr. 10▪ 26. 27. you perſiſt willingly in the
defence of conformitie, your caſe is moſt
dangerous, and to be lamented. Take heed
therefore of tranſgreſſing maliciouſly,
though it bee never ſo pollitickly, the
Lord of hoſtes,
               Pſa. 1. 5. 
               the God of Iſraell will not
be mercifull unto ſuch (the fervent prayer
of all the faithfull is againſt it.) Enter
not then into the Councell or convocations
with the wicked,
               Pſ. 
                     •
                  . 1. how to iuſtifie and
defend their courſes, or if that bee
paſt, ſtand not therein, be not ſtiffe and
reſolute in ſuch wicked proceedings: for

if once you ſit downe, or ſettle your
ſelues (with reſolution) to proue the
lawfulneſſe of the ſeates of theſe ſcorners,
or money-changers, you are neere vnto
curſing, and farre from the bleſſing, yea
the Lord thinking upon his congregation
which he hath poſſeſſed of old,
               verſ. 4. 5. 6. 
               and on the
rod of his inheritance which he hath redeemed,
and meaſured out for himſelfe, and
on mount Syon wherein hee hath dwelt,
will verily lift up his ſtrokes,
               Pſ. 74. 1. 2. 3. 
               and deſtroy
for ever every enemy that doth evill to the
Sanctuarie. Even ſo be it Lord Ieſus.
            
            If true Religion onely knits our heart unto
God, and all falſe Religions ſeperate our
hearts from God, then whatſoeuer is of
Religious uſe and to be conformed unto in
Gods publick worſhip, muſt be true (that
is truely grounded in the word of God) or
elſe it ſeparats us from God.
            But true Religion doth onely knit our hearts
unto God &c. and the geſture of kneeling
as it is urged being of Religious uſe and to
be conformd unto in Gods publick worſhip
is not true, (that is not truely grounded on
the word of God.)
            Therefore to Conforme to kneeling as it is
urged is to ſeparate from God.
            
               All feare or Religion towards God, not
taught by the Scripturs, but by the precepts;
of men, remooues the heart farre from God,

               yea the defence and juſtifying hereof
workes great wonders and marvels▪
               
the wiſedom of ſuch wiſe men ſhall periſh,
and the underſtanding of
their prudent men ſhall
bee hid: Eſa. 29.
13, 14.
         
         
            
            TO
THE CHVRCH
OF GREAT BRITtaine
in generall, or to the ſeverall
congregations or Churches
therein in particular, being the
true viſible Churches of
Chriſt, grace & peace
bee multiplied
for ever.
            IT is not vnknown, how vtterly vnlawful,
yea altogether impoſſible it is, to ſerue
or conforme to two maſters;
               Mat. 6. 24 as alſo that
by our fall in Adam we haue not onely
forſaken our firſt maſter of Creation,
who in our innocent eſtate did immediatly
direct, teach and leade vs into all truth,
but haue betaken vs to a new maſter
whoſe Inventions or nouelties we did
moſt voluntarily ſubſcribe vnto, euen
Satan who now doth immediately in the
eſtate of nature, guide and leade all the
children of men (as well in the Church

as out of it) into all falſitie and error in
all things concerning God and his Church
and yet alſo how euerie one naturally
doth moſt willingly (though ſome perhaps
more wiſely or learnedly, and others more
vilely and deſperately) yeeld their hartie
obedience vnto him, though not in their
purpoſe and intention, yet at leaſt in error
of their Iudgment and corrupted reſolution.
For the vnderſtanding being vtterly
blinded, we think in our reaſon, wiſdome
and learning, that to be certe
                  〈…〉
               ly good,
which is directly euill,Pſ▪ 78. 5
                     •
                  . 57. 58. & 1. King 11. 4. to 12. & 2. Cron. 11. 15. that to be cleare
light which is Egiptian darknes, that to be
the ſervice of God which is the apparant
worſhip of Deuills, and ſo think and are
verely perſwaded our maſter to be God,
when in verie trueth it is Satan. True it is,
that wiſdome, diſcretion, learning, and
many other excellent parts and gifts,
(yea euen in heavenly things) nature
may and doth ſtill by induſtrie attaine
vnto, but the ſauing or ſanctfying graces of
God which bring the heart vnto Chriſt,
(that new or renewing maſter) are ſupernaturall,
euen the immediate worke of
the holy ghoſt, whoſe ſchollers or ſeruants
euerie one of neceſſity muſt be that will be
ſaued, and thus farre I take it is agrreed
on all ſydes in all our Churches or congregations.
(For I ſpeak to none but to
ſuch among vs as profeſſe thēſelues to be
the ſchollers of Chriſt) now being matriculated

or by the bleſſed ſacrament of holy
Baptiſme Initiated into the ſchoole or
corporation or bodie of our Lord and
Saviour Ieſus Chriſt.
            
            I humbly beſeech euerie one that doth
ſincerely purpoſe euer to take the leſt degree
of true holines or ſanctification (without
which no man ſhal ſee God) ſeriouſly to conſider
what books (whether hiſtorical, propheticall,
politicall, poeticall, or Euangelicall)
or authours (as they terme
them) muſt here to this purpoſe be learned
and profeſſed and theſe are all bound
vp together in one volume of the canonicall,
ſacred or inſpired ſcriptures, and for
their excellencie called the Bible, all other
writers or authors diffring from theſe
in any thing concerning God or his worſhip,
by teaching or preſſing ſome things
which are not truly grounded vpon theſe,
are to bee eſteemed books of our ſecond
maſter,Gal. 1. 8. & therefore to be accurſed how honeſt
or holy ſoever their intention or drift
pretends or ſeems to be; yea of moſt abſolute
neceſſitie it followes, that all who
do upon any terms learne their leſſons
from thence and ſo conforme unto them,
do thereby conforme unto Satan, who of
all men (in their wits) is acknowledged to
be the author and teacher of all leſſons or
doctrines, concerning religious ceremonies,
callings, or geſtures in the worſhip of
God which are not in evidence and

power of the holy Ghoſt, plainly grounded
upon the word of God, for there bee
but two maſters, who are by Chriſt oppoſed
the one to the other, All trueth therefore
is to be learned of the one, and to be collected
or gathered onely out of his books
or ſacred writings, even from God to
whom onely wee muſt giue credit in his
word (for oportet diſcente credere) whatſoever
then is learned elſewhere, muſt needs
bee from that other maſter as the proper
leſſons of his open and free ſchoole (wherin
yet wee confeſſe all the excellencies of
of all arts, and all the deepeneſſe of learning
do abound) who muſt alſo in thoſe
arguments and reaſons we ground or practiſe
upon, bee credited and beleeved to
bee the authour of that ſuppoſed truth
which we make profeſſion of by our ſo
doing.
            Let us therefore bring forth thoſe
bookes, or authours into the open view
of the world, wherein this leſſon of Conformitie,
or refuſall thereunto is taught
and learned, that ſo every Scholler may
be knowne by his own Maſter, and the authours
publickly taught in his ſchoole.
            Now if any be aſhamed to profeſſe that
hee obayes or learnes this leſſon of any other
then of God, then muſt hee either
ſhew his warrant and authoritie out of
the ſacred Scriptures, for the things hee
profeſſeth and practiſeth in this controverſie,

or elſe he plainly diſcovers whoſe
ſcholler he is, for they onely are the fountaine
of trueth that which comes from
them is holy and ſincere, but if it be
grounded vpon men or Churches, though
ancient and orthodox in many other
things, yet the filthines of their channell,
in all matters (eſpecially) of religious
vſe will leaue ſome infection behinde it.
Let vs therfore trie all things,
               1. Theſ▪ 5. 21. yea though
they haue beene the receaued opinions or
practiſes of the holieſt men and pureſt
churches in the world (whoſe iudgment
yet is highly to be reuerenced, though it
differ from ours till the worde of God do
euidently to our conſciences dicide the
Controuerſie) and keepe or conforme to
that onely in the divine ſervice of God
which is good, which nothing poſsibly can
be,Iam 1. 17. but that which comes from God, the
ſole author of whatſoever is good. For
howſoever it cannot bee denied but
that ſurely there is a ſpirit in man,
               Iob. 32. 8. and
great excellencie of learning, wiſedome,
government and diſcretion in the ſubordinate
tutors or teachers of this other
maſter, yet the inſpiration of the Almightie
(or the inſpired word of God onely,
by the effectuall working of the holy
Ghoſt) giveth underſtanding, eſpecially in
all things of a religious uſe in the publick
worſhip of God.
            To ground religious conformity therefore

vpon any thing els whatſoeuer, is directly
to forſake the right way (and there is
but two wayes the one of truth which is
ſtreight and narow,
               2 Pet. 2. 15. and but a few that will
ſubſcribe vnto it) and to go aſtraie and follow
the broad way (or to learne the eaſie
leſſon) of Balaam the ſonne of Boſor which
loued the wages of vnrighteouſneſſe.
               verſ▪ 2. I iudge
none,Math. 7. 13. 14. but intreate all to take heede
of thoſe ſwelling wordes of this other
Schoole or Synagogue full of vanitie,
               2. Pet. 2. 1
                     •
                  
                  ▪
               
leaſt they bee beguiled by them and ſo
bee wrapped alſo in their error, eſpecially
to take heede of the ſecond entangling:
               verſ. 20. for
the latter end of ſuch is farre worſe then
the beginning,
               verſ. 17. 
               to whom the black darknes is reſerued
for euer. Seing then there be but two
chiefe maſters, God and the Deuill, and
but two wayes, grace and nature, and ſeing
all that ground their conformitie truly
on the ſcriptures, are in the way of truth,
(though impriſonment and other grievances
inflicted on them make it ſome thing
ſtreight and narrow) and are verily taught
of God,
               1. Theſſ. 4. 9. it muſt needs follow that all, that
ground their conformitie vpon any thing
els, or vpon theſe erroniouſly, are taught of
the diuel, which their maner of reaſoning
& allegation of their beſt authorities doth
not obſcurely diſcouer.
            But here perhaps one will ſtrike me on
the face and ſay,Rom. 9. 20. 21. why ſhould the clay call
the potter to account why hee made it thus

or ſo, or why ſhould our adverſaries demand,
why this geſture of kneeling
ſhould not be as comely, and as comfortable
as a table geſture.
            Surely I, for my part can ſay no more
but ipſe dixit, our maſter, whoſe teaching
we onely rely upon, hath by his own practiſe
openly and ſolemnlie publiſhed and
proclaimed in the word as with a ſilver
trumpet to all Churches and congregations
for ever, the excellent and divine dignitie
thereof. The other maſter, teaches
from fathers, and counſels, from the precepts
of men, yea (as he bragges) from
unitie, Antiquitie, and univerſalitie, as with
the verie quinteſſence of Parnaſſus melodie,
that kneeling in the verie act of receiving
the holie bread and wine in the
Lords ſupper, is the moſt humble, thankfull,
reverent and fitteſt geſture in the
the whole world, yea far beyond that of
the table. Thus either maſter hath & flows
in a different ſence, let everie ſervant,
diſciple or ſcholler therefore cleaue faſt
to his own maſter, and quite forſake, yea
hate and deſpiſe the other,
               Luc. 16. 13. but ô man who art
thou? are thou mortall, muſt thou come
to Iudgement, and yet dareſt thou aske a
queſtion of the immortall ſonne of God
(in his members or ſervants) why the geſture
which he made choice of, and uſed
and ordeined ſhould bee better then that
which the ſonne of perdition deviſed and

exalted? mayeſt thou not as well aske,
why there ſhould be any Sabboth or but
one, not two, why two ſacraments and
not ſeven, why he wrote to 7. Churches
and not onely to the metropolitan? why
wives ſhould be ſubject to their husbands
more then in name,Eph. 5. 22. 23. or the Church unto
Chriſt further then in ſhew?2. Cor. 12. 5. let us examine
and trie theſe things therefore whether
they be of faith (for elſe they are ſin)
yea no man can be ignorant of this,Rom. 14. 23. that if
Chriſt do not warrant them by his word,
they are reprobated and ſerue for no other
uſe but to bring ſome to reprobation, and
to hinder others in the means of their ſalvation,Gala. 5. 23.
for as there is no law or condemnation
againſt any fruit of the ſpirit, or againſt
them in whom it is, yea though the world
make a law againſt it, yet is great conſolation
to be found in ſuffering for it: even ſo
if theſe things in queſtion be the luſts or
inventions of the fleſh,
               Eſheſ. 2. 3. then can they not
poſſibly ſerue to any other uſe but to fulfill
the will of the fleſh and of the mind, and
ſo in their verie nature are (as I may ſay)
the children of wrath as well as others, even
as well as thoſe damnable deviſes of ſacrificing
for the quick and the dead, of diſpoſing
of crowns, of diſpenſations with corporall
and ſpirituall adulteries, or Inceſts
and other like helliſh abominations or humane
inventions, for they al com frō one
& the ſame root, flow out of one & the
ſame fountain, haue all every one of them

as good warrant (by the doctrine of this
ſecond maſter) one as another, even from
the prince that ruleth in the aire,
               verſ. 2▪
                
               that ſpirit
which worketh in whatſoever is not donne
in the obedience of faith in all things of
Religious uſe.
            Dare we then conforme in the Religious
actions, or geſtures of our bodie to
the ceremonies of that ſpirituall harlot,1. Cor. 6. 15. or
to the likeneſſe of them? eſpecially ſeing
in this great ſecret or myſtery of our union
with Chriſt,Ephe. 5. 32. wee are now ioyned in a far
neerer bond unto God then in the innocent
eſtate, and therefore a far greater and
ſtricter ſubjectiō is required at our hand.
True indeed by creation wee were the
lovely ſonnes and amiable daughters of
the moſt high, having no thing uncomely,
nor any diſpoſition thereunto in any
part of us, but by ſin we made our ſelves
ſtrangers yea enemies,
               Ephe. 2. 12. 19▪
                moſt filthie, and euen
loathſome to look upon, yet even in this
eſtate to look upon, when he ſaw us polluted
in our own bloud (or filthy nature,verſ. 4. 5. when
we were naked and bare, utterlie void of all
goodneſſe or any diſpoſition thereunto,Ezek. 16. 6. 7.
even ſtarke dead by ſinne, in ſinne, I ſay in
this hatefull condition hee looked upon 
                     〈◊〉
                  
               
with the eyes of his love,Eph. 2. 4. &c. and covered, yea
clothed our filthineſſe with the skirts of his
own righteouſneſſe,Ezek. 16. 
                     •
                  
                and ſware unto us, even
entred into covenant with us, and ſo contracted

vs to him ſelf to be come wholy and
in all things his, and his onely, euen fleſh
of his fleſh and bone of his bone,
               verſ. 9. 10. 11. 12. 13. 14▪
                therfore did
he waſh us in that fountaine of the houſe
of Dauid and annointed vs with an ointment
from that holy one,
               1. Iohn. 2. 20. 
               decking vs with all ſpirituall
ornaments of grace, and ſanctification
of life ſo that his holines in the Godly,
though never ſo contemptible to the
world, is become as truly glorious and
honorable as a kingdom, (euen as wickednes
makes the mightie and great ones
in the world ignominious and contemptible.)
            Is it poſſible therefore to expreſſe what
great and iuſt cauſe we haue to forſake all
other (how learned and reverent,Math. 19. 5. how
wiſe and ancient, how holy and univerſall
ſoeuer) and in our conformitie in all
matters of religious uſe, (eſpecially in the
publicke worſhip of his name (which being
the marriage bed) of neceſſitie is
carefullie to bee kept holy and undefiled)
cleaue onely unto him ſo long as wee
both ſhall liue, being tied to him not
onelie by our creation, with the great
bonds of loyall ſubiection and cheerefull
obedience of loving and naturall children;
but in our redemption, with that
indiſſoluble loue and moſt loyall affection
of a deere and faithfull wife.
            Seeing then our nature is thus inſeperablie
united unto the God-head in

the incarnation of our Lord, how deere
any true member of his myſticall body,
in the religious actions of his divine ſervice,
conforme to the devices of ſtrange
lovers? and ſuch are all whatſoever
they be, as require any other ceremonies,
callings; or geſtures, then Chriſt Ieſus
the Lord is author of. Doth not everie
wife (if ſhe deſire to be found faithfull)

                  
                     •
                  are how ſhee may bleaſ
                     •
                   her huſband?
               1. Cor. 7. 34. 
               Hearken
therefore O daughter, and conſider, yea
incline thine eare,
               Pſ. 45. 10. and giue diligent attention,
for thou ſhalt haue many diſſembling
lovers who will perſwade thee to the
contrarie, but thou muſt forget thine
owne people and thy fathers houſe, and not
regard the cuſtomes and traditions of
nature, the devices of reaſon, or the innovations
of wit and ſence, though never
ſo graue and learned, but in the obedience
of faith, conforme onely to the holy
and wiſe ordinances of thy Lord, yea in
all religious actions giue this honour and
worſhip one lie to him;ver. 8. let all thy garments
(ceremonies or callings) ſmell of Myrrh,
Aloes, and Caſſia out of the Ivory Pallaces
(his owne holy and glorious ordinances)
which make the heart of the
godly to reioyce, and not ſtinke of novelties
and incertainties out of the high
places of mens precepts or devices, which
make heavy the ſoule of the righteous,
ſo ſhall the king haue pleaſure in thy beautie,
               verſ. 11.
               
or in that worſhip which thou giveſt unto
him, when it is pure and ſincere, not
painted or ſophiſticated with the Italian
penſill, (whoori
                  •
               h or carnall inventions)
for he is thy Lord God, and therefore thus
Reverence thou him, even performe every
ceremonie and geſture of religious uſe
in his publicke worſhip, according to his
owne commandement, and no otherwiſe,
for elſe thou denieſt Reverence unto him,
and giveſt it to thoſe whom thou doeſt
conforme unto.
            Remember how he waſhed thee from
Popiſh Antichriſtian (that whooriſh) Idolatry,Eze. 16, 9. 10,
and clothed thee with broidred work
(even the pure doctrine of iuſtification by
faith working by loue, and manie other
divine truthes and ſanctifying graces) doe
not truſt now in thine owne beautie (or excellencie
of gifts) and ſo play the harlot,15▪
               
preſuming of thy renowne; becauſe thou
art famous over the Chriſtian world, for
thy wiſedome and learning and other
worthy endowments, 
                  
                     •
                  owr not out thy fornications
on every one that paſſeth by and
makes loue unto thee, let no carnall reſpect
ever kindle thy deſire to ſuch abhominable
courſes;16, 
               Deck not thy high places
or Cathedrals, with divers colours, bring
not into Gods holy worſhip thoſe ſweet
delights of the ſences, which are no better
then the alluring baits of an harlot,
the like things ſhall not come, neither hath any
               
ſincere Church euer conformed to
ſuch abhominations. Bee not, I ſay, ſo
preſumptuous,17▪
                as to abuſe thoſe ſiluer
gifts and golden Iewells which the Lord
hath conferred vpon thee (to purge his
worſhip and to preſerue his ſervice pure
and ſincere from all kinde of mixture
of any carnall devices) to defend the indifferencie
or lawfulnes of whoredome or
humane inventions therein,18▪
                offer them not
thy brodered garmēts, neither ſet the oyle &
perfume of the Lord.
               19▪
                (Thoſe divine truths
which then teacheſt purely) before them.
Thou thinkeſt in the pride of thy heart
that theſe will be ſweete and ſauorie vnto
them,20▪
                and ſo by an enforced ſubſcription
cauſeſt thoſe ſonnes whom thou haſt
borne vnto God, to ſacrifice their ſtudies
how to giue beſt content to theſe ſtrangers
by mingling their abominations & Gods
holy ordinances indifferently together,22▪
                
               is
this they whoredome a ſmall matter? Oh
turn thee from all theſe moſt grievous and
carnall inuentions,30▪
                and remember the daies
of thy youth, when thou waſt naked and polluted
in thy bloud, how weake is thy heart
ſaith the Lord God, ſeeing thou doeſt all
theſe things, which are the workes of a
preſumptuous whoore,
               38▪
                or a Lordly lawleſſe,
and over-ruling woman. Yet for
all this it is ſchiſme to denie that thou
art a true Church, yea there is no doubt
but when thy Harlots and Bawdes with

their carnall and fleſhlie deviſes,58▪
                haue
borne the puniſhment of their wickedneſſe
and abhomination;60▪
                
               the Lord will
remember his couenant made with thee in
the dayes of thy youth,
               61▪
                
               and will confirme
unto thee an everlaſting covenant,
then thou ſhalt remember thy wayes and be aſhamed.
            
            Oh our reverend and moſt deere mother,1. Cor. 11. 7.
is it not the glorie of the man to haue his
wife humble & obedient; why wilt thou
then thus preſſe us even upon thy bleſſing
as wee would not incurre thy diſpleaſure
and curſe, to Conforme to ceremonies,
callings or geſtures which beare no Image
or reſemblance, of the moſt holy
ordinances of our heavenly father, but the
direct ſimilitude or likeneſſe of that Character
or marke of the Beaſt? oh forget not
thou faire one the moſt amiable loue of
that ſonne of his loue, that we are the true
or legitimate fruit of thy wombe, is it
poſſible for thee to be unmindfull of this;
can we ever forget thoſe ſweet inſtructions
and moſt heavenly conſolations
which wee ſucked out of thy beautifull
breaſts; O thou ſiſter and ſpowſe of that holy
one, call to minde what excellent graces
hee ſo enamiled thee withall that hee
cannot but loue and delight in thee, unleſſe
hee ſhould hate himſelfe, are all the
gardens of the Eaſt, or living fountaints
of the weſt, or ſweet fruits of Camphir, ſpikenard,

Calamus and Cynamon, with all the
trees of Incencer mirr
                     •
                  rand Aloes yea all the
chiefe ſpices in the whole world poſſibly
able to ſhadow out, that high excellencie
and moſt ſoveraine dignitie where with
out of his owne verie prerogative hee
hath truely and Really endowed thee?
why then by thy conformitie to theſe
humane devices, wilt thou ſhut the dore
againſt thy wel beloved and not ſuffer him
to enter into his gardē to eate his pleaſant
fruit, but offers him grapes wch thou haſt
gathered of theſe thornie Inventions, &
figs which theſe thiſtly traditions haue
brought forth? was it not thine own inſtruction
from our Creadle, that we muſt
put of the old man with all his works and
put on the new,
               Coſoſſ. 3. 9. even bee made conformable
to the will or word of God in all
things, both in our tender years and ſtronger
age, and oldeſt dayes? and muſt wee
now learne another leſſon or manner of
perfection even to haue our eyes opened,
               
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  . 3. 5. 
               yea
and be as Gods by conforming to theſe
novelties? whoſe device is this? marke
deere mother upon my bare knees I beſeech
thee who that is that talketh ſuch
things with thee? Do we ſel Advowſions,
depopulate townes, or houſes, do we keep
two benefices, or cloſely practiſe uſurie,
are we partners in monopolies, haue we a
whore in a corner, doe wee diſſemble and
deceiue, or are we unmercifull, uniuſt or

any way diſhoneſt; then let thy holy Ce
                  •
               
               ſures
cut us of from that bleſſed Communion
of they heauenly familie, and divine
ſocietie. But oh thou ſweeteſt among
the louelieſt who art the verie choice
of all the faireſt, Inioyne us not wee
beſeech thee to forget the name of
our God, or to bow our knee or conforme
to any thing which is not truely grounded
on his word, ſome thing indeed may
be in theſe courſes which we cannot diſcerne,
but no goodneſſe or godlineſſe can
poſſibly be in them, unleſſe they bee his
commandements.
            But thou ſayeſt or rather thy minions
informe thee,Object. that the Lord did never
forbid theſe things,
            The cleane contrarie ſeems moſt plain to
us and that out of thine own doctrines,Anſw.
but ſuppoſe hee bee pleaſed to be ſilent,
to teach modeſtie and feare, ſhall we bee
bould therefore to fall into preſumption?
Conſider, (oh thou that bare us the appointed
months, and brought us forth in
everie ones due ſeaſon) where did he forbid
Adam to eate that particular fruit? true
indeed that the tree was forbidden; and are
not we in the ſame generall terms directly
forbidden to worſhip him in any other
manner in his publick ſervice then he hath
cōmanded? is not this the very tener purpoſe
& drift of the ſecond cōmandement,
forbidden alſo to bow down or ſhew any

Reverent reſpect to the likeneſſe of any
thing which in his worſhip man hath deviſed?
            Oh thou that are the mother of
us all, pluck up: theſe fruits of diſtraction
even by the verie roots, and ſuffer
them no longer to breed diviſions and
ſeparations among thy true children, deall
truly with thine own ſoul and marke it
well, though it come from ſuch as excell
all other in learning and wiſdome,Gen. 3. 1. 4. 5.
yet whether it be not a tare of that En
                  
                     •
                  ious-man,
               Iohu. 8. 44.
and whether thoſe Reſolute
diſputers for the Iuſtifying thereof be not
his profeſſed Children, for thou haſt
often taught us to take heed of ſinning
againſt our knowledge or certeine perſwaſion
though it bee but in a matter of
never ſo ſmall conſequence, but eſpecially
in all things of Religious uſe, ſeeing
diſobedience yea and Rebellion appeareth
as well therein as in the groſſeſt
and fouleſt abomination of poperie, yea
this was the comely talke of thy ſcarlet
lips,Iam. 2, 10, that whoſoever keepeth the whole
law and yet faileth in one point, hee is
guileie of all, and therefore though we
haue caſt quite away the groſſer point
of poperie, yet wilfull conformitie to
any humane Innvention of Religious
uſe in the publick worſhip of God,
makes us guiltie of the whole maſſe of

that damnable Idolatrie; according to
an other leſſon which moſt carefullie
thou didſt often beate upon,1. Cor 5. 6. that a
little leaven doth ſoure the whole lumpe,
               Ion. 
                     •
                  . 6.
yea whatſoever is borne of the verie
wiſedome of the fleſh,
               Rom. 
                     •
                  . 7. is notwithſtanding
verie Enmitie with God,
               Luc. 3, 39. for howſoever
Adam and all in his loyns were
by creation the ſonnes of God, and whatſoever
geſtures they uſed in his worſhip
were moſt pleaſing and acceptable
to him; yet now (by tranſgreſſion)
hauing changed their father and nature,
all the ceremonies, callings, and
geſtures which they can poſſibly deviſe
concerning the worſhip of God, or government
of his Church are without
contradiction the very works of their
new father and nature,Iohn, 8 41, for who can poſſibly
be ignorant of this,Rom, 6, 16, that to whomſoeuer
we giue our ſelues as ſervants to obey, his
ſervants we are to whom by conformity we do
obey, whether it bee to humane Inventions,
or Gods holy ordinances, and
the ſame rule holds in all matters of
Religious uſe,Rom, 10, 14, 15 if they can not tell how
to preach except they bee ſent, nor wee
how to pray or call upon God as wee
ought,
               Rom. 
                     〈…〉
                  . 
               but by the ſpirit of God, according
to the Scriptures, how is it poſſible
for all the learning and wiſdom in
the world to tell what ceremonie, calling
or geſture is fit and lawfull in the ſervice

of God but by the ſame ſpirit▪
            
            Seeing then theſe devices (at the very
beſt, the mocking, yea ſome of them perſecuting
ſonnes of Agar) haue no warrant
from the word and ſpirit of God,Gen. 21. 9.
what letteth but that ſafely we may,Gal. 4. 29. yea
ought to eſteem them. Vagabonds & Runnagates
in the earth, howſoever not in the
higheſt degree able to murder (or make
an abſolute nullitie of religion) yet not
being borne of God,
               1. Iohn. 3. 9 or warranted by his
word, they muſt of abſolute neceſſitie
be confeſſed to be unrighteous, becauſe
the Lord our Righteouſneſſe is not
author of them, and all unrighteouſneſſe (in
ſubſtance or ceremonie) is ſinne,
               Iohn. 5. 15. and
therefore all that wittingly conform therevnto
upon what terms of conſiderations
ſoeuer though in the loweſt and moſt tollerable
degree that can be imagined) are
(in the ſame degree that this their ſinn is
of) verely and moſt certeinly of the Diuill,
               1. Ioh. 3. 8.
            
            VVhy ſhould any woonder then or
thinke it ſtrange,Pro. 1. 20. 21. that though wiſdome
hane cried out and vttred her voice like
a trompet, in pulpits, in priſons, in words,
in writings, in fierie zeale, in moſt humble
and meekeſt manner, yet theſe carnall and
worldly minded men loue fooliſhnes (even
the devices of fleſhe and bloud,)22 and take
pleaſure in ſcorning whatſoever and whoſoever
is contrary to them therein, and

               ſo deſpiſe all the counſell of the Lord:25. ſhall
not the end of theſe things be bitter? yea
will not Deſtruction ceize on them at
length,26. and will not the Lord reioyce and
laugh thereat, even make ioyfull the hearts
of his people, to ſee their cruel adverſaries
eate the fruit of their own way,
               31. 
               and be filled
with their owne devices?
            
            Yea moſt deare and tender mother, haſt
thou not often told us, that all that are
diſobedient unto,Rom. 10. 21. or wilfully gainſay anie
thing truely and evidently taught from
the Scriptures, were to be eſteemed of all
that deſire ſincerely to feare the Lord,
ſtiffeneked reſiſters of the Holy Ghoſt?
               Act. 7. 51. becauſe
by ſuch proceedings they plainlie
proclaime that in their hearts they ſay th
                     •
                  re
is no God,
               Pſal. 14. 1. or which is all one, that God
is not ſo iealous of his worſhip, and everie
ceremonie, calling, and geſture therein,
ſo as he eſteemes them onely his lovers
and friends that ſubſcribe onely to his
commandements therein;Exod. 20. 5, 6. and holds them
his enemies, yea ſuch as hate him that conforme
to any thing therein which in his
word hee hath not commanded as in the
ſecond commandement more at large it
doth appeare? be pleaſed therefore to remember,
from the verie word of our father
thou haſt often inſtructed us, that
though without all contradiction there is
a ſpirit in man (and therefore it may bee
that ſome are called ſpirituall men) yet we

ſhould allwayes find this to be true in all
controverſies o
                  •
                proceedings about matters
of Religious nature,1. Cor. 1. 26. 
               not many ſuch
how excellent ſoever (much leſſe the greateſt
part of them) though moſt wiſe after
the fleſh, no though their counſell in their
dayes be eſteemed as free from error as the
oracle of God,
               2, Sam, 16, 23, are notwithſtanding choſen
of God to doe any ſpeciall good to his
Churches, or ſervants: for indeed though
their titles be ſpirituall,
               Hoſe, 9, 7, yet their wayes
and courſes doe plainly teſtifie that their
hearts are Carnall and fleſhly,
               Rom. 8, 5. and therefore
they do not ſavour the things of Gods ſpirit
no they ſeeme meere fooliſhneſſe unto them,
               1. Cor, 2, 14,
               becauſe indeed they are ſpiritually diſcerned,
& therfore they eſteem them verie fooles
and aſſes that will looſe a good living rather
then conforme to mens Inventions
in Gods worſhip, thus doe they aſſume
that ſufficiencie to themſelues which is
wholy of God Almightie whoſe inſpiration
onely giveth underſtanding eſpecially in all
matters of Religious uſe,1. Cor, 3. 5. and yet will
theſe aſpiring ſpirits preſume to ſet the H.
Ghoſt to ſchoole,Iob, 32, 8, & moſt preſumptuouſly
reade large lectures of diſcretion unto him
in his ſervants, becauſe they will not conforme
without his direct warrant, pretending
that there is great truth (& no lies) in
the things they preſſe, and yet cannot poſſiblie
proue them to bee commanded of
God (as all trueth neceſſarie for the

Church to conforme unto, is) as though
if there were any kind of truth in them
the holy Ghoſt would not lead and direct
us therein,Ioh. 16. 13. and leaſt they ſhould put this
off, as a peculiar promiſe to the Apoſtles
he hath purpoſely by precept and practiſe
expreſly in all ſuch occaſions,Iohn 5. 39▪
                tied us abſolutely
to the Scriptures,2. Tim. 3. 17. you haue
done fooliſhlie therefore in this,
               Math. 12. 2. to 10, & 19. 8. O yee reverend
and learned men, that ye
                     •
                   haue not reſted
on the word of the Lord, in theſe thing
in controverſie which you ſo eagerly
preſſe conformitie unto but (as it were
upon the hoaſt of the Aramits) on the Ancient
fathers,2. Chron. 16. 7. 9. general counſels, and canons,
humane reaſon, and the learning and wiſdom
of the world, heare therefore the
word of the Lord henceforth you ſhall haue
wars, one or other ſhall ſet upō your ceremonies
& all other your humane inventions,
and never giue that argument over,
till all ordinances in the Church which
God hath not planted by the authoritie
of the Scriptures bee utterlie rooted
out.
            And this your Idoll of conformitie the
ripe fruit of your proud hearts wil deceiue
you,Ier. 49. 16. yea though thereby you are growen
confident, becauſe you haue at length ſetled
your ſeats as ſafely, as in the clefts of
the Rock and made your neſts the verie next
to the Eagle himſelf in the ſupremeſt mountaines
of the higheſt Region, yet, will I
bring you down from thence ſaith the Lord,
               
for though by thy wiſdom and deepe pollicies
or undiſcerned ſubtleties thou haſt
gotten thee great riches and prefer
                  〈…〉
               nts,Ezek. 28. 4. 5.
               and haſt increaſed very greatly thy power
and authoritie and ſo art lifted up in thine
heart as in a chaire of ſecuritie, conceiting
thy ſelfe that thou art wiſer then Daniel
and haſt more learning and wiſdom,verſ. 3. greater
reaſon and ſtronger arguments for thy
conformitie then all thoſe that are of
perfect or ſincere hearts towards the Lord,
               2. Chron. 16. 9.
and are contrarie minded, and therefore
dare no way conforme unto you,
with whom their feare even hee whom they
ſerue will ſhew his ſtrength) yet behold God
hath choſen the fooliſh things of the world to
confound you that are ſo wiſe,
               1. Cor. 1. 27. yea vile and
deſpiſed perſons which in the opinion of
the world being compared with you, did
not ſo much as ſeeme to exiſt,28 or bring to
naught your ſtrongeſt arguments for this
your great goddeſſe conformitie, and that
by a plaine demonſtration of their vanity,
yea though they be neither prophets, or ſons
of the Prophets nor ſo much as brought up
at the feet of ſome prophet, but in compariſon
meere ſtrangers yet they bee as a
terrible nation and their arguments ſhall
be as drawen ſwords againſt the verie beautie
of thy wiſdom yea they ſhal defile thy brightneſſe,
               Ezek. 28. 7.
your ſo admired vnderſtanding, by
laying open your moſt diſſembling and
cunning practiſes, yea (in ſome of you)
horrible and fearefull blaſphemies.
            
               
Many haue had I confeſſe, too religious
eſtimation of your learning, and other venerable
endowments but finding it plaine
that in this Controverſie with poore Chriſtians
you haue caſt off the word of the Lord,
               Eſa. 30. 12.
               and truſt in violence and wickedneſſe, and
ſtay thereupon, for the iuſtifying of your
courſes, not regarding the lawes of God
or man, but by one deviſe or other will
breake through all, therefore there is
great hope that this iniquitie which lies
ſwelling within you,13 will make you ſo top-heavie,
as your verie height, the onely
thing you ſo wiſely foreſaw to be neceſſarie,
and therefore ſo providently by
your deepe reaches haue attained, will be
an unavoydable cauſe of your ſudden and
violent downefall, yea, and with that
deteſtation, as no one humane invention
ſeeme it never ſo tollerable, ſhall bee left
for the meaneſt uſe and office in the worſhip
and publick ſervice of the Lord, no
not ſo much as a little ſheard to fetch fire
or water: for as all Gods ordinances are
good, ſo no humane invention of religious
uſe in Gods worſhip can be good, no
not one. And wheras it is obiected yt the
reverend Fathers of our Church hold thē
lawfull and good Iure diuino,
               
                  in a tract beginning 
                  
                     〈…〉
                  ddite quae ſunt Caeſaris Caeſari &c even ſo that
Reuerend father Deterano, Chamberlen to
Vrban 6. publickly taught with great approbation
of many great Divines, that the
verie meaning of Chriſt in ſaying giue

to Caeſar the things that be Caeſars, was but
till his aſcention and that when he was
lifted vp he would drawe all theſe things vnto
him, that is, Baronies, Earledomes, yea
and kingdomes too, even all that was Caeſars,
and that it is therfore of Diuine Inſtitution,
that the miniſters of the Goſpell
might challenge and enioy theſe things
as their proper and peculiar right, both
revenewes and honours, and that it was
grievous ſacriledge for any prince to withhold
the ſame, or any ciuil authority from
them, or to this effect was that which he
held, & which hath ſprong out of that ſlip
which he then ſet, the ſeueral plants wherof
haue wōderfully thriven in al chriſtendom;
ſo likewiſe many great ſchollers and very
learned divines haue held it an invincible
argument, that the Popes gouernment,
Hierarchie, and ſupremacie is lawfull, becauſe
it hath proſpered and ſo long endured
with good ſucceſſ, for els ſay they, God
would neuer haue ſuffred it. Is it not alſo
avowed by many wiſe and reuerent Doctors,In Canon. Ioco. frat. de conſecra. diſt. 1.
that Iames the brother of our Lord according
to the fleſh, did bring in the Maſſe
and ioyned it to the ſcripture, and therefore
that it is of Apoſtolicall inſtitution
and ought to be conformed unto? In like
manner it is a receiued opinion of great
antiquitie being one of the deepe doctrines
of diuine Durandus, that euerie ſonday and
holiday the ſoules do play in Purgatorie: Are

they not worthy therefore to be preſented
that doe any kinde of worke upon
any holy day, yea though it bee not in
prayer time, unleſſe it bee to goe to the
Ale-houſe to be merry, and to leap and
daunce about the May-poule after a bagpipe,
or ſo forth, for that helpes forward
the foreſaid merriment? yea our owne
countrey-man Cardinall Poole,
               In his booke vpon the councel of Trent. a reverent
Divine, and as great a Scholler as any
of our great Adverſaries, held and
taught that the meaning of Chriſt in making
Peter a fiſher of men, was, that hee
would driue all Emperours and Kings, yea
all the people of the world into the Popes
net, ſo that he might ſeeth, broyle, or fry
them in a pan, even as his Holines ſhould
think beſt to uſe and order them, and his
Prelates and their inferiour officers alſo
to make their beſt gain and advantage of
them, and many other ſtrange opinions
concerning callings, and ceremonies in
Gods worſhip, haue beene publiſhed by
great Schollers, and confirmed by whole
Synods & Convocations; yea and generall
Councels, with as great probabilitie
many of them, and ſhew of all kinde of
true learning as all that is, which the reverend
fathers and learned Divines of this
age haue publiſhed, or can ſay for theſe
ceremonies, and the other things in controverſie
amongſt us.
            Seing then the Church in her wiſedom

eſtabliſed them as divine truths, though
not as neceſſarie to ſalvation, yet profitable
for unitie, decencie, and to try the obedience
of her children, why ſhould not
they be as well conformed to as ours?
were not their pure naturals as able to
finde out ſome things commendable, yea
neceſſarily to be conformed unto in the
worſhip of God, though they had no better
ground for them in the Scripture, then
as is formerly mentioned, as well as the
naturals of this pure or learned and ſpirituall
age? Degrees of Evill there is indeed,
but nature admits not any one degree
of goodneſſe, no not one, for it is
ſtarke dead in treſpaſſes and ſinnes,
               Eph. 2. 1. & 4. 17. 18. 
               the minde
vaine, the underſtanding darkened, and full of
ignorance,
               1. Cor. 2. 14. 
               the heart haidened not perceiving
the things of the ſpirit of God, nay it thinks
them to be meere fooliſheneſſe, and more
then needes; even moſt abſurd and againſt
common ſence: muſt it not therefore be
granted of abſolute neceſſitie, that all
ſuch ſpirituall perſons, as well in theſe
times as in thoſe (by what name or title
ſoever they be called, though they haue
all the learning and wiſedome in the
world; yet if they bring not the warrant
of Gods word plainly or truely for them
in all their ceremonies, callings, geſtures,
and other devices whatſoever of religious
uſe, are to bee held, reputed, and adiudged
lyars,
               Rom. 3. 4. and therefore all ſuch their

opinions of the Divell the father of lies, and
therfore by no meanes upon any tearmes
to bee conformed unto? was not their
verbum non ſcriptum, conſuetudo ſanstae Eccleſiae,
traditiones patrum, bonae intentiones,
conſtitutiones vel canones, as tollerable and
neceſſarie as ours? was it not the practiſe
of the ſerpent from the beginning, to
proue by many wiſe and learned arguments,
that the onely way to aſpire to
ſpirituall preferments in this world, is abſolutely
to forſake and diſclaime the warrant
of the ſacred ſcripture in all matters
of ceremonie, and to depend upon tradition,
and the Catholicke grounds aforeſaid?
            Oh our moſt deere mother, we can never
forget theſe weightie inſtructions
which ſo carefully and conſtantly thou
haſt taught unto us, firſt that all manner
of witch-craft is (in the degree) a direct
forſaking of God, and a uniting and knitting
unto the Divell, and therefore no
manner of Witch,
               Leuit. 20. 6. white or blacke, good
or evill, nor any that ſeeke after them, ought
to liue, (not that there is any of them
good, but that like other humane or divelliſh
inventions they ſeeme to do good,
by maintaining divers in unlawfull callings,
and by helping ſome to their ſtollen
or loſt goods,1. Sam. 15. 25. or others of diſeaſes in men
or beaſts, or the like.) Secondly that Rebellion
is as the ſinne of witchcraft, yea that

a Rebellious tranſgreſſion though it bee
but in ceremonie, calling or geſture is a
wickedneſſe not inferiour to Idolatrie▪
                for
the ſame ground or foundation ſerues for
both, and that it is no
                  •
                garments, muſick,
and ſuch like complement that the Lord
accepts or takes any pleaſure in (which yet
hee doth in every thing of Religious uſe
which he would haue his fervants in his
worſhip to conforme unto) but when his
voyce is obeyed.
               verſ. 22. Now his voice is in nothing,
but what his word doth command;
therefore thou didſt conclude that hee
was not obeyed in any thing of religious
uſe, which was not grounded upon his
commandement, according to his own
words whatſoeuer I command you (concerning
my worſhip) that do,
               Deu. 12. 32 
               thou ſhalt not add
any thing (whether ceremony, calling, geſture
or whatſoever) thereto, for al counſels,
or canons or whatſoever, that in Gods
worſhip require any thing of religious uſe
which is not the commandement of the
Lord or his voyce,
               Ier. 7, 23, 24, is directly ſtubbornes of
a wicked heart, which makes to go backward
from God and ſinceritie, to all profanes
and Apoſtacie,ver, 28. 
               trueth is periſhed and cleane
gone out of the mouth of ſuch preachers as
maintain ſuch things, and therefore thou
didſt charge us for ever, to continue (in
our ſerving of God) in all things which are
written in the word of God,Gal. 3. 10. 
                     •
                  
                  ▪
                
               to doe them;
yea them onely and not any Invention

or noveltie whatſoever, which unavoidably,
eſpecially being once known and
yet Iuſtified and defended; will bring
Gods greevous plague and curſe.
               Rom. 1. 17. Is the
Righteouſneſſe of the Church Revealed in
the Goſpell and that not torne or patched,
but perfect and compleate? and
is the worſhip and ceremonies, callings
and geſtures, whereby the Church is
made partaker of that righteouſneſſe,
and ſhewes her thankfulneſſe unto God
for the ſame, but lamely taught therein,
or to the halues? part being left to
traditions, unwritten verities, and humane
Inventions? verily as in that ſo
in theſe,Rom. 4, 2. 1. if there be any cauſe of Reioycing
it is not with God, and therefore
muſt needs be with the Devill, for what,
elſe can poſſibly bee found concerning the
fleſh (bee it never ſo wiſe or learned)
or any work, fruit, or device thereof is
not the Iuſtifying of humane Inventions
in Gods worſhip without warrant
from the word, a plaine profeſſion
that they thinke though they bee not
more Iuſt then GOD,
               Iob. 4, 17, or more pure
then their maker, yet verily there is
ſome iuſtice and puritie in their nature,
whereby they are able to find
out a holy uſe of theſe things which
God never commanded?
            Is not this a verie naturall branch of

that follie which being found was puniſhed
ſo fearefullie in the Angels;18 therefore
didſt thou warne us alſo for ever to
take heed of unſtedfaſtnes, & not to preſume
to conforme to any invention of
man (in this kind) ſeeing hee dwels but in
a houſe of clay whoſe foundation is in the
dust,
               19 and therefore all his reaſons and
arguments are but duſtie and dirtie, and
that fleſhly libertie & carnall priviledges
which he claims proceeds but from his
fatnes even that abundance of earthly
honours and preferments which pamper
him,Deut. 32. 15 and by ſecuritie makes him better
fed then taught, and ſo to fall from
ſinceritie and uprightneſſe, and even
to ſpurne with his heele at Gods ordinances
and ſervants, which in effect is to forſake
God that made him, by not regarding
the ſtrong God of his ſalvation, but deſpiſing
his gracious ordinances which hee
had made ſtrong and effectuall to bring
him to the aſſurance thereof by faith in
Chriſt, he ſets up his owne inventions,
and magnifies his carnall devices, puniſhing
moſt grievouſly all that will not conforme
thereunto.
            And thus by ſtrange gods, or (which differs
nothing in effect) by ſtrange ceremonies
calings and geſtures of Religious uſe
in Gods worſhip which are Abominations
they provoke the Lord to Anger, how can
this be otherwiſe, ſeing all ſuch outward

worſhip and ſervice (though the Inward
ſubſtance concerning the doctrine of faith
in the Meſſias ſeeme never ſo found) is a
meer offering unto devils and not unto God,
evē 
               new gods, newly come up, as every thing
which God himſelfe hath not commanded
in the word is to be eſteemed.
            Can wee with any honeſty condemne
the inventions of poperie in their religious
worſhip whether they concerne their
callings, as their 7 orders of prieſts &c. or
ceremonies, as voluntarie vows, & like devotions
as directly comming out of that
ſmoake of the pit, becauſe they thereby
corrupt the true worſhip of God with
profane & carnal devices, & muſt we not
needs thereby ſubſcribe that ours are of
the ſame hatch, if they haue no better
warrant then they by the word of God?
Their civill magiſtrates allow & cōmand
thoſe as beſt fitting their government, &
as hauing long experience of Gods bleſſing
on them for maintaining of them, &
where is it forbidden in the Scriptures to
haue a moſt reverent opinion of the Relikes
of ſaints? ſuppoſe it be Ioſephs breeches
or our Ladies ſmock which are with great
devotion reſerved at Aken, or in what
Epiſtle or Goſpel is it prohibited that the
town of Genua in Italie ſhould keepe in
a reverent memoriall of Chriſt, the
taile of the Aſſe which hee roade upon
to Ieruſalem, which if any man will

not beleeue mee, hee may goe thither
and ſee verie freſh and faire at this
day, for ought I know not one haire wanting.
            Now may not they as well greevouſly
puniſh and perpetually impriſon) at leaſt
till death ſet them at libertie) all that will
not conforme to theſe, and many other as
good as theſe, as having nothing in them
contrarie to the word of God, as well as
our adverſaries for theſe in queſtiō among
us? for what greater decencie can
be found in a white ſhirt, or a well furd
hood, then in theſe? Oh Lord, did not
theſe plants come from Gomorah,
               verſ, 32, which
haue ſuch dragoniſh poyſon, and Aſpiſh crueltie
in them?33 are not theſe their courſes
laid up in ſtore with thee, yea are they not
ſealed moſt ſafely (till their full rypeneſſe
be accompliſhed) among thy treaſures?34
ſhall not their feet (whoſe beautie doth
onely conſiſt in their golden buskens and
ſlippers) in due time ſlide?35 Haue they
not ſome feeling alreadie of the ſlipprineſſe
of their places, which makes
them ſo extreamly violent in their miſchievous
Courſes? yes verely, deere
mother, thoſe that thus haue abuſed thee
and fed thy Children with corrupt food,
the very Day of their Deſtruction is at hand
and the things,
               36 
               that ſhall come upon them
make haſte, for the Lord ſhall iudge his people,
and repent towards his ſervants, when hee

ſeeth that their power is gone, and no man
left either to ſpeake or ſtand out for the
truth, when men ſhall ſay, where are their
Gods,
               37▪
                even that mightie God in whom they
truſted, whom they did ſo reioyce with
their propheſyings; and dayes of publicke
humiliations and reioycings,38, 
               Let them riſe
up and helpe you, let him be your refuge, and
if he will haue you, let him deliver you out
of our courts, from our cenſures, from excommunicato
capiendo, from our bands and
impriſonment.Eſa, 66, 5. Oh heare the word of the
Lord all yee that tremble at his word, your
enemies, who tearmed themſelues brethren,
and hated you, which they evidently ſhewed
by caſting you out for my names ſake,
ſaid, let the Lord be glorified, and ſo he will,
for he ſhall appeare to your ioy,
               verſ. 4. 
               and they ſhall
be aſhamed, for I will chooſe out their defuſions
wherewith they haue ſo blinded and
deceived the Princes and the Rulers, and
diſcover their hypocriſie to all the world.
For I know the thoughts that I haue toward
my people ſaith the Lord;
               Ier. 29. 11. 
               even the thoughts
of peace and not of trouble,
               12 
               to giue you an
end, and your hope; then ſhall you cry unto
me, and yee ſhall go and pray unto me, and I
will heare you, and yee ſhall ſeeke mee, and
finde me, becauſe yee ſhall ſeeke me with all
your heart, yea you ſhall take up this curſe
againſt your adverſaries,22 
               The Lord make
thee like Zedechiah and Ahab, whom the
King burnt in fire, becauſe they committed

villanie in Iſrael,
               23 
               even adulterie with their
neighbours wiues, and haue ſpoke lying
words in my name▪ which I haue not commanded
them,
               He ſaith not which I haue forbidden. 
               even I know it; and teſtifie it
ſaith the Lord, though they walke ſo cloſely
as they think no body ſhall finde them
out; yea, I will viſit Shemaiah becauſe hee
hath ſpoken rebelliouſly againſt the Lord,
               32
               and hath propheſied and I ſent him not.
            
            Thus wee finde it true (deere mother)
which thou haſt often repeated, that a
little leaven in their corrupted mindes being
thus by ambition nouriſhed, brings
this lamentable ſoureneſſe to the whole
lumpe of all their proceedings, even a Rebellious
wilfulneſſe to breake anie of Gods
greateſt commandements, if occaſion ſo
require, rather then to reforme their fleſhlie
and carnall devices, the onely ſupporters
of their lawleſſe greatneſſe. Yet wee
muſt needs acknowledge that howſoever
divers of our adverſaries are exceeding
violent, and will not ſtand to heare reaſon,
or to giue any for the things they
require, but either conforme, take the
oath, or take him away Iaylor, or caſt him
out; yet divers of them take exceeding
great paines, and with many deepe reaſons
full of learning and antiquitie, diſcretion
and wiſedome, ſeeme to ſay very
much for conformitie, but for mine
owne part I ſtill ſay, and for ever muſt
ſay, that I never heard or ſaw any dram

of divine authority, nor any thing favouring
of the ſpirit of grace come from thē;
& alas holy mother, thou haſt taught us,
over & over again, that we muſt eſteeme
the moſt abſolute perfection of the wiſdom
of the fleſh,
               Rom. 8. 5
                     •
                   6. 7. 8. to be unſenſible of the things
of God, yea meere Enmitie againſt him, and
therefore in any caſe never to conforme
unto them, becauſe in ſo doing wee cannot
poſſibly be ſubiect to the law of God, but
muſt needs Rebell againſt the holy Ghoſt
by whoſe inſpiration it was written.Act. 7. 51.
            
            Rebell therefore no longer you learned
men by walking in a way which is not good
euen after your own Imaginations,
               Eſa. 65. 2. if you
think it horrible blaſphemy, that a prieſt of
a peece of bread ſhould make his maker,
then iudge it at leaſt ſome ſmatch of like
Idolatrie, for men to preſume without
any warrant from the word, to creat any
thing whatſoever of Religious uſe for the
ſervice of their ſauiour, but if you be perſwaded
that thoſe fiue words are of ſuch
efficacie, then hold on your courſe make
more cannons to ſtrengthen your Conformitie.
            Laſtly one word to you my deere brethren
of the Separation and one word to
the wiſe is ſufficient. There is no one
thing that our adverſaries do more greedily
deſire, then how to raiſe diviſions
and diſſentions amongſt us, which
moſt willingly, though diſſemblingly, they

uſually for a time giue way unto. Carefully
looking what comes neereſt to the
truth; and therefore moſt directly oppoſing
their kingdom and that with force
and armes, euen by fraud, and all abominable
practiſes, they ſet againſt (which my
truſt is ſome good body will plainly diſcouer
to their perpetual ſhame) but tēl me
true in good ſadneſſe did you never read
the learned legēd of that holy Nun, mother
Hubberd, how that an Aſſe is ſtill an Aſſe,
though he haue ſtoln a Lyons skin, & iets
up and down like an irregular monſter, a
learned maſter I ſhould ſay, even verie ſo
it is, I tell you a trueth though indeed a
great ſecret, they haue bretrayed our
deere mother who bare us all, and becauſe
ſhe would not yeeld to their beaſtly
luſts; by a trap doore, yea in the place
of holineſſe and that under pretence of
devotion, haue cauſed her ere ſhe was aware
of their guilefulnes, to fall in a moſt
deep dungeon, and hauing ſtript her of all
her goodly Raiment, they haue power giuen
them, there to detain her for a time,
and ſo haue clad their common harlot
my Lady (ſa-reverence) Superſtition in
our mothers beſt cloathes, and painted her
writhen face, filling up the pockholes &c.
with ſuch excellent art and learned devices,
as they haue made the filthie beaſt to
ſeeme 
                  •
               erie like our holy mother, inſomuch
as a good while, we all were perſwaded

that it was ſhee, but ſome of
our elder brethren hearing her voice ſo
ſtrangelie changed, began to ſuſpect that
ſome thing was in the wind, and ſo obſerving
more diligently, perceived her box &
penſill, attendans never to be from her, leſt
any accident ſhould diſcover the knavery.
Now you know ſhee alwayes abhorred
painting (as all honeſt women do) and
ſo it is evident that this filthie ſtrumpet
guls the world, & abuſes all that are ſincerely
affected, having ſuch a Company
of baſe and beaſtly followers, as will
ſweare and forſweare any thing for the
preſervation of her credit, for if her vizard
be once plucked off, they know full
well that they muſt be ſent packing with
a vengeance.
            My humble ſuite is therefore unto you,
that in your wiſedome you would bee
pleaſed ſeriouſlie to moralize this fable,
and to Ioyne with us in the meanes
of the redemption of our mother,
who I do aſſure you, recommends her
loue unto you, and deſires greatly to embrace
us all in her armes of unitie and
ſinceritie. The dungeon is an entire Rock
and ſo hard that no toole will pierce it,
onely the tears of true Repentance, diſtild
in a limbeck of a lively faith, over a fire
of a godlie life, moderately kept burning
with the bellows of holy zeale according
unto knowledge, will abſolutelie diſſolue

it, yea I may tell you our mother is verie
confident that if you and wee would louinglie
ioyne together in this buſineſſe
without fainting, ſeparating our ſelues frō
all ſingularitie, pride, loue of the world,
even all the works of darkneſſe, her ſighs
and groans haue alreadie ſo ſoftned the
inſide, that the outſide gapes as it were
for our mollifying medicine. Vp my
brethren ſtir up one another, and let us
never giue over till by our earneſt prayers
and godly liues we haue procured her libertie,
then ſhall we ſee theſe Inchanters,
and witches children with their goddeſſe
Conformity, ſent home againe to Egypt,
where ſhortly together with all of that
litter, they are to receiue their portion:
pardon my boldneſſe deere
mother, paſſe by my rudeneſſe
deere brethren, accept of
my ſervice to my Saviviour,
for I deſire
onely his prayſe
and glory.
            MALAC. 3. 1.
            
               The Lord whom yee ſeek, ſhall ſuddenly come
to his Temple, even the meſſenger of the
Covenant, whom ye delight in, behold, he
ſhall come, ſaith the Lord of hoſtes.
               But who may abide his comming? and who
ſhall ſtand when he appeareth? for he is like
a refiners fire, and like fullers ſope, &c.
            
            
               
               I doe moſt humblie intreate all Chriſtians
that are zealous of the Common ſalvation,
wiſely, yea and earneſtly to Contend for
the maintenance of all and everie action,
geſture, and ceremonie of the faith
which were once giuen to the ſaints, and
never to conforme to any other.
            FOR
            No omiſſion of any action is Sin, but onely
of thoſe actions which GOD hath
Commanded, or haue warrant from his
word, but the actions of the geſture of
kneeling and of the ceremonies in queſtion
in maner and forme as they be urged, are not
commanded by God, neither haue warrant
from the word therefore the omiſſion of
them is not ſin,
            Let our adverſaries proue that they bee commanded
by God, or are warranted by the
word, and we will ipſo facto conform unto
them, but elſe their omiſſion is no ſin, and
therefore we are puniſhed for well doing.
            Be of good courage and doe it, and the Lord
ſhall be with the good. 2. Chron. 19. 11.
            
         
      
   