
      
         
            
            
            DIRECTIONS GIVEN BY THE PATENTEES, how their Compounded ſtuffe is to be vſed in Dying.
            
            
               
                  IMPRIMIS all Colours to be made or finiſhed with the ſaid Stuffe, are to be wrought vpon good grounds of Woad, according to the lightneſſe or ſadnes of the colours that are intended to be made.
            Item, the Cloth, Kerſey, Bayes, or whatſoeuer elſe to be dyed, is firſt to be boyled with Allom and Argall as they vſe to doe for graine colours in halfe water, and halfe liquor or Float, and then to be landed, and very well cooled.
            The ſame muſt be finiſhed in new float or liquors of Branne and water (ſuch as ordinarilie are vſed for graine Colours) not aboue one day old, In manner following:
            Firſt, the Lead or Copper being prepared and filled with a quantitie of the ſaid Float or liquor proportionable for ſuch things as are purpoſed to be dyed, the Cloth or whatſoeuer elſe muſt be mathered, hauing an allowance of Mather, as followeth.
            
               For A Cloth for a French Ruſſet of 60. l. waight, being a ſad azure in woad,
—Foure pound.
               
               For A Violet of the like waight, being a ſad watchet in woad,—Three pound.
               
               For A Purple of the like waight, being a light watchet in woad,—Three pound.
               
               For A Tawney of the like waight, being a light Azure in woad,—Eight pound.
               
            
            And ſo proportionably for any colours to be dyed according to ye lightnes or ſadnes of their Woads, Prouided alwaies, that they be high ynough in woad for the colours purpoſed to be made.
            Then being mathered as aforeſaid, they are to be very cleane waſhed, and the Lead or Copper to be prepared with one third part of water according to the quantitie of Clothes or other things intended to be finiſhed, And then a quantitie of our Compounded ſtuffe to be allowed, as followeth.
            
               For A French Ruſſet of the waight of 60. l.—Fiue pound.
               
               For A Violet of the like waight.—Twoo pound and a halfe.
               
               For A Purple of the like waight.—Twoo pound.
               
               For A Tawney of the like waight.—One pound.
               
            
            Which Stuffe is to be put into the ſaid third part of Water in the Lead or Copper, ſtirring the ſame continually till it boyle, which it muſt doe halfe an hower, and then put to the water, twice aſmuch Float or liquor of a day old, or a day & a halfe at the moſt, this liquor muſt be ſwéet, and not made vpon ſtale grounds.
            Then your Lead or Copper being at a moderate or mathering heat, ſtirre about the liquor that the Stuffe may not lye at the bottome.
            1 Then ſhoote in your Clothes putting in the ſaddeſt Colours firſt, for example, firſt a French Ruſſet giuing  it 5 or 6 ends ouer the winche very quicke, Then a Violet giuing it one or twoo ends in like ſort, Then a Purple &c. when any of the aforeſaid Clothes come to their height or ſadnes, they muſt be landed, and very well cooled, continuing the fier till the Lead be ready to boyle: 2 Their ſtirre about the Liquor and  ſhoote in the Clothes againe, and let them be handled 4 or 5 ends ouer the winche as ſhalbe thought fit, then let them boyle till they haue taken the ſtrength of the Stuffe, or till they come to the Colours deſired, then land them and coole them very well. 3 And if they be once more ſhot into the Liquor and handled 4 or 5  ends ouer the winche, they will be the better and fairer.
            Hauing thus finiſhed any of the foreſaid Colours, there may be dyed in the ſame Liquors (being refreſhed with a little water or Float) Lauender colours, Siluer colours, Aſhe colours, or ſuch like vpon very light Woads, the ſame being boyled in Allom as aforeſaid, and not waſhed out of their Boyling.
         
      
   