
      
         
            
            
            ¶ A RIGHTE noble and pleasant History of the Successors of Alexander surnamed the Great, taken out of Diodorus Siculus: and some of their liues written by the wise Plutarch.
            Translated out of French into Englysh. by Thomas Stocker.
            Imprinted at London, by Henrie Bynneman, dwelling in Knightrider streat at the signe of the Mermayd, for Humfrie Toy.
            ANNO DOMINI. 1569.
         
         
            
            
            TO THE RIGHT honourable, his verie good Lord, Lord Ambrose Dudley, Earle of Warwyck, Baron Lisle, of the right honorable order of the garter, Knight: and M. of the ordinaunce to the Queenes most excellent Maiestie.
            
               AS of late came vnto my handes (right honourable and my very good Lord) this Booke, entituled, the Historie of the successors of Alexāder, surnamed the great, written in the Greeke tong by Diodore the Sicilian, and translated into Frenche by M. Claude of Seissell, sometime M. of the Requestes, to the most Christian King Lewis the . xij. of that name, and to him addressed: I

was (when I had ouer read and well considered the same) maruellously rauished, and earnestly wished, it hadde bene published in our vulgare tong, that many others might vnderstand it. Bycause (as me thinketh) it is both noble and pleasaunt, as well for the noueltie of the Historie, as also for the varietie and stile, which is right propre, and such one as apperteyneth, and chiefly belongeth to a very good Historian: wherein is shewed the vncerteintie of fortune, whiche maruellously may serue and helpe to read, and consider the worldly happes heretofore, to great Kings, Princes, and Nobles chaunced, who sometime were in great dignitie and had high authoritie, and wonderful prosperitie. Wherby in seeing (after great felicitie and maruellous prosperitie) the straunge aduersitie and miserie whiche happened them, and the continual chaunge of their estates and aduentures: may more and

more be vnderstood the instabilitie and imperfection of wordly matters. And chiefly in those great and honorable personages, the successors of Alexander the great, by whome is most declared the inconstancie of all things subiect to alteration and chaunge: and where Fortune (to speake after the vulgare opinion) hath best shewed the power, and auctoritie. Whiche Booke when I hadde finished, I aduised me to what honorable and Martiall personage I might fitliest addresse it. And as I aboade in this imagination, I at last called to remembrance your late noble progenitor, who in facts of warre and Martiall pollicies, surmounted in these our dayes the more parte of this noble Realme of Englande. And forthwith considering, that your honoure is he, who in those noble vertues, rightly representeth the very liuely Image of your most noble progenitor, and also vnderstanding your affabilitie

and naturall inclination to all suche as haue delight therein: I am therefore (all these things considered) the rather enboldened, to take on hande to dedicate this the firste fruite of my trauell vnto your honour: Most humbly beseching the same that it woulde vouchsafe to take in worth, thys small present and gifte, and to consider rather the harte and good will of the giuer (who desireth nothing more than to do you seruice agreable) than the value or qualitie of the present, very small, and in a rude stile, to dedicate vnto so Noble a personage. And bycause the sayd Claude of Seissell would not that this sayde Historie shoulde remayne imperfect, to leaue the Reader in doubt of the ende and issue of the warres begonne by Antigone the great and Demetre his sonne, against al the rest of the Kings and Princes successors of Alexander in those dayes, somewhat touched in the beginning of

the third Boke by the sayd Diodore, he hath therefore taken out of the wise Plutarche, the remnaunte, in the life of Demetre vnto his death, in whose tyme were almoste all the great and notable factes of warre (worthie memorie) exployted and done. Wherefore in reuoluing the sayd Historie with iudgement, and to the ende it is translated, there may (in my opinion) some commoditie and profit be receyued. For as touching the course of worldly things, may be sene the Stratagemes and pollicies in the facts of war, togither many sundry and diuerse battailles, sieges and enterprises, verie pleasaunt to read and heare: wherein may also be lerned many things apperteyning to that arte. And farther as concerning the morall direction of mannes life, there may besides be founde both by learning and examples manie goodly documentes. And chiefely, that whiche is moste meete and becomming

a noble personage, whereof he is called Magnanimus, that he shoulde not for any prosperitie whiche happeneth him, be ouer high minded nor yet for any aduersitie he hath or might chaunce him, lose hys harte, courage or hope, whiche things wholly seruing to the perfection of man in this present life, and consisteth in the habitude and operation of Morall vertues: and also to the perfection of the soule, ordering and appointing the latter ende and intentiō to the euerlasting blisse: which god of hys infinite goodnesse and grace graunt your honour, and vs al, after the course of this present life.
            
               Your honours most humble at commaundement. Tho. Stocker.
               
            
         
      
      
         
            
            ¶ The first Booke of the successours of Alexander surnamed the great, wrytten by Diodore the Sicilian, in the Greeke tongue, and after Translated into the French by Claude of Seisel, sometime a Counsailour, and maister of the Requests to IEWES the twelfth of that name, then the FRENCH King. And now Englished from the FRENCH, By THOMAS STOCKER.
            
               The Prologe.
               
                  
                     PYTHAGORAS the Samian, and diuers other graue and wise Philosophers, haue taught & lefte in writing, that the soules of men are immortal: and the more strongly to approue and verify their opion and iudgement therin, they affirme that whē the soules depart the bodyes, that they haue the prescience and foreknowledge of things to come. Thereunto also accordeth the famous Poet Homer, as appeareth by his introducing of Hector, who a little before he died, prognosticated the death of Achilles, which shortly after ensued. The like also of later dayes hath bene wel noted & knowne in many that died, who at the hour of their deathes, prophecied what should happen: and chiefly confirmed in Alexander surnamed the great
                     •
                    his death, King of Macedone. For he lying at Babilon vpon his death bed, being by his friends asked in the very extréeme and laste article of death, to whom he would leaue his Realme and royal dignities? answered,

to the most worthy the gouernement thereof. For I (ꝙ he) foresée, that in stead of my sepulture and funeral, my friends are determined to moue open hostilitie & warrs: which in déede soone after came to passe. For the greatest & most honorable his friends, striuing for the principalitie and gouernment, were the causes of many & great conflicts. Al which matters, together with the deedes and gestes of hys said successours, shall be contained in this present Booke, and be made manifest and plain to al studious & learned, which wil read and desire to vnderstand the same. For the booke precedent, treateth of the Noble and worthy déedes of Alexander, vnto the time of his death. But this which now I am in hand with, comprehendeth and setteth forth the renoumed actes of Alexander his successors, being an Historie of .vij. whole yeares continuaunce.
            
            
               
                  ¶After the death of Alexander the great, Aride his brother is established king, and Perdicas appointed to be his gouernoure.
               
                The first Chapter.
               
                  
                     THE same yeare that the Athenians ordained and chose Celphisodore to be their Prouost and gouernour, and the Romaines created Lucie Fury, and Dece Iuny theyr Consuls: King Alexander deceasing without issue, chaunced betwéene the raigne & state, to arise great dissention and sedition amōgs the Princes, for the principalitie and gouernement. For the regiment of his foote men were wholy determined to aduaunce Aride to the kingdom: who although sōne to king Phillip, and brother to Alexander, yet notwithstāding he was attainted with the incurable disease of the mind. By reason wherof, the

rest of the Princes and Nobles in aucthority, which garded Alexander his body, hauing with them the horse men called the Souldiours, condescended and agréed by one whole and common consent, to reare warres against the footemen, rather than they would suffer and abide their insolent boldnesse. But before they enterprised the matter, they thought best to send certaine of the chiefest and most honourable personages in their company, with an ambassade to the footemen: Amongs whom Meleager was appointed chief & principal Ambassador, to dissuade them to desist and leaue of their attēpt, alleaging that it stode most with reason, that they shold obey the Princes. But so soone as Meleager was come amongst them, he neuer made mention of the Ambassade and charge committed vnto him, but contrariwise approuing & alowing their attempt and enterprise, did al that in him lay, to support and maintaine them agaynst the Princes and their confederates: so that the footemen hauing great good liking both of his counsaile and corage, ordained him forthwith their Coronel, and thereupon armed them to giue battail to the aduersary. In so muche that the Princes and Nobles in their company, issued out of the towne in armes, and put them selues in order of battaile. How be it certaine of the wisest and most circumspect, deepely waying & considering the case, concluded a finall peace. Wherein was agréed that Aride shold be established king. And Perdicas chiefe of the Macedonian princes, to whom Alexander at the hour of his death gaue his ring, deputed his gouernor. And to the rest of the Princes, and chiefe of the army, were diuided and geuen the administrations and gouernmentes of the Prouinces late vnder the subiection of Alexander. Which administratiōs or presidentships the Gréekes called Satrapies, & the gouernors of the same Prouinces Satrapes, conditionally that euery of the sayd Princes at all times should be subiect and obedient vnto the King and Perdicas his gouernor.
            
            
               
               
                  ¶Perdicas taking vpon him the gouernement of the realme, deuideth the Satrapies amongs the Princes.
               
                The second Chapter.
               SHortly after that Perdicas hadde taken vpon him the rule ouer the rest, he forthwith assembled all the princes and captains, & assigned to euery of them certaine Prouinces to gouern. And first he bestowed the gouernmēt of Egipt, on Ptolome the sonne of Lage: on Laomedon of Mytthilene, Syrie: on Philote, Cilice: on Phiton, Mede: on Eumenes Paphlagone and Cappadoce, together the regions to them adioyning, in which Alexander, by reason of the continuall warres betwixt him and King Darye, neuer came: on Antigone, Pamphilie, and Licie, together Phrigie the great: on Cassander, Carie: on Meleager, Lydie: and on Leonate, the lesser Phrigie: which bordereth aboue Hellespont. In this sort were deuided the Prouinces of Asia. In Europe was appointed to Lysimache, the Countrey of Thrace, with the Countreys and people therunto adioyning, lying vpon the Sea coast of Euxine: to Antipater, Macidone, with all the rest of the Countreys bordering thereon. And for the residue of the Countreys and Satrapies of Asie, ouer & beside those already named, he thought good to leaue to the rule and gouernment of those, whom Alexander had deputed in his life time. And the rest next to them, he left to Taxille and the other Kings and Princes, which before enioyed them.
                     Taxille.
                   And the Countreis lying beyond Caucase the Mount, which is Paropanisade, he left to Osarte, King of the Bactrians, whose daughter Alexander had espoused,
                     Osarte.
                   named Roxanne. He bestowed also on Sebirte, Aracose and Gedrose: on Stasanor the Solian, Arrye and Draucine: on Phillip, Bactriane and Sogdiane: on Frataferne, Parthe and Hircane: on Lucete, Perside: on Tlepoleme Carmanie: on Atrapes, Mede: on Archon, Babilon: on Achesilaye,

Mesopotame. Besides all this, be constituted and ordained Seleuck, captaine general of the horsse men, called the Souldiers, being the chiefest Office of charge, & most honorable within the army,
                     Epheston.
                   which charge Ephestion first had, and after him Perdicas. Moreouer, the Realmes and dominions which Alexander gaue to Taxille & Pore,
                  
                     Pore.
                   they held and enioyed them according as Alexander had lefte them. And as touching the transporting of Alexander his body to the Temple of Iupiter Hammone, the setting vp of his Toomb, the apparelling therof, with the furniture and solempnization of the funeralles, the whole charge was committed to Aride. While Alexander liued he appointed Cratere one of hys chiefe Captaines, with
                     ••
                    M. old souldiors to goe into Cilice, to whom he gaue certaine ordinaunces and Commissions to execute and performe. But assone as Alexander was dead, the Princes his successors would in no wise agrée that the sayd ordinaunces should be performed. For after Perdicas had seene and red the letters & registers of the said Alexander,
                  
                     Meruelous enterprises, and ordinaunces of Alexander.
                   whereby he appointed a great deale of treasure to be leuied for ye buriall of Epheston, and that he had farther assigned many other things of great cost and charge to be done, he was of the opinion that all the said ordinaunces of Alexander shold be reuoked and adni
                     •
                   hilate. But to the end it shold not be thought that he wēt about to derogate the aucthority and honor of Alexander, he comprimitted the matter to the deliberation of the Macedonians, and amongs diuers and sundry things they found great and waightye matters (worthy remembraunce) appointed by Alexander. For first he ordained that a thousande tall Gallies should be built longer and bigger than were in Phenice, Sirye, Cilice, or Cypres, to warre against the Carthagians and certaine other Countreis, lying and bordering vpon the Lybian and Spanishe seas, & the regions to them adioyning euen vnto Sicile: to the end he wold be Lord and gouernour of all the Libian seas hard to the pillers of Hercules.
                  
He also ordained that there should be erected .v. royall and honorable Temples to the value of fiue hundred talents euery of them, and that there should be cut out a number of large and great harborowes, in places méete for the purpose, to ride at harborow the said nauie of gallies. That done, he willed and commaunded diuers mighty and great Cities to be built, & those to be peopled as foloweth.
               First, that the inhabitaunts of Asie should be brought into Europe, and the inhabitantes of Europe into Asia, to the end that they being conioyned in mariage and affinitie with the other, they should always liue and continue in amitie, friendship & concord. And for the places where the Temples should be erected, he appointed that one should be at Delos in the honor of Iupiter Dodone, one in Macedone, to Iupiter Nidie: one in Amphipolis to ye goddesse Diane of Scithie: the other two in ye honor of the goddesse Pallas, the one in Cyrne, the other in Illye. Which temple in Illye, he would should be so excellent and sumptuous, that the like might not any where be found. Ouer and bisides all this, he appointed a tombe to be built in manner of a Pyramide or broche, in the honoure of his father Phillip, farre excéeding them in Egipt, which are thought the most excellent things in the world, that euer were séene or heard of.
               When the ordinaunces and escriptes of Alexander were red and heard, although the Macedonians loued Alexander maruellously, yet after they see that his enterprises were suche and of so great charge, and very difficult to bring to passe, they all agréed that nothing should be done. And shortly after Perdicas caused thirtie of the principal soldiours to be slaine which were against him, and namely Meleager, whom, bisides that when he was sent Ambassador to the footemen, he did traiterously, and quite contrary to his charge, he accused also to haue bene the chief conspirater, and purposer of his death.
            
            
               
               
                  ¶Perdicas sendeth Python against the Greekes, rebelling in the hye Countries, whom he ouerthroweth. And incidently is described the scite and compasse of all Asie.
                  
               
               The thirde Chapter.
               AFter Perdicas was aduertised that the Grekes which were deuided by Colonies into the higher prouinces rebelled, and had assembled great puissance of men, he sent against them, one of the Princes, named Python. But before any mētion be made of the warres, we think it first méete to make report in this History of the occasions of the said rebellion, together the description of the scite and greatnesse of the Countrey of Asie: and the natures and properties of the Prouinces of the same. In doing whereof, they which shall read the History, hauing before their eyes the distaunces of the places, may with greater ease, conceiue and vnderstand it.
               First, the Mount Thaure adioyning to the Countrey of Cilice, extendeth and reacheth all alongst Asie, euen to the East Occean. But bicause there are in the same, many bowes and crookes, they haue therfore diuers and sundry names, so that Asie is deuided by the said Mount into two partes, the one of which abutteth and lyeth towardes the North, and the other towardes the Southe. Some of the springs also which discend from the sayde Mountaine on the North side of the hil, run into the Caspian sea, some into the riuer Euxine, and another part into the North Occean. And the rest which descend from ye South side, some fall into the Indian Sea, some into the Occean, adioining to that part of Inde, and some into the red sea. In this manner abut the prouinces of Asie, some against the North, & other some against ye south. And for the North part thereof, the first prouinces which boūdre

vpon the riuer Thanais, are Sogdiane and Bectriane, and adioyning to them, Arrie and Parthe, enuironing the Hircane-sea, deuided from the rest. Bisides all these are the Prouince of Mede, the greatest and largest of all the rest, hauing many and sundry countreys belonging there to, called by their seueral names. After these are Armenie, Licaonie, and Cappadoce, very colde Countreis. Beyonde this straight forward, is Phrygie ye great, which ioyneth vpon Hellespont, and of either side it are Lydie and Carie. And on the right sidelieth Piside a great countrey.
               Behinde that lieth Licie in the firme land, and all alongst the Sea coastes are the Cities which the Greekes somtime builded and inhabited, whose names shal not be néedful to be mētioned in this present history. And in this sort do lie & abut the prouinces of Asie towards ye North. But to returne to the prouinces towards the South, the first that lieth about the Mount Cauc
                        •
                      se, is Inde, a very great realme, and wōderfully peopled with diuers nations: amongs which the greater natiō are the Ga
                        •
                      garides, against whom Alexander could neuer bring his army, by reason of their Elephants: which countrey extendeth so the riuer Ganges. In the same riuer boundreth the realm of Inde, being in that quarter .xxx. furlōgs brode, or there about.
               Next vnto the Countrey of the Gangarides, ioyneth the rest of the realme of Inde, which Alexander cōquered, ful of goodly holesome riuers, and of great wealth. In the same, besides many other countreys, are also the realme of Pore and Taxille, amidst which runneth the riuer Inde
                        •
                      
                   wherof all the coūtrey first toke the name of Inde, About which,
                     Mesopotame to say lying betwene two riuers, whiche are Euphrates and Tigris.
                   lie the Prouinces of Aracose, Gedrofe, and Carmanie, and right ouer against thē 
                  Perse wherin are enclosed Fusiane, and Sita
                        •
                      ine, together the Countrey of Babilon, which reacheth to the deserts of Arabie. And on ye other side leding hyer vp, lieth Mesopotamie, enclosed with tw
                     •
                    riuers, and therby so called. And on thother side ioyneth

al this region of Babilon, the higher Sirie, & nere to them al alongst the Sea coast are Pamphile, and the other part of Sirie, called Celosyrie, in which is enclosed Phenice. To that and the desertes ioyning thereto, by which the floud Nile runneth downe, and deuideth Sirie, there is on the other side of the riuer, the Countrey of Egipt, which was alwayes reputed and taken the richest, and of greatest reuenues of all the rest. And al these Prouinces are in a hote Region, for so much as they lie towards the south, euen as the others which be towards the North, are very colde. All whiche were deuided amongs the principall chiefetaines and Captaines of warre, which serued Alexander as hath bene aforesaid. But to returne to the History of the Greekes, (I meane those which Alexander had sent by Colonies, to enhabit the hier prouinces, there to dwel) they were much agreued, for that they wer driuen to forsake their maner of life, the holesome aire and fertile soile of the good countrey of Grece
                  
                     •
                    & as it were become abiects in the farthe s
                     •
                   wartes & cōfines of the countrey. Notwithstāding so long as Alexander liued they endured the case for feare of him. But so sone as they had newes of his death, they ge
                     •
                    to rebell & assemble in armes to the number of twentie thousand footemē or more & thrée thousand horsemen all trained souldiers, amongs whom Philo Enian
                        •
                      
                   was general.
                     Philo.
                   When Perdicas vnderstood the rebellion of the sayde Grekes
                  
                     •
                    he sent against them Phiton one of Alexanders garde or Pencioners, a man of great magnanimitie and courage, and for his prowes and martiall pollicie; worthy the charge. He deliuered to hym thrée thousand footemen, and eyght hundred of the choi
                     •
                   est horses within the armie, & farther directed his letters vnto the Satrapes in these quarters, cōmaunding thē to 
                     ••
                   euie for him ten thousande footemen and eyght thousand horse.
               When Phiton had taken vpon him this charge and addict to atchieue hie and waightie enterprises, he hoped vnder that colour through his curteous & gentle entreating,

to winne the loue of the Grekes, and so thereby to encrease his power and get great signories and dominions. But Perdicas knowing the haultinesse of his minde & courage, had already conceyued that whiche he pryuily imagined, and therfore willed and commaunded him, that so sone as he had vanquished and ouercome the Grekes his enimies, he should foorthwith do execution on them al, and giue the spoyle to his men of warre.
               After Pithon had receyued of him those souldiers, & that the Satrapes had deliuered him the rest, he merched against the rebelles with his whole powre, and by the meane of Eniane a Greke, he by corruption wanne Lipodore one of the captaynes of horsemen to the rebelles, and therby easely ouerthrewe the enimie. For although they were the greater number, and of more force, (yet the victorie beyng vncertayne) the traytour Lipodore retired with his troupe of thrée thousande horse towardes an hill hard by, whom whē the rest of the souldiers perceiued, they stoode in suche amaze, thinking him to flie, that they all fled at ones. By reason wherof Pithon obtayned victorie, and foorth with caused to sound the trumpet, and made proclamation that so many as were escaped shoulde cast of their armoure, and peaceably depart home to their owne houses, with the one halfe of their goods: which incontinent was done. But the Macedonians calling to remembraunce the commaundement of Perdicas, they without regarde of the peace, graunted to them by Phiton, which they also had cōfirmed with their othes, by and by with shot ouerthrew and kild
                     •
                    all the Captiues and foorth with butyned their goods. When Pithon sée that he was put beside his enterprise, he immediatly returned with the Macedonians towardes Perdicas. And in this case stoode the state of Asie.
               
            
            
               
               
                  ¶ Of the warres whiche the Athenians make against Antipater, called the Lamian warre.
               
                The fourth Chapter.
               AFter that the Rhodians expulsed the Macedonians garrison amongs them, and the Athenians made preparation to warre against Antipater, called the Lamian warre, bicause of the siege of Lamie. But first before I procéede any further, I thinke it very necessarie to make report of the occasions of the sayde warres, to the ende that the déedes and factes of warres exployted in the same, may with more ease be vnderstood of the Reader, whiche were these.
               Not long before Alexander died, he purposed to cal home againe al the exiles and bannished men of the Cities of Grece, and restore them to their mansion places and dwelling houses, thinking that that woulde greatly redound to his honour and fame: and therby he might haue a number of men in euery citie to be his Pertisannes or garde, if the rest at any time tooke in hande or enterprised any mutany or would reuolt. Wherfore he seyng the time of the Olimpiad at hand, he sent thether Nicanor the Stagerite with letters, conteyning the edict of the sayde restitution straightly charging and commaunding him in the ende of ye assemble, to make proclamation by the sounde of the Trumpets victors of the said letters: which thing he speedily did. The tenor of which letters hereafter ensue.
               
                  Alexander the great king of Macedone,
                  
                     The tenour of King Alexanders letters.
                   to the bannished and exiles of Grece gréetyng. We haue not ben the cause of this your exile and bannishement, but rather are a meane that ye may retourne home, except such as haue offended against the sacred lawe. Wherfore we haue addressed our letters to Antipater concerning the same, strayghtly charging and commaundyng hym, if any the cities refuse to do this our commaundement, that he foorth with enforce

and compell them.
               When these letters had ben proclaymed and red, the people therof were maruelous glad. And bicause the thing pleased the multitude, they made such a noyse and showte, that it was heard vnto ye heauēs, for as much as ther were aboue twentie thousande exiles, who all auerred & sayde, that the same restitution was for the common wealth of the whole state & countrey of Grece. But the Etholians and Athenians were therwith euill apayd, & greatly displeased, bycause ye 
                  Etholians feared to be plagued for the oultrage they had cōmitted against Eniade, whō they chased & expulsed their land, knowing for certain ye the king had sworne that not only his neuewes & others descending from his line, but also the exiles and bannished them selues woulde be reuenged for the iniurie done to him. Againe the Athenians in no wyse determined to rendre the Isle of Damie, whiche they had deuided amongest them selues, to those whom before they had expulsed. But bicause it lay not in them to resist the powre of Alexander, they endured the case, always awayting oportunitie, which in the end at vnwares happened them. For after they had hearde newes that Alexander was dead without heires, they then boldly enterprised not only to set them selues at libertie, but also tooke vpon thē the gouernement of all Grece, hauing great affiaunce that they were able to mainteine warres against all the worlde, by reason of the maruelous amasse of money, which they not long before had gotten by the death of Harpale, recited by vs in the booke precedent, with whiche they waged the mercenaries whom the Satrapes had left in Asie, to the number of eyght thousande or more lying then at Teuare, in the countrey of Peloponnese. Wherfore they gaue secret commaundement to Leosthenes the Athenian,
                  
                     Leosthenes.
                   to take vpon him as it were at his owne costes & charges to wage them, makyng them beléeue he woulde without knowledge of the Citie, enterprise some notable exploit, to the ende that Antipater who made no great estimate

of hym or his doyngs, shoulde haue little regarde to make agaynst hym, wherby they might haue leysure and time to prepare for all such necessarie hablements and engines of warre as were méete for the purpose: which thing in déede was done. For Leosthenes at his pleasure, assembled the sayde men of warre, so that he had gotten a bande of valiaunte and lustie Souldiers and of great experience, bycause they had serued in many sundry & notable warres in Asia. All this was done, before there came any sure knowledge of the death of Alexander.
               
               But after certayn which came from Babilon, had giuen it out that they sée him dead, the Athenians arrered open warres, and sent immediatly to Leosthenes some part of Harpale his money, together wt great stoare of Armoure & weapon, willing him no longer to dissemble the matter, but openly to beginne to warre, as to hym should séeme for the best.
               When Leosthenes had receyued the money, he then according to his promise, payde al his souldiers their wages, aswell the vnarmed as the armed, and so marched on into the countrey of the Etholians, to the intent they might ioyne with him, whom they right thanfully receyued, and with great courage accorded his request, & there vpon deliuered him seuen thousande Souldiers. From thence he sent to the Locriens, Phocians, & the other cities therabout, solliciting them to take their part for the restauration of the whole countrey of Grece into hir pristinate estate & libertie, from the seruitude and bondage of the Macedoniās:
               
               But in the citie of Athens, the richest and welthiest citezins, prayed and exhorted the cōmoners of the same to peace and quietnes. Neuerthelesse there were other who diuers times, & many wayes had gratified and done much for the sayd cōmoners, that continually moued and stirred the multitude to warres, bicause their chiefe liuyng was by their salarie and wages in the time of warres. Wherfore king Phillip oftentimes accustomed to say, that

peace was their warres, and warres their peace. Therfore an edict of the warres was drawen and published by them which were deputed by the communalty, as followeth.
               First that the people of Athens ought to take vpon them the quarrell, to reduce into hir populer gouernaunce the whole countrey of Grece.
               
               Also that there should be no garrisons maynteyned or kept within any the sayd cities.
               Moreouer, that there shold a nauie be sent to sea. To say fourtie excellent tall, long and fléete gallies of thrée tier of ores on a side, and lxx. of foure.
               Also that all the Athenians of the age of fourtie yeares and vpward, should be in a readines to warre.
               Moreouer, that of the ten tribunes of their people, thrée should remayne at home for to defende the countrey, & the other seuen to be in a readinesse for the warres, to sende whether it should be thought most conuenient.
               Far
                     •
                   her, that Ambassadours should be sent through out all Grece, pronouncing and signifiing to all the Cities of the same: that euen as in tymes past the people of Athens dyd repute and take the whole countrey of Grece to be one common and frée countrey and domi
                     •
                   ill of Greciaens, & had assayled, chased and put to flight by sea ye 
                  Barbarians who ment to haue subdued and conquered them, in like case also they nowe thought it best foorthwith (for the cōmon libertie of Grece) to moue warre, and to be contributors in the same, both with their shippes and money, for the sa
                     •
                   etie of the sayde Grecians, before any other people of the world.
               Whiche decrée and edict beyng approued and allowed, was foorthwith put in execution. Wherevpon many both graue & wise Grecians seyng the imminent daungers that woulde ensue sayd, that the Athenians had well considered of all things concerning honour, but for any gaine or commoditie that thereby should ensue, they greatly er
                     •
                   ed and were deceyued, alleaging, that before they néeded,

they had taken vpon them to arrere warres against great and inuincible armies, exhorting and praying all sage and wise men to be otherwise minded, and to take example of the late destructiō of Thebes. Notwithstanding this, the Ambassadours of Athens neuer desisted, but trauailled through all the cities of Grece, persuading thē by eloquēt orations & fine persuasions to wars, so yt in the end the greater number of the cities agréed to ayde them, some with all their powre and force, & other some with certain numbers of men. And the rest which refused to ioyne with them, some tooke part with the Macedonians, and the other rather chose to be neuters. Howbeit the first yt ioyned wt the Athenians were ye 
                  Etholians, as we haue before declared. After them all the Thessalians, except the Pellenians. All the Oetians also, except the Heraclians. All the Achees, the Phitiothes reserued: and all the Eliens, except the Milesians. And beside al these, ye 
                  Dorians, Locrians, Phocias, Aenians, Elisians, Dolopenians, Athamantians and Leucadians, and al ye 
                  Molossians vnder the gouernemēt of Aripthy. For he had shewed him selfe to be their friende, although after he betraide the Grekes and toke part with the Macedonians. And as for the Illirians and Thracians, fewe of them would take part with the Athenians, by reason of the old enimitie they bare them: But notwithstanding the Euboians declared them selues to be their ayders in those warres, & all those which dwell in the vttermost cōfines of Peloponese. To say the Argiues, Sicionians, Elians, Messenians, and those which enhabite the quarter of Acten. These were in effect all the people of Grece, whiche conspired with the Athenians in those warres.
               After which conspiracy, the Athenians sent to Leosthenes a new supplie of fiue thousand footemē all Citizins, fiue hundred horse, and two thousand straungers: Who trauailling the countrey of Boetia, found al the people in those quarters against them, bycause that when Alexander had assaulted and wonne the Citie of Thebes, he gaue away al

their landes & possessions to the Boetians, enhabiting there round about: whiche people had made particion of all the sayd lands and possessions, whose reuenues yerely amounted to a great value. Wherfore fearing that if the Athenians preuayled, they would rendre vnto the Thebanes their Citie and territories, they determined the rather to take part with the Macedonians. After Leosthenes had encamped before Platea, he retourned with certen of his Souldiers into Boece, and there ioyned with the armie of the Athenians, wher they encountered and fought with the Boetians and ouerthrew them. And immediatlie after the battaile, he caused a Trophe to be set vp in token of victorie. Which done he retourned to the passage of the piles, and there continued certayn tyme, always awayting the puyssaunce of the Macedonians. But when Antipater vnderstood of the death of Alexandre, and the diuision of the Prouinces which had ben made in Babylon, he sent his messengers towards Cratere who was in Cilice, who had ben sent thether before, to conduct into Macedonie fiue thousande old Macedonian souldiers. He sent likewise to Philote, Gouernour of the countrey of Phrigie, adioyning to Hollespont, praying him to come to his ayde and succour, and by ye meane he offred him one of his daughters in mariage: he vnderstanding the concourse of the Grecians against him, being Gouernour of Macedone, he left in the Countrey for Lieutenaunt Sisbe
                  
                     Sisbe.
                   and a certayn of suche Souldiers with him as he thought best, commaunding him to leuie so manie men in the said countrey, as he could. And him selfe with .xiij. thousand footemen & sixe hundred horse, (for more he coulde not well haue, bycause the great numbre of his Souldiers were gone into Asia, to garde that countrey and confynes of the same) departed out of Macedone and came into Thessalie, where he sée before his face vpon the sea coast of Macedone, the whole Nauie which Alexandre had sent for the wasting of a great summe of money and a great deale of other treasure, being in all an

hundred & ten tall Gallies of warre. The Thessalians allied them wt 
                  Antipater, & for that cause they had sent him for the maintenaunce of his warres, a great numbre of able horse mē wel appointed. Howbeit, after the Atheniās were come amongs them, and that they had with pleasaunt and delicate woordes so wonne their fauour to fight for the cōmon libertie of Grece, they wholy yelded to Leosthenes, through which practize the Grecians army then was of greater force than the Macedonian. By reason whereof happened, that when Antipater came to ioyning of battail, he was incontinent ouerthrowen and vanquished. And after that, he neuer durst come in the face of the enimie, neyther yet was he able safelie to returne into Macedone: wherfore he was forced to retier into the Citie of Lauige with the rest of his army, whiche Citie he there fortified and furnished it with men, armour, weapon and shot to auoide the siege, euery day looking & attending for ayde out of Asie. Wherevpon Leosthenes forthwith remoued his Campe, and with his whole power besteged the Towne. And after, he had encamped and entrenched him selfe about, he approched the wals offring battaill. But when he sée the Macedonian
                        •
                      
                   after many daies offers durst not sallie out he assaulted the Towne. Notwithstanding, the Townes men so valauntlie defended it, that they repulsed the ennimy, and slewe a great numbre of the rash assailants: by reason the towne was well manned, throughly prouided wtih all kindes of hablements of warre, and the curten of suche heigth and thicknes that the besieḡed with great ease became victors. When Leosthenes sée that he could not by force winne the Towne, straightwaies cut of their victuals, trusting by famine to winne it, wherefore he stoppeth all the passages with large and déepe ditches and trenches. In this meane while had Leosthenes for a time gyuen leaue to the Etholians to go into their countrie, about suche necessary affaires as they had to do, and thereupon they all returned into Ethole. And as Antipater was thus distressed and in great

danger, loking for none other, but that he must néeds for wan: of victuals, yelde him selfe and al his power to the enimy: sodenly happened them great good lucke. For as the assaillaunts were vndermyning the wals, Antipater with fierce courage falied out vpon them, and Leosthenes comming to the rescue of his souldiers, had by hap such a blow on the head with a stone, which was throwen frō the curten in time of the skyrmish, yt it felled him to the ground, and being by his Souldiers, taken vp more than halfe dead and caried to his Tente, within thrée daies after died therof: who for his noble and cheualrous acts in feates of war, was honorably buried, where at the commaundement of the people of Athens, Hiperides then the most excellent Orator in all the Towne, made an Oration in his prayse at the funerall. For Demosthenes the Orator was in exile by reason of the money which he had gotten of Harpale. After the death of Leosthenes the people chose Antiphile for their Captaine in his rowme, a right and valiaunt mā, and in Martiall Pollicies verie expert.
            
            
               
                  ¶ Certen of the Princes vpon whom Perdicas bestowed the gouernement of the Prouinces, go about to seigniorize them. 
               
               The fifth Chapter.
               WHile these broiles were in Grece, the Princes and Gouernours of Asie among whom the Prouinces were deuided, emōgs Ptolome who was one, eftsones without resistaunce or contradictiō, seised on Egypt
                  
                     •
                    behauing him selfe to the whole coūtrey, wisely, liberally & gently: And during the time of his gouernement there, had gathered together about viij. thousand talents, by meane whereof he had leuied a great numbre of Mercenaries. There also repaired to him many af his kinsfolkes and friends, aswell for the bountie of his nature, as also for his

liberalitie and frāknesse. Againe he sent Ambassadours to Antipater, to participats wt him al his affaires & businesse, knowing for certaine, yt if Perdicas could, he would expulse him the prouince of Egipt. But now to returne to Lisimache, so soone as he was arriued in ye prouince of Thrace, he found King Southe with xx. thousand footemē
                  
                     •
                    and two thousand horse there encamped, yet feared he not to ioyne battail with him. But bycause on the one side was the greater numbre, and on the other side prowesse and vertue, the fight endured long and cruell, wherin many Grecians were slaine, but a farre greater numbre of Barbarians, so that eyther of them retiered into his camp, not knowing who had the better, and there continued a season both minded to assemble greater power.
            
            
               
                  ¶ Leonate comming to the rescous of Antipater, is by the Athenians ouerthrowne and slayne; but after the said Athenians are at Sea by Cly
                           •
                         e chased and ouerhrowen.
               
                The sixth Chapter.
               DUring the time that Antipater was besieged in Lamie, he had secretlie sent his Ambassadour Ecathe towardes Leonate desiring his ayde: who promised to come. And thereupon he immediatly put all things in a readinesse & passed Europe, vntil he came into Macedone, where repaired to him many Souldiers, Macedonians, so that he had assembled twentie thousand footemen and fiue thousand horse: with whiche armie he intented to warre vpon the Grekes through the Countrey of Thessaly. Who vnderstanding of his comming, raised their siege, and sent all their baggage and artillarie; together the Paysaunts & Sclaues which followed the army into the citie of Melite
                  
                     •
                   
                  
                     The Citie of Milet.
                   bycause they might more spéedelie marche on with the soldiers, aswel
                     •
                    footemen as horsemen, against Leonate, meaning to gyue him battaill before he ioyned with Antipater.
                  
Now had the Grekes not passing xxij. thousand footemē, (for that the Etholians and certen other regiments were licensed to goe into their Countreis and mansion places) & thrée thousand horse, of which two thousand were Thessalians, valiaunt and trained Souldiers, in whose magnanimite cōsisted ye whole hope of victory. At last they ioyned battaill with Leonate, which cōtinue long and doubtful, but in the ende, the Thessalians through their hie and manlie courages obtained victorie, and Leonate manfully and stoutelie fighting, in the retire fell into a ditche, and there miserablie was slaine. Neuerthelesse his Souldiers recouered the body and carried it to his Tent. When the Macedonian Phalange sée that Memnon Generall of the Thessalian men at armes had wonne the victorie, and fearing they woulde charge them, sodenlie retired from the plaine where the battaill was fought, vnto the straightest passages they coulde finde néere hand, for their garde and strength, through whiche pollicy the Thessalian men at armes charging them, profited nothing. The next day in the morning, Antipater comming with the rest of his power to ayde them, ioyned all the Macedonians in one campe vnder the gouernement and conduct of Antipater, who fearing the Grecian horsemen, neuer durst 
                     〈◊〉
                    battaill (and againe, doubting his inabilite to passe through them, was enforced by the straight wayes & passages in those quarters, faire and easelie to retire.
                     Antiphile.
                   But Antiphile generall of the Grecian armie, hauing honorablie ouerthrowen the Macedonians in battaill, remayned still in Thessalie, alwayes attending and looking what the ennimie mente or durst to do. Thus had the Grecians in all their affaires by lande prosperos successe. But after the Athenians vnderstood that the Macedonians were of great power by sea, they caused many new ships of warre to be buylt, so that they had in all C
                     •
                   xx saile.
                     Clite.
                   But Clite Admirall of the Macedonian Nauie hauing alwais about CCxl. saile, twise chased and vanquished Ethion Admirall to the Athenians,
                  
                     Ethion.
                   & slew

manie of his people about the Isles Ethimades.
               
            
            
               
                  
                     Perdicas ouercommeth Ariarathe, and restoreth to Eumenes the Countrey of Cappadoce.
                  
               
                The seauenth Chapter.
               IN this meane, time Perdicas (hauing with him King Phillip and his armie royall) purposed to warre vppon Ariarathe of Cappadoce: Who neuer (during the life of Alexander) would at anie time be subiect to the Macedonians. And the cause why Alexander suffred him peaceably to enioy the same, was, that he had suche notable warres with King Darie, that he neuer forced of Ariarathe, so that he peaceably held and enioyed that countrey of Cappadoce many yeares. By reason whereof he became so rich and of such great wealth, that he had waged a great numbre, aswel Cappadocians, as straungers, with whome he thought to defend him selfe and his Realme against Perdicas, if at any tyme he attempted to pierce and inuade his countrey. He had about xxx. thousand footemen, & x. thousand horse. Notwithstanding, when they came to battaill, he and all his armie was quite discomfited and ouerthrowen: wherof about iiij. thousand slaine, and aboue v. thousand prisoners taken, of which numbre him selfe was one, who with all his kinsfolks and allies were hanged. This done, Perdicas proclaimed peace to the whole Countrey, & restored to the Gouernement thereof Eumenes Cardian, who was before assigned vnto it at the first particion of the Prouinces.
            
            
               
               
                  ¶ Antipater in fight vanquisheth the Grecian armie
                        •
                       putteth in subiection the greater numbre of the Cities of Grece and Athenes, and in the end restoreth them to libertie.
               
               The eight Chapter.
               IN this meane season was Cratere come out of Cilice into Macedone, accompained with vj. thousand footemen of ye most expert souldiours that serued Alexandre when he first inuaded Asie. And vpon the way he tooke vp iiij. thousand Persian Archers, a thousand Slings or Shot, and a thousand horse to aide Antipater, and to reuenge the oultrage committed by the Grekes against the Macedonians. But so sone as he was come into Thessalie, he voluntarily gaue the principall charge and conduct to Antipater, praying him to take vpon him the office of L. Generall of the army. So they encamped together about the Riuer Pene,
                  
                     The riuer Pene.
                   and one day mustering the army (accompting those which came with Leonate) they had xl. thousand footemen well armed, iij. thousand archers and slings, and about v. thousand horse. Notwithstanding the Grekes feared nothing, but encamped right ouer against them, albeit they were the weaker and febler companie, by reason that a great numbre of them (for their many victories before obtained) were so hault and proude, that without weting or knowledge of their Captaines, they were gone home, so that (the Captaynes being not obeyed, nor the Souldiers at commaūdement) there remayned not behind aboue xxv. thousand footemen, and iij. thousand v. hundred horse, in which nmubre of horse laye & consisted the only hope of victorie, both for their valiaunt courages, & also bycause the countrey was playne and champion. Antipater daylie offred battaill, but the Grekes remained quiet & kept their camp, loking still for aide from the cities of Grece. But they were by the enimy so long oppressed and gréeued, that of force

they must in the end abide, and put all to the hazard of battaill. And bycause they desired that the horsemen shold first charge, they placed them as it were for their voward before the Phalange of footemē. And when Antipater sée that the Thessalians at the first encountre and charge had gottē the better, he commaunded his Phalāge to marche against the maine battaill of the Grekes, whome they so fiercely greeued and pressed, that in lesse than an houre they had almost slaine the whole Grecian Phalange. And at last the Grecians seing them selues no longer able to abyde the brunt, nor maintayne the fight, retired in good order to battaill to the straight passages towardes a moūtayne, where by reason of the aduaūtage of the place, they with greater ease defended them selues from the power and force of the Macedonians. And albeit the Grecian horse were to harde and bettered the Macedonians, yet they seing their footemen so retired, yelded them selues to the enimie: so by that meane the Macedonians wanne the honour of the battaill, in which were slaine about v. hundred Grekes, and Cxxx. Macedonians.
               
               The next day in the mornyng Memnon and Antiphile chiefe leaders of the Grecian armie, assembled their Captaynes and called a counsayll, wherein was proposed two questions. First whether it were good to abide and tarrie for the ayde and help of the cities of Grece, aud continue the warre vntill they were of as great powre as the enimie: or whether it were better (considering the time) to sende vnto them to treat a peace: so they agreed vpon the last. Whervpon they sent Ambassadoures to Antipater: who aunswered, he woulde not at one instant condescende and agrée to conclude a peace with al the whole cities of Grece: but if they woulde euery of them perticulerly sende their Ambassadoures to him, that then he was content to heare them, and otherwise not: whervnto the Greekes in no wise would agrée.
               Whyle the warres still continued, Antipater and Cratere
                  
besieged the citie of Thessalie, to the ende wherof the Greekes were not able to come: wherefore the Citizens beyng sore distressed and in great daunger, rendred the towne to Antipater, whom he receyued into fauoure, and shewed him selfe so gently and curteous towardes them, ye shortly after al the rest of the cities of Grece euery of them particulerly yelded to Antipater, with whom he accorded peace. And farther, they clerely forsooke both the Athenians and Etholians vtter ennemies to the Macedonians: who séeing them selues so reiected, tooke counsayll of their captaynes for the mayntenaunce of the warres. When Antipater had by such Stratageme separated and dispersed the Greekes, he then with all his powre made preparation against the Athenians, who séeing them selues vnprouided of aide & succoure of their friendes and allies, were greatly astonied:
                     Demades.
                   wherfore they al agréed, ye 
                  Demades the famous Orator shold be sent to Antipater to treate a peace, which he refused to do. And although they had called him to counsaile, he woulde not come thyther, bycause he had ben before thrice condemned of the priuie Counsell or Senate, as an insringer of the Lawes, forbidden to aske for him selfe the ayde or benefite of the Lawes, and to declare his opinion in the Counsaill. Neuerthelesse for the cause aforesaid, the communaltie incontinent forgaue him, and sent him to Antipater, accompanied with Phocion,
                  
                     Phocino.
                   and certen other Citizens: whome Antipater after their Ambassade published, aunswered that he would cōclude no peace with the Athenians, vnelesse they wold wholie submit them to his discretion and gouernement: alleaging that what time they besieged him within the Citie of Lamie, they woulde make none other answere to his Ambassadoures. When ye 
                  Athenians sée none other boote, & that they were no longer able to resist, they remitted the whole gouernement of the Citie to his pleasure. Who being of such moderation of mind, redeliuered to them their Citie and landes with all their goods and cattels. Howbeit, he altered and chaunged

the gouernement of the Citie. Declaring, that where before the rule and estate of the Citie was common, he therefore now decréed and ordayned, that none should be admitted to anie office or dignitie within the Citie, except suche as were of good reuenue and liuing, & that might at least dispend two thousand Drachmes by yeare, & they to haue all the aucthoritie, gouernement and ordering of the same. And that the rest whose lands did not amount to the clere yerely value aforesaid (as persones seditious and desirous of tumultes and warres) were clerely excluded from authorite and gouernement. Neuerthelesse, they that were contented to dwell elsewhere, he gaue them the conntrey of Thrace for their habitation and reliefe: of whiche sorte were aboue xx. thousand which went to dwel al in Thrace. And there remained in the Citie of auncient and landed Burgesses about ix. thousand or néere thereabout: who gouerned the same and territories therof, after the Lawes of Solon, without taking away frō 
                  Perseus any of the goodes which he possessed. And for their better quietnesse and refuge, Antipater least behinde vnder the the charge of Menille,
                  
                     Menille.
                   a garrison of men of warre for the repressing of such as would go about to commence or reuiue anie innouatiō or mutation. And for as Samy, he least it to the willes and discretions of the Kings. Thus the Athenians being gently handled and well entreated (farre beyond their expectation) minded vpon that cōclusion to liue in rest and peace, and to vse their trauaill without feare: by meane wherof in shorte time they grew to great wealth.
               After Antipater had atchieued and obtained these victories, he retourned with Cratere into Macedone, whome he perfectly loued and greatly honoured, bestowing on him large and honorable gifts, giuing him also in mariage hys eldest daughter Phile, a yong a Damsel of excellēt fauoure and beautie, making farther great preparation for his retourne into Asie.
               
               Moreouer, he used such great humanite and curtesie towards

all the Cities of Grèce, and reduced them to ciuility and politique gouernement, that he acquired great prayse and renowme. Perdicas lykewyse rendred to the Samians their Citie and Countrey, and called home all the citisens which had ben in exile xl. yeares and more.
            
            
               
                  ¶ Of the explotys done by Thimbron and Ptolome in the warres of Cyrene.
                  
               
               The ninth Chapter.
               NOwe since we haue spoken of all the factes of warres done in the Lamian warre, it behoueth vs out of hand to make mencion of the warres which the Macedonians had against Cyrene, and to gyue it this meane space, to the end we deferre not those gests so long from the time in whiche they were done, but to make the matter more clere and manifest, we must beginne somewhat farther of.
               What time Harpale fled out of Asie into Crete with a certen numbre of souldiers (as in the booke before we haue mencioned) Thimbron who by outward apparaunce séemed his friend, traiterously slew him, and seising on all his money, men and shippes, sailed with all the said souldiers and riches into the countrey of Cyrene, and by the meane of the aide and conduct of the exiles of the same Citie, he gaue battaill to the Citisens gouernours, and vanquished them, wherof he slewe many and tooke a numbre of prisoners, and so wanne the Port or hauen, whereupon he put the Citisens in such terror and feare, that he draue them to come to a composition, wherein they agréed, that he should haue v. hundred Talents of siluer, and the one half of his Charriots and Charrets that he woulde occupie in his warres. This agréement concluded on, he immediatly sent his Ambassadours to the rest of the cities néere hand, demaunding their ayde for the subduing of the Region of Lybye, thereto adioyning. He farther willed his Souldiers

to spoile and but in all the goods which they founde in the shippes within the said Port, the rather to enbolden them to enduer the warres. And albeit fortune highly fauoured the said Thymbron, that he became rich & proude, yet not long after she brought him agayne into as great miserie by this occasion, for one of his Captaines, named Mnasicles,
                  
                     Mnasicles.
                   borne in Crete, a man expert in martial factes, chalenged him, and said he had done yll, bycause he made no egall diuision of the but in: And being a valiaunt and stout man, and of nature mutinous, reuolted & tooke parte with the Cyrenians, greatly blaming and discommending the crueltie and disloyatie of Thymbron: dissuading them to breake promisse with him, and to set thē selues at their owne choise and libertie. But when Thymbron sée that they had not as yet payd but lx. Talents, and that frō daye to day they delayed the payment of the rest, he held the agréement and composition on their parte infringed & brokē: wherfore he tooke so many Citisens as were within the Port prisoners, to the nūbre of foure score. That done, with al his force he besieged the Citie, and preuayling nothing, retired into the hauen. In this while the Barcians & Hesperits toke part with Thymbron, wherfore the Cyrenians purposing some facte, least one part of the Souldiers within the Towne: and with the other parte salied out and ranne vpō the Barcian and Hesperite camp, who were forced to send to Thymbron for ayde: whether he came with all his power: which when Mnassicles sée, and perceyuing he had leaft the Hauen vnfurnished, persuaded the Cirenians in the Towne to assaye to winne the hauen, whereupon they immediatly issued out, and with great ease wanne it, bycause there were few or none leaft to defend the same: all whiche was exploited and done by the meane and conduct of Mnasicles, who straightwayes redeliuered to the merchaunts of the towne so muche of their goods as might be found: and after furnished the Porte with a garrison of valiaunt men of warre.
               
                  When Thymbron vnderstood that the Port (so méete a place for the anoying of ye enimy) was lost, & al the bagage of his mē of warre, he was thereat greatly abashed. Howbeit, he tooke to him a martiall courage & went to the siege of an other Citie called Thacire,
                  
                     Thacyre.
                   which he wanne, wherfore he waxed right glad and bolde. Neuerthelesse, not long after happened him other great misaduentures. For first, his Souldiers which were a bord, hauing lost the Hauen (therby cut of from victuals at land) were constrayned to make out certeyn bandes to fourage the fields and Countrey for prouision of victuals: whome the Libians one daye among the rest finding abrode disordered, discomfited & ouerthrew: of which, some were slaine, other were taken prisoners, & the rest recouered thire shippes and went to sea, meaning to arriue at some Port where they might finde friendship. But sodenly arose so gréeuous and vehement a tempest, yt it perished and drowned manie of their shippes: and such as escaped, were driuen with winde and weather into Cypers, and vpon the coast of Egypt. Yet for all this ill fortune, he neuer desisted his purpose and attempt, but without stoppe sent certeyn of his chiefe and assured friēds into Peloponese to mustre and take vp Souldiers, willing them also to entertaine the two thousand men of warre straungérs, lying and abyding in the Countrey of Tenare,
                  
                     Tenare.
                   and to bring them also into Libie
               
               All this time the Cirenians (by reason of the late ouerthrowes by them gyuen) trusting in their owne courages, and hoping well of better successe, boldly attempted Thymbron with battaill, wherein they vanquished & kild a great numbre of his people, which conflict made him almost despaire of the conquering and subduing the Cyrenians. But sodenly came in his ayde the Souldiers of Tenare, wherewith he tooke such harte, that he a fresh assembled an other great numbre to commence and beginne his warres. But when the Cyrenians sée that, they by and by sent to the Libians & Chartagians their neighbours, requiring

ayde, so that with them and of their owne Citie, they had gotten together about xxx. thousand men, with whom they arrered an other great army, wherein on eyther side cōsisted and depended the whole and totall victorie. And although the fight endured long, yet in the end Thymbron obtayned victorie, whereof he was right ioyous, hoping then in short time to conquere and subdue all the Cities thereabout. In whiche conflict the Cirenians lost al their Captaynes: wherfore they chose for their Chieftayne and Generall Mnasicles and other vnder him, to defend the hauen and Citie, whiche Thimbron had before besieged and yet still dayly approched. But in the ende, the siege so long continued, that victuals within the Towne were verie scarse, which caused great muteny: wherfore the Cirenians expulsed the most worshipfull and riche Citisens: whereof some tooke part with Thimbron, and the rest went for rescous into Egypt, and desired ayde of Ptolome, for their retourne home, whereunto he graunted. So they departed thense towards Sirene, with a puissaunt army, both by sea and lande, vnder the conduct of Orphellon.
                  
                     Orphellon.
                  
               
               When the exiles with Thimbron vnderstood of their cō
                  ming, they determined by night to steale vpon them, and so to rob and spoyle them: but their enterprise being reuealed and discouered, they were all slayne. Then the Cō
                  moners which kept the Towne, perceyuing the exiles at hand, truced with Thimbron, and ioyned together to fight against Orphellon, who encountred them in battaill and ouerthrew them & tooke Thimbron prisoner. Whē al these conflictes had thus taken end, he toke the Citie of Cirene, & the rest of the Cities neare about (whiche before liued at libertie) to the behoofe of Ptolome his Lorde and Soueraigne.
            
            
               
               
                  ¶Perdicas entring Piside, taketh the Lauradians prisoners, & by siege so distresseth the Isaurians that they kil them selues. And at the entreatie of Antigone, Antipater and Cratere, which warred vpon the Etholians, conclude a peace with them, bycause they would go against Perdicas.
                  
               
               The x. Chapter.
               BUt now to returne to Perdicas and King Phillip, after they had ouerthrowen and discomfited Ariarathe, and bestowed the gouernement of Cappadoce on Eumenes, they tooke their iourney into Pisided, etermining to sacke & raze the Cities of Laurade and Isaure: bycause that they in the life of King Alexander had slaine Balacre the Sonne of Nicanor, whom Alexander had deputed their Patrone and Gouernour. And first by force they tooke the Citie of Laurade, and killed all the men and made portsale of their infaunts and yong children. But bycause the Citie of the Isaurians was strong and throughly manned to hold out the enimy: after they had two dayes besieged it, wherin many of their Souldiers were lost they (seing the Citisens wel furnished of all things for the defence thereof, & fully determined to maintayne it to death) retired: howbeit, after thrée dayes past, they agayne approched the wals and gaue a fresh assault, which the Citisens to their great losse, manfully defended: wherfore being thē disfurnished of able men for the manning of their wals, rampiers and Bulwarks, they purposed an honorable fact & worthy memorie.
               First, foreséeing their iminent destruction ineuitable, by reason they were no lenger able to resist, and knowing for certein that they should shamefully and villaniously be entreated, they therefore determined rather than to yelde to the enimy, to die an honest and honorable death. For first they shut vp in their houses the old men, women and children, and to the ende there to burie them, they set all the

houses on fire, which being on a light and the flame issuing out on euery side, they cast in all their mouable goodes, and all other things which any way might be profitable or gaynefull to the enimy: whereat Perdicas greatly amased, commaunded his Souldiers to enuiron the Towne, and gyue the attempt to the wals, but the Townesmen so valiaunly defended the curten, that they ones agayne repulsed the assaylaunts. Then Perdicas much more astonied, enquired the cause why they so couragiously stoode to the defence of the Citie, considering they had burnt both their houses and goods. But after Perdicas had retiered his Souldiers from the assault, the Isaurians threwe them selues into the fier, and so were buried in their houses with their friends and familiers.
               The next day in the morning Perdicas licenced his soldiers to sacke and spoyle the Citie, who after the fier was throughly put out, found infinite treasure of gold & siluer: forasmuch as the said Citie had long continued without warres, and through traffique & great trade of merchaundise grew to great wealth, and became very riche. When Perdicas had wonne these two townes, he purposed thē to marry being in choyse of two Gentlewomen, to saye, of Nice the daughter of Antipater,
                  
                     Nice.
                   whome he had already fianced, and of Cleopatre sister to Alexander the great,
                     Cleopatre.
                   and daughter to king Phillip, sonne to Amint. But first he determined to allie himself with Antipater, bicause his puissaunce and aucthority was not yet throughly confirmed & established: and therfore fianced he his daughter. But after he had once obtayned an army royal, & princily estate, he altered his purpose, meaning for his greater aduaūcement to espouse Cleopatre, wherin he affected the kingdom of Macedone: to ye ende the Macedonians might accept and take him for their Lorde and Soueraigne. Neuerthelesse, bycause he would not that this his practise should come to light, he in the meane while married Nice, fearing that if he did not, Antipater woulde be come his vtter enemy.

But after he perceyued that Antigone
                  
                     Antigone.
                   friende to Antipater had smelt out and vnderstoode his determination and practise, and beyng he emongs the rest of the Princes, who was both wise and martiall to enterprise any hie and notable matters, he thought therefore to dispatch him cleane out of the waye. Whereupon he began to reproue him of manie false and slaunderous imputacions, whereby might easely be perceiued, that he went about to bring him to his finall end and destruction. But Antigone like a wise & stout Champion dissimuled the matter, openly pronouncing that he would aunswere and defend all such false and surmised accusations, wherewith he should be charged. But contrariwise making secret preparation to flye with Demetrie his Sonne,
                     Demetrie.
                   his friends and houshold folkes, enbarqued in certein shippes of Athens, and with prosperous winds sailed into Europe to ioyne with Antipater. The same time laye Antipater and Cratere in Camp against the Etholians with xxx. thousand footemen, and two thousande v. hundred horse. For of all the regiments of Souldiers which conspired against the Macedonians in the Lemian warres, remayned no more vnsubdued but the sayd Etholians (who although they sée so huge a power inuade their countrey) would not be daunted, but assembled about ten thousand lustie yong men, and taking with them their wiues, children, and all their goodes and cattels vp into the mountaines and strong places, abandoned & forsooke their townes and villages indefensable, and thrust into the rest garrisons, who right stoutly defended them against the power of the enimy. But after Antipater & Cratere were entr
                     •
                   d the Countrey, and found their Cities vnpeopled, they turned all their force against those which were runne vp into the mountaynes: where the Macedonians thinking at their first arriuall to winne by force and vertue, those strong aud inuincible places (being well and manfully defended) were greatly discomfited and many slaine. For the Etholians being ouer them in the straight passages

& places of aduauntage, repulsed & hurt so many as came against them. Whiche thing Antipater and Cratere séeing, besieged the mountaines, pitched their camp, set vp Tents and Hales of wood, and there encamped all Winter. By meane whereof the Etholians enclosed in the mountaines full of snowe, were through colde and want of victuals brought into so great necessity and extremity, that eyther they must descend the mountaines and come to battaill against the enimy, which were many, and especially against two valyaunt Chieftaynes of warre, or else to dye of colde and hunger. And being thus distressed, and thereby almost desperate, sodenly happened them for their deliueraunce straūge ayde and succours as if the Goddes had sent it frō heauen, taking pitie of them and respecting their magnanimitie and noble courages. For Antigone comming oute of Asie (as aforesaid) arryued at that present before Antipater and Cratere, declaring the enterprise of Perdicas: farther, asserteyning them, that incontinent after the mariage of Cleopatre (which should be shortly) he would wt his whole army come downe into Macedone as King, and there enioy the Empire and dominion of the whole coūtrey. With which newes they being both astonied, assembled their Captaynes to consulte and deuise what were best to doe: and by their aduise they concluded to take the honestest peace with the Etholians they might, and then spéedely to passe with all their army into Asie, and that Cratere should gouerne and enioy the Empire of Asie, and Antipater Europe. After to send towardes Ptolome into Egipt, desiring his helpe and ayde, knowing him to be their chief friende, and vtter enimy to Perdicas, who with asmuch expedition would practise the discomfiture of him by espiall or other martiall pollicies, as they thē selues by any possible meane could or might: wherfore incontinent they coucluded a peace with the Etholians, thinking nothing lesse but at last to discomfite and transferre them with their wiues and children into some desert in Asie farre ynough of.
               
                  After they had put in writing and sealed the treatie and conclusion, they made preparation about their enterprise. Agayne, Perdicas assembling his friends and Captaynes, consulted whether it were best first to goe into Macedone with his army, or into Egipt, but they all agréed, that he should first warre vpon Ptolome and discomfite him, alleaging, that there was then no let or staye to go into Macedone: whereupon he following their counsaill and aduise, first sent Eumenes with a great bande into Hellespont to garde the passages there: who departed out of Piside, and went straight into Egipt. Al these matters were exployted the yeare that Philocles was Prouost of Athenes, and Caie Sulpete and Gne Eley were created Consulles at Rome.
               
            
            
               
                  ¶Of the transporting Alexandre his body out of Babylon into Alexandrie. The forme and fashion of the Chariot, with the Pompe and solemnity thereof.
               
               The .xj. Chapter.
               IN this meane while Aride, to whome the charge for transporting Alexandre his body was committed, so soone as he had finished the Chariot whereon it should be carried, and made ready all the rest of the furniture there to belonging, he immediatly tooke his iourney. But bycause the excellencie of the workmanship was sumptuous and singuler agéeing with the state of so honourable a personage as Alexander, both for the infinite charge & dispence of many Talents, as also for the singularitie and excellency thereof: me thinke it not much from the purpose to staie a while in describing and setting forth the maner and order of the same.
               First, a Coffin was forged and beaten out of fine golde, portured and made according to the stature and bignes of the body, verie full of swéete spices and many other droogs

aromatike, aswell for swéetenesse as also for preseruing the body from corruption. The couer wherewith it was couered, well proporcioned and made, fitted to the same, was a fingers thicknesse of golde, curiously and artificially wrought. Ouer that was cast a purple cloth, curiously enbroidered, and wrought with golde with most excellent deuises, standing vpright like a brouche, whereon was hanged the armoure of the dead, to the ende, that all the whole worke standing together, shoulde represent the figure of his noble actes and inuincible courage. After that was brought out the Chariot whereon the Coffin shoulde be carried, couered with a tabernacle of gold, rered and set vp in maner of a vault, garnished and set within with many precious stones & Iewels, eight cubits broad, & twelue cubits long, vnder the same rouffe besides the workmanshippe thereof was a place of a state or Throne Imperiall foure square, by which stood a certein kind of beastes, ye one halfe of them like hartes, and the other parte like goates, thrusting out their forepartes, excellently engrauen and wrought in golde, with great collers of golde about their necks, whereat hong the scutchins of the armes of Alexander such as customably are borne at hie solemne feasts, pictured and couloured with most rich and orient colours. In the toppes of euery the corners of the place of a state was a valence finely wrought like a net, whereat hong great belles, the noyse of which were heard far of. And at euery corner of the Tabernacle stood a statue or Image of a Goddesse victor, all of golde, bearing a Trophe in hir hande in token of victory. The same vaulted Tabernacle also was supported with small pillers of golde, whose toppes were enbost and enameled like the curious Pillers of Iony. Betwixt the Pillers was a square netting of golde, whereat hong foure Tables all of a bignesse, at euery corner one, of egall distaunce one from an other, wherein were grauen and artificially wrought diuerse pictures.
               
                  In the first was depainted a Charriot vpon whiche sate Alexander, holding a Scepter in his hand, royally apparelled, garded with a bande of Macedonians all in armes, & an other of Persians called Portpomes likewise armed, before whom went the Esquiers for the body.
               In the second table were grauen the Elephants which came after the armed men, appointed as if they shold haue bene led to the warres with their Captaynes and Gouernours on their backs: to say, on the side before Indians, & on the side behind Macedonians, all apparelled and appointed as they were wont to be in the warres.
               In the third were pictured and grauen the battails and troupes of horsemen as if they had ben ready to fight.
               In the fourth were set forth the whole Nauie of ships, all apparelled and furnished ready to gyue battaill. At the entre of the Tabernacle were two Lions of golde, sitting as if they marked those which entred. Atwixt the Pillers were certein leaues of gold, subtily wrought, which moū
                  ted by little and little vp to the toppes. Aboue all this was cast a purple cloth like a Tent, which couered all ouer the Tabernacle without, and in the top a great crowne of gold like an Olife leaf, that when the Sunne cast forth his beames and shone on it, forthwith appeared such a glistering & burning light, that so many as sée it far of thought it to be a hote burning furnace.
               The place of estate or throne, whiche was vnder the tabernacle, stoode vpon two Axeltrées turned with foure persian wheales, hauing no kinde of iron worke about them, but the only shoing: and for the rest, as spokes and naues, all were of gold, wrought and made like Lions heads, byting a Dart of golde, which serued in stead of lyntpinnes to kéepe on the wheles. In the middest, betwixt the two Axeltrées was a rounde pole fastened in the middest of the Tabernacle, by such artificiall meane, that neyther it, nor the place of estate or throne which stood vppon the Chariot, being dryuen ouer Hils and Dales, euer weaued or

reled eyther one way or other, but continually draue vpright and steadie. To the Charriot belōged foure draught trées, and euery of them had foure yokes, and to euery yoke were foure great mulets yoked to draw it, so yt there were in all lxiiij. fayre and strong choise mulets, and euery of them had a Crowne of golde on his head, and at eyther side of the chekes hong bells of golde, and about their necks collers or wreathes of gold set with many and riche precious stones.
               In this sorte was the Charriot apparelled: and bycause it was so sumptuous and costly to beholde, and not almost possible to be described: there came (for the bruyt and renowme thereof) men out of all Countreys to sée it. And whē it was brought into any Citie, the Citizens would be right angry if they stayed not vntil they had their ful sight of it. And when it went away, they would accompany it, so that for the beauty, richnesse and excellency thereof, they were neuer weried with the sight. For the conduct were a great numbre of Pyoners appointed to playne the wayes, that it might the better passe. And to attend on it, were a great numbre of Souldiers richlye apparelled and armed, appointed to follow the body.
               In this pompe and glory did Aride transport Alexander his body into Egypt, being aboue two yeares making preparation, for the appareling of the same. To the receyuing of which came Ptolome with al his Souldiers, euen vnto the entre of Sirie, and did all that in him laye to honour it. But he thought it not best that it should be carried to the Temple of Hammon, according to his owne ordinaunce and appointment: but rather to remaine and continue in the Citie of Alexandrie, whereof Alexander was founder, and one of the fayrest and renowmedst Cities in the world. And to the ende his body should the more honorably reast, Ptolome him selfe caused a Temple to be erected, méete for the worthynesse of so honorable a Potentate as Alexander. Whiche thing done, he there honored him

with honorable and noble sacrifices as was the maner in those dayes, apperteyning to so noble a Prince. By reason of which gratitude not men alone, but the Goddes also estéemed and rewarded Ptolome therfore. For men vnderstanding the magnanimitie & bountifulnesse vsed towards his Prince and Soueraigne, came from all parts to dwell in Alexandrie, offring their seruice in his warres, although they knew that the army royal which Perdicas arered, was to fight against him, and so that both he and his estate stood thereby in great hazard & daunger. The Goddes likewise séeing his bounty, his liberality and curtesie towardes his friends, deliuered him from many great and daungerous perilles, as shall be well vnderstood by that which we will hereafter treate of.
            
            
               
                  ¶Eumenes is in battaill ouerthrowen and Cratere slayne. 
               
               The .xij. Chapter.
               WHen Perdicas sée the power of Ptolome dayly encrease, he imagined and deuised all the mischief he could against him: wherfore he determined to bring the greater parte of the army, with all the Kings of Egipt to warre vpon him. Agayne, he sent Eumenes into Hellespont, for to stop the passages against Antipater and Cratere, deliuering him such numbre of men of warre, as he thought woulde serue his turne, and suche Captaynes and Leaders, as he best liked: 
                     •
                   mong whom was Alcete,
                  
                     Alcete.
                   brother to Perdicas, and Neoptolome,
                  
                     Neoptolome.
                   commaunding them to obey Eumenes aswell for his great conduct in martiall facts, as also for the singular trust he reposed in him. After Eumenes had taken his charge, and passing towardes Hellespont with his armie, he tooke vp vpon the waye in the countrey of Capadoce, whereof he was Gouernour, a certein numbre of men at armes, and thereby strengthned

his power, whiche before wanted. In this meane time were Antipater and Cratere come into Asie. Which Neoptolome vnderstanding, alwayes hartburning Eumenes, & disdayning to serue vnder him, secretly practized to ioyne with Antipater and bring a band of lusty Souldiers Macedonians vnder his charge: practizing also and deuising secret mischief against Eumenes. But the conspiracy being manifested before execution, he was constrayned to fight against Eumenes, whereby he was in extreme daunger: for the one part of his Souldiers were slayne, and the rest reconciled them to Eumenes. Neuerthelesse him selfe with foure hundred horse escaped and fled towardes Antipater and Cratere, where after long consultation they concluded that Antipater should go against Perdicas through the coū
                  trey of Cilicie, & Cratere against Eumenes. For they thought if Eumenes could be vanquished, & that they might a newe ioyne together with Ptolome and his power whome they looked for, they then should be well able to encountre the army royall, and discomfite and ouerthrowe them.
               When Eumenes vnderstood his enimies to be at hande, he mustered his men, and arranged them in order of battaill, but chiefly his horsemen, in whome lay all his hope of victorie, bycause he knew right well his footemen were neuer able to abide the Macedonian Phalange.
               When the armies were in view one of an other, Cratere like a stout and valiaunt Champion exhorted his soldiers in hartie and couragious maner, gyuing them (if the victorie lighted on their sides) the butin and spoyle of the enimies Camp, thinking thereby the more to enbolden & encourage them. After which exhortation he also arranged his battaile, placing him selfe in the right wing or voward, and Neoptolome in the left wing or rereward. He had in all xx. thousand footemen the greater numbre Macedonians (in whome he much trusted, bycause they were all men renowmed and experimented in many battails and warres) and about two thousande horsemen.

And Eumenes had of sundry Nations xx. thousande footemen, and about v. thousand horse, with which he thought to gyue the first charge: whereupon he deuided his horse into two wings, and caused them to troup before the Phalang. Cratere likewise with his horse first encountred Eumenes, and fighting there valiauntly, was in the prease ouerthrowen and smothered. But after the horsemē which charged with him in the right wing or voward, vnderstood of his death, and séeing the enimy going about to enclose them (notwithstanding their valyaunt fight) retired to their battaill of footemen as vanquished. But Neoptolome who led ye rereward of Cratere his army, & Eumenes which had the voward of his owne, so violētly charged one an other, that the fight on eyther side was cruel. Then the two Captaynes, which both by their horses and other signes & tokens knew one another, encountered body to body, and with great courage, fel & angry moode, valiauntly fought: which fight was cause of victory, for after they had a while buskled and fought together with their swordes, they forsooke hold of their bridles, and wrestled on horseback, meaning by playne force to ouerthowe one another. But as they were thus wrestling, their horses drewe backe, & they both fell to the ground, which fal was such, that neyther of them (by reason of the heauinesse of their armour) coulde well recouer their selues. Howbeit, Eumenes first recouered his féete, and comming with his sworde in his hande towardes Neoptolome, gaue him such a blowe, that he cut his hamme strings cleane asunder, whereby he could not arise. But his harte which supported the imbecillity of his body was such, that he recouered his knées and defending him selfe manfully, wounded his enimy on the hande and on both his thighes: notwithstanding, him selfe continually bled, and bycause the wounds he gaue Eumenes were neither déepe nor deadly, Eumenes at the next encoūtre so violētly strake him on the head, that he yelded the ghost. During this affray, the Souldiers valiauntly fought: and

albeit on eyther side was great slaughter, yet woulde they not gyue ouer vntil Neoptolome his death was knowen, and then the horsemē gaue ouer and retired towards their Phalange as to their garde and place of suerty.
               When Eumenes had considered that he had wonne honour ynough in obtayning victory, and especially that he had gotten the bodies of two his chiefest enimies, he caused to sound the retraict. And after he had set vp & garnished his Trophe, and buried the dead, he sent certaine messangers towards the Macedonian Phalange, to exhorte them to take his parte, offring to as many as were disposed, leaue to departe. Who taking the appointment & league confirmed by their othes, prayed they might go to the next villages to prouide them of victuals: whereunto be agréed. But after they had made their prouision (falsifying their othe & promisse) they in ye night stole their wayes, meaning to ioyne with Antipater, whereof Eumenes aduertised and thinking of the periured traytours to be reuenged, incontinent pursued them. But séeing (what for their manly & noble courages, and also for the dolor and anguishe whiche he felt of his wounds) that he nothing preuayled, he immediatly retired. And thus through this great victory, but chiefly by the killing of two his principall enimies, being both noble personages & well estemed, he acquired great renowme and fame. From thence he marched towardes Perdicas, through the Countrey of Cilice, hoping in good time to come to his succoure and helpe.
            
            
               
                  ¶ After Perdicas hath brought his Souldiers into Egypt, they slea him. And Phiton and Aride are chosen Gouernours ouer the Kings.
               
                The .xiij. Chapter.
               
                  WHen Perdicas was entred Egypt, something néere the Riuer of Nyle,
                  
                     Nyle.
                   he encamped before the Citie of Peluse,
                  
                     Peluse.
                   and there taking vpon him to scoure and make cleane an old ditch through which ranne an arme of the Riuer Nyle, he impaired and lost all whiche before he had done, for the riuer ranne then with so fierce and vehement a course, that it carried awaye and ouerflowed all: wherfore many of his Souldiers rendred to Ptolome: for Perdicas in the ende became so detestable in pride, & beastly cruelty, yt he put his Captaynes frō all gouernemēt and would by force & viole
                     •
                   ne ouer rule al. But Ptolome did otherwise, for he was curteous & liberall to his Captaynes, & would gladly heare them whensoeuer they spake: & besides, he prouided for the méete and necessarie places of Egipt, and furnished them with men, armoure, weapon, and all other things néedefull for the defence of the Countrey. Wherfore, whatsoeuer aduentures he tooke in hande, eyther in battaill or else, he cōmonly had the better, bycause his Souldiers loued him so dearely, that they woulde hasard them selues in any daunger to do him pleasure & seruice. When Perdicas sée this eminent mischief, meaning to get agayne the good willes of his Captaynes clerely lost, and to put things in better order, that were disordered: he by the sound of the Trumpet assembled his Captaynes and Souldiers, making a long protestation, wherin (with curteous and gentle wordes) he exhorted them, & when he had by gifts wonne some, and other with large promisses, thinking that he had then brought them agayne to a good conformitie to serue him, and to attempt any danger he would lead them to for his cause: he commaunded them that they should by the first watch be in a readinesse to marche forward, not declaring to any whether he wold: and continuing their iourney all night with great spéede, about the day breake, they encāped by Nyle, néere a towne and Castle called the Wall of the Camels,
                  
                     The Wall of the Camelles.
                   and besieged it. But after a dayes continuaunce there, he beganne to set

ouer his army. And first, he put ouer his Elephantes, next to them, his footemen which carried the terges and scaling ladders, and all the rest which were appointed for the assaulte of the towne. After them he placed his best men at armes which should encountre Ptolome if at any tyme he issued out into the fields. And as they were passing & about the middest of the riuer, they escried on the other side the enimy, whome Ptolome with great spéede 
                     •
                   hrust into the towne for the defence thereof. And although they were first entred the towne, which they well vnderstood both by their noyse, and sound of Trūppets, it nothing daunted the courages of Perdicas Souldiers, but that they stoutely approched the walles, and addressed them to the scaling thereof, and they which led the Elephaunts threw downe the trenches and battred and spoyled the batlements of the Curtennes: whiche thing Ptolome séeing, and minding to encourage his Captaynes and Souldiers (whereof were many both famous and valiaunt) encountred them euen vpon the vttermost rampare at the push of the Pyke, and fighting in a place of aduauntage, put out the eyes of the foremost Elephant, and sore wounded his ruler an Indian. This done, he with great despite and mighty blowes, charged the scalants, & tūbled them frō the ladders into ye riuer which ranne alongest the side of the Towne. Then his friends & compaignions in armes purposing some notable exploit, with shot so charged the other Elephant which followed the first, that they slew his gouernour, whereby he could do nothing. Notwithstanding all this, Perdicas Soldiers cōtinued the assault & forced to enter: when Ptolome sée yt he then bare him selfe twice so bold & stout, & to gyue good example of wel doings to all his friēds, he in his owne person exploited notable déedes of armes: whereby many worthy mē (through ye noble courages of their Captaynes) wt aduenturing lost both life & limme. And bycause Ptolome had the place of aduaūtage, & the enimy the greater nū
                  bre, the assault on eyther side cōtinued long & daungerous,

vntill at last Perdicas séeing he could by no meane winne it, and that night drew on, he retired into his Camp, & immediatly without noyse, priuily remoued and came to a place right ouer against the Citie of Memphis, where the Riuer Nyle maketh a particion like vnto an Isle, and an excellent good and méete place to encamp a great & mighty army. Into this put he ouer his army, being hard for the Souldiers to passe, bycause they waded vp to their chinnes, & through the violēce and swiftnesse thereof so staggered, that with great payne they hardly passed. When Perdicas had séene the daungerous and difficult passage, he sent his Elephantes on the left side vp into the Riuer to breake the violēce of the streame, and beneath on the right hande, placed his horsemen to take vp them whome the violence of the water did carry away, and so bring them to land. In this passage chaunced a singular thing, and greatly to be maruelled at.
                     A thing to be maruelled at.
                   For after the first company had safely passed ouer, the rest which followed, were in wonderfull daunger, bycause the Riuer sodenly swelled and became so déepe, that none could perceyue by any apparaunt reason whereof it should come, for it ranne aboue the Soldiers heads. And being enquired and reasoned of what might be the cause, aunswere was made, that there was some lowe or hollowe place about the arme of the Riuer stopped vp, by meane whereof the waters goulfed, & therevpon procéeded the swelling and waxing: some sayd it had rayned about the head or spring of the Riuer, and that that might be the cause. But after, it was found to be neyther the one nor the other, for they whiche went ouer first, so raysed and remoued the sand and grauell which lay in the bottome of the water, that the violēce and swiftenesse therof carryed it away: and so by that meane became déeper, and chiefly in the chanell. When Perdicas sée that his souldiers already ouer, were not able to resist Ptolome, nor him self able to make any shift to set ouer ye rest, he was in such a perplexity, that he commaunded them that were ouer to

returne. So the mighty and strong men and such as could swimme, came hardly backe agayne, leauing behind them (notwithstanding) their armour, other which had no skill in swimming, were with the water swallowed vp, and a great many violētly carried downe with the streame, were eaten and deuoured of the Crocodiles: the rest whiche durst not gyue the aduenture, yelded to the enimy, who spoyled and robbed them of all they had. When Perdicas in this sorte had lost better than two thousand of his men, amongs whome were a great many good Captaynes, the biggest nūbre of the army found them sore agréeued with
                     •
                    him. Contrariwise, when Ptolome had burnt the dead carcases whiche were cast on lande on his side, he sent their bones to their kinsfolks and friends. When the Macedonians with Perdicas vnderstood that, they were then more offended with Perdicas
                  
                     •
                    than before, and enclined to the good nature and conditions of Ptolome. But at night, all the whole Camp was filled with sorrowes, complaintes, lamentations, & wéepings: bycause they had lost through euill conduct and want of good guyding (without fight) such a numbre of their friends: of which the better parte of a thousand were eaten and deuoured with Crocodils: whereupō diuerse of the Captaynes (for ye causes aboue rehearsed) assembled, openly blaming Perdicas. Againe, ye battail of footemē wt threatning wordes shewed their malice & grudge against him. For that very cause also the principall Captaynes assembled, amongs whome Pithon was chief, the same Pithon who at the commaundement of Perdicas, had in the hier Asie discomfited the Grecian rebels, and for his noblenesse and vertue nothing inferior to any of Alexanders friends and familiars. Whereupon they all with one accord, hauing at their commaundement certain of the men at armes, forcibly and violently rushed vpon the pauillon of Perdicas, and there incontinent slew him.
               The next day following Ptolome came towardes the Macedonians, and after he had saluted them and excused

him of all suche matters as Perdicas would haue charged him withall, he caused to be brought such abundaunce of bread, wine and diuerse other necessarie things, as furnished and fillede their Camp: whereby he acquired so great fauoure and good will of the whole army, that they woulde néedes in Perdicas stede, make him gouernour and regent of the Kings: whiche charge he clerely refused, but made meanes, that that gouernement with the whole power & aucthority therof (by the aduise and deliberation of the whole counsaill) might be bestowed vpon Pithon & Aride, the same Aride who transported the bodye of Alexander in to the Citie of Alexandrie. Thus and in this maner dyd Perdicas (after he he had ruled and gouerned the principalitie the space of .iij. yeares) lose both Empire and li
                     •
                   e.
            
            
               
                  ¶ After Perdicas his death, the Macedonians slea all his kynne and friends in the army, and adiudge Attale and Alcete, with their Abettors and friends, enimies and rebelles. Of Attale his retire into the Citie of Tyre
                     
                        •
                       and consequently how he afresh assembleth all Perdicas escaped friends.
               
                The .xiiij. Chapter.
               INcontinent after the death of Perdicas, newes were brought that Eumenes had ouerthrowen and slayne Cratere and Neoptolome in Cappodoce: which newes if they had come and ben knowē before Perdicas death, there was not one amongs them (vnderstanding the prosperous successe of victory done in his fauoure and behalfe) that once durst haue laid hands on him. But after he was dead, the Macedonians (for the déedes aforesaid) adiudged Eumenes an enimy and condempned man, and L. great personages with him, amongs whome was Alcete Perdicas his brother. They slewe also all Perdicas chiefe and principall friendes, and his owne sister Athalante, Attale his wife,

then Admirall, and abyding at Peluse. But after he vnderstood of Perdicas death and his wife, he immediatly loused thence, and with all the furniture of his Nauie, sayled vnto the Citie of Tyre, whome Archelay the Macedonian, Captayne of the Castle there, gently receyued and entreated, and rendred to him the towne and all the treasure which Perdicas had deliuered him to kéepe, amounting to the summe of viij. C. Talents. Then Attale abyding still at Tyre, assembled & brought together all Perdicas friends, which diuerse wayes had escaped from the discomfiture & ouerthrow gyuen before the Citie of Memphis.
               
            
            
               
                  ¶ The Etholians to put Antipater from his enterprise, entre Thessalie, who are constrayned by the Acarnanians to returne into their countrey: and in what sorte Polispercō
                      conquereth the coūtrey of Thessalie.
                  
               
                The .xv. Chapter.
               WHat time Antipater was come into Asie, the Etholians who had leagued with Perdicas warred on Thessaly, to the ende to put Antipater from his enterprise: and thereupon they mustered and gotte together .xij. thousand footemen and .iiij. thousand horse, and appoynted Alexander the Etholian their Generall. But as they marched on the waye, they besieged the Locrians, and spoyled and fouraged their territories, and tooke certen of their smallest townes. They discomfited also in battaill Policles one of Antipaters Captaynes, and slew a numbre of their soldiers, & of those prisoners which they tooke, they ransomed some, & sold the rest. But after they were entred Thessaly, they persuaded many of the people of the coūtrey to ioyne with thē against Antipater in ye warre, so that in short time they had leuied about .xxv. thousand footmen and viij. thousand horse. When the Acarnanians (enimies to the Etholians) apperceyued that the other Cities ioyned and tooke parte with them, they entred their Countrey,

wasted and spoiled their fields, & besieged certain of their townes, whereof the Etholians aduertised, appointed and ordeyned Memnon of Pharsale their Captayne and generall in Thessaly,
                  
                     Memnon.
                   & they them selues spéedily returned home, at whose comming the Acarnanians trembled & feared, & by that meane their coūtrey was deliuered from daunger & spoyle. While these matters were in deciding, Polyspercon Gouernour of the realme of Macedone, entred Thessaly with an army royal wel appointed, & ouerthrew his enimies in battaill, and slewe Memnon their chieftayne with many other, and thereby recouered the whole Countrey of Thessaly.
               
            
            
               
                  ¶ Antipater being constituted Gouernour of the Kings, a new deuideth the Satrapies.
                  
               
                The .xvj. Chapter.
               THen departed Python and Aride, protectours of the Kings, with their army from the Riuer of Nile, and went to Triparadice in the hier Siry.
                  
                     Triparadis.
                   And after they were thether come and apperceyued that Quéene Euridice had taken vpon hir greater care and charge about the affaires of the realme, than was méete or requisite that she should, and that she was clerely against all things that the Gouernours meant to do, and that they had no obedience of the army, they assembled all the Macedonians: And after they had declared vnto them their minds and purposes, they discharged them selues of their gouernement and aucthority. Then the Macedonians fully and wholy, those Antipater gouernour of the kings. Howbeit Antipater was no sooner come to Triparadice, but yt he found Quéene Euridice, practizing and suborning the mē of warre against him. Neuerthelesse, although they were as then very mutinous, yet assembled he them, and with fair and gracious woords so wanne their good willes, that be appaysed that

mutinie, & put Euridice in such feare, that she desisted from all mutinies and practizes, and became most quiet. This done, he a new deuided the Satrapies, and gouernements of the Prouinces.
               And first he leaft to Ptolome the regiō of Egipt, which he already possessed, & the reason was, bycause he knew not well how to put him besides it, forsomuche as Ptolome thought that that which he had, he had gottē and held it by his owne strength. To Laomedon of Mythilene, he gaue the countrey of Syrie: To Philoxene, Cilice: And for the other Sapatries in the hie countreys, he bestowed on Amphimacke, Mesopotamie and Arbelite: To Seleucke, he gaue Babylon: To Antigone, Fusiane: bycause he was the first that assailed Perdicas: To Pencete, Perside: To Neoptolome, Carnanie: To Phillip, Parthe: To Scasandre, Cyprian, Arie & Draucine: To Stasanor, Soliene, Bactriane & Sogdiane: To Oxiarte, the father of Roxāne, wife to Alexander, he gaue the Paropanisades. And that parte of Inde which ioyned on the Paropanisades, he gaue to Python the sonne of Agenor. And the realmes thereto adioyning he gaue to the Kings which before enioyed them, to say, those next the riuer Inde, to Pore: and those about the riuer Hidaspe to Taxille: bycause he was not able to expulse them without sending an army royall and the most of his chiefe and noble Captaynes. But touching the Prouinces towardes the North: To Nicanor he gaue Capadoce: To Antigone, Licie which he before occupied: To Cassander, Carie: To Clyte, Helie: To Aride, the part of Phryge ioyning vpon Hellespont. He farther constituted Antigone Marshall or chief ruler of the army, commaunding him to warre vpon Eumenes and Alcete. Neuerthelesse he ioyned with him as a compaignion in the said charge, Cassander his owne sonne, Captayne of a cohort of a thousand men, to the end Antigone should enterprise nothing to his own particularity, but that Antipater would be aduertised therof. These things finished, he departed with the army royal

to conduct the Kings into Macedone, their chiefe seat and habitation.
            
            
               
                  ¶Antigone vanquisheth Eumenes and besiegeth the Citie of Nore.
                  
               
                The .xvij. Chapter.
               WHen Antigone (as aforesaid) was nominated and appointed generall to go into Asie against Eumenes, and had gotten together his men of warre which lay in garrison, to winter, and made ready al things necessarie for warre, he tooke his iourney against Eumenes abiding in Cappadoce. It fortuned that season that Perdicas, one of Eumenes Captaynes, rebelled & led away .iij. thousand footemen and .v. hundred horse, with whom he had encamped and enpalled in a strong place thrée dayes iourneis from him. Wherfore Eumenes sent against him an other of his Captaynes named Tenede a Phenician, to whome he deliuered foure thousande footemen of the best and most trained Souldiers he had, and two thousande horse: who with such diligēce sped him, that sodenly about midnight, when they were all at rest and a sléepe, he stole vppon the said rebelles, and tooke Perdicas and brought him backe to Eumenes, together the men of warre with him, who according to the qualitie of the offence, punished the chiefe and principal procurers of that conspiracy, and deuided the rest by their bands, reconciling them with giftes and faire promisses.
               In this meane time had Antigone secretly sent to Apollonide generall of Eumenes, horse to betraie him, whom at last through large promisses he corrupted, promising yt whensoeuer they came to battaill, he would retier to Antigone and reuolt from Eumenes. It happened that Eumenes encamped in the middest of a large and great playne

of Cappadoce, bycause he would be the better ayded and succoured with his horse. And Antigone encamped at the foote of the hill ioyning vpon the saide playne. Nowe had Antigone in his hoste, about ten thousand footemē the better halfe Macedonians, notable and valiaunt Souldiers, and in martiall factes greatly experimented, two thousand horse, and thirtie Elephauntes. But Eumenes had not many lesse than twentie thousand footemen, and as many horsemen. Anone, they ioyned battaill, and whiles they were in the chiefe fight, Apollonide with his horse reuolted and turned to Antigone, who then wanne the victorie, so that there were slayne on Eumenes parte, about eight thousande Souldiers, besides the rifling and spoyling of the Camp, which was verie riche. Whereupon Eumenes his Souldiers that dyd escape, séeing (besides the losse of the fielde, their friendes and compaignions) that they had also lost their goodes, they became verie desperate and out of harte.
               When Eumenes sée his Soldiers in this disorder, he determined to flye towards Armenie, trusting to get certayn Soldiers there which would take his part and helpe him. Agayne, séeing the enimie sore distresse him, and the greater numbre of his Souldiers yeld to Antigone, he retired into a litle strong Towne called Nore,
                  
                     Nore.
                   situate on a rocke, and not aboue two furlongs compasse. But by reason of the strength of the seat, and the fortification and strong buylding thereof, it was of maruelous strength and force, and had bene of long furnished with all things necessarie to abide a siege.
               Into the same Towne retired Eumenes with fiue hundred Souldiers, which dearly loued him, all determined to spill their blouds in his seruice. When Antigone sée his power waxe strong, by reason of Eumenes Souldiers, which daylie repaired to him, and that he had wonne his Countreys, and exacted on them great stoare of money, he reuolued in his minde many notable and worthy

enterprises, séeing right well that none of the Satrapies nor Captaynes of Asie, were able to contend against him for the Principality. Notwithstanding, he all that while dissimuled the matter vntill he had well assured all his affayres with Antipater whome he serued and obeyed: but his meaning was, that after he had takē order & gone through with that businesse according to his promisse & allegeance, then neyther to be subiect to him or the Kings. But first he besieged Eumenes & his people within the towne of Nore, & enuironed it with a double wall, great ditches and déepe trenches. After that he parled with Eumenes, to whome he began to recompt the olde acquaintaunce and great amitie betwéene them of long had: persuading him to ioyne with him in all his affaires & businesse. But Eumenes (allthough he sée the sodayne chaunging and alteration of his fortune) demaunded greater and larger requests than the daunger or necessity of the place required or deserued. For first he asked pardon of all he had perpetrated and done: agayne he would that those Satrapies which he before held and enioyed, should be restored vnto him. Whom Antigone aunswered, that he would aduertise Antipater of those his demaundes. But after he sée he could not win him to be of his faction, he left behind him at the siege such a numbre of Souldiers as he thought would suffise, and him self went against Alcete and Attale. During whiche time Eumenes sent his Ambassadoures to Antipater, among whom Ierome (who writ ye histories of the successours of Alexander) was chiefest.
                     Ierome the Historian.
                   And although Eumenes sée him selfe in this miserie and so distressed: yet would not his hart yeld, for he had experimēted so many chaunges of fortune, that still he hoped out of hande to sée an other chaunge to his great aduauncement and honour. For he considered that ye Kings had no more but the title & name only, and ye many noble & mighty Princes which there gouerned, always cōsidered & regarded their priuate and singular honor and estate royall, for the vsurpation of the whole regiment and

principalitie. Wherefore he thought (& he was therin not deceyued) that many of those Princes shoulde haue great néed of him, bycause he was not only a man of great wisedome and vertue, and notably experimented in martiall pollicies, but also faithfull and constant. And as he thus lay attending the occasiō and oportunitie of time, and séeing he could not exercise his horses by reason of ye straightnesse of the place, he bethought him of a new kinde and fashion of exercise, to the end they should not be vnbreathed with still lying. First, he caused their forepartes to be tied vp with yron chaynes so hye, that the horses (do what they could) were not able to touch the planks with the tippe of their houes before, whereupon they striuing to set their fore féete on the planchers, aswell as their hindre féete, laboured so sore, that they were dryuē into a watery sweat, by which deuise they were alwayes in breath, able to trauail, and yet neuer come out of the stable. He also made such deuision of his victuals amongs the Souldiers, that euery man had as great portion as him selfe, or rather a greater, so that he still wanne their good wills and fauour. In this estate were Eumenes and his men.
            
            
               
                  ¶ Of the conquest which Ptolome maketh on the countreys of Phenice and Celosirie.
                  
               
                The .xviij. Chapter.
               BUt to returne to Ptolome, after he had dispatched him of Perdicas, and dryuen out of Egypt the army royall, he held and enioyed that countrey as his owne, and as if he had wonne and gotte yt by conquest. And considering that the Prouince of Phenice, and that parte of Sirie called Celosirie were hard adioyning to Egipt, he toke vpon him to conquere them: whereupon he sent out one of his chief friends and Captaynes named Nicanor,
                  
                     Nicanor.
                   with a sufficient army into Sirie, who tooke in battaill Laomedon,
                  
                     Laomedon.
                   Gouernour

thereof, and brought vnder Ptolome his subiection all Siry. From thence marched be into Phenice, and dyd the like, and furnished the Cities with garrisons and soone after returned into Egypt, when he had in short time performed his enterprise and voyage.
            
            
               
                  ¶ Antigone enterpriseth warres against Alcete and Attale, and discomfiteth them.
               
                The .xix. Chapter.
               THe same yeare that Apollodore gouerned Athenes, and Quinte Pompile and Quinte Publie were created Consulles at Rome, soone after 
                     •
                   hat Antigone had vanquished Eumenes, he beganne to warre vppon Alcete and Attale, whome Perdicas (in his life) amongs all the Chieftaynes and Captaynes in his army most honoured and estéemed: eche of them hauing an armie Ryall, able so make warre and fight for the principalitie and gouernement. And first he marched with his armie into Piside, where Alcete, Attale, and their Souldiers were res
                     •
                   a
                     •
                   nt: and contending to come thether with spéede, he with his armie in seuen dayes had trauelled two thousand fiue hundred Furlongs, and gotten to the Citie of Crete, where (through his expedition) he tooke and furnished certayn straight passages and mountaynes néere adioyning, before Alcete knew it. But as soone as Alcete and Attale knew and vnderstood thereof, they arranged their battaill of footemen, and with their horse charged those whiche had wonne the hye passages, thinking to repulse them. Whervpon the skirmish waxing very boat and cruell, with maruellous great slaughter on eyther side, Antigone with sixe thousand horse, violently and with great force, spedde him against the Phalange of the 
                     •
                   nimy, thinking to enterclude Alcete from his footemen. Whiche done, they in

the mountaynes (by reason of their great numbre and difficultie of the places) clerely repulsed Alcete. But in the retier, when Alcete sée they were cut of frō their footemen, and encompassed with the multitude of enimies, he then looked for none other but present death. And although the matter stoode vpon this tickle and dangerous point, yet at last with the losse of many Souldiers, he got and recouered to the battaill of footemen. Howbeit Antigone with his mighty Elephauntes and army marching against them in order of battaill, greatly amazed them, being farre the weaker. For Alcete had not in all the world aboue .xvj. thousande footemen and nine hundred horsemē, and Antigone ouer and besides his Elephants, had aboue fortie thousand footemen and eight thousand horsemen. Wherfore whē the Phalange of Alcete sée the Elephants marche towardes them in the front or voward, and the horse by reason of the great numbre enuiron them, and that the footemen in a maine battaill marched also against them, being the greater numbre and valiaunter Souldiers, they were therewith greatly astonned, and the rather bycause of the place of aduauntage whiche the enimy had wonne, and the thing done vpon such a sodaine, that their Captaynes and Leaders had no leysure to arrange their battaill. Wherefore they fledde, in which flight were taken Attale, Docine, Poley, and many other noble and valiaunt Captaynes. But Alcete with his Esquiers and familiars together the Pisides which he waged, fledde into a Citie of Piside named Thormese.
                  
                     Thormese.
                   When Antigone had won this victorie, he pardoned and forgaue all Alcete his men of warre whiche were left, and deuided them amongs his bandes.
               But the Pisides whiche escaped with Alcete to the numbre of sixe thousande, prayed him not to be discouraged nor dismayed, promising him that they woulde liue and dye with him. For they all which were with him, singularly well loued him, bycause that he after Perdicas his death,

hauing no trustie Companions or allies in all the Countrey of Asie, determined by gifts and curtesie to drawe the Pisides to his friendship, thinking thereby to get a warlike nation to be at his commaundement, and a countrey very strong and hard to be entred, being full of many inuincible castles and fortes. For this cause in al his warres honored he them more than the rest: and of euery spoyle and butin which he got of any enimies, the moetie he gaue to them. He was very familiar amongs them, dayly inuiting of the chief and principall to dynner or supper, sometime one, other while an other: rewarding them also particularly with diuerse and many gifts, as those in whose friendship and alliaunce he reposed his finall trust and confidence: wherein he was nothing at all deceyued, as then appeared. For as Antigone with his whole power encamped before the towne, and demaunded nothing else but Alcete, notwithstanding that the auncient Burgesses of the Citie were of one determinate minde to deliuer him, yet the lustie yong gallaunts and Souldiers, against the willes and minds of their owne fathers, concluded and agréed rather than to render so noble and worthy a man of warre, to abide and sustayne all mischiefs and daungers whatsoeuer. But when the auncient Burgesses sée that neyther counsaill, or reason, could persuade to the contrary, they practised an other deuise. Wherefore they secretly in the night aduertised Antigone by their intelligencers, that they would deliuer Alcete alyue or dead. For accomplishing wherof they willed him after a while to approch the town and make some skirmishes and false Alarmes, and sodenly to retier as though they fled, which woulde be a meane to cause all the lusty young Gallaunts and Souldiers to sally out vpon them, so yt they being in the skirmishe busied, the rest within would assault Alcete, being disfurnished of his said companions, and with ease take him. Whiche thing according to their demaund and request, Antigone performed. For while the yong and lusty Souldiers were salied

out of the towne to skyrmish and chase the enimy: the old men with their sclaues and other lustie fellowes (no mē of warre) assailed Alcete in his lodging: but alyue they could not get him. For he séeing the present daunger wherin he was, kild him selfe, rather than he would be rendred aliue to the enimy. Notwithstanding, they layd him dead on a beare couered ouer with a most vile robe, & so carried him through the gates of the towne to Antigone, before the yong blouds in the skirmish knew of it. By this meane ye auncient Citizens saued their Citie from desolation and spoyle. But after the Souldiers vnderstood thereof, they (for the great loue they bare him) were so agréeued and angry, that they kept one parte of the towne and held a counsaill, wherein they first concluded and agréed to set fier on the towne, and after to gette them out in armes to pille and destroye Antigone his countreis hard adioyning to the foote of the Moūtaynes. Howbeit, after they tooke better aduise than to burne the towne, but gotte them out in armes wasting and spoyling the greatest parte of the playne countrey of the enimy. After Antigone had gotten Alcete his body, he dyd him all the opprobries he knewe or could deuise, and in the ende of thrée dayes after, it began to corrupt, he threw it into the fields without buriall, and so departed from Piside. Howbeit, the lustie yong Gallaunts of Thormese tooke him vp and honorably enterred the dead. Whereby may be apperceyued that the curtesie and pleasure which men do one to an other, engendreth in them whiche receyue it, an indissoluble bond of loue and amitie.
            
            
               
                  ¶After the death of Antipater, Polispercon is ordeyned gouernour of the Kings, and Cassander enterpriseth to expulse him the gouernement.
               
               The .xx. Chapter.
               
                  WHat time Antigone departed from Piside, he with his armie trauailled into Phrigie. And as he laye to repose him in the Citie of Crete, there came to him Aristodeme the Milesian,
                  
                     Aristodeme.
                   aduertising him of the death of Antipater, and farther declaring that the Empire and gouernement of the Kings was gyuen to Polispercon the Macedonian. Of which newes Antigone was right ioyous, determining now to establishe him selfe Lord & Seigniour of al Asie. But for a while we will omit speaking of him, & make report of al things which were done in Asie.
               
               It happened at that season, that Antipater fell into a gréeuous disease, and in déed waxed so sicke, that (by reason of his great age) all men thought it impossible for him to escape the danger: wherefore the Athenians thinking Demades
                  
                     Demades.
                   the notable Orator a méete and necessary man for such a charge, sent him in an Ambassade to Antipater, to require him that he (according to his former promisse) should call home his garrisons from the towne of Munichie.
                  
                     Munychie.
                   And although Antipater had before tyme very well loued Demades, notwithstāding after ye death of Perdicas, such letters were found in Demades his chest, writen with his owne hand to the Kings, in which he exhorted Perdicas to passe into Europe against Antipater, that Antipater was maruelously despited therewith. Neuerthelesse, he dissimuled his grudge and anger. But Demades with arrogant language and threatning words so stil pursued and delared his Ambassade, that Antipater without aunswere caused him and his sonne ioint Ambassadours in the same Ambassade to be apprehēded, and forthwith cōmitted them to the rulers and gouernours, who immediatly sent them to prison, and after put them to death. Not long after whē 
                  Antipater perceyued he could not escape death, he nominated and appointed Polispercon gouernour of the Kings,
                     Polispercon.
                   & chief of all the whole power, bycause he was ye auncientest Chie 
                     •
                   ayne that had serued with Alexander, and of all the Macedonians had in great honour. He ordeyned also

                  Cassander his sonne Chiliarque or Captayn of a thousand men, and next in authoritie.
                     Cassander.
                   The same order of Chiliarque was first erected by the Kings of Persie, & after continued & maintayned by Alexander, and therfore dyd Antipater long before he dyed, giue the said office to Cassander his sonne when he was yet very yong. Neuerthelesse, after the death of his father, he liked not his constitution and ordinaunce, but thought he had done him great iniurie and wrong to preferre Polispercon to the Empire before him selfe being his child, & not of so néere alliaunce as he, knowing also that he was both able and sufficient to gouerne the Realme: as by experience ynough both of his valiantnesse and wisedome he had before séene and well appeared. Wherfore ryding abroad in the countrey with certayn his friends, he deuised with them at his leysure touching the Empire and gouernement, and seducing euery of them, moued them to take his parte and ayde him with their power, for the attayning of the principalitie, promising them in their so doing, large and honorable rewarde. He sent also his Ambassadoures to Ptolome, to renue and confirme the old amitie and friendship lately had betwéene him and his father Antipater, praying his ayde also in the same warre, and to send him out of hande his Nauie from Phenice into Hellespont. He likewise sent messangers to other nobles, Captaynes, and cities, to be confederate with him in the same matter. And during the time of this practise, to put him selfe out of suspicion of this conspiracy and treason, he made semblaunt as though he cared for none other thing but hunting, and such like disports. In this meane while Polispercon Gouernour of the Kings, by the aduise and cousaill of his friends, sent to Olympias Alexander his mother, praying hir to repaire into Macedone, & to take vpon hir the gouernement of yong Alexander hir sons sonne. For Olympias by reason of ye discord & enmitie betwéene hir & Antipater, had long before gotten into Epire, & there continued. In this state stood ye affaires of Macedon.
               
            
            
               
               
                  ¶Antigone vnderstanding of Antipater his death, taketh vpon him the gouernement of the Empire of Asie, and sendeth to Eumenes desiering his returne.
               
                The .xxj. Chapter.
               AFter it was diuulged in Asie that Antipater was dead, the people began to studie and muse of straunge and new deuises, and chiefly suche as gouerned vnder him were in doubt what to do. But amongs others
                     •
                    when Antigone was nominated and proclamed Emperour of Asie, and had greatly encreased the othe deliuered him by Antipater, through the subduing of Eumenes, Alcete and Attale, he became after so many victories so proude and arrogant, that he persuaded him selfe with ease to enioy the gouernement ouer all the rest, and not to be subiect to the Gouernours. He agayne thought (considering his power which was at least .lx. thousande footemen, ten thousande horse, and thirtie Elephaunts) he might reare of all the treasure in Asie, for that there was none able to resist him, and hoped for his mony to leuie in Asie a numbre of hiered soldiers to augment his armie. And dwelling in these ymaginations and deuises, he sent for Ierome the Historian, a friend & familiar of Eumenes Cardian, who lay besieged in ye towne of Nore aforesaid, whom he with large promisses sent towards Eumenes to persuade him to forget the battaill and conflict betwixt them in Cappadoce, and to ioyne with him as his allie and companion, whiche if he woulde do, he promised honorably to reward him, and to bestowe on him greater Satrapies and dominions than euer before he had, and to hold him as his most deare friend, and neuer to enterprise or do any thing, but that he shoulde be priuie of. After Antigone had thus done he assembled his friends, declaring to them his meaning and purpose, and entred them in a booke, in whiche he made to some a diuision of

certain Satrapies, and gaue to other the charge and leading of Souldiers, so that in déede they all greatly hoped to be both honorable and rich, and were thereby in all his attemptes & seruices the rather encouraged to serue him. For he determined wholly to subdue and conquere Asie, and to expulse al the Satrapies, and in their steades to place his familier and trustie friends.
            
            
               
                  ¶ Aride is repulsed from the siege of the Citie of Cizice.
                  
               
                The .xxij. Chapter.
               AS Antigone was thus occupied, Aride gouernour of Phrigie about Hellespont (doubting the enterprise of Antigone) determined to fortifie and furnish his principall Cities and townes. And bycause the Citie of Cizice was verie strong and méete for the warres, he incontinent went thether, accompanied with .x. thousand Mercenaries, a thousand Macedonians, fiue hundred Persian shot, and viij. hundred horse. He was farther well prouided and furnished of all maner of weapon both great & small, engines also to shoote great stoanes, and pieces of wood, and all other things méete and necessarie to maintayne a siege. So he sodenly came vpon them, and on the waye he tooke vp a great numbre of the Citizens whiche were dispersed abroad in the countrey: and after besieged the towne, and would néeds enforce the sillie besiegeaunts to receyue and take in his garrisons. And although they were vnprouided of men and all other things necessarie to holde out the enimie, yet determined they to defend their libertie. Notwithstanding they sent first their Ambassadoures to Aride, praying him to rayse his siege, saying they were all at his commaundement to do whatsoeuer he woulde, except the receyuing of men into garrison. But in the meane time they secretly armed all their yong and lustie fellowes to

man the wall and curten. And when they sée Aride still vrge them to receyue his garrisons: they aunswered, they would comprimit the matter to the deliberation of the cō
                  munaltie, and for dispatch thereof demaunded truce for the next day and night following, which was graunted: and in the meane while made they greater preparation for their defence. When Aride sée he was thus deceyued and mocked, he lost both oportunitie & hope for winning the Citie, bycause it was verie strong, both towardes the Sea and lande, standing almost like an Island within the Sea, and but one way to enter by lande, and that parte towardes the Sea very strong, bycause Aride had there no ships. They sent also by Sea to the Bizancians for men, armoure, and all other things necessarie to holde out the siege, which they incontinent sent, whereupon they were greatly assured, and tooke meruailous courage to defende their Citie. Farther, they sent out their gallies alongest the shoare to gather together their people which were dispersed in the countrey, and in the end they had assembled so great a numbre of men of warre, that they sallied out vpō the enimie, slew many, and repulsed the rest from the siege. Wherefore Aride (deceyued by pollicy) returned into his Satrapie without any exploite.
            
            
               
                  ¶Antigone commenceth warre against Aride, gouernour of Phrigie, and against Clyte, Lord of Lydie. And in the ende openly proclaymeth him selfe enimie to the Kings, and enioyeth one parte of Asie.
                  
               
                The .xxiij. Chapter.
               
                  
                     
                        
                           ••
                         lene.
                  AS Antigone abode in the Citie of Celene, he was aduertised of the siege of Cizice, wherefore he thought (if he sent towards them spéedy ayde and succoure in their distresse) that it woulde be a good occasion for him, to

winne the said Citie to be his friend and confederat. For which cause he chose out of the whole armie .xx. thousand of his most warlike Souldiers, and .iij. thousande horse, and in his owne person spéedely marched to aide the Cizicians: And although the siege was raised before his comming, yet euer after they became and remayned his most bounden friends. Notwithstanding, he sent his Ambassadours towards Aride, declaring to him that he had done verie yll to besiege a frée Citie of Grece, and friend to the Macedonians: considering the people thereof had in nothing abused him, and that he had shewed inough to make him selfe of a Deputie and Gouernour a Potentate and commaunder, commaunding him therefore to gyue ouer his said Satrapie, and for his habitation to betake him to one onely Citie. When Aride vnderstoode the charge of the Ambassadours, he greatly detesting the arrogancie of Antigone, aunswered, that he was not as yet determined to leaue his Satrapie, but to kéepe and defend it: and if Antigone would come to expulse him, he should then sée whether of them had the better right. After the Ambassadours had receyued this answere and were departed, he soone after fortified and furnished his Cities and townes. He also sent to Nore a bande of Souldiers, to Eumenes vnder the leading of one of his owne Captaynes, thinking therby to winne his fauoure and be his confederate. When Antigone had receyued aunswere from Aride, he sent one half of his army against him, and him selfe with the rest, trauailed into Lydie to chase out Clyte Gouernour thereof. But so soone as Clyte vnderstood the cause, he garrisoned his Cities, and made as good prouision against him as he could. That done, he immediatly went to Sea, and transfreted into Macedone, signifying to the Kings, the boldnesse of Antigone, & saied that he went about to aduaunce him selfe to some high and honorable estate, and to rebell against them: praying therefore aide for the repressing of him.
               
                  In the meane time Antigone by the intelligence of certain citisens, tooke at his first cōming the Citie of Ephese. But after he vnderstood that Eschil the Rhodian was there arriued,
                     Eschilus.
                   and would for the behoue of the Kings carrie out of Cilice into Macedon, in foure shippes, sixe hundred Talents: he intercepted them and tooke it away, saying that he had great néed thereof for the wageing of his mercenaries: which déede imported that he ment to establishe him selfe some great Prince and to warre vppon the kings. When he had this done, he went against the other Cities of Asie, and by violence and practise brought many vnder his subiection.
            
            
               
                  ¶ Of diuerse aduentures which happened Eumenes, and of his deliueraunce from the siege of Nore.
                  
               
                The .xxiiij. Chapter.
               WE will here leaue a while to speake of Antigone, and returne to Eumenes, who (besides many and diuerse mishaps) had also ben in sundrie aduentures, both good and bad: for after the death of Alexander, he still tooke part with Perdicas, who gaue him the Satrapie of Cappadoce and the countreys thereto adioyning, in which he had assembled and gotte together numbres of men of warre and great summes of money, getting thereby great renoume, alway liuing in prosperitie and felicitie. He in battail vanquished and killed Cratere and Neoptolome: two of the most renowmed Captaynes amongst all the Macedonians, and all the Souldiers whiche serued vnder them, which had ben continuall victors where euer they became. But when he thought him selfe most puyssaunt, and none able to resist him, he was by Antigone in battaill sodenly vanquished and constrained to flie and retier with a fewe of his friends into a litle towne & castle: where being besieged and enclosed with a double trenche,

could not in one whole yeare be aided to raise the siege. Howbeit, about the yeares end, when he was almost out of hope & in despaire, sodenly came vnto him present remedie: For Antigone (who still helde him besieged, hauing altered his determination and purpose, sent to him, requiring his friendship & companie: and after he had takē his othe and faith, he deliuered him of the siege. Who departing thence, trauailed into Cappadoce: and being there but a short time, assembled the Souldiers lately vnder his charge dispersed through the said countrey: and by reason of the earnest zeale and loue they had to him, he had gotten together in a little whyle, a great numbre at his commaū
                  dement. For ouer and besides the six hundred whiche were with him during the siege, he had gotten aboue two thousand other souldiers, and in the ende came to great authoritie: for he was made Generall of the armie Royall, to warre vppon those whiche rebelled against the Kings, as hereafter shalbe declared. But at this present we meane to leaue speaking of the matter in Asie, and make mencion of those which happened in Europe.
               
            
            
               
                  ¶ Cassander sheweth him selfe enimie to Polispercon, and getteth to his alliaunce many of the Satrapes. Polispercon by an edict royall restoreth the Cities of Grece into their auncient libertie. 
               
               The .xxv. Chapter.
               VVHen Cassander (of whome we haue before spoken) of him self put frō the Empire & gouernemēt of Macedone, kept not his desire lōger vndiscouered, but purposed by violēce to obtayne & recouer ye said gouernement: thinking it a great dishonor to suffer any other than him selfe, to haue the rule and authoritie which his father held & enioyed. But apperceyuing yt the Macedonians in generall were prompt and ready at Polispercon
                  
his commaundement, and tooke his parte, he secretly beganne to discouer his intention to his trustie friends, and vnder a colour made them go towards Hellespont occupying him selfe many dayes in the countrey in chasing and hunting, to the ende his people should beleue and thinke that he forced not of any hie enterprises or princelie gouernement. But after he had dispatched & put al things in a readinesse, he secretly departed & went towards Hellespont, sending forthwith to Antigone, praying his aide, & aduertising him yt 
                  Ptolome had promised the like. Whereunto Antigone accorded, and promised to send out of hand both Souldiers and shippes. This friendship fained he to doe, for the great loue he had alwayes borne to Antipater his father, but truth is, he ment none other thing but to trouble Polispercon in his warres and affaires: to the ende that while those matters were in deciding, he might seaze on the whole countrey of Asie: and after attayne to the Empire of Macedone.
               
               When Polispercon had séene the sodayne departure of Cassander, he knew he meant to worke him great trouble and mischief: wherfore he did nothing without great aduise of his friends and the chief of Macedone, declaring vnto them, that he clerely see ye 
                  Antigone would ayde Cassander, and by that meane should win the Cities of Grece, bycause that diuerse of them were guarded by the seruitours of his father, and the rest gouerned by some of the Citizens whome his said father had deputed gouernours, and had alwayes supported them. He sée also that Ptolome gouernour of Egipt, and Antigone, who apparauntly had alreadie withdrawne him from the obeysaunce of the Kings, would ayde him, eyther of them hauing an huge and mightie hoste, great stoare of treasure, and held vnder their obeysance great countreys and prouinces. When they had at large consulted on these matters, and that euery man had said his opinion, he was finally resolued to restore the Cities of Grece into their popular gouernaunce

and libertie, thereby to depose the Tyraunts and Gouernours assigned by Antipater. For ye 
                  Macedonians thought by that meane to diminishe and abate the power of Cassander, and that the Kings and Polispercon shoulde winne great honor and renowne, together the friendship of al the Cities who greatly might helpe them with their seruice. Whereupon they sent out commaundements to all the cities, that they shoulde sende their Ambassadoures to the Kings: which they did. And when they were al assembled, it was by the kings declared and signified to them, that they should be of good courage, and haue an assured hope and confidence that they would restore them to their auncient libertie and popular gouernement: deliuering forthwith in writing the decrée of the saide deliberation to be carried and published without delaye vnto the Cities: to the ende they should know the liberalitie and franknesse of the said Kings and Macedonians towards them. The contents and effect of which decrée was written in Greke as followeth.
               Forasmuch as our noble Progenitours haue in times past greatly pleasured & gratified the Grecians:
                  
                     The substance of the Decree.
                   We therefore pursuing & following their institution and ordinance therein, doe declare and pronounce to all people the loue and good will we beare towards the Grekes. Wherefore, since the death of Alexander
                  
                     •
                    and that the realmes came to our possession and gouernaunce, thinking that they are all determined to peace and quietnesse, and also contented to stand to the institutions and ordinaunces concerning the weale publique established by Phillip our noble parent, we haue herein addressed our letters to all the saide Cities. But bicause of our absence in farre coūtreys some of the said Grekes, not rightly vnderstanding our meaning and intencion, making warre vpon the Macedonians: certain of them chaunted to be vanquished by our Captaynes and Chieftaynes of warre, wherby many inconueniences ensued to some of their Cities: which troubles and misfortunes

ought to be imputed to the fault and negligence of our said Captaynes. Wherefore we, for our partes considering the auncient amitie and beneuolence of our Auncestors towardes you and yours, are desirous and by vertue of this decrée do graunt you peace, and farther doe remit & restore you into that libertie and Ciuile gouernement which you heretofore haue had vnder Philip and Alexander: and that all you and euery of you, do gouerne according to the ordinaunces first by them to you graunted: we wil also, that all those whiche were banished and expulsed the Cities by our Lieutenaunts and Chieftaynes of war, since Alexander passed into Asie, be called home, and being so called and come agayne, will by these presents, that they recouer and enioye all their goods, and euer hereafter to lyue peaceably without sedition in their countrey, forgetting all iniuries and wrongs done and passe, and be partakers of the honors and ciuilities of their Cities, aswell as any other. And that all decrées and sentences made to the contrarie, shall be reuoked and made voide (except and alwayes reserued all such as are banished for murder, or any other like villanous acte, except also and reserued all those which were bannished Megapolite, for the treason conspired with Polyenote, except also the Amphisencians, Tricians, Pharcondonians and Heraclians.) And for the rest we well they be called backe, and receyued home on this side the thirtie day of Aprill. And if Philip our Father and Alexander our brother, haue ordeyned and made any ordinaunces or lawes particular contrarie to this, let them which find them selues agréeued come to vs, and we will take such order, as shall be both honest and reasonable for eyther parte. And for the Athenians, we will that they continue and remayne as they did in the time of Philip and Alexander, and to enioye the citie of Orope, and countrey thereof as they did at that present: together the Citie of Samye, as Phillip our progenitour and noble parent deliuered it them. In this doing we forbid the Grekes that

they enterprise nothing, neyther serue or ayde any whom soeuer against vs, vpon payne of banishement both they and their posteritie, with confiscation of their landes and goods, whiche attempt or do the contrarie. Of all which things we haue gyuen notice and power to Polispercon & Deicete to execute, willing therefore and commaunding you wholly to obey him accordingly, as we haue heretofore written vnto you. For if any take in hand to doe contrarie to our ordinaunce aforesaid, we will by no meanes suffer and abide it.
               When Polispercon had published this edict, he cōmaunded the Argiues and other Cities to expulse the Gouernours whome Antipater had authorised, and to condemne and put certain of them to death, and confiske their goods that Cassander might not be holpen thereby. He write also to Olympias to returne into Macedon, and take vpon hir the gouernement of Alexander, vntill he came to age. He write likewise letters in the names of the kings to Eumenes, not to reconcile him to Antigone, but to take parte wt the kings, and returne into Macedone, where he should be receyued as a compainon with the said Polispercon to the gouernement of the said kings: or else if he would farrie in Asie, there should be sent vnto him both men and money to warre vpon Antigone, an vtter enimie and rebell against the kings: and that he would also render the Satrapies which Antigone had expulsed him: together, al the rest which he before held and enioyed in Asie. Saying farther, that it was hée aboue all other, which of right ought to be most zelous and vigilant about the affaires and authorite of the ligne Royall, by whiche he was altogether preferred and honored: following his accustomed care and diligence whiche he before at all times had shewed to the same. And if he néeded greater force, the saide Polispercon would with the kings and their power come into Asie. These matters were done the yeare that Archippe gouerned Athens, and Quinte Elye and Lucy Papyre were created

Consulles at Rome.
               
            
            
               
                  ¶Eumenes taking parte with the kings, goeth into Cilice: and of his practises to gette men of warre.
               
                The .xxvj. Chapter.
               SOone after that Eumenes was departed the Citie of Nore, he receyued letters frō 
                  Polispercon, wherein were conteyned ouer and besides the things abouesaid, how that the kings (somewhat to countreuayle his great losse) had fréelie gyuē him fiue hundreth Talents, and that they had written to the Pretors and receyuers of the countrey of Cilice, to deliuer him other fiue hundred Talents, and so much money besides as was sufficient to paye his Souldiers wages, and for the buying of all other his prouision for the warres, and that the Captaines of the Argiraspides who had about sixe thousand men, should serue vnder the said Eumenes as Lieutenaunt to the kings, and Lord and Gouernour of all A
                        •
                      ie. Anon were brought letters from Olympias to him, praying and requiring his aide in the behalfe of the kings, and hir: For that he alone had bene alwayes iust and faithfull to the kings and was presentlie able to deliuer them from the troubles which grew dayly vpon them. And farther, she desired his counsail, whether it were hir best to remayne in Epyre, and not to gyue credit to them which séemed but protectors and gouernours, and in déede affected the onely kingdome, or to returne into Macedone. Whome Eumenes agayne aunswered by letters, yt he thought it the surest waye for hir to remaine still in Epire, vntill she sée some ende of the warres. But Eumenes euermore trustie and faithfull to the kings, purposed not to take parte with Antigone, affecting the kingdome, but rather to serue the Sonne of Alexander, yet a boy (who through the wickednesse of his Captaynes & seruitours

wanted ayde) and to aduenture him selfe for his cause in al daungers. Wherefore he departed incontinent out of Cappadoce with eight hundred horse, and two thousand footemen, hauing no time to tarrie and abide, for all those which promised to ioyne with him, bicause Antigone (vnderstanding that he was his enimie) had in all haste sent Menander wt a mightie armie to expulse him Cappadoce.
                  
                     Menander.
                   When Menander came thether, and found Eumenes gone thrée dayes before, he determined to pursue him, but seing he could not ouer reach him, he retired into Cappadoce. Shortlie after, Eumenes (through his great spéed, passing the mount Thaure) got to Cilice. As soone as Antigene and Teutame (Captaynes of the Argiraspides, who serued the kings) vnderstood of his comming,
                     Antigene.
                  
                  
                     Teutame.
                   they mette him on the waye with a numbre of their friendes: who after they had reioyced together with him, in that he had escaped from so manie daungers, they fréelie and redilie offered him their seruice. In like case also did the Argiraspides Macedonians, greatlie wondering at the varietie of his fortune, considering that not long before he was adiudged a rebell to the kings, he and all his friends condemned to death, and now reuersing their iudgement, they had not only pardoned him, but also had gyuen him the gouernement of their whole Empire.
                     The varietie & instabilitie of worldlie things.
                   Notwithstanding, suche as considered Eumenes straunge Fortune, little or nothing maruelled thereat. For what is he, whiche marketh and noteth the instabilitie of our life, that knoweth not the chaunge and mutabilitie of fortune? Or who is he, which ouermuch trusteth to the honor and prosperitie, whiche in this world happeneth him that is not subiect to fleshly britlenesse? For the common and ordinarie life of men gouerned and ruled by some secret ordinaunce of God, is without any stabilitie, continually turned to good and euill. Wherefore let no man meruaill if any thing chaunce to him sodenlie, but rather if whatsoeuer commeth, commeth not vnlooked for. And therefore by good reason ought all

men to cōmend histories.
                     The commendation of Histories.
                   For the varietie and instabilite which men in worldly matters find by experience, abateth the pride and ambicion of those whiche haue in them any felicitie, and enboldeneth and gyueth hope to such as are in aduersitie, as to Eumenes chaunced, who knowing the slippernesse of worldly Fortune, constantly endured his infelicitie, hoping and looking for better: And then seing him selfe preferred and aduaunced to great authoritie, & foreséeing the inconstancie of Fortune, verie wiselie and circumspectlie ordered his affaires and businesse. For first he considered, that he being a straunger, the gouernement of a realme and so princelie an astate was vnméete & not apperteyning vnto him: and that those whome he should gouerne were Macedonians, and had condempned him to death: and that al the Captaynes and Gouernours of the Prouinces were honorable personages, and of hie courages, and pretended great and waightie enterprises. Wherefore he suspected, that if he shoulde take vpon him so great a charge, they woulde contemne him being a straunger, and thereby he shoulde get great enimitie, and alwayes stand in daunger of losing his life. For he knew well, that the Macedonians woulde in no wyse be at his commaundement, bicause they reputed him a meane man, and much inferior to them, and therefore rather thought that he should be subiect to them, than they to him. Wherfore all these things considered, he declared to the Captaynes and Souldiers, that first, where it had pleased the Kings by their letters to graūt him for his reliefe .v. hundred Talents, he highlie thanked thē, but vtterlie refused the receipt thereof: saying, he néeded not so great a reward and gift, since he affected neyther Empire or dominion: nor to haue any suche charge was his desire, but that by the letters of the kings he was commaunded to do it: neyther was he able any longer to abide the labors & trauails of warre, bycause he was now sore broosed and lame: doing them farther to wete, that he looked not therby

to attayne to any principalitie, considering he was a straunger and not a Macedonian. He also affirmed, that in his sléepe he see such a vision, that him thought necessarie to be manifested to them, forasmuch as in his iudgemēt it might be an helpe to vnitie and concord, and also very profitable to the common wealth. He thought in his sléepe, that Alexander appeared to him as if he had bene alyue: and in the same robes which he commaunded all his princes and Captaynes, and ministred the Lawes apperteyning to the Empire. Wherefore quod he) I thinke it good that of the kings treasure a Throne imperiall be forged & made of golde, and thereupon to be placed and set the statue or image of Alexander crouned, holding a Scepter as he did in his life time. And that all the Princes and Captaynes shall euery morning assemble there, and after the sacrifice finished, to sit in counsaill of the affaires of the warres: and whatsoeuer is concluded on, to take it as frō the mouth of ye said Alexander: which thing was thought good by all the assistauntes, and they all out of hand caused the said deliberacion to be executed, and forged a statue or ymage: bycause in the treasurie of the kings was great stoare of golde and siluer: Whereupon within few dayes after, an image was enstalled in a Throne Imperial with a Diademe, Scepter and other kinglie robes. About the same was an Aulter rered vp, and fire layed thereon, of which all the Captaynes tooke coales, and put them in Censures of golde, wherewith they encensed the Statue with swéete and precious smelles, making sacrifice thereto as vnto God. After the sacrifice was done, stooles and formes were brought, whereon sat all the noble Princes and valiaunt Captaynes, consulting of the incident affaires. In doing whereof Eumenes tooke vpon him no authoritie or title of Gouernour, but shewed him in all points egall to them, and through curteons and gentle language, was voide of all grudge and hatred, and gotte the good willes of all the Captaynes. Moreouer, bycause of the

superstition they vsed towardes the statue of Alexander, they hoped to prosper as if some God had gouerned and guyded them. And vsing the same humanitie towards the Argiraspides Macedonians, they highly estéemed him and accomted him worthie the charge and gouernement of the affaires of the kings. This done, he sent his principall and wisest friends to assemble and wage other Mercenarie Souldiers, appointing large sallarie and entretainement. Of whiche Cōmissioners some departed into Piside, Lycie, and other Regions néereby: other into Celosirie and Phenice: the rest into Cypres: so that amongest them they leuied a great numbre of men. But after it was noysed that they tooke vp Souldiers, and gaue good entretainement, a numbre of good fellowes of the Cities of Grece, offered their seruice and were enrolled, so that in short time (as besides the Argiraspides and other whom Eumenes brought with him) they had gottē together, aboue ten thousand footemen and two thousand horse.
            
            
               
                  ¶ Ptolome goeth about to cause the Argiraspides to kil Eumenes, whome he by his wisedome appaised, and after sendeth an army by Sea into Phenice.
                  
               
                The .xxvij. Chapter.
               WHen Eumenes in short time was sodenly became puyssant, Ptolome arriuing with his Nauie at the Citie of Zephire,
                  
                     Zephire.
                   in the countrey of Cilice, sent letters to the Argiraspides, signifying to them, that they ought not of right to obey Eumenes, considering he had ben by the Macedonians already condemned to dye. He sent also straight admonition to all the townes in Cilice, not to deliuer him any money: promising to saue thē harmelesse against him. Howbeit, there were none that made any accompt of his letters, bycause the kings, Polispercon
                  
their gouernour, and Olympias, Alexander his mother, had writen to the contrarie, that they shoulde obey Eumenes, and to whome they shoulde gyue whatsoeuer he demaunded, as to the Lieutenaunt generall of the kings, hauing full power and authoritie. Now waxed Antigone maruelous angry, by reason of Eumenes his authoritie. For he knew it was Polispercon who had so aduaunced and set him in such rowme to plague the rebelles against the kings. Wherefore he determined eyther by treason, or some other villanous meane, to bring him to his ende. And therfore sent he Philote one of his chief friends with letters to the Argiraspides and the rest of the Macedonians.
                  
                     Philote.
                   Whereupon he incontinent appointed thirtie Macedonians, both wise and well spoken, to accompany him: commaunding them to prease and talke with the Captaynes of the Argiraspides, to saye Antigone and Teutane, and to promise, (that if they would kill Eumenes) to rewarde them largely, and besides bestowe on them greater Dominions than before they enioyed: and make the like promisses to all the Argiraspides with whome they had any acquaintaunce or familiaritie. Howbeit, they founde few or none agréeing thereto, but Teutane onely, who in all he might labored to winne Antigone his companion. But he as one that estéemed his faith and honour, did not only gainesay so wicked and villanous an act, but in the ende, conuerted his corrupted friend, saying, that it were much better for them that Eumenes dyd lyue and beare rule, than Antigone. For yt if Antigone attained the greatest dignitie and authoritie, he woulde expulse them their Satrapies and gyue them to his friends: where Eumenes being a straunger durst not affect the principalitie, but continuing Chieftayne and Lieutenaunt, would alwayes gently and fauourably entreat them as his special friends and companions: and in taking his parte, woulde suffer them to enioye and possesse their Satrapies, and paraduenture bestowe some better vpon them.

By this meane and persuasion they whiche came to betraye Eumenes, were frustrate of their enterprise. Notwithstanding Philote assembled the Argiraspides, and the other Macedonians, to whom they presented their letters writen by Antigone, wherein he greatly accused and charged Eumenes, commaunding them incontinent vpon the sight of the letters, to apprehend and put him to death: And in case they would not, he threatned and ment with his whole power to come against them, for their disobedience sharply to punish thē. When the letters were séene and read, both Captaynes and Souldiers stood in great perplexitie and doubt
                     •
                    for they sée that they by no meane could escape the daunger, bycause (if they tooke parte with the kings) Antigone would ouerthrow them: and if they obeyed Antigone, the kings then would plague them. And as they were in this trouble of mind, Eumenes boldly entred the assemblie: & after he had read the letters, he pronounced vnto them, that of dutie and allegiaunce, they ought to obey the kings, and not to gyue eare to suche as rebelled against them, so that through his words and persuasions, he in such sorte confirmed them, that he both assured his owne estate, and likewise still wan their fauours and good willes. And where he was before in maruelous daunger, he now agayne sodēly became to be aduanced to high authoritie. Incontinent after, he marched forwarde with his armie towardes Phenice, purposing to assemble all the ships of the Cities, and to send a mightie Nauie to Sea, to the ende, that Polispercon shoulde be Lorde of the Seas to passe into Asie, to warre vpon Antigone.
               
            
            
               
                  ¶Nycanor keeping and occupying the Port of Pyre against the Athenians, is besieged by Alexander Polispercon his sonne, and of the mutenie in the Citie of Athenes.
                  
               
                The .xxviij. Chapter.
               
                  AT the same time that the things abouesaid were exploited in Phenice, Nycanor Captayne of the Citie of Munichie, vnderstanding that Cassander was departed Macedone, and gone to Antigone, and that Polispercon would come with his armie Royall shortly into the countrey of Athenes, he persuaded the Athenians to kéepe their friendship and amitie with Cassander. And when he sée they stayed not at his wordes, but instantly required him to take away his garrisons whiche kept the citie, he ment to entertayne and delay them: desiring them to pawse a while, and after that, would take such order, that they should haue cause to be well contented and satisfied. Now in this meane time that the Athenians were quieted with these wordes, he priuely thrust in the night by little and little all the Souldiers of Athens into the Castle of Munychie, so that he was then able with those Souldiers to kéepe and maintayne the same place, and defend him selfe against the assailauntes, whiche crafty dealing the Athenians séeing, sent their Ambassadoures towards the kings and Polispercon, to demaund ayde, according to the edict published for the libertie of the cities of Grece. They also called many coūsails to sée by what meane they might expulse Nycanor. But whyle they thus cōsulted, Nycanor found the meane to wage a certain numbre of Mercenaries, with whome in a night he sallied out of Munychie, and seized on the entrie or mouth of the Port of Pyre.
                  
                     Pyre.
                   When ye 
                  Athenians sée that in stead of recouering Munychie they had lost Pire, they were sore agréeued. Wherfore they chose certen Ambassadoures of the worshipfullest of the Citie, Nycanors very friends, and sent to him: to say, Phocion the sonne of Phoce, Thymon the sonne of Thymothe, and Clearcke the sonne of Nansicles, commaunding them to chalenge and blame him for that fact, and to require that they might be restored to their Ciuill gouernement, according to the Decrée of the kings before by them published. Nycanor aunswered, that they must send to

                  Cassander by whom he was deputed Gardein of the same: bycause without him, he had no authoritie to dispose or take awaye any thing. In the meane time letters came to Nycanor from Quéene Olympias, commaunding him to render to the Athenians, Munichie and Pire. Then Nycanor séeing that the kings and Polispercon woulde haue Olympias come into Macedone, and restore hir to the gouernement of the infante, and gyue hir as great authoritie as she had in the life of Alexander, fearing therfore to disobey hir, promised the Athenians to make restitution to them according to the forme and tenour of hir letters. Notwithstanding, he delayed them from daye to daye, making many excuses. During this season, the Athenians considering that in times past they had maruelously endeuoured them selues to honor Olympias the Quéene, and that the honor which they had done to hir, was well emploied and bestowed: and that therefore they might by hir meanes recouer their libertie without daunger, they became maruelous glad, and fedde them selues with vaine hope. But before Nycanor had accomplished his promise, Alexander Polispercon his Sonne arriued in their Countrey with a great army. Then the Athenians thinking that he was come to restore them the Citties of Munychie and Pyre, were in maruelous ioye. But it chaunced contrary to their expectation: for he came to seize to his owne vse on the saide Fortresses, and to furnishe them with garrisons for his owne ayde in the warres. At hys comming, certain conspiratours, Antipater his friendes and Phocion him selfe fearing punishement for their disobedience and rebellion against the ordinaunces of the Kings, mette with Alexander, and coūsailed him according to the necessity of the case, and what was best for his commoditie and profit, but chiefly that he shoulde furnishe the fortresse with his owne Souldiers, and not render them vnto the Athenians, before Cassander were discomfited. When Alexander was come before Pyre, he forthwith

pitched his campe and besieged the Towne, and fell to a parle with Nycanor touching the same, without calling any of the Athenians to counsaile, or once making them priuie: so that it manifestly appeared then, nothing to be done for the profit and common vtilitie of the Citie. By reason whereof, the people assembled and deposed the officers then in authoritie, and assigned and deputed new: and such as they thought more affectioned to the popular faction. And certen which had the gouernement of any particular office: some they condemned to death, and other to perpetuall exile, with confiscation of their goods: amongs whome was Phocion, who in Antipater his time had the greatest rowme and authoritie within the Citie. And after, he with the rest whiche were deposed, repaired all to Alexander Polispercon his sonne, trusting by him to be restored, whom he right gently receyued, gyuing them his letters addressed to Polispercon his father, praying him not to permit and suffer Phocion and his adherents to be destroyed, who had taken parte with him, and had always ben ready to do what pleasure and seruice him liked. The people of Athenes also sent their Ambassadoures to the said Polispercon, to accuse Phocion, and to demaunde that the Citie of Munychie might be rendred to them, & them selues restored to their libertie and popular gouernaunce. When Polispercon vnderstood the whole matter, he greatly desired to kéepe the Port of Pyre, being a méete and necessarie place for the affaires of warre. Neuerthelesse, fearing to be reputed a dissembler and double man if he went against that which he before had commaunded by a common and publique Decrée, and that he woulde not be accompted and taken deceytfull and disloyall, chiefly to doe wrong to that which was the principall Citie of Grece, altered his determination & curteously aunswered the Ambassadours of the people: whereupon Phocion and his adherents were apprehended & sent bound to Athens, cōprimitting ye whole matter to the wil & choyse of ye 
                  Athenians,
                  
whether they woulde condemne and put them to death, or remitte and forgiue the effendours. Wherefore when the people were assembled to sit in iudgement of Phocion and his complices: the most of the banished in the time of Antipater which tooke parte against him, greeuously accused and adiudged them worthy the death, the summe of which accusation was this: that they after the Lamian warre were the principall and chiefe causers that their Citie and Countrey were brought in thraldome and bondage, the gouernement and authoritie of the people wholy extinguished, and the lawes and ordinaunces of the same Countrie clerely violated and infringed. When the daye assigned was come, Phocion very sagely and wysely beganne to plead and defende his cause: but so soone as the multitude and great numbre of the people heard him beginne to speake,
                     The furie of the people.
                   they made suche a noyse and vprore, that he could not be heard. When the noise was ceased, and that he beganne agayne to speake, they likewise interrupted and stopped him that he coulde haue no audience: for the multitude of the baser sorte, which had bene degraded and put from the publique gouernement, being sodenly newly authorised, were very insolent against those which had depriued them their libertie. Howbeit Phocion in daunger to lose his life, boldly and stoutely stood to the defence of his iustification, so that these about him heard what he sayde. But they which were any thing farther of, could heare nothing for the noyse and vprore of the people: but they might all sée, that he spake and made many gestures with his body, as a man in great daunger and feare. But in the ende when he sée no boote, he with a loud voice cried and sayde, that he was contented to dye, but prayde that they might be forgiuen whome he had inuegled and attracted to his will and pleasure, some forcibly, and some by gentle admonitions and persuasions. When certaine of Phocions friendes sée that the violēce and rage of the people ceassed not, they preased in to

speake for him, whome the multitude incontinent hearkened vnto, before any man knewe what they woulde say: But after it was perceyued they spake in the fauour of the accused, they were in lyke sorte reiected by the clamors of the people, so that in the ende by the cō
                  mon voyce and exclamation of the multitude, they wer condemned to death, and that done carried to prison. Then many of their friendes seing their miserie, were very pensife and sorowfull. For when they sée that such personages being the chief and principal of the Citie, as wel for their nobilitie as their authoritie and renoume, & had done many good and gracious déedes to the Citie, were in such sort condēned without order of iustice, they greatly feared to come in the like dāger. But forasmuch as fortune is common and mutable, many of the people dispiteously agreued with the sayd Phocion, spake al the oultrages & viltanies against him they could, reproching hym of many wicked acts & déedes, as people commonly doe which dissimule their anger against them in authoritie: But when they see fortune turne hir saile, & that it otherwise hapneth, then wil they without reason or measure, in all despiteful crueltie vtter and shew forth their priuie griefe and pestiferous malice. Not long after, the condemned, acording to the custome of the coū
                  trey, dranke poyson, and their carkaises were throwne without the limites and precinctes of Athens vnburied, and this was their ende.
            
            
               
                  Polyspercon besiegeth Cassandre in Pyrey, and perceiuing that he coulde not win it, departeth thence and besiegeth the citie of Megalopolis, where by the wisedome and policie of Demades, he is at an assault repulsed.
               
                The .xxix. Chapter.
               
                  DUring the time that these matters were done in Asia, Antigone had sent Cassander with .xxxv. tall warlike gallies, and foure thousand souldiours to saile into Pire: whom Nichanor captaine of the Castle, receiued and rendred to him the port and castle. But as for Munichie Nicanor garded and helde that with his owne garrison. When Polispercon who abode and continued in Phocide, vnderstoode that Cassander had taken and enioyed Pire, he came into the Countrey of Athens, and encamped before Pire, with twentie thousād Macedonians, and foure thousand straungers and confederates, and thrée score and fiue Elephantes, and besieged the same. But séeing the scarcitie and want of victuals, and the siege like long to continue, he left behind at the siege such number of Soldiours as the Countrey might wel vittell, deputing for his lieuetenant Alexander his sonne, and him selfe with the rest, being the greater number, entred Peloponess, to the ende to force the Megalopolitanes to come vnder the obeisaunce of the Kings, being greatly enclined to Cassander, and the continuation of their Oligarchie: to say, the gouernement of certaine particular offices and dignities which Antipater had appointed them. While Polispercon was about this enterprise, Cassander with his Nauie hauing alliaunce with the Eginets, went and besieged the Citie of Salamine his enimie: And euery day with shot, whereof he had foyson, assaulteth the town, bringing them in great hazarde and feare. And being almost in despaire, aide came from Polispercon bothe by sea and land. Wherevpon Cassander was so daunted, that he raised his siege and returned to Pire. After that Polispercon meaning to set and order and stay about the affaires of Peloponese, assembled before him the Deputies of all the Cities: whom with gentle and gratious woordes he allured to ioyne with him, and afterward sent his Ambassadoures to all the Cities, commaunding them that they should

sodainely kill all the gouernors appointed by Ptolome, and restore the gouernement to the people. Which commaundement the people incontinently obeyed, so that there were great slaughters and banishmentes throughout the Cities of the friends of Antipater. Then the commonaltie being restored to libertie and authoritie, ioyned with Polispercon. And bicause the Megalopolitames would not obey, but still sticke to Cassander, Polispercon fully determined to besiege them. When they vnderstood his meaning and purpose, they incontinently caused all their goodes in the Countrey to be brought into their towne, and after mustered and tooke viewe of their people, which were of Citizens and forainers, about fiftene thousand besides their slaues, all able men, and deuided them into two bandes: whereof some made rampiers and other workes, some manned the walles, so that at one instant they were all busied and occupied: One companie ditched about the Towne, an other companie carried woode and earth out of the fieldes to make the Rampiers, other repaired and mended the walles where they were any thing at all decayed, some forged harnaies and engines of Artillarie, and on this sort was all the whole Citie occupied, bicause that euery one was minded, and disposed thereto, for so muche as the power which came against them, were men of inuincible courages, and the Elephantes of great violence and might. Not long after that they had brought all things into a readinesse and perfection, Polispercon with his whole armie arriued before the same, and on both sides besieged it. On the one side encamped Macedonians, and on the other side his allyes and straungers. He builded also many Towers of woode, hygher than the curten and wall, and planted them in places conuenient, and thrust into them Souldioures, with verie great plentie of shotte or slings, who stoutly fought with them which manned the walles,

toures & bulwarkes. He vndermined likewise thrée of their toures, and one parte of the curte
                     •
                   , and after gaue fire to the mynes, and ouerthrew them: When the Macedonians see the ouerthrowe of them, they made a great outcrie, wherat the townesmen were maruellously dismayed, to see their curten layde on grounde: Neuerthelesse when they see the Macedonian
                        •
                      
                   force to enter the breache of the toures and walles, they deuided themselues into two bands, wherof one band stode to the defence, and through the aduaunting, and difficultie of the passages where the enimie wold haue entred, they valiātly repulsed them. The other band made new rampiers and bulwarks more within the towne: so that bisides the wall or curten which was ouerthrown, they did make an other curten and trenche a good distaunce from the first, workyng day and night vntill they had ended and finished it, furnishing the same wyth shotte and engines of artillerie, wherwith they sore hurt and galled the enimie vpon the toures of woode, so that on eche side were many hurte and slayne vntill nyght approched, and then Polyspercon cau
                     •
                   ed to sounde the retraite, and retired into his campe.
               The next day in the morning he gaue a freshe assault and wanne the breache
                     •
                    commaundyng hys Pyoners to cast abroade the rubbishe and greate stones whyche lay on heapes, into the dytches and trenches, for smoothing and playnyng the grounde, that hys Elephauntes myght come neere, bycause then they woulde greately helpe to winne and take the towne. But the Megalopolitains through the wisedome and conducte of Damides, who had long serued with Alexander in Asie,
                  
                     Damides.
                   & knewe the nature of Elephantes, founde an excellent remedie against them, and through his policie and trauail, made those monstrous and terrible beasts vnprofitable, and able to do nothing in maner as foloweth.
               First, he caused many doores and gates to be made, &

thrust them full of great pinnes, and layde them within the little shallowe ditches, wyth the poyntes of the pynnes vpwarde, and couered them with mouldes of earth, and suche lyght stuffe, that they mighte not bée seene: and when the enimie came to assaile, to place on euery syde a strong companie of shot of all sortes, and none before, so ye 
                  Polyspercon séeing none to resist at the front of the entrie, brought on hys Elephantes through the breache into the towne. But as soone as they came to the place where the ditches were, they by reason of their heauinesse, so hurt their féete, that they could neither go forwarde, nor backwarde, chiefly bicause of the violence of the shotte, whiche came so thicke agaynste them on the side, that the greater parte of the Ind
                        •
                      ans, their leaders, were sore hurt or slaine, not able to gouerne them, and the beastes f
                     •
                   lyng them selues hurte, returned in great disorder against theyr owne people, and maruellously hurt them: and in the end, the mightiest and fiercest fell downe deade, and the rest able to doe no good, ouerthrewe theyr owne companie. When the Megalopolitanes sée that they hadde thus repulsed the enimie, they were delyuered from al feare, and waxed very proude.
            
            
               
                  After Clyte hath ouerthrowne at sea Cassander, he is through the wisedome of Antigone, soone after discomfited, and finally slaine in his flight.
               
                The .xxx. Chapter.
               AFter this repulse, Polyspercon repented hym, that he had besieged the Citie before it was néedefull: And bicause he would lose no time, he left one part of his armie at the siege, and with the rest, he intended some greater and more necessarie exploites: Wherfore he sente Clyte Admirall wyth hys whole Armie into

                  Hellespont to stoppe his enimies for passing oute of Asie into Europe, commaunding him to call vppon Aride, to accompanie him, abyding with hys armie in the Citie of Cyane,
                  
                     Cyan
                           •
                         .
                   for feare of Antigone his enimie. When Clyte had sayled and was come to the passage of Hellespont, and had taken in Aride and hys menne of warre, and wonne to be his confederates, the Cities of Proponetie, Nicanor capitaine of Munychie was sent by Cassander, with all the shippes there, with a certaine companie of other Souldiers, whych Antigone had also sente, to the numbre of one hundreth, and encountred Clyte about Bizance.
                  
                     Bizance.
                   So he gaue him battaile, but Clyte wonne the victorie, in which he soonke .xvij. sayle of Nicanors, and prized fortie, and the men within them. The rest packt on sayles, and fledde into the porte of Calcedone. After whyche ouerthrowe, Clyte thought that hys ennimies durst no more encounter him at sea, by reason of theyr greate losse. Notwithstandyng Antigone aduertized of the sayde conflict, shortly after thorough his wisedome and diligence amended and requited the same. For be founde a meane to gette from the Bizances a certaine numbre of small ships which he furnyshed and charged with stoare of shotte,
                     A Stratageme.
                   and nimble and quicke footemen, and sent them into Enrope, who being landed before the daunyng of the day, gaue the alarme to Clyte and hys Souldiers, encamped on the lande, whome they so disordered, that they retired to theyr shyppes out of aray, leauyng the greater parte of theyr baggage behynde them, and many that did tarrie for the sauyng thereof, were slaine or taken prisoners. In the meane while Antigone furnished hys greatest shyppes wyth his best and most trained Souldiers, and also a greate numbre of Maryners, declaryng vnto them, that if they would lustyly assayle and boorde the ennimie, he would warrante them bothe great honoure and also victorie. In pursuing which commaundement, Nicanor departed

that night, and sped him with such diligence, that about the day breake, he wyth suche deuoire assayled and boorded the enimie, that findyng them at his arriuall oute of order, he put them to flight. In whiche flight some of the ennimies shippes were sore shaken and broosed, and the reste wholly rendred, and became subiecte to Nicanor, excepte the Admirall, in whyche Clyte escaped. Neuerthelesse after he was sette on lande, and hoped safely to passe thorough the countrey of Thrace into Macedone, he was by certayne of Lysimache his Souldiers encountred on the way and slaine.
            
            
               
                  ¶ Eumenes vnderstanding that Antigone is commyng against him, departeth out of the countrey of Cilice. And when he hath by his wysedome and industrie escaped in the way the handes and ambushes of Seleuke, he commeth into Perse.
                  
               
                The .xxxj. Chapter.
               FOr this noble and honorable victorie Antigone was greatly esteemed, & wan thereby much glory & reputation, & therfore fully minded to be lord of the seas and emperor of Asie, wherfore he chose out of his whole armie .2000. footmen, & .4000. horse, with whō he spéedily marched into Cilice against Eumenes, thinking to ouerthrow him before such time as he might assemble a greter army. But Eumenes being aduertised of his commyng, albeit he was willing to recouer in the name of the Kings, the Countrey of Phenicie, whiche Ptolome vniustly enioyed, séeing that the time then serued not, and especially bicause he still looked for the comming of Antigone, went from Phenicie with his whole armie, and with great spéede came through the countrey of Celosirie, for that he ment to get vpon the hie Countrey of Syrie. And when he was néere the riuer Tygris, the people of the Countrey, by night assailed him and slue some

of his souldiers. From thence marched he into the countrey of Babilon, where Seleucke also assailed him about the riuer Eufrates, being in danger of loosing al his whole armie: bicause an arme of the Riuer which woonted to run through an olde ditche, was broken vp by Seleucke his souldioures, so that all Eumenes campe was ouerflowed. But through his wisdom and industrie, he retired vnto an hill, and caused the entrie and mouth of the said ditch to be stopped vp, and turned the entercourse of the water, so by that meanes he readily saued bothe his person and armie from the hands of Seleucke, & with the losse of fiftene thousand foote men, & thrée thousand horsse, marched on into the Countrey of Perse. And after he had there a while soiourned, his soldiers yet through their long trauaile sore wearied, he sent towardes the Satrapes and gouernours of the higher Prouinces, commaunding them to send him men and money. And these were the things done that yeare in Asie.
               
            
            
               
                  ¶The Athenians make a perfect amitie and inuiolable peace with Cassander and allie with him. After he killeth Nicanor, and bringeth the greater number of the Cities of Greece to his alliaunce.
               
                The .xxxij. Chapter.
               AFter Polispercon had shamefully bene repulsed frō the siege of Megalopolis in Europe, his credite began maruellously to empaire and abate, so that manye of the cities of Grece reuolted from the kings to Cassander. And when the Athenians saw that neither through the helpe of Polispercon or Olympias, they could expulse the garrison from Pire, some of the worshipfullest of the Citie, presumed and tooke vpon them to propose before the assemble of the people, that it should be very méete and expedient, to make alliance with Cassander.
                  
But bicause many were of the contrary opinion, there arose great contention amongs them. Neuerthelesse after they had considered their commoditie and profite, they all thought it the surest way to send their Ambassadors to Cassander to agrée with him in the best manner they might: Who after many dayes of parle and treatie, compounded with him as foloweth.
               First, that the Athenians taking part with Cassander, should holde, occupie, and enioy in quiet and peaceable possession, their citie and territorie with the reuenues: together their ships, and all other their appurtenances.
               Item that the town of Munychie should continue and remaine in the possession of Cassander, vntill he had finished the warres against the Kings.
               Also that the gouernaunce therof, should be in the richest and welthiest men, and such as might at least dispend .x. Minas of reuenue by yeare.
                     X. Minae, is of our money .xx. poundes.
                  
               
               Moreouer, that the gouernor thereof should be a Citizen, & such one as Cassandre wold nominate & appoint.
               These articles agreed vpō, Cassander deputed Demetre Phalare ruler of ye Citie,
                     Demetre Phalare.
                   who peaceably & gently gouerned it. After Nicanor was arriued at Pirey, with his victorious army, Cassāder receyued him honorably. But whē he sée him shortly after to be ouer glorious & insolēt, & that Munychie was garrisoned by his souldiers, he therfore fearing some secrete mischief, traiterously put him to death. This done, he made a voyage into Macedone, wt whom he ioyned a nūber of the borderers there. Many Cities of Grece likewise as it were with a violēt desire, drew to his alliaunce, bicause they thought ye 
                  Polispercon vnwisely and cowardly ruled & gouerned the affairs of ye kings and his allies, and that Cassander was towards all men curteous, gentle and painful in all his affaires & businesse: & many there were yt tooke his part.
            
            The ende of the first Booke.
         
         
            
            ¶The second Booke.
            
               
                  ¶Of certaine matters bothe by the Romaines and the Crotonians exploited in Italie.
                  
               
                The .j. Chapiter.
               
                  THe same yeare that Demogene was Prince of Athens, and Luce Phoce, and Manius Faluy were Consuls at Rome, the ninth yeare of the warres betwéene the Romaines and the Samnites, the Romaines warred not so opēly, as they had vpon them the yeares before vsed: but by farrages and pillages, wasted and spoyled the Countrey of ye 
                  Samnites, without any other déede worthie the talke. And after the same maner, they spoyled and wasted the countrey of Damie in the Region of Pouylle, and there by composition tooke the Citie of Canouse,
                  
                     Canouse.
                   enforcing the Cities to rēder them hostages and pledges: bringing likewise vnder their obeisance the Cities of Phalerne and Ophartine. At that tyme had the Crotonians made an appointment with the Brutians, that they might the better continue and maintayne the warres against the exiles of their citie, who were recō
                  ciled to Heraclides & Sosistrate, as we haue declared in the booke precedent. And bycause the same warres had alreadie continued two yeares, they chose for their Captayns and Chieftaynes of warre that yeare, Paron and Menedeme, men greatly renowmed for their experiēce in martiall factes and warlike pollicies. Notwithstanding, the exiles of Thury by night came wt thrée hundred marcenaries, and thought by stealth to take the Citie of Crotone: Howbeit, they were repulsed. Wherefore they retired into the territorie of the Brutians, & shortly after were discomfited and ouerthrowen there, by the said Crotonians, who charged them with mightie power.

And for this time we will leaue speaking of the things done in Italie, and make mention of those exploited in the other partes of Europe.
               
            
            
               
                  ¶ Olympias Alexander his mother, by meane of Polispercon obtayneth the gouernement of the Realme of Macedone, causeth King Philip and Euridice his wife to be executed, and besides vseth many other cruelties.
               
                The .ij. Chapter.
               IN that season Quéene Euridice (who had the ordering and disposing of the affaires of Macedone,
                  
                     Euridice.
                  ) vnderstanding that Olympias made preparatiō to come into the said Realme, sent a messanger of hirs to Cassander in Peloponese, praying him that he would out of hand come to helpe and ayde hir: And through great giftes and large promises, she wan the Princes & Barons of Macedone. Notwithstanding Polispercon assembled a mightie armie, and with the King of Epyre accompanied and conducted the sayde Olympias, together the sonne of Alexander, into the realme of Macedone. And when Olympias had intelligence that Euridice was with hir armie encamped in a countrey of the Realme called Ema, she with an armie made all possible spéede against hir, determining to hazarde all in one battaile. But so soone as the two armies were aranged in order to fight, the Macedonians with Euridice seing the person of Olympias, so reuerenced hir for the remembraunce of hir sonne Alexander, & the good turnes that he had done them, that they rendred to the sayde Olympias. And by that meane was king Philip with his familie and gard taken, and Euridice wyth Policles one of hir counsaylours, retired into the Citie of Amphipolis,
                  
                     Amphipolis.
                   where not long after she also was taken. Thus when Olympias
                  
had taken Philip and Euridice prisoners, she shortly after without danger seazed on the realme: howbeit she very vngently entreated them.
               For first she caused Euridice and hir husband to be detruded into so straight a prison, that they coulde scarse tourne them within, and had their meate giuen them in at a little hole. And after they had bene a great while thus miserably dealt withal, Olympias perceiuing that the Macedonians for very compassion that they had of the said captiues maliced hir, caused king Phillip by certaine souldioures of Thrace to be slaine, after he had raigned and continued king six yeares and foure monethes. And bicause that Euridice somewhat insolentlye spake, and saide that she had better right and title to the realme than Olympias, she therfore without regard either of the late dignitie royall that the sayde Euridice had bene in, or yet the common varietie of fortune, sent hir thrée instruments to end hir life withall: to wete, a sword, a halter, and poyson, willing hir to choose which kinde of death of the three she best liked. Whereupon as maters after fel out, Olympias in ye same sort miserably ended hir life. For when the thrée kindes of death wer presented Euridice, she prayed the gods yt such presents might light vpon Olympias. And after she had adorned the bodie of hir husbande Phillip slaine in hir presence, and stopped vp the woundes, to couer the deformitie of them in the best manner she could, with hir owne girdle strangled hir selfe, neuer sighing nor wéeping, eyther yet shewing any countenaunce of desire to liue: suche was the greatnesse and courage of hir heart there shewed in the ende of hir dayes.
               After Olympias had thus shamefully put thē to death, she made Nicanor Cassanders brother to be slaine, and defaced the Tombe and monument of Iolas hys other brother, to reuenge the death of Alexander hir sonne, as she sayde, bicause that it was suspected that he had

poysoned him, in gyuing him drynk. Ouer and besides this, she picked and wéeded out an hundred noble men of Macedon Cassanders friends, and caused their throtes to be cut. Wherefore the people of the countrey séeing hir cruell dealing, reduced and called to memorie oft times the wordes of Antipater on his death bed,
                     The prophecie of a sage man whiche dyed.
                   prophecying of things to come, who exhorted them to beware howe they gaue the regiment of a realme vnto a woman. In thys sorte was then gouerned the realme of Macedon, which euidently proueth, that there was very oft great alteration and chaunge.
            
            
               
                  ¶ Eumenes passeth the riuer of Tygre, and maugre Seleuke and Python, marcheth into Susiane, and after cō
                     maundeth the Satrapes of the higher Asie, with their whole power to mete him.
               
                The .iij. Chapter.
               AFter al these matters, it is méet we somwhat speak of the things that tyme done in Asie. Eumenes who had then in his companie the Macedonians Argiraspides and Antigene their captaine, wintred in the Prouince of Babylon, in the chief townes of the marches, and from thence sente his ambassadors towards Seleuke and Python, praying and exhorting them, that they with hym would ayde the Kings against the rebell Antigone, bycause that in the seconde distribution of the prouinces made at Triparadis, was giuen to the sayde Seleuke the Satrapie of Babylon, and to Python, Mede. Whom they then aunswered, that to serue the Kyngs they were at commaundement, but to obey Eumenes, by the Macedonians adiudged an enimie and condempned man, that woulde they neuer do. And after they had with the sayd Embassadors at large debated the matter, they sente a counter ambassade to Eumenes and the Argiraspide
                        •
                      , to

persuade them that of right they ought to depose Eumenes from his authoritie: which thyng they denied: wherfore he gaue them heartie thankes, and great commendations. From thence departed he with his armie, and encamped on the riuer Tygre, being thrée hundred furlongs from the Citie of Babylon, to the intent to come to Susie, and get the fauours of the Satrapes of the hyer countreys, and helpe hym selfe with the treasure of the Kings as he thought néedefull. Notwithstanding in the ende he must néedes passe the riuer, bicause on that side where he remained, were no victuals left, and on the other side store. And as he had gotten a numbre of ships, to put ouer hymselfe and his armie, Seleuke and Python therof aduertised, rowed down the riuer in two galeys of thrée tire of oares, and many brigantines and other pinnaces, whiche had bene there builte and lefte in the countrey, and remained from the time of Alexander his being in that quarter of Babilon. And as soone as they were come thither, they nowe a freshe practized and suborned the Argiraspides, willing them to expulse Eumenes his authoritie, saying he was a straunger, & had caused many Macedonians to be slaine. But when they sée that they coulde not compasse them to execute the same, the Seleucians rowed downe the riuer vnto an old ditche, and opened the mouth therof, which of long time had bene stopped vp: wherevpon the water in shorte space had so broken and runne out, that it couered and ouerflowed the campe of the Macedonians, and all the countrey rounde about, who being therewith in greate dāger, & not knowing all the day how to remedie it, armed them with pacience vntil the next day in the morning that they had gotten together their pinnaces and barkes, to the numbre of .CCC. or therabouts, in the whiche without stoppe they put ouer the greater parte of the armie, bicause Seleuke had on the other side none but horsse, and fewer in numbre than the Macedonians.
                  
But when Eumenes sée nyght drawe on, and the greate difficultie and hardenesse to put ouer the baggage, hée caused those that were already passed, to returne. And by the aduise and counsell of certaine peasantes, he hollowed and clensed a place of the ryuer, through whiche the water myght runne and voyde, to ouerthrowe the countrey next adioynyng. Whiche thing the Seleucians seing, and desirous to discharge them their countreye, incontinent sent messangers towardes them, by whom they agréed to graūt passage and truce for certain days. They sent also ambassadours with all diligence towardes Antigone in Mesopotamie, requiring hym to come in all spede with his whole power, before the other Satrapes of the hier Regions came downe to ioyne wyth Eumenes and the Argiraspides. After Eumenes had passed the Riuer, and come into the countrey of Susiane, he deuided hys armie into thrée partes, bycause victuals there were very deare. For they neither had wheate or barley, but of other graine, as rice, and the fruict of palmes growyng in that cuntrey great abundance, which he by measure deuided amongs hys souldiers. And although he had by his first Ambassadors sente to the gouernours of the higher countreys, the letters patents of the Kings, by vertue of whiche all the gouernoures and Captains were commaunded to obey him, yet sent he after his posts, requiring them with all their power & force to mete him in Susiane, at which tyme the rulers had leuied an armie royall, for the exploiting of other great affaires, whiche shall out of hande be declared.
            
            
               
                  ¶ The Satrapes of the hie countrey of Asie, to resist Python, ioyne together: and of the power they assembled.
               
                The .iiij. Chapter.
               
                  WHen Python gouerner of Mede, and chiefe ruler of all the higher Satrapies, was with greate power come into Parthie, and had killed Philote deputie therof,
                     Philote.
                   and in his stede placed Eudame his brother,
                     Eudame.
                   all the other Satrapies vnderstanding the case, and fearing his like dealing with them, assembled agaynst him, & vanquished him in battaile, so that he was wt the losse of a greate numbre of Souldiers forced to abādon the countrey of Parthe. Whereupon he first retired into Mede, and from thence towardes Seleuke in Babylon, to craue his aide and succour, offring to make partition of the countreys he had conquered. By reason wherof, the Satrapes which vnderstod it, assembled theyr power, and by that meane Eumenes his messangers foūd them in armes, vnder the conduct of Penceste,
                  
                     Penceste.
                   whom they had appointed their general, a mā highly renoumed amongest the rest, and of the chieftayns best estéemed, whom Alexander also in his life time by reason of his strength and mightinesse of body, had apointed to be of his gard, & after gaue him the Satrapie of Perside, whiche he many yeares during Alexanders life enioyed, and so well gouerned the same, that all the people of the countrey, greatly loued and honoured him. Wherfore Alexander minding to gratifie them, suffered him onely, and none other of the Macedonians, to be apparelled like a Persian, thinking they woulde therby be more addict and obedient to his gouernaunce. He had .x. thousand Persian shot, and .iij. thousand other armed after the maner of the Macedonians: Greekes and Thracians vj. C. horse, and of Persians, aboue .iiij. hundred. Ouer and besydes these,
                     Polemon.
                   
                  Polemō
                   the Macedonian gouerner of Carmanie, had a thousande fiue hundred footemen. & .vij. hundred horse, Sybirte bailiffe of Aracosie,
                  
                     Sybirte.
                   a thousande footemen & .vj. C. horse.
                     Androbase.
                   
                  Androbase gouerner of parte of Paropamsade was sent wt .xij. C. footemen, and .iiij. hundred horse. Stasander of Arie and Draugine,
                  
                     Stasander.
                   with a bande of Bactrians, hadde a

thousande and fiue hundred footemen, and one thousand horsse. Out of the countrey of Inde came Eudame wyth v. hundred horsse, and .iij. thousand footmen, & .xxx. Elephants: which Elephantes he got after the death of Alexander from king Pore, whom by treason he had slain. And thus the power of all the sayde Satrapes together, were .xxj. thousande and two hundred footemen, and .iiij. thousand and two hundred horsse.
            
            
               
                  ¶ Eumenes through his wisedom appeaseth the dissention of the Satrapes striuing for the principalitie, and payeth his men of war. And of the preparation which Antigone for his part maketh.
               
                The .v. Chapter.
               AFter they were all come into the countrey of Susiane, and had ioyned with Eumenes, great contention arose, who should be generall of the armie. For Penceste said that he ought to be perferred vnto it, both for the greatnesse of his numbre, and also for his estimatiō & prerogatiue during Alexander his life. Agayne, Antigene Captayne of the Argiraspides sayd, that the chosing of the generall, appertayned to him and the Argiraspides, bycause it were they which in Alexander his companie had conquered the countrey of Asie, and through their vertue and prowes stood alwayes inuinci
                     •
                   le. When 
                     
                        •
                      umenes see and perceyued their controuersie, and fearing that by their intestine dissention Antigone might easely ouerthrow them, he was of the aduise not to appoint one sole Generall or chief, but looke which of the Satrapies & Captaynes soeuer that the multitude thought most worthie and renowmed, should dayly assemble in the Kings pauyliō, which he had made readie to be pitched, wheresoeuer they were, in the middest whereof should si
                     •
                   te the statue or image of Alexander in a Throne Imperiall, vn
                     •
                   er a

sumptuous tabernacle or clothe of estate: and after seruice done, to deuise and talke of the vrgent and publique affaires. Which opinion was amongs them all thoughte good & resonable. And after they had agréed vpon this, they assembled and mette togethers as they commonly doe in Cities gouerned by the best and worshipfullest Citizens, after the maner Democraticke. And immediatly vpon their comming to the Citie of Suse, Eumenes commaunded the kings Treasurers to deliuer him suche summes of money as he thought necessarie to be employed & defraide about the affaires of the warres. For the kings had commaunded them to gyue him what he would aske. After whiche receipt, he payed the Macedonians for sixe monthes, and gaue to Eudame the Indian, who brought the Elephants, two hundred Talents as it were for the hier of his beasts, but to say trueth, it was to make him his friende. For he thought who so euer of the Satrapes would stand agaynst him, if he ioyned with him, he should (through the vse of the said beastes being in warres very terrible) be greatly strengthned. And for the rest of the Souldiers which wer not Macedonians, euery of the Satrapes maintayned his with the reuenue of his Satrapie. While Eumenes laye thus at Suse, he greatly encreased & strēgthned his armie. And as for Antigone, he determined after winter once past ouer in Mesopotame, to assaile him before the other Satrapes shoulde ioyne with him. But when he vnderstood they were alreadie ioyned, he altered his minde, and assembled a new armie to strengthen that he hadde, knowing right well, that the warres by him entreprised, required great power.
            
            
               
                  ¶ How eight prisoners, Alcete his souldiers, through their great prowes escape, and take the towne wherin they are emprisoned, and in the end againe taken.
               
                The .vj. Chapter.
               
                  WHile these things were in doing, Attale, Poleme, Docine, Antipater and Philote, Alcete his Captaynes, and taken with him at the ouerthrowe, and euer after in a verie strong Castle emprisoned, vnderstanding that Antigone was gone into the hier Satrapies, thinking it then good time to escape, practized and wanne some of their keepers to be loosed, whereby they seyzed on the other Souldiers armour which garded them, and about midnight being but eight, violētly ranne vpon their kéepers which were aboue .iiij. hūdred: neuerthelesse they wer of greter corage than their garders, & somtime Alexander his Souldiers. And first, they threw downe from the heigth of the wals into the ditch. Xenopithe Captayne of the Castle, being aboue a furlong of height: and for the rest, some they slew, cast some out of the Castle, and after set fire on certain houses without, & tooke into them fi
                     •
                   tie of their houlshold seruaunts, who alwayes had attended abroad, looking when the enterprise would take place. By which meane they seized on a very strong Castle, and furnished with al things necessary: neuerthelesse, they were in great deceptation and doubt, whether to tarrie there & attend the comming of Eumenes, since they were strongly placed & well victualed, or whether to aduenture through the countrey whatsoeuer betid them. Docine was of the opinion to go out, and Attale cōtrary, saying, that through their long detention in prison, which hadde much féebled their persons, they wer not able to endure any warlike labours. And while they thus contended (certen souldiers of the next villages to the number of .v. thousand footmē and four thousand horse, assembled with aboue four thousand paysantes whiche they had gotten together sodainly, vnder suche a Captayne as they had chosen) preuented and besieged them.
               When Docine sée and apperceyued that they were agayn enclosed, he had espied a certaine secrete way of the Towne vngarded, by whiche he let downe a messanger

of his,
                     Stratonice.
                   and sent him towardes Stratonice Antigone his wife abiding thereby, praying hir to take pitie and compassion on him. And not tarrying for aunswere, but t
                     •
                   inking to escape, tumbled him selfe twofold downe the wal, where he was without suertie taken and cast in prison. But the other whiche came out before him, the enimie racked, to make him confesse and shew the passage whiche he and the said Docine came out at: which he did, so that by his meane and conduct, they wanne and tooke one of the rocks the castle stoode on, although almost impregnable & inaccessible. Neuerthelesse, the Captaynes within, albeit few in number, through their great vertue and prowes so valianntly them defended, that they resisted and kept them out a yeare and foure moneths before they could be vanquished, fighting almost euerie daye, and in the ende, were takē by force And now for whi
                     •
                   e we will leaue of this matter and re
                     •
                   orne to Antigone, making mention of that he did.
            
            
               
                  ¶Antigone being come into Babylon, and ioyning with Seleuk
                           •
                         
                      and Pithon, is by Eumenes repulsed the passage of Tygre, to the great losse & slaughter of his people.
               
                The .vij. Chapter.
               THe same yeare that Democlade was Pretor of Athens, and Caye Iune and Quinte Emilye were Consulles at Rome, and that Denomene of Laoco
                        •
                      ia won the prise at the running in the Olympiade the Cxvj. Antigone departed out of Mesopotamie, and wt his power came into Babylon where he founde Seleuke and Python, who there ioyned with him. Shortly after, they made a bridge with their ships ouer the Riuer of Tygre, vpon which they set ouer their armies, and after marched against the enimie. Which thing when Eumenes and the other Satrapes
                  
and Captaynes with him vnderstood, gaue first in commaundement to Xenophile Captayne of the Castle of Suse,
                  
                     Xenophile.
                   not to deliuer to Antigone any of the money in his custodie, nor yet once to communicate & talke with him. That done, they departed the Citie, and came all together to the Riuer of Tygre, from the said Citie about a dayes iourney, adioyning the mountaine in that Region, wherein inhabit and dwell certayne people called the Vsians, liuing at libertie. The breadth of whiche in many places thereabout, is commonly thrée and foure furlongs ouer, and the midst of the streame as déepe as the height of an Elephant, running through the countrey from the mountaines aboue .vij. hundred furlongs, and falleth into the red Sea. It is also full of Sea fishe and monsters whiche shew them selues after the first entring of the Canicular dayes. When Eumenes and his companions were there arriued, they encamped about the banks of the riuer next to the Sea side, attending the enimie. And bycause they wanted men for the garding of the said riuer, Eumenes & Antigene required Penceste to send for, out of Perse, ten thousand Archers and other shot, who sligthly gaue them the hearing, bycause he was not chosen generall of the army. But after he had considered that if Antigone wonne the victorie, he should lose his Satrapes, and stand in daunger of his life, and that hauing a greater number he might the easlier obtayne victorie, accorded their requestes, and sent for ten thousand Persians shot more. And although some of the said Persians were thirtie dayes iourney from the place where the campe laye, yet in one day they hadde newes and were by a maruelous industrie aduertised of the message.
                     Maruellous industrie.
                   And bycause it is a thing at the first sight, hard to be beléeued, I therefore meane to tell in what order and maner it was done. And first, thou must presupose that the Countrey of Perse is all hilly and full of little mountaynes: wherefore they had appointed certaine people of the Countrey, and especially suche as hadde the

loudest and shrillest voices, to stād in the hiest places of the mountaines to kéepe watch so néere one another, that they which made a loude noise, might both be hard & vnderstood, and by that meane they declared from one to another, that which was commaunded by the sound of the first watch, euen to the ende and farthest partes of the Countrey. Then Eumenes and Penceste, hauing regarde with their host to that before sayd: Antigone with his whole armie entred the Citie of Suse, and there proclaymed Seleuke gouernour of that Prouince. And bycause Xenophile Captayne of the Castle and kéeper of the treasure, refused to obey him, he appointed a number of his men of warre to tarrie and besiege him, and him selfe with the rest sette forth against the enimie, throughe a hoate countrey, very daungerous and painfull to a people of another Nation: wherefore he was forced to trauell by night, and at the Sunne rysing to soiorne about the Riuer: so that he could no way escape without losse of many men, by reason of the feruent heat, and chiefly being about the canicular dayes. And incontinent after he was come to the place he would be at, he made readie all things méete and necessarie for his passage. Now was he in the same corner or boought, that the Riuer of Tygre descending from the Mountaynes entreth Pasitigre,
                  
                     Pasitigre.
                   distaunt from the Camp of Eumenes foure score furlongs, and commonly aboue foure oxgangs broade: and besides that, the Riuer was so violent and swift, that it was impossible to passe ouer without a bridge or ships. Wherefore taking some cockes and long boates, he put ouer a certain numbre of his men, commaunding them, that as soone as they were on the other side, to entrenche and strengthen them with ditches and trenches, kéeping good watch vntill the rest were come ouer. Whereupon Eumenes by hys intelligencers aduertised, passed and came ouer the bridge which he had made ouer the riuer Tygre, with foure thousand footemen, and a thousande and thrée hundred horse,

to charge Antigone his Souldiers already passed, being néere about thrée thousande footemen, and foure hundred horse, and of forragers, victuallers and such like whiche went before to make prouision of victuals, aboue six thousand. And first, he charged the disordered and straglers, so that at his first arriuall he put some to flight, and in the ende caused all the Macedonians whiche stood to their defence, he runne into the Riuer, bycause he had the greater number, and therefore he charged them lustely. And for that euerie man was gladde to saue him selfe, they made such spéede to their shippes to haue repassed, that with an ouercharge, the greater numbre sonke, and the rest which thought to be saued, assayed to swimme, but few or none escaped drowning, by reason of the violence and swiftnesse of the Riuer. And they whiche thought better to render to the mercie of the enimie, than to be drenched in the water, were taken prisoners, being aboue foure thousand. And although Antigone see before his eyes so great an ouerthrow of his Souldiers, yet could he by no meane remedie it,
                     The Citie of Bedace.
                   by reason of the want of shippes. Wherefore considering it was impossible to passe, he returned & went to the Citie of Bedace, standing vpon the Riuer Eule.
                  
                     The ryuer of Eule.
                   But bycause it was in the middest of Sommer, and the Countrey maruellous hoate, he lost in traueling, many of his Souldiers: wherefore the rest of the Souldiers were almost in despaire, but after that they had reposed them selues and soiourned in the same Citie a certaine time, they were well refreshed, and tooke then better harte.
            
            
               
                  ¶Of Antigone his comming with his armie into the countrey of Mede, and the daungers and harde passage he hath vpon the way.
               
                The .ix. Chapter.
               
                  WHen Antigone had certain dayes in the Citie of Bedace, well refreshed his armie, he determined to marche therewith into the Region of Ecbathane in the countrey of Mede, hoping thereby to conquer the hie Countreis. And although there were two wayes to passe into Mede, yet was it a hard matter for him, without interruption and let to get through any of both. For the way by the mannured lande, was fayre & excellent, but very hoat and little lesse than .xl. dayes iourney. But the other, leading through the Countrey of the Eosians, was very short and close, howbeit, colde, sharpe, straight, hilly and barren, and the enimies coūtrey: so that it had ben very difficult without the good wils of the paysaunts to passe an army, being a people which time out of mind had alwayes lyued at libertie, dwelling in ca
                     •
                   es, & liuing with acornes, mushrubbes and the fleshe of sauage and wilde beastes poudered. Neuerthelesse, Antigone hauing so mightie an armie, thought it ouer great a shame to pray and require suche paysauntlie slaues of passage & recourse. Wherefore determining to take that waye, he chose out of the whole army the targe carriers, archers, & all other shot and light armed men, which were the lustiest fellowes and most aduenterours, and deuided them into two bands, whereof the charge of the one he gaue Nearche,
                  
                     Nearche.
                   commaunding him to march before, and to winne the most méete and conuenient passages. And the other bande he deuided, and set al alongs the way in diuerse places, as occasion serued. Then him selfe marched on with the phalange or battail of footemen, and cōmitted the rereward to Python. But the first which were sent out, after they had won certain trifling passages to no purpose, & not the passages most necessarie, the paysaunts at hande, so stoutly charged them, that they slew a great number, and the rest very hardly escaped. And Antigone comming on with his battail of footmen, thinking to win the straightes, was in great daunger, which by no meanes could be remedyed.

For the paysants knowing the ways and straightes of the passages, had preuented them, and from the tops of the rocks, cast and tumbled downe agaynst the souldiers as they marched, huge and mighty stones. They had also great strength of bowes, wherwith they hurt and galled the enimie, bicause they coulde neyther defende nor yet eschue the dinte of the shotte, by reason of the hardnesse of the way, which was stiepe and almost inaccessible: so that the Elephants, horsemen, and the armed footemen, coulde no waye succoure them, for that that they were in as greate daunger, or more than the rest. Then acknowleged he his fault, and repented him that he had not beléeued and followed the aduise & counsel of Python & other his friendes, for buying of the passage. Notwithstanding in the ende he so valiantly and wisely bare hym selfe, that he had wythin nyne dayes, with great losse, maruelous daunger and sore trauaile of his souldiers, gotten the countrey habitable of Mede. Wherfore they were so mutinous, that euery man cō
                  plained, cried out, and spake very euill words of hym. And to saye the truthe, for the space of .xliij. dayes, they had abidden many maruellous aduentures, and suffered intollerable mischeues. Howbeit he with swéete words and stoare of victuals appeased their mutinie, and well refreshed them, and after commaunded Python to trauaile through the whole countrey of Mede, there to leuie so many horsmen & horses as he coulde get. Whiche commaundement he diligently executed, and in shorte time, bicause the region was well furnished with horse and other bestiall: he brought .ij. thousande lusty horsemen, and very neere a thousande spare horsse, well appointed for the warres: And of al other kinde of cattel, as Mares, and such like bearing beasts, so many as suffised the whole armie: and bisides broughte .v. hundred talents of the tresure royall on the emptie horses. Then remounted Antigone all those which had loste their horses:

and amongs the reste diuided the other bestiall. Which liberall dealing, brought him againe in fauoure with his men of warre.
            
            
               
                  ¶ Eumenes to please his Satrapes, with the whole armie marcheth into the countrey of Perse, and by his wisedome and policie putteth Penceste, who affected the gouernment and armie, in great fear: and after reconcileth the sayd Penceste, and assureth him selfe of all the other Satrapes and Captaines.
               
                The .ix. Chapter.
               AFter Eumenes & the Satrapes with him, vnderstode of Antigone his commyng into Alcide, they called many counsells, and were of diuers opinions. For Eumenes and Antigene captaine of the Argiraspides, and all the rest whiche came out of the lowe countrey, dyd thinke it méetest and moste for their safetie to go towardes the sea from whence they came. But the Satrapes of the hye countreys, hauing special regard to their owne particular case, sayd, that the best were to march into the higher regions. When the dissention thus encreased and waxed hoter, Eumenes foreséeing, that if the armie should be deuided and dispersed, either part then should be to weake to encounter the enimie, condescended to the Satrapes of the high cuntreys. Wherupon they remoued their Campe from the Ryuer of Pasitigre, and marched on to Persepolis,
                  
                     The Citie of Persepolis.
                   the honourablest citie of Perse, being about .xxviij. dayes iorney, a countrey very hilly, the one way lying beneath the mountaines very hotte and barrein of all kindes of victuals, and the other a hie countrey, very holsome, and a good aire, ful of al kindes of pleasant fruites. It was also ful of valeys, close and shodowy, and gardens aboūding with all sorts of trées, and frutes, great store of fountaines likewise running

with cléere waters, makyng the countrey maruellous pleasaunt and delectable, whiche caused the passengers to desire to rest and soiorne there. Moreouer there wer many faire chases, and greate plentie of wilde beastes, wherof the peasantes brought to Penceste greate abundance, whiche he gaue and bestowed vppon the men of warre, to get and win their loue and good wils. There are also in that region for archers and other shotte, the best Souldiers within the whole countreye of Perse. When they were at last arriued in the Citie royall of Persepolis, Penceste gouerner of the same countrey, made a solempne sacrifice to Philip and Alexander, as to theyr Gods, and after the sacrifice, a greate and sumptuous banket to the whole campe, aboundyng in all sortes of meates, brought from all the partes of the countrey. And for the assemble of the men of warre, he made readie a place abroade in the fieldes, with .iiij. round circles like vnto a cloister, one with in an other egally distant, the seconde bigger than the first, & all the reste in mete proportiō, so yt the vttermoste which inclosed the other thrée, was .x. furlongs about, in whiche sate the mercenarie souldiers and straungers. In the seconde sat the Argiraspides Macedonians, and the Souldiers which serued with Alexander in his warrs .viij. furlongs in compasse. In the thirde were the extraordinarie captaines horsemen, and all other the speciall friends of the Satrapes, and other chieftaines, being foure furlongs aboute. In the last which was two furlongs round, sat the Dukes, and chief rulers of the armie, the captaines of the horsmen, and the princes of Perse there. In the middest of the last circle stode the altars of the Gods, the tabernacle of Alexander and Philip, whose seates were made of leaues and trées bearing frute, and the residue couered with faire and riche tapistrie, wherof the countrey of Perse aboundeth, being full of delices and thyngs of pleasure. The distances of the circles were in that sort

drawen out, to the ende that they which sat in the one, should be no let or stop to those in the other: and euery circle had his officers and ministers, kitchins, and all other houses of office, in such order and so many, that the great diligence and prouidence of Penceste, might therin be well vnderstoode and knowne. By meane wherof he greatly wanne the fauoure and good willes of all the companie. Which thyng Eumenes perceyuing, and knowing he went about to win the souldiers fauours to bée made generall, and to obtaine the principalitie, counterfaited & forged certaine false and surmised letters, by whiche he animated the Souldiers to warre, wherewith he soone abated Penceste his audacitie and ambition, and brought him self into greater authoritie and reputation, in whome also the men of warre had greate hope and confidence. The contents of the letters were these: How that Olympias had brought the yong sonne of Alexander into Macedone, had slayne Caslander, and peaceably enioyed the realm. And that Polispercon, with the greatest parte of the armie royall and all the Elephantes, was gone into Asie, to war on Antigone, & was already in Cappadoce. Whiche letters. were written in the Syrian tongue, subscribed in the name of Oronte Satrapa of Armenie, Penceste his great friend, and therfore bare the more credit. Then Eumenes caused them to be caried to all the Satrapes and captaines to be séene, and after published them to the whole armie. By reason of whiche letters, all the host then thought that Eumenes might aduaunce to the kings whome he woulde, and punishe those he hated. And the more to put and kéepe in terrour and feare suche as were disobedient and desirous of authoritie, he called to iudgement Sybirte, Satrapa of Aracose, and great friend to Pencest, whome he accused, saying that he had sent some of his horse against the Aracothes, without knowledge of the assemble and counsel, and therfore required that he might be discharged,

and all his treasure and goodes confiscate. Wherevpon he put him in such perill and danger, that if he had not secretly fled, he had bene slaine by the multitude of the Souldiers. Notwithstandyng, after he had by that meane put the other in feare, and recouered his authoritie, he returned to his accustomed humanitie and curtesie, and through faire wordes and large promises he reconciled Penceste, and made hym readie and tractable to employ his seruice in the affaires of the Kings. And to assure him self of the other Satrapies, chieftains & captaines, and to haue some maner guage of them, to serue in steade of hostages, he fained the want of money, praying euery of them to lend him as much as they coulde spare, for the affaires of the kings. Whiche they did, so that he borowed of those whom he chiefly suspected, the iust summe of .CCCC. talents. By which mean he thought him so sure of thē, that they would not work him any falshode or treason, nor yet once steppe asyde from him, whom he after kept & reserued for the garde and defence of his person and his fautours, in all his affaires whatsoeuer.
            
            
               
                  ¶Of the battaile betwene Antigone & Eumenes, and of their powers: and of their retire to winter without victorie on either side.
               
                The .x. Chapter.
               WHen Eumenes had thus prouided for all things that might happen as aforesayde, newes were brought out of Mede, howe Antigone with his whole power was commyng into Perse, which Eumenes vnderstanding, immediatly toke his iourney wyth hys whole armie, determining to be there before him, to ye ende to giue battaile. Whereupon he sacrificed to the Gods, and that done, royally banketted the Princes

captaines and men of warre, bicause he would giue them greater occasion of affection and loue towardes him. And for that they should thinke he wold at ful please them, he pledged so many as dronke vnto hym, by reason wherof he fell into a grieuous maladie, and therfore was forced to repose there certaine dayes. For whose cause, all the whole armie (desirous of battaile) were very sorie. Neuerthelesse, after some amendement and recouerie, he no longer stayed his iourney, but being carried in a horselitter, hasted on the aray, the conduct wherof he gaue to Pencest and Antigene. And after he had gotten within a days iorney of the enimie, the vauntcurrers of eche side gaue intelligence of the approch of one an other, wherfore they determined on both sides the next day folowing to giue battaile. Howbeit by reason of a valley and Riuer betwixte them, besides the straightnesse of the grounde, they were frustrate of their purposes and determinations. Notwithstanding they aranged on either side their battailes, and encamped not aboue .iij. furlongs one from an other: and for .iiij. dayes together, they onely skirmished with shot: during which time both the armies had wasted and cōsumed all the victuals in the countrey néere vnto them, so that they began to wante.
               The fifte day folowing Antigone sent his ambassadors towards the Satrapes & Macedonians, to persuade them to abādon & forsake Eumenes, and ioyne with him, promising to leaue the Satrapes theyr Satrapies. And the reste whiche would not folowe the campe, he promised to some greate landes and possessions, and to sende the reste honourably with large giftes home into their countreys: and so many as minded to serue, he was contente to retaine, euery one according to his astate. To whiche offers and gentle wordes the Macedonians gaue no eare, but threatened to kill the messangers, if they departed not, and that quickely. Which thing Eumenes vnderstanding, came towards

them, highly allowing and commending their doinges, and gyuing them besides hartie thanks, beganne to recite this Fable ensuyng, which although right olde, yet very méete and serued for hys purpose.
               There was sometyme (quod he) a fierce Lyon, amorous of a certayne faire yong Damosel,
                     A moral fable.
                   which prayed of hir Father this mayd in mariage. Wherunto the Father aunswered, that he was wel pleased to bestow hir on him, always prouided, that he shoulde pull of his clawes, and plucke out his téeth, fearyng that if vpon any occasion he waxed angry with his daughter, hauyng his téethe and clawes, he would incontinently teare hir in pieces: To which demaūde the Lyon agréed. But whē the father of ye mayden sée that the Lyon had neyther clawes nor téeth for his defence, he with a leauer easily slewe hym. Euen so (quod he) noble souldiers and Companions in armes, woulde Antigone doe with you, promising all your desire vntill he haue you vnder his power, but after he will punyshe you at his pleasure. When he had thus spoken, the souldiers beléeued he sayde truthe, and therevpon the assemble brake vp. When night came, certaine which fled from Antigone his campe, arriued, declaryng that he was trussyng vp his baggage, and that at the seconde watche of the nyght he meant to departe. When Eumenes vnderstoode therof, he imagened that he would into the countrey of Gabene,
                  
                     Gabene.
                   being but thrée dayes iourney off, bycause it stoode whole, and furnyshed wyth all kindes of victuals to victuall a campe for a long time, and besprinkled wyth ryuers and strong valeys very harde to passe. For which cause, Eumenes determyned to preuente and occupie the same countrey before hym, and therevpon marched forth on the way.
                     A cautell.
                   But to kéepe the enimie in the meane whyle occupied, he sent certaine of hys mercenarie Souldiours whome he hadde corrupte, to Antigone hys campe, who shoulde make semblaunt as though they came to yelde:

affirming that the enimie was in redinesse to come and assaile them that night in their campe, and in the meane tyme, commaunded hys souldiers soone after they had supped, to take their iourney: which they did. When Antigone vnderstoode that the enimie would come and assaile him in his campe, he stayed his armie, and put them in order of battaile: and while he was so occupied Eumenes with his armie had trauailed a great way beyonde them before it was perceyued and knowne. Neuerthelesse after he was by his scoute aduertised of the truthe, and vnderstoode the craftie dealyng, he altered not his purpose, but cōmaunded his men with all spéede to pursue the enimie as though they fledde.
                     A Stratageme.
                   But after a whiles trauail, seing the enimie six houres before him, and he by no meane able to ouertake them, bethoughte hym of this policie. First he left the conduct of his footemen to Python, to bryng them on with reasonable iorneys, and he vpon the spurre wyth his horses pursued the enimie, and by the daye breake had ouertaken the taile as they were descending into a valey. So he taried and rested him vpon the top of a mountayne, and there mustred his men, makyng in the face of the enimie, the greatest shew he could: Who thinking it to be ye whole armie of Antigone, stayed and put themselues in order of battaile, determining out of hande to fighte. In thys sorte, the generals of either armie by subtile and marciall policies, deceyued one an other, as if they had striued whiche of them had ben wisest, and skilfullest and to shew that the victorie greately consisted in their two persons. And by this deuise hathe Antigone stayed the enimie, hauing good leysure to attende for his footemen: and after they were come, they aranged their batailes, and then discended the side of the hill,
                     The number of the men on either side, and their order.
                   in suche order as was terrible to beholde. He had in the whole with the souldiers of S
                        •
                      leuke
                  
                     •
                    and Python, aboue .xxviij. thousande footemen .viij. thousande horse, and .lxv. Elephantes.

The two Chieftaynes vsed their sundrie pollicies in ordering their battails, as who would saye that the one had as great knowledge and experience as the other.
               First, Eumenes gaue the leading of the vowarde of his armie to Eudame, who brought the Elephantes out of Inde, besides a bande of .v. hundred horse aboute him. Before thē placed he two bādes of launces, fiftie horse in eche, one at the tayle of an other, at the foote of the mountayne in places moste méete. After was placed Stasander, wyth his thousande horse. After hym, Antimacke,
                  
                     Antimacke.
                   gouerner of Mesopotamie, with .vj. hundred horse, besides .vj. hundred Arocothes, who before had ben vnder the cōduct of Hybirte and after he fled, giuen to Cephele. After were .vj. hundred horse of the Paropamsades placed,
                     Cephele.
                   and with them .vj. hundred Thracians. And before all the bandes aforesayde, he placed .xxv. Elephants, aranged in manner of a saint Andrewes crosse, and the spaces betwene the Elephants and the horse, he supplied with shot. The vowarde being in thys sort placed, the battaile of footemen marched next, in the foreparte whereof were appointed the mercenaries, being aboue six thousande, behinde them, fiue thousand of dyuers nations, whiche came thither to serue, all armed after the maner of the Macedonians. After them were placed the Argiraspides, to the numbre of thrée thousande or more, kéeping their aray: whiche bande bycause it was neuer vanquished nor ouerthrowen, greatly feared the ennimie, and behinde them, all the souldiours which Alexander waged, beyng aboute the lyke numbre of the Argiraspides, and serued vnder their captaines: and before the Phalang or battaile of footemen he arranged fortie Elephantes, and the voyde spaces betwixte them he likewise supplied with footemen lightly armed. On the lefte wyng or rerewarde on the other side of the phalang, were firste placed thrée hundred Carmanians, vnder the charge of Clepoleme,
                  
                     Clepoleme.
                   after them nine hundred, called the companions or aduenturers, with the bands of Penceste and Antigene,
                  
to the numbre of thrée hundred horse, all vnder one guydon: and at the end of them, 
                     •
                   e appointed his owne band of horse of the like numbre. And for their gard, he placed two wings of his houshold seruants, fiftie horse in eche, aranged on the side, and not a front like the rest. And without them in the right poynt he likewise placed in an other wing foure bandes, wherein were two hundreth choyse and picked horse. Besides them, he chose out of the lightest and brauest of all nations he had .CCC. whome he placed in the front of the battaile where he hymselfe was, and before them he aranged the rest of his Elephantes. The whole armie of Eumenes was about .xxxv. thousand footemen .vj. hundred horsse, and .Cxl. Elephantes. Antigone being in the top of the mountaine, had séene the order which Eumenes kept, he arranged his battails as hée thought for the best. For seing the right wyng or voward of the ennimie chiefly fortified with Elephantes and his beste horse, he placed righte ouer against them the chiefest light horse he had, the more parte shot, meanyng that they shoulde not choake the enimie
                     •
                    but whéele aboute to and fro, thinkyng therby to kéepe them occupied in that wing or vowarde, wheron they most trusted, so that they should do nothing. And right ouer against the battaile of footmen of the enimie, he placed Arbalisters on horsback and launces, about a thousand Medians and Palatians, all trayned souldiours, according to the necessitie of the time & place. After them placed he .xij. hundred Tarentines, all choyse men, and very subtil to lye in ambush, in whom he greatly trusted, wherof a thousande were Phrygians and Lydians. After he placed Pythons horse, being a thousande and and .iiij. hundred launces, whome Lysanias conducted: behynde them placed he the vauntcurrers or forrayers,
                     Lysanias.
                   and viij. hundred other of the hie countreys. With this number and in this order was furnyshed and placed the lefte wing or rerewarde vnder the conducte of Python. After them marched the phalang or battail of footemen, in which

were the mercenaries to the numbre of nine thousande: behind them were the Lydians and Pamphilians, and after thē were .viij. M. of diuers nations armed after ye maner of ye 
                  Macedoninas. And behind thē were ye 
                  Macedonians, about ye like numbre, whom Antipater, whē he was created gouerner of the kings, had giuē to Antigone
                  
                     •
                    And in the right wing on the other syde of the phalang, trouped the mercenarie horsmen of diuers nations, being about fyue hundred: after them a thousande Thracians, and .v. hundred other souldiers, which came thither to serue: behind them a thousand, called the compaignions or aduenturers whome Demetre the son of Antigone had charge of, which was the firste time that euer he came into the fielde wyth his father in battayle.
                     Demetre.
                   And in the vttermoste parte of the righte wyng or voward was Antigone with his bande of of foure hundred horse, deuided into thrée cohorts or troupes all of his own house, and to them adioyned a hundred Tarentines. On the front before the sayd right wing or vowarde were placed .xxx. Elephants, whiche embraced the whole ryghte wing or vowarde in forme of a crosse, and the spaces betwene them, and the men of warre, he furnished with light armed footemen. And for the rest of the Elephantes, he placed the greater parte before the phalang, and the rest before the left wing or rereward.
               When Antigone had in this order aranged his battails, he caused thē to marche down frō the moūtaine in order, and not afront. For the right wing or vowarde wherein lay all his hope, he caused to marche against the ennimie, meanyng they should charge all alongest the flanke of the enimie. But the left wing or rerewarde which he had appointed to amuse the right wing or voward of the enimie he caused to march straight and close together. Howbeit, after they approched, and the trumphets sounded to battail, the horsmen with Python, seing no greter power against them, and they more in numbre and farre better mounted than the enimie, kept not the order of amusing them,

according as they were appointed, but stoutely shewed their corages. And bicause that in the fronte of that wing or voward were the elephantes, whiche they thought not good to assayle, they wheled about. And after they had passed the Elephantes, they charged them on the flanke, in which they slew and hurt with their shotte and launces a great numbre, and the enimy no way could hurt them, by reason they were so heauyly armed, that they were neuer able to pursue them, nor yet saue them selues when they were charged. When Eumenes sée that, he called oute the lightest horsses in Eudame his bande, whiche were in the right wing or vowarde, and a certain numbre of footemen lightly armed, and charged the sayde Python, and by little and little brought on the Elephantes in the same wing or vowarde, & by that meane incontinente he put the enimie to flight, and chased them harde to the foote of the mountaine, during which fight, the two battailes of footemen fought long together, where many men were wounded and killed, but in the ende Eumenes phalang wanne the victorie, through the vertue and prowes of the Argiraspides Macedonians, all olde trained Souldiers, who had oftentymes bene in many aduentures and daungers, and thereby became so valiaunt and hardie, that fewe or none were able to abide their force, as clearely by them then appeared: For being not passyng .iij. thousande men, theyr bande was the bulwarke and strength of the whole armie, and therfore placed in the fronte of the battaile, as theyr chief strength. When Antigone sée his lefte wing or rereward put to flight, and his whole phalang turne the back, and heard his friends counsell him to make to the mountaine, to put in order his men which were fled, yet would he not: but with the bande of horse about him, he so profited him selfe, and vsed the oportunitie of the mountayne, that he both saued his fled men, and also wanne the honor of the fielde. For after he sée that the Argiraspides and the rest of Eumenes footemen, had subsecuted and chased his

Souldiers vnto the foote of the hill, and had therby broken their aray, and were diuided, he straightways charged the flanke of Eumenes right wing or vowarde, which Eudame ledde, and put them al to flight, bicause that where as they thought before the victorie had ben theirs, and then being so sodenly charged, they became so amazed, that many of them were slaine. Then Antigone forthwith sent out certain of his light horse to staye the fled footemen and retire them to the foote of the Mountaine, which was speedely done, and there he put them againe in order of battail. When Eumenes vnderstoode that his right wing or vowarde vnder the conduct of Eudame was put to flight, he caused to sounde the retraict, and sent out aide to retire the rest which had the enimie in chase. When both the Chieftaynes by this meane had retired their fledde Souldiours, they somewhat before night got them together, and againe put them in order of battaile: both generals, Captaynes and Souldiers, on either side were so obstinate & fierce. And althoughe it drew to night immediatly after, yet it was so very faire & cléere, that they might sée (by reason the Moone was at the full) one another. And besides, the armies were so néere the one the other, that they might on both sides heare the neighing of horses, and clattering of armours, that euerie man would haue thought they had ben together by the eares. But being passed aboue thirtie furlonges beyond the place where the battaill was fought, and that the dead laye: about midnight the Souldiers on eyther side all weried and tyered, what with their trauaill sustained in the battaill, as also oppressed with hunger and thirst, desired they might pitch their camp without any moe blowes. And althoughe Eumenes did all that in him was, to persuade them to returne to the place where the dead laye, to the ende to bury them, which was the whole honour of the field, yet could he not bring them vnto it, but all with one

voyce cried, to returne to their Campe and cariages: Wherefore he was forced to agrée thereto, bycause he was not of that power and authoritie there to chastise and rebuke them: for that many of the Chieftaynes there thought them his egal: and therfore was no time conuenient to vse correction and punishment. But Antigone being chief of his armie, after the retire of the enimie into their camp, enforced his Souldiours to remoue their camp and pitch it where the battaill was fought. And by that meane being Lorde of the fielde, to bury the dead, he wan the honour of the fielde, although in the rest he had no whit the better: for there were on his part slaine aboue .iij. thousand .vj. hundred footemen,
                     The number of the dead & hurte.
                   liiij. horse, and aboue .iiij. thousand hurte. And of Eumenes side .v. hundred .xl. footemen, fewe or no horse, and about .ix. hundred hurte. After Antigone was returned from the battaill, and perceyued his Souldiours greatly discouraged, he determined to retire from the enimie: and to the ende he might the spéedylier marche with them, he sent all his hurt men and baggage into a Citie néere hand. And after he had about the dawning of the daye buried the dead on his part, he detayned the Herault whiche was come to enterre the bodies of the enimie, and commaunded his Souldiours presently to suppe. When the day was past and night come, he deliuered the Herault, gyuyng leaue the next daye in the morning to bury the dead. That night remoued he hys camp, and with his armie so hasted, that by morning he had gotten farre inough of the enimie, and lodged hym in Gamarge in the region of Mede by Pyton gouerned, a countrey well victualed, and very singular for an armie.
            
            
               
                  ¶Eumenes burieth the dead: and of a maruelous case which happened betwene two women of Inde.
               
                The .xij. Chapter.
               
                  AS soone as Eumenes was by his scoulte aduertised of the enimies departure, he by reason of his mens wearinesse sustained in that battail, minded in no wise to pursue them, but to bury the dead. Which was very honorably done. In doing whereof happened a maruellous sodaine thing, and to the Grekes very straunge. For after that Cete Captayne of the Indians had in that battaile ben slaine, two of his wyues which he brought out with him in the same warres, being there, the one newly married, the other many yeares before, shewed the great and excessiue loue they bare him. But first you must vnderstand, that the lawe sometime amongs the Indians was, that all or at the least the most contracts & mariages were by the willes and agreements of the maried made, without asking the consents either of fathers or mothers, whereby oftentimes happened, that many yōg people being neyther like nor matches, for a little light fantasticall loue, married togethers, & so soone after repented. Through whiche sufferaunce, many incontinent and light Dames, made loue and became familiar with others, and bicause that with their honesties they could not forsake their first husbandes, they would poyson them: for in the same Countrey are great stoare of all kindes of poyson which spéedely will do it: and especially there are such vehement poysons, that if they but come néere the meat whiche is to be eaten, or the dishes wherein it lieth, the meat straight becommeth mortall. And bycause this was a common practise and chaunced ofte, and that many husbands by this meane died, to the ende that the wyues being in such cases attainted might be punished, they made a generall lawe, that when the husbande died, if the wyfe were not with childe or had borne him one, she shoulde be burned with him. And they that refused to be burnt, were reputed and taken for whoores and vile women, and neuer after to be married, nor yet receyued with

the honest and vertuous Dames and Matrones to thi administratiō of their sacrifices or other publique matters. By reason of which lawe, the wicked déede before so common amongs the naughtie wyues in poysoning their husbands, was now conuerted all to the contrary. For they considering the necessitie and straightnesse of the lawe, and the shame and dishonour to such as refused the accomplishing thereof, were not onlye carefull for the lyues of their husbands whereon theirs depended, but also when it happened any their husbandes to die, the wyues would be at cōtrouersy (if he had many) which of them shoulde haue that glorie and honour, as then chaunced, for the lawe woulde that one should be burnte, and bycause there were two, eyther of them pleaded hir cause before the Chieftaynes and Captaynes of the armie to haue the glorie. The yonger womā saide, that the other was with childe, wherefore by the lawe it was not laufull she should be burnt: the elder said, that since she was the auncienter, she most deserued the honour. In the end the Commissioners appointed for the hearing and determining of ye controuersie, enformed by the report of the Matrones, that the elder was with childe, iudged the yonger to be perferred: Wherewith the other sore agréeued, with great lamē
                  tation and teares, despoiled hir of hir clothes, and tare hir haire, as if she had had maruellous euill tydinges brought hir. On the other side, the yonger who had the honour, accompanied with hir wayting maids casting chappellets of floures vppon hir head as if she had ben newlie married, ioyfullie went to the fire. Her kinsfolkes also went with hir, singing hympnes and songs agreable to hir vertue. And as she came néere ye stake, she beganne to put of hir garments whereof she hadde stoare, besides rings, bagges of golde and all kindes of precious stones and iewels both on hir fingers, head, necke and armes, which she gaue and bestowed vppon

hir friends and seruaunts as tokens of remembrance. And after she was vnrayed, hir owne brother ledde hir to the fire: where in the view and sight of al the whole armie there assembled in greate admiration to sée the sight, she honorably ended hir life. But before the fire was put to hir, all the armie thrice marched about the stake in armes: whiche done, she embraced the body of hir husband hard by hir, and so without either sighe or grone was burnt. Whereupon some of the lookers on moued with pitie, condemned the lawe of the Indians, as strict and cruell, and other some highly commended the same. After Eumenes had celebrated the exequies of the dead, he departed from Paretace, and trauailled into the countrey and Prouince of Gabene,
                  
                     Gabene.
                   wherein his men of warre had neuer ben, very ful of victuals, and all other things necessarie for the armie: distaunt frō the place where Antigone laye by the maineured lande, xxv. iorneys, but through the desertes where is neither victuals nor water .ix. or thereabouts. In this sorte lodged Eumenes and Antigone their armies to winter, exercisyng and refreshyng their Souldiours one farre inough from an other.
            
            
               
                  ¶ Cassander vnderstanding of that Queene Olympias had done, with his armie commeth into Macedone, and besiegeth the said Olimpias within the citie of Pidue, where the Queene in short time is cleane voide of hope of all succours she loketh for.
               
                The .xiij. Chapter.
               IN the meane time that Antigone and Eumenes warred in Asie as aforesaid,
                     The citie of Tege.
                   
                  Cassander who besieged the Citie of Tege in the Countrey of Peloponese in Europe, vnderstanding of Olympias comming into Macedone, and the death of Euridice and Phillip hir husband, and of

the defacing the tombe of Iolas his brother, concluded with the Tegeans a peace, and with his armie marched towardes Macedone, whereby he leaft his friendes and allies in great perplexitie. For Alexander Polispercon his sonne hauing a great armie, alwayes had an eye to the Cities of Peloponese. And the Etholians minding to gratify Quéene Olympias and Polispercon, toke and furnished the passage of the piles, by whiche Cassander should passe: wherefore he was forced to leaue that passage, and to get together a number of Passengers out of the countrey of Eube and Locres, in which he put ouer his armie into Thessalie,
                  
                     The Citie of Perrhebie.
                   where he was aduertised that Polispercon besieged the Citie of Perrhebie. So he sent Calas one of his Captaynes with parte of his armie to maintaine the warres against Polispercon, and Dynias an other of his Captaynes to win the passages of Macedon:
                  
                     Dynias.
                   which he diligently exploited and wanne, before the Souldiers of Olympias (whome she had for that purpose thether sent) were come. But after she vnderstood that Cassander with a power royall was approched Macedone, she constituted Aristone Generall,
                     Aristone.
                   to fight against him, and hir self accompanied with the yong sonne of Alexander & Roxanne his mother, Thessalonique the daughter of Philip, and sister to the saide Alexander, Deidamie the daughter of Eacle King of Epire sister to Pyrrhe, who after warred on the Romaines, the daughters of Attale, and many other of the principall Ladies of the countrey, wt a great number of their kinsfolkes and friends, retired into the Citie of Pidue:
                  
                     The Citie of Pidue.
                   the more parte of which people were vnméete for the warres, and the towne vnprouided of victuals to maintaine the siege long. And notwithstanding that she see she was in some daunger, yet determined she to tarry there, trusting that the greater parte of the Grekes and Macedonians wold come ayde hir. She had aboute hir a certain numbre of footemen and horse, whiche accustomably

were restaūt in the court, besides a fewe Elephants which Polispercon had least in the Countrey. For Cassander at his first entry into the countrey, had taken the greater number, and after he had passed the straights of Perrheby, he came and besieged the Citie of Pidue, and with a trench enclosed it from the one side of the sea to the other. For it stood in a gulfe of the Sea, on eche side enuironed with water, except the entrie, wherein he made a crosse trench, & sent to them whiche would be his friends and allies, for ships, artillary, and all other hablements of warre, to besiege the same by sea and land. And when he vnderstood that Eacke King of Epyre was with a great army comming to ayde Olympias his sister,
                     Attarie.
                   he sent Attarye with one parte of hys army out against him: who made suche spéede, that he wan and kept the straight passages betwene the countrey of Epyre and Macedone: so that he put Eacle from his enterprise: by which meane, and also for that the greater parte of his subiects which with euill wil came against the Macedonians, made in his camp such a muteny, that he was fayne (notwithstanding his meaning to succoure his sister) to sende backe all those whome he sée euill willing, and with the rest which determined the aduenture with him, continued his iourney: howbeit, he was very weakely accompanied: and whiche was worse, they that forsooke him, after their returne home, brought all the rest of the people of the countrey into such a mutenie, that by a common and publique decrée, they bannished their King Eacke, and allied with Cassander: which thing in the countrey of Epyre was neuer séene since Neoptoleme the sonne of Achilles first gouerned there. For that Realme always went by discēt from the father to sonne, and the Kings vntill that daye died within the Countrey. After that rebellion,
                     Lyciseus.
                   when Cassander had sent into Epyre Lisiske to be gouernour and ruler of the same: they which stoode

in doubt whether to take Olympias parte or no, seing all things out of hope, turned to Cassander: whereby remayned no more for Olympias but one expectation and hope of aide, to wete, of Polispercon, who not withstanding soone failed hir.
                     Callas.
                   For Callas whome Cassander hadde sent to warre vppon Polispercon, being verie néere encamped the said Polispercon, as he besieged the Citie of Perrheby, founde the meane so to suborne his men of warre, that the more parte forsoke him and rendred to Callas. Thus and by these meanes in short tyme lost Olympias all hir hope of aide.
            
            
               
                  ¶ Antigone thinking to surprise and discomfit Eumenes and his armie, the said Eumenes (throughe his wisedome and diligence) frustrateth his enterprise: & by that meane saueth both his Elephants and baggage.
               
                The .xiiij. Chapter.
               WHile Antigone aboade in the Countrey of Gamarge, in the Region of Mede as we haue before declared, & had considered yt he was much weaker than the enimie: he imagined and enterprised at vnwares to assaile them, & by skil and policie martiall to conquer them, and the rather forasmuche as they were so dispersed in diuerse villages to winter, that some of them were six daies iorneis one from another. Notwithstanding his enterprise was very difficulte & hard to bring to good purpose, bycause to passe throughe the maneured countrey was a very long iourney, and neuer able to do it without knowledge of the enimie, and he coulde not wel passe his armie the shorter way without great trauaill and want of all things, in so much as it was through the desertes, and the countrey very drie. Neuerthelesse, bycause it was the nearest

waye and méetest to bring his purpose to passe, he fully resolued to take it, whereby he thought he might beste so surprise the enimie, being all dispersed, deuided, and ydle. Wherevpon he commaunded his Souldiours to be in redinesse to departe, and to make prouision of victuals readie to eat for .x. dayes, causing it to be noysed, that he would into Armenie. But sodenly beyond all mens expectation, he tooke his iourney through the deserts in the winter when the dayes are at the shortest. And as he passed, he gaue commaundement to his souldiers on the daye to make so great fires as they would, but in the night none, to the ende the p
                     •
                   isaunts might not by the sight therof haue any notice to aduertise the enimie, considering that the deserte being playne and champion, and with hye mountains enuironed, ye light of the fire might easelie be séene very farre of. In this sorte trauailled they without fire in the night .v. dayes together. The .v. daye at night, the Souldiours almost frosen to death and farre spente for wante of victuals and other things necessarie, made fires to warme and refresh them. Which the inhabitaunts of the desertes seeing, and suspecting what that was, with all possible post sent certain of their men vppon Dromadaries, a very swift beast in iourneying, towards Eumenes and Penceste: which beastes in one daye without baite, had posted a thousande fiue hundred furlongs, to aduerti
                     •
                   e them of the comming of Antigone. When Penceste hys Souldiours vnderstoode that the enimie was already halfe waye, they determined to goe into the farthest partes where the rest of the Souldiours laye, and so ioyne with them, rather than there still to tarry and be surprised of the enimie, before any aide coulde come vnto them. When Eumenes sée them thus feared and dismayed, he to gyue them courage, & to persuade them that they néeded not to remoue from the places they were in, whiche was the entrie of the desert, declared

that he had found out an excellent deuise and remedie to staye the comming of the enimie for .iij or iiij. dayes: during which time the rest of the armie might easely be gotten thyther, and so by that meane withoute any great difficultie they should winne of the enimie victorie, who with hunger and thirst were al benoumed and weried, and likewise vnprouided of all other thinges necessarie. At whose wordes all the Souldiours maruelled, and would needes know what deuise that was or might be, whiche was able to kéepe back the enimie iij. or .iiij. dayes. Then commaunded he, and enioyned al his Captaynes there, to followe him with those men they had, and to carry all the vessels they coulde get, wherin any fire might be made. Which done, he hasted to get the hiest moūtaynes about the vttermost limits of the desert, in the sight of the enimie, and on thē placed men dispersed in diuerse places, being about .lxx. furlongs in length, commaunding euery of them (during that time) to make great fires in the places wher they stood all alongest about .xx. cubits one from an other, and at the first watche of the night to make notable great fires, as thoughe they watched and were at supper, at the secōd watch lesse, and at the third watch least of all: to the ende, that they which sée them farre of, might thinke it a great campe. Which commaundement by the Souldiers diligentlie executed, many paysaunts dwelling on the moūtaynes in the oppisite, and Pithons friendes Satrapa of Mede, with great spéede descended into the playne, signifying to Antigone and Python, all they had seene: who were greatly abashed at those newes, which they neuer doubted of. Wherefore they sobdainlie stayed where they were, & asked counsail of the said Paysants what was best to do. For they thought it very daungerous, for their men being trauailled, weried, and vnprouided of all things, to ioyne battaill with the enimie well prouided of all thinges, &

together assembled, thinking also, that some of their owne men had betrayed them, and had aduertised the enimie of their comming. Wherefore at last they leaft the playne waye and tooke that on the right hande, by the mountaynes, a whyle to repose and refreshe their people. In this sorte abused Eumenes the enimie, hauing time ynough to assemble al his power which was dispersed in diuerse places and lodgings, to entrenche and fortifie his camp, and to prouide & furnishe it with all things necessarie.
               After Antigone had passed all the desertes, worde was brought him, that all Eumenes his Captaynes and men of warre were gone to the camp, and that their Elephaunts were cōming behind on the waye almost at hande, without companie or conduct of any men of warre. Wherefore he chose out .ij. thousand
                     •
                    lau
                     ••
                   es .ij. hundred Tarentines, and all the light armed footemen to go and assaile the enimies Elephants, thinking that if he could ouerthrowe them, the enimy thereby should greatlie be weakened. But Eumenes doubting thereof, sent to conduct the said Elephaunts, a thousande of the best horse he had, and about .iij. thousande light armed footemen. When Antigone his Souldiers had shewed them selues to the conductours of the Elephaunts, they arranged their beastes in a square battaill. And after they set in order the. CCCC. horse that they hadde for their ayde, and in the middest put all their baggage. Howbeit Antigone his bande of horse, bycause of their great numbre so violentlie charged the horse of the enimie, that they were forthwith ouerthrowen and put to flight. That done, the Antigonians charged the Elephaunts and their conductours, who a pretie whyle defended them, albeit they were by the enimie very sore hurte, and they harmed them no whit at all. Wherfore in the ende they beganne to recule and had out of hand fled, if present ayde whiche was vnlooked for, hadde not

come and deliuered them of that peril and daunger.
            
            
               
                  ¶Antigone in battaill ouerthroweth Eumenes, putteth him to death, and after seizeth on all his armie.
               
                The .xv. Chapter.
               SHortlie after, as they laye in campe about .xl. furlongs one from an other: they embattailled them selues to assaye and proue fortune, and to hazarde their estates in hope of victorie. And first Antigone beganne to place his horse and deuided them into two wings or battailles, of whiche the charge of the left he gaue to Python, and him selfe with his sonne Demetre ledde the right, and aranged the armed footemen in the middest, and appointed the Elephaunts in the fronte of the battaill in good order. And in the voyde space betwixt both, he placed the light armed footemen: so accompting those he brought out of Mede, he had in the whole .xxij. thousand footemen .viij. thousand horse, and lxv. Elephāts.
                     The number of the men on eyther side, and order of their battailes.
                   When Eumenes vnderstood that Antigone led the right wing or voward of his battail with his best horse, he placed him selfe right ouer against, in hys left wing or rerewarde with his best and choise horse, bycause he had in that battaill appointed the greater numbre of the most experte and best trayned horse of the Satrapes, and in the same Mithridate Ariobarzane his sonne, whiche Ariaobarzane was descended from the princes of Perse, whom the Tyraunts sometime flew, a valiaunt and hardy Champion, and had all his youth ben brought vp and trained in the warres, and before ye wing or rerewarde he arranged in forme of a crosse, lx. of the most puissaunt and best Elephaunts: and in the voide places appointed the light armed footemen. Next after, he placed his armed footemen in a maine battaile, in the foreparte whereof, he firste placed the

                  
                     •
                   erge bearers, behind them the Argiraspides, and after them the Mercenaries and other straungers, armed after the manner of the Macedonians, and before them al, his Elephants, and betwene thē the light armed footemen, as him thought best. In the right wing or vowarde which Phillip led, he placed the other horse, and arranged before them the least & weakest Elephantes, whome he commaunded by no meane to charge, but to forbeare fighting and to haue an eye and regard to the leaft wing or rerewarde. So there where in Eumenes armie .xxx. thousand footemen .vj. thousand and vij. hundred horse, and .Cxl. Elephantes. A little before they ioyned battail, Antigene gaue commaundement to one of his horsemen to ryde strayght against the Phalange of the enimie: and when he was néere ouer against the place where the Macedonians stood, so that they might well heare him crie out with a loude voice vnto them, saying these wordes folowing. Ah cursed and wicked people, how dare you presume to come against your fathers, who alwayes haue serued with Philip and Alexander, and obtayned in their companies many victories. Certes anone ye shal sée them exploit as condigne and worthy factes for the kings whome they haue serued & do, as their noble and honourable déedes heretofore executed and done. For there was not one thesame time among the Argiraspides Macedonians vnder thrée score or thrée score and ten yeares of age or more, and by reason of their long continuaunce and exercise abidden in the warres, all passing valiaunt and hardy. After thys horsseman had done his message, they on the other syde aunswered aloude, and sayd thay they were very sorie it was their chaunce to fight againste their kinsfolkes, coosins, and so auncient men of warre. But the souldiers with Eumenes desirous of battaile, exhorted him to march with speede against the enimie. Then Eumenes seing their forwardnesse, made signe to the trumpets,

who forthwith founded to battaile, wherat both the armies made a great outecrie. The first which encountred were the Elephantes, and nexte the horsse: whervpon bicause the field was large, dry and barren, there arose through the mouing and stirring of the horse, such a dust, that although they were hard together, yet could they scarsly discerne one an other dyd. Whiche thing when Antigone see, he commaunded the Median horse, and certain Tarentines, to ride out and spoyle the campe & baggage of the enemie, whiche he thought by reson of the dust, might without the sight of the Eumenians be easily done, and so winning the campe and baggage, woulde with little effusion of bloude be the cause of victorie on their side, as it after happened. For the fayd Medians and Tarentines passyng: the corner of the enimies battaile, and riding forth on, ranne vpon the baggage, which was fiue furlōgs from the battaill, before they were perceiued, & frō thence to the campe, wherin were few souldiers but many straglers, who for a while resisted, but soone after they put them to flight, and by that meane wanne they the campe and carriages, and without any greate resistance tooke all the straglers. In the meane while began Antigone to ioyne battaile, and so charged the lefte wyng or rerewarde which came agaynst hym, & through the greate numbre of his horsse, gaue so violent a charge, that he daunted their courages, through which Penceste Satrapa of Perse, being in that wyng, retired out of the duste with his owne horses, and after hym folowed a thousande more, and by that meane was Eumenes left disfurnished and weakly accompanied in the vttermoste parte of that wing or rereward. Notwithstandyng he thought it a greate shame and dishonoure to flie, and therfore determined he rather to tarrie, and valiantly defend the quarell of the Kings, than to recule. Whervpon he with might and maine charged Antigone: so

yt the fight betwixt the horsemen was sharpe and cruel, and many slaine. It chaunced the same very tyme as the Elephants were fighting, that the formost on Eumenes side, was by the chief and principal of Antigone discomfited and ouerthrowne. When Eumenes see hys men disordered, and in al places haue the worst, he retired the rest of his horse yet vnbroken from the battayle, and trouped to the wing or voward which Philip had the leading of, whome he had commaunded to stay and delay from fight, and tooke his souldiers. In ye meane time, the Argiraspides so lustily & couragiously charged the maine battail of the enimie, that with very hand strokes they slew many, & put a numbre more to flight. And their force was so intollerable, that they repulsed and discomfited the whole phalāge, being the farre greater numbre, wherof .v. thousand wer slaine, and the rest fled. When Eumenes vnderstode that the ennimie had woon his campe, and that Penceste was at hand yet whole in troupe, he forced to ioyne with him, and to charge Antigone againe with hys horse. For he thought if he could get the victorie, he should not onely recouer his owne cariages and his mennes, but also the enimies. Howbeit Pencest and his horsemen wold not therto agrée, but rode further of from the battaile: and when night came, they retired one from an other into diuers places. Antigone likewise deuided his horse into two handes
                     •
                    the one of which himself kept, attending the doings of Eumenes and his souldiers, and the charge of the other he gaue to Python, commaundyng hym wyth all spéede, to charge the Argiraspides, who were dissefurnished of their horse: which commaundement with great diligence he executed: but the Argiraspides seyng their vnabilitie to resist, retired together in a square battaile, harde to the riuer side, withoute hurte, greatly blaming Penceste: and hys companie, as the onely causers of the ouerthrowe of the horssemen.

And being in such order retired, Eumenes with hys horsse came and ioyned with them. But at their accustomed houres to make fiers, they went to consulte and aduisedly debate of their greate businesse and waighty enterprises. The Satrapes were of the opinion that they all should forthwith retire into the high coūtrey which they gouerned. And Eumenes contrary affirming that it were best for them to charge afresh, saying that the Phalange of the enimie was discomfited, and that yet they were as many horsse. Notwithstanding the Macedonians Argiraspides sayde, they woulde neyther followe the one opinion nor the other, bicause al their goodes, baggages, together with their wiues, children and familie, were vnder subiection of the enimie, so that the counsayle and assemblie without any conclusion brake vp. They sent also secret messangers towards Antigone, practizing with him to yeld Eumenes at his pleasure, condicionally that he shold restore their wiues, children, and goodes. The Satrapes likewise & the more part of the other Captains concluded a league & amitie, and abandoned their chieftaine. Through which meane, Eumenes was betrayed & rendred to Antigone. Who seeing that by greater happe and much better good lucke, than he loked for, he hadde gotten vnder his subiection the Argiraspides and the rest of the souldiers which held against him, tooke Antigene coronell of the Argiraspides and buried him quicke. He also slewe Eudame captaine of the Indian Elephantes, & diuers other captaines his vtter enimies. And for Eumenes, he cōmitted the garding of him to certayn of his men, vntil he had determined what to do with him. For gladly he would haue reteyned him, if eyther by good or gētle entreatie he thought he might win him: bicause he knewe him to be a noble warriour and stout man. Notwithstanding he had no great confidence in his premis, by reason of the maruellous loue and singular affection that he did beare Olympias & the Kings, which he before

had well declared. For although he was by his meane from the siege of Nore deliuered, yet after in the quarel of the Kings he warred vpō him with his whole power. Moreouer seing the mortall hate of the Macedonians against him, he determined to put him to death. Howebeit for the loue and fauoure he before bare him, he caused him to be burnt, and in a faire vessell sent his bones to his kinsfolkes and friends. He found likewise among the hurte men, Ierome Cardian, a wise and politike man, whome Eumenes greatly honoured and familiarly vsed:
                     Ierome.
                   and therefore Antigone in like sorte, after Eumenes hys death, honoured and well entreated him.
            
            
               
                  ¶Antigone retireth to winter in the countrey of Mede, and of the deluge or floud which that time chaunceth in the countrey of Rhodes.
                  
               
                The .xvj. Chapter.
               AFter Antigone had brought backe al his armie into the countrey of Mede, he wintred in a village of the Ecbathanes harde by, wherin is the Kings Palace of that quarter, and deuided his men of warre through the whole countrey of Mede, and chiefly in the waste country, so called bicause of diuers mysfortunes which there sometime happened. For in olde time about those quarters had bene the richest and gretest number of townes within al that Prouince, and by reason of so many terrible and continuall earthquakes,
                     The wast Countrey.
                   all the sayde townes together with their inhabitantes perished and were vtterly lost, wherby the whole region was maruellously altered and chaunged: for there were such new riuers and lakes séene, as had not customably bene. The same time that Antigone lay in Mede, the citie of Rhodes was the thirde time by deluge or floude ouercome, by reason wherof a great many Citizens a new were at that present

drowned, more thā at the other two times. For the first, bycause the towne was newly buylt and little enhabited, dyd no great hurt. The second was much greater, and did more domage, for that there were more enhabitaunts. But the third came about the spring, and began through great raines & showres whiche fel sodenly wt  mightie & maruellous hayle stones: for they fel hole and bigge and waightie as a myne, but some much bigger and heauier: so that they beate downe the toppes of many weake built houses, and kild a great number of people: and bycause the Citie was round, stepest and hiest in the middest in maner of a Theatre, the waters on euery side so aboundauntlie flowed, that the lower partes were incontinent filled vp, and coulde no waye passe nor fall, bicause the Citizens (seeing winter paste) tooke no great h
                     •
                   de to the clensing of their sinks vnder the earth. And the more part of the sinks and chanels about the wals were so choked, that the water in short time grew so 
                     •
                   ie & strong, that it flowed vp to the market place called Digma,
                  
                     Digma.
                   and the temple of Dionisie, and in the end grew and arose vp like a lake, euen to the temple of Esculape. Whereuppon the Citizens seeing so great and sodayne a deluge, sought euery man to saue him selfe. Some ranne to the shippes, some to the theatre: and they whiche were most oppressed, s
                     •
                   aled the tops of the churches, and clymbed the pillers on whiche the statues and ymages stood. And as the Citizens were in this terrour and perplexitie, chaunced them a sodain remedy. For one of the panes of the wall (through the violence of the water) fell downe: and so by that means it voided and ranne into the sea. It was also a happy tourne that the deluge chaunced on the daye, bycause that when the Citizens see the imminent daunger, they had leysure to get out of their houses, and withdrawe them to the hiest places of the towne. It was good happe lykewyse that the wals of their houses were stronglie

buylt of stoane, and not of bricke: and therefore they which got vp to the toppes were safe. Howbeit, there died aboue .v. hundred, and many houses ouerthrowen & wholy beatē downe, besides diuerse that were sore shaken and quashed. In this daunger and inconuenience was the Citie of Rhodes.
               
            
            
               
                  ¶ Antigone by craft putteth to death Pithon, who beginneth to rebell: and gyueth the Satrapie of Mede to Orondonate: and likewise vanquisheth certen other Median rebelles.
               
                The .xvij. Chapter.
               AS Antigone wintered in the countrey of Mede, he was aduertised that Python practised with the soldiers in garrison, about some enterprise. Notwithstanding he made semblant that he beléeued not the report, reprouing the reporters before the people, saying, that to set controuersie betwene him and Python, they had fained and deuised it in their own heads. He caused it also to be openly diuulged, that he would leaue the said Python Satrapa and gouernour of al the Prouinces and Satrapes of the hye countrey, together one parte of his armie, so that he might rule the better, and hold and kéepe him selfe in sauetie. He writte also vnto him gentle and gracious letters, praying hym to repaire ouer so soone as was possible to communicate and deuise of the affaires in those quarters, to the ende Antigone might with more spéede returne to Sea. This dyd he wt a crafty and painted contenaunce, clerely to put him out of suspiciō, thinking he would, in hope of obtayning that Seignorie, come to him. For well he knew, it was not hi
                     •
                    
                  
                     •
                   ase forcibly to take him, bicause he was a valiaunt and couragious man, and such one, that Alexander when he lyued, by reason of his vertue, had gyuen hym the gouernement

of the same countrey of Mede, whiche to that day he held and enioyed. And to be short, he through corruption and other ways, greatly got the good willes of the men of warre, that the more numbre promised to forsake Antigone and follow him. Notwithstanding, although he for this cause somwhat mistrusted his crafty cloyning, yet through the hope which certen of his familiars and friends with Antigone put him in, he came at his commaundement. And so soone as he was come, Antigone caused him to be apprehended, and the chiefe and principall Captaynes of the armie being there in maner of a Senate assembled, accused him. Before whome he was lightly conuict, & incontinent condemned to death, and with greater spéede executed. Whiche done, he assembled the whole army, & in their presence proclaimed Orondonate the Median,
                  
                     Orondonate.
                   
                  Satrapa of the said Countrey of Mede, hauing for his assistaunce and ayde Captayne Hypostrate with foure thousand Mercenarie footemen,
                     Hyopstrate.
                   and .v. hundred horse. And him self with the rest of the armie went to the Citie of Ecbathane,
                  
                     The Citie of Ecbathane.
                   where he tooke .v. hundred Talents of vncoined siluer. Frō thence trauailled he towards the Citie of Persepolis, in the countrey of Perse,
                  
                     The Citie of Persepolis.
                   distaunt thence .xx. dayes iourney of. But as he passed on his iourney, certen of Python his friends & coniuratours, of which Meleager and Menete were chief,
                     Meleager.
                  
                  
                     Menete.
                   had assembled, and got together of Pythons familiars about .viij. hundred horse, and made many incursions and roades vppon the people of the Countrey which would not obey them. But when they were aduertised of the encamping of Hypostrate and Orondonate, they sodenly by night assayled them, and hadde almost wonne their camp. And although they were through the nūbre of the ennimie repulsed, yet suborned they some of their Souldiours, who went away with them. And bycause they were all horse and had no carriages, they feared all the whole countrey, and set them in a maruelous

vprore. But in the end being sore pressed and charged, they were forced to retire into a valley enuironed with steepe rockes, and almost inaccessible, and at laste there taken and slayne. But Meleager and Occrane both valiaunt Captaynes, and diuerse other of the principall stoutely standing to their defenses, were amongest the rest also slaine. And this was the end of the rebelles in Mede.
               
            
            
               
                  ¶Antigone comming into Perse, and there receyued as Lord and Seigniour of all Asie, deuided the Satrapies thereof: and after goeth to the Citie of Suse, and taketh all the treasure he there findeth.
               
                The .xviij. Chapter.
               WHen Antigone was come into the countrey of Perse, he was without contradiction by ye people of the countrey as Lord and Seignior of all Asie honorably receyued. And after that he assembled his friends, and with them consulted and deuised cōcerning the diuision of the Satrapes.
                  
                     Pampolemon.
                   First he left to Pampolemō Carmanie, and to Stasanor Bactriane: bicause he could not with his letters easely expulse them, who were of the inhabitants in the said prouinces well beloued, and had also amongs the men of warre great friends and mightie armies. Into Arie he sent Erite,
                  
                     Erite.
                   and after his death, he deputed Euagoras,
                  
                     Euagoras.
                   a mā of meruelous great courage, and wise.
                     Oxiarthe.
                   He permitted likewise Oxiarthe the father of Roxanne Alexanders wife, to kéepe and enioye the Satrapes of Paropanisade, as he before held it: bycause he could not expulse him without great power, and long continuaunce. He also called home out of Aracothe Sybirte, whome he dearlie loued: and on him bestowed that Satrape, gyuing him the charge of the mutinous Argiraspides,
                  
vnder a colour to lead them into the warres, but the trueth is, it was to destroye them. For he tolde him in coūsail, that he would send and put them to such vses as they should loose their liues. Amongs whiche were those ye betrayed Eumenes,
                  
                     Euen so commeth to all Traitours.
                   and for their treason suffered that waye condigne punishement. And as oftentimes it happeneth, that treasons to Princes are profitable to winne victorie: euen so to suche as commit them, they haue always ben the cause efficient of many and great mischiefs.
               After Antigone sée that Penceste in the Countrey of Perse was greatly honoured, he expulsed him the Satrapie, whereupon many of the countrey being therewith agréeued, at last one of the chief and principall of them named Thespius,
                  
                     Thespius.
                   stepped out and frankly tolde him, that they would obey none other: whome he caused for hys so saying, incontinent to be slayne, and gaue the Satrapie to Ascleptodore:
                  
                     Ascleptodore.
                   together a sufficient and able numbre of men of warre, to garde and defend it. Notwithstanding he with gentle wordes and large promysses curteouslie entertained Penceste, vntil he had gotten him out of the countrey. These things done, Antigone tooke his iourney towards Suse: and as he approched néere the citie, Xenophile Captayne of the the Castle of Suse,
                  
                     Xenophilus.
                   and Treasurer of all the treasure Royall within the same, by Seleuke sent to offer his seruice, and to be at his commaundement, met him about the riuer Pasitigre, whom Antigone gently and curteouslie receyued, making him beleeue that he would honorably entreat him, least if he otherwise dyd, Xenophile might alter his determination and purpose, and so shoulde be despoyled and robbed of him. By which meane, after they were entred the Citie, Xenophile rendred him the Castle, wherein he founde a trée and many other things, all of massife golde, amounting to the value of .xv. thousand Talents: he found also there great summes of money, besides many crowns

with other great giftes and spoyles, to the value of .v. thousand Talents. So by that meane and with that he brought out of the countrey of Mede, he had in golde and siluer the summe of .xxv. thousand Talents. And for this time we will leaue speaking of Antigone and the things by him done in Asie, and returne to that the same time exploited in Europe.
               
            
            
               
                  ¶ Cassander taketh by composition Olympias, and after putteth hir to death.
               
                The .xix. Chapter.
               NOwe saith the historie, that Cassander who besieged Olympias within the Citie of Pidue, in the countrey of Macedone, could not well winne it, by reason of the winter season, but only with ditches and trenches, held it enclosed and garded the Port with ships: to the end no ayde or succoure should be thether brought. By meane whereof, the townes men were so distressed and in such néede, that they allowed monethly to euery soldiour, but fiue Choenices of corne:
                     Choenice was a measure amongs the Grekes about the bignesse of our quart, or somewhat more.
                   Neyther did the Elephantes eat any thing else than the poudre of drie wood, and the horsemen were forced to eate their horses. Notwithstanding the Quéene still hoping of succoure, so long aboade the siege, that the Elephantes dyed of hunger: and almost all the extraordinarie horssemen, besides the greater part of the footemen, died for want of victuals. And certen Barbarians whiche there serued, by necessitie constrayned (against nature) eat the fleshe of the dead carcases. And the rest whiche were vneaten, one parte by the Cōmissioners, deputed by the Quéene, was buried, and the other throwen ouer the wals into the ditches, very horrible to sée: so that not the women alone, who always had ben fynely & delicately brought vp, but the Souldiours also, which had abyden almost as

many miseries as might be, endured there a most intollerable stench. But at last, the famine dayly encreased, that many of the Souldiours came to the Quéene and desired leaue to depart, who seeing the great want of victuals, and other inabilitie to deliuer them of the siege, gaue licence: whereupon they departed and rendred to Cassander, whome he right gentlie receyued, and sent them home to their owne houses, trusting that the Macedonians thereof aduertised, and séeing no hope to be looked for at the Queenes hands, would not long trauail in hir ayde: wherein they had good reason. For all the Macedonians which determined to succoure hir, vnderstanding the daunger, she was in, altered their opinions, and tooke parte with Cassander:
                  
                     Aristone.
                   
                  Aristone and Momme except, which Aristone kept the Citie of Amphipolis,
                  
                     Amphipolis.
                   and Monime the Citie of Polle When Olympias see,
                     Monime. Polle.
                   that one parte of the Macedonians had quite forsaken hir, & that ye rest were vnable to mainteyn & help hir, she went about to saue hir self & hir friends in a Gally by sea, which she caused to be sent for and brought to the Port. But Cassander being therof aduertised by one that fled out of the town tooke the sayd Gallie. Whereupō the Queene despayring in hir affaires & businesse, sent Ambassadours to Cassāder, to treat a peace. But he séeing the necessitie wherein she stood, and therfore meaning that she should yeld hir self to his curtesie, he hardly graūted hir safe cō
                  duct for hir owne person. When Cassander had the citie rendred to him, he incontinent sent certen of his men of warre to take Amphipolis and Polle. Whereupon Monime Captayne of Polle vnderstanding the state of Olympias, yelded without resistaunce. But Aristone who was extréeme proude both of his great hande of men of warre, as also for that he had a little before vanquished and ouercome Cratebas, one of Cassanders Captaynes, in battaill slayne a great parte of his armie,
                     Cratebas.
                   subsecuted & chased him through the countrey of Busalcie, hard to the

Citie of Bedine,
                  
                     Bedine.
                   & it besieged & tooke by cōposition, whom he after with .ij. thousand of his men besides, sent away wt white roddes in their hands, supposing that Eumenes had not ben yet dead, and hoping that Polispercō
                   and Alexander his sonne would come to ayde hym, vtterly refused the yelding vp of the Citie of Amphipolis. But after Olympias had written to him to render the Towne, summoning him of his faith and allegiaunce, he thought it best so to do, and taking suertie for his persone, gaue vp the same. Notwithstanding Cassander cōsidering the great aucthoritie of Aristone, by reason of Alexanders aduauncing him in his life, and meaning to make quicke dispatch of so many as would or might any way let or hinder his affaires and doings, caused Cratebas owne kinsfolkes to kill him. He persuaded likewise all their friends which Olympias had put to death, to accuse hir in the place of iudgement before the assemblie of the Macedonians, which thing they did: where the Macedonians in hir absence without patrone or Aduocate there to defend hir cause, condemned hir to death: wherupon after sentence and iudgement gyuen, Cassander sent to hir certen of his friends, persuading hir to flie, promising to enbarque hir in a Gallie, which should bring hir to the citie of Athens. And this did he, not for anie good will to saue hir, but to the end she might by that meane voluntarily runne in exile, and be drenched in the Sea: so yt it might after haue ben said, how by fortune of the sea, and iudgemēt of the Goddes, she was for hir cruell, mischeuous and wicked déedes, iustly punished. Neuerthelesse, she aunswered yt messangers, that flie she would not, nor yet refuse the iudgement of the Macedonians. Which thing Cassander perceyuing, he for feare that the people and assemblie of the men of warre would alter their determinations and minds, when they vnderstood she was well able to purge hir of euery offence wherewith they would charge hir, and should likewise reduce

and call to memory the great good turnes and honour
                     •
                    by them long before at the hands of Phillip and Alexander receiued, sent .CC. of his trustiest soldiers about him to kill hir. Who with great violence entring the Palaice where she was, were at the first sight so abashed with the Maiestie of hir face, that they returned without doing hir any hurte. But their kinsfolkes whom she caused to be slayne, thinking to reuenge their deaths, & also to gratifie Cassander, out of hande slew hir, who neuer made woords or shewed any countenaunce of a woman dismayed, or yet fainte harted. In this sorte Olympias, whiche in hir time hadde bene the most honorable Dame of the world, Neoptoleme his daughter King of Epire, Alexander his sister King of Epire, who warred in Italy, King Phillip his wyfe of Macedone the most puissaunt of all other which before him in Europe raigned, & Alexander his mother, surnamed the great, which hadde exployted the most notable and honorable warres that euer were worthie the writing and talke, miserablie ended hir life.
            
            
               
                  ¶ After the death of Olympias, Cassander espouseth Thessalonice Alexander the great his sister, & foundeth the Citie of Cassander. And after he hath put in safe keeping Roxanne and Alexāder his sonne, he goeth into the countrey of Beote, and reedifieth the Citie of Thebes.
                  
               
                The .xx. Chapter.
               WHen Cassander thus gloriously & prosperously raigned, he affected the realme of Macedon, and the better to bring his purpose to passe, espoused Thessalonice,
                  
                     Thessalonice.
                   
                  Phillip his daughter and Alexander his sister both by father and mother, being always desirous to insinuate him selfe with the ligne royall. He likewise

in the countrey of Palene, within the Region of Macedone, found and built a citie named Cassandria,
                  
                     The Citie of Cassandria.
                   and peopled it with inhabitaunts of the Cities of Cheronese and Potede, and diuerse other villages about the same Citie, and the remnaunt of the Olinthians. By whiche meane & also bycause of the great & fertile territorie, he laid and gaue thereto and by other ways he tooke, wherewith on hand to enlarge and make it great. The Citie in short time became so mightie and riche, that it was named to be the greatest and worshipfullest amongs all the Cities of Macedone. Nowe had Cassander purposed to put to death Alexander his sonne, and Roxanne his mother: to the end, there shoulde no more of Alexanders ligne remayne on liue. But before he would execute this execrable murder, he stayed, first to vnderstand what the Macedonians thought of the death of Olympias, & what talke was emongs them: togither what Antigone did in Asie. Wherefore he all that while caused Roxanne and hir sonne to be brought into the Castle of Amphipolis, and charged Glaucias Captayne thereof and one whome he greatly trusted with the kéeping of them, commaunding him to vse and treat them no other wayes but as common persones, laying al princilie honours and dignities towardes them aparte, and to put away all the children which had ben brought vp with the said Sonne of Alexander, as his playe fellowes. After that, he tooke vppon him the aucthoritie and gouernement as King, and caused solemne exequies for Euridice and Phillip, whome Olympias had made be murdred, to be celebrated, & with great pompe and solemnitie entombed them in a tombe royall with ye Kings their predecessours, making sports and pastimes, at those dayes accustomed. That done, he leuied a great numbre of men of warre in the countrey of Macedone, to go into Peloponese. While Cassander was thus occupied, and that Polispercon who laye besieged in the Citie of Naxe, in the Region of Perrheby, vnderstood

of Olympias death, apperceyuing no lōger hope for him to take in hand to rule the affaires of Macedone. priuilie by night stoale out of the Citie with a fewe of his people, and passing through Thessaly, tooke the Souldiours with Eucide, and trauelled into Ethole (where he was verie well beloued) to see what retinue or traine would there gouerne the affaires of Macedone, hoping to find some mutacion or chaunge. After Cassander had assembled a mightie armie, he sped him into Peleponnese to chase Alexander the Sonne of Polispercon, bycause there was not one of his enimies which hadde an whole armie but he, who also had fortified and furnished all the Townes and Castles of the same Countrey, by hym thought most meete and defensible. Thus without empechement or stoppe, passed Cassander through the countrey of Thessaly. But after he was come to the entrie of the Piles the Etholian. kept him such play, and so stoutly resisted him, that with great and difficult payne, he perforce wanne the passage: but after he was passed & had entred the countrey of Beote, he sped him to bring backe and agayne to assemble all the Thebanes, and to restore and reedifie the Citie of Thebes, thinking be should therby get both great praise and immortall fame: aswell for the high and incomparable facts of the same Citie, as also for the maruellous reports which came thereon. And bycause it had ben greatly altered and chaunged, & oftentimes made desolate, I thinke good to make some notable declaration of the fortunes and chaunces that thereto happened.
            
            
               
                  ¶Of the foundation and fortunes of the Citie of Thebes in Beota.
                  
               
                The .xxj. Chapter.
               
                  AFter the deluge and flood of Deucation, the Citie of Thebes in Beote was by Cadme first foūded & built,
                     Cadme.
                   and by his name called Cadme, by the Spartes inhabited, to saye, a people dispersed, bycause the recourse there was of al sortes. It was by some also named Thebicene to wete dwelling at Thebes, for that by reason of the deluge, the people departed thence and scattered abroad in diuerse countreys, and after returned thyther. It fortuned after, that the Eucheleians (by force) chased and expulsed the said inhabitants aboute the same season that Cadme with his people was put to flight, and fled into the countrey of Illyrie. After that, Amphion and Zethe who had the gouernement thereof,
                     Amphion.
                  
                  
                     Zethe.
                   enlarged the same as witnesseth Homere,
                  
                     Home
                           •
                         e.
                   saying: Who first with walles enuirond Thebane Towne: And with seauen gates, to winne fame and renowne. Yet after that, the inhabitaunts whome Amphion & Zethe had thyther brought, were by Polidore the sonne of Cadme the second time expulsed,
                     Polydore.
                   by reason of a sodaine mortalitie whiche happened Amphion his children. And in processe of time, the same being by the successours of the saide Polydor gouerned, all the countrey bare the name of Beote, so called of Beote,
                  
                     Beote.
                   the sonne of Neptune and Menelippe which somtime ruled there.
                     Neptune.
                   The Argiues likewise ye third time expulsed the Thebanes,
                  
                     Menalippe.
                   and tooke the Citie. But after the Argiues were gone agayn into their countrey, the Thebanes which retired into Alcomene, in the mountaine of Thilphosine, returned home. Yet after that certen of the said Thebanes were gone to the siege of Troye, the Pelasgians draue so many as remayned at home, both oute of the Citie & Countrey, who continued in exile in diuerse miseries vntill the fourth generation, as by an Augurie of certen Crowes was presaged. But in the end, the succession of the exiles, in the fourth generation returned, and there enhabited the space of eyght hundred yeares. Who were the first that gouerned that Region, and after

contended and fought for the Empire of Grece vntil the tyme that Alexander the sonne of Phillip (by force) tooke the citie, and after razed it. But about .xx. yeares after, Cassander (desirous of glorie as aforesaid) through his earnest request and maruellous persuasions, by the assent and consent of the whole countrey, reedified it, and repeopled it with those which liued, and of the ligne of the exiles which were dead, aswel for the pitie he had of the miserable people, as also for the glorie & renoume of the citie. The Athenians also at their owne costes and charges, built and set vp one parte of the wall. Manie other cities, likewise and seuerall people of Grece, Sicill & Italy, h
                     •
                   lp them with money. After this maner recouered the Thebanes their Citie and Countrey.
            
            
               
                  ¶ After Cassander hath taken and subdued certen Cities of Peloponnese, and vnderstandeth of the comming of Alexander, Polispercon his sonne, against him, he returneth into M
                           •
                         c
                           •
                         done.
                  
               
                The .xxij. Chapter.
               WHen Cassāder was with his whole armie come to the entrie of Peloponnese, called Isthmus, and found the same by Alexander the sonne of Polispercon taken and guarded,
                     Isthmus.
                   he passed beyond him, and went to Megare,
                  
                     Megare.
                   and there got togyther a numbre of shippes, barges and fery boats, wherin he put ouer into Epidaure his armie and Elephants,
                     Epidaure.
                   and so came against the citie of Argos,
                  
                     Argos.
                   which he constrained to reuolte from Alexander, and to take his parte. He reduced likewise after, all the townes and cities of the Messenians to him, except I
                        •
                      home,
                  
                     Ithome.
                   and by composition tooke the Citie of Hermonide.
                  
                     Hermonide.
                   And apperceyuing that Alexander came against him to fight,
                     Gerannie.
                   left in the Citie of Gerannie about I
                        •
                      thmus.
                  
                     Moliecke.
                   
                  Moliecke one of his Captayns with .ij. thousand trayned souldiers, and him self returned into Macedone.
               
            
            
               
               
                  ¶ Vpon Antigone his arriuall in Babylon, Seleuke perceyuing that he seeketh occasions to expulse or kil him, flieth into Egypt.
                  
               
                The .xxiij. Chapter.
               THe yeare ensuing wherein Praxibule was created Gouernour of Athens, and Nance, Spure & Marcke Popill were chosen Consulles at Rome, after Antigone had gyuen to Aspise one of the Satrapes of the countrey, the Satrapie of Susiane,
                  
                     Aspise.
                   he got togyther a numbre of charriotes and Camelles to carrie all his golde and siluer to sea, and with them and his armie tooke his iourney to Babylon. And when he had in .xx. dayes iourneis reached Babylon, Seleuke Gouernour of that Prouince, honorablie receyued him, on whome he bestowed great giftes, and roially banquetted his souldiours. Notwithstanding Antigone called him to an accompt, for the reuenue of the said Prouince. And bicause he held & mainteyned that he was not accomptable for it, considering that the said Prouince was by the Macedonians in the life of Alexander, for his merites and good seruice bestowed on him, they were at some controuersie. Neuerthelesse after Seleuke had remembred his dealing towards Python, he much doubted that Antigone vnder like colour, would make quicke dispatch of him, for so much as it was well knowen, that he endeuoured hym to discomfite all the noble personages and men in aucthoritie, which were appointed for the ruling and gouernement of any good and honest businesse. Wherfore bycause of the notable fame and renoume whiche was blowen abroad of Ptolome, his great honour and honestie, and also his gentlie and friendlie entreaty of al such as came vnto him for helpe, he with .L. horse departed thence, and fled into Egipt vnto him. Whiche newes wonderfully ioyed and gladded Antigone, bycause he

thought ye would be such a colour for him, that no man shoulde be able to reproche him and saye he had layde hands on Seleuke his great friend, who had with his power always ayded him: but that of his owne mynde he voluntarily fled, and by that meane left him withoute questiō or difficultie, the said Satrapie. But after he was by the Chaldees aduertized and admonished, that if Seleuke escaped his hands, he should be Lorde and King of the whole Empire of Asie, and s
                     •
                   ea hym in battaill: he thē maruellous sorie repented him of his escape. Wherfore he sent out in all possible post, certen horsse after him, who in long pursuite and doing lesse good, returned. And although Antigone gaue no great faith or credit to such diuinations, yet by reason of the aucthoritie of the said Chaldees, and their great and long knowledge and experience in the course and influēce of the starres, he was meruellouslie troubled. For the people of that countrey and sect, had alone a thousande yeares wholie applied them selues to that kind of studie and knowledge. Which thing by their great experiences, well appeared, and chieflie by Alexander his death, of whome they presaged that if he entred Babylon, he shoulde there lose his life. And as that prediction proued true in Alexander, euen so according to their diuination of Antigone happened him, as hereafter when we come to the time wherein it chaunced, shall at large be declared. But for this time let vs out of hand treat of the armie of Seleuke in Egipt.
               
            
            
               
                  ¶ Of Seleuke his practize and deuise, touching the alliaunce and confederacie betwixt Ptolome, Cassander & Lysimache, against Antigone
                           •
                         
                      of their defiaūce they send him, and of his preparation against them. Also of his siege aginst the Citie of Tyre in Phenice.
                  
               
                The .xxiiij. Chapter.
               
                  WHen Seleuke was come into Egipt, Ptolome right honorablie and curteouslie receyued him. To whom he recompted the vngentle and disloyall dealing of Antigone against him: declaring farther, that Antigone his meaning was to expulse and vanquish all the Satrapes which had any rule or dominion, and especiallie all those which had ben in houshold with Alexander. And the more to asserten him of the trueth that it was so, he recompted how he had put to death Python, expulsed Penceste Perse, and all he had done to him selfe: where neyther he nor they had once offended him, but had employed and bestowed all their trauaill and seruice, as his deare friends and complices. He farther shewed him the mightie power he had of men, and hys innumerable treasure: togyther the great victories and prosperitie he had in short time atchieued: whereby he beganne to waxe so proude and arrogaunt, that he affected the whole Empire of Macedone. By these tales & reports had he persuaded Ptolome to prepare and resist him. And agayne sent certen of his friends into Europe towards Cassander and Lysimache, to perusade them to do the like: who diligentlie performed their charge. By reason whereof they forged manie practizes, whiche were the originall and beginning of great dissention & warres. For Antigone who doubted (& not without good cause) the euill will of Seleuke against him, and the practizes he would deuise, sent his Ambassadours towardes Ptolome, Cassander, and Lysimache, to exhorte and desire them to continue and remayne his olde and auncient friends. Neuerthelesse after he had created Python who descended from the Indians,
                  
                     Pithon.
                   Gouernour of Babylon, and left him there, he tooke his iourney with the whole armie, and marched towardes Cilicie: And after he was come to Maley,
                  
                     Maley.
                   he diuided his armie into diuerse places to winter.
                     The Citie of Quint.
                   He tooke also all the money he could gette in the Citie of Quint, amounting to .x. thousand Talents:

& with the rest he brought wt him, he was maruelouslie prouided of gold and siluer, besides his cleare yerely reuenue of .xj. thousand Talents.
                     Antigone hys yearelie reuenue.
                   By reason whereof, as also for his mightie puissaunce of Souldiours and men of warre, he was much to be feared. When winter was past, as Antigone with his whole power had taken hys iourney to come into the hier Syrie, the Ambassadours of Ptolome, Cassander, and Lysimache came vnto him: who hauing open audience to tell their Ambassade, demaunded of him to restore to Cassander the countreys of Cappadoce and Lycie, to rendre Lysimache Phrygie and Hellespont, to yeld vp to Ptolome all Sirie, and to deliuer to Seleuke Babilon. And that he would also make an egall deuision with them of all the treasure he had gotten and taken since the warres commenced against Eumenes: bycause they had ben pertakers with him, and companions in the said warres. And in case he refused this to do, they denounced to him in the names of them all, that they would allie and ioyne togyther, to arrere mortall hostilitie against him. When Antigone had heard this their Ambassade, he with arrogaunt & insolent wordes aunswered, and amongs other things willed and charged them to tell Ptolome that he made good and strong preparation to stand to his defence. When the Ambassadoures were returned and had made reporte of their aunswer, the saide Ptolome, Cassander and Lysimache, reallied togyther, and made the greatest preparation of men, armoure, and all other things necessarie for the warres, they possiblie could. When Antigone vnderstood thereof, and considered the noblenesse, puissaunce and aucthoritie of those against whome he tooke on hande warres: he drew to his amitie and alliaunce all the Princes, Nations and Cities he could get. For accomplishing wherof, he sent Ageselaye towardes the Kings of Cypres, and to the Rhodians, Idonome and Moschion. He sent also into Cappadoce an armie with his Nephew

                  Ptolome, to raise the siege before the citie of Amisse, and to expulse all Cassanders Souldiours that countrey: gyuing him farther in charge to haue a vigilaunt eye and take good heede, ye 
                  Cassander passed not into Asie, through Hellespont. Moreouer,
                     Aristodeme.
                   he sent Aristodeme the Milesian wt a thousand Talents to Pelopōnese to make alliaunce wt 
                  Polispercon & Alexander his sonne, and to get togyther there, so many men as they could, and forthwith warre vpon Cassander. That done, he sent to make readie hys posts & Beacons, throughout al the countrey of Asie vnder his obeissance: by which he might in all his affaires haue spéedie aduertisement. These things set in order, he sped him towards the countrey of Phenice, meaning there to prepare and make readie a Nauie to send to Sea: bycause the enimie was yet strongest at Sea: by reason of their great Nauie, and himselfe altogyther disfurnished. And when he was come into Phenice, he encamped before the Citie of Tyre, meaning to besiege it. Neuerthelesse, he sent towards the Kings of the Countrey, and Gouernours of Syrie, exhorting and requiring their ayde and helpe for the addressing his Nauie to sea: bycause all the ships which had ben before in the countrey, Ptolome had sent into Egipt. He commaunded also the Lieutenaunts of Syrie to furnish him with so muche wheat, as should suffise the maintenaunce of hys armie for one whole yeare, and him selfe got togyther all the Carpenters, Sawyers and shipwrights he could finde, and caused them to fell an innumerable numbre of trées in the mount Libane,
                  
                     The mount Libane.
                   whiche were carried to the Sea side, for he had .viij. thousand men to fell, sawe and build ships, besides a thousand waines for carriage. It is to be vnderstoode, that the Mountaine is of a great length, for it runneth alongest from the Cities of Tripolis and Byblie, euen to Sydone, full of an innumerable numbre of maruelous high and mightie Cedres and Cypres trées. He likewise caused .iij. mightie Docks to be

cut oute to build the sayd shippes in, one at Trypoly, another at Byblie, and the third at Sidone, all thrée in Phenice. There was also an other in Cilice, whether was brought all the timbre feld and cut downe in the mount Thaure: and another at Rhodes, by the consent of the citizens, likewise to build shippes in. As Antigone was thus occupied in building of shippes, & encamped about the sea side, Seleuke commeth out of the Countrey of Egipt with a Nauie of an hundreth tall shippes of warre vnder all their sailes, richelie apparelled, passing alongest the Sea coast in the view of the campe, as who would saye, in despite and maugre Antigone and his people. At which sight the Citizens of the next Cities & other his allies with him, were in great terrour and feare, being then apparaunt that the enimie was Lord and King at sea. Wherefore they thought, they went to forraie and robbe their Cities and territories. When Antigone sée them thus daunted, he comforted them in the best maner he could, saying, that him selfe withoute stop, would that sommer be vpon the seas with .v. hundred tall and warlike shippes or more. And as he was thus occupied about the things aforesaid, Ageselay whō he had sent into Cypres, came towardes hym and reported vnto him, that Nicocrey and diuerse other mightie & puissaunt Kings were alreadie allied with Ptolome. But that Citicke,
                  
                     Nicocre. Citike. Lapite. Marye. Cerenite.
                   
                  Lapite, Marie, and Cerenite, hadde allied with him. Which newes vnderstood, he left Andronicke with .iiij. thousand men behind at the siege of Tyre, and himselfe with the rest went against the cities of Hyoppe and Gaze,
                  
                     Andronice.
                   his aduersaries, and wonne them togyther al the Souldiours of Ptolome within the townes,
                     Hyoppe.
                   and retained them in wages,
                     Gaza.
                   & thrust into them garrisonnes, and into the rest of the Cities in that quarter. That done, he retired towardes his other campe lying before Tyre, making prouision for all things necessarie to take the Citie.
            
            
               
               
                  ¶Of the wisedome and vertue of Phile, Antipater his daughter.
               
                The .xxv. Chapter.
               AT that same verie time Aristo to whome Eumenes had gyuen Cratere his bones to burie, deliuered thē to Phile,
                  
                     Phile.
                   first married to Cratere, and then wife to Demetre, Antigone his sonne, who was reputed a right sage and vertuous Ladie, in so much that hir wisedome and curtesie towardes the Souldiours being suche, that she oftētimes appaised the controuersies and mutenies arising in ye camp, they loued & honoured hir. She would also at hir owne costs and dispence marrie the poore men of warres sisters and daughters: and besides acquite and discharge diuerse of the souldiours when they had at any time bene accused and wrongfully sclaundred. And it was saide, that when Antipater hir father (whō al men thought to be the wisest and sagest Prince in his tyme that euer bere rule) had any great & mightie affaires in hand, yt he would vse the aduise and counsaill of Phile his daughter. And although she was in maners gracious and excellent, yet dyd she farre passe in speche and vtteraunce, and all hir doings were thereto correspondent & agreable. And as for hir witte and prudence, that well appeared vppon the iudgement which she gaue of Demetre his principalitie, as we will hereafter set forth in their places.
            
            
               
                  ¶Antigone winneth to his alliaunce Polispercon and Alexander his sonne, and by a decree by the Macedonians made, denounceth Cassander an ennimie, and after taketh the Citie of Tyre.
                  
               
                The .xxvj. Chapter.
               
                  BUt now we will returne to the Chieftaynes and Ambassadoures whom Antigone hadde sent into diuerse places to make new alliaunces. And first, Aristodeme who was sent towards the Spartians,
                  
                     Aristodeme.
                   hadde by their permission and sufferaunce, assembled in the countrey of Peloponnese .viij. thousand footemen, with whome he went to seeke out Alexander Polispercon his Sonne, and in Antigone his name allied with him & his father: through which alliaunce he left the gouernement of the countrey of Peloponnese to Polispercon, and persuaded Alexander to go into Asie towardes Antigone, whiche he performed. And the other Chieftaynes, to wete, Ptolome his Nephew whome he had sent into Cappadoce with a great armie, deliuered the citie of Amise frō the siege, which Asclepiodore one of Cassander his Captaynes laye before,
                     Amise.
                   and vpon composition dismissed him with all his Souldiours,
                     Asclepiodore.
                   and so recouered the Satrape. From thence he went into Bythanie, and finding Zibith King of the said countrey besieging the Cities of Calcedone and Astacone, forced him to raise it, and after allied with him, and the said cities, and tooke of them ostages. From thence he trauailled into Ionye and Lydie: bicause Antigone had written to him to make so great spéed as might be to the Regions lying and bordering vpon the sea, bycause he vnderstood ye 
                  Seleuke was sayling towardes those quarters. And at last Seleuke arriued in the Countreys, and besieged the citie of Erythe. But after he was aduertised of Ptolome his comming, he retired without doing of any thing. When Alexander was come to Antigone, he confirmed and sware the alliaunce for him and Polispercon his Father.
               Then assembled he all his men of warre, and in presence of them, charged and greatlie accused Cassander, but chieflie for the death of Olympias, and the detayning of Roxanne & hir sonne in prison: alleadging moreouer that he forciblie had espoused Thessalonicke, and in déed

meant thereby openly to vsurpe the Realme of Macedone. And farther obiected, that he had suffered the Citie of Olynthe chief enemie to the Macedonians, to be reenhabited, and also reedified the citie of Thebes, whiche Alexander, surnamed the great, hadde destroied and razed. When he sée, that by the meanes of those accusations and tales the men of warre and Souldiers there assembled, were with Cassander greatlie despited: he incontinent caused a decrée to be written & proclaimed: wherin Cassander was pronounced an enimie, except he wold raze the said two cities, set at libertie the said King and Roxanne his mother into the hands and gard of the Macedonians, and also wholie obey Antigone, named and chosen Emperoure of the armie, protector and regent of the Kings, and of the realme of Macedone. He woulde also it should be denounced, that all the Grekes were discharged of al garrisonnes and other impositions, to liue at libertie according to their auncient and accustomed woonte.
               When this Decrée had bene thus by the common assent and consent of the whole armie ratified and approued. Antigone by & by sent it throughout all quarters to be published, trusting that the Grekes in hope to come at libertie, would allie and ioyne with hym. He likewise thought that when the Satrapes and Gouernours of the Satrapies of the hier countreys of Asie (whiche still ymagined that Antigone would clerelie extinquish ye Kings, and all the ligne Royal of Alexander) apperceyued that he nowe enterprised and publikelie tooke in hande, the warres for the defence of the Kings, they would alter & chaūge their determinatiō & purpose, & gladlie become obedient and subiect to him. That done, he gaue to Alexander .v. hundred Talents, and sent him into Peloponnese laden and fraught with faire promisses, and in hope to be preferred to some great authoritie and honour. He sent also for his ships to Rhodes, the greater numbre of

which he made readie and furnished, and after embarqued and sailed to Tyre,
                  
                     Tyre.
                   and both by sea & land besieged the citie the space of .xv. monethes, so that nothing could be brought into it. Whereupon in the ende they were enforced to render vppon thys composition and agréement, that all Ptolome his Souldiours within the same, should with bag and baggage safelie departe, and Antigone at his pleasure to thrust in his gerrisones.
            
            
               
                  ¶Of the practizes, deuises and prouision by Ptolome & Seleuke on the one part, & Antigone on the other parte, made by Sea in the countrey of Asie.
                  
               
                The .xxvij. Chapter.
               AMongs these entrefaicts, when Ptolome vnderstood the edict and decrée which Antigone and the Macedonians had made for the libertie of Grece, bycause he would it should to the Grekes be knowen, that he had so good an hart and will to restore them to libertie, as the said Antigone, he caused the like proclamation to be made, and before them to be notified and published. For eyther of them made great accompte, and thought it a verie good way to win the Grekes to stand their friends, and therfore they contended howe and by what meane they might best gratifie them. He wanne also to his alliaunce Cassander, gouernour of Carie, a mightie Prince, and one who had at his commaundement manie Cities. He sent likewise ouer and besides the .iiij. thousand men sent before by him to the Kings of Cypres his confederats, a mightie armie to enforce to their obeissaūce their enimies, to wete,
                     Mirmidon.
                   
                  Mirmidon the Athenian with .x. thousand Souldiours,
                     Polyclete.
                   
                  Polyclete with a Nauie of an hundreth saile, and appointed for generall Menelaus his brother.
                     Menelaus.
                   And as they arriued in Cypres, they heard of Seleuke hys being there: whereupon they held a counsell, wherein

was concluded that Polyclete should with. L. shipe saile into Peloponnese, to warre vpon Aristodeme, Polispercon and Alexander: That Myrmidon with the Mercenaries should into Carie to ayde and comforte Cassander and other their allies, whom Ptolome Antigone his brother warred on: and that Menelaus and Seleuke shoulde remayne in Cypres with Nycocreon and other their allies, to mainteyne the warres there. When Seleuke and hys companie had thus deuided their power, they tooke the cities of Cerine and Lapythe,
                  
                     Stasicetus.
                   and there wanne to their al-aliaunce Stasicetus King of the Manians,
                  
                     Amathusius
                   and forced Amathusius an other prince of the countrey to deliuer thē ostages.
                     Cithia.
                   They besieged also with great force the Citie of Cythie, bycause they would not at their first cōming allie with them. At that same verie season sailed from Hellespont and the Rhodes, to Antigone .xl. saile vnder the cōduct of Themyson their Admiral.
                     Themison.
                   
                  Dioscorides likewise brought from Hellespont and the Rhodes foure score,
                     Dioscorides.
                   besides the ships first built in Phenice, being in all, accompting those left at Tyre .Cxx. wherof .iiij. score & .x. rowed with foure tier of ores in a side: ten with fiue tier: ten with nine, and ten with ten tier, and .xxx. barques, the rest lesse, so that he had in the whole .CCxl. Gallies appointed for the warres. Which Nauie he deuided, wherof .L. he sent into Peloponnese, and appointed Dioscorides his brothers sonne, Admiral ouer the rest, and gaue him in charge to goe to the ayde of hys Allies, and purchase the good willes of the Isles not yet confederate. Nowe for this time, we wil leaue speaking of the things done in Asie, and returne to the matters exploited in Europe.
               
            
            
               
               
                  ¶ Of certen exploictes of warre, by Cassander and his Souldiours in Peloponnese and other partes of Grece done. And how Alexander Polispercon his Sonne reuolteth. After of a great victorie whiche Ptolome his Nauie hath against Antigone his Nauie in Cilice. And after, Ptolome and Antigone come to a parle, and of certain exploits of warre betwene the Romaines and Samnites.
                  
               
                The .xxviij. Chapter.
               THe while that Antigone made preparation for the warres in the countrey of Asie, as we haue heretofore declared. Apollonide whome Cassander had left Captayne of Argos,
                  
                     Apollonide.
                   secretlie departed into Arcadie, and in the night by stealth tooke the Citie of Stymphale.
                  
                     Stymphale.
                   In this meane time the Argiues not content with Cassander, sent to Alexander Polispercon his sonne, and promised to yelde him the Towne, but he so detracted his comming, that Cassander was thyther first come, & whē he had entred the citie, the Traitours cōspiratours tooke ye Palaice for their defence, which he besieged & clerely burnt to the ground. And of the reste be put some to death, and sent a great number in exile. The same time Cassander aduertised of the sailing of Aristodeme into Peloponnese, and concourse of the Mercenaries thyther: first assaied, if he could withdrawe and remoue Polispercon and Alexander his sonne from the amitie of Antigone. And séeing it would not frame, he passed throughe the coūtrey of Thessalie into Beote, and strengthning the Thebanes with ayde for restauracion of their Citie, entred Peloponnese, and tooke by force the citie of Cencre,
                  
                     The Citie of Cencre.
                   and made incursions on the territories of Corinthe, and there winning two castles by force: licenced Alexanders Souldiours to departe without dommage or hurte. After that, he was by a band which loued not Alexāder,
                  
receyued into the Citie of Orcomenie,
                  
                     Orcomenie.
                   and licenced the citizens to plucke out by the eares certen of Alexanders friends, gotten into the Temple of Diane, and to do with them what they listed, whome they incontinent contrarie to the lawe and common custome of Grece, put to the sworde. After that, Cassander came against the Citie of Messenie,
                  
                     Messenie.
                   and séeing it to difficile to winne, passed on and entred Arcadie, in which countrey he left Damides Gouernour,
                     Damides.
                   and him selfe returned to Argos, where he caused manie tou
                     •
                   noys to be done, and after returned to Macedone. Whereof Alexander aduertised, tooke with him Aristodeme, and warred vpon all the Cities whiche Cassander had wonne and furnished with garrisonnes, thinking to bring vnder his subiection the saide Cities, promising to restore them to libertie. Which Cassander vnderstanding, sent towardes him Propelle,
                  
                     Propelle.
                   by whome he offred, if he would yeld and reuolt from Antigone, to gyue him the gouernement of Peloponnese, and the aucthoritie ouer all the armie: & farther, to vse him as his companion, and aduaunce him to great honour and dignitie. When Alexander had considered that the same offer whereunto Cassander graunted, was the onely occasion of the warres betwene them, he allied with hym, & so became and remayned Gouernour of Peloponnese. In this meane while, Policlete sent by Seleuke out of Cypres touched at Cencre,
                  
                     Polyclete.
                   and vnderstanding of Alexander his reuolte, and séeing there no armie of aduersaries, sailed into Pamphilie,
                  
                     Aphrodise.
                   and from thence to the citie of Aphrodise in Cilice,
                  
                     Theodote.
                   where he vnderstood, that Theodote Admirall for Antigone, was loused from Patare in the region of Lycie,
                  
                     Patare.
                   in the shippes whiche came from Rhodes, mā
                  ned with Marriners of Carie:
                  
                     Perilaye.
                   and that Perilaye for the more safetie of the said Nauie, went by land with a terrible armie. Wherefore he by ambushes deceyued both the said armies: for he closelie laid a numbre of men against the enimie which came by land, where they must

néedes passe: and him selfe with the Nauie laye behind a promontorie, attending the enimie to battaill. It happened that the armie by land first lighted vpon the Ambushe, where being surprised and sodenlie come vppon, they were almost all slaine and takē prisoners: amongs whome was Perilaus, all in the sight of the Rhodian Nauie: who with great spéede making towardes the lande to their ayde, were by Policlete which there road in order of battail, so lustelie bourded, that they discomfited all the whole Nauie, and prized their shippes, and the greater numbre of their men: amongs whome was Theodotus, who soone after, of the woundes he had receiued in fight, died.
               When Polyclete had thus without daunger wonne these victories, he sailed into Cypres, and from thence to Peluse, whome Ptolome honorablie receyued, and with great rewardes and giftes rewarded, and to him gaue a farre greater charge, as to the Aucthor of that notable and honorable victorie. He deliuered also Perilaus and manie other prisoners, for deliuerie of which Antigone had sent an honorable Ambassade, and to treat a peace. Which treatie was graunted to be had at the place called the Eruption where they met togyther, and commoned of the matter, but departed without conclusion, bycause Antigone would not agrée to Ptolome his demaundes. The same season the Romaynes inuading the Samnites, tooke by force from them the Citie of Ferent in Ponille. But the Citizens of Nucere called Alphaterne, by the persuasion of some reuolted from the Romaynes, and confederated with the Samnites.
               
            
            
               
                  ¶Of diuerse exploites which Aristodeme, one of Antigone his Captaynes, doth against Alexander Polispercon his sonne in Peloponnese, & Alexander being slaine, his wife through hir prowes, taketh vpon hir the gouernement.
               
                The .xxix. Chapter.
               
                  THe self same yeare that Nicodore gouerned Athens, and Luce Papyre the fourth time, and Quinte Publie the second time were at Rome created Consuls: Aristodeme Antigone his Lieutenaunt, vnderstanding the reuolte of Alexander Polispercon his Sonne,
                     Aristodeme.
                   accused him in the presence of all the assemblie of the Etholians, and persuaded them to ioyne with Antigone. Whiche done, he departed with his Mercenaries out of the countrey, and came into Peloponnese, where he found Alexander and the Etholians, besieging the Citie of Cilene,
                  
                     Cilene.
                   sore distressed, and by his comming in good time to the ayde thereof, raised the siege. And after he had thrust in as he 
                     ••
                   ought a sufficient numbre to garde and defende it, he went to Acaie, and there likewise deliuered the Citie of Pataras, by Cassanders souldiours besieged. He tooke also by violence the citie of Ege,
                  
                     Pataras.
                   and vsed the garrison therof at his pleasure,
                     Ege.
                   and according to the generall Edict, determined to restore the Citie to libertie. Howbeit, he could not, bicause the men of warre who by assaut hadde taken it, were wholie bent to the spoile, slewe manie of the Citizens, and razed, and sacked a numbre of their houses. After that, during the time he was in Etholie, the Citizens of Dyme kéeping a garrison of Cassāders in their Citie,
                     Dyme.
                   sodenly had buylt and set vp a wall betwene the towne and castle, to seperate them, exhorting one another to reduce their citie to hir pristinate libertie, and entrenching the Castle, gaue many proude assautes. Which doings Alexander vnderstanding, wt his whole power returned, and after he had entred the towne, he put to death the principall mutiners, imprisoned some, and bannished a numbre. By meane whereof, the remnaunt neuer durst a long tyme after make or reuiue any commocion or rebellion, reducing to memorie the miserie and punishment of the late rebelles. But not long after, they got in their ayde the souldiours of Aristodeme in Ege, by whose helpe they againe attempted

the Castle, and by great industrie wonne it, and flewe the greater parte of the garrisonne, togyther all the citizens which tooke parte with Alexander: who departing at the same time from Sycione was vnder the coulour of friendship by Alexion,
                  
                     Sycione.
                  
                  
                     Alexion.
                   and certen his complices, shamefully slaine. Notwithstanding after his death, Cratesipolis his wife tooke vpon hir the domination and rule of the citie and armie,
                     Cratesipolis.
                   whome the Souldiours dearelie loued, by reason of the great pleasures she had oftentimes done them, and always helping their present miseries. She was a wise Ladie, and in matters of great importaunce had a meruellous forefight, and an hart and courage more valiaunt than to a woman was pertinent, which she amongs the Sicionians throughlie shewed. For when the Sycionians, after the death of hir husband, without making any accompt of hir, had gotten in armes, in hope to haue restored their libertie, she in battaill vanquished and ouerthrewe them. In whiche conflict were manie slaine, and .xxx. of the rest after takē and hanged. When she had appaised thus this mutenie, she peaceably gouerned the towne, and had at commaundement a great number of Souldiours which were all determined to abide in hir seruice any aduentures whatsoeuer. These things were done in Peloponnese.
               
            
            
               
                  ¶Cassander making amitie with the Acarnanians and Illyrians, and reducing to his alliaunce certen other Cities, returneth into Macedone, and the Etholians taking the Citie of Arginye in Acarnanye, slea and kill the inhabitaunts therof.
               
                The .xxx. Chapter.
               WHen Cassander had considered, that the Etholians (which fauoured Antigone) warred against the Acarnanians their neighbours, he thought

he should do very well to allie with the Acarnanians in that warre, and so abase and represse the Etholians. Whereupon he trauailed with a mightie power oute of Macedone into the countrey of Etholie, and encamped about the ryuer Cambile, and there called togyther the Acarnanians to speake with them,
                     The riuer of Cambile.
                   to whome he declared, the importaunce of the warres which they so long had had so néere hand, and yet stil continued. And the better to encounter them, said, that it was very néedfull, that they did forsake the indefensible small townes and villages, and get them into two or thrée of the chief & principall. For while they were so seperated and deuided, they could neyther easelie nor yet readilie assemble, when occasion of businesse serued, and thereby might lightlie be surprised & discomfited. In following which counsaill, the greater parte retired into the Citie of Strate,
                  
                     Strate.
                   very great and strong. The Cynades and their neighbours into the Citie of Saurie.
                  
                     Saurie.
                   The Dorians & certen other into the citie of Arginie.
                  
                     Arginie.
                   That done, Cassander for their guarde and defence left a bande of Souldiours vnder the charge of Lyascke,
                  
                     Lyascke.
                   and him selfe with the remnaunt went against the citie of Leucade,
                  
                     Leucade.
                   and by an Ambassade gotte the fauoure of the citie. From thence he went into Adrye, and by assault wanne the Citie of Apollonie.
                  
                     Apollonie.
                   After that, he entred the countrey of Illyrie, and passing the ryuer Hebre,
                  
                     Hebrus.
                   vanquished in battaill King Glaucye of Illyrie,
                  
                     Glaucie.
                   and after made amitie and alliaunce with him, which Glaucie amongs other things promised neuer to warre against Alexander or anie his Allies. After that, he subdued the citie of Epidaure, and there left a garrisonne,
                     Epidaure.
                   and so returned into Macedone. But during the time of this voiage, when the Etholians perceyued that he was a great waye of them, they assembled and gotte togyther the number of .iij. thousande, & came to besiege the citie of Arginie: which they round about entrenched, and made other fortifications to assaut it.

When the townes men sée that, they came to a parle and treatie, wherein was accorded and agréed, that the besieged should render the Towne and safelie departe with bag and baggage: who trusting vpon the conclusion, daparted. But the Etholians cōtrarie to their othes, pursued the citizens which went out, and flew them almost euerie one. And now we think it méete a little to touche the matters of Asie.
               
            
            
               
                  ¶ Two bandes of Cassanders which he sendeth to Lemne and Carie, are by the Souldiours af Antigone ouerthrowen.
               
                The .xxxj. Chapter.
               WHen Cassander had returned into Macedone, he was aduertised that the cities of Lemne and Cary (Seleuke & Ptolome their confederates) were by Antigone his Souldiours sore warred on and oppressed. Wherefore he sent parte of his armie for their succoures, to deteyn
                     •
                    
                  Antigone in Asie, to the end he should haue no leisure to passe into Europe. He writte also to Demetre Phalerey and to Dionise Captayne of Munichie,
                  
                     Demetre.
                   to send .xx. saile into the Isle of Lemne,
                  
                     Dionise.
                   whiche with all spéed was done. And for transfreting of them, Captayn Aristotre had charge:
                     Aristotre.
                   who after his arriuall in the Isle, sent worde to Seleuke to repaire thyther with all his shippes. And after he was come, they assaied and forced to winne to them the Lemnians, but apperceyuing they would not thereto consent, they fouraged all their land: and after besieged the citie, and entrenched it rounde: which done,
                     Dioscorides.
                   
                  Seleuke departed to Coo. Then Dioscoride (Antigone his Admirall) aduertised of his departure, came to the aide of the Lemnians: and chased Aristotre, & tooke the greater numbre of his shippes, and the Souldiours within them. But when Cassander and Propelaus
                  
(deputed chief rulers of the armie whiche Cassander
                  
                     Cassander.
                   had sent into Carye) vnderstood that Ptolome (Antigone hys Lieutenaunt) had deuided his Souldiours in garrisone to winter,
                     Propelaus.
                   and was also occupied about the funeralles of his father deseased, they sent Eupoleme wt .viij. thousand two hundred footemen,
                     Eupolome.
                   to watch and surprise the enimie lying about the Region of Caprine, in the Countrey of Carye. Whereof Ptolome (by some whiche came to render to him) aduertised, assembled of his garrisons néere there abouts .viij. thousand .CC. hundred footemē, and .vj. hundred horsse, and by night went and assailed the camp of the enimie, & them lightly (who doubted nothing lesse) ouerthrew, by reason they were at rest and a sléepe, and without scoult or watch: so that they tooke Eupoleme prisoner, and made the men of warre render and yeld. Suche was the aduenture of Cassander his Captaynes by him sent into Asie.
               
            
            
               
                  ¶ Antigone gyuing order about the affaires in Syrie, goeth into Phrygie, and of a notable victorie which one of his Captayns winneth at sea on the enimie.
               
                The .xxxij. Chapter.
               WHen Antigone perceyued Cassander his doings, and considered, that he affected the Empire of Asie, he left his sonne Demetre with .x. thousand Mercenarie footemen .v. hundred Lycians and Pamphilians .CCC. hundred Archers and other shot .iij. thousande horse and .xiiij. Elephants to garde and defend ye Countrey: bicause he feared that Ptolome would with his armie come thyther. And bycause hys sonne Demetre was yong, not aboue .xxij. yeares olde, he left behind: for hys Gouernours & Counsailours,
                     Nearche.
                   foure noble personages, to wete, Nearche of Crete, Pithon the Sonne of Agenor,
                  
                     Python.
                  
                  
(who a litle before came out of Babylon) Andronicke of Olynthe,
                  
                     Andronicke.
                   and Phillip,
                  
                     Phillip.
                   all foure auncient and not able soldiours, and had serued with Alexander the great in all his warres. And him selfe with the remnaunt of the armie prepared to passe the Mount Thaure: But by reason of the great aboundaunce of snowe, he was forced with no small losse of his men to retire into Cilice, vntil the time and season were more faire and pleasaunt, and the passage much easier: and then passed he with all his armie. And being come to Cilene in the Region of Phrygie,
                  
                     Cilene.
                   he sent his armie by garrisons to winter. After that, he commaunded that his shippes should be brought oute of the countrey of Mede, Captayne of whiche was one Mede a Median.
                  
                     Medius.
                   And as the said Mede came sailing alongest, he encountred .xxxvj. saile of the Pidues, and them prized, togyther the souldiers within them. These matters were exploited in Grece and Asie.
               
            
            
               
                  ¶ The Romaynes losing a great battaill against the Samnites, people the Citie of Locres with their men.
               
                The .xxxiij. Chapter.
               ABoute this season, in Italy, the Samnites who with the Romaynes had many yeares continued warre to get the Empire and dominion one of an other, tooke by force the towne of Plastick,
                  
                     Plastick.
                   by the Romaines garrisoned, and in such sorte practised with them of Sore,
                  
                     Sore.
                   that they slew all the Romaines in the citie guarding ye same: and after the Soreans tooke parte with the Samnites. And not long after, as the Romaines laye before Straticole,
                  
                     Straticole.
                   the Samnites with all their force came thyther to raise the siege, where both the armies ioyned & fought together. In which battaill were many slaine, but the Romaines had still the better, tooke the Citie, and after subdued al

the whole countrey. When the Samnites sée that their only strife was for the countrey and cities of Pouil, they prepared an oste and sent out their generall letters and commaundements, by which all the Citizens and subiects able to beare armoure, were commanded to come, and then encamped hard by the Romaines, being all determined to fight for the totall of their estate. The Romaines likewise knowing the importaunce of that battaill, sent great strength and supplices of men: and appointed besides Quint Fabie the most renoumed Captayne they then had,
                     Quint Fabie.
                   Generall of their armie,
                     Quint Elye.
                   & Quint Elye Marshall,
                     La
                           •
                         scalle.
                   and about Lanscalle ioyned battaill with ye enimie, in which on eyther side were many mē slaine. But in the ende, the Romaines were discomfited and put to flight. Which Elye séeing, bicause he would auoide the shame to be said he fled, tarried alone in the battaill, & there valiauntlie and manfullie fought against the enimie: not for anie hope he had of victorie, but to shewe such magnanimitie to be in him, as an apparaunt matter of the inuincible courages of the Romaines, who much more loued honorably to die in fight, than to liue and remayne Captayne of those whiche fled. After this discomfiture and ouerthrow, the Romaines fearing to lose al Pouille, sent one Colonie of their people to Locres, the principall citie of that countrey: from whence they transferred the warres against the Samnites. And that Colonie and Citie serued them not for that warre only, but continuallie euer after: and at this present doth, as an explorator and receptacle to hold and keepe their neighbours in subiection.
            
            
               
                  ¶Lisimache subdueth the cities of Pont & Thaure, which rebell: and after vanquisheth the Scythes, & supplies by Antigone sent into the same countrey.
               
                The .xxxiiij. Chapter.
               
                  THe yeare ensuing, whiche was the same tyme that Theophraste gouerned Athens, and Marcke Publy and Caye Sulpitie were at Rome created Consuls, the Caulandians enhabiting the left partes of Pont, expulsed Lysimache his garrisone there, and set them selues at libertie. The lyke also dyd the Histrianois, & the other cities néere thereabouts. Whereuppon they altogyther ioyned to resist Lysimache, and made also alliaunce with the Tracians and Scythians néere them, so that (being altogyther ioyned) they were able to encountre & resiste a mightie armie. Wherof Lysimache aduertised, departed with an huge armie, and came through the countrey of Thrace, and passing the mount Emus,
                  
                     The mount Emus.
                   sodenlie encamped before the citie of Odesse, and after besieged Obseste, both which he at his first arriuall surprised and put in suche feare,
                     The Cities of Odes
                           •
                         a and Obsesta.
                   that they rendred vpon composition: and going thence, he tooke after the same maner the Histrianois. From thence he went to besiege the Calandians, but whē he vnderstood that the Scythes were come in the coūtrey with a mightie armie to helpe their Allies and friends, he marched against them, and as soone as he was neere them, so fierslie charged the whole camp, and put the Thracians which were with thē in such feare, that they reuolted and came to him: and after ioyned battaill wt the Scythes, in which he ouerthrew and kild a great nū
                  ber, the rest he chased and expulsed the countrey. After that, he besieged the citie of the Calandians, fullie determined to be reuenged for their rebelliō.
                     Calantia.
                   But as he was thus purposed, newes came that Antigone had sent two armies for the reliefe of the Calandians: to saye,
                     Lycon.
                   
                  Lycon by the sea of Pont, and Pausanie by lande:
                     Pausane.
                   who alreadie was encamped at a place called Sacre. With whiche newes Lysimache verie sore troubled, left so many of his armie as he thought would suffise for the siege, and him selfe with the greater parte marched on to encounter the enimie which came by land. But when he was

come to the foote of the Mount Emus, & thought to passe, he was aduertised that Seuthes the King of Thrace was reuolted from him,
                     Seuthes.
                   and ioyned with Antigone, and garded and kept the passage with a great numbre of men. Wherefore he was enforced to gyue him battaill, in which many of his people were lost. But in ye end, after great slaughter he draue the enimie from the passage. And al sodenlie he so lustelie charged Pausanie his bande which was fled to the straights of the mountaine on the other side, that he slew the greater part, amongs whom was Pausanie
                  
                     •
                    and some of the prisoners he ransomed and sent awaye, and retained the rest, and deuided them amongs his bandes.
            
            
               
                  ¶ Thelesphore one of Antigone hys captaynes restoreth the greater number of the cities of Peloponnese to libertie. And Phillip a Captayne of Cassanders, vanquisheth the Etholians and the King of Epire which came to their ayde.
               
                The .xxxv. Chapter.
               AS Lysimache his affaires stood in this astate, Antigone apperceyuing him selfe frustrate of his purpose, sent .L. sayle manned with suche numbre of men as he thought good into Peloponnese, vnder Thelesphore, and gaue him in charge to restore the cities of the same countrey to libertie: thinking to get suche credit thereby amongs the Grecians, that they woulde firmelie beléeue, how he vnfainedlie desired nothing more, than the restoring of them to their libertie and popular gouernement. He sent also his intelligencers to learne what Cassander did. And shortly after that Thelesphore arriued in Peloponnese, he deliuered all the citizens from the garrisons of Alexander, except Sycione and Corinth, which Polispercon with a great armie helde and kept,

whome he coulde not expulse, considering the great strength of the places. The same season,
                     Phillip.
                   
                  Phillip whome Alexander hadde sent as Lieutenaunt Generall against the Etholians, after his comming into Carnanie, beganne to make incursions and robberies in the countrey of Etholie. But soone after, he was aduertised that Eacide, who had ben expulsed the realme of Epyre, was thyther returned, and had assembled a great armie. Wherefore he departed thence and marched forth, meaning to encountre him before he ioyned with the armie of the Etholians. But he found at his first comming the Epirotes all prest & readie to battaile, whō he so forcibly assayled, y•  he them discomfited, slew many, and tooke a great nūbre prisoners, and amongst ye rest .L. of those which had bene the causers of Eacide his returne into Epire,
                  
                     Eacide.
                   which .L. he sent boūd to Cassander. But they escaped wt 
                  Eacide, & ioyned agayne with the Etholians, to fight a freshe, whome Phillip likewise discomfited, and slew the greater part, togyther wt King Eacide him self. Thus Philip by reason of his two great victories in so short time, put the Etholians in suche terrour and feare of him, that they abandoned the playne countrey and vndefensable places, and with their wyues and children got vp to the straights in the moūtaines. And so much as touching the affaires of Grece.
               
            
            
               
                  ¶ Antigone apperceyuing that he is by Cassander deceyued, taketh certen cities in Carie, and after commeth to a parle with Cassander. And vppon little or no agreement, they beginne the warre in Grece.
                  
               
                The .xxxvj. Chapter.
               
                  DUring the time that these things were exploited in Grece, Cassander (Lieutenaunt to Ptolome) & other his Allies in Asie, by Antigone oppressed, came to an agréement wt him. Wherein these articles were concluded vpon. First, that he should put away and deliuer hys armie to Antigone. Item, that he should set the Cities Grecians in Asie at libertie. Item, that he shoulde retayne and hold the Satrapies he had first gyuen him. And lastlie, that he should become and remayne Antigones entier and deare friend. For suertie and performaunce of which things he gaue him in ostage his brother Agathon.
                  
                     Agathon.
                   Notwithstanding before many dayes past, he repented him of that alliaunce, and founde the meanes by stealth to get awaye his brother. And incontinent after he sent towardes Ptolome Seleuke, and Cassander, to send aide for his defence and suertie. Whereof Antigone aduertised, in great despite, sent both by sea and lande, a mightie armie to set the Grecians Cities at libertie: to saie,
                     Medius.
                   
                  Mede his Admirall by sea, and Decime by land. And when they arriued before the citie of Mylese,
                  
                     Decimus.
                   they denounced to the Citizens,
                     Mylese.
                   that they were come to restore them to their auncient libertie, and to expulse the garrison in the Castle. In this meane while, Antigone tooke be force the citie of Tralles
                  
                     Tralles.
                   From thence he marched by land and came before the citie of Caune,
                  
                     Caune.
                   whether he made his shippes also to come by Sea, and it besieged, & wonne (except the castle) he could not presentlie take. Howbeit, he entrenched it on that side it was siegeable, and gaue many assauts. And as he laye thus before the castle, he sent in the meane time Ptolome with one part of his armie to the citie of Iase,
                  
                     Iase.
                   and draue them to a composition, whome he enforced to take parte with Antigone, and so the cities of the countrey of Carie became subiect to Antigone. Few dayes after, the Etholians and Beotians sent an Ambassade towardes him, to treat an alliaunce, which was concluded vppon. That done, he

came to a communication with Cassander about Hellespont, thinking to haue agréed vpon some conclusion of peace: but they departed doing nothing. By reason wherof Cassander voyde of all hope of peace, determined againe to winne the Grecian cities. Wherefore he departed with .xxx. saile to besiege the Citie of Orey, and so stoutlie charged it with siege and assauts, that it was in great daunger of taking or rendring. But all at one instaunt Thelesphore came out of Peloponnese with .xx. saile, and Medie out of Asie with an hundred, who séeing Cassanders shippes kéepe the Port, threw in amongs thē wilde fire and burnt foure, and failed verie little that the rest had not ben so serued. And as Cassander was thē the weaker (behold) so sodeyn ayde came to him frō the Rhodes, where with his Souldiours tooke such courage, that they assailed the enimie, nothing fearing or doubting anie suche thing, eyther yet accompting of their force, vntil they had sonke one of their shippes, and tooke other thrée and the men within them. These matters were done in Grece and Pont.
               
            
            
               
                  ¶The Romaines winne a victorie on the Samnites. And the rebellious Champanois by an agreemēt put them selues to their obeisaunce.
               
                The .xxxvij. Chapter.
               IN Italy the Samnites pursued their victorie, winning & destroying the townes and cities, which hadde taken parte with the Romaines in Pouille. Again, the Romaine Cōsuls marched on with their armie to the ayde of their friends and allies: and perceyuing that the Samnites laye before the citie of Cynue, they came and encamped hard at their noses, and forced them to raise the siege. But few dayes after they ioyned battaill, wherein manie on both sides were slaine: but in the ende the Romaines
                  
wanne the victorie, and in fight so lustelie pursued the enimie, that they slew aboue .x. thousand. During which time, and before the victorie knowē abroad, the Champanois contrarie to their alliaunce with the Romaines, came towards the ayde of the Samnites: which thing the Romaines vnderstanding, fully aucthorized Caie Manlie,
                  
                     C. Manlye.
                   and sodenlie sent him against them, and according to their custome ioyned with him Manlie Fuluie.
                  
                     M. Fuluye.
                   And as they were encamped about Capue, the Champanoys put them selues in armes to gyue battaill: but so soone as they vnderstoode of the ouerthrow of ye 
                  Samnites, and fearing that the Romaines had sent against them all their puissaunce, they made an appointment, by whiche were rendred the aucthours of the reuolte. Who by reason of iudgement prolonged, and sentence not pronounced, they in the meane time slewe them selues. And the cities of Champanois being pardoned, continued with the Romaines their pristinate alliaunce and amitie.
            
            
               
                  ¶ Ptolome and Antigone to despite one the other, restore diuerse cities of Grece to libertie. And the same Antigone faileth of his entrie into Macedone. After are entreated the matters by Ptolome done in Cypres and Cilice in the hier Syrie.
                  
               
                The .xxxviij. Chapter.
               THe yere following that Ptolome gouerned Athens, and that at Rome Lucie Papirie the .v. time, and Caye Iunie were created Cōsuls. And the .Cxvij. yeare of the Olympiade, when Parmenon of Mythilene wonne the prise at the running: Antigone sent his Captayne Ptolome into Grece to restore the Grekes to libertie, gyuing him .Cl. Gallies vnder Mede the Admirall .v. thousande footemen, and .v. hundred horsse. And besides allied with the Rhodians to fight for the libertie of Grece, who sent

him .xx. saile armed and furnished. Ptolome likewise with his power at Sea arriued at a Porte of the Beotians (called the déepe Porte) and there mustered and tooke vp .ij. thousande two hundred Beotian footemen, and three hundred horsse. He called backe also his Nauie frō 
                  Orey
                  
                     •
                    and after he had with a wall entrenched Salmone,
                  
                     Salmone.
                   he brought thyther his whole power. For he verilie trusted to take the Calcedonians, being onelie defended from the enimie but by a garrison of Eubeans. But Cassander myndfull of Calcide, and fearing the loste thereof raised his siege from before Crea, and came to the laid Calcide, and commaunded his armie to marche thyther. When Antigone vnderstoode that the two armies were assembled there togyther, watching one another, and euerie of them attending the oportunitie and aduauntge, he commaunded Mede with al spéede to returne into Asie. And at his comming backe, he agayn enbarqued hys armie and hastily sailed into Hellespont, thinking through Cas
                        •
                      ander his absence, to finde the countrey of Macedone vnprouided of men, and so win the same before he could returne from Calcide, or if he came backe for the defence of the realme of Macedone, he should lose that he held in Grece. When Cassander vnderstood thereof, he left for the defence of Calcide his Lieutenaūt Plistarche,
                  
                     Plistarche.
                   with a numbre of his men, and him selfe with the remnaunte went to the citie of Orope in B
                        •
                      ote, and by force tooke it, and trucyng with the other Cities of the Countrey of Beoce, left for his Lieutenaunt in Grece Eupoleme,
                  
                     Eupoleme.
                   and returned into Macedone, chieflie to stoppe the enimie for passing into Europe. When Antigone was come to the passage of Propontide, he sent his Ambassadoures towardes the Bizancians, requiring their ayde in those warres: who there found for the same matter the Ambassadoures of Lysimache, requiring that they would not go against him nor Cassander. By reason whereof the Bizancians fully determined to take neyther part. When

                  Antigone sée he failed of his purpose, and that ye winter drew néere, he deuided hys Souldiours into garrisons, and sent them abroad into the Countrey to winter. In this meane time the Corcirians with the ayde of the Apollonians and Epidaurans, expulsed Cassanders garrisons their cities, and set at libertie the citie of Apollonie, and restored Epydaure to the King of Illirie. Ptolome also (one of Antigone his Captaynes) after Cassander was departed into Macedone, tooke the citie of Calcide, and after he had expulsed the garrison of the enimie, he restored them to their pristinate estate: to the end al men might thinke ye 
                  Antigone sans faile would restore the cities of Grece to libertie. For if he had ment to kéepe & retaine ye same citie, it had ben a méete defence for such as would continue any warres to haue recourse vnto. Ptolome likewise tooke the Citie of Orope, and restored it to the Beotians, and had Cassander Souldiours in his power. After he made alliaunce with the Eretrians and Caristians, and remoued his camp to the citie of Athenes, (Demetre Phalerey being then gouernour thereof). But the Citizens vnderstanding of his comming, first secretly sent Ambassadours towardes Antigone, praying his ayde for the defence of their citie. Whē 
                  Ptolome was approched the Citie, they constrained Demetre to make a truce, and after to send to Antigone to treat an alliaunce. After the truce made & taken, he departed and came into Beote and there tooke the citie of Cadmea,
                  
                     Cadmea.
                   thrust oute the garrison of the enimie, and deliuered the Thebanes. Frō thence went he into the countrey of Phocide, and there expulsed Cassanders garrisons the cities, and after besieged the citie of Locres, Cassanders confederate. The same season the Cyrenians rebelled against Ptolome, and besieged the castle which his Souldiours kept, thinking out of hand to haue taken it. It chaunced the same time certen Ambassadours to come out of Alexādrie in the name of the citie, to praye and exhorte them to surcease and

gyue ouer their enterprise and rebellion: whiche Ambassadours they killed, & then made greater preparation to take the castle. Wherewith Ptolome sore moued and agreeued, sent by lande Agis a Captayne, we a mightie armie, and by sea Epinete for his greater succoure.
                     Epinete.
                   Which Agis forcibly tooke the citie,
                     Agis.
                   and sent the principall aucthours of the rebellion into Alexandrie, and from the rest tooke their armour and weapon, and taking order about the affaires of the citie, returned into Egipt. When Ptolome had thus reduced the Citie of Cirene to his minde, he departed from Egipt, and went into Cypres, to subdue the kings which would not obey him. Amongs which he slew Pigmalion, bycause he had sent an Ambassade towardes Antigone to take Praxippes King of Lapithe,
                  
                     Pigmalion.
                   and the tyraunt and Prince of Cyrene,
                  
                     Praxippe.
                   for that he mistrusted them, wt 
                  Stasice Malie his sonne. Whiche Citie he destroyed, and transferred the inhabitaunts thereof into the citie of Paphe. These things performed, he left Nicocreon his Lieutenaunt in the Isle of Cipres,
                  
                     Nicocreon.
                   and gaue to him the cities and reuenue of the Kings, whome he had deposed, and after sailed into the hier Syrie, and there tooke the cities of Neptunie and Carie. From thence we al spéede, he departed into Cilice, where likewise he tooke and forraged the citie of Male, and solde the Citizens he tooke prisoners: he wasted and spoyled also the next region. And after he had enriched and furnished the whole armie with spoyle, returned into Cypres, for he so loued his Souldiours, that he thought all he could do for them was to little, to the ende they shoulde the willinglier serue him in all such high and great affaires as he hadde to do.
               Amongs these entrefacts, so soone as Demetre Antigone his sonne lying in Celosirie, and nothing mynding the warres exploited in Egipt, vnderstood the great spoile and domage whiche Ptolome had done in Cilice, and the hier Sirie, he left the charge of his armed men, hys Elephantes

and baggage to Python, and him selfe with the horsse and shot, departed with all spéede to the ayde of his friends in Cilice. But when he came thyther, he found the enimie quite dispatched and gone. Wherefore by reason of his great haste he returned with the losse of many horsse, for he had rydde from Maley thether in two dayes, whiche was .xxiiij. reasonable dayes iourneys for men of warre to trauaill, in so much that neyther Muleter nor horsse sclaue might follow him.
            
            
               
                  ¶ Ptolome and Seleuke come into Syrie against Demetre, and in battaill vanquish him. And after Ptolome conquereth the countrey of Phenice.
                  
               
                The .xxxix. Chapter.
               WHen Ptolome had according to his harts desire woonne in shorte time so many victories, and performed such notable exploictes, he sailed into Egipt. Howbeit, not long after at the instigation of Seleuke, and the rather bycause he maliced Antigone, he determined a freshe to inuade Celosyrie, and fight with Demetre. Wherefore he assembled his armie and losed from Alexander to Peluse with .xviij. thousand footemen, and .iiij. thousand horsse, the one halfe Macedonians, the other Mercenaries. He had besides of the Countrey of Egipt, a great numbre of men, as victuallers and suche like, and some armed men méete for the warres. From Peluse daylie trauelled he through the desertes vntill he came about the old citie of Gaze in Syrie,
                  
                     The Citie of Gaze.
                   & there encāped néere the enimie.
               When Demetre vnderstood of his comming, he likewise assembled and mustered his garrisons and brought them into the said old Gaze, attending the violence of the enimie. And although his Gouernours and friendes coūsailed him not to hazard battaill against so valiaunt

a chieftayne & mightie an armie, yet would not he by their counsayls be stayed, but made him readie to fight, hoping (notwithstanding hys yong yeares and absence of his father) to winne honour and victorie. And after he hadde assembled hys armie and by hys oration verie stoutlie exhorted them to warre, perseuering and still abyding in the assemble pensiue and in great trouble of mynd, the multitude with one voyce showted and cried vnto him to hope well and feare nothing. And such was their honor & reuerence towardes him, yt before he could commaund them to silence, they held their peace, vppon this onely occasion, for that he neyther in factes martial or cyuill hadde offended them, in so much as he was but newly made chieftayne, & the first time that the charge of an armie had ben committed vnto him: but it cōmonly chaunceth otherwise to them which long haue hadde such rule and leading,
                     The variable nature and cō
                        ditions of soldiours.
                   bycause they sundrie wayes and by diuerse meanes gréeue their mē of warre and Souldiours. And therefore when they once gette occasion to trippe and take their Captaynes in any one faulte, they forthwith séeke reuenge of ye rest of the iniuries against them committed: for the multitude loue not long to perseuer and continue in one estate, but always desire and are glad of chaunge, so it excéede not. The men of warre besides séeing his father well stryken in yeares, and the likelyhood of the succession of the Realme lyneallie to descend and come to hym, the rather wholie addicted them to his seruice.
               He was a man of wonderfull beautie and faire complexion, of body tall, mighty and strong therewith, and when he was like a king richelie apparelled and armed, there appeared in him a goodlie maiestie & reputation, in whome the multitude greatlie hoped: hys modestie, curtesie, bountie and liberalitie also allured the people to loue, honour and obey hym, as to a newe and noble King appertayned, so that both the ordinarie and extraordinarie

Souldiours would runne to heare his proposition and sentence, & were verie carefull of hys youth and victorie: bycause he mynded so valiantlie to aduē
                  ture his persone against such a numbre of enimies, and especiallie against two such Chieftaynes (to saye Ptolome and Seleuke) both in pollicies martial renoumed and greatlie experimēted, and had had often conduct & charge aswell in the companie of Alexander as else where, being neuer vanquished nor ouercome.
               When Demetre had with an hartie oration exhorted his men of warre, promising them giftes and butinie according to their demerites, he arraunged them in order of battaill.
               And firste in the left battaill (where he him selfe ment to fight) he placed two hundred of the choysest horsse within the camp, which alwayes attended about him: amongs whome were his chief and principall seruitours and friends, and the same Python also who had serued amongs Alexander his men at armes, and therefore had Antigone gyuen him the principall charge and conduct of the armie with Demetre. In the front of that he placed thrée bandes of horsse like vnto a bulwark, and on eche side as many: and without from the battaill to the wings he placed thrée other bandes of Tarentines, so that about and néere his persone he had .v. hundred launces and an hundred Tarentines. After thē he placed about eight hundred horsse called the Companions or Aduenturers. And next to them about a thousande horsse of diuerse Nations: and before the whole front of that battaill he placed .xxx. Elephantes, and the spaces betwixt them he furnished with .xj. hundred shot: with this leaft battaill thus ordered as aforesaid, he determined to beginne the fight, the Phalange or mayne battail of footemen being to the numbre of .xj. thousand or therabouts, whereof a thousand were Macedonians, and as many Lycians & Pamphilians, the rest all Mercenarie soldiers.
               
                  In the right side adioyning to the Phalange he placed the rest of the horsse to the numbre of a thousand and .v. hundred vnder the leading of Andronike, whom he commaunded that when he shoulde come to fight, to slippe by and not to come on yt front, but to stay and delaye the battaill, attending and diligentlie marking what the other poincte woulde doe. He placed moreouer the .xiij. Elephantes which remayned, before the Phalange or maine battaill, and betwene them an other companie of light armed footemē. In this order arrāged Demetre his battailles. But before Ptolome & Seleuke knew Demetre his order, they had stronglie appointed and well furnished their left corner. But after they were by their espials aduertised of the order of the enimie, they altered and chaunged theirs, and ordered their battails as followeth.
               First they placed in their right corner all their principall force to encountre the battaill wherein Demetre was. On the other side in the left corner were .iij. thousand horsse, and the two Chieftayns. Before them went a great numbre of men which carried great store of iron poles, tied to iron chaines, prepared like an haie against the violence of the enimies Elephantes, which was an excellēt deuise easelie to staie & repulse the Elephants. And by them they placed a great numbre of shot to hurt and galle the saide beastes and their Gouernours. The rest of their mē they arraunged as to them best séemed, in the middest of the right poinct and at the wings, and in this order with great shoutes and cries beganne to marche one against an other. And firste the horssemen whiche were in the vttermost places of the poinctes beganne to charge, so that on eche side was a stout fight. Howbeit from the beginning the Demetrians dyd valiauntest and had the better: but shortlie after they which were in the opposite began so lustely to charge and enuironne the old battaill wherein Demetre was, that the

fight on eche side (by reason of the readinesse and valyauntnesse of the Souldiours) waxed hoat and terrible, in so muche that at the first encountrie they brake well néere all their launces, in whiche were many hurte and ouerthrowen. Then drew they their swordes & fought so cruellie, that the slaughter was farre greater than before: bycause the Chieftaynes them selues preased forth so valiauntlie, & aduentured so many perilous and daungerous attemptes, that by meane & throughe their exhortacions they encouraged the Souldiours violently to fight. And all the horssemen who for their vertue and prowes were all choise men, manfully & stoutly fought togyther in the view and sight of their Chieftaynes, bycause they might beare witnesse of their noble harts and inuincible courages. But after the horssemen hadde fought long, and that no man could iudge whiche parte had the better, ye 
                  Indians Demetre his Elephanters with great violence marched against the enimie, who somewhat at the first feared, bycause they thought them nothing able to resist their power. But so soone as they came against the yron rampier, they stayed, and the shot which flanked the rāpier, shot so thicke, that the greater parte of the beastes were sore wounded and their ryders, who féeling their greuous woundes, vrged the beastes with great strokes, so that some of them fell on the rampier, and being sore hurte with the pricking of the poles and shot, ranne quite out of order. And here is to be noted, yt those kinde of beastes so long as the way is playn & short, are maruelous strong, eyther to charge or encountre. But when they shal charge in hard places they cā do nothing, by reason of ye softnesse of their féete. Which thing they with Ptolome right well knew, and therfore prepared this maner of stoppe. At laste, after ye greater part of the Indians Elephanters were eyther slaine or sore hurte, the Elepantes were by the enimie all taken. Which thing Demetre his horssemē were

so a fraide of, that the greater number of them 
                     •
                   ledde. And althoughe Demetre by entreatie and persuasions dyd what in hym laye to kéepe still the small number which tarried about him, yet was there no remedie but that they would néedes flie to Gaze: and when he see he could not staye them, yet enforced not he hym selfe to flée with them: but so handled the matter, that a great numbre of his horssemen ioyned togyther, and in suche order retired, that the enimie which pursued in heapes and disordered were neuer able to hurte them: by reason the waye was so champion and large, that they easely retiered in a great troupe togythers. Some footemen likewise disorderlie followed, and bycause they would runne the lighter, they cast of their harne
                     •
                   s. In this sorte they came néere Gaze, almost at the sunne set. But after they were about the citie, certē of hys horssemen forsooke him and entred the Towne, to carrie oute their baggage: by reason whereof the throng & prease was so great of mares and other bestiall at the gates, for that euery man thrust to be foremost, that Ptolome his Souldiours whiche chased thē thyther, bycause they could not shut the gates, entred the towne, and so seized on it to Ptolome his vse. When Demetre had thus loste the battaill, he fledde all that night without staye vntil he came to the Citie of Azote,
                  
                     Azote.
                   distaunt from them two hundred .lxx. furlongs. The next daye in the morning he sent his Ambassadours towards the enimie, of whom he prayed leaue to burie the dead, meaning in that case to do them all the honour he could. There were in that conflict slaine the greater parte of his friendes. Amongs whome Python was principal, who with him had equall charge of the armie, and Berte whiche was with hym brought vp of a childe, and knewe all his mynde and secretes. In that battaill also were slaine of noble personages aboue .v. hundred, the more parte horssemen, and aboue .viij. thousand prisoners taken. When Ptolome
                  
and Seleuke had gyuen leaue to burie the dead, they sent backe to Demetre all hys mouable goodes and treasure which they had taken, and so many prisoners as were his housholde meiny without ransome, saying, that the warres which they arrered against Antigone, was not for his goods and treasure, but bycause when they were in consort and warred togyther, firste against Perdicas & after against Eumenes, he woulde not make egall distribution with his friends and companions of the realmes and dominions atchieued in those warres: and also for that against the tenor of his alliaunce, contrarie to all equitie and conscience, he had expulsed Seleuke Babilon. The reste of the prisoners Ptolome sent into Egipt for Gallie slaues.
               When Ptolome had magnificiallie and honorablie buried all the dead on his parte, he with his armie inuaded the cities of Phenice, some of which he besieged, and vpon composition reconciled others. When Demetre sée hys power and armie decrease and insufficient, he sent letters towardes his father, praying his ayde and spéedy helpe. And in the meane tyme while he taried for aunswere, he went to the citie of Tripoly in Phenice:
                  
                     Tripoly.
                   and frō thence sent into Cilice for Souldiers, and to all the Captaynes farder of, whiche eyther in citie or castle had any garrison. When Ptolome had wonne this victorie, and that there was no armie to resist hym, he subdued the citie of Sidonne, and from thence departed and encamped before the citie of Tyre, and practized with Andronicke Antigone his Lieutenaunt, to render it vnto hym, promising great giftes and hie promotions: who not onely aunswered that he would by no meane falsifie his faith to Antigone and Demetre, but also vsed chorlish lāguage to Ptolome. Notwithstanding he was shortlie after through the mutenie and sedition of the Souldiours expulsed, and the towne rendred to Ptolome: so that Andronicke then became his prisoner, who both for his vile

and naughtie language, also bycause he would not yeld the town, looked to be euil entreted. Neuerthelesse Ptolome forgat the iniurie, and gaue him great giftes, and retayned him as one of his chief friendes, and after preferred him to an honorable charge. He was a Prince ful of maruelous equitie and iustice, curteous, pitifull, full of lenitie, and therewith liberal, which greatly profited him, and was the chief cause that great and honorable personages desired his amitie and friendshippe. And amongs other, he right gently reteyned Seleuke, who praying his ayde for the recouering of Babylon, willingly graunted hys request, and farther promised to lende him what thing soeuer was hys, vntill such tyme as he had recouered his Satrapie which he first enioyed. In this estate were the matters of Asie.
               
            
            
               
                  ¶Thelesphore reuolteth from Antigone: and Alcete by the Epirots chosen King, making alliance with Cassander, after many battailles is by hys subiects slaine. And Cassander loseth a battaill before the Citie of Apollonie in the Countrey of Adrie.
                  
               
                The .xl. Chapter.
               AS the matters of Asie stood in the estate aforesaid: Thelesphore Antigone his Admiral lying about Corinth, apperceyuing that Ptolome (Antigones Lieutenaunt) was better perferred and aduaunced than he, and all the estate and affaires of Grece committed to hys charge, complained thereof to Antigone, and after sold all his shippes, and bestowed the money amongs the mē of warre which would follow and go with him. And going to the citie of Elyn,
                  
                     Elyn.
                   was there receyued as Antigone his friende. But when he had once furnished the Castle, he brought the citie in seruitude. He robbed also the

temple in Olympe, and tooke away aboue .L. Talents, wherewith he waged a great number of hired souldiers straungers. In this sorte Thelesphore (for the enuie and malice of Ptolome his preferment and auctoritie) reuolted from Antigone. Whiche things Ptolome (Antigone his Lieutenaunt in Grece) vnderstanding, with his armie entred Peloponnese, and marched to the Citie of Elyn, tooke the Castle and razed it, restored the Citie to libertie, and rendred to the God the siluer violentlie taken away from him. After, vpon treatie and composition he compassed Thelesphore to rēder the citie of Cylene which he enioyed and kept,
                     Cylene.
                   and it restored to the Citizens of Elyn.
               
               Amongs these exploites, the Epyrotes after the death of Eacide (their King) bestowed the Realme on Alcete, whome Aryuille his father,
                     Ariuille.
                   and enimie to Cassander, had bannished.
                     Lyciske.
                   Wherefore Lyciske (Cassander his deputie of Acarnanie) marched with his armie into Epyre, thinking easely to depriue and put downe Alcete from hys princelie seat and realme, before he were throughlie confirmed and established in the same. And as he encamped before the citie of Casopey,
                  
                     Casopey.
                   
                  Alcete sent his two sonnes, Alexander and Theucer,
                  
                     Alexander.
                   commaunding them to assemble so many Souldiours as they could.
                     Theucer.
                   And him selfe with the Souldiers he had, drew néere the enimie, attending the comming of his sonnes. Whereupon Lyciske séeing the Epyrotes approche (although the greater number) so lustely charged them, that they reculed, and finally fled: but Alcete escaped vnto the citie of Eurymen,
                  
                     Eurimen.
                   whome Lyciske there besieged. And as he laye before the Towne, Alexander Alcete his sonne came with all his power to the ayde of his father and fought with Lyciske. In which conflict he had the better and slew a great number of Lyciske his Souldiours, and two valiaunt Captaynes, to saye Mychite and Lysander of Athens, to whom Cassāder had left the gouernement of Leucade. After that conflicte

and ouerthrow, Dyme came in Lyciske his ayde,
                     Dyme.
                   and in few dayes after gaue battaill to Alcete his Sonnes, and vanquished them: wherevpon the yong men and their father retired into a strong place and forsoke the Citie of Eurimene, which citie Lyciske shortlie after tooke, sackt and razed. When Cassander was aduertized of the discomfiture of his people, before he had heard of the victorie before by them atchieued, he leuied a great numbre of men, and hasted into Epyre to the aide of Lyciske. But after he vnderstood that his Souldiours had had the better, he concluded a peace and contracted amitie with Alcete. From thence departed he with a great number of men into the quarters of Adrie to besiege the Apollonians: bicause they had expulsed his garrisons and ioyned with the Illirians. Howbeit, the Citizens nothing afeard of hys comming, hauing a great armie with the ayde of their Allies, marched out of the Towne to fight against the enimie. And after a long and cruell battaill, the Apollonians being the greater number, at last discomfited Cassander. Whereuppon he with great losse and slaughter of his men (then to weake, and séeing winter approche) returned into Macedon. After whose departure the Leucadians with the helpe of the Corcyrians expulsed Cassanders garrisons there lefte. The Epyrotes also a while perseuered vnder the subiectiō of Alcete their King. But after he beganne to waxe ouer rigorous and cruell against them, they slew him, and Esione and Nise two of his yongest sonnes.
            
            
               
                  ¶ Seleuke through his wisedome and prowes, with a small numbre of men which Ptolome had giuen him, conquereth the countrey of Babylon, togyther Susiane, and the rest, nere adioyning, which hold with Antigone.
                  
               
                The .xlj. Chapter.
               
                  BUt to returne to the doings in Asie. After Ptolome and Seleuke wonne vpon Demetre the victorie about the citie of Gaze in the countrey of Sirie, Seleuke with viij. hundred footemen and aboute two hundred horsse, (which Ptolome deliuered him) trauailled into Babylon. For so great was his hope, that although he had no men of warre, yet doubted he not, but with his seruauntes & familiar friends only to go thyther, bycause he surely trusted that the Babylonians for hys gentle entreatie towardes them heretofore shewed, so hartelie loued him that they woulde with right good will receyue him: and especiallie for that Antigon
                        •
                      
                   was far off that countrey. And as he in this hope and confidence went, his friendes which sée his small number, and the great force & power of the enimie, both of men, money, friendship, victuals, and all other things necessarie, were not a little astonied. When Seleuke sée them in this terrour and feare, he with these persuasions comforted them. Had it bene requisite (quod he) thinke you, that they which serued Alexander the king in his warres (to whome for their prowes he had preferred and giuen charge to enterprise and take on hand matters of great waight) shoulde haue trusted in the force & strength of men and money, more than in their owne prudence, experience and industrie? No: for throughe that chieflie atchieued Alexander so many honorable and notable victories, which at this day are in admiration of all the world. It is also méete and conuenient to gyue faith and credit to the oracles and mouthes of the goddes, who haue presaged, that the beginning and sequele of this voyage shall haue good and prosperous successe. For as I went to the oracle of Branchide to knowe my fortune, the God saluted and gréeted me as a King: moreouer I hadde a vision in my sléepe which seemed that Alexander was with me in my iourney for myne ayde and succoure, letting me clerely vnderstand, that in tyme I should attayne to great Empire

and dominion. Agayn, no great and waightie matter cā be brought to passe without some labour and trauaill, besides great hazard and daunger. And after all these persuasions, he vsed him selfe as a companion amongs the Souldiours, which encreased suche loue and reuerence in their hartes towards him, that they were emboldened to do him double seruice. In this sorte came he with his small companie into the countrey of M
                        •
                      sopotamie, and there what with faire and fowle meanes, he drew to him many of the Macedonians enhabiting Caris, and with them marched into the countrey of Babilon. And after he was entred, al the whole Countrey mette him and offred their entier seruice and obedience: bycause that during the space of .iij. or .iiij. yeares while he gouerned that Prouince, he shewed him self a iust man and good Officer: by meane wherof, he wonderfully got the loue of all the people. He likewise grew in the amitie of diuerse and sundry persons, which woulde do hym seruice at a pinche:
                     Poliarche.
                   and Poliarche besides Antigone his Lieutenaunt of a certen countrey, reuolted and ioyned with him, with aboue a thousand men of warre. When they in League with Antigone sée the vnbrideled affection of the multitude, they retired into a strong castle (where of the Captayne was one Deiphile) whiche Seleuke shortly after besieged and wanne,
                     Deiphile.
                   and therein found many of his friends and familiars, whome Antigone after his departure out of Babylon had committed to warde. That done, Seleuke gotte togyther so many men as he could, and bought a numbre of horses whiche he bestowed on such as came in his ayde. He likewise shewed him selfe to al men so curteous and gentle, that they determined to endure al aduentures and daungers in his seruice whatsoeuer. But after he was aduertised that Nycanor gouernour of Mede had assembled of the same countrey and Perse and of other countreys thereabouts, an armie of .x. thousande footemen, and .vij. thousand

horsse, he with great diligence departed with those Souldiours he had, to the numbre of .iij. thousande footemen and .v. hundred horsse to méete him. And when he had passed the ryuer Tygre, and was aduertised that the enimie was not aboue two or thrée dayes iourneys of, he retired & hid his men in certen mershes thereabouts, amongs the réedes and bulrushes, to the intente by ambush to surprise Nycanor, who being come to the bank of the said riuer, and hearing no newes of ye enimie, lodged in a Manor roial hard by: thinking ye enemie vnderstood of his comming, & had gone into some place farther of. And for that selfe same cause was he not verie carefull to set his watch, neyther yet put him selfe in any readinesse whatsoeuer might chaunce. By reason whereof Seleuke that night with great noise and affraie assaulted his lodging. Neuerthelesse the enimie in that disorder stoode to the defence aswell as they could: and as it happened, the Persians first encountred and fought, wherevpon their Satrapa Euager and diuerse other of their captaynes were slaine.
                     Euager.
                   Wherefore the more parte of the rest of the Souldiours, what for feare of daunger, and for that they liked not Antigone hys dealing, rendred to Seleuke. Whiche thing Nycanor séeing and fearing to be by the Souldiours betrayed and deliuered prisoner to Seleuke, fled through ye desertes with a few of his friends. When Seleuke had strenghtned him selfe with these mē at armes, and vsing his acustomed curtesie and humanitie towardes all men, he easely wanne agayne to hys obeissaunce the countreys of Susiane and Mede, and diuerse other regions néere about. Of whiche doings Ptolome and his other friends were aduertised, hauing alreadie such encrease of power and authoritie as might beséeme a right mightie King wt glory & fame worthy a great Empire.
            
            
               
               
                  ¶Demetre in battaill vanquisheth Cylles Ptolome his Lieutenaunt, and after Antigone his Father commeth and ioyneth with him, and then Ptolome forsaketh the countreys of Syrie and Phenice, and leaueth them to the said Antigone.
                  
               
                The .xlij. Chapter.
               DUring the time that Seleuke was occupied as is aforesayde, Ptolome who had in battaile vanquished Demetre in Celosirie (as aboue) and there still remained, vnderstanding that Demetre was againe come into the hier Syrie, and there encamped, sent one of his captaynes named Cylles a Macedonian,
                  
                     Cylles.
                   with suche numbre of men as he thought good, eyther to expulse him the coū
                  trey of Syrie, or else to kéepe hym so occupied, that he should do no kind of exploite. But as he was vppon the waye, Demetre being by his scoulte aduertised of hys comming, and their disorder: bycause he neyther feared or estéemed the enimie, in the night departed from hys camp (lying nere Myunte) wt hys horsse and light armed footemē,
                     Myunte.
                   leauing in his camp the rest with the baggage: and so hasted, that about the daye breake he assayled Cilles camp, which he found so disordered, that they without resistaunce yelded, togyther Cylles himselfe. Whervpon when Demetre had thus sodenlie done so great an exploite, he thought he had well reuenged the shame and domage by him (at the battail before lost) receiued. Notwithstanding, doubting that if Ptolome hearde of those newes, he would with his power come agaynst him, he pitched his campe in a verie strong place, hauing at hys backe a great Marris, and then so much as in him laye, sent to aduertise his father of that he had done, praying him with all diligence to sende a strong supplie, or else with all his power to come him selfe and enter Syrie, to recouer it. Of these newes Antigone (then lying in Cylene
                  
in the countrey of Phrigie) was right glad that his sonne,
                     Cylene.
                   a yong man, had wonne so great and honorable a victorie, whereby he deserued to be a King. And incontinent he with hys whole armie departed Phrigie: and after he had passed the moūt Thaure, he made such spéed, that within few days he was come to his sonne. When Ptolome vnderstood of his comming, he aduised with hys counsaile what should be best to doe, whether to attend the enimie in Syrie and there to fight, or to returne into Egipt, and from thence make warre as he hadde before done against Perdicas. Whereuppon they all agréed that he should not hazard his case against the force of the enimie ioyned togyther: and chieflie, bycause they hadde a great numbre of Elephants, and Antigone hym selfe also in persone, who neuer yet was vanquished. Wherefore it séemed to them that the beste & surest way was, that Ptolome should returne into Egipt, where were victuals great store: and might there kéepe hym selfe in strong and aduauntageous places. In following which counsaill he delibered to go into Egipt: but before hys departure he beat downe and razed certayne faire and beutiful cities: to wete Hace in Phenice,
                  
                     Hace.
                   
                  Yoppe in Samarie,
                  
                     Yoppe.
                   and Gaze in Sirie.
                  
                     Gaze.
                   That done he with his armie and al the mouable goods which might be carried, went into Egipt. By this meane Antigone without difficultie or resistaunce recouered all the countreys of Sirie & Phenice.
               
            
            
               
                  ¶Antigone enterpriseth warres against the Nabathians inhabiting the deserts of Arabia: and Athaney his Captayne is by them discomfited. Also after Demetre hys comming thyther, he concludeth a league and amitie with them.
               
                The .xliij. Chapter.
               
                  AFter Antigone had thus recouered and wonne the countreys of Syrie and Phenice: he indicted warres to the Arabians called Nabathians, whō he thought his enimies. Wherfore he chose out one of his Captains named Atheney, and deliuered to him .iij. thousande shot, and .vj. hundred of his lightest horsse, cōmaunding them to enter the said countrie, and to make so many incursions as they might. But bycause the maner of life and order of the said Arabians is farre different and disagréeing from all other, I thinke it meete and expedient here to make some mention and declaration thereof. First they dwel wildlie abroad without eyther townes or houses: wherefore they saie their lande is vnhabitable, bicause there are neither ryuers or foūtayns wherwith to maintayne an armie.
                     The Arabians maner of life in the deserts.
                   They haue also a lawe which prohibiteth them on paine of death not to sowe any corne, neyther to set or graf trées bearing fruit, nor to drinke wyne or build houses. This they hold & mayntayn, bycause they thinke that those which haue houses, and maneured lands and fruitfull, are always subiect to conquerours. But there are amongs them many whereof some haue great flockes of shéepe & other great heards of Camels going abroad in the desertes, neuer tarrying long in one place. And althoughe there are diuerse kindes of Arabians whiche inhabit the desertes, yet are the Nabathians the richest and wealthiest, and are about the numbre of .x. thousand: whereof some are accustomed to trade by Sea with incense, myrrhe and other drugs aromatique, growing in the fertile Countrey of Arabie. They are also meruelouslie determined to kéepe and mainteyne their libertie. And when any enimie inuadeth, they draw to the desert and places solitarie which serue in stead of castles and forts, where no straunger can liue. Notwithstanding they haue certen receptacles within the Caues whiche they digge in the same earth being of plaister and softe stones, whereby

they may the better digge the Caues, the entry of which are little, but within large and déepe, so that they are more than an Arpent square: and in those they set earthen vessels filled with great store of rayne water, and then they in suche sorte couer the entry of the Caue aboue, that they which passe by can not perceyue it, but them selues knowe it again by a signe which they leaue behinde, and euery third daye they water their cattell with that water, to the ende, if they were put to flight, they should not want drinke: and their chief foode is flesh, mylke, and other things which the lande bringeth forth, verie good and holsome to eate. In this lande also groweth Peper and wild honie, which they drinke with water. There are besides beyond these, other Arabians, dwelling in the maneured land, and are tributaries as the Syrians, and liue in such order as they doe, saue that they dwell in no houses. And this is ye maner and life of the Arabians. Nowe is there a place in the same Countrey verie strong, without walles or anie suche like defence (distaunt from the land habitable two dayes iourney) where at one time of the yeare whiche was euen verie then, they repaire and come from all quarters of the countrey to buy and sell. And as the merchaunts were there assembled and had left at home their goodes, wyues, children, and olde men and women in a certen strong rocke, Atheney (who had wel espied out his time) with his deliuerest and lightest Souldiours, departed the countrey of Ydumey, and in two dayes & thrée nights had trauailled thrée thousande & two hundred furlongs, and were gotten to the saide rocke and assaulted them within, whereof some they slew, 
                     •
                   ooke some prisoners, and left the rest hurte: from whence they carried great store of incense and myrrhe, besides .v. hundred talents of siluer. Which done, Atheney fearing that the Arabians which were assembled at the place abouesaid, when they heard thereof, woulde pursue them, he after .iij. or

iiij. dayes with spéed returned & without stay iourneyed aboue two hundred furlongs. Wherefore being through their great speede sore trauailled, and thinking that the Arabians could not in two or thrée dayes ouerget them, without making any great watche, pitched their camp. But the Arabians in that assemble aduertised by suche as see it, of the domage the Grekes had done them, broke vp their assemble, and with all diligence came to the place where the discomfiture was, and there being better informed of the trueth of their losse, and tolde of the waye which the Grekes went, in such haste pursued thē, that they hadde the same night ouertaken them, and encamped hard by. And hauing intelligence of some of their people which were escaped, by meane of the negligence of the watche, all weried and a sléepe, aboute thrée houres before daye assailed them, and slewe all the footemen a sléepe in their beddes, to the number of .viij. thousand, and there escaped not aboue .L. of their horsse, the greater parte of which were also sore hurt. In this sorte the Souldiours vnder the charge of Atheney, after good exploite of their matters in the beginning, were in the end through follie and negligence ouerthrowē. As commonlie happeneth, that with felicitie and good Fortune followeth negligence and contempt of the enimie, by reason whereof many sage and wise men haue said (and not without good ground) that it is more easie paciently to sustaine and abide infelicitie and aduersitie, than in prosperitie, sagely and wisely to gouerne. For the infelicitie and miserie once passed, causeth them which haue tasted thereof (for feare to runne hedlong into the same agayne) to be in their affaires verie circumspect and diligent: where contrariwise prosperitie and felicitie maketh men negligent and 
                     ••
                   relesse, and in all things causeth great contempt and rechelousnesse. When the Nabathians had reuenged the outrage and domage done to them in such sorte as aforesaid, they writte their letters

in Greke to Antigone, wherein they complayned them of Atheney his assailing, and excused the déede by them committed. To whose letters Antigone aunswered, that whatsoeuer Atheney had done against them, was without his consent and knowlege, & that he was well pleased with the reuenge thereof. All this saide he to assure and deceyue them: to the ende they shoulde haue no regard or care of him, whereby he might sodenly surprise thē. For it was a hard matter without some cautel and wyle to surprise such a people always liuing like shéepheardes, and hauing for their retraict places inaccessible and impregnable. And although the said Arabians were right ioyous to be by that meane deliuered of so great terrour and feare where they were, yet gaue they no such credit to the letters of Antigone, but that they placed their espialles and watches vppon the mountaines and places eminent, where they might sée al the entries of that countrey: and beside disposed and ordered their businesse, to their best aduauntage according to the necessitie of the same, attending that whiche might happen. When Antigone thought he had by his letters sufficiently abused, deceyued and assured them, he chose out .iiij. thousand of his lightest men, and as many horse, and commaunded them to make prouision of victualles to carry for certen dayes, and be obedient to followe his sonne Demetre to whatsoeuer he cōmaunded. Willing him by al meanes possible he could, to chase and expulse the said Arabians. Which commaundement he obeyd & followed, and so tooke his iourney & trauailled throughe the desertes the space of thrée dayes (thinking the Arabians had thereof knowen nothing) but they forthwith by their espials and watches were aduertised by signes and tokens whiche they made on the hie mountaines wt fiers and other ways as they had amongs them deuised. Wherefore they carried into their strong rocks, al their baggage, wyues, children and olde people, and left with

them a number of their lustie yong fellowes to defende the same, very easie to garde and kepe, bicause it was of a mightie heigth, and but one entrie and way to come in at. The rest deuided them into bandes, & draue their bestiall thorow diuers places amidst the wildernesse.
               When Demetre was come to the rocke, and all their cattaile driuen away, he gaue many assautes to take it, but the Arabians right valiantly defended it, & by reason of the aduauntage of the place, easily repulsed the Greekes, so that the assaut through many attemptes continued all day. But about the sunne going downe, Demetre caused to sound the retraict. The nexte day in the morning, as they thought to giue a fresh assault, one of Arabians standing in the toppe of the rocke, cried oute with a loude voice, addressing to Demetre these words ensuing: Sir King Demetre, what wickednesse hath moued thée to warre vpon vs pore wretched men that inhabite the desertes, where is neyther corne, water, wine, nor any other thing necessary and méete for thy vse. For we to defend our liberty haue chosen this place improuided of all things méete and necessarie for the life and maintenance of any other nation, but liue here like sauage and wilde beastes, doing neither hurt or displeasure to any. Wherfore we pray & earnestly desire thée and thy father to take such giftes as we are able to yéeld you, and withdraw and call backe your army, and hereafter to holde and retaine the Nabathians for your friendes. For if thou tarrie and continue here any whyle, thou shalt want water, and other things necessarie for the nourishing and relieuing of thy people. And admit thou conquer vs, thou canst neuer force vs to alter and change our maner of life, so that those which thou shalt kepe prisoners, can not nor wil not endure or abyde in seruitude and bondage. Through these words Demetre his heart waxed so colde, that he drewe backe his men, and caused it to be declared to the Arabians, that they

should send to him their Ambassadours to treat a league and amitie: whereuppon they sent the most auncient amongs them, who in like maner persuaded as the first man dyd. Whereby was accorded, that they should giue him a certen numbre of ostages with many other riche and precious giftes, and that then he would returne wt his armie. Whiche conclusion performed, he forthwith departed. And after he had trauelled about thrée hundred furlongs, he arriued at the Lake called Asphalte.
                  
                     The Lake Asphalte.
                   The nature of which bycause it is meruelous and singular, I thinke it méete to entrelace in this present historie.
            
            
               
                  ¶Of the Lake Asphalte, and the meruelous nature thereof: also the discomfiture of Antigone his people there, by the Arabians.
                  
               
                The .xliiij. Chapter.
               THis Lake surnamed Asphalte, is as it were in the middest of the Satrapie of Arabie, about .v. hundred furlongs long and .lx. broode: the water thereof is meruelous foule and stinking, so that no fish can lyue therein, nor any other thing accustomed to lyue in the water. And albeit there entreth and runneth into it many great ryuers of fresh and swéete waters, neuerthelesse they are through the great and maruelous stenche of the water of the Lake incontinent infected, which of it selfe yéerely casteth a great quantitie of plastry all hoale as bigge and great oftentimes as thrée Arpentes: and many times not passing as great as one Arpent. And when there is great store and abundaunce, the inhabitaunts cal it the Bull, and when lesse, the Bulchin. This amasse and heap of plaistry in such sorte riseth and swimmeth aboue the water, that they which sée it farre of, thinke it to be some Island. And when it beginneth to arise as we haue before saide, they may perceyue it

xx. daies before: bycause there issueth oute of the Lake such a vapoure smelling like plaistre, many furlonges round about: and of such efficacie and strength, that all the golde, siluer, and all other metall within the limites and compasse thereof, lose their colour. But after the plaistre is once risen aboue the water, it getteth it agayne. Whiche vapoure scaldeth all the Regions thereabouts, and drieth them as if they were half burnt, and maketh the people verie pale and wanne & also sicklie, so that they are not long lyued. Notwithstanding the land round about is fruitfull for Date trées, whereas is any ryuer or fountayne to moyst them. And in a place lying in a valley néere thereto, groweth the swéete and odoriferous Baulme whiche is of great price: bycause there is none in the whole worlde but there,
                     The sweete Baulme.
                   whiche the Phisicions vse in their receytes as an excellent and singular thing. And as touching the plaistre rising oute of the Lake, the people of the Countrey runne thyther to spoile and gather it as it were the butine of the enimie. The boats which they row in are made of great réedes, and in euery boat but thrée men, whereof two rowe, the third hath bowe and arrowes to defende them against those which would let them from gathering. And when they are come to that amasse or heape, with their axes and hatchets they cut thereof as a man shoulde do on a Tuph or softe stone, and therewith fraught their boats, and then returne. And if it happen at any tyme that the boats breake that they fall into the water, yet thoughe they cannot swymme, they sinke not to the grounde as in other waters, but remayne aboue as if they swam. For the nature of the water is to beare and hold vp the bodyes of any thing whiche hath humiditie and breath. And such things as are whole and massife, as golde, siluer, lead and such other mettals sinke not so soone to the ground as they do in other waters. With the same plaistre the Paisaunts gather & get great store of siluer, for

they carry it into Egipt, where they sell it very déere, bycause it is verie excellent and soueraine to preserue dead bodies from steach and putriture: and if the other dredges be not mingled with that, they can not long preserue and keepe them.
               When Demetre was returned to his Father in Sirie, he recompted all he had done against the Arabians, and also the nature of the Lake whereof we haue spoken. Howbeit his father was no deale contented with the league and amitie made with the Arabians: saying they would hereafter become more cruell and fierce, seing they hadde not now bene chastised and brought vnder: and farther, they woulde thinke that the same conclusion of peace was made not for anie pitie or compassion he tooke of them, but bycause he was not able to correct and punishe them. Notwithstanding he much commended hym for fynding oute the Lake by which he trusted the better to encrease hys reuenue and possessions. Wherefore he charged Ierome the Historian to assemble and get togyther a numbre of shippes and to fraught them all with the plaistre he coulde there finde, and to carrie it into some place to be safely kept. But the matter happened all other wayes. For the Arabians who were therof aduertised, had assembled to the numbre of vj. thousand or thereabouts, and with their boats with shot of arrowes so charged Antigone his people vppon the saide Lake in their ships, that they had almost slain them all. Whereof Antigone aduertised, losse all hys hope of gayning by the said Lake: and chieftie bycause newes were brought him out of Mede, of greater and weightier affaires, which aunswered him as hereafter shall be declared.
            
            
               
               
                  ¶ Demetre Antigone his sonne, at his fathers commaundement goeth to Babylon, to make thereof a conquest, and after returneth to his Father.
               
                The .xlv. Chapter.
               AS Antigone laye in Syrie, and thought a freshe to commence warres against the Arabians, sodenlie came a messanger to him with letters from Nycanor Gouernour of Mede and the other Satrapes néere thereabouts, by which he was aduertised of Seleuke hys arriuall in Babylon, and of the things he hadde already done, togyther of Nycanor his discomfiture, with which newes he was greatly astonied. Wherefore he incontinent dispatched Demetre his sonne with .v. thousand Macedonian footemen .x. thousande Mercenaries, and iiij. thousand horsse: commaunding him with al celeritie to go and recouer the Satrapie of Babylon, and after to returne to Sea towardes him. For execution of whiche commaundement Demetre departed from the Citie of Damas in Syrie,
                  
                     The Citie of Damas.
                   & sped him to Babilon. Whē 
                  Patrocles Seleuke hys Lieutenaunt there vnderstoode that Demetre was alreadie entred Mesopotamia,
                  
                     Patrocles.
                   and séeing his smal number not able to resist, kept with him self one parte, and commaunded an other companie to depart the citie, and passe the ryuer Euphrate, to saue thē selues through the desertes: and appointed the rest to passe the Ryuer Tigre, and to go into Susiane, into the citie of Eutele,
                  
                     Eutela.
                   ouer against the red Sea. And him selfe (with the souldiours he deteyned) remayned in the Countrey of Babylon, hauing an eye to the passages and fourdes of the Ryuers and other difficile places, that he might know when and what waye the enimy came. He also gaue notice with all spéede to Seleuke abyding in the countrey of Mede, of their comming: and from day to day signified vnto hym what was done, exhorting hym to bring with all diligence, ayde and succoure. When Demetre was come to

                  Babilon, and founde the Citie left alone, he mynded to take the castles. The one of which he forcibly tooke, and gaue the spoyle to hys men of warre. And seing it impossible for him out of hande to take the other, and that the terme appointed to méete his Father approched, he left behind at the siege thereof one of his friendes hight Archelaye,
                  
                     Archelaye.
                   with .v. thousande footemen and a thousande horsse to continue the siege, and him selfe with the reste returned to Sea.
            
            
               
                  ¶ The Romaines vnder the cōduct of Quinte Fabie their Dictator, winne and take two Cities from the Samnites.
                  
               
                The .xlvj. Chapter.
               DUring the time that these things aforesaide were done in Asie, the warres betwene the Romaines and Samnites in Italy waxed and continued more fierce, neuer ceasing besieging of Townes, making incursions and robberies one into anothers countrey and running all ouer with rolling campes. For these two Nations, notable Souldiours and warlike people, left nothing vnhazarded for the winning of Empire and Dominion one of another. It happened also that ye 
                  Romaine Consuls with one part of their armie were come and encamped more néere the campe of the enimie, to espie the tyme, and aduauntages for them to fight, and also to staye the enemie: that they might thereby hold & kéepe the Cities allied and confederate with them, in suertie. The other parte of the armie ledde Quinte Fabie,
                  
                     Quinte Fabye.
                   Generall of the whole armie,
                     The Citie of Fretonia, or Ferent.
                   and soueraigne Dictator, who wonne and forcibly to
                     •
                   ke the Citie of Ferent, and sent two hundred of the principall Citizens to Rome prisoners, whom for their common rebellion against the Romaines, they according to the Lawe and maner of the

                  Romane custome, were whipt about the Citie, and after beheaded in the great market place. Shortlie after he entred the territorie of the Nolaines, tooke the citie, and by the sound of the drumme, sold the butine thereof, and deuided one parte of their lande amongs the men of warre. Wherefore the Romanes séeing their affaires prosper and go forward,
                     The Isle of Potide.
                   sent a Colonie of Citizens into the Isle of Potide.
               
            
            
               
                  ¶After the alliaunce made and confirmed betwene Cassander, Ptolome, Lysimache and Antigone: Cassander putteth to death the yong Alexander and Roxanne his mother.
               
                The .xlvij. Chapter.
               THe yeare ensuing in which Thesimonide hadde the gouernement of Athens, and that Ma
                        •
                      ke Valerie & Publy Dece were at Rome created Consuls, Cassander, Ptolome and Lysimache treated a league and amiti
                     •
                    which was put in writing. By which Cassander was declared and named Gouernour and Emperour of Europe: Lysimache of Thrace: Ptolome of Egipt, and the Cities neere there about, aswell in Lybie as Arabie: And Antigone of all Asie, vntil that Alexander, Roxanne hir sonne came to his full age. It was also concluded and agréed vppon, that the Grekes should remayne and be at libertie after their accustomed lawes. Neuerthelesse the sayde Princes continued nor remained not in that accord and appointement, for euery of them by exquisite meanes went about to enlarge and encrease his Dominion and authoritie. But Cassander séeing that Alexander ye sonne of Roxanne waxed and grewe in yeares and bignesse, & that in Macedon the voices went and men talked that it was néedfull and requisite to take Alexander oute of prison and to restore hym to the authoritie and gouernement

of his fathers Realmes: and fearing if that should so come to passe, it would go awry with him, commaunded Glaucye (who had charge and kéeping of the infant) secretlie to put him & his mother to death:
                     Glaucie.
                   whiche thing was spéedily done. Through which facte, both Cassander, Ptolome, Lysimache and Antigone, so soone as they had thereof intelligence, were clerely deliuered of the feare they had of the yong King Alexander. For after him remayned no succe
                     ••
                   our of Alexander the great, but euery of the Gouernours of the Countreys and Prouinces, aspired the Kingdomes and principalities, and after held and kept them as their owne inheritaunce, acquired and gottē by the right and conquest of warre. And the same tyme in Italy the Romaines with a great number of footemen and horse, went to besiege the citie of Spolite, in the countrey of Maruce: and sent into that countrey a Colonie of their Citizens whom they called Interanneis.
               
            
            The ende of the .xix. Booke of Diodorus Siculus, the second part of this present volume: and here beginneth the .xx. of this volume, the third parte.
         
         
            
            A little shorte Prologue, wherin the Author declareth in what sorte it is commendable and well beseeming a good and perfect Historiā to vse Rhetoricke, Orations, Declarations and such other like.
            
               NOt without iuste cause ought they which vnderstand and knowe the arte of Rhetorick, to reproue their order, which in Histories do admixt eyther too long or many orations, bycause they by such impertinent and superfluous wordes, doe not onely interrupt and breake the order of their narration, but also do hinder the desire of the Readers for vnderstanding of the things passed. And if suche Oratours and Rhetoritians wil by such orations shew their skill and learning, and the elegancie of their spéeche and language, they may particularly by them selues couch the orations and Ambassades apperteyning to Ambassadours, the prayses and disprayses able and méete, and other suche like: and so vsing their arte and elegancie in such tales, and busying them in this and that matter particularlie, shall be cōmended therin. Howbeit, at this day some writers wt vsing the art Oratory, reduce the greater part of Histories into Orations & tales: whiche to the Readers are verie tedious and yrkesome, not only for that they haue naughtely written and made them, but also bycause they no whit regarded the order and nature of the Historie. By reason whereof suche as do read them, verie ofte passe ouer vnread the saide orations and declarations, which by great arte and cunning had bene composed and made: or else for the length & impertinencie are so weried, that they leaue all vnread. And not withoute good reason: for the nature of an Historie is to be plaine

and continued without interruption: like as when the bodye of a man is dismembred, it loseth hys kindely vertue, but when it is whole ioyned togyther, it hath then the full grace and perfect strength. And so in like case, the narration and setting forth of an History gyueth to the Reader thereof a manifest and delectable pleasure, if it be playne and continued. Notwithstanding, I wil not altogyther reiect and forbidde the vse of Rhetoricke in an Historie, for that to make it pleasant, it ought with some varietie and copie to be garnished, & is therfore very requisite that in some corner & place thereof be orations and declarations. Neyther will I my selfe be altogyther voide of that facultie and arte, when I shall come to the talke of any Ambassadoure, Counsailour or other such graue personage, but I will recite what he hath saide. And they whiche haue not the knowledge to do that, might find manie excuses and say they had forgotten to put it in, which had ben expedient and necessarie in the same place to haue ben interlaced. Therefore where things be worthie memory and profitable, whereby the Historie should be garnished: they ought not negligentlie to be passed ouer (as it were vnder colour that they nothing serued to ye purpose) & not properlie couched and placed. But where the matter & effect of the History is euident and of importaunce, it is not conuenient that the declaration thereof be inferior to the déedes. It is also sometimes méete and necessarie to vse the arte Oratorie, to saye, when any thing happeneth otherwise than is looked for. For it is expedient by copye of wordes to make the orations artificially as it falleth oute. And nowe, since we haue sufficiently aunswered this matter, it is méete we returne to the narration of our Historie, and deuide the things whereof we haue spoken, according to the times they were done in.
         
         
            
            The third Booke.
            
               
                  ¶ Of certen ayde whiche Cassander sendeth to the King of Peons: of certen enterprises by Ptolome against Antigone, done in Phenice. How Polispercon taketh on hand to restore Hercules the sonne of Alexander to the realme of Macedon. And finally of the pitifull and lamentable death of Nycocles and his whole familie.
               
                The first Chapter.
               THe yeare that Hieronemon gouerned Athens, and Quinte Iulie and Quinte Emelie were Consuls at Rome,
                  
                     Antholion.
                   as Antholeon King of Peons laye in Macedon, the Antariates warred vpon him: to whom Cassander sent ayde and succoure, so that where before he was in case like to haue lost his estate, he is nowe clerely deliuered of that daunger, and enforced the Antaryates with their wyues and children to go inhabite the mount Odorbel. In this same verie season Ptolome Antigone hys Lieutenaunt of his armie in Peloponnese, vnder coloure that he was not so well entreated and honoured as he had merited and deserued, reuolted from hym and tooke parte with Cassander, and left Captayne Satrapeas the Phenician (whom he best trusted) in Hellespont,
                  
                     Satrapeas.
                   and sent to him certen men, with commaundement not to take parte with Antigone, but to kéepe and garde the places and Townes he held for him, in his owne propre name. Again, bicause in the league & peace concluded betwene the Princes as aforesaide, amongs other things was pronounced and declared, that the Cities of Grece should remayne and continue at their libertie and popular gouernaunce, Ptolome Prince of Egipt, for that Antigone kept his garrisons in some of them, determined to arrere open hostilitie and warre against him. Whereuppon he sent one of his Captaynes named Leonide, into the hier Cilice, to take the Cities of the same countrey, subiect

to Antigone, and sent likewise to Cassander and Lysimache, praying them to ioyne with him, that they thrée togyther might warre vppon Antigone, and no longer permit his power to waxe and encrease eyther greater or mightier. For resisting of which enterprise, Antigone sent his yongest sonne Philip into Hellespont to warre vppon the Phenician and other rebelles. And sent hys sonne Demetre into Cilice against Leonide, who chased & expulsed Ptolome hys Souldiours, and recouered the Townes whiche they had taken. Amongs these enterfactes Polispercon abyding in Peloponnese, finding hym selfe agréeued with Cassander, did all yt in him laye, to recouer the gouernement of Macedon. Wherfore he sent for Hercules Alexander the great his bastard Sonne (by Barsine) to Pargame,
                  
                     Hercules Alexander his bastard sonne.
                   where he was brought vp, and then about .xvij. yeares olde, and writte to all his friends, and to so many as he thought hated Cassander, for helpe in Alexander his ayde for recouerie of his fathers realme. And further writte to the Etholians in generall to ioyne with him in that enterprise: promysing that if the said Hercules could by their meane and ayde recouer his Fathers realme, to gyue them great things. To which persuasions the Etholians and many other agréed, and put them selues in armes, to the number of .xx. thousande footemē, & a thousand horsse. And Polispercon who about this enterprise was most carefull, leuied money on all sides, and sent secret Messangers to the Macedonians, to exhorte them to take parte with the yong King, thinking that to be their best and most agreable to reason. Againe, when Ptolome Lorde of the Isle of Cypres, vnderstood that Nycocles King of Paphe had secretly allied with Antigone,
                  
                     Nycocles.
                   he sent two of hys principall and chiefe friends,
                     Argey.
                   to wete Argey and Calicrate into Cypres, charging them to kil the said Nycocles,
                  
                     Calicrate.
                   fearing, that if he left him vnpunished, the rest would not styck to do the like. When they were arriued in Cypres, and had taken with

them Ptolome his souldiers vnder Menelaye his charge, and encompassed Nycocles house, they signified to hym their charge from Ptolome, and exhorted him to kill him selfe, who from the beginning vsed many wordes in excusing the fact and déede. But when he see there was no accompt made of his talke, he at laste slew him selfe. And after that Axithea his wife vnderstood of his death,
                     A pitifull History.
                   the first slew two yong maides hir daughters, whom she had by him, to the end they should not come in the hands of hir husbandes enimies: and after exhorted Nycocles brothers wyues willinglie to die with hir, whiche they did, albeit Ptolome had commaunded that no hurte should be done to the women, but let them alone. In this sorte was the Palaice Royall of Paphe full of murdres and wilfull slaughters, and after in maner of a Tragedie, burnt. For immediatly after Nycocles brethrens wiues were dead, they shut vp the dores of the houses & set them on fire, and forthwith killed them selues.
            
            
               
                  ¶ Of the warres betwene Parisade his three children, King of Bosphore, after hys death, for the succession of the Realme, togyther their deedes and gestes, and also their endes.
               
                The .ij. Chapter.
               IN this season while these matters were done in Cypres, great controuersie arose in the countrey of Pont,
                  
                     Parisade.
                   after the death of Parisade, sometyme King of Bosphore Cymerique:
                  
                     Satyre. Eu
                           •
                         ele. Pritame.
                   betwene Satyre, Eumele and Pritame, Parisade his sonnes, for the succession of the said Realme. Bycause that the sayd Satire in the life of his father had by him ben named and declared heire apparaunt, and successour, and had also gouerned and ruled the estate the space of .xviij. yeares: Eumele who there with was much moued and offended, assembled a great number of men,

of the countreys thereto adioyning, to warre vppon hys brother. And he vnderstanding his fetch and enterprise, with a mightie power came against hym. And when he had passed the Ryuer Thatis,
                  
                     The Riuer of Thatis.
                   whiche ranne betwene the two armies, he enpaled his Campe with hys carriages, whereof he badde store, and arranged his Souldiours in order of battaill, and placed him selfe in the middest of the Phalange according to the custome of the Scythes. He had in his companie and armie aboute two thousand Mercenarie Grekes, and so many Thracians .xx. thousand Scythian footemen, and aboue .x. thousand horsse. And on Eumele his side came Arypharne King of Thrace with xx. thousand horsse, and .xxij. thousand footemen. And at last they courageouslie ioyned battaill. Satire then hauing about him his choise and picked horssemen, so lustely charged Arypharne in the middest of hys battaill, that there was a sharpe and cruell conflicte betwixt the horssemen, and many on bothe sides slaine: but in the ende Aripharne was put to flight, whome Satire a while chased, and ouerthrew and killed a great number of hys people. But when he vnderstood that his brother Eumele which lead the other wing ouer against the Mercenarie Grekes, hadde the better of them, he desisted chasing of Aripharne and came to the rescous of his owne men. At whose comming the enemie was repulsed, and in the end put to flight. And in this maner Satyre him selfe was cause of victorie in both the wings. By which well appeared yt the realme, aswell for his Seignoritie as also for his vertue and prowes, to him only apperteyned.
               The victorie thus wonne, Aripharne and Eumele retired into a Castle standing on a verie stéepe rocke, scituate in the middest of the Riuer of Thatis. By reason whereof, and also bycause the walles were strong and hie, well manned and also furnished with all kyndes of shot and weapon, it was not easie to be taken, but verie difficile and harde to besiege, hauing but two wayes to

enter, both of them artificially made and wrought: the one went directlie to the castle, enuironed and defended with flankers and bulwarks: the other to certen marshes lying round about the castle, fortified with rāpiers of wood, in the middest of whiche marshes were faire houses buylt vppon great pillers standing vppon the ryuer. When Satyre had considered the strong situation and great daunger in the siege thereof, he first made incursions and robberies vppon all the countrey round about, and tooke a great numbre of the paysauntes prisoners, with great plenty of cattell, and burnt and fouraged all the villages. And after he had thus done, he determined forcibly to assaile the place whiche lead to the Castle, but he was repulsed with losse of many men. Notwithstanding he desisted not, but so lustely and courageously assaulted the other waye, that he wanne the rampers and houses standing on the marshes, and spoyled them, and after passed the ryuer, where he began to cut and hew down the piles and houses of wood through which he must néedes passe if he determined to come to the Palaice. Which thing when Arypharne sée, and fearing the taking of the Palaice, his whole trust and chief refuge, defended the same by all the possible meanes he could. Now had he a great numbre of shot, which he deuided on both sides the waye, who hurt a great numbre of the wood fellers, bycause they coulde not auoyde the shot, nor yet endomage them which did the hurte. Neuerthelesse they couragiouslie endured the daunger, and for thrée dayes togyther neuer ceased cutting downe of wood, so that they hadde made a playne beaten waye through the marshes, and the fourth daye were gotten hard to the curten. For Menisce Captayne of the Mercenaries,
                     Menisce.
                   a valiaunt and wise man, came brauely and courageouslie with his Souldiours throughe the same waye to gyue the assault. But after he had long susteyned the violēce of the shot within, and the greater number

of his men hurt, he then of force retired. And in the retire they of the Castle in such number sallied out vppon him, that what through the narrownes of the way, and disaduauntage of the place, he surely had ben slayn, had it not ben that Satyre séeing them so distrest, incontinent came to their rescous. Who nobly fighting and abyding the force of the enimie, was with the blowe of a launce in one of his armes so sore hurte, that he was faine to be taken and carried backe into his campe, and the night ensuing died on the same stroke, when he had raigned but .ix. monethes, after the death of his Father. When Menisce sée that, he raysed the siege and retired the armie to the citie of Galgaze,
                  
                     Galgaze.
                   and from thence sent his brothers bodie downe elongest the Ryuer vnto hys brother Prytame, in the citie of Panticape: who caused it very sumptuously & honorably to be enterred, amongs the sepulchres and tombes of the Kings. And that done, he incontinent went into the citie of Galgaze, and there seized on the armie and Realme. To whom Eumele hys brother sent Messangers to demaund particion of ye said Realme, who harkened not to any suche demaund: but after he had placed his garrisons in Galgaze, forthwith returned to Pāticape,
                  
                     Panticape.
                   to establish and set an order about the affaires and estate of the realme. The same time Eumele with the ayde of a numbre Barbarians, tooke the citie of Galgaze, and many other Townes and Uillages thereabout. Whereof Pritame aduertised, leuied a great armie and came against him, where he in battaill was vanquished, and enforced to flie into a place in the straight néere the marshe Meothide: and being there by Eumele enclosed, was driuē of necessitie to come to a cō
                  position, wherein he gaue ouer & restored to him his armie, and also forsooke his right and title of the realme. But after he was returned to Panticape the Palaice Royall of the King of Bosphore, he againe forcibly tooke vppon him the gouernement and estate of the Realme,

but he was a fresh by Eumele ouerthrowen, and fleing through certen orchyardes, there slaine. After whose death, Eumele meaning to assure himselfe of the realme, caused all the friends, wyues and children of Pritame & Satyre his brethren, to be put to death, except and reserued Parisade, Satyre his sonne, a verie yong stryppling, who on horse backe got out of the towne and fled to Agare King of the Scythes.
                  
                     Agare.
                   But when Eumele sée the Citizens for the slaughter of their friendes and familiars waxe mutinous, he assembled them and declared the causes which moued him to do the same, saying farther, that he would restore them into their auncient estate, immunitie and franchize, sometime had vnder his predecessours, and that they should be exempte of all trybutes and impostes: by which meane he appaised them, and wanne againe their good willes and fauoures, and after, sagely and courteouslie gouerned & behaued hym selfe in his raigne, to the great admiration of all his neighbours. For through his munificencie and curtesie, he made all his friendes to loue him: as the Byzancians, Synopians, and the rest of the Grekes inhabiting the countrey of Pont. And when Lysimache besieged the Calantians, who for want of victuals, were brought into great daunger and necessitie, he receyued a thousand of them which came out by reason of the famine: and not onely licenced and assured them to remayne in his Countrey, but also gaue them one of his owne cities, named Yse, & amongs them deuided the territorie thereof.
                     Yse.
                   He moreouer warred vppon the Heniques, Thaures, and Achees, Barbarians, and Sea rouers, to make the Sea Pontique nauigable to them of the countrey. By which his doings he both got great prayse and renowne of the countrey men there, and also of the whole world: bycause of the reporte the people of that countrey made to all whiche sailed and came thyther, so that he hadde wonne a great parte of the region of Barbary ioyning vpon his realme,

and became so puissaunt and renoumed, that he enterprised to subdue and conquer the whole coūtrey of Pont, which he had without pe
                     •
                   aduenture compassed, if death by a meruelous mishappe had not shortened hys dayes, after he had raigned .v. yeares and .v. monethes. For as he was ryding in a coche running on foure wheles, by foure horsses drawē towards a sacrifice or pilgrimage, the horsses sturtling at some thing they sée, ranne quite out of the waye, coursing ouerthwart all the fieldes. But when the King sée that the waggoner coulde not stay thē, fearing the ouerthrowe of yt coche or charriot, made haste to get oute, & thinking to leape to ye ground, his sworde caught betwene the spokes of one of the wheles, wherewith he was immediatlie drawen vnder the wheles, aud there frushed and brused to death. And it is said, that ye death of him and his brother, were by certen playne and simple Oracles pronosticated of, which in deed the men of the countrey greatly credited. For one daye Satire demaunding what death he shoulde die,
                     The superstition of the Paynims.
                   aunswer was by the Oracle made, that he shoulde take heede and beware he were not by a mouse sodenly slayne. By reason whereof he would neyther suffer free or bond bearing that name, to tarry within his coūtrey: and so feared the myse in field and towne, that he commaunded all should be slayne: and farther made all the holes in the ground to be stopped vp, whiche they might come oute at. Howbeit, that serued to no purpose, nor was the cause of his ende, but died of a wounde on the muscle of the arme by vs called the brawne. It is to be vnderstood, that a mouse in Latin is called Mus, and a little Mouse, Musculus: and thereby was signified, that he should take héede, he died not by a mouse, and after his death, some enterpreted that it was of the muscle, which in Latin may be said a little mouse, & also the brawne. And it was of Eumele presaged, to beware of the fall of a house, and therefore he neuer entred any house, but

that he would first circumspectlie aduise, and looke vpon the fundation, to sée if it were stable and sure. But after he was dead in maner as aforesaide, some thoughte the Oracle was accomplished, and that the Charriot was vnderstood the fall of an house. But for this time we wil gyue ouer mencioning of the things done in the East parte of Pont, and speake of those the same season done in Italie.
               
            
            
               
                  ¶ Of two victories which the Romaines wonne against the Samnites, wherby they took many of their Cities.
               
                The .iij. Chapter.
               IN this season the Romaine Consuls being come with their armie into the coūtrey of Puille, wanne a battaill against the Samnites, aboute a place called Talie:
                  
                     Talie.
                   who retired into a mountayne there by, called by the inhabitaunts, the holy hil: so that the Romaines could not pursue them that daye bycause night drew on, and therfore returned to their campe. But the next daye in the morning they ioyned battaill, where a numbre of Samnites were slaine, and aboue two thousande taken prisoners. Through which victorie the Consuls kept the fields and tooke the Cities and Townes against them. Amongs which by force were taken Cataraste, and Carauille, and certen other by treatie and practise.
                     Cataraste.
                   And thus muche touching the matters of Italie.
                  
                     Carauille.
                  
               
            
            
               
               
                  ¶ Ptolome Prince of Egipt winneth from Antigone certen Cities, practizeth and getteth to him Ptolome Nephew to Antigone, and after putteth him to death. Polispercon also through the persuasion of Cassander, putteth to death Hercules the sonne of Alexander. And finallie of Cleomenes death King of Lacedemon.
                  
               
                The .iiij. Chapter.
               THe same yéere that Demetrie Phalerie gouerned Athens, and Quinte Fabie the seconde time, and Caie Martie were created Consuls at Rome, Ptolome aduertised that his Captaynes in Cilice had lost all the Cities they had wonne and taken, betooke him to sea with his whole armie, and arriued at Phaselid,
                  
                     Phaselid.
                   whiche Citie he tooke by siege, and from thence sailed into the Countrey of Lycie, and there tooke the citie Xanthe,
                  
                     Xanthe.
                   garded by Antigone his Souldiours: after that he came before the citie of Caune,
                  
                     Caune.
                   which he by Sea attempted and wanne: he likewise tooke by force the Castle of Heracle, and the Castle Persike yelded vppon compositon. From thence departed he, and came before the citie of Coo, at this daye named Laugo: and there practized with Ptolome, Antigone his brothers sonne, and Lieutenaunt of certē men of his fathers, whome he drew to his alliaunce, & made him reuolte from Antigone hys vncle. And going from Calcide where his armie laye, to méete with Ptolome at Coo, he receyued and welcomed him right honorably. But after he sée his prodigalitie and ambition, to winne and get away Ptolome his Captaynes, fearing he went about to betray him, he preuented the matter, and caused him to be apprehended and poysoned: and attracting his Souldiours to his fauoure, deuided them amongs his bandes. In this meane while, after Polispercon had assembled a great armie, he tooke hys iourney to bring Hercules the sonne of Alexāder by Barsine, to the realme

of Macedon. And when he was with hys armie come to the place Stymphale, Cassander also came thyther with a puissaunt armie, and encamped very néere hym. But when he perceyued that the Macedonians which came with him, were satisfied and contēt that Hercules should be restored to his fathers realme, and fearing if they sée him, they would quickly take his part, sent secret Messangers to Polispercon, declaring that so soone as he had restored Hercules to his realme, he shoulde then become his subiect and thrall: but if he would kil him, and make alliaunce with the saide Cassander, he would first render and restore to him, al that he before held and enioyed in Macedone, gyue him a sufficient armie, nominate & proclame him Prince and Gouernour of Peloponnese, make him partaker and consorte of all he had vnder his dominion, and besides haue him in greater honour and reuerence, than any other of the Satrapes. Through these persuasions and faire promisses, he induced Polispercon to consent vnto this mischeuous and wicked practize: and after they had plighted their faythes one to an other, he caused the yong Hercules trayterouslie to be slaine: and that done, openly then shewed him selfe friende to Cassander, who for accomplishing hys promysse, rendred first to him all that he had held and enioyed in Macedon, and after deliuered him .iiij. thousand Macedonian footemen, and .v. hundred Thessalian horsse: and so many as voluntarily came to serue him, he receyued and gaue them good enterteynement, with which armie he inuaded and entred Peloponnese, through the countrey of Beoce: but being by the Beotians and Peloponnesians repulsed, he returned with his armie and wintred in Locres. The self same yeare founded Lysimache a citie in Theronese, called after his owne name Lysimache. And when Cleomenes King of Lacedemon hadde raigned .Lx. yeares and .x. monethes, he died: after whose death his Sonne Arete succeded, and raigned .xliiij. yeares.
            
            
               
               
                  ¶Of certen victories which the Romaines haue vppon the Tyrrhenians and Samnites. And of certen Innouations, by Appie Claudie the Romaine Censor made, in contempt and defacing of the Senate and nobles, in fauoure of the communaltie.
               
                The .v. Chapter.
               ABout the same time, the Tyrrhenians besieging the Citie of Souttre,
                  
                     Souttre.
                   a colonie of the Romaines, were in vattaill by the Romaine Consuls vanquished & chased home into their campe: whiche Romaines came thyther with great power, of purpose to rayse their siege. On the other side, the Samnites séeing the Romaine armies farre from their countrey, burnt, wasted, and pilled the landes and countrey of the Iapides, confederats with the Romaines. By reason whereof the Consuls were enforced to deuide their armie, leauing Fabie in Toscane,
                  
                     Fabie.
                   and sent Martie against the Samnites,
                  
                     Martie.
                   who tooke by force the citie of Aliphe, and deliuered the Allies of the Romaine people, from the necessitie and daunger they were in. Agayne, Fabie séeing that a great number of the Tyrrhenians were assembled to besiege the Citie of Souttre, secretly departed from that quarter, and passing throughe the territorie of their neighbours, before they were espied, entred the hie countrey, whiche of long had bene vnpilled and vnrobbed of any enemie, and spoyled and fouraged it all ouer, and slew numbres of the paysaunts that resisted hym, and tooke many prisoners. Whiche done, he went against Perouse: and finding the Tyrrhenians there assembled in battaill,
                     Perouse.
                   discomfited them, and slew a great numbre, wherwith they were maruelously amazed: for the Romaines had neuer ben so beforehand as Fabie was thē. Who after that victorie, trused with the Aretians, Crotonians and Perousians: and shortly after

tooke by force the citie of the Tyrrhenians named Castolle,
                  
                     Castolle.
                   by meane whereof they were enforced to raise their siege from before the citie of Souttre.
               
               In this season Appie Claudie and Lucie Claudie were by the Romaines elect and named Censores.
                     Ap. Claudius. I. Claudius.
                   And the said Appie being throughe flatterie of his companion, in all doings followed, chaunged and altered many of the ancient customes of the citie, for he (to please the communaltie) had no regard to content the Senate. And firste, he caused a pipe of lead to be brought into the Citie by conductes foure score furlongs long, to the great coste and charge of the common treasure, withoute making the Senate any thing priuie thereto, and called it after his owne name Appie. He likewise caused the wayes and straights, from Rome to Capue, being a thousand furlongs distaunt betwene, to be paued, and called them Appie, he playned and leuelled also all the rockes and mountaynes, and filled vp all the ditches and vallies wt earth and rubushe, so that he had about those works employed & bestowed almost the whole reuenue of ye Citie, to haue his name ymmortall, for his liberalitie and munificence towardes the weale publicke, besides great nouelties and chaunges in the Senate by him made. For where in times past were none but of the noblest houses and greatest wealth admitted to the dignitie of a Senator, he put in many sclaues borne, wherewith the nobles and gentlemen were greatly offended. He likewise graunted to euery of the Citizens, to enrolle & writte him selfe in what tribe he would, and in the same paye his rente. Moreouer, when he perceyued the nobles wholie moued and bent against him, he woulde do nothing, that in any wise should seeme to please or content them, nor do any thing according to their intention and desire, that by any meane might displease the meane sorte of the communaltie: making in this sorte hys parte good against the nobles, through the good willes of

the commons. So that, when it came to the musters of the horssemen, he woulde not once reiect any horsse of theirs, and in vewing the Senate, would not put backe one of the infamed according to the auncient custome therein always before obserued and kepte. By reason whereof, the Senates to despite him, when they assembled the Senate, would not once cal to counsail the Senators by him appointed, but onely those whiche before had ben by the others Censors nominated and chosen. Howbeit, the communaltie thinking to please Appie, & to vpholde and mainteyne that whiche he had done, and also desiring that the promotion of their kinsfolkes and friends by him pronounced Senators might take effect, chose to the chief and principall office of Edilite Gne Flauie,
                  
                     Gne Flauie.
                   sonne to a bondman: whiche thing in Rome was neuer before seene. When all these things were finished and done, and that the ende and terme of Appie was cō
                  sumed and determined, to auoyde the malice and displeasure of the nobles cōceyued against him, he feigned and countrefaited blindnesse, and neuer after remoued out of his owne house.
            
            
               
                  ¶ After Ptolome Prince of Egipt hath restored one parte of the Cities of Grece to libertie, he for despite and in recompence of their breach of promisse with him, concludeth a peace with Cassander. And Cleopatre sister to Alexander the great, comming on hir waye towardes hym, is by the commaundement of Antigone, miserablie slayne.
               
                The .vj. Chapter.
               THe yeare that Carine helde the principalitie of Athens, and at Rome were created Cōsuls, Publie Decie and Quite Fabie
                        •
                      
                   and in the Olympiade the .Cxxvij.

                  Ptolome Prince of Egipt went to Sea with a great armie from Mynde: and sayling alongest the Isles of Grece, deliuered first Andrie from the subiection of Antigone
                        •
                      
                   and expulsed his garrisons. From thence he sayled to the straight of Peloponnese, called Isthmus, and there tooke the cities of Sycione, Corynth, and Cratesipole, and restored them to libertie, fully de
                     •
                   ermined to do the lyke to the rest of the cities in Grece, thinking thereby to get great good will and fauoure, and so to fortifie and make strong his estate. But after he sée that the Peloponnesians would not with victuals and money ayde him according to their promisse, he for despite and anger, allied and cō
                  cluded a peace with Cassander, wherein was declared, & agreed on, that euery of them should gouerne the Cities and Prouinces alreadie in their possessions. And vppon that conclusion, after he had garrisonned Sycione and Corinth, he returned into Egipt. In the meane while Cleopatre séeing the enimitie dayly betwene hir and Antigone encrease, determined to ioyne with Ptolome, and so departed from the Citie of Sardis, meaning to séeke hym out. It is to be vnderstood, that Cleopatre was sister to Alexander the great, and sometime wife to Alexander late King of Epyre deceased, whiche warred in Italie: whome for the noblenesse of hir ligne and stemme, Cassander, Lysimache, Antigone, Ptolome, and in effect all the puissaunt and renowmed Princes & Chieftaynes which remained after Alexander the great, greatly desired to wife, thinking that the Macedonians would soone obey and follow him, who shoulde marry hir, by reason of the affinitie he should haue in the bloud Royall, and be held for chief and soueraigne ouer the rest. But the deputie of the Citie of Sardes for Antigone, hauing from hym expresse charge and cōmaundement to take diligent héede she departed not, incontinent stayed hir going. And after, by the commaundement of Antigone, throughe certen women whome he had for that purpose corrupted,

put hir to death. And bycause Antigone woulde not séeme to be the Author of so execrable a murder, he by iustice put to death certen of the said women, as if they had perpetrated and committed some hainous facte: and verie honorably buried the body of the Ladie, as apperteyned to so noble a Dame. In this sorte Cleopatre for marriage of whome all the noble and renowmed Princes were at debate and controuersie, before the time of marriage ended hir life.
            
            
               
                  ¶ After the taking and razing of Munichie, Demetre, Antigone his sonne, by his Fathers commaundement restoreth Athens, Megare, and many other Cities of Grece to libertie: and of their liberalitie towardes him, and the honours they iudged him worthie for that his benefite & good turne.
               
                The .vj. Chapter.
               THe same yéere in which Anaxicrate held ye gouernement of Athens, and that Appie Claudie and Lucie Volamine were at Rome created Consuls, when Demetre Antigone his sonne (to execute his Fathers cō
                  maundement for restauration of the Cities of Grece to libertie) had gotten togyther a great number of footemen, shippes, plentie of armoure, and all other munition méete & necessarie for a siege, he loused from Ephesus, and sayled directly to the Citie of Athens, by Cassander garrisoned. And after he had before the Porte of Pyrea pitched his campe, he caused by an edict, his fathers commaundement to be published for the restauration of the cities of Grece to libertie. But Dionise Captayne of Munychie, and Demetre Phalerey deputie of Athens for Cassander, right ouer against him had with Souldiours mā
                  ned their walles and curtens. Neuerthelesse some of

                  Antigone his Souldiours had gotten one quarter of the curten of Pire, standing vppon the Sea side named Acten, and there slew and repulsed the enimie, whiche was the cause of the taking of Pyre. Howbeit, Dionise retired into Munichie, and Demetre Phalerey into the Citie of Athens, who the next day in the morning was by the commoners sent in an Ambassade towardes Demetre, before whom he propounded aswell the deliueraunce of the citie and Citizens, as also his owne. But when he see he could no whit impetrate or get graunt for the said Citie, but for him selfe only, he fled into Egipt to Ptolome, and so abandoned hys Countrey after he had gouerned the citie .x. yeares. And after the people had gotten libertie, they adiudged the authors thereof worthie perpetuall honours. In this meane tyme Demetre hauing great prouision of shot and engines for to assault, both by Sea and land besieged Munychie. Howbeit Dionise and his souldiours had great aduantage of the enimie, by reason the towne was of great heigth, and the scituation of the walles agréeing thereto, so that they right valiauntlie defended it, although Demetre hadde maruelous great prouision of all things. And lastly, after he had two dayes togyther without staye assaulted the castle, he shreudlie daunted the courages of ye defendants, bycause the greater number were sore hurte and gald with shot, not able to releue the curten with fresh men, and the assailaunts by reason of their mightie numbre, continuallie refreshed and releued their Souldiers, and thereby at last wanne the castle, and tooke Dionise Captayne thereof prisoner. After he hadde in short tyme atchieued this victorie, he razed Munychie, restored the Athenians to their pristinate libertie, and with them allied and made an inuiolable peace. By reason of which benefite,
                     Stratocle.
                   they by the commaundement of Stratocle ordeyned that the statues or Images of Antigone and Demetre should be set vp in golde hard by Armodie and Aristogiton,
                  
and farther, sent to eche of them a crowne of golde worth two hundred Talents. They likewise rered an Altare called the Altare of their deliuerers, and added and annexed to their .x. Tribes two more: wherof the one called Antigonide, and the other Demetriade. They farther ordeyned euery yeare (in their honoure) games and sacrifices to be made as vnto Goddes, and that their Statues and Images shoulde be wound and couered ouer with a couerchief of the Goddes Pallas. And thus the Gouernement and libertie populer which the Athenians had in the Lamian warre lost vnder Antipater, was restored to them vnlooked for .xv. yeares after. The like did Demetre to the citie of Megare, by Cassander garrisoned, whom they also honoured as they did the first. After all these matters, when the Ambassadors of Athens came to Antigone to present the Decrée made by the citie in the honour of him and hys Sonne, and to desire him of timber and other stuffe for the buylding of certen shippes and corne to victuall them, he gaue .Cl. thousand Medymnes of wheat, and so much timber and other stuffe as would build a hundred tall shippes, and rendred to thē the citie of Imbre which he kept,
                     The Citie of Imbre.
                   & farther writte to Demetre his sonne to depute and appointe all the Conseruators of ye frée cities of Grece, to haue charge and authoritie to consulte and puruey for all things apperteyning to the conseruation of their libertie: and ye done, incontinent to take shipping and saile into Cypres, to fight with the Lieutenaunts of Ptolome.
               
            
            
               
                  ¶ Demetre, Antigone his sonne, vanquisheth in a battaill at Sea Ptolome, before the Citie of Salamine in Cypres, and by that meane winneth the whole Isle from him. And after the said Antigone, Demetre and Ptolome take vppon them the Tytles and Dyademes of Kings.
               
                The .viij. Chapter.
               
                  WHen Demetre had executed and performed hys Fathers commaundement, concerning the restauration of the Cities of Grece, he sailed into Carie, & from thence sent his Ambassadoures to the Rhodians, to persuade them to allie and ioyne with him in the warre against Ptolome, whereunto they would not agrée, but concluded to be in amitie and friendship with them both, and not to make or medle with any of their doings, which was the first occasion and chief cause that plucked away the harts of the Rhodians from Antigone. From thence loused Demetre, and passing elongest the Isle of Sicile, leuied shippes and Souldiours and sayled into Cypres, hauing with him .xv. thousand footemen .iiij. hundred horsse, and of Pumasses and excellent fine Gallies .Cx. besides .Liij. other of greater burden, méete for the warres, and a number of Barques laden with victuals and other necessarie hablements for the armie. And first he landed on the coast of Carpasie,
                  
                     Carpasie.
                   and there encamped hard by the shoare, which he entrenched with déepe ditches and trenches. From thence he went to the siege of Vranie,
                  
                     Vranie.
                   making incursions on the Countrey in the waye, and tooke them. That done, leauing a sufficient number for the garde of his shippes, he marched on to Salamine,
                  
                     Salamine.
                   whereof Menelaye was deputie for Ptolome,
                  
                     Menelaye.
                   who had leuied a number of mē in the Isle, and retired into Salamine, & hauing intelligēce that Demetre was approched within .xl. furlongs of the citie, he marched oute against him with .xij. thousande footemen and .viij. hundred horsse, and encountred him in battaill, but after the horssemen had a while lustely charged one another, the Menelaians retired and fled, and the Demetrians séeing the victorie theirs, subsecuted and chased them harde to the walles of the citie, so that they slewe aboute a thousand, and tooke aboue thrée thousand prisoners. Whome Demetre reteyned in wages, and deuided amongs hys bandes. But when he see they dayly fled from him to

                  Menelaye, bycause their goods and baggage, were left in Egipt with Ptolome: and that he could not reduce thē to his amitie and seruice, he enbarqued ye rest, and sent them to his father lying in the hier Syrie, where he buylt about the ryuer Oronte a verie sumptuous Citie, called after his owne name Antigone, being foure score furlongs about. Now was this a méete and necessarie place to get and hold the imperiall dominion of Babylon and al the hier and lower Satrapies in subiection, notwithstanding, it stoode not or continued long: for Seleuke shortly after destroyed it and transported the inhabitaunts into an other citie of his foūdation and building called after his name Seleuke. After Demetre hadde bene victor in the battaill aforesaid, Menelaye and the reste of his Souldiours which escaped and had gotten the Citie of Salamine, made great preparation of shot and engines for their defence and suretie, deuiding the quarters of their walles with the towers and flankers betwene them, bycause they sée that Demetre determined with al his power and force, to attempt and assault the citie. They also sent into Egipt to Ptolome, signifying to hym of their estate aud daunger, solliciting him to send hys ayde and helpe. When Demetre sée that the Citie was mightie and strong, and throughlie māned, he determined to make huge & mightie engines wherewith they commonly vsed to besiege and ouerthrow Townes and Cities, which shot stones and other kinde of shot of all sortes against the walles, and the residue of his prouision maruelous terrible to batter & ouerthrow the same. For exploiting wherof he sent for a wonderful number of workemen and artificers, & plentie of yron and such other stuffe out of Syrie, so that in short tyme he had prepared and made readie all things to batter and ouerthrow the walles. But amongs other his deuises he caused an engine to be made called Helepolis,
                  
                     Helepolis.
                   to saye, an ouerthrower of cities .xl. cubits eche waye square, and

foure score and ten cubits hie, in which were .ix. stories or sellers deuided one from another with planchers of wood, all running vppon foure great wheles .viij. cubits hie. He had also many other engines called Rammes, very large & great to batter any wall, & two great and puissaunt Tortoises to helpe them. In the lowermost sellers of the Helepolis he planted store of engines and ordinaunce which threw and shot stones, the greater sorte waying thrée Talents. In the middle stories he planted engines made like boltes shooting long & sharpe shot, and in the hier stages were other whiche shot lesse and lighter. He placed also in the saide roomes or stories two hundred experte Souldiours to shoote off and handle the said ordinaunce and engines. After he hadde placed his engines of battery against the wall, he in short time beat down the toppes and batlements of the curten, and after sore battered and shaked the walles: Howbeit the besieged so valiauntly defended their Citie with such weapon and engines as they had prepared against the assaultes, that for certen dayes no mā could iudge of the winning of the citie, suche were the noble hartes and courages inuincible of the honorable Captaynes and lustie Souldiours on eyther side. But to be short, the wall was so sore battered and shaken, and a long breach made, that the citie was disfurnished of defence and no remedy but to yelde or be taken the nexte day following, if there were not found some newe maner of defence that night, before the assault ceassed. Wherfore the Menelayans hauing great store and plenty of drie wood and suche like stuffe whiche soone would take fire, about midnight so néere approched ye engines of the enimie, that with long poles and other which they had lighted, they cast in fire: so that in lesse thā an houre, the fire grew so quicke and terrible, that they had burnt the greater part of the engines and the souldiours within them: which thing the Demetrians coulde not helpe,

and auoide by reason of the sodainenesse therof. And althoughe Demetre for that time was frustrate of hys determination & purpose, yet had he good hope and still vrged to take the citie, continuing the siege both by Sea & land, not doubting but in the ende to winne it. In this meane while Ptolome hauing intelligēce of the affaires and slaughter of his people, departed oute of Egipt, and tooke sea with a great power sayling towardes Salamine, and being dryuen into the Porte of Paphe in the Isle of Cypres, he there landed and got togyther all the ships of the cities thereabout, and from them made his course to Syrie, distaunt from Salamine two hundred furlongs. He had in his Nauie an .Cl. Gallies, wherof the greater were of .v. tier of ores on a side, and the lesser of foure: he had also aboue two hundred Barques, wherein were enbarqued aboue ten thousand souldiours, and the reste laden with baggage and other prouisiō. He sent by land likewise certen Messangers to Menelaye, commaunding him if it were possible to send the .lx. Gallies lying in the hauē of Salamine, which ioyned with his, & he thought to be much stronger at sea then Demetre, hauing two hundred Gallies or better. When Demetre vnderstoode of Ptolome his comming, he left the siege furnished before the citie, and enbarqued the rest of his Souldiours with great store of shot and engines which shot far off, planting them in the noses of his Gallies, and when he had arranged them all in order of battaill, he enuironed the Towne, and in the mouth of the hauen cast ancre, and road there all that night withoute the daunger of the shot, bothe for stopping of the Gallies which laye in the Port, that they should not get out to ioyne with Ptolome, and also to sée what course Ptolome kept, to the ende that which waye soeuer he came, he would be arranged and readie in order of battaill to fight. But after the day once appeared, he might descry a mightie and terrible Nauie of Ptolomes, sayling towards the citie, whereat

he was astonied:
                     Anthiston.
                   wherfore he left his Admirall Anthiston with ten Gallies of fiue tier of ores, in the place where he laye, to garde and take héede that the Gallies of the Towne made not out, & commaunded hys horsemen to ryde all alongest the shoare, to the end, that if any mischief happened him, they might saue them which were ouerthrowen into the sea and swamme to lande: and him selfe in order of battaill, sailed against the enemie with a Nauie of a .Cviij. saile with those he receyued of the cities he wanne, whereof the greater were of vij. tier, and the rest of .v. tier. And first in the left wing or rereward he placed .vij. Phenician Gallies of .vij. tier, and of the Athenians .xxx. of foure tier, appointing Mede,
                  
                     Mede.
                   the leading of that battaill: behinde them he placed ten of sixe tier, and ten of fiue tier, meaning to fortifie and strengthen that well, wherein him selfe paraduenture would fight. In the middle wing or maine battaill he placed the lesser Gallies, the charge of which he committed to Themise the Samian, and Martian the Historian who writte the déedes and gestes of the Macedonians. The right wing or vowarde lead Egesippe the Alicarnasian, and Plescias of Coho, Admirall of the whole Nauie. Now had Ptolome in the night loosed, and with all possible speede sailed towardes Salamine, thinking to preuent the enimie, if he could gette into the Porte of Salamine. But when it waxed néere daye, he might discry not farre of the Nauie of the enimie in order of battaill. Wherefore he got togyther hys Gallies and arranged them as followeth: First he commaunded that the barques should come a good way behinde, and arranged the rest in good and compotent order, placing him self in the left wing or rereward, wherin was the greatest power and strength. When he had ordered and placed hys battaill, the Souldiours on eyther side made the prayers and supplications to the Goddes in loude maner according to their custome. And ye Chieftayns considering

that ye hazard of their liues & whole estate stood thereon, were very carefull and sore troubled in mynde aboute the same. But so soone as they were approched within thrée furlongs one of an other, Demetre first gaue the signe and token of battaill to his Souldiours, halsing a terge of golde in the poupe of hys Gallie in the view of the whole Nauie: and shortlie after, Ptolome did the like.
               Then sounded ye trumpets to battaill, and forthwith beganne a fierce and violent fight with shot and dartes, being a pretie distaunce asundre, wherein on eche side were many sore hurte: but after they drew neerer, there was flinging of great mightie stones, and the Marryners for their liues rowed as harde and forcibly as they could, so that at the bording was a terrible affray, for they violently rushing one by another, brake and carried away one anothers ores, to the ende there should be no flight nor yet any great forcible assayling. Some encountred one an other afore, and there fought hande to hand, some borded on the broad side ye eas
                     •
                   ier to get into the enimie, bycause it is difficile and hard to laye abord about the beake or forebough of a Gallie, other some thinking to enter, fell into the Sea and were slaine wt the shorte pikes of the enimie, some entred and slewe many en
                     ••
                   ies, and made the rest leape into the Sea, so that in the ende happened diuerse aduentures and victories vnlooked for. For often tymes the lesser Gallies borded and tooke the greater, bycause they were so heauie that they could not so readily remoue and turne to and fro. And although in fight on lande the vertue and prowes of the Grekes winneth them victorie whiche by no fortune or chaunce can any way be let or stopped: yet in conflictes at Sea, diuerse and sundrie wayes it chaunceth that the greater power and most lykely,
                     The valiauntnesse of Demetre.
                   contrary to mannes reason, is soonest vanquished and ouerthrowen. But in this battaill Demetre amongs the rest

most valiauntlie bare him selfe, for he getting vp to the poupe of a Gailie of .vij. tier of ores which he had wōne, so stoutely fought against the Souldiours within, that what with dartes and Iauelings he slewe of thē a great number, and some with playne hand stroks. And althoughe great store of shot came against him, yet put he by and eschewed some, & receyued the rest on his armoure. And for the thrée men whiche continually were aboute him, the one was with the pushe of a pyke slayne, & the other two with shot sore hurt. But to be short, he so cheualrouslie exployted his matters, that he put to flight ye right wing or voward of ye enemie, & as many as were next them. And Ptolome with his greatest and most warlike Gallies put to flight the leaft wing or rerewarde of the enimie, sinking some and pryzing the rest with so many as were within them. And returning as victor to the ayde of his right wing or vowarde, whiche was discomfited and put to flight, he séeing the Demetrians pursuing and chasing them, and after making towardes him, was so afraid, that he fled into the Citie of Citin.
               
               When Demetre had at Sea atchieued and gottē this victory, he deuided hys Nauie and gaue the charge to Neon and Burick two of his Captaynes,
                     Neon. Buricke.
                   commaunding them to pursue and chase the enimie, and take in as many of his souldiours as they founde swimming, and him selfe with the rest of his Nauie and his prizes carried ensignes and tokens of victorie into his campe, lying about the Porte of Salamine. In the meane while that these two Prouinces were in fight, Menelaye deputie of the Citie of Salamine had enbarqued a numbre of men of warre in the .lx. Gallies, ryding in the hauen of Salamine, to send in Ptolome his ayde, appointing for Admirall Menete,
                  
                     Menete.
                   who with such violence rowed out vpon the .x. Gallies which garded the entry of the hauen, that he put them all to flight, and made them haste towardes the

shoare where Demetre his horssemen were. But the Menetians preuented of the enemie, came a daye after the faire, and were fayne to returne to their citie. In this fight were aboue a hundred Barques taken with .viij. thousand Souldiours .xl. Gallies and the Souldiours within them, and foure score sore frushed and shaken, which Demetre his Souldiours brought awaye laden to the siege lying before the entry of the Porte of Salamine. There were not of Demetre his Gallies aboue .xx. lost. After this victorie Ptolome despayring in the defence & kéeping of the Isle of Cypres, returned into Egipt: and incontinent after his departure, Demetre got in subiection all the Townes and Cities of the countrey, togyther al the garrisons within them, to the number of .xvj. thousand footemen, and .vj. hundred horsse, whiche he deuided amongs his armie. When he had finished and accomplished all these things, he embarqued certen of hys most warlikest Gallies he had, and sent them to hys Father, signifying to him of his notable and triumphāt victorie: who was so glorious and proude thereof, that he tooke vppon him the name of a King and Diademe Royal, and after bare hym as a King, willing Demetre his Sonne to do the same. Ptolome likewise (notwithstanding hys great ouerthrow and losse in Cypres) to shewe he had lost neyther hart or courage, tooke vppon him the name of a King, and in all his letters and proclamations to all mē so entituled and named him self. By whose example the other Princes which before were but as Uicegerents and Gouernours, entituled them selues then by the names of Kings, to saie, Seleuke of the Satrapies and hier Prouinces by hym newlie conquered, Lysimache and Cassander, of those whiche at the first were gyuen them and still reteyned.
            
            
               
               
                  ¶ Antigone and Demetre his sonne, with a mightie power inuade Egipt both by Sea and lande. And after finding the entry and border of the countrey well prouided and furnished, they returne without any exploite.
               
                The .ix. Chapter.
               THe yeare that Corile gouerned Athens, and at Rome Quinte Martie and Publie Cornelie were created Consuls, after King Antigone had sumptuously celebrated the funeralles of Phenix his yonger Sonne deceased,
                     Phenix
                   he sent to his Sonne Demetre in Cypres, to make haste and come to him, and in the meane time him selfe made great preparation to arrere warres against Ptolome in Egipt. Which done he tooke hys iourney through the countrey of Celosirie, with an armie of foure score thousand footemen, about .viij. thousand horsse and foure score and three Elephantes, and sent his sonne Demetre by Sea with .L. Gallies and aboue an hundred Carraques and Barques, whiche carried his people and their baggage, commaunding him to saile alōgest that shoare side which the armie marched on by land. And although the Marriners counsailed him to staye .xv. dayes longer, vntill suche tyme as the daungerous season of winter were passed ouer, yet woulde he not be ruled, but very angerly gaue them despitefull and reprochefull words, calling them cowards and dastards: and encamping at the citie of Gaze,
                  
                     Gaze
                   determining to preuent Ptolome hys armie, commaunded his Souldiours to make prouision of victualles for ten dayes, and laded the Camels which ye 
                  Arabians brought with .Cxxx. thousande Medynnes of wheat, and haye for their horsses great store: and hys shot, armour, weapon, and other necessaries were carried by carte through the desertes, a laborsome and painfull iourney, bycause the wayes were myery, déepe and

ful of marshes, but especially as he drew néere the countrey of Baratre.
                  
                     Baratre.
                   And Demetre who the same daye about midnight loused from Gaze, had for certen dayes a faire and caulme ceason. During which time he haled & drew with his Gallies the Carraques and Barkes fraught wt Souldiours and sarriages. And as he thus for a fewe dayes rowed, sodenly arose so great a flaw of wynd out of the North, that it put the Gallies in great hazarde, in so much that some of them were carried with the surgies and bellow into the daungerous mouth of the port of Raphie,
                  
                     Raphie.
                   bycause it was almost choked vp with a shelf of dyrte and ouze. And some of the Barques whiche carried the shot, armoure, and other carriages, perished by tempeste, and other were dryuen backe ageyne into Gaze. But the rest of the Nauie wherin were the strongest Gallies and lustiest Souldiours, so labored against the wether, that they arriued about Cassile,
                  
                     Cassile.
                   a citie scituate vpon the riuer Nile, hauing no Port but only a rode, which in the tyme of any vnseasonable wether or tempest is very daungerous, by reason wherof, the Marryners were forced to caste Anker two furlongs from the shoare riding in much daūger, for ye Bellow went so hie that it was great maruell the shippes and men had not out of hand ben ouerthrowen and drowned. And to land could they not get eyther with boat or man, which land also belonged to the enimie: and that which was worse, their fresh water failed, and they driuen to such néede, that if the tempest had continued but one daye longer, they had all died of thirst. While they were in this dispaire looking for present death, sodēly the wind calmed & anō they descried Antigone his armie encamped not far from the Nauie: wherefore they came on lande, & there refreshed them certē dayes, attending some good newes of the rest of their shippes. In this tempest perished .iij. Gallies, but by good hap many of the Souldiours were saued and came on land. From thence departed Antigone,
                  
and encamped within two furlongs of Nyle. But Ptolome alreadie aduertised of the enimies comming, had throughly furnished all the fortes and blockhouses which fronted on the enimie, with strong and mightie garrisons
                     •
                    and sent certen in smal pynnaces, with commaundement that they should row néere and make proclamation that so many as would come and serue hym, he would gyue liberall wages and gentle reteynoure, to saye to euery common Souldiour two mynes a day,
                     A Myne was a coine amongst the Greekes of two sortes, the one called Mina Attica Solonis, in value of our money xlvij. s. xj. d. the other named Mina vetus worth .xxxv. s. and .xj. d. farthing.
                   and to euery Captayne or any other which had charge, a Talent a day. By reason of which proclamation most of Antigone his Mercenarie souldiours minded to serue Ptolome: and amongs them many Captaynes also for diuerse occasions desired to serue him, so that Antigone séeing his Souldiours dayly steale from his campe, was enforced to set strong garde and watch all alongest the ryuer side, with great store of shot and engines to stop the enimie for comming on lande, and gréeuouslie punished certen of those which were taken going to the enimie, to the ende to put the rest in terrour and feare. Demetre also with those fewe shippes he had,
                     A Talent: of Talen
                           •
                         es were diuers sortes, one worth fiue hundred poūd, one of .cc
                           •
                         li. but the cōmon 
                           •
                         alent of .xl. li.
                   entred an arme of the riuer Nyle, whiche ranne into the Sea, called the false Porte, thinking there to lande a number of his Souldiours. But when he founde it garded with a lustie garrison, and that he was with shot and all other kinde of engines repulsed, and the night drawing on, retired, and commaunded all the Captaynes of the ships to followe the Admirall by the light in the mayne toppe sayling directlie to the other entry of Nyle, called Phenitique. When daye was come, bycause manie of his ships had missed their course, he was driuen to stay for them, & sent oute his Brigantines to séeke and haste them forward. Wherefore with spending much tyme in getting them togyther, Ptolome who was aduertised of the certeyntie thereof, made spéede to gard the said passage, so that he had a great numbre of able fighting men, readie

arranged in battail vppon the shoare. When Demetre sée them thus furnished, and that the Countrey next to the said entry was almost all marish ground, he sailed backe into the déepe, where immediatlie arose suche a great wind which so violentlie draue them towards the shoare that .vj. Gallies and as many Barques, which carried men of warre, with the vehemencie of the wether were runne on lande vnder Ptolomees power, and the rest with strength of ores rowed against the winde to the place where Antigone encamped. When Ptolome had thus furnished all the passages of the Sea wt strong garrisons, and the entry of Nile with shippes, shot and men, Antigone was in great feare. For once Demetre his Nauie at Sea serued to no purpose to enter the mouth of Peluse, being so well garded and kept: ageyne the armie by land could no waye passe, by reason of the swelling and rysing of the ryuer: and that whiche was worse, they hadde so long trauailled, that they wanted victuals both for men and horses. When the souldiours for the causes aboue said, begā to murmur and grudge, Antigone assembled hys armie and tooke counsaill and aduise of his Captaynes, whether it were more expedient to tarry and continue hys enterprise, or presentlie to returne into Syrie, and come agayne at some other more conuenient tyme, when he were better appointed and the ryuer Nile fallen lower. But when he see them all of mynde and accord, he brake vp ye camp and spéedily returned into Syrie by land, hauing his Nauie sayling by him all alongest the coast. As soone as Ptolome hadde intelligence of their departure, he was right glad, making to the Goddes great sacrifices, and to his friends honorable feastes and banquettes, signifying also Seleuke, Lysimache and Cassander by his letters, of his aduenture and good lucke, and the reuolte of Antigone his Souldiours to him. This done, thinking that he had nowe the second time by armes recouered and gotten the Countrey

of Egipt: and last of all, that he might by iust title and conquest of warre hold and keepe it, returned to Alexandrie.
               
            
            
               
                  ¶Of certen exploites of warre betwene the Romaines and Samnites.
                  
               
                The .x. Chapter.
               
                  
                     Dionise.
                  THe same season after Dionise Tyraunt of the citie of Heracle in the countrey of Pont, hadde raigned xxxij. yeares, he died:
                     Zatras.
                   and his two children Zatras & Clearche succéeded,
                     Clearche.
                   who raigned after him .xvij. yeares. And the selfe same yeare the Samnites wonne of the Romaines the cities of Sore and Acye, and them sacked and spoyled: Ageine the Romaine Consuls entred the Citie of Lapige, and after besieged the citie of Silue, whiche the Samnites had long kepte and garrisoned, but in the ende the Romaines tooke it by assault, butined all their goods, & ransomed aboue .v. thousand prisoners. Which done, they spoyled the Region of the Samnites, cut downe the wood, and burnt the Townes and Uillages. For the Romaines thought, bycause the same Nation hadde alreadie many yeares contended with them for the Empire and rule, that if they destroyed their lande, they shoulde of force gyue place and yelde vnto them. For which cause they for .v. whole monethes togyther, burnt and spoyled in their Countrey all that they could not carrie awaye, in so muche that they left not standing in all the Countrey eyther house, cottage, trée or bushe that might be destroyed, but made the lande vtterlie voide and desolate. And this yeare also they warred on the Egmettes, and by composition tooke the citie of Erusin, and sold the whole territorie.
            
            
               
               
                  ¶ Demetre by the commaundement of hys Eather, both by Sea and land besieged the Citie of Rhodes. Of the great and lustie assaultes they gaue, and the maruelous and honorable defence that the Townesmen made.
               
                The .xj. Chapter.
               THe yéere following that Xenippe gouerned Athens, and Lucie Posthume and Tyberie Mynute were at Rome created Consuls, warres for these occasions were betwene Antigone & the Rhodians cōmenced. For the citie of Rhodes was then by sea verie puissaunt and strong, and was most wysely gouerned, and in greater reputation than all the other Cities of Grece. By reason wherof, al the Kings and Princes in those dayes hadde an eye thereunto, and endeuoured them to obtayne and get their fauoure and alliaunce on their side. But the Rhodians who foresaw and considered their cōmon emolument and commoditie, gently enterteyned al the said Princes, and had with euery of thē a particular league and amitie, withoute entremedling at any hande with any of them in their warres. Whereuppon happened, that all the said Princes honoured and cherished them diuersly, & with great giftes remunerated and gratified them: by which meane they long liued in tranquillitie and wealth. Throughe whiche occasion, their power so greatly encreased, that they at their owne costes and charges enterprised warre for the whole state of Grece, against all Pyrats, and clearely purged the Seas of all theeues and rouers. But their chiefest and greatest estimation was, that Alexander surnamed the great, moste renowmed of all Princes of the worlde of whome remaineth any mention, made so muche more accompte thereof, than of all the other Cities of Grece: so that he gaue them the Testament of his whole estate and Empire,

to kéepe, and in all things he might, honoured and greatlie aduaunced the same. And although the Rhodians had in such sorte (with all the most puissaunt Princes & Potentates) liued, that none of them could reasonablie complayne on them or be agreeued: yet had they neuerthelesse farre greater amitie and familiaritie with Ptolome than with all the rest, bycause their Marchauntes had greater traffique and commoditie from the coūtrey of Egipt than else where, and the greater parte of the citie lyued and was mainteyned by the marchaundise of the said countrey. Whiche thing Antigone vnderstanding, dyd all that in him laye to turne the trade and entercourse of Marchandise thence,
               Wherfore after his sonne had warred vpon Ptolome in Cypres, he sent his Ambassadors towards them, praying their ayde and to send their shippes to Demetre hys sonne. But when he sée they woulde not heare him, he sent one of his Sea Captaynes with certen number of shippes in that quarter, commaunding him to staye and take so many saile of Rhodians as he founde sayling into Egipt, and to spoyle and robbe them of their marchandise. But the Rhodians thereof aduertized, draue hym quickly backe, and chased him quite from those Seas. Whereuppon Antigone tooke his occasion to saye that they were the authors of the warre. So he with many minatorie termes menaced them, and vaūted and bragged that he would with his so mightie a power come against them, & that he would besiege their citie. Wherof the Rhodians aduertised, decréed to do hym great honours in their citie, sent great Ambassades to him, praying him not to enforce them to make warre against Ptolome, nor yet to breake their promisse and alliaunce which they had with him. Antigone gaue a fierce and sterne aunswer, and therewith sent Demetre his Sonne with a great armie, store of engines and artillery to besiege and beat downe the citie. Whereupon they were

astonied, so fearing the great power of the King, yt they sent to Demetre, declaring that they were readie and cō
                  tent to go with Antigone to warre vpon Ptolome. Who neuerthelesse was scarcely content therewith, but demaunded an hundred ostages of the chief and principall of the citie to be deliuered him, and also to haue his Nauie receyued into their Portes. Which demaunde made them greatlie suspect, that he went about to make hymself Lord of the Town, & therfore made all ye preparation they could for their defence. When Demetre had assembled his armie at the Porte of Elorym, he trymmed his Nauie to saile to the siege of Rhodes, in whiche were two hundred Gallies of sundrie mouldes, and of other shippes to carry men and victualles .Clxx. and in them aboue .xl. M. souldiers, besides an innumerable number of armoures, shot of all sortes, and all other engines of battery. There were besides aboue a thousand Foistes and Barques of Marchaunts and diuerse other sundrie kind of people, who followed the Campe to traffique. For knowing that the Rhodians had ben long without wars, they thought there would be such store of wealth in the Countrey, whereby the Marchaunts should be great gayners. When Demetre had set all things in readinesse, he went to Sea, and so ordered his shippes as though he would fight. And first he placed his Gallies in the first front & in their noses he couched great engines, which shot great sharp arowes of wood .iij. spānes about: next them came the shippes whiche carried the horses whiche were haled out by the Gallies and other small pynnaces rowed with ores. In the latter flote came the Pyrats and Marchaunts aforesaide, so that all the Sea betwene the citie and the firme land was couered with shippes: which sight sore dismayed and troubled the citizens. Neuerthelesse they with their Souldiours and so many as were able to beare armes, manned their walles and bulwarkes, awayting the approche of the

enimie, and the olde people and children were set in the garrets and hiest places of the houses to beholde them, for the citie stoode so vppon the Sea, like vnto a Theatre, that they might clearely sée the hugenesse of the shippes, and the braue glistering armoures and helmes, whiche was a terrible thing to sée, and that made them carefull of their estate and Citie. Shortly after, Demetre landed and encamped before the citie without daūger of the shot, & incontinent after he had pitched his camp, sent out his Pyrats & a nother cōpanie thoroughout the Isle, to spoyle and robbe it both by sea and land: And further himselfe caused to fel the trées & pull down the houses in the fieldes to make and buyld vp the lodgings and fortifications in hys Campe, which he with a treble of wood & earth fortified, yt it might be the strōger against the force and power of the enimie. He likewise filled the voide ground and places betwixt the Citie, & the Porte: and left at the Sea side onely a space for the Nauie to ryde in. In the meane while the Rhodians sent many and sundrie tymes Ambassadoures to praye hym not to do them any hurte. But when they perceyued he would giue them no reasonable aunswere, they sent to Ptolome, Caslander, and Lysimache, requiring them to come to the aide and succour of the citie, which for their quarrell was besieged and oppressed. During this time, it was put to choise of the inhabitaunts within the citie able to beare armoure, aswell Citizens as Forainers, whether they would tarry and abyde the daunger of the siege, or else departe the towne: and so many as would not tarry, as also those which were vnméete for the defence thereof, they excluded the citie, f
                     •
                   reséeing yt their victualles thereby shoulde last longer, and that no man should saye he was there against hys will besieged, and so not content therewith, might deuise and ymagine some treason or villanie against the Citie. This done, they mustered the remnaunt, whiche were aboute sixe

thousand Citizens, and aboue a thousande straungers. They moreouer made and published a Decree, wherein was agreeed, that all the sclaues whiche valiauntly serued in the same siege, should with the common treasure be bought & set at libertie: and that their bodies slaine in those warres, should be enterred, their Fathers, mothers, wyues and children at the despence and cost of the Citie mainteyned, their daughters with the money of the common treasure endowed, and the men children when they were out of their minoritie, crowned and armed in the theatre with all suche solempnities as sometyme were done to Dionise, to the ende their Citizens should with greater courage defend and mainteyne the citie. Whē they had thus by an whole and common consent accorded, the riche men disburst money, the artisans and workemen labored to make armoures, engines and other things necessary for their defence, so that in effecte euery man according to hys calling, in that he was most skilful and excellent, did his best: some made Crosbowes and engines, other repared and strengthned the walles, and the greater sorte carried stones and earth to the curten. They sent also out of the Port thrée of the lightest shippes & best sailers, to gyue an alarme to the enimie, and especiallie vnto the victuallers, who much more exploited than they thought them able: for they soonke many Marchaunts shippes whiche followed the campe to traffique spoyle, and buy the pillage, and brought a great number into the Porte, which they after burnt, and tooke many prisoners, of whome, they according to the appointement & conclusion in that behalf, betwene Demetre and them accorded and agréed vpon, tooke a great summe of money, which was this, that the prisoners taken on eyther syde shoulde be ransomed as followed.
                     A Drachme is about the value of our Grote.
                   First that a frée man should paye a thousande Dragmes, and a bond man .v. hundred.
               When Demetre had prepared and gotten abundaunce

of al things, he buylt two great tortoises made of bords and couered with leather that would not burne, the one to defende his Souldiours from the stones, the other to defend them from quarrelles and such like shot, whiche two engines were set vpon two shippes of burden ioyned and grappeled togyther an egall distaunce the one from the other. He caused also to be set vpon two other shippes, two towers of wood, euery of them hauing .iiij. stages or stories much hier than the towers within the Porte to assaile and batter them with great artillerie & other shot. He made also a notable rāpier of great tymber hollowed-nayled and pinned togither, which swāme foure féete aboue the water, as a defence before the ships which carried the towers and engines and great artillerie: bycause the shippes of the Towne (whiche were great and mightie) shoulde not borde them with their beakes, and so quash and breake them, or else vtterly repulse them. In the meane tyme while these things were brought to an ende, he picked oute hys strongest Barques and furnished them with thicke plan
                     •
                   hers made out with great wyndowes, which serued in stead of Port holes to open and shut, at which he placed great mightie crosbowes and other artillary which shot great arrowes and farre of, and men also cunning in the handling of them, besides a great number of other archers and Arbalisters of the countrey of Crete. All which preparations thus made as aforesaide: after the saide shippes and engines were approched the wall within daunger of the shot, he sore hurte and gald the Townes men which manned and defended the towers and Bulwarkes in the Porte. When the Rhodians sée that al the force and power of the enimie was bent against the Porte, they with all their studie deuised howe to defend it. Whereupon they planted two engines of Artillary vppon a Bulwarke adioyning to the Porte, and other thrée engines vppon thrée ear
                     ••
                   cques néere the entry of

the little hauen, wherein were men, crosbowes, shot, stones & other things necessary, of great force to withstand and repulse the enimie, were it eyther to set men on land to wynne the said bulwarke, or else to approche their engines of Artillary. They also built and set vppe vpō the other carracques which laye in the great Port, certen receptacles of weapons to shoote, méete for the engines, called boltes. And as eyther parte hadde made ready all things for the fight, and that Demetre purposed forthwith to approche and bring néere his engines of battery of the entryes of both Portes, sodenly arose a great tempest at Sea, which lasted and continued vntil night. But when night came and the wynd calmed, he secretly sayled about the hauen vntill he came to the great Bulwarke aboue in the great Port, and wonne that, being from the walles of the citie about .v. acres, & fortified it with strong rampiers and déepe trenches of stone and wood, and thrust into it foure hundred souldiours well purueyed of all kinde of shot. But so soone as daye appeared, he with great noyse of men and Trumpettes brought néere his engines to the Porte, and with his crosbowes and other small artillary, hurt and slewe the garders of the rampiers of the Porte. And with his greater engines he so battered the Wall, that there he brake some and there ouerthrewe some, bycause it was neyther very strong, nor yet hie. Neuerthelesse the Citizens all the whole daye right valiauntly repulsed thē, where was on eyther side great slaughter and mischief gyuen and taken. And after it began to drawe towards night, Demetre retired and haled backe his shippes with his engines of battery, out, and from the daunger of the shotte. Then the Townesmen fraughte their cockes with drie wood and such like stuffe, and pursued the said engines, and so soone as they were come neere, they cast fire into the shippes. Notwithstanding they were enforced to retire, both bycause of the rampier before mē
                  cioned,

which swāme aboue the water, & also by reason of the shot wherewith they were by the enimie galde. But when they see they could do no good, some quenched the fire of the boates wherein they were, and then returned into the Port, and the rest which coulde not, let all burne and leapt into the Sea, and by swimming saued them selues. The next day in the morning Demetre by Sea a freshe assaulted the Porte, and at one instant with as great noise of men and Trumpettes as was possible, attempted the walles of the towne round about, thinking thereby so to affray the townesmen (being on euery side assaulted) that they woulde leaue defending of the curten and come to some treaty, who for their partes ment nothing lesse, but valiauntly susteyned all the atteintes & assaults that were giuen, during viij. dayes. When Demetre see he coulde not daunte the courages of the defendaunts, he caused to be planted vpon the toppe of their Bulwarke whiche he had wonne about the great Port, his greatest artillarie, which shot stones as waightie as three Talents, wherwith he flanked and battred the curten betwene the Towers, and the Towers also. During this broyle certen of Demetre his Souldiours had wonne the toppe of the Wal right ouer the Porte: but the Rhodians in suche numbre came thyther, that they slewe very many of them, and stoutely repulsed the reste. For they were but a fewe men, and the place for the Rhodians of such aduauntage, bycause it was stéepe and hard to mount vnto, that they so oppressed the Demetrians with stones, whiche were cast downe vppon them, and so gald them with shot oute of the houses standing neere the Wall, that the Marryners (who brought the assaillaunts) were enforced to runne on ground their shippes, and retire to the Souldiours on land, whereupon incontinent the townesmen sallied out, tooke and carried away al such ornaments as they found in the poupes of the shippes, and after sette

them all on fire. Amongs this entrefactes Demetre hys Souldiours sailed about the towne and set vp ladders all alongest the sea side, and violently assailed them, and the Souldiours on land did the like, so that there were many which without feare aduentured maruelous daū
                  gers and sealed the very toppes of the walles. Ageyne, the defendaunts so maruelously aduaunced thē selues, and so stoutlie defended, that they slewe many whiche were gotten vp, and hurt a great numbre, whome they tooke prisoners, amongs which were certen of the principallest Captaynes and honorablest personages of the Campe. After this assaulte and slaughter, Demetre ritired his owne shippes into the road where the rest laye, and his engines of batterie, which at the two assaultes were sore broused and torne and newe trymmed and amended them. When the Rhodians hadde thus repulsed the enimie, they enterred the bodies of their people and sacrifised to the Goddes the armours and beakes of the enimies shippes, and for the space of .vij. dayes in al corners repaired their Walles sore battered and broken downe. During which tyme Demetre newe built and ageyne trimmed his engines. When Demetre hadde the vij. daye set in good order all hys whole businesse a fresh to assault it, he came directly with hys shippes well furnished against the hauen, for to winne it was hys onely studie, bycause he would cut them from victualles. And whē he was with in an arrow shot approched the Port, he beganne violently to set vppon the Rhodian shippes with fire brandes and other fire workes, wherof he had plentie, and with long bowes and crosbowes slewe many which manned and defended the curten, and with his great artillary sore battered and shaked the Walles. Neuerthelesse, the Rhodians in this fight tooke suche paynes to defend their shippes, that they clerely extinguished the fire. And the Captaynes and Chief of the towne fearing the winning of the Porte and Citie, exhorted

all the lustiest Souldiours, at that pinche stoutly to stand to it or else neuer, which thing they spéedely did. And amongs other things they enbarqued in thrée of their tallest shippes the most hardy and valiaunt mē they had, cōmaunding them with all their force to borde with their beakes or Gallie noses on the enemie which bare the engines of battery, and drowne them, who (notwithstanding al the shot which came against them) so violently ranne vpō the enimie, that they first brake the rampier whiche swamme vppon the water before the shippes, and after so lustely borded them which carried the engines, that the water broke in on euerie side and drowned two of the greatest engines. Neuerthelesse the third was by the Gallies haled out and carried back. When the Rhodians sée al things prosper thus wel, they waxed so proude and bold, that néedes they woulde pursue the third engine amiddest the enimie: wherfore they were so surprised, assailed and ouerthrowē, by reason of the numbre of the enimies shippes: that Exaceste Chieftayne of the band,
                     Exaceste.
                   and Captayn of one of the Gallies, was very sore hurte, and in the end taken & a great number of the reste leapt into the Sea and so were saued: and of thrée Gallies the one taken, and the other two escaped. After this assaulte Demetre made an other engine of battery thrice so great as the firste: but as he was sayling towards the Port, there arose such a wind, that the shippes and engine were all drowned. When the Rhodians see such opportunitie, they salied out of the Towne and assailed the Bulwarke aboute the Porte, which a while was manfully defended. But when they sée their ayde taken and cut of from them by reason of the tempest, and the Rhodians continually relieued with fresh men, so oppresse them, yt they were forced to yeld, being within aboue foure hundred Souldiours. After this victorie, great ayde arriued at the citie, to saye, from Gnose Cl. men, and out of Egipt from Ptolome more than

v. hundred: amongs whome were some Rhodians which serued and had entertaynement of Ptolome. In this sort was the siege of Rhodes.
               
            
            
               
                  ¶ Of two victories by the Romaines had vppon the Samnites.
                  
               
                The .xij. Chapter.
               IN this season the Romaines wanne victorie against the Palinians and expulsed them their lande,
                     Palinians.
                   and bestowed the Citie on such as fauoured them & tooke their parte. But after the Consuls vnderstood that the Samnites kept the territorie and countrey of Phaleritide,
                  
                     Phaleritide.
                   and it wasted and spoyled, they made out and vanquished them in battaill, in which they wanne aboue .xx. ensignes and tooke aboue two thousand prisoners. After the Consuls hadde taken by assault the Citie of Vole, Gellie Gaye Chieftayn of the Samnites came against them with sixe thousande Souldiours, whome the Consuls likewise vanquished & tooke him prisoner, slew the one halfe of his men, & tooke the rest prisoners.
                     Sore.
                   By meane of which victories the Cō
                  suls recouered their townes and cities confederates,
                     Arpine.
                   to saye Sore, Arpine, and Saronie.
                  
                     Saronie.
                  
               
            
            
               
                  ¶ Demetre at many assaultes by the Rhodians repulsed, concluded a peace. And departing thence, restoreth to libertie many Cities of Grece. Of the death of King Eumele of Bosphore, and the raigne of Spartace his sonne.
               
                The .xiij. Chapter.
               THe yeare ensuing that Pherocles was Prince of Athens, and Publie Sempronie, and Publie Sulpitie were at Rome created Consuls: And that Andromenes
                  
wanne the prize in the course at Eley, the .Cxix. of the Olympiade. Demetre besieging the Rhodes both by sea and land, and seeing al he did at sea auailed him nothing, determined with all hys power wholy to besiege it by land. Whereupon amongs other artillarie for battery, he buylt the engine Helepolis before mencioned, and of suche hugenesse, that the like before had neuer ben séene. The foūdation thereof was foure square, eche waye .L. cubits long, made of great square pieces of timber, armed and bound with yron, in the middest were great beames layed ouer, a cubit betwene eche, to set in men which shoulde thrust and runne the engine against a wall. It ran vpon .viij. great and massiue wheles, whose axeltrées were two cubits about, armed with mightie yron cloutes: and to turne it about, were fine and subtil engines made to remoue it whether they woulde or listed. At the foure corners were foure great pillers of wood, armed and bound with yron, eche of them an hundred cubits hie, so leaning and bending one to an other, that the whole building, hauing in it .ix. stories or sellers, the lowermost had .lx. beddes, and the vppermost but .ix. And for defence of the engine against fire and other shot, it was before and on both the sides armed wt thicke yron plates nailed to with great yron nayles. In the front of the stories were windowes, out of which they might lay out and shotte any kinde of artillary y•  was within. To euery window was a couer which opened and shut by cunning and arte as occasion serued, for suertie of the enginers, made of cowe hides farsed with wolle to breake the blow and dint of shot. In euery storie also were two broad ladders: the one to go vp on for carrying of such things as were néedeful, and the other to come downe on, to the ende one should not hinder and let another. When the engine was throughlie finished, they chose out thrée thousand and foure hundred of the mightiest and strongest mē in the armie, to moue

and dryue it: whereof some were thrust in, and the rest stood withoute at the bréeche with cables & other things made for the purpose meete to runne it forward. He also built Tortoises and couers to defend the other engines of artillary as rammes and such like. He forced and cast a trenche also couered ouer, wherein men might go and come in safetie from the place where the engines stood, to the place they should be brought. He made hys Marryners and Gallie sclaues likewise to smoothe and playne the ground where the engines should be drawē & brought on, being about foure furlongs broad, whiche is halfe a myle Englishe: ouer against whiche place of ground in the wal of the Towne stood .vij. great towers or Bulwarks, and sixe little Turrets, against which he planted his engines. And althoughe the workemanship was maruelous, and suche that in long tyme it was thought impossible to finish and end, yet had he quickly atchieued and brought it to passe, by reason of the great store of workemen he had of all sortes, being .xxx. thousand or more: all which things in the sight of the Citizens were very terrible. For besides ye great multitude of engines and numbre of men which they sée, they considered the diligence and violence of Demetre, and his industrie in the making of engines of battery, being of him selfe able to deuise more than the Masters of the mistery and occupacion had eyther wyt or skill to finde oute.
                     The descriptiō and commendation of Demetre.
                   By reason whereof they named him Poliorcete, which is in the Greke tong, a besieger and ouerthrower of cities. He was amongs all in that reputation, and thought to be such a one, that there was not so strong a wall in the world able to stand against him and his engines. He was of personage and stature tall, and thereto well proporcioned & made, so that he séemed a stout and noble Champion: he had besides so good a grace, so gentle and curteous enterteynement, that all straungers which came where he was, séeing his comlinesse of

body, his grace, maiestie and royall attire, did thereat much maruell, and would followe hym for the pleasure they had to behold him. Besides hys comely stature, gesture & beautie, he was of that magnanimitie & haultie courage, that as he made little estimate of the meaner sorte of people, euen so also made he small accompte of the Princes of warre & Potentates. In tyme of peace his propertie was to be very familiar with his Souldiours, to banquet them ofte, and many times play with them, which bred him great fauoure and loue. To be short he forced to follow in all pointes the manners and cōditions of Dionise, accordingly as is of him written, & in the warres he was so ware and painful, yt there was not one within hys campe who lesse rested in bodye or spirit, so that vnder his conduct were made the greatest engines of artillary and greatest shotte that euer were séene or heard. He hadde also at Sea the most huge and mightie shippes after that siege and after hys Fathers death, that euer were built or séene.
               When the Rhodians sée the great furniture and preparation that he made to come against them, they buylt and set vp within the vttermost wall for their defence, a countermure of stone, least ye first Wall should be sore battered and shakē. For performaunce wherof, to haue store of stone, they pulled downe the wall whiche encō
                  passed the Theatre, and many houses ioyning thereto: besides certen temples, vowing (to the Gods in whose honour they were built and consecrated) that they would build and set vp muche beautifuller Temples, if they escaped that siege. They armed moreouer .ix. tall shippes, and sent them out of the Porte, eyther to sinke or bring in so many of the enimies as they encountred, that they might be Masters of the Sea, whiche shippes were into thrée partes deuided: whereof the thrée called the Scoult,
                  
                     Demophile.
                   
                  Demophile had charge and sayled directly to the Isle Carpathe,
                  
                     Carpathe.
                   where they founde a great many

sailes of the enemie, some of which after long fight they sonke, and brought away the rest to the Port of Rhodes, and after set them on fire. But a great numbre of the chief and principall Souldiours and Marryners whiche were in them
                     •
                    that went to robbe and spoyle the fruictes and commodities of the Isle, they kept still in prison. Menedore Captayne of other three,
                     Menedore.
                   sailed towardes the Countrey of Lycie,
                  
                     Patare.
                   and finding in the Porte of Patare a great ship vnmanned, laden with victualles, for that the Marriners were gone on land, he burnt it in their sight, and tooke besides many other smal Barques laden with victualles, which he sent to the Rhodes: he tooke a Gallie also coming out of Cilice, in which amongs other things was found much royall, riche and precious attire, that Phile, Demetre his wife, had sent to hir husband, which apparel he sent into Egipt to King Ptolome,
                  
                     Phile.
                   and brought the Gallie into the Porte of the Rhodes, and ransomed all the men both in that and in the rest. The third Captayne named Amynthe,
                  
                     Aminthe.
                   who hadde charge of the reste, throughe long sayling, fortuned to descrye a numbre of Barques laden with wood and suche like stuffe to make engines, kéeping their course towards the camp, whom he had in chase, some of which he sonke and brought the rest home to Rhodes, hauing a great numbre of prisoners, amongs whome were .xj. of Demetre hys moste excellent enginers. Betwene these doings ye gouernours of the Towne beganne to animate the commoners to throwe downe the Images of Antigone and Demetre, which they had set vp before the warres in their honor, saying it were no reason that they which held them besieged as enemies, should stande amongs their friendes and benefactours. Notwithstanding the people woulde not consent thereto, but sharplie rebuked those whiche vrged and put forward the matter. And surely the people aswell for the honour of the citie, as for the profit & cōmoditie therof, had therein great reason. Which constancy

of the Rhodians got not onely great commendaciō and honor amongs al their neighbours & friends, but also amongs all forreners & strangers which knew it. Agayne, the assaylaunts seeing their 
                     •
                   ranchise & bountie, repented that euer they came against them: considering they had restored to libertie all the other Cities of Grece, who neuer had shewed any signe or token of beneuolence or gratitude towardes them. And that Citie which by experience had manifested so great acknowledging of good wil and bountie, they went about vtterly to subuerte and bring to ruyne. Which thing if it had ben well and iustlie considered, was a good occasion for them to haue deliuered the Rhodians frō the great daunger they were in. And besides, if peraduenture the citie hadde ben taken, they might well haue aunswered no breach of peace in them, bycause they had alwayes desired to haue continued amitie and friendship with Demetre his father, which of the Rhodians was very wisely and circumspectly considered. But when they were aduertized by one who fled from the campe, that Demetre had with his Myoners vndermyned one corner of the wall, they digged a very déepe trenche and countermyned the enimie, so that they could no farther passe, but euery of them at the entry and mouthes of the mynes kept diligent watche. And as Demetre was thus vndermyning to ouerthrow the curtē, certen of the Demetrians had practized to corrupt Anathagore of Mylete, sent thyther by Ptolome, with the charge of shippes as generall to the Mylesians, that he would suffer Demetre to enter the Citie by the mynes, wherunto Anathagore accorded.
                     Anathagore.
                   So there was a day taken betwene them, when Demetre should send one of his chief Captaynes, whome he promised to thrust into the town by the mynes, that he might sée how to bring in the rest of the Souldiours withoute. But after they were agréed vpon the practize wherein Demetre had great hope, the Mylesian reueled

the matter to the Senate. Notwithstanding at the day prefixed and assigned, Demetre sent one of the friendes and domesticals of the King of Macedone, named Alexander, to the said myne, whome the townes men incontinent tooke prisoner, and after crowned Anathagore with a Crowne of golde, and rewarded hym with fiue hundred Talents of siluer, to the ende to gyue greater encouragement to the other Mercenaries and straungers within the Town, iustly and truly to serue in the said siege. When Demetre see he could thereby nothing preuayle, and hauing finished and made readie all hys engines, and playned the waye wherein they should be drawē, he planted in the middest the great Helepolis, and the .viij. Tortoises without rammes, he planted on eche side the Helepolis foure, wel couered and porched, and the wayes couered frō one to another like porches, so that men without daunger might passe to and fro. Ouer and besides these engines he hadde two other rammes of wood, of a maruelous greatnesse, which were brought thyther, eche of them sixe score féete long, and the beaks or points armed with yron like vnto the Gallie nose, so that there could not be fewer than a thousande men to driue and runne them against a wall, albeit to conducte and bring them fewer would serue, bycause they went vpon wheles. When he had brought his engines néere the Wall, and had appointed in euery storie of the Helepolis, such number of shot of all sortes as hym thought good. He sent to the porte and to his men about the Sea and all other quarters of the towne, cōmaunding them to approche and seale the wall: And forthwith marched on with the footemen to gyue the attempt and assaulte, so that in one moment the towne in euery corner was assayled, and the walles with great engines of artillary battered, and they whiche manned the curtens were wt quarrelles & stones sore hurt: But to sée how the Rhodians defended was wonder. While these matters were

at this point, and that the assault had long tyme continued, the Ambassadours of the Guidians came to entreat Demetre for their Citie to leaue of and raise hys siege, promising to persuade the Rhodians to performe hys demaundes which with reason might be graunted, whervnto he gladly agreed. But after the assault ceased, and that the Ambassadours had long gone aboute all partes of the curten, debating with them to and fro to yeld and to consider the daunger they were in, the King séeing yt impossible to persuade them, gaue a freshe assaulte more fierce and terrible than the first, and with his Artillary so beate them, that he battered and ouerthrewe a great square Tower of stone and the wall it stoode on all to pouder, so that the Souldiours of the towne could not that waye passe to go to their other towers and defenses. Notwithstanding the Attemptaunts (throughe the wonderfull and valiaunt defence of the Citizens) could not all that daye enter the Town. In this meane while arriued at the Hauen a great number of barques laden with corne and great plenty of other victuals, by King Ptolome sent out of Egipt, who with a prosperous wind, sayled a maine vnder all sayles, and entred the Hauen maugre all Demetre his Nauie, who did al that in them laye to barre them the Porte. And as it were al at one time, certen other shippes laden with victualles sent from Cassander and Lysimache, arriued. Whereupō the Citizens which before were in great feare and necessitie, tooke now such courage, that they wholie determined to sallie oute on the enimie and set on fire their engines. And thereuppon they made great prouision of drie wood and such other stuffe for fire workes: & when they had appointed all their shot to that side on the wall where the engines were planted, they which were put out of the Town began about midnight al at one throw to cast fire in diuerse sorte against the engines and their garders; and the Souldiours from the curten so lustely

applied them with shotte, which came to the rescous, that the whole armie was in maruelous terrour, as of a thing not precogitated or thought on. But the Demetrians fearing the burning and spoyle of all their Engines, fiersly ranne to their rescue, and by reason of the darknesse of the night, the fire carriers being alwayes in sighte, were very sore hurte and stryken downe, bycause they could not in the darke auoyde the shot which came on them. Neuerthelesse, after the Rhodians hadde once perceyued that the plates of yron wherewith the great Helepolis was armed were fallen of, they then in all they might, cast fire aboute the bare & naked places. But they within diligently quenched the fire with water which they had for the purpose made readie. Howebeit when Demetre sée the fire stil encrease, & fearing ye consummation of all his engines, he caused them at the sound of the Trumpette to be drawen awaye by those who had the charge. The nexte daye in the morning he commaunded his Souldiours to gather togyther all the shot which came out of the Towne, to the end he would haue a gesse what furniture they hadde within, whiche thing was spéedely done: and by the reporte that was made, they coniectured to be within, engines of artillary, for fire workes, aboue .viij. hundred of diuerse bignesse: and of other artillary as crosbowes and such like, aboue a thousand. Wherefore when he hadde séene such plenty of shot in so short tyme, in one night, he greatly wondred at the maruelous wealth and dispence of the Citie, and yet he more wondered at their furniture. Neuerthelesse, after he had taken order for the burying of the dead and healing of the hurt mē, he then repaired and amended his engines of artillary.
               During which time the Citizens being at reaste and without daunger of battery, made a crosse wall within the Town, enuironning all that part of the wall which was in daunger, and besides cast a déepe trenche at the

corner of the Wall whiche was beaten downe, to staye the King, that he should not by any great or impetuous force entre the Citie by assault. They sent oute also secretly Amynthe with a number of their fittest saylers, who before anie thing was perceyued, had gotten ye coast of Asie, right ouer against the Isle where Demetre had thrée tall and mightie shippes, whiche the Pirates had brought in the ayde of the King, whom he there borded, and after a whiles fight, tooke them and all that were a borde, amongs whome he had Thimocles Prince of the Pirates. He tooke besides these, many other small Barques laden with victualles, cōming towardes the camp, all which he brought by night into the Rhodes withoute knowledge of the enimie. Soone after that Demetre had repared and amended his engines of battery, he ageyne brought them as neere the wal as was possible, and with great force of shot, repul
                     •
                   ed all that stoode to the defence and towers of the curten, and with his rammes & other engines of battery, so sharpely battered them, that he threw downe two Turrets. Howbeit, the Souldiours of the Tower or Bulwarke that stood betwene the two Turrets, defended it so valiauntlie, that it was nothing shaken: neuerthelesse many of the Souldiours were slayne and Ananie Captayne thereof.
                     Ananie.
                   Amongs these enterfacts Ptolome had ageyne sent another fléete laden wt asmuch corne and other necessarie things as before, wt a thousand Souldiours vnder the conducte of Antigone the Macedonian.
                  
                     Antigone.
                   In this meane while arriued before Demetre aboue .L. Ambassadours sent by the Athenians and other cities of Grece, desiring him to conclude an inuiolable peace with the Rhodians and rayse hys siege, whereunto he agréed, and for certen dayes the Ambassadours and diuerse other messengers were sent on all handes to treat a peace, but in the ende they agreed not, so that the Ambassadoures returned withoute conclusion. After their departure he by treason determined to

wynne the Citie, and by night to thrust in his Souldiours at the great breach. And thereuppon he chose oute a thousand of his valiauntest and best trayned Souldiours, commaunding them about midnight, faire and easely without noyse, to approche the Wall on that side: & the rest he arranged in order of battail, and at that very instant with so great noyse as might be, gaue an assault round about the town, both by sea and land. And incontinent they whiche were charged to enter the breache, violently rushed in, and slew the watche whiche garded the trenche, so that they entred the towne, and ment to winne the Bulwarkes and Bastils standing about the Theatre. When the gouernours of the Rhodians vnderstood the case, and seeing al the Citie in great terror and maruelous feare, they commaunded them whiche manned the Port and Walles, not once to remoue frō their charge, but valiauntly stand to the defence thereof, and they with a numbre of pycked men and trayned Souldiours, and those newly come out of Egipt, went against the enimie that had entred the breache: but during the night, no great exploite was done. Aboute the dawning Demetre gaue a signe as well to those Souldiours which assayled the Porte, as to all the rest, at one present to make a great showte and noise, to encourage thē whiche were entred and hadde wonne the Bulwarkes and Bastils about the Theatre. When the shoute and noyse was heard, women, children, and all the weake companie beganne to crie, howle and wéepe, as if the citie presentlie had ben taken. But the lustie and couragious Souldiours, valiauntlie assailed the enimie entred, who verie long right stoutlie defended, so that on eche side were a great number slayn. But in the end, ye Townesmen still releued aswell with freshe men as also men of valiaunt and lusty courages: for that it then stood vpon the hazard of the losse of them and their Citie, and contrariwise ye force of the enimie decreasing, they so stoutly

after charged the Demetrians, that they slewe in honorable fight Alcime and Mancie the two Captaynes of those bandes,
                     Alcime. Mancie.
                   and the greater number of their Souldiours, the rest they tooke prisoners, except a fewe which fled that waye they entred, and returned to Demetre. Notwithstanding a great number of the Citizens were slayne, amongs whome was Prytame of Demotele,
                  
                     Pritame.
                   a mā greatly renowmed for his valiaunce and martiall pollicies. After this assaulte, Demetre yet had a greater affiaunce and hope to take it than before. Wherefore he agayne furnished him to gyue a fresh assault. But in the meane while he receyued letters from his father, which willed him to conclude with the Rhodians so honorable a peace as he could. Wherefore he attended and espied some occasion to come to an honest composition & agreement with them. Ageyne Ptolome had addressed his letters to the Citizens, letting them to wete, yt he woulde send a new supplie of thrée thousand men, notwithstanding counsayling them that if they might come to anie gracious and fauourable composition, not to refuse it. Which letters séene and read, they all were enclined to peace. It happened the selfe same tyme that the Etholians had sent their Ambassadoures to Demetre, to entreat a peace: who after many entercourses betwene one an other, a finall peace was there concluded as foloweth.
               
                  
                     The cōclusion of the peace.
                  First, that the Rhodians should be at libertie, and liue after their old accustomed manner, and not to be enforced to take in or keepe any garrison.
               Also that they should continue and remayne friendes and Allies with Antigone, with all, and against all, except Ptolome.
               
               Item, for assuraunce and confirmation thereof, they should deliuer an hūdred ostages, such as Demetre would chose out, except and alwayes reserued the officers.
               In this sorte the Rhodians after they hadde susteyned and abidden one whole yeares siege, were deliuered.

And so many as bare them in that siege valiauntly and manfully, were continually euer after highly honoured and largely remunerated with manie great giftes. And all the sclaues who hadde well serued, were bought of their Lords, set at libertie, enfranchised and made Citizens. They caused also in their Theatre the Images of Cassander and Lysimache, to be enstalled, and diuerse other of lesse honour and dignitie, who had them in that siege ayded. And bycause they woulde honour Ptolome more than all the reste, they sent into Lybie to the God Hammon, to enquire if it were lauful for them to honor the said Ptolome as a God. And when they had aunswer from the Oracle, that they might not, they buylt and set vp a Temple in hys honor within the Citie, foure square like a Cloistre, a furlong eche waye, which they called the Temple of Ptolome. They likewise repared their Theatre and all the places of the Walles beaten downe, much fairer and stronger than before. And after the conclusion of the peace, Demetre with his whole armie tooke shipping, and following hys Fathers commaundement, sayled alongest the Isles, and arriued at the Porte of Aulide,
                  
                     Aulide.
                   in the Countrey of Beoce: being commaunded to deliuer the Cities of Grece: many of which during the siege, were by Cassander and Polispercon robbed and spoyled. And at his first arriuall, he deliuered the Citie of Calcide,
                  
                     Calcide.
                   by the Beotians garrisoned, and constrained the saide Beotians to forsake the amitie of Cassander, and after alliaunced with the Etholians, against Polispercon and Cassander, and vppon them arrered warres. In this season died Eumele King of Bosphore,
                  
                     Eumele.
                   after he had reigned sixe yeares,
                     Spartacke.
                   and after hym succeded Spartace his Sonne, who reigned .xx. yeares.
            
            
               
               
                  ¶ The conclusion of a peace betwixt the Romaines and Samnites, & certen other their neyghbours, and of their subduing the Asculaines.
                  
               
                The .xiiij. Chapter.
               IN the same yeare was treated and concluded a peace betwene the Romaines and Samnites, after the warres hadde betwene them, continued .xxij. yeares and sixe monethes. That done, Sempronie one of the Consuls tooke from the Asculains in .L. dayes .L. Cities, and enforced them to submit to the Seigniorie and obeisaūce of the Romayne Empire, and after returned to Rome, where he was with great triumphe receyued. And soone after, the Romayne people made peace and alliaunce wt the Marians, Palians and Marucians.
               
            
            
               
                  ¶ Demetre by force and treaty taketh many Cities of Grece, and diuerse other rendre to him: all which he restoreth to their auncient accustomed libertie.
               
                The .xv. Chapter.
               THe yéere ensuing when Leostrate gouerned Athens, and ye 
                  Serie Cornele & Lucie Genuce at Rome were created Consuls, Demetre arrered warres against Cassander, to restore the Cities of Grece to libertie: and before all other things to set a staye about the affaires of the same Countrey, aswell for that it séemed to hym good in doing the same, to gette great glory and renowne, as also for that he determined to discomfit Cassanders armie in Prepelaye,
                  
                     Prepelay
                           •
                         .
                   & after to go with hys whole power against the saide Cassander. And firste he came before the citie of Sicione,
                  
                     Sicione.
                   the deputie wherof was a noble and cheualrous Captayne of Ptolomes, named Phillip,
                  
who being by night sodenly surprised, was repulsed and enforced with all his Souldiours to retire into a very great and strong Citadell. When Demetre hadde thus taken the towne, he encamped betwene the town and Citadell, and planted his engines of battery against the same. Wherfore the defendaunts séeing them withoute ayde and succoure, yelded, vppon such composition as they might, and so from thence went to sea and sailed into Egipt. When Demetre had wonne the Citadell, he transferred the Citizens thyther, & razed the one parte of the citie ioyning to the Port, bicause it was to strōg: so he holpe the Citizens with his money to build and repaire the Citadell, and therewith restored them to libertie. By whiche occasion they adiudged hym yearely go
                     •
                   ly honors, to wete, sacrifices, assembles, solempne processions and combats, and named the citie Demetriade, and did him many other honors as if he had founded the citie. But the varietie of time, the mutations and alterations that after happen, make all things vncertayne and voyde. For the Citizens séeing that the scituation of the Citadell (whereunto they were remoued) was much more commodious and pleasaunt to enhabite than the auncient citie, kept it always euer after, euen to these dayes. For the place was great and roumie, and aboue plaine and smoothe, but round about so knaggy & hanging, that the wayes were inaccessible, and subiecte on no side to battery. Therein were also great store of springs and fountaines, wherewith they watered their gardens. In this sorte then (throughe the Kings prouidence) they were in great suertie and in a very pleasaunt place. When Demetre had set in good staye the affaires of of the Sycionians, he marched with his whole armie against the Citie of Corinthe, whereof Prepelaye a Captayne of Cassanders was deputie. And at his firsts comming, by meane of the intelligence which he had by certen of the Citizens, he entred the Town in the night

through a posterne. But the Souldiours within, saued them selues in two fortes standing at the endes of the Towne: the one of which was named Sysiphe, and the other Acrocorinthe. Notwithstanding he throughe great payne and 
                     •
                   rauell, wanne by force Sysiphe, and by composition tooke the other: bycause the attemptes and assaultes, by reason o
                     •
                    the great industrie of his Engines of Artillary, and his maruelous care and diligence therin vsed, where intollerable. Whiche done, and that he had set the citie at libertie, the Citizens were well contented he should put in a garrison into the Bastill of Acrocorinthe, for defence of their Citie, and there to kéepe them vntill suche tyme as he had descomfited and ouerthrowen Cassander. And after Prepelaye had shamefully ben expulsed Corinthe, he tooke his waye to Cassander. When Demetre had thus wrought against Corinthe, he departed thence, pursuing his victorie by the other Cities of Peloponnese, where by force he tooke Bute, and restored the citizens to their auncient libertie,
                     Bute.
                   and frō thence went to Scyre,
                  
                     Scyre.
                   and there did the like, and expulsed Cassanders Souldiours. Then went he against the Citie of Orcomenye in the region of Arcadie,
                  
                     Orcomenie.
                   and there talked wt 
                  Strombicke deputie for Polispercon,
                  
                     Strombicke.
                   to rendre it. But when he see it would not be, and that he vsed stoute and arrogaunt wordes, he planted his engines, and battred and ouerthrew the walles of the Citie, and tooke it by force, and caused the said Strōbicke and .viij. hundred of his souldiours to be carried out of the citie as vtter enimies, and there to be hanged: and waged and deuided amongs his bandes, the Mercenarie Souldiours, being about two thousand. After he had thus done, the reste which held the cities and townes néere hand, hauing no newes or hope to be succoured by Cassander, Prepelaye, nor Polispercon: and considering that the King was so stoared with engines of artillary and men, that they were not able to withstand his so mightie power, yelded

their cities.
            
            
               
                  ¶ The Tarentines desire Cleonyme the Lacedemonian to ayde them against the Lucaines: of the villanies and lecheries he committeth, and after two mischiefes which in one tyme betyde hym, he retireth into Corcyre.
                  
               
                The .xvj. Chapter.
               WHile the Tarentines warred all this time vppon the Lucaines & Romaines in Italy, they sent their Ambassadoures to the Lacedemonians, into the citie of Sparte, praying them, that they would send them Cleonime to be their Leader and Generall,
                     Cleonyme.
                   with a certen numbre of men: which thing the Lacedemonians readely graunted them. And shortly after Cleonyme leuied in the countrey of Laconie, about .v. thousand men, with whome he tooke shipping and sailed to Tarent, and arryuing there, he leuied an other numbre of men in that countrey, so that he had well néere about .xx. thousande footemen, and two thousand horse, amongs which were many Grekes, lying then in Italy. Of this so great assemble, the Lucaines were in such terror, that they grewe to an agréement with the Tarentines. Howbeit, the Metapontines forced not their power, for which cause Clonime by the consent of the Tarentines, sodenly assailed them. Wherewith he put them in such feare, that they suffred him vnder the colour of friendship, to enter the citie, but after he was entred, he exacted of them aboue sixe hundred Talents, and tooke two hundred of the beautifullest maydes within the Town, vnder the Title & name of ostages: but trueth was, it was to saciate his lecherous desire and beastlie luste, so as in that and also in diuerse other things he euidently declared hys monstrous and abhominable villanies. For besides that, he

lest wearing of his Grecian apparell, and apparelled him after the maner of the most lasciuious and effeminate countrey. Ageyne, so many as rendred vppon his faith & promisse, to be assured, he made bond. And in déed whē he had so goodly and mightie an armie, he did nothing worthie and beseaming a citizen of Sparte. He also tooke on hande to indict warres to Agatocles in Sic
                        ••
                      e, to enlarge his tiranny
                     •
                    and to restore the Sicilians to their auncient libertie, but he to much delayed and deserred hys sayde enterprise, and before he went thyther, tooke his iorney to Corcyre, and brought the citie vnder his obeisaunce, of which he leuied a great summe of golde and siluer & garrisoned it, meaning to kéepe that as a receptacle or refuge, whereby he might alwayes be at hand, to marke & 
                     •
                   spie out the affaires and doings of the Grecians. And during the time of his aboad there, the Ambassadoures of Demetre, and after the Ambassadours of Cassander came to him, eche of them praying his alliaunce. Howbeit, he would not graunt eyther to one or an other, but being aduertised that the Tarentines and their neighboures rebelled, left sufficient numbre in Corcyre, & with the reste tooke shipping and sailed with all spéede into Italy, to the ende to be reuenged of the rebelles. So he arriued at a citie named Tyrice, by the Barbarians kepte, and by force tooke it, sackt it, and forraged the territorie therof: the lyke dyd he to an other Citie named Tripole, where he tooke aboue thrée thousande prisoners. After this, the Barbarians in that quarter assembled and by night assayled him in his campe, and there slew aboue two hundred Souldiours, and tooke aboue a thousand prisoners. Not long after chaunced hym an other losse at Sea, for (through a tempest that sodenly arose) he lost .xx. sayle, of those which rydde néerest his campe, at which mishaps he was so greatlie astonied, that he retired with the rest of hys armie and Nauie into Corcyre.
               
            
            
               
               
                  ¶ Cassander and Lysimache attending ayde from Ptolome and Seleuke, beginne to warre vppon Antigone, the one in Thessalie, the other in Asie, and do take from him certen Townes, Cities and Castels.
               
                The .xvij. Chapter.
               THe yéere following that Nycocles gouerned Athens, and Marke Liuie and Marke Elye were at Rome created Consuls, Cassander King of Macedone, séeing ye countrey of Grece waxe strong, and doubting that al the warre in the end would be transferred against the countrey of Macedone, he was thereof so carefull, that he sent his Ambassadours to Antigone in Asie, to treat a peace with him, who aunswered, that there was but one way for him to auoyde the warres, which was to submit hys persone and whole estate to him: with which aunswere he was sore abashed. Wherfore he sent into Thrace to Lysimache, praying him to come ouer, that they might togyther consult of his estate. For in all his affaires and waightie businesse, he always accustomed to sēd for him to communicate with him of them, and also to desire his ayde, aswell for that he was a noble and valiaunt man, as also bycause he was néere neighbour to the countrey of Macedon. After Cassander and Lysimache had long cō
                  sulted and debated togyther of their businesse, they determined to send their Ambassadoures to King Ptolome in Egipt, and to Seleuke, gouernour and ruler of the hier regions, to declare to them of Antigone his proude and arrogant wordes: and how that the hazard of that victorie was common to them all. For if he were seized on the realme of Macedon, such was his desire of Dominion and rule, thinking him to haue no pere, that he would dryue them euery man oute of their Countreys, as they had by experience séene and proued. Wherfore it was

méete and necessarie, to ioyne all togyther, and with one common accord warre vppon him. To which admonitions, Ptolome and Seleuke soone agréed, and promised eche of them to sende a mightie power of men to resiste the said Antigone, if at any tyme he came to pierce and inuade their countryes. Howbeit, they determined not to looke for him before he came to séeke them at home in t
                     •
                   eir owne countrey: and then to preuent him and do some exploite of great waight, they deuided them into two bandes, the one of which Cassander gaue to Lysimache, and with the other him selfe went into Thessaly, against Demetre and the Grekes. As for Lysimache he passed into Asie, & at his first comming receyued and got to his amitie the Lampsacians and Paryanians, whome he set at libertie, bycause they yelded to him of their owne accorde. But he forcibly tooke the Sigeans, who stoode to their defence, and thrust a garrison into their citie. This done, he deliuered to Prepelaye, one of hys principall Captaynes .vij. thousand footemen, and a thousande horsse to go reduce into his obeisaunce the Cities of Eolide and Ionye, and him selfe went and besieged Abide. But as he was making preparation with his Engines to assaile the towne, vnderstanding that Demetre hadde by Sea sent thyther ayde sufficient to defend it, he chā
                  ged his determination and purpose, and departed thence and came into the countrey of Phryge by Hellespont, and there besieged the citie of Synade, wherein stood a strong Castle,
                     Synade.
                   in which Antigone layde vp and kept one part of his treasure and richesse. But in the ende he so practised with Docime deputie for Antigone, that he deliuered the Towne and Castle and ioyned with him against Antigone, and was the cause that certen other forts and Castles rendred, within which likewise Antigone hadde an other parte of hys treasure. And Prepelaye who was sent into Eolide and Ionye, tooke as he passed, the Citie of Adramit,
                  
                     Adramit.
                   and after encamped before Ephese, where he

put the Townesmen in suche terror, that they rendred to him vpon composition, and found in it a hundred Rhodians, which he sent away vnransomed and without endomaging the Townesmen any whit at all. Howbeit, he burnt all the shippes within the Hauen, bycause the enimie was at Sea stronger than he, and the successe of that war is yet vncertayne and vndetermined. After that, he incontinent drewe to his alliaunce the Theians and Colophonians. But the Erythreans and Clazomenians he could not winne, bycause they were spéedly ayded by Sea: notwithstanding be made incursions, and robbed all their lande. After that, he went against the citie of Sarde,
                  
                     Sarde.
                   whiche he by composition tooke on Phonicke and Docime, Antigone his deputies, and wanne them to hys alliaunce. Howbeit, he could not get the castle, bycause Philip Captayne thereof, one of Antigone hys chiefe friends, would not by any practize or deuise be wonne, but honestly kept it for his said Master, who put him in that truste. In this estate where the affaires of Lysimache.
               
            
            
               
                  ¶ Antigone commeth against Lysimache, and after he hath him twise besieged, and can not get him out to battaill, they are both fayne to sende their Souldiours in garrisons to winter.
               
                The .xviij. Chapter
               THe same season had Antigone made great preparation for the sportes, tournais, and diuerse other pastimes in the citie of Antigone.
                  
                     Antigone.
                   For performaunce whereof, he caused a great numbre of all sortes of people thyther to repaire, as sword players, wrastlers, and all the most excellent artificers. But after he vnderstood of Lysimache his passing by, and the reuolting of his captaynes, he left of all his sportes and pastimes. Neuerthelesse,

to content thē that were come thyther, he gaue aboue two hundred Talents, to be distributed amongs them, and after departed with his armie out of the countrey of Syrie, making haste to come before the face of the enimie. And after he had gotten to the citie of Tarse,
                  
                     Tarse.
                   in the Region of Cilice, he payed all his Souldiours for .iij. Monethes. And besides carried in siluer with hym, three thousand Talents: bycause he would want no money to atchieue his enterprises, what so euer should happen. From thence passed he the Mount Thaure, and entred the countrey of Cappadoce: and from thence into the hier Phrygie, bringing vnder his subiection the Townes and cities of the said countreys, whiche were reuolted. Whereof Lysimache aduertised, assembled his captayns, and consulted what was best to be done. And in the end cōsidering the great puissance of the enimie, they were all of the opinion, not to ioyne battaill, vntill such time as the ayde and succours which Seleuke should send out of the hier Satrapies were come: but still to kéepe in the strongest places and most of aduantage, to fortifie their campe stronglie, to keepe good watch. And to be shorte, whatsoeuer séemed for their most aduantage, they right wysely performed. For althoughe Antigone approched them & presented battaill, yet made they no semblaunt once to sallie out of their campe. Which thing Antigone apperceyuing, tooke and kepte certen passages to cut them from their victualles. Whereupon Lysimache fearing famine, & by that meane to be forced to render to the enimie, stoale away by night, and without staye trauailled foure hundred furlongs, vntill he came to Dorythe, and there pitched his campe:
                     Dorythe.
                   bycause the place was well purueied of victualles and all other things necessarie, hauing a Ryuer running hard by it, whiche was a great sauegard and comfort for the armie, and entrenched his campe with a broad and déepe ditche, and thrée trenches.
               
                  In the meane season, Antigone aduertised of Lysimache his departure, with all diligence pursued hym, but before he could ouertake him, he might perceyue, that he had already fortified his campe. Notwithstanding he a fresh presented him battaill, but seeing him that waye nothing apte and disposed, commaunded his Souldiours to enuiron the campe of the enimie with trenches, and planted all his Engines against the same, determining there to besiege them. And althoughe the enimie, sore gald, and oftentimes repulsed them with shot, yet hadde Antigone his Souldiours euer the better: and in short tyme had almost wonne their rampire, whiche Lysimache séeing, and still fearing enclosing and famine, in a foule and raynie night raysed hys Campe and stoale awaye, without knowledge of the enimie, passing throughe the places of aduauntage, alongest the Mountayne, by which meane he lost not one mā of his armie: but dispersed it, and sent them by garrisons to winter. When it was daye, Antigone vnderstanding the departure of the enimie, likewise departed and pursued them certen dayes alongest the playne, costing dayly the mountayn, but there fell such store of rayne, and the ground waxed so miery and déepe, that he lost manie of his beastes and mares which drew his carriages, and also many men: and the reste were verie sore trauelled and weried. Wherefore the King meaning to rest his weried Souldiours, and séeing winter approche, left pursuing the enimy, and deuided his armie, sending them into places couenable to winter. But when he vnderstoode, that Seleuke was with great puisaūce come out of ye hier Satrapes against him, he sent a friend of his to Demetre hys sonne lying in Grece, commaunding him to make spéedy returne with his whole power, bycause he greatly feared, that all the rest of the Kings and Satrapes would sodenly come vppon him, and gyue him battaill, before his armie were come out of Grece. Lysimache also had deuided

his men to winter in a champion Countrey, called Salmone,
                  
                     Salmone.
                   and had great plentie of victualles out of the Citie of Heracley,
                  
                     Heracle.
                   bycause of the alliaunce betwene hym & the Gouernours of the citie by marriage: for he had espoused a Lady named Amistre,
                  
                     Amistre.
                   daughter to Oxiarthe, Niece to the King of Aure,
                  
                     Oxiarthe.
                   whom Alexander had before giuen to Cratere for wife.
            
            
               
                  ¶ Demetre commeth into Grece against Cassander, and after certen small exploites on eyther side done, they grow to a composition. That ended, Demetre goeth into Hellespont, to ioyne with his Father: and of many and diuerse other things.
               
                The .xix. Chapter.
               THe same season, wherein the matters before spoken of were exploited in Asie, Demetre after purposed to celebrate in Eleusine the accustomed annuall pastimes and sacrifices of the countrey, to the ende he would there be enstalled and cōsecrated. And bicause it was long to the ordinarie daye, he sore laye vpon the Athenians, and required them, that they woulde for hys loue, and in parte of recompence of the good turnes he had done them, set forward the daye: whiche at hys request they did: whereupon he all vnarmed, presented him selfe to the Priestes, and being before the vsuall daye enstalled and consecrated, after the maner and custome of the countrey, departed from Athens, and came to the citie of Calchide,
                  
                     Calchide.
                   in ye Isle of Euboye, where he first assembled his shippes and footemen.
                     Euboye.
                   And being there, he vnderstood that Cassanders souldiours kept the passages of the countrey thereby: wherefore he thought it not good to trauell into Thessaly by land, but enbarqued hys armie, and sailed thence, and arriued at the Port of Larisse, where he came on land,
                     Larisse.
                   and first wanne the citie, &

after the castle, and committed the garrison men to prison, and set the Citizens at libertie. After that, he wan Pronas and Pteley,
                  
                     Pronas. Pteley.
                   and stayed the Citizens of Dium and Orcomenie,
                  
                     Dium.
                   whome Cassander would haue transferred into the citie of Thebes,
                  
                     Orcomenie.
                   least they should go thyther. When Cassander sée that Demetre his doings still prospered, he thrust greater garrisons into the cities of Phere and Thebes: and with the remnaunt of his men marched towardes him, and encamped as néere as was possible. He had in his armie .xxix. thousande footemen,
                     The great power on eyther side.
                   and two thousand horsse. And Demetre hadde aboue .xv. hundred horsse .viij. thousand Macedonian footemen .xv. thousand Mercenaries .xxv. thousand Grekes, and aboue eight thousande Pyrates and other light armed men, who came more for spoyle than to fight: so that in all he had lvj. thousand footemen. When the two armies were in view one of another (although the Souldiours on eche side desired battaill) yet came they not to ioyning, bycause the Chieftaynes attended and looked for newes of the successe of the warres in Asie. For vpon that hoong the losse and victorie to tall. In the meane tyme the Phereans had brought secretly into their citie Demetre with a certen numbre of his Souldiours, who tooke and helde the Castle: and vppon his honour sent away Cassanders Souldiours, with bagge and baggage, and after restored the Phereans to libertie. The affaires of Thessaly being in this estate, Demetre receyued letters from his father, wherein he commaunded hym forthwith to come to him with his armie into Asie: whiche letters receyued, and obeing his fathers commaundement, he cōcluded a peace with Cassander, alwayes reseruing his Fathers pleasure for confirmation thereof, bicause he was assured his father would neuer agrée therto: but would by armes and dint of sworde determine and finishe the warres, and not by composition and agréement. Howebeit, Demetre concluded the league and peace, to the end

he would haue an honest occasion to departe Grece, to go into Asie, so that it should not be saide, he fled, but yt he honestlie departed, chieflie considering, that in one of the articles of the conclusion was agréed, that all the cities of Grece, aswell in Asie as in Europe, should be restored to libertie. After the same conclusion, Demetre made great prouision of Carracques, wherein he enbarqued all his whole armie, and fraught al his carriages: & sayling thence alongest the Isles, he arriued at the Porte of Ephese, and there landing his armie, encamped harde before the towne, and enforced the garrison to restore to hir pristinate estate and libertie the Citie, and licenced them and their Captayn Prepelay one of Cassanders Chieftaynes, safely to departe with bag and baggage: and garrisoned the Castle with his owne Souldioures, and thē entred Hellespont: where he wanne to his obeysaunce the Lampsaks, Parians, and certen other Cities, who were subtract from hys amitie. After he sayled to the entry of Pont, and encamped about the temple of the Calcedonians, for gard wherof he left thrée thousand footmen, and .xxx. Gallies, the rest of his Souldiours, he deuided amongs the cities to winter. The same time Mytridate Gouernour of the countreys of Mysie and Carie, who tooke parte with Antigone,
                  
                     Mythridate.
                   being suspected, that he had conference with Cassander, was put to death, when he had gouerned .xxxv. yeares, after whom his sonne Mithridate succeded, who after enlarged & encreased his fathers Empire, and besides, for the space of .xxxvj. yéeres, gouerned the countreys of Cappadoce and Paphlagone. The same season also, Cassander (after the departure of Demetre) recouered the cities he had lost in Thessalie, and sent in Lysimache his aide, Plisterche one of his captains into Asie, wt the greater parte of his armie, being about xxij. M. footmen, and .v. C. horsse. But after Plistarche was come to the straight of Hellespont, and sée it garded by Demetre his Souldiours, he returned.
            
            The ende of the third Booke.
         
         
            
            The fourth Booke is taken out the wise Plutarque, in the life of Demetre.
            
               
                  ¶ Antigone comming to battail against the enimie, is throughe the default of hys sonne Demetre slayne.
               
                The first Chapter.
               
                  ABoute the spring, the two armies (to saye, Antigone and Demetre on the one parte, and the Kings confederate on ye other) with great power came into ye fields one against an other. For Antigone had about .Lxx. thousand footemē .iiij. thousand horse, and .Lxxv. Elephantes. And on the enimies side were about .Lxiiij. thousand footmen .xv. thousand horsse, foure score Elephantes, and .Cxx. armed charriots. When the two armies were in viewe one of an other, Antigone was maruelously troubled and very pensife. For there ranne in hys fantasie many things, and especially the great daunger and hazard of that battaill, whereof he no lesse doubted the losse, than he had good hope of victorie. And although one waye (by reason of his continual victories) he well hoped: but chiefly for the fame and reputation, by him newly gotten for hys laste victorie in Cypres, yet he agayne as a wise man, and one experimented in martiall pollicies, considered the varietie of Fortune, who is neuer firme or stable, but still delighteth in mutation and chaunge. All whiche things throughly wayed, he became so sore troubled and gréeued, that where he before in other warres and battailles was accustomed to speake lowde and fiercely, in reproche and despite of the enimie, and set forth hys stoutenesse and

magnanimitie: he then without words was altogyther heauie & pensiue, which imported a maruelous thought and care in him, as if he had had some present infelicitie in his head, which sodaynly happened him. He did also at that time (as they said) many things whiche he neuer woonted to do. For he there openly in presence of al, declared and named his sonne Demetre successor of hys realme, as thoughe he should presently haue died: and after tooke him into his Pauilion a great while, and conferred with him alone, whereat the whole armie was maruellously abashed, bycause he neuer before vsed a parte to talke, nor yet communicate with him in secret of his affayres, but trusting to his owne wyt, determined all matters after his owne fantasie, and withoute demaunding aduise or counsail of any, would cōmaund that to him seemed best. In so muche that at one tyme, (they said) when Demetre his sonne, being but a yong Souldiour, demaunded when he should returne to hym with the armie, with a troubled and disdainfull countenaunce, aunswered: Arte thou so very a boy & cowarde that thou canst not without me heare the sounde of the Trumpets? Ageyn, besides these his fantasies and imaginations, many things then happened whiche might be iudged pronostications of euill lucke and misfortune towardes him. For Demetre one night sée in his dreame, Alexander the great al armed in white, who asking him what signe and token he should giue to hys Souldiours in that battaill: aunswered that Iupiter gaue victorie, and by and by hym thought that Alexander saide, and I also will take parte with your enimies. It was likewise reported, that after Antigone had aranged his Phalang or battaille of footemen, and comming oute of hys Tente, that he stoond one of his féete, and therewith sodenly fel flat to the ground. And after he was lift vppe, holding vp his handes to heauen, made his humble prayers to the Gods, that they would eyther gyue hym victorie,

or at the least, that he might be slayne, rather than with shame to be enforced to flie: and all at once wholy went to the battaill, which on eyther side beganne very hoate and cruel. It happened soone after ye 
                  Demetre, with a lustie band of horssemen vnder his charge, so violently charged Antioche the Sonne of Seleuke, that he put him and all his company to flight, and by reason of the excessiue ioye of victorie, hadde them so long in chase, that with his too great desire, he lost altogyther. For during the time he had them in chase, the Seleukeans séeing the footemen left naked without horse (whiche shoulde haue ben their garde and succoure) so encompassed them, as though they would on euery side haue charged. Wherevpon some seeing all their horssmen gone, forthewith rendred, and the reste whiche stood to the defence, after they see their inabilitie to withstand, fled, so that when Demetre was returned from the chase, he could no way bring them ageyne into order. And immediatly after this companie was discomfited, a great band of the enimie, charged the battaill wherein Antigone was, euery of them meaning to get his persone. Whiche thing one of his Souldiours apperceyuing, sayd to him: Saue thy selfe Sir King, for euery of these men séeke and desire none but thée, whome he ageyne thus aunswered: In vayne they séeke and desire me, for Demetre will soone be here to ayde me. Howbeit, the charge was so sodaine and impetuous, that before his Sonne coulde come to helpe him, many times calling for him to his ayde, and looking round about if he came, was by the enimie enuironed, and after he was dead sore wounded. And then all his enimies about him fled, except Thorax of Larisse,
                  
                     Thorax.
                   who alone tarried with the body.
            
            
               
               
                  ¶ After this discomfiture, the Athenians woulde not suffer Demetre to entre their Citie: and howe he ageyne gathereth togyther his armie. After, Demetre his daughter is married to Seleuke, who treateth a marriage betwene Demetre & Ptolomais, daughter to King Ptolome: and of the deniall he hath of two little Cities.
               
                The .ij. Chapter.
               AFter the Kings confederate had wonne this victorie, they deuided amongs them (as a great praye & but in) all Antigone and Demetre their landes and Seigniories. And after Demetre sée the battaill loste, he in all haste, with .v. thousande footemen, and foure thousand horsse fled to Ephese. Whereupon the Citizens considering his losse, and the necessitie he was in, greatly feared that he woulde robbe and spoyle the riche Temple of Diana Howbeit, he tooke not a Talent, but doubting that his Souldiours (bycause they were not well pleased with him) would do some wicked déede,
                     The industrie of Demetre.
                   he therfore determined to departe the Citie. And after he sée the wind beganne to blowe vp, he enbarqued all his soldiours, and sailed directly into the Countrey of Grece, meaning to get into the citie of Athens, whiche he hadde kepte for his onely and singular refuge, and therefore had there his shippes, treasure, and Deidamie his wife,
                     Deidamie.
                   being fully persuaded that that Citie would neuer faile, whatsoeuer chaunce and aduersitie might happē. Howbeit, he was therein greatly deceyued, for so soone as he was thyther come, arriuing aboute the Cyclades, there came messangers to them from the Athenians, whiche brought him such newes, as he neuer thought on or looked for, signifying to him, that the Athenians had concluded and determined not to receyue any King into their Citie, praying him therefore to refrayne and staye hys

comming thyther. Neuerthelesse, that they would send him his wife, in suche honorable estate as became them to do, and as to the wife of so honorable and Noble a Prince apperteyned.
                     What faith and confidence a Prince ought to haue in hys subiectes.
                   With whiche Ambassade Demetre was so angry & agréeued, that a litle thing would haue made him lost all the hope of his estate, and almost desperate. For although what with the losse of his Father, armie, and realme, he see him reduced and brought from so great felicitie almost to extreme miserie and beggerie, yet considering the power and nature of Fortune, (to whome al men are subiect) he paciently endured and abyd all his misfortunes and infelicities. But séeing him so frustrate of his hope, deceyued and mocked of the Athenians, he was thereat so agréeued and despited, that he could by no meane beare it. Whereupon by example may be learned, and by experience knowen, that the hyghe and mightie Princes which thinke bicause of the great honor and seruice that the people do them, that therefore they singularly loue them, and that that is a great establishemēt and suertie of their estate, are therin maruelously deceyued: And although of their owne accord, & for some good will they beare to Princes, they oftentimes do them these honoures: yet many tymes it is for feare, for we dayly sée that they will do as great honour, and make as humble reuerence to them whom they hate, as to those they honour and loue. Wherefore all sage Princes and Gouernours of common weales, do not care or force to be so much honoured of the common people by Decrées, by setting vp their statues or images, by orations, and other like means, as to do such things as are worthie and deserue such honours. Notwithstanding his angre and despite against the Athenians, séeing yet no way of reuenge, he dissimuled the matter, hoping one daye to haue a more conuenient tyme & season. Neyther gaue he the Ambassadoures any euill or discurteous language, nor yet made semblant, as

though he were discontented, but required them one thing, to send him his shippes lying in the Porte of Pyrey: amongs which was one of .xiij. tier of ores on a side, which they speedely did. And so soone as he had them, he sailed in all haste to the straight of Peloponnese, called Isthmus: being there arriued, newes were brought hym out of al quarters, that his case daily empaired, and that his garrisons euery where were expulsed, & his townes without resistaunce rendred to the enimie. Where upon he was in maruelous doubt what to do. Notwithstanding, considering that he left Pyrrhe in Grece, he went wt his whole armie into Cheronesse, to inuade Lysimache his countrey, and in short time his strength and power so encreased, that he had an able armie, whereat the other Kings were nothing agréeued, bycause they all maliced Lysimache his pride, and enuied his puissaunce. But shortly after happened Demetre a better aduenture: For Seleuke séeing that Lysimache had had in marriage two of Ptolome his daughters, one for him selfe, an other for Agathocles his sōne, he likewise determined by alliaunce with the other Kings to establishe and fortifie his realme as much as he could. Whereupon he sent to Demetre, demaunding in marriage his daughter Stratonice:
                  
                     Stratonice.
                   whiche sodaine aduenture Demetre right well knew how to accept, and thereuppon incontinent, with his whole Nauie sailed into Syrie, & brought his daughter to Seleuke. But coasting alongest the shoare, straight vppon the Countrey of Cilice, hys Souldiours went on lande, and robbed and spoyled the countrey. Wherupon Pisistrate,
                  
                     Pisistrate.
                   brother to Cassander, whiche Cassander had had the same Countrey, by particion made at the spoyle of Antigone, was verie sore displeased. Wherefore he incontinent went towardes Seleuke, and made to him hys complainte: and farther declared, that he did euill to seperate him selfe from the other Kings, who had altogyther made alliaunce with him against the said Antigone.
                  
But when Demetre vnderstood that Pisistrate was gone, he set on land the greater numbre of his Souldiours in the said Countrey, and ageyne robbed and spoyled the same, and in the ende made the paysaunts compound wt him for .xij. hundred Talents: which they payed on the nayle, and thereupon he ageyue enbarqued his Souldiours, and kept his course directly towardes Syrie. And one euening going on land with his wife Phile, he found Seleuke come thyther before, where at their firste méeting, without countenaunce of mistrust the one of the other, was made great chéere. But firste, Seleuke feasted Demetre in his Pauilion on lande, and after Demetre feasted him in a Gallie of .xiij. tier of ores, and all that daye, they had great talke, and long conference togyther without armour or watche one to another, but altogyther good chéere and confidence amongs them and their Souldiours. Finallie, when Seleuke had espoused Stratonice, he brought hir away, and with his whole furniture departed thence towardes his Sonne Antioche. Demetre likewise returned into Cilice, and after his arriuall, he incontinent sent Phile his wife towardes Cassander hir brother,
                     Phile.
                   to excuse him of the incursions & robberies, by him in the said Coūtrey committed and done. In the meane season arriued out of Grece Deidame, before Demetre, who within fewe dayes after, fell into a disease, whereof she died. Shortly after whose death, Demetre seeking new alliaunce, a marriage by Seleuke his meane, was concluded betwene Demetre and Ptolomaide, daughter to King Ptolome, wherein Seleuke dealt very gentlie and curteously towards Demetre. But not long after, he played him as vngentle a parte and ill agréeing to the affinitie with him newly contracted. For notwithstanding Demetre his large and great offer of money to Seleuke, he not only refused to render the coū
                  trey of Cilice, but also denied him two Cities Tyre and Sydone: whiche in Seleuke was a great discurtesie, and

therefore reputed of great pusillanimitie, that he being Lord and King of all the lande and countreys betwene the Indian Sea vnto the Syrian shoare, did more estéeme two trifling cities of no 
                     •
                   alue, than the amitie and parentage of one so noble and valiaunt a King. And although he had married his daughter, séeing him by Fortune persecuted euen to the hard hedge, did not only refuse to ayde him, but in refusing to giue him the domicile of two small Cities, secretly expulsed him all hys landes and dominions. And trulie this pusillanimitie doth the sayings of Plato well proue in this I counsaill him that woulde be riche (sayeth Plato) not to studie and deuise to gather togyther great store of treasure,
                     A goodlie example of Plato against auari
                        
                           •
                         ious men.
                   but that he refraine his couetous desire. For he shall alwayes be poore, who without setting measure to his couetousnesse, hath an ardent desire to get. Neuerthelesse, although Demetre was thus of his intention & purpose by his sonne in lawe frustrate, yet lost he no whit his courage, but as a man of an inuincible harte, & one that oftentimes had assayed the deceytes of Fortune, said to his friends: Although I should a thousand times haue ben vanquished and ouercome, yet would I not be so fainte harted and effeminate, for so small a trifle to lose the loue and fauoure of my sonne in lawe.
            
            
               
                  ¶ Demetre at his pleasure, taketh by siege the Citie of Athens: of his bountie and humanitie towardes them. And after besiegeth the Citie of Sparte in the countrey of Laconie.
                  
               
                The .iij. Chapter.
               WHile these matters were doing, Demetre was by letters from his friendes oute of Grece aduertised, how Lamacare, throughe a popular sedition which had ben at Athens,
                  
                     Lamacare.
                   vsurped the Dominion

thereof. Wherfore they willed him not to lose any such occasion for recouerie of so noble a citie. Whereuppon he incontinent went to Sea with his whole armie: and sailed directly into Grece. But as he drew néere the regiō of Athens, sodenly arose a sore tempest, wherein many of his shippes and men perished, whereby he was enforced, for his better sauetie, to come on land, and for that time to leaue of his enterprise of Athens, vntill some other more conuenient season. Wherefore he gaue in charge to certen of his mē, that they should new calke & amende hys shaken and brused shippes: and hym selfe with the rest sailed into Peloponnese, and besieged the Citie of Messene,
                  
                     Messene.
                   at whiche siege, as he one daye went about the wall to view the Towne, there came a shot out of it, which gaue him such a blowe on the chappes, that he had almost yelded the ghoste: neuerthelesse, being soone after healed, he tooke the sayd citie, & by cōposition many other. This done, he ageyn enterprised his voiage of Athens, and after his entry into the countrey, he tooke the cities Eleusine and Rammise:
                  
                     Eleusine. Rammise.
                   and farther commaunded his men to make incursions, and to spoyle and rob all the countrey about the citie of Athens. When the Athenians were by Demetre his Souldiours thus we
                  
                     •
                   ied and endomaged,
                     A myne here was a waight amongs the Greks of three sortes: the one named Mina Attica, waying xij ounces and a halfe. Mina Medica xij. ōc. And Mina Alexandrina. xx. ounces.
                   happened them an other sodain inconuenience, which sore troubled them. For as a Carracque of theirs was comming to the Citie laden with corne, Demetre toke it, & immediatly hung the Patron thereof: the taking of whiche draue them to so great a necessitie, that a Myne of salte was solde for .xl. Drachmes: and a Bushel of corne for three hundred. Wherevpon they were so troubled and in suche despaire, that they beganne to treat and rendre. But as they were in that mind, newes came to them from all coastes, howe King Ptolome would send an Cl. sayle to their ayde, alreadie séene at Eugine, whereupon they were not a little encouraged, and hoped to saue all. When Demetre vnderstood

of the comming of the saide Nauie, he got togyther in the countrey of Peloponnese and Cypres, two hundred shippes, so that when Ptolome hys Captaynes see that they were not able to resiste so mightie a Nauie, they durst not abide, but incontinent retired. After Lamacre had heard of that, he secretly stoale out of the Citie and fled. And although the Athenians had decréed and published a new and common Decrée, that who so euer did talke, or once make motion with Demetre of peace, or conclusion in peace, he should lose his hed: yet being with famine sore oppressed and gréeued, they were enforced to agrée, vpon such composition as him best liked, and set open the gate nexte to his campe, and sent their Ambassadoures to rendre the Citie and Citizens at hys pleasure, with petition, that he would not forget his old accustomed benignitie and clemencie, neyther to be reuenged of the iniuries and offences against his Maiestie committed. And this did not the Athenians for any fauoure or grace yt they hoped for at Demetre his hands, considering his mortall grudge towardes them: but by famine enforced, thought it muche better to submitte them to his highnesse discretion and mercie, than to die of hunger: which (as they said) was then so great, that a rat falling from the toppe of a house downe vnto the flowre,
                     Great famine.
                   the father and hys Sonnes straue maruelously, which of them should haue it to eate. And the Philosopher Epicure fed his housholde with beanes,
                     Epicure.
                   whiche he gaue them out by tale. When Demetre with his whole armie was entred the citie, he commaunded that all the people should at the Theatre assemble, in the middest wherof on a great scaffolde pitched he his Pauilion, and appointed his Souldiours to stand about the same with their weapons in their handes. And soone after the people were come togyther, he descended from his Pauiliō vnto a Tribunall, much lower, whereat al ye people that sée him, were in maruelous terrour and feare. But after

they heard him vtter no sharpe or rigorous words, they were well recomforted. And when he had in the beginning of his Oration checked and reproued their stubbornesse and obstinacie, he gently in al humanitie & benignitie procéeded on with the rest. And in token and signe of reconciliation, he gaue them two thousand Medymnes of wheat, and appointed them such Officers, as were méetest to Gouerne the Citie, according to their auncient accustomed libertie. Wherat yt people were so excéeding glad and reioyced, that they neuer ceased highly to prayse and commend Demetre, and to blason hys name throughoute all quarters: the Oratours also of the citie were wel furnished to make and set forth Orations in his commendation and prayse. And bycause Democlide,
                  
                     Democlide.
                   after he had made his Oration, would seeme to do something more than the reste, he propounded a Decrée, whereby was ordeyned, that the people of Athens should fréely gyue to Demetre the Townes of Pyre and Munychie, to vse at his pleasure: which Decrée being by the people allowed, Demetre calling to remembraunce their former rebellion, receyued their gentle offer: and immediatly fortified the Towne of Munychie, to the ende if they at any tyme else rebelled, he had now gotten a reyne to restrayne them. After Demetre had thus recouered the citie and Countrey of Athens, he rested not, but still continued frō one warre to another, and with his armie went against the citie of Lacedemonie, and when he was come about the Towne of Mantine,
                  
                     Mantine.
                   he encountred Archidame King of the Lacedemonians,
                  
                     Archidame.
                   who with great power was come thyther to stoppe his passage, whome at the firste ioyning he put to flight, and incontinent without farther resistaunce, entred the countrey of Laconie, robbing and spoyling vntil he came before the citie of Sparte,
                  
                     Sparte.
                   which he besieged. And as he laye before the citie, the Citizens sallied out vppon him, but they so valiauntly repulsed them, that there were

two hundred slaine, and .v. hundred taken, and it went very narrowly that his Souldiours had not entred the citie pale mele, which then was riche and opulent, and vntill that tyme reputed and taken to be verie strong & inexpugnable.
            
            
               
                  ¶ Alexander King of Macedone, praying Demetre his ayde, goeth about to betraye him, but in the ende him selfe according to his demerite, is by Demetre with suche lyke practize slayne, whome the Macedonians after receyue and honour as their King.
               
                The .iiij. Chapter.
               
                  
                     The great var
                           •••
                         ie of Fortu
                           •
                         e.
                  WHen I haue throughly cōsidered the great mutations and chaunges of fortune which happened Demetre, he of all the reste of the Kings in my iudgement, was by fortunes inconstancie, most vexed and tossed, both in peace and warre. For oftentimes she aduaunced him to great glorie and prosperitie, gyuing him mightie armies, notable victories, and a large realme and Dominion. And at an other time, frō great prosperitie and power, soon after, by the losse of one battail, she ageyne brought him almost into extréeme calamitie and miserie. Who being in this estate, and considering the varietie of instable Fortune, recited (they say) these Uerses of Eschine following:

                     
                        
                           Eschine.
                        Fortune, once thou didst me set in hye estate,
                     And in short tyme, as lowe didst me mate.
                  
As to him then happened. For hauing prosperous successe in the countrey of Peloponnese, newes were brought him, that his cities confederate in Asie, could no longer hold out Lysimache his puisaunce, who persecuted them. And that if he the sooner came not to the ayde of the Isle of Cypres, King Ptolome would subdue and take it.

Moreouer, that his wife and children were in the Citie of Salamine besieged in great daunger of taking. By reason of which newes, he was forced to raise his siege frō 
                  Sparte, and prouide for the foresaid mischiefs. But as the womā according to Archilocke the Poet carrieth in one hand water,
                     Archilocke hys similitude of a woman.
                   and in the other fire: euen so playeth Fortune with Demetre. For so soone as he was departed frō the countrey of Laconie, as aforesaid, sodēly other newes came, whiche put hym ageyne in good hope to exployte many notable things. And firste it is to be vnderstoode, that Cassander not lōg before was departed this world,
                     Cassander.
                   by reason whereof,
                     Phillip.
                   the realme stood in controuersie betwene the other two brethren: the elder of which hight Alexander,
                  
                     Alexander.
                   and the other Antipater. Whiche Antipater, after he had killed their mother Thessalonicke,
                  
                     Antipater.
                   persecuted Alexander,
                  
                     Thessalonike.
                   thinking to haue chased and expulsed him the realme, who finding him self of no force in the countrey, sent oute for ayde to King Pyrrhe in Cypres,
                  
                     Pyrrhe the King.
                   and to Demetre in Peloponnese. Howbeit, Demetre was so occupied about the estate and affaires of Peloponnese, whē the Ambassadoures of Alexander came, that he could by no meane helpe him. In the meane tyme Pyrrhe with a mightie power came thyther: in recompence of his aide and charge, tooke possession of so large a piece of yt countrey of Macedone, ioyning to his realme of Epyre, that Alexander greatly dreaded him. And while he aboade in this feare, he was aduertised that Demetre (whose helpe he had before required) was with his whole armie comming thyther to ayde him: whereuppon he considering his authoritie and great renowme, and the worthinesse of his déedes and actes, for whiche he was honoured and had in great admiration of the whole worlde, did nowe more than before feare his estate, if he entred hys realme. Wherefore he went to méete him, whome at their first méeting, he right courteouslie and honorably entreated, greatly thanking him of his curtesie & trauel,

in that he would leaue his owne affaires of great importaunce, and with so mightie an armie to come and ayde him. He farther told him, that he had already well quieted and established hys affaires and estate, so that he should not néede any farther to trauaill. Neuerthelesse, he thought him so much bound, as if he had come at his first sending for, or that al things by his meane had bene appeased and quieted. To these wordes Demetre curteouslie aunswered, that he was of his quietnesse right glad, and that he had now no néede of his helpe, besides many other louing and gentle wordes, whiche gréeting ended, eyther of them for that night returned into hys Pauilion. During this time arose such matters betwen them, that the one greatly suspected the other: For as Demetre was by Alexander bidden to supper, he was willed to take good héed to him, bycause that Alexander had practized by treason to slea him. Notwithstanding he by no meane shewed any contenaunce of mistrust, but ment to go to the banquet, to whose lodging Alexā
                     der was cōming, to bring him on his way, but he diuersly detracted the time, & went a soft and treatable pace, to the end his souldiors might haue leasure to arme thē, and commaunded his gard being a greater number than Alexanders, to enter with him, and also to wayte néere his person. When Alexanders Souldiours sée them the weaker companie, they durst not once attempt it. And after they hadde supped, bycause Demetre woulde haue some honest occasion to departe, he fayned him to be something yll disposed in his body, and therfore forth we tooke leaue of Alexander, and went thence. The nexte day in the morning Demetre fayning that he had receyued certen newes, sent word vnto him that he was aduertised of matters of great importaunce, that he must of necessitie with hys armie returne into Peloponnese, praying Alexander to haue him excused. Neuerthelesse, he offred him his ayde and helpe, whensoeuer he néeded,

and desired him to vse him as one in whom he might repose and put his whole trust. With whiche message the yong Alexander, who greatly doubted him before he came, and muche more after hys comming, was nowe maruellous gladde that of hys owne accorde he returned out of his Realme and Dominions. And bycause he would better let him vnderstande some signe of the acknowledging of his good will and loue, he accompanied him into Thessaly. But after they were arriued in the citie of Larisse,
                  
                     Larisse.
                   they a freshe began to practise new treasons one against an other. And firste, Alexander to put Demetre quite out of suspicion, withoute armoure or garde visited him, hoping to make him do the like, but he was in his so thinking greatly deceyued. And as Alexander one night, according to his accustomed woonte, came to supper to Demetre without company, and that they were in the chief of their supper, Demetre sodenly arose from the table, whereat Alexander was so sore abashed, that he arose and followed him to the Haldore. But so soone as Demetre was withoute, he gaue signe & token to his Souldiours, who incontinent fell vppon Alexander and slewe him and certen of his men whiche would haue defended him, among whome one as he was killed, saide, Demetre hath preuented vs but a daye onely. With this slaughter were the Macedonians all that night and the next daye in the morning maruelously astonied, and in great feare. For séeing to oultrage was to no purpose, and that Demetre after Alexander his death was very strong to bring his purpose to passe: before they vnderstood what he would do, they durst not trust him, nor yeld, vntill such time as Demetre sent to them certen of his men, which in his behalfe sayde, that they néeded not to feare him, for it was not his will to do them any hurte, but prayed them to come to him, and then he woulde shewe them a good reason why he hadde done that he dyd. Whereupon the Macedonians ioyed

that they were deliuered of that feare and daunger. Wherfore they went all togyther vnto him, and without gyuing eare or attending his oration, salued him as their King, and néedes would bring him into Macedon. Of this chaunge was all the countrey maruelous glad: for they so mortally hated Cassander, for the cruell facts and great villanies, by hym (against the great King Alexander and his ligne after his death) committed, and also for the great oultrage and impious murder whiche Antipater, Cassander his sonne had vsed towards his mother Thessalonicke, that they desired nothing so much, as a new King. By reason whereof, Demetre was of al the Macedonians generally well liked. Ageyne, his wife Phile and the children he had by hir, so much renewed & liuely reuyued the Image and likenesse of the good olde Antipater hir father, that they reputed Demetre the verie true, and vndoubted successour and heire to the sayde Realme.
            
            
               
                  ¶Seleuke through a fatherly loue, remitteth to Antioche his sonne, his owne wife Stratonice, daughter to Demetre, and gyueth to them in title and name of the realme, all the hier Prouinces.
               
                The .v. Chapter.
               THe same season that these things were exployted in Madecone, Demetre had newes that his wife & children, besieged at Salamine, were by Ptolome deliuered and with great honours and presentes sent awaye. And soone after, it was throughout al the coastes of Asie bruted, that Stratonice Demetre his daughter,
                     Stratonice.
                   whome Seleuke had married, was diuorsed, and espoused to Antioche his sonne: and therfore by the people of the heir Prouinces, receyued and named Quéene, as followeth. While Antioche laye and aboade in the house, and

companie of Seleuke his father, he so muche haunted and frequented the cōpanie of Stratonice his mother in law, being then yong, maruelous faire and beautifull: and had had also a childe by the sayde Seleuke: in processe of time became so enamoured and rauished, that daye and night his mynde wholy ranne on hir: whereby he was so troubled & fel into such weakenesse, y•  to euery mans sight he dried and consumed awaye: and so muche the more gréeued it him, bicause what for shame, as also for the reuerence and naturall loue he bare his Father, he durst neuer discouer it to any in the worlde. Wherfore séeing his maladie dayly vexe and trouble him, and no hope of remedie, he to be deliuered of that so gréeuous a martirdome, tooke vppon him a quicke dispatche, more necessarie than holsome. He determined to feine hym sicke, and vnder that colour, to absteyne from meate, whereby to being him selfe so féeble and weake, that as then death must followe. But after Erasistrate,
                  
                     Erasistrate.
                   at those days a great Doctor in Phisicke whome Seleuke before all other had sent for to cure his sonne, by his statue & other wayes well considered what disease this yong Prince might haue, he at last apperceiued it only to proceede of loue, but for whome he knew not. Wherefore he diligently and circumspectly marked and noted al the partes of his body, which are woont to moue whē a man in amours, séeth that he loueth: And with great care, watched when he sée any of the yong and faire Ladies & Damosels of the house come to visite him. But he could by no meanes perceyue, that for any of them who often had recourse vnto him (as it had ben moste reason) that eyther he moued or chaunged his countenaunce, but only when Stratonice entred with Seleuke. And thē he was so sodenly taken, that he (as it were) loste hys speache, waxed very red, his pulse vehemently beat, a fine and subtill sweat running throughout all his body, and in effect appeared in him all the accidentes that men gather

to be in them, which are in loue: and after by little and little lost his senses, waxing very pale and wanne ouer all the body. By these signes knewe Erasistrate clerely, that it was Stratonice whom the yong Prince loued, and none other. Notwithstanding, fearing the angre and displeasure of
                     •
                    his father, and the daunger he might incurre, if he discouered the case: determined rather to leaue the sonne in that daūger, whatsoeuer should come on him, than to open the secret to the Father, and putte his persone and life in hazard. Howbeit, after certen dayes, when he see the great loue that Seleuke bare hys sonne, and the malancolie he was in daye and night for his sicknesse, he determined to bord and tel him, and by some subtill meane and swéet vaine, to feed his humour, concerning his sonne. Wherfore one daye he came vnto him, and spake in this sorte: Knowe Sir King, that the mortall dysease which infesteth thy sonne, is no dysease in the bodye, whatsoeuer they saye, but only an ardent desire in loue. And paraduenture it were better for me to hold my peace,
                     A sage & wise medicine.
                   and kéepe it close, than to reueale and tell it thée, considering there is for him no remedy. Whereat King Seleuke all astonied and abashed of the matter, said vnto him. Now I praye thée (my friend) tell me 
                     •
                   ow the case standeth. And if my sonne haue none other dysease but amoures, is it not possible to find remedie? Are we so vnprouided of wyt and wealth, that we can no waye remedie it? Finallie after long talke betwene them, Erasistrate feining him to be sore troubled, said: Know Sir King, that it is my wyfe, on whom he is enamoured. Whiche wordes Seleuke hearing, wt  warme teares trickling down hys chéekes, embraced & instauntly desired him to helpe that poore yong man and not suffer him wilfully to perishe, considering it was he in whome consisted all his ioye and hope, to whome the whole realme should lineally descend, and in whome all the people and nations vnder his subiection, hadde their

expectation and hope. And that after his death there remayned for him none other comforte, but likewise present death, without redemption. Certes Sir King (quod Erasistrate) you speake this all on pleasure, but admit he were as amorous of Stratonice, as he is of my wife, peraduenture you would then be of an other opinion. Now I would it pleased the Goddes (quod Seleuke) it were so, and that I could alter and chaunge that loue of thy wife to myne. For I take all the Goddes to witnesse, that if all the things whiche I holde moste déere in this world were togyther, I would gyue them al for the sauegard of my sonnes life. Then Erasistrate seeing hys maruelous affection and wéeping so tenderly, tooke him by the hande and began thus to saye: Nowe haste thou Sir King no more néede of my ayde, for being a King, married, and a Father as thou arte, thou mayste be the right medecine and cure of thy familie, bicause that for trueth,
                     The maruelous loue of a Father.
                   it is not my wife whome thy sonne loueth, but thyne owne: with these wordes was Seleuke much abashed, as of a very new and strange thing. And thereupon prayed Erasistrate to declare vnto him the whole estate and circumstaunce of the matter, and howe 
                     •
                   e knew it. And after he vnderstood that for childishe reuerence Antioche chose rather to die than discouer his fond loue, he was moued with so great pitie, that he determined all he might to saue him. Whereuppon immediatly he assembled al his people, and after he had with many faire and gracious wordes persuaded them, he declared that it was his will and ordinaunce, that Antioche his sonne should espouse Stratonice his wife, and that they shoulde haue in the title and name of the Realme, all the hier Prouinces: thinking it vnreasonable to gainesaye hys sonne in that, who neuer to him in any thing hadde ben disobedient. And so by aduenture Stratonice his wife made therof some difficultie, & thought it verie straūge: wherefore he prayed all hir friendes and familiars, to

persuade hir, to obey his will and pleasure, and farther, to saye that all things which he had ordeined were good, iuste, and reasonable. In this sorte was the marriage made, and soone after, with al the greatest ioye & pompe of the world, celebrated.
            
            
               
                  ¶Demetre thrice conquereth the Countrey of Beoce, and citie of Thebes, and chaseth King Pyrrhe out of the countrey of Thrace.
                  
               
                The .vj. Chapter.
               WHen Demetre in this season hadde obtayned all Macedone and Thessalie, and many cities in Peloponnese, Isthmus, Athens, and Megare, he was not yet satisfied and content, but determined to warre vpon the Beotians. Howbeit, that was no enterprise, either long and difficile. For after the Beotians were aduertized of his comming, they came and desired him of peace, and concluded vppon suche conditions as him liked, albeit against their willes.
                     Cleonyme.
                   Whereupon Cleonyme King of Sparte, came soone after from Thebes with great power, and had gotten to his alliaunce Piside the Thespian,
                  
                     Piside.
                   a man greatly renowmed, and done many notable exploites, whereupon the Beotians waxed so proud, that they rebelled against Demetre, who being thereof aduertised, determined sodenly to come vppon them and so to chastise their infidelitie and inconstancie. Wherfore he incontinent departed with those armed men he had, and besieged the citie of Thebes.
                  
                     Thebes.
                   And sodenly planted his engines of battery against the weakest places of the wal: whereat the Townes men were greatly astonied, in so much that Cleonyme of Sparte stoale awaye and fledde: wherevpon the Thebanes were in such feare, that they sent their Ambassadoures towards Demetre, remitting the citie and Citizens at his commaundement, praying

him to remember hys benignitie and clemencie, wherin he surmounted all other Princes. In this sorte rendred they, whome he no whit hurte, but exacted on them great summes of money, thruste garrisons into their Townes, and left Ierome the Historian his Lieutenaūt,
                     Ierome the Historian.
                   in that Countrey. And thus shewed he (according to his old accustomed manner) hys debonaire and curtesie towardes the rebelles.
                     Great bountie of a King.
                   But especially towardes Pyside the Thespian, who being his prisoner gently entreated him, and after with great and large giftes rewarded him, and gaue him charge of his Souldiours in the quarter of Thespie, of which countrey he was. Shortly after that these things were done in Beoce, newes came to Demetre,
                  
                     Dromichete.
                   how that Lysimache was by Dromichete taken prisoner, whereupon he thinking that to be an excellent occasion, and good opportunitie for him to exploite great and waightie matters, went in all spéed with such power as he could readily leaue into the Countrey of Thrace. And at his first comming, he besieged a forte and very riche Towne of the same Countrey: whiche Forte and Towne at the first, practized and deuised to render vnto him, but when newes on euery side came to him, that the Beotians ageyne rebelled, and that Dromichete hadde deliuered and released Lysimache, he was thereat abashed and sore despited with the commotion of the Beotians. Wherefore he incontinent departed thence, and in so short tyme as was possible, returned into Grece, to chastise them: but before he could get thyther, he was aduertised,Antigone. that his sonne Antigone had in battaill vanquished them all: and that they greatly repented and bewailed their rebellion. Of which newes he was maruelous glad, and chiefly that his sonne hadde wonne the victorie. And to execute and consūmate hys enterprise, he continued his iorney to besiege the citie of Thebes. But in the meane time, he was aduertised that Phyrrhe King of Epyre was in armes entred Thessaly, and hadde

robbed and spoyled the Countrey vnto the citie of Thermopile. Wherefore he left his sonne at the siege of Thebes with one parte of hys Souldiours: and hym selfe with the rest, made great spéede into Thessaly, and at hys first comming, made Pyrrhe soone retier to the strong passages and forsake the playne countrey. Which done, he left in that countrey for the garde thereof a thousand horsse, and .x. thousand footemen, and with the remnaunt returned to the siege of Thebes, where he caused to be brought and planted that maruelous engine aforesayd, named the beater downe of Cities, albeit it séemed he coulde not in long tyme do it, bicause the engine was of such poise and waight, that it could scarsely be drawen in two monethes the space of two furlongs. When the Thebanes had considered their fault and oultrage committed against Demetre, they determined to stande to their defence euen to the last man, bycause they hoped or looked for no mercie at his handes. And he ageyn was fully persuaded, to spare for no cost, but that he woulde winne it, more for to be of them reuenged, than for any gayne or profit he loked for, for the losse was muche greater than the gayne or commoditie, bicause the more parte of the lustiest & most valiaunt souldiours, wt ouermuch aduēturing to assault the strōgest and most disaduantagious places of the citie, were many times slaine. Wherefore Antigone, séeing the losse of so many braue and couragious Souldiours, came to his Father, and wt great méekenesse and humblenesse of mynd, in this maner said vnto him: To what purpose (good father) are at these lustie and valiaunt Souldiours dayly forced to hazard them selues to suche slaughter for a thing whereof will arise no gaine or emolument? Whome Demetre all in a rage aunswered: Why arte thou (quod he) so carefull of thy selfe, séeing there are suche a numbre of men betwene thée and thy daunger? And bycause hys Souldiours should well knowe that he would not haue

them hazard farther than he him selfe would endaunger him: He one daye amongst the thickest, and with the foremost came to the assault, where he nobly and valyauntly bare him, but in the ende to openly approching the wall, he was by the Townesmen with the blow of a stone hurte, and although he felt with the blowe, great anguishe and payne, yet neuer ceased he frō the assault, but with much greater courage than before, exhorted his Souldiours valiauntlie to stand to it, whereuppon they waxed so hardy and bold, séeing their King there in person to leade them the waye, that through their great vertue and prowesse, they by force entred the Citie, and so tooke it: whereat the Citizens were in maruelous feare, looking for none other mercie, but that he woulde make great slaughter of thē, and after spoyle & burn thē, and neuer leaue doing of any mischief whiche might be deuised.
                     The great humanitie and mercifulnesse of a King.
                   But he contrarie to the iudgement and expectation of all the worlde, caused but .xij. to be executed, sent a numbre in exile, and left the rest entier & whole. Thus was the citie of Thebes in ten yeares by Demetre twise taken and subdued.
            
            
               
                  ¶ Demetre robbing and ouerrunning the Countrey of the Etholians, enterpriseth warre against Pyrrhe King of Epyre, and after missing of their encountre and meeting, eyther of them do all the mischief they can one to anothers Countrey: and of the renowme and fame that Pyrrhe getteth in that warre against the Macedonians.
                  
               
                The .vij. Chapter.
               THe same verie season, should the solempne feastes of the God Apollo Pythie haue bene celebrated in the Temple of Delphos, but bycause the Etholians
                  
stopped the passage where they shoulde passe, Demetre against the old auncient custome, caused all the sayde pastimes with the pompes and ceremonies to be done within the citie of Athens, which was the moste principall and chief place of Grece, to honour their Goddes in. And after his returne into Macedone, considering that the aide of the Macedonians would more preuayle him in warre than in peace, following his owne nature and inclination, which was neuer to be at rest and in quiet, incontinent arrered new warres against the Etholians, wt  great power went thyther, where he robbed, burnt, and wasted the greater parte of their countrey, and that done, left Panthauke, one of his Captaynes with a braue band of souldiours to gard and kept it: and he with the rest in all possible spéede marched against King Pyrrhe, with whome he had many quarrels. Who being thereof aduertised, came with so great will to fight against him, as the other to assaile him. Howbeit, by Fortune it happened that they tooke seuerall wayes, so that they meet not: Neuerthelesse, after Demetre was entred the countrey of Epyre, he ouer ranne and spoyled the greater parte. But Pyrrhe had a better aduenture, for as he had gotten to the place where Panthauke was,
                     Panthauke.
                   he fought wt him, and throughe his great vertue and prowes, wanne the victorie. And as the two armies ioyned, Panthauke calling oute & vrging Pyrrhe to fight wt him body to body, he willingly accepted the offer: and in viewe & sight of both the armies, very brauely encountred: and after he had receyued one wounde, he gaue Panthauke two, finally vanquished him, and therewith put his armie to flight. Whereupon Pyrrhe got him not so muche hatred and euill will of the Macedonians, whome he had vanquished, as he for this victorie wanne honour and admiration, bycause all men wondred and were abashed at his vertue and valiauntnesse. Wherefore they sayde it was he amongs al the rest of the Kings, which should

renue the vertue and courage inuincible of Alexander the great. And that the reste all inflamed with honour and prodigalitie, and enuironned with Souldiours, alwayes went accompanied with whores, and minstrels, as common daunsers. And amongs them was none other controuersie, but who shoulde surmounte other in pompe, deceipt, and vaine glorie. And that was spoken by Demetre, who (as they saide) dyd not onely weare a Crowne royall, and robes of crymosin tynsell, but also shoes of golde. It was also said that he caused a robe to be made like vnto heauen, with starres in it, a verie curious & sumptuous worke, which fashion he there long tyme ware, but the alteration and chaunge thereof remained imperfect. And neuer before or since was any King of Macedone, were he neuer so proude and pompous, that once durste enterprise or take on hande to cause such a garmēt to be made to weare. These things abouesayd greatly troubled the Macedonians, yet were there other fashiōs that Demetre vsed, which more misliked thē, both for his straungenesse in gyuing audience, as also for his hie and stoute annsweres, besides the ceremonie and grauitie intollerable. But one thing amongs other whiche is talked & noted of hym, was that he helde and kept the Ambassadoures of Athens two whole yeares, being more his friendes than any of the rest of Grece, and made them follow him which waye so euer he went, without any dispatche: and in the end departed from him in as great hatred as they came. Another time was an Orator sent to him from the Lacedemonians, wherat he maruelously grudged, thinking they estéemed him not, for sending of so simple an Ambassadoure. Wherefore he wonderfully reuiled & with minatory words menaced them, and after turning his talke to the Orator said: And arte thou he whome the Lacedemonians haue sent hyther alone? Whome the Orator very gently aunswered: yea for so the Sir King to thée

alone. Another time also, when he hadde caused it to be published, that he would giue attentiue audience to all suters: a numbre of people at the day appointed came with many supplications, and deliuered them to him in writing, whiche he verie curteously receyued, and put them in the skirte of his gowne, but at hys departing thence, going ouer the bridge of the Riuer Axie, in the sight of all those whiche had put vp and giuen him their supplications,
                     The ryuer Axie.
                   and followed for aunswer, he caste them all in the ryuer, whereat the Macedonians were greatly offended and discontent. For they thought it not the office and honour of a King of hie and noble courage, nor yet a good officer, but rather of a iester and deceyuer of the people, and of one who made no accompt of iustice. And a great deale the more thought the Macedonians it straunge, for that they hadde vnderstoode of their auncesters, the great curtesie and facilitie that King Phillip, father to Alexander the great, vsed in gyuing audience to his subiects. It happened one daye aboute the same season, that a poore woman cōming to Demetre, & desiring him to heare hir, he aunswering that he was not at leysure,
                     A good & holsome documēt for a King.
                   she ageyne with loude voyce replied and saide: Then oughtest thou not to reigne. Which wordes well considered and reuolued in his mynde, at last constreyned him to giue good and gracious audience to his people. And truely there is no one thing in the worlde that so well apperteyneth and is so propre to a King, as to be at leisure and attent to iustice. For as the Philosopher Timothey sayeth:
                     Tymothey.
                   
                  Mars is a Tyraunt: and according to the iudgement of the Poet Pyndare:
                  
                     
                        
                           ••
                         ndare.
                   The Lawe is king ouer al. Homere also sayeth:
                     
                        
                           •
                         omere.
                   that Kings and Princes reciued not of God engines and such other warlike instruments, to batter and ouerthrow walles and Bulwarkes of Cities, but iustice: and to exercise & vse that for the preseruation of their people and subiectes. Therfore the saide Poet calleth not that King a

good disciple of God which is cruell and fierce, but commendeth him which is gentle and iust. And for trueth, Demetre delited in a name and Title more agreable to the great God Iuppiter, than méete or apperteyning to him. For he would be called the Garden and conseruator of Cities, and also the ouerthrower and destroyer of them. Wherefore it is oftentimes séene, that villanie and wickednesse, entring the house of honour and honestie, and fauoured of the vulger opinion and ignoraunce of the people, vsurpeth the name and title of dignitie and renoume.
            
            
               
                  ¶ King Pyrrhe entring the countrey of Macedone, is by Demetre expulsed. And after, Demetre raiseth a mightie power to recouer his Fathers realme, and the other Kings linke togyther against him. And going ageyne to encountre Pyrrhe, who was entred Macedone, is throughe the mutinie of the Macedonians enforced to flie, and after of the deuision of the realme betwene Pyrrhe and Lysimache.
                  
               
                The .viij. Chapter.
               SHortly after these matters aforesayd, when it was blowen abroad and come to Pyrrhe his eare, that Demetre was sore sicke in the citie of Pelle,
                  
                     Pelle.
                   he thought he hadde then good occasion to occupie and enioy the realme of Macedone. Wherefore he sodenly assembled the greatest numbre of Souldiours he could gette, and with great hostilitie entred the sayd countrey, robbing and wasting all he encountred, euen to the citie of Edisse,
                  
                     Edisse.
                   bycause none came against him. Nowe was the estate of Demetre in great daunger, after he was cured of that maladie. Notwithstanding he caused hys captaynes to assemble hys whole armie, to encountre King Pyrrhe,
                  
who vnderstāding of their cōming, retired in great hast out of the countrey of Macedone. And shortly after Demetre concluded a peace with him, fearing, that being his néere neyghbour, a valiaunt and Martiall man, he might for the execution of hys other enterprises of greater importaunce, much hinder him. For he thought the time was come, that he might to his great honoure and glorie, recouer the Realme whiche hys Father not long before had lost, which was the greatest thing of the whole world that he considered and thought on. Wherfore, minding nothing else but the execution thereof, bycause he knew it very hard, leuied in short tyme aboue a hundred thousand footemen, and .x. thousande horsse, besides a Nauie of .v. hundred sayle,
                     A terrible power.
                   which with maruelous spéede had come out of diuerse places. Firste, he caused some of the kéeles and bottomes to be built, in Pyre, Calchide and Pelle: and after went him self to those places, to gyue order for the finishing of them: so that by hys wisedome and industrie they were in fewe dayes made an end of, armed, apparelled, and furnished ready to sea. Whereat all the worlde wondred, & not at the shippes alone, but at the straungenesse of the workmanship and buylding. For he had there which excéeded in bignesse al those that euer were séene, euen those of .xv. and .xvj. tier of ores on a side, then thought very straunge. But after, Ptolome King of Egipt,
                  
                     Ptolome.
                   surnamed Philopater
                  
                     •
                    made one of .xl. tier on a side,
                     Philopater.
                   whiche in greatnesse excéeded all those that euer were seene. For it was by the kéele two hundred and foure score cubits, and from the kéele to the netting .xlviij. For nauigation whereof were appointed .iiij. thousand men to rowe,
                     An horrible great Gallie.
                   & for sayling, thrée hundred marryners. There were also laid in, aboute foure thousand armoures, to arme them aboue. The Uessell was so ponderous, that they had much ado to styrre it, built more for the shew, and to be maruelled at, than for any seruice. But to returne to Demetre his Nauie, they

were not onely maruelous great and full of good workmanship, but also the vse of them where for the warres méete and necessarie. At this great preparation, wherof the like was not sene since the time of Alexander, were Ptolome, Seleuke and Lysimache, greatly astonied, and therefore they lincked togyther to resist him. They also sent by a common accorde towardes King Pyrrhe, persuading him to warre in Macedone, declaring that the peace which Demetre had made with him, was to none other ende, but to amase him, that he in the meane time might vanquishe the other Kings, and so consequently destroye all at hys pleasure. And in effecte, that was a fire to burne al the whole world in order, if it were not in good season extinquished: and therfore that they all with one consent, should ioyne and linke togyther to resist him, their common enimie, who in mind hadde conceyued to subdue all Asie and Europe. Throughe these persuasions Pyrrhe moued to his alliaunce, and to the otheir kings being ioyned togyther (to take their whole force against Demetre) maruellous warres on al partes were arrered against him, before he was fully furnished and ready. For all at one instaunt, to wete, Ptolome wt a great Nauie and armie went to sea, to inuade & perce Grece, and Pyrrhe and Lysimache Macedone, to saye Lysimache on the coast of Thrase, and the other on his owne coast in the countrey of Epyre ioyning vpō 
                  Macedone. When Demetre had notice of these things, he sent hys sonne into Grece with one parte of his armie to gard it, and he with the rest went into Macedone. And firste he marched into that quarter, where Lysimache was entred. But before he came there, he had newes how Pyrrhe by force hadde taken the citie of Bery, and burnt and wasted all the countrey round about: with which news the Macedoniās were sore vexed and troubled, yt there arose great tumulte and mutenie, with wéeping, wayling, maledictions, & cursing ageinst Demetre, throughoute

the whole armie. Whereuppon many vnder colour, for the defence of their houses, children and parentes, came to him and prayed leaue to departe, but their meaning was to yeld to Lysimache: whiche thing Demetre well apperceyued, and therfore determined he not to come néere Lysimache, whome he knew the Macedonians both for his noblenesse and familiaritie vsed to a numbre of them in the tyme of Alexander woulde accept. Wherefore he marched against Pyrrhe, a straunger and of another Nation, but as after it appeared, he was much deceyued. For so soone as he was come néere the place where Pyrrhe was, many Citizēs of Bery came to the campe, who aboue the heauens praysed and commended Pyrrhe, saying he was valiaunt, in Martiall factes inuincible, liberall towardes his Souldiours, and towardes them whome he vanquished, curteous and gentle. And farther put them in remembraunce, that their aūcestors always reputed those true and vndoubted Kings, who knewe to vse armes in tyme of warre, and gouerne their subiectes by gentlenesse and curtesie in tyme of peace. In all whiche things they preferred and commended King Pyrrhe. And to be brief, they sayd the time was come, yt they might be deliuered from the gréeuous dominion of Demetre, and submitte them to a valiaunt and gentle King, who hartely loued and estéemed his Souldiours and men of warre. Throughe this and such like talke were the Macedonians Souldiours so moued and affectioned, that some first began secretly to mutine: and shortly after arose so great mutenie throughout the whole hoste, that no mā could make thē kéepe order, eyther in the campe or withoute, nor yet obey any. And the matter at last grew to his ende, that some of them were so bolde to come to Demetre and say, it was necessarie if he ment to saue him selfe to flie: for the Macedonians were so aggréeued, to fight any lōger for his pleasure, that they would no more abide his Dominion

and gouernement: whiche wordes to Demetre séemed very louing and honest, considering the common voyce and rumour throughout the armie. Wherefore he thought it not good to tarrie for any more motions, but with that, retired at once into his tent: and after despoyled him of his hablementes royall, 
                     •
                   nd put on a minstrels garment, and with a small companie fledde. After it was noysed he was gone, the greater numbre of his Souldiours ranne to his tente, and there straue for the butine, but Pyrrhe vnderstanding therof, sodenly came vppon them and made them all retire. And incontinent as the Souldiours sée him, they al with one voyce receyued and saluted him as their King, and he thereby seized of the armie and spoyle of Demetre. But shortly after, thyther came Lysimache, and there deuided they betwene them the realme of Macedone, which Demetre had about .vij. yeares held and enioyed.
            
            
               
                  ¶ After Demetre his flight out of Macedone, he besiegeth the Citie of Athens whiche rebelled, from whence he departed without taking it, and goeth into Asie to warre on Seleuke. After he hath taken many Cities, he is so sore pressed on, that he sendeth towardes Seleuke, to conclude a peace, and vppon the refusall, he ageyne commenceth the warres, and winneth on him certen victories.
               
                The .ix. Chapter.
               WHen Demetre was fled out of Macedone, as hath ben said, and gotten with all diligence to the citie of Cassander, Phile his wife being there, after she had intelligence in what sorte he was come, was therewith so displeased and desperate, that she could not be persuaded to sée him, so fled, and in such aduersitie, cō
                  sidering

that fortune was more constaunt in hir aduersities, than permanent in hir prosperities. Wherefore, euē werie of hir life, she tooke poyson & so died. Notwithstanding, Demetre departed thence, and with all spéede went into Grece, and there assembled as many shippes as he found whole and sounde, and the residue of his armie, determining once ageyne to put them in a redynesse, and so pursue his enterprise, lamenting neuerthelesse his Fortune and aduersitie, as King Menelaye, according to Sophocles in these wordes lamented his:
                     Menelaus.
                   Alas, my Fortune and chaunce incessauntly tourneth as doth the whéele of a Myl,
                     Sophocles.
                   and as the Moone, which neuer in one forme and estate continueth two whole nightes togyther,
                     A man greatly subict to Fortune.
                   but at the beginning altereth hir figure, as if she came out of a darke place, by little and little shewing hir selfe vntill she come to the full, & after by the same degrées decreaseth, vntill she hath lost hir whole light. Euen so may truly be spoken of Demetre his Fortune, who after the losse of Macedone, going into a priuate habite through the Townes of Grece, without any princely tokens and signes: one which sée him in the Citie of Thebes in this estate sayd of him the verses of Euripide, making much to this purpose and in this effect:
                     Euripide.
                  
                  
                     Who sometime was most like the forme deuine,
                     And now to forme humaine conuerte agayne:
                     Is come to Cyrces fountaynes cleare and fine.
                     And Ismenius Ryuer: there to lyue doth daine.
                  
Neuerthelesse, Fortune shortly after somewhat returning in his fauoure, restoring his power, whiche in hys first estate séemed to be clerely or very néere extinguished, purposed by a singular benefite worthie memorie, in restoring it to his first and auncient libertie, to win the beneuolence and loue of the citie of Thebes.
               
               In the same season, newes were brought him, how that Deiphile gouernour of the citie of Athens was dead,
                     Deiphil.
                   and another (according to their customes and orders)

placed in hys roome, and that they were reuolted and rebelled ageinst Demetre. And when they vnderstoode his power to be greater than they supposed, they sent into Macedon, to King Pyrrhe, to desire his ayde, wherat Demetre was so angrie, to sée that Citie so often times rebell, which he so many times had conquered: and to be so lightly from him reuolted, which he alwayes hadde so gently and curteously entreated, that he incontinent with his whole power departed thence to sea, and went so besiege it. But after he had ben there certeyn dayes, Crathe the Philosopher,
                     Crathes.
                   a mā then in great authoritie & renoumed in the citie, came with the Citizens Ambassadoures towardes him, and by diuerse reasons persuaded him to raise his siege and departe, and take some other enterprise in hande whiche might be more profitable. At whose persuasions Demetre hauing another enterprise in his hed, quieted him self, and went his way. And incontinent assembled his shippes and all his men of warre, to the numbre of .xj. thousande able men or more, and with them spéedely sayled into Asie, to the intent to winne from Lysimache the Countreys of Lydie and Carie. But as he drew neere the citie of Mylette,
                  
                     Milet.
                   he met Euridice,
                  
                     Euridice.
                   sister to Phile, his late wife, bringing Ptolomaide, whom Ptolome by Seleuke his meane had graū
                  ted him for his wife, and there forthwith by the consent of Euridice espoused hir. After the celebratiō of the marriage, he went about his enterprises, and at his arriuall tooke by assault many cities, the rest without resistance rendred: amongs which the citie of Sardes,
                  
                     Sardes.
                   garrisoned by Lysimache his Souldiours was one, whiche with the armie and treasure they had of his in kéeping, came and yelded to Demetre. But after he vnderstood that Agathocles,
                  
                     Agathocles,
                   
                  Lysimache his sonne, came with a mightie power that waye against him, he departed thence into Phrygie, thinking that if he could get and enioye the countrey of Armenie, he might after easely trouble the Region of

                  Mede, and thereby bring the hier Prouinces vnder hys subiectiō. And during the time that he marched through the playne countrey, Agathocles dayly pursued him so néere, that they had many skirmishes togyther, wherein Demetre had alwayes the better. Neuerthelesse, he sée many discommodities whiche hindred him from the attayning the chief and principall matter of his enterprise. The one was the great lacke and want of victuals, both for men and horsse. Wherfore the Souldiours séeing them in that necessitie, doubted he would lead thē into Armenie, but there chaunced him an other mishap. For as he passed ouer the ryuer of Lis,
                  
                     The Riuer Lis.
                   a great number of his men which knew not well the depth, swamme ouer: whereat the rest were so angrie, that they would neyther obey any within or withoute the campe, and that which was worse, they with euill and oultragious wordes, reproched Demetre. And there was founde set vppon his Pauillion written in a table these wordes: O thou sonne of good father Antigone, into what region wilt thou now carry vs? Finally when he sée the famin more and more dayly increase & augmente, he thought it most expedient and necessarie, considering the necessitie of the time, to departe, that with the losse of eight thousand Souldiours, he retired into the citie of Therse.
                  
                     Therse.
                   And bycause that Countrey was subiect to Seleuke, he was carefull to looke about him, that his men should not spoyle the Countrey, whereby he might prouoke Seleuke his indignatiō against him, whose puissaunce was very strong, but especially at that tyme, bycause he had such great affaires in hande, whiche was impossible for him to compasse, considering the necessitie and pouertie of his people. And Agathocles so garded the passages of the ryuer Tygre, that he was euery waye inclosed. Whereupon considering the daunger he was in, he determined to slie towardes Seleuke, but before he would so do, he wrote vnto him his pitifull letters, conteining

all his misfortunes and aduersities, gréeuously complaining his miserable estate, praying him to haue pitie and compassion of so wretched a man, his familiar, and neere allie, who alreadie had had so many aduersities, that his verie mortall enimies thereof ought to haue compassion and pitie. These letters receyued, Seleuke hauing pitie and compassion of one so noble a personage, by fortune come into such calamitie and miserie, writte to his Officers and Lieutenaunts in those quarters, that they should vse and entreat him, as apperteyned vnto so noble a Prince: and farther, to cal backe the men of warre which pursued him. But after that Procley, a sage and wise man, and one of Seleuke his counsaill, had told him that it was not expedient he should nourishe and mainteyne Demetre his men of warre, nor yet to guie occasion to a Prince and Chieftayne of warre, and so Noble a warriour, to tarrie long within his coūtreys, he grew maruelous suspicious, and by & by altered his opinion. For men (quod he) ought not to make light accompte of so quarrelous a man, which hath alwayes inuented and deuised straunge and hie enterprises, and chiefly of one in so great aduersitie, which were inough to moue a man of small courage, to enterprise and execute a very great oultrage, to his best and dearest friende. These persuasions so moued Seleuke, that he leuied a sufficient armie, and with great diligence entred the countrey of Cilice. When Demetre heard therof, he was wonderfully abashed and astonied to sée so sodayn a mutation & chaunge, and so spéedy a returne. Wherfore he with his armie, retired into the strongest places of the mount Thaure, and sent towardes Seleuke his Ambassadoures, praying of him ayde and helpe, for the obtayning and getting some principalitie and Seigniorie in some of the prouinces néere hand, which had no King, wherein he might staye him selfe, ende his banishement, and there leade the rest of his life, and mainteyne his armie: and further, furnishe

him and his people with victuals, for want wherof sore distressed and in great néede: and not to suffer that one of his familiars and poore and miserable allie to liue (to his great dishonour) vnder the power & subiection of his enimies. Wherevpon Seleuke greatly suspecting, aunswered him: That he was content, Demetre and his armie should remayne two monethes in the countrey of Laconie: alwayes prouided, that he send certen his principall friends for hostages. When Demetre vnderstood this aunswere, he then wholly dispaired, séeing him selfe on euery side enclosed and enuironed with Seleuke his garrisons, and out of hope, by prayers or entreatie to vrge him. Wherfore he turned al his despaire into a rage, and determined to warre and fight wt hym: and thereupon descended into the playnes, where he made great incursions & robberies, wasting the playne and champion Countrey: and after came and encamped so neere Seleuke, that they dayly escarmoushed togyther, in which Demetre had alwayes the better. And at last, as they were one day arranged in order of battaile redie to fight: after Demetre had repulsed and discomfited certen armed charriots, he brauely put all the reste of Seleuke hys armie to flight. And all at once with all possible spéede marched against Seleuke Souldiours, keeping the passages of Syrie, whome he likewise withoute great resistaunce incontinent chased and erpulsed.
            
            
               
                  ¶After the victorie by Demetre wonne on Seleuke, certen of his Souldiours (by reason of a dysease which happened him) forsake him: but he with the rest still warring vpon Seleuke, is at laste vanquished, and enforced to render, and in the ende kept as a prisoner.
               
                The .x. Chapter.
               
                  OF this victorie were Demetre and hys Souldiours so proude and cruell, that they dayly presented battaill to Seleuke. But he, who feared Demetre his hazard and fortune, then verie miserable, yet bycause she ageyne somewhat fauoured him, and aduaunced hym to an hier degree of prosperitie, turned backe Lysimache his souldiours by him sent in his aide, for that he had no great trust or confidence in them. And with the reste of his own, kept him in the places of most aduauntage, not meaning to fight. In this sorte began Demetre to gette ageyne courage and strength. But as he stood vppon the point to exploite some notable matter, he was sodenly with a gréeuous maladie (which troubled and hindred al his enterprises) taken. For his Souldiours who throughe victorie hadde gotten courage, and in good hope to worke wounders, seeing their chieftayne so sore sicke, faynted ageyne, so that some fled from the armie: some rendred to the enimie: and other thinking by straunge and vncouth wayes to retire home, villanously died. Notwithstanding when Demetre with much a doo, had in .xl. dayes recouered his health, he with the men which remained, forcibly entred the country of Cilice, ouerrunning and spoyling euery where: and in the ende encamped in so hie a place, that the enimie being a great waye of, might easely sée them. When night came, he without noise departed with his armie, and passed the mount Aman, and after descended to the foote of the mountaine,
                     The Mount Aman.
                   into the playne, and there spoyled and wasted all, harde to the citie of Cyriste.
                  
                     Cyriste.
                   But shortly after, Seleuke, who faire and easely pursued him, encamped néere him. Whereuppon Demetre was right gladde, thinking that that happened well for his purpose, to surprise him in such sorte as he had determined to do: and in the night at such tyme as he thought Seleuke and his men were at rest and a sléepe, and doubted nothing, he putte all hys hoste in armes, and came straight vppon the Campe of

the enimie to assaile them are they were prouided. Neuerthelesse, he was not so soone approched the sayd cāpe, but that certen of the scoultes were come in extréeme haste, to aduertise Seleuke of his comming, who at the newes all dismayed, sodenly arose and tooke his gowne and slippers, and ranne out of his Tent, crying alarme, alarme, making the Trumpettes sounde to armes, exhorting and praying the Captaynes, lustely to resiste such an enraged beast. But when Demetre knew by the noise in the enimies campe, that his enterprise was discouered, he would not attempt Fortune but retired. Soone after, Seleuke with ensignes displayed, assailed his campe: and bycause Demetre woulde shewe that he was no whit abashed or afeard, he sent out a band of his Souldiours ageinst the enimie, which so lustily charged a corner of Seleuke his battaile, that they stood at a stay whyther to tarry or flie. Which thing Seleuke séeing, & knowing the daunger of the case and his estate, threwe of his headpece, and fiercely on horsbacke galloped hard to the forefronte, shewing hym selfe barefaced to them all, praying them to returne to the battaile, saying he had long absented him from them, not for want of good will, or feare of Demetre, but to obey those who were his good and loyal friendes. Then his Souldiours thorow these exhortations were so encouraged and emboldened, and chiefly bycause they see and behelde the face and Maiestie of their King, that they incontinent returned brauely to the battaile, and so impetuously recharged the enimie, that Demetre being well mounted, and séeing him not able to abide the violence of his power, got out of the campe, and vppon the spurre fled harde to the Amanipiles: and immediatly from thence with a few of his owne folks got into a forest hard by, and there tarried till night: to the ende to gette to the Porte of Caune,
                  
                     The port Caune.
                   where his Nauie rode, trusting to find it and hys friends who had charge thereof there, and from thence

to go hier: but considering his want of money to paye for victualles by the waye, he was enforced to take another deliberation. And being in this imagination and thought, one of his houshold seruants, named Sosignes, came to him and said,
                     Sosignes.
                   that he had yet .iij. hundred pieces of golde sowed within his girdle, which he trusted wold beare his charge to the sea side. And as they were by night cōming out of ye forest, they had espied a farre the fires in the enimies campe, so that they were constrayned to alter their determination and purpose, and returne from whence they came, being therby disseuered, but not all: For certen left him, and they which tarried, had much a do to follow: amongs whome was one, who was so bolde to saye vnto him, that he must now of necessitie, yeld to Seleuke, whereat he was so sorowful and troubled, that he drew oute his sworde to haue kild himselfe, and without stay had done it, if his trustie and louing friendes had not letted him, and forthwith bereft him his sworde, praying him so to aduise and counsaile with them, that they might saue them selues togyther, and not wilfully to kill and destroy him selfe: with which wordes he was well quieted. And after they had long debated their matters, he in the ende by persuasion of his friends was content to send towardes Seleuke some of them, signifying that he was willing, frankly to yeld his life and all that Fortune had left him, to his pleasure. Of whiche Ambassade was Seleuke right ioyous, and by reporte, sayde these wordes: Certes, Fortune doth not so much for Demetre in sauing of him, as for me. For ouer and besides many great good turnes and honours by hir to me done, she hath now gyuē power and libertie to shewe my liberalitie and curtesie towardes my familiar and allie, who is a man of so great vertue, prowesse & renowme, that I repute and take it for the chiefest felicitie that euer happened me. He after caused a Pauilion and Lent, and all other furniture apperteyning

to a mightie Prince, to be prepared and made readie in the moste honorable and pompous wise he could deuise. Now had he in his house a seruaunt named Apollonides, who long had vsed Demetre his companis, whome he sent vnto him, charging him to saye, that he might withoute feare fréely come to his friende and allie. After Seleuke had giuen him this in charge, a few of his men, at the beginning, and after a great nū
                  ber made them ready to ryde, and meete with Demetre, euery man studying and deuising to do him the greatest honour he coulde: thinking that he being so great and renoumed a personage and allie to Seleuke, shoulde incontinent haue all the whole authoritie about him. But it happened quite contrarie, for that pitie and compassion turned into enimitie. Bicause certen villaines who ruled and had authoritie about Seleuke, fearing that Demetre his comming woulde thrust them by, with many surmised tales put sundrie suspicions into his head, saying, that it was not méete to suffer so valiaunt and renowmed a Prince, a conductor and leader in warres to come in the view of his armie, bicause it was to be feared that his presence might be an occasion to make some commotion and mutenie in his Campe. In the meane while was Apollonides and the rest which accompanied him, come to Demetre, and had made reporte of Seleuke his curteous and gracious purpose for him, who thereof right ioyous, gaue them maruellous good and gentle enterteynement, and there reioysed and chered togyther. And aboue the rest Demetre who before reputed his fortune miserable so shamefully to yelde him selfe, vnderstanding by the reporte of his very familiars, the good & gentle wordes of Seleuke, merely and ioyfully went towardes him as to his auncient friend and Allie. But in these enterfactes Pausanias sent by Seleuke with a thousand horsse met with him,
                     Pausanias.
                   and so soone as he approched, encompassed him and put backe all the rest, which were

with him: and after, as frō the mouth of Seleuke, sayde that as then he might not come to him, but that he had charge to bring him to an other place. So he brought him into a castle of Syrie, named Cheronnese:
                  
                     Cheronness.
                   and leauing there with him a great garde, returned towardes Seleuke.
               
            
            
               
                  ¶ Antigone for deliuerie of hys Father Demetre, maketh great speede, but in the ende, Demetre dieth in prison, and of the honours done to him after his death.
               
                The .xj. Chapter.
               AS Demetre lay prisoner in the castle of Cheronnese, verie straightlie kept and strongly garded, yet Seleuke caused him to be verie well entreated, & gaue him also so much libertie to sporte him as might be. For the lodging was honorable and royal, and therein great orchyardes and gardens full of maruellous faire and pleasaunt trées and other delices, in whiche he might at his pleasure, solace him: and left with him hys owne seruaunts and familiar friendes whiche serued and accompanied him at his commaundement. And they oftentimes repayring to Seleuke, and eftsoones returning towardes Demetre, reported vnto him all the good and curteous language and communication by Seleuke sayd and talked in his behalfe, exhorting and praying him to make good chere, and to hope well of his deliueraunce: and not to mistrust the bountie and liberalitie of Seleuke. They farther declared vnto him for certen, that Seleuke looked for the comming of Antioche his sonne, and Stratonice his wife, daughter to the sayd Demetre, whom he had sent for, to the ende they should haue the honour and thanke for his deliueraunce, and that after their cō
                  ming he shoulde be set at libertie to go whyther it pleased

him. Notwithstanding Demetre séeing him selfe in this captiuitie, and voyde of all hope of deliueraunce, sent certen messangers to the Gouernours of Athens and Corinth, his subiects, to signifie vnto them, that they neuer after that time should giue any credit to his seale or letters, but hold and take him for dead. He moreouer willed them as they had alwayes loued him and kepte their faith to him, that they would in the best sorte they might, conserue the Realme and estate to Antigone hys sonne. Whiche Antigone after he had heard the pitifull newes of his fathers captiuitie in the citie of Patras, became thereof so sorowful,
                     Patras.
                   as he could not be more. And incontinent when he had made him his mourning gown to mourne, he sent letters and Ambassadours into euery countrey, towardes the other Kings, praying and requiring them to make intercession to Seleuke, for deliuerie of his Father. He sent also Ambassadoures to Seleuke, praying him to take all such goods as Fortune hadde left him for the ransome of his father, and besides offred, if it so liked him, to come him self to be an hostage or pledge for his sayd father. He farther desired him presently to shewe and declare his humanitie and curtesie, wherein he had euer surmounted all the rest of the Kings. The like request made al the other Kings, except Lysimache, who was so cruell,
                     The crueltie of Lysimache.
                   that where the reste entreated for his deliueraunce, he not onely refused to make that request, but contrariwise offered Seleuke a great summe of money to put him to death. Whereunto Seleuke gaue no eare, but blaming and detesting his crueltie and inhumanitie, refused his request and money. Neuerthelesse he still looked for the cōming of Antioche his sonne, and Stratonice, bycause he would at their requestes and pleasure deliuer him: to the ende, they shoulde for that deliueraunce receyue all the thanke, fauoure, and good will at his handes. Howbeit, the matter (vnder colour of long looking for them) was so procrastinate, that Demetre
                  
in the end had no néed of their helpe. For although he see yt miserie ineuitable which happened him, yet determined he paciently to endure and abide it, and after hir comming, he made semblaunce that he méekely bare it. And although from the first houre he was brought in to that place, he in hunting, running, and exercising his persone, aswell on foote as on horsbacke passed the time, yet neuerthelesse after a while he helde and kepte an other kind of life. For, where before he tooke pleasure in trauell, he nowe gaue him selfe wholy to reste, and desired nothing but banquets, feastes and other suche like pleasures, done without trauell of the body: were it by that meane to passe awaye hys melancolie humour, or else bycause it séemed he had founde out the right order of life, which he alwayes desired: detesting and abhorring his labours and trauels heretofore taken, and the daungers and miseries which he through ambition and vaine glorie had oftentimes aduentured. For to that only ende had he beaten and trauelled the Seas and all Countreys, hoping euer after to take his rest and ease: whereby he might vse the remnaunt of his life in pleasures and delightes, which ease and rest he there found, vnlooked for. And surely, these are the endes and issues of the warres which vicious & couetous Princes so excessiuely desire,
                     Against ambitious Princes.
                   and with great laboure and trauell follow, placing their whole pleasure and felicitie in them: wherein after my iudgement they not onely greatly erre, in reputing vices for vertues: but also in desiring to liue an idle and voluptuous life, séeke after, and follow those things which are quite contrarie to pleasure. But after Demetre had about thrée yeares bene at Cheronnese: what with banquets, rest and ease, pleasures, and ydlenesse, he fel into so gréeuous a maladie, that in the ende he died thereof: when he hadde liued. lxiiij. yeares. Whereupō the news soone after were throughout the whole worlde diuulged and spread abroade, and

so many as vnderstood it, greatly blamed Seleuke, for being so vngentle towardes his Allie. Him selfe also was very pensiue and heauie in that he had greater suspicion of his friend and Allie than néeded, and shewed him selfe more wretched and fearefull than Dronichete the Thracian, a barbarous and vnciuill man, who after he had taken Lysimache, frankly and fréelie set him ageyne at libertie. Howbeit, he commaunded, that for his sepulture and buriall al the honours, ceremonies and solemnities that were possible should be made, whiche woulde be to tedious to recite, and séeme rather a Tragedie than an Historie. In so much that when his sonne Antigone was aduertised of his death, he with his whole Nauie went to Sea and sailed into Syrie, to get togyther his Fathers Ashes. But being about the Isles, he mette certen messangers which brought them, of whō he receyued them & enclosed it in a box of massiue gold, and sette it in the Poupe of his ship Royall, making his course directly to sayle to Corinthe. And as he sailed alongest the Cities of the countrey of Cheronnese, the Citizens with solempne processions came oute, some bearing Crownes of gold, other brought Mourners to accompanie the dead body. In this sorte was borne and accompanied Demetre hys body in the very top of the poupe of the ship which was couered with purple, and crowned with golde, hauing also about it a great numbre of lustie yong Souldiours, all armed in white, which renued the remembraunce of the dead. He had also an excellent Musician, named Xenophante, who in all swéetnesse and hermonie, soong the Psalmes and songs accustomed in suche a case, and the Gallie sclaues, with so great consonance haled their ores, that they aunswered Xenophante his song:
                     Xenophante.
                   and al with one voyce, made dolorons and lamentable noyse, very pitifull to heare. Finallie, when he was arriued at the Porte of Corinth, the townes men came out to mete it, and séeing the yong Antigone in mourning apparell,

al sadde, and besprent with teares, were so moued with pitie, that they all at one present gaue a maruelous lamentable dolorous shoute and crie. From thence was the body carried into the Citie of Demetriade, whiche he him self founded, and called after his owne name, and it peopled with the places néere about, as if it had bene in his owne propre domicile. Of the sayde King Demetre descended a right noble and honorable ligne or steme. For he left behind him by hys wife Phile, Antigone and Stratonice: and by Deidame, Alexāder, who liued in Egipt. Ouer and besides these, he left two other yong mē, both named Demetre, whereof the one named Demetre the long, he had by his wife Illiriade: and the other he got of Ptolomayde, who after reigned Lorde and King of Cyrene. There are some also which saye, that Barrabe begotten of Euridice, was likewise his sonne. Thus after hys death the succession and posteritie of the sayde Demetre obtayned and enioyed the realme of Macedone, vntil the reigne of King Perse, whome the Romaynes after vanquished and expulsed.
            
         
         Thus endeth the Historie of the Successors of Alexander, extracte out of Diodore the Sicilian, & some part out of the wise Plutarque, which conteyneth their actes & iestes from the death of Alexander the great, vntil the death of Demetre sonne to the great Antigone. And whosoeuer lysteth to read and know the end of the other, may read the Historie of Troge Pompey, abridged by Iustine.
         
         FINIS.
      
      
         
            
            
            ¶ The Table of the Chapters conteyned in this present volume.
            
               
                  The first Booke.
                  AFter the death of Alexander the great, Aride hys brother is established King, and Perdicas appointed his Gouernour. Chapter .1.
                  fol. 1
                  ¶ Perdicas taking vpon hym the gouernement of the Realme, deuideth the Satrapies amongs the Princes. Chapter .2.
                  fol. 2
                  ¶ Perdicas sendeth Python against ye 
                     Grekes rebelling in the hye countreys, whome he ouerthroweth. And incidentlie the description of the scite and compasse of all Asie. Chap. 3.
                  fol. 4
                  ¶ Of the warres that the Atheniās made against Antipater, called the Lamian warre. Cap. 4.
                  fol. 6
                  ¶ Certē of the Princes vpon whome Perdicas had bestowed the gouernement of the Prouinces, go about to Seiniorize them. Cap. 5.
                  fol. 9
                  ¶ Leonathe cōming to the rescous of Antipater, is by the Athenians ouerthrowen and slayne. But after the sayd. Athenians are by Clythe chased and ouerthrowen at Sea. Cap. 6.
                  fol. 10
                  ¶ Perdicas ouercōmeth Ariarathes, & restoreth to Eumenes the countrey of Cappadoce. Cap. 7.
                  fol. 11
                  ¶ Antipater in fight vanquisheth the Grecian armie, putteth in subiection the greater numbre of the cities of Grece and Athens, and in the ende restoreth them to libertie. Cap. 8.
                  fol. 11
                  ¶Of the exploits which Thymbron & Ptolome did in the warres of Cyrene. Cap. 9.
                  fol. 13
                  ¶Perdicas entring Piside, taketh the Lamadians prisoners, and by siege so distresseth the Isaurians that they kill them selues. And at the entreatie of Antigone, Antipater
                     
and Cratere whiche warred vppon the Etholians, concludeth a peace with them, bycause they woulde go against Perdicas. Cap. 10.
                  fol. 15
                  ¶Of ye transporting the body of Alexander into Egipt, out of Babylon. The forme and fashion of the charriot wt the Pompe and solempnitie thereof. Cap. 11.
                  fol. 17
                  ¶ Eumenes is in battaill ouerthrowen, and Cratere slayne. Cap. 12.
                  fol. 19
                  ¶ How the souldiors of Perdicas after he had brought them into Egipt, slew him. And howe Python and Aride were chosen Gouernours of the Kings. Cap. 13.
                  fol. 21
                  ¶ After the death of Perdicas, the Macedonians flea all his kynne and friends in the armie, and adiudge Attale and Alcete with their abettours and friends, enimies & rebelles. Of the retire of Attale into the citie of Tyre, & consequently, howe he a freshe assembleth all Perdicas friends which are escaped. Cap. 14.
                  fol. 23
                  ¶The Etholians to put Antipater from his enterprise, enter Thessalie, who by the Acarnanians are constrayned to returne into their countrey. And in what sorte Polispercon conquereth the countrey of Thessaly. Cap. 15.
                  fo. 24
                  ¶ Antipater being constituted Gouernour and Protectour of the Kings, a newe deuideth the Satrapies. Cap. 16.
                  fol. eodem
                  ¶ Antigone vanquisheth Eumenes, and besiegeth the Citie of Nore. Cap. 17.
                  fol. 25
                  ¶ Of the cōquests which Ptolome made on the countreys of Phenice and Celosirie. Cap. 18.
                  fol. 27
                  ¶ Antigone enterpriseth warres ageinst Alcete and Attale, and discomfiteth them. Cap. 19.
                  fol. 27
                  ¶ After the death of Antipater, Polispercon is ordeyned Gouernour of the Kings, & Cassander enterpriseth to expulse him the Gouernement. Cap. 20.
                  fol. 29
                  ¶ Antigone vnderstanding of Antipater his death, taketh vpon him the gouernement of the Empire of Asie, and sendeth to Eumenes desiring his returne. Ca. 2
                        •
                      .
                  fo. 30
                  
                     ¶ Aride is repulsed from the siege of the Citie of Cizice. Cap. 22.
                  fol. 31
                  ¶Antigone commenceth warre against Aride, gouernour of Phrigie, and against Clite, Lorde of Lydie. And in the ende openly proclaymeth him selfe enimie to the Kings, and enioyeth one parte of Asie. Cap. 23.
                  fo. 31
                  ¶Of diuers aduentures whiche happened Eumenes, and of his deliueraunce frō the siege of Nore. ca. 24.
                  fo. 32
                  ¶ Cassander sheweth him selfe enimie to Polispercon, and getteth to his alliaunce many of the Satrapes. Polispercon by an edict Royall, restoreth the Cities of Grece into their auncient libertie. Cap. 25.
                  fol. 33
                  ¶ Eumenes taking parte with the Kings, goeth into Cilice: and of hys practises to gette men of warre. Cap. 26.
                  fol. 35
                  ¶ Ptolome goeth about to cause the Argiraspides to kill Eumenes, whome he by his wisedome appeased, and after sendeth an armie by sea into Phenice. Ca. 27.
                  fo. 37
                  ¶ Nycanor kéeping and occupying the Porte of Pyre against the Athenians, is besieged by Alexander, Polispercon his sonne, and of the mutenie in the citie of Athens. Cap. 28.
                  fol. 38
                  ¶ Polispercon besiegeth Cassander in Pyrey, and perceyuing that he coulde not winne it, departeth thence and besiegeth the citie of Megalopolis, where by the wisedome and policie of Demades, he is at an assault repulsed. Cap. 29.
                  fol. 41
                  ¶After Clyte hath ouerthrowen at Sea Cassander, he is through the wisedome of Antigone, soone after discomfited, and finally slaine in his flight. Cap. 30.
                  fol. 43
                  ¶Eumenes vnderstanding that Antigone is comming against him, departeth out of the countrey of Cilice. And when he hath by his wisedome and industrie escaped in the waye the handes and ambushes of Seleuke, he commeth into Perse. Cap. 31.
                  fol. 44
                  ¶The Athenians make a perfecte amitie and inuiolable

peace with Cassander and allie with him. After, he killeth Nycanor, and bringeth the greater number of the cities of Grece to his alliance. Cap. 32.
                  fol. 44
               
            
            
               
                  Of the second booke.
                  OF certayne matters both by the Romaines and the Crotonians exploited in Italie. Cap. 1.
                  fol. 45
                  ¶ Olympias, Alexander his mother, by meane of Polispercon obtayneth the gouernement of the Realme of Macedone, causeth King Phillip and Euridice his wife to be executed, and besides vseth many other cruelties. Cap. 2.
                  fol. 46
                  ¶ Eumenes passeth the Ryuer of Tygre, and maugre Seleuke and Pythō, marcheth into Susiane, and after commaundeth the Satrapes of the higher Asie, wt their whole power to mete him. Cap. 3.
                  fol. 47
                  ¶ The Satrapes of the hier countrey of Asie, to resiste Python ioyne togyther: and of the power they assembled. Capt. 4.
                  fol. 48
                  ¶ Eumenes through hys wisedome appeaseth the dissention of the Satrapes stryuing for the principalitie, and payeth his men of warre. And of the preparation which Antigone for his part maketh. Cap. 5.
                  fol. 49
                  ¶ How eight prisoners, Alcete his souldiours, throughe their great prowes escape, and take the Towne wherein they are emprisoned, and in the ende ageyne taken. Cap. 6.
                  fol. 49
                  ¶ Antigone being come into Babylon, and ioyning we 
                     Seleuke and Python, is by Eumenes repulsed the passage of Tygre, to the great losse and slaughter of hys people. Cap. 7.
                  fol. 50
                  ¶ Of Antigone his comming with his armie into the Countrey of Mede, and the daungers and hard passage he hath vpon the way. Cap. 9.
                  fol. 52
                  ¶ Eumenes to please his Satrapes, with the whole armie marcheth into the countrey of Perse, & by hys wisedome

and pollicie putteth Penceste, who affected the gouernement and armie, in great feare: and after reconcileth the sayd Penceste, and assureth him selfe of all the other Satrapes and Captaynes. Cap. 10.
                  fol. 53
                  ¶ Of the battaile betwene Antigone and Eumenes, & of their powers: and of their retire to winter without victorie on eyther side. Cap. 10.
                  fol. 55
                  ¶ Eumenes burieth the dead: and of a maruelous case whiche happened betwene two women of Inde. Cap. 12.
                  fol. 59
                  ¶ Cassander vnderstanding of that Quéene Olympias had done, with his armie commeth into Macedone, and besiegeth the sayde Olympias within the Citie of Pidue, where the Quéene in short time is cleane voyde of hope of all succours she loketh for. Cap. 13.
                  fol. 57
                  ¶ Antigone thinking to surprise and discomfite Eumenes and his armie, the sayde Eumenes (throughe hys wisedome and diligence) frustrateth his enterprise: and by that meane saueth both his Elephants and baggage. Cap. 14.
                  fol. 58
                  ¶ Antigone in battaill ouerthroweth Eumenes, putteth him to death, and after seizeth on all hys armie. Cap. 15.
                  fol. 60
                  ¶ Antigone retireth to winter in the Countrey of Mede, and of the deluge or floud which that time chaunceth in the Citie of Rhodes. Cap. 16.
                  fol. 67
                  ¶ Antigone by craft putteth to death Python, who beginneth to rebell: and gyueth the Satrapie of Mede to Orondonate: and lykewise vanquisheth certen other Median rebelles. Cap. 17.
                  fol. 68
                  ¶ Antigone comming into Perse, and there receyued as Lorde and Seigniour of all Asie, deuideth the Satrapies thereof: and after goeth to the citie of Suse, and taketh all the treasure he there findeth. Cap. 18.
                  fol. 69
                  ¶ Cassander taketh by composition Olympias, and after putteth hir to death. Cap. 19.
                  fol. 70
                  
                     ¶After the death of Olympias, Cassander espouseth Thessalonice, Alexander the great hys sister, and foundeth the citie of Cassander. And after he hath put in safe kéeping Roxanne and Alexander his sonne, he goeth into the countrey of Beote, and reedifieth the citie of Thebes. Cap. 20.
                  71
                  ¶Of the foundation and fortunes of the citie of Thebes in Beote. Cap. 21.
                  72
                  ¶After Cassander hath taken and subdued certen cities of Peloponnese, and vnderstandeth of the comming of Alexander, Polispercon his sonne, against hym, he returneth into Macedone. Cap. 22.
                  73
                  ¶ Upon Antigone his arriuall in Babylon, Seleuke perceyuing that he séeketh occasions to expulse or kill him, flieth into Egipt. Cap. 23.
                  74
                  ¶ Of Seleuke his practize and deuise, touching the alliance and confederacie betwixt Ptolome, Cassander, & Lysimache, against Antigone. Of their defiaunce they send him, and of his preparatiō against them. Also of his siege against the citie of Tyre in Phenice. Cap. 24.
                  74
                  ¶Of the wisedome and vertue of Phile, Antipater his daughter. Cap. 25.
                  77
                  ¶ Antigone winneth to his alliaunce Polispercon and Alexander his sonne, and by a decrée by the Macedonians made, denounceth Cassander an enimie, and after taketh the citie of Tyre. Cap. 26.
                  77
                  ¶Of the practizes, deuises and prouision by Ptolome and Seleuke on the one parte, and Antigone on the other parte, made by Sea in the countrey of Asie. Cap. 27.
                  78
                  ¶ Of certen exploites of warre, by Cassander and his souldiours in Peloponnese and other partes of Grece done. And how Alexander Polispercon his sonne reuolteth. After of a great victorie which Ptolome his Nauie hath against Antigone his Nauie in Cilice. And after, Ptolome and Antigone come to a parle: and of certain exploites of warre betwene the Romaines and Samnites. Cap. 28.
                  79
                  
                     ¶Of diuerse exploites which Aristodeme one of Antigone his captaynes, doth against Alexander, Polispercon his sonne in Peloponnese
                     
                        •
                       and Alexander being slaine, his wife through hir prowes, taketh vpon hir the gouernement. Cap. 29.
                  80
                  ¶Cassander making amitie with the Acarnanians and Illirians, and reducing to his alliaunce certen other Cities, returneth into Macedone: and the Etholians taking the citie of Arginye in Acarnanye, slea and kill the inhabitaunts thereof. Cap. 30.
                  81
                  ¶ Two bandes of Cassanders whiche he sendeth to Lemne and Carie, are by the souldiours of Antigone ouerthrowen. Cap. 31.
                  82
                  ¶ Antigone gyuing order aboute the affaires in Syrie, goeth into Phrigie: and of a notable victorie which one of his captaynes winneth at Sea on the enimie. Ca. 32.
                  83
                  ¶ The Romaines losing a great battaill against the Samnites, people the Citie of Locres with their men. Cap. 33.
                  83
                  ¶ Lysimache subdueth the cities of Pont and Thaure, whiche rebell: and after vanquisheth the Scythes, and supplies by Antigone sent into the same Countrey. Cap. 34.
                  84
                  ¶ Thelesphore one of Antigone his Captaynes restoreth the greater number of the cities of Peloponnese to libertie. And Philip a captayn of Cassanders, vanquisheth the Etholians, and the King of Epyre, which came to their ayde. Cap. 35.
                  83
                  ¶ Antigone apperceyuing that he is by Cassander deceyued, taketh certen cities in Carie, and after commeth to a parle with Cassander. And vppon little or no agréement, they beginne the warre in Grece. Cap. 36.
                  83
                  ¶The Romaines winne a victorie on the Samnites. And the rebellious Champanois by an agréement putte them selues to their obeisaunce. Cap. 37.
                  84
                  ¶ Ptolome and Antigone to despite one the other, restore

diuerse Cities of Grece to libertie. And the same Antigone faileth of his entrie into Macedone. After are entreated the matters by Ptolome
                     
                        •
                       done in Cypres and Cilice, in the hier Syrie. Cap. 38.
                  85
                  ¶ Ptolome and Seleuke come into Sirie against Demetre, and in battaill vanquishe him. And after Ptolome conquereth the countrey of Phenice. Cap. 39.
                  89
                  ¶ Thelesphore reuolteth from Antigone: and Alcete by the Epirots chosen King, making alliaunce with Cassander, after many battailles is by his subiectes slaine. And Cassander loseth a battaill before the citie of Apollonie in the countrey of Adrie. Cap. 40.
                  92
                  ¶Seleuke through hys wisedome and prowes, with a small numbre of men which Ptolome hadde giuen hym, conquereth the countrey of Babylon, togyther Susiane and the rest néere ioyning, whiche holde with Antigone. Cap. 41.
                  93
                  ¶ Demetre in battaill vanquisheth Cylles Ptolome his Lieutenaunt, and after Antigone hys Father commeth and ioyneth with him, and then Ptolome forsaketh the countreys of Syrie and Phenice, and leaueth them to the sayd Antigone. Cap. 42.
                  95
                  ¶ Antigone enterpriseth warres against the Nabathians, inhabiting the desertes of Arabia: and Athaney his Captayne is by them discomfited. Also after Demetre his comming thyther, he concludeth a league and amitie with them. Cap. 43.
                  96
                  ¶ Of the Lake Asphalte, and the maruelous nature thereof: also the discomfiture of Antigone hys people there, by the Arabians. Cap. 44.
                  99
                  ¶ Demetre Antigone his sonne, at hys Fathers commaudement goeth to Babylon, to make thereof a conquest, and after returneth to his father. Cap. 45.
                  100
                  ¶ The Romaines vnder the conducte of Quinte Fabie their Dictator, winne and take two cities from the Samnites. Cap. 46.
                  101
                  
                     ¶After the alliaunce made and confirmed betwene Cassander, Ptolome, Lysimache, and Antigone: Cassander putteth to death the yong Alexander, and Roxanne hys mother. Cap. 47.
                  101
               
            
            
               
                  Of the third Booke.
                  OF certen aide which Cassander sendeth to the king of Peons: of certen enterprises by Ptolome against Antigone, done in Phenice. How Polispercon taketh on hand to restore Hercules the sonne of Alexander, to the realme of Macedone. And finally of the pitiful and lamentable death of Nycocles and his whole familie. Cap. 1.
                  103
                  ¶Of the warres betwene Parisade his thrée children, King of Bosphore, after his death, for the succession of the Realme, togyther their déedes and gestes, and also their endes. Cap. 2.
                  104
                  ¶Of two victories whiche the Romaines woon against the Samnites, whereby they tooke many of their Cities. Cap. 3.
                  107
                  ¶ Ptolome Prince of Egipt, winneth from Antigone certen cities, practizeth and getteth to him Ptolome Nephew to Antigone, and after putteth him to death. Polispercon also through the persuasion of Cassander, putteth to death Hercules the sonne of Alexander. And finally of Cleomenes death King of Lacedemon. Cap. 4.
                  108
                  ¶ Of certen victories which the Romaines haue vppon the Tyrrhenians and Samnites. And of certen innouations by Appie Claudie the Romaine Censor made, in cōtempt and defacing of the Senate and nobles, in fauoure of ye communaltie. Cap. 5.
                  109
                  ¶ After Ptolome Prince of Egipt, hath restored one parte of the cities of Grece to libertie, he for despite and in recompence of their breach of promisse with him, concludeth a peace with Cassander. And Cleopatre sister to

                     Alexander the great, comming on hir waye towardes him, is by the commaundement of Antigone, miserablie slaine. Cap. 6.
                  110
                  ¶ After the taking and razing of Munichie, Demetre Antigone his sonne, by his fathers commaundement restoreth Athens, Megare, and many other Cities of Grece to libertie: and of their liberalitie towardes him, and the honours they iudged hym worthie for that hys benefite and good turne. Cap. 7.
                  111
                  ¶ Demetre, Antigone his sonne, vanquisheth in a battaill at Sea Ptolome, before the citie of Salamine in Cypres, and by that meane winneth the whole Isle from him. And after the sayd Antigone, Demetre and Ptolome take vppon them the Tytles and Dyademes of Kings. Cap. 8.
                  112
                  ¶ Antigone and Demetre hys sonne, with a mightie power inuade Egipt both by Sea and lande. And after, finding the entry and border of the countrey well prouided and furnished, they returne without any exploit. Cap. 9
                  116
                  ¶ Of certen exploites of warre betwene the Romaynes and Samnites. Cap. 10.
                  118
                  ¶ Demetre by the commaundement of hys Father, both by Sea and lande besieged the citie of Rhodes. Of the great and lustie assaultes they gaue, and the maruelous and honorable defence yt the Townesmen made. Cap. 11.
                  119
                  ¶ Of two victories by the Romaines hadde vppon the Samnites. Cap. 12.
                  124
                  ¶ Demetre at many assaultes by the Rhodians repulsed, concludeth a peace. And departing thence, restoreth to libertie many cities of Grece. Of the death of King Eumele of Bosphore, and the raigne of Spartace his sonne. Cap. 13.
                  124
                  ¶ The conclusion of a peace betwixt the Romaines and Samnites, and certen other their neyghbours, and of

their subduing the Asculaines. Cap. 14.
                  130
                  ¶ Demetre by force and treatie taketh many Cities of Grece, and diuerse other render to hym: all whiche he restoreth to their auncient accustomed libertie. Cap. 15.
                  130
                  ¶ The Tarentines desire Cleonyme, the Lacedemonian, to ayde them against the Lucaines: of the villanies and lecheries he committeth, and after two mischiefes whiche in one tyme betyde him, he retireth into Corcyre. Cap. 16.
                  132
                  ¶ Cassander and Lysimache attending ayde frō 
                     Ptolome and Seleuke, beginne to warre vppon Antigone, the one in Thessalie, the other in Asie, and do take from him certen townes, cities and castles. Cap. 17.
                  133
                  ¶Antigone commeth against Lysimache, and after he hath him twice be sieged, and can not gette him oute to battaill, they are both fayne to sende their Souldiours in garrisons to winter. Cap. 18.
                  134
                  ¶ Demetre commeth into Grece against Cassander, and after certen small exploites on eyther side done, they grow to a composition. That ended, Demetre goeth into Hellespont, to ioyne with his father: and of many and diuerse other things. Cap. 19.
                  135
               
            
            
               
                  Of the fourth Booke.
                  
                     ANtigone comming to battaill against the enimie, is through the defaulte of hys sonne Demetre slayne. Cap. 1.
                  137
                  ¶After this discomfiture, the Athenians woulde not suffer Demetre to enter their citie: and how he ageyne gathereth togyther his armie. After, Demetre his daughter is married to Seleuke, who treateth a marriage betwene Demetre and Ptolomais, daughter to King Ptolome: and of the deniall he hath of two little Cities. Cap. 2.
                  138
                  
                     ¶ Demetre at his pleasure, taketh by siege the citie of Athens: of his bountie and humanitie towardes them. And after besiegeth the citie of Sparte in the countrey of Laconie. Cap. 3.
                  140
                  ¶ Alexander King of Macedone, praying Demetre his ayde, goeth aboute to betraye him, but in the ende hym selfe according to his demerite, is by Demetre with such lyke practize slayne, whome the Macedonians after receyued and honour as their King. Cap. 4.
                  142
                  ¶ Seleuke through a fatherly loue, remitteth to Antioche his fonne, his owne wife Stratonice, daughter to Demetre, and gyueth to them in title and name of the realme, all the hier Prouinces. Cap. 5.
                  144
                  ¶ Demetre thrice conquereth the countrey of Beoce, and citie of Thebes, and chaseth King Pyrrhe oute of the countrey of Trace. Cap. 6.
                  146
                  ¶ Demetre robbing and ouerrunning the countrey of the Eholians, enterpriseth warre against Pyrrhe King of Epyre, and after missing of their encountre and méeting, eyther of them do all the mischiefe they can one to anothers countrey: and of the renowme and fame that Pyrrhe getteth in that warre against the Macedonians. Cap. 7.
                  148
                  ¶ King Pyrrhe entring the countrey of Macedone, is by Demetre expulsed. And after, Demetre raiseth a mightie power to recouer his fathers Realme, and the other Kings linke togyther against him. And going ageyne to encountre Pyrrhe, who was entred Macedone, is throughe the mutinie of the Macedonians, enforced to flie, and after of the deuision of the realme betwene Pirrhe and Eysimache. Cap. 8.
                  150
                  ¶ After Demetre his flight out of Macedone, he besiegeth the citie of Athens, whiche rebelled, from whence he departeth withoute taking it, and goeth into Asie to warre on Seleuke. After he hath taken many Cities, he is so sore pressed on, that he sendeth towardes Seleuke,
                     
to conclude a peace, and vppon the refusall, he ageyne commenceth the warres, and winneth on hym certen victories. Cap. 9.
                  152
                  ¶ After the victorie by Demetre wonne on Seleuke, certen of his Souldiours (by reason of a dysease whiche happened him) forsake him: but he with the reste still warring vppon Seleuke, is at laste vanquished, and enforced to render, and in the ende kept as a prisoner. Capt. 10.
                  154
                  ¶ Antigone for deliuerie of his father Demetre, maketh great spéede, but in the ende, Demetre dieth in prison, and of the honours done to him after his death. Cap. 11.
                  157
               
            
            The ende of the Table.
         
         
            ¶ Imprinted at London, by Henry Bynneman, dwelling in Knightrider streat, at the signe of the Mermayd, for Humfrie Toy.
            
            ANNO. 1569.
         
      
   