
      
         
            
            
            THE EXPLANATION.
OF THE TRVE AND
LAVVFVLL RIGHT AND TYTLE,
OF THE MOSTE EXCELLENT PRINCE,
ANTHONIE the firſt of that name, King of Portugall,
concerning his warres, againſte Phillip King of Caſtile, and
againſt his Subiectes and adherentes, for the recouerie of his kingdome.
TOGETHER VVITH A BRIEFE HIſtorye
of all that hath paſſed aboute that matter, vntill the
yeare of our LORD. 1583.
            Tranſlated into Engliſh and conferred with the
French and Latine Copies.
            By the commaundement and order of the Superiors.
At Leyden
In the Printing houſe
of Chriſtopher Plantyn.
1585.
         
         
            
            The order of the Priuiledge.
            
               MAurice Erle of Naſſawe, Catzenellebogen, Vianden, Dietz,
&c. and the counſelors of eſtate appointed in the prouinces
vnited of the low countreis: To all to whom theſe preſents
ſhall come greeting. Th'ambaſſador of the moſte
noble prince Anthony King of Portugall, Algarbes &c. hath declared
vnto vs, that he hath cauſed a little treatiſe to bee made, in the
Latine, Frenche, and Flemmiſh tongues, conteyning the iuſtification
of the ſaid king Anthony, with a briefe hiſtorye of all that hath
paſſed betweene his maieſty and the King of Caſtile: vntill the taking
of thiſlands of Aſſores, together with an exhortatiō to all princes
& potentates of Chriſtiandome, how muche it ſtandeth them
vpon, to aid and ſuccour the ſaid king Anthony to recouer his kingdom.
The which diſcourſe the ſaid Ambaſſador is deſirous to cauſe
to be imprinted with aſmuch expedition as poſſib
                  •
               y he may, to wit
in the Latine & French tongs by Chriſtopher Plantin, & in the Flē
               miſh
tong by Peter Verhaghen printer of Dordright. Wherefore &
for other cauſes vs hereunto mouing, we haue giuen & granted, &
by theſe preſents do giue & graunt vnto the ſaid declarer licence,
authority & permiſſion to cauſe the ſaid treatiſe & boke to be printed
by the ſaid Chriſtopher Plantin & Peter Verhaghen, & to put the
ſame to ſale in the tongues aforeſaid. Wherefore we commaunde
all men generallie and particularlie that they ſuffer the ſaid declarer
fullie and peacablie to enioy and vſe this our preſent licence
authoritie and permisſion, cauſing all troubles and empechemēts
contrary to the ſame, clearelie to ſurceaſe and be remoued: Forbidding
as hereby we doe ſtraightly prohibite & forbid all other
printers of the ſaid prouinces vnited, to imprinte or imitate the
ſaid booke in anie of the ſaide three tongues or in anye other
language without the knowledge and conſent of the ſaide ambaſſadour,
or his ſucceſſor in office, to ſell or diſtribute the ſame
either within the ſaid Prouinces vnited, or elſewhere, without the
ſame, vpon pain of arbitrary correction and to forfait L. l. for a fine
For ſo haue we found it conuenient, Giuen at Delft the 15. of Ianuarie.
1585 Ad Meetkerke.
            
            In the abſence of my Lord the Earle, by thorder of the counſellers
of eſtate aboueſaide.
I. VAN, LANGEN.
            
         
         
            
            
               
                  •…
               reſent woorke.

                  〈…〉
                the ſecond his Coſen germaine,
            
               
                  〈…〉
               e vviues.
            
               3

                     •…
                  ONOR, the ſiſter of themperour Charles the fift, by whome

                     •…
                  he had one ſonne named Charles that died in his infancie, and
Marie that died vnmaried.
               6

                     •…
                  LPHONSVS

                     ••
                  o was made

                     ••
                  rdinall.
               7
HENRIE, who
was alſo made
Cardinal, and after
king by the
death of Kinge
Sebaſtìan.
               8
EDVVARDE,
who married
Theodoſia Duches
of Bergantia
of whome iſſued

                     
                        
                           •…
                        ARIE who married

                           〈…〉
                        nder Prince of Par
                        
                           〈…〉
                         whome are iſſued

                           〈…〉
                         children.
                     KATHERINE,
who married the
Duke of Bergantia.
                     Edwarde who died and
was neuer married.
                  
               
               9
ANTHONIE,
who died in his
infancie.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
            The explanation of the true
and lawfull Right and Tytle, of the moſt excellent
Prince, Anthonie the firſte of that
name, King of Portugall, as touching his
warres againſt Phillip, king of Caſtile and his
Subiectes and adherents, for the Recouerie
of his kingdome. Together with a briefe hiſtory
of all matters paſſed vpon that occaſion
vntill the yeare of our Lord. 1583.
            
               WHen Iohn the ſecond of that name, King of Portugall,
was departed out of this mortall life, without any iſſue
of his bodie lawfully begotten, then liuing, (For his
onely legittimate ſonne Alfonſus, while his Father was
liuing, dyed at Santaren, by the fall of a horſe.) The kingdome of
Portugall deſcended, or rather was giuen by election of the people,
vnto Emanuell the firſt of that name, ſonne of Ferdinando, who
was vncle to the ſame king John. This was that king Emanuell,
whiche in the time of his Reigne conquered and annexed to his
crowne, a good part aſwell of the Eaſt as of the Weſt Indies, together
with diuers Cities and Townes of Affrica, which at this day
remaine ſubiect to the kinges of Portugall. The whiche king Emanuell
had three wiues, the firſt whereof was Iſabell the eldeſt
daughter of Ferdinando and Jſabell king and queene of Caſtile.
which queene Iſabell wife of the ſaid king Emanuell dyed in child-bed
after ſhe had brought forth her firſt and onely ſon Michaell,
who when he was declared and ſworne Prince of Caſtile and Portugall
dyed in his yong yeares. whereupon the ſaid king Emanuell
tooke to his ſecond wife, Marie the ſecond daughter of the ſaid
king Ferdinando and queene Jſabell his wife. By whiche Marie
he had nine children. The firſt whereof, was John the third, who
ſucceeded his father in the kingdome, and tooke to his wife, Catherine,
the daughter of Phillip, the firſt of that name, king of Caſtile,
and Archeduke of Auſtriche, &c. The ſeconde childe was
Jſabell who married the Empeorour Charles the fifte, of whome iſiſſued

three children, to wit Phillip the ſecond of that name nowe
King of Caſtile, Marie who married the Emperour Maximilian
the ſeconde of that name, and Iane who was married to
John prince of Portugall the ſonne of King Iohn the thirde of
that name. The thirde childe of the ſayde King Emanuell
was Beatrice who marryed Charles Duke of Sauoy. The fourth
was Lodowike who (as it hath beene ſince founde) was ſecretlye
married to one Jolenta of honeſt parentage, & of a ſingular beawtye,
adorned with vertue and good quallities, by whome hee
had one onely ſonne, named Anthonie: (who is the ſame partye,
of whome and concerning whoſe righte and tytle this
treatiſe principallye maketh mention). The fift childe of the
ſayde King Emanuell, was Ferdinando who married a daughter
of the Earle of Marialua in Portugall, by whome hee had two
ſonnes who dyed while their father and mother were lyuing.
The ſixte was Alfonſus who was made Cardinall and ſo dyed
without iſſue. The ſeuenth was Henrye who lykewiſe was
made Cardinall and prymate of Portugall, and after that King,
by the death of King Sebastian, as heereafter in this treatiſe more
at large ſhall bee declared. The eyght childe was Edwarde
who married Theodoſia Ducheſſe of Bergantia: by whome hee
had three children, that is to ſay, Mary who marryed Alexander
Prince of Parma of whome are iſſued three children: alſo Katherine
who marryed Iohn Duke of Bergantia. And Edwarde
who dyed vnmarryed. The ninthe chylde and laſte ſonne
of the ſayde King Emanuell of his ſayde ſeconde marryage was
Anthonie, who alſo dyed in his infancye. The thirde wyfe
of the ſame Emanuell was Eleonour ſiſter to the Emperor Charles
the fifte, by whome he had two children, to wit, Charles, who
dyed in his infancie, and Marye who alſo deceaſed and was
neuer marryed. When the ſayde Emanuell was deceaſed,
Iohn the thyrde of that name, his eldeſt ſonne ſucceeded him
in the kingdome as is aforeſayde, who by Katherine his wife had
manye children the whiche dyed all in their infancyes, except
Prince John, and Marye; The whiche Marye marryed
Phillip, nowe King, and then prince of Caſtile, and dyed before
her ſayde husbande came to his Crowne, leauing one
onelye ſonne whoſe name was Charles. Whome (as the fame

thereof is conſtante) his father King Phillip commaunded to
bee put to death in pryſon. When Prynce Iohn came to the
age of ſixteene yeere, hee married Jane the daughter of the
ſayde Emperour Charles, and dyed aboute one yeare after leaving
his wife greate with childe, who in the ſixte monethe after
the death of her huſbande, brought foorth a ſonne whoſe name
was Sebaſtian, whiche yong Prince when hee came to aboute
the age of foure yeares, ſucceeded in the kingdome by and
after the death of the ſayde Iohn the thirde his Graundfather by
the fathers ſide.
            Now when King Sebaſtian was come to the age of foure and
twentye yeares, vppon the intreatye and ſolicitation of Mulei
Mahumet Kinge (as hee pretended) of Fez and Marrocos,
who by Mulei Maluco his brother was expelled and
driuen out of his kingdome, the ſayde King Sebaſtian at the
laſt determined to paſſe into Affryca with a greate and puiſſant
Armye, to reſtore this Mulei Mahumet to his kingdome.
And for the better accompliſhmente thereof, hee prayed his
vncle King Phillip of Caſtile to voutchſafe ſome ayde vnto him
in that beehalfe. The King of Caſtile graunting this petition,
promiſed to ayde him, with fiftye Gallyes well appointed
and furniſhed, and foure thouſand armed ſouldyours. King
Sebaſtian truſting thereunto, with all care and dilligence prepared
his armye, wherewith in the monthe of Iune. 1578.
hee departed from Lisbone and came to a porte of Caſtile neere
the ſtreighte of Gibraltare called, el puerto de Sancta Maria,
where hee ſtayed certayne dayes for the Gallyes and menne
whiche the Kinge of Caſtile had promiſed to ſende vnto him.
But the Kinge of Caſtile, vnder pretence that the greate Turke,
prepared an Armye for that yeare, not onelye denyed to performe
his promiſe, but alſo (that is farre woorſe) cauſed a proclamation
to bee made and publiſhed thorowoute all Spayne,
ſubiecte to his Iuriſdiction, whereby all his ſubiectes were
commaunded vppon greate pennalties that none of them
ſhoulde accompanye Kinge Sebastian in that Voyage, whereof
certaynelye there can no other coniecture bee gathered,
ſauing onely that the king of Caſtile by his vnmeſurable ambition
& inſatiable deſire to haue dominion, neither coueted nor hoped

for any other thing then onely that the yong prince king Sebaſtian
his nephew, for want of ſufficient force, ſhould be ouerthrown
and come to deſtruction in the ſame Iourney, ſo as thereupon the
ſaid king of Castile might by that meane haue oportunity to ioyne
the kingdome of Portugall to his kingdome of Caſtile as it came
to paſſe.
            Neuertheleſſe the ſaide king Sebaſtian being a prince of greate
magnanimitie, when hee had all thinges in a readineſſe, and employed
infinite expences vpon the furniſhing of this armie whiche
was aboue a thouſand Saile, determined to purſue his voyage, and
ariued in Affrica and there landed all his armie amounting to about
fifteene thouſand fighting men. Thereupon in the end hee
came into a plaine fielde whiche beareth the name of Alcazar,
where the fift day of Auguſt in the ſame yeare, was fought a great
and terrible battaile betweene him and the enemie, wherein the
ſaid yong king Sebastian was not onelye ouercome but alſo ſlaine
in the field together with Mulei Mahumet whoſe parte he tooke,
at what time neyther did Mulei Maluco the king that fought againſt
them eſcape, For he, in the time of the battaile being ſicke
and wearye of ſitting his horſe, was remoued into his horſelitter
and there dyed during the battaile. A battaile certainlye worthie
to be had in remembraunce, for in the ſame dyed three kinges
together in one daye, as in lyke manner there were ſlaine in the
ſame aboue ſixe hundred of the cheefeſt of the Lordes and gentlemen
of the kingdome of Portugall beſides the common ſouldiers,
the moſt wherof were ſlaine in the battaile, and the reſt taken priſoners,
amongſt whiche number Don Anthonio of whome this
booke ſpecially treateth was one of the Captiues. Further there
be certaine perſons who affirme, that after the death of the ſayde
king Maluco, there was found in his pocket a letter written vnto
him from king Phillip wherein he aſſured king Maluco, that king
Sebaſtian nephew of the ſaide king Phillip ſhounde haue no ayde
at his handes. whereby may be perceaued agreat vnfaithfullnes of
king Phillip againſt his owne blood.
            Now when as by the death of king Sebaſtian, the linage of king
Iohn the third his grandfather by the fathers ſide, was vtterly extinct:
it muſt follow of neceſſity (if collateral ſucceſſion, take place
in this behalfe,) that recourſe muſt be had to the linage of the ſaid

               Lodowike as ſeconde ſonne of the aforenamed king Emanuell.
Whiche Lodowike (as is afore aleaged) had one onelye ſonne
called, Don Anthonio, who therefore (his lawfull byrthe preſupſuppoſed)
was the onelye lawfull and rightfull ſucceſſor of the
kingdome. But it fell ſo out, that while he in the ſaid diſcomfiture
of Affrica was taken priſoner and there remained captiue, (howbeit
vnknowne of the enemie,) as it was alwaies before that tyme
vnknowne, yea and that alſo to Don Anthonio himſelfe, that hee
was the legittimate ſonne of the ſaid Lodowike: Henry the Cardinall
his vncle, the fift iſſue male of King Emanuell, was preferred to
the kingdom being then a very old man. within a little while after,
by a wonderfull meane, or rather by the prouidence of God, the
ſayd Don Anthonio about forty daies after the loſſe of the battaile,
was deliuered out of captiuitie, and returned into Portugall, where
he was with great ioy receaued, not onely by King Henry, but alſo
by all the nobilitie and principall gentlemen of the countrey, and
moſt chiefly and principally by the common people. For hee was
beloued of all men, as well in reſpect of his noble and excellent
diſpoſition of mynde, as for the ſingular and rare vertues of his
ſayde Father Lodowike which moſt cleerely ſhined in him.
            Within a fewe dayes after Don Anthonio was arriued at Lyſbone
the metropolitan Citie of the kingdome, he was aduertiſed
by one of his father Lodwikes ancient ſeruantes who was a man
of good callinge and approued integritie, that his father Lodowicke
(as is afore mencioned in this treatiſe) was ſecretlye married to
the ſaid Iolenta. And howe there were diuerſe credible witneſſes
yet liuinge that could teſtifie the trouthe therof. And beſides that
dyuerſe men of good credit & calling, had expreſſed and declared
the ſame by their laſt willes and teſtamentes for the diſcharge of
their conſciences notwithſtanding that it was alwaies kept verye
ſecret through the endeuour of the ſaid Lodowike aſwel in reſpect
of thine quallitye of the perſons, as alſo for that the publiſhinge
thereof was not materiall at that time, for that Don Anthonio was
brought vp to be a Prieſt and Churchman and for that alſo there
were then many other heyres of the kingdom that were nearer to
the Crowne then he. When Don Anthonio had receaued the
ſame aduertiſement, he opened the matter to King Henry his vncle,
and beſought him to voutchſafe the examitation thereof, and

to graunte that hee might produce certaine witneſſes and poofes
whereby the truth of the matter myght bee founde oute and manifeſtlye
knowne, for the auoydinge of all controuerſies and
warres which otherwiſe were lyke to ariſe betweene them who
after the death of the ſayde Kinge Henry myghte pretende Tytle
to the kingdome. For ſithe hee was the onelye ſonne of
the ſayde Lodowike ſeconde ſonne of the ſayde Kinge Emanuell
(if his byrth bee prooued to bee legittimate) hee neceſſarilye
excluded and barred all others that by tytle of conſanguinitye
myghte aſpyre or pretende tytle to the ſucceſſion of the kingdome,
notwithſtanding there were anye of the children liuing
who were beegotten of the daughter of the ſayde Kynge Emanuell,
which was elder then the ſayde Lodowike her brother, foraſmuche
as the kingdome of Portugall falleth not by ſucceſſion
to the woman nor anye other deſcending of her.
            When Kynge Henrye had vnderſtandinge thereof beeing
a verye olde manne (as afore is aleaged) and fearing leaſt himſelfe
ſhoulde (in caſe Don Anthonio were proued to bee borne
in lawfull marriage) bee depriued of his kingdome, he conceaued
ſo greate indignation thereat, that immediatlye hee
banniſhed Don Anthonio, Thirtye myles from his courte, with
expreſſe commaundemente that hee ſhoulde not preſume to
retourne thither vntill his Maieſtye ſhoulde take further order in
that behalfe. Thereuppon Don Anthonio yeilding his obedience
to the ſame commaundemente made his repayre to the
Cytie of Columbria being foure and thyrtie myles from Lysbone
where at that tyme Kinge Henry kepte his Courte. But yet
neuertheleſſe the ſayd Don Anthonio lefte at Lisbone, the
ſayde auntient ſeruaunte of his fathers, from whome hee had
receaued the ſayde aduertiſemente, who at the ſame tyme was
in the ſeruice of the ſayde Kinge Henry and verye farre in his
fauoure. To this man, the ſayd Don Anthonio at his departing
from Lisbone, gaue a ſpeciall charge, to ſollycite
his cauſe to the Kinge in his abſence with all endeuoure and
diligence. The which the ſame Miniſter promiſed with all fidelitye
to accompliſhe, and made humble petition to Kinge

               Henry, that with his good fauour and lycence, hee might proſecute
the affayres of the ſayde Don Anthonio. Whiche
the Kinge not onelye graunted, but alſo expreſſely commaunded
him ſo to doe.
            When the ſaid Agent had receaued this aunſwere of the King,
he required Emanuell Biſhop of Almada, then conſeruator of
the priuileges of the order of the Knights of ſaint Iohn at Thiſle of
Malta, competent Iudge, of the ſayde Don Anthonio as prior of
Crato of the ſame order: To receaue and heare the depoſitions of
witneſſes and certain documents and inſtruments wherby the ſaid
Don Anthonio intended to verifie and proue himſelf to be iſſued of
a lawfull marriage: praying the ſayd Biſhop neuertheleſſe to keepe
the matter very ſecrete leaſt the King by vnderſtanding the ſame
ſhoulde conceaue ſome newe diſpleaſure. Whereuppon the
ſayde Byſhoppe proceeded in the examination of the cauſe. Before
whome were produced three witneſſes, who perfectlye &
with lawfull circumſtaunces depoſed that they were preſent at
the celebration of Marriage betweene the ſayde Lodowike and
Iolenta parentes of the ſayd Don Anthonio. Alſo there was
broughte and produced beefore the ſayde conſeruatour, the
Teſtament of one Rui Celema, who while hee liued was knowne
to bee a verye honeſt credible man, of approued integritie,
and was ſeruaunte to Don Anthonios Father and in good eſtimation
not only with him but alſo with King Henry. This Rui Celema
by his teſtament had declared that he alwaies vnderſtood &
certaynelye knewe, that the ſayde Lodowike Father of Don
Anthonio was ſecretlye marryed to Jolenta, ſetting downe
therewithall diuerſe reaſons whiche ſufficyentlye prooue the
ſame, and bycauſe hee was at poynte of death, and for
that in tyme to comeit myghte bee expediente and beehouefull
to the common wealth of the kingdome of Portugall to
knowe that Don Anthonio was iſſued of a lawfull marryage,
therefore and for the diſcharge of his conſcience, hee had
made true declaration thereof in his ſayde Teſtamente.
There was alſo exhibited before the ſayde Byſhop, the Teſtament
of the ſayd Lodowike wherby he ordeined and appointed the
ſaid Don Anthonio his ſon his only heire, not only in al his goods

Patrimoniall, but alſo in certaine patronall rightes of greate im-Portance
which were lefte vnto the ſaide Lodowike by the teſtament
of his brother Ferdinando and his wife who (as is aforeſaide)
dyed without children. Further there were produced before the
ſayde Biſhop other witneſſes of good calling and credite, who depoſed
that King John the third of that name, immediatlye after the
death of the ſayd Lodowike his brother, gaue vnto Don Anthonio,
the ſignet and Armes of his father commaunding him to vſe the
ſame frankly and freely without barre or breach, in as ample manner
as his ſayd father had the vſe thereof, as the ſayd Don Anthonio
hath alwayes ſince accordingly done. Vppon the proofe of
all theſe thinges, the ſayd Biſhop taking vnto himſelfe certaine other
Iudges of the ſame order gaue ſentence touching the ſame
matter: whereby it was pronounced and declared, that the ſayde
Don Anthonio was the lawfull ſonne of the ſaid Lodowike and Iolenta,
the which ſentence was alſo pronounced and confirmed in
the Chauncerie of the ſaide order, howbeit ſecretly for the cauſe
afore aleaged.
            In the meane tyme, King Henry, aſſembleth the eſtates of his
kingdome to treate of diuers matters concerning the commonwealth
and tranquillitie of the ſame, and ſpeciallye to deliberate,
who ſhould be the next and meeteſt Heire to the crowne after his
deceaſe: and yet neuertheleſſe gaue expreſſe commaundement to
Don Anthonio, not to come to the ſaid aſſembly but to ſend ſome
deputie or agent that might repreſent his perſon there. Alſo the
ſame king Henry being very fearefull leaſt Don Anthonio ſhould
proue himſelfe to be legittimate, required the Pope of Roome to
voutchſafe to commit vnto him the hearing and examination of
the cauſe touching the legittimation of the ſaid Don Anthonio. In
the meane time the ſame king Henry proceedeth with the conuocation
of the ſaide eſtates, and commaundethe, that theſe perſonages
ſhould be cited thither, to wit Philip King of Caſtile as ſonne
of Iſabell eldeſt daughter of the ſaid King Emanuell, which Iſabell
(as is afore alleaged) was married to the Emperor Charles the fift.
Alſo the Duke of Sauoy as nephew of Beatrice daughter of the
ſame King Emanuell. Alſo Katherine Duches of Bergantia daughter
to the ſaide Edward ſixt ſonne of the ſaide King Emanuell, and
laſtlye the prince of Parma as father and tutor to his eldeſt ſonne

which he had by Mary daughter alſo to the ſayde Edward. All
the which princes and potentates, were cyted by the ſayde King
Henry to appeare at a certain day to thintent euery of them, by his
Ambaſſador or Agent might propound and ſet downe in the ſayd
aſſembly of theſtates all ſuch right and tytle as euery of them after
his death could pretend to the ſayd kingdome. Saying hee was
minded to determine the ſame cauſe in his lyfe time if poſſibly he
could bring it to paſſe. But if death ſhoulde preuent his purpoſe
therein, his meaning was to commit and appoint not onelye certaine
perſons to gouerne the kingdome, but alſo certaine Iudges
to determine who had beſt right, and title to ſucceede & enioy the
crowne, alleaging he tooke that courſe, to auoide all controuerſies
inconueniencies, & warres which otherwiſe were like to happen.
            Whereuppon all the ſayde princes and potentates thus lawfully
cyted, ſent their Ambaſſadors or deputies, with ſufficient inſtructions
on their behalfe to propoūd in the ſaid aſſembly of theſtates
their ſeuerall rightes and tytles which they pretended to the ſaid
kingdome, Except onely Phillip King of Caſtile, who anſwered, he
neyther had, nor acknoledged and Iudge in earth, but onelye in
heauen. And therfore woulde not commit his righte and tytle to
the determination of any Iudges that ſhoulde bee appointed concerning
that matter, adding withall howe hee was ſufficiently informed
by his beſt learned lawyers in his owne kingdome, that
there was no other perſonage in the world ſauing onely himſelfe
that had lawfull right to ſucceede in the ſayde kingdome of Portugall
after the death of the ſayde King Henry, which right in caſe
it ſhoulde be denyed vnto him, that then hee woulde obtaine the
kingdome by force of armes.
            When the moſt excellent prynceſſe Katherine de Medicis the
french Kings Mother, was aduertiſed of theſe matters, namely that
King Henry had commaunded all them to be cyted whiche pretended
auy tytle to the kingdome, ſhe ſent into Portugall for her
Ambaſſador the Byſhop of Comminges to propound in lyke manner
on her behalfe in the ſayde aſſemblye of theſtates, the righte
which ſhe pretended to the ſayde kingdome, grounding her tytle,
vpon her deſcent from King Alfonſus brother to King Sancho
the ſeconde of that name, who before he was King, had marryed
in Fraunce, Mawde Counteſſe of Bulloyne, by whome he had two

ſonnes, one of the whiche was marryed in Fraunce, of whome the
ſayde Katheren de Madicis deſcended, the other of the ſame
ſonnes deceaſing in Portugall without iſſue: and the plea exhibited
on the behalfe of the ſayde Kathereine de Medicis, was
receaued by the ſaide Kinge Henry in the ſaide aſſembly of the-ſtates.
            Alſo when the people of Portugal vnderſtoode the right of ſucceſſion
of the kingdom was committed to examination, and conſidering
themſelues had lawfull power & right to elect & chooſe
a Kynge for and in default of a lawfull heire Maſle deſcending
directly of the Maſculine line, therefore they exhibited a ſupplycation
to king Henry, that his maieſty would voutchſafe to graunt
them lycence to propounde and alleage thier right in that behalfe
and to exhibite a plea whiche they had made thereof, conteyning
in ſubſtaunce and effecte as followeth: To wit. That the
people of Portugall had made and choſen for their Kinge, Alfonſus
the firſt Kinge of Portugall, ſonne of Earle Henry. Alſo
that the ſame people had depoſed from the adminiſtration and
gouernement of the kingdome, Kinge Sancho, the ſeconde of that
name after hee had Reigned by the ſpace of fiue and twentye
yeares, and that thereupon the ſame people committed the adminiſtration
and gouernement of the kingdome to his brother Alfonſus
Earle of Bulloyne who had marryed Mawde the Counteſſe,
and after the death of Sancho, they elected the ſame Alfonſus to
be their King. Further that the ſame people had elected & made
their king, Iohn the firſt of that name, the baſe ſon of King Alfonſus
the fourth, notwithſtanding there remayned liuing two legittimate
daughters of the ſame king Alfonſus. Which King John, the
ſame people of Portugall did confirme in the royall ſeate & mainteyned
and defended him, againſte John Kinge of Caſtile alſo the
firſt of that name who pretended title to the ſucceſſion of the ſaid
kingdome of Portugall, for and in the name of his wife eldeſt and
legittimate daughter of the ſaide King Alfonſus. Whereuppon
there grew ſharpe warre betweene the ſame two Kinges concerning
that matter, wherein the Kinge of Caſtile in thende was
ouerthrowne in battayle, aboute a certaine towne of Portugall
called Algibarotta. Moreouer that the ſame people had created

their King, Emanuell the firſt, for that King Iohn the ſecond
had lefte no iſſue male deſcending of the righte Maſculyne lyne.
Laſtlye that they had made the ſayde Cardinall Henry their King
after the deceaſe of Kinge Sebaſtian who was ſlayne in the battayle
of Affrica leauing no lawfull iſſue of his body to enioy the
Crowne. By all theſe reaſons the ſayde people concluded, that
their power and righte to make the ſayde election, was offarre
greater force and effecte, then the righte and tytle of ſucceſſion,
whereuppon the other pretenders grounded them ſelues, and
the ſame people added withall, that by the Lawe, called the
mentall Lawe, made by the ſayde Kinge Iohn the firſte of that
name, no woman can nor oughte to inherite anye goodes or
poſſeſſions depending of the Crowne, and therefore neyther
myghte they who deſcended of the iſſues female as all the
ſayde pretenders did, ſauing onely the ſayd Don Anthonio. Vpon
thunderſtanding of all theſe matters ſo propounded and ſet down
on the beehalfe of the people, Kinge Henrye lykewiſe admitted
their plea.
            Hereuppon whyle the ſtates of the Kingdome of Portugall were
aſſembled treating vppon the nomination and election aſwell of
thoſe perſons whiche after the death of the ſayde Kinge Henrye
ſhould haue the adminiſtration and gouernement of the kingdome,
as alſo of ſuche as ſhoulde decyde and iudge the queſtion
and controuerſie touchyng the ſucceſſion of the crowne,
Thagent of Don Anthonio was informed that one Alphonſus of
Alburquerque an aduocate of the Cytye of Lysbone was ſubcrned
and wonne by ſome of the King of Caſtiles fautors, and
that hee had manifeſtlye declared his aduiſe and opinion to
certayne greate menne of the kingdome whereby it euidentlye
appeared that hee was altogether bent and enclyned to the
King of Caſtiles parte. Wherefore the ſame Agent propounded
and put in againſte the ſame Alfonſus a plea or byll of recuſation
to thintent hee ſhoulde haue no voyce in thelection
neyther of the ſayde adminiſtrators or gouernours of the kingdom,
nor of the Iudges that ſhould haue the hearing and determination
of the cauſe touching the ſucceſſion of the crowne, & alſo
the ſame Agente auoutched how hee woulde declare ſufficiente

cauſes that mooued him to make the ſayde recuſation in caſe the
ſayde Alfonſus woulde not admit the ſame. Whereat the ſayde
Alfonſus conceaued greate diſpleaſure and made greeuous complaint
thereof to certayne ſpeciall men that fauoured the Kinge
of Caſtiles parte, at whoſe handes hee obtayned ſo muche fauour
that they went with him to king Henry, to whome they declared
this matter as they thought moſt fit for their owne purpoſe,
alleging vnto his maieſtie that Don Anthonios Agent had propounded
this ſcruple of recuſation for no other intent but onelye
to hinder and diuerte thelection of the ſayde Iudges for this purpoſe
that Don Anthonio after the death of the ſayde king Henry
might with the more facillitye attayne to the kingdome. This
complaint wrought ſo effectually in the minde of the ſayde kinge
Henry, that forthwith without hearing the ſaide Agent in his anſwere
and defence touching the ſame he commaunded him to be
caſt into cloſe priſon where he was deteined by the ſpace of nine
daies vntill the ſayde Gouernors and Iudges were ordeyned and
eſtabliſhed according to the kinges will and minde. Vppon the
accompliſhment wherof, king Henry cauſed the ſayd Agent to be
deliuered out of the priſon where he remained, commaūding him
neuertheleſſe immediatlye to repaire home to his owne houſe, and
not to returne to the Court, without his Maieſties ſpeciall licence.
Whereby the ſame king moſt manifeſtlye vttered his extreme hatred
againſt the ſaide Don Anthonio beeing his owne nephewe,
ſith before that tyme (as is before alleaged in this treatiſe) he had
giuen his conſent to the ſaide Agent, yea and expreſly commaunded
him freelye to proſecute the cauſe of the ſayde Don Anthonio.
            
            Within a while after: the kinge commaunded Don Anthonio
then remayning at Colimbre, to repayre to his Maieſtie to Lisbone
to take an oath to obey the Iudgement, that ſhould be giuen, touching
the righte of the Crowne, by the Iudges in that behalfe appoynted.
Affirming that the other pretenders woulde doe the like,
by themſelues their Ambaſſadors or agentes. Vppon this commaundement,
Don Anthonio came to the king, and when the ſaid
oath was offered vnto him he aunſwered he was ready to take the
ſame in caſe the king of Caſtile would doe the lyke, but if hee refuſed
it there was no reaſon why eyther the ſayde Don Anthonio
               
or any of the other pretenders ſhould bee conſtrained thereunto.
Notwithſtanding kinge Henry perſiſted and in greate rage commaunded
him to take his oath, in ſo much that in thend he did ſo,
with this proteſtation firſte made in the preſence of certaine of his
friendes, that hee tooke not the ſame oathe with a franke and free
will but by compulſion and commaundement of the king.
            The next day after, Don Antonio had taken this oath, king Henry
cauſed the Popes letters pattents to be ſhewed vnto him wherby
the ſame Henry was conſtituted to take notyce and information
of the cauſe touching Don Anthonios legittimation, and theruppon
commaunded him to appointe his procurer to pleade his
cauſe before his maieſty as iudge. And that yet neuertheles, within
foure and twentye houres the ſayde Anthonie ſhoulde departe againe
thirtie miles from the Courte. Whereunto Don Anthonio
anſwered that the King coulde not bee Iudge in the cauſe for two
reaſons: thone for that he was partie himſelfe, thother for that
in his former actions hee had plain elye ſhewed a great hatred againſt
him, alleaging a freſh example thereof, in that the ſaid King
Henry had lately before impriſoned his Agent, for proſecuting his
cauſe as he thought conuenient by order of lawe: And that therfore
he doubted he coulde not finde any other that would take vppon
him to purſue and follow his buſines. Vppon this aunſwere,
the king with all expedicion ſendeth woorde to the ſayde Agent
that hee might freely come to the courte and proſecute the cauſe
of Don Anthonio denying expreſly, that himſelfe was partie therein,
and therefore ſignifying how his will and meaning was to proceede
therein, yea and that he woulde proceede againſt the ſayde
Anthonie as contumax for defaulte of anſwere in caſe he refuſed
to pleade his cauſe before him & to informe him therin as ſhould
be meete and conuenient. Wherefore King Henry graunted vnto
the ſayde Agent his lybertye and commaunded him to proſecute
Don Anthonios cauſe.
            Now when the ſaide agent was returned to the Court, he prayed
one of the kinges confeſſors, to be a meane to his maieſtie, that
ſyth he was by the kinges commaundement vrged to take vppon
him the proſecution of Don Anthonies, cauſe, he might therefore
freely employ and endeuoure himſelfe in the ſame as hee ſhoulde

thinke to bee moſte meete and conuenient for the ſafegarde and
preſeruation of his mayſters righte and tytle. And that his maieſtie
woulde neyther bee diſpleaſed nor take in euill parte if he proceeded
in the ſame ſorte that hee did when (as is afore recyted in
this treatyſe) hee ſoughte to remooue the ſayde Alphonsus of
Alburquerque as a perſon ſuſpected. But if hee myghte not
proſecute the cauſe freelye as appertayned, then hee beſought
his maieſtie to voutcheſafe to diſcharge him of that burden and
to graunt him lycence to returne agayne to his owne houſe where
he dwelt when King Henry commaunded him to bee ſente for to
take the charge and adminiſtration of thoſe goodes whiche Don
Anthony poſſeſſed in Portugall when he remayned in Aphrica.
When the Kinge was aduertiſed hereof, his maieſtie gaue in commaundement
agayne to this Agent to proſecute this cauſe freely
before him in as good and ample ſorte as he ſhould thinke moſte
behouefull.
            When Don Anthonie ſawe himſelfe thus preſſed to pleade his
cauſe before the king & that his maieſtie purpoſed to giue ſentēce
againſt him for default of anſwere, he commaunded his Agent to
nominate the witneſſes which were there at hand proteſting hee
had yet further proofes to produce, whereuppon hauing giuen
perfect inſtructions to his Agent, Don Anthonie departed from the
Court within the tyme appointed by the king. Then the king commaundeth
thoſe three witneſſes to bee called before him whiche
were produced before thaforeſaid Biſhop and conſeruatour of the
priuileges of thorder of the knights of S. Iohn at Malta, Who being
come before the king perſiſted in their former depoſitiōs made
before the ſaide conſeruator, to wit, that they were preſente when
marriage was ſecretly celebrated betweene the ſaide Lodowike &
Jolenta. The king vppon the hearing thereof, vſed great threatning
ſpeeches vnto thē, ſaying he would cauſe them al three to be hanged
in caſe they would not vpō their oaths confes, they were wōne
by promiſes and otherwiſe, by Don Anthonio or ſome other in his
behalfe, to giue thaforemencioned teſtimony before the conſeruator.
And when two of thoſe witneſſes affirmed that no bodie had
induced or perſwaded them thereunto, and that their depoſition
therein was according to the plaine and ſimple trueth, the Kinge
cauſed them to be committed to priſon, and the thirde witnes for

feare reuoked part of his former depoſition ſaying he was not preſent
when the ſaid marriage was priuily had & concluded, but the
truth was, hee had hearde it by reporte of others by reaſon hee was
houſhold ſeruant to Iolentaes parents. The King by reaſon thereof
was mooued immediately to ſent for all the Actes, depoſitions of
witneſſes & inſtruments exhibited on the behalfe of Don Anthonio
before the ſaid Biſhop and conſeruator to proue his matter, togeather
with the ſentēce giuen thereupon, al the which being brought
before him he cauſed to bee caſt into the fire, & would not admit
any other witneſſes & profes which the ſaid Agent offered yet further
to produce in the ſame cauſe amongſt the which were diuerſe
religious men of good calling who had bin confeſſors to the ſaide
Lodowike, beſides diuers other witneſſes of good credite & eſtimamation.
Howbeit the king contemning and reiecting all the ſame,
contrary to all order of law gaue ſentence whereby he pronounced
the former ſentence before giuen by the ſaid biſhop and conſeruator
to be void & of no force or effect. And thereuppon gaue order
to the high marſhal of the kingdom called Edward de Caſtle branco
(whom ſince the Kinge of Caſtile hath made one of the chiefe
Treaſorers of the kingdom) that he ſhould binde and bring Don
Anthonio to the Courte as Captiue & priſoner, and commaunded
that the two witneſſes which remained priſoners ſhould be banniſhed,
but contrariwiſe, greatly rewarded him that had altered his
depoſition graūting vnto him a croſſado of the knights of thorder
of Saint Iames withall the rent and reuenues thereunto appertayning,
but Don Anthonio beeing in due time aduertiſed of all theſe
things remooued immediately from the Cytie of Colymbre, ſo that
the marſhall came thither in vaine & ſo retourned to Lisbone.
            
            Aſſoone as the ſaid ſentence was giuen Don Anthonies Agent,
ſent a ſupplycation to the byſhoppe of Rome, complayning of the
great iniuſtice done to Don Anthonio by the king, beſeeching the
ſaid biſhop to voutchſafe his ayde to Don Anthonio by remedy of
lawe againſte that ſentence ſo wickedly giuen, and alſo to inhibite
the Kinge that by force of the ſame hee ſhoulde proceede no
further nor execute any thing againſt the ſayd Don Anthonie. Vpon
the exhibiting of this ſupplication, the Pope with all expedicion
cauſed his letters pattents to bee diſpatched whereby hee declared
the ſayde ſentence of Kinge Henry to be altogether voyde
and of no force, moſt ſpecially for that he had raſhly proceeded to

to ſentence diffinitiue, withoute commiſſion or authoritie, foraſmuch
as the former letters by vertue whereof he proceeded againſt
the ſayde Don Anthonio conteyned no other matter ſauing onely
that hee might heare and examine all the witneſſes, and receaue
therewithall all inſtrumentes and ſuche like thinges whereby Don
Anthonio ment to prooue his cauſe, and that vpon the hearing of
the witneſſes, and the cauſe duly pleaded, all the actes inſtruments
and proofes ſhould be ſent to the ſayde Biſhop of Roome that hee
mighte Iudge and determine of the ſame as hee ſhoulde thinke
to bee moſt conuenient. Expreſly commaunding the ſayde Kinge
Henry to proceede no further nor attempt any thing againſt Don
Anthonies perſon by vertu of the ſaid ſentence giuen againſt him
by the ſame kinge Henrye, but to ſende vnto the Pope all thactes
inſtruments, and proofes produced before king Henry on the beehalfe
of Don Anthonio, to thintent the cauſe mighte bee decided
and Iudged by the Pope himſelfe or ſuch Iudges as he ſhould
appoint. When theſe letters were by the Popes legate denounced
to king Henry: immediately theruppon the ſame kinge commanded
Don Anthonies Agent, within ten dayes, vpon payne of death
to departe out of his kingdome, bycauſe the king vnderſtoode the
Popes letters were obtained through his induſtrie and and diligence,
by reaſon whereof the ſame Agent vppon this commaundemente
departed preſentlye from Lysbone to a monaſterie of Caſtile
adioyning to the borders of the kingdome of Portugall.
            
            Nowe when king Henry, by reaſon of the Popes inhibition,
could proceed no further, nor attempt any thing againſt Don Anthony
by vertue of the ſaid ſentence: he determined to take another
courſe for thexecution of his rancour againſt him. Wherupon,
vnder pretence and coloure that Don Anthony had come within
ſix miles of his Court contrary to his commaundement, hee commaunded
him likewiſe uppon paine of death to depart oute of his
kingdome within fifteene dayes, declaring and decreeing with all
that by the ſame occaſion he had forfaited all his right whiche he
pretended to the kingdome, commaunding moreouer that none
of Don Anthonies ſeruants vpon paine of death ſhould attend &
ſerue their maiſter in that extremitie. This moſt hard and rigorous
ſentence he preſently cauſed to be ſignified to Don Anthonio then

being at the ſaide towne of Colimbre, whereof when the Burgeſſes
of the towne, and chiefelye the ſchollers of thuniuerſitie there amongſt
whome remained many of the nobilitye, were aduertiſed,
there aroſe ſuch trouble that they put them ſelues in armes, crying
euery where in the towne, howe King Henry doting with age
and mooued with hatred againſt Don Anthonie, would deliuer the
kingdome of Portugall into thandes of the Kinge of Caſtile, and
for the ſame occaſion, had giuen this rigorouſe ſentence againſt
him, Wherefore they would not ſuffer him in this manner to bee
expelled out of the kingdome. Offering themſelues to bee his
valiaunt and faithfull defenders herein, and ready to ſpende their
lyues and goodes for his ſafetye. Neuertheleſſe Don Anthonio
not mynding to ſtirre vppe anye tumulte in the Realme for his
cauſe, gaue greate thankes to the multitude for their readye
good will and affection towarde him, deſiring them to pacifie
and content themſelues. For hee was wholy determined to obey
the kinges commaundement, in hope that when his Maieſtye
had better weighed the matter, hee woulde at the laſt reuoke
the ſame ſentence, whereuppon hauing by this meane
pacified the tumulte and diſmiſſed thaſſemblye, hee departed
towarde the kingdome of Castile, and wente to the ſame place
whither his Agent within a fewe dayes beefore was gone, whiche
was a monaſterie of Franciſcan Fryers diſtant one myle from the
towne of 
                  Ʋalentia of Alcantara.
            
            When the king of Caſtile vnderſtoode of Don Anthonioes banniſhment
out of Portugall, hee ſent letters forthwith to all Gouernours,
Maiors, and other highe officers of his townes, Caſtles
Borowghes and Villages bordering towarde Portugall, to ſhewe
vnto him in caſe he reſorted thither all manner of courteſie and
honorable entertainmente, but yet neuertheleſſe to take heede
and haue ſpeciall regarde, that he retourned no more into Portugall.
Thereuppon the ſaide Agent vppon aduertiſemente to him
thereof giuen, required a ſpecyall friende of his then remayning
in Portugall neere the confines of Caſtile, to ſpye oute in thoſe
quarters ſome ſecrete place farre from the common paſſages,
where Don Anthonie might ſaelye remayne for a certaine ſpace.
In the meane while when thagent vnderſtoode what daye Don
Anthonie woulde come to the monaſterie, hee cauſed a notarie of

the ſaide towne of Valentia to come thither the very ſame day, by
whome aſſoone as Don Anthonio was come, hee cauſed a certificat
or teſtimoniall to bee made wherein was conteined that he
was then come to the ſayd monaſtery, cauſing the ſame teſtimoniall,
for the better credite of the matter to be ſubſcribed by the chiefeſt
religious perſons of the ſayde monaſterye. This inſtrument
thagent ſent forthwith to tharchbiſhop of Lisbon to be ſhewed
to the King, and wrote withall to the ſaid Archbiſhop, how
Don Anthonio was alreadye departed from thence for thaccompliſhmente
of a pilgrimage which he had vowed to make when
hee was captiue in Aphrica. But contrariwiſe Don Anthonio
diſmiſſing a greate parte of his traine which hee had brought thyther,
wente the ſame daye accompanyed with his Agente and
onelye two ſeruauntes to the ſecret place prepared for him, where
hee contynued the ſpace of about twentye dayes, but his Agente
in the meane while returned preſentlye to the ſayde Monaſterye.
            Within fewe dayes after: letters were brought to the ſaide Agent,
wherein certaine of Don Anthonios friendes wrote, that it
was not conuenient for Don Anthonio to abſent himſelfe far from
the Court, leaſt after King Henryes death (who was verye ſickelye
and full of infirmities) the people ſhoulde bee mooued to chooſe
the Duke of Bergantia for Kinge. For as touching the Kinge of
Caſtile hee was to bee feared in no reſpecte ſauing onelye thinuaſion
of the Realme by force and violence, further for asmuch as
King Henry had in all places appointed ſpyes, and likewiſe the
Duke of Bergantia, and the Kinge of Caſtiles Ambaſſadours, who
made dilligent ſearche whether Don Anthonio ſtayed ſecretlye
within the limites of the Kingdome of Portugall, to thintent, (in
caſe hee did) hee mighte then bee apprehended and put to death
by vertue of that latter and moſt rigorous ſentence giuen againſt
him by Kinge Henrye. Don Anthonios Agente vppon thunderſtanding
thereof appointed one of his ſayde mayſters ſeruauntes
called Sebastian Figueira; then remayning in the ſayde Monaſtery,
a verye truſtye and faithfull man, to hyer a Barke in a towne
neere thereunto called Brantos ſcituate vppon the Ryuer of Tagus,
and to furniſhe the ſame with victualles and all other neceſſaries,

that Don Anthonio by the ſpace of certayne dayes
mighte bee kepte ſecrete in the ſame vppon the ſayde Ryuer
and ſo eſcape thandes of the ſpyes, ſo when the ſaide Barque
and all thinges ſeruing thereto were in a readineſſe, Don Anthonyo,
not withoute greate daunger to bee knowne and intrapped
in the waye, at laſt came to the ſayde Barque, and goeth
aboarde the ſame, wherein he was carryed vppe and downe and
Riuer, about the ſpace of eyghte or tenne dayes without arriuing
in anye Hauen, but in thende beeing wearie and ſickelye,
hee came priuilye to Lisbon and ſecretlye conueyed himſelfe into
a Prieſtes howſe, where his Agent had informed him hee
mighte continue in ſafetie.
            Aboute the ſame time or ſhortlye after, the Kinge of Caſtile
ſent a gentleman of good calling to the ſayde Agent, to the
monaſterye where hee remayned, requiring him to exhorte Don
Anthonio, to compounde with him touchinge the controuerſie
that was lyke to aryſe beetweene them aboute the ſucceſſion of
the kingdome, and for the better bringing to paſſe thereof, the
ſame gentleman required the ſayde Agent to goe with him to
Madril to the Kinge of Caſtile. But thagente ſuſpecting all
that was propounded on the Kinge of Caſtiles behalfe, aunſwered
howe the ſame courſe was not in any reſpecte conueniente for
the King of Castile himſelfe, aſwell for that the people of Portugall
vppon thunderſtanding of Don Anthonios treatye aboute agreement
with his maieſtye woulde bee quickelye mooued to
electe the Duke of Bargantia for their Kinge, as alſo for that
the ſayde Agente coulde doe nothing therein without expreſſe
commiſſion from Don Anthonio whome the matter concerned,
ſaying hee woulde with ſpeede repayre vnto him aboute the
ſame cauſe, and in the meane tyme the ſayde gentleman might
make his retourne to the King of Caſtile.
            
            Heereuppon this Gentlemanne retourned to the Kinge
of Caſtile, and the Agente in greate daunger came ſecretlye
to Lisbone where hee founde Don Anthonio in the
Prieſtes howſe. And hauing ſignified vnto him, what
hadde paſſed beetweene him and the Gentlemanne aforeſayde

               Don Anthonio aunſwered hee was verye glad his Agent
had thus eſcaped the kinge of Caſtiles handes. And as touching
the making of anye accorde with the ſame Kinge, it was farre
from his meaning, but his determination was rather to expecte
what ſhoulde bee reſolued and determined by the Iudges therefore
ordeyned. Within a little while after Don Anthonio was aduertiſed,
howe Kinge Henry was informed of his ſecrete beeing
in Lisbone, and had already ſerched many howſes for him. Vppon
thunderſtanding whereof, hee repayred ſecretlie with his Agent,
Didaco de Carcamo, Anthony de Soſa, and Anthony S
                     ••…
                  res, into a
Barque whiche his ſayde Agent kepte alwaies readye for a neede
in the hauen of Lisbone. Wherein after hee had beene by the ſpace
of a fewe dayes conueyed agayne vp and downe the riuer, he receaued
newes that Kinge Henry was dead, Whiche happened about
the beginning of Februarie 1580.
            When Don Anthonio was more certainelye aduertiſed of theſe
newes, he came forthwith to Lisbone, giuing notyce of his comming
to the gouernours and Captayne generall of the ſame Cytie,
who reſorted preſently to him to congratulate his comming, offering
to make him king. Whereunto he anſwered very diſcreetely
that king Henry was but newly deceaſed and howe theſtates, and
gouernours of the kingdome were aſſembled to diſpoſe of the ſucceſſion
of the ſame, and that there were alſo other princes and potentates
pretending to haue right and action thereto, and therfore
hee determined to expecte what ſhoulde bee Iudged therein by
waye of Iuſtice.
            The next day Don Anthonio withdrew himſelfe into a monaſtery
neere the Citie of Lisbone, called Belen of thorder of S. Ierome,
halfe a mile from the ſame cytie, where his grandfather king Emanuell
and thother two kinges deſcending of him were buried. And
hauing there accompliſhed his deuotions, he repaired to Santaren
a myle from Almerine where the ſayde Gouernoures of the kingdome
were then aſſembled: who being ſuborned by the King
of Caſtiles ambaſſadors and very deſirous to deliuer the kingdom
into his hands, tooke it in very euill part that Don Anthonyo came
thither, ſith by king Henries commandement he was vpon pain of
death banniſhed the realme. Wherfore they commanded him to
departe ten miles from thence vntill Kinge Henries teſtamente

were opened, thopening whereof, they intended to de
                  •••••
               , 
                  〈◊〉
               
the Ambaſſadors or deputies of thother Princes 
                  •••…
               ending 
                  •…
               yt
                  •
               e
to the kingdome, were come. Hereunto Don Anthonie anſwered,
he ſuppoſed the rancour and hatred of King Henry againſt
him, had not taken ſo deepe roote, as that he did perſeuere therein
to the ende, but rather before his death had ſhewed ſome tokē
of repentance thereof. And therefore very inſtantly prayed them
to open the ſayd teſtament without further delay, that it might be
manifeſt what king Henry had ordeined, touching the ſucceſſion
of the kingdom: inſomuch that the gouernours moued therewith,
commanded the kings laſt will and teſtament to be opened, in the
preſence of thambaſſadors of the king of Caſtile, the dukes of Sauoy,
and Bargantia, and of the Prince of Parma: whereby it was
found, how King Henry had ordeined, that the Iudges appointed
to determine the matter, touching the ſucceſſion of the kingdom,
ſhould proceede no further nor decree any thing therein, vntil the
cauſe concerning Don Anthonyes legittimation were decided by
the Iudges therfore authoriſed by the Biſhop of Rome, which ſufficiently
proueth all the rigorous dealing of king Henry againſt
Don Anthonie, to haue proceeded rather through diffidence
or for feare of the king of Castile, then otherwiſe of any reaſon
grounded vpon right and iuſtice. Vpon the ſight of this teſtament,
the gouernours declared to thambaſſadours, of thother
pretenders, howe they could not nowe determine any thing touching
the ſucceſſion of the kingdome, except the cauſe of Don
Anthonies legittimation were firſt decided. Wherefore they ſent
worde to Don Anthonio to proſecute the cauſe touching his legitimation,
before the Iudges thereunto authoriſed, namely the Popes
nuncye then being in Portugall and tharchbiſhop of Lisbone.
            
            In the meane ſpace, the king of Caſtile (hauing ſince the death
of king Sebaſtian, by little and litle gathered a mightie armie together,
vnder pretence of attempting ſome enterpriſe againſt Aphrica,)
not minding to ſtay for iudgement in the matter of Don Anthonies
legitimatiō, nor in the cauſe of the ſucceſſiō of the crowne,
commaunded all his men to ioyne together vnder the Duke of
Alua captaine generall ouer the ſame armie, about the towne of
Badaioz in the kingdome of Caſtile, bordering vpon the limittes
of Portugall. Vpon notice whereof, the gouernours and Iudges

authoriſed to decyde the cauſe of the ſucceſſion of the kingdome,
ſent certaine deputyes to the Kinge of Caſtile, praying him to
voutchſafe to leaue the waye of armes and take the courſe of iuſtice
ſith there were Iudges ordeyned to heare and examine the
cauſe and to Iudge & determine the ſame according to right and
equity. To whoſe Iudgement thother pretenders were readye
to ſtande: Informinge hym withall that by proceedinge to obtayne
the kingdome by force of Armes hee ſtoode in daunger to
looſe all his righte and tytle thereto by meanes of a decree made
for that cauſe by Kinge Henry, whereby it was ordeyned and prouided,
that euerye of the pretenders goeing aboute by force
of Armes to gette the kingdome and refuſinge to ſtande to the
iudgement of the Iudges aucthoriſed to decide the cauſe, ſhould
thereby loſe and forfaite all his righte and tytle which hee had or
might pretend to the kingdome.
            Howbeit the King of Caſtile, (who as is afore mencioned) had
long before hand declared, how hee woulde not ſubmitte his right
to anye mannes iudgement,) truſting vppon his owne power, and
thendeuour of the ſayde gouernours and other noble men whom
hee had wonne to his ſide by giftes and fayre promiſes, without
anye regarde of that information, commaunded the Duke of Alua
with his army (which hee had in a readineſſe) to proceede and inuade
the kingdome of Portugall by force. Vppon notice whereof,
the gouernors foorthwith departed from Almerin to Setuball fifteene
myles from Santaren fearinge leaſte the people of Portugall
vppon knowledge of the Duke of Aluaes comming to inuade the
realme, woulde firſt fall vppon them and then proclaime Don Anthonio
King. Within a ſhort ſpace after the departure of the gouernors
from Almerin, newes came to Santaren howe the Duke of
Alua had taken two townes in Portugall bordering vppon Caſtile,
to wit Eluas and campo maior. Whereat the Citizens of Santaren
being greatly mooued firſt toke counſell together for the fortifying
of their towne againſt the violence of thennimy, and therefore
went in all ſolemnity with the clergy and nobillity to ſuruey
and vewe the walles, & giue order for the beginning of the worke.
After that they reſorted all together in great multitude to Don Anthonyo
then remayning in a monaſtery not far from thence, where
ill with one voice ſalute & call him king leading him from thence
to the principall church, and then to the townhowſe, inſtantly rerequiring

him to accept the royall name and dignitie and to bind
them to him by oath. Howbeit Don Anthonio contrariwiſe aleged
vnto them how the cauſe touching the ſucceſſion of the Crowne
was in controuerſie betweene him and other Princes pretending
tytle thereto, wherefore he would not accept the royall name, but
rather expect the determination of the Iudges therfore authoriſed.
But if they would vſe him as their defender he was ready to ſpend
his life and goodes for them and the common liberty of the countrey.
Whereunto the Citizens of Santaren aunſwered againe howe
their reſolution was to make him King, ſith the people of Portugall
(as is before expreſſed) might lawfully doe it for defaulte of heyres
maſles in the right line. Which they were the more deſirous to accompliſh,
for that the king of Caſtile in contempt of all other Iudgmēt,
would be his own iudge & went about to poſſeſſe the kingdō
by violence & force of armes. Therupon whē 
               Don Anthonio could
no longer reſiſt, he was ſworne, King, by the three members of the
ſame place, namely, the Clergie, the nobillitie, and the common
people, with erection of the Kinges ſtandarde and all other ſolemnities
according to the auncient cuſtome of the countrey, beinge
conducted from thence with the ſaide ſtandarde to a Chappell of
great deuotion, called Sancto Milagre and other accuſtomed places
and laſt of al to the royal Pallace. Of all which things publique
acts were made & ſubſcribed by the ſaid three members, and therupon
regiſtred in the townhowſe of the ſame city. Vpon thaccompliſhment
wherof Don Anthonio proteſted openly in the preſence
of the ſame three members and many others that he accepted the
royal name more by force, then of his owne accorde, and that therfore
he determined to lay downe the ſame, and expect the Iudgement
of the Iudges, in caſe the King of Caſtile would call backe his
army which he had alredy ſent into Portugal, & ſubmit his cauſe to
the iudgment of the iudges authoriſed as aforeſaide, of which proteſtation
hee cauſed a publique act to bee made and enrolled the
ſame amongeſt the recordes of Santaren.
            
            Within three daies after, Don Anthonio went to Lisbone where
within a mile from the city, he was mette by the ordinary gariſons
of the realme with their Captaines, and many of the cheefe of the
nobilitie, amongſt whom were Peter Dor a French gentleman agent
for the moſt excellent Princeſſe the french queenemother &
M. Edward Perin eche of them with a goodly cōpany of ſtrangers.

When he came to the gate of the citie, there ſtayed for him the religious
men of the three orders of the Fryers minors, who receiued
his maieſtie with great deuotion and reuerence, and in forme of
proceſſion marched before him ſinging Te Deum laudamus. &c.
In this ſort the king was firſt brought to the Cathedrall Church,
and in all places where he paſſed, the people ſhewed themſelues
ſo ioyfull, as the like thereof was neuer ſeene before at thelection
or receiuing of any of the ſaide former Kings. When he came to
the Cathedrall Church, he was there receiued with great honour
and reuerence by all the Cleargie, with the celebration of all ceremonies
thereunto by cuſtome appertaining, and from thence was
conduced to the Regall Pallace. The next day, the gouernours &
magiſtrates with the moſt noble and principal men of the citie together
with the three eſtats of the realme, cauſed the royall ſtandard
to be caried before them, through all the principall ſtreets of
the citie, crying aloud, God ſaue king Anthonie, & grant him long life.
In thend they came all to the ſaid Pallace, where they ſwore him
for King, binding themſelues to him by othe
                  •
               : whereof likewiſe
publique actes were made. Don Anthonio making proteſtation
thereupon in the like ſort that he had made at Santaren, when hee
was there choſen and ſworne for king: whereof alſo a publique
act was made and enrolled as aboueſaid.
            Now when it came to the knowledge of the gouernours of the
Realme then remaining at Setuball, that Don Anthonio was choſen
King, the greater part of them withdrew themſelues into Caſtile,
to wit, Iohn Maſquerennas, Frauncis de Sa, and Diego Lopez
de Soſa, thother two, namely tharchbiſhop of Lisbone, and John
Tello de Meneſes came within three myles of Lisbone, and ſent
to King Anthonie, beſeeching him to voutchſafe to receaue them
into his fauour: which they eaſely obtained at his hands, ſith the
one of them namely John Tello de Meneſes had alwayes ſhewed
himſelfe to beare a good affection to the common wealth, and
tharchbiſhop had alwayes ſhewed himſelfe a neutre, where contrariwiſe
thother three which were fled into Caſtile, being wonne
and corrupted by the king of Caſtile with giftes and promiſes, had
alwayes openly mainteined his quarrell: and yet in thende did
pennance for their horrible treaſon. For ſhortly after they dyed al
for very griefe and melancholy that they had ſold their countrey,

and could obtaine little or nothing of all that had bene promiſed
vnto them on the behalfe of the king of Caſtile by his ambaſſadors.
            Within certaine dayes after, king Anthonie departed from the
citie of Lisbon, to Setuball, where ſtill remained the deputies of
the townes, with the high Chauncelour, the principall Counſellours
of the realme, and many of the nobilitie: By whome he was
likewiſe created and ſworne King with all ſolemnities thereunto
conuenient. Where the third time he made the like proteſtation
that he had made afore in Santaren, ſending two of the ſaid deputies
from thence to the king of Caſtile, with commiſſion to declare
vnto him, that if he would deſiſt from force of armes, and ſubmit
his cauſe to the determination of the Iudges thereunto authoriſed,
that then he would doe the like, and lay downe the name and dignitie
of king. And hauing firſt giuen order for the defence of a
towne called Monte Maior (which was in daunger to be beſieged
by the duke of Alua) he returned from thence to the citie of
Lisbon. In the meane while the king of Caſtile, howe much the
more he was moued by Don Anthonio and others to commit his
cauſe to be determined by way of iuſtice, ſo much the more he endeuoured
to get the kingdome by force, making great offers notwithſtanding
to Don Anthonio, in conſideration that he ſhoulde
yeeld vp the royal name, and renounce his action to the kingdom.
But neuertheleſſe Don Anthonio ſeeking the libertie of his countrey,
more then his owne benefit, would neuer yeelde to accept any
condicions, howe great ſoeuer they were.
            Now when Don Anthonio was come backe to Lisbon, hee diſpatched
letters immediatly to all cities and townes of the kingdō,
and to the townes and caſtles of Aphrica, and thylandes and
firme lande, ſubiect to the crowne of Portugall, certifying them
how he was choſen and ſworne king, and therefore required them
all from thenceforward, to take & knowledge him for their king,
the like alſo was written to all the ſaid townes, Caſtles, Iſlandes
and firme land, by the ſaid gouernours and magiſtrates of the citie
of Lisbon. Immediatly vpon the deliuerie of theſe letters, Don
Anthonio was in all places acknowledged and proclaimed king
in all ſolemnitie, and that ſo greatly to the ioy and contentation of
all thinhabitantes as is ſcant poſſible to bee beleeued. In the
meane ſpace king Don Anthonio ceaſed not to prouide as farre as

laye in his power, for the defence of the ſaide Citye of Lisbone,
(which is the chiefe Citye of the realme,) for that the Duke of Alua
approched from daye to daye with a greate armye whiche hee
brought by land & ſea, amounting to about ſixe and twenty thouſand
fighting men aſwell horſemen as footemen, all olde ſoldiors
and well appointed, the moſt parte of them comming by lande &
the reſt by ſea in fiftye gallyes and about as manye great ſhippes.
At laſte theſe two armies comming by lande and ſea, mette and
ioyned together at the towne of Setuball whiche was quickelye
brought vnder the power of thennimie by reaſon it was neyther
anye ſtrong towne, nor prouided of gunpowder, whiche in greate
plentye together with thartillerie and other munitions of warre
had bene before that conueyed into Caſtile by the ſayde gouernours
vnder coloure of thexpedition whiche was pretended into
Aphrica.
            
            The Duke of Alua hauing thus taken this towne of Setuball,
cauſed the moſte parte of the footemen to be imbarqued in the
gallyes, and the reſt in the greate ſhippes wherewith he wente
to the towne of Caſcais ſtanding by the Ocean ſea, ſeuen myles
from Lisbon, hauing in his company Anthonie de Caſtro lorde of
the ſame towne, who a little before yeilded him ſelfe to the ſayd
Duke. Through this mans labour and induſtrie, the Duke in fewe
daies eaſilye got this towne into his handes, where Diego de meneces
a gentleman of a noble houſe was gouernour, who after the
yielding vp of the towne was beheaded by the Duke of Aluaes
commaundement, and one of the Captaynes called Henry Perera
hanged vppon a gibette notwithſtanding that eache of them had
yeilded himſelfe.
            After the taking of this towne of Caſcais the Duke of Alua remoued
his campe to the ſtrong caſtle of Saint Iohn within three
myles of Lisbone, wherein Iriſtan vaz de vegna was captayne, a
man verye notable in militarye experience hauing made greate
tryall of his valiauncye in theaſt Indie, and nowe when the ſayde
Duke by the ſpace of one daye had beaten the Caſtle with great

ordinaunce, withoute doing it anye harme, the nexte daye the
ſayde gouernour thoughe hee wanted neyther munition nor anye
other neceſſaries, yet after parle with the Duke of Alua, yeilded
the Caſtle into his handes vppon the Dukes promiſe that the
King of Caſtile ſhould yeilde vnto him a greate pencion yeerelye
during his lyfe, but euen as traitors by gods iuſte iudgemente are
commonly payde according to their deſert, ſo this man was ſo
farre from hauing promiſe kept with him, as that contrariwiſe
hee was preſentlye by the King of Caſtiles commaundement banniſhed
into Affrica for the ſpace of ten yeares there to ſerue againſt
the Moores becauſe hee had withſtoode the Duke of Alua
a whole daye and yeilded not the Caſtle at the firſte ſomonce
but after by compoſition, whereas hee had beefore promiſed and
written, that immediatelye vpon the Dukes comming he would
yeilde vp the Caſtle. Wherefore hee purchaſed the name of a
Traytor without reaping anye commoditye thereby as it often
happeneth to traytors.
            When this Caſtle was thus yeilded (whereby the free paſſage
of Gallyes and Shippes to Lisbon was greatelye hindered,) The
Duke of Alua remooued his campe to the ſubburbes of the Cyty
of Lisbon where King Anthony then remayned in the ſubburbes
called Alcantara, with his Armye conſiſting of aboute ſixe thouſande
footemen, and eyghte hundered horſemen of his owne
kingdome, the greateſt parte thereof beeing ſmallye experienced
in feates of armes. Wherefore althoughe it ſeemed not
ſufficiente to reſiſte ſo puiſſaunte an armye as the Duke of Alua
brought, yet King Anthonie more regarding the common
wealth and lybertye of his Countrey, then the ſafetie and preſeruation
of his owne perſon, determined to hazarde the battayle
rather then lightlye and ignominiouſlye to yielde himſelfe and his
people into thandes of the Tyrants, hoping for the lyke good ſucceſſe
that in tyme paſte Kinge Iohn the firſt, of that name had who
with ſixe thouſande Portugalles in a verye lyke quarrell ouercame
Iohn Kinge of Caſtile the firſte alſo of that name, with
his Armye of thirtie and two thouſande men, in a battayle
foughte beetweene them neere the village of Algiba Rotta
               
But after certaine ſkirmiſhes, wherein two-thouſand Caſtillians
were ſlaine, it fortuned the ſame day that the ſaid king Don Anthonio
thought to haue ioyned battell with the king of Caſtiles power
(which was the xxiiii. day of Auguſt) earely in the morning,
many of them that were with him, ſeeing thenemie approch, beganne
to flye: whereof certaine went to thenemies, ſpecially the
horſemen, a great part whereof (as afterwardes manifeſtly appeared)
were corrupted by the king of Caſtile, beſides there was
great want of gunpowder in King Anthonies campe: for at that
time by the default and treaſon of the ſaid gouernours (who as is
afore declared) had conueied a great quantitie of gunpowder into
Caſtile, there could not be found aboue two thouſande pound
weight of the ſaide powder in all the citie of Lisbon.
            
            Vpon conſideration of all theſe thinges, King Anthonies moſt
principall & faithfull ſeruants counſelled him to prouide in time
for the ſafetie of his perſon, for as long as it was ſafe, there remained
ſome hope of the recouerie of the libertie of the countrey,
which in caſe he were loſt, was vtterly vnrecouerable for euer.
Which aduiſe by his maieſtie well weighed and conſidered, hee
determined with many of his noble men and others that were very
faithfull vnto him, to breake thorow a ſquadron of horſemen,
whereby thenemie ſuppoſed to haue cut away from him all poſſibilitie
to eſcape away. And thereupon without delay cauſing the
Kings royall ſtandard to march before him, they all ſet ſpurres to
their horſes, and ſo furiouſly aſſayle thenemies, that ſtraitghtwaies
they droue them from their place, and ſo with their weapons procured
their paſſage. Wherein King Anthonie himſelfe receiued
two great woundes in his head by ſtaying (and that not without
effect) to helpe Ferdinando Valeroſo out of the handes of thenemies.
And although the King was greatly troubled and weakened
by meanes of thoſe woundes whereout the bloud ranne in
great abundance downe his eyes and face: yet more by Gods
prouidence then by mans ſtrength or induſtrie he eſcaped from
the ennimies, and yet not once but diuers times was driuen to
breake thorowe the middeſt of them with foure or fiue horſemen
that continually followed him (of the which number was
Fraunces of Portugall Erle of Vimioſo) the reſidue of thoſe that
holpe to make the ſaide paſſage being turned another waye

carrying the Kings ſtandarde before them. Nowe when the kinge
had paſſed through all the Cyty, of Lisbone, meeting his enemies in
diuers places, at laſt he came to the ſhoreſide of the riuer of Tagus
which runneth by theſt end of the Cyty where he found Emanuell
of Portugall Vncle to the ſaide Erle of 
                  Ʋimioſo, already imbarqued
to fly to the City of Santaren. Who aſſoone as he knew the King,
cauſed the Barque to be brought to the ſhore, that his Maieſtye
might bee receaued thereinto and ſo paſſe awaye with the ſayde
Erle and others amongſt whome was Simon Maſquerennas deane
of Ebora who came to the king at that very inſtante when he was
ready to enter the Barque.
            Nowe as the king was ſayling vp the riuer in the ſaide barque
towarde Santaren, his Agent (hauing followed the ſtandard) came
preſently by great chaunce to the ſame place where the king was
taken into the barque, and vnderſtanding his Maieſtie to be therin
ſeeing the ſame a farre off, and perceauing how certen of the king
of Caſtiles galleys purſued the ſame verye neere diſcharging ſtore
of harquebuſh ſhot thereat, he galloped after by the riuer ſide in
all poſſible haſte to ouertake the barque and beeing come righte
againſt the ſame, ceaſed not to make ſignes from the ſhore ſide
that it ſhoulde come to lande in the place where he was, and as it
was comming towarde him, hee cauſed two of them that were in
his companye to alight their horſes namely Anthonie de Soſa, and
Jerom de Sylua, appointing the beſt horſe to the Kinge, and thother
to therle of Vimioſo and Emanuell of Portugall his vncle, and
taking Simon Maſquerennas behind him vppon his owne horſe.
In this maner they galloped away all as faſt as they could through
Oliue trees and other vnfrequented places, till they were in ſome
better ſafetie. But ſcarſely was the King with thother three lords
aforenamed landed, when the barque was preſently aſſayled and
taken by one of the Gallyes ſo as the reſte that remained behind
coulde not come to ſhoare, the greateſt parte of thennimies leaping
into the water where it was ſhallowe for the eaſier taking of
the ſaide barque, where they tooke many priſoners, amongeſt
whome the chiefeſt were Emmanuell de Castro and Anthonie Botado
and other the Kings ſeruants.
            When the duke of Alua was entred into Lisbon, ſuppoſing Don
Anthonio had hid himſelfe there, he made no great ſearch after

him in the fieldes. In ſo much that while the ſouldiors were buſie
in ſpoyling the ſubburbes, and ſearch was made in the towne for
him, the King with them of his companye came firſte to a Village
three miles from Lisbon, where after he had ſtayed a little to dreſſe
his wounds he paſſed further from thence by vnfrequented waies,
and came that night to a houſe of pleaſure a myle from Santaren,
belonging to Peter de Menezes one of his treaſourers who ouertooke
his maieſty in the waye, flying alſo from thennemye in the
company of the Biſhop of Guardia. The next day after his maieſties
comming to this place, he ſent his Agent to Santaren to declare
to the gouernour and Magiſtrates of the Towne, how he was
determined to come thither, praying them to receaue and defend
him in caſe thennemy purſued him thither. Wherevpon the gouernour
and Magiſtrates, vppon notice of the Kinges comming,
went with a great companye of the Citizens to meet him halfe a
myle without the Towne, and there very humblye receaued him
not without great lamentation for that which had happened at
Lisbon the day before: and ſo conducted him to the royall palace
of the City, offering all with one accorde to ſpende their liues and
gooddes in his defence if he woulde ſtaye there. Bur for that the
Towne was not verye ſtrong nor conuenientlye furniſhed, with a
garriſon, munitions of warre and other neceſſaryes, to abyde a
ſiege, he ſtayed there onely twoo dayes to heale his woundes, and
then tooke his iourney towarde Porto of Portugall a ſea towne indifferent
ſtrong, about fifty myles from Lisbon, (whither the Duke
of Aluaes armye eaſely coulde not paſſe) where the Kinge might
haue conuenient place and oportunitie to repayre his armie and
ſtay for ayde, which he hoped for out of Fraunce or England. In
this iourney the king Don Anthonio was accompanyed, by the
Byſhop of Guardia, the Erle of 
                  Ʋimioſo, Emanuell de Sylua then
gouernour of the ſayde Citie of Santaren, Peter de Meneſes, and
his maieſties Agent, beeing all of his priuie counſell, with manye
other Lordes, Gentlemen, and other perſons of great worſhippe
and calling to the number of about twoo hundred horſemen and
a thouſande footemen. And in the ſame by reaſon of his woundes
became ſo weake and feeble, that he coulde not abyde to ſit his
horſe nor be carryed in his Litter, but was dryuen to be borne vppon
mens ſhoulders. Then comming to the Towne of Montemaior
               
not farre from Col
                     •
                  mbre, his maieſtie ſtayed there ſix daies
to refreſh himſelfe and cure his woundes, gathering men togeather
in the meane ſpace, to aboute the number of eyghte thouſande
wherewith he martched to the Citye of Auero and was in
all places as he paſſed through the countrey receaued and acknowledged
as Kinge, notwithſtanding that the Kinge of Caſtile
had alreadye ſubdued Lisbon the chiefe Cytye of the kingdome.
When the ſayde Kinge Don Anthonio drewe neere
to this Cytye of Auero hee ſommoned thinhabitantes to take
his parte and topen the gates of their Cytie vnto him according
to their oathe. Vppon refuſall whereof on theire behalfe
madehee gaue in charge to therle of 
                  Ʋimioſo (whome after
that hee made Counſtable of Portugall) to doe his endeuour
to take it by force, giuing alſo the ſpoyle of the Cytye
to the ſouldiours. And thoughe it were well furniſhed with
munitions of warre and other neceſſaries, yet the greater
parte of the Citizens refufed to make reſiſtaunce againſte
Kynge Anthonies men, inſomuche that the Towne was taken
eaſily by ſcaling the walles and otherwiſe, and ſo brought vnder
his obedience and ſacked. But yet vppon the taking of the
ſame, his maieſtie gaue ſuche order that the ſoldiours exceeded
not in their inſolencie, ſo that all thinges were ſoone in
quietneſſe, his maieſtie lodging there firſt in the monaſterye of
rhe dominican freres by the ſpace of three dayes, wente from-thence
to a verye fayre large houſe pleaſauntlye ſcituated vppon
the riuer and beelonging to Franciſco de Tauares a gentleman
who a little before was gone to the king of Caſtile to ſue for pardon
bycauſe he had ſaluted and acknowledged king Anthonie for king.
When Kinge Anthony had cauſed certaine traytours in this Cyty to
be executed by order of law, he continued his iourney towarde the
ſaid towne of porto of Portugall, lykewiſe ſommoning the citizens
of the ſame to acknowledge him for their king, and to open the
gates of their cyty vnto him. In this towne was then gouernor Pantaleon
de Sà brother of Frauncis de Sà one of the three gouernours,
which preſentlye after Don Anthonie was choſen King, fled to the
king of Castile. This gouernour being likewiſe wonne to the
King of Caſtiles ſide, was a meane with other of his complices
that entrance into this towne was denyed to King Anthony, his

maieſtie conceauing greate diſpleaſure thereat aſſembled men
from all partes thereaboutes to encreaſe his armie & made al poſſible
preparation to paſſe ouer the Ryuer and take the towne by
force. When all thinges neceſſary for the ſiege were in a readines,
as the king was marching with all his hoſte againſt the town
hauing in his campe about twelue thouſand men, and yet the moſt
of them vnarmed, the Citizens began preſentlye to ryſe in ſuch a
mutinie againſt Pantaleon the gouernour and his complyces who
pretended to reſiſt Don Anthonio and his men, that the ſayde gogouernor
and his pertakers had much a doe to ſaue themſelues by
flight from the furye of the people, whereby it came to paſſe that al
the religious and clergy men of the towne camme foorth to meete
the King, beſeeching his maieſtie to pardon the Cytizens in that
they had not yeilded the towne into his hands vpon the firſt ſommonce
according to their alleagence and the dutye of their oath.
Whereupon the King in thend, was content of his naturall clemē
               cie
to pardon their offence vpon condition they ſhould compound
with the ſouldiours to whome he had graunted the ſacking of the
towne. By reaſon whereof the Citizens promiſed for the ſafegarde
of the ſame from ſacking, to giue the ſouldioures a hundred
thouſande Duckets. And ſo the Kinge at his entraunce into the
towne was honorablye receaued by the Citizens, whereupon his
maieſtie preſently ſent the Biſhop of Guardia from thence with al
ſpeede to the next prouince called Entre dueroe Minho to encourage
thinhabitans and gather men & victuals for thaugmenting
and prouiſion of his campe, and ſo ſtayed certaine daies in the
ſame towne expecting aide and gunpowder from Fraunce.
            Nowe the Duke of Alua (vnderſtanding howe Kinge Anthony
was come to Porto and there encreſed his army) feared leaſt
his Maieſty ſhould receaue aide from Fraunce, and therefore in all
haſt ſente Sancho de Auila (ſometime gouernour of the Caſtle of
Antwerp) with two thouſand horſemen and eyght thouſand foote
men, Artillerie and all other munitions and neceſſarye prouiſion
of warre to beſiege the ſaide towne of Porto, who ariued there about
thirtie daies after King Don Anthonio came thither. Nowe
when the ſaid King Don Anthonio was informed of thenimies comming
he gaue order to all townes where they ſhould paſſe, to giue
them free paſſage without reſiſtaunce for that his maieſtie coulde

not defende them by reaſon he wanted horſemen and gunpowder,
and that the greateſt part of his ſouldiors which ſerued him in
the getting of Porto, were retyred hoame to their owne houſes.
When Sancho Dauila was come before the Towne of Porto, hee
ſtayed with his armie and planted his artillery vppon the farther
ſide of the riuer of Dureto ouer againſt Porto, from whence he began
to batter the walles of the towne with his artillery, but foraſmuch
as he got little this way by reaſon of the great ſpace which
was betweene him and the towne, he determined to paſſe ouer
the riuer to that ſide, which lyeth next Porto. And in the ende accompliſhed
his determination with certaine barques and boates,
which for the ſame purpoſe he had procured from all partes. For
King Don Anthonies men were not able to hinder the ſaid paſſage,
by reaſon they were for the moſte part vnarmed and vnexperienced.
            King Anthonie ſeeing his affaires in theſe hard termes determined
to make his retrayte to the towne of 
                  Ʋiane, a port alſo of the
ſea, intending there to embarque himſelfe for Fraunce, with many
noble men and others following him, to about the number of fiue
hundred, with whom he came to 
                  Ʋiane verye late in the night,
weary and euill at eaſe, & not yet throughly healed of his wounds.
In this place, he prepared fiue ſhips the next daye, and furniſhed
them with victualles and all other neceſſaries for the ſayde embarquement.
Now when all thinges were ready therevnto, and
the king and his companye almoſt all embarqued, there chaunced
a great tempeſt with a contrary winde out of the ſea, whereby the
ſhips were all ſtayed and could not depart out of the hauen. In the
meane ſpace Sancho Dauila ſending his horſemen before, came
after himſelfe with the reſte of his armye to beſiege the towne.
Wherefore King Anthonie fearing leaſt the ſhips would from the
the land at laſt be vexed and ſuncke with the artillery of the enuemie,
and ſeeing he coulde not ſayle out of the hauen by reaſon of
contrary wind, determined (while he had time) to ſaue him ſelfe
from ſo apparant a daunger, before thennemie had hemmed him
in on all ſides. And therefore in all haſt forſaking the ſhippes, with
great griefe, he tooke his leaue of the principall noble men, and others
that were about him, exhorting them, euery man to prouide
for their ſafety by the beſt meanes they could: amongſt whom the

chiefe were, the ſayde Erle of 
                  Ʋimioſo, the Biſhop of Guardia, Emanuell
de Sylua, Peter Fernando, and Diego de Meneſes, with
manye other of the auncient nobilitie, prayinge them to bee
all of good courage, hopinge at laſte fortune woulde ſo
chaunge that hee mighte gyue them honourable recompence
for their good ſeruices doone vnto him and which he hoped to
receaue at their handes in time to come.
            Thus King Anthonie with all poſſible ſpeede paſſed awaye on
foot vp the riuer ſide, hauing in his companye onelye his ſayde
Agent, and one of his ſeruauntes called Thomas Cachero,
with twoo honeſte Burgheſſes of the ſayde towne of Viane
who knewe the coaſtes of the countreye, ſending his treaſurer
before him with aboute fourtie men attending the ſame. But
hauinge in this maner paſſed but a little waye, they ſpied vppon
an hill not farre off, a troupe of the ennemies horſemen beeing
fiftie in number or aboue, who ſeemed to come downe
into the plaine fielde, and directlye to take their courſe toward
the king.
            Wherefore for the auoyding of ſo preſent a daunger, by his
Agentes counſell, hee cauſed the company attending his treaſoure
to depart from him and to martche and paſſe with the
ſame ouer the playne fielde, whileſt him ſelfe with his Agent,
Thomas Cachero and the ſayde twoo Burgheſſes of 
                  Ʋiane
helde on their waye by the riuer ſide. This deuiſe tooke
good ſucceſſe, for the ennemy directed his courſe ſtraight towarde
the greater companye, making none accoumpt of the
ſmaller number which paſſed by the riuer ſide. Inſomuch
that while the ennemye ſpente his time to purſue and take
the treaſure (amounting to little leſſe then a million of golde) The
king founde meane (when he was got a good waye of) to ſaue
him ſelfe (with thoſe foure that were in his companye) by wading
ouer the ſayde riuer where it was ſhallow, but yet the water
came vp to their breſtes as they paſſed thorough.
            When they were thus come to the other ſide of the riuer beeing
that ſide where the towne of 
                  Ʋiane is ſcituate, they ſpied a

farre off, other troupes of horſemen and foote men who (by all
likelyhood) ſought alſo for the King, for which cauſe his maieſtye
and his companye thought good to goe ouer the riuer agayne to
the ſame ſide from whence he came. Vpon the accompliſhment
whereof they hidde them ſelues amongeſt buſhes and young trees
by the water ſide, where they aboade all the ſame daye
which was the twelfth of October faſtinge and wette, for
it ſcant ceaſed from rayning all that daye. At night they
went a foote from thence by pathes and otherwyſe as they
coulde, to a Village about two myles from Viane, beeing
there receaued into a poore wydowes houſe where hee reſted
all the ſame nighte and the daye followinge. The
nexte night hee departed from thence to other places thorough
vnfrequented wayes and deſartes, taking with him
to the companye hee had before, a fift man whoſe name
was Iaſper de Gran, whome hee founde vppon the ſhore
at his firſte paſſage ouer the riuer. This Jaſper was one
of his olde and moſte faythfull ſeruauntes, who was the
greateſt meane that the Kinge had, ſo happely eſcaped out of
the Moores handes when hee was captiue in Aphrica.
            
            Now for that Sancho Dauila coulde not finde the Kinge
in the ſhippes, neither in the Towne of Viane nor elſewhere
there aboutes, hee gaue order to all his horſe men and
foote men to diſperſe them ſelues in diuerſe troupes, and to
paſſe into all places and Villages of the prouince adioyning,
called in the Portugall tongue, Entre Dueroe Minho, to ſeeke
for King Anthonie, promiſing great and ample rewarde to
whoſoeuer ſhoulde bringe him pryſoner: and wrote to the
Duke of Alua remayning ſtill at Lisbone to appoynt ſufficient
watch and warde in euery of the ſea portes to watch diligently
that King Anthonie embarqued not him ſelfe to depart out of the
kingdome.
            Alſo the Duke of Alua him ſelfe and Sancho Dauila
withall, wrote to the like effect, to all townes and places of

the Kingdome of Caſtile bordering vpon Portugall. In ſomuch▪
that great and curious ſearch was made in euerye place for Kinge
Anthonie. Beſides, manye Spaniardes and Portugals were hyred
and appointed to that buſines, by the Duke of Alua and other
of the king of Caſtiles miniſters. But the king of Caſtile not ſo content
proclaymed in all places that whoſoeuer coulde bring king
Anthonie either dead or aliue, ſhoulde haue fiue and twenty thouſande
Duckates of golde for his rewarde. Whereof open proclamations
were ſet vppon the principall Church dores, and alſo
vppon the gates of the Citie of Lisbon and other places of Portugal
and Caſtile, and beſides all this, the King of Caſtile grieuouſlye puniſhed
whomſoeuer he knew or ſuſpected to beare good will to
King Anthonie, ſome by death, ſome by perpetuall exile, not ſparing
many men and women though they had let ſlip but a worde
onely in fauour of King Anthonie.
            
            Yet notwithſtanding the king of Caſtile got nothing by al theſe
more then tyrannicall deuiſes and meanes. For King Anthonie
beeing (more, by Gods prouidence and ſufferance then by mans
induſtry) preſerued about the ende of ſeuen monethes wherein he
had wandred about by rockes deſartes and other ſolitarye places,
at laſte founde meanes to embarque him ſelfe for Fraunce the
tenth of May 1581, neare the afore ſayde town of Setubal, in a ſhip
of Holland of the towne of Anckbuyſen wherof wasmaiſter Cornelius
de Egmont, and arryuod at the Port of Callais in Fraunce the
ninthe of Iune following, hauing in the preparation of his embarquemente,
verye greate helpe and furtheraunce at thandes of a
diligent and faithfull wydowe whoſe name was Beatrice Gonſalues
dwelling neere vnto Setuball, whoſe picture, after the matter was
diſcouered and ſhee fledde awaye, was hanged by the kinge of
Caſtiles appointment. There accompanyed Kinge Anthonie in
his paſſage to Fraunce Emanuell de Silua (whome his maieſties afterwardes
made Erle of Torres Vedras and gouernour of Th
                  •
               ſles of
Aſsories,) the Kinges Agent, (whoſe name is purpoſelye concealed
in his booke for a certayne conſideration) Thomas Cachero,
Diego Roys, Conſtantine de Britto, and Diego de Quareſma the
kings miniſters, Dominicke Gonſalues brother to the ſayde Beatrice,
and Ferdinand Martines a man of the countrey whoſe helpe

and ſeruice the King had vſed to prouide his victualles, and other
neceſſaries, during the tyme that he ſecretly remained amongeſt
the Rockes and deſartes.
            But if all perils and diſcommodities whiche King Anthony ſuffered
while hee thus wandered in deſartes and ſolitarye places to
eſcape thandes of his enimie, ſhould here bee expreſſed and ſette
downe, ſcarſe woulde a large volume ſuffice thereunto. Yet this
is to be noted, how all this happened to his maieſtie when he was
aboue thage of fortye yeres, and not in perfite health, in the middeſt
of winter, and coldeſt countrey of all Portugall, where hee
was conſtrayned to ſpende many nightes in the playne fieldes and
that very often in ſnowe and rayne all the night long, without eyther
fire or other remedy againſt the colde, being for the moſt part
all the whole daye without meate or drinke, for his foode (ſuch
as it was) for the moſt part was brought vnto him in the nighte by
the ſayde countriman Ferdinando Martines. (Yea his maieſtye
thoughte himſelfe happye when hee coulde put his heade vnder
ſome roofe, and reſte hymſelfe vppon a padde of ſtrawe, whiche
kinde of lodging the countreymen vſe in thoſe partes of Portugall
without eyther beddes or ſheetes (ſpecially where there bee no
throughe faires) ſo that his maieſtye was driuen commonly to lye
in his apparell wrapped onelye in a couerlet whiche the ſayd Thomas Cachero alwaies carried with him for that purpoſe. Manye
tymes alſo his maieſtie was almoſte apprehended by his enimies
who lefte no place vnſifted for him, inſomuche that the ſpaniardes
often came to the verye ſame place where the King had beene,
within an howre or thereabouts after his maieſties departure
from the ſame, where they miſerably afflicted the poore husbandmen
that had harbored his highnes, executing ſome by the corde,
and burning their houſes. But yet for all that, other husbandemen
refuſed not to harbour his maieſtie in their houſes when occaſion
required, notwithſtanding they knew his perſon very well,
for they were ſo well affectioned toward him, that none of them
euer bewrayed him to the Caſtilians, and yet were they not ignoraunt
of the great quantitie of money which the king of Caſtile by
open proclamations had promiſed to whoſoeuer coulde deliuer
him dead or aliue. In all theſe ſo great and incomparable daungers

the ſayde king Don Anthonio hath alwayes ſhewed ſo cherefull
and conſtante a mynde as though no misfortune at all had
chaunced vnto him, alwaies encouraging and comforting thoſe
that were in his company, ſetting alwaies before his owne eyes a
ſtedfaſt hope not onely to paſſe and ouercome all theſe dangers &
toyles but alſo in thend t'attaine to the recouery of his kingdome.
            Heere alſo is to bee noted, that whileſt Kinge Anthonie was
toſſed in all theſe daungers and miſfortunes he omitted not anye
thing that might further his eſcaping from the tyrants handes. For
foure tymes he attempted to take ſhipping for Fraunce, before he
coulde bring it to paſſe, hauing euery tyme made conuenient preparation,
defrayed the charges of his ſhipping, and made all other
neceſſarye prouiſion for his voyage, firſt at the towne and
porte of Auero, the ſeconde tyme at Lisbon, the thirde tyme
at Villa Noua of Milfontes, the fourth tyme at the Hauen of Sizimbre
nere Setuball, but the number of ſpyes and traytors aſwell Portugalles
as ſpanyardes was ſo great, and their awayting and vigilancie
ſo extreme, that theſe the Kinges attemptes were fruſtrated
(although moſte ſecretlye handled,) yea his maieſtie was not farre
from his apprehenſion at what tyme he firſt prepared for his embarquing
at Lisbon, for hee was there almoſt entrapped as more
particularly hereafter ſhall be declared. Beſides his maieſty
in the moneth of December ſent ſecretlye into Fraunce Jerom de
Silua a gentleman of a noble and auncient houſe to ſignifie vnto
the moſt Chriſtian french King and the moſte excellent princeſſe
the Queene-mother that he was yet liuing and in good healthe,
for that he vnderſtoode, the King of Caſtile had written to many
Princes of chriſtiandome, howe he was dead.
            Nowe when the king of Caſtile had eſtabliſhed his affaires in
Portugall according to his pleaſure, he ſent incontinentlye lettres
to all the townes of Aphrica, of the Eaſt Indyes, the country of Braſile
and other countreyes and Iſlandes depending of the Crowne
of Portugall, requiring them from thencefoorth to acknowledge
him for their ſoueraigne Lorde and Prince, whiche hee eaſily
obteyned at their handes, by reaſon there ranne a rumour that
Kinge Anthonie was deade, and for that they ſawe no lykelyhoode
how he could euer recouer his kingdom, and beſides theſe
countreis and townes cannot want the traffique of Portugall from

whence they haue their prouiſion of victualls, munitions of warre
and other neceſſaries. wherefore in thend they ſubmitted themſelues
into the king of Caſtiles handes more by neceſſitie, then for
any good will. The King of Caſtile alſo wrote to the lyke effect to
thiſles of Aſſores where at that tyme remayned gouernour Cipryan
Figueredo de Vaſcogoncelos eſtabliſhed there by king Sebaſtian
before his going into Aphrica, in reſpect of his great wiſedom and
experience linked with a ſingular and commendable conſtancie
and fortitude of mynde and courage. After good and mature deliberation
had thereupon the ſame gouernour togeather with thinhabitants
of the Iſlandes anſwered howe they were bounde by
oath to kinge Anthony, and in regarde thereof could not acknowledge
the king of Caſtile for their ſoueraigne lord nor do homage
vnto him before they were certainly aduertiſed and ſure that king
Anthonie was dead, and therefore reſolued to defende themſelues
againſte all force, (wherewith the king of Caſtile threatned them)
vntill they ſhould receaue, certen newes of king Anthonyes death,
or expreſſe commaundement from him to yeilde them ſelues into
the ſayde king of Caſtiles ſubiection and obedience.
            With this anſwere the king of Caſtile was highly offended, and
therefore within ſhorte ſpace after prepared an armye by ſea amounting
to aboute three thouſand men, whereof Peter Baldez
was Captaine, who arriued with his nauie well appointed in the
beginning of Iune 1581 neere thiſle of Tercera the ſtrongeſt of
of all thiſlandes of Aſſores, and albeit the ſame Iſlande remained
vnfurniſhed not onely of ſouldiours but alſo of armour, gunpowder,
and other neceſſaries fit for the warres, yet by Ciprian Figueredo
his vertue and induſtrie (whome the inhabitantes of thiſland
had choſen for their Captayne) thennimie was repulſed with the
loſſe of aboute ſeuen hundred of his ſpanyards all olde ſouldiours
and amongeſt them many of the chiefe gentlemen that firſt ſette
foote on land who were all preſently ſlayne, which ſpectacle caſte
ſuch a feare into the reſt of tharmy remaining in the ſhippes, that
none of them durſt come a lande, inſomuche that Baldez with this
foyle was driuen to returne into Portugall to his greate ſhame.
            Aboute the ſame tyme, when Kinge Don Anthonio was (as is
aforemencioned) come to Calais, hee ſtayed not long there, but
paſſed with all expedition into England, from whence he preſentlye
diſpatched a Carauell, towarde the ſaide Iſlande of Tercera
               
with letters to Ciprian de Figueredo aduertiſing him of the ſucceſſe
of his voyage, and howe he was arriued in health in the realme of
England. Vppon the receipte of theſe letters, Ciprian himſelfe
and all thinhabitants of thiſlande conceaued ſuche ioy as is ſcant
poſſible to be beleued. For manye of them thought his maieſtie
had bene eyther dead or fallen into thandes of his enemy notwithſtanding
the Conſtable, and Anthonye de Britto Pimentill had perſwaded
certaine of thiſlanders, (who repaired into Fraunce to inquire
newes of him) howe his highneſſe was come thither and for
a certaine reſpectt kept himſelfe ſecrete in a Caſtle, whereat thiſlanders
greatly reioyced, whome Cipryan confirmed in this good
opinion, although he ſuppoſed the ſame to be cunningly inuented
(as in truth it was) by the Conſtable and Anthonie de Britto to encourage
the people and keepe them in good deuotion toward
his maieſtie, who came not into Fraunce till a good while after.
But it fell ſo out that this was no ſmall furtherance to thobteyning
of the victorie whereof mention is before made. Ciprian and the
reſt of thinhabitantes of thiſland ſending backe the carauell to his
highneſſe certified him of the victorie obteyned, which was gotten
but two dayes before the comming of the Carauell, offering
their ready ſeruice to ſpend their liues and goodes for the maintenance
of his maieſties authoritye, and preſeruation of thiſlance as
they had alreadye done. At the retourne of this Carauell into
Englande, Kinge Anthonie was there ſtill preparing an Armie
wherewith hee purpoſed to meete the fleete which was to come
that yere to Spaine and Portugall from theſt and weſt Indies. But
But for aſmuch as it was after knowne to be then to late to execute
thenterpriſe, it remained in ſuſpence, without anye thinge effected
that yere. Wherfore King Anthonie departed out of England and
in the moneth of October following, arriued at the hauen of Diepe
and paſſed from thence to Parris, where he was honorably receaued
aſwell by the moſt Chriſtian king, as by the Queenemother.
            The King of Caſtile (conſidering howe greatelye it ſtoode him
vppon to ſubdue the ſaide Ilandes of Aſſores, and ſpecially Tarcera
as the moſt principalle and chiefeſt amongſt them that hee might
therby better aſſure his nauigation from the Eaſt & Weſt Indies,)
determined to prepare a greate and puiſſant armye by Sea for the

yeare following 1582. Vppon notice whereof King Anthonie
gaue aduertiſement of the ſame preſently to the queene-mother
She for the repreſſion of the Kinge of Caſtiles purpoſe gaue order
for the preparation of another armye by ſea in Fraunce for Kinge
Anthony, appoynting her coſen the lorde Phillip Troſſi generall of
the ſame, and the countie of Briſſake for his lieuetennant. This
armye conſiſted of ſeuen and fiftye ſhippes of warre aſwell great
as ſmall and foure or fiue thouſande ſouldiours, with aboute ſixe
hundred frenche gentlemen of name and armes, and certen Portugalles.
King Don Anthonio determined to goe perſonally in the
ſame armye, to ſee the ſayde Iſlandes of Aſſores and thanke his
good and faithfull ſubiectes thinhabitantes of the ſame, for theire
duties and loyaltye thitherto ſhewed vnto him, and withall moſt
principall to maintayne militarye diſcipline amongeſt his ſoldiours,
meaning alſo by the waye to take thiſle of ſaint Michaell,
one of the greateſt of thiſlandes of Aſſores and then poſſeſſed by
the Kinge of Caſtile. Whereuppon aboute the ende of Iune
1582 his maieſtie ſayled from Beliſle with his ſayde armye, and
arriued before ſainct Michaels Iſle the three and twentie of Iuly
following, whiche preſentlye yeilded to his highneſſe by reaſon
thinhabitantes were well affectioned towarde him ſauing certen
traytors, who were conſtrayned with the ſpaniardes that lay there
in garriſon to about the nūber of eyght hūdred to flyinto a ſtrong
Caſtle there. In whiche Iſland Kinge Anthony landed with the
principall heades of his army & many of his Captaynes and ſoldiours,
where his maieſtie was well and humbly receaued by his ſubiectes
according to their duties. But the thyrde day after they
ſpyed approching towarde the ſayde Iſlande the King of Caſtiles
nauy vnder the conduction of the Marquis of ſainct Croſſe bringing
therein aboute nine or ten thouſande fightinge men. By
occaſion whereof it was thoughte neceſſarye for all them whiche
were gone a lande, to repayre backe to theire ſhippes and to prepare
themſelues for the battayle, howbeit the lorde Stroſſi, the Cō
               ſtable,
and others of aucthoritye, counſelled, and intreated kinge
Don Anthonye to abſent himſelfe from the battayle, and to rytire
into thiſlande of Tercera and not to hazarde his perſon in a doubt
full battayle, ſith thereof depended the libertye, not onely of the
people of Portugall, but alſo of all the reſte of Chriſtiandome. The

King was againſt their aduiſe a good while, but in the ende (ouer
come with their reaſons) he reſolued to followe their counſell, and
in a little Carauell together with his agent, Edward de Castro, and
certen others was conueyed into the ſaide Iſle of Tercera, leauing
in tharmye the Conſtable with aboute two hundred Portugalles
aſwell gentlemen as others who came to his Maieſtie into
Fraunce.
            The next daye being the ſixe and twentith of Iulye, the Lorde
Stroſſi hauing ſette his armie in order, determined himſelfe firſt of
all to aborde thenimie, and therefore comming oute of a greate
and mightie ſhip of ſeuen hundred tonnes which ſerued for thadmirall
of his armye, he ſhipped himſelfe with the Conſtable and
many gentlemen aſwell Frenchemen as Portugalles in an other
ſhippe of ſmaller burthen whiche ſayled well, wherewith hauing
ouercome & ſonke certen of thennimies ſhippes, hee ſet ſo fiercelye
vppon the Marquis his viceadmirall conducted by Don Lopus
de Figueroa, that he ſlewe aboute ſixe hundred ſpanyardes therin,
and had her rendred vnto him, howbeit at the very ſame inſtant he
was ſo furiouſly aſſailed by the marquis of ſaint Croſſe himſelfe (cō
               ming
in a very great & ſtrōg ſhip called the galeon ſaint Martin,)
that in the end he was vanquiſhed for want of ayde; For hee was
not ayded by anye other ſauing onelye the ſayde Erle of Briſsack,
who fighting valiantlye with two ſhippes greatelye endomaged
thennimie, but yet at laſte ſeeing himſelfe ſore wounded and
that he laboured in vaine being not ſeconded by others as was convenient,
he made his retrait in tyme retourning into Fraunce with
the loſſe of manye of his men and his ſhippes in euill plight. Duringe
this greate battaile the Lorde of Sanſolenne viceadmyrall to
the Lorde Stroſſi, and the lorde of Fumei captaine of fiue ſhippes,
for wante of winde, (as they pretended) neuer inuaded thennemies.
Theſe two lordes, when they ſawe the lord Stroſſi ouercome,
retyred with twentie ſhippes to king Anthony into thiſle of Tercera.
His Maieſtie vppon notice of thill ſucceſſe of the battayle, cō
               ceaued
greate ſorrowe, (as he had good cauſe) and that moſte
ſpecially for the deathes of the lordes Strosſi & the Conſtable both
lordes of greate valor, and tooke it in verye euill parte, that Sanſolenne
and Fumei had ſo miſerablye forſaken them in the battayle.

Theſe lordes of Sanſolenne and Fumei ſhortly after by his maieſties
lycence retyred into Fraunce, leauing in thiſlande about two thouſand
and fiue hundred frenche ſouldioures for the defence of the
Kings perſon in caſe thennemye woulde aſſalte thiſle. But the
Marquis of ſainte Croſſe hauing loſte in the battayle aboute two
thouſande of his beſt ſoldiours durſt attempte no further againſte
thiſlande of Tercera but onelye ſtayed for the fleete whiche came
out of the Eaſte and Weſte Indyes, and when they were ioyned
with him hee tooke them vnder his conduction and ſo retourned
preſently towarde Spayne with all his atmye.
            Vppon the aduertiſement whereof King Don Anthonio with
all expedition gathering together all the ſhippes aſwell frenche
as others whiche were at the ſayde Iſlande of Tercera and other
places there aboutes to the number of ſeuen and thurtye ſhippes,
embarqued himſelfe with two thouſande frenche ſouldioures and
as manye Portugalls, to thintent to paſſe therewith to thiſlande of
Madera, belonging to the Crowne of Portugall, but then holden
by the King of Caſtile. But when the monethe of October was
come (at what tyme the ſea beginneth greatelye to ſwell in thoſe
parties) there aroſe ſo mighty and furious a tempeſt in the middeſt
of their iourney with a contrary wind that it was vnpoſſible for thē
to paſſe any further, and for their ſhippes to keepe company together,
but being diſperſed diuerſe waies, arryued with great trauaile
and daunger, part in Fraunce, and parte with the Kinge in thiſle
of Tercera. After the Kinge had ſoiourned there aboute twentye
dayes, and ſette ſuche order in thiſlande as was conuenyente,
hee departed from thence with fiue ſhippes towarde Fraunce and
arriued there with the helpe of a fauourable wynde within twelue
dayes, taking in his companye Ciprian de Figuereds (who till then
had gouerned the ſayde Iſlandes of Aſſores), and appointing in his
place Emanuell de Silua Earle of Torres Ʋedras (of whome more
ſhall be ſpoken hereafter;) His maieſtie beeing arriued in Fraunce,
was there agayne verie honorablye receaued aſwell by the
moſte Chriſtian kinge, as by the Queene-mother who then
offred to giue him any aſſiſtance to preuaile againſt his ennemye
and as time and occaſion ſhould ſerue to reſtore him to his
kingdome, naminge vnto him ſhortelye after, the Duke of

               Ioyence for generall of tharmies. Whiche for that cauſe ſhoulde
thereafter be prepared.
            But in the meane tyme the kinge of Caſtile (ſeeking all poſſible
meanes for the cauſe afore alleaged, to bring the ſayde Iſland
of Tercera and the reſt of thiſlandes of Aſſores vnder his ſubiection,)
appointed therefore, to be prepared for the yere following another
myghtie and greate armye of manye gallyons, galeies, &
other veſſels both greate and ſmall to the number of a hundred
and twentye. Of whiche nauye the Marques of ſainct Croſſe
was appoynted generall agayne. In the meane ſpace King Don
Anthony vnderſtanding thereof, omitted nothing that might tend
to the defence and preſeruation of thiſle. For by the fauour &
aſſiſtance of the queenemother, hee prepared a Nauye and leuied
two thouſande frenche ſoldiours to bee for that cauſe employed
vnder the conduction of Mounſir de Chartres a noble gentleman
and of greate valour, of whome the queenemother had made
ſpeciall choyſe (amongeſt manye) for that ſeruice. This Mounſyr
de Chartres with the ſayde nauie and number of ſoldiours aboute
the beginning of ſpring tyme, departed towarde the ſayde
Iſle of Tercera to furniſhe it with a ſtronge garriſon and defende
it againſte thinuaſion of the King of Caſtile, & arriued there with
a fauourable wynde without anye misfortune.
            Nowe when the Kinge of Caſtiles armie was ready, amounting
to a hundred and twentie ſayles, and ten or twelue thouſande
fighting menne, the Marques of ſainct Croſſe departed with the
ſame from Lisbone about thende of Iune. 1583. and arriued before
the ſayde Iſle of Tercera, the foure and twenty of Iuly following,
and hauing ſpent two or three daies in viewing where to land
his men beſte, vppon the thirde daye after by the
                  •
               lpe and benefite
of his Galleyes which (contrary to many mens opinions) he
brought thither, he landed his men of war in a certaine place, leaſt
ſuſpected by the captaines & inhabitants of thiſland, where remained
but a verie ſmall garrſion. By reaſon whereof it came to paſſe
that before the principall body of the garriſō which was two miles
of, could come thither, then'nimy had leaſure to land almoſt tenne
thouſande fighting men, and had halfe intrenched them. Firſte
therefore Mounſyr de Chartres came thyther in all expedition
with his regimente of Frenchemen and hotlye ſkirmiſhed

with the enemies, wherein manye were ſlayne on eyther ſide, but
ſpecially of the Spanyardes. At laſte alſo came therle of Torres
Ʋedras gouernoure of the Iſle with a good number of Portugall
ſouldioures and men of the Iſlande well armed and ſufficientlye
trayned. And perceauing in what caſe thinges ſtood, treated with
Mounſyr de Chartres touching the ioyning of preſent battayle with
the ennemy. Herevpon they all prepared themſelues to fight, &
the ſquadrons being ſet in order are apoynted to march againſt the
ennemy. But for that the Marquiſe had twice as many men in his
army as were in King Anthonies, and alſo it ſeemed very late in the
day to gyue this battayle, the ſayde Erle propounded to Mounſyr
de Chartres to differre it tyll the next daye, and that in the meane
ſpace he would cauſe victuals, gunpouder, munition, and other neceſſaries
to be brought into a conuenient place amongſt the rockes
of the Iſle, to the intent to make their retraite thither to ſtaye for
ayde out of Fraunce or the other Iſlandes, if they fortuned to looſe
the victory: Alleadging withall that the ennemyes army could not
ſtay long about the ſayd Iſland for want of a hauen, and ſpeciallye
how the galleis could not abyde the Ocean ſea when it began to
ſwell, which happened commonlye about the moneth of Auguſt
then beeing at hand: further how the ennemye with all his armye
could not long remayne there if the commoditye of victuals were
taken from him. When Mounſyr de Chartres had conferred with
his captaines about theſe matters, ſome were of aduiſe to giue preſent
battayle, others and the greater part reſolued with the Erle to
differre it till the next day.
            The Erle beeing aduertiſed of this reſolution, called before him
certayne of the chiefe Portugall captaynes, declaring vnto them
what had paſſed in this matter, exhorting them to keepe diligent
watch that night, that none of their ſouldiours departed from the
campe. But when the Portugals (who before were willing to
ioyne battayle) vnderſtood the differring of the ſame tyll the next
day, their heartes began to faint, inſomuch that by little and little
they forſooke the campe and wente home to their houſes. Vpon
the vnderſtanding whereof, the Erle diſtruſting the victory, conueyed
him ſelfe about midnight, with ten or twelue of his company
out of the campe, to the intent to ſaue him ſelfe by flight (as
appeared afterwardes by certaine barques which he had prepared

for that purpoſe,) yet faining to make preſent returne. But on the
morow after thinking with his companie to be embarked, he was
diſappointed by certaine women dwelling aboute the place,
where the barques laie, who brake them in peeces to ſtop his paſſage:
Then ſeeing him ſelfe in this aduerſitie and deceiued of his
expectation, he went in diſpaire, and hid himſelfe in the beſt ſort
he could among the rockes.
            Nowe when it was light day, Mounſir de Chartres hearing no
newes of therle, and perceiuing howe in a manner all the Portugalles
were gone from the camp, thought no other but that therle
had withdrawne himſelfe with his Portugalls to the rocks, according
to his ſpeeche had the daie before: Whereupon preſentlie
the ſaide Mounſyr de Chartres ſetting al his men in order of battell,
marched ſtraight to that place which therle had before nominated
vnto him, But foraſmuche as he founde there neither the
ſaide earle, nor victuals and other neceſſaryes which hee had promiſed
to conuaie thither, Therefore hee aſſembled all his Captaines
and officers with the cheefe of the Portugalles which yet
ſtayed in the campe, to conſult what was beſt to be done. Thereupon
they al concluded how it was beſt to agree with the enimy,
Inſomuche that vpon conference had betweene him and them,
at laſt a concluſion was made, whereby it was lawfull for all the
ſouldiers, aſwell frenchmen, as Portugalls to depart with bag and
baggage out of the Iſland, whitherſoeuer they would, leauing behind
them their armor, Enſignes, and Drummes. Alſo the enimie
promiſed to furniſh them with ſhips & victualles for their paſſage.
Howbeit the ſaide earle of Torres Vedras and certaine naturall
borne ſubiectes of thiſle were excepted out of this treatie &
agreement, whoſe pardon thennimie would in no wiſe yeelde to
graunt. After this compoſition thus made, all thiſle was miſerably
ſacked by the ſpace of 3 dais, many of thinhabitants hanged & Emanuel
Serradas beheaded, (who a little before, by king Anthonies
commandement had taken & ſacked thiſle of Caboverde) neither
could therle of Torres vedras eſcape his fortune, for the 3. day after
thagreement made, he was found among the rocks, by meanes of
a maid-ſlaue bewraying him, & therupon was alſo beheaded.
            And although the loſſe of this Iſlande of Tercera with thothers
depending therof, was vnto the ſaid king Don Anthonie a great &
lamentable misfortune, yet for all that, neuer abating his courage,

he hath alwaies repoſed his confidence in God, and thuprightnes
of his iuſt cauſe, hoping by the grace of almighty God, & good aſſiſtance
of Chriſtian princes, at laſt to recouer his kingdom which
the king of Caſtile hath tirannicallie taken from him, as wee are
taught by many hiſtories, how the raign of tyrāts laſteth not lōg.
And this is the verie reaſon that hitherto the ſaide King Don Anthonie
hath refuſed all manner of cōpoſition with the ſaid king of
Caſtile, notwithſtanding he hath had very large offers at his hands
of ſome of the which and ſpecially of the cheefeſt, it ſhall not bee
from the purpoſe here to make reherſall. It is therfore conuenient
to be knowne, how the king of Caſtile by Chriſtopher de mora, his
ambaſſador in Portugall, offered vnto Don Anthonie yeerely (before
he was created king), 500 thouſand duckats and the gouernorſhip
of Portugall during his life, with the free diſpoſition of all
offices, benefices and dignities aſwell eccleſiaſticall as temporall
falling void in that time within al the kingdō of Portugal, vpon cō
               ditiō
that he ſhold renoūce his actiō to the kingdō of Portugal. Afterwards
whē 
               Don Anthony was ouercōe & wādred in great dāger
in deſerts & vnfrequēted places: the king of Caſtile gaue in charge
to Ieronimo de mendoza, a gētlemā & cōmander of thorder of the
knights of S, Iames, to endeuor by al poſſible means to come to the
ſpeech of Don Anthonies agent, to propoūd ſome other meane of
agremēt. Therfore this Jeronimo de Mendoza, taking in his cōpany
Emanuell of Portugall, a ſpeciall friend of the ſaid agent, and vncle
to therle of Vimioſo, came to the wife of the ſaid agēt to a houſe of
his about 8. miles frō 
               Lisbon, deliuering vnto her a ſafe cōduct frō
the king of Caſtile, for the ſurety of her husbands perſō with particular
letters directed to him & deſired her to ſend them to him,
aſſoone as ſhe could learn wher he was, telling her it was a matter
of very great importāce, which he had to treat vpō with him, wher
of depēded the wealth & tranquilitie generallie of al the kingdō
of Portugal, & particularly of the ſaid Don Anthony, & her husbāde
his agent. It fortuned that within 8. dayes after the ſaide agent ignorant
hereof, came fecretly to his wife, to thintēt to take order for
the ſaide king Don Anthonies firſt ſhipping, which he thought to
haue taken at Lisbon, leauing the ſame king Don Anthonio 2. miles
from thence in a ſecrete place (where he was to ſtay) til al thinges
were ready for his embarking, in a ſhip which thē vnladed at Lisbō
               
               
beeing couertly ſent thither for that purpoſe, by the ſayde queene
mother, with maiſter Peter Dor a gentleman of great wiſedome,
and diſcretion, who alwayes had been well inclyned to King Anthonies
ſide, and had expreſſe commaundement to inquyre whether
he were dead or alyue. Now when the ſayde King Don Anthonie
vnderſtoode by his Agent what Ieronimo de Mendoza propounded
from the king of Castil, he was very vnwilling to conſent
that his ſayde Agent ſhoulde enter into any communication with
him, fearing it was but a drift to entrap his ſayde Agent and yeelde
him priſoner into the King of Caſtiles handes, but yet the ſayde Agent
more regarding the Kinges preſeruation then his owne ſafety,
very earneſtly intreted his maieſty to permit him to confer with
the ſayd, Ieronimo, ſith it woulde bee a good meane to further his
highnes embarquing, which was in hand to be prepared. Inſomuche
that Kinge Don Anthonie at laſte conſented therevnto.
Therefore the next day the ſayde Agent ſignified aſwell to Jeronimo
de Mendoza, as to Emanuell of Portugall that he was come to
his wyfe to the place afore ſayde, and therefore they might come
and declare what they had to ſaye. Firſt therefore came Emanuell
the next day to the ſayde Agent, and they concluded to meet Mendoza
the daye following in a place halfe a myle from the ſayde Agents
houſe. Now at the howre appoynted meeting togeather,
the ſayd Mendoza declared to the ſayd Agent how the King of
Caſtile woulde giue vnto Don Anthonio the Kingdome of Naples,
vpon condition that he would yeeld himſelfe into his handes, and
renounce his right & action which he pretended to the kingdome
of Portugall, promiſing alſo large recompence on the King of Caſtiles
behalfe to the ſayde Agent in caſe he could procure king Anthony
to accept this offer. Herevpon the ſayd Agent to lengthen
this buſines and winne tyme, fained he knew not where King Don
Anthonio was, but yet told Mendoza he was well content to break
the matter to his maiſter aſſoone as he could vnderſtand where to
finde him, alleadging how his maieſtie neuer ſtayed two dayes togeather
in one place. At which communication the ſayd Ieronimo
de Mendoza made earneſt entreatie to go in the company of the
ſayde Agent to conferre with Don Anthonio when it ſhoulde bee
knowne where he was. Whereof the ſayde Agent did put him in
good hope and helde him in ſuſpence about the ſpace of twentye

daies ſpace, applying neuertheleſſe in the meane time the buſineſſe
of his maieſties ſhipping, which beeing readie the ſaide agent
returned to king Anthony, certifying Mendoza thereof, and
ſending him word how he would with ſpeed, aduertiſe him what
reſolution the ſaide king Don Anthonio tooke in thoſe matters
which the ſaid Mendoza had propounded. But the ſaid agent
thought nothing leſſe then to returne to Mendoza, fearing leaſt he
wold by ſōe pretēce either deteine him captiue or not leaue til he
had brought him to king Don Anthonie. Moreouer the king of Caſtile
commaunded manie other moſt ample and beneficiall offers
to be made on his behalfe to king Don Anthony, after his arriuall
in Fraunce, yea and after the taking of thiſle of Tercera, which for
breuities ſake are here omitted.
            Nowe when kinge Don Anthonio vnderſtoode what offer
Mendoza propounded vnto him, he made none account thereof,
but went by night with his agent, and others of his traine to a
ſecrete place not farre from Lisbon, adioyning neere the ſea, there
ſtaying for a barke which was to come from the ſaide citie of Liſbon
to carrie him aboard the ſhip wherein hee was to ſaile away.
This barke was partlie prepared by the care and diligence of Peter
de Alpoen Doctor of the lawes, a man of great learning and integritie
hauing alwaies conſtantlie maintained king Don Anthonies
cauſe, wherein hee purpoſed himſelfe with certaine of his
freendes and kinred to meete king Anthonie and paſſe into France
with him. But this matter being diſcouered by the treſō of one Peter
de Oliuera (to whoſe charge king Anthonie had alſo committed
this buſineſſe) certaine gallies of Caſtile lying in waite for the ſaid
barke in the ſea, in the place where it was to paſſe, aſſaulted and
tooke it, wherein Peter de Alpoen with his vncle and nephue, and
two religious men, and certaine other perſons were taken, and all
put to the torture to confeſſe whither they went. But it happened
by Gods permiſſion that before the barke was taken, Baſtian Figuera
(one of the Kings ſeruauntes afore mentioned) paſſed along
the ſea ſide to ſeeke for his maieſtie, and ſpied the Gallies there
diſpearſed about the ſame place where the barke (that his highneſſe
ſtaied for) was to paſſe. And brought preſent word therof to
his highneſſe, who immediatlie tooke horſe and in great haſt retorned
with his companie to his accuſtomed pilgrimage vntill about

two moneths after it was his hap to be embarqued in deede
& to come into Fraunce as is afore declared.
            This alſo is not to bee omitted in this place, howe king Don Anthonio
in his paſſage from Lisbon towarde Fraunce, was driuen by
contrary winde about two hundred leagues from land toward the
weſt, where hee met a great and mightie ſhip of warre, whereof
Ambroſe de Guyar was captain, who had the conduction, of aboute
300 Spaniſh ſouldiers, to place in garriſons in the ſaid Iſle of Saint
Michael. This ſhip (as the manner is) had a carauel with her, which
came to aboard the ſhip wherein his maieſtie was. The men of the
carauel demanded of the maſter of his highneſſe ſhip, frō whence
they came, he anſwered from Calice in Andalouſie. Being demaunded,
what newes there, he aunſwered, how the people died of the
plague, & ſome of his mariners were alreadie deade & others yet
very ſick of the ſame diſeaſe: Vpon thunderſtanding whereof, they
of the carauell abandoned the kinges ſhip, taking their courſe toward
the ſaid ſhip of warre.
            When the King of Caſtile vnderſtood how King Anthony was
arriued in Fraunce, he was ſo highlie offended therewith, that hee
cauſed Peter Dalpoen to be forthwith beheaded, and his vncle and
nephue to be perpetually baniſhed the realm, condemning the 2.
religiouſe men to the gallies, whō neuertheleſſe afterward (changing
his ſentence) he condemned to cloſe priſon for manie yeres.
cauſing the wife of King Anthonies agent, with his children & his
coſens (of whom he had the bringing vp) and his mother in Law,
& 3. religious ſiſters of his, of thorder of S. Clare, to be all brought
into Caſtile, & put into diuerſe monaſteryes. Likewiſe appointing
to be brought into the ſaid kingdō of Caſtile the Counteſſe of 
                  Ʋimioſo
mother of the ſaid conſtable with 3. ſonnes and 7. daughters,
together with the wife of Emanuel de ſilua, thē gouernor of the ſaid
Iſle of Tercera, whom he detained there vntill the ſaid Conſtable
& Emanuel de ſilua had loſt their liues, as is afore mentioned.
Alſo it is not to be paſſed in ſilence, how the King of Caſtile, euen
ſince king Dō Anthony arriued in fraunce, hath vſed al practiſes poſſible,
to procure the ſaid king Don Anthonio his couſin germaine, to
be murdered, ſending many caſtilians and Portugalls into Fraunce
for that ſpeciall purpoſe. Of which the firſt & chiefe was, Edward
de Caſtro, a man of baſe birth, though very rich, a portugal borne,

who notwithſtandinge had in former time done much good and
faithfull ſeruice to King Don Anthonio in Portugal. This man faining
himſelf to be malcontent toward the King of Caſtile for detaining
him priſoner a certain time, came into France to K. Anthony,
to whome at his firſt comming (for the better cloaking of his
treaſon) he declared how for his deliuery out of priſon, he had promiſed
the King of Caſtile to aſſay by all manner of meanes to kill
the ſaid King Don Anthonie: Or if he could not bring that to paſſe,
how at leaſt he would finde the meane to procure certaine french
companies or other ſtrange ſouldiers (ouer whome he hoped to be
appointed captaine) to riſe againſt his maieſty at ſuch time as hee
ſhould be readie to ioine battail, or in hand to execute any like enterpriſe,
or elſe would do ſome ſuch thing as ſhould caſt the perſon
and campe of the ſaid King Anthony into ſome notable danger:
wherein the very trueth is, his meaning was to haue kept promiſe
with the ſaid King of Caſtile. For it came to paſſe within a litle
after, when King Anthony was ouercome in a ſea-battail at the
Iſle of S. Michael, while the Marquiſſe of S. Croſſe remained in the
ſame Iſle, that the ſaid Edward de Castro being with King Anthony
in thiſlle of Tercera, earneſtlie perſwaded the french companies
which were there in garriſon (whome he had won to him by gifts
and otherwiſe) that the Portugalls went aboute to murther them
all ſuddenlie, ſhewing to them for proofe thereof a letter written
by King Anthonies agente, which (though falſelie) he vouched to
containe ſuch matter, and likewiſe made the portugalles on the
contrariſide beleeue, howe they were in the like daunger at the
Frenche mens handes. When he had laid this foundation, he went
aboute to put the matter in execution, and ſo handled the ſame
that one day the Frenchmen firſt made them readie to ſet vpon
the portugalles and ſlewe Anthony Baracho a gentleman of portugal.
But as eche party began to put themſelues in armes, it came
to paſſe by the great dexteritie and wiſedome of a portugall Captaine,
who in time ſmelled this treaſon, that the matter proceeded
no further, but all was well pacified & the Traitour apprehended.
Who vppon the falling out of the matter otherwiſe then he expected,
woulde preſentlie haue retired into the ſaide Iſle of S. Michaell,
to the Marquis of Sayncte Croſſe in an Engliſhe

ſhip which he had hired for that purpoſe for a great ſome of monie.
Thus the traitor being taken & conuict of his treaſon aſwel
by his owne confeſſion in the priſon, as openlie vpon the ſcaffold,
was at laſt beheaded. Yet the ſaide king Don Antonie in remē
               braunce
and conſideration of his former ſeruices, would haue pardoned
him had not the common people & ſouldiers made great
inſtance for the open puniſhment of ſo great & dangerous a treaſon.
About the ſame time Sebaſtian Caruaillo another Portugal was
executed in the ſaid Iſle of Tercera for enterpriſing to kil the ſaid
king Don Anthonio. Alſo for the like cauſe, a Caſtilian gentleman
of thorder of the knightes of Malta, was afterwardes executed in
Fraunce, Further, for the like offence, Iohn Franciſco, and John Rodrigues
deſoſa were priſoners in France, and vpon their conuiction
were ſent in captiuitie to the ſaid Iſlande of Tercera a little before
the taking thereof, by means whereof they recouered their liberty
contrary to their deſarts, But the ſaide Iohn Rodrigues had neuer
eſcaped from execution in France, had not the moſt excellēt princeſſe
the Queene of England (with whom he had beene king Anthonies
Ambaſſadour) made interceſſion for him.
            Whoſoeuer therefore ſhall rightlye conſider all theſe daungers
and greate inconueniencies whiche the ſaide King Don Anthonio
hath endured and eſcaped, may eaſilye iudge that all this came not
to paſſe without gods peculier prouidence and diuine ſufferance &
that ſome great matter of importance is hid thereunder, namely a
great hope is to be conceaued therof, that almightie God, will vſe
the ſayd king Don Anthonio as a fit inſtrument, to breake the great
powre & force of the King of Caſtile, wherby through his exceſſiue
and vnmeaſurable ambition, he would elſe in tract of tyme, inuade
not onely all chriſtiandom, but alſo al the reſt of the worlde, & that
vnder the faire colour of maintaining the Catholike Romiſh religion,
vnder pretence whereof he hath thus manye yeeres afflicted
thinhabitantes of the lowe countreys, otherwiſe a good and curteous
people, that in former tyme had alwayes bene good & faithfull
ſubiects to him & his aunceſtors: to thintent that vpon the ſubduing
of thē according to his fātaſie, he might eaſily & freely ſpred
his armies ouer England, Germany, France & other nations, either
for that they receiue, or at leaſt permit in their countries any other
religiō thē only the catholike Romiſh religiō, or els vnder ſome other

kinde of pretence whatſoeuer. This is the marke he ſhooteth
at & wil eaſily hitte except thother chriſtian Princes (before theuill
creepe any further,) haue ſpeciall regard to oppoſe thēſelues to his
power & force by ayding the prouinces vnited of the lowe countreys
nowe greately afflicted, and alſo and that moſt ſpecially, the
ſayde Kinge Don Anthonio who with thayde of ſome reaſonable
nauie of ten or twelue thouſande men furniſhed with victualles,
munition, and other neceſſaries, may in ſhorte tyme without anye
greate difficultie recouer his kingdome. Whereunto thincredible
affection which the Portugalls beare alwayes to their King &
naturall prince, together with thauncient hatred they haue alwaies
borne to the Caſtilians their auncient ennemyes, woulde ſerue for
a greate furtherance. As the lyke meane ſerued the prince of Oranges
for a greate effect in the ſayde lowe countreyes, to mainetayne
warres there ſo longe againſt the forces of the ſayd Kinge
of Caſtile. Further if King Don Anthonio had recouered Portugall &
driuen away the caſtilians, he might alſo eaſily in ſhort time aſwel
reduce into his power and dominion the townes of Aphrica with
the townes and countreys of the Eaſte Indies, and Braſile (where
the garriſons conſiſt all of naturall Portugalles) as alſo take from
the king of Caſtile, his power by ſea conſiſting chiefely of Portugal
ſhippes & Marriners. Who without doubte for the naturall affection
they beare towarde their Kinge and Countrey, and the rather
bicauſe their wiues, children, landes, and goodes remaine in Portugall:
and for the naturall hatred they beare to the Caſtilians (vnder
whome they ſerue againſt their willes) will eaſilye come and
yeilde themſelues to the ſayde King Don Anthonie, as wee haue
ſeene the lyke example in the ſayde lowe countreys, when the
wars began, for the driuing away of the ſpanyardes. Alſo it is to be
noted, how the people of Portugall beare a generall hatred againſt
the king of Caſtile & his Caſtilians not onely in reſpect of their auncient
enmitye againſt the ſayde Caſtilians but alſo and moſt principally
for the greate iniuries and indignities which they haue ſuffered
at their handes ſince the ſayde King of Caſtile by force & violence
poſſeſſed their countrey. Whereby all mens mindes are ſo
bent and inflamed againſt him and his Caſtilians, that their chiefe
wiſhe and expectation is for the ſayde kinge Don Anthonie (by the
ayde of ſome Princes) to enter into Portugall with an armie, not

onely for their deliuery from the yoke & bondage of the Caſtilians
(whoſe garriſons there exceede not the number of three thouſand
men) but alſo to inuade Castile in reuenge of the ſaid iniuries
whereinto there is long & wide acceſſe and entry out of Portugall
without any ſtrong place to hinder free paſſage into the ſaid kingdom
of Caſtile. Moreouer the hatred of the Portugalles againſt the
Caſtilians, is growne ſo far, that they which before were addicted
to the ſaid King of Caſtile, and corrupted with money & promiſes
to deliuer their natiue country into his handes, do nowe ſecretly
fauour King Don Anthonio, auouching how they will rather yeilde
their liues & goodes to his maieſties mercye, then liue any longer
vnder the tyranny of the King of Caſtile. Who hath them in no eſtimation,
neither will perform what he promiſed when he ſolicited
them to be authors to procure him the kingdome.
            Although all men know how ſmalle accompte the king of Caſtile
maketh to fulfill his promiſes to ſuche men as he hath vſed in
like kind of affaires, & moſt ſpecially when he hath no more neede
of them: yet it ſhalbe worth the noting in this place, how hee hath
dealt with them that were the principall authors to bring his matters
ſo eaſilye to paſſe in Portugall. Theſe men, when King Don Anthonio
was ouercom & diſcomfited, & the King of Caſtile in peace
able poſſeſſion of the Kingdome of Portugall, & of the realmes lands
& countreis depending therof (ſauing onely the ſaid Iſlands of Aſſores
which held a good while as is afore recited for king Anthony)
exhibited a ſupplication to the ſaide King of Caſtile declaring at
large their ſeruices done in his behalfe for thobteining of the ſaid
Kingdome of Portugall, beſeeching his maieſtie to voutchſafe the
performance of thoſe promiſes which his ambaſſadors, the Duke
of Oſſuna and Chriſtofer de Mora had made vnto them on his behalfe,
exhibiting writings withall to prooue the ſaide ambaſſadors
promiſes. Wherunto the King commaunded anſwere to be giuen,
that this ſupplycation with thambaſſadors writing, ſhould be ſent
to his counſell called in the Portugall language, Meſa da conſcientia.
Wherupon followed a decree touching that matter, of the tenor
or effect enſuing Foraſmuch as the king of Caſtile, is true inheritor
of the kingdom of Portugal: it was not lawfull for the ſuppliants to ſel
the ſame for gifts nor promiſes, but rather they had incurred the penalty
of death for th
                     •
                  s▪ of their own accord, & without theſe promiſes, they

deliuered not the kingdom to the ſaid king of Caſtile: But if the kingdom
perteyned to Don Anthonio, then they could not ſell it to king
Phillip, wherfore the king was no way bound to performe the promiſes
which thambaſſadors made to the ſuppliants, but of his benignity and
clemencye hee abſolueth the ſupplyants from the capitall puniſhment,
whereunto for this cauſe they had endaungered them ſelues. A notable
reward ſurely, yea & that ſuch a one, as commonlye all traytors
receaue, & as the King of Caſtile accuſtometh to beſtow vpon
all them that doe him ſeruice in like affaires; Which may ſerue for
an example to all men, that for giftes or promiſes they attempt nothing
againſt their dutie nor conſciences. For God is a iuſt iudge
that neuer leaueth wickednes vnpuniſhed, nor well doeing vnrecompenced.
            Syth therefore it manifeſtly appeareth by the premiſſes, that the
fayd King Don Anthonio hath a rightfull & moſt iuſt cauſe: it is to
be wiſhed, that al chriſtian princes or the more part of them would
of their owne accordes, offer them ſelues to aide & ſuccour him to
recouer his Kingdom whereof he is ſo vniuſtlye and tyrannouſlye
ſpoyled by the king of Caſtile, as it alſo appertayneth to all princes
to helpe them that be afflicted and oppreſſed by tyranny. Whereunto
truly they ought to be the more forwarde and mooued, for
that it ſeemeth the onely waye and meane to deliuer themſelues
and their poſteritye from the tyrannye of the
Spanyardes, whiche otherwiſe in the ende
they ſhall hardelye auoyde, as more
particulerlye hath beene declared
in this treatiſe.
            FINIS.
         
      
   