
      
         
            
            
               
                  printer's or publisher's device
                  Aedes Chriſti in
Academiâ Oxonienſi
               
            
         
         
            
            
            
            THE
SECOND PART
OF
A PLAIN DISCOVRSE
OF AN VNLETTERED
CHRISTIAN,
WHEREIN BY WAY OF
demonſtration hee ſhevveth vvhat
the reaſons bee vvhich hee doth
ground upon, in refuſing conformity
to kneeling in the
act of receiving the
Lords Supper.
*⁎*
            
            By Tho. Dighton. Gent.
            PSAL. 119. 113.
            I hate vaine inventions, but thy law doe
I loue.
            Printed in the yeare
1619.
         
         
            
            
            TO ALL FAITHFVL
MINISTERS AND
CHRISTIANS WHO ARE
perſwaded of the lawfulnes of kneeling
in the act of receiving the
Lords Supper; grace in Chriſt
Ieſus, and ſatisfaction by
theſe preſents.
            
               AL this whole world and all
the learning and wiſdome
thereof lies in wickednes
or darknes,
               1. Ioh. 5. 19 and cannot poſſibly
diſcerne or judge and
find out whether any gesture
be indifferent,Eph. 5. 8. or if they
were, which is the fitteſt geſture: for he that
walketh in darknes knoweth not whither
he goeth,
               Ioh. 12. 35. whither he conforme to a right geſture
or to a wrong it is all oneto him. Harken
not then to the arguments or reaſons of Darknes
or of fleſh & bloud (though all the choſen
chariots of Egipt go before thē) but let vs goe
to the light, not in the doctrine onely, but in
the Ceremonie alſo, not in the ſubſtance onely,
but in the geſture alſo, for no error may be
conformed vnto in either: and whatſoeuer is

not warranted by the light, muſt needs bee
darknes; yea if it come not from the truth, of
neceſſity it is erroneous and dangerous, and
therefore not to bee conformed vnto. If then
Chriſt bee the light of the world,
               Ioh. 8. 12. and his
word be the onely truth in the world,Ioh. 17. 17. then
whoſoever followes not Chriſt in the geſture,
according to the teſtimony of the word,
walkes in darkneſſe and conformes to errour
therein. Howſoever therefore I doe with all
thankefulneſſe to God, and due reſpect of you,
confeſſe and acknowledge that I doe highly
reverence you with Peter: yet I doe avow in
the ſight of God, and of all his Churches, that
all thoſe are worthy to be blamed,
               Gal. 2. 11. who either
iuſtifie or approue conformity to kneeling
in that manner and order as it is urged,
(and by the meaner or poorer ſort refuſed) or
eſpecially that preſſe it with ſuch violence, as
if they would take it by force: yea herein I
am bold through Christ, to reſiſt you, becauſe
I know, Whoſoever (be his gifts never
ſo excellent and admirable) doth any
thing (in ſubſtance or in ceremony preſumptnouſly
againſt the apparant practiſe of the
Apoſtolicall primitiue Churches,Numb. 15. 30 grounded
in the evidence of the ſpirit, upon the plaine
teſtimony of the inſpired Scriptures, being
approved by Christ himſelfe in the very institution,
and haue no warrant from the word of
God for their ſo doing, do directly blaſpheme
the Lord; which place, that I be not cenſured
to abuſe, or any other at any time upon this

occaſion mentioned by me, this once for alwayes,
I doe in all humility deſire the godly
to conſider and remember, that howſoever every
place of Scripture hath a particular intendment
or ſpeciall reſpect, yet in the large extent
thereof (as it hath relation unto all ages,
Churches, and perſons) there is alſo, and that
warrantably a more generall drift and purpoſe
directly intended: though therefore I preſſe
them not in that ſpeciall or particular intent,
yet if according to the true Analogie of
faith, I uſe and urge them in the larger ſence,
and reſpectiue meaning of the Holy Ghoſt, I
hope I may ſaſely, yea in the aſſurance of faith
iuſtifie, that I erre not from the direct purpoſe
of the ſpirit of truth. As for example,
the Holy Ghoſt ſaith, that not to heare the
the voyce of Chriſt even in all things,
               heb. 3 13. 15 with Act. 3. 22. will
harden the heart. Whence I conclude from
the large extent and generall ſcope of theſe
places. That not to heare and regard the word
of God (which is the voyce of Chriſt) which
plainly declares that Chriſt hath approued a
table-geſture, and no other, and yet to declare
and teach the people that any geſture ordained
by the Church, and in particular this in question,
is lawfull and ought onely to be conformed
to, or in caſes of extremity may bee
vndergone as a burden, though Chriſt haue
given no warrant for it, I ſay ſuch poſitions
and courſes taken and maintained, will harden
the wiſest, moſt learned, beſt diſpoſed,
and moſt zealous heart or hearts of the ſincereſt

teachers and profeſſors in the beſt reformed
Churches in the world. Againe, it is
ſaid, When Chriſt commeth hee will tell
us all things,
               Ioh. 4. 25. the particular intent of this
place concernes the publicke worſhip of God;
from the larger and generall ſcope whereof, I
hold it a moſt warrantable concluſion, that
Chriſt in his word hath certainly made
knowne what geſture we may conforme to in
the act of receiving the Lords Supper (being
eſſentially neceſſary in this part of his worſhip)
but in the whole Scrip. Chriſt hath not
given approbation to any but a Table-geſture:
therefore no other may bee conformed unto.
For theſe things were not written for them
of thoſe times onely,Ro. 4. 23. ver. 24. but for us alſo: yea for
all the churches to the end of the world.
            Another thing I alſo deſire not to be miſtaken
in, namely that though I do verily beleeue
and therfore confidently affirme, that
Conformitie to any gesture of religious vſe in
the worſhip of God, being not warranted by
the word, is abſolutly vnlawfull and ſinfull,
yet do I not thereby Iudge, or hold all Conformitants,
to be vile and wicked perſons:Phil. 2. 13. or that
ſuch Congregations are not the true Churches
of Chriſt, for I know, it is God which works
both the will and the deede, euen of his
good pleaſure, as he ſees beſt, not alike at all
times, nor to all perſons, but ſome ſhall remaine
ignorant of ſome truths (yet not to be
therfore ſeperated from.pſ. 119. 113. Others hate all Inventions
(yet not therfore to be runne after

as if they were the onely true churches, and ſalvatiō
no where els to be found) ſome I ſay ignorantly
conforme to error, others according
vnto knowledge abhorre and hate all falſe
waies,
               pſ. 119. 104. 120. and yet both of theſe the true Churches
and faithfull ſervants of God. Onely my deſire
before the Lord is to ſtrip hypocrits of that
conceite which they haue of their wiſdom,
learning, authoritie, and great eſtimation
which they haue purchaſed or obtained in the
world, for nature, or the naturall man, putting
on the ſhew of grace, or the name and title of
the ſpirituall man (as the Aſſe in the lyons
ſkinne) is preſently conceated, that forthwith
they are Canonically holy, ſpirituall, or diuine,
becauſe ſuch traditionall titles, are ſucceſſiuoly
compounded for thē (though none in the world
be more lycentious and profane then euen ſome
of thē) yea and that in theſe outward forms of
Godlines diviſed by man for Gods diuine worſhip
and ſervice, the verie ſubſtance of Religion
ſo farre as it is outward and ſubiect to
ſence, doth in a ſpeciall or principall parte conſiſt:
for they hold, that no man neede or ought
to make queſtion, but that theſe humane inventions
being performed (not in ſuperſtition
but in a good Intention,) are moſt acceptable
& well pleaſing unto God, and therefore ought
of verie conſcience to be conformed unto. In
which reſpect I do ſtryue gladly to dryue them
from this deceitfull and conceited kinde of
pleading, by a Iudicial proceeding to the triall
of their faith, for ſo ſhall wee quickely diſcern

what they are, Infidels or Vnbeleevers; for
profeſſion of the truth (though never ſo fundamentall)
no nor practiſe of it alſo, makes
not a true beleever, though a true profeſſor,
for even that man of ſin himſelfe, and many
other of like ambitious humour, know and
acknowledge, profeſſe and practiſe many excellent
truths;Heb. 4. 2. with 3. 19. but faith onely puts the difference,
and proues who is for the Lord, and who
bolds on the other ſide againſt him. What
action or ceremony then ſoever of Religious
uſe is not conformed unto in faith, is conformed
to in infidelity, unleſſe we muſt admit of
Agrippa his almoſt a Chriſtian,
               Act. 26. 28. halfe faithfull,
halfe infidell, halfe Papiſt halfe Proteſtant,
halfe of God and halfe of the Divell,
halfe Turke and halfe Christian: not that
I aime at any other perfection but that which
is Evangelicall, even ſincerity and truth in all
things;Rom. 11. 32 but to declare that all are ſhut up
under unbeliefe, though they be never ſo
wiſe and learned, great and many, till they bee
enlightned. But theſe men ſay and ſweare,
they haue faith, yea a iuſtifying, living, and
ſaving faith, as well as the beſt of them all, and
in their conformity do liue and walke thereby.
This is ſoone ſaid, but not ſo ſoone proved.
Let us therefore come to the tryall:
Faith conſiſts not in good opinion, or well
meaning, or preventing inconueniences. For
though I intend in kneeling before an image,
onely to ſtirre up my heart to devotion, that I
may with greater feeling and fervency call

vpon God in the confeſſion of my ſins, and
craving pardon for the ſame; yet this is not
done in faith, no though I finde that in my
conceit ſuch effect therein, even as I did purpoſe
and deſire; for nothing that is in nature,
as wiſedom, reaſon, ſence, diſcretion, iudgement,
experience, or whatſoeuer can bee by
any poſſible meanes, in any reſpect the true
object of ſaving faith (for the learned and devout
of all nations haue theſe, and yet all in
the true churches (though true profeſſors)
haue not faith) but onely the word of God
is the obiect of faith, yea true and ſaving
faith in all things of holy and religious uſe
in the divine ſervice of God, rejects not onely
what is forbidden therein, but conformes to no
thing but what in the evidence of the ſpirit
is plainly grounded on the Scriptures: for
without the warrant and commandement of
the word, ſubſcription to or approbation of
any thing of divine uſe cannot bee an act of
the faith of Gods elect, but of ſome other
counterfet faith, transformed I confeſſe into
the likeneſſe or appearance thereof, which (like
Will with wiſpe, ar Megg with Lanthorn,
or ſome other hob-goblin with a falſe
light) having dazled their ſight, or darkened
their iudgement, will by degrees lead them into
the boggs and quagmires of Armenius his
inherent grace, free-will, or other like deceiueable
fables, and damnable errors. So that this
is not an argument of true faith, if I doe not
conforme, the people will bee untaught, or the

church overtbrowne, and the like, or it is not
forbidden in the ſcripture, therefore though it
be of religious uſe in the worſhip of God, and
be onely deviſed by man, yet thou mayest, yea
being commanded, oughteſt to conforme
unto it: but directly it is a plaine doctrine of
infidelity. For whereon I pray you is faith
grounded in ſuch a caſe, but onely upon meere
and wilde vncertainty (a ſea whereof this
ſluce will open.) As therefore it is the property
of fooles to doubt of any thing which
the Scriptures teach;Luk. 24. 25 ſo it muſt needes be a
ſpeciall branch of infidelity, in matters of
conformity to things of religious uſe in Gods
publicke worſhip, to ground our faith therein
(for hope they will not ſay but they doe it in
faith) on any thing but the ſacred Scriptures.
            Now the Word telleth vs plainely that a
table geſture was ſanctified by our Lord in the
inſtitution, are they not fooles then (by Chriſts
owne doome) who will not beleeue that it is a
good & boly geſture, & that our faith in cō
               forming
thereto is plainly grounded on the
ſcriptures? and ſeing no other gesture is warranted
by the Scripture, is not the doctrine of
conformitie to any other whatſoeuer our faith
therein being grounded on vncertainty a direct
doctrine of Infidelity? may not the Evangeliſts
juſtly crie out, Lord who hath beleeued
our Report?
               Eſa. 53. 1. why ſo I pray you will ſome ſay,
what do they reporte? euen this, that in the
firſt inſtitution by Chriſt him ſelf the ſacramentall
geſture in the act of taking or receving

the holy bread and wine, was onely a
table geſture and no other will the profeſſing
and beleeving many other truthes, though thou
willfuly (againſt the plane ouidence of the
truth) refuſe to beleeue this, euer prooue the to
be a ſound Chriſtian; hath Chriſt honoured a
table geſture, and do men onely honor another
geſture? will you ſay then conformity to them
is an action of faith and yet refuſe thereby that
geſture which Chriſt by his preſence & approbation
honored? is not this to loue the
praiſe of men (or that which men praiſe)
more then the praiſe of God?
               Ioh. 12. 43. (or that
which his word commends) true it is I knowe,
that men do preferre thoſe that conforme vnto
them, and will not Chriſt doe ſo alſo? Yea, is
it not a marke of infidelity to receiue ſuch
honour one of another,
               Ioh. 5. 44. 
               and ſeeke not the
honour that commeth from God alone?
Will you feare the diſpleaſure of man if you
doe not conforme? and will you not feare the
diſpleaſure of God if you do not conforme to
his geſture in the act of receiving? I ſay his
geſture, for ſo none can deny but it was in
the inſtitution, I meane of his direct appoynting;
and did he ever caſhiere it? or did
his Apoſtles or true churches ever diſlike or
refuſe it? Take heed therefore, for hee that
beleeues not every place of Scripture, beeing
made known unto him, will not be bound to
be ſubject to any ſcripture further then hee
lusts or likes:verſ. 47. They that will not beleeue
Moſes or his writings, will not beleeue the

doctrines or practiſe of Chriſt himſelfe; reject
one place wittingly, and in effect thou renounceſt
all.Ioh. 4. 50. Let us then beleeue the word of
Ieſus in this controverſie; he tels us by the
Scripture, that a table-geſture is a holy geſture,
of divine inſtitution; let us never therefore
conforme to any other without like
warrant.Eccleſ. 3. 14. 
               For whatſoever hee hath done,
it ſhall be for ever (unleſſe himſelfe alter
it) to it can no man add (ſuch deepneſſe of
learning is the very height of dark ignorance)
from it can none diminiſh (to aſſume
ſuch power is direct preſumption. Hath
Chriſt ſanctified a Table-geſture?pſal. 95. 
               Come let
us worſhip and fall downe, and kneele
before the Lord our Maker, euen giue this
honour of deviſing his owne worſhip and ſervice,
both in matter and manner, both in ſubſtance
& order to him onely & to non other:
for his is the kingdome, in deviſing his own
ſervice; and the power, in making it effectuall
to his church; and the glory, of praiſe and honour
for making known and exhibiting his
eternall loue thereby, for ever and ever. Amen.
            
            The Egyptians by reaſon of the grievous
plagues which God ſent amongſt
them, were content to let Iſrael goe, ſo
that they would leaue their hoofes or
cattell behinde them: We haue thruſt
the Egyptians out, let us ſend their
hoofes after them, leſt they come to
fetch them, and God by a more grievous

hand then ever yet we felt, make
us willing through experience of their
blouddy cruelty to be rid of all their
Reliques and Remainders whatſoever.
            
               ROM. 1. 16.
I Am not aſhamed of the Goſpell of
Christ
            
            ſaith the Apoſtle; nor I of that
geſture, which the Goſpell mentions
that our Sauiour Chriſt approued in the
Inſtitution of his Supper.
            
               Philip. 3. 17.
               Be followers of me & looke on them which
walke ſo as yee haue vs for an exſample.
            
            
               1. Cor. 11. 1.
               Be yee followers of me as I am of Chriſt
            
            But Chriſt and all his diſcriples vſed a
table geſture, and therfore vnles our adverſaries
can proue that they vſed ſome
other geſture we may not followe or conforme
to any other, then a table geſture
in the act of receaving.
            
               1. Cor. 3. 11.
               For other foundation can no man lay then
that which is laid which is Ieſus Chriſt,
            
            We haue this foundation for the elements
and for the geſture, to conforme
therefore to other elements or another
geſture is to lay another foundation and
ſo to follow ſome other Chriſt then our
Chriſt or his Apoſtles, but we haue not ſo
learned Chriſt.
            
            
               Hebr. 4. 14.
               Seing then wee haue ſuch an high prieſt,
let us hold fast our profeſſion.
            
            Euen profeſſe him to be our high preiſt
as well in the geſture as in the elements,
in the ceremonie as well as in the ſubſtance.
            
               1. Cor. 11. 24.
               Do this in remembrance of me. Maſter
ſpeakeſt thou this to vs alſo?
            
            All actions of Inſtitution
are for Imitation.
            
               1. Ioh. 1. 6. 7.
               If we ſay we haue fellowſhip with him and
walk in darknes (whether it be in ſubſtance
or in ceremonie) wee lie and do not truely.
            
            
               1. Ioh. 2. 4.
               He that ſaith I knowe him and kepeth not
his commandements is a lyar, & the truth is
not in him.
            
            Yea but how may wee know in this
controverſie what his commandement is?
            
               Verſ. 5.
He that kepeth his word, in him is the loue
of God perfect indeede: hereby we knowe that
we are in him.
            And hereby we know & are
aſſured our reverent paſtors are of him and
our godly brethren are in him bycauſe
they keep his commandements, & refuſe
Conformity to nothing but what is not

in his word nor groūded thereon▪ whoſoeuer
therefore profeſſeth or ſaith he remaineth
in him ought even ſo to walke (both in
ſubſtance and in Ceremonie) as he hath
walked. Verſ. 6. and ſo haue they doone in
theſe Controuerſies, neuer broaching or
reviving any new commandement, but the
old which was from the beginning, even the
Word, verſ. 7. which directs alwayes to the
inſtitution, and never ſo much as inferrer
any kinde of alteration from the ſame.
            
               Math. 12. 50.
Whoſoever doth the will of my father which
is in heaven, the ſame is my brother, and ſiſter
and mother.
            Chriſt preferres ſpirituall kindred before
carnall, becauſe they heare and obey the
word of God. And we preferre this ſpirituall
geſture of the table, being according
to the Scriptures, and warranted by
Chriſts own practiſe in the inſtitution, before
that carnall geſture of kneeling having
no warrant from ſcripture, and therefore
cannot be the will of our father which
is in heaven.
            
            Accept my willing endevours heerein
good Reader, chooſing rather to expoſe
my ſelfe the malice of the ambitious,
then the light of this truth ſhall not be
maintained. All that loue the truth,
helpe me with your prayers.
         
      
      
         
            
            
            DEMONSTRATIVE
REASONS AGAINST
conformity to kneeling in the act
of receiving the Lords
Supper.
            
               
                  HAVE you not read in the
Scripture, The ſtone which
the Builders refuſed, is become
the head of the corner?
And muſt a Table-geſture,
which Chriſt
himſelfe, and all his Apoſtles
in the firſt inſtitution
uſed, as the very ſole foundation
for all future ages to build upon, bee
therefore now reiected, and another conformed
unto (as farre more ſeemly and
ſignificant) becauſe it pleaſes learned and
wiſe men of ſpeciall note and eminencie
in the Church (by profeſſion and reputation
even chiefe pillars and arch-builders)
to lay that imputation upon it, & ſo
by their canons to conclude and determine
againſt it? I beſeech you rather to
to conſider, whether this diſgracefull
foundation thus openly laid upon the
divine doctrine of the holy ceremony,
preſage not (though they pretend the

contrary) ſome evill intendment cloſely
to depraue and corrupt by degrees the
very heavenly ſubſtance. Looke to their
poſitions, obſerue their diſcourſes, compare
their pretences and practiſes together,
and ſo proceed to ſentence.
            May any thing appropriated to religious
uſe in the publick worſhip of God,
be prophane or carnall? And are not the
beſt deviſed devotions of the holieſt and
devouteſt perſons that ever were, or ever
poſſibly can be, of this very nature? yea,
doth not the Scripture uſually ſet in direct
oppoſition unto God himſelfe, whatſoever
being eſſentially neceſſary in his
worſhip (as a geſture in the act of receiving
is) which is not ordained by God,
or warranted by his word? ſtiling them
with the titles of Novelty & Innovation, or
deviſes, imaginations of their own hearts,
new gods, ſtrange or other gods, &c. not
that ever thereby (in the Church eſpecially)
any other Deitie was once imagined,
or any foundation concerning the
doctrine of the bleſſed Trinity, ſhaken or
controverted: but, though they held the
doctrine of the inward ſubſtance ſound, as
Ieroboam did, yet in the outward actions
and ceremonies of his worſhip, or outward
manner of his ſervice they erred,
not onely from the particuler directions
of the ceremoniall law, but from the generall
ſcope of the ſecond commandement,
viz. to ſerue God onely as hee

requires in his word.
            Gods worſhip is either inward or outward:
that concernes the ſoule and is
contained in the firſt commandement:
this pertaines to the bodily exerciſes, and
is taught in the doctrines appertaining to
the ſecond commandement, forbidding
all other not required therein; not that
theſe may bee ſeparated, though diſtinguiſhed:
for as ſoule and body make an entire
perſon, ſo do theſe two make an entire
worſhip, and neither of them can in this
world be performed alone: for as the inward
is the life and ſoule of the outward,
ſo the outward is the inſtrument of the
ſoule to expreſſe the inward; yea both
theſe without thoſe affections of the third
commandement, even holines to the Lord,
are in vaine; and all three (if poſſibly that
can be) without a conſcionable obſervation
of the Sabboth, are abhominable.
Now as all the inward graces of the firſt
commandement, are the meere and free
gifts of God, and not at a mans command:
ſo all things eſſentially neceſſary in his
outward worſhip (as a geſture in the act
of receiving the Sacrament is) are Gods
inſtruments for the edification of his
Church, even his conduits to convey thoſe
inward graces by: which ſupernaturall
vertue, or divine property they cannot
poſſibly haue from the canons or precepts
of men (though all the Chriſtian world
ioyne together therein) but onely from

the free will of God in making choyce of
them, and ſo appointing and ordaining
them to ſuch holy ends and purpoſes. As
therefore nothing ought to bee conformed
unto in his outward worſhip, but
what is for edification: ſo nothing can
poſſibly be for edification in any degree
or reſpect, but what the Lord himſelfe
hath appointed for that uſe and purpoſe.
Either then kneeling for matter and manner
as it is urged, is for edification (as indeed
is pretended) or elſe it may not bee
conformed unto: but for edification it
cannot be, unleſſe God haue commanded
it; and therfore either proue by the word,
that God hath commanded it in the act
of receiving, or elſe (though he haue commanded
it in other parts of his worſhip,
and though you ſay it is not forbidden
in this) it is a humane device (which never
edifies but deſtroyes) and therefore
of abſolute neceſsity to conforme thereto
in the act of receiving the L. Supper, is ſin.
            The Iewes ſilled the outward worſhip
of God with actions, and ceremonies deuiſed
by them ſelves or by ſome other
bordring people whoſe affinity they deſired
and whoſe conuerſion they perhapps
intended not hauing the leaſt thought of
ſetting vp another God; or of declining
from the true God, but to ſtirre vp them
ſelues with greater zeal and deuotion to
ſerve the Lord their God and to draw others
alſo to ioyne therein with them.

Yet, did not this turne ſtill to theire confuſion
& many times to the ouerthrow of
their ſtate? The Papiſts with the ſame conſideratiō
haue ordained new ſacraments, &
others in like humane boldnes ordain new
ſacramentals or ceremonies in the adminiſtration
of the true ſacraments, you refuſe
conformity to theirs, iuſtly as you ſpeake
becauſe they are additions to the word,
and may wee conforme to yours without
good warrant from the word? you Conclude
againſt them that of neceſſitie the
word muſt come to the elements, to
prooue and make it plaine that God hath
ordained theſe verie viſible ſigns to be his
inſtruments of grace for the edification of
his Church, or els (though they haue all
the devouteſt ſignifications that man can
deuiſe) there can be no ſacrament, and
haue your ceremoniall ſignes ſuch a ſupreame
prerogatiue as without direct warrant
from the word they ought ipſo facto
to be conformed vnto? Indeed if a Reall
preſence (which in the ſcriptures ſence we
acknowledg) had deſtroyed the nature as
it changeth the vſe, of the elements then
the breaden geſture, or the geſture of
kneeling vſed to the breaden god, had
beene an vnavoidable conſequence.
            God is the God of the order, as well as
of the ſubſtance of his worſhip, yea the
verie outward order is a ſpeciall parte of
the ſubſtance of his outward worſhip, and
a principall parte of the proper ſubiect of

the ſecond Commandement, which
honor of ordaining & ordering his owne
ceremonies in his own worſhip he neuer
committed to Angell prophet or Apoſtle,
but laid the gouernment thereof only vpon
Chriſt, and will not giue it to any other.
Now Chriſts gouernment for order
in the act of receving, we ſee to be a table
geſture dare we then forſake this and conforme
to your order of kneeling without
any warrant from the word of Chriſt, no
not ſo much as from an Angel, a prophet,
or an Apoſtle, or Apoſtolicall Churches?
            In the Inſtitution, the Ceremonies of
the ſacrament had the ſame warrant from
Chriſt that the ſignes had. If then it be
an infallible marke of Antichriſt to take
away or alter the Elementall ſignes, in
which ſpiritually Chriſt is Really exhibited;
how can you Iuſtifie the alteration
of the ceremoniall ſigne by which euery
faithfull beleeuer doth really receaue
him; are not both theſe ſigns together ſacramentally
vnited, to be thoſe verie viſible
& grauen Images, or moſt liuely and
reall repreſentions, whereby as by his ſelected
and predeſtinated inſtruments; God
the father doth giue Ieſus Chriſt his ſon,
& all his graces to his children according
to the meaſure of euery man, by the effectual
working of the holy ghoſt; yea, are
not theſe together (for without both nothing
can be effected) I meane the elementall
and ceremonial ſignes, by Gods

owne ordinance efficient (inſtrumentally)
to exhibit and receaue whole Chriſt and
all his benefits? and yet will you (O
what will not the Rebellious will of man
preſume to do?) againſt his direct Commandement
make vnto your ſelues other Images
and alter theſe? Hereto you reply and
ſay they are but ceremonies; and thereto
ſay I no more was the calf in Horeb or
thoſe in Dan and Bethel: yea theſe are
Chriſts Ceremonies, and the very Ark or
Cherubims were no more. Theſe are not
therefore Idle,or for ſtate and ornament,
or vpon any reſpect or conſideration to be
varîed, but purpoſely ordained and in the
moſt abſolute perfection of the divine wiſdome
in the verie inſtitution, for the help
and ſtrengthening of our weak faith, vſed
and eſtabliſhed: being therefore by Chriſt
vnited, and Ioyned with the word to make
a perfect ſacrament and a compleat maner
of pertaking ſpiritual food, how may they
by any humane authority ever bee altred?
doth not ſuch a graunt ſtrike mainly and
fundamentally at the authority of the
ſecond Commandement? yea is it not
high preſumption when the Lord offers
this heavenly food, not by peeces but in
fullnes, neither ſeuering his graces from
the ſubſtance, nor the ſubſtance from the
graces, but even whole Chriſt and all his
merits, for us to alter not the placing or
order onely, which himſelfe uſed (and
therefore being never repealed, thereby

eſtabliſhed) which yet were a fault foule
enough; but the very diſhes or ceremonies
themſelues, wherein this ſpirituall
food is prepared, tendred and received as
ſome in reſtraining the cup, others in altering
the very elements, and you in altering
the geſture (for ſo much doth conformity
profeſſe) wherewith it is received?
As therefore no one part of Chriſt
wrought our ſalvation, but whole Chriſt,
and as where there is no more but the
body and bloud of Chriſt received (if
that poſſibly could be, yea though really)
there is no Chriſt received, becauſe it is
the ſpirit or divine grace that quickneth
unto eternall life; and therefore the true
receiving muſt be ſpirituall and of whole
Chriſt, God and man, or elſe no benefit is
received: even ſo the viſible inſtruments
(corporall ſubſtances or bodily exerciſes)
which in the inſtitution our Lord united
for the exhibiting and receiving this ſpirituall
food, may not be ſeparated, omitted,
altered, or diſplaced. Seeing then the
Lord himſelfe for the effecting of this divine
and ſpirituall worke, hath ioyned
them together, is it not high preſumption
I ſay, to alter them, or put them aſunder:
            True it is, that the ſpirituall eye, hand,
and mouth, onely ſeeth, receiveth, and
pertaketh this heavenly food, and I dare
appeale to any who haue this eye to bee
iudge in this caſe, even which geſture is

moſt decent and ſeemly, that which out
bleſſed Lord and Saviour in the inſtitution
of the Sacrament made choyce of,
as the very beſt of all other whatſoever
(for I hope you will not deny but that if
he had known a better, I mean would he
ever haue had his Churches to haue a
better opinion of any other as more decēt,
or in any reſpect more uſeful or as fit,
he would either then haue choſen it, for
ſome of his diſciples to haue uſed, or elſe
left warrant in the word for our conformity
thereto) or whether that geſture in
caſe of deprivation be rather to be conformed
unto (for ſo much you inferre
notwithſtanding your diſtinctions of unwillingneſſe,
and I know not what) which
many hundred yeares after was deviſed
by Antichriſt: were his doctrines, doctrines
of Divels becauſe they were of
his owne deviſing, and are not his ceremonies
of the ſame diſpoſition? And yet
muſt we conforme unto them, or by your
own confeſſion, to the likeneſſe of them?
Is there no tranſgreſsion in this, haue we
no precept for things of good report? Doth
no commandement forbid all appearance
of evill, yea the uſe of any thing (not being
commanded by God, for then the abuſe
indeed is onely to bee taken away)
which hath been an inſtrument of Idolatry?
            This Sacrament was ordained, not to
nouriſh to a carnall or temporall life, but

to a holy and ſpirituall, that ſo in all the
occaſions and occurrences of this world,
we might liue by faith, and be made able
more and more to bring forth the fruits
thereof, it muſt of neceſſity therefore follow,
that this ceremonial ſigne or geſture,
or any thing eſſentially neceſſary in the
act of receiving this holy nouriſhment,
may not be carnall, or of humane deviſing,
but holy and ſpirituall, not onely in
the intention of the party (for ſo was
theirs to the Calfe) but of divine ordinance,
or elſe whatſoever the world eſteemes
of it, it is moſt abhominable unto
God, and dare we then conforme unto it?
ſo that what geſture ſoever is propoſed,
if Chriſt haue not ordained it, it is ſtrange
and vnlawfull, and ſo not being holy,
conformity thereto is hatefull, for none
can make a geſture for the ſacrament holy,
but onely he that may ordaine a ſacrament.
            As the elementall ſigne being delivered
hath relation to the ſpirituall thing ſignified,
ſo the ceremoniall ſigne or ſignificant
geſture in the act of receiving, hath relation
to the very true and aſſured partaking
of that heavenly feaſt and ſpirituall
food which is the thing ſignified, and
whereunto the Lord hath invited us as his
moſt welcome gueſts, and deerely beloved
friends, even to his owne Table to haue
communion and fellowſhip with him in
partaking of his divine nature in the act

of receiving this ſacrament. Therefore as
in caſes of extremitie to uſe other ſignes
herein, is erroneous, and wilfully to perſiſt
therein, is directly hereſie, and as the
Papiſts (in ordaining an other manner of
union or coniunction betwixt the elementall
ſignes and the ſpirituall things
ſignified, then the nature of them will
ſuffer) do deſtroy the Sacrament, and by
changing it into a ſacrifice, commit moſt
damnable Idolatry: ſo you in iuſtifying,
defending, or excuſing without warrant
from God, this geſture of kneeling as it is
urged) altogether diſproportionall to a
Feaſt, or Supper, and to a Table wherein
the viſible ſignes are ſet apart, and prepared
(though you waſh your hands neuer
ſo often, to giue teſtimony of your
innocency) doe giue ſentence againſt
Chriſt his own practiſe in the inſtitution,
the ſole preſident of the whole action, and
doe directly inferre that you hane a more
fit and decent geſture then he could finde
out and make choyce of.
            As the ſacrament admits no other coniunction
betwixt the viſible ſignes and
the things ſignified then a ſacramentall,
which is not ſubiect to ſence and reaſon,
but is meerly miſticall, ſecret and ſpirituall,
ſo the geſture by the ſame ordinance
of Iuſtitution is of the very ſame nature,
and may not without grievous ſin vpon
any terms or conſideration whatſoeuer▪
admit of any Innouation or alteration

though all the reaſon wiſdome, learning
common ſence and vnderſtanding in the
whole world do neuer ſo highly approoue
thereof, but muſt be miſticall,
ſecret, and ſpirituall perpetually, euen
hold proportion with and haue relation
vnto a table, and to a feaſt, and a great
ſupper ſet and to be communicated
thereon. Whoſoeuer therfore ſhall bnt ad
any other miſticall ſignification therevnto,
or tranſlate this to any other geſture
then was in the inſtitution ſeeme it
neuer ſo full of decencie, deuotion,
and humilitie, yea though the godly
themſelues proteſt they can as comfortably
receiue the ſacrament there with, as
with that of the inſtitution, yet ſhall they
be Iudged as thoſe that add vnto the ordinances
of Chriſt, and therfore ſhall receiue
an additiō of his indignation. Therefore
no geſture but a ſacramentall (and
ſuch in this caſe is the table geſture only,
which our Lord him ſelf in the inſtitutiō
being author thereof) may vpon any
termes or in any reſpect, in the act of receiving
be conformed vnto,
            Vnles you hold that Chriſts inſtitution
is herein defectiue, and therefore variable
without his own warrant, which we haue
for the alteration of the time) who but
that blaſphemous man of ſin and his louers
or freinds dare profeſſe, they haue
power to ordaine a ſacramentall geſture,
or any other eſſentiall propertie of a ſacrament,

for it that of the inſtitution by
Chriſt be ſufficient (and els you deny his
ſufficience in this) then any other is ſuperfluous
and therefore a humane addition?
which admitted to haue dominion in
one thing will be reſiſted in nothing. Is
not this a ſpeciall parte of the foundation
of our Comfort and ſtay in all occaſions
that whatſoeuer God hath done muſt
needs be good and iuſt, and to open our
mouthes againſt it, is to call in queſtion
his wiſdom, goodnes and truth, and yet
dare fleſh and bloud with voyces of
trumpets, or the flaſhing report of a
thundring Canon proclaime, that though
Chriſt haue done it, euen approued of a
table geſture onely, in all his diſciples in
the inſtitution and neuer gaue warrant
for any other, yet kneeling is better, more
ſignificant and decent; yea do not the beſt
of you by your vnwilling conformity
willfully admit imperfection and defection
in the geſture of the inſtitution ſeing
you haue no warrant from Chriſt to varie
from it?
            As the miſticall, ſpirituall and ſecret
Coniunction betweene the ſignes and
things ſignified, is not ſeene with the Corporall
eye, nor can poſſibly be apprehended
or demonſtrated by humane learning
wiſdom or ſence? ſo I do verely beleue
that they cannot choſe but grievouſlly err
(be they neuer ſo wiſe, learned, Iudicious,
zealous and holy) who take vpon them

to Indge and diſcerne the fitnes, decencie
and lawfulneſſe of this ſacramentall geſture,
or the geſture in the act of receiving
the ſacrament, by the iudgement of
reaſon and ſence, without warrant from
the word of God. For as the blind cannot
iudge of colours, no more can the
quickeſt or moſt learned and beſt qualified
ſence in the world, diſcerne or iudge
of that which is ſacramentall, or is of a
ſignificant or ſpirituall uſe in the ſacrament
or publick worſhip of God, but as
the blinde eſteemes every colour alike, ſo
doth ſence thinke every geſture indifferent,
onely the ſpirituall eye is able to
put this ſpirituall difference, and to diſcerne
of the miſtery or ſpirituall ſecreſie
of the Table geſture (which in and by the
inſtitution onely hath 
                  ••
               e ſeale and brand
of Chriſt ſet upon it) which muſt needes
be relatiue or reſpectiue, even according
to that which on the Table is tendred,
and by the gueſts or communicants receiued,
and ſo holds due Analogy, likeneſſe
or proportion therewith.
            There bee three things conſiderable
concerning this bleſſed ſacrament. Firſt,
that which goes before: ſecondly, the
action it ſelfe: thirdly, that which followes
after. Now as to omit any of theſe
is a grievous ſinne, ſo to diſplace them is
wicked and abhominable. As for example,
preparation muſt go before, & thankſgiving
is to come after, and meditation

properly belongs to the action it ſelfe: he
that leaues his preparation, and doth not
examine himſelfe till after the action, is
an unworthy receiver, and eates & drinks
iudgement; yet I confeſſe that theſe are
ſo united as they are inſeparable, and that
not any one of thē cā be alone in the faithfull,
but that they are all mixed one with
another, onely the ſoule is properly to
haue reſpect unto theſe in this manner and
order; and ſo accordingly we are to eſteeme
the fitteſt and moſt proper time
for preparation to be before, for meditation
to be in the time of the action, for
thankeſgiving after: which ſhewes, that
howſoever there is thankeſgiving in all
theſe, yet it cannot properly be ſaid, that
the whole action is a thankeſgiving, and
yet if it might, kneeling is not the fitteſt
geſture for thankeſgiving in this action.
            There be two ſorts of ſignes in this ſacrament.
Elementall that is bread and
wine, and Ceremoniall that is actions and
geſtures ſome of theſe concern, or are proper
to the paſt or alone, ſome to the people
alone, ſome common to both, and euery
one of theſe haue divine ſignifications peculier
and ſeuerall to themſelues euen
haue a miſticall and ſeetet Relation to an
inviſible grace or heavenly thing, not by
the appointment of any morall power,
but by the ordinance of God for all the
Churches in the world cannot make or
ordain any thing of Religious vſe to haue

a ſpirituall ſignification, this power is proper
and peculiar vnto Ieſus Chriſt ſo that
howſoeuer, wyſe, honeſt, learned and
godly men thinke this or that, may very
well haue ſuch a holy vſe and ſignification,
and that they can with as good deuotion
and heavenly meditation receaue
with this geſture of kneeling, as with a table
geſture, and from their owne experience
profeſſe as much, yet all this is no
more then Ieroboams pretence for the calues,
the inward ſubſtance he held and
eſtabliſhed, the outward ſubſtance of action
and ceremonie he mixed with theſe diuiſes
of his owne, which yet had by his
appointment, reference and relation to the
ſame heauenly thing in their intention
that the arke had, euen to be the viſible repreſentations
of God preſence, and not to
ſignifie or to haue relation to any other
thing els whatſoeuer. But yet the Lord
calls them deuils, and why becauſe they
did ſignifie any diueliſh thing? nothing
leſſe. But though they ſignified by common
conſent and publicke decree and
Eccleſiaſticall canon the preſence of God
euen Iehouah, and many with great deuotion
and feeling made that comfortable
vſe of them as they thought, euen as well
as if they had gon to Ieruſalē, yet becauſe
they were not warranted by the word of
the Lord, therfore they were deuills, & all
the deuotion that the people Imagined
they found themſelves ſtirred vp vnto by

their ſpirituall ſignification and myſticall
relation was meerly of a divelliſh diſpoſition,
leading from God. Seeing then not
man but Chriſt himſelf, is author both of
the Elementall and Ceremoniall ſignes,
and alſo vnited them ſacramentally together
in this myſticall action, that by our
worthy pertaking thereof we might haue
an inſeperable vnion and euerlaſting fellowſhip
with him, how dare we conform
to any alteration or innouation herein? If
we reiect the geſture which Chaiſt vſed
or approved in the inſtitution, what right
can wee plead to the ſacrament which
then and therewith he ordained?
            Chriſt vnites and ioynes himſelfe to
his own ordinances in the adminiſtration
of the word and ſacraments, not fantaſtically,
or doubtfully; but truly, really, and
verily, that partaking in ſincerity of them,
we might be aſſuredly conioyned unto
him, even as certainly as the elementall
ſignes are united unto us, and the ceremoniall
ſignes are performed by us. Let all
Chriſtians therefore who loue the Lord
Ieſus, and deſire to partake of this heavenly
and ſpirituall union with him, take
heed that they never yeeld to conforme
to a fantaſticall geſture, or doubtfull ceremony
in the act of receiving, eſpecially
having ſo eſſentiall a property as the geſture
hath, leſt by caſting off the Lords
geſture (or that geſture which our Lord
himſelfe cauſed his Apoſtles to uſe in the

inſtitution of the ſacrament) they caſt off
the benefit of the Lords ſacrament, or at
leaſt be found authour of an anti-geſture
which our Lord never warranted; and
therefore cannot to the conformers thereunto
be ever ſanctified.
            It is our happineſſe to bee united unto
Chriſt in the ſacrament, and is it our miſery
to cleaue faſt to that geſture which
in the inſtitution thereof was by all his
Apoſtles uſed, and by himſelfe bleſſed
for that very end? Here is ſpirituall meat,
come thou with ſpirituall hunger: here is
a holy table, come thou with a holy geſture:
and who can make a geſture holy,
or of holy uſe, but the Lord? Not that a
right geſture is ſufficient, unleſſe thou
come with a right heart alſo, examined
or prepared and purged, not onely from
Popery, Non-reſidency, Atheiſme, uſurie,
ambition, oppreſſion, murder, covetouſneſſe,
blaſphemy, whooredome, drunkenneſſe,
and other bloudy and abhominable
vices; but from every worldly luſt, or
fleſhly pleaſure, which thy ſoule longeth
after: that I doll I ſay muſt be thruſt out
before Chriſt cā be let in. It is but folly to
profeſſe thy faith in him, and haſt not repented
of that (I ſpeak not of their order
which of theſe is firſt, but of their inſeparation.)
All therefore who haue
not this ſpirituall hunger, and ſee not in
the elementall and ceremoniall ſignes this
holy union, haue ſome inviſible Idoll in

them, even ſome ſecret corruption or boſome
ſin which lies lurking in the heart,
the cuſtome or continuall fume whereof
hath ſo darkned the ſight, and flattered
the taſte of the ſoule, as it cannot diſcern
or iudge truly in this controverſie, but
eſteemes of one geſture as good as another,
that which Antichriſt deviſed, as
that which Chriſt approued & hallowed.
            As Gods worſhip even for the ſubſtance
of it, is partly inward and partly outward;
ſo this ſacrament being a ſpeciall part of
his worſhip, is of the ſame nature. The
inward ſubſtance is the ſpirituall things
ſignified: the outward ſubſtance or eſſence
is the viſible ſignes ſignifying or having
relation to thoſe ſpirituall things
ſignified. Now whatſoever in Gods worſhip
is conformed unto, as having relation
to theſe ſpirituall things ſignified
(whether it be purity or holineſſe of life,
or humility, devotion, or whatſoever)
muſt of neceſſity be cōfeſſed to be (in the
acceptation of theſe that ſo uſe it) a part
of Gods outward worſhip, which conſiſts
of outward and viſible things, as actions,
geſtures and ceremonies, ſignifying, and
having reference unto ſome inviſible
thing ſignified. True indeed, every thing
uſed in the worſhip of God, is not I confeſſe
of this nature, as our uſuall apparrell,
places of aſſembling, ſeats in thoſe places,
and the like, which therefore come
within the termes of indifferency and decency,

but to ſay and defend that any
one thing of ſignificant uſe in the divine
ſervice of God is either not of the eſſenc
of his outward worſhip, or is indifferent
and variable, is I dare ſay, a fault more
then remarkeable: yet true it is, that he
who makes ſuch a part of Gods worſhip
of this or that ſpirituall uſe and ſignification,
may verily vary and alter it. But as
no mortall or created power can giue the
ſpirituall gift or grace ſignified, and therfore
may not deviſe the thing ſignifying:
ſo if God haue approved and ſanctified
any action, geſture or ceremony of ſuch
holy ſignificancie, none but he can alter
the ſame, and therefore to hold that ſuch
a thing is or can poſsibly bee indifferent,
or may in any caſe be conformed unto, is
ſin. But the Table geſture in the act of
receiving the ſacrament of the Lords body
and bloud, is of divine ſignification,
aſſuring us that as verily as we take and
partake of thoſe viſible ſignes, ſo verily in
that very action we by faith take and partake
of the very body and bloud of
Chriſt ſignified and repreſented, yea truely
exhibited in and by them. And this
geſture onely was hallowed by the Lord
in the inſtitution of the Supper, in the action
of all his Apoſtles, who were the types
of all communicants to the end of the
world, to that very end and purpoſe:
therefore none but Chriſt may alter it,
who was authour of it, and to hold that

it is variable (whatſoever ſence and reaſon
babble for it) is a fearefull ſin.
            As the inward ſubſtance of the ſacrament,
and the outward ſignes elementall
or ceremoniall, having relation thereunto,
even the whole ſacramentall action is
holy and heavenly (which nothing can
poſsibly be, but that which is of divine
inſtitution) ſo let thy care in partaking
thereof bee faithfull and zealous according
to knowledge and godlineſſe.
Look not ſo to the inward ſubſtance as
thou neglecteſt the outward ſignes and
ceremonies, as if divine reverence belonged
not to them, being Gods divine inſtruments
or holy myſteries, and ſo might
be varied according to the will & pleaſure,
or determination of man. Neither
yet let it ſuffice, that thou commeſt with a
right geſture, unleſſe thou come with a
right heart alſo, leſt in ſtead of receiving a
bleſsing, thy heart be hardned, and thou
goe away with a curſe: for even as not to
uſe Gods ordinances with divine reverence,
is the mother of Apoſtaſie and Atheiſme,
ſo to uſe mans ordinances with
divine or holy reverence in Gods divine
ſervice (as every thing of divine ſignification
ought) is the father of ſuperſtition
and hereſie: to conforme therfore to a ceremony
of divine ſignification, not being
eſtabliſhed by God, muſt needs be wicked
and ſinfull.
            As no perſon may meddle with the adminiſtration

of a ſacrament, but ſuch as
are called by God in the word thereunto;
ſo may not they who are truely called of
God, preſſe to any thing therein, but what
the Lord hath in his word required or
commanded. For howſoever it is God
onely that giues the ſpirituall grace, or
heavenly things ſignified, ſo yet he is pleaſed
to uſe the miniſtery of man in the diſpenſation
thereof by thoſe meanes or inſtruments
which himſelfe hath appoynted;
and as wee cannot haue the bleſſing
but from him, nor from him by any other
meanes then thoſe which himſelfe
hath appoynted: ſo to receiue the ſignes
at the hands of ſuch as he hath not ſent
or called, or to conforme to, or approue
of any ceremonies of ſignificancie in the
worſhip of God (though it bee at the
hāds or by the adviſe of ſuch as are truly
called of God) which himſelfe hath not
ordained, is to be convocated or gathered
together againſt the Lord, as Corah,
(though not every one in the ſame degree)
for as the beſt miniſters in the
world can exhibite and giue no more but
the outward and viſible ſignes (and yet
even in ſuch their exhibition the inward
and inviſible thing and grace ſignified is
given by God through Chriſt by the effectuall
working of the holy Ghoſt) ſo to
profeſſe that either they haue power to
giue more then the ſigne, or haue warrant
to deviſe any ſigne to repreſent or exhibit,

or to receiue grace by, is meere and
high preſumption againſt the Lord▪ Conformity
therefore for the approbation
thereof, muſt needs be abhominable, upon
what tearmes, or in what caſe ſoever
it bee.
            Let vs content our ſelues with the
holy Counſel and determination of God
concerning the right adminiſtration of
this ſacrament, euen whatſoeuer is of miniſteriall
elementall or ceremoniall vſe
therein, concerning all which the inſtitution
is without all exception, and ſeing it
was to be the verie patterne and preſident
to all Churches for euer (as Chriſt his
precept Doe this vndeniable includes) let
vs neuer conforme to any thing of the nature
of any of theſe therein, vnles wee haue
from the patterne or from ſome other
part of the word, Chriſts warrant ſo to
doe. And howſoeuer wee ſhall hereby
procure great dammage to our ſelues, yet
ſeing nothing that is in the fleſh (or is not
of Gods own ordaining and appointment
can poſſibly pleaſe God, let vs remember
it is farre leſſe danger to offend thoſe, that
for not conforming to their Canons can
but depriue vs of our goods and comfortable
conditions, expoſing vs to open diſgrace
and contempt, or at worſt can but
take a way our liues, then to offend him
that can do all this, & then caſt our bodies
and ſouls into hell. Let no mā therefore by
conformity to kneeling intimate diſability

in the inſtitutor, or inſufficiencie in
the inſtitution: for either is a blaſphemous
ſin.
            He that is ſole author of the ſacrament,
is ſole author of all the ceremonies and
ſignificant ſigns therein, either concerning
miniſter or people: for he that is the ſole
author of the bleſſing muſt needs be ſole
author of the means and inſtrument wherby
he wil giue it: therefor ſeing the Lord
onely giues the ſpiritual bleſſing ſignified,
repreſented, and verily exhibited by the
geſtures and ceremonies therein, and his
word neither by precept nor example
giues any warrant for any other geſture in
the act of receaving then that of the Inſtitution,
(which on all ſides is graunted
to be a table geſture) how dare wee by
conformitie varie from Chriſts owne practiſe
without Chriſts owne warrant.
            It is ſaid and that truly (but how fitly
and wiſely let others iudge) that God is
the author of kneeling euen in his divine
worſhip, therefore we ought to conform
vnto it in the act of receiving. I anſwere
that God is the author of images euen in
his diuine worſhip as the Arke and Cherubims,
yea differing from the firſt inſtitution
as the braſen ſerpent, therefore wee may
conforme to the calues at Dan and Bethell
which are but images and conſecrated
onely to his worſhip and diuine ſervice,
but either let the Lord be God in the order
of the outward ceremonies as well as

in the inward ſubſtance of his worſhip, or
if you will conforme to Ball in the geſture
or in the order, follow him euen in all, for
God is the God of the order, as well as
the God of the ſubſtance of his worſhip
(Inward or outward) let him be therfore
either all in all, or els not God at all.
            By the word of God and by it onely
the miniſter knowes what to deliuer and
what not, how to deliuer and how not,
to whom to deliuer and to whom not;
the gueſts alſo or communicants doe
thereby vnderſtand, at whoſe hands to
receaue and at whoſe not, what to receue
and what not, and with what geſture to
receaue, and what geſture not to conforme
vnto in the act of receiving: for the word
of God is the life or ſoule (as I may ſay)
of the ſacrament, and that not onely in generall,
but even of euery particular, of
abſolute neceſſity required therein (as a
geſture is) ſo that whatſoeuer is ordained
to be of holy vſe therein (as the geſture
in the act of receauing is) if it receaue no
life or quickning warrant from the word
of God, it is abſolutely dead, or vncleane,
and defiles, and therfore may not vpon any
terms be conformed vnto, as good and
lawfull.
            The word of inſtitution ſets forth firſt
the precept of Chriſt, Doe this: ſecondly
the promiſe of Chriſt, This is my body:
Thirdly, the practiſe of the Apoſtles, having
relation to the comandement or precept

in their obedience, and in their faith
having reference to the word of promiſe,
now this being the type of all the true adminiſtrations
of this ſacrament to the end
of the world doth plainly and vndeniably
teach this truth that what ſoeuer is of abſolute
neceſſity in the ſacrament (as a geſture
in the act of receauing is) muſt, both
in miniſter and people haue relation to the
precept of Chriſt that ſo it may be donne
in obedience and alſo to the promiſe of
Chriſt, that ſo it may be donne in faith or
els it is abſolutely ſin? and then, though
kneeling which in that act & manner as it
is vrged hath neither precept nor promiſe
of Chriſt would convert Turke and Pope
too, yet I hope you wil confeſſe we ought
not to conforme thereto;
            Is kneeling in the act of receaving the
ſacrament of the altar, the geſture of the
maſſe? let all that abhorre the groſſe Idolatry
of that, neuer conforme to the likenes
of this (vnleſſe they haue diſpenſation
from the ſcripture ſo to doe) becauſe in
ſimilitude though not in intention it holds
proportion with, and hath Relation to the
Coporall and Reall preſence locally. Yea
let all faithfull Chriſtians holde themſelues
onely to the name and geſture and to what
ſoeuer els in the inſtitution and word of
God is eſtabliſhed, and was therein by
our bleſſed Lord ſanctified and ordained
to be of perpetuall vſe. unles him ſelfe
in the word ſhall teach otherwiſe.
            
               
The ſacraments (even whatſoever is ſacramentall
were ordained of God, not to
giue any novelty or new thing by way of
tran- or con-ſubſtantiatiō, or like humane
deviſe, but having reſpect to our weakneſſe,
to bee a helpe unto us in ſealing up
that righteouſneſſe which is by faith, even
to increaſe that aſſurance of faith,
which we haue through the word in a
greater meaſure and degree then is had
by the miniſtery thereof (let every one
labour to haue the feeling of this uſe) if
then it be dangerous to add unto the doctrine
of the word, being the hand writing
of the King, even his moſt gracious
pardon for all our ſins and offences, and
his patent alſo for our liuelihood and
hope of eternall life. Surely it cannot in
any reſpect be leſſe dangerous (ſeeing nothing
paſſes by the writing alone without
the ſeale (I ſpeake herein after the manner
of men) to make (or conforme to) any
innovation in the Kings ſeale, even in any
thing which is of ſacramentall inſtitution,
being ſpeciall and effectuall parts (inſtrumentally)
of our ſpirituall Evidences,
or aſſurance which is by faith through
the word. But if ſuch cōformity be committed
againſt our knowledge. I leaue it
to the iudgement of the godly learned,
whether the wilfull perſiſting therein doe
not (though not alter the outward eſſentiall
forme, yet) diminiſh and leſſen every
time more and more the powerfull

effect, and comfortable benefit of this
bleſſed and moſt holy ſacrament. For ſeeing
in the inſtitution this ceremoniall
ſigne hath relation to that ſpirituall ſupper
and moſt heavenly food, or divine
nouriſhment, it is moſt apparant to all
that will not winke leſt they ſhould perceiue,
that in the very manner of a table
geſture, there is by intimation a grounded
expectancie and good aſſurance of partaking
that holy and divine nouriſhment
viſibly repreſented unto us, a thing which
in the matter the Lord ſaw to be needful
for his bleſſed Apoſtles, and therefore
purpoſely cauſed them to uſe this very
manner to be a helpe herein unto them,
and ſo to every communicant though never
ſo learned and well inſtructed.
            This ſacrament is called a communion,
ſealing up unto us our holy communion
with God in Chriſt, by the holy Ghoſt,
and our fellowſhip with all the Saints &
faithfull children of God. Can there bee
(by any poſsible meanes) therefore any
good diſcretion or decencie, humilitie or
devotion, to leaue a Table geſture which
inferres thus much, and in this ſence is
ſo often mentioned in the ſcripture, and
conform to another, or the likeneſſe therof,
which inferres and intimates communion
with Antichriſt and his followers, or
well-willers, as kneeling doth? Whereof
therefore there is not onely no mention
in the holy Scriptures, but continuall intimations

both in this and in all things elſe
of religious uſe to the contrary.
            I confeſſe it is very true, that neither
the viſible ſignes repreſenting, nor the ceremoniall
ſignes or geſtures giving or receiving,
haue any naturall or inherent
power, efficacie, or vertue to convey any
manner or meaſure of ſpirituall grace to
the receiver more then kneeling, or any other
geſture or ſignes whatſoever; but the
Lord was pleaſed to ſelect and make
choyce of theſe before all other, and
ſo it was his very will (which concludes
nothing without conſulting with his wiſedom
and loue) to make theſe efficient (inſtrumentally)
hereunto. As therefore our
Lords uſing the bread and wine in the inſtitution,
and never approving of any other,
made them the onely viſible ſignes,
and no other by any meanes may in the
act of giving or receiving, be conformed
unto, ſo his very uſing a table geſture in
the inſtitution, and never giving warrant
in the ſcripture for any other, is a direct
commandement to uſe this, and a plaine
prohibition to conforme to any other.
            If a table and viſible ſignes thereon, be
neceſſary in the adminiſtration of the ſacrament,
then the geſture of neceſſity both
in giving and receiving, muſt haue reference
thereunto: if there bee a feaſt for
the gueſts invited to that table to eate
and drinke that proviſion which is prepared
& ſet thereon, then a feſtivall geſture

muſt needs be moſt ſeemly, as having relation
to a feaſt (even as at weddings
wedding garments) yea if it had been left
to the wiſedome and diſcretion of the
Church, a table geſture by the naturall
Law of Correlatiues muſt needs of all other
be moſt fit and decent. Indeed ſeeing
the Papiſts haue altered the Table to an
Altar, and the feaſt of God unto man, to
a ſacrifice by men unto God, they haue
very wiſely enioyned ſuch a geſture, as
may hold correſpondency with, and hath
a moſt fit relation to an Altar, and to a
ſacrifice thereon. Of all the geſtures
therefore in the world, the likeneſſe of
theirs is moſt unlawfull for us to conform
unto.
            As the heavenly things ſignified, are
never received, if the earthly ſignes or inſtrumentall
meanes be neglected: ſo if the
ceremoniall ſigne or geſture, wherewith
the holy elements are received, bee wittingly
innovated, and againſt our knowledge
perverted from the order of the
inſtitution, ſuch conformity hath no promiſe
of a bleſsing from God; continuance
or cuſtome therein muſt needs therefore
harden the heart, which of all iudgements
and curſes in this world, is the moſt grievous.
            
               Ieroboam and the Iewes never purpoſed
or intended in their calues or other
abominations of Molech, Aſhtaroh, Baal or
the like, to alter the ſubſtance of Gods

inward worſhipe, no nor yet to varie from
the maine end or intent of his outward
worſhippe, which was to knit the hart
more and more vnto God, and therefore
theſe or any other of their images were nor
repreſentations of any other Trinitie or
perſon then is therein but onely in a dyuers
manner) of one and the ſame Iehovah,
for conſidering the naturall diſpoſition
and diuers education or cuſtomes of
thoſe ſeuerall nations with whom they
were mixed and deſirous to draw them
to the true religion and ſervice of God
and ſalvation of their ſoules they inclined
ſome thing to the ceremonies and inventions
of theſe heathens in the actions and
geſtures of Gods outward worſhip, but
were moſt carefull to haue the doctrine
of the inward ſubſtance and ſpirituall ſignifications
concerning faith in the Meſſias
to come preſerued ſound, namely to
loue the Lord with all their heart and
with all their ſoule and to thinke no
thing too deare for him, whole Ryuers of
oyle, thowſands of Bullocks and Ramms,
yea the firſt borne of their children, and
there was neuer people killed no nor ſilenced
or impriſoned for teaching this
inward ſubſtance, though hee were a ſon
of thunder, neuer ſo zealous and fervent
therein, but onely for refuſing conformitie
to theire ſtate, ceremonies, wherein
yet many learned prophets, and reuerend
Leuits, and graue preiſts proteſted there

was nothing intended, but the very ſame
decencie, humillitie, vnity, and ſtirring vp
of the heart to deuotion, which the Lord
aimed at & required, and diuers of them
did vow vpon their ſaluation (I ſpeake
by way of ſuppoſition) that they having
had experience of both ceremonies or
formes of worſhip, haue found as much
inward comfort and heavenly conſolation,
and haue been rapt up with as divine
meditations in the ceremonies of Baal,
and of the Calues, as in thoſe at Ieruſalem,
and they yeeld a ſufficient reaſon, which
will giue a ſatisfaction to any honeſt and
indifferent heart: for ſay they, it is true
that theſe ceremonies & geſtures in their
originall among the heathens, were Idolatrous,
damnable, and divelliſh, for they
uſed them to other gods, and not to the
true God. Now we haue put it into the
Magiſtrates head when he conſulted for
the ſetling of the ſtate in peace, that the
retaining of theſe being purged from
their Idolatrous abuſe, and the ſubſtance
of the worſhip of the true God, being
preſerved ſound, and ioyned with them,
and the myſticall ſignifications of Gods
ordinances being transferred unto theſe;
will be ſo farre off from confirming them
in their old ſuperſtitions, as it will proue
the onely meanes in all learned probability
and wiſe experience to make them all
abſolute proſolites. But to this you ſay,
that notwithſtanding ſuch pretences, their

ſin is moſt fearfull and damnable, becauſe
they had the law of God as well direct
for every ceremony and geſture in the
outward ſervice of God, as either for the
intent of the outward, or for the ſubſtance
of the inward worſhip: and God
never left or referred any action, geſture,
or ceremony of religious uſe, eſpecially in
his divine ſervice to Moſes, David, or Salomon,
but referred his Church ſtill to the
patterne which onely by the revealed
word was made known unto them, and
therefore though it be never ſo true that
they intended to ſerue God in theſe
things, and had very conſiderately▪ and
painfully purged them (in a deviſed purgatory)
from their black-Mootes hue; yet
not being warranted by his word, they
offered their ſervice in them not unto
God, but unto Divels. For the Lord is
not therefore God unto men, becauſe they
ſuppoſe him ſo to be, or verily intend to
eſteeme of him thus or ſo, but becauſe by
his word, which is as true as his own maieſty,
he hath manifeſted and made himſelfe
known to be ſo; yea whatſoever doctrine
concerning God in eſſence, nature,
perſon, property, or attribute, is other
then the word doth teach, is an Idoll of
their owne heart, a viſion of their owne
braine, an imagination of their owne deviſing,
yea though all the learning and
wiſedom in the world do never ſo well
intend therby, or religiouſly eſteem therof.

Even ſo this geſture, or that ceremony in
divine worſhip, is not therefore done unto
God, becauſe in conformity thereto it
is ſimply and ſeriouſly intended to doe it
onely unto him; but if it be not warranted
by the word, it is wicked and Divelliſh,
what good intent ſoever be in it.
            Hereto the better ſort of theſe graue and
reverend Rabbins reply and tell you, that
though it be true, that the law is as direct
for the ceremonie as for the ſubſtance,
and that the Church is as ſtrictly
tied to the direction and warrant of the
word for every one of them as for the
moſt fundamentall poynt in the doctrine
of Iustification, or the ſubſtance or inward
worſhip, and may not vary one iot therefrom,
no not in any thing whatſoever,
without warrant thereof; yet ſeeing it is
not in their choyce to uſe or not to uſe
them, but a very great neceſſitie is layd
upon them by the Magiſtrate and the
Church, who for ſome ſecret cauſes, and
State conſiderations, haue in a moſt ſolemne
Convocation or Aſſembly, conſiderately
by an vniverſall conſent determined
the lawfulneſſe and fitneſſe of the
ceremonies of theſe golden Calues, and
therefore haue decreed, that whoſoever
will not conforme thereunto, ſhall
be (after Canonicall admonition) deprived,
and no longer ſuffered to miniſter
before the Lord. In this caſe of extremi
               
                  •
               y
therefore utrum horum? yea ſeeing the

Magiſtrate profeſſeth open deteſtation of
all manner of Idolatry in theſe things,
and the Church condemnes all Idolatrous
or ſuperſtitious uſe of them, and they
themſelues underſtand the uſe of them
in a ſincere ſence (which qualifies whatſoever
can be obiected againſt them.) Therfore
rather then they will be contentious
and breake (yea or diſturbe) the quiet
peace of the holy Church, and leaue their
flockes and charges ſo deere unto them,
unto woolviſh or ambitious or carnall
teachers, and ſo be deprived of their miniſtery,
as deere unto them as their liues,
they are perſwaded from theſe grounds,
that in this caſe they may very warrantably
undergoe conformity, doing it unwillingly,
as the Lord in whoſe preſſence
they ſtand, beares them witneſſe, and bearing
it as a heavy burthen till it pleaſe
the Lord to viſit his Churches with his
ſalvation, and to take from the ſhoulders
thereof this heavy load, which even bends
the backe, and at length will breake the
necke thereof. For prevention whereof,
they will teach and maintaine, preſerue
and defend the ſubſtance and foundation
ſound and ſincere from error and corruption:
and therfore though the Magiſtrate
and Church do grivouſly ſin in cōmanding,
yet they in conformity unto them,
are meere patients, and not agents, and
therefore in ſo doing incline rather to
martyrdome for God then rebellion againſt

God. Hereunto you reioyne and
tell them in louing (yea in moſt wiſe and
learned termes, that if their caſe had been
indeed as yours is, they had well ſayd,
and moſt ſufficiently anſwered, and all the
Vniverſities in the whole world could never
haue confuted them, but they having
ſo direct lawes for all manner of ceremonies
of religious uſe, and direct prohibitions
againſt any other, though an Angel
from heaven ſhould ioyne with the Magiſtrate,
they ought rather to haue followed
that holy, remarkeable, and matchleſſe
preſident of their zealous fellow-Prieſts,
and learned Levies, and other devout
and iuſt perſons, who had ſet their
very hearts to ſeeke the Lord, and with
them to haue left their ſuburbs and poſſeſſions,
their livings and free-holds, and
ſo to haue gone to Iuda and Ieruſalem to
haue offered to the Lord God of their fathers,
according to the warrant of the
word, and ſo to haue ſtrengthened the
kingdom both with peace and proſperity;
whereas the varying from the warrant
of the word in the doctrine and practiſe
of theſe ceremonies of religious uſe
in the worſhip of God, hath the cleane
contrary effect, and ſtrongly, yea ſtrangely
weakens the kingdom, and Church by
breeding diverſity of opinions, ſchiſmes,
diviſions, oppoſitions, heart-burnings and
grudges, with infinite other muddy perturbations,
according to the variety of

humor (which men experienced in fiſhing
can tell how to make uſe of, & therefore
are content to foreſee and further:)
therefore conformity in ſuch a caſe,
though never ſo unwillingly undergone,
yea though with all reaſonable and wiſe
conſiderations tempered, and iudicious
expoſitions, and honeſt intentioms qualified,
is ſo farre off from looking after, or
inclining unto martyrdom, as it opens the
very wideſt gate to mutinie and rebellion
both againſt God and man. If then wee
haue as direct warrant for the lawfulneſſe
of a table geſture, as ever the Iewes had
for their worſhip at Ieruſalem, and that
the word of the Goſpell bee as ſure and
certaine being ſpoken by Chriſt and his
bleſſed Spirit, as that under the Law
(which it cannot be, unleſſe it giue as certaine
and ſound directions for the ceremonies
under the Goſpell, as that by
Moſes did for the ceremonies under the
Law: For if it bee an unſure word in the
ceremonie, how can we be ſure, it is ſure
in the ſubſtance?) then (I ſay) to erre
from the practiſe of Chriſt in the inſtitution,
without a direct precept or warrant
from the ſure word of God, though you
haue the ſame holy intent in ſuch geſtures,
and the like reverend reſpect to
ſuch ceremonies as you haue to Gods
own ordinances, yet conformity thereto,
even in them that do it ignorantly, is ſinfull,
but in thoſe that doe it wilfully againſt

their knowledge, it is dangerous to
the State and Church, and breeds carnall,
worldly, yea divelliſh diſpoſitions and
practiſes in ſuch hearts when time and
opportunity ſhall call for the effectes
thereof.
            Will any man be content that his liuely
Image ſhall in any part thereof bee defaced?
The whole action of this ſacrament
both in ſignes and ceremonies, and not
ſome parcels thereof without the reſt, is
the moſt liuely Image and repreſentation
of the moſt precious body and bloud of
our Lord Ieſus, as God the Father hath
ordained and appoynted to exhibit and
giue it to be the ſpirituall nouriſhment
of our ſoules (even meat and drinke indeed)
unto eternall life. Suppoſe the geſture
be but the meaneſt part of this Image
of Chriſt, yet if without his warrant
it be altered from the firſt inſtitution (the
very patterne for the pourtraying of all
others afterwards) is there not iuſt cauſe
of offence? And dare any, by conformity
to any alteration therein, profeſſe & vow
that though it doe directly differ in this
and that, yet if we thinke ſo, then it is his
very true Image, though ſomething bee
ſuperfluous, or out of the firſt order? Is
not every errour (though not in the ſame
degree) oppoſite to truth, and every defect
contrary to perfection?
            As there is difference betwixt the ſubſtance
of the ſacrament (Chriſt Ieſus our

Lord) and the fruits and benefits of the
ſacrament (our holineſſe, ſanctification,
and redemption) ſo I confeſſe there is
difference betwixt the elementall ſignes
(bread and wine) and the ceremoniall
ſignes (the actions and geſtures) but as
the ſubſtance, and the benefits or vertues
are inſeparable (for where the one is in
truth, the other is alſo in power, and that
not in hypocriſie, though perhaps in marvellous
great weakneſſe) ſo the ſignes exhibiting
or giving the ſubſtance, or in
which the ſubſtance is given or exhibited,
and the ſigne in the act of receiving
or partaking the ſubſtance, or by and with
which the ſubſtance is taken and received,
may not be parted, changed, nor diſplaced,
leaſt by degrees the ſacrament it
ſelfe be perverted: for he that inſtituted
one, inſtituted all, even whatſoever is
ſacramentall: and a geſture in the act of
receiving is as eſſentially neceſſary, as the
viſible ſignes in giving or delivering, I
meane, there is as abſolute neceſsity of
that as of theſe. Now therefore, if you
can ſhew vs the like divine warrant for
kneeling, or any other geſture in the act
of receiving, as all the Chriſtian world
ſees there is for a table geſture, even by
our Saviours owne practiſe, and moſt
holy and matchleſſe example in the behaviour
of all his Apoſtles, we will moſt
willingly and readily conforme unto you
therein: but if heaven and earth (true

Churches, nor falſe or counterfet Churches)
cannot poſsibly produce ſuch warrant,
conformity thereunto is not onely a
moſt heynous ſin in all that command it,
but a fearefull tranſgreſsion in all that
wittingly, though unwillingly yeeld unto
it.
            The geſture (as it is commanded and
uſed in Gods ſervice) in the act of receiving,
is either holy or unholy (though in
civill actions it may be indifferent) and
all holineſſe comes from the Lord (for
the Lords uſing or commanding any
thing, though it were never ſo vile and
uncleane before, makes it holy, and his
not uſing or commanding any thing,
makes it in his worſhip and ſervice abhominable
and unholy, what reverend opinion
ſoever men, yea good men, haue
thereof.) Either then you muſt proue
that kneeling as it is urged in this act of
receiving, comes from God, and was uſed
or commanded by him, or elſe it is unholy
(though all the holy men in the world
ſay to the contrary) and then conformity
thereto is unholy and ſinfull.
            Not onely the outward ſignes and viſible
ſubſtance or elements, but the very
outward forme, and viſible order alſo of
the ſacrament, even a table geſture, was
ſanctified by Chriſt, and being never repealed,
nor any other by divine warrant
eſtabliſhed (the ſacrament being perpetuall,
and a geſture in the act of receiving

therein eſſentially neceſſary) muſt needs
be of divine inſtitution (for it was once
divine, a face of braſſe cannot deny it) unleſſe
therefore you can proue it by divine
warrant repealed, or ſome other commanded,
it is perpetually to be obſerved,
yea no other in any caſe, or upon any
condition to be conformed unto.
            The Church may not (though civill
authority for ſome urgent or weightie
occaſions neerely and deeply concerning
the welfare of the whole State, do approue
thereof) appoynt Beefe or Lambe,
Bacon or Veale to be uſed in ſtead of
bread in the act of receiving the Sacrament,
nor Beare, Ale, Milke, or Water in
ſtead of Wine (the fruit of the vine) no
though wee hold and teach the doctrine
of the inviſible things ſignified never ſo
ſoundly and zealouſly, and free all the
poynts thereof from Popiſh Apoſtaſie, or
other humane abſurdity. And may any
pervert the order of delivering or receiving
theſe unchangeable ſignes without a
command from God, as to deliver firſt
the wine and then the bread (may Chriſtians
in caſes of extremity conforme to
ſuch a Canon?) or to vary frō the geſture
of the inſtitution either in forme or in order
without a divine warrant? hath not
the Lord alwayes reſerved this honour of
deviſing all the parts, whether actions, geſtures,
or ceremonies of his outward worſhip
to himſelfe? And though hee haue

given many high prerogatiues and very
great preferments unto his deputies and
vice gerents, yet hee never imparted this
to any creature, but was alwayes very iealous
of it, as the very top of his ſupremacie:
yea doe they not by a direct conſequence
deſtroy or deny this eſſentiall property
or attribute of God, who hold and
teach that the Magiſt
                  •
               ate and Church
may deviſe the viſible parts, or actions
and geſtures of Gods outward worſhip,
even thoſe that are of abſolute neceſsity
therein (as a geſture in the act of receiving
is?) is not this the very proper and peculiar
obiect of his burning and conſuming
iealouſie? Let them be conſumed and deſtroyed
then that herein riſe up againſt
him. Conformity therefore in this caſe is
the ready way to deſtruction.
            It is obiected, that the whole action of
the Sacrament is a th
                  •
               nkſgiving and kneeling
(being the fitteſt geſture for thankeſgiving)
doth beſt beſeeme the whole
action, and therefore alſo this particular
act of receiving. The whole action cannot
be ſaid properly to be a thankſgiving
though it may be ſafely acknowledged,
that in the whole action, and every part
thereof there is thankeſgiving; but the
ſpeciall end of this Sacrament is to work
in us a more liuely feeling of our union
with God, the increaſe whereof he conferres
in this Sacrament, and onely for
the effecting thereof did ordaine it: and

howſoever he would not haue his Diſciples
unthankfull in the very act of receiving
ſo ineſtimable a bleſsing, yet in his
wiſedom (which is ſufficient for our warrant,
and a plaine proofe that this obiection
is but a drugg of human wiſedom) he
conſecrated a table geſture for them in
the act of receiving, and not kneeling or
any other geſture proper to thankſgiving.
I confeſſe, to be unthankfull is to be unfaithfull:
but as the proper time for preparation
goes before, and according to
the truth and meaſure thereof, ſo is the
bleſsing▪ ſo the fitteſt time for thankeſgiving
comes after the act of receiving the
benefit and bleſsing: and according to the
truth and meaſure thereof, ſo is the true
comfort and ſpirituall conſolation. Let
the practiſe of Chriſt ſtop the mouth of
babbling 
                  •
               ence and iangling reaſon: and
howſoever in reſpect of the ſoule theſe
duties are ſo mixed, as they cannot be one
without another, but are inſeparably united,
yet there is a diſtinct propriety of
time peculiar to every one of them: the
ſenſible manifeſtation whereof giues true
denomination to the proper manner of
their ſeaſonable exiſtence and viſible ſubſiſting.
Howſoever therefore the ſoule in
one and the ſame act and inſtant, can
heare, ſee, receiue, taſte, and be thankfull,
yet cannot the body poſsibly in one and
the ſame act and inſtant, performe and uſe
proper and fit geſtures to manifeſt and

expreſſe the ſame: and if it could, yet the
patterne of the inſtitution proclaimes ſilence
to all the wit and learning in the
world, and therefore kneeling cannot bee
the fitteſt geſture in the act of receiving,
no though it ſhould be granted that the
whole action were a thankeſgiving.
            Nothing can poſſibly be conioyned or
united further, or in any other manner or
meaſure then the nature thereof will admit.
As therefore you moſt iuſtly and
religiouſly refuſe conformity to the reall
preſence either by tranſubſtātiatiō or conſubſtantiation,
becauſe the nature of the
ſignes cannot poſſibly admit it, and there
is nothing but the bare opinions, and
Canons or precepts of men to warrant it?
euen ſo in the act of receaving no geſture
in the world can poſſibly in the nature
thereof hold proportion with, or haue relation
vnto our ſpirituall coniunction with
Chriſt and Communion and fellowſhip
with the Saints, in the pertaking of this
ſpirituall meat and drinke prepared and
ſet on the holy table in this divine action,
but onely a table geſture, and therfore
wee alſo, (according to your example in
the outward ſubſtance) do iuſtly refuſe
to conforme to any other geſture in the
outward Ceremonie.
            Reaſon muſt not be our guide in matters
of Religion, or in ceremonies of Religious
vſe in the publicke worſhip of God, for
take it at the verie beſt, without paſſion

partialitie or preiudice, yea excellently
quallified with learning, wiſedom and experience,
yet is it ſtarke blinde in theſe
things and will verily miſleade vs. In
theſe controverſies therefore concerning
conformitie wee muſt to the law and the
Teſtimonie, and whatſoeuer hath not
warrant there from, by Gods owne doom
hath no true light in it, or divine warrant
for it, but black darknes abydes vpon it
for euer. What Angellical transformation
ſoeuer therefore you provide for your
ſignificant kneeling, you ſee from whence
ir comes and whither it goes, and therefore
in that manner as it is vrged, we dare
not vpon any terms or with any limitation
conforme vnto it.
            The coniunction in the ſacrament is
not ſencible, but meerly miſticall, ſpirituall
& inviſible: yet as the ſignes, and alſo
the ceremonies therein (not by nature
or the ordinance and wiſe diſcretion or
learned pollicie of man but by the ſole inſtitution
and will of Ieſus Chriſt) haue relation
to the things ſignified which are
heavenly and ſpirituall, and not to any deuiſed
vnity, pretended humility, or manifeſtation
of our corporall ſubiection to
the civil magiſtracie, (yea to brand them
with ſuch carnal relations or worldly ſignifications
is the verie high way to Apoſtacie)
euen ſo theſe heavenly and ſpiritual
things by the ſame law of inſtitutiō,
haue Relation to thoſe ſigns onely which

are ſet apart by Chriſt, and not to any other;
yea to holde that they either haue,
or poſſibly can haue relation to any other
ſignes either deuiſed by man; or not ordained
by God for this verie end, is the
next way to hereſie and Atheiſme. For the
things ſignified and the things ſignifiyng
(either in the act of geving or in the act
of receaving) are verely vnited by this
mutuall relation or relatiue coniunction,
which no mortall power can ordeine or
alter, he that hath power to ordeine the
relatiue▪ onely hath power to ordeine the
correlatiue, I meane he that hath power
to giue the ſpirituall things ſignified, onely
hath power to ordein ſings or ceremonies
ſignifying or having relation therevnto,
either in the act of giuing or receving. For
mortall power therfore to ordaine any
action or geſture of ſpiritual ſignification,
is ſpirituall adultery, and moſt groſſe abhomination.
Either proue then that the
ſign or Ceremonie you ſo eagerly preſſe vs
vnto, is in this verie action ordained of
God, and ſo hath a promiſe of a bleſſing
from him, or els wee dare not conforme
vnto it though for ſuch 
                  •
               efu
                  •
               all wee receiue
nothing but Curſes from you.
            As the elementall ſigns (bread and
wine) receiue their heauenly vertue and
ſpirituall power onely from Chriſt, and
now differ from all other of the ſame kind
being truly and verely changed into holy
and diuine foode, not in their nature and

ſubſtance (for then they could not be
ſigns if they were changed into that which
they ſignified) but in their vſe and ſervice
which is ſpirituall (and ſuch a change
no other creature but by Chriſts own ordinance
can poſſibly admit or bee capable
of) euen ſo the ceremoniall ſigns or
geſtures in the act of giving or receiving
theſe element
                  •
               ll ſigns thus ſpiritually
changed, do differ from all other ſignes or
geſtures whatſoeuer, & haue from Chriſts
inſtitution a heavenly or ſpirituall power
conferd vpon them, which no other geſture
can poſſibly be capable of though all
the humane power in the world beſtow
all their craft and cunning vpon it. For
this power is proper onely vnto Chriſt
and not communicable to a creature, yea
to intimate ſuch a power (without direct
warrant from the worde of God) is directly
to band themſelues and to aſſemble
together againſt the Lord and againſt
his Chriſt. Either prooue then your conformitie
to be warranted by Chriſt, or els
this banding diſpoſition aff
                  •
               ights vs
from giving the leaſt approbation therevnto.
            They that admit or would countenance
any other coniunction, in, by, with, or
vnder the elementall ſigns then a ſpirituall,
muſt of neceſsity cōtend for ſuch innovation
in the ceremoniall ſigne in the act of
receiuing, as may hold due proportion
with that conceited coniunction of their

owne Imagination. And hence it comes
to paſſe that this carnall deuice in the ceremonie
is ſo eagerly preſſed and readily
conformed vnto, becauſe not onely the
ignorant, and the learned who are profane
and wicked, but euen the godly and
the learned that are holy, iudge of the
lawfullnes thereof by carnall ſence and
reaſon, and not by the rule of the word,
yea I would be hartily glad to meet with
one good and ſincere argument which is
not of this diſſpoſition, yet I doe confeſſe
I haue heard of many burniſhed with
the gloſſe of humane wiſdome and accademicall
learning, which makes indeed
the verie droſſe of nature to ſtroute it ſelfe
out becauſe it gliſters, and ſo looking bigg
upon the matter ſeems to very many like
the verie golden truth. But can the beſt
quallified wiſedom of the world ſavor the
things that are of God? yea are not the
things which him ſelf taught and vſed or
ordained for the ſpirituall vſes of his
Church (& therefore onely ſpiritually to
be diſcerned) meere foliſhnes, yea verie
enmitie vnto nature? and therefore if this
ceremonie haue not a diuine warrant how
dare wee conforme unto it;
            So much in the ſacrament of the Lords
ſupper as euery one ſees, ſo much he receiues,
and no more, they that ſee nothing
but with bodily eies, or perceiue
no further then naturall ſence and wiſe
or learned Iudgment giues vnderſtanding.

Receaue no more but earthly things, euen
the elementall ſigne, & not any thing that
is heauenly or ſpirituall, to make them the
more holy and vertuous, and any geſture
or ceremonie whatſoeuer, and whence ſoeuer
it comes, is comely and decent or
good enough for ſuch a peece of ſervice,
but all thoſe that ſee with ſpirituall eies,
yea they onely receaue ſpirituall things,
and they dare not conforme to any geſture
or ceremonie, but that which is of a ſpirituall
or holy uſe, and ſuch none can be,
but thoſe geſtures and ceremonies onely,
which are ordained by our holy God. In
all and euery one of which (being faithfully
vſed) as there is certeinly and infallibly
a bleſsing to be obtaind, ſo whatſoeuer
of religious vſe is known not to be
ordained by God, but onely by man, it
is at leaſt vtterly voide of all ſpirituall bleſſing,
if not filled with contrary effects, and
therefore not in any reſpect to be conformed
vnto. But ſuch is this ceremony
and therefore vnlawfull.
            They that conforme to a right geſture
or ceremonie in the ſacrament, and want
the inward eye, mouth, and hand of the
ſoule, receiue onely the elements with Iudas,
& not the ſpirituall things ſignified by
which vnworthines, they eate and drinke
their owne damnation, becauſe they diſcern
not the Lords body though they truly
diſcerne & vſe the Lords geſture, & wil
not by any means conforme to any other

for they trample vnder foote the blood of
Chriſt, as an unholy thing, not that they
eſteem it ſo in their minde (for this trampling
is inward or ſpirituall) but where
faith is wanting there is unworthy partaking,
and faith is as neceſſary in the action,
or geſture of taking, as in the act it
ſelfe: for this whole action of the ſacrament
(and not ſome ſpeciall or principall
parts therin) is the evidence or ſeal of our
aſſurance of partaking the divine myſteries
or holy things ſignified; even of our
true and ſpirituall cōmunion with Chriſt.
To conforme then to a wrong geſture having
no promiſe of any bleſsing, cannot
be an action of faith, aud therefore ſin.
            
               Eating and Drinking are ſacramentall
phraſes, applying that to the ſoule which
is proper to the body, but doe neceſſarily
imply, that there muſt of abſolute neceſſity
be a ſpirituall eating and drinking in
the very act of the corporall eating, or els
no benefit or ſpirituall bleſsing can poſſibly
be ſealed up by that action, which
neceſſarily inferres that ſuch a geſture is
onely lawfull in this action, as in the nature
thereof holds proportion with eating
and drinking, and hath relation thereunto,
which onely a table geſture doth,
and therefore was ſelected and choſen by
Chriſt the Lord of the ſacrament, and
ſanctified in the inſtitution, and ſo not
onely by his uſing preferred before all other,
but no other being commanded in

the word, it is thereby made onely uſefull
in the act of receiving, and no other to be
conformed unto.
            If a corporall or viſible and locall coniunction
(which yet cannot profit the
ſoule) or any other learned device of the
ſpiritualtie were ſufficient to bee conceited,
or with ſtrong imagination to be beleeved,
then indeed any geſture or ceremony
of carnall deviſing were indifferent
or good enough, and might ſafely be conformed
unto, but faith being inviſible,
lookes (according to the nature thereof)
not to reaſon and ſence, wiſedom and
diſcretion, or other like humane conſiderations,
but to the things that are inviſible,
and therefore in all the actions and
ceremonies of Gods worſhip, dare onely
conforme to ſuch as by his appointment
who is inviſible, haue an inſeparable relation
(by his divine inſtitution) to the inviſible
things ſignified or repreſented, yea
and verily exhibited in them, and dare
not conform to any other, though by the
learned Cleargie the ſame relation be appointed
thereunto.
            Reaſon and Sence even in Nicodemus
cry mainly out, How can this be? It is impoſsible.
And in others, Can this man
giue us his fleſh? This is a hard ſaying, who
can chooſe but be offended at it? So alſo
in Naaman, Why ſhould not the rivers of
Damaſcus, being uſed with the like good
intention and purpoſe, be as full of vertue

to waſh away ſin or leproſie, as that of
Iorden, it is but an idle conceit of guiddy
heads that makes this difference, yea what
good argument can any ſuch finde out,
that is able to aſſure their conſciences,
they do well in ſuffering for refuſing conformity
herein? Even ſo concerning this
bleſſed ſacrament, ſome cry out, How can
a peece of bread, or a ſuppe of wine nouriſh
my ſoule, or increaſe my faith, or patience,
humility and contentment. Others
(which is a branch ſpringing from
the ſame root) with open mouth exclaim,
Why ſhould not all geſtures in the act of
receiving be alike, or any geſture in the
worſhip of God, (though deuiſed by
man) be indifferent? What reaſon can bee
given that one ſhould be better then another?
and therefore why ſhould not
kneeling be as good as the table-geſture?
Here wiſedom, learning, diſcretion, reaſon,
and experience, in a temperate and graue
modeſty, lay hand upon their mouthes,
and for peace ſake, in this caſe of extremity,
by ſilence doe ſubſcribe; but faith
knowes full well (as a thing never denied,
unleſſe by carnall and worldly minded
perſons) that every thing is therefore
onely good, and better then all other,
becauſe God hath commanded it, and that
nothing can poſsibly be of good or holy
uſe in the holy worſhip of our moſt holy
God, but that onely which himſelfe hath
commanded, inſtituted or ordained, and

therefore that whatſoever (of religious
uſe in his ſervice) is not in the word directly
commanded, is by direct conſequence
by the ſame word forbidden: my
reaſon is, becauſe every action of Gods
worſhip is either performed in obedience
or diſobedience: if it be in diſobedience,
though in a caſe of extremity and danger,
or in caſe of commodity and advantage,
is it not (if performed againſt our knowledge)
direct rebellion, as in Saul? And
you cannot for ſhame ſay, that your
conformity is obedience, unleſſe a commandement
from God go before. For if
our holy intentions and good conſiderations
and purpoſes, or zealous devotions,
could make our deviſed geſtures and actions
in Gods ſervice, works of obedience;
which of all the Kings of Iuda had not
iuſt cauſe to puniſh and kill the Prophets
for reproving them for their inventions,
which had as many good intentions as any
in theſe dayes can haue? But the old
rule holds, Whatſoever is not done in faith
(eſpecially in actions, geſtures, and ceremonies
of religious uſe) is ſinne. If then
you bring faith to make triall of the lawfulneſſe
of theſe things in queſtion, it will
not hearken what Canons this Convocation
made, nor regard what that Councell
decreed, or what ſuch a State commanded,
or ſuch reformed Churches practiſed,
or thoſe reverent preachers & godly
people conforme unto: but what God

commands, or what ſaith the Lord in his
word, and in this particular controverſie,
faith retires to the inſtitution, wherein is
ſet downe upon divine record what the
Apoſtles received of the Lord concerning
the geſture for their direction in laying
the foundation for the ceremony in the
act of receiving the Sacrament in any
Church whatſoever: yea faith dare not
conforme to any thing of divine uſe
in Gods publicke worſhippe, without
Gods direct warrant in the word,
though all the wiſe and learned men in
the world do never ſo highly commend
and extoll it. So that if it be not done in
obedience, it is not done in faith: and
then you will confeſſe it is ſinne, and then
you know we may not conforme unto it,
though we might prevent thereby never
ſo great and fearefull miſchiefes, and procure
never ſo many benefits & bleſsings:
& it cannot be done in obedience of faith
unleſſe a commandement goe before (for
looke whom you obey, his ſervants you
are:) that therefore cannot be Gods divine
ſervice, which God doth not by his
divine word command: or that cannot
be an action of faith which is not commanded
by the word? and every action
of religious uſe, which is not of faith
is expreſſely forbidden. Try your ſelues
therfore whether in conforming to kneeling
in the act of receiving the Lords
holy Supper, you ſtand in the faith or no:

if you ſay you looke to God, and haue
powred out your ſoules before him, as
your conſciences, and many other can
beare you witneſſe, and you dare appeale
to him how deere your miniſtery
is unto you, and how loath you are to
leaue your flockes to a company of roaring
boyes, or raging beaſts, &c. I anſwer,
if you looke to God, then you muſt
look to him in his word: (for elſe whatſoever
you intend, he doth not intend to
be God unto you) if you haue not his
warrant therein, you do not looke to the
true God (no more then the Barbarian or
Turke doth) but do make a very Idoll of
him; I meane, our God doth not bleſſe or
approue of any thing of religious uſe in
his worſhip, as good and lawfull to bee
conformed unto, but onely thoſe things
which himſelfe requires in his word, and
he that will accept of any thing which is
not commanded in the word, is an Idoll,
and not the true God: for all things concerning
him or his worſhip, are onely
made known to his Church by the ſcriptures,
and the Churches never erre in
theſe things, but when they want the
commandement or warrant of the word,
the defect whereof all the learning, devotion,
wiſedom, authority, and zeale of the
whole world cannot ſupply. I confeſſe
you make goodly ſhewes for excuſing
your conformity, but what haue you
ſayd, or what can you pretēd, which Ieroboam
               
would not haue accepted at the
hands of thoſe Prieſts who left their places
and charges, becauſe they would not
conform to the ceremonies of the calues?
And if it be lawfull in you, why not in
them? I confeſſe that which you obiect,
that their conformity overthrew the
very ſubſtance of Gods worſhip, but not
that (you will not ſay) which was inward,
but that only which was outward,
and which is required in the ſecond
commandement: for the doctrine of the
inward ſubſtance was (in the intention of
that proviſion) preſerued ſound, but the
forme of Gods outward worſhip was
mainly and diverſly I confeſſe perverted;
and I alſo acknowledge, that your conformity
is nothing ſo groſſe and abhominable
as theirs, yet this I dare ſay and teſtifie,
that it is of the ſame nature, and
that it corrupts and perverts this part of
Gods worſhip in the act of receiving the
body and bloud of Chriſt: ſo that though
they differ, and differ very greatly, yet it
is onely in the Species, and not in the Genus.
Without further contention therefore
let us bring it to the true rule.
Whence doth your conformitie come? It
is a matter concerning Gods outward
worſhip and divine ſervice, and ſo appertaining
to the ſecond commandement.
What muſt bee the cauſe of this: for if
the cauſe be good, the effect is good: faith
is the cauſe of all true obedience, and

that obedience or conformity which is
not an effect of faith, cannot by all the
trickes and deviſes in the world, ever be
made good (for where the cauſe is, there
is the effect, and where the effect is, there
is the cauſe, the effect can never bee in
truth, whatſoever is conceited or pretended,
where the cauſe is not.) If therefore
kneeling as it is urged, bee an effect of
faith, then haue you a precept & a promiſe
for it is in the word, upon which your
faith is grounded, and ſo your obedience
and conformity is holy: but if it bee not
in this very kinde required therein, it
cannot poſsibly be an effect of faith: and
therefore ſet the beſt face you can upon
it, it is but an Idoll of mans invention, and
therefore conformitie thereto upon what
pretence, or in what caſe of extremity ſoever,
is unlawfull and wicked.
            It is confeſſed and profeſſed publikly
by ſome of you that the magiſtrate ſins
greevouſly in requiring this conformity.
but yet you do well in yeelding thervnto
rather then to ſuffer ſuch a world of incōveniences,
which you wiſely & carfully
foreſee wil otherwiſe fall vpon Church &
Cōmonweale. Cōpare your caſe with former
times, Dauid ſinned grevouſly, though
not preſūptuouſly, as I think ſome of you
do not, in bringing the arke from Gibeah,
in a new Carte, this Arke or outward
worke (the glory of Iſraell) in
this iorney was ſo dangerouſly ſhaken by

the oxen (at the threſhing floore of Ornan
as if Vzza had not put to his hand it was
like to haue bin broken all to peeces, did
not Vzza cōmendably therfore in putting
forth his hand to preuent ſuch a miſcheif;
is not this your very argument? many inſeparable
euils cleaue to this cōſequence,
he was not ſtricken for touching the ark,
for that the Leuits might do, but onely
for the manner and order of touching it,
being in a cart which was not warranted
by God, and I tell you the beſt and moſt
learned men in the whole world are but
as oxen, and put the Arke of Gods word
into the moſt temperate Cart of their
neweſt and beſt reformed Invention, they
will grieuouuſly ſhake the verie ſubſtance
of it?
            Seing then the ſacraments and whatſoeuer
is ſacramentall (as a geſture in the act
of receaving is) are ordeined not by man
but by God, not for any worldly, carnall
or civill reſpects as to teſtifie our obedience
to the magiſtrate which yet I confeſſe
muſt moſt cheerfully be manifeſted,
but meerly and properly for ſpirituall
vſes, euen to nouriſh our ſoules by ſealing
vp unto our hearts the aſſurance and certeintie
of the couenant of grace in the
free pardon of all our ſins through the
ſole merit of the moſt pretious blood
of our Lord Ieſus Chriſt, moſt liuely repreſented,
and truly or effectually exhibited
to every faithfull beleeuer herein? let

vs hold faſt the right order and forme
of adminiſtration thereof in all the ſigns
elementall or ceremoniall, euen in all the
actions, geſtures, or ceremonies, which by
Chriſt himſelf in the firſt adminiſtration
being vſed, and neuer after repealed not
any other by his warrant eſtabliſhed come
within the compaſſe of diuine inſtitution?
Ieaſt wittingly, though wee pretend vnwillingly
conforming to the alteration of
the ſigne (though but ceremoniall) wee
depriue our ſelues of that which ſtands in
relation therevnto (which is ſubſtantiall).
            The ſacraments with all the eſſentiall
properties therein, together with the ſcepter
of the word truely adminiſtred, are
the vndoubted markes or proper Cognizances
of the Churches communion both
with Chriſt the head, & with all the ſaints
making one entire miſticall body; and by
theſe they may be known? where theſe are,
is a true Church whoſoeuer ſay to the
contrary. Let vs therfore preſerue not
ſome fundamentall partes onely but all
things of eſſential vſe herein, uncorrupted
and vndefiled, euen pure and vnſpotted,
and therfore neuer conform to wordly rudiments,
carnall innovation, & human invention
in any part of Gods worſhip leſt
we decline from our firſt loue, wherein
we vowed and profeſſed to haue a ſincere
reſpect not to ſome principall, but to all
the parts of Gods worſhip, euen to all his

commandements, and ſo ſhall wee rteaine
the infallible markes of the true Churches
of Chriſt vpon vs, but if wee forſake the
geſture or ceremonie of the pureſt Church
that euer was wherein the heavenlieſt order,
& diuineſt decency that euer was vpon
the earth was by our Lord and Sauiours
owne preſence and practiſe in the inſtitution,
ſanctified and propoſed for all
ſucceeding Churches to follow for euer
(as this neuer being repealed, nor any other
approued by the ſcriptures doth
plainly teſtifie) do we not beſpot and obſcure
this marke of our viſibilitie, eſpecially
by conforming to the ceremonie (or
the likenes thereof) of the falſeſt, moſt
perfidious, bloodieſt and moſt Apoſtate
Church that euer was, or can be? is not euery
thing which is of religious vſe in
Gods publicke worſhip being without
warant frō the word erronious? and doth
not error in any one part, though but in
the ceremonie, prooue a direct defect in
the whole ſacrament, being an entire and
an inſeperable action? if therefore we wittingly
ſubſcribe to the lawfullnes of that
which we know wee are defectiue in,
we haue no promiſe of God for his bleſſing
vpon vs in our ſo doing, yea the very hoping
of mercie in ſuch a caſe (I meane
where there is no ground for it in the
word but onely in our owne intentions)
is a main cauſe of Apoſtacie Atheiſme and
like abominable preſumptions.
            
               
Rytes and ſignes of religious vſe in the
publike worſhip of God, which are not
ordained by him to be ſeales (for as all
the parts of the ſeale make but one ſeale,
ſo euery part not being deuided may
truly be faid to be the ſeale) of his covenant
and inſtruments of his grace, are not
the true marks of the true Church, though
the true Church vſe them to that very intent,
and indowe them with the verie
ſame properties and intentions: for none
can ordain a ſign in Gods worſhip, (whethere
actions, geſtures, or any kinde of
ceremonie of holy or religious ſignification,
which indeed are peculiar marks of
Cogniſances) but he onely that is able
to giue that ſpirituall grace or heavenly &
inviſible bleſſing which is repreſented
therein, or ſignified thereby. Seing then
the holy geſture in the act of receauing
the moſt pretious body and blood of our
Lord Ieſus ſacramentally, is on all ſides
confeſſed to be ſignificant (and a part of
the individuall ſeale, it cannot be denied,
that none (of what condition of quallitie
ſoeuer) may ordaine it, but hee onely
who is able to giue the thing ſignified or
receaved thereby. If then kneeling in this
very kinde, manner, & order as it is vrged,
be not ordained by the Lord and yet haue
a ſpirituall ſignification (as all men agree)
though all the wiſdom of the world labor
to grace it with all the complements, than
art, wit and learning, or authority can

poſſibly conferre vpon it, wee may not
conforme vnto it, neither is it a marke or
ſeale of the true Church but a blot and
ſtaine thereof, for the precept and promiſe
of Chriſt haue no relation therevnto,
but onely to thoſe geſtuers and other
ceremonies in his worſhip which himſelfe
hath ordained, and therefore no other
may be with ſafety of conſcience conformed
vnto.
            Nothing, of religious vſe but what is of
divine inſtitution, can be holy, and all ſuch
are holy to the beleeuer though wicked
perſons adminiſter them, or be pertakers
of them, but if God haue not ordained it
to be of religious vſe, in that very manner
and order of his worſhip, it is profane to
the beleeuing receiuer, though the holieſt
men in the world adminiſter it, and approoue
thereof, for therefore onely is any
thing in divine ſervice Gods inſtrument,
becauſe he hath ordained it ſo to be, whether
it be a ceremony of p
                  •
               aier or of praiſe,
of receiving a bleſſing or ſhewing thankfulnes
for the ſame, whether it be of humiliation
or of ioyfulnes, or whatſoeuer is
aimed at therein, there is no bleſſing to
be obtained where none is promiſed, for
if God had appointed the forme of the
altar of Damaſcus, it had beene as good
and holy as that at Ieruſalem, they were
both altars and the ſame ſacrifices to the
ſame God offered thereon, yet differing in
the very forme, made the whole worſhip

abominable: therefore thoſe who dare ſo
confidently affirm that God will bleſſe our
conformity to ceremoniall ſigns being
ſome in matter, ſome in manner of mans
meere deuiſing, is directly with the groſſeſt
idolators to adiure the holy ghoſt to
ſanctify or make of holy vſe our, owne
carnall deuiſes, becauſe wee aime at nothing
but deuotion therein, is not this to
goe a whoring after our owne Inventions?
            The end of all Gods ordinances is to vnite
vs to himſelfe, not carnally, locally
ot naturally, but ſpiritually, myſtically, ſacramentally
or holily, after the manner
of contracts or covenants. What beleeving
heart then dare conform to any eſſentiall
Ryte in this holy ſacrament (a moſt ſpeciall
and effectuall inſtrument of increaſing
our aſſurance of this our ſpirituall vnion
with God through Chriſt) which is not
commanded or warranted by the ſcriptures?
may mortall men, yea or Angels of
heaven ordain any thing to be done in remembrance
of Chriſt (and without a geſture
in the act of receiving, this whole
action of his remembrance vaniſheth) or to
put vs in mind of what he hath done for
vs, or to vnite and knit vs more firmely
vnto him, doth not the opening of this
gap in the geſture, approue of, and (not
whiſperingly) recall (alwaies provided
that a Canon waſh and wype away their
ſuperſtition and Idolatry) all thoſe fleſhly

and carnall abhominations, which our
forefathers and Churches, both Princes
and people, haue caſt out as the notorious
workes of that infamous Beaſt? Is
conformity then to this humane devices
in the geſture, the very beſt way you can
deviſe to preſerue the Churches from utter
ruine? Are carnall inventions, I ſay, in
this cleare light of the Goſpell, the very
beſt courſe to preſerue holy Aſſemblies
and Eccleſiaſticall Miniſtery? will God
elſe quite forget to be gracious? Doth the
moiſture hereof onely preſerue his hand
(of helpe and power) from withring
and his arme of protection from being
ſhortened, do you verely beleeve indeed,
that as the caſe doth ſtand, conformity
to the liknes of Idolatrous & vncleane ceremonies
will diſtinguiſh vs from Idolatrous
& vnclean perſons, and are your
conſciences perſwaded that this plaine &
apparant difference, and direct and wilful
diſſenting from Chriſt and his Apoſtles
in the ceremonie of the acte in receaving
(ſo long as we holde the doctrine of the
inward ſubſtance ſounde; and free it in
teaching from fundamentall corruption)
hauing no warrant from ſcripture but only
from ſence, and ſo conforming to a
geſture which hath beene allwaies not in
ſome but in all true Churches of ill reporte
will this courſe I ſay giue ſound teſtimonie
of our vnion with Chriſt as our
head, and with all reformed Churches as

fellow members? haue you warrant from
the words of eternall life for this perſwaſion,
or is it but a conceite of your owne
imagination aryſing from an honeſt affection
to continue your miniſtery and to do
good to your people? I beſeech you conſider
what is the true obiect of your faith
in this choice which you haue ſo conſidera
                  •
               ly
made? for if faith doe not guide you
heerein you haue done an abominable
thing, and to ground faith on any thing
but onely the worde of God, is at beſt
erronius, but wittingly perſiſted in, is Idolatrous,
wil vtrum horum or in a caſe of ſuperior
reaſon ſatisfie in this caſe, and
teſtifie for you that you are not gone from
the truth in this conformity, becauſe you
once were for it? ſearch the ſcriptures
you were beſt, and if you finde no good
warrant there, repent and returne, for els
you cannot reſt here, but do the beſt you
can you ſhall decline more and more. Remember
Demas.
            
            There haue been indeed ſignes or ſacraments,
and ceremonies of religious uſe
in the publicke worſhip of God, which
were variable and not perpetuall, but
differed from the firſt inſtitution, and
came in and went out as the times and
occaſions of the Church required, as the
rocke was called Chriſt, the ſea Baptiſme,
the brazen ſerpent was a figure alſo of
him, and divers other, as Manna and the
Rocke, but was it ever heard (unleſſe in

the mouthes of falſe teachers) that the
Churches ought to conforme to any ſacraments,
either ordinary or extraordinary,
or to any ſuch ſignificant Rite or ceremony
as the queſtioned geſture is, which
are not expreſſely grounded on the word
of God? but as it ever was no great or
ſtrange thing that the Miniſters of the
Divell ſhould transforme themſelues, and
by their teaching many fundamentall
truthes, and by many pleaſing paſſages of
their life, deceiue the world; yea and notwithſtanding
their abhominable workes,
and moſt damnable hypocriſie, yet be reputed
and taken for the Miniſters of Righteouſneſſe
(being growne ſo abſolute in
the trade of Deceitfulneſſe:) even ſo let
it not ſeem any wonder that men of your
parts and gifts having changed your
mindes, do labour to transform the traditions
of men, and ceremonies or rudiments
of the world into the very likeneſſe
of the ordinances of Jeſus Chriſt: for
whoſoever liues ſhall ſee greater things
then theſe breake forth in you. But as
nothing in the worſhip of God can poſſibly
profit, unleſſe it be mixed with true
faith, ſo it is utterly impoſſible that iuſtifying
faith ſhould upon any tearmes, or
in any reſpect bee mixed with any thing
in the ſervice or worſhip of God, which
is not grounded on the word of God; if
then your contentious geſture be not in
that very manner and order as it is urged,

warranted by the word of God, it is not,
neither poſſibly can bee of faith, and
therefore may not for prevention of the
greateſt miſchiefe in the world, bee conformed
unto: for we may not do the leaſt
evill, though the greateſt good that could
be wiſhed, would come to the Church
thereby.
            Some pleaſe themſelues with a conceited
evaſion from the phraſe of Supper,
earneſtly contending that we are no more
tied to Chriſts geſture, then to Chriſts
ſupper, which I willingly grant to be very
true, even that we are bound to both alike;
but yet let them alſo be pleaſed to
underſtand, that the purpoſe of the Holy
Ghoſt is not by this ſacramentall phraſe
to ſet forth the fitteſt time (in the peaceable
condition of the Church) for the
adminiſtration of this Sacrament, which
being to ſucceed and come in the roome
of the paſſover, was (as I may ſafely ſay)
by a caſuall neceſſity inforced to attend
the evening (or Supper) paſſover, but to
expreſſe for ever to all the Churches of
Chriſt, that this ſacrament is the ſolemne
& great feaſt of the Lord IEHOVAH,
wherein he keepes open houſe, and ſets
forth his rich loue, exceeding bounty, and
admirable greatneſſe, yea immeaſurable
goodneſſe, by the ſurpaſſing excellency of
his all-ſufficient proviſion, and by the
hearty welcome, loving countenance,
kinde and familiar entertainment of his

beloved gueſts, who are invited to his
owne table, not as ſtrangers, or by way of
curteſie, or to ſhew his magnificence and
bounty, but as his deereſt and moſt reſpected
friends, to whom onely he admits
this particular and ſpeciall familiarity;
muſt not therefore of neceſſity (I ſpeake
but by the way) their geſture in this action
hold correſpondencie with, and haue
relation unto a feaſt, and to a table, and
to beloved friends, of whoſe hearty welcome
this whole action (whereof the
geſture is a part) is a moſt certaine aſſurance.
Yet the word Supper is not put in
at random, or accedentally, but purpoſely
and for ſpeciall inſtruction, to teach the
Church for ever, that as uſually their
greateſt and moſt ſolemne ſumptuous
feaſts, wherein they deſired to expreſſe
and manifeſt the ſuperabundance of their
loue, and entire good will, were not at
dinners but at ſuppers: ſo this great feaſt
or ſupper of the Lord doth affoord to every
worthy partaker a moſt plentifull
and abundant increaſe of all thoſe graces
and heavenly comforts, which are formerly
or elſewhere obtained by any other
of Gods ordinances whatſoever: and that
there is no where the like proviſion to be
ſound againe (for even aske the father
what you can, here it is to be had) he that
neglects this, muſt never looke for the
like againe any where elſe. Now I beſeech
you (I meane thoſe that ſtand ſo

much upon ſence and reaſon) conſider
whether it be not very high, yea intollerable
preſumption for any invitant to
thinke any thing wanting in this princely
feaſt of this King of eternall glory, and ſo
to take upon him either to ad matter of
ſubſtance, or ornamēt, or order; & having
ſeen the carriage and geſture of the kings
owne perſon, and of all his moſt honourable
gueſts, yet in a conceit of his owne
wiſedom, learning, and experience (having
perhaps been a farre traveller) undertakes
to ſet downe a more ſeemly and decent
ceremony for the geſture or behaviour of
the gueſts, then then the Lord himſelfe
by his owne preſence approved and appointed:
dare wee conforme to the practiſe
of ſuch a device as lawful, & good,
eſpecially being very like the behauiour
of the moſt mortall and deadly enemy
that the King hath? Your conformitie
therefore may bee farre fetcht and deere
bought, but yet not good for Lord nor
Lady, nor any Invitant, at this heavenly
banquet.
            Whatſoever of eſſenciall neceſſity was in
the firſt inſtitution, & no alteration therof
is in the word of God recorded, nor any
varying therefrom warranted, or ſo much
as mentioned, muſt needs be for imitation:
yea the approbation therof by Chriſt our
Lord, is not onely a ſufficient warrant for
the lawfulnes, holines, or decencie and
goodneſſe thereof, but a direct binding

precept to uſe it, yea it onely, and a plaine
prohibition for ever, upon any occaſion
or condition whatſoever, to conforme to
any other. For as Chriſt his uſing it made
it holy and good, ſo none but hee onely
can either make it unſeemly, or any other
geſture lawfull or comely. Conſider therefore,
yet not by reaſon and ſence (for they
though never ſo wiſe and learned, are but
blind Iudges in matters of Religion) but
by the unerring iudgement of true faith,
(which begins where theſe end) whether
any geſture can beſeeme a gueſt, a friend,
a familiar, yea a ſonne or daughter of
yeares and good underſtanding, at the Table
and feaſt, yea at the great ſupper (of
the immortall King indeed, but yet) of
our deere, loving, and well pleaſed Father,
ſo well as a table geſture, being not
onely directly intimated in theſe myſticall
phraſes of ſignificant vſe, viz. Feast, Supper,
Table, Communion, and the like, but
purpoſely alſo recorded to be the practiſe
of Chriſt, and of all his Apoſtles in the inſtitution,
and never altered or queſtioned,
till the manifeſt declaration of Antichriſt,
which was many hundred yeares after,
who indeed by ſolemne decree or canon,
did ordain that a table geſture ſhould be
left in the act of receiving, and having ſet
up another Chriſt in his breaden deviſe,
he appoints kneeling in the ſtead thereof
to bee onely conformed unto. Now as
Chriſt his uſing that geſture (the word no

where commanding any other) is a divine
warrant for the goodnes thereof: ſo Antichriſts
ordaining this (and the word of
God not commanding it) is a divine prohibition,
never in the worſhip of God to
conforme unto it upon any tearmes, or in
any caſe whatſoever.
            Wee do not conforme to the bleſſed
Apoſtles Paul or Peter, or to our moſt
godly and learned paſtors, in vſing a table
geſture, but onely followe them becauſe
they follow Chriſt, whoſe moſt holy and
vnerring practiſe) not any where in all
the ſcripture altered) we hold to be his expreſſe
will, and directly contained in his
commandement, Doe this, wherein he left
it not to the diſcretion of the Apoſtles or
their ſucceſſors, to diſpoſe of the geſture,
as times or occaſions ſhould require, but
to prevent al colour of innouation (which
he ful well foreſaw matchleſſe Ambition
would audaciouſly preſume to bring in, &
Machiuillian pollicie would arrogantly
contend to continue) he purpoſely adminiſtred
this ſacrament firſt himſelf both in
the elements and geſture, that (as to the
verie beſt and moſte vnreproueable preſident,
in all controuerſies about this or any
other ceremonie herein) the Churches
might retire and haue recourſe, ſtill to his
owne practiſe for their ſafe direction and
full ſatiſfaction, for euer, ſo that as in
matter of doctrine you do moſt worthely
anſwer the papiſts, with Thus ſaith the

Lord', or the Lord neuer required this, ſo
we ſay to you in the ceremonie, thus did
our Lord, he vſed a table geſture, & there
is no mention in the ſcripture that euer
kneeling in the act of receiving was vſed,
therefore ſeeing, Non fuit ſic ab initio,
wee dare not with any limitation or fauorable
conſtruction conforme vnto it,
            It was not nowe a time in the act of inſtitution,
to vſe geſtures at randome, or
ceremonies of indifferencie, but only that
which is primarily or principally, and
therfore (vnleſſe himſelf giue warrant to
the contrary) perpetually neceſſary, for
euen now was he to ſet vpon the greateſt
worke that euer he did. Hath he then at
this verie time, by his owne perſonall
practiſe, bequeathed to all his Churches
for ever (in this leagacie of his infinite,
eternall and incomprehenſible loue) the
ceremoniall ſigne of a table geſture?
where is then the faith and vnderſtanding
of theſe learned ſcribes, and the deepe
wiſdom of theſe great diſputers become,
who reuerently lapping vp the table geſture
in a faire white Cloth, caſt it aſide
into a corner of their veſtrie (that if it
euer come in requeſt againe, they know
where to fetch it) and moſt eagerly contend
for kneeling in the ſtead thereof,
which in the act of receaving this bleſſed
ſacrament was neuer approoued of in any
Catholike Church thorow the whole
world, till the darknes of the groſſeſt Idolatry

that euer was, or can be, had brought
confuſion into the whole publicke worſhip
and ſervice of God through the Ambitious
Tyranny, of that man of ſin, yet doe I not
by any means inferre, that thoſe who being
ignorant of the abhomination that
lies lurking in this very geſture, and being
therefore perſwaded of the indifferency
or lawfulneſſe thereof, do conform thereto,
doe not alſo receiue comfortably and
effectually by the hands of faith, the very
things themſelues which are ſignified; onely
I hold it a ſin of their ignorance (which
God regardeth not) and therfore beſeech
them better to conſider of it hereafter,
ſeeing the table geſture had been indifferent,
yea unſeemly, yet the practiſe of
Chriſt in the inſtitution, uſing onely it and
no other, makes it now moſt decent, and
without all exception, yea onely to be
conformed unto before all other, unleſſe
a divine warrant can bee brought to the
contrary.
            Suppoſe that all geſtures in the act of
receiving were indifferent, Chriſt he makes
choyce of a table geſture, and ſo by his
very uſing it, ſanctifies it, and makes it of
holy uſe: Antichriſt he miſlikes it, and
takes up in the ſtead thereof kneeling, and
by his very uſing of it profanes it, and
makes it uncleane; for he being the greateſt
Idolater that ever was, appropriated
it ro the groſſeſt Idolatry that ever was.
Now I beſeech all you that are indifferent,

               utrum horum? Did CHRIST
our Lord bleſſe the whole action, or
ſome principall partes thereof onely?
Conſider therefore not by naturall reaſon,
but by the eye of ſupernaturall aith, how
far this precept, Do this, extends, whether
to the whole action of the ſacrament or
to the elemetall ſignes onely; or if ſo be,
to ſome of the ceremoniall ſigns, as ſetting
aparte, breaking, powring out, and
giving, why not to the reſt alſo in taking
or receaving? or if to ſome of them as to
the conſiderate beholding or looking on,
reuerent taking, cheerful eating and comfortable
drinking, why not to the very
geſture alſo; or if you cannot but grant,
that a geſture, or ſome geſture is included
within the compaſſe of this precept, why
then not that geſture which our Lord and
Sauiour vſed at the very time of geving
this precept, rather then that (or the ſimilitude
thereof) which that man of ſin
the verie child of perdition invented and
ordeined, for this is a moſt undoubted
truth, looke how farre the commaundement
extends, ſo farre doth the bleſſing of
the commander euen of Ieſus Chriſt our
Lord extend, and no further. Therefore
whatſoeuer in the ſame ſacrament you
haue not a commandement for (and is
of neceſſary vſe therein) you haue no promiſe
from Chriſt for his bleſſing thereon,
dare wee then conforme to a geſture
which the Lord hath not promiſed to

bleſſe, yea which being not warranted by
his word he will verely curſe and bring
contempt vpon though all the world bleſſe
it;
            I confeſſe the table geſture doth not ſo
liuely expreſſe and call to remembrance
the death of Chriſt, his torments and
breaking of his body, his greevous paſsion
and ſheading of his moſt pretious bloud,
as ſome other ceremoniall ſignes do, for
which cauſe it was not ordained to that
end, and the breaking of the bread and
powering out of the wyne, were appointed
as perfectly ſufficient for that purpoſe and
vſe, but no other geſture in the world can
poſsibly ſo liuely expreſſe our communion
with Chriſt our Lord through our aſſured
pettaking truely and really the verie
things themſelues and the whole merit
thereof, which ſpiritually are repreſented
and exhibited to euery faithfull receauer
in the viſible elements, aſſuring vs that
they are as verely ours as if wee had done,
and ſuffered the ſame things our ſelues,
which are herein called to our remembrance.
Let not conformity therefore to
any other geſture intimate a grevous indiſcretion
in Chriſt, either in leauing this
waightie matter vncerteine, and to be varied
according to the humors of times, or if
making it certeine, then in chooſing, and
ſo cauſing, all his Apoſtles (repreſenting
all the communicants to the end of the
world) to conforme to a geſture in the act

of receaving nothing ſo de
                  •
               rnt and ſeemly
as that which Antichriſt ordained, eſpecially
nothing ſo comely and ſignificant
as the ſimilitude thereof, which others hauing
purged, haue alſo canonized.
            In the inſtitution of this holy ſacrament
there was nothing vſed or approued by
our bleſſed Lord, but what was holy & neceſſary,
and neuer being by him repealed,
is ſtill moſt pretious. Let all that loue
him labour to keepe it from the vile,
and neuer conforme to any humane deuiſe
in the ſtead thereof, which all the canons
of all the learned men in the world cannot
poſsibly make a holy or pretious vſe.
It is neceſſary for al that deſire to be ſaued
or to haue (by worthy pertaking this ſacrament)
aſſurance of falvation, to haue
good aſſurance for their certeine perſvvaſion
in theſe things, vvhom therefore in al
hearty humility pray and beſeech, that
they labor and ſtriue to get the vvedding
garment, and it vvill quickly teach them
the ſupper geſture.
            
               Revel. 14▪ 3.
               And they ſang as it were a new ſong before
the throne and before the fowre beaſts
and the Elders, and no man could learne that
ſong but the hundred forty and fowre thouand
which were bought from the earth.
            
            
               Verſe. 4.
               Theſe are they which are not defiled

with woemen for they are Virgins, theſe follow
the Lamb whither ſoeuer he goeth, theſe are
bought from men, being the firſt fruits vnto
God, and vnto the Lamb.
            
            
               Verſe. 5.
               And in their mouth was found no guile
for they are without ſpot before the throne
of God.
            
            
               Ezek. 16. 2.
               Sonne of man, cauſe Ieruſalem to knowe
her abominations.
            
            
               Pſ. 64. 2. 3.
               Hide me from the conſpiracie of the wicked,
and from the rage of the workers of iniquity
which haue whet their tongue like a
ſword, and ſhoote for their arrowes bitter
words.
            
            
               Hebr, 2. 8.
               Thou haſt put all things in ſubiection vnder
him, and left nothing that ſhould not bee
ſubiect to him. Epeſ. 1. 22.
            
            FINIS.
         
      
   