
      
         
            
            
            
            
            
            
            MORIOMACHIA.
            
            Imprinted at London by
Simon Stafford. 1613.
         
         
            
            
            
            TO THE MOST HAPPY AND GLORIOVS conſtellation of brotherhood, together with the trinall knot of the moſt honourable family of the Howards, Robert Anton ſacrificeth this new borne babe of his humble duty, wiſhing an euerlaſting motion of happynes both the them, and that Honourable houſe (*⁎*)
            
               RIght Honourable branches of a fayre and ſpreading faily, vnder whoſe ſhades my beſt fortunes ruminate, I haue thought good to vnite you all in a whole peece, whom enuious time cannot make marchandiſe in parcels. (to conioyne you:) which to diſioyne, were a ſinne as deepe as a Lawyers pate in Terme time, that ſings no ſong but De profundis. I honour that muſicall conſent of fraternity, and hold it not inferiour to Pithagoras his harmony: let this modicum of ſuperfluous minutes craue but the priuiledge of a Seruingman, and weare the cloth of your fauour. Semel in anno ridet Apollo: Serious houres and graue deſignes muſt needes laugh, and amongſt them, my ſtudyes at this time, are turned merry Greeke. I writ them in Dog dayes, and they muſt needes bite: but what? not vertue, not honor, not nobility: but error, ignorance, and that peſthouſe of the time (foppery.) But what I would ſpeake, ſilence ſhall be my Attourney, and pleade both for times reformation, and your perpetuall happyneſſe.
            
               Your Honors deuoted ſeruant, Robert Anton.
               
            
         
         
            
            To the vncapable Reader.
            GIue place, Ass-crapart,
            Start backe, A noysome Gyant, whom Anus King of Pedolia, beat out of his Kingdome. Tatifart,
            Colebrond, be a by-stander:
            For here comes to fight
            The Fayryes faire Knight,
            ycleped Pheander,
            To conquer full soone
            The man of the Moone,
            Sir Archmoriander.
            The truth of which Battell,
            This Booke well can that tell
            to each Vnderstander,
            Vnlesse that he be,
            As some men are, (wee see)
            a Goose or a Gander.
            By which his rare workes
            He giues secret iurkes:
            he one day shall wander,
            Though yet he priuy lurkes:
            Against the big Turkes
            to be a Commaunder.
            I meane, thou shalt worke-ny
            To conquer the Turke-hy,
            Notorious Pheander.
            Vntill when, let no man,
            Of this Knight of the For being without a wife, he may be as honest as honourable. woman,
            speake euill or slander.
         
      
      
         
            
            ¶Moriomachia.
            
               ABout that time of the yéere, when siluan
Pan pipes Roundelayes, and nimble Satyres
friske about the timely Palmes, old
Tytan turnd swaggerer, and reueld in the
Tauernes of the earth so late, that he durst
not appeare to a Lanthorne, (fearing the rough examination
of a Rugged watch, and the dogged authority of
a common Iaylor) before the fresh Aurora fetcht him
foorth with a fiery face, and alayd his high colour with
the coole mornings dew. Then Fayry Nymphs turned
Milke-maydes, and tooke pleasure in dandling the dug.
The Fayry Queene herselfe at that time dispos'd to recreation
(and to try her huswifry) accompanied her attendant
trayne to their accustomed haunt: which was
to a rare and delicate pleasure-fitting meddowe, most
copious, & neately furnisht with diuers proper bellowing
Bulls, and many comely courteous gentle Cowes,
where euery pretty Elfe betooke her to her seuerall taske,
to prouide Milke for Ale possets, to welcome home at
night their ouerwearyed Knights in Armes.
            
            
               No Arte in armes giues Fayry Knights content,
               Vnlesse they haue their Ladyes sweet consent.
            
            The Fayry Queene not acquainted with such rustick
Dayry, most vnfortunatly (but more Cockney like)
by chaūce hapned on a meeke and louing Bull. Shee (poore
Lady) thinking he had bin a reasonable creature, made
him lowe cursy, and fayrely intreated him, to yeelde his
consent to be quiet and gentle, vntill shee had finisht her
Milking. And so takes the Teate in her slender hand,

               
(which was ſomewhat too groſſe for her fine fingers,)
ſhée (kind Madam) drew many a dry draught.
            
               Good Lady ſhee did ſeldome vſe to milke,
               Or touch ſ things as were not clad in ſilke.
            
            The poore vnderſtanding beaſt proud of his Milkemayd, ſéemed not ſo much as once to ſtirre, fearing to hinder what ſhe did intend, but ſtood moſt loying and kindly to her.
            When ſhe began to perceiue her owne miſtake, and withal obſeruing the ſtrange and vnvſuall curteſie of the beaſt towards her, ſhe pittyed his preſent eſtate, and immediatly called a councell of her Nymphs about her,  where all generally yéelded their voyces, and concluded, to haue him tranſformd into the habite and ſhape of a man, but ſtill to retayne his braue beaſtly courage, wherwith he might in time (by ye aſſiſtance of his ſtarrs) be ranckt in eminency with the gallant ſéeming Courtyer, the valorous heyre of a gowty Vſurer, or at leaſt, with the Farmors proper Gentleman-like ſon. And for his qualityes and maners (hauing ſo excellent a Tutres) he already was able to kéepe the company of a Meere Scholler, a bold Bayliffe, or a brawny fiſted Mechanicke: ſo being prouident of his welfare in purſute of Knightly aduentures, ſhe ſuited him in an Aſſes ſkinne impenetrable, made after the neweſt faſhion, and intitled him, Tom Pheander, the mayden Knight her Champion.
            
               The Aſſe did weare a Biggin being young,
               Which kept his eares from growing ouerlong.
            
            And for that ſhe would at firſt let him vnderſtand the generall dangers of a Knight errant, ſhe put him in a weather-beaten Barke with totter'd ſayles, fraighting it with a whole firkin of valour, and ſo expoſ'd him to the Sea and fortune, who with the fauourable wind of her Fan, droue him with ſafety vpon the coaſts of Morotopia, euen at the mouth of a riuer, where grew a goodly Viniger tree, which was very ſharply beſieged

               
with fat & large ourgrowne Salmons (betwéene whom for this long time, hath bin mortall warre, and waſte, by fire and knife) where he ſo valiantly beſtir'd himſelfe, that he rayſ'd the ſiege, and recouered the trée, which he carefully preſerues with a gariſon of Fayryes, by reaſon of the aboundance of Viniger it yéeldes, which he found would be very commodious in his Turkiſh warres, as wel to coole his double dags, as alſo to make ſauce to eate the hearts of all ſuch Turkes as he ſhould chance to kill.
            So trauelling vp into yt countrey, as he paſſed through a Uillage, he eſpyed two men threſhing out Corne in a Barne, which ſtrooke him into amazement, ſo that hee ſtood as mute as a politike Drunkard, to ſee them beate one againſt the other with their flayles; But taking them to be Knights inchaunted, he addreſſed himſelfe towards them, and ſayd, Fayre Knights, remember your ſelues, and call to mind your former eſtates, reſume your noble ſpirits, and be not thus ouerborne with Nicromanticke ſpels. One of them looking vp, ſayd, Honeſt man, be gon: for thy fole ſpéeches hinder our worke, and our Dame will be very angry, if our dayes taſke be not finiſhed at night. (Quoth ye 
               Fayry Champion) Miſtake me not, gentle Sirs: for fortune hath ſent me hyther, to eaſe and releaſe you both from theſe Magicall charmes, if I may but ſee or ſpeake with that damn'd Magician. Mary Sir, my Dame and Marian are both within, and Marian is euen iuſt now a charming: and if you will go in & ſpeake with her, you ſhall. (Quoth the Fayry Champion) With all my heart. So in he leades him to the Milke-houſe, where Marian was charming butter. As ſoone as he eſpied her, he ſayd, Aha, haue I found thée at thy charme, thou fowle Inchauntreſſe? I ſpeake to thee that keepeſt Knights in ſeruile ſlauery. Ile diſſolue your Charmes and Circles, your Inuocations and Incantations: and ſo takes the Charme & Cheeſefats, and throwes them about the houſe. Which Marian ſéeing, ſhe cryed out for helpe,

to saue her from the madde man: when presently one of
the seruants of the house came with a cudgell, and there
began a fearefull fray.
            
               Why dost thou beate this courteous Knight, thou swayne?
               Chud ha him catch his (woodcocke) wit againe.
            
            But Marian, like a wise Stickler or moderator, reconciled
them with a composition of sowre whay, where each
dranke to other, and so parted louing friends.
            Now being in a strange countrey, and altogether vnacquainted
with the wares and passages, or how to bend
his course, straggling here and there (the weather being
exceeding hot,After honour. and he extreme thirsty) at length hée
enquired of haruest people, intreating their directions
where he might get drinke: who very courteously shewed
him a playne beaten way, leading to a Noblemans
house not farre off.
            The Fayry Champion put on a bold sharpe face, went
to the Noblemans house, and desired the Butler to giue
him a cup of his giuing drinke. But the Butler (as the
custome is) churlishly denyed him, and bid him be gone,
for that he had not any charity, much lesse commission, to
giue any thing to such an able wandering fellow as hee
was, bidding him go looke for worke amongst haruest
folkes, and take paynes for his liuing.
            Whereupon ye 
               Fayry Champion, like a valiant sturdy
Begger, tooke the Butler by the braines, & dasht his heeles
against the wall, made corkes to stop Ale-bottles of his
bones, & threw them into his Buttery, for al succeeding
Butlers (yt were not boon cōpanions) to, take example.
            
               He tooke his braines from foorth his head before,
               Else sore Kibe-heeles, perhaps, had made him rore.
            
            So he dranke vp all the beere in the Buttery, before he
could quench his intolerable thirst: for the house was not
then so well furnisht as at other times, by reason there
was no houshold: for the Lord and his Lady were gone
vp to Moropolis to take phisicke, & see the newest fashion
at Court.
            
            
               Thus he procéeded on his intended iourney, and after hee
had gone twenty miles or thereabouts, he began to finde a
fainting in himselfe, and felt his guts shrinke together like
burnt parchment, yet he tooke as good courage as necessity
vseth to driue men to, in such a case, and ere long, by good
hap he espied not farre off, a very fayre new built house, with
many goodly turrets and battlements, and whole clusters
of chimneyes more then néede required, for that he could
not see any vse of those that were néedfull, in regard there
was not any Tobacco stirring amongst them, which argued
there was but little good fellowship: therefore his heart waxed
cold; yet he went and knockt at the gate, but all in vaine:
for there was not any within to giue him answere, but onely
Spyders: for all the Rats and Mice were eyther gone, or
else staru'd with that extreame dearth.
            
               O Champion fayre, what ill did thee befall,
               To be deceiu'd? it was no Hospitall.
            
            It fortuned, as he was thus standing at the gate, a husbandman
of a néere neighbouring village, came by and asked
the Fayry Champion what he would haue there. Sir, qd.
the Fayry Champion, I am a traueller without money, and
altogether without any acquaintance, but onely Hunger and
Thirst, & this place afarre off promised reliefe to such wantfull
trauellers as I am. O Zur (quoth the husbandman)
the see how you ma be desseyu'd: but come and goe along
with me, to such vittles as old Madge my wife has puruided
vor my dinner, and cham suer yée shall be welcome to hur
with all hur heart. Sir (quoth the Fayry Champion) I rest
much bound to your loue, and will imbrace your kind offer
to go along with you.
            
               The honest playne countrey man in charity milde,
               Tooke vp at the gate, this poore fatherlesse child.
            
            But I pray, sir, tell me: what Gentleman owes this faire
house where you found me knocking? (quoth the husbandman)
Zuerly sur, he is no Gentleman, vor he is a Knight,
and my Londlord too, mary, and now both he and my Londlady

               
lye in the zitty, a vollowing a lawing matters, and they zay a haz zitch an intercate troubling vowle zute, tis a ſhame to zée it, and that it is great chance whether a conere get out  on't or no: vor a has not bene here in our countrey this tweluemoneth and more, burlady, come the time: but I wudd to God a were here vor me, vor we miſte a great deale of good cheare, and dauncing, and ſport at Kurſmas, zince my old Lond-lord his vather dyed. Well, God reſt his zoule, vor a was the beſt hondler of a long whip in all our countrey: nay I may tell you, a has not left his mate behind him: and cham zore a veard we zhall nere ha zuch another man as he was, vor a wud be zo yarly vp a mornings to vother his zhéepe himzelfe, as twas wondervull: and Lord, a wud tell zich a company of old vables, a mon wudd be the better to be in his company. Chée ha heard him zay, that his vather turn'd him out a doores when a was a little boy, to zéeke his vortunes, with one poore ſingle groat, all in three Hapences, in his purſe: but by my vaith chée know not how a got it: but cham zuer a dyed a mizerable rich mon.
            I wonder (quoth the Fayry Champion) much, that your Land-lord being no Gentleman, could come to be a Knight! (quoth the Huſbandman) Chee ha oftentimes heard him zay, that it coſt him well and vanordly vor it, I may tell you.
            When the Fayry Champion vnderſtood, there were more wayes then one to attaine to a Knightſhip, he held himſelfe in the moſt fortunateſt place of ye earth; for in the Fayry land they onely haue it by deſert: & on the ſudden he grew to ſuch an excéeding height of ambition, that with all haſte he would be gone, and to that purpoſe tooke leaue of the Huſbandman, who (as it appeared) was high Conſtable of the hundred, by reaſon he went to the pariſh Clarke, & cauſed him to make a paſſe for the ſecurity of Tom Pheander ye Fayry Champion in his trauels, wherein he charged all the petty Conſtables within the hamlets of his hundred, to ayde and reſiſt the Fayry Champion againſt any one whatſoeuer, that ſhould

               
ſéeme to stay, defend, or any way diſtribute him in his iourney, but ſuffer him to paſſe quietly without any of their tolerations.
            And although the Paſport was written by the hand of an old Wood-hen, (one would haue thought) if Hennes had had hands, yet the countenance of a Magiſtrates hand at it bore it out, & made it carry meate in the mouth. So he thanked him for all his good chéere and much kindnes, and departed in purſute of the fortunes he aymed at, which was to be a Knight at the leaſt.
            When he began to come néere the heart of the Iland, hée heard of the rich and flouriſhing City of Moropolis; thitherward he repayred with what expedition he could deuiſe, and drawing within ſight of it, he met in the way a proper tall trading Gentlewoman, ſet out after the fineſt faſhion of new deuices, with a white looſe body in a ſtraight blacke Gowne, hooped about with the flexible bones of a ſlender Whale: the crowne of her Cap was ſo déepe in band, that it durſt not ſcarce peepe out to be ſeene: her Maſke came downe to the tippe of her noſe, and her chin tyed vp with a lac'd clout (or handkercher,) as if ſhee were iawe-falne.
            Her obſequious Vſher, was a little leane fellow, with a fayre ſmooth cloake, whoſe fine threed was not aſhamed to ſhew it ſelfe to the vttermoſt: by his ſide he wore a long ſword, which was ſo quarrelſome, that it would draw vpon any thing it me withall: for the chape was worne out in drawing on the ground, not much vnlike a Munkey going vpright on his hinder legges, drawing his tayle after him.
            
               You do not much in your ſimile fayle:
               For he was an Vſher vnto a Wagtayle.
            
            This Sir Pandarus, was vſhering his Lumpe of foode and rayment,For he had no wages. three Miles from the City, towards the diſeaſed broken Chambers in a Brothell, to giue méeting with the wiſe profuſe firſt fruits (or heyre) of a rich Broker, whoſe extorting Intreſt money did ſo trouble

the Vse of his memory, at the very last houre of his death,
that he dyed without bequeathing the least sparke of wit to
his soone, amongst his great patrimony; for he had not the
time to remember the least Colledge of poore Schollers, nor
the meanest Hospitall of diseased people.
            
               He might haue left something, although but little,
               To cure his sonnes diseases in a Spittle.
            
            This parcell of Sinne, going towards the place of action,
to meete her Money-Paramour, had an Izeland dogge newly
shorne, which was going along with her, and being in the
fields, the dog fetch't his courses to and againe afarre off,
so that she was fearefull of losing him, and with a loud shrill
voice, she called him by the name of Lyon. Which the Fayry
Champion hearing, and withall séeing the dog runne towards
her, he thought she had cryed out to saue her from the
Lyon, and therefore drew his sword, and spéedily ranne to
ayde the ouerpressed virgin, according to the othe and office
of an arrant Knight.
            
               When Tom Pheander espy'd this dogged Lion,
               He drew his sword, and ran, till he was ny on.
            
            And comming to her, he sayd, Feare not, fayre Swéeting,
the outrage of this cruell rauening beast: for I will keepe
you from any euill whatsoeuer may betyde you, that hereafter,
Historyographers shal, Romanlike, stuffe out my valiant
acts, with the bumbast of their perpetuall Inkhornes.
            The dog comming néere her, began to leape and fawne,
and lickt her hand: which the Fayry Champion seeing, sayd,
Now do I well perceiue, that you are a most spotlesse miraculous
mayde: for that you are armed with the armour of
pure honesty, against the insatiety of this all-deuouring Caniball.
            
            
               Pheander shewed his iudgement was but poore,
               To call her mayd, that was a common ()
            
            Although he spoke seriously to his owne vnderstanding,
thinking indéed it had bin a Lyon: yet she (who scorned the
name of a mayd at those yeres) thought (as well she might)

that he had laughed her to scorne, & derided her with scoffes;
and therefore with her hand, she suddenly basht him on the
lips, that the very bloud sprang from his teeth: which flirt
he accepted as a token of great fauour from her bounteous
fist, and with his handkercher spung'd the blood from his
mouth, which he sayd he would kéepe as a perpetuall remembrance,
giuen by the hand of a faire vertuous virgin. With
which spéeches she grew so excéeding angry, and was so highly
incensed against him, that she commanded Sir Panderus
to set vpon him with his long sword: which he refused to
doe, being daunted with the feare of hauing his profession
questioned.
            
               A guilty conscience sometimes keepes in awe
               That thing, which else would not be curb'd by law.
            
            The Fayry Champion séeing there were no further aduē
               tures,
fitting the worths of a Knight errant, he quietly departs,
& addresses himselfe into that much renowned City
of Moropolis, where he purposed to spend some time about
the City, to learne a generous carriage of himselfe: and, for
that he would auoyde to be déemed an Intelligencer to some
forrayne State, he altogether abandoned Ord'naryes, and
Tauernes, and would not at any time séeme to intrude
himselfe into the company of those that vnderstood much, but
tooke a Poeticall Sculler, (whose swift Muse borrowed the
Poets pretty Nagge Pegasus to ride poste: and comming
short of his Iourney,Mariners seldome good Horse-men. he brought him home pittyfully Spurgal'd)
and so crost the water to visit the Beares, and Puppet
playes, the tall Dutchman, the woman Tumbler, the
dead skin of a strange liuing Fish, the Calfe with two heads,
whose two mouthes had deuoured more hay, then his one
stomacke could disgest, so that it lyes yet in his belly as fresh,
as when he first eate it, without putrifaction, as may be seene.
Hee likewise noted a very strange thing, which was, a
Blind man led through euery street of Moropolis by a staffe,
which had eaten so much Garlicke, that he could follow it
by the smell. And truely, many more great obseruations

he had gotten from amongst the Motion-mongers of Niniuy
and Babylon, so that now hee had sufficient experience to
mayntayne an argument by Parrattisme after dinner or
supper, with such ord'nary company, as vse to make great
talke of their small trauels.
            
               As their Iourney by Land from Burmooda to Tunis,
               And their Voyage by Sea, o're the Alpes to Venice.
            
            And now hauing furnished himselfe with some reasonable
store of coyne, which he had wonne at the excellent, and
most ingenious games of Pigeon-holes, and Trap, he put
his fortunes on towards the Morotopian Court, where it
pleased the Pages of the Nobility to do him much fauour,
and the Ladyes to grace him with the honour of Knightshéepe.
            
               The Lady layd the sword vpon his shoulder:
               He arose, and swore to beate her foes to poulder.
            
            For which he was (Anabaptistically) created or nominated
(at thyrty yéeres of age) Sir Tom Pheander, the
Mayden Knight, or Fayry Champion, otherwise, The
Knight of the Sun, otherwise, The Knight of the Burning
Pestle. And but that he was most notoriously knowne to be a
meere naturall subiect, the mutiplicity of his names & additions
might haue brought him in suspition, to be apprehended
for some seducing Spye, or at least, a Knight of the Poste.
            
            When the Fayry Quéene vnderstood by the inuisible Attendant,
which shée sent with him in his trauels, of his
grace in Court with Lords, his sometimes desired company
of Ladyes, and the generall loue and laughter of his iollity,
and Naturall conceits from the vulgar,
            
               He oftentimes shewed good pastime of body:
               The whole Globe did thinke him a counterfet Noddy.
            
            She foorthwith prouided him a rich Coate-armour inchaunted,
which had these propertyes: that whatsoeuer he
was (at any time) that put it on his backe, should not néede
to feare any terryble thing whatsoeuer, vnder the degree of
a Crabtrée Cudgell, & whensoeuer he should looke in a glasse,
               
with the Helmet on his head, he should be instantly so wise,
that he should be for that time alwayes opposite to a foole.
            
            This Coate-armour was of a singular proofe, checkerd
Motley, Vert and Argent, party per Pale, ribd with rowes
of Gules and Or▪
                from the very Gorget to the skirts. The
Helmet was of the same, on which was a deuice of foure
faces, resembling the foure windes. In the midst of those
faces were rays'd little mounts, appearing like Noses, on
which stood pretty conceited Windmills, which in the going
made as pleasant a soūd, as curious Fawlcons Bells. On the
Crest was aduaunced the Necke, Head, & Combe, of a bloudy
crested Cocke, betokening true valour euen after death.
            
               Wit eb'd from his Noddle like floods from a Rocke,
               Which made her prouide him the combe of a Cocke.
            
            This complete Coate-armour was committed by the
Fayry Queene vnto the trust and care of Madame Moriana
(a Fayry Lady) to be with all spéedy expedition conuayde
to her worthy merry Champion, the (now) Knight of the
Sunne.
            
            Madame Moriana séemed to hasten, and with all possible
spéed dispatched messengers with the greatest expedition that
might be, and (Lady-like) made a goodly shew of that shee
neuer purpos'd, giuing the Messenger direction to hasten to
the Morotopian Court, and there enquire after one Sir
Archmoriander Dunce-ll dell Cinthya, the Knight of the
Moone, her Knight, to whom true reason had farre ingag'd
hor loue and due respect, in fréeing her from the outrage of
Andromago a monstrous, strong and terrible little Gyant:
and thus it was.
            Madame Moriana, vpon a time, walking in an euening
(as the custome is in Fayry Land) downe in a greene valley,
wherein Nature had seated a most pleasant Groue, so fit for
priuate recreation and delightful excercise that Arte it selfe
could not deuise a more curious frame: thither she often walked
without neglect, or missing ye least minute of her accustomed
houre, who (by her often recourse thither) was espied by

               
               Andromago, a mighty huge and chollericke Pigmey Gyant. He was a full halfe yard broad betwixt the eyes, and almoſt eightéene ynches by the rule (wanting but the breadth of a ſuper-fine wyer) from the crowne to the héele, and the reſt of his body proportionable accordingly.
            This monſtrous grim-looking Gyant, knowing Moriana's vſuall houres of reſort to the Groue, ambuſhed himſelfe in a very great Thicket, (in the middle way) growing on the ſide of a high cloud-pearcing Mole-hill.
            The faſhion of the countrey is, that the Nobles and Gentry of ancient houſes, haue their Armes portrayed in a ſmall Eſcuchion, which they euermore beare before them, to the end they may be knowne from priuate perſons, and that the thronging multitude may giue way, when they approach neere; whereas otherwiſe, they could not haue that due reſpect which belongs to them, in regard it is a warlike nation, and ſubiect to Inſurrections: THerefore for that they may be euer in a readynes vpon any domeſtick warre, all go ready arm'd with Maſkes and Mufflers.
            Now had Andromago the Gyant, with his Fawchion, lopt downe the great arme of an Eglentine trée, where hee (Saliſberry playne like) looked through, to ſée the paſſing by of Moriana, whom at length he eſpyed comming alone afarre off, towards her wonted place of recreation. And drawing néere within the apprehenſion of his eye, he was well aſſured it was ſhe, and knew her by the Eſcuchion ſhe caryed before her, wherein was charged in chiefe, a halfe Moone Gules, in a iagged cloud Sables, and the lower (or backe) charge was, thrée Drops Or, vnder a Feſſ Argent. This coate ſhe gaue, which was the moſt ancientſt in al the Fayry Land, and euer continued hereditary to the heyres female of that houſe.
            When ſhe was come néere the Thicket, Andromago watched his fit opportunity, and ſuddenly ruſhed out like a Snake from a hedge, leaping thirty ynches by the rod, and caught her in his armes, and with very ioy of his prey, ror'd

               
like a Bull of eight dayes old, This hideous yell ſo affrighted the poore Lady, that ſhe was euer after troubled with a kind of Falling ſickneſſe. So leading her along as his priſoner, towards a Caſtle he had not farre off, which was double grated with huge Iron barres, not much vnlike the mighty ſtrong Baracadoed windowes of a monſtrous ouergrowne Mouſe-trap: wherein he had impriſoned many ancient tooth-wanting Ladyes, and fed them with nothing but hard candied ſweetemeates, and the ſowreſt iuyce of the ſweeteſt Grape.
            
            It was Sr. Archmorianders good hap, to take his way through the Fayry Land, homewards from his trauels, who had bene amongſt the barbarous Braſillians, to ſée the faſhion of the countrey, & alſo to learne the nature of the people, by a moſt happy chance, he met the poore captiu'd Lady, led by the hand of his vgly Monſter, who was néere as high as the Ladyes girdle, which compaſt her delicate waſte ſeuen times, beſides the knot.
            The ſudden appearance of the Gyant to Sir Archmoriander (for he had neuer ſéene in all his trauels and aduentures the like creature before) ſtroke him into ſuch a ſhaking palſey, that he could very hardly ſtand ſtill on his legs,Hee would haue bin gone. yet he tooke an indifferent ſtrong heart, and addreſſed himſelfe towards the Gyant, with a ſwéete quauering voice, ſaying:
            Thou moſt monſtrous and huge diminitiue of nature, which haſt alwayes bene an enemy to Ladyes, I aduiſe thée ſurrender thy priſoner into my hands, or elſe by the light of this marſhall hand, thou ſhalt well vnderſtand the price of her: for thou haſt done her ſuch ſkuruy paltry wrongs, as thy weake ſtate cannot counteruayle to make her ſatisfaction; for reaſon induces my worthy ſelfe to wey both your cauſes in my vpright ballance of vnequity.
            
               Andromago ſtaring at Sir Archmoriander, like a wild Gooſe, ready to fly vpon, ſayd, Thou fooliſh

Knight, thinkest thou I will so easily part with the
thing I haue so long stood and wayted for? No; I aduise
thée be gone, or else I will wyther thy very face, and
confound thy smelling sence with my breath: for I
scorne to stand to thy vnequall Chaundlers weights.
            The Gyants threats could not discourage Sir Archmoriander
one iot more then he was before, (although
surely the Giants breath was very strong, by reason he
was so short wasted, and his two ends were so néere
neighbours, that their friendshipp were alike, and the
one did participate the others strength and sauour) But
Sir Archmoriander well backt with hope to winne the
Ladyes fauour, and his affection to iustice, made him
looke so néere to his busines in hand, as an old purblindePurblind men are good husbands, and looke neere to their busines.
               Counceller (or rather concealer) whose veluet Ierkin is
sufficient to make a Iustice of peace without a commission,
that will not suffer the smallest caracter of a fault
to runne at randome vnpunished: but binds it fast in
recognizance, to receiue eyther corporall or pecunier
punishment. Euen so he consideratly bare in mind the
execution of some seuers iustice vpon a homicide, and
with warme courage betooke him to his sword; which
Andromago perceiuing, he likewise prouided to defend
himselfe against his aduerse Assaylant.
            
               The Iustices law did so assist his Clyent,
               As Morianders sword, the Lady from the Gyant.
            
            Sir Archmoriander, in the first encounter, had made
an end of the fight before they began, but that (being mad
with fury) he mist the Gyant, and runne the poynt of
his sword into the ground. Andromago (léering like a
Sargeant) espyed that aduantage (seeing him tugging
to pull it foorth againe) omitted no time, but aduanc'd
his club, and with one blow pasht Sir Archmorianders
head all into a lumpe: which euer after looked like a Beetle:
so that afterwards, when he came to be drest, the
Surgeons opinion was, that he was very likely to carry

that marke to his graue.
            But Sir Archmoriander recouered himselfe so well
as he could, and turned about as swift as a Windmill
sayle in a hot Summers day, (with strong agility of body,
and resolution withall, to giue a finall period to the
battayle) and most valiantly vntrussed his poynts, put
off his Doublet, snatcht vp his breeches by the sides,
and with his sword cut off the Gyants right hand,
so that it onely hung by the very bare bone and
sinewes.
            
            With this blow, Andromagoes Club fell out of his
hand: which Sir Archmoriander suddenly tooke aduantage
of by closing with him▪ and with a nimble strength
threw him flat on the earth with as much facility, as if
the Gyant had bene a childe of two yéeres old.
            
               Sir Moriander cut the Gyant on the hand,
               And hurt his little Toe, he could not stand.
            
            The Lady Moriana standing by all the time of the
fight, perplexed with an extreame feare of danger, and
now séeing a hope of victory attend her Champion, shée
began to take comfort in a pretty Medley, betweene
weeping and laughing.
            
            Sir Archmoriander hauing gotten Andromago vnder
him, lay vpon him with such a heauy weight, and
pressed him so sore, that till then,Archmoriander lay very heauy vpon the little Gyant. 
               Andromago felt not
Sir Archmorianders heauy displeasure fall vpon him:
which caused Andromago to cry out to the Lady, for
pardon, and craued mercy of Sir Archmoriander,
with a great shew of sorrow, for the excéeding iniurious
wrongs offered to the Lady, and the heauy vnsufferable
iniuryes intended against Sir Archmoriander: All
which was now fallen vpon himselfe, and the burden
did much bruise his conscience.
            Upon this submission, with penitency for his faults,
Sir Archmoriander most honourably (befitting his
worth) cut off his head, & set it on his doublet brest (where

a button was lost in this fray) wearing it in token of his
valour and victory, and so set him at liberty to go whither
he would.
            
               Although the Gyant would haue giuen a groate,
               Yet Moriander vow'd, to see his naked throate.
            
            Sir Archmoriander hauing thus freed the Lady Moriana
from the outrage of Andromago, hee went to
comfort her, who was then suddenly falne into a déepe
passion of sadnes.
            Swéete Madam (quoth he) you see your dangerous
enemy héere lye slaine: therefore, fayre Lady, I much
scorne your thoughts should be possest with any future
feare. Let me be the example of your courage, to take a
strong heart, and valiantly beare vp your Escuchion and
Armes without feare: for vnder your coate will I fight,
whilest I can sland or breathe: for nature hath taught
man to be an agent euen to brute Animals, much more
to fayre Ladyes, as for example: The heauy Oxe, hee
lightens with the Goade; the sullen Horse, he quickens
with the spurre; and the Melancholy dull Lady,
he stirrs vp to mirth, with the pricke of witty inuention
from a good brayne.
            At these pretty Similes Moriana smiled, and bid him
knéele downe, taking his sword, which was yet bloudy
with cutting the Gyants throate, and layd it on his
shoulder, bidding him rise vp, Sir Archmoriander, otherwise,
Dunce-ll dell Cinthya her Knight of the Moone,
(dubbing him in the ordure of the Escuchion she bore,
and intitling him by her halfe Moone) which bargayne
he seal'd with his lips,Not on the Escuchion, on the backe of her hand, with a
smacking impression, and kindly sayd, Fare you well,
sweete Lady, and so departed.
            
               Moriana thus was freed from the Gyant,
               And gaue him thanks, with tongue which went most plyant.
            
            This well deserued affection from Moriana to Sir
Archmoriander, possest him with the Armour, which of

right belong'd to the Knight of the Sunne, when he (as
many Gallants vse) neglected not the least opportunity
that occasion could minister, to crake and bragge of his
Mistris fauours most, when (if truth had béene knowne)
they least concern'd him.
            Sir Tom Pheander,
               For he was euer a great dreamer of Fayry busines. the Knight of the Sunne, had a
vision, wherein he had intelligence of a Coate-armour,
that was sent vnto him by the Fayry Queene, which
Coate-armour was likewise shewed to him in this
dreame, whereof he tooke especiall obseruation for the
markes and tokens, so that hee could not fayle in the
challenging of it.
            It was likewise told him in this vision, that Moriana,
a Fayry Lady, had most trecherously betrayde it into
the hands of the Knight of the Moone, who wrongfully
delaynde it from him.
            
               Sir Pheander had the Armour shewed in vision,
               Which made him hold Moriander in derision.
            
            This vision put the Knight of the Sunne into such a
passion of anger, that like a foolish mad man he tore his
hayre, and vowed a reuenge against the Knight of the
Moone, which he should be well assured to heare of, and
hastens with all spéed towards the Court, to sée whether
he could méete with his iniurious aduersary.
            That very morning the Knight of the Moone was
ready armed in the Knight of the Sunnes armour, and
almost vpō taking horse, to ryde abroad for some strange
aduentures, euen at the instant, when the Knight of the
Sunne came to Court.
            
               Archmoriander was arm'd, I know not how,
               To ride abroad to slay the sauage Sowe.
            
            And méeting the Knight of the Moone, he was well
assured (calling his memory to aduise, and summoning
the remembrance of the markes) that it was his armour:
therefore he stept to the Knight of the Moone, and sayd,
            Sir Knight, my simple opinion cannot iudge any of

your actions lesse then abominable honest, yet this
Coate-armour (and clapt him on the shoulder) belongs
to me, although you most ignobly detayne it from mee,
yet I am sure tis my right, and by Cockes and Combes
(the badge of my honour) I looke to haue it.
            The Knight of the Moone, thinking that he had struckē
him in earnest, most valiantly blurted out his tongue,
and bade him come by it how he could.
            This now likely to grow to a dangerous quarrell,
the freinds of both parts vsed their mediations, and
perswaded them to haue the matter put to arbittermēt,
and not fight, or go to lawe like brabbling fooles, which
arrest one another for Moone-shine in water: and so
with much adoe they both yéelded to haue the matter decided
by two indifferent honest men.Not too honest by no meanes.
            
            So they were both bound, each to other in generall
acquittances of a hundred pounds a péece: and the
Knight of the Moone vnarm'd himselfe, and deliuered
the Coate-armour and Helmet, (as he was inioyned)
into the custody of the Arbitrators then chosen, which
were two Headborrowes of a Hamlet neere adioyning
to the City Moropolis:
            
            
               The one had no wit, the other had no land,
               But botcht vp his liuing by patching with Holland.
            
            These Headborrowes being altogether vnskilfull in
deciding controuersies of such nature, retaynde a common
Lawyer, as an Vmpeere to assist them.
            The Lawyer, when he had séene the Coate-armour,
tooke a very great liking to it, insomuch that he purpos'd
to giue the two Knights satisfaction by money, and
kéepe the Armour to himselfe, if it would fit his body
(although his conscience told him it belong'd but to one,
yet he would please both parties to serue his owne turne.
So putting it on to try the fitnes, he felt it giue him such
a shrewde pinch in the Gues, (by reason it was too little)
that he could neuer after graze any where, but on bare

Commons.
            
            
               O Gaffer Lawyer, stay, how do you looke?
               Sir Pheander will note downe your name in his book.
            
            So the Lawyer séeing his purpose preuented by misfortune,
and no benefit like to rise towards himselfe, he
would take no further paynes in the busines, but left it
to the discretion of the two Headborrowes: who now
hauing the whole and absolute power of determining
the cause, and withall the Coate-armour in their owne
hands, they made no great haste to beate their heads
together about an award, but (like subtill Foxes) made
good vse of the Armour for the most part of their whole
yéere, to Watch and Ward in, and (hauing learned
a tricke of the Lawyer,) fed the two Knights with delayes,
till their owne turnes were serued, and in the
end, (because neyther of them could write or read) they
return'd an Ignoramus.
            
            When the matter was vnderstood to bée so difficult,
that such Understanding men (as they were taken to
be) could not decyde the controuersie, it was held
fit, that they should try out their owne rights in single
combate, by reason both challeng'd with like proofes,
and the one would not indure the other, to bee riuall
in eythers absolute right: where indéed, necessity admits
no plurality in such a Case.
            
            
               You say very true, the weather growes hot:
               And two fooles at once were too much in one coate.
            
            The day for Combate was appoynted, and the
two Combatants had warning giuen them, to prouide
themselues sufficiently for the mayntenance of their
iust claymes.
            Now does the Knight of the Sunne lye ruminating
euery night, tossing and tumbling in his bed
without sléepe, bethinking himselfe (being of a timorous
nature) what the issue of this dangerous quarrell
may come to, and (oftentimes) heartily wished,

               
he had neuer challeng'd ſo worthy a Knight, for ſo ſmall a trifle.
            On the contrary part, the Knight of the Moone ſéemed to be very vnwilling to expoſe his body to ſuch an eminent danger, eſpecially againſt a Knight of his owne order, but rather could wiſh him to sléepe in peace, till he did awake him, which he would not do for a world; but that his Knight-ſheeps word was ſo farre ingag'd.
            
               Alas, poore Knights, I much bewayle their caſe,
               To ſee how meager both looke in the face.
            
            The Knight of the Sunne armed himſelfe in a new white armour, which he neuer tryed before, and (for decencyes ſake) went into his chamber, to his looking Glaſſe, to ſée how his Armour did fit and become him, and finding it to his liking, he called his Page, and aſked his opinion.
            The Page anſwered, that the Armour did not fit or become him, in his opinion. (Quoth the Knight of the Sunne) No, my pretty Page? Why, the Glaſſe in my chamber tels me, it is very proportionable and fit.
            Sir, beléeue not the Glaſſe, (quoth the Page) for the knquiſh Opticke made it to reflect many faire figures on fowle faces, and they will flatter many, and make them ſéeme farre better then they are. But, maſter, content your ſelfe: for you looke very well, eſpecially when your Beuer is cloſe lockt, that a man cannot ſée your face. Which anſwers pleaſed the Knight ſo, that he reſted paſſing well contented. But now the time is come, and the Combatants ready to enter the liſts.
            
               Soft, who comes heere? I pray can you tell?
               The Knight of the Sunne, what can you not smell?For there was ciuil warres in his belly, and ſome run from the campe.
               
            
            Firſt came in the Knight of the Sunne, richly acowterd in a white Armour, adorn'd with a white and azure Plume in the creſt, with blacke beaten buckrum baſes, gliſtering like the pureſt blacke Iet, beautyfied all ouer with paynted deuices of Sunnes and Starres.
            
            
            
            
               Iacke (towering) Daw that tops the lofty tree,
               On a Swines backe, ſits not ſo vpright as hee.His blacke Baſes gliſtred like a Crow on a Hogs backe.
               
            
            On eyther ſide were Emblemes of T P K, figured in Eſcuchions, farre more fayre then the Shelfe-clothes in a new Grocers ſhoppe.
            Direct before him, at his Saddle pummell, hung a Battle-axe, which had endured the brunt of many a deepe danger, ſhadowed vnder the myſtery of a Burning peſtle, flaming out of a Common morter, moſt artificially wrought in Naturall colours vpon Holland.
            
            By his ſide was claſped a dangerous payre of Hangers, wherein was wrought with ſubtill imbrodery, of Moſſe and Peacocks feathers, a Landſkipp of ſtrong grated Caſtles, high growne Woods, and large fieldes of Hempe: in which hung a ſword wrought with ſuch cunning, that a man could very hardly iudge which end ſhould hang downwards. In his hand he carried a proper tall ſlender Lawnce, ſo ſtraight as a bent-Bow, (againſt which, the Knight of the Moone did except, fearing to be ouer-reacht with a crooked meaſure) and it was ſo ſharpe at the end, that it would ſticke to a coate of ſtéele like a piercing Burre.
            
            He was mounted on a browne-bay Courſer, of ſuch a ſtrange vnderſtanding, that he would apprehend more then himſelfe 
                could deuiſe to teach him.
            
               The Horſes wit did worke, as I ſuppoſe,
               Ouer the Tubbe, and Barme dropt from his noſe.It was not a Brewers horſe for all that.
               
            
            For when he but preſented his foote to the Stirrop, he would ſtand ſo gentle as a blocke: but being vp and ſurely ſeated, one very whiſke of a birch rod would make him fling out his héeles like a Schoole-boy, and runne with ſuch ſwiftnes, and wonder full ſpéde, that the very ſtuffing of his head would drop out at his noſe like Turpentine.
            
            The Capariſons of his horſe were of the ſame péece that his baſes were of, and wrought all ouer with rich

colours of painted Néedleworke: which made a more delightfull
shew, then the braue Buceplialus of a Whitsontide
Lord in his Morrice daunce.
            Hee had such small Spurres, that a man could very
hardly discerne the Rowels: for they were no bigger then
the little fore whéeles of a small ordinary Coach.
            
            
               
                  His Launce the whip, his spurrs the wheeles, the caparisons the Carre, and himselfe the Carter. His Rowels bore compasse, extending so farre,
               He looke like a Carter, with whip, horse and Car.
            
            Before him was carryed by strength of man, a morall
deuice of wind-Instruments, figuring a man troubled
with the wind-chollicke, which could neyther haue ease,
or take pleasure, till he heard the wind breake from him
with a melodious sound. These Instruments in the Fayry
Land, are called Poke-whistles; but héere, the vulgar
most deprauingly doe giue them the playne attribute
of Bagpipes.
            
            
               At length his sullen pipes began to squeake:For he cannot hold his water, when he heares a Bagpipe.
               
               To saue his breech, he did alight to leake.
            
            On eyther side went a Squire in the habite of Turkes,
with red Turbants on their heads, wreath'd about with
white Shashes, and Trunchions in their hands, betokening
Bandettors, or sturdy high-way standers, captiu'd
to the mercy of his victorious sword.
            He was come into the Lists, (I meane not, of thréedbare
broade cloth,) and had ridden so often about, to
shew himselfe to the people,He almost tyr'd his horse, before the combate that it would haue tyr'd a
horse, before the other Combatant came in. But hee is
not long that comes at last.
            Then came in the Knight of the Moone, making no
great shew, who was likewise in a milke white Armour
newly scowr'd: he bare a plume in his crest, as white as
a Goose feather, signifying his innocence (for that the
Lady Moriana was neuer had before any Iustice, to be
examined how she came by the Armour, nor did the Messengers
that brought it, acquaint him that it did belong
to the Knight of the Sunne.)
            
               He had party colour'd silke bases of a rich Mercers
stuffe, but the name I doe not well know.
            His Sword and Launce were pattern'd by the Knights
of the Sunne.
            
            His Horse was blacke, and so frée-spirited, that hee
rid him without spurres.
            
            He came in,I meane not Knights, that dyet in Ord'naries. like a plaine ordinary Knight without
Attendants, saue onely his horse—had rich trappings.
            
            
               Sir Moriander's come, grim look't, as sharp as vargis,
               Without Attendants▪ fie vpon this charges.
            
            A brother of their order, hearing of this combate, made
his personall appearance, with a blue flat Cap, wherein
stucke a feather-bush, of all the colours in the Rainebow.
            
            He had a déepe ruffe band with wide sets, so great,
as if the Lawndresse had mistaken the steele, and poak't
it with the Band-blocke. It bare a circumference like
the whéele of a Brewers Dray-Cart.
            
            He had a long dropping Nose, like the pipe of a Still, to
which, his leane Chin, in curtesie (turned backwards)
to giue méeting halfe way, at the signe of the Mouth.
            
            
               No iesting foole, but a playne dealing Lad,
               That speakes his mind, be it good or bad.
            
            At his sudden comming in, the two Knights stomacks
began to rise (but not at one another) for they thought
he had brought a Calues head & bacon (in aRuffe Band. 
               Charger
vpon his shoulders) couered with a blue (Blue Cap. 
               Chinay) dish,
and aHis feather. bunch of Reddish: but it fell out otherwise: for
he came like a voluntary Trumpet, at his owne proper
costs and charges, to sound the terrible Alarum.
            
            
               He blew allarme, so sweete as any figges:
               Which pleas'd the eares, as Iewes loue rosted Piggs.
            
            So taking his Cow-Trumpet from about his necke,Horne.
he soūded a charge: which the two Knights hearing, they
put on couragiously, with as swift speed as their horses
could goe,Not run to the very shocke, where both their horses
most vnfortunately started off so farre, that the one
could not come neere to touch the other with his

               Launce, and running out their full caréere, the Knight
of the Moone, for want of Spurres, could not stay his
Horse,
               Or Picadilla. which put him in such a madde standing Choller,
that he forgot to beare vp the poynt of his Launce, in somuch
that the Burre had like to light vpon the skirts of
some of the standers by, and made them cry, Beshrewe
them that beare Burres.
            
            The Knight of the Sunne (premeditating the danger,
and withall respecting the meanest subiects safety, as
also his owne) most grauely let fall his Launce, and
tooke hold of the Saddle pummell with one hand, and
checkt in his Courser with the other, so fiercely & short,
that he made a sudden stand, in lesse then a quarter of an
houre, to the great pleasure, and wonderfull applause of
all the beholders.
            In the second course, the Knight of the Moone vsed
his Launce for a Iacobs staffe, and winking with one
eye, tooke the iust height of the Knight of the Suns brest,
to which height, he most politikely glided his Launce,
all along on the top of the Barre, the whole careere to the
very shocke, where (by great chaunce) he broke his
staffe with such a counterbuffe, that the Knight of the
Sunne was halfe way behind the saddle, before he could
catch hold of his horses mayne, which otherwise had kist
his tayle to the very ground but his sure hold so nimbly
recouered him, that he brake his Launce athwart the
Knight of the Moones brest with such fury, that the
Knight of the Moone was extremely troubled with
the passion of the heart: wherewith he was so grieued,
that the next course he was fully resolued, to seale the
Knight of the Sunne his Quietus est. And for that purpose,
he called for a stiffe Launce, with a full resolue, eyther
to breake the Knight of the Suns backe, or at least,
to dismount him ouer his horses crooper.
            The Launce was deliuered to him, which was a
great deale too big for the graspe of his hand, and therefore

he put it vnder his arme, and tooke fast hold with
both his hands on the Pummell of the Saddle: and running
his full course, he hit the Knight of the Sunne, against
the thumbe of his Gauntlet, which beat backe the
Launce quite from vnder his arme, and withall, neere
turnd the Knight of the Moone out of his Saddle to the
ground, but that the buckle of a girt catcht hold of his
Bases, and so sau'd his honour from the dust.
            But recouering himselfe, and halfe mad with fury,
he ranne his horse about to the same side of the Barre,
where the Knight of the Sunne was, and most cowardly
(against the law of legges) set vpon the Knight of the
Sunne,
               Or, armes. with both his armed fists, when the Knight of
the Sunne had nothing in the world to defend himselfe,
but his Sword and Launce (which he so dearely loued)
that he carefully preserued it from breaking that course.
            In this their last course of Tilting,
               Although they were not ale-tubs. the very dregges
of their malice began to appeare, & therefore they were
resolued to runne no more, but to try it out with their
single swords at the Barriers. So both of them drew, and
layd on such heauy loade, that the very fire it selfe did
not dare to appeare from their valiant swords, for feare
of being quencht with the drops of sweate, that fell from
their Knight-sheepes hyde-bound faces.
            
            In this conflict they were both so farre spent and
tir'de, as euer was Hackney horse vnder prodigall Citizen,
and the pride of their eager swords (now hauing
their bellyes full) were so rebated, that neyther of them
would bite:They threw away their swords without scabbards. And therefore (like old ouerworne Seruingmen,
whose prime of youth was spent in their masters
seruice) had at last both their coates pul'd ouer their
eares, & dismissed their masters seruice without wages.
            The Knights of the Sunne and Moone now being
both on foote, made a pawse to breathe themselues,
staring in opposition one against the other, with full
bigge faces swolne with anger, foming or slauering at

               
the mouth, like two ſucking ſauage Bores, whetting their tuſhes againſt a dugge.
            And on a ſudden they cloſde together, and ſo fell to wraſtling, to trye their ſtrength of armes:14. daies ſoone come about; for the Sunne and Moone are in coniunction. but the Knight of the Moone (being the elder Courtyer) was too cunning for him in the Gripe, and threw him downe,The Moone ouercame the Sunne. but ſo, as both were downe together, and the Knight of the Sunne vndermoſt, which ſeemed ominous, portending ſtrange things to come.The Eclipſe of the Sunne.
            
            
               Why is it ſo darke? that I can tell ſoone:
               The Knight of the Sun is the Man in the Moone.
            
            The (Knight of the) Sunne, and the (Knight of the) Moone, continuing thus in coniunction, cauſed ſuch an Eclipſe, as hath ſeldome béene mentioned in any hyſtories of your greateſt (Almanacke) writers for the interpoſition of the body of the (Knight of the ) Moone, did ſo darken and obſcure the light of the (Knight of the) Sun: that it made a pitch-blacke darke day, and wrought ſuch confuſions and miſtakings on earth, by reaſon of the darkenes, that in Moropolis, where the houſes ſtood thicke, one honeſt Citizen could very hardly ſée another, without the helpe of Lanthorne light.
            He was a happy man that could kéepe his wife to himſelfe, for feare of loſing her: for many wiues tooke other men in their huſbands ſtead, for want of light.
            It was ſo extreame darke, that Collectors for the poore could not ſee to diſtribute the monyes, gathered to charitable vſes, but were glad to put it vp in their owne purſes, and imploy it to their owne vſes till this Eclipſe was paſt.
            The poore Conſtables were glad to take money of Malefactors to buy them fire-light, to ſée the peace kept, whereas oftentimes before, many of them were forſworne, by reaſon they could not ſée to bring in true Preſentments.
            
            The Lawyers could not ſée their briefes, not to make

               
ſo much as one motion for his (rich oppreſſing) Clyent, without three double fees for his motion & Torch-light: but for his poore Client, if his cauſe were good, his charge of torch-light was ſaued, by the preſence of Angels.
            
            And although Attournyes ſwarm'd like the Graſhoppers in Egypt, yet they kept ſo cloſe, and were ſo hard to be ſeene, (by reaſon of this darknes) that a man could very hardly haue any one appeare, not ſcarce for ten groats.
            
            The fogging Solliciter could not ſee to follow a cauſe, as in honeſty he ought, but neglected the buſines of him that firſt retayn'd him, & for want of Candle-light, tooke fées of the contrary party, which (after the Eclipſe was paſt) came to light, and he called coozening Knaue for his labour, though ſore againſt his will.
            In this darke Eclipſe, the Bankrupt could not ſée to pay his debts: but his creditors were glad to grope out halfe a crowne in the pound, and thanke him for it.
            The miſerable Iewiſh Vſurer would not be at charge, for ſo much light as would ſearch the odde corners of his Counting-houſe, to find out, and deliuer vp Morgages of Land, and old bonds that were formerly payd: but put off the debtors with releaſes, and acquittances, with hope that time might neglect them, or caſt them aſide to be loſ
                  •
               : then would he but forſweare the payment, and all is his owne.
            The extorting Broker, (that ſuckes the very marrow from the bones, worſe then the fowle diſeaſe) for want of candle-light, could not ſée the Deuill at his elbow with one pawe on his ſhoulder, ready to teare in in a thouſand péeces, for oppreſſing the poore pawning borrower with threeſcore in the hundred, and in miſſing but one houre of his pay-day, he ſhould be ſure to loſe more, then thrice the value he borrowed.
            Some wicked Mothers, after they came home from their Reuelling cheere and Muſike, for want of Candle-light, became Bawdes euen to their owne Daughters.
            
            
            In this darke Eclipse, the Peaking Pandar sneakt
out with his bundle of rotten commodity, which by
candle-light made such a fayre shew, that he held it at a
Pockey deare rate; but the world was growne so cunning,
that none but young Heyres, and Fooles would
deale with him in Hole-sayle, and yet hee made shift to
retayle it out to many Gallants by the yard, because they
were his common Customers.
            
            The Tapster could not sée to doe any man right, it was
so excéeding darke in his Celler, that he thought the Deuill
had bin there, (so that he came running vp affrighted,
before his Pot was halfe full.
            By reason of this Eclipse, the Oftler could not giue
the horse hay, nor sée the age in his mouth, without a
greazy candle in his hand.
            O, 'twas a lamentable time with Dyers & Picture-drawers:
for the one could not sée by candle-light to put
in those true ingrediences that would hold colour, and
kéepe from stayning: Nor the other by candle-light,
could not take the true picture of Man or Woman,
without great faults.
            This darke Eclipse was more beneficiall to Tallow-Chaundlers,
then thrée darke Winters before,
wherein Prentices to the trade tooke such paynes, and
withall were so carefull; that many of them were made
frée, which before were but Screalings, and euer crawling
in the Tallow, with their blacke flat Caps like
Maggots.
            
            And this Eclipse did not much hinder Haberdashers
of small wares, by reason they kept so many lights: for
by so much light, a man might well discerne small wares
in many Shops.
            
            It was a merry time with Carrmen, Watermen, &
Porters: for in this Eclipse, many of them did nothing
but drinke, domineere, and swagger in Alehouses; but
the often going to and fro of the Pot, made them talke

of that, which they had nothing to doe withall, and
many times their obtuse apprehensions would be medling
with the warres betwixt the great Turke and Prester
Iohn, how it was likely to end; because they heard

                  〈◊〉
                neighbour goodman Iobson say, they were now
growne friends, and had put the matter to a bickerment.
So that State businesses (which nothing concern'd
them) and the pot together, so stupified their
braynes, that many of them went raling out of doores.
But if money began to fail out somewhat short, before
they came to the heyght of their State matters, then
many of them, (like a company of fowle-mouth'd fellowes)
would sweare, curse, and rayle, euen against
those men that set them on worke, from whom they
had their chiefest meanes of liuing.
            This darke Eclipse was almost the vndoing of many
Bayliffes and Sargeants, and the impouerishing of
Marshals-men so much; that their Mercenary dependances
(whom they authorize to arrest) made men more
fearefull of their purses, then of putting in bayle to their
actions; by reason their exacting fees, (for want of businesses)
came not in roundly, so that they could not
better their apparell, but went like Runegado Baccanalians,
be dropt all before with greale and ale, whose
long continuance begot a glistering substance, which
made such a coogning shew, that a man would haue
thought his preface had béene all Sattyn, although his
Doubblet was not worth a Button,
               Not one button on his Doubblet. and pind ouer before,
as if he had bin in his swaddling clouts, or els borne
with those clothes on his backe.
            
            This darke Eclipse prou'd dismall to the chiefe Miller
of a Wind-mill; for he hauing beene abroade amongst

                  〈◊〉
                companions carowsing, was so extremely typpl'd

                  •
               ith drinke, that he had much adoe in the darke to finde

                  〈◊〉
                
               Mill, although it was but a coytes cast from the

               
               Ale-houſe where he got his liquor. At length finding the Mill, by the noyſe it made in going, he groped fo
                  •
                the ſtayrs to go vp, which he could not find, but wen
                  •
                vnder the Mill, amongſt the Sacks of Wheate that we
                  ••
                ſtanding there ready to grinde. Amongſt theſe ſa
                  •••
                he found good eaſie elbow-roome, and leaning again
                  ••
                them, fell faſt aſleepe: This Malt-ſacke now among
                  ••
                the Wheate-ſacks was ſo dead in ſleepe, that indéed he was as ſenceleſſe as his bed-fellowes. The Millers man aboue in the Mill, had put vp almoſt the laſt hopper full of all the wheate that was then ready cran'd vp▪ Therefore hee let downe the rope to crane vp more, and afterwards came downe himſelfe in the darke (like a fooliſh knaue without a candle) ſo féeling for the ſacks of corne, the firſt that he lighted on, was the Malt-ſacke his maſter, whom he tooke for a Sacke of Wheate. Then the wicked hangman put the ryding deuice ouer his maſters head, where he felt a handkercher (which his maſter did vſe to weare, with lace and buttons) about his necke, (after the effeminate faſhion, forſooth
               A Caueat for Clownes in faſhion.) tyed with a knot, which his knotty-ioynted numbd fingers could not diſtinguiſh from the ſtrings of a ſacke: there he faſten'd the rope, and away he goes vp into his Mill to wind vp the ſuppoſed ſacke, (his maſter towards heauen againſt his will) and hauing cran'd him vp halfe way, hee heard the ſtones of the Mill begin to touch each other, for want of corne, whereby he was enforced  
                  ••
                faſten the wrench of the Crane with an Iron pinne, an
                  •
                ſo let his maſter hang whileſt he went vp to put more corne in the hopper, (wherein he ſhewed his carefull diligence, to looke to his maſters buſineſſe, although h
                     •
                   were hang'd.) After ye Millers man had fild hi hopp
                  ••
                he betooke him to his old worke, and cran'd (by fauo
                     •
                  
                his Maſter to the height of his ambition (but pride 
                     〈◊〉
                   haue a fall.) So he tooke ye ſuppoſed ſacke of corne in,  
                  •
                went to fetch the candle, to ſee to vnlooſe the ſtrin
                  •
               
               
               
               
and comming néere, he perceiu'd it was his dead maſter: then did he wring him by the noſe, and boxt him about the eares, to recall life, but all was in vaine. So he ſtayd his Mill, although he durſt not ſtay himſelf, lock't vp the doore, and put the key in his pocket, fearing his maſter ſhould follow him to rayſe the towne, and away he runne, and was neuer heard of to this inſtant day.
            The (Knights of the ) Sunne and Moone, thus continuing their long coniunction together, made the ſpectators weary by reaſon of this Eclipſe: for it was ſo darke, that thoſe which ſtood néereſt to them, could not poſſibly ſee any of their valiant déeds, but onely they might heare them puffe and blow, and therefore it was thought fit to haue them parted. So they felt them out, who lay ſo ſtill (being both ouerwearyed) as if they had béene in a ſound ſleepe.
            
            When they were both vp, and had breathed themſelues a while, the Knight of the Sunne was very earneſt to be at the Knight of the Moone againe, to try whether he could regaine the light which ſo Eclipſt his honour: but he was held backe (which made him the more eager) and might not be ſuffred, becauſe the combate was already adiudged to be loſt on the Knight of the Suns part, and the award giuen vp, which was:As the cuſtome is.
            
            That the Knight of the Moone ſhould haue and iniuoy the Coate-armour and Helmet, and his owne proper right, without the leaſt trouble or moleſtation of the Knight of the Sunne, and to weare the ſame, where, and when he pleaſ'd, according to his diſcretion. Prouided alwayes, that the Knight of the Sunne, vpon reaſonable warning, ſhould haue the vſe of the Armour and Helmet, ſo that at any time he could alleadge ſome great cauſe, without yeelding any reaſ
                     •
                  n for the ſame but to redeliuer the ſame againe to the Knight of the Moone, as true and lawfull owner, without detayning

it by delayes, any longer then his present vse required,
vpon the forfeiture of his Knight-sheepe and
Armes.
            
            So the Knight of the Moone had the Coate-armour
and Helmet deliuered to him, wherewith hee was immediatly
arm'd,Boyes. and so departed the Lists, with a great
applause (especially of the younger sort of people) as
Victor.
            
            The Knight of the Sun, hearing the award proclaymed,
and withall séeing the Knight of the Moone beare
away the Bell: he stood like a body without a soule▪
                or a
man whose heart was falne into his hose, or indéed like
King Belins armed Stake in the fieldes, which Archers
shoote at.
            So this (little dangerous) Combate was ended,
which since the battell betwéene Clineasse and
Dame
                     •
                  asse the like hath not bin heard
of, saue onely that of Don Quishotte
and the Barbor, about
Mambrinoes inchaunted
Helmet.
            
            
               Thus endeth the Legend of this fearefull fight,
               Twixt Pheander the mayden, and Moriander the Knight:
               Which parted betweene them, their indifferent dealings
               Did proue them to-meane Knights, not Gyants, nor Screalings.
            
            FINIS.
            
            
            
         
      
   