
      
         
            
            
               
THE COPPIE OF the Anti-Spaniard made at Paris by a French man, a Catholique.
            Wherein is directly proued how the Spanish King is the onely cause of all the troubles in France.
            Translated out of French into English,
            LONDON. Printed by Iohn Wolfe. 1590.
         
      
      
         
            
            
            The Coppie of the Anti-Spaniard, made at Paris, by a French Gentleman a Catholique.
            
               THe Spaniard now after some time hauing by treasons, and sundry sleightes and practises enueigled away no lesse of our dominions, then at this day remaine vnder our iurisdiction, and presuming on his successe therein, hath of late dared to aduaunce himselfe aboue vs, to whom it was accostumably: an honour to follow vs, euen in the second place. And now at this present féeling his aged yeares to hasten in, winding vp his latest daies, knowing well ye insufficiency of his ofspring, the ambition of his seruantes, and iminent ruine of his estate, and foreséeing that the weakened kingdome of France will and may in time recouer hir former health and liberty, (which as it were newly reuiued, and enflamed with desire of warre, will in the end encounter hir fiercest enemies) he laboureth before his death to chaine fast that Lion, which otherwise may in short time deuour both him and his children, and endeuoreth to make him selfe absolute Lord of all France, not regarding any rightfull claim, title or pretence whatsoeuer. Whose desire notwithstanding I doe not much maruaile at, this being the most excellent pray that euer Prince obtayned, but rather wish that we would here fore-thinke vs, before we be bound, for it wil be too late with after thoughtes to recouer our liberty being once lost. For the effecting whereof his Embassadour here amongst vs, (a man as it were borne to the managing of such affaires) hath proceeded so farre by his extraordinary liberalities, and by meanes of his preaching Friers, and meetings of his Iesuites (his disguised spies, whom we haue fréely entertained amongst vs to our great cost and charges) that in the end a

contract is agreed on, which in effect is the very sale of the Crowne of France: for the ratifying whereof, it is euen now a concluding to put the Spaniarde in full possession of the same. And that it may not be gainesayd, some labour to perswade vs that it is the only and most necessary thing, as without which we must of necessity in the end become al Heretiques. O most miserable wretches then that we be. Can not our Catholique religion continue without the safety of an aged Spaniard? hath it no other holdfast, then vppon so sclender a thréed? Are wee now come to this passe, that if either the King of Spaine (whose aged yeares bréede continual danger) should chance ere long to die, or the Turk should againe assaile him, or the Flemmings renewe their warres, or if the Portingales (which can no longer brooke his insupportable tyranny) should happen to rebell, whereby his leisure might not serue him, to restore France to hir desired peace. And if either the one or the other should befall him (all which ere long are most likely to happen) are wee then vtterly to loose our Religion? why good God, who to deliuer thy people from bondage, didst restraine the course of the waters, and madest a wall of the sea against the sea it selfe, canst thou not at this present in the secrets of thy great prouidence, finde some meanes to continue the glorye of thy holy name, but that of necessity we must be made the bondslaues of a most cruel maister, being the most insolent tirant that euer liued, or now doth liue on earth? Must it needes he (Lord) that thy Religion, which at the beginning preuailed in France against the Romane slauery, being an assurance of our frée liberty, and a pledge of thy great fauoure, must it now produce most contraryeffects in constrainyng vs to yeld our selues to the Spanish tiranny? Oh happy then, yea thrise happy those our forefathers, who fighting, died, rather then they would become Spaniards, must wee now their successiue children so much degenerat from them? and must we needs become Spaniards? Alas if your spent

blood hath profited so litle, yet at leaste, why haue you not lefte vs some sparke of your Honor, or some praise-worthy motions to die in fight against those, who seek to dispoile vs of our liberty? Shall it remaine chronicled in the histories of our time, that a few Hugunots (albeit with extremity of danger) haue maintained them selues true French, not becoming either English or Germains, in such sort as that albeit we sought to enforce them with the cruelty of fire, and other torments. To alter their religion, yet spared they not to aide vs them selues, in the recouerie of Newhauen: and that we, whom none haue dared so much as to thinke to constraine in our religion, and who more then doubly exceede the armie of our enimie, do so slenderly regard the honour of our countrie, and our owne proper libertie, that at the first we are contented to yield our selues professed Spaniards? Here some will say, it is not the name of King, that he will so soone take vpon him, but onely of Protector. Oh learned Lawiers, and such as vnderstand the sense and meaning of wordes: is not euery King necessarily either a tyrant, or els a Protector. The King of Spaine would make vs belieue that he will be our Protector. But in what sorte? Did not the Romanes content them selues with the bare name of friends, and allies with those, whom by conquest they had made their subiects? And doth not he at the first vsurpe the name of maister ouer vs? But make your meaning a litle more plaine vnto vs: Either we shal haue no King at all (& yet Philip shal be our King) or wee will haue another, which if we haue, he must néedes be vnder the protection of the Spanish King. What? shall the King of Fraunce (who neuer had any other Protector but God, and the sword which he hath giuen him, and who neuer had other superiour to direct and commaund him) acknowledge him selfe to be at the disposition of the Spaniard, and leaue God, to be vnder the Spanish protection? At the beginning we were made belieue, that he would take no other

title vpon him, then Protector of the Catholike religion. But now we find the contrarie: for the very first word of the agréement which some haue passed vnto him, importeth him to be Protector of the Kingdom and crown of Fraunce. But imagin this (wherto we are perswaded) to bevery true, and that we had a Protector of our Catholike faith, and a King who for the preseruation of the Catholike religion (as one vnable to subsist of him selfe) should stand in néede of a Protector, I would demaund but this question, whether of the two should haue absolute authoritie to command in time of warre? who the direction of armies? whether the placing of gouernours, officers, and benifices? and if any matter of strife or controuersie should happen betwéene them, either for matters of religion or otherwise, or if the one would vsurpe ouer the other, who should procure an agréement betwéene them? Oh rare imaginations. Is it possible the world should haue two Sunnes? or one Estate two Soueraines? And if it be néedfull (as in déed it is most necessarie) that the one should be vnder the other, whether in reasonable sence is likely to be the greater commander? the Preseruour or Protector: or he who shadowed and protected vnder a greater power then his owne? Alas, doth he not alreadie by these articles, take vpon him the name of his Maiestie without any addition thereunto? What difference is there betwéene the name of Maiestie and King, but that the first is a name of greater pride and more arrogancie. Let vs say (if so much liberty be left vnto vs, and that we be not already become his slaues, let vs boldly say that which euery man doth know. That the King of Spaine will be our maister for a time vnder the name of Maiestie, and of Protector enterchaungeably: but in the end, for euer vnder the name of King. He will haue his Lieutenant, or Uiceroy of Fraunce, as he hath of Naples: and for a while he will vse them that presently aide and assist him to serue his owne turne, but at last destroy or at least banish them: fearing least they will

not humbly enough obey him in Fraunce: and then shall we haue a Don Ferdinando amongst vs, as well as his other subiects: it is expedient that we speake thus boldly. Haue we not beene long enough deluded with these fantasies, haue we not often beene told, that in sooth there is some intelligence and entercourse of dealing with ye Spaniard, but not of such consequence as some imagine, & peraduenture he expects, and that is necessarie to retaine him in expectation of some great good, but that in the end he is vndoubtedly to be deceiued: forasmuch as he knowes not how to make his owne bargain, and take good assuraunce of vs? Is it not a good while, since the state of France is secretly bought and solde: especially at this present time, when with all manner of open hostilitie it is suriously assaulted? Must wee still dissemble and hide the cause of our miserie? or rather must we néedes please our owne humours therein, seduced with a vaine hope of coine and siluer? As though anie thing could happen more miserable to a minde of anie courage and valor, then to be enforced euen to sell himselfe for méere want and penurie. Are we so poore and néedie? Here let me aske a question or two, what is become of those great and infinte summes of mony which not long since were founde in many houses of this Citie? Where are those huge summes that were leuied of so many ransomes, lones, beneuolences, and imprests? where was that money imployed which was made of the sale of all our plate, of all our chaines, and of all our iewels? Is the greatest parte thereof transported out of the Realme? Haue not certaine, as it were hunger staruen pesants, and gréedie varlets, so enriched themselues with the remainder, that they are now as demie Princes? Haue not some of them so sumptuously adorned themselues therewith, that they iet it vp and downe rather lyke new married bridegromes, then souldiers sit for the field? Haue not many of our best and richest widdowes of Roane and Paris, bene seduced and beguiled with some part of it? In conclusion, haue our treasuries beene so

well managed, and our reuenues so well husbanded, that for néede and pouertie we should in the end be inforced to seeke vs new Maisters? Was this the reason that Roland our Treasurer could neuer be brought to anie account, for feare we should sée the infinite (yea bottomlesse) depth of our reuenues? and therewithall perceiue that it is not in the power of the Spaniard to furnish vs with the twentéeth parte of such and so great summes. Alas good man, where shoulde he leauie so great store of siluer? Are we ignorant howe before he lost his great fléete (foolishly by him baptised the Inuincible, of which long before we sawe so many arrogant Catologues both written and printed, whose miserable slaues wée afterwards receiued into our portes, permitted them in pitty to be reléeued by begging from doore to doore) he brake and was banquerout with his creditours of Genoua? But shall we better discouer and make his penurie more manifest? Let vs sell our selues to him (séeing we desire it so much) alwayes prouided, that without faile he make vs readie paiment, not posting vs ouer with bonds, promises, delayes, and Spanish bragges (for if we be once his seruants, what action may we haue against our maister? What plea may we commence against him? Shall our purse be at his commandement, or his at our disposition? Let vs resigne all these fertile fieldes vnto him, these beautifull riuers, let vs deliuer al these strong and mightie townes vnto him, these goodly and stately buildings. To conclude, let vs surrender all France vnto him, (which is the verie eie and beautie of the world) and that for nothing. Let vs fréely and frankly giue him all the riches and treasures that are contained therein. Let vs giue him our wiues, our childen, and whatsoeuer els wee haue, and all for nothing (oh griefe and intollerable misery to think vpon) let him buy nothing but our selues, and that at the lowest price. And the chepest rate that may be, so that he make readie payment. Let him disburse but twentie millions of golde for all vs, all which will not amount to ten crownes a

man. But what speake I of twentie millions of gold? it béeing so farre from his meaning, who neuer intended to giue vs one hundreth thousand crownes. Oh how long is it since we are bought & sold, but no paiment made yet, onely two & thirtie thousand crownes excepted, which lately he deliuered to those sixtéene théeues, and that onely to solicite and hasten our deliuerie? But where (I beséech you) shall he leauie so many millions of golde? where shal he haue so much mony? are they as easie to be found as promised? As though wée knowe not that the rebellions of the lowe Countries haue cost him as much golde, as euer he receiued from the mines of Peru, when he drew them driest? Or when he ransacked the whole country, murthering aboue two millions of those poore, naked, and innocent Indians, on whome he committed all the execrable cruelties, that either antiquitie could inuent, or the time present deuise. The historie whereof (printed in the yere 1584.) was wholy smothered by meanes of the Iesuits, who buying vp al the copies yt were extant, caused yt it shuld be forbidden to be printed any more. Oh braue butchers, whose fingers ends itch, to try whether the French that doth not sufficiently humble himselfe before you, will proue so abiect and so base as those poore and naked sauage Indians. But rauenous tygers that you are, you are not yet come to that passe: knowe you not that you must confront so many millions of true French men, as will (if neede require) encounter you with an hundreth and an hundreth battailes, before they will become Spaniards? What? shal those Marranos, yea, those impious Atheiests raigne ouer vs as Kings and Princes? Shall the Countrie of France become seruile to the commandement of the Spaniard? shal France be added to the titles of this King of Maiorica? Of this demie Moore, demie Iew, yea demie Saracine? Shall it be made knowen to the worlde, that France is no more a kingdome? that France is become Spaine? and that all to the riuer Rhene contayneth nothing else but prouinces of

Spaine? and that the thrée flowers de Luce are as an honor annexed to the py-balde and barrie-armes of this vniuersall King? Oh that the earth would rather open, and the Sea breake out his limites, then we doe die and neuer remedie these outrages: Oh let vs die rather then proue such traitors to our natiue Country, and that we subiect our selues to the yoke of the Spaniards. Let vs die rather, yea let vs die with our swords in our hands, thicke and thrée folde one vppon another, like the naturall and true children of our forefathers, who for the honor of France, and for the preseruation of theyr owne libertie, haue couered the plaines of Saint Quintines, those of Rantie, and so many others with the slaughtered bodies of these accursed Spaniards. What, are we brought to that exigent, that we must néeds be subiect to these Castillians? Haue we not yet an hundreth Lordes in France, who will choose to die a thousand times rather then yéelde the right they haue, or hereafter may haue to the crowne of France, after the bloud Roiall, vnto anie stranger whatsoeuer? An hundreth Lords (I saie) who cannot reade anie one Chapter of our histories, but they shall finde sundry notable exploites and déeds of armes of theyr ancestors, who valiantly haue dyed in fight against the Spaniards, and others theyr enemies, who alwaies haue bene the very props and stayes, whereon the state and Crowne of France haue depended, who with the losse of their bloud, and by theyr meanes and valor haue gotten, preserued and conquered the greatest part of this most goodly and famous Realme, and who haue left vnto theyr children all the right, interest, and possibilitie they had (after the bloud royall) in those thinges which with such pains and trauaile they haue holpen both to get and preserue. There is no question but that theyr title will be most auaileable agaynst all straungers whatsoeuer, who vnder pretext and coulour of aide, haue a long time laboured and sworne our vtter ruine and subuersion. This is the reason for which we sée the Spaniards trecherous procéedings

against the Princes and whole nobilitie of France, agaynst whom he laboreth by all means possible, to enflame the people dayly more and more, knowing well that he cannot laie anie sure foundation for to establish the state which he goeth about to vsurpe from vs, but by theyr vtter ruine, whoby no meanes can neuer brooke him, or his tyrannie. For hee knowes full well that our Gentlemen of France will neuer be brought euerie New yéeres daie to purchase a license from a Castillian, whereby they may bee authorised, (if so they please) to weare a weapon by theyr side, as it is notoriously knowen, that those fewe which remaine of the Nobilitie of Naples, are inforced to doe at this daie: the vse being, that if anie man be noted throughout the whole yéere not to haue sufficiently humbled himselfe to the basest pesant that is a Spaniarde borne, they may doe him this disgrace and dishonor, as at the yéeres end to depriue him of his Rapier, without yéelding anie reason wherefore. Well wots he that our Nobilitie can neuer endure to sée the Castles, Townes and fortresses of France to be in the hands, and at the disposition of the Castillians. As it is most manifest that they must all be, by the Maximes of Estate which hetherto he hath most diligently practised: who can neuer be induced to reuerence and worshippe such his Uize-roies, as it shall please him to send vs one after another. Who in conclusion will rather haue theyr throates cut, then that theyr bodyes should containe Spanish soules. And here may wee note the reason why our Preachers (dazeled with the brightnesse of his golde, and bewitched with the hope they haue that the Abbeis and Bishoprickes shall by the spoyle of those which presently possesse them, be bestowed on them, grounding this doctrine of theyrs vpon the Councell of Trent) proclayme and pronounce nought else to vs, nor trouble vs with anie other thing but this, that the whole nobilitie is vtterly to be defaced and rooted out, as seruing to no other vse nor purpose, but to braue and ouer-crow vs at theyr pleasure, and

that wee shall neuer bée at rest till it bée cleane consumed. What? shal we then destroy the race and of-spring of those, who haue made the French standard to flourish euen in the farthest partes of the Estate? and haue placed the name and honour of the French in the heauens? Shall we so vnnaturally massacre those in whome nature hath séemed to frame the verie perfection of true valour and prowesse? And shall we be-die our natiue soile with the proper bloud of her owne children? onely to please theyr humors who haue practised the like in Flanders? Beginning with the two Earles Eigmont and Horne, whome an hundreth thousande men knowe well, and can witnesse to haue died good Catholikes, bearing the crosse in theyr handes, and confessing themselues to a Priest, euen in the view of the whole world. The cause of whose death was naught else, but their heartie affection, and naturall loue to theyr Countrie, and kinde good will to theyr Countrie-men: as those which could not tollerate the execution of a most execrable Spanish tyrannie, and that a base Spanish swaine should so outragiously rauish (euen before theyr eyes) a young damzell left worth in substaunce aboue an hundreth thousand Crownes. Which extreamest crueltie was no whit alayd by the death of those two noble Gentlemen, but hath rather bene increased more and more euen to the extirpation of the whole Nobilitie. For in truth what is now become of them throughout all the Prouinces of Flanders, that are vnder the Spanishe gouernement? Where are now so many great and famous houses, wherewith all histories of former ages are teplenished? Oh poore nobilitie of France, must it néeds be that the time shal come, when thine vtter ruine and ouerthrow shall serue as an example to other nations, to beware of the Spanish tyrannie? And will not the successe of these thy next neighbors at this day any whit moue or warne thée? Here some wil say, what néed we be so careful for the good estate of our nobility, séeing that if it be once destroied, we shall peraduenture remayne

frée from being any more taxed, and pouled? no without doubt we shalbe taxed, no more then those of Naples and of Milane are at this day, from whence all manner of inuentions and deuises seruing to this purpose are brought amongst vs. Doe we not already see how they beginne to ease vs of such our superfluous and neuer well brooked charges? we are constrained to make warre vnder the colour of the common wealths benefite and commodity, hoping therby to remedy such extreame taxings as we are daily troubled withall, yet haue these warres brought forth nothing els as yet but destruction with fier and sword? haue wee not seene our wiues and children rauished before our eyes? haue not our goods, our houses and our selues bin robbed, spoiled and massacred? and haue not our taxings bin doubled? and accompa
                  •
               ed with a number of new kindes of borowinges, lones, and imprests? being fed onely with this bare comfort (which some doe secretly séeke to perswade vs) that if anye thing be left vs to pay tolle, and taxes vnto the Spaniarde, we shall not pay alone, for all townes and citties, shall pay as well as wee, and we shall haue no Nobility to trouble & vexe vs any more. Alas, and shall we haue no Noble men lefte amongst vs? Who shall then defend vs, if we be assaulted? Shall so great a charge be committed to a few fresh water souldiers? I meane to those sixteene newe hatched Caualieros: who know better how to cut our throats then how to defend themselues? Alas most miserable that we be, we stand in fear of our Nobility, who haue liued thus lōg in peace among vs, and yet we do not so much as dream on the couetize, cruelty, and extreame insolency of the Spaniards, who as yet being but silly adopted swaines amongst vs, durst vppon the one and twentith of October last past, violently take away from the Parlament a Sergeant and companion of their owne, condemned by law to die for wilfull murther, making him to passe through the chéefe chamber of that high and honourable Court. What Lord of France

did euer enterprise so outrageous a fact? But in these flattering perswasions wherby we imagine that at our pleasure wee may euen at one blow ruinate and destroy the whole Nobility, it semeth that we may without controllment both checke and mate the same. But oh good Lord, how much are we deceaued, and how far are we from that, for that only will remaine as a due scorge to chastice vs most vnkinde traytours to our Countrey, and as the very patterns of monstruous ingratitude, the like whereof the world did neuer yielde, as those that rather deserue to be borne slaues, and bredde as vassals to the Castillian tiranny, then in this most faire, and frée Countrey of France. Doe we not forsée that the thrée partes of our Nobility, are and haue beene of long time armed against vs, and that the rest séeing these vnnaturall contractes with the Spaniards, for as much as they detest to haue so foule and so reprochfull a blotte of infamy and treason engrauen on the foreheads of their posterity (either manifest, for arming them selues against the Floure de Luse, or secret, for lurking in their houses like dastards, so long as this publique flame doth burne in their naturall Countrey) they prepare with all possible spéed to show them selues like courageous children in the greate and bloody battailes, which France their naturall mother, yea faire and Noble France, will present and giue to Spaine, if it shall perceue the same to haue so much corage or so much valour, that it dare encounter vs and accept of fight. Oh how hard a matter wil it be to vanquaish this Nobility? being once ioyned together: which though it be deuided, and fighting against necessitie, hath notwithstanding alreadie obtained sundrie notable victories, and hath brought vs to so miserable a famine: this Nobilitie maintained by so many, so strong and so well munited cities: This Nobilitie on whom all the good souldiers doe alwaies attend and waite: which are the stockes on whom by reason of her great prowes she is engraffed: this Nobilitie which hath heretofore beene assisted

with the goodly and strong armies of those populous and mightie nations, that at all times haue beene in perfect league and amitie with the name of Fraunce, and enimies vnto the tyrannie of Spaine, all which will no doubt with might and maine iointly hinder the encrease thereof: this Nobilitie led and commaunded by so many excellent Captaines, who maugre all these stormie windes of sedition, and to the intollerable griefe of the Spaniard, doe yet suruiue the furie of these miserable tempests. This Nobilitie animated, and enflamed vnto warre by the aspect of those bright shining starres, the children of Saint Lewis, procéeding from that warlike race, which can not, nor will not dye but in the middest of bloudy battailes: and to conclude, this Nobilitie so vndaunted and so terrible in armes, that knowes not yet what it is to recoile and giue ground, much lesse to be daunted with feare: which alwaies heweth, and with the dint of sword cutteth out her way, and makes him selfe passage. What? and shall it be vanquished, and shall it thus be ouerthrowne by these Castillians and renegd Frenchmen? Is it vpon them we must relye our hopes? Is it from them we must expect that peace, that quiet, and that happy time, which so long, and so often hath béene promised vs? But shal we yet more clearely consider and view into what gulfe of wretchednesse (besides the losse of our libertie) we headlong cast our selues? Let vs graunt and suppose that the Spaniards and all their followers and subiects doe gaine sixe notable battailes of vs (howbeit they shall sooner lose an hundreth then get one onely) how many yeares shall we trouble them with warre (that is in regarde of vs, with all sortes of miseries and afflictions) ere they shall force and get an hundreth strong cities, and conquere thrée whole partes of the kingdom, which rather then they will yéeld to acknowledge any King, vnder what title and name soeuer, except their owne right and lawfull King, whom God and Nature, and all the lawes of the Kingdom hath giuen and appointed

them, are resolued to endure all the extremities of the world. But what do we speake of forcing and conquering of cities, when we haue so lately béene most shamefully chaced from Senlis, and from Diepe? We whom Sauense, Senlis, the Gautiers, Argues, and our owne Suburbs haue brought into so good forwardnes and possession, to be alwaies beaten? we who through false and deceyuing promises of succour haue suffred those of Gergeau, of Pluuiers, Estampes, Ponthoise, Meulan, Eu, Geinuille, Uandosme, Mans, Sable, Chasteau-gontier, Touuoy Laual, Alenzon, Dampfront, Argentan, Fallaize, Bayeux, Lisieux, Honflew, Bridge audemer, and of Eureux, to be so vily lost and ouercome? Let vs rather consider and thinke vpon our own necessities which still doe presse and follow vs, let vs (I beséech you) remember the commodities that we haue lost, & those which we dayly féele the want of, and not goe about to force and surprize cities which are defended and maintained by so many of the Nobilitie, a thing which all the strength of the world conioyned together may not, nor can not atchiue and bring to passe. Here some will say, that we shall now bee troubled with Spaniards those great warriors, those great bug-beares: what? those thrée thousande Wallons led and commanded by a reneagd Frenchman? what? and are they not the mates of those cowardly runawayes of Senlis, and Argues, who being ten to one durst neuer attempt to charge one small number of the Nobilitie of Fraunce? Are these all the great and inuincible Spanish forces (as for the naturall, they will neuer be drawne to leaue the Cittadels?) Are these they, who without any other helpe will one of these daies in triumphant sorte bring vs, al our enimies prisoners into the Bastille? who if they be so mightie, how comes it to passe that they can not defend them selues better from the open enimies of all Christendome? why haue they so ignominiously suffred them selues to be chased and driuen from Algiers, Thunis, and Goletta? and through their own

default caused so many poore Christians to be so miserably oppressed by the Infidels? what is the reason they will not reuenge the death of King Sebastian, whose kingdom and inheritance they haue so wrongfully vsurped? Hath this vniuersall Protector of the Catholike faith so suffred it to fall where he should most haue maintained & vpheld the same? who though he care not for the encrease of Mahomet, and that he séeketh to suppresse none but Luther, wherefore doth he not make hast to subdue the English whom so long sithence hee hath so much threatned, and yet could neuer hurt, who though they neuer threatned, haue notwithstanding so greatly hurt and endamaged him? But I perceiue how the case standeth with him: it is easier for him to terrifie the fearefull with his Bug-beares, then to hurt others: it is more easy for him to promise and féede men with hopes, then helps. Shall not we thinke, that he wil abuse vs hereafter with his false promises (then which nothing is euermore vncertaine) sith that in all our troubles past, he would faine perswade vs, that we are beholding to him, and that the honour of the battailes which heretofore we haue gained on the Hugonots, is onely due to him. Good God: what inuincible Caualieros are these Spaniards? they are the cause of all our victories, and yet we could neuer sée any of them among vs: They will peraduenture speake of those fiftéene hundreth Harguebuziers, who at the battell of Dreux made such notable barricades with all the Carts of the armie, out of which they could neuer be drawne to bestow one shote on the enimie, till all the daunger was past, and then they began to cry aloud Viue Espagne, viue Espagne, as if they alone had put the enimie to flight, when (God wote) they durst neuer looke him in the face, till we had cleane subdued him, and yet were these fiftéene hundreth right Castillians, and naturall Marranos, whom they would now make vs belieue to be Giants, and souldiours of the other world, that they might the better hide their small number, and the want

of men in their waste and desert countries. Now if this Spanish armie bé so terrible, and the Spaniards such iolly fellowes, I pray you, what did they, and wherein were they occupied when (not long since) their greatest enimie was so long in so destitute, so poore, and so weake a towne, which neuer saw a Campe, nor euer defended it selfe from any armie? they were but thrée dayes iourney from him, at the most. How commeth it to passe that these great Poliocetes came not altogether, where in thrée dayes they might haue taken Diepe, and so many Noble men and Captaines in it? Good God, what doe I speake of thrée dayes? The Spaniard can not yet tell what it is to take a citie, vnlesse it be at thrée yeares end. He will stoupe, he will linger, he will suffer, (which is the chiefest of his prayse) and finding no other way (a notorious Atheist as he is) he will neuer attempt to win any by assault. Moreouer, it were necessarie that the Duke of Parma were not poysoned with a lingring poison, which (as he him selfe causeth publikely to be reported) his good maister hath sent him. But let vs suppose him to be so strong and valiant, and so well affected towards vs, and let vs graunt him the victory of twelue battailes, and that our enimies haue withdrawne them selues into their holdes: yet shall wee be troubled fiue and twentie yeares more with him (that is the least) is it not so long, and more, that the Spaniard is about to conquere and tame his countrie of Flanders? and yet could neuer get one halfe of it: which to effect, we must make this old King yong againe, and cure him of so many diseases, that he may liue fourescore and ten yeares more, or els shall we be left friendles and succourles, euen in the middest of those warres, which we haue vndertaken, when most we shall néede both: els in the middest of the storme and in our greatest danger shall our great Pilot be drowned, and then will a lamentable shipwrack follow our ship, that erst with full spred sailes did with top and top gallant saile so stately: then will euery man shift for him

selfe and take hold on what splint soeuer he can get. Who doubteth that the gouernours of these so deuided estates and dismembred Prouinces will not embrace euerie opportunitie, and shew their desire of libertie (a thing that neuer ceaseth to set the mindes of all the Spanish Slaues on fire) who doubteth (I say) but that euerie one will with might and maine go about to appropriate that countrie, or place which he houldeth vnto him selfe. Good God, what new counsels, what new deliberatiues, what new drifts, and new aliances will then follow. Then will those whom now we thinke to be our Kings greatest enimies, become his seruants, onely to be maintained and defended by him. And whilst the Spanish Empire shall thus be tossed and shaken, what shal become of all the goodly forces on which (as the Iesuites will force vs to belieue on paine to be proclaimed heretikes) all our Catholike religion doth depend. Let vs suppose (all which notwithstanding is as it were impossible) that so many natiōs, which expect nothing so much as that day, wherin with what price and how soeuer they may deliuer them selues from their miserable bondage and slauerie, do so farre forget their duetie, and fall a sléepe when it shall come. Let vs imagine that the Portingales and Flemmings which neuer enquire for any other newes, so much as of the Catholike Kinges health, remaine as giddie & irresolute, when they shal heare this happy and so long desired newes. Let vs suppose moreouer, that all the good hap which a man in such an alteration may wish for, do happen: yet taking al things at the best, shall we be but in the hands of an infant, of an Idiotte, and of a sickely person: who if he dye (which is the desire and vow of all the Spaniards) then are we in the hands of a yong woman, a Wench. What? shall Fraunce be subiect vnto a Distaffe, as a member & dependance of Spaine? And shal these Alexanders and Cesars of Fraunce, whose auncestors the Merouees, the Clodions, the Charlemaines, the Phillippes worthely surnamed Augusti,
               
and Valloys. Shall Charles the eight, Francis the first, and Henry the second, who were neuer able to extinguish their thirst of fighting, shall all these Marciall mindes be subiect vnto such, and so sillie a woman as a daughter of Spaine, and vnto him whom she pleaseth to chuse and adopt for her husband? No, no, Fraunce is not so easily gotten. Fraunce is not giuien as a dowrie, he that will be King of Fraunce, must be borne King of Fraunce. Vitam tibi contulit idem imperiumque dies: the Countrie of Fraunce is the Minion and Darline of Nature, it is the portion which shee hath reserued for her selfe alone to dispose as best shee pleaseth, with whom no contract or condition of any man shall bee admitted to deale withall. Fraunce can not be gotten with one nightes lying with a Wench. If the Daughter of Spaine will not marrie vnlesse she make her husband King of Fraunce, she may vow virginitie for euer. As farre as I see then, the King of Spaine is not so much moued by a godly zeale, and due regard of our religion, as by a desire he hath to haue a sonne in law to be Uiceroy of Fraunce, to swaie and tyrannize ouer vs vnder the name of his Maiestie, vntill he haue gotten all our Fortresses and holdes into the handes of his Castillians, and then shall hee be remoued and chaunge place with the Uiceroy of Naples. That is the zeale, that is the desire, those be the burning thoughtes of Phillip King of Spaine, who neuer waxeth old, who faileth not (though in respect of his age he seeme not to aime at Fraunce, and at the crowne thereof, but to content him selfe with the Kingdomes, Dukedomes, and Counties which hetherto he hath so wrongfully alienated and dismembred from it) to goe about by all possible meanes to cosm and deceaue vs, as whilome hee did the Portingals: for wee know that Couetousnesse and Ambition haue this peculiar condition, to encrease proportionablye as other passions diminish. And that Youth by reason of other pleasures

and vanityes is drawen and distraughted from them, but as riper age doth by little and little weaken and enfeeble them, ambition (especially in those that are high borne) entreth in their place, and daily encreasing doth in time take greater holdfast. Suppose we did not apparantly perceiue the insatiable desire that this Spaniard hath to growe great, and aduance himselfe vnder what colour and pretence soeuer, suppose we knew not the care which of necessity he muste haue of his children, and the feare and apprehension he féeleth, if he leaue them so great and mighty an enemy standing, and therewithall so noble and so puissant a king as ours is: do we thinke in conscience that it doth not touche and pricke him as neare the hart, as any other particular consideration? Shall we yet a little more enter into the view and consideration of his holy and sacred zeale? woulde he for any thing in the world (I beséech you) that ther were no difference nor controuersie of Religion throughout all Christendome, and that all men were at peace? And that we liued quietly vnder the obedience of so great a King as ours is, and that he were in quiet possession of France, no I warrant you, for were not this controuersie of Religion, and our troubles of France, he would not thinke him selfe safe in the middest of all his kingdoms of Spaine? would he not feare, yea tremble (if our King should once reobtayne that which the Spaniard hath heretofore so fraudulently vsurped from him in his kingdome of Nauarre) least he shold one day (prouoked thereunto by a iust reuenge, and lawfull right of war) victoriously vndertake the recouery of his right, and ioin Scepter to Scepter, and Crown to Crown. For is not he that great and polliticke commander and leader of armies? he who in counsell is a graue; Nestor, and in the midst of larums and battailes a stoute Achilles, who hath sooner surprised Citties, then other men can take the vew of them? Who in the space of two moneths, in the very hart of winter, hath with the dint of sword conquered one

hundreth leagues of Countrey in length, and fifty in bredth? Is not he that al-daring French Alexander, whome the twinne-headed imperiall Eagle séeing already adorned and beautified with two Royall Crownes, beginneth to cherish and embrace, desiring to conioine these two inuincible nations in one, and brotherly forces together? To conclude, is not he that glorions King of the Floure de Luse, with the long visage, with the great nose, who by auncient prophesies is called to be the Monarch of the world? And is not this that great King who hath so often bin promised vnto vs? Yes verely it is euen he.
            
               The Monarch whose vndanted lookes,
               and neuer conquered arme,
               Shall force the furie of his foe,
               to flie the threatned harme:
               Fore-runne, shall victory his steps.
               About his azurd shield,
               (Of terror and of wasting war,
               which represents the field)
               Shall laurell boughs, and palme,
               the trophes of his triumph spring,
               When through the world his tried fame,
               and high renowne shall ring.
               Then shall he make the knights of France,
               each where to vnderstand:
               The greatnes of that honour which
               is got by armed hand.
               No wight this King shall ouercome,
               in courtesie and grace:
               Yet when he takes in hand,
               his neuer-yelding cortelace:
               No Prince or wordly Emperour,
               how mightie that he be,
               The angry furie shall of this
               most christian Hector flye.
            
            
               
It is therefore (as far as I perceiue) to hinder the succesfull victories of so worthy a King, and to empeach the conquests that els he should haue on the Spaniard, that these Frenche Castillians, or Castillian Frenchmen doe so trouble the state of France: it is therefore that so many do daily séeke to perswade vs, that hee which neuer failed his word, will neuer kéepe that which hee hath promised vs in his late declaration, wherein as a good father, he hath with teares of pitty, and meare compassion of our miseries, clean washed, and wholly blotted out of his remembrance all our forepassed faults and trespasses, onely fiue or sixe trecherous Spanyolised villeins excepted, who haue engored the name of France in blood with the most proditorious & traiterous parricide, that euer the Sunne saw yet, a parricide committed and perpetrated in the person of him, for the preseruation of whom all true French men should neuer refuse to die a thousand deaths. Is it not for this occasion that the Spaniard doth daily cause so many to whisper in our eares, that our King is fallen into the relaps, he that neuer profest any other Religion, but that which his mother held, and who was neuer in any of our Churches but once, and that in daunger to haue his throat cutte? Is it not for denying the omnipotency of God, that he is called impenitent, as if that God could neuer touch his hart? Is not that the cause that all those which goe about to instruct or conuert hym, are called Heretiques? least that in shewing him the truth, he should be brought vnto the mother Church againe, not to assure him selfe of his two rightfull earthly Crownes, but also of the thirde and glorious Crowne of Heauen? Thus must we say, and thus it be houeth vs to cry, if we will faithfully serue the King of Spaine our good Lord and maister, otherwise his Maiesties affayres wil prosper but sclenderly, if the Frenche should once agree and come to an vnity together. Oh poore and silly miserable French men that wee are, shall we suffer our selues to be deceaued and enueagled

by these false traytours, who are duely paid their pensions euery moneth, for the paines which they take to fleshe and prouoke vs one against another, and to make vs abhorre the meanes giuen vs by God from aboue, to cut off al heresies, with his bright-shining sword (that is his word) which our forefathers haue vsed thrée or foure times to cut off, and roote out one selfe same error, and which all Europ déemeth necessary and expedient for to bring Christendome, and the states therof vnto an agréement and conformity, therby to shunne the vtter ruine of it, which otherwise is iminent and near at hād, and to auoid the Turks inuasion which cannot by meanes of so many diuisions bee deferred or withstood? These be the same pencioners that would faine make vs beléeue that al France wilbe of the Hugonots Religion, neuer remembring that there are not so many ministers in all the world as may suffice to alow for euery forty miles of ground one onely. Do you thinke that those of the Nobility which are Catholiques? all the strong townes that professe no other Religion but the Catholique, all our Princes, al our Croune officers, all the Frenche Cardinals that follow our King, as the true and lawfull heire of France, and of the Floures de Luse, and al Catholiques els wil euer sette theyr helping hand to the ouerthrow of our auncient true Catholique Religion? and that he who neuer detested any thinge so much as to winne and compell soules with the sword, wil in any sort compell and constrain our consciences? Euen he who in the middest of the most violent wars that wee haue waged against him, had more then the one halfe of his own houshold seruants, followers and officers Catholiques, yea true Catholiques, who no doubt might (if they had pleased) haue bene otherwise.
            It is therfore most manifest and apparant, that Phillip king of Spaine hath caused these tidings to bee preached vnto vs, rather to make his slaues to engage vs in a perpetual warre against our naturall liege King (which may well be tearmed

an ineuitable perdition) then for anie motion of Christian charitie that remaines in him. And to saie truth, when did wee euer perceiue anie sparke of charitie to appeare in the Spaniard? Is not this that Catholike charitie, which with so notorious and trecherous treasons hath wrongfully depriued vs of Cicilie, the fertilest & fayrest Iland of the world, and matchlesse price and marke. At which those two vndanted nations did in all theyr noble warres shoote at? Is not this the same charitie that hath in lyke manner depriued vs of the flourishing kingdom of Naples, and of the rich Dukedome of Millaine? both auncient and lawfull Patrimonies of the house of Angiou and Orleans, which earst cost France the price of so much golde, and losse of so much bloud: Is not this that charitie, which so vnlawfully detayneth the principalitie of Flanders, and of the Countie of Burgondie from vs? that hath vsurped new France from vs, yea fayre France, which the fayre riuers of Loyre, Beine, and Sōme doe wash and runne alongst? Is not this the verie same Catholike charitie, that with large promises and a little siluer, suborned the confessour of one of our Kings, by whose fonde perswasions the Countie of Roussillion was so subtillie dismembred from the Crowne and Demaines of France? Is not this also that charitie, that Catholike humilitie with which he hath presumed to dispossesse vs of our right of precedence, and to take place before vs? Alas, what an indignitie is this? Is it not a shame for France, that this newe vpstart, this new come Christian, whom not yet long since we haue drawen from the Alcoran, and from Paganisme (who had not we bene, should yet be a Saracen, a Barbarian, a Iew) should so much as dare to think, much lesse to attempt to march and take place before our most Christian Kings, who successiuely are the successors of the mightiest and most auncient Kings of the world? But miserable and silly wretches as we are, what doe we dispute and call our place and standing in question? It is not that wee must stande vppon

now, they are other matters and of greater consequence, that this Saracin Castillian, or Castillian Saracin doeth so busily goe about. He would fain be our maister, and make vs all his subiects, his subiects sayd I? What? shall France that hath heretofore euer bene so mightie in armes, France that hath euer bene a terour to all nations, faire France that yet was neuer subdued, but through a necessitie of the prouidence of God (who thought it expedient that his Sonne our Lord should be borne vnder one greate Monarchie) at what time it was diuided into twentie pettie Kingdomes: Noble France which Caesar deemed inuincible, and neuer to be conquered, if euer it might bee reduced to one sole Monarchie, and vnder one absolute King. And to be briese, France which acknowledgeth and holdeth nothing but from God, and by the sword, which euer was her tenour: shall it now be brought into subiection and bondage? Shall it nowe bee compeld to liue in seruile slauerie? Shal it be made to receiue and admit Uizeroies, Lieutenants, Generalles and Gouernours, and Dons of Spaine? that hath of yore beene one of her Prouinces, and euer bene readie to stande to the mercie of euerie conquerour and inuadour: and is and euer hath bene the finke, the puddle, and filthie heape of the most lothsome, infected, and slauish people that euer yet liued on earth. O Clouis, O our good King Clouis, this wicked race of those fals Wisigots, with the cation of whose carcases (after thou hadst with thine own hand slain theyr King) thou didst sprinkle and fatten the fertile plaines of Poictou, who neuer thought themselues safe from the furie of thy sworde, vntill they had past the Pirency hills againe, that verie same trecherous race dare at this daie goe about to sway and dominer ouer thy faire Countrie of France: that wicked race would make all thy people theyr slaues. But why do we cal on good Clouis dead so long agoe? This goodly King Phillip, this iolly King Protector, is not he the sonne of Charles the fifth, that sworne and mortall enemie of our fathers,

which agaynst all right and Christianitie, did kindle those two bronds in Picardie and in Prouence (a thing the Turke nor the Scithian would neuer haue attempted) that set a ranseme of thrée millions of golde vppon vs? Which huge summe we haue euer since felt, and yet to our common griefe doe féele. Who framed all his driftes, and contriued all his desseines vppon the ruine and ouerthrowe of our poore France? Which purposes and intents hee hath by his latter Testament bequeathed vnto his sonne Phillip? O you noble Maeedonians that wept for ioy when you sawe your Alexander sitting in Darius chaire, and felte no other discontent, but yt your forefathers might not participat your great Coment. O most miserable as we are, we go about to place Darius in Alexanders chayre, to enstal the Spaniard in the royall Throne of France, and lodge King Phillip in the Louure. Francis the first, O Henrie the second, our good Kings, rise vp & leaue your graues for a while. Doe you not sée your mortal & professed enemy prepare himselfe to occupy and vsurpe your Estate, your Crowne, your Citie of Paris, your Pallace, your Louure? Who by his Embassador alredy taketh the possession therof? Do not you perceiue how he goeth about to insult and triumph ouer your graues, and to violate and breake the same, as he hath alreadie done that of your Constable? Be ye well assured, that hee who hath so villainously brought your two last children (the verie and liuely images of your selues) to theyr longest home, will neuer parden your Statues of Marble. O worthie and noble minded Phillip Prince of Spain, although fortune hath not aduanced thée to be Emperor, as thy Father was, yet hast thou gone beyond him far in his valiant exploits, to consume and extinguish our noble Princes of France. He neuer durst imploy any other poison, but that of his de monte Cucullo, that was executed at Lions. And yet not withstanding left vs one of our great king Frances his thrée children: But thou hast with thy valor vtterly rooted out al the race of them, for

the performance whereof, thou hast vnto the secrete poyson of thy Salcedes (by meanes of thine Embassador) added and imployed the poysoned knife of a damned Iacobine. But why shoulde he spare them vnder the colour of méere allyance? Hath not he most vnnaturally caused his owne wife theyr proper sister to bee poysoned? and his naturall eldest sonne to be strangled? Courage then O noble Frenchmen, adde valour to your strength, and valyantly take armes in hand for to follow the iust, lawful and euer victorious armes of our great Henrie, whom God hath euen frō aboue chosen for to reuenge the bloud of the Valois, so traiterously spilt, and which continuallie craues iustice at his handes? Why doe you followe so brauely the Standarde ofithat but cherlie homicide of your Princes? Why doe you followe the colours of that empoysoner and hereditarie murtherer of the house of France? Will you put your selues euen in the mouth of the Cannon of your King? Will you besprinkle France with your blood, that in the ende it may become all Spanish? Or will you but keepe some portion of it for the Infant of Spaine? And good reason, because shee is the eldest, and that her youngest sister hath alreadie the Marguisate of Saluzzo, strong Salluzzo, that footing and holde-fast which wée had left in Italie, and that hath béene giuen hir for the increase of her dowrie: which was the Arsenall and Store-house of munition that our Kings had beyonde the mountains, wherin were more then four hundreth péeces of ordinance: which Arsenall made al things tremble vnder the name of France, which made the strongest walls to stoupe and fall before it, that Arsenall which had already danted the chiefest rampard or hould which the Spaniard had in Italy, against the strength of France, and which wee helde as a meane and gage forto recouer ere long both Naples and Millane again. Alas poor France, what potion hath so depriued thée of thy sences, that thou dost not féel how by litle and little thou art disabled, and disarmed? that thy weapones

are taken frō thée, that thou art tied in chains, with purpose to be cast into a galey, ther miserably to perish and die vnder the stripes and cruelty of thine enemies? and if thou haue any féeling, sence, or sight, oh my poore Fraunce, what charmes haue so besotted thy spirites, or what illusions haue so dazeled thée, that thou darest seeke thy wellfare and protection among those which gape and seeke for nothing els so much as thine ouerthrowe and vtter ruine? who like false traitours, that they may the better and with more ease yoke and at theyr pleasure binde thee hand and foote, doe daily whisper thee in the eare, that when thou please thou shalt be frée again, and whensoeuer thou wilt, thou shalt be able to expell and chase the Spaniard out of Fraunce: as if a man could by any examples proue that euer they would or coulde be remoued from any place, where once they haue had footing: as if they could not erect Citadels, great and stately Citadels, cimented with the bloud, and built with the goods and wealth of the poore people, and Citizens: as though they were to learne how to tirannise in all Cittyes with theyr blood-thirsty garisons, and to affright poore men with the erecting of so many gibbets, wheeles and scaffoldes, with which they keepe men in such awe, that none dare so much as frowne vppon them: those of Portingall, of Naples, of Millane, and of Flanders, can with griefe and experience witnes what I say: but to come nearer home, what is hee amongst vs, that dares be so bold, as to say aloude in the Greue of Paris, that he is no Spaniard, but a true French man, and escape present hanging ipso facto for an Heretique, and hainous offendour against the lawes of God and man? all these robbers, all these spoilers, all these bloud-suckers, and destroyers of christians, these sixteene Caualieros and their adherents, which liue but by the spoile of vs, which glutte themselues with our bloud, euen our hart blood, are they not the ministers and officers of the Spanish tiranny? Ministers as yet but weake, officers as yet but easye

to be withstood, and punished for their faults, if there were any sparke of yt auncient corage of France remaining in vs: but alas if we so fondly suffer our selues to be enueagled and luld a sleepe with their superficiall faire wordes (which wée haue payd full deare and ready money for) what griefe and harts-sorrowe shall we feele when we shall wake and rise out of our slomber againe when we shall finde our selues fast chained, and hembd in roūd about, so that we shal not be able to stir, no not so much as complaine, when we shal feel the proud Castillians proudly to tread and keepe vs vnder, holding their daggers in theyr hands ready to stab vs at the hart, if wee doe but offer to waile and sighe our miserable condition. Alas it wilbe too late to offer vowes after the shipwracke, or to repent when the fact is done. And if we will consider how dangerous euery delay is on our side, I beséech you doe but beholde and vewe how forward he is already in the establishing of the foundation of his future Emperie. Do you think that that great Caualiero, or turret of offence lately erected so alofte in the Bastile against our owne Citty, hath bin built at the cost and charges of Bussi the Clerke? Oh poore and miserable French men, are we so voide of iudgement that we cannot perceiue how he will not employ his larcenies and stolen goods so nigh home, but that he sends and embanks them further? is there any man that knowes not, or at least that wil not know, how Bernardin Mendoza hath weekly paid the work men of it? and that Bussi is but a substitute of that Barbarian and squynteied great Commaundadour? who in effect is the chief Captaine of the Bastille? Doth not the Spaniard also promise vs that his poison shall not cease vppon the vtmost borders, but that it shall spred it selfe to the noblest and chiefest parts, euen vnto the hart it selfe? that he will not stay in Frontiere tounes, but ere long enter, take, and surprise all other parts of the kingdome? and will some say that for conscience sake he will refuse Cambray, Amiens, or Aubeuille?

would he do it thinke you, if they would receiue him? or is it because he knowes that the Picards (as they that haue of long time knowne his conditions) haue flatly refused to accept of him? what? haue those of the Frontiere tounes bin eccepted, because they haue stoutly resolud not to receiue the Spaniard, and yet all wee, with all the partes of the kingdome of France are contained in this honourable couenant, or agreement, not so much as our Bastille is comprised in the same, by vertue wherof these Castillians wil one of these dayes (as well they may) at their pleasure mount and leuell all our owne canons vppon the huge Caualiero, and first batter, and then sacke and spoile our poore Citty of Paris, as whilome they did Antwerpe. And it is not good reason, since that this Mauritanian race hath so well begonne, it should continue, and so pluck out and deface the two fayre eyes of Europe, and that it should make an end, and vtterly ouerthrowe those two stately and ritch Citties, those two great miracles of nature, Paris and Antwerpe. Oh Antwerp, whilome faire Antwerp, who of the fairest, ritchest, and most flourishing cittyes of Europe, art by the handes of these villeinous and blood-sucking Spaniards, brought to be the most delolate, spoiled, and desert citty of Christendome. Is it possible that the verie name of thy fall, and report of thy monstrous and horrible sacke, should not make all men (especially thy neyghbors) to be warnd and to take heede of Spaniards? since that it doth so manifestly declare vnto vs, theyr insatiate auarice, theyr more then Tigrish cruelty, theyr filthy, monstrous and abhominable luxurie, theyr wast full burning of thy houses, theyr detestable ransacking and pillage of those great treasures, which from all parts of Europe, were laied vp in store in thy sumptuous pallaces, theyr lustfull and inhumaine deflouring of thy matrones, wiues, and daughters, theyr matchlesse and sodomiticall rauishinge of young boyes, which these demi-barbarian Spaniardes committed in the presence of aged Burgeoses that were fathers,

brethren, husbands or parents of those tormented pacientes, who to grieue them the more whilest they committed al these execrable villenies and outrageous cruelties, did tie and chaine them at there beds féete, or in other places, and last of all the generall and continuall cruell tormentinge and masscring of thy poore and wretched Citizens? hath not the report thereof made all them that euer heard it to tremble at the same, and feel a kind of horror in them selues? and nowe to take away the apprehension of so many euills from vs, they goe about to bleare and blinde vs with theyr holie Inquisition. Good Lord, is that the first messe that the Spaniard will present vs with? is that the Ring that he will wedde France withall? will he endowe vs with that seuere and barbarous Inquisition, which hath the vertue to make men rotte in prison, beefore they know any cause, and who is theyr accuser? that Inquisition, which vnder a false pretence of Religion, doth miserably bring all them that derest the Spanish tirannny to death and confusion? Are wée ignorant how they haue vsed the same at Naples, and at Millane, and how only that hath bin the meane and efficient cause to destroy and subuert all the noble houses which before times had in any sorte followed or fauored the French faenction: Is this then that holy Inquisition, of which good Catholiques neede not stand in any feare? no in good sooth they need not feare it, alwaies prouided that they haue theyr soules died in Spanyolisme, alwayes conditioned that they forget they were borne free men, that they were bone French men, alwaies graunted that they become as abiecte slaues, prepared to endure all cruelties, and to pocket vp euery Castillian brauado, that none of thē haue any houses, offices, benefices, or any thing els whatsoeuer, that a Spaniard may desire or like, that no French man haue a young wife, or faire daughter, which any gallant Inquisitour may haue a fancy or minde vnto, and to be briefe, that they become so miserable, and so submisse, that neither enuie or hatred,

or any other such passion may moue any motion in them, otherwise (I pray you do but tell me) what is he that is so pure and vnspotted in his conscience, that canne thinke himself secure and safe amongst these butcherly murtherers, that subuert all orders, confound all iustice, and peruert all law and equity, to bring a man to his graue, whome they hate or mislike. The Rectour of our Uniuersitie of Paris, a man for the purpose, chosen by the Spaniard, and denoted to them, not long since suing and labouring that this Inquisition might be embraced amongst vs, told vs that if it brought some innocent to his death, it would in recompence thereof ere long cleare all the kingdome of France of Huguenots. There is no doubt of that, for when the least word that shall escape a man shall be construed to be an irremissible crime, when we shalbe enforced as soone as we sée a Iesuite to fall downe and worshippe him, although he bée a mile off, or els we shalbe in daunger to be cast into a déep dungeon, not being allowed any man to speake for vs, and to conclude the Inquisition shall no sooner be established among vs, but they of Rochell will send vs theyr keyse. Here let me aske a question, why is it not vsed in the low Countryes? how comes it to passe that hee who hath such excellent and soueraigne remedies against this disease can not cure himself? How can he promise helth vnto vs, whē he him selfe is full of sores and vlcers? Wherefore should we rather thinke him a skilfull Phisiition, then a pratling Ciarlatan? But I sée what it is, he goeth about to preferre the infirmitie before death, and yet would faine persuade vs the contrarie. For if it be not so, how comes it to passe, that he who would fayne be reputed an Angell of heauen (without whose helpe we should all be Hugonots) hath graunted the inhabitants of Antwerpe to inioy the frée libertie of theyr consciences for the space of foure whole yéeres? Where is that earnest, pure and Catholike zeale which he would make the world beléeue to be in him? And yet all this is nothing in regarde

of the Edict which was made at Gant in the yéere of our Lorde 1576. For by that he yeelded and promised, that none dwelling in anie of the Prouinces, which had submitted themselues to his lawes and obedience, shoulde in anie sort be troubled or molested concerning matters of religion. And as touching the prouinces of Holand and Zeland, nothing appertaining to the exercise of theyr religion, should be remoued or altred from that it was at that present: which yet stands in full vertue and effect. Is not that a testimonie of his yelding and stretching conscience, which (on condition that he may bring his intent to good and wished effect) hee will turne, bend and applie to what bias a man please? Hée will allowe of two Religions in the lowe Conntries, so that he might thereby recouer them againe, and yet can he abide but one in France, that thereby hée may subuert the state thereof.
            His owne subiects will not beléeue him touching those thinges which depende onely of his owne authoritie, as they that knowe well, and to theyr cost haue experienced, that he neuer promiseth, but to deceiue them: and shall French men beléeue and giue anie credite to theyr auncient enemie, touching those things that onely depend on his lyfe, which were he but thirtie yéeres of age, and sure to liue one hundreth yeres more, he shal neuer be able to bring to passe? But let vs consider (I praie you) and waighe the occasions that doe so animate and moue the people of the lowe Countries so opiniatiuely, or rather obstinatly to endure the discommoditie of such long and loathsome warres (for so I may well tearme them) as we sée they haue hetherto, and yet doe maintayne agaynst him. These people (I saie) who are both trustie and tractable (if the world may yéeld a people of suche qualitie) is it for anie pleasure they take in so vnpleasant an exercise? no man will beleeue it. Is it because they will not be as good subiects to theyr Prince, as hee will bee gracious Soueraigne to his people? Nay, so farre are they from the

merite of so vniust a censure, that contrariwise they mayntaine themselues in all dutie and loyaltie towards him: hee hath attempted to tyrannize them with no lesse barbarous crueltie, then he spared not to intreate the Indians with all vnchristian immanitie, contrarie to his sundrie othes and solemne vows made vnto them. And when as by humble supplications they haue besought him, sending for sollicitours of theyr sute, of the most noble and honourable personages of the Countrie, to seeke to mittigate his mercilesse mallice, and to procure a remedie for so great a mischiefe. Euen then hath he most of all (lyke the vyper her venome) spit forth his spight, and redoubled his rage agaynst this innocent people, most miserably and without mercie, putting them to the sword, as sheep to the slaughter, his impious Excellencie being impatient of the petitions of his faithfull, and (but too affectionate) subiects, as in deede to our cost we may saie, they haue but to much shewed themselues to be. For in witnes of theyr good willes, they haue at seuerall times (besides the reuenues of his Dema
                  ••
               s and receit of tallages, subsidies, and other ordinarie impostes) assented to supplie the Emperour with the summe of nine millions of golde extraordinarie, and in déede haue not failed to furnish him therewith, though to the great damage of the Realme of France. But will you knowe what it is that so much moueth the patience of this barbarous King, or rather incestuous tyrant. It is forsooth, that his Father the Emperour had these contributorie sums by gayning (with his Grace) theyr good wills, and in déede by holding a generall assemblie of the Estates, gotte them graunted by a common consent of voyces, but Phillip his sonne, onely by his authorities power, will wreast from the people what him pleaseth, as exacting it from a Countrie but newly conquered. Are we ignorant (thinke you) how as well by the Duke of Alua his endeuour, and by the labour of other the ministers and executioners of his mischiefes, hee went about to obtaine this exaction amongst them, viz. that

euerie man should yéeld him yerely the tenth of his reuenue, and paie him the tenth pennie of euerie thing that should bee solde, yea, and for euerie time it should be vttered, though it were bought and solde an hundreth times to and fro, which surely had amounted to a masse inestimable? And yet hee thought he dealt verie fauourably with the Flemings, sith he maketh no conscience to extort the fifth part yéerely of the Indians. Nay this is not all, the couetousnes of this defencible piller of Christendome, or rather offencible piller and poller of other mens possessions, hath encroched euen vnto the Ecclesiasticall rights and liuings. For considering with himselfe that this intollerable tyrannie, vnto which hee coupled that barbarous and vnchristian Inquisition of Spaine, might at the length bréede a discontentment amongest his subiects. To giue remedie thereunto, hee determined vppon this resolution, which was to cut off from the Cleargie so much of theyr reuenue as might suffice to maintayne such a number of men at armes, that therewith he might so bridle them, & so straightly curbe them with the yoke of his subiection, that though he should take al that euer they haue from them, yet should they not once dare to grudge or murmure agaynst him. Which manner of dealing made them all, both Church-men, Nobilitie, and Communaltie ioyne together to séeke some meanes how to shake off such an insupportable burthen, as lawfully they might doe, séeing it meerely was repugnant and contrarie to the established lawes of theyr Countrie, and namelye to that Satute, whereby it is prouided, that hee shall not impose anie newe subsedie or taxation vpon the people without the aduise and consent of the States generall of the countrie, vpon which lawes both he and his predecessors haue béene receiued and acknowledged for Lordes and gouernours of their societie, but with this expresse prouiso, that if at any time they should infringe or violate those lawes, they also should ipso facto be discharged from the bond of any oth of alleageance

or other duetie, wherein before they had tyed themselues vnto them. So I say, these Spanyolized Frenchmen as they know not, or at least wise will not séeme to know how iustly the people of Flanders are stirred vp to this warre, euen so as men wedded to their owne ouerwéenings for meere blindnesse, doe they not discerne the mischiefe into the which of a brauerie they hurle them selues headlong, most miserably thrusting both their owne and their posterities necks into the haulter, and in lew of the fréedom wherein they haue beene borne and brought vp, become the slaues and bondmen of the most sauage, faithlesse, inhumaine, and barbarous nation, that the circuit of the whole world doth comprehend. Oh wise, and well aduised men of Holland and Zeland, and those other inhabitants of the vnited Prouinces of the low Countries: yea I will say further, Oh most happy people, if knowing (as in deed you doe) whence springeth your blisse and bale, you persist in your sage resolution, whereby you shall auoide all imminent mischiefes, and in short space infeoffe your selues with felicitie, accompanied with an assured safetie from the Spanish tyrannie. Surely you are more neare thereunto, then the tyrant is to death, although he be alreadie old, crazed, and decrepite. And your gladnesse shall bring so much the greater griese to our turncote Frenchmen, when they shall sée them selues so mated with miserie, deuoide of all hope of deliuerance from that harme, which your prudence and foresight hath escaped, and fréed your selues from: and shall serue for an example of folly to all the world, as notable as your counsell and constancie shall be to your posteritie admirable. But let vs returne to the Spanish King. Shall we then be such simple sottes, as to belieue that he would not willingly couple Fraunce to his other countries. Yea, though with condition that it were all Hugonots, or of what religion soeuer? Are we so blinde, that we know not his butte to be the body, and not the soule, his fetch to be at Fraunce, and not at the Heretiques?

vnlesse in that they are an hindrance vnto his purposes, otherwise, why shoulde he not as well ioine in friendship with the French, as heretofore he entertained amitie with the English? vntill the prize of his pence was by them taken from him, which in the yeare of our Lord 1569. he sent into Flanders vnto the Duke of Alua? till which act he had league and alliance both offenciue and deffenciue with them, euen with those that were vowed enimies to the Pope and all Papisme? Oh constant Catholike, Oh puissant Protectour of the faith Catholicall? whom the losse of his gold, not the lacke of religion prouoked, the interest of Spaine, not the right of Rome stoong and pricked to the hart. All the dreadfull threatnings, and fearefull excommunications thundred out by the Pope against the English Protestants, could neuer haue power to make him leaue league with England, when a few lost crownes made him immediatly let fall both friendship, and faith, and climbe vp euen vnto the cloudes with the swell of reuenge and vengeance. Let men say then what they list, let them thunder, and threaten, let heauen and earth be at iarre together, yet shall they neuer remoue me from these two maximes. The one, that the Spanish religion censisteth in enlarging the metes and boundes of his dominions, his zeale in commanding his neighbour nations, and his care in aspiring to the Maiestie of a Monarche, that other religion he hath none, but vseth that of the peoples according as it may best maintaine the trade of his tyrannie. The other is, that he deserueth not the name of a Christian, who doth not belieue that God can farre more safely conserue the glory of his name by the instructions of good Pastors, godly Bishops, zealous Ministers, and sincere Preachers of his word, then the Spaniard or other man liuing can bee able to doe with massacres, sackings, blasphemies, robbings, sacriledges, and incestuous dealings of the most cruel, disordred, licencious and insolent (though hardie) men of warre that euer were

assembled together. Let vs bethinke vs then at length I beseech you, and let vs looke vnto our selues, let vs consider on the one side, the happie estate of those eight or nyne great Prouinces that are alreadie in quietnesse vnder the obedience and protection of our King, on the other side, let vs behold our own miserable and accursed condicion that liue not, but languish in dayly expectation of death through the cruel infliction of famine, which as an handmaide attends on these warres. Let vs well ponder the waight of our enterprise, which tendeth to no other end but to continue, to fill France with brigandage, and bourelage, with rapes, and robberies, with theft and murther, to multiply by millions the number of poore widowes and fatherlesse children, to no other end but to maintaine the pride of the Spanish vsurpation, and make our selues the onely wretched and miserable wretches of the world, and onely to please the desires, and second the humors of certaine desperate cast awaies, the horrors of whose treasons and offences hath cleane consumed our Kinges comiseration: yéelding to the appetites of those, who by their contracts being counterchanged into Spaniards, haue no more any féeling or apprehension of the griefes and miseries of Fraunce, but rather contrariwife make her miseries, their mirth, her losses, their riches, and her ruine, their 
                  •
               singes. If all this can not mollify the hardnes of our harts, if in our mindes there remaine no remnant of remorse, yet at least wise let our eyes enforme vs, and let vs with them behold our selues beset on euery side with the fortunate and florishing armies of our King: let vs view those great and warlike septentrionall nations which replenishe euery place with men, armour and horses, not onely to defend and mantaine the Scepter of Fraunce, but therewithall and with one breath to goe and abate the pride and insolencie of these Negroes, who through our negligence haue a fewe yeares since so saucely or rather sauagely insulted vpon the countries bordering round about vs, making

vs the instruments of our owne scourge, and our butcherly bloudsheds, the subiect of their mirth & triumphes. And in very truth, is not the houre come wherein the very ashes of our Ancestors aske reuenge by our hands, whom their Pencioners procured to spill each others bloud, & cōmit so many publike paricides? What? do we tarry or expect the arising of a more royal King, or victorious Captaine? Haue wee not bin long enough the laughing stocke of those who heretofore could neuer heare vs talked of without trēbling? To conclude, is it not time to go bid the Spaniard battell in his own countrie, where the conquest is so easie, & the fruite so ripe, & so readie at hand? They of Portingall, & Nauarra, do alredy hold vs out their hands, the way wil be the shorter for to redéeme Naples & Milane. It is not the Alpes, but the Pireney mounts yt we must now passe, we must strik home at the head, the blow is mortall. Sée howe the English men haue already pearsed euen the very life-vaines of his golden vent, & in a maner clean shut him out of the sea. He durst not before Lisbone wals stand to fight with Norris, the general of a small English armie: how wil he then dare to encounter a mightie King of France, a Prince of so great puissance? he durst not once assaile the English infantery, how wil he then be able to withstand and escape the furie of the French Cauallerie? backt and fortified with all the forces of the Countries and Prouinces that are on this side of him? Chéere vp your selues, adde will vnto your courage, the true adopted children of Bellona, let not the dreade of our King kéepe anie of you backe, the gates of his clemencie stand wide open for to receiue all, his mercie is mightie, his grace is greater in forgiuing, then our gracelesnes hath bin guiltie in offending. Yea beholde, he holdeth out his royall hand vnto vs all, he is our Father, our naturall and lawfull Father, wée are all his children: but if we shew coldnes in confessing him, if we despise his bountie, if wee mocke his mildnes, miserable wretches, what can wee expect but the sharpe effectes of the

rodde of his indignation, as the rightful and deserued reward of our execrable offences, that our iust suffering may serue for others example? Yet if we can take no pitty of our selues, let vs at least haue some compassion of our wiues and children, whose condition is so much the more miserable, by how much they haue yet no féeling of their miseries. Well, let it now, yea euen now appeare, if in vs there be yet remayning anie relique of true French men, let the desire of preseruing our libertie, and the hatefull apprehension of such miserable feruitude, cleane wash out of our memorie the remembrance of our fore-conceiued and priuate quarrels, and let vs burie our olde broyles and ciuil dissention, in the entire affection of our deare Countrie. There are now no more, nor any other factions but the French and Spanish. Oh omnipotent God, that hast euer held the eyes of thy commiseration open to France, and hast euer plentiously filled her with thy bountifull blessings. It is now, yea verie now, that we haue néede of thy heauenly helpe, and aboue all, that it will please thée to giue sight vnto our sealed eyen, that we may haue power to perceiue and discerne our true enimies, what the Spaniarde is, what his gouernment, what his pretence to our poore, desolate, and oppressed Countrie. Good Lord, leaue vs not now in the exigent of our extremitie, being vpon the point eyther presently to precipitate our selues into euerlasting bondage, or prosperously to purchase our eternall fréedome. Assist our King, protect our Princes, animate our nobles, & strengthen our souldiers, send thy holy Angels to aide them, inspire them with an ardent zeale to maintain thy quarrell, let theyr foreheads be fraught with fearefulnesse, and theyr armes filled with force. Comfort this consanguinitie, continue to lighten with thy grace this line of that holy Lewes, that holy Saint that ceaseth not to pray vnto thée for his posteritie, that thou wilt not blot them out of thy booke of lyfe, that thou wilt not take from them the comfort of thy countenance, that thou wilt not destroye them, that thou wilt not

put in theyr place theyr enemie, the enemie of theyr forefathers: but rather that thou wilt be pleased to preserue vnto his posteritie the inheritance of his patrimonie, and restore his France to her former prosperitie, to the ende that after we shall haue subiected to the yoke of our gouernment those that threaten vs with the rod of their vsurping rule, we may take in hand the accomplishment of his holy vowes, and the pursuite of his religious warres agaynst the Infidels, vnder the conduct of this Christian Conquerour Henrie his eldest sonne, who is borne to aduance the honour of his house, and for euer to eternize the name of the French: and that the auri-flame now ioyned with the Eagle, may be the guiding of so great a King, so Augustius an Emperour, ouerthrowe the Ensignes of that proude Mahomet, and free thy people from captiuitie, who faythfully affying to thy neuer failing promises, haue long attended the comming of that happie daie.
            
               
               An extract of the Spanishe Kings declaration, which hee sent to the Princes of France, and others the partakers of the Catholique Religion, against the Heretiques of that Countrey, their fauourers and adherents.
               
                  THe Catholique King now growen old and crazed, contenteth him selfe with such kingdomes, dukedomes, and seigneuries, as are at this present vnder his obeisance, neither hath his Maiesty any need of that of France. But forasmuch as hee séeth the kingdome of Fraunce afflicted with Heretiques, whome the Catholiques of that Countrey (albeit they be in nomber twelue to one) are not able to master, his Highnes hath alwayes offered him selfe to succor and assiste them, and in deede hath both in theyr first and second troubles ayded and assisted them, as well with men as with money, without intention to receiue any recompence in lew thereof. All which notwithstanding, they haue alwaies couertly maintained wars against him as well in Flanders as Portingal, whereof neuertheles he hath neuer bin willing to take reuenge, nor euer would consent to frame any thing againste Fraunce, since the peace concluded betwixt them.
            
            
               Hereafter follow the conditions demaunded by the Catholiques of France, and by hys Maiesty assented vnto.
               1 First that his Highnes shall haue the title of Protector of the Realme and Croune of France, and the Cardinall of

Bourbon to remain their King, whom his Maiesty shal helpe to deliuer out of captiuity, and cause to be consecrated King.
               2 That his Maiesty may (if he please) mary one of his daughters to one of the Princes of the bloud of France, who after the disease of the said Lord Cardinall shal be crowned King, and in respect of such mariage to be had, his Highnes shall giue the counties of Flanders, and Burgundy to bee ioyned and vnited to the Realme of France,
               3 That the ministers of the Gallicane church, shalbe reformed according to the counsell of Trent.
               4 That no Spaniard shalbe endowed with any benefice, or beare iudiciall office in this Realm, nor be admitted to the gouernement of any townes or bordering places.
               5 That the offices of iustice shall not be made mercenary, but be fréely bestowed vppon good and honest persons, such as shall haue bestowed theyr time in study and in the practise of the bar.
               6 But as for such as not being answerable to these sayde conditions, shall haue already purchased any such places of dignity or office, being men of behauiour and Catholiques: in regard that they haue paide for them, and many of them yet owe rents and fines for the same. It shalbe lawfull for them at this time to resigne vnto others that shalbe capable of them, being Catholiques and men learned, and of good and honest reputation, who afterwards néede not make any other resignation.
               7 That his Maiesty shall make a banke or stock of two millions of gold to be kept in Paris, and employed for the paiment of the arrerages of the rents of the chamber of the Citty, and that his saide Maiesty shall at his proper cost and charges, and with that which it shall please our holy father the Pope to contribuite, entretain the warres that now we haue in hand.
               8 And as for tallage money and impositions, that to bee

reserued and employed towards the paiments of the debts of the Crowne, and not to any other vse, and the debts once discharged, the said impositions to be remitted, except onely one tallage, wherewith shalbe entertayned a certaine number of men of warre, as well horsemen as footemen, for the gard and conseruation of the Realme.
               9 That from hence forth the souldiers of the Kings ordinaunces shalbe gentlemen, and shall make their musters, and receiue theyr pay quarterly, as well in time of peace as warre.
               10 That the French men shall haue frée liberty to commerce and haue recourse of trafique and negotiation to the lands of Peru, and other the new conquered countries of hys Maiesty, with frée election either to associate with the Spaniards and Portingalls, or if they thinke good, to saile alone by them selues.
               By vertue of the articles here aboue agréed on, his Highnes for a beginning of the sayd stocke or bank of two millions of gold, hath caused already to bee deliuered into the City of Paris, the sum of foure hundreth thousand crownes.
            
            FINIS.
         
      
   