
      
         
            
            
            A
MOST EXCELlent
exploit perfourmed by Monſieur
de Diguieres, the French Kinges
Lieutenant, vpon the Popes Armie which
was vnder the conduct of Earle Hercules
the Popes Nephew.
            With the taking of Sainct Eſprite, and the mutiny in
Paris.
            Together with
A Diſcourſe of the ouerthrow of the Duke of Sauoyes army
defeated by the Lord de Diguieres, in the plaine of
Pont-Charra, near to Caſtle Bayard, in the vale of Greſiuodan
the eighteenth of September 1591.
            Printed at Toures by Iames Mattayer Printer to the Kings
Maieſty, and truely tranſlated into Engliſh, according to
the ſame coppy.
            LONDON.
Printed by Iohn Wolfe, 1591.
         
      
      
         
            
               
                  
                  
                     A MOST EXCELLENT
e
                           •
                        ploite perfourmed by Monſieur
de Diguieres, the French Kinges Lieutenant,
vppon the Popes Armie, which was vnder the
conduct of Earle Hercules the Popes Nephew.
                     With the taking of Sainct Eſprite, and the mutinye
in Paris.
                     
                        IT is commonly known becauſe it is the
generall plague of Chriſtendom, howe
that vſurper of Eccleſiaſticall power, abuſer
of Kinges, and miſleader of ſouls,
I meane the Pope, rageth as a whirlewind
through Europe, muſtring rebels
and fugitiues, nurſing traytors to God
and their countrey, and ſending them out into the world
to trouble the quietnes of kingdoms and ouerthrowing
al, onely to ſupport himſelfe.
                     Amongſt others (beſides the buſineſſe of his greate
Sonne the Spaniſhe King) hee hath ſent a power of his
owne, vnder the conducte of his owne Nephewe at
leaſt, the Earle Hercules, furniſhed in all pointes to the
proofe, loaden with the bleſſings of the Pope himſelfe,
and the ſpoiles of their owne Churches, royally, rich, and
reſolute inough, and in this pride they march down into
that maſſacred countrey of Fraunce, with great purpoſe
of moſt wonderfull concluſions.
                     But Mounſieur de Diguieres being there for the king,
gathered a head of expert ſouldiers by diſgariſoning the
neyghbour Townes, and welcommed theſe gallants of Italy

with ſo hote an encounter, that in leſſe then two
hours, two thouſand & fiue hundred of them were ouerthrowen,
and almoſt as many taken priſoners, eight hundred
of which were ſlaine in the fury, and foure hundred
kept priſoners, the reſt (more to qualify the pride of their
hawty natures) were firſt ſolemnly ſworne by Mounſieur
de Diguieres neuer more to bear Armes againſt the French
king, and then ſhamefully ſent home diſarmed, ſauing
onely white wandes in theyr handes in ſcorne of theyr
weapons.
                     The Generall and his company were well apaide of
this ſeruice: for whereas before they lay in Garriſon and
lackt money, now theſe braue Romaniſts brought them a
neceſſary exerciſe, an honorable victory and rich ſpoiles,
for amongſt them they found in chaines of golde, rings,
iewels, and armour, as much as was valued at more then
two hundred thouſand French crowns, beſides three hundred
great horſe for ſeruice, God ſend him and all his
friends, many more ſuch banquets.
                     Beſides Sainct Eſprite, ſur Rue hath ben taken by ſom
of the kinges ſide, which doth mightely hinder thoſe of
Abeuile, and Amyens from hauing ſuccour by ſea.
                     It is moreouer knowen for certainty, that they in
Paris are at intollerable mutiny amongſt themſelues, the
people againſt their gouernours, and the great ones againſt
them, and ſo much haue the people preuailed that
they haue hanged vp their chiefe Gouernour, God ſende
all their Leaders and fauorits ſo good an end.
                  
                  
                     
                     A diſcouery vppon ſuch accidents as haue happened
in the French King his Army, ſithence the firſt
day of October, vntill the fifte of the ſame moneth.
                     
                        THe King departing on munday morning
from Attigny, with a thouſand
French, three thouſand Ritters, and
fiue hundred Harquebuziers, all on
horſe, intending to ingage fight, and
to know what his ennemies forces
were, and with what reſolution they
woulde indure the brauado, if any
ſhould be giuen; was by diuerſity of informations led into
ſo many douts, that he would not altogether vnaduiſedly
hazard his troupes, till ſuch time as with better aduauntage
and more certayne intelligence he might trye
the Fortune of ſuch an aſſault, as might both make hys
Maieſty be helde in an honourable eſtimate for his wiſedome,
and his followers be animated with ſo reſolute a
zeale to the perfourmance of theyr enterpriſe, as mighte
cauſe a continuall report, and make good their warlike
indeuours.
                     Thus minding to perſiſt in the effecting of ſome exployt,
about two of the clocke in the after noone, he with
theſe foure thouſand foot and fiue hundred horſe, ariued
at Grandpre, a place diſtant ſeuen Leagues from whence
he was departed, where he vnderſtoode that the Lorde of
Amblize, with the troups of horſe which belonged to the
Duke de Lorain, and al the ſtrangers of the Duke de Mayn,
were quartered, about a Town called Mountfaucon, bordering
vppon Lorayne which was not diſtant aboue fiue
Leagues from Graundpre, which newes chaunced to the
Kings great ioy: After animating his troupes with ſuch
words as might beſt beſeem ſo braue a General, ſet ſpurs,
and in all haſt made towards Mountfaucon, where hee arriued
before night. But thoſe Leaguers which were lodged
in the Town eyther without intelligence of his Maieſties
intended aſſault, or any Alarum at al, were departed

from thence to lodge betwixte Stenay and Villefranche,
hauing intended the day following to giue ſome brauado
on ſuch companies as his Maieſty had left about Aulmont,
vpon which doubtles they had executed ſome notable
ſtratagem, had not information of the Kings aryuall
apalde them in ſuch ſort, as they were forſt to plot
grounds for their own ſafety, & deſiſt frō their enterpriſe.
                     His M. being quartered near to Mountfaucon, a Forte
wel furniſht with munition and ſouldiers, thought beſt to
vndertake the trying of the Popes forces: yet notwithſtā
                        ding
maugre the ſconce & the Leaguers which were therabout,
lay there al that night, not without a general terror
to the pore rebels which held the place. Notwithſtanding
that they had two hundred horſe, and many fine ſallyes
for aduantaging themſelues.
                     The next morning he determined to make for Verdun
beiond the riuer Meuze, wher the Popes forces lay, vnder
the conduct of Don Octaui
                              •
                            Chezis: wherupon the next day
his troups being in readines marcht directly to la Meuze,
where he found a ſquadron of horſe, which vppon his M.
approch carried newes to the leaders of the Popiſh Army,
who vpon aduiſe were ſent to guard the paſſage, but they
halfe dead for feare, began to quake as ſoone as they perceiued
what a number came ſwarming roūd about them,
thought it better to get within the wals, or at leaſtwiſe to
liue themſelues with ſom companies that might bear the
blowes: but whilſt they ſtood thus ſcanning their neckeverſes
without booke, they betooke them to their heels,
and ſo ſaued themſelues harmeleſſe.
                     This cowardiſe not giuing any ſmal occaſiō of admiration
to the Kings powers, who to their no litle diſhonor,
began to ſhout at thē, was not alone an ap
                           •
                        aling of thoſe
which were after to encounter, but ſo proſperous an accident
to the incoraging of his M. reſolute followers, that
they almoſt eſteemed it as diſhonor to combat with ſuch
Cowes. But the King now perceyuing it high 
                           •
                        ime to
giue notice to the world of his magnanimity, began thus
to lay the platforme of his valour.
                     
                        
Firſt he ſent Mounſier Fournier and le Sieur de Giury with
50. horſe to ingage the fight, but ſeeing how theſe at one
place had giuen the alarum, and that therfore it was hard
to ſurpriſe them, turnd right towards Amblize whom he
hoped to encounter with either on the way, or reſting
themſelues: Meanewhile diuers forragers of the kinges
met with twelue lances which garded chariots and conuoyes
of the leagues, and about the ſame time three Carbines
of the kinges gaue him to vnderſtand how they had
ſeene Amblize mounted with all his troups, march right
to Dampuilliers: Vpon which information hee thought it
good to go and lie in the waie to cut them off, and for the
more ſpeede aduanſt himſelfe in perſon, and tooke the
neereſt way which lay through a forreſt bounding on
Lorraine, & Luxembourg, and by this meanes aduentured ſo
far as he came within Cannon ſhot of Dampuilliers, where
hee found they had not yet paſſed. Wherefore ſeeing the
day began to faile, prouided for the lodging of his men,
becauſe being in armes, the diſtance and the great pace
they rode, made them wearie: The meanewhile his Maieſtie,
as his naturall diſpoſition is, not ſleeping aboue
three houres, ſpent the reſt in premeditating on the ſequel
of his enterpriſe, but neuer ceaſsing to thinke howe hee
might circumuent his great enimies, commaunded that
the day following the rendezvous ſhoulde at the furtheſt
by ten of the clocke bee appointed, at his court of Gard
that was furtheſt aduanſt, and from thence intended to
make for verdun to giue the battaile, which being done he
approched within a league of the towne, where hee made
a ſtand, looking till a woonderfull great tempeſt was allaid:
which notwithſtanding his Maieſtie impatient of
the leaſt delay, accompanied onely with thirtie horſe:
came within the ſight of the towne, whence not ſeeing any
bodie come forth, and the raine and winde rather increaſe,
then giue ouer, gaue order to the Baron Byron, that his
ſquadrons might be lodged halfe a league further off, to
preuent any ſally, and to ſend to him 150. horſe, being
choſen ſome out of euery troupe: whereupon the Prin
                           ••
                        
                        
                        d'Enhal
                              •
                           
                         came in perſon with thirtie Alman horſe and other
Nobles to the number of an hundred and fiftie.
                     Now when the weather began to breake vp, there ſallied
out of the towne fiftie Lances, which ſeemed at the firſt
as if they woulde haue come to render themſelues to his
Maieſties fauour: but like traitors pretending nothing leſſe,
being within musket ſhotte of the walles, made a ſtand, hauing
for their Generall the Lieutenant of Don Ottauio Chezis,
which is the firſt companie vnder the Popes Nephew: theſe
hauing diuers Carbins in their companie, made them ſcout
vp and downe, to eſpie if anie ambuſhe were not laid neare
the town, in performance of which they ſpent two houres,
whereby their good deuotion, either to ſubmit themſelues
to the kinges mercie, or the fortune of the day, proued ſo
could, as his highneſſe could but ſmile at their ſimple indeuors,
But whileſt they were in this ſquadron, neyther daring
for feare come out of the ſhotte, nor for ſhame returne
into the Towne, his highneſſe ſent le Sieurs de Praſlin, la
Curee & de l'Hargerie to counter braue them, but with 20.
horſe, geuing them in charge, that the firſt pace that they
ſhould ſee the enemy retire, as they were naturall Friends
and honourable ſubiectes, they ſhould charge them what
miſhap ſoeuer ſhould befall, and the more to annimat them,
promiſed newe ſupplies: whereupon on their allegeance,
promiſed to performe what his Maieſtie ſhoulde pleaſe to
commaund, and ſo ſet forward. The king perceiuing with
what loyal affection & reſolute hardineſſe, theſe few ſubmitted
their liues to his pleaſure, priſing their loſſe aboue anie
eſteeme, willed the Baron Byron to be ready on one ſide with
40. and le Sieur de la Chappelle aux Vrſins, with 20. horſe on the
other ſide, aſwel to ſuccor the aſſailants if need ſhould be, as
to ſee if any troups came not behind, or were laid in ambuſh
to cut them off: not cōtrary to an expected cowardiſe, at the
rāging of theſe ſquadrons, they ſo betook them to a gallop,
but not with ſuch haſt, but that ſix of thoſe 20 being the beſt
moūted, entred the backs of them, and began to make their
Enſigne fly. In this ſkirmiſh was ſlayn the horſe that Le Sieur
de la Curee had vnder him, which the ennemy perceiuing turned,

and ſet vpon them being not paſſing 5. or 6. (the reſt not
being ſo well horſt could not enter the reregard ſo ſoone) yet
hauing no more then theſe 6. they behaued themſelues in ſuch
ſort, as although they were in the midſt of the throng, yet euery
ſeuerall man could haue ſhowen his ennemies head on his
launces point, wherein they ſhewed the magnanimity of right
loiall ſubiects, & yet not thus content chaſt them euen vnder
the wals of the town, ſlew 8. of their horſes, and brought away
two priſoners where they ſtood, & fronted three ſquadrons of
horſe, priuily ſalied out of the town, which making ſhew to
charge them ſcarce almoſt aboue a hundred paces were content
to make a ſtand, & ſee their fellowes rifled, amongſt whō
was the Lieutenant and Captayne of the guard aforeſaid.
                     Thus valiantly hauing made an impreſſion of their true and
notable affection towards their ſoueraigne they returned, Le
Sieur de Praſlin hauing receiued three ſeueral blowes of a lance
in his cloke, and a Piſtoll which perced his curaſe, bruſed his
fleſh but reſted in his doublet. Wherfore his M. perceiuing the
night to draw on, and that his enemies retired themſelues vnto
their holds, commanded a retreat ſhould be ſounded, and
ſuch as in his aduentures once had worthely behaued themſelues,
he receiued with ſuch princely & honorable entertainment
as might ſtand with his M. honour and their owne deſerts.
There was one of thoſe priſoners which were taken in
this ſkirmiſh, which vppon friendſhip he receiued at the hāds
of Le Sieur de Saint Gouard one of the kings ſide, diſcouered the
whole number of the Popes forces: which vppon his honor he
auouched not to be aboue 800. launces, 1200. Italian footemen,
and three thouſand Switzers, the reſt being either well
beaten, run away, or dead with eating of grapes.
                     Thus whilſt his M. had laine a league and a halfe from Verdun
without any alarum, ſeeing the Leaguers wold not budge
out of the wals: he left them to the mercy of a ſecond aſſay: &
thence went to Montfa
                           •
                        con ſpoken of before, which he took,
& from thence wēt to Grandpre & ſo to Attigny, wher after
a litle ſoiourne, he ment to aſſemble new forces & once more
to try whether they would come out of their holes.
                  
                  FINIS.
               
            
         
         
            
               
                  
                  A
DISCOVRSE OF THE
ouerthrowe of the Duke of Sauoyes
Armie, defeated by the L. de Diguieres,
in the plaine of Pont-Charra, neare to Caſtle
Bayard in the Vale of Greſiuodan, the
eighteenth of September,
1591.
                  Printed at Toures by Iames Mattayer, Printer to the Kinges
Maieſty, and truly tranſlated into Engliſh, by E. A.
                  
                  LONDON,
Printed by Iohn Wolfe, 1591.
               
            
            
               
                  
                  
                  A Diſcourſe of the ouerthrowe of the Duke of Sauoyes Army,
defeated by the Lord de Diguieres in the plaine of Pont-Charra,
neare to Caſtle Bayard, in the vale of Greſiuodan,
the 18. of September, 1591.
                  
                  
                     AFter the taking of the Towne of
Luz in Prouince, the Lorde de
Diguieres meaning to take the
benefite of the time, & to imploy
it in the Kings ſeruice, while his
Maieſties armie lying at the ſiedg
of Graneſon, was by the Duke of
Sauoy reſtrained from tending els
where, determined with the ſmall forces, wherewith
he had reduced the Towne of Luz into obedience, to
goe and beſiedge Digne, and to that intent hee departed
from Meſine the 24. of Auguſt. Vpon his arriuall
neare the ſaide Towne, which lyeth within two muſquet-ſhot
of the ſaid Digne, and vpon his deliberation
to put his enterpriſe in execution, there was certayne
newes of the armie of Sauoy, conſiſting of ſeuen hundred
horſes, and ſeuen thouſand harquebuziers (a
matter well knowne to all men, confirmed by diuerſe
aduices, and ſince found true) this army I ſay, beeing
lead by the Lord Amedee Olliuaro and the Marquis of
Treny, had beſiedged Moreſter, which was lately fortified
to couer Grenoble from the border of Sauoy. Vpon
this new aduiſe, he was neceſſarily to change his purpoſe,
and in lieu of aſſailing, to ſuccour and defende,
yea euen to vſe great diligence, for that the place was
not ſo well fortified and prouided, as was to be wiſhed,
as a matter enterpriſed and put in execution in
foure dayes ſpace, whiles the ſaide Lord de Diguieres
                     
remained vpon the frontier to diſcouer the Popes armie,
as it paſſed by Montmellion, to the end thereof to
giue aduiſe vnto the King, and withall to keep it from
raunging and waſting the valley of Greſiuodan; as vndoubtedly
it would, had it not beene for the bar and
troupe of the ſaid Lord de Diguieres caſt in their way,
and finally, to prouide againſt the ſiedge wherewith
the ſaid armie threatened Grenoble.
                  
                  The 25. and 26. of the ſaid moneth, the ſaid Lord de
Diguieres hauing left ſome of his companies in Corbon,
vntill ſuch time as the Lord of la Valette had taken
order as hee thought good, departed out of Prouince,
without licenſing or disbanding of any of his troups,
whom he cauſed to take the way 
                        •
                     hither where neceſſitie
required. From that day vntill the twelfth of September,
the ſaide Lord de Diguieres labored to gather
together his friendes, ſo that the ſame day hee lay at
Grenoble, and the villages round about, accompanyed
with the Lords of Mcures, Briquemant, Marges, Pra
                           •
                        ant,
and other Gentlemen and Captains, with three hundred
horſe at the moſt, and two thouſand ſeuen hundred
harquebuziers. The enemie vnderſtanding of
the arriuall of theſe troupes, whoſe numbers he knew
not, rayſed his ſiedge, which in truth he had not layde
very neare to Moreſter, and tooke his lodging at Pont-Charra,
halfe a league aboue the ſaide place, and there
he laboured to intrench and barriquade the wayes to
his lodging, ſetting a countenance as if hee would
keep it, and lodge ſome troupes in houſes therabout.
But as for the ſaid Lord de Diguieres troupes, the footmen
tooke vp their lodging at Chelais, and the horſemen
at Gouſelay and Ranſin, ſo as the reſt of that ſmall
armie, was but halfe a league from the enemie.
                  
                     
The fifteenth day was ſpent in the diſcouering of
the enemies lodging, and the ſixteenth attending
the comming of the ſaid Lord de Diguieres, who ſtaid
at Grenoble ſick of a rheume that held him four daies
the Lord of Beliers with ſome harquebuziers on horſbacke,
pie
                        •
                     ced the gard of one company of horſmen,
ſtrooke into their lodginges, and vtterly ouerthrewe
them, ſo that there remained on the place ſome twentie
men, and there were won ſome twentie ſeuen horſes
of ſeruice, with caſſackes, lances & other furniture.
                  The ſaid ſixteenth of the ſaid moneth, the Lordes
of Meures and Morges, being loth to loſe any time, departed
with ſome twentie of their companies, to take
ſo neare a view of the guard of the army, that they entred
it peſſe-meſſe, & caſt it vpon the armes of the ſaid
armie, ſo that had it not bene that the narrow way being
peſtered with three or foure horſes that were fallen,
& ſtood the fliers in ſteade of Barriquadoes, they
had followed further: ſome enemies were there ſlain,
& good horſes taken. The ſaid Lord de Diguieres arriuing
the ſame day, forgat not to ſpend the ſeuēteenth
day about a perfect viewe of the enemies lodging,
wherein alſo hee conſidered of the ſcituation of ſuch
places as might fauor them, or be any helpe to them,
in caſe he ſhould ſet vpon them. All which he took ſo
certain notice of, that euery thing fell out in maner as
he had premeditated & deſcribed on a leafe of paper.
                  The next day being the 18. the enemie ſet himſelf
in battaile array, obſeruing the order that followeth.
His head was turnd toward Crenoble: on the left hand
ſtood his footemen in a round vpon alſo all hillocke
of vines; on the right hand vnder caſtle Bayard ranne
the riuer of Lizere, and betweene the riuer or the hillocke

ſtood his horſemen in three ſquadrons, within
the medows that lie neer the Lord of Beumons houſe:
and before the ſaid horſemen ſtood ſome 40. horſe in
a field on a rowe, where they had a valley or downfall
that debarred our men from comming at them in
battaile aray. This order did the enemies take, becauſe
they had a farre off diſcouered the L. de Diguieres
troupes comming toward them: who being come
without two musket ſhotte of the enemy, hee cauſed
them to make a ſtand in a bottome neere the riuer,
where they were ſhadowed with trees, to the ende
they might not be diſcouered. In the meane time the
Lord of Prabant with 1500. Harquebuziers followed
the hill on the right hand in two troupes, whereof the
one kept the top, ſo to diſplace thoſe that ſtood on the
ſide, and the other marched on the lower way, ſo to
diſplace the footmen that fauoured the enemies horſmen.
And in the meane time while the Lord of Prabant
eyther fauoured, or made ſhew of anie footemen
in the field, where the enemies gard was ſet, a troupe
of horſe which conteined not aboue twentie, being
led by the lord of Veraſſe lieutenant of the Lord of
Baquemands companie, marched directly to the ſaid
gard, which had no minde to ſtaie, but forſooke their
ground, & retired to the main battaile. The L. de Diguieres
marking this coūtenance, as alſo that footmen
had begonne to ſhake the enemie that ſtood on the
hillocks, cauſed his troups to march on into the enemies
field, which they had choſen, which alſo was the
ſame, where the enemies Guard had bene ſet before.
The footmē alſo led by the L. of Probant, keeping the
night hand, aranged themſelues like wiſe, as did alſo
the Lord of Miz
                           •
                        les with a battail of footmen on the

left hand vpon the edge of the riuer: The horſmen in the
midſt aranged in three ſquadrons, eche at anothers
heeles, among whom we do not comprehend the light
horſe, making as it were an aduantage, led by the Lord of
Brigmant. The ſquadron that followed next was led by
the Lord of Morges, then the ſecond Cornet of the ſaid
Lord de Diguieres, led by the Lord of Poligny: and the
laſt, which was the white Cornet, togither with 52.
great horſes, who ſeemed neuertheleſſe to be ſome, fiue
hundred, by reaſon they had following them at the
heeles, 120. Harquebuziers on horſeback, and the varlets
with euerie one a ſword in his hand, which greatly danted
the enemy: vpon the left hand of the ſaid white Cornet
ſtood an other battaile of footmen to fauor the ſame
that ſerued for an arriergard. Beeing thus aranged at the
ſame time that the skirmiſh waxed warme on either ſide,
and that the enemy began to abandon his lodging, wee
charged their horſemen, who at the firſt comming, ſet a
reaſonable good face on the matter, and bard out the
ſaid charge, entring ſomewhat into our vauntgard, who
ſeeing themſelues ſupported, returned and broke the
enemie, who had alreadie ioyned all his ſquadrons in
one, ſo to flie the ſooner: yet fetched they a compaſſe in
the medowes, that belong to the ſaide lord of Beumons
houſe, and ſtaied vntill our vauntgard came within the
Speare length, and then began to flie. The chace held on
to Montmelliun, whether all the fliers did notretire, for
ſome lay dead in the place, and others fled at randon towards
Rochette Arguebelle Miolans and the woodes. The
number of the dead amounted vnto aboue 2500. There
were taken aboue 300. horſe. Alſo ſome priſoners, moſt
of them Captaines, lieutenants, or ancient-bearers. Alſo
18. Ancients bearing the red croſſe, and one Cornet. The
lord Amedee ſaued himſelfe at Miolans, the lords Marquize
                     
of Treny and Otiuare, were loſt in the Woode 36.
houres, and afterward ſaued themſelues at Montmelion.
The baggage was taken fully and whole. Moſte of the
heades of the enemie are loſt. This happened the 18.
of September, and vpon the 19. of two hundred Romains,
and Mil
                           •
                        nars, who had ſaued themſelues in the Caſtle
of Aualon with their leaders the Galatine and Beliogeuſe
yealded at diſcretion: But the furie of the ſouldiers could
not pardon ſixe or ſeuen hundred, who were cut in peeces:
and the reſt, euerie one with a white ſtaffe in his
hand, hauing promiſed to repaire to their owne houſes;
and neuer to fight any more againſt the king, were by
the ſaid Lord de Diguieres ſafeconducted into a place of
ſafetie. This victorie is ſo much the more notable, becauſe
wee loſt neuer a man of name. Alſo that after the
muſter of the Companies, there wanted but one light
horſe belonging to the Lord of Brigmant, and two ſouldiers
that were ſlaine: and the Lord of Valleure, and
two ſouldiers wounded. The bootle was not ſo ſmall,
but that it amounted vnto aboue 200000 crownes, the
moſt part in chaines, Iewelles, Gold and Siluer coyned,
Siluer Veſſell, and rich Garmentes, and the reſt in horſes
and armour. It ſeemeth that the memorie of the
great captaine Bayard, in his time, ſo affectionat vnto
France, would not ſuffer her moſte auncient ennemies,
ſhoulde receciue any better entertainment about his
houſe which himſelfe builded.
                  To God be the glorie, and to the kinges ſeruantes,
the contentation hereof.
                  
                  FINIS.
                  
               
            
         
      
   