
      
         
            
            
            THE SHEPHEARDES COMPLAINT. A paſsionate Eclogue, written in Engliſh Hexameters: Wherevnto are annexed other conceits, brieflie expreſsing the effects of Loues impreſsions, and the iuſt puniſhment of aſpiring beautie. By J. D.
            
            
               Breuiſsima, gratiſsima.
            
            Imprinted at London for William Blackewall, and are to be ſold at his ſhop ouer againſt Guild-hal Gate.
         
         
            
            
            
               TO all courteous Gentlemen Readers, Scholers, and whoſoeuer elſe affect the ſtudie of Poetrie, Iohn Dickenſon preſents this the fruit of an vnripe wit, done ſucciſiuis horis: deſiring them courteouſly to accept, & fauourably to peruſe theſe his ill-pleaſing labours, and protect them by their friendly cenſures, from the malice of vnfriendlie carpers, not for their owne worth, which are worthleſſe: but entreating them rather to allow his good will in perfourming what hee could, then accuſe his want of ſufficiencie in not affoording what they would.
         
         
            
            
               VIdit Amor, viſos legit, lectoſque probauit
               Anglia quos de ſe libros muſaeque Britannae
               Compoſuere: Deo placuit mutatus Amintas
               Veſte nitens propria & Romana veſte decorus:
               Nec pla
                     •
                  uere minus viridi digniſsima lauro
               Aurifluis foecunda metris Sidnaeia ſcripta,
               Et laudes Roſamunda tuae: nec numinis vllae
               Subter fugerunt oculos viſumue camoenae.
               Singula dum luſtrat, Paſtoris forte querelam
               Conſpexit riſitque parum, de in talia fatus
               Sunt ait haec aliquid laudes ſpectantia noſtras,
               Et ſint parua licet, non aſpernanda videntur,
               Haec Deus: haec noſtrae praebent ſolatia muſae.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            The Shepheards Complaint.
            
               PHoebus awaked with the early ſummons of Aurora, moūted his burning Chariot bathed in the Chryſtalline cleare ſtreames of aged Oceanus, while ſhe moiſtning the earth with a ſhowre of ſiluer pearled dewe, did ſelemnize with her morning teares, the neuer-ended obſequies of her deareſt Memnon. But though the God conpling his head-ſtrong Stéeds, had begun his daies-taſke in the Eclipticke, yet I, whoſe vnquiet thoughts affoorded no reſt to my ouer-wearied ſenſes in the ſilent night, reſolued not to riſe, til I had ſomewhat refreſhed & repaird the decaying vigor of my dulled ſpirites. As thus I lay muſing on ſundrie matters, gentle ſleepe recompenced my oft-interrupted ſlumbers with a long repoſe, wherein mee thought I was tranſported into the bleſſed ſoile of heauenly Arcadia, the beauteous garniſhing of whoſe fertile plaines, decked with the pride of Flora, which had there opened the royall Storehouſe of her pompous magnificence, did farre ſurpaſſe the triuiall pleaſures of Theſſalian Tempe. I cleane rauiſhed with delight, ſolac'd my ſelfe in the viewe of that Celeſtiall plot, earths ſecond paradiſe, whoſe pleaſures thus briefly, though badly, I will expreſſe.
            
               1
               FIelds were ouer-ſpred with floures,
               Faireſt choyce of Floraes treaſure:
               
                  Shepheards there had ſhadie bowers,
               Where they oft repoſ'd with pleaſure:
               Meadowes flouriſh'd freſh and gay,
               Where the wanton heards did play.
            
            
               2
               Springs more cleare than chryſtall ſtreames,
               Seated were the Groues among.
               Thus nor Titans ſcortching beames,
               Nor earthes drouth could ſheapheards wrong,
               Faire Pomonaes fruitfull pride,
               Did the budding branches hide.
            
            
               3
               Flockes of ſheepe fed on the plaines,
               Harmeleſſe ſheepe that rom'd at large:
               Here and there ſate penſiue Swaines,
               Waiting on their wandring charge:
               Penſiue while their Laſſes ſmil'd,
               Laſſes which had them beguil'd.
            
            
               4
               Hils with Trees were richly dight,
               Valleis ſtor'd with Ueſtaes wealth:
               Both did harbour ſweet delight,
               Nought was there to hinder health.
               Thus did heauen grace the ſoile,
               Not deform'd with workemens toile.
            
            
               5
               Pureſt plot of earthlie mould,
               Might that land be iuſtly named.
               Art by Nature was controul'd,
               Art which no ſuch pleaſures framed:
               Fairer place was neuer ſeene,
               Fitteſt place for beauties Queene.
            
            But to our purpoſe. As I wandred along, the ſwéet chantreſſe of the field, into whoſe gentle kind fair Philomele was earſt tranſformed, did ſeeme to gratulate my arriuall with diuine melody, raiſing her harmonious laies in higheſt tunes.

And not reſpecting the ſafetie of her tender charge ſcal'd with her wings the top of a lofty trée, where while ſhe ſate, a careleſſe contemner of worlds euer-changing chaunces, and pleaſed her ſelfe with the ſweetneſſe of her owne ſong, a Snake ſlilie créeping into the fooliſh birds late forſaken neſt deuoured the ſillie yonglings not garded as before with the warie Mothers watchfull eie: They ſtraining their tender breſts, implor'd their wretched dammes vntimelie aid, who hearing the ſad exclaimes of her betraied brood, and being the ſorrowfull eie-witneſſe of their miſerie, turnd her ioyfull tunes into paſſionate laments, moaning ſo ſweetly, that Nature vrged by fatall neceſſitie, ſeemed to excel Art: but complaints were bootleſſe: for the cruell deuourer had alreadie engulfed the innocent yonglings in his venemous maw, whoſe deaths ſhe celebrated with her mournfull cries, & framed their funerall ſong in heauenly notes. But while ſhe bereft of her pretie little ones the hope of her future content, began freſh ſorrowes, a Fowler hauing eſpied the hapleſſe bird, and intending her like miſfortune, tooke his ſtation and prepared the engines of his crueltie, throughly reſoluing to embowell a ſmall bullet in her guts, and ſo finiſh her hearts ſorrow. But while he aimed at her, deſirous to effect his cruell reſolution, the Snake whoſe entrals were yet warme with the guiltleſſe bloud of thoſe vnhappie young ones, did ſting the gréedie birders foot, who grieued with the ſodaine peine, left his former interpriſe, and falling into a cholericke humor, diuided the mangled bodie of that curſed Serpents brood into manie péeces, imploying his death-bodening engine, the fatall receptacle of conſuming ſulphur otherwiſe than hee had determined. Thus he which made his bellie the childrens graue, did with remorſ-full recompence procure the mothers ſafety, ſatiſfiyng her reuenge with his bloud, and ſauing her life through his kinde attempt. I thought the ſtrangenes of this chance worthy of recitall. But going forward, I diſcried a little thicket, a name well fitting the propertie of that place: for it was ſo thick & cloſe, that it ſeemed rather deſpairs manſion, then delights harbour. Nature moderating her lauiſh

bountie ſeated there this onely blemiſh of Arcadiaes bliſſe, whoſe other groues haunted by the wanton Satyres, traced by the light foo
                  •
               e Hamadriades, and hallowed with the ſacred preſence of the rurall Dimigods, hauing cleare ſprings to comfort the thirſtie hunters, and ſweet Arbours to refreſhe the weary Nymphs, wanted no perfections of pleaſure which Natures plentiful prouidence could affoord, or heauens kinde influence maintaine. But though this amaſing obiect contrarie to the reſt, did ſomwhat daunt me, yet armed with a firme reſolution, I bololy entered to ſearch the ſecret corners of that affrighting place: Where what I ſaw, and how I ſaw, is plainely diſcouered in this following diſcourſe, the ſad record of a mournful Shepheards laments, which being the chiefeſt part of my dreame I noted ſo ſoone as I awaked, deſcanting on his eſtate in common verſe, both before and after the paſſionate Eclogue. But being loth it ſhould come abroad ſo naked, I haue thus meanly clothed it with the addition of other accidents to make it a perfect dreame, though an imperfect matter. But be it as it wil. I wil rather preſume on the courteſie of your frendly cenſures, then loſe time, & beſtow labor in refining a toy, which I haue bene occaſioned to publiſh. But they which haue by their owne miſhappes experimented the force of Loue, and torturing troubles of enthrald affection, wil I hope gently cenſure of his Complaintes, if not for the worth of his deſert, yet for his paſſions fake.
            
               WIthin a Groue encompaſt round with trees,
               VVhoſe cloſe ſet tops cleare ſight of piercing eie,
               Could ſcarce find paſſage through, by iuſt degrees
               Proportioned in diſtance equally
               As done hy skilfull Artiſts memorie,
               A penſiue Shepheard ſtretch'd him on the ground,
               VVhoſe wonted ioyes ſad paſsions did confound.
            
            
               As when a blacke thicke Meteore dothore-goe
               Heau'ns light, whoſe vautie roofe bright orbs emboſſe,
               The vapours late exhaled from belowe
               
                  Dimme that faire place with dregs of earth-bred droſſe,
               Which ſtriuing winds doth rough the welkin toſſe:
               So this thicke ſhade, darke manſion of deſpaire,
               Did ſcarce affoord an entrance to thinne aire.
            
            
               Vnder an Arboret embranched wide,
               This fore-lorne ſwaine oppreſt with care did lie:
               Vpon whoſe barke approching I eſpide,
               And red engrau'd this dolefull Elegie,
               As euery way I glaunc'd my rouling eie,
               Sad Elegie which in few lines compriz'd:
               Much care: and thus it was by him deuiz'd.
            
            
               If I could carue on this thy tender rind,
               Such deepe characters with my feeble arme,
               Arme feeble through diſtreſſe of woefull mind,
               As in my heart deepe cut, thicke-ſet doe ſwarme,
               While earthes kind moiſture fed thy bloſomes pride,
               Theſe ſorrow-ſeaſond lines ſhould firme abide.
            
            
               UUhatere thou be that paſsing by this way,
               Readſt this memoriall, ſearch not curiouſlie
               My name, moſt hapleſſe name, but haſt away,
               Leaſt heau'ns afflict thee with like miſerie:
               And gentle paſſenger let this remaine,
               Long monument of vnknowne ſhepheards paine.
               Hei mihi quam tardo mors pede lenta venit?
            
            
               Scarſe had I read this ſad record enrold,
               On winding barke, when lifting vp his eies
               To heau'n, though he no heauen could behold,
               (For ouer-ſpreading trees did that diſguiſe)
               He fild the aire with oft repeated cries,
               And gan prepare in ſtile Heroicall,
               To waile his loues loſſe and his fancies thrall.
            
            
               Goddeſſe and mother of the learned nine,
               
                  Mnemoſyne rich treaſurie of Art,
               Nourſe of conceit, and myſteries diuine,
               Infuſe a powrfull influence to my heart,
               That outward mones be wraying inward ſmart,
               My mindfull penne making rehearſall true,
               May regiſter as thus they do enſue.
            
            
               IF plaints could penetrate the ſun-bright top of Olympus,
               
               Whoſe lights ſweet cōfort theſe eies, eies moiſt with abundance
               Of down-ſtreaming teares ſince wrong'd by Fancy, beheld not:
               Or th'earth yeild paſſage to my voice, voice hoarſe with a thouſād
               More then a thouſand mones, ſending them downe to the deepe vawts,
               Where Pluto Lord of Acheron enioyeth his Empire,
               Or ſome bluſtring blaſts conuey by force of a whirle-wind,
               Theſe my ſad laments to the wide world there to be talk'd of:
               Gods that dwell on high, and Fiends that lurke in Auernus:
               Men that liue on earth, or ſaile through watery Tethys.
               Gods, whoſe diuine ſhapes loues force hath oft metamorphoſ'd,
               Fiends, whoſe helliſh hearts no remorſe, no regard euer entred,
               Men whom loues deepe wounds haue proſtrate laid at his altars,
               All theſe would pitie me, but vaine wiſh can litle helpe me:
               Yet though wiſh be vaine, my ſad complaints I will vtter:
               Though to my ſelfe I repeat as oft ere now I repeated,
               Mones mix'd with ſalt teares for th'eaſe of harts heauy burthen,
               Heart preſt with ſorrow, heart with care heauily loaden.
               When Fortunes doome was equall, and loues fury forceleſſe,
               Arcadian paſtures tending my flocke I frequented
               Chiefe mongſt the ſhepheards for wit, for beauty, for all things.
               Oft did I win both prize and palme, when our ioly meetings
               And yearly feaſtings ſolemniſd were to the great God
               
                  Pan, the God of ſhepheards ſoueraigne defender of all flockes,
               And Laurell garland hath crown'd me conqueror often.
               
                  Dametas pend ſweet ditties, with comely Palaemon:
               
               And with him Lycidas, and mongſt Neat-heards many gallants:
               But none of theſe durſt, though each of theſe had a miſtreſſe,
               Striue in praiſe of them with me, fearing to be vanquiſh'd:
               Yet Lycidas had a choyce, a faire choyce, louely Feliſa.
               
                  Nymphes would ſit in a round comming fro the chaſe to refreſh them
               Liſtning vnto my ſongs, & vnto the tunes that I gaue thē.
               With the Satyres lightly skipping, where Flora reueſted,
               And with ſommers pride, earthes faire greene mantle adorned,
               And th'hornfeet halfe-gods, with all the progeny rurall:
               The wind-wing'd Naiads ſpring-haunting Naiades, all theſe
               Did me requite, whoſe pen with praiſe they gently rewarded.
               Each faire ſhepheardeſſe was with my company gladded:
               Me Galathea fauourd, yet was Galathea reiected:
               Me faire Phillis lik'd, but Phillis could not I fancy.
               
                  Theſtylis and Daphne, both faire, both woo'd me with offers:
               
                  Theſtylis and Daphne, both faire, were fondly repulſed:
               Kind girles, fit epithete for girles ſo kind, but vnhappy.
               The ſnow-white Hyalus worlds wonder, faire as Adonis,
               
               Scornd Nymphes allurements, and Heardmens gifts he refuſed:
               But me the boy did loue, and in coole ſhade I remember,
               With me repoſing oft, Philomeles cleare notes he reſembling,
               With voyce Angelicall, my ditties ſweetly recorded.
               But nor he, nor they could my fond affection alter,
               Whoſe care-craſ'd hart, and loue-pierc'd thoughts fair Amaryllis,
               
               Held in pleaſing thrall: for then it ſeem'd ſo: but aie me,
               Now I repent too late, too late I repent that I thought ſo.
               Her did I greet, and fairly ſalute each morne with a preſent:
               But proud girle, coy girle, though preſents ſome ſhe receiued,
               Yet ſhe refuſ'd the moſt, and better not be receiued,
               Then be receiued ſo: with feigned ſmiles ſhe rewarded,
               My not feind good-will: and when by chance I beheld her,
               Walking on the plaines, if I did draw neere to ſalute her:
               Then wing'd with deſdaine, more ſwift in pace ſhe returned,
               Then light-foot Daphne ſhunning the ſight of Apollo,
               
               Flying his purſute and bootleſſe chaſe, with a ſtubborne
               And peruerſe conceit: like her was coy Amaryllis.
               
               For me ſhe loath'd, although her I lou'd, and in many ditties,
               (Few ſuch ditties were) her beauties praiſe I recounted.
               Fames ſhrill eternall trumpet through Arcadie, ſounded
               Her matchleſſe vertues, and gentle fame the reuenger
               Of my cauſeleſſe wrongs, her coynes hath ſo recorded.
               
                  (Fame which from my penne large matterfully receiued)
               That ſea-bred Dolphins, and miſform'd waterie Monſters,
               Shall in the welkin ſport them with loftie Laualt
                        •
                     s,
               
               And ſaile-bearing pine glide through thin aire with a Syren,
               Swimming neere the ſterne, and Ioues bird lodg'd in Olympus,
               
               The royall Eagle chiefe Lord and lordly regarder
               Of the featherd brood with his wing'd army repairing.
               Downe to the late-left boure of Nereus and Thetis and all,
               That lodge in watrie cabinets, ſhall ſooner abide there,
               And for euer dwell there then fames ſound which memoriſed,
               Her deſdainefull pride be cleane forgot by the ſhepheards,
               Or mongſt th'Arcadians my ſorrowes not be remembred.
               Yet vaine was my labour ſmall comfort thence I receiued,
               For ſhe lou'd an other though farre vnfit to be riuall
               With me which did ſurpaſſe him that nor very witty,
               Nor verie comely was: all Arcadie knowes that I feine not,
               Nor fond boaſting vſe, yet was he receiu'd, I reiected,
               Pardon faire, fairer then any faireſt Amaryllis,
               
               Pardon ſweet, more ſweet then any moſt ſweet Amaryllis,
               
               Though thou abſent be, yet craue I pardon O pardon,
               Thoſe my wrathfull lookes ore-caſt with frownes neuer vſed,
               Till thy miſdeeming cenſure did wrong ſo the ſhepheard,
               Whoſe match for loyall ſeruice wide world neuer harbourd▪
               
               Except loues martyr, loues wonder gentle Amintas.
               
               O pardon thoſe impatient thoughts which I did vtter
               In blaſphemous words, blaſpheming thee Amaryllis,
               
               Curſing thoſe graces where with nature did adorne thee,
               And on thy pride exclaiming fond paſsion vrg'd me,
               Then when I ſaw my riual ſpeed, my ſelfe ſo reiected,
               Then did it vrge me ſo, that mou'd with more then a wonted
               Griefe of mind, I vowd to renounce the ſtate of a ſhepheard,
               State too good for me which vow too well I remembred.
               For leauing all the pleaſures which Arcadie yeelded,
               Cleare ſprings, faire fountaines, greene meadows, & ſhady valleis
               Where, while flocke did graze, ſometimes I ſweetly repoſing,
               Did meditate on loue, when loue was friend to my fancy,
               Leauing theſe, loathing my ſelfe, looking for a ſpeedy
               
                  End of care, I remaind alone, all companie ſhunning,
               To grace thaſſemblies of Shepheards oft I refuſed,
               Sheep were left a pray to the wolfe, ſheep which me beholding,
               Droupt in deepe ſorrow, with bleating ſeemd to bemone me,
               Gentle ſheepe, kinde beaſts, more kinde then coye Amaryllis,
               
               Thus I reſolu'd to ſeeeke a place, fitte place for an abiect,
               Found this dark ſome groue, ſince when ſtill heere I remained,
               Heer to the woods I waild: woods ſeemd to grone whē I wailed,
               Heer to the trees I mon'd, trees ſeemd to bend when I mon'd me,
               Heer to the winds I mournd, winds ſent calme blaſts to releiue me
               Thus to the woods, to the winds, to the trees, to the flouds, to the fountains
               & to the thinneſt aire, to the valleis & to the moūtains,
               Framing ſad laments, more comfort haue I receiued,
               From theſe, then from the coye lookes of proud Amaryllis,
               
               Kinde Eccho was mou'd, her like miſhap ſhe remembring,
               Ioyn'd her mones to mine, my laſt words gently repeating:
               And the chirping birds attentiue vnto my ſorrowes,
               Chang'd their pleaſant notes for mournfull tunes to bewaile me.
               But why talke I thus? all theſe could ſmally relieue me,
               Slowe death when com'ſt thou? ſlow death can wholy releaſe me.
            
            
               THis ſaid, he ſighd, as though his heart would riue,
               Had ſhe that wrongd the ſweet-tongud ſhepheard ſo,
               Whoſe high thoughts fortunes malice did depriue
               Of ſweete delight, matter more fitte then woe,
               O would his fates had preordaind it ſo:
               Had ſhe beene there to heare him thus lament,
               Her eyes ſome teares, her heart ſome ſighes had lent.
            
            
               O how diuinely would the ſwaine haue ſung
               In Laureate lines of beauteous Ladies praiſe?
               Her fame emblaſon'd, farre abroad had rung,
               Where worlds bright eye his fartheſt beames diſplayes,
               If Loue had deignd his drouping quill to raiſe,
               Whoſe heau'nly Muſe midſt ſorrow tun'd ſo high,
               Her Swan-like notes, as loath that all ſhould die.
            
            
               
               When I beheld the ſhepheard grieued ſo,
               I did compaſſionate his heauineſſe,
               And with ſad ſighes accorded to his woe,
               Which in thoſe former plaints he did expreſſe.
               Yet loath to trouble him in his diſtreſſe,
               As vneſpi'd I thether did repaire,
               So vneſpi'd I left him in deſpaire.
            
            
               Moſt ſweete Amintas, if the heau'nly Pen
               That wrote the loyall iſſue of thy loue,
               Whoſe golden lines are mongſt conceitfull men,
               Eſteem'd as doth his labours beſt behooue
               Whoſe ſtile th'applauding Muſes did approoue,
               If that had written ſillie ſwaines vnreſt,
               Poore ſhepheards griefe had ſweetly beene expreſt.
            
            
               But death that ſeaſd on matchleſſe Aſtrophel,
               
               Bereauing ſtill the world of worlds delight,
               Hath ſtop'd his hopefull courſe that did excell,
               Sweete Poet that diuinely did indite.
               
                  Arcadians doe him his deſerued right,
               And on his Tombe greene Laurel-branches ſpread,
               Which while he breath'd on earth, ador'nd his head.
            
            
               Dead though thou bee, faire floure of Poetrie,
               Yet gratefull Loue hath memorizd thy name,
               A monument of laſting memorie,
               Enrold in endleſſe regiſters of Fame,
               Thou for thy ſelfe didſt in ſweete Poems frame.
               But what meane I in harſh ill-ſounding verſe,
               Thy rare perfections rudely to rehearſe?
               Soli quidſit amorſciunt amantes.
            
            LEauing this comfortleſſe harbour of the deſpairing ſhepheard, I wandred halfe diſmaied through the ſpatious

plains, couered with mulitudes of graſing flocks: at laſt I diſcried a little hill, whoſe ſhadie top was thick ſet with Myrtle Trees: approaching, I perceiud a little valley vnderneath, and therein a pleaſant ſpring: and at the foote of the hill I beheld a faire Shepheardeſſe, ſitting and making a prettye Garland of odoriferous Floures, to crowne her Swaine which ſate ſomewhat belowe, and euer as he durſt, did caſt vp his eyes the admirers of her beautie, yet fearefully, as not aſſured of her fauour. Thus while the one was buſie with her hands, the other with his eyes: a yong Heyfer, whoſe neck was not yet tamed with the heauy yoake, did in the valley ſport her ſelfe now friſking, then leaping wantonly, ſometimes tumbling her bodie in the graſſe, and wallowing on the ground, ſuddenly leaping vppe, as if glutted with the fruition of Floraes benefits: thus ſtill ſhe played, yet neuer wearie with play. The faire Shepheardeſſe ſmild at this ſight, as partaker of like fréedome: the Swaine ſéemd to ſighe, as depriued of like libertie: ſhe renude her ſmiles, as triumphing in his thrall, yet crownde him with the Garland which ſhe made, as loth he ſhould deſpaire, hauing receiued ſo faire a token of her fauour.
            The Shepheard comforted with this vnexpected courteſie, did reſume his loſt courage, and began thus to deſcant on his fortune.
            
               FAire miſtreſſe, when the Heifar plaide with pleaſure,
               You ſmild, I ſobd, for ſmiles could not relieue me:
               His feareleſſe life, your freedomes worth did meaſure:
               Which cauſd you ſmile, and with your ſmiles to grieue me.
               But though you ſmiling ſeemed to deny me,
               Yet this kinde fauour proues twas but to trie me.
            
            
               More faithfull Swaine was neuer tryde of any,
               More true, more truſtie, to his deareſt loue:
               A rare example, and vnknowne of manie,
               Which doe their ſeruants lightneſſe oft reproue.
               
                  Henceforth bold thoughts: deſpaire ſhall not confound me▪
               
               Eyes gald, ſmiles kild, but gentle hands haue crownd me.
            
            The Shepheardeſſe glad to heare her ſwaine in this pleaſant moode, could not diſſemble her diſcouered affection, nor conceale that which ſhe had already opened: thus therefore ſhe did replie, conſorting with him in one key, and conſenting in one thought.
            
               WHen wanton Heifar ſported heere and there,
               I ſmild as ſoueraigne of mine owne deſires:
               When thou didſt ſob, my ſmiles renewed were,
               To ſee thee ſcorch'd with loues enflaming fires:
               Yet loth to wrong the truth of thy intent
               I gaue thee hope, and ſtaide thy ſad lament.
            
            
               I ſmild though not as mou'd with coy deſdeigne;
               But with a garland crownd thy head to pleaſe thee:
               Smiles were renewd, not to deride thy peine,
               But to reioyce that I alone could eaſe thee.
               Sob then no more, but if thou loue at all,
               Eſteeme no freedome like this pleaſing thrall.
            
            
               Shepheard.
               SWeet thrall firſt ſtep to loues felicitie,
            
            
               Shepheardeſſe.
               Sweete thrall no ſtop to perfect libertie.
            
            
               Shep.
               O life.
            
            
               Shee.
               What life?
            
            
               He.
               Sweete life.
            
            
               Shee.
               No life more ſweete.
            
            
               He.
               O loue.
            
            
               Shee.
               What loue.
            
            
               He.
               Sweete loue.
            
            
               Shee.
               No loue more meete.
            
            Thus with her kinde concluſion, knitting liues ſweetneſſe with loues ſolace, ſhe relieud the fainting Swaine, which before halfe diſmaide, was doubtfull of her fauour, and droupt diſcontent. How happie had the ſiluer-tongud Shepheard bene, if coye Amaryllis had pitied his extreames, and with

lyke kindneſſe conuerted his moane into mirth, his care into comfort, his deſpaire into hope: whoſe heauenly muſe, ſweete ſecretarie of his diuine conceit, would haue expreſt the ſumme of loues happines in matchleſſe lines, and encreaſed the number of conceitfull Arcadians, whoſe wits ſharpned with loues pleaſures, imploying their pennes in dooing homage to loues Altar, and publiſhing their Nymphes praiſes with neuer-dying blazons of their beauties worth.
            Both true and oft tryed is that ſaying: Amor melle & felle foecundiſſimus. Which I will thus Engliſh, following rather the ſence then the ſentence: Loues ſweete is oft mixed with ſowre. The truth of which aſſertion is by his miſfortunes largely prooued: who though wanting no deſerts which loue might challenge, yet could not compaſſe that whereto he aymd his deſires: how iuſtly then might he ſet this Lenuoye at the end of his ſorrowfull complaint?
            
               WHat life, what loue, dooth reſt in Womens lookes?
               What hap, what hope, haue they whom beauty ſnares?
               Coye dame no bold conceit in ſeruant brookes,
               But for her captiue ſtill new thrall prepares,
               And loades his heart with new enforced cares.
               Thus hopes he ſtill for that he nere ſhall finde,
               Such are the trophaes of proud womankinde.
            
            But this other Shepheard, whoſe fortune made him owner of his eyes choiſe, would haue contradicted his ſaying if he had heardit, accuſing him of impatience, becauſe hee pend his iniurious cenſure in too cholericke a veine: and doubtleſſe would thus haue turnd theſe diſparaging lines, and annered them to the end of all his deuiſes, as the ſumme of his whole opinion.
            
               WHat life, what loue, if not in womens lookes?
               What hap, what hope, like theirs whom beauty ſnares?
               Faire dame no fond deſpaire in ſeruant brookes,
               But for her captiue ſtill new ioy prepares,
               
                  Eaſing his heart of vnbeſeeming cares.
               Thus what he hopes, he ſhalbe ſure to finde,
               Such is the ſexe of glorious womankinde.
            
            But ceaſing to deſtant on their thoughts, whoſe fortunes I haue not tryed, I wyll proceede to recount what elſe I ſawe.
            Na
                  •
               e, loues wondrous ſtratagems deſerue a déeper medetitation, and cannot be thus ſleightly conceited. I wandred therefore, muſing more then earſt I did, on the effects of loue, not knowing howe to terme ſo ſtrange a paſſion, whoſe diuerſe ſucceſſe did cauſe ſeuerall motions in their hearts, which were enthrald by fancie, and captiuated by affection, yet all ending in extreames. I thought then that Poets had reaſon to inueſt him with the title of Deitie, whoſe powerfull ſhafts had not onely pierced the yéelding hearts of mortall men, but made a forcible entrance into the relenting thoughts of immortall gods: Iupiter himſelfe Hominum ſator atque deorum, felt the force of his aſpiring Nephewes fatall weapons, elſe would he not haue courted Leda in the ſhape of a Swanne, wafted Europa in forme of a Bull, deſcended into Danaes lap like a goulden ſhowre, beſides his other prety ſleights, which the amorous God did oft practiſe to beguile his iealous Queene.
            Nor was Apollo ignorant of loues power, who being ouermatched by Cupid, to whome he durſt equall himſelfe, was forced to eaſe his ouerburthened heart, and vtter his paſſion, exclaming thus in an impatient humor.
            Hei mihi quod nullis amor eſt ſanabilis herbis.
            Phyſicks God knew no ſalue to cure ſuch a ſore, whoſe incurable vehemencie is proued by his moſt paſſionate complaints, recorded by Loues Herault in his volume of tranſformed ſhapes. But whether am I carryed? it be ſéemes not me to deſcant on loues powerfull ſouereigntie, but to imploy

my pen, in relating that which I ſaw or ſéemd to ſée in my morning viſion. Paſſing along, and viewing many trees, whoſe gorgeous branches garniſhed with rurall pompe, and the pride of Syluanus, did ſomewhat darken the ground with a ſpatious ſhade: not farre from the reſt, I eſpied a Myrtle tree, and approching did read written neere vnto the top, thus:
            
               Vnder this tree faire Phyllis did relent,
               And Tityrus receiud his firſt content.
            
            And a little vnderneath that, thus:
            
               Faire Queene of loue to whom this tree belongs,
               Next Phyllis, thou ſhalt grace the ſhepheards ſongs.
            
            And vnderneath that againe, thus:
            
               
                  Apolloes laurel to this tree ſhall yeeld,
               For Phillis deems the Myrtle cheefe in Field.
            
            And on the other ſide of the tree thus:
            
               The ſillie Swaine whoſe loue breedes diſcontent,
               Thinks death a triſle, life a lothſome thing:
               Sad he lookes, ſad he lyes:
               But when his fortunes malice doth relent,
               Then of loues ſweetneſſe, he will ſweetly ſing:
               Thus he liues, thus he dyes:
               Then Tityrus whom Loue hath happie made,
               Will reſt thriſe happie in this myrtle ſhade,
               For though loue at firſt did grieue him,
               Yet did loue at laſt relieue him.
            
            The ſeate vnderneath the tree was worne with their oft ſitting on it: for it ſeemed to be much frequented by Phyllis and her beloued Swaine.
            
               Héere by I gathered, that all Arcadians were not vnhappie, but the moſt, fortunate in loue: what though Ouid cenſured thus:
            Faſtus ineſt pulchris?
            Tuſh, that is an imperfection incident to ſome fewe, not a fault common to all. Amaryllis was coy, Helen had a gadding humour: yea but Penelope was chaſt, Laodamia loyall, Artemiſia louing, Lucretia chaſt: thus haue we many proofes to anſwere any inſtance of feminine imperfection: yet nothing which is mortall, can bee abſolutely perfect: Virgils ſaying is moſt true.
            
               Varium et mutabile ſemper
               Femina.
            
            
               Euridice, which liuing could not bee accuſed of inconſtancie, was after death blemiſhed with vnkindneſſe, becauſe forgetting the couenant of her returne from hell. ſhe fondly looked backe. The ſiluer-tongued Thracian, whom Apollo had endued with a double gift of muſicke and poetrie, beeing mooued with this, hated and with hatefull diſgrace diſparadged the woorth of that ſcxe which before hee had honoured by his matchleſſe Art: but if I proceed in this vaine, I ſhall fall into a Labyrinth more intricate than the firſt.
            Scarſe had I left that place, when I heard a loud noyſe of Pipes: & looking forward, I ſaw a great troupe of mourners, towardes whome I paced: and drawing néere, behelde God Pan formoſt of this aſſemblie, who ſounded a dolefull note on his Oat en pipe: Next him came Syluanus, Pomona, Faunus and all the rurall powers, whome the light-foote Satyres followed piping all, though harſhly, yet heauilie. Next after theſe, the ſwift-pacing Wood-Nymphes came, whoſe golden lockes ſtaining the beautye of Titans beames, hoong looſe about their ſhoulders: theſe did ſtrewe flowers on the ground as they went, hauing their lappes full, and with their voyces agreeing in one ſound, made a ſorrowfull, yet ſweet conſort.
            
               Next theſe, a coarſe couered with a faire hearſe curiouſlie embrothered, and ouer-ſpredde with choyce plenty of ſweeteſt flowers was carried by foure ſhepheards: on it this ſhort Epitaph in red letters.
            
               Heere beauties wonder lately ſlaine doth lie,
               Whome angrie Cinthiaes wrath did doome to die.
            
            A great troupe of Shepheardes followed this breathleſſe coarſe, which made mee muſe the more, thinking that it was ſome rare creature, at whoſe perfections that angry Goddeſſe did repine, as fearing that the report of hir worth would bring her deity into contempt: yet deſtrous to bee throughly reſolued, I demaunded of him which was the laſt of the company, what this ſolemne pompe did ſignifie: he courteouſlie ſhaped me this anſwere. Stranger, (for ſo thou ſeemeſt) know, that theſe are the obite rites of faire Amaryllis, whome fewe could match in beautie, none in pride. She refuſing the loue and ſeruice of the beſt deſeruing Shepheard that euer was bred in Arcadia, beſtowed her fauour on a clowniſh Swaine, his inferiour in all perfections: hee it was whome thou ſaweſt following the hearſe clad in mournfull attire: but ſodainelie repenting her choice, ſhe did coldly entertaine him, thinking him to bee honoured enough, and her ſelfe too much abaſed by ſuch ſleight fauors which ſhe affoorded him yet ſuch, as they might haue prolonged the other ſhepheards life, which could not obtein the leaſt courteſie, though worthy of the moſt. But proud Amaryllis, déeming her ſelfe better than any mortal creature, durſt attempt compariſons with the immortal powers, matching her ſelfe in the height of her owne conceit with matchles Diana, the ſoueraigne of theſe Groues: who though ſprong of heauenly race, yet deignes to bleſſe Arcadia with her ſacred preſence. The Goddes iealous of her honor aimed at her one of thoſe ſhafts, where with ſhe wounds the flying beaſts: and depriued the coy girle of life, which would haue bereaued her of renowne. Thus being ſlaine by diuine iuſtice, ſhe is honored in her death, and her bodie accompanied to the earth with

the ruſticall muſicke of the rurall Dimi-Gods, and the celeſtiall notes of the louely Nrmphes, which tune their voyce in a funerall ſong, they purpoſe to conuey her body to the darkeſome Oroue, where it is ſaid, the fore-lorne Shepheard by her deſdeigned leads a ſolitarie life: who if he yet liue, may ſee his wrongs reuenged, and the cauſe of his complaints, on whome before he durſt not looke, lying by his ſide a breathleſſe obiect, on whome he may now looke his fill. If he be dead, her bodie ſhall be interred where he ſpent his daies in ſorrowe: But the loſſe of Niobe, the metamorphoſis of wretched Arachne, or the death of Marſias might haue warned her to auoyde like preſumption.
            Thus haſt thou heard the cauſe of this ſolemnity brieflie vnfolded: but now ſtranger thou muſt pardon me, I can ſpend no longer time in theſe diſcourſes, but muſt haſt after my companie. This ſaid, he left me in a déepe meditation, muſing at the ineuitable lot of deſtiny, whoſe ſucceſſiue chances knit togeather with the chaine of neceſſitie, followe each the other in fatall courſe: the laſt finiſhing what the former left vneffected, and all diſcharging the moſt certain ordinances of diuine preſcience. But ſleepe could not furniſh my fancy with ſuch high thoughts, as my troubled conceit did affect: therefore amidſt my dumps, I ſodainly awaked, & thus ended my dream, which if you vouchſafe to peruſe with fauourable cenſure, I ſhall reſt fully ſatiſfied: and though I can performe nothing elſe, yet of this I wil be ſure, not to trouble you with tedious toyes: nor manifeſt mine owne inſufficiency in long diſcourſes, for then miſliking the ſubiect, you would caſt it away before yee read halfe, or if you beſtowed a fewe idle houres in peruſing it all, you would curſe mee that helde you ſo long in reading a trifle, ſith you might haue employed that vacant time in viewing matters of more moment, and greater pleaſure.
            But where Apolloes Lute is ſilent, Pans harſh Pipe may ſupply a roome, which elſe would bluſh at the ſound of his own muſicke. You know the ſaying of Horace.
            
            Scribimus in docti doctique poemata paſsim.
            
               They which are not ſufficiently furniſhed with matchleſſe perfections, wrought in them by vertue of a diuine Entheos, may yet talke of Parnaſſus, thirſt for the ſiluer ſtreames of Helicon, and honour the Muſes in wordes, whoſe high conceited ſeruants they cannot match in worth. A Scholers Aliquid, is better than whole Uolumes of Clowniſhe lines. drawne from the muddie fountaines of Mechanicall braines.
            But ſeeking freely to excuſe, I doe fondlie accuſe my ſelfe. I wil therfore reſt on the hope of your courteous acceptance.
            
         
      
      
         
            Imprinted at London for William Blackewall, and are to be ſold at his ſhop ouer againſt Guild-hal Gate.
         
      
   