
      
         
            
            
            A SERMON PREACHED AT SAINT MARIE SPITTLE April. 10. 1615.
            BY THOMAS ANYAN Doctour of Divinity, and Preſident of Corpus Christi College in Oxon.
            AT OXFORD, Printed by Ioſeph Barnes, Printer to the Vniverſity.
            
         
         
            
               
HONORATISSIMO, ET ILLVSTRISSIMO VIRO, THOMae EGERTONO, MILITI AVRATO, BARONI DE ELLESMERE, TOTIVS ANGLIAE, ET ACADEMIAE OXONIENSIS CANCELLARIO SVMMO ET INTEGERRIMO, MVSARVM GRATIARVMQVE PATRONO SINGVLARI, SACRATAE REGIAE MAIESTATI A SECRETIS CONSILIIS INTER PRIMOS SPECTATISSIMO, DOMINOQVE SVO OMNI OBSERVANTIA COLENDISSIMO, LEVIDENSE HOC DEVOTISSIMI OBSEQVII TESTIMONIVM D. D. D.
            
            
               Capellanus Honori Tuo Devinctiſſimus
T. A.
            
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
               
                  ACT. 10. 34. 35.
                  34 Then Peter opened his mouth, and ſaid, Of a truth I perceaue, that God is no accepter of perſons.
                  
                  35 But in every nation, he that feareth him, and worketh righteouſnes, is accepted with him.
                  
               
            
            
               MY Text is the beginning of a Sermon, endited by Him, who at his Aſcenſion inſpired the Holy Ghoſt, preached by that great Apoſtle & glorious Martyr of Ieſus Chriſt St Peter, delivered at Caeſarea a gariſon town by the Sea-coaſt of Palaeſtina, occaſioned by the ſtrange and wonderfull converſion of Cornelius an Italian Centurion; and is an Evangelicall Speech, well ſuiting ſo bleſt an occaſion, ſo divine a Speaker. Wherein I obſerue,
            1 The Speaker of the Speech; Peter.
            
            2 The Maner of his Speech; which was, not by letters, but by words, not by writing, but by preaching, not by ſubſtitution or deputation, but by teaching himſelfe in his owne perſon.
            
               
3 The truth of his Speech, and aſſeveration thereof; 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , In veritate comperio.
            
            4 His confidency, and apodeicticall knowledge of what he taught; 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , I plainely perceaue, or, am conſtantly perſwaded.
            5 The Speech it ſelfe; God is no accepter of perſons, &c. Wherein we may ſee (as in the Viſion of the Prophet Ezechiel) rotam in rotâ, two propoſitions, one linked within the other, which cary with them much weight, and a glorious luſtre of God's vnpartiall Iuſtice and Majeſty.
            The firſt is negatiue and generall; God is no accepter, &c.
            
            The ſecond is affirmatiue, with a particular exception out of the generall negatiue. But in every nation, &c.
            
            In the firſt God's Iuſtice overpoiſeth his Mercy: in the ſecond his Mercy is tranſcendent over his Iuſtice. In the firſt hee appeares a terrible Iudge to ſpare none: in the ſecond a mercifull Father to ſpare all, that feare him, and worke righteouſnes. For they are accepted of him, not by merit, but by favour, not by workes, ex condigno, but by mercy, and ex dono. Theſe are the parts of my Text; of which in their order.
            
               Peter] What Chriſt elſewhere promiſed here hee performed, & makes a poore Fiſher-man, to become a fiſher of men. The Sea wherin he fiſhed is the Oceā of this World, ſwelling with pride, livid and blew with envy, boiling with wrath, deepe with covetouſnes, foaming with luxury, ſwallowing all by oppreſſion, dangerous
               
for rockes of preſumption and deſperation, riſing with waues of paſſion, ebbing and flowing with inconſtancie, and laſt of all, Mare amarum, bitter with all kind of miſery. The chiefe fiſh, which at this time came to his net, was Cornelius an Italian Centurion, and with him many other Gentiles. The Net, wherewith he fiſhed and caught him and them, was the glad tidings of the Goſpell, and Faith in Ieſus Chriſt: which is compared in Scripture to a Net, and conſiſteth of manic Articles, as a Net of many threds. The caſting of this net, was the vnfolding of the Word: Then Peter opened his mouth. The plummets that keepe ſuch downe, as are taken in the Net, from preſumptiō, are the threatnings of the Law, and the ſevere Iuſtice of God: God is no accepter of perſons. The Corkes, that beare them vp in all the ſurges of this world, that they ſinke not downe into the depth of deſpaire, are the promiſes of the Goſpell, and the ſweete mercies of Almighty God: But in every nation, &c.
            
            This great Fiſher of men St Peter, was naturâ Homo, gratiâ Chriſtianus, abundantiore gratiâ vnus idem
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   primus Apostolus. He was by nature, ſaith St Auſtin, but a man, by grace a Chriſtian man, by abundant grace not only one, but a cheife Apostle. He was the firſt, that confeſſed Chriſt to bee conſubſtantiall with his Father; he was the firſt, that preacht Christ; the firſt, that baptizeà in his name; and ſtil the forwardſt man, in the execution of his Apoſtoli
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                  
                function. He was with Chriſt, whil'ſt he liu'd on earth moſt familiar & converſant, with his ſecret counſailes beſt acquainted, moſt obſervant

of his words and precepts: and becauſe, ſaith Cyprian, vnit as ab exordio dependet, to preſerue order & to avoid ſchiſme amongſt the guides of the Church, he was by Chriſt ſet before the reſt, vnto whom all the reſt of the ſame ranke and order in religious matters of importāce ſhould haue recourſe, as to a perſō more honorable then the reſt. Iohn indeed was that Apoſtle, whom Christ lou'd aboue the reſt; but St Peter was he, that lou'd Chriſt, more then Iohn or any of the Apoſtles. Ille melior qui plus diligit Chriſtum; illefeiicior, quem plus diligit Chriſtus. In that S. Iohn was beſt belou'd of Chriſt, he was the happier man; but in that S. Peter lou'd Chriſt better then they all, he was the better man. Better, not in commiſſion, but in place, and order; he was before him or the reſt, not aboue him or any of the reſt; he was a chiefe Pecre of the Apoſtles, not their Prince; he was in order their Superiour, not their Soueraigne; he had a Primacy amongſt them not a Supremacy ouer them; he was not 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , but 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , not a prince of the Apoſtles, but a fellow Elder, as he himſelfe termes himſelfe, 1. Pet. 5. 1.
            There is, ſaith Almaine (in his Tracte de Poteſtate Eccleſiasticâ) a double Primacy; there is Primatus Ordinis, and Primatus Iuriſdictionis, a Primacy of Order, & a Primacy of Power and Iuriſdictiō; the former is properly Primatus, the other Poteſtas. The firſt wee yeeld vnto Peter, & giue him 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , the firſt place, the firſt and beſt imployment, the ſitting and ſpeaking firſt, the moderation & direction of other mens ſpeeches,

the publiſhing and pronouncing of the Concluſion agreed vpon by the Synode of the Apoſtles: but Primatum Potestatis, a power to doe any miniſteriall Act, which another hath not, a power to reſtraine others in the performance of their Acts of Miniſtery, ſuch a Primacy wee denie vnto Peter; th' Apoſtles all being, (as Cyprian ſaith) pari conſortio praediti Poteſtatis, all ioynt Commiſſioners endued with equal power. This Primacy of Order, which wee aſcribe vnto Peter, is the originall of all the Superioritie, that Archbiſhops & Metropolitans haue over the Biſhops of their Provinces; and the foundation, vpon which is built all the fabricke of Eccleſiaſticke diſcipline, whereby the vnitie of the Church at this day remaines preſerved.
            If I were to diſpute with a Papiſt, I would not be ſo troubleſome vnto him, as to cauſe him to proue that Peter was ever at Rome, that hee ſate Biſhop there, that he died there, or that the Pope is his lineall Succeſſour, (which ſome of our Divines haue denied; and to proue them all, it is impoſſible) but yeelding that, yet tanquam datum, non conceſſum, nothing thence can be inferd, for the ſupport of the Romane Supremacie, more then may be concluded for the Sea of Antioch, or the Biſhop of Ieruſalem. For at Antioch Peter firſt ſate Biſhop, & afterwards gouerned it by Evodius; at Antioch the Profeſſours of the Goſpell were firſt called Chriſtians, and the place 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , the City of God. And if St Peter's death, or Martyrdome, could adde ſuch Soveraigntie to the place, where hee died;
               
then much juſter claime may be laide to this Supremacie by the Biſhop of Ieruſalem, becauſe Chriſt the great Paſtor and Biſhop of our ſoules did there ſuffer death for the Redemption of vniverſall man. But nor the one, nor the other, is a ſufficient foundation to raiſe vp this Edifice of the Popiſh Hierarchie. The Cō
                  miſsion given to Peter was not ſingular, but to others common with him: the reſt of the Apoſtles were authorized, as well as he, and that immediately from Christ; their preheminence of binding and looſing as ample; and as Christ was ſent by his Father, ſo ſent he them, & what he ſaid to one, he ſaid to all, Paſce oves, Feed my ſheepe. For it was a thing in the Evangelicall ſtory with Chriſt vſual, ſometimes to direct his ſpeech to one private man, and no more, as Ariſe and walke, Lazarus come forth; ſometimes to direct his ſpeech to one in the perſon of al, as Vade & noli ampliùs peccare, Goe and ſinne no more, and to Peter, Paſce oves; Nam quod dicitur Petro, dicitur omnibus; What was ſaid to Peter, was ſaid to all the Apostles, ſaith Austin, cap. 30. de Agone Chriſtiano. Now the reaſons, why Chriſt directed his ſpeech to Peter in the behalfe of them all, were theſe; vel quia aetate ſenior, vel charitate ardentior, velne videretur reliquis abiectior, quia negaver at Chriſtum, ſaith Occham lib. 4. Dial. 1. Tract. 3. part. c. 3. Either becauſe he was more ancient, or in charitie more ardent, then the reſt, or elſe leſt he ſhould ſeeme to bee deſpiſed for the denyall of his Master. But the Pope (the pretended Succeſſour of this Peter) will not content himſelfe with this Prioritie; he will not only

haue a Cheiftie of Order, but of command, and Power: and becauſe (in all likelyhood) Christ would haue his Church gouerned in the beſt forme of regiment that is, and that of all States the Monarchie is beſt; hence Sanders, and after him Bellarmine lay it downe for a Praecognitum, that the Government of the Church muſt needs be Monarchicall; that this was committed vnto Peter, and continued in his Succeſsours; whereby his Power is become illimited, his Iudgement infallible, and hee an Vniverſall Biſhop, whoſe Dioceſe is the whole World. The truth of this State-Maxime, on which they build the Pope ſo high a Throne, I will not diſpute; but keepe my ſelfe within the ſphaere of mine owne Profeſſion; and, for an vncontroll'd Anſwere to them all, adde that limitation, which I finde in the fore-cited Occham (3. Part. Dial. l. 3. Tr. 1. c. 30.) Status Monarchicus eſt omnium optimus populo ſimul moranti, non autem vni populo comprehendenti plures populos locis diſtantibus. That Government is beſt, where one beares Soveraigntie, not many, but ſo, that it be over but one nation, & not manie, or if over many, yet not farre diſjoyned. Which limitatiō of Occham's I find ſtrengthned with the authoritie of great St 
               Austin (lib. 4. de Civ. D. c. 15.) Feliciores eſſent res humanae, ſi omnia regna eſſent parva, & concordi vicinitate laetantia. The eſtate of worldly things would bee much more happy, if the whole world were divided out into ſmall Kingdomes, then if all ſhould be ſway'd by one ſupreme Commander. That forme therefore of Gouernement is not ſo expedient for the whole, as for each part, for large

and diſioyned Circuits, as for narrow bounds: and as it is impoſſible for one temporall Monarch to weeld the Empire of the whole world, either long, or well, ſo much more impoſſible it is for one man to manage all Eccleſiaſtique affaires and diſpatch the weighty buſineſſes of the Vniverſall Church. Better therefore were it for Peter, or his Succeſsours, to bee (as St 
               Austin tearmes him Tract. 13. in Ioh.) Oculus in corpore, an Eye of the Church, then to be ſo vaſt a Head of a body ſo farre diſſevered: leſt that bee applied vnto him in the Comedy, Hic quidem fungino genere eſt, capite ſe totum tegit; The Church of Rome is become a muſhrome, or like a Toad-ſtoole, all Head, and no bodie.
            Yet hath the ſweet deſire of Ambition ſo enchanted the Chaire of the Scarlet Whore, that rather, then the Pope will looſe this eminent Soveraigntie and command, he will become the Patrone and maintainer of moſt enormous offenders and their offences, thereby to procure ſupport of his Antichriſtian Primacy. For the beſt ſtake in the Pope's hedge is his owne Authority, to maintaine his owne Infallibilitie, and is now become ſtript of all, ſaue the naked Decrees of Canoniſts, and the Dreames of wel-fed Monks: to which had he not of late annexed an omnipotent Power of Binding, and Looſing, of Approuing, and Diſpenſing with things repugnant to all Laws as wel Naturall as Divine; I might by way of prediction ſay of the Pope's Arrogancie, that, which was ſaid to the Troians of the Grecian Horſe,—haec in veſtros fabricata eſt Machina muros; The Pope's Supremacy had long ſince

beene the destruction of him, his Sea, and City. Hee is but a child and ignorant in the Hiſtories of his owne times, that doth not know, that the cheefeſt proppe, whereon the Pope ſtands, and at this houre is ſuſtained, is his correſpondency with the Spaniſh King, and the Houſe of Austria; which hee firſt procured and now maintaineth by his diſpenſing and warranting of his inceſtuous and vnlawfull Mariages. So that if the Spaniard ſhould revolt from the Sea of Rome, the Legitimation of his Succeſſours would be queſtioned & his Signiories endangered. Which is the only reaſon of the conſiſtencie of the Papacie, claimed vnder the title of S. Peter, which otherwiſe had ere this not beene at all, or elſe reduced into a narrowe Dioceſe.
            
               Opened his mouth] S. Peter ſpake not raſhly, or without meditation making his words to breake the priſon of his lips, before the doore of his mouth was opened; but he taketh the keyes of knowledge and Meditation in hand, and therewith opened his mouth, and then ſpake. When I muſed (ſaith David) there was a fire kindled, and then I ſpake. What was this Muſing, but his Meditation? What was this fire, but the light of God's Spirit? What was the kindling therof, but the inflammation of his affections? that ſo he might ſpeake Ignita Dei eloquia, with a tongue toucht with a cole of Meditation from Gods holy Altar.
            
            For by opening of the mouth in this place is not to be vnderſtood a bare diſſevering of the lips, but a preparation of the heart, out of the abundance of which the tongue ſhould ſpeake, and is indeed a pleonaſme,
               
or redūdancy of the Hebrew tongue, ſignifying to begin to ſpeak after long ſilence with Religiō; & in this ſenſe our Church Liturgy prayeth, O Lord open thou our Lips. So that, as Moſes firſt ſpake with God, before he ſpake to the people: ſo St Peter firſt ſpeaketh with God's Spirit by Meditation, before hee delivered to Cornelius this Sermon, which is the ſubject of my Diſcourſe. The greateſt perfection of a man is his Wiſedome, and the beſt herald to proclaime his wiſedome is his Speech, and the richeſt treaſure to adorne his ſpeach is Meditation. Meditatio eſt quaſi mentis ditatio, (ſaith Bernard) it is the enriching of the ſoule with the treaſures of Wiſedome: nay it is the chewing of the food of the Soule, which maketh it taſte ſweeter in the mouth, & digeſt better in the ſtomack; and you know thoſe beaſts, that chewed not the cudde, are reckoned among the vncleane beaſts in the Arke. I know no greater difference betweene a wiſe man and a foole, then that one ſpeaketh all things raſhly, the other all things maturely and adviſedly: the one hath his tongue in his heart, the other hath his heart in his tongue, as the Wiſe man ſpeaketh. For want of which ſerious conſideration, of the Majeſtie of the perſon, of whom they ſpeake, and of the holynes of the place, wherein they ſpeake; many bold and vnworthy ſpeakers, contrary to the Law both of God and the Church, ſtart vp into the Pulpit, and being dull and heavy bodies, contrary to the Law of Nature, they aſcend vp to fill a vacuitie. Theſe empty veſſels make the greateſt ſound in many places of this City; and

like Veſſels fill'd with new wine, they wil rather break then not vent, though it be but their owne Emptines and Ignorance; their words are full of winde, and like Aeolus Windes,
            
            Quâ data porta ruunt, & turbas turbine perflant.
            Their mouth, like the Cocke of a Conduit-pipe, if it be but once opened, will run out two Howre-glaſſes, and that twiſe or thriſe a weeke. Before Ezechiel could haue his Commiſſion to ſpeake to the people, he was enioined, not to touch, to open, or to put into his mouth, but to eate the roule, Ezech. 3. 1. and to receiue the wordes into his heart, Ezech. 3. 10; but theſe men never doe ſo much as touch the Roule, or open the booke. They ran from the Seminaries of learning, like Lapwings from their neſts, with their ſhels vpon their heads: the portion of learning they brought with them was like the bread & wine of the Gibeonites; their bread was hot that day they departed, & therefore it was moulded and dry; & their bottels becauſe they were new, were rent, Ioſh. 9. 13. Theſe men need never feare to bee taken for Mercury with St Paule, becauſe they ſeeke to vent their wares by number, never weighing them. Of theſe too haſty Pulpit men St Bernard ſaith wittyly, Quia nimis properè, minùs proſperè rem peragunt.
            
            When the Materiall Temple was built, there was not ſo much as the noiſe of a hammer heard there, all things were ſo prepared before: but in the building of the Immateriall Temple of God, and edifying of mens ſoules in the faith of Chriſt, whoſe Temples we are, there

is oft times amongſt theſe extemporary preachers, (who never prepare what to ſpeake, but onely to open the mouth and ſpeake) ſuch a ſtammering and hammering of words, ſuch a rude noiſe of jarrings in ſenſe, and conſtruction; that I hold it farre better for the Church they ſhoulde looke grauely and ſay nothing, then make ſo many ſhallow, frivolous, inconſequent diſcourſes. And ſo I come from his Maner of ſpeech, to his aſſeveration; which is, In truth.]
            
            He was the Legate of the God of truth, the Apoſtle of him, in whoſe mouth there was found no guile; and being by Cornelius required to ſpeak only that which God had commanded, (as it is in the verſe before my text) he could not but ſpeake the truth; and therefore doth adorne the forefront of his ſpeech with this 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , Of a truth. This is the inſoluble bond of Amity, the ſafeſt refuge of Innocency, the ſureſt warrant of Fidelity, the ſtrongeſt ſinew of humane Societie, the authenticall evidence of Iustice, the enſigne of Chriſtianity, the ſoveraigne influence of God, nay it is God himſelfe, for God is truth.
            
            Deteſtable therefore and more then Diabolicall is their doctrine and practiſe, who ſtraine, and weaken this ſinew, which holdeth peace and ſociety together; who cancell this bond, which being made in earth is regiſtred in the high court of heaven, ſubſcribed and ſigned by God himſelfe; who either vntie this everlaſting knot of truth by cunning Aequivocation, or cut it aſunder by Papall Diſpenſation. How can wee better argue, that the Pope is not Peters Succeſſour, at

leaſt in doctrine, then by vrging this one argument here in my text? Peter beginnes his Plat-forme of ſpeech, Of a truth: but the Pope adviſeth his Diſciples oft times in their ſpeech to vſe a Mentall Reſervation, which is in plaine tearmes a Lye; and ſo to begin their ſpeech, not with St 
               Peter, Of a truth, but Of a lye. How could wee demonſtrate the Pope to bee the man that exalteth himſelfe aboue all that is called God, if hee ſate not in the Temple of God, as Iudge of God's law, nay as God of GOD himſelfe; whoſe commands he controles, by adding to, taking from, and diſpenſing with them. Far be it therefore from vs to hold with him that breakes with God himſelfe; to joine with them in truth of doctrine, that maintaine Equivocating and forſwearing; to partake of that Religion, which taketh away all religious obligation. Is that the faith of a Chriſtian, which alloweth, and in ſome caſes commendeth Perfidio uſneſse, and vnnaturall treaſons? Can their doctrine be truth, qui dogmatizant mendacium, who make an equivocating lye a doctrine, and that they may verifie this their lye, belie the truth it ſelfe, and make IESVS himſelfe (I tremble to ſpeake it) to become a Ieſuite? teaching by many arguments, that Chriſt himſelfe vſed this kinde of Equivocation, both vnto the High Prteſt, and his Diſciples, and that all his ſpeeches were not like vnto this of Peter's, Of a truth.
            
            Tantum relligio potuit ſuadere malorum?
            Of all beaſts we haue thoſe in greateſt deteſtatiō, which devour their own young. What are our Words
               
& Promiſes, what are our Oaths, & Vowes, but the iſſue of our mind, which they that reſume, and recall, what doe they elſe, but devoure and eate their owne ofſpring? The firſt that brake this bond of truth in earth was the Divell Gē. 3. whoſe ſcholers they ſhew themſelues, who teach, that Oathes, Vowes, and Promiſes of truth are better broken then kept with Heretikes, & that they may lawfully violate them at their pleaſure; as Iulius 2. was not aſhamed openly to profeſſe, fides danda omnibus, ſervanda nemini. And of this profeſſion was Alex. 6. and his ſon Borgias, of whom it is reported that the one would never ſpeake what he meant to doe, nor the other ever doe, what hee ſpake. Theſe were two of the greateſt mōſters which nature ever yet produced. For what monſter can there be in nature more prodigious, then a Liar, or Equivocator, whoſe ſpeech is not Of a truth? All other creatures in the world bring forth the ſame iſſue, which they conceaue; but a Lyar, or Equivocator bringeth forth of his mouth, that which hee conceaueth not, or rather a contrary iſſue to that which he conceaueth. He conceaueth, or rather concealeth, the truth, and bringeth forth a lye, and ſo the iſſue of his mouth is contrary to the conception of his heart. The heathen Philoſopher Zeno rather then hee would be the Father to beger, or ſuffer his tongue to bee the Mother to bring forth ſuch a monſter, bit of his tongue, and ſpit it in the face of the king of Cypres, who had a long time tortured him to tell a Lie. Pliny in his 37. Booke of Naturall Hiſtory reporteth, that if a perjured

perſon dip hand or foot into the river Olachas in Bithynia, hee feeleth as great torments, as if he were throwne into a fornace of melting lead. And Solinus ſeconds this relation with the like of a river in Sardinia, Periuros furto facto, quos lumine coecat.
            
            And Philoſtratus telleth as ſtrange a miracle of a river neere Tyara; in which, if a perfidious perſon, that hath forſworne himſelfe, doe but bath, the water ſinketh into all parts of his body, and breedeth an incurable dropſie. But alas! what is Olachas in Bithynia, or any river in the earth, to that River of Brimſtone in hel which boyles with a continuall fire, and much wood? In which, without long and bitter repentance they ſhall boyle for ever, who make no conſcience of making a lye, & breaking the truth. Great ſurely are the tortures, which Dives, and with him all the damned doe, and muſt ſuffer in hell; yet no part of Dives body was ſo much tortured, as his Tongue. He was prowd, and clad in fine linnen; hee was a Glutton, and fared deliciouſly every day, and therefore in all likelyhood a wanton too, Nam epulas comitatur voluptas; he was vncharitable to the poore, and denied Lazarus the crums that fell from his table: yet none of theſe ſins were puniſhed ſo ſeverely as the ſins hee committed with his tongue. Ex poena indicat culpā, quia illud membrum maximè omniū puniebatur; they are St 
               Gregories words l. 1. Mor. c. 5. and may teach vs to put a watche before our lips, & to make a conſcience of breaking the truth, which ſhould be the cognizance of euery Chriſtiā
                mans ſpeech; as here it is placed in the frontiſpice

of St 
               Peters, Of a truth.
            
            
               I Perceaue] St 
               Peter was not till this time ignorant of God's vnpartiall Iuſtice to vniverſal man; but now he doth ſee that truth cōfirmed in particulars, which before he knewe in generall; hee knewe it before, and now his knowledge was by a ſenſible probatiō more confirmed. Iob in his proſperity knewe, that God would not puniſh the innocent, yet hee would never acknowledge ſo much, till he had a ſenſible experience of it, Iob, 9. 28. The ſincere affection, and filiall obedience of Abraham to God, could not bee hid from God himſelfe, yet there was no evidence of it expreſſed by God, till he refuſed not to ſacrifice his Sonne. Gen. 22. 12. And although the Apostle before this time had a notion of this truth, which here hee preacheth; yet a manifeſt & experimentall overture he never learned, till he ſaw the gate of the Church now opened to the Gentiles alſo. The Miſtreſſe of truth is Experiēce, & the beſt knowledge hath it's aſsurance frō 
               particulars. By a Generall knowledge we know, as he that had bin blind ſaw, confuſedly, Men like trees: but by a collection of Particulars which are obvious to the ſenſe (eſpecially in matters practike, & morall) our mind reſts aſſured without heſitation. The one I may call Notitia, th' other Fiducia, the one reſides in the vnderſtanding th' other in the will, th' one is Theoricall, th' other Practicall, the one conſiſts in General notions, the other in Particular Experiments; the one is 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , the other 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , by the one wee may knowe Good from Bad, by the other Better from Good. In the knowledge therefore

of divine verities we muſt not cōtent our ſelues with the first operations of the Spirit, which are but generall, but we muſt ſtriue for particular directions, and aſſurances; we muſt not only haue our harts diſpoſed, but informed; not only ploughed vp, but ſowen. For as all other Sciences and Profeſſions muſt needs ſavour of much rawneſſe and imperfection, if they be ſtudied only in paſſage, 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , to gaine popular eſtimation, or to content the ſtate in which we liue: So, & much more, is it with religious knowledge, if a man profeſſe it only with relation, and faſhion ſuperficially, not ſyncerely, and exactly.
            For though that a weake faith and confuſed knowledge of Divine things be of that admirable and working nature, that the very leaſt corne and graine of it, is able to effect the ſalvation of him in whom it is, & to lift him vp to heaven, were he as groſſe and heavy as a mountaine: yet nevertheleſſe this muſt not content a Christian man; but hee muſt make a continuall progreſſe from faith to faith, from knowledge to knowledge, till at length he be not only able in groſse to knowe, but evidently to perceaue the myſteries of religion and properties of God himſelfe; whereof this is one, 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , that hee is No accepter of perſons.]
            
            God is an agent infinite, whoſe will is nothing elſe, but Deus volens, as St 
               Austin ſaith, eſſentially God himſelfe, without whom there is no mouing or efficient cauſe of his operations: but his will is a law to himſelfe, and to all things elſe whatſoever, & the only

cauſe of what, and why he worketh. It was his pleaſure to create this goodly fabricke of the world wee ſee in time, and not before. It was his pleaſure to permit the lapſe of the firſt created man, and his poſteritie, and being fallen, to ſequeſter out of the corrupted maſſe ſome few, to bee the inheritors of his kingdome, and to leaue the major part in their deſerved perdition. Beyond his pleaſure to make a Quaere of his actions were ſaucie curioſitie, and yet to thinke his will to be without reaſon were indigne blaſphemy. It is not the preſcience of faith, or previſion of workes, that can moue the will of God, to chooſe one, and refuſe the other, becauſe they are not, (ſaith Aquinas part. 1. q. 23. a. 4.) the cauſe, but the effects of Gods loue. Praedestinatio eſt gratiae praeparatio, gratia verò praedeſtinationis effectus. Aug. c. 10. de praedeſtinatione ſanctorū. Predeſtinatiō is the harbinger of grace and grace the effect of Gods loue. He firſt created all things, and then ſaw they were good: the foreſight of their goodneſſe was no inducement to the worke of their creation, but his creation gaue them this eloge, Quaecun
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   fecit erant valdè bona. God chooſeth none, becauſe they are good, but men are good, becauſe they are choſen. Gratia Dei non invenit eligēdos, ſed facit. Therefore St 
               Paul (ſaith Austin) compared together the ſonnes of Iſaac, twins, vno etiam concubitu fuſos in vtero, both yet vnborne, neither of them hauing done well or ill; Quod referendum eſt (ſaith the ſame Father) non ad diſpenſatoris iniustitiam, ſed ad donantis miſericordiam; which wee muſt not impute to

Gods Iniustice, or partialitie, but to his good will and pleaſure: which muſt be the laſt reſolution of our inquiries; and whatſoever the event is, we muſt ſtill ſay, as our Saviour did, Mat. 11. 25. Naepater, quia ſic placuit tibi; Even ſo father, for it ſeemed good in thy ſight. Could the maſter of the vineyard ſay, Annon poſſum facere de meo, quod volo? Is it not lawfull for me to doe with my owne, what I will? And ſhall wee deny to God the ſupreme cauſe of all things, the free diſpoſition of any thing after his pleaſure? Whoſe will is not only iuſt and full of equitie, but, as St 
               Baſil calls it, 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , the very oracle and rule of iuſtice, who doth make things iuſt and right, becauſe he wils them. There is no man reiected by God without iuſt cauſe and demerit, nor any ſaved but by his mercy & free pleaſure. Now if it be asked, why God ſhould thus be an accepter of perſōs, & affoord this mercy to ſome, and not to all: we muſt with a religious ignorance cō
               tent our ſelues, and ſtand amazed at the ſecret and inexplicable greatneſſe of God, and ſatisfie our ſelues with this, 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , it was his pleaſure ſo to diſpoſe of his kingdome. This is the Nonvltrà, beyond which wee muſt not wade, but hither being come, wee muſt make a ſtand, and with the bleſſed Apoſtle cry out, O altitudo divitiarum! O the depth of the riches both of the wiſdome and knowledge of God! how vnſearchable are his iudgements, and his waies paſt finding out! Rom. 11. 33.
            But here we may not be ſo injurious to the Deitie, as to conceaue God in his Decrees to be tyrannicall, as to ſay,

               Sic volo, ſic iubeo, ſtat pro ratione voluntas;
or that the will of God is moued 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , without reaſon: for although neither beautie of face, feature of body, honourable deſcent, wiſdome, and the endowments of the mind, or any thing elſe without God, cā moue his will to Election, or make him to accept of one perſon before another; yet is there never wanting a moſt iuſt cauſe, and ſufficient reaſon of his purpoſes and Decrees. For although God worketh all things according to his will and pleaſure; yet whatſoever he doth, he doth it 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                with counſell and wiſe reſolution. Eph. 1. 11. God doth order all things ſweetly and profitably. Sap. 8. 1. Omnia feciſti in ſapientiâ Domine. In wiſdome haſt thou done all thy workes ô God, Pſ. 104. 24. And ſhall wee thinke that this wiſe-creating God, who made all things for his glory, ſhould without ſome proper reaſon determine of any thing which hee hath made? The doctrine therefore of St 
               Peter in my Text remaines ſtill true, & as firme as heaven, 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , God is no accepter of perſons: becauſe when hee determineth any thing hee hath a ſufficient reaſon, beſides his VVill and Pleaſure to doe what he doth. Which reaſon (ſaith the divine Author of the Eccleſiaſtical Policie) becauſe we are not worthy or, able to apprehend, we muſt humbly & meckely adore. This ſecret and vnknown reaſon of Gods purpoſes is like himſelfe, Eternall, before the foundations of the world were layd, and hath ſo effectually moved his VVill, that now it can admit of no change or variation. That which God hath decreed, muſt ſtill bee like

God, without change, who can as well deny himſelfe to be God, as not performe, what hee hath defined. Whom he loues, he loues vnto the end; & to whom he giues the earneſt of his ſpirit, they haue a continual feeling in ſome meaſure more or leſse, of his gracious preſence. For the loue of God, it is not 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                variable like the gifts of temporall men, which may bee granted to day and reverſed to morrow, with a Non obstante priore conceſsione: but the loue of God and the gifts of his holy Spirit they are 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , and ſtand for ever without change, Rom. 11. 29. He is Triumphator Iſraëlis, the glory and ſtrength of Iſrael, and will neither lie nor repent, nor yet can hee in the meane time be tearmed injurious to any, or an accepter of perſons (as Pelagius prophanely ſomtime did object:) becauſe God in giuing his grace to ſome and denying it to others doth not proceed (ſairh Alex-Hales) iuxta dignitatem humanam, ſed ſecundùm dignationem divinam, it is a donation of bounty, not a dotation according to the rules of Iuſtice. As God is in heaven, ſo ſhould Gods Vicegerents bee in earth; as they ſit in his chaire, ſo ſhould they walke in his paths of Iuſtice. They ſhould without reſpect of perſons, as well heare the cauſe of poore Bartimaeus, as rich Zachaeus, as well the ſmall, as the great, Deut. 1. 17. Their eies muſt alwaies be ſhut, that they be not drawn by favour, their eares alwaies open, that they may heare both parties indifferently, & their hands muſt be faſt clinched vp, leaſt otherwiſe they be corrupted with bribes, quae excoecant prudentes, & ſubvertunt verba iuſtorum, which

blind the wiſe, and ſubvert the words of the righteous, Exod. 23. 8. It was a provident law enacted in the time of Rich. 2. and afterwardes revived in the daies of the laſt Henry (and woulde God till this day it had ſtill beene continued without violation) that no Iuſtice of Aſſize ſhould ride his Circuit in that country, where either he was borne, or did liue: that being vnknowne to all, they might accept of the perſons of none, but be indifferent vnto al; that ſo they might the more freely adminiſter juſtice, and the more liuely repreſent him, whoſe deputy Lieutenants they are; in being merciful, as he is mercifull, holy, as he is holie, no reſpecters of perſons, becauſe with God there is no reſpect of perſons.
            
            
               But in every nation] Cornelius an alien from the cō
               mon wealth of Iſrael is accepted with God, as well as Peter borne among God's owne people, and trained vp in Chriſts owne ſchoole; the poore Leper a Iew, as well as the rich Centurion that built his nation a Synagogue; as well old Simeon in the temple, as young Iohn in the womb; as wel thoſe that watcht him vnder the Croſſe, as the Theefe that hung with him on the Croſſe: for in Christ there is neither Iew nor Grecian, neither bond nor free, Gal. 3. 28. but he that is Lord over all, is rich vnto all, not onely to ſome of all nations, but to all of all nations, that feare him and worke righteouſnes. And if any man be not accepted of him, the fault is not in the ſufficiencie of God's grace, but in the defect of efficiencie in vs. Wherevpon ſaith Calvine Com. in 10. Act. v. 33. the words before my text,

               Maceriâ i am dirutâ, Deus aequali amore omnes gentes complexus eſt; the partition Wall being now broken downe, God embraceth all nations with an equall loue. For the will of God toward, mankinde is (if I may ſo ſpeake) Orbicular, environing vniverſall man, with Mercies and Iudgements, with Salvation, and Damnation: if with repentaunce and workes of righteouſneſſe we turne to the right hand, we ſhall finde a Mercifull Father, and be accepted of him; but if we remaine obdurate in our ſin, and turne to the left hand, we ſhall ſee an Angry Iudge and rue the puniſhments of his wrath. Which change and alteration is in vs, not in God; God doth not bow to man, but man doth come to God; nor doth God leaue any man of any nation, but man doth revolt frō his Creatour. Not onely the Schooles, but Expoſitors both Orthodoxe & Romiſh, ſtand at this day much diſtracted, with a diverſity, or at leaſt a divers conceit of the Will of God; of his Antecedent, and Conſequent, Hidden and Revealed will, of his Abſolute, and Conditionall Will: whereas to ſpeake properly, Gods Wil is one and the ſame, nor can he be ſaid to haue two VVils, no more then to haue two Wiſedomes, two Mercies, two Goodneſſes, or a diverſity of other his Eſſentiall Attributes. But as the Wiſedome of God (to inſtance in that Attribute) is by St Paule tearmed 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , Eph. 3. 10. which ſome render Multiformis, others Multis modis varia, and our Engliſh Manifold; which is yet but one: ſo the Will of God being one and the ſame in it ſelfe, may yet in reſpect of vs, and the diverſe effectes thereof, bee tearmed

               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , Manifold, and Divers. The ground of all theſe Diſtinctions is taken out of Damaſcene, and by Damaſcene out of Chryſoſtome, Hom. 1. in Epiſt. ad Eph. There is in God (ſaith hee) a two-fold VVill, 
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               . There is in God a twofold Will, a Firſt and a Second; the firſt and principall will of God doth immediately proceede from God himſelfe, whereby hee deſireth to doe good vnto all, 
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , & it is Voluntas ſimplicis complacentiae, and may be tearmed Voluntas benefaciendi. His ſecondary will doth proceede from contingent cauſes without God, and is occaſioned by vs, and it may be tearmed Voluntas Iuſtitiae, which doth ariſe from our ſinnes, which God cannot but put in execution without prejudice to his Iuſtice. The firſt is the Will of God, wherein he taketh delight and pleaſure, and is by the ſame Father tearmed 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                the principall will of God. That which hath beene ſpoken I thus bring home to my text. That it is the Will of God to leaue many of most nations in the corrupt maſſe of perdition, I well know: but that it is his principall VVill, his 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , or Voluntas ſimplicis complacentiae, to decree the abſolute reprobatiō of any man of any nation, I vtterly deny. Deus non eſt priùs vltor, quàm homo eſt peccator, ſaith Aug. ep. 105. Man deſerues his puniſhment, before he hath it, & God makes no man a reprobate without juſt cauſe. The word Reprobation or Reprobate is in Scripture ſeldome vſed to this purpoſe, & the Greeke word 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                will hardly cary it,

ſignifying as well Improbus, or Reprehenſione dignus, as a Reprobate, and therefore ſhould bee vſed more ſparingly, and not ſo abſolutely determined of. In the Fathers the oppoſite to Predeſtination to life eternal is Predeſtination to a ſecond death; and to Election to grace, they oppoſe Dereliction in the Maſſe of perdition, ſeldome Reprobation. In thoſe parts of St Auſtin, which I haue read, I never met with the word Reprobus as oppoſite to Elect, but once; & whoſoever hath ſpent moſt houres in reading the works of that Iudicious Father, did never in that ſenſe read it twiſe. I wil end this point (becauſe I haue St Maries in Oxon. elſewhere ſpokē of it more at large) with that of the Prophet, Perditio tua ex te ô Iſrael; there is no man of any natiō
                that fals, but by his owne iniquitie. Stygias vltrò quaerimus vndas, we ferry our ſelues over vnto hell: and like the Oſtrich in Pliny, Proprijs configimur pennis, wee pricke our ſelues with our owne feathers, & like deſperate Marriners cauſe thoſe ſhips to leake which ſhould cary vs ſafe to the fortunate port of heauen.
            
               He that feareth him] Feare is defined by the great Maſter of Art Ariſtotle, l. 2. Rhet. c. 11. to bee nothing elſe, but a perturbation of the mind through an opinion of ſome imminent danger, threatning, if not the deſtruction, yet the annoyance of our nature, which to ſhunne it doth contract and deiect it ſelfe. For as the obiect of Hope is Bonum, ſomething that is Good, ſo the obiect of Feare, Hopes oppoſite, muſt needs be Malum, ſomething being or apprehended to bee Evill. Yet not every evill, but 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , ſuch an evil as threatneth
               
vs with deſtruction or vexation, and that ſuch as we haue no abilitie to reſiſt, nor yet are vtterly diſenabled to avoid. To feare that which we know our ſelues able to withſtand were cowardiſe; to withſtand that, which we knowe our ſelues vnable to differ or eſchew, were extreame folly. The proper obiect therefore of Feare, is an Evill in our perſwaſion vnreſiſtable when it comes, yet not vtterly impoſsible for a time, either in whole or in part, to be declined. 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               : Feare alwaies, ſaith the ſame Aristotle, hath ſome hope of eſcape annexed, & therefore doth cauſe vs to conſult and deliberate; which in matters past hope to doe were meere madneſſe. Neither doth our nature much ſhrinke and deiect it ſelfe, at ſuch evils, except they be at the doore, ready to enter in & ruſh vpō vs, or hanging over our heads ready to oppreſſe vs. 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , dangers out of ſight are ſeldome feared, nor, if they be neere, do we feare them except we thinke them to be neere. There is no man liuing but is aſſured, that once hee muſt pay the tribute due vnto nature, Death: but becauſe moſt men put death è longinquo, farre from them, and the eldeſt mā that is, doth thinke hee may liue yet, yet a day longer, there is nothing in time of health leſſe thought on thē 
               ſickneſſe, and throughout the whole courſe of our life leſſe feared then death.
            
            But when we apprehend a thing nociue, as nociue, a danger as a danger, ready at hand, for to aſſault vs; then doth our daſtard bloud retire to the fountaine of heate, and what we cannot forcibly withſtand, that we

ſeeke warily to decline. Which eſchewing of evill being a thing naturall, and ingrafted in the heart of every man, as he is a man, is in it ſelfe neither good nor bad, but good or bad according to the cauſe for which, or the meaſure by which it is entertained. Now becauſe in diverſe Texts of Scripture we read this paſſion of Feare commended and enioyned, and elſe where forbidden and reprooued: to reconcile this ſeeming oppoſition, we muſt knowe, that on the one ſide is commended a godly and religious feare, on the other is reproued a diffident and perplexed feare; the one is a remedie againſt deſperation, the other againſt preſumption; the one againſt diffidencie, the other againſt ſecuritie; the one reprooues an anxious torturing feare, which is without hope, the other commends a cautelous and ſollicitous feare, in every man that stands, to take heed, leſt he fall.
            
            And if here any Auditour ſhould demand, how God can be feared, being not only good, but eſſentially Goodneſſe it ſelfe; and that nothing can bee feared but that which is evill or apprehended ſo to be? I anſwere with Aquinas 2a. 2. q. 19. a. 1. that as hope hath it's double obiect, the one the good we purſue in expectation, and the other the auxiliarie helpe, by which wee hope to obtaine this good: ſo feare hath it's double obiect, the one is the evill which it eſchewes and dreads, the other is ſomething from which this evill may proceed. Now although God everlaſting and bleſt for ever, cannot in the firſt ſenſe be ſaid to bee feared, or to be the obiect of feare; yet in the ſecond he may. For

although he be goodneſſe it ſelfe, yet ſomething may be feared to proceed from him, which is evill; evill, not in it's owne nature, but evil in reſpect of him that feares; which is indeed malum poenae, not culpae, an evill of puniſhment, not of offence.
            
            And for our direction in this point, giue me leaue to note vnto you (out of Aquinas) a fourefold feare, A Naturall, a Worldly, a Servile, and a Filiall feare. A naturall feare is nothing elſe but a providēt ſhunning of thoſe dangers and miſcheefes, with which wee are not able to encounter. Which paſsion is entayled to all the ſonnes of Adam, and made hereditary; nor from it was our Saviour himſelfe freed, but as hee was a man he feared, and therefore prayed, and that often, Father, if it be poſſible, let this cup paſſe from me.
            
            The ſecond is a worldly feare, when, for the ſafety of things temporall, we ſticke not to admit of things excluding from eternall; when we more feare them, that can kill the body only, then him that can caſt both body and ſoule into eternall fire; when we ſtartle at the leaſt bluſter of perſecution, when wee contract our ſelues at the touch of a pins point, being ready at the leaſt aſſault to leaue Chriſt for the loue of the world.
            
            The ſervile feare is a ſlaviſh dread of the iudgements of God, and his puniſhments for ſinne; when not for the loue of heaven, but for feare of hell, we retaine our ſelues within the circle of Gods Commandements.
            
            The laſt & beſt feare, is a filial, chaſt, & loving feare, when we feare to commit ſinne, becauſe it is ſinne, & doe embrace vertue, as it is vertue; cùm non delectaret
               
               iniquitas, quamvis proponeretur impunitas, ſaith Ambroſe. Which feare is proper to Chriſts flocke; which who ſo hath is accepted with God and may bee aſſured to liue for ever. St Auſtin in his 120. Epiſt. ad Honoratum doth truely expreſſe and liuely effigiate the nature and difference of theſe two feares, by the example of the two maried women, th'one an adultereſſe, the other a chaſte matrone. Theſe both feare their husbands, but after a different manner. The one feares the preſence of her husband, leaſt comming home hee take her tardè, the other feares the abſence of her husband, leſt by his departure ſhee be deprived of his much deſired company. The one feares to commit adultery leaſt her husband catch her, her minde nevertheleſſe is adulterous, & quod deeſt operi ineſt voluntati (ſaith Auſtin) what ſhee wants in deed ſhee perfourmes in deſire: th'other feares her husband, but t'is chaſtly & lovingly, nothing but his diſpleaſure or abſence; Nam amanti etiam abſentia moleſta eſt. So the wicked feare God with a baſe, ſervile feare, they feare him as a Iudge; the godly as a Father. The ſervile feare makes men to avoide ſinne, quia nocivum, the filiall, quia prohibitum, onely becauſe it is forbidden, ſaith Almaine in his Morals. He who hath a chaſt, filtall feare, doth not only avoide the act of ſinne, but a deſire to commit the act: but the ſervile feare reſtraines men only ab actu executorio (ſaith Aquinas,) and leaues behinde, velle complacentiae, a deſire to ſinne. In a word, the ſervile feare doth tie vs vnto God with clampers of yron and fetters of braſſe, the filiall with bracelets of needle worke

and chaines of gold; by the one we receiue the ſpirit of adoption and cry Abba father; by the other the ſpirit of bōdage againe vnto feare. The ſervile feare (ſaith Hales part. 3. q. 06.) reſpicit poenam aeternam, vt deſtructivam ſubiecti; the fil
                     •
                  al, tanquam ſeparativam et privativam à Deo. By the one we feare the Iudgements of God and the paines of he
                  ••
               , by the other the loſſe of his grace & the ioies of heaven. The one is not Timor, but Terror, a paſſion mixt of horror and diſmay; the other ſweetly compoſed of loue and an awfull regard. The one is timor poenae, th'other culpae; the one the feare of the puniſhment, the other of the offence: th'one is the badge and brand of the reprobate; the other the proper and inſeparable character of the elect; inſomuch that Iacob the religious Father of the Patriarcks did cal God nothing elſe, but the feare of his father Iſaac. Gen. 31. 42.
            This feare of God ſhould binde vs hand and foote from ſinne, & make vs thinke of that heavenly Vow of St Anſelmes, Si hinc peccatum & illinc infernum viderem, ac vni eorum neceſsariò immergi deberem, priùs me in infernum immergerem quàm peccatum cōmitterem. If ſinne (ſaith he) were on th'one ſide and hell on the other, I had rather plunge my ſoule into the depth of hell, then commit a voluntary ſinne. This feare of God and loſſe of his loue, ſhould ſerue, as a ſtrong curbe to retaine vs from ſinne; whenſoever either by the corruption of our nature or allurements of the Devill we are tempted therevnto. When Ioſeph was by his wanton miſtreſſe tempted to adultery, it was not the feare of temporall puniſhments, the

loſſe of his ſervice, or the diſcovery of the fact, that kept him from yeelding to hir vnlawfull deſire, but the feare of offending God; How can I doe this ſo great wickedneſſe & ſin against God? Gen. 39. 9. But now ſin hath clambred vp to that heigth of impiety; that neither the feare of God (whoſe wrath is a cōſuming fire) nor the terrour of puniſhment can reſtraine many from the frequent practiſe, ſcarce from the open profeſſion of ſin. There was a time, when Tamar was vayled and covered hir face: but now ſhe boldly walks vnmaskt in the broad eye of the multitude, enters the preſence of the beſt, walkes through the midſt of the citie, and makes publike profeſſion of her luſt; & quod ſolet eſſe publicum incipit eſſe licitum, that which is done commonly by many, will ere long bee thought lawfull to be done by any. There was a time, when, thoſe that were drunken, were drunken in the night, but now it is become a daie worke, or rather a dayly worke, and ſo obvious that a man can hardly balke it in the ſtreet. There was a time, when an eye required an eye, and bloud would call for bloud againe; but now murder is become the badge of manhood, and ſinne is made a mockery. As Abner called fighting but a play or ſport, 2. Sam. 2. which indeed procured a bloody battaile (for every man kild his fellow) ſo Monomachies are now become but recreations, and the leaſt but ſuſpicion of diſgrace is a iuſt cauſe of a ſingle combate. But this is madneſſe not manlineſſe; this kinde of courage is in the head, not in the heart, it is not hardy valour, but a ſoft and moiſt enthuſiaſme of Bacchus, qui ad praelia
               
               trudit inermes. And therefore men ſhould as well conſider of the beginning, as feare the end of ſuch contentions.
            
            But ſuch men the feare of God in my Text cannot retaine, the goodneſſe of God cannot allure; nothing but his Iudgements & terrours can prevaile with thē. Let the firſt call to minde the fearefull end of Zimbri and Cozbi in the very act of Incontinency; that God ſent fire and brimstone, even Hell from Heaven, to cō
               ſume the people for their vncleanneſſe; & that moſt times then puniſhment in this life is ſhame and penury, and in the other perpetuall torments, and extreameſt miſery. Momentaneum est quod delectat, aeternum quod cruciat: an Oceā
                of torture for a drop of pleaſure. Let the other knowe, that though the wine be red, & goeth downe pleaſantly, yet in the ende it will bite like a Serpent and hurt like a Cockatrice: and wine in the conveyance is moſt like the poyſon of Serpents, whoſe teeth are hollow (ſaith Pliny) like pipes, that with more ſecret ſpeed they may convey their poyſon. Laſt of all, let the other knowe, that Clamitat in coelum vox ſanguinis, the voice of bloud is loud, it pearceth the clouds, it knocks at heaven gates, and enters into the eares of the Lord of Hoſts. And ſo I goe on.
            
               And worketh righteouſneſſe] It is the note of Calvine vpon my Text; who by the feare of God vnderſtandeth the obſervation of al the Commandements of the firſt Table, and by working of righteouſneſſe, all the Commandements of the ſecond Table; by the one we are iust, and righteous before God, by the other before
               
               men; the one is neceſſary, but not ſufficient, the other is acceptable, but not perfect. Which expoſition of his will ſerue to ſtrike off all the hold-faſt of the Divines of Rome from this place; who hence inferre the Merit of Workes, and the favour they procure vs with God: for if by working of righteouſnes be vnderſtood, only the obſervation of the Commādements of the ſecond Table; then doubtleſſe are they not ſufficiently able to make vs acceptable with God. Yet Bellarmine fals vpon this Text of Scripture, & hence infers an ability in man to make himſelfe acceptable with God. I am in the Pulpit, not in the Schoole; and therefore will not trouble you with the Subtilties of the Queſtion: which as well in this, as other caſes, are oft times made too common to the multitude.
            The property of Faith is to receaue and apprehende; the nature of Charity is to diffuſe & impart to others. Faith alone is the Iuſtifying inſtrument, whereby wee apprehend and apply Chriſt's merits vnto vs: but we cā
               not make any diſcovery or manifestation thereof vnto others, except there bee ioyned to our Faith the Workes of righteouſneſſe. So the inward worke of Iuſtification we aſcribe to Faith onely, but the righteouſneſſe of Sanctification, we aſcribe vnto good Workes, which are by Ieſus Chriſt to the glory and praiſe of God. For the more cleere vnderſtanding whereof, we muſt obſerue, that our Workes are of two ſorts; either Intrinſecall and infus'd, as Faith, Hope, &c. or Extrinſecall and acquiſite; ſuch are Almes-deeds & Workes of Charity. Our intrinſecall Workes, they are, as it

were, the Principall, and our Extrinſecall or outward workes they are the Intereſt, which God expects as due vnto him; as may well appeare by the Parable of the Servants in the Goſpell, to whom the Talents were concredited.
            
            Now we ſhalbe rewarded by God, not according to our intrinſecall Habits, but extrinſecall Workes; not becauſe we had a ſtrong faith, or great hope, but for releeving the poore, viſiting the ſicke, and performance of other workes of that quality, and nature. But the Church of Rome, proceedeth further, and doth not only make them the rule according to which, but the cauſe for which we are iuſtified. They make them Merita, we Debita, they the Cauſe of our ſalvation, and à Priori, we the Conſequent, and à Poſteriori; as fruit makes not the tree to be good, but only ſhewes it to be ſo. Non praecedunt iustificandum, ſed ſequuntur iuſtificatū: they are the Signes of our Sanctification, not the Cauſes of our Iuſtification. For Faith doth not ſpring out of Charity, (as Bellarmine falſely averres;) but true Charity is the ofſpring of Faith; wherevpon it is by St Paule tearmed 
                  De Iuſt. l. 1. c. 4. 
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , the ground of things hoped for, and the foundation on which all other Theologicall vertues are erected. Credendo fundamur ſperando erigimur, diligendo perficimur. By Faith (ſaith Austin) we are ingrafted, by Hope we are improved, & by Charity we are made perfect, God working in vs, and with vs. For our righteouſneſſe is rather paſsiue then actiue: Iustitia noſtra non eſt in nobis, ſed extra nos, ſaith Doctor Luther. Yet although our Workes are not the

               cauſe of our iuſtification, yet are they the perfection of our faith and a demonstratiue aſſurance, that we are iuſtified. And although it be true that ſola fides iuſtificat, faith onely iuſtifies, yet fides quae eſt ſola non iuſtificat, that faith which is alone doth not iuſtifie. And although it do iuſtify alone, yet doth it not ſaue alone; for it is one thing to be ſaved, and another thing to be iustified. They who expect to be the ſons of God muſt be legitimate both by the Fathers & the Mothers ſide, and as they muſt be begotten of Abraham who was 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , the father of the faithfull, Rom. 4. 11. ſo they muſt haue Sarah the free woman to be their mother, who was 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , the mother of all that doe well, 1. Pet. 3. 6. Beſides the State in fide, there muſt be an Ambulate in dilectione: & although the crowne of glory be not given bonis operibus, yet is it given benè operantibus, not for the worke, yet to the workers, for Chriſts ſake, in whoſe name the worke is done.
            
               Ariſtotle (l. 2. Eth.) requires in his perfect Moraliſt, beſides knowledge and a will to worke, an actuall practiſe, wherein conſiſts the life of vertue: and in every ſcholer in Chriſts ſchoole, beſides the theory of faith & ſpeculation of theologicall verities, or with theſe a deſire to doe good, there muſt be an actuall performance, we muſt worke out our ſalvation, and thereby make our election ſure. The fountaine of ſaving grace I know is ſet wide open vnto vs all by Christ; and by the hallowed waters of Baptiſme, as by the waters of Iordan, we are cleanſed from the leproſie of ſinne. But yet this meanes alone without Workes and induſtrious labours,

without fights, races, croſses, and ſtrict examination of Talents, will never preſent vs, as amiable ſpectacles, in the ſight of God and heavenly ſpirits. Wee muſt not thinke that it is the Churches office to abſolue that the Spirit muſt cleanſe, Christ muſt ſuffer, God muſt ſaue, and that We muſt either ſit ſtil or ſinne ſtill, all the while relying vpon this, I beleeue, and therefore I ſhall liue. It is a reaſon without reaſon to infer, that ſith God ſaues little ones becauſe they cannot worke righteouſneſse, therefore alſo hee muſt ſaue great ones without workes, becauſe they will not worke. But this muſt be our rule for direction; that God hath propoſed both himſelfe and his kingdome vnto vs vnder a double title, the one of Inheritance, the other of Reward; an inheritance to ſons, a reward to ſervants. For to inherit, it ſufficeth to be ſonnes; but reward preſuppoſeth ſervice, which muſt expect it. Every man ſhall receiue his reward according to his labour. The first yeares of man, through the vnaptneſſe of the reaſonable powers of his ſoule for action, allow him not to expect God or heauen as a reward, which yet as his inheritance even Baptiſme doth impart vnto him. But when yeares increaſe, and with yeares reaſon groweth actiue, it will not ſuffice to plead for our inheritance, as ſonnes, except we alſo endeavour for our reward as ſervants. God will be Abrahams reward; but Abraham muſt walke for it: Ambula coram me, Walke before me. And it is not ſaid, Euge fili bone! Well done good ſonne (though none but good ſonnes ſhall enter;) but they muſt be good ſervants too, Euge ſerve bone! intra;
               
Well done good ſervant! enter into thy maſters ioy.
            It is therefore a ſlanderous imputation caſt by Bellarmine vpon the Reformed Churches, that their Goſpell is carnall, and the high way to Epicuriſme; that they inveigh againſt Good Workes, and by a bare and naked faith doe expect to ſoare vp to heauen. To which my anſwere is, that of St 
               Auſtins in another caſe Ep. 86. Nemo nos ita intelligit, niſi qui ſeipſum non intelligit. There is no man that vnderſtands himſelfe, or any thing elſe, that can ſo vnderſtand vs. Wee make the one the tree, the other the fruit, and doe profeſſe, with the ſame Father in another place, Inſeparabilis eſt hona vita à fide, imò ea ipſa eſt bona vita: A good life is the inſeparable companion of Faith, nay, a liuing Faith is it ſelfe a good life.
            The preaching of which doctrine in our Engliſh Church warranted by the Word of God hath taken ſo deepe roote, and brought forth ſo good fruit, that ſince the firſt yeare of our late Soveraigne Queene of pious memory there haue beene more Hoſpitalls, Publike Schooles, Libraries, Colleges, and Places for learning, built, adorned, and now in building, then ever were before in any one 60. yeares. Many of which publike Monuments of Religion haue receaued their firſt erection and chiefeſt endowments from the Heroicall liberality of thoſe, whoſe Succeſsours divers here preſent are in Office and Dignitie. Be not, I beſeech you (R. H.) their ſucceſſours onely in Place, but in Pietie; paſſe not through this world, like an arrowe in the ayre, or ſhip in the ſea, that leaue no impreſsion behind them. As

God hath given you meanes and handes to effect, ſo ſhould you haue hearts to affect that which is good; & if not to found, yet to further & finiſh Good works for publike benefit: whereby your righteouſneſſe ſhall be recorded in heauen, and your Names preſerued from rottennes on earth.
            And if your Charity wants a fit obiect for her practiſe, then caſt your eyes vpon the bare Habitations of the Muſes: harken after the SCHOOLES of ſciences and learning, which by the beneficency and prenſation of many, eſpecially of that worthy Sr Iohn Benet. Knight the Patron of the work, (whoſe name ſhall for ever be to vs as a ſweet oyntment powred out)  haue crept out of the ground, and now deſerue to be covered by the Charitie of all that loue either learning, or learned men. This is a worke in which the Elephant may wade, as wel as the Lambe, the rich mans gift ſhal be welcome, & the meaner mite not refuſed: & a cō
               currency of ſo many founders to a work of that incō
               parable benefit, wil doubtleſſe make a glorious conſtellation of bleſſed ſtarres, whereof ſome ſhalbe greater, others leſſe, but al ſhining in the higheſt heavens. And if that be true which the Wiſe mā ſaith, Eccl. 40. 19. that the Building of a Citie will make a man immortall; then much more the erection of a Work of this infinite benefit which ſhall remaine longer, then any Citty. For when the stones ſhall by time and long continuance be decayd, yet Iuſtitia manet in aeternum, the Founders & Benefactors (eſpecially with vs of that Vniverſitie) ſhall be in everlaſting remembrance.
Sola
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   non nôrunt haec monumenta mori.
               
Of this aſſured I am, that neither the Plantation of Vlster in Ireland, nor the Contribution to Prage in Bohemia may ſtand compariſon with this Monument of all Arts and learning: of whoſe benefit, not only our owne nation, but the remoteſt kingdomes of the Chriſtian world ſhall haue a taſt. It diſquieted the Wiſeſt man, that ever was to thinke, that he ſhould leaue his goods he knewe not to whom, peradventure Homini otioſo, to one that would ſpend all, Eccleſ. 2. 19. And let it not be your ſole care to leaue All to your riotous Executors, who peradventure in few yeares will conſume that eſtate, which with much care & in many yeeres you haue gathered together. You muſt purchaſe ſomething, Alteri ſeculo, for the world to come: you muſt make your eyes in this life the overſeers of ſome good workes; you muſt imitate Iacob, who to pacifie his brother Eſau, ſent a Preſent before, Gen. 32. 20. and before Cornelius could haue Peter ſent vnto him, hee ſent his Almes deeds to vſher him vp the way into heaven. And therefore it is not ſaid in my Text, he who hath, or hereafter will worke righteouſnes, but 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , hee that actually doth worke righteouſneſse.
            
            That new convert Zacheus did not ſay 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , the halfe of my goods I wil giue vnto the poore whē I am dead: but 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , I now preſently giue. Such as defer the performance of the workes of righteouſnes, till the end of their daies, are like thoſe that cary cādles in Lanthornes behind them in a darke night; whereby they direct others, and themſelues in the meane time fall into

the ditch. It is not for men to bee like ſwine, good for nothing till they be dead; or like Christmas-boxes, that will afford nothing, till they be broken. Let vs rather imitate the example of the forenamed Zacheus, who gaue in the preſent tenſe, and that no ſmall driblet, but 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , even the halfe of his goods and ſubſtance; and that not 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , but 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , not to one poore man, but to many; yea and maketh proclamation, that if by forged cavillation hee had wronged any man, he would reſtore him fourefold. Surely had Zacheus liu'd in theſe our daies, hee had beene an honeſt Maſter of the Cuſtome houſe. For if this or the like proclamation ſhould bee made among vs by all of his profeſſiō, how many are there in this City, now in great reputation and eſteeme, that would haue ſcarce ſufficient left them in this life to maintaine their families, and being dead to defray the expenſe of an ordinary Funeral! And yet theſe men too to ſweeten the mouth of the poore, and to ſtop the eares of the multitude will clad ſome few in frize, & when they die bequeath a ſolemne Potation to their adioyning friends, thinking by theſe petty poſthume workes of righteouſneſſe to make themſelues acceptable with God. Such men I can compare to nothing more fitly, then to the Lion, which Sampſon killed; which in his life time was ravenous and devoured all, and being dead was found to haue ſome little hony in his mouth. Iudg. 14.
            And as we are to worke righteouſnes, whileſt we haue time, or rather continually, ſo we muſt worke our own,
               
not other mens; we muſt not like Simon of Cyrene cary other mens croſſes: we muſt not be buſie Biſhops in other mens Dioceſſes, but ſtand in that ſtation, wherevnto we are called; and not thinke it ſufficient in ſome reſpect to be good & in other bad, to bring forth with one branch ſound fruit, and with the other rotten, but to worke righteouſnes in every reſpect. It is not ſufficient for the inferiour to be a good man, but to bee a good ſervingman, for the ſuperiour to bee a good Maſter, but a good Magiſtrate. It is not ſufficient to be a good Preacher, but a good Biſhop; and not only a learned Lawyer, but an vpright Iudge. For vnleſſe in all reſpects we be quadrate and perfect, we ſhall not bee accepted with God: which is the end of my Text, & ſhall be the end of my ſpeech.
            
               Is accepted with God] Not in ſtrict legal rigour, but in Evangelicall mitigation, not, becauſe we can performe exact obedience to the Law of God, or worke perfect righteouſnes: but becauſe we loue, purpoſe, deſire, endeavour, and in ſome meaſure perfourme obedience to the Law of God; and where we are deficient we ſigh and groane for our defects, which at the Chauncery barre of Gods mercy is acceptable performance. Acceptable, not for our obſerving what the law requires, but for our ſincere deſire to performe it: becauſe, as Saint Paul ſaith, 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , the ready minde is accepted with God.
            The benefits (ſaith Ariſtotle lib. 1. Eth. c. 14.) which men receiue from God & their Parents are of that infinite worth and tranſcendent value, that wee are not

able to returne for them any correſpondency of deſert, 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               . The reaſon is, becauſe the gifts of God and his acceptation is infinite, but the actions of man finite and determinate; the beſt whereof hath many ſtaines and imperfections. For the immediate and next cauſes of our workes are not altogither ſpirituall, and totally regenerate, becauſe there dwels yet the Iebuſite in Ieruſalem with the Iſraelites: the ſoule of man hath her inmates, the Old man coinhabiting with the New, the fleſh with the ſpirit, the law of ſinne, with the law of the mind. Inſomuch that the beſt of men cannot climbe vp to heaven without Iacobs ladder, the merit of Chriſt, and the gift of God.
            I haue wearied my ſelfe & am ſure haue tyred you. I will therefore ende all with that devout praier of Arch-biſhop Anſelme; Recognoſce Domine quod tuum est, & abſterge quod meum, ne per dat mea iniquit as quod fecit tua bonitas. Accept (O God) of what is thine owne in vs; and let not our iniquity eclipſe thy gracious mercy. Meritum no ſtrum, miſeratio Domint; our Merit is thy Mercy & gracious acceptation; in which we repoſe our whole aſſurance. We acknowledge our ſelues to be naked of all righteouſnes, beſeeching thee to cloath vs; to be lame and impotent in the performance of any Good worke, deſiring thee to ſtrengthen vs; to be blind in our vnderſtanding, deſiring thee to enlighten vs; to be ſervants to ſinne deſiring thee to free vs: and we aſcribe all glory vnto thee in this world, praying to be glorified of thee in the world to come.
            FINIS.
            
         
      
   