
      
         
            
            
            
               
            
         
         
            
            The Preface to the
Reader.
            
               GENTLE READER, WE
may ſee with deepe conſiderations
the mercifull woorke of the
Lorde from tyme to tyme, ſhewing
vnto vs many ſtrange Signes
and tokens, forewarning vs vnto
repētāce: But ſuch is the corruptiō
and hardnes of this our age,
that we cōtemne and neclect all
tokens in the Heauens, by reſpecting
our owne ſecuritie for the tyme preſent, and yet if
any man would recken the courſe of this life paſt, hee
ſhoulde ſee in himſelfe greate cauſe to tremble at theſe
things: And alſo if wee doe conſider what great route of
euils doth beſet vs, and how many hath bene deſtroyed,
or what hurtes hath bene by Lightnings, Earthquakes,
Ground-openings, Fluddes, Tempeſtes of the Sea, great
Windes, Infections, Ayre, Warres, Mortalities, Plagues,
ſtraunge diſſeaſes and ſuch like, which things, Commets
doth commonly Prognoſticate to enſue. I ſuppoſe that
the remembraunce of ſuch daungers, ſhould make vs not
to be altogether careles of theſe tokens, threatning vnto
vs calamities for our vnthankefulnes, and therfore whoſoeuer
doth make light accoumpt of Earthquakes and
gleaming Starres: and is not moued with the ſight thereof
with the feare of Gods heauy diſpleaſure: the ſame
people doe alſo as lightly and as little regard their owne
conſciences and amendment of life. And now let vs beare
in mynde the fourth Starre, that was ſeene in Calabria,
which ſignifieth great alteration this yeere. 1587. and

that the world will not long indure, God make vs all ready
againſt the day of the Lorde. This Starre Maiſter Iohn
Doleta, a learned Aſtronomer doth write, and with hym
alſo doe agree, in wryting all the learned men in Grecia,
Alexandria, Spaine, and Italy, That is to ſay, in the yere aforeſayd,
the Sunne ſhalbe couered with a Dragon, in the
Morning from fiue a Clocke vntill nine, and will ſhewe
forth as fire, and in this yere is thought to be great Fluds,
Windes; Tempeſtes and Earthquakes. I pray God defend
and keepe vs from the ſame, and giue vs grace to repent,
and beare in mynde the fearfull ſignes and tokens. For as
before the deſtruction of the firſt World, like ſignes and
tokens appeared, & yet they would not turne from their
wickedneſſe, and ſo were drowned in the Flood. And as
before the deſtructions of Sodome and Gomorra, appeared
like wonders, but they would not call to God for mercy,
and ſo were cōſumed with Fire and Brimſtone. And that
goodly Citie Ieruſalem, for their abhomination was made
deſolate, and not one ſtone left vppon an other. Yet
now let all theſe ſignes and tokens cauſe ſpeedie repentaunce,
and amendment of life, and then no doubt the
wrath of God, which is now kindled againſt thee, will be
turned to his wonted mercie: and thē poſſeſſe that place
of felicitie, which is prepared for all thoſe that feare and
tremble at the threatning of our GOD: to which
place of perfect reſt, I beſeech God to graunt
his Spirit of liuely repentaunce, in the
harts of all true beleeuers. Amen.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            ¶Straunge Newes
out of Calabria: Prognoſticated in
the yere 1586. vpon the yere 87. and
what ſhall happen in the ſaid yere: Praying
the Lord to be mercifull vnto vs.
            The Interpretation of the fourth Starre which was ſeene
in Calabria: being written for a warning vnto all faithfull
Chriſtians, as followeth.
            
               BE it knowne vnto all men, that
in ye yere 87. whē as the Moone
is in the watrie ſigne, the world
is like to bee in great daunger:
For a learned man, named maiſter
Iohn Doleta, who is very well
ſeene in Aſtronomie, doth write, and with him
alſo doth agree in writing the chiefeſt men in
Grecia, Alexandria, Spayne, and Italie: that is to ſay,
that in the foreſayd yere, the Sunne ſhall be couered
with the Dragon, in the morning frō fiue
a clocke vntill nine, and will appeare like fire:
therfore it is not good that any man doe behold
the ſame: for by the beholding thereof you may
loſe your ſight.
            SEcondly, there ſhall come a marueilous great
water Flood vpon our Lady day in Lent, being

vpon the 25. day of March, and by reaſon of
the fearfulneſſe thereof many people may dye.
            THirdly, there ſhall ariſe a marueilous great
winde, and for great feare thereof many people
ſhall bee conſumed, or diſtraughted of their
wittes.
            FOurthly, the ſame yeere, vpon the 12. daye of
Maye, will ariſe an other wonderfull great
water Flood, and ſo great as no man hath ſene,
ſince Noyes Flood, and will continue three daies
and three nights, and many Citties & Townes
which ſtandeth vpon ſandy ground will bee in
great daunger.
            FIftly, Infidels and Hereticks through great
feare and dread, will flye and gather together,
and a great parte of Chriſtindome, ſhall be in
daunger to be ouerthrowne, which God defend.
            SIxtly, in the ſaid yeere, after the great waters
be paſt. vpon S. Margarets day, being in the Dog
daies, will be a great and fearfull Death: for the
Peſtilence wilbe in ſuch force that it is to be feared
that fewe places in Chriſtendome, will bee
free: which the Lorde defende and preſerue vs
from the ſame.
            SEauently, there will be throughout the world
great change, and alteration in Religion, and

wonderfull ſtraunge newes vnto all people as
conſerning the ſame.
            EIghtly, the Turke with his God Mahomet
shal loſe his Scepter, and a great change and
alteratiō; in his Regement, through hunger and
warres, ſo that the moſt parte of them will rather
ſeeke for reliefe by the Chriſtians then at
his hands.
            NInthly, there will alſo ariſe great Earthquakes,
and the fruite of Trees will be very
ſtraunge to be ſeene, and hollowe within.
            LAſtly, vpon S. Bartholmewe day wilbe great mouings
of the earth, both on Hils and Vallies,
ſo that for feare thereof, fewe people wil remaine
alyue, God bee mercifull vnto vs. Therefore it
behooueth all good Chriſtians, for to call earneſtly
vnto almightie God in heartie prayer, to
tourne all theſe Plagues from vs, which hee
through his wrath will laye vppon vs for our
wicked liuing.
            He which hath no miſfortune in the yeere 85.
            And in Anno. 86. Doth remaine aliue.
            He being in 87. vnhurt and vnſlaine,
            And in 88. Aliue doth remaine.
            And liuing vntill the yere 89.
            He may then ſpeake of a ioyfull tyme.
         
      
   