
      
         
            
            
            FOVRE
GODLIE
AND FRVITFVL
SERMONS:
TWO
PREACHED AT DRAITON
IN OXFORD-SHIRE,
At a Fast, enioyned by authoritie, by
occasion of the pestilence then dangerously
dispearsed.
            Likewise
            TWO OTHER SERMONS ON
the twelfth Psalme.
            
               VVhereunto is annexed a briefe
Tract of Zeale.
            
               By
               I. Dod.
               R. Cleauer.
            
            The second Edition inlarged.
            LONDON
Printed by TC. for WILLIAM WELBIE, and are
to be sold at his shop in Pauls Church-yard, at
the signe of the Swan. 1611.
         
         
            
            
            TO THE RIGHT
HONOVRABLE ANNE, LADY
WAINTVVORTH, increase
of all true honour and
happinesse, &c.
            
               RIght Honourable, may it please
you to take in good worth my
bold attempt, in presuming to
recommend vnto your fauourable
patronage these Sermōs following.
Your honours vndeserued
respect of me, made me desirous
to testifie my vnfained thankfulnesse: which
I could not imagine how with greater conueniencie
to expresse and manifest, then by taking
hold of this present occasion; especially considering
that your constant and more then ordinarie
pains-taking to heare such holy instructions, is a
sufficient argument to euince your loue and liking
of the matter therein comprised: and your good
regard of the authors (well knowne vnto me)
gaue me occasion to thinke that their labours, in
this sort offering themselues vnto your eye, would

be no lesse welcome than formerly they haue
beene, being in another manner presented vnto
your eare.
            Concerning the Tract of Zeale annexed to
these Sermons, it is a collection of diuers rules
which I heard & read touching that subiect, principally
of such as were scattered heere and there
in Maister R. Greenhams Workes: which being
exceeding vsefull, I thought good to gather them
into one (with an addition of sundrie proofes of
Scripture) for the ease and helpe of those that are
well affected, especially of such whose abilitie will
not reach to the price of that great volume of M.
Greenhams labours.
            And thus humbly beseeching your Honour to
pardon my boldnesse, and to beare with my manifold
defects which shall be found in the penning
of these Sermons, I recommend you to the
gratious protection of the Almightie.
            
               Your Honours
according to my poore abilitie
readie to be commanded,
IOHN WINSTON.
            
         
         
            
            THE POINTS OF
DOCTRINE HANDLED
IN THE SERMONS
following.
            
               SERMON I.
               
                  DOCT. I.
                  
                     THe first steppe to true and sound repentance,
is, to be wounded and disquieted
in our hearts for sinne.
                  2 Lawfull things must be done lawfully,
and good things in a good manner.
                  3 With confession of sinne, must be
ioyned earnest requests for pardon thereof.
                  4 The more sinfull any one is, the more foolish he is.
                  5 It is a wonderfull hard thing, to take downe the pride
of mans heart.
                  6 The more speedily we iudge our selues, the more mercifully
the Lord will deale with vs.
               
            
            
               SERMON II.
               
                  DOCT. I.
                  SInne brings men into maruellous straits.
                  2. Gods seruants neuer find so great fauour as with
God himselfe.
                  
                     
3 God maketh his iudgements, sutable to our sinnes.
                  4 When God sets in with his iudgements they shall be farre
dispersed in a short time.
                  5 As God appointeth iudgements to be inflicted on his
people, so he himselfe will see execution done.
                  6 A good man will lay a greater burden on himselfe then
on another.
               
            
            
               SERMON III.
               
                  DOCT. I.
                  ALthough humane helps and earthly friends do faile Gods-people,
yet they are not helpelesse, nor hopelesse.
                  2 No outward thing comes neerer the hearts of Gods children,
then the decay of good men.
                  3 Deceitfull friends, are worse then open foes.
               
            
            
               SERMON IIII.
               
                  DOCT. I.
                  THe more skilfully and artificially any contriues his ill purposes,
the more fearefull destruction shall fall vpon him.
                  2 The more wicked men boast of their mischieuous intents,
the neerer mischiefe is vnto them.
                  3 No man hath the royaltie of his owne tongue, nor the ordering
of his owne speech.
                  FINIS.
               
            
         
      
      
         
            
            The first Sermon.
            
               2. SAMVEL. 24. 10. 11. 12.
               
                  
                     Verse 10. Then Dauids heart smote him after that hee
had numbred the people: and Dauid saide vnto the Lord, I
haue sinned exceedingly in that I haue doue: therefore now
Lord I beseech thee, take away the trespàsse of thy seruant,
for I haue done very foolishly.
                  11. And when Dauid was vp in the morning, the word
of the Lord came vnto the Prophet Gad, &c.
               
            
            
               IN these words is set foorth the repentance
of Dauid, for his sinne
committed in numbring the people,
wherin the holy Prophet sheweth:
I. What meanes hee vsed to
be reconciled vnto God, Namely;
            1. First, that he was touched with
inward remorse and hearty griefe for
his offence: [Then Dauids heart smote him after that hee
had numbred the people.]
            2 Secondly, that he made a particular and very earnest
confession of his fault:] I haue sinned exceedingly,
in that I haue done.
            
            3 Thirdly, that hauing bewayled and acknowledged
his sinne, he instantly craued pardon for the same:
[therefore now Lord I beseech thee, take away the trespasse
of thy seruant, &c: as if he should haue said, I haue sinned

very hainouslie, I cannot denie it: yet I am thy seruant,
and one of thy familie, and therefore Lord cast me not
off for one fault, but take notice of my sorrow, and pardon
my sinne: for I haue dealt verie foolishly.
            
            
                2 Secondly, he declareth that meanes the Lord vsed
to make him fit for reconciliation: viz: that hee
sent vnto him the Prophet Gad, a worthy man of God,
& Dauids Seer, who had bene ready from time to time
to lay open the will of God vnto him, and in that regard
was more reuerend in his eyes, and hee threatneth and
denoūceth iudgement against him, that seeing his heart
had beene lifted vp with pride, in regard of the multitude
and strength of his people, God would meete with
him in his owne sinne, and make his punishment to be
suteable to his fact: and seeing he begun to be humbled
for it alreadie, and yet needed still further humaliation,
he telleth him, that [the sword, or the famine, or the pestilence]
must pursue his subiects, and make wonderfull
hauocke among them, and therfore biddeth him make
his choice which of them hee would haue to come vpon
the land: for one of them hee must needes vndergoe,
to further him in the worke of humiliation, as also
to bring the whole Church vnto the like, who then had
incensed the Lords anger against them.
            
               Then Dauids heart smote him] In that setting downe
the repentance of Dauid the holy Ghost taketh notice
of this in the first place,Verse. 10. that [his heart smote him] the Doctrine
is, that.
            The first step to true and sound repentance is to bee
wounded and disquieted in our hearts for sinne,Sound sorrow the first step to repentance. vntill
our soules bee pierced, and as it were strucke through
with the feeling of our corruptions, and of Gods displeasure,
due vnto vs for the same, wee haue not made
any entrance into the wayes of godlinesse, nor laid the
verie foundation of the works of conuersion, therfore
the Prophet Ioel exhorting the Israelites to repentance,Ioel. 2. 13.
               
biddeth them, rent their hearts: that is, the first stone
that must be laid in this building: their hearts must bee
crushed and broken,Note, for the wickednesse committed against
the Maiestie of God; till then there is no turning
vnto him: one may as well bid a prisoner that is in
strong hold, and hath bolts and fetters vpon his heeles,
walke abroade and take the fresh aire, and not remaine
any longer in that darke & loathsome dungeon, as bid
one that hath not his heart crushed & humbled to turne
vnto the Lord: alas he is held fast in the chaines of Sathan,
and cannot stirre one foote to God-ward; therefore
is it noted in those conuerts,Acts. 2. 
               Act. 2. 37. that They
were pricked in their hearts] when they began the worke
of repentance, the rebukes of God had wakened their
drowsie consciences, so that they saw their sinnes and
Gods vengeance due vnto them,Psal. 45. and the words of Peter
had gone through their hearts, euen as a two edged
sword, and then they were fit to bee soundly healed and
comforted, when they had beene pierced, and throughly
wounded by the Arrowes of God.
            1 First,Reasons. till the heart bee broken for sinne, there can
be no plaine confession of sinne, and therfore no repentance.
Men naturally are like wilde Asse-Colts,Iob. 11. nothing
will worke vpon them, nor bring them vnto any good
frame or order; though they heare often of their faults,
they will not acknowledge them, but be still vnruly and
vntamed, as Paul was before his conuersion; so long as
he was heart-whole in his owne conceit, though he had
heard many excellent Sermons (no doubt,) yet hee was
like a beast still, neuer bewailing nor confessing his grieuous
offences,Rom. 7. till the Lord had taken him downe,Act. 9. and
throughly mastered him.
            2 Nay further, men are so farre from taking paines 
to come to a true acknowledgment of their iniquities,
till such time as there is a breach made into their hearts
by godly sorrow, they doe not so much as desire to be

deliuered from them, nor make any reckoning of Gods
mercy for the pardoning of them: till such time as they
become mourners for sinne, they cannot possibly hunger
and thirst after righteousnes.Math. 5. 4. 6. And indeed what reason
is there that they should esteeme of that medicine
which will cure, when they doe not feele themselues to
be sicke? they thinke it a matter worth the looking after,
to be freed from pouertie, from infamie, from the
pestilence, &c. but as for the corruptions of their nature,
and the sinfulnesse of their waies, they were neuer much
troubled with them, and therefore they make little account
to be deliuered from them. See this poynt more at
large in M. Dods Sermon on Isa. 1 Doct. 1.
            Seeing therefore that inward contrition for sinne is
the first step to repentance, and that which killeth the
roote of sinne, and setteth vs free from the power and
dominion of it, and erecteth in our hearts a throne for
Christ Iesus; the vse of this point is,
            First for reproofe of those that perswade themselues,Vse. 1.
and beare others in hard that they haue truely repented,
and doe continually confesse their faults, and aske
pardon for them: but what griefe and paine haue they
had in their hearts for their sinnes? nay, they thanke
God, they were neuer terrified nor troubled in their
consciences. Do you thanke God for this? it is in effect
to thanke him for that you want the first and principall
note of true conuersion: if your harts haue neuer beene
pricked and slung with the sense of your vilenesse and
wretchednesse, it is because you are senselesse: for there
is cause sufficient why you should be grieued; and the
lesse you haue had,Luke. 6. the more you are likely to haue, if
not heere,Reuel. 6. 16. yet in the world to come, and at that day
when you shall be most vnwilling of it.
            Secondly,Vse. 2. heere are those to be reprooued that run
into farre greater excesse of sinning than euer Dauid
did, breaking forth into grosse and foule euils, that euerie

body seeth and knoweth, and condemneth, and yet
they passe them ouer slightly, and carelessly, as if they
were matters of nothing. When Dauid did but cut off
the lap of Sauls coat, his heart smote him, and was grieued
within him, in that he was so neere vnto sinne:
what then shall we thinke of these that doe not cut off
the lappe of the coate of an enemie, but are iniurious to
their friends, and cruell against their brethren, that
breake couenant and promise, sinne against God, blaspheme
his name, profane his Sabbaths, and the like,
and yet none of all these do soundly worke vpon them,
nor much trouble them? surely such men are not of
Dauids spirit, and therefore not being broken hearted
heere, they shall be broken and crushed in peeces with
the vnsupportable weight of Gods vengeance heereafter.
            Thirdly,Vse. 3. sith this inward touch for sinne is a thing so
necessarie, let vs hence learne to labour for it, and to
keepe tendernes of heart when we haue obtained it: for
that sorrow which breaketh the heart, doth withall
breake the necke of sinne: and therefore when the Lord
doth checke & controle our consciences, let vs esteeme
it as a great mercie, and not let such stroakes passe without
their right vse, but let vs goe to God and to his children
for helpe and direction, and them that little sparke
of the fire of God in our soules, being fed & nourished,
will grow in the end to a great flame. Now that our harts
may be kept alwaies tender & sensible of those checks
which Gods spirit giueth vs, let vs vse these meanes
that follow.
            First,Meanes to get tendernes of heart. let vs lay vp in our hearts the weapon of God,
euen the sword of the spirit, whereby our hearts may be
wounded, as often as need requireth: for vnregenerate
persons wanting that weapon, will rather defend, then
smite themselues when they haue offended, and euery
childe of God hath somewhat of old Adam in him, in

which regard he must be more carefull to vse the sword
of the spirit, for the piercing of his heart when any sinne
is committed by him:Iohn. 16. 8. withall praying for the spirit of
grace which will conuince the conscience when it is
guiltie, so that it shall haue nothing to say in defense of
it selfe, but very much for the condemnation of it selfe:
as is euident Ezec. 36. 27.Ezeck. 36. whereby we may obserue, that
when God hath giuen his spirit vnto his elect, and (as it
is in Ieremy. 31. 33.)Ier. 31. withall written his lawes in their
hearts, then they shall remember their owne wicked waies, and
their deedes that were not good, and shall iudge themselues
worthy to haue beene destroyed for their iniquities, & for their
abhominations. What is the reason they should passe such
a heauie sentence vpon themselues? one would thinke
they should rather reioyce now, & allow of themselues
and of their workes? so they doe reioyce at, and approue
of themselues and their workes, so farre as they
are spirituall: but they proclaime war against themselues
and their workes so far as either they are or haue
beene carnall and sinfull, and that because the word of
God, and the spirit of God doe beare sway in their
hearts: they are at vtter defiance with their pride and
hypocrisie, and all wretched lusts that fight against their
soules: being neuer so much tormented with those
sinnes, as when they haue attained to a great measure of
humilitie, and of sinceritie. He that is most lowly is euer
most vexed with his pride, and he that is most vpright
and true hearted, is most of all troubled with the
guilefulnes and deceitfulnes of his owne heart, because
the word and the spirit working together doe cause him
both more clerely to see, and more throughly to hate
those corruptions, than euer hee did before he had
attained to that measure of grace.
            Secondly, we must not content our selues when once
we haue gotten the word and spirit of God within vs,
but we must still striue to keepe our hearts humble and

lowly: for otherwise we shall not feele the strokes of
the word and spirit of God;Isa. 30. therefore it is said Isay. 30.
20 21.) that when the Lord had dieted his people a
while [giuing them the bread of aduersitie, and the water of
affliction] and thereby taken downe the pride and stubbornenesse
of their hearts, that then [their eares should
heare a word behind them, saying, this is the way walke in it,
&c. that is when they were thus humbled, as soone as euer
they had committed any offence, they should presently
haue a blow vpon their hearts for it, and be full
of feare and anguish: though no man in the world tell
them of it, yet the word in their hearts will be like a
good guide that is still following a little child, and telling
him, this is not the right way, leaue it; there is the
right way, walke in it: but many haue hearts pestered
with pride, and lust, and couetousnesse, and yet goe a
whole moneth, nay, many monethes and yeares together,
and neuer feele any rebuke in their consciences.
How comes this to passe that others are full of griefe
and full of teares for their sinnes, and they are neuer
troubled for them? is it beause there is greater vprightnes
in them, then there is in others? No surely it is because
they haue a more blind minde, and a more proud
and senselesse hart then others haue: for the more humble
any one is, the more often shall he heare the voyce
of the spirit, checking him when hee goeth out of the
way, & moouing him to turne again into the right way.
            Thirdly, we must especially beware of presūptuous
sins: for if we liue therein our hearts will cease to smite
vs, or at least we shall be senselesse of these strokes: as
may be seene in the case of Dauid: when he had cut off
the lap of Sauls garment and numbred the people
(which were but infirmities) forthwith his conscience
rebuked him, and he was humbled before the Lord: but
when he had committed adulterie, and murder, either
the checkes of his conscience were none at all, or else

they were so weake,2. Sam. 12. that hee had no sense nor feeling
thereof: so that Nathan was driuen to fetch about (as it
were) and to vse all the art that might be, to make him
see his offences, and passe sentence against himselfe for
the same. Let vs therefore by his example learne to beware
how we presumptuously sinne against our consciences,
especially in palpable and grosse offences, least
our mindes being by degrees blinded, and our affections,
by little and little corrupted, we become in the end
very blocks and stones, and haue our consciences so
darkened, that they will not accuse vs, or our hearts so
benummed, that they will not be mooued with the
stroakes of God, and with the checks of his holy spirit.
            
               After that he had numbred the people.] Heere is his
speciall sinne, that he numbred his subiects, which may
seeme to be no such great matter, for which God should
so plague the land: and if there had bene that measure
of hypocrisie in Dauid, as there is in many of vs, he
would haue pleaded thus for himselfe: What need I to
be so troubled for this? and what reason is there why
God should proceede so seuerely against me for the
same? did not Moses and Ioshua, holy men of God,
number the people in their daies, and that warrantably?
and why then may not I doe the like, hauing more absolute
authoritie ouer them then they had? but his
heart staied him from all such reasoning of the matter;
and told him, that though hee did the same action
which they did, yet the manner of doing thereof was
diuers; he performed it not in obedience to God (as
they did) but in pride and hautines of minde, in regard
of the multitude and strength of his subiects: before he
esteemed Gods name a strong tower for his defence,
but now what need he runne crying vnto God? he had
so many souldiers and valiant warriours in his dominion,
that he could make his part good against any forren
power whatsoeuer. Thus was his heart lifted vp

vnto vanitie, when it should haue bene lifted vp to God
in thankfulnes: and therefore was he so humbled, because
he had an ill affection,
                  Doct. 2. God looketh into the manner of our doing. and a wrong end in a good
action. Whence ariseth this doctrine, That it is not enough
for to forbeare things that are euill, and to make
conscience of grosse sinnes, but men must doe lawfull
things lawfully, and performe good workes in a good
manner: otherwise the Lord may and will punish them
for doing lawfull things, aswell as for vnlawfull things.
This may be seene in that great enditement which
Christ brings against the old world:Mat. 24. 38. 
               They did eate, and
drinke, marry, and giue in marriage. A naturall man would
haue thought there could be no hurt in these: if they
had bene charged with whoredome, murder, blasphemie,
or the like, they had bene matters of some moment:
but for those before named, what fault can be
found with them? Indeed the things in themselues are
very warrantable, but the manner of performing them,
doth either make or marre them:Iude. 12. 1. Tim. 445. to eate and drinke
without feare, without prayer, and thanks-giuing, as if
the creatures were our owne, and not the Lords, to abuse
the blessings of God to surfetting and drunkennesse,
&c: these and the like corruptions, doe turne eating
and drinking into sinne, which in themselues are
not onely allowable, but also necessarie. The like may
be said concerning marriage,Heb. 13. it is a sanctified ordinance
of God vnto those that vse it holily: but then it becomes
very sinfull and hatefull vnto the Lord,Gen. 6. 2. when
the Sonnes of God doe ioyne with the daughters of
men, and professors are yoaked with Infidels, for beautie,
or commoditie, or any such carnall respect: yet that
is a horrible sinne, too too common among such as
professe Christianitie, that they make no scruple of
matching their children with those, whome they know
by their workes to be as yet the children of the diuell;
and so in other matters, if they can proue them once to

be in themselues lawfull, they make no conscience of
the meanes they vse, nor of the end they propose in accomplishing
of them.
            The like is alleaged by our Sauiour against the Sodomites,
               Luk. 17. 28.
as against those of the old world, viz: that they
bought and sold, and built in couetousnesse, pride and vanitie,
as if they had bene euer to dwell vpon the earth,
not caring what craft and fraud they vsed, nor what
snares and grins they laid for men, if they might satisfie
their couetous and ambitious desires.See M. Dods Sermon on Isa. 10. Doct. 1. Vse. 1. More might be
said concerning this point, both for proofes and reasons,
but that it hath bene handled at large elsewhere.
            This serueth. First for terror vnto those that satisfie
themselues with this, that no bodie can charge them
with grosse sinnes, and therefore they imagine their
case to be good, and that they need not trouble themselues
in regard of their offences.
            But was it not thus with Dauid? who could now accuse
him of any notorious ill fact? surely none in the world:
and yet he hauing grace in his heart, accuseth and condemneth
himselfe, for that he had done a good action
in an ill maner, and with an ambitious and vaine glorious
minde, and for the same is much abased and confounded
in himselfe: and therefore those are in a miserable
estate, that neuer disquiet their soules for their
hidden corruptions, but thinke that all goeth well with
them, when mens eyes can discerne nothing amisse in
them: as they on the other side are in happie case, that
doe often take themselues apart, and beseech the Lord
to be mercifull vnto them in regard of their failings,
euen in the most spirituall duties that they performe:
such iudge themselues, and therefore shall not be iudged
of the Lord.
            Secondly,Vse. 2. this is for instruction, that we carefully
looke vnto the manner of all our actions, and in particular,
of the exercise of fasting, which is now in hand:

let vs consider wherefore we are come together, and
what is required of euery one that is present this day, to
wit, that we should put wickednesse out of our hearts,
and out of our hands: and for that purpose, come with
true humiliatiō on our part, that there may be a perfect
reconciliation granted vs on Gods part.
            This was practised by the Niniuites, who hearing
Gods iudgements denounced against them for their
sinnes,Ionah. 3. 8. 9. that within fortie daies Niniue should be destroyed,
except they repented, what did they? All of
them, both King and people, humbled themselues in
fasting, bewailing their euill & sinfull waies and workes,
and crying mightily vnto the Lord for pardon, and resoluing
to turne from the wickednesse that was in their hands,
that so God might turne away from his fierce wrath. Yet
they had enioyed but little teaching: they had heard
onely one Sermon from Ionah, who was a man vnknowne
vnto them, and did not bring such testimonies
of Scripture to conuince their consciences as are now
alleaged vnto vs, &c: and therefore we should be much
ashamed to come short of them in this holy exercise,
especially seeing we haue not one Ionah, but many; not
a iudgement threatned, but executed, and the sword of
the Lord still drawne against vs, and deuouring by hundreds
and thousands in many quarters of our land. Let
vs then search and examine our hearts, and grieue, and
iudge our selues for all our former transgressions; and
couenant with the Lord to auoid them hereafter, crauing
strength from him for that purpose, that we may
be enabled to subdue and keepe vnder all our corruptions:
and then our hearts being broken with godly sorrow,
they shall be healed with godly ioy; and being
truely cast downe before the Lord, he will raise vs vp in
due season, and make it knowne by good effect, that he
is appeased towards vs.
            Thirdly,Vse: 3. here is matter of exceeding great terror vnto

those that spend their dayes in the continuall practise
of grosse and presumptuous sinnes: for if Dauid were so
grieued & punished for that corruption which no man
liuing could touch him for, euen for dooing a good
thing in an ill manner, how then shall they bee able to
stand, that haue heaped iniquity vpon iniquitie, and for
manie yeeres together added one foule euill vnto another;
and not onely done good things in an ill manner,
but ill things in the worst manner, hauing manie
crying sinnes still to call for vengeance against them?
If Dauid were brought to such a strait, that he was euen
at his wits ende, and in exceeding great anguish for doing
one thing, which in mans reason might seeme very
lawfull; Oh what horrible terrors shall seaze on their
soules, who doe continuallie rush vpon a multitude of
hainous offences, which all the world crieth out against!
especially when they shall be called to answere, not before
Gad, as Dauid was, but before the Maiestie of the
great Lord of heaven and earth; not for one sinne, but
for all their sinnes: not to endure three dayes punishment
in mercie, but euerlasting woe and miserie, and
that in iudgement and heauie displeasure! Dauid had
great sorrow indeed for the offences which he committed;
yet no more then hee should haue: how then doe
they thinke to escape, that are not wrought vpon at all
with any remorse for their grieuous transgressions, but
are euen as a lumpe of dead flesh, altogether insensible
of any stroke of God, that is threatned, or inflicted vpon
themselues, or others?
            Verse 10.
                  Doct. 3. Confession of sinne, must folowe griefe for sinne. 
               I haue sinned exceedingly] Now followeth
the second step vnto sound repentance, namely, a true,
full, particular, and hearty confession of his sinne that so
wounded his heart: which all that would obtaine remission
of their sinnes, must be carefull to bring before
the Lord as Dauid did. But this point hath bene more
largely handled elsewhere [in M. Dods Serm. Prou. 28.
Doct. 2.
            
               
I beseech thee take away the trespasse of thy seruant, &c.
            This is the third worke of repentance, viz: that he
craueth pardon for his fault; and that is the next point;
that,
                  Doct. 4. Asking pardon must be ioyned with confession. Luk. 18. 13. Daniel. 9. 19. Nehem. 9. with confession of our sinnes, we must alwaies
ioyne requests vnto God for the pardoning of the
same: so doth Dauid in this place, as also Psal. 51. so
doth the Publican, Lord be mercifull vnto me a sinner: and
in a word, so doth Daniel, Nehemia, and the rest of Gods
seruants, as may be seene in their seuerall confessions.
And for incouragement vnto the performance of this
dutie, we haue,
            1 First,Exod. 34. the name of God, which is to pardon iniquitie,
transgression, and sinne: euen all without exception, great
or small, if we repent for them, they shall be pardoned:
if we acknowledge our miserie, we shall assuredly finde
Gods mercy.
            2 Secondly,Ezeck. 36. we haue the couenant of God, that he
will wash vs from all our filthinesse, by powring the bloud
of his sonne vpon our sinfull soules.
            3 Thirdly,Mat. 
                     •
                  . we haue the name of Christ to incite and
moue vs to become suters for a pardon: for he is called
Iesus, because it is his office to saue his people from
their sinnes.
            This Doctrine serueth,
            First,Vse. 1. for the confutation of the Papists, who clog
mens consciences, and lay on them heauie and yet vnnecessarie
burdens, enioyning them, if they would get
termission of their sinnes, to goe in pilgrimage to this or
that place, to pray to this or that Saint, to make some
satisfaction to God, &c: as if they should finde mercie
any where, rather then by seeking it at Gods hands:
and they speed accordingly: for whereas Dauid went
vnto the Lord for fauour, and obtained it, they haue
still vnsetled hearts, and restles consciences: or hard
hearts, and benummed consciences, neuer getting any
true peace, or sound comfort in the assurance of their

reconciliation with the Lord.
            2 Secondly,Vse. 2. for reproofe of those, whose offences
are very many, and very grieuous, and they see and acknowledge
so much: and yet will they not be so presumptuous
(as they tearme it) to expect pardon for the
same: indeed they thinke it fit for such holy men as
Dauid was, to aske and looke for mercy from the Lord,
but for themselues, they are such hainous offenders,
that they dare not doe so, neither can they conceiue
any hope to speed well if they should doe so. But why
should we put in conditions where God doth not, and
as it were interline Gods couenant? doth not he promise
without any exception,1. Ioh. 1. 9. that if we confesse our sinnes,
he is faithfull and iust to forgiue vs our sinnes, and to cleanse vs
from all vnrighteousnesse? It is therefore a great fault, to
thinke that any hath more abundance of sinne, then
God hath of mercy to forgiue it.
            Thirdly,Vse. 3. heere is an vse of instruction, that we should
be very importunate for the obtaining of Gods fauour
in the pardoning of our sinnes: which earnestnes that
we may attaine vnto, let vs vse these two helpes following,
which Dauids example directeth vs vnto:How we may attaine to earnestnesse in asking pardon. First, let
vs labour that our hearts may thorowly smite vs, and
that our consciences may euermore checke vs when we
doe offend: for wheresoeuer there is the checke of
 conscience, it will make the party grow not onely to
hartie confession, but also to earnest petitions for grace
and fauour. The greater therefore is their follie, who
when the Lord doth strike their drowsie consciences
for any wickednesse committed by them, will presently
betake themselues to merry company, & so by iesting,
and laughing, and drinking, and sporting, seeke to driue
away their melancholie fit, as they call it: but God meeteth
with them accordingly: for when they will not
take benefit by that mercifull warning which he giueth
them, they commonly fall to maruellous hardnes of

heart, and after breake foorth into some horrible sinne,
which ouerwhelmeth them with shame and confusion.
Let vs therefore obserue when the Lord smiteth our
hearts, and with Peter get out of company speedily, and
lament bitterly, that so we may turne the rebukes of our
soules into holy requests, that the Lord would forgiue
vs, and not enter into iudgement with vs for our grieuous
prouocations against his Maiestie.
            Secondly, when sinne is so odious vnto vs, that our
hearts doe condemne vs for it, then let vs striue to be
perswaded that it is pardonable, yea and that it shall be
pardoned vnto vs: that though we deserue to be
throwen out of seruice, because we haue dealt so foolishly,
yet seeing we are Gods seruants, he will not goe to
extremities with vs, but deale as a father with his owne
children, this ancor of hope we had need still to hold
fast by: for if we be not in some good measure resolued,
that we shall finde the Lord gratious, and that we our
selues are not hypocrites, but such as to whom mercy
belongeth, we shall presently giue ouer prayer: for who
would seeke vnto a Chirurgion to cure him, of whom
he is afraid lest he should wound him, in that he hath
cause and abilitie so to doe? Therefore hold this for a
firme ground, once Gods childe, and euer: once his
seruant, and neuer his enemie: in which regard we may
come with confidence vnto him, and say, Lord, I am
vnworthy to be called thy sonne; yet art thou my mercifull
Father: I haue done thee ill seruice, yet am I thy
poore seruant still: and though I be bad now, yet time
hath bene when I haue bin better, & done better: when I
haue praied in secret, and humbled my soule; and shedde
teares for my sinnes in priuate; and haue had an vtter
detestation of those euils, which now through the corruption
of my nature I haue fallen into, and therefore
Lord be pacified towards me, and put out of thy remembrance
the trespasse of thy seruant. If any one
want these testimonies of Gods loue towards him, and

of his loue towards God, when affliction ouertaketh
him for his sinnes, he will either flee from the Lords
presence, as Adam did, or if he aduenture to come vnto
him, his prayers will descend as plummets of lead vpon
him, and Sathan and his owne conscience will be
readie to accuse him, and to say, what hast thou to doe
with God? he heareth not sinners: thou shall rather prouoke
his vengeance, then obtaine his fauour by thy petitions;
and because thou hast bene his enemie heretofore,
he will shew himselfe to be thine now: and because
thou hast cast his word behind thy backe, he will shut
out thy cries, that they shall not haue any accesse vnto
him. Which vncomfortable newes, will be as a dart to
strike thorow the liuer of an hypocrite, and as a two edged
sword to pearse his soule: and therefore let vs all
labour to be strongly setled in this point, that we are
Gods seruants, that so we may be feruent and firie in our
prayers, and not be so daunted as sinners are when the
hand of God is vpon them.
            
               I haue dealt very foolishly] This he speaketh to make
this sinne more odious vnto himselfe: for by nature we
are so proud, that we cannot abide that any body should
say, we haue dealt foolishly and absurdly: therefore doth
he lay lode vpon himselfe, the more to beat downe his
pride, confessing that he had dealt very foolishly, because
he had dealt very sinfully: whence note this doctrine,
That the more sinfull any one is, the more foolish he is.
            
               Eue did eat of the forbidden fruit,
                  Doct. 5. The greatest sinners are the veriest fooles. thinking she had
dealt very wisely & prouidently for her selfe: but did she
get any thing by sinning against her makers commandement?
No surely: when shee had a conceit that she
should deale most wisely, she dealt most foolishly of any
that euer was in the world: for thereby she brought
sorrow and miserie, yea eternall damnation of soule and
body, not onely vpon her selfe (had not God giuen her
repentance and mercy) but vpon many hundred thousands

of her posteritie. So Achan thought it a part of
wisdome to take vp the Babylonish garment & the wedge
of gold that lay in his way:Ioshua. 7. hee might thereby (as he
imagined) inrich himselfe, and the matter neuer be
knowne: but was not that the ruine of himselfe & his
houshold? In like manner Ieroboam esteemed it a wise
and safe way for him to set vp the Calues, that the people
might worship at Dan and Bethel, and so not fall
from him, to ioyne againe to the house of Dauid: he
accounted this a surer course to establish his throne,
then for him to rest on Gods promise: but did he not
get exceeding dishonour and vtter ruine heereby? in so
much that when the Lord will set foorth a notable reprobate
and firebrand of hell, he doth describe him by
this, that he was like Ieroboam the sonne of Nebat, that
made Israel to sinne: and whereas he hoped by this
meanes to set vp himselfe and his seed for euer, he caused
them through his sinnes to be swept away as dung
from the face of the earth. The like may be said of Ahab
in taking away Naboths vineyard. And this must needs
be so,Reason. that the greatest sinners are the veriest fooles, because
in sinning they forsake the wisedome of God, and
follow the direction of flesh and blood. It is noted as a
point of great folly and indiscretion in Rehoboam, that
he would forsake the good counsell of the old men, and
follow the rash aduise of young men: and are not they
then egregious fooles indeed, that leaue the counsell
of the wise God, and follow the aduice of Sathan, his
and their vtter enemie? We would esteeme it a great
madnesse, if we should see a man, his barnes being full of
corne, to set fire on the thatch, and to sit by and laugh
to behold all turned into a flame: and yet certainely
this is not so great a madnesse as for one to fire his
soule with sinne: for all the friends and meanes that
the world affordeth cannot quench this flame, nor recouer
this losse, as they may the other: and therefore

they are the fooles of the world, that are the sinners of
the world: and there is no such frenfie, as for a man to
prouoke his Creator: and whatsoeuer applause wicked
persons haue for a season, yet at length all the world
shall see, and they themselues shall feele, that they haue
beene notorious fooles: Ier. 17. 11.
            This serueth for instruction,Vse. 1. that if we would not be
branded with the name of fooles and Idiots, we be carefull
to eschew all manner of sinnes: and on the contrary,
if we would be truely wise, let vs cleaue vnto the
Lord in constant and faithfull obedience: that was the
reason why Dauid was wiser then his enemies,
               Psal. 119. 93. 
               then his teachers,
then the aged, because he kept Gods statutes. What
made those in the Gospell to be foolish Virgins, but
this, that they made not prouision for eternall life? And
what made the other fiue to be indeed wise, but that
their hearts and liues were adorned and beautified with
grace and goodnesse? Achitophel was a deepe politician;
yet because he was destitute of heauenly wisedome, he
shewed himselfe to be but a miserable base foole: for
when he had no meanes to helpe himselfe, he went and
hanged himselfe: if one had studied an hundred yeeres,
he could hardly haue found out a readier way to manifest
his notable folly, then he tooke in that horrible
murdering of himselfe.
            2 Secondly, is it so that the greatest sinners are the
veriest fooles? then here is matter of singular consolation
for Gods seruants, that are vilified and contemned,
and accounted sillie and simple, euen for this,
that they carefully decline from the waies of sinners,
though in shew neuer so pleasant and profitable: and
conscionably, walke in the paths of righteousnesse,
though neuer so rough and dangerous: let vaine men
speake their pleasure of them, and count and call them
the fooles of the world, yet God esteemeth and speaketh
otherwise of them. It is no maruell that the world

iudgeth them fooles, for with them the doctrine of the
Gospell (vnto which the godly endeuour to conforme
themselues and their courses) is accounted foolishnes.
But as wisedome is iustified of her children, whatsoeuer
men thinke or speake of it, so are the children of wisedome
iustified by the infinitely wise God, whatsoeuer
slanderous and reproachfull imputations carnall men
doe lay vpon them: he saith that the feare of the Lord
is the beginning of wisedome. Prou. 1. 7. and that those
that obey his commandements are the onely wise people
vnder the Sun. Deut. 46.
            
               Verse. 13. Wilt thou that seuen yeeres famine come vpon
the Lands &c.
            Heere commeth an obiection to be answered.Obiect. It is
said, 1. Cor. 11. 31. that if we iudge our selues, we shall not be
iudged of the Lord: how commeth it to passe then in this
place, that Dauid confessing his fault, aggrauating it, and
asking pardon for it, hath notwithstanding such a heauie
iudgement denounced against him, as the famine,
or the sword, or the pestilence?
            1 Though such as iudge themselues,Answer. shall not be
iudged, yet must they be cured: and that was Dauids
case here: this stroake was not laid vpon him in wrath,
but in fauour: he had set vpon a good worke, euen the
pulling downe of his pride, & by this meanes the Lord
furthered him in ye good worke, & made a speedier way
for abūdāce of grace, which was after bestowed vpō him.
            2 Againe, the people were not so reformed as they
should be at this time, and therefore God in this plague
doth aime at their humbling, thrusting Dauid out of
the gappe (as it were) who had formerly by his prayers
& teares stood in the breach, to keep of the Lords wrath
from them, so that all this while beeing intangled with
his own matters, he could not so freely deale for them.
            Now in that Dauid must haue such a sharpe corasiue
to consume that proud flesh that had growne about his

heart, by reason of his mightie forces, and the largenesse
of his dominions,
                  Doct. 6. It is hard to be at downe mans pride. the Doctrine is, that it is a wonderfull
hard thing to take downe the pride of mans heart:
it is no small affliction that will doe it, as is plaine Iob
33. 14. &c: where is at large shewed, that God vseth all
meanes, and that againe & againe, and yet men will not
profit thereby: then he findes out the cause of it to be
pride, verse. 17. and so laieth corrections vpon them sutable
thereunto, smiting them with sorrow vpon their beds, so
that the griefe of their bones is sore: pinching them with
grieuous sicknesses and diseases, and making their bones
to clater, so that their soules draw neere to the graue, and
their life to the buriers. Now when these or the like wofull
distresses haue tamed and maistered their vnruly affections,
then doe they begin to be somewhat more tractable:
and whereas neither dreames, nor visions, nor
any of Gods ordinances would doe any good vpon
them before, after that, if God send vnto them a messenger
or Interpreter one of a thousand, they will begin to
hearken vnto them, and to learne how they may obtaine
mercy and reconciliation with God, that they descend
not into the pit of destruction. Further, we may
obserue what a great deale of woe Dauid sustained by
reason of the hautinesse of his heart, and his earthly
confidence (which is a signe thereof) when he thought
his mountaine so strong, that he should neuer be mooued:
               Psalm. 30. 6. 7. for
God turned away his face from him, and he was troubled, and
euen ready to goe downe into the pit,
               Verse. 9. 
               & to descend vnto the
dust, &c. Neither did God minister vnto him a stronger
purgation then he needed: but his pride required full
as much affliction as the Lord laide vpon him, this was
also the case of vzziah, who being in a moderate estate,
did exceeding much good both for the Church and the
common wealth: but when he was growen mighty and
strong, his heart was lifted vp, and then he could not
content himselfe with his kingly dignitie, but he would

needs take vpon him the office of the High-priest also,
and so went into the Temple of the Lord, to burne incense
vpon the Altar of incense; but what came of this
presumptuous fact of his? When the admonition of the
Priests of the Lord would not preuaile with him, but he
grewe wroth with those that withstoode him, the Lord
louing him, did forthwith smite him with Leprosie, and
so he was driuen to liue apart all his life long, that so the
hautinesse of his heart might bee throughlie cured. 2.
Chron. 26.2. Cor. 12. The like may be seene in Paul; who albeit
he were a man of wonderfull graces, & had beene continually
exercised with many and great afflictions, so that
he had no great need of further humbling, as we would
haue thought, yet had he Satan turned loose vpon him,
to buffet him, and to beat him blacke and blew as it were,
that so hee might not bee lifted vp with the multitude
and excellencie of the reuelations that he had receiued.
Hee had beene in the third heauen, and was indued with
exceeding rare gifts: and the Lord knew, that if he were
not taken downe, hee would bee very conceited of himselfe,
and then all had beene lost: he would be vnfit to
receiue or doe good, altogether vnprofitable and vnfruitfull,
and robbe God of his honour, and men of their
due: and therefore to preuent this, hee giueth Satan libertie
to worke vpon his originall corruption, and to
exercise him with strange temptations, which was a
speciall preseruatiue against pride, and loftinesse of
minde.
            Lastly, wee may note in the 8. chap. of Deuteronomie,
verse 2. what a great adoe the Lord had with his people,
the children of Israel; to helpe them, against this vile
corruption that was in them: hee was driuen to keepe
them fortie yeeres in the wildernes, and there to exercise
them with manie and grieuous crosses and iudgements,
and all to humble them, as there it is saide: and
certainly, if fewer and easier afflictions would haue done

it, the Lord would neuer haue handled them so roughlie
and sharplie; for mercie pleaseth him, neither doeth
hee afflict willinglie.
               Micah. 7. Lament. 3.
            
            Now the reason why the pride of mens hearts cannot
easily bee remooued, is,
            First, because it doth wonderfully harden them, and
makes them euen like a Flinte: so that they are verie
hardly wrought vpon, either by instructions, or by afflictions.
This is euident in Nebuchadnezzar, who notwithstanding
that diuine dreame that God had sent vnto
him,Dan. 4. 24. and the holy instructions and exhortations that
Daniel had giuen him, after his interpretation thereof;
yet continued in his arrogancie still, and was full of boasting
and bragging: in so much that the Lord was faine
to strippe him of his wittes, of his kingdome, of his
foode, of his apparell, and of the societie of mankinde,
and to cause him, euen for seuen yeares together, to liue
as a beast, among the beasts of the fielde: and all little
enough to take downe the stoutnes and loftines of his
sinfull heart.Dan. 5. 20.
            
            Secondly, as pride maketh men vnteachable, and vncapable
of good by any meanes that others can vse, so
doth it make them vnable to vse any means themselues,
for the humbling of their soules: for proud men cannot
examine, and iudge themselues, because they are
wise in their own eyes, and haue an high conceit of their
owne doings: they cannot pray, because they haue no
promise to builde vpon, nor any heart to humble their
soules before the Lord, as all that will speede well with
him must doe: they cannot labour in a calling for conscience
sake;2. Chron. 11. Iam. 4. 8. because they onely seeke and serue themselues
in whatsoeuer they doe: in a word, they cannot
applie themselues to vse any of those holie remedies
that God hath ordained, for the subduing and mastering
of the pride, and haughtinesse of their wicked
hearts; and therefore it must needs be concluded, that

this dangerous sicknes is very hardly cured. And if we
haue yet any doubt hereof, let experience teach vs the
truth of this point: for if wee obserue it in our selues or
others, we shall find, that those that haue had most heartbreakings,
and shed most bitter tears, and gone through
most fearfull temptations, and most grieuous distresses,
haue yet still a great deale of pride in them, which is
ready vppon euery occasion to manifest it selfe, vnto
their griefe and the offence of others.
            Which maketh first of all for the terrour of all proud
and arrogant men,Vse. who may looke for a great deale of
woe and miserie, for the expelling of this poysoned humour
out of their soules. Let such therefore remember
what is said concerning them,Prou. 16. 5. 18. to wit, that all the proud in
heart are an abomination vnto the Lord: though hand ioyne
in hand, they shall not be vnpunished. And againe, Pride goeth
before destruction, and an high minde before the fall. And
in the 119. Psalm:Psal. 119. 
               thou hast destroyed the cursed proud: and
in the Epistle of Iames, God resisteth the proud.
               Pet. 3. Iam. 4. Let these
and the like terrible sentences fright their drowsie consciences,
and vnlesse they would haue the Lord to abhorre
them, to curse them, to fight against them, and
vtterly to destroy them, let them sue vnto him, who
alone is able to heale them of this loathsome corruption:
otherwise their case is very wofull, and lamentable,
and the more account they make of themselues, the
more cleerely will God manifest his heauie displeasure
against them, as he did against Pharaoh, Nebuchadnezzar,
Herod, and such other lostie spirits as they were.
            Secondly, let this be an instruction vnto the children 
of God, that if they would not haue their maker to
loath them, and to fight against them, they must labour
to abhorre all loftines of minde, and ouer-weening conceites
of themselues, and be content that the Lord
should keepe them in humilitie by whatsoeuer meanes
he thinketh best: the godly begin to thinke much diuers

times that they are afflicted euery morning; that
they are exercised with wants, with sicknesses, with disgraces
and the like: but better is it to vndergoe some
of these, or all of these, though it be all our life long, so
we be made more lowly thereby, than to ouerflowe
with great plentie and varietie of outward things, and in
the meane time to be pestered with that venemous humour
of pride and selfe-conceit. Therefore was it that
Paul doeth professe that hee would reioyce in infirmities,
in reproaches, in necessities, in persecutions, &c:
               2. Cor. 12. 10. 7. because
he knewe they were excellent preseruatiues against his
sinne.
            Now because men are readie to thinke that there is
not in them such store of pride, as that they greatly
neede Gods medicines to cure them of it, or if they doe
see their pride, they are readie to sit downe discouraged,
as if it were vnpossible to get the better of it, therefore
will it not be amisse to set downe some fruits and effects
of pride, whereby it may be discerned, and some remedies
and helpes against it, by vertue whereof it may be
cured.
            Concerning the first point, it were an infinite worke
to reckon vp all the effects of pride,Fruites of pride. and therefore I will
 onely touch some few of the principall, whereby we
may be led to a sight of the rest:Prou. 13. 10. And the first of them
shall be that where of Salomon speaketh, saying, Onely by
pride doeth man make contention: many there are that doe
ignorantly imagine they were neuer proud in all their
life; but let them consider better of the matter; did they
neuer brawle nor contend with any in all their life? if
they did, certaine it is that they were proud: for looke
how much contention there is, so much pride there is
in euery man. Which may be an euident argument to
proue that this sinne doeth greatly sway euery where:
for if we looke into most families, and euen into those
of the purest sort (who thinke themselues most free

from pride) shall we not finde many iarres betwixt husband
and wife; betwixt maister and seruants, betwixt brethren
and sisters, betwixt neighbour and neighbour?
this is so palpable that none can denie it; and therefore
let not men deceiue themselues, but see and acknowledge
and bewaile the wretched hautines of their
hearts.
            Another fruit of pride is, impatiencie vnder crosses,
or losses, or indignities that doe befall vs: for when we
are discontented at that estate and condition, wherein
we are, we euidently expresse our dislike of Gods gouernement,
as if he did not dispose of things aright, and
as if we could order matters in a better sort, if they were
in our hands: and is not that monstrous pride to thinke
ourselues wiser than God, and to censure him for his
proceedings?
            Againe, this is an euident token that men are proud,
when they are readie to scorne at an admonition, or a
reproofe that is giuen vnto them, for that argueth that
they haue a verie good opinion of themselues and of
their actions, when they cannot abide that anie should
finde faulte with them, or goe about to reforme them.
Dauid was otherwise affected,2. Sam. 12. 13. when the Prophet Nathan
came vnto him with a sharpe reprehension,Psal. 51. and when
Abigall met him with a wise admonition. And Iob bringeth
this as an argument of his vprightnesse,1. Sam. 25. 32. that hee
durst not contemne the iudgemēt of his seruāt. No, not of his
Maide seruant,
               Iob. 31. 13. if they had any matter to obiect against
him: and therefore let such as are enraged, or imbittetered
against their reproouers or admonishers, knowe,
that they are farre from that modestie and meekenesse
of spirit that was in these holie men of God.
            Lastlie, this is a sure note of pride, when men doe 
much regard earthly things, and promise vnto themselues
a kinde of happinesse in the enioyment thereof:1. Tim. 6. 17.
in which regard the Apostle willeth Timothie to charge

rich men that they be not high minded, and that they doe not
trust in vncertaine riches: Implying thereby, that so
much confidence as there is in wordlie substance, so
much high-mindednes there is in the parties so addicted.
The more men trust in God, the more humble
they will be, but the more they trust in their wealth, the
more high-minded they will bee. If men would trie
themselues by this touch-stone, they should easily discerne
abundance of pride in themselues: for who almost
is there but doeth thinke himselfe the better and
safer for the very hauing of earthlie things? and who
doth not iudge his case more miserable, meerly for the
want of these deceitfull vanities?
            Let vs therefore sifte our owne hearts, and by these
and the like fruites of pride, learne to iudge what abundance
of this poysoned sappe there is within vs. And
then perceiuing how liable wee are vnto many fearefull
stroakes of God by reason thereof, let vs carefully vse
these remedies following against the same.
            First, let vs often search and trie our owne hearts,
and workes by the right rule,Remedies against Pride. that is, by the holy law of
God: for none are lifted vp, but such as doe not knowe
themselues: for if wee rightly considered what we are,
and what our actions are, it would take downe all that
foolish conceitednes, that is naturallie ingrafted in vs,
and cause vs to say with the Publican, Lord bee mercifull
to mee a sinner: and with Paul, Miserable man that I am,
who shall deliuer mee from the bodie of this death!
               Luke, 18. 13. hee was
aliue;
               Rom. 7. 24. that is, thought himselfe aliue, and in verie good
case, before the law came, & cōuinced him of his wretched
corruptions, hee was euen as a blinde man that feares
nothing, though a man came running vpon him with
a sharpe sword, or he were ready to fal down violētly frō
an high and dangerous rocke, he would neuer be daunted
at the matter, nor one whit moued, because hee sees
not that hee is in any danger: such was Pauls case, and

such is the state of euery vnregenerate man: but when
Gods law is once pressed vpon the conscience, by the
liuely working of the holie Ghost, it inlightens the
minde, and makes men see their owne sinfulnes, as Paul
did, which is an excellent meanes to kill all proud and
loftie conceits. If therefore we desire to be ridde of this
hatefull and hurtfull companion, I meane pride, let vs
often and earnestly examine our selues by this straight
rule of Gods law: we are giuen to try our selues often
by examining whether we be not better than such a
man, or such a woman, but this is a false and a deceitfull
rule: for a man may be better than such and such, and
yet be starke naught.
            But the proud flesh will be readie to obiect,Obiect. and say,
I doe not onely goe beyond these and these wicked
ones, but I am better than diuers that are esteemed
godly and religious.
            Are you so?Answer. you may easily be deceiued; and the better
conceit you haue of your selfe, the worse you are
likely to be: but grant for the time that you excell others
in some things, doe not they goe before you in
some other? you haue a better gouernement of your
tongue than many of your neighbours; but are you
not more grosly tainted with couetousnes than they
are? You haue a better gift of chastitie than another,
but doeth not he lesse offend in violent distempered
passions than you doe? and the like might be said in
other particulars. If you consider your owne goodnes
and others badnes, you may easily growe to thinke better
of your selfe than of others: but if you would withall
set before your eyes their goodnes and your owne
badnes, it would happily make you to haue a better opinion
of them than of your selfe, and cause you to conclude
that (all things considered) their graces are more
excellent than yours. But let that be yeelded, that you
are indeed beyond many others in pietie and godlines,

doe you not yet come farre short of that which the law
requireth? & for those gifts that you haue, whence proceeded
they? are they not bestowed vpon you out of
the Lords meere bountie? and if you haue receiued
them, why are you puffed vp as if you had not receiued
them? If you did aright consider that you are no more
worthy of the least blessing of God than the vilest creature
in the world, and that not your goodnes, but Gods
goodnes is the cause that you excell others, there would
be no place left for ouer-weening cōceits of your selfe,
but you would conclude (as the truth is) that the better
you are gifted,Rom. 1. 14. the more you are indebted, and the
more talents you haue, the more thankes you owe vnto
God,Math. 25. and the more seruice vnto his people. And thus
much for the first remedie against pride, which is, to
try our selues and our actions by the true touchstone
of Gods word.
            
                The second is, often to bring our hearts into Gods
presence by prayer & thanks-giuing, for that will make
vs acquainted with that holines which is in the Lord,
and then we cannot but see and acknowledge that vilenes
which is in ourselues. This was it that made Abrahā
               
the father of Beleeuers, and the most excellent of all
the Patriarks,Gen. 18. 27. to confesse, that he was but dust and ashes:
this was it that caused Isaiah, a maruellous holy prophet,Isa. 42. 6.
to cry out, that he was a man of polluted lips; and
this was it that made Iob that worthie and renowmed
seruant of God,Iob. 42. 6. euen to abhorre himselfe, and to repent
in dust, and ashes. And assuredly if we constantly and
zealously accustome our selues to come before Gods
glorious throane, it will make vs much ashamed to
stand vpon our owne worth, and frame vs to a very lowly
conceit of our selues. And on the contrarie, we may
boldly conclude, that they that doe not vse reuerently
and faithfully to call vpon the Lord, are proud and hautie,
and arrogant persons, and neuer yet knewe what

true lowlines meant, where there are many and feruent
prayers, there is much humilitie: where there are
fewe and weake prayers, there is little humilitie: where
there are no faithfull prayers at all, there is no humilitie
at all.
            A third helpe against pride is, diligence in some lawfull 
calling:Eccl. 1. 13. for labour and trauell (as the wise man
saith) are appointed vnto the sonnes of men to humble
them thereby. As for idle persons, they are alwaies proud
and conceited:Prou. 
               A sluggard is wiser in his owne eyes, then
ten men that can render a reason, for such kind of people
hauing nothing to busie their heads about, are very
readie (Sathan helping them forward) to thinke of
their owne worth, to imagine high things of themselues,
and so to build castles in the aire: besides that,
idlenes nourisheth in them all manner of vile lusts, and
the more sinfull any one is, the more proud he is; and
therefore is the diuell more proud than any, because he
is more sinfull than any. If then we would not be in bondage
vnto this vile sinne of pride, let vs apply ourselues
diligently vnto the workes of our seuerall vocations;
and that for conscience sake and in obedience vnto
God; not for filthy lucre sake, or for enuy, or the like,
for if we labour & toyle neuer so much for worldly respects,
we shall not be rightly humbled thereby, but rather
puffed vp in our fleshly mindes.
            A fourth remedie is, often to meditate of the hurts 
and mischiefes that come by pride, and of the benefits
that doe arise from humilitie. The mischiefes proceeding
from pride were partly before named in the first
vse of this doctrine, viz, that it causeth the Lord to abhorre
vs, to resist vs, to curse vs, and to plague vs, yea
and to depriue vs of those things whereof we are most
proud and conceited: besides that, it causeth vs to pine
away with enuy: to consume with malice, to fret and
vex with anger and discontentment, and vpon euery

slight occasion to brabble and wrangle, to fall out with
this body and that, and in a word, to be very vnquiet in
our selues, and very troublesome and hatefull vnto others;
and who then would not be freed from this hurtfull
sinne, which hath so many badde effects arising
from it?
            Then on the other side, the benefites issuing from
the pure fountaine of humilitie, are very many and
great: for besides the auoyding of the forenamed
mischifes,Isa. 61. 1. lowlines will giue vs an interest in all the promises
of God:Luk. 4. 18. 
               meeke men shall inherit the earth; they shall
haue God to dwell with them,
               Psal. 37. 11. and grace to remaine in them
while they liue,Isa. 57. 15. and glory to inuest them,Iam. 4. 6. and to make
them eternally happie when they die.Math. 5. 3.
            
            These remedies of often examination, frequent prayer,
diligence in our vocation, and serious consideration
of the hurts that come by pride, and of the benefits that
proceed of humilitie, we must constantly and conscionably
vse for the humbling of our hearts.
            
                And lastly, for this very ende and purpose, we must
not onely be cōtent to heare admonition, but earnestly
desire it: both of the Lord, that he would be pleased to
stirre vp mens hearts to admonish vs, and of men, that
they would shew vs that fauour, as to tell vs plainely
and faithfully of our faults, that we may thereby discerne
of those corruptions, and be humbled for them,
which we thorough selfe-loue, and too much partialitie
cannot easily espie, or not so thoroughly censure in our
selues. The benefit here of Dauid found vpon the prophet
Nathans comming vnto him;2. Sam. 12. and therefore doeth
he so earnestly pray for it,Psal. 141. 5. saying: Let the righteous
smite me for that is a benefit, and let him reproue me, and it
shall be a precious oyle, &c. And whosoeuer they be that
doe not thus desire the admonitions of Gods seruants,
they carrie too little hatred against sinne, and doe not
with any great earnestnes and indignation controule

and checke their consciences for it: and therefore they
are likely to liue and die in their pride, and may iustly
feare those punishments that doe belong vnto proud
persons.
            
               Verse 12. I offer thee three things: chuse thee which of
them I shall doe vnto thee.
            In that the Lord putteth him to this choyce when he
began in good earnest to humble himselfe, the doctrine
is, that
            The more speedily we iudge our selues,
                  Doct. 7. Speedy iudging of our selues procures fauour. the more
mercifully the Lord will deale with vs.
            This we see proued in this text, where God dealeth
with Dauid as a father with his owne sonne: First, letting
him chuse his owne rod, when of necessitie he must
be corrected:The time being expired, this point was briefly handled. Secondly, he giueth him warning before
hand, that the plague might not ouertake him on a sudden,
which would wonderfully haue discomforted him:
Thirdly, he telleth him how long it should continue, so
that he was sure three daies would be the longest.
Which serueth first for singular comfort vnto Gods
children that doe bewaile their sinnes,Vse. 1. and passe sentence
vpon themselues as well as they can: if they goe
thorow with that worke, the Lord wil giue them a comfortable
and speedie deliuerance: or if it be requisite
that they should feele Gods hand vpon them or theirs
in any more grieuous manner, yet the Lord will deale
with them in some sort as he did heere with Dauid: for
first they shall haue warning thereof before hand, and
so be better prepared and armed for it. And further, if
they striue to humble their hearts before the Lord,
though they haue not the choyce of their particular
scourge, yet it shall be as well with them in effect: for
although at first they thinke the rod very smart, and
euery blow two, yet when they are growne to be stronger
men in Christ, they shall be driuen to confesse, that
if they had chosen their owne rods, there could haue

beene none in the world so fit for them as those wherewith
the Lord hath scourged them: So that they shall
be able not onely to say with the Prophet, It is good for
me that I haue beene afflicted; but good for me that I was
whipped with these and these rods, yea and that I receiued
thus many strokes from the Lords mercifull hand,
No crosse could haue beene inuented to doe me more
good, then pouerty, or disgrace, or ill neighbours, or
any the like, according as Gods seruants are seuerally
tried. If God should haue put it to Abrahams and Iacobs
choyse, they would rather haue parted with any outward
thing, then with their children, that were as deare
vnto them as their life: but when they saw Gods end in
trying them that way, when Isaac was spared, and Ioseph
aduanced, and made an instrument of humbling his
boisterous brethren, and of releeuing his father and all
his familie, besides many others, then they must needs
acknowledge that it was fittest for them to be crossed in
their children, and that Cods waies are the best, whatsoeuer
we may iudge of them for a while.
            Secondly,se. 2. heere is matter of terrour vnto all vngodly
men that will not be perswaded to iudge themselues:
looke what iudgement will most vex, and sting, and torment,
and euen kill their soules, that let them make account
of. If Haman might haue beene the chuser, of all
other miseries he would not haue chosen that which
befell him: to wit, that Mordecai his enemie should be
aduanced and honoured and that by himselfe, who did
beare him such deadly hatred for that he could not obtaine
honour and reuerence from him: what an horrible
torment must this needs be vnto his heart, that
Mordecai now should ride, and he goe by him on foot?
that now he must bow the knee to Mordecai, that would
so faine haue had Mordecai to doe it to him? that the
gallowes that was by him prepared for Mordecai, must
now serue for himselfe: &c. This must needs be an exceeding

torture vnto him: and this shall befall all impenitent
sinners: What they are most loth to vndergoe,
that shall light vpon them, and that at vnawares
when they least thinke of it, and shall continue with
them, and neuer leaue them till it haue either turned
them vnto God, or brought them vnto hell, the place
of all such rebrobate sinners. And that we may apply
this to the present occasion, are there not many that are
horribly afraid of the pestilence? yea farre more then
they are of sinne which bringeth it: in so much that
they absent themselues from Sermons, and from publike
prayers, lest they should be infected. Are there not
very many (I say) that are possessed with such feares?
Let them looke to it: for of all other strokes the pestilence
is likely to fall vpon them: if it were a sword in
the hand of the Pope, or of Sathan, then it stood them
vpon to beware of Gods ordinances: but seeing none
but Atheists will denie but it is ordered by Gods ouerruling
hand, they take a bad course to escape his stroke:
for where can they hide themselues, but he will finde
them out? And whither can they flee from his all-seeing
presence?
            He can take away the infection where it is, and bring
it euen in a moment where it is not: and therefore goe
where they can, they goe in continuall danger: for
where is the sword of God most likely to smite, but
where he is most displeased, and where there is most
prophanenesse, and greatest contempt of the meanes
of saluation? therefore if they would escape, let them
fall downe before the Lord, and humble themselues as
Dauid did: and not be so much afraid of their neighbours
that haue the plague, as of sinne that brings the
plague: and runne not so much from the occasion of
this sicknesse (though all good care must be had that
way) as from the cause: which if we can doe, then either
God will spare vs, and exempt vs from this stroke, or

else giue vs comfort vnder it, and deliuerance from it
by life or death: making it a meanes vtterly to kill originall
sinne, which all his ordinances could but onely
weaken: and who would be afraid of such a cure? what
child of God would not be more glad to sit on a throne
in heauen (though he be called thereto by a boysterous
messenger) than to be in a prison heere on earth?
to be where he shall be quite freed from sinne and sorrow
and temptation, and haue all happinesse aboue
that which his heart can desire, rather than to be
continually turmoyled heere in the world,
and euery day to taste of new tribulations.
            The end of the first Sermon.
         
         
            
            The second Sermon.
            
               2. SAMVEL. 24. 14. &c.
               
                  
                     Verse 14: And Dauid said vnto Gad, I am in a wonderfull
strait: let vs fall now into the hand of the Lorde, (for his
mercies are great) and let mee not fall into the hand of man.
                  
                     Verse 15. So the Lord sent a Pestilence in Israell, from
the morning, euen to the time appointed: and there died of
the people from Dan to Beer-sheba seuenty thousand men.
                  
                     Verse 16. And when the Angell stretched out his hand
vpon Ierusalem, the Lord repented of the euill; and said to
the Angell that destroyed the people, It is sufficient, hold now
thy hand, &c.
                  
                     Verse 17. And Dauid spake vnto the Lord, &c.
               
            
            
               YEE haue alreadie heard of Dauids
sinne in numbring of the people,
of his humiliation, confession, and
crauing of pardon for the same: also
of the message that was brought
vnto him by Gad; what offer the
Lord made him, Namely, that hee
should haue the choise of his owne
rodde: the sentence was alreadie past, and some one of
the three iudgements mentioned Verse 13. must needs
light vpon the land: yet would God vse as much mildnes
as might bee, and therefore hee referres the matter

vnto him, and biddeth him consider, and determine
which of them hee would most willingly vndergoe.
            Now followe the euents that ensued both vpon the
sinne that Dauid committed, and the message that God
for the same directed vnto him.
            The first whereof, was the great distresse wherewith
hee was perplexed, which he bemoned to the Prophet,
telling him that he was in a wonderfull strait.
            
            The second was the choyse that he made,Verse 14. absolutely
passing ouer the famine, without so much as speaking of
it, as knowing it to bee incomparablie the sharpest
scourge of the three: (for the Scripture saith, that they
that are slaine by the sword, are better then they which
are killed with hunger) and rather also submitting himselfe
to the Pestilence,Lament. 9. which was more immediately
the sword of God, from whom he expected mercie and
sauour, then to the violence and sword of man: in
whome what else in such a case is to be found, but crueltie
and fiercenesse?
            The third was the execution of that plague of the pestilence,Verse 15.
which he had yeelded himselfe vnto: which is
declared as well by the manner, as the minister of it: it
being in so short a time, as in three dayes space, dispersed
thorough the whole Land, from North to South,
and (though not affirmed, yet implied) from East to
West, Ierusalem onely excepted, as may appeare by
the circumstance of the Text: and in this time seuenty
thousand being destroyed; which stroke was inflicted
by the hand of an Angell, whome God had therevnto
appointed, as minister and executioner of the same.
            The last was, the ceasing and stay of this plague,Verse 16. euen
then when the stroke was lighting vpon Ierusalem, to
haue destroyed it. And hereof are assigned two causes:
the one, and that the principall, was the Commandement
of God: to whom (for our better apprehension
of his prouidence) is ascribed an humane passion of repentance:

which properly befalleth not him, because
hee cannot but doe euery thing absolutely well, nor possiblie
at any time bee wearie of well-doing: neither is
hee subiect to perturbations, because he is free from all
manner of corruptions. But hee is said to repent, when
hee withholdeth that which he condicionallie promiseth,
or threatneth, or desisteth from that which he had
begun to doe, sithence men many times breake off their
proceedings, with dislike of the beginnings thereof, and
their not doing of that which they saide, argueth commonly
that they are sorrie, for saying that which nowe
they minde not to doe.
            The other cause, yet of an inferiour nature, and mouent
(as wee call it) was the prayer of Dauid,
               Verse 17. whereby
hee obtained the preseruation of Ierusalem, and the rest
of the people, and herein hee offereth himselfe to be
smitten, that they might be spared, with acknowledgement
that hee was the offender, and they in this matter
altogether innocent.
            Verse 14. And Dauid said, I am in a wonderfull strait]
The Doctrine that hence ariseth, is plaine: viz. that
Sinne brings men into great distresses, and into maruellous
straits.
            It is the proper nature of wickednesse,
                  Doct. 1. Sinne brings men into straits. to encomber
and cast men into perplexities: neither will God spare
his owne people, when they take libertie in prouoking
his maiestie; but either they shall be straited in their
owne hearts, or else in regard of outward calamities, or
both: and though the Lord will not condemne them,
yet will he afflict them. Iehoshaphat was so foolish, that
he would make affinitie with Ahab: and lest he should
breake off that league of friendship that was betweene
them, he would aduenture (contrary to the expresse
word of the Lord) to goe against Ramoth Gilead to battle
with him: now was not he in an exceeding great
straight, when the maine force of the battle was bent

against him, being supposed to be the King of Israel,
concerning whom a command was giuen to the Captaines
by the King of Aram,
               1. King. 22. 31. 32. that they should fight against
none, neither small nor great, but onely against the King of Israel?
Yet would not Iehoshaphat take warning by this:
but after that he had beene rebuked by Iehu the Prophet,
for helping the wicked,
               2. King. 3. 
               and louing them that hated the
Lord, he yet ioyned with Iehoram the King of Israel, against
the King of Moab: but was his successe any better
then before? No surely: for howsoeuer they had the
victorie ouer the Moabites with much difficultie, yet before
that was effected, he was in a greater straight, then
when he went against Ramoth Gilead: for there his owne
person onely was endangerd: but heere both he and
his people, together with two Kings and their armies
besides, were like to perish for want of water. A further
proofe of this point we haue in Ionah, who discoursing
with his owne reason, thought it would be to no purpose,
but very dangerous for him to goe to preach at
Niniue, and therefore refused to yeeld to the Commandement
of the Lord. But what wofull distresse did this
disobedience bring him into, when being in that sore
tempest, the sea did roare, his conscience accuse him,
men were against him, God was against him, and there
was no way for him, but to be throwne into the sea, and
there to remaine three daies and three nights in the belly
of a whale?Iudges. 16. The like may be seene in Sampson, who
being carried with boisterous lusts, and immoderately
and sinfully affecting that vile strumpet Dalilah, could
hide nothing from her, but discouered vnto her very
foolishly wherein his great strength lay, namely in his
haire: and so that being cut off, as a recompence of his
folly and sinfull dealing, he was betraied into the hands
of his most deadly enemies the Philistims, who puld out
both his eyes, bound him in fetters, made him grinde
in the prison house, and besides made him a laughing

stocke vnto those into whom he had formerly stricken
a great terrour and amazement by his admirable valour,
and the strange enterprises atchieued by him.
Thus we may in part perceiue into what narrow straits
sinne doth bring Gods owne children: but this is especially
verified in wicked men, of whom it is said, that
thornes and snares are in the way of the froward:
               Prou. 22. 5. they are
hedged in with thornes, and all their walke is vpon
brakes: they run to hell with great vexation: they are
intangled in snares continually, and are neuer out of
them: they are caught in Sathans net, and held fast by
hardnesse of heart, which neuer leaues them till either
conuersion, or vtter confusion doe befall them.
            But this will more fully appeare in particular sinnes,
as first to giue instance in drunkards, whose appetite
doth prouoke them vnto that beastly abuse of Gods
good creatures: the wine delights their eye, and pleaseth
their taste, and goeth downe merily:Pro. 13. 32. 29. 30. but in the end
it will bite like a Serpent, and hurt like a cockatrice: for to
whom is woe? to whom is sorrow? &c. Euen to them that
tarrie long at the wine, to them that goe and seeke mixt wine:
for they ruinate and ouerthrow their estate, they blemish
and staine their names, make their wiues to fall
out with them, their children to contemne them, their
companions to quarrell with them: their best friends
to loath them: and after all this, they are a burden vnto
themselues, hauing their wittes crackt, and their bodies
diseased, and beeing fit for no place, but onely for hell.
            The same may be said of proud men: doth not their
sinne throwe them into great miserie? Let vs consider
a little of Hamans fall, which was procured by his insolencie.
God knewe what crosse would most vexe his
proud heart, and that he sent him: for whereas all Hamans
honour could doe him no good, vnlesse Mordecai
would rise vp before him, and doe him reuerence, that
was a thorne vnto him, when hee could not make him

doe it: but when hee must honour Mordecai, and be as
a seruant vnto him, that was a snare vnto his soule, and
therein was hee helde fast, with horrible vexation and
monstrous shame, till death and damnation seazed vpon
him.
            The like may bee seene in riotous and voluptuous
persons, who are whollie addicted to followe sporting,
and gaming, and surfetting, and chambering,
and wantonnesse, with such like sinfull delights of the
flesh: the world thinks that such liue a merrie life: but
iudge not too well of them; they haue not paid all their
shot as yet: they haue miserie enough behinde, that
still pursues them, and at length will ouertake them:
for hee that loues pastime, shall be a poore man; and hee that
loues wine and oyle shall not bee rich:
               Prou. 21. 17.  and a Whore will bring
a man to a morsell of bread: pouertie shall followe at the
heeles of such,Prou. 6. 26. as a swift Post, and shall set vpon them as
a strong armed man: they shall be ouercome and vanquished,
and downe shall their estate goe, euen to the
ground.
            Another instance may be in couetous persons, who
haue wealth in wonderfull admiration, so that it is made
the common god, and most vsuall Idoll of the world:
and when they haue gotten it, they, and manie others
thinke they shall haue great credit with it: and manie
times it so falls out, that they are men of great place, because
they are of great substance: they haue manie to
attend vpon them, manie to flatter them, and to crouch
vnto them, and by their riches they may procure almost
what they list: doth not this now seeme to be an
easie, a pleasant, and happy life? Yet the Apostle telleth
vs,1. Tim. 6. 19. that they that will be rich, fall into tentation, and snares,
and into manie foolish and noysome lusts, which drowne men in
perdition and destruction: so that when wealth (together
with the loue of it) flowes in on euery side, men are as it
were cast headlong into a sea of miserie: and therefore

it is added, that the desire of mony is the roote of all euill: for
it doth not onely poyson mens hearts, make them erre
from the faith, and bring them into the snares of the
diuell, to be lead by him according to his will; but it
pearseth them thorow with many sorrowes: for greedy
wordlings are euer disconted and froward, falling out
with one, and chafing with another: so that those things
which seeme to glad their hearts, doe not indeed bring
them any sound contentment, because their desires can
neuer be satisfied, but especially because they are often
times much crossed: as when their sheepe or cattle miscarry,
their grounds prooue vnfruitfull, their seruants
vntrusty, theeues set vpon them by violence to spoile
them of their goods, or subtill aduersaries by craft seeke
to defraud them of the same, with many such like occurrences,
which will neither let them rest quietly in
the night, nor liue comfortably in the day: and the
hearts of such couetous persons can tell them, that manie
times all other things doe them no good, sithence
they cannot haue some one thing which they would, as
the case stood with wicked Ahab in the matter of Naboths
vineyard.
            But suppose, that these and the like sinnes should not
bring men into snares in their lifetime, yet at the time
of their death when they must goe out of the world,
they will:Iob. 27. 8. for what hope hath the hypocrite when God
shall take away his life? though he haue heaped vp riches
as the dust, yet when God shall vnsheath his soule,
and put it violently from his body as a rustie sword out
of the scabberd, what good will all his substance doe
him then? It was his hope while he liued, that he should
still get more wealth: but when death sets vpon him,
he is past that hope, and for better hopes he hath none,
and therefore must needs be full of woe, and full of perplexitie.
Then though he call vpon God, he will not answer:
               Pro. 1. 26. 
                     ••
                  .
               and though he seeke him early, he shall not finde him: but God

will laugh at his destruction, and mocke when his feare commeth.
Because God called, and he refused; he stretched out
his hand, and he would not regard; therefore when he crieth,
the Lord will shut out his prayer.
            But set the case they be not in such perplexitie at the
time of their death, but that they die securely, and goe
suddenly downe to the graue as senslesse blocks, or
stones, yet must they come before the iudgement seat
of Christ, and then they shall be paid home for all. Ordinarily
they meet with extremitie of anguish while
they liue, or when they die: but if they doe not, they
shall not misse of it when they appeare before the Iudge
of heauen and earth,Rom. 2. but tribulation and anguish shal be
vpon euery soule that hath offended, of what estate and
degree soeuer he hath beene. Then their distresse and
honour shall be such, that when they arise out of their
graues, they shall wish to returne thither againe: yea
they shall desire that the mountaines and rockes might fall
vpon them, & couer them from him that sitteth on the throne,
and from the wrath of the Lambe. Then they would thinke
no paines nor torment too much so they might perish
euerlastingly: they could rather desire that an huge
rocke or great mountaine might crush them in peeces,
and that they might perish as beasts, than to appeare
before Christ Iesus to receiue that fearefull sentence,
Goe ye cursed, &c: This is the proper wages of sinne: and
of disobedience against the Lord: it castes the committers
of it into a wofull Labyrinth of distresses and
miseries: and good reason is there that it should be so,
because otherwise the hatefulnes of it, and the hatred
of God against it would not cleerely appeare, & so men
would like better of the broad way, than of the narrow,
and chuse to be rebells against the Lord, rather than
obedient subiects vnto him: euen the best would doe
this as well as the worst. Which serueth
            First,Vse. 1. for instruction: that we should beware of all

kinds of sinne, and consider what will come of it, before
we presume to rush vpo it: let vs looke before we leape,
lest afterwards we repent vs when it is too late. Sinne
will make goodly shewes of delight, and preferment,
and commoditie that it will bring vnto vs: that if we
will giue entertainement thereunto, it will neuer be a
meanes of any disgrace vnto vs, but will hide it selfe
from the view of the world. But what doth the Lord say
of it? Doth not he tell vs that it will breake out, and flie
abroad at length? The adulterer would haue his wretched
pleasure, but not the iust reproach of his filthinesse.
But what saith Iob?
               Iob. 31. 3. 
               Are there not strange punishments
for such workers of iniquitie? And though they may
hide it from the eyes of men,Verse. 4. doth not God behold their
waies, and tell all their steps? If Adam and Eue had considered
what mischiefe would haue ensued on their eating
of the forbidden fruit, they would neuer haue tasted
thereof: but when they would beleeue the serpent
rather then God, did not they, and shall not their posteritie
for euer smart for it?
            The Prophet Micaiah bid Abab take heede of his
iourney to Ramoth Gilead: yet he would haue his owne
minde, let the prophet say what he would: but when
the arrow was shot into his side, then he saw that Micaiahs
counsell had beene worth the following: but then
it was too late, and such is the folly and madnesse of
most men; they must haue their owne wils▪ and their
owne waies, and will neuer hearken to those instructions
that are giuen them, either by God, or by godly
men, till miserie haue ouerwhelmed their soules, and
they be past recouerie. But let their follie teach vs to be
wiser, and let vs take heede of Sathans baites, and of his
sugred poyson:Math. 4. he will make vs profers (as he did vnto
our Sauiour) of maruellous great honour, and pleasure,
and gaine that may be gotten by such and suel, sinfull
courses:Iohn. 8. but let vs neuer giue credit vnto him, for he

is a lyar from the beginning: but,
            Secondly,Vse. 2. if we haue harkned too far vnto him already,
and haue fallen by our iniquitie, let vs withall
possible speede get out of that which holds vs in bondage,
and wrappeth vs in milerie, and chaineth vs in
many sorrowes and calamities; let vs get sound repentance
for it, and striue for a reformation of it: let not
sinne keepe possession in vs, and then iudgements shall
not long continue vpon vs He that hath committed any
grosse sinne, is as it were a prisoner: according to that
of Salomon,
               Prou. 5. 22. 
               His owne wickednesse shall take the wicked himselfe,
and he shall be holden with the cords of his owne sinne.
There is a iudiciall proceeding against him: sinne commeth
as an officer, and chargeth the partie to stand:
then it apprehendeth him, and bindeth him hand and
foot as a malefactor: (it spareth not the mightiest Monarch
in the world, that is found guiltie before the
Lord) after there is a proceeding vnto arraignment
and execution, if there be not meanes vsed to stay the
same: therefore let vs get off the fetters of iniquitie as
soone as we can: and if we find terrors vpon our hearts
for our couetousnesse and crueltie, for our pride and
insolencie, for our filthinesse and impuritie, &c: let vs
labour with God for the obtaining of a pardon: and
then though we be plagued for our foolishnesse, and
brought very lowe, yet crying vnto the Lord, he will
deliuer vs out of our distresse:Psal. 107. yea he will bring vs out of
darknesse, and out of the shadow of death, and breake our bands
asunder.
            
            Heere is also matter of comfort to them that proceed
in the waies of the Lord with a good conscience,Vse. 3. whose
workes doe testifie for them that they are vpright and
sincere, and that though they be clogged with many infirmities,
yet they giue entertainment to no sinne at all:
though they haue many troubles and slanders raised against
them, and many temptations, wants and necessities

lying vpon them, yet let them be of good cheere:
for albeit they be afflicted on euery side, yet shall they
not be in distresse,2. Cor. 4. 8. they are not straitned, but haue elbow
roome enough, and doe enioy the best freedome
and libertie. For they may come into Gods priuie
chamber (as it were) and into his presence when they
will: they are not strained in their soules, but haue libertie
to powre out their hearts before their heauenly
father, who knoweth and pittieth their distressed estate,
and will worke out their freedome and comfort in due
time: and in the meane while his hand shall defend and
vphold them: his spirit shall comfort and strengthen
them: his word shall reuiue and refresh them, and (in a
word) his grace shalbe euery way sufficient for them,
so that such as are not chained and fettered with their
owne iniquities, and raigning sinnes, are of all other the
best freemen, and the most happie and blessed people:
they walke at libertie, & they keepe the precepts.
            
               Let vs fall now into the hand of the Lord] That is, Let
God proceed with the pestilence according to his pleasure:
which is called Gods sword and Gods hand, because
this pestil̄ece proceeded immediately from him,
without any second causes, whereas many other iudgements
doe not so. In that he maketh choyse to fall into
Gods hand,
                  Doct. 2. The godly finde greatest fauour with God. the Doctrine is, that Gods seruants neuer
finde so great fauour as with God himselfe.
            None can deale so fauourably with Gods children as
their heauenly Father.
            He goeth as farre beyond earthly parents, as God is
better then man. They, when they are prouoked, doe
oftentimes cease to be mercifull: but God, when he is
most incensed, is perfectly fauourable; and when he is
driuen to chastise his children, he is exceeding moderate.
Which is liuely expressed, Hos. 11. 8. where the
Lord speaketh in this manner:Hos. 11. 
               How shall I giue thee vp
Ephraim? How shall I deliuer thee Israel? How shall I make

thee as Admah? How shall I set thee as Zeboim? As if he
should haue told them, You haue deserued to be vtterly
destroied, as Sedome and Gomorrah, and the Cities neere
adioining: but my compassion that I beare towards
you will not suffer mee to doe it: Mine heart is turned
within me: my repentings are rowied together. Man repents
after hee hath done amisse, but God before, so that hee
can neuer doe amisse: and therefore to manifest his infinite
goodnes, and care for their preseruation, hee addeth,
verse 9. I will not execute the fiercenesse of my wrath:
I will not returne to destroy Ephraim; and the reason is added,
for I am God, and not man: and therefore though
a man (if hee were so prouoked,) would haue done his
best vtterly to haue spoiled them, yet the Lord would
not enter into their Citie, viz. for that end, but deale gratiously
with them, notwithstanding all their offences.
            Moreouer, earthly parents, when they set vpon correction
with best staiednesse, doe want knowledge and
discretion, and therefore giue their children too little
or too much:1. Pett. 6. Isa. 27. 9. but the Lord is of such infinite wisedome,
that hee euer proportioneth his chastisements
to the neede of the partie, and the nature of the fault.
            Againe, earthly parents, when they haue layde on
stripes, cannot take them off againe: when they see
their children weeping, and grieuing, and humbling
themselues in good earnest for their offences, they wish
(but all in vaine) that their paine were ouer, & the smart
remooued: but as the Lord woundeth, so can he heale;
as hee cast Iob downe,Hos. 6. 1. so could he raise him vpagaine:
and whatsoeuer our distresses be, if wee can humble our
selues, and crie vnto the Lord, hee is able and readie to
relieue and to deliuervs. In which regard, wee should
be most willing, if we must needs he corrected, to yeeld
vp our selues into his hands. For there is no comparison
betwixt the compassions of men, which are finite,
and of Gods, who is infinite.
            
               
Which may serue to discouer vnto vs their folly that
are so farre from submitting themselues to Gods chastisements,
that they cannot endure his rebukes. Let any
man of God admonish them, and they are readie to
flie in his face. What hath he to doe with me? (say they)
let him meddle with his owne matters. I will not take
it at his hands: with many bitter speeches of that kinde,
which argue in them great distemper and vexation of
minde. And let a man tell them in neuer so great loue,
that if they doe not amend, their sinnes will abroad to
their disgrace: their friends will grieue at them, their
aduersaries will reproach them, and all cry shame vpon
them; yet they will be no whit pacified, but rather enraged
against the admonisher, not caring what be
thought or spoken against them, so Christians may not
reprooue them.
            Hence is it that men are so loath to be vnder any
Christian gouernment,Vse. 1. where they must be instructed
how to doe well, and rebuked if they doe not well: they
will none of it: to liue in such a family or congregation
where they shall be catechized, and restrained
from the breach of the Sabbath, and other leaud courses,
they will neuer endure it; but will chuse rather to be
vnder the gouernement of Antichrist, and of Sathan
himselfe, then of Christ Iesus: Let their maisters be Papists,
cruell oppressors, as sauage tyrants as Pharaoh was,
they will rather dwell with them, then with godly and
religious gouernours, that would vse them most kindly,
and reward them most liberally for their seruice.
Such were the Israelites. Moses (as the Lord testifieth of
him) was the meekest man vpon the earth, and withall
a most wise and couragious Ruler: yet would they rather
haue beene euery day vnder the whip in Egypt,
then vnder Gods gracious gouernment which was executed
by Moses, And as these are heere to be condemned
of great want of wisedome, that will not submit

themselues to be admonished and ordered by the Lord;
so are they also which are vnwilling to come vnder
Gods correcting hand, which is indeed of al other most
desireable.
            And because the present occasion requireth it, it will
not be amisse to shew that the pestilence, wherewith the
Lord hath now visired this Nation, is a fauourable and
gentle correction, and that this sword of the Lord is
nothing so terrible as the sword of man would be if he
should cause that to be drawne out against vs: and that
for these reasons:
            First,Reasons why the pestilence is a more fauorable stroke then the sword. because heerein we may more immediately and
cleerely behold Gods hand, which is a meanes to draw
vs to more speedy and earnest humiliation: whereas if
we were pursued by the sword of men, we should be
more distracted, sometimes with feares of and greese,
 for the enemies violence; sometimes with hopes either
of mercy from them, or of aid from others: all
which do either vtterly withdraw vs from, or much hinder
vs in the worke of humiliation.
            Secondly, in the time of the pestilence the aduersaries
 of Religion haue not such matter of insultation, as
when warres are hote in the Land: for then they would
triumph in this or the like manner: Now these forward
men shall pay for it: downe they shall all the sorte of
them: they were wont to brag that God would be their
buckler and their shield; their refuge, and their strong
tower of defence: but what will become of them now?
thus would they insult ouer Gods chosen, in the time of
warre: but in the time of this sicknes, they themselues
are exceedingly afraid, & euen at their wits ende, (knowing
that hell and destruction gape for them, whensoeuer
death taketh hold of them:) whereas Christians are
quiet, and full of peace & ioy in the holy Ghost, knowing
that if they die, they shall go from earth to heauen,
from a place of miserie, to a palace of glorie.
            
               
Thirdly, this is a maruellous great mercie, that there
doth still remaine the face of a Church, that the Gospell 
is preached, the Sacraments administred, & the profession
of the truth openly maintained: whereas if there
were a forraine inuasion, or a ciuill mutinie & insurrection,
the vsuall course of the minsterie, and of the exercises
of religion, would be stopped, which now is not onely
tollerated, but commanded.
            Besides, now there is a continuance of the state of
the common-wealth: whereas when the sword rageth 
in a land,Lamen. 5. the face of the honourable is not respected,
the Magistrates authoritie is reckoned a matter of nothing,
and all lawes must giue place to the wills of violent
men.
            Againe, in the times of warre, there is an vtter subuersion 
of all meanes of maintenance and comfort: we
cannot enioy our possessions, nor dwell in our houses,
nor reape the fruits of our labours, which now (through
Gods mercie) is farre otherwise.
            
            And as for our estate, so euen for our liues and for
our soules, the case is better with vs in the time of pestilence
then in the time of warres: for then all our families,
wiues, children, seruants, and all may bee barbarously
slaine, or worse vsed before our eyes, or we before
theirs: and if not so, yet they must be left to Idolaters,
and in danger to be vassalls of sinne and Sathan: but
now if death come, it is nothing so lamentable: if life
bee graunted, it is nothing so dangerous: for though
we be taken away, yet our friends shall remaine with the
Saints & seruants of God; and they that haue bene our
Christian friēds, will be theirs, at least there is very great
hope of their happinesse, both here, and hereafter, in regard
of that liberty of the Gospell which through Gods
goodnes is still maintained. And therefore great cause
haue wee to magnifie the name of God, that when our
late gracious Queene was taken away, & the Land must

needs bee exercised with some heauie stroke or other,
that hee then miraculouslie deliuered vs from the violence
of the sword of man, and smote our Nation with
his owne sword.
            Now when this is said to bee a fauourable stroke, we
must vnderstand that it is so only vnto Gods children,
not to the wicked: concerning whose departure out of
this world, it is saide, that Hell followeth death. If they
bee not reconciled vnto God, but liue and die in their
sinnes,Reuel. 6. 8. their case is fearefull. And therefore is it a iust
hand of God vpon impenitent sinners, that they should
bee horriblie afraid of that sicknes. No sinne, nor Sathan
himselfe, is so much feared of them as the pestilence,
nay nor Gods wrath it selfe: and therefore they
care not what foule sinne they commit, whereby they
are sure to incurre the Lords displeasure, so their bodies
may escape this plague of God. But suppose they doe
escape it, if they be as full of impiety, and iniustice, and
impurity, as they were wont to be, the Lord hath seuen
times greater plagues behinde,Leuit. 26. and his reuenging hand
will be stretched out against them still. Therefore let
them labour to make a good vse of this, to humble
themselues, and turne from their euill wayes: otherwise
assuredly some greater punishment will light on their
soules, or bodies, or both.
            Verse 15.The time allotted being welneere spēt, the points following were but briefly touched. 
               So the Lord sent a pestilence in Israel, &c. and
there died of the people, from Dan to Beer-sheba, seuenty thousand
men.] Yee heard the cause of this before; to wit, because
Dauid, partly through pride, and partly through
vaine confidence, had numbred the people: whence this
point may be gathered, that
            God maketh his iudgements sutable to our sinnes.
                  Doct. 3. Gods punishments are answerable to mens sinnes, Ioel. 1. 5.
            
            
               Dauid was lifted vp, because hee had so many strong
and valient men: therefore doth God lessen the number
of them. So (Ioel, 1. 5.) it is said, Weepe & houle ye drinkers
of wine, for the new wine shalbe pulled from your mouth.
               
This was a most iust correction, that they should be punished
with scarcitie of drinke, seeing they had before
time so wretchedly abused the same. In like sort doth
the Lord meete with proud men, turning their glory into
shame, as wee may obserue in Tyrus. Isa. 23. 8. where
the question is made,Isa. 23. 
               Who hath decreed this against Tyrus
(that crowneth men,) whose Merchants are Princes? whose
Chapmen are the Nobles of the world? And the answere is
made, vers. 9. The Lord of Hosts hath decreed this, to staine
the pride of all glorie, and to bring to contempt all them that be
glorious in the earth. So for couetous men, they are many
times brought to beggarie, according to that of the
wise man,Prou. 
               Hee that maketh hast to be rich, shall surely come
to pouertie. Albeit they vse wonderfull diligence, and
be exceeding painfull, and haue an excellent capacitie,
and a deepe reach for worldly things, & seeme to want
nothing that may make them prosper, yet because
God is displeased with them, he brings them downe,
both stripping them of their wealth, which they most
affected; and plaguing them with pouertie, which they
most detested.
            And a cause heereof is,Reason. that he giueth men thereby
to vnderstand, that he taketh knowledge of their waies,
to the end they should take knowledge of his iudgements,
when they see them directed so iust against their
faults, and affections. And by this meanes as reprobates
are left without excuse, the elect are much furthered
to repentance, when their corrupt wils, their vnlawfull
desires, and sinfull delights are crossed: when they
behold Gods visible hand, and righteous hand: when
he sheweth them the nature and qualitie of their offences,
by the manner and proceeding of his corrections:
& that was the true cause why the Lord laid this stroake
on Dauid at this time, rather than any other, viz: that he
might more speedily and euidently see his fault, and
more soundly and heartily repent for the same. Which

maketh for our instruction,Vse. if wee would haue comfort
in any thing that we possesse, let vs vse it well: neither
let our hearts deceine vs; whether it be honour, or
goods, or children, if we dote vpon them, and make
Gods of them, we are likely to be depriued of them: the
Lord can take from vs our power,
               Ezek. 24. 35. 
               the ioy of our honour, the
pleasure of our eyes, and the desire of our hearts, euen our
sonnes, and our daughters. When men loue to be commanders,
God can take their authoritie from them: if
they stand vpon their honour and reputation, he can
soone make it wither and vanish: if the delights of their
eyes doe content them, he can quickly remoue those
from them: finally, if they set their affections immoderately
vpon their children, and lift vp their soules
vnto them, (as the words are in the originall) that is,
make them the desire of their hearts, God can suddenly
bereaue them of their children, or so bring it to passe,
that they shall haue little comfort in them.
            Would we then haue our houses and our children
free from Gods strokes, and in particular from the pestilence
(as that many pretend that they are more carefull
for their children, then for themselues;) then
let vs neuer commit any sinne to set them vp, for that
is the next way to depriue vs of them: when we carry
more affection to them then to the Lord himselfe, we
endanger our selues and them both. The Lords will is,
that you should in the first place serue him, and so doing,
you shall make your children, not Lords but kings,
not of an earthly, but of an heauenly kingdome.
            The next thing heere briefly to be considered is
[the space] in which these seuentie thousand men died,
namely in three daies: Doctrine, that
            When God sets in with his iudgements they shall be
farre dispersed in a short time.Doct. 4. Gods iudgements very swift. He can cause his plagues
to flie fast, and make great speed. This is prooued in the
Psalme, where speaking of any decree of God, it is said,

               He sendeth forth his commandement vpon earth,
               Psal. 147. 15. 
               and his word
runneth very swiftly. What God determineth to doe, he
can doe it out of hand, when it standeth with his good
pleasure.Exod. 12. So we see how he could cause one Angell to
goe thorow the whole land of Aegypt in one night, and
to slay the first borne in euery house:Zach. 5. 2. and in this regard
Gods curse is compared to a flying booke, to note the
swiftnesse of it, that it commeth as it were with two
wings: but withall it is likened to a talent of lead, that
sticketh fast where it fals: it maketh speed vnto the
place that God appointeth, and tarrieth there where
once it lighteth.
            Furthermore we see, how quickly Gods curse was
scattered ouer the whole earth, when our first parents
had sinned:Gen. 3. 17. 18. the deformitie came not vpon the creatures
by degrees, but it ouertooke them presently and out of
hand. And so at the last day Christ shall come in the
twinckling of an eye, as to call the godly forthwith vnto
glory,1. Cor. 15. 52. so to draw the wicked immediately before
Gods iudgement seate, to receiue present and euerlasting
punishment and torment.
            And the reason of this is,Reason. because God at all times is
in all places, and of equall power in euery place, and
therefore what should hinder him from doing that euery
where in the same moment, if it stand with his iustice
and will, which he doth any where? The great deluge
in the time of Noe, couered not one Nation one yeare,
and an other the next, and a long time after the rest
which were farre separated asunder, but he in his wrath
was present in euery country, and so were they all ouerwhelmed
in few daies: and who knoweth whether it
seized not vpon each of them in one day? which maketh,
            For reproofe of them that thinke,Vse. if they escape one
place of infection, they are safe enough. But cannot
God or his Angell reach them wheresoeuer they be?

Though no infected person come neere them, cannot
the Lords hand finde them out? Yes certainely, let them
climbe vp vnto heauen,Psal. 1 39. or goe downe into hell, or hide
themselues at the center of the earth, Gods eye is still
vpon them, and his hand neere vnto them: so that they
can goe safe no where without Gods fauour. If the pestilence
were onely in India, we should as easily be infected
in England, if God had a quarrell against vs, and
a purpose to plague vs that way, as if we were in the
midst of ye infected persons. Who would haue thought
the Gehazi should haue beene smitten with the leprosie
when his maister and he were together? The like may
be said of Miriam when Aaron was with her. Nay who
would haue thought that King Vzziah should haue
beene plagued with that stroke in such an holy place as
the Temple was, where God would haue no vncleane
thing to enter? Yet when he presumptuously vsurped
the high Priests office, he was not spared, no not in the
Sanctuarie. So that this may be surely concluded, that
no place can shelter a man from miserie, if sinne be harboured
and entertained in his heart.
            Verse 16. It is sufficient: hold thy hand.] Doctrine, that
            As God appointeth iudgements to be inflicted on
his people, so he himselfe will see execution done.
                  Doct. 5. God is present at the execution of his indgements.
            
            He stands by in this place, and directeth the Angell
how farre to proceed, and where to make an end, God
would haue Iacob humbled, and therefore he sent him
to his vncle Laban: but withall he assureth him of good
successe, and for that purpose sheweth him a ladder,
whereupon the Angels of God went vp and downe,Gen. 28. 12. to
signifie, that they should guide him foorth, and bring
him backe in safetie: but (for the present purpose) withall
the Lord promiseth, that he would be with him, and keepe him.
               Verse. 15. So Psal. 34. 15. it is set downe as a great consolation
vnto the Saints, that the eyes of the Lord are vpon
the righteous.
            
            
               
Instruction, that we should labour not onely to be in
Ierusalem,
               Vse. but to be of it: and then when Gods iudgements
are abroad, we shall be in no danger▪ God will
command his faithfull Angels to doe vs no hurt; wherein
if they should refuse to obey, they must needs become
diuels, and reprobate spirits, which is impossible.
Let vs labour therefore to be of the number of those
that mourne for the abominations of Ierusalem, that so
we may be saued when others are destroyed. Let vs
grieue for the impietie, and blasphemie, and crueltie,
and impuritie that is in our Land: so shall we haue a
testimonie vnto our hearts, that we are Ierusalem: but
as for those that are Babels, Egyps, Sodomes, whose houses
are full of voluptuousnesse, pride, gluttony, drunkennesse,
worldlinesse, and the like, the Lord is likely to
command his Angell to smite at them with a ful stroke;
for where should his sword light, but vpon his enemies?
            Verse 17. And Dauid spake vnto the Lord, and said, Behold,
I haue sinned] Whereas indeed the people had provoked
the Lord most, yet Dauid thought himselfe most
guiltie, and therefore he would haue Gods hand to haue
beene on him, and not on the people.
            A good man will lay a greater burden on himselfe
then on an other,
                  Doct. 6. A good man is most seuere against himselfe. and passe sentence against himselfe,
rather then against another.
            So doth Paul. Christ came into the world to saue sinners,
(saith he) of whom I am chiefe.
               2. Tim. 1. 15.
            
            And as for matter of guilt, so also for matter of punishment.
We see in Moses,
               Exod. 32. that because the people were
many, and he was but one, he intreated God that he
might be wiped out of his booke, rather then all his
people should be destroyed, But especially this point is
verified in our Sauiour, who, when mankind was vtterly
insufficient,Philip. either to put in sureties, or to discharge
their debt, did humble himselfe, to take on him the slate
of a seruant, and abased himselfe, that he might bring vs

vnto glory; and endured a shamefull, and painefull, and
cursed death, that he might bring vs vnto eternall life.
            And this commeth to passe,Reasons first, because good men
 are endued with that amiable grace of brotherly loue,1. Cor 13.
which causeth them not so much to seeke their owne
case, as the benefit of others, but to lay the more vpon
themselues, that others may be the rather spared.
            
                Secondly, they are adorned with that admirable vertue
of Christian humilitie, which directeth their eyes to
other mens graces, and their owne corruptions: they
hope the best of that which is in their brethren, and
finde out the worst of that which is in themselues.
            This serueth,Vse. 1. first, for reproofe of those that are readie
to shift off all from themselues, and though they be
wholy, or most in fault, yet will lay the blame altogether
on others.
            Heere also are those hypocrites to be reprehended,
that will lay heauie burdens, and require strict obedience
of others, especially of Ministers, and yet they
themselues make no conscience of any sinne, be it neuer
so contrarie to the Lawes of God, or of man.
            Others there are also, that may iustly come vnder
this reproofe, that care not who want, so they haue plentie;
nor who hunger, so they haue sufficient; nor who
sinke, so they swimme; though it be by thrusting others
vnder water.
            
                Secondly, this is for consolation to them that can
goe from their owne commoditie, and ease, & credit, so
God may haue glory, and his people good: they are of
the same spirit that Moses, and Dauid, and Paul were, and
therefore their reward in heauen, and their praise on
earth, shall be sutable.
            Mercifull men lost nothing: if Nehemiah had gotten
together all the money in that country, and had attained to be King of Persia, he could not haue procured
himselfe so much true honour,Nehem. 5. 14. 15. 16. 17. 18. as he did by not taking

all the stipend that he might haue done, being a man
of his place, and by entertaining a great many that were
in want at his table, which he needed not to haue done:
and besides the good and deserued estimation that
he got, he could with comfort (and so may all
that are like him) intreate the Lord to remember
him in goodnesse: which the
Lord neuer failed to do.
            The end of the secoud Sermon.
         
         
            
            The third Sermon.
            
               PSALME 12. 1. 2.
               
                  
                     Verse 1. Helpe Lord, for there is not a godly man left▪
for the faithfull are failed from among the children of men.
                  2. They speake deceitfully euery one with his neighbour,
flattering with their lips, and speake with a double heart.
               
            
            
               THese words containe in them a prayer
of Dauid, when hee himselfe was
pursued by Saul, and the Church of
God was in great distresse: when his
friendes withdrew themselues from
him, and fewe continued in that holie
profession of Gods name, which
formerly they had made.
            Now in this prayer of his, wee may obserue
            1. First a petition, Helpe Lord; Seeing mens helpe
failed, and their power was bent against equitie and Iustice,
which should haue vpheld & maintained it, therefore
hee appeales to an higher power, and intreateth reliefe
and succour from the Lord.
            2. Secondly, a complaint, and that
            1. Of the decay of good men, and of goodnes in them,
There is not a godly man left, &c.] Whereas superiours
should haue ministred refreshing vnto the distressed, or
at least inferiours borne a burden with them, they were

now taken away, when there was greatest need of them:
not that there were no good men at all (for Gad, and
Nathan, and Ionathan, were now in the Church) but in
comparison of the aduerse part, they were so fewe,
that they did scarce appeare to be any at all.
            2. Of the deceitfulnes of bad men, They speake deceitfully
euery one with his neighbour, &c: that is, euery one of
the contrarie side, was full of craft and cunning, vsing
faire words, but intending much mischiefe: speaking
with a heart and a heart (as the Prophet saith) that is, a
heart that made shew of one thing, but meant the quite
contrary; seeming to be for Dauid, when in truth they
plotted against him.
            
               Helpe Lord] here we see his refuge,Verse. 1. he betaken himselfe
vnto God, when he is forsaken of men, Whence
obserue this Doctrine, that,
            Although all humane helpes and earthly friends doe
faile Gods people,
                  Doct. 1. Gods childrē neuer helples. yet they are not helplesse, nor hopelesse.
            Albeit in regard of mans assistance, they be vtterly
destitute, yet the Lord will be euer with them, and alwaies
stand for them. Dauids argument here is not this,
Lord helpe: for there be many that will ioyne with
thee: but this, Lord helpe, for there is none else that
will helpe: so that our case is not according to mens affections
towards vs, but according to Gods loue vnto
vs.
            This is euident in the prophecy of Micha,
               Micah. 7. 2. where it is
shewed, that friends failed: neither did they faile one
man alone, but the whole Church; good men were perished
out of the earth, and there was none righteous among
men, &c: but the best of them was a briar, and the most rightteous
of them sharper than a throne hedge: yet the Church
is not quite dismaid, but resolueth to fly vnto the Lord
for succour. Therefore will I looke vnto the Lord;
               Verse. 7. 
               I will
waite for God my Sauiour: my God will heare me, though

good men were dead and gone, and hypocrites did put
on their shape and likenesse, that they might more freely
practise mischiefe.
            Yet the people of God determine with themselues
not to cast off all hope, but to relie vpon the Lord, and
though he delay to helpe them for a time, yet they will
waite vpon him, knowing that at length he will deale
graciously with them.
            And for the further confirmation of this point, we
haue the example of Christ Iesus himselfe, who being
grieuously perplexed and troubled within and without,
and on euery side, vseth this argument vnto his father;
Be not farre from me,
               Psal. 22. 11. 
               because trouble is neare, for there is none
to help me. And this is vsuall with God, to relieue his
people in extremities: and therefore when no man calleth
for iustice, no man contendeth for the truth, &c. then he
himselfe wil take the matter into his hand, & he wil saue
& deliuer his seruants as the Prophet Isaiah witnesseth.Isa. 59. 4. 16.
            
            And the reasons hereof are these.
            First,Reasons. though all men doe forsake vs, yet Gods power
 is no whit diminished thereby: and therefore that is a
worthy speech of faith in Ionathan, that it is not hard to
the Lord to saue with many or with few: and in Asa, who
saith,1. Sam. 14. 6. 
               it is nothing to thee to helpe with many, or with no power.
They knew that though they had few,2. Chro. 14. 11 or none at all on
their side, they were in as good case as if they had many
millions, if God were on their side: for all power in his,
and that which men haue,Psal. 62. 11. Math. 6. is but borrowed from him:
and though he sometimes vse them, it is not because he
needs them: for who did helpe him in making of the
heauens and of the earth, and of al the creatures in them
both? and what assistance hath he now in sustaining,
and vpholding of the same? now if he neuer needed the
aid of any creature in these greatest workes of creation
and preseruation, surely he wanteth not the helpe of
men in matters of smaller importance.
            
               
Secondly, Gods mercy is no more lessened then his
power is, by mens withdrawing of themselues from vs,
he loues his people when they haue no friends, as well
as when they haue many friends; nay he manifesteth
his loue more at such times: for in him the fatherlesse
findeth mercy.
               Hos. 14. And then doth he exercise the bowels of
his cōpassion, whē men shew little or no cōpassion at all.
            When we see children to haue rich and mercifull parents
to prouide for them, we doe not much pitie them:
but as for those that are fatherlesse and friendlesse, that
are hungry & naked, and altogether destitute of reliefe,
we tender their case, and are ready to releeue them. Can
we carrie such an affection towards other mens children
that are distressed and helplesse, and will not the
Lord our God haue a greater care of his owne children
in the like case? Will he leaue them because men
haue forsaken them? No surely. But when they are in
distresses and straits, and that through their owne foolishnesse
and disobedience, if they humble themselues,Psal. 107.
and cry vnto him, he will deliuer them, though men
dare not, or will not speake, or deale for them.
            Thirdly, when Gods seruants are left destitute, their 
faith is much exercised and increased: and then we alwaies
speed best, when we beleeue best, So long as we
haue helpe about vs, we doe not so much set our faith a
worke, as our carnall reason and sense, and so pray not at
all, or very coldly: but when we are desolate and forsaken,
and those that should be most for vs are against vs,
then we begin to lift vp our hearts to heauen, and to
cast our selues vpon Gods prouidence and goodnesse,
and to vse the weapons of the spirit, and not of the flesh:
this is plaine in Dauids example, who being in great
danger in the caue, did at first looke about him, for
helpe on this side, and on that: but seeing that all refuge
failed him, what did he? I cried vnto thee ô Lord (saith
he) saying, thou art mine hope, and my portion in the

Land of the liuing.
            
                Fourthly,Psal. 141. 4. 5. in such times of difficultie, Gods glorious
hand is more apparantly seene, and so all the honour is
ascribed vnto him. If Moses had brought the Israelites
out of Aegipt by force of armes, being aided with two
or three millions of souldiers, much of the praise would
haue bene giuen vnto them: but when Moses was naked
and altogether destitute of any power of man, the Lords
mightie Arme was more cleerely seene in the deliuerance
of his people, and the subuersion of their enemies,
And that worke of his, hath bene, is, and shall be memorable
in all ages.
            So also, Hezekiahs sicknesse had beene such as anie
Physitian could haue cured, his recouerie should neuer
haue beene recorded in Gods booke, as not making so
much for his glorie: but when the prolonging of his
life was as much as the giuing of a second life, then notice
of it was taken and giuen by the holie Ghost, to the
euerlasting honour of Gods name. And as it was then,
so is it yet still, and euer shall be to the end of the world:
the greater the extremities and necessities of the Saints
bee, wherein God doeth relieue them, and out of which
hee doth deliuer them, the more will it be for the magnifying
of his omnipotencie, and of his tender mercie
therein expressed.
            This serueth,
            1. First,Vse. 1. for the confutation of their foolish conceit
and expectation, who seeing mighty aduersaries against
the Church, and fewe or no friends to interpose themselues,
presently conclude, that their case is desperate:
downe they must: they are vtterly vndone: and so they
begin to forecast in their mindes the manner of their
ouerthrow, & the forme of their lamētation, when they
shall bee thus and thus handled. But these men, for all
their deepe reach, may bee deceiued; for all their conclusions
are grounded on men: they doe not consider

what God may doe, as wee see in Dauids enemies, who
perceiuing that manie did band themselues together,
and rise vp against him; concluded, that there was
no helpe for him in God,
               Psal. 3. 1. 2. 3. But what sayes Dauid? Lorde,
thou art a buckler for mee, my glorie, and the lifter vp of my
head. And in another Psalme,Psal. 71. 10. 11. 
               Mine enemies (saith hee)
speake of mee, saying, God hath forsaken him: pursue & take
him, for there is none to deliuer him. These speeches (no
doubt) pierced Dauids soule: but doth hee make the
same conclusion? No, hee is farre from that; hee rather
layeth faster hold on God, seeing cruell men to be
so violently bent against him. Goe not farre from mee,
               Verse 12. 13. 
               O
God (saith hee) my God haste thee to helpe mee: let them be
confounded and consumed, that are against my soule, &c. Indeede
if mens opposing of themselues against him,
could haue kept him from complaining vnto God, or
God from giuing eare vnto him, his case had bene very
lamentable: but seeing that was impossible, whatsoeuer
they imagined, there was safety enough for Dauid, and
so is there still for all the elect of God.
            Secondly,Vse. 2. this is for instruction, that seeing by how
much lesse helpe we haue from men, so much the more
we shall haue from God; therefore we should deale earnestly
with the Lord in our distresses, and wrestle with
him as Iacob did,Gen. 31. when his brother Esau came with foure
hundred men against him: hee was vnable to encounter
him, and therefore hee encountreth the Lord himselfe
by prayers and teares; and that which was his refuge,
must bee ours, and then wee shall haue peace and
safetie: if once wee can lay hand-fast on God, (as wee
may in our houses, in our chambers, in our beds, in the
night, or in the day) then our case is good, wee shall be
protected from all the violent rage of the wicked; so
that none of the sonnes of violence shal be able to touch
vs for our hurt: and therefore herein let vs take comfort,
that though men forsake vs, and our neerest

friends reiect vs, yet the Lorde will gather vs vp,Psal. 27. and
prouide sufficiently for vs, as he did for Dauid: neither
can mens perswasions withdrawe his compassion from
vs, nor mens threatnings terrifie him from releeuing
of vs, For there is not a godly man left, &c.
            
            From this lamentable complaint of his, ariseth this
doctrine, that
            No outward thing comes neerer the hearts of God
children,
                  Doct. 2. want of good men much to be lamented. then the decay of good men.
            It much troubleth the soules of godly men, to see a
small number of Christians. Hence proceedeth that
lamentation of the Prophet Micah: Woe is me, for I am
as the Summer gatherings, &c:
               Micah. 7. I. 2. or, I am in case, as in the
destruction of the Summer fruites: as in Hoseah it is
said, The fishes of the Sea shall be gathered: that is, destroyed:
and that this is the sense,Hos. 4. 3. it appeareth in the words
following, when it is said, There is no cluster to eate: My
soule desired the first ripe fruites: that is, I am as one that
hath a feruent longing for them, and yet can get none
of them; and what is the reason of this his lamentation?
The good man (saith hee) is perished out of the earth,
and there is none righteous among men, &c. So that the effect
of those words is thus much: that looke how worldlings
would grieue, if they should see their grapes and
figges (which were speciall commodities in those countreys)
to faile, and their expectation that way to bee vtterly
frustrate; so, and much more bitterly did the Prophet
bewaile the losse of good & righteous men. That
was it also that did so pierce the heart of Elias, Lorde
(saith he) the children of Israel haue forsaken thy couenant,
broken down thy Altars,
               1. Kings. 19. 11. 
               & slaine thy Propeets with the sword,
and I onely am left, and they seeke my life, to take it away.
Which losse of the Prophets was so grieuous vnto him,
that hee had no pleasure in his owne life; and therefore
hee intreateth the Lord to take away his soule.
               Verse 4. In which
regard whē the Lord would comfort him, he vseth a fit

remedie for his disease: for whereas his griefe was that
there were no godly men left, but all were declined to
Idolatrie, he telleth him that he had reserued to himselfe
seuen thousand,
               Verse. 1
                     •
                  . 
               that had not bowed the knee vnto Baal.
            
            Yet further it may appeare what a matter of heauinesse
the losse of good men is vnto those that are good
themselues, by that speech of Dauid, who saith, All my
delight is in the Saints: for if they be his chiefe delight,Psal. 16. 3.
then the want of them must needs be an occasion of very
great anguish vnto him: as is euident that it was▪
               Psalm. 42. 4. when he remembred how he had gone with
the multitude,Psal. 42. and had beene as a Captaine to leade
them vnto the house of God, which then he could not
doe: this cast him into wonderfull griefe, so that he poured
out his teares, yea and his very heart, as he there
speaketh, being in such extremitie of sorrow, that he is
faine to restraine himselfe, why art thou cast downe my
soule (saith he) and why art thou disquieted within me? &c:
yet godly men were not quite abolished at this time,
but Dauid, onely taken from them: and he knew that he
should come againe vnto them at length, and that they
should be his flocke: if then he were so farre cast downe
for that he might not be with them, what griefe would
he haue conceiued if they had vtterly beene cut off, and
ceased to be any longer?
            Now the reasons why the decay of Gods people is
and should be such an heart-breaking vnto the rest of
the Saints, are these:
            First, because the glory of God is precious vnto them,Reasons.
which is much hindered and obserued when his seruants 
are diminished: for then there is lesse seruice done
vnto him in publike and priuate: there are fewer praiers and
praises offered vp vnto him, fewer religious exercises
in vse amongst men, and fewer workes of mercy
performed vnto the needie and distressed. And if the
decay of good souldiers and of loyall subiects in any

kingdome must needs be a matter of griefe to those
that loue and seeke the honour of their King; then can
it not but goe neere the hearts of the godly, when they
perceiue the souldiers and subiects of Christ to goe to
wracke.
            
                Secondly, in regard of themselues they are mooued
heere at, as being fellow members with them: for when
the godly perish, they are as it were a maimed body.
They haue fewer friends and fellow-helpers, fewer to
pray with them and for them, fewer to reprooue, exhort,
and comfort them, and in a word, fewer to whom
they may doe good, and from whom they may receiue
good.
            
                Thirdly, in respect of the publike losse, they mourne
for the decay of the righteous: for when multitudes of
all nations, and of all sorts of people, doe know the
waies of God, and praise the name of God, then (as the
Prophet saith) the earth shall bring foorth her increase,
               Psal. 67. 5. 
               and
God euen our God shall blesse vs. If there be but ten righteous
men and women in a Citie, or some few in a whole
Country, all the rest shall speed the better for their
sakes: how much more then if there be multitudes of
them? What a griefe therefore must it needs be to the
wise and godly, when these props and pillars of the
Church and Common-wealth are taken away?
            Which serueth,
            First,Vse. 1. for the iust reproofe of those that doe carrie a
deadly enmitie against the multitude of Christians that
now are, and doe much grieue that there should be so
many that resort vnto the word in publike, that read it
in priuate, that haue praier and singing of Psalmes in
their families, &c. they grudge and murmur at it, as if
some conspiracie or mutinie against the State were towards,
and as if the good of mens soules, and the peace
of the common-wealth could not stand together. These
are of another spirit then Dauid was, who lamented

that there were so few such: and these are indeed vtter
enemies vnto God, who esteemes his people to be his
chiefe treasure vnder heauen: and therefore they shall
beare their iudgement, whosoeuer they be that doe thus
malice the seruants of God, and endeuour to peruert
them, or to diminish the number of them.
            Secondly,Vse. 2. heere is matter of cōfort for thē that are of
the same disposition that Dauid was, that cry night and
day, Helpe, Lord, for the godly perish, &c. & that labour with
God, by fasting, and weeping, & praying, that he would
vphold the state of his Church. If the praier of Dauid,
being but one man, were effectuall for the continuing
of Gods people, how much more forcible shall the requests
of many thousands be, who doe vncessantly intreate
the Lord with great earnestnesse to be fauourable
vnto Sion, and to build vp the walles of Ierusalem, to saue
his chosen, and defend his owne heritage against the
malicious plots and practises of all their enemies.
            
               They speake deceitfully euery one with his neighbour.]
            Heere he sheweth what manner of enemies were against
him: not such as would professe themselues open
aduersaries, (for though he had many such, yet
heere he dealeth not against them) but such as would
make shew of good will, whereas indeed there was in
them nothing lesse, Now in that his chiefe complaint
is against them, the doctrine is, that
            Deceitfull friends are worse then open and apparant
foes.
                  Doct. 3. Fained friends worse then open foes.
            
            
               Dauid had diuers professed enemies, as Saul, and such
as were neere him: yet none of their practises went so
neere his heart, as these mens that would pretend to be
friendly vnto him.
            To this purpose it is said by Salomon,
               Prou. 27. 6. that The wounds
of a louer are faithfull, and the kisses of an enemie are to be
praied against: (for so the words must be read) When a
faithfull friend doth rebuke vs, and seeke to wound our

hearts for sinne, that is exceeding profitable for vs: but
when an enemie vnder pretence of loue (whereof by
kissing they then made shew) doth come against vs,Iudas, Matth. 26. 49. and
seeke to vndermine vs, that is exceeding dangerous, and
the hurt there of much to be praied against.
            The waters that runne smoothly and mildly are
commonly most deepe and dangerous, whereas that
which roares is more shallow and safe.
            The reasons of this doctrine are,
            
                First,Reasons. that such craftie foxes doe more easily come
within a man, and sooner deceiue him. An open enemie
commeth as it were before ones face, and so his blowes
may be better warded off: but a false friend commeth
behind ones backe, and fasteneth a deadly blow ere a
man be aware: and therefore Ioab, when he would speed
Abner and Amasa, did not bid open defiance vnto them,
but (being therein more crafty and subtill, then either
godly or manly) gaue them kind salutations, and, vnder
pretence of loue, most cruelly murdered them both.
And as it is for the outward man, so is it also for the
soule. The most dangerous temptations are those that
proceed from fained friends vnder the colour of loue,
and desire of our good. If Sathan had come vnto Eue,
and told her, I charge you eat of the tree in the midst of
the garden, & whatsoeuer the danger be, stand not vpon
that, for I will haue your husband and you to be damned,
she would neuer haue hearkened vnto him: but
when he perswaded her, that he was her friend, and
meant her good, namely, that by eating thereof she
might be made like vnto God himselfe, knowing both
good and euill, then was she ouertaken by him, and so
being ouercome her selfe, she became the instrument
of the diuell, to deceiue her husband in like sort. And so
it is with many, that haue held out well against raging
and violent temptations, and yet haue beene foulely
drawne aside, and shamefully foiled by milder temptations,

vnto profit, or pleasure, or credit.
            Secondly, the false dealing of such counterfeit friends,
doth much more afflict the heart of a man, then any
iniurious actions of manifest aduersaries: as we may see
in that Psalme of Dauid, where he saith, Surely mine enemie
did not defame me, for I could haue borne it, &c. but it
was thou ô man,
               Psal. 55. 12. 13 
               euen my companion, my guide, and my familiar,
&c. When his words were smooth, and softer then
butter, and yet prooued deceitfull, they went thorow
his heart euen as swords: and this was iust vpon him,
because he had dealt in that sort with his faithfull subiect
Vriah. seeming to fauour him by imploying him in
speciall seruices, when he went about to take away his
life, that be might couer his owne iniquities.
            First,Vse. 1. therefore let this instruct vs to take another
course: if we haue inward dislike, let vs professe it: if we
carry a louing affection, let vs make shew of it, and loue
not in word alone, but in deed, as the Apostle exhorteth.
            Especially let us looke vnto this in matters betwixt
God and vs: let vs not play the hypocrites with him,
pretending a loue vnto the Church of God, and to the
word of God, when there is no such matter; and drawing
neere vnto him with our lips, when our hearts are
farre from him: for in so doing we shall offer great iniury
vnto the Lord, and doe more hurt at length then
those that are profest Papists or Atheists: for such as
flatter with their lips, and dissemble with a double heart
in things that concerne the holy religion of God, if any
persecution come, will quite renounce their profession,
and betray the cause of God, and grieue the seruants of
God, and harden the hearts, and open the blasphemous
mouthes of the enemies of God, and make many to
fall by their reuolting and backsliding. Therefore let
euery one that taketh vpon him the profession of Christianitie,
be a true, & not a fained friend of the same; and
bring a faithfull, and not a guilefull heart thereunto;

that the Lord may witnesse for him, that he doth heartily
and vnfainedly seeke him.
            Secondly, let vs hence learne this point of wisedome,Vse. 2.
neuer to trust those too farre, of whose faithfulnesse we
haue any iust suspition: be they neuer so neere vnto vs,
let vs not open our selues vnto them, but keepe them
at armes end. This is the aduice of the holy Ghost: Let
eurey man take heed of his neighbour, and trust not any brother:
(viz. that is not sound hearted)for euery brother
will vse deceit,
               Ier. 9. 4. 5. 
               and euery friend will deale deceitfully, &c. for
they haue taught their tongues to speake lies: they haue exercised
the trade of vsing faire words, when there is within
them nothing else but falshood and deceit. And the
like exhortation we may read in the 7. of Micah.
            
            Thirdly, this is for our consolation,Vse. 3. when we finde
such hollow hearted hypocrites and deceiuers: we
should not be dismaied because there are so few whom
we may trust and giue credit vnto, for it is no strange
matter: there haue beene such heeretofore, and they
haue been discouered: God hath hearkened vnto the
praiers of his seruants, and giuen them wisedome to
discerne of them, and so will he doe still, so that they
shall bring no annoyance vnto his people, whatsoeuer
they intend against them.
            FINIS.
         
         
            
            The fourth Sermon.
            
               PSALM. 12. Ver. 3. 4.
               
                  3. The Lord cut off all flattering lippes, and the tongue
that speaketh proud things.
                  4. Which haue saide, with our tongue wee will preuaile:
our lips are our owne, who is Lord ouer vs?
               
            
            
               IN the two former verses it set downe
the petition that Dauid made vnto
God for helpe, and his complaint
that he put vp concerning the decay
of good and righteous men, and the
deceitfulnes of vngodly and vnrighteous men.
            Now in these verses is set forth an
other part of his prayer, to wit, an imprecation; The
Lord cut off, &c: wherein hee doth by the spirit of Prophesie,
and according to the Analogie of faith, denounce
iudgement against Gods and his enemies, to the end he
might comfort himselfe, and refresh his hart with hope
that good men should bee recouered, and wicked men
confounded. And as for this curse, we must vnderstand
that it is not vttered in bitternes, but in zeale, and with
warrant from Gods owne spirit; and this is directed,
            1. First against deceitfull persons, who are called
flatterers: the Lord cut off the flattering lips.
            
            
               
2. Secondly, against proud persons, who are described:
            1. In generall by their speech, that they speake proud
things, verse 3.
            2 More particularly, that they say, with our tongue
wee will preuaile. vers. 4. as if they should haue said, looke
what wee aske, we will obtaine it: looke what we threaten,
wee will performe it: looke what we set downe, that
shall come to passe.
            But it might be said vnto them, you speake presumptuously,Obiect.
and vtter words that doe not beseeme you.
            They answere,Answere. 
               our tongues are our owne: as if they should
say, who dare be so audacious as to controle vs? we will
speake what we list, in despite of them all.
            But some might say, though you set so light by men,Obiect.
you must know that there is one higher then you: what
if the Lord should take the matter into his hand?
            To that they answere.Answere. 
               who is Lorde ouer vs? they
thinke they may blaspheme God, & reuile his seruants,
and speake what they list, and yet none shall haue to doe
with them for it.
            
               The Lord cut off all flattering lips.] whereby are vnderstood,Verse 3.
the most dangerous and subtill deceiuers, who
vnder pretence of friendship, doe seeke a mans vtter ouerthrow.
            Now in that the Prophet prayeth against such as doe
so cunningly carry their matters, that they will appeare
to loue, where they hate with a deadly hatred, and in
praying doth shew, not only what is his wish, but what is
Gods purpose, viz. that the Lord will cut off the flattering
lips: hence this doctrine may be gathered, that,
            The more skillfully and artificially anie coutriues his
euill purposes,
                  Doct. 1. The more cunning any is for mischiefe, the more fearefull shall his mine be. the more fearefull destruction shall fall
vpon him.
            The more fraudulent a deceiuer anie one is, the more
heauy shall the hand of God be vpon him, to crosse and
contrarie him, and to bring him to such straits, that hee

shall not for shame open his mouth againe to speake as
he hath done: and this is to haue his tongue cut out, as
it were, as is threatned in this place.
            Flatterers haue a certaine kinde of dexterity in their
enterprises, that they will not be seene to be brochers
of those things whereof they afterwards become practisers:
but they speed neuer the better, but a great deale
the worse for that. Therefore doth Dauid conclude,Psal. 52. 4. 5. that
God would certainely destroy Doeg, because hee was a
skilfull worke-man, and as it were a tradesman in mischiefe:
he could flatter Dauid, that he wisheth him well,
and was sorry for his troubles, and would be ready to
befriend him in any thing he could: but when Saul
complaines how hardly he was dealt with, in that no
body would discouer vnto him the treacheries of Dauid, Deog
changeth his tune, and falleth to accuse Dauid,
               1. Sam. 22. 8. 9. &c.
and most iniuriously chargeth Abimelech to haue conspired
with him: and for all this, he (no doubt) would
haue goodly pretences: as, that dutie bound him to
speake as he did: he respected the Kings honour and
safety, and certainely things were not well, but some
mischiefe was a working; for he saw the sonne of Ishai
come vnto Abimelech, who gaue him a sword, and asked
counsell of the Lord for him, and ministred food vnto
him, and to those that were with him, and that extraordinary
food too, euen the shew-bread: in which regard,
he, as a loyall subiect, must needs aduertise Saul, to take
heed, and to looke well to himselfe, that so he might
preuent all imminent dangers.
            So in the prophecie of Ieremie,
               Ier. 4. 22. this is set downe as
one cause of the vtter subuersion of the Iewes, that they
were wise to doe euill, but had no knowledge to doe well. They
wanted not ordinarie capacitie, (which had beene one
degree of happinesse vnto them, for then God would
haue shewed them greater compassion) but they wanted
grace to vse it well, and had cunning heads to plot

mischiefe, and therefore doth the Lord threaten iudgement
against them. And in another place he saith, that
they had taught their tongues to speake lies.
               Ier. 9. 5. And what followeth?
Therefore thus saith the Lord of hosts, Behold, I
will melt them, &c. Shall not I visit them for this, saith the
Lord? Or shall not my soule be auenged on such a Nation as
this? Their tongues were too much inclined to lies of
their owne accord, so that they needed not to be taught
that language: yet did they set their tongues to schoole,
as it were, that they might be artificiall in their leaud
practises, & carry out their lies vnder a colour of truth,
and so sinne with lesse disgrace: which was a thing that
the Lord could not abide, and therefore he threatneth
to plague them therefore.
            And good reason is there that it should be so:Reasons. for
            
                First, such persons are extreamely hurtfull. Neuer is
euill practised with such mischiefe, as when it is contriued
by craft, and polished with deceit. The Apostles
were neuer so troubled in dealing either with the idolatrous
Gentiles, or with the superstitious and malicious
Iewes, as they were when they had to doe with those
that pretended to be Christians, to be Ministers of the
Gospell, yea to be Apostles: and therefore Paul expostulateth
the matter with the Galathians, saying, O foolish
Galathians,
               Gal. 3. 
               who hath bewitched you? &c. As if he should
haue said, No man could deale so dangerously as these
false Teachers, who haue as it were charmed your affections,
and bewitched your mindes. And in the Epistle
to the Corinthians, he greatly complaineth of such deceiuers:
I am iealous ouer you with a godly iealousie: for I
haue prepared you for one husband,
               2. Cor. 11. 2. 3. 
               to present you as a pure
Virgin to Christ. But I feare lest as the Serpent beguiled Eue
through his subtiltie, so your minds should be corrupted from
the simplicitie that is in Christ. For such false Apostles are
deceitfull workers,
               Vers. 13. 14. 15. 
               and transforme themselues into the Apostles
of Christ. And no maruell, for Sathan himselfe is transformed

into an Angell of light. Therefore it is no great thing
though his Ministers transforme themselues, as though they
were the Ministers of righteousnes. Paul had taken great
paines to make a match betwixt Christ and them, and to
fit them for such a glorious husband: but he was much
afraide lest it would be broken, in regard of manie of
them, and that as the Diuell deceiued Eue, so the false
Apostles would deceiue them, and that by transforming
themselues into the Apostles of Christ, making shew (as
the Diuell doth,) of the greatest loue and care of their
good, and of their eternall saluation: when the truth was,
they intended no such thing, but onely the seruing of
themselues, in their carnall credit and commoditie.
            Secondly, albeit such kinde of persons doe worke 
much mischiefe, yet they seldome passe vnder the censure
of men for the same, and therefore it stands the
Lord vpon to rebuke and punish them; Nay, they are
so farre from being condemned by men, that they haue
great thankes many times, for their wise counsell and
good aduice (though it be most vile and diuellish,) in
incensing mens mindes against such as haue wronged
them, and putting it into their heads how they may bee
auenged of them; which is a thing most detestable
before God, and therefore shall not goe vnpunished.
            Thirdly, their hearts are maruellously hardened: for
when they can fetch ouer men according as they list,
they intertaine an opinion of singular witte and vnderstanding,
& of a deepe reach in themselues, and so begin
to contemne others, and will not admit of a reproofe
or admonition from any: and therefore being growen
to this height of pride, and this exceeding hardnesse of
heart, they are the more fit for Gods iudgements to be
executed vpon them.
            Fourthly, Gods wisedome is much magnified by proceeding
against such: they are fit aduersaries for him,
               who scattereth the deuices of the craftie,
               Iob. 5. 12. 
               so that their handes

cannot accomplish that which they enterprise, (as Iob speaketh)
and that taketh the crafty in their craftinesse, causing
those that are cunning hunters and fowlers, to fall into
the pit that they haue digged for others, and to be insnared
in the works of their owne handes;
               Psal. 7. & 9. so that when they goe
about to take others, it falleth out by the righteous and
wise prouidence of God, that they are taken themselues.
            Sith it is so dangerous to haue a crafty and cunning
head,Vse 1. closely to plot and contriue mischiefe, let this admonish
vs to beware of that vice: for assuredly, it will
bring shame vpon the fauourers thereof. The wise
man saith,Prou. 24. 8. 
               Hee that imagineth to doe euill, men shall call him
an authour of wickednesse. All men shall point at such a
one, There goeth a crafty fellow, a subtill Foxe, &c: so
that the name of a vagrant is not more odious then his:
euery one hath such in detestation, euen the most contemptible
of the people: Doe you see yonder man?
(will they say) he is a perillous fellow, able to set a thousand
together by the eares; If any haue an euill cause,
hee is a man for his turne: Let him make him his Soliciter,
and hee will goe as farre as diuellish and craftie
wit can reach. And as it is a blemish to the name, so it
is the bane of ones estate to bee a fraudulent dealer. The
bread of deceit (saith Salomon) is sweete to a man, but afterterward
his mouth shall be filled with grauell.
               Prou. 20. 17. Howsoeuer
deceitfull persons doe snatch heere and there, and get
much from others, yet few of them thriue, but the curse
of God lighting vpon that which they haue, makes hauocke
of all. And therefore as wee tender our estimation
and good estate in the world, let vs beware of
such practises.
            Secondly, let vs hence learne, not to be discouraged
at crafty aduersaries,Vse 2. that haue winding wits, & plotting
heads, and flattering tongues, and acceptance with great
ones, euen as they would wish: let vs not bee dismayed
heereat, but let this be our comfort, when they fawne,

and flatter, and lie, and traduce vs most shamefully, that
the Lord will cut off the lying lips. Grant that we haue not
libertie or skill to encounter them, yet the Lord hath:
There is no wisedome,
               Prou. 21. 30. 
               nor vnderstanding, nor counsell against
him: that is, none of these shall take any effect against
him:Psal. 33. 10. and therefore the Psalmist saith, The Lord breaketh
the counsell of the Heathen, and bringeth to nought the deuices
of the people. Though all the wisedome of all the nations
in the earth were laide together, yet God would
bring all their consultations to nothing if they made against
him. When Achitophel fell from Dauid to take
part with Absolon, it much troubled Dauid, for his words
were as Oracles, and none could speake more in matters
of policie then he, and he knew all Dauids heart, and
the state of the whole kingdome, and therefore he turneth
himselfe vnto God: O Lord (saith he) I pray thee
turne the counsell of Achitophel into foolishnesse: and God
heard his request, and did so, insomuch that no creature
could deale more foolishly for the procuring of his
owne euerlasting woe and shame, then he did in hanging
himselfe.
            The diuell is still labouring to worke mischiefe, and
he wants not craft nor subtiltie, besides the experience
that he hath had from the beginning of the world hitherunto:
yet for all this, he hath neuer beene, nor shall
be able to procure the ouerthrow of one of Gods elect.
The Church hath beene nothing the worse, though he
haue beene still warring against it. And why is this, but
because Gods wisedome is infinitly beyond all the subtilty
of the diuell? And what cause haue we then to feare
crafty men, seeing their Captaine hath had no better
successe, and seeing that the Lord hath a quarrell against
them as well as against their head?
            
               And the tongue that speaketh proud things.]
            In that the Prophet denounceth iudgement against
such kinde of persons, the doctrine is, that
            
               
The more wicked men boast of their mischieuous
intents,
                  Doct. 2. The wickeds boasting, a forerunner of their ruine. the neerer mischiefe is vnto them.
            When they bragge most how well the world goes
with them, and what hope they haue of effecting their
badde purposes, some great euill is euen at their doores.
When men boast in their talke, and swords are in their lips
(as Dauid speaketh) then the Lord will haue them in derision,
               Psal. 59 7. 8.
and laugh at their destruction. When they fall to
bragging, God fals to laughing: and when their swords
are drawne out against others, the Lords hand is stretched
out against them. Whē 
               Pharaoh in the pride of his
heart said, Who is the Lord? God made him know who
he was.Exod. 15. 9. And when the enemie said, I will pursue, I will ouertake
them, (meaning the Israelites) I will diuide the spoile,
&c: then the Lord set in against them, and made the Sea
to couer them, so that they sanke as lead in the mighty waters.
            
            So when Saneherib insulted against God,2. Kings. 18. and against
his people, and bragged what his forefathers and himselfe
had done, and what now he would doe, if they
would not yeeld vp the Citie and themselues into his
hands,Chap. 19. 28. then did the Lord put a hooke into his nostrils,
and a bridle into his lips, & brought him backe againe
the same way he came, and caused him to fall by the
hands of his owne sonnes.
            And the reasons why it must needs be so,Reasons. are these:
            
                First, when vngodly men do most vaunt of their malicious
intents against Gods people, then is the Lords
compassion most stirred towards them: euen as it is
with earthly parents, when any one threatens their children,
that if hee take them, hee will knocke out their
braines; this will cause them to prouide for the safetie
of their children, and that such leaud persons bee punished
and restrained.
            This was Dauids comfort against Doeg:
               Psal. 52. 1. 
               Why boastest
thou thy selfe in thy wickednes, ô man of power? (saith hee)

               The louing kindnesse of God endureth daily. If the stocke
of Gods goodnes were all spent, then his children had
reason to hang downe their heads: but seeing that is,
and will be as much still as euer it was, they neede not
feare the insultations of their wicked aduersaries.
            Secondly, at such times Gods seruants begin to looke 
about them: when their enemies speake of wonders
that they will worke against them, then they are wakened,
and stirred vp to crie vnto the Lord, as in the 94.
Psalme, O Lord God the auenger! O Lord God the auenger!
shew thy selfe cleerly. And why are they so instant and
earnest with God? The reason is yeelded, verse 4. The
wicked prate and speake fiercely: all the workers of iniquitie
vaunt themselues. As if they should say, Lorde, if euer
thou wilt awake and stand vp for our defense, now doe
it, when vngodlie men doe so insult and triumph ouer
vs.
            Thirdly, such proud persons doe bid defiance to the 
Lord himselfe, and therefore hee hath a quarrell against
them. All the proud [in heart] are an abomination vnto him.
But if their pride appeare in a more notorious manner
in their tongues, and in their behauiour, they are much
more hatefull vnto him: for in making boast of their
owne hearts desire, they doe contemne the Lord;Psal. 10. and
in speaking against the Church,Psal. 73. 9. they set their tongues against
heauen it selfe, as the Prophet speaketh.
            Which point thus prooued, ministreth vnto vs,
            First,Vse. 1. an vse of instruction, that seeing the Lord is so
incensed against proud boasters, therefore wee should
containe our selues within the compasse of modestie,
and neuer boast at all, but let others mouthes, and our
owne workes, and Gods voice at the last day praise vs,
and not our owne lips: but especially let vs take heede
of vaunting our selues against the people of God, and against
the Maiestie of God himselfe; for that will least
of all be endured,
            
               
Secondy, here is an vse of consolation against all the
insultations of malicious enemies:Vse. 2. if wee can with patience
and modestie endure, and stand it out for a while,
not returning like for like, nor vsing any sharpnes and
bitternesse against them, we shall see that the Lord will
cut them off. If a man had knowne the day before,
what should haue befallen Haman, notwithstanding all
his boasting of his greatnes, and of his honour, and of
that fauour which hee had with the King, and of all the
euill that hee intended against the Iewes, and against
Mordecai especially; if (I say) a man had knowen before
hand what should haue befallen him, would it not
haue made him laugh at his pride and follie? Yes certainely:
and yet the case of all boasters against Gods
Church is little or better then his. And if we could with
the eye of faith behold Gods purpose concerning their
ruine and ouerthrow, all their bragging would seeme
vnto vs, and it is indeed, euen exceeding ridiculous. And
this in particular should comfort vs against the blasphemies
of the Church of Rome, and against all her insultations
ouer the Saints: for the Lord hath set downe her
sentence:Reuel. 18. 7. 8. 
               In as much as she gloried her selfe, so much giue
ye her torment and sorrow: for she saith in her heart, I sit being
a Queene, and am no widow, and shall see no mourning. But
what saith God? Therefore shall her plagues come at one day,
death, & sorrow, & famine, and she shalbe burnt with fire, &c.
            
            Verse 4. With our tongues wee will preuaile: our lips are
our owne] In that they are heere found fault with for
thus speaking, because they affirme that which is directly
contrary to the truth, the point hence to bee obserued
is, that
            No man hath the royaltie of his owne tongue, nor
the ordering of his owne speech.
                  Doct. 3. No man hath the ordering of his owne tongue.
            
            Euery mans tongue is in Gods hand, and his wordes
at Gods disposing, hee is Lord ouer all mens, tongues;
which will euidently appeare by this, that
            
               
First, men cannot speake what they would, but what
the Lord will,Reasons. according to that of Salomon: The preparations 
of the heart are in man:
               Prou. 16. 1. that is, a man determineth
and prepareth what to vtter: but the answer of the tongue
is of the Lord. As who should say, When a man hath done
so, yet he shall speake, not what he himselfe intended,
but what God hath decreed; as is plaine in Balaam, who
came with a purpose to curse, and if the Lord had permitted
him, he would haue vomited out horrible imprecations
against the Israelites; for that would haue
made for his credit and commoditie:Num. 23. but notwithstanding
his intent, the Lord made him to blesse his people
in stead of cursing them. And so Saul, he would haue all
men know that Dauid was a Traitor, and therefore he
pursued him, to bereaue him of his life: yet when he
met with him, he had no power so much as to rate him,
or to rebuke him; but on the contrarie part, is driuen to
iustifie him: O my sonne Dauid (saith he) thou art more
righteous then I. And this we may obserue in our owne
experience, that oftentimes men, contrary to their
mindes, doe vtter things which doe exceedingly grieue
them, and bury other things in silence, the speaking
whereof might haue beene very behoouefull vnto
them: whence do arise these and the like speeches, How
was I ouerseene in that which I said? What an aduntage
did I lose at such a time? which doth plainly prooue,
that God hath the disposing of mens tongues.
            Secondly, God hath giuen Lawes for the tongue, how 
it should be ruled,Ephes. 4. that men should not speake blasphemously,
nor filthily, nor bitterly: whence it may be concluded,
that it is Gods subiect; for Princes make statutes
for none but for their owne subiects.
            Thirdly, the successe and euent of mens speeches is 
according to Gods pleasure. They say, With our tongues
we will preuaile; yet doe they not preuaile: for whereas
they forespeake others destruction, the wise man saith,
A fooles mouth is his owne destruction. And whereas they

say triumphingly,Prou. 18. 7. Micah. 4. 11. 12. 13. 
               Sion shall be condemned, and our eye shall
looke vpon Sion, they know not the Lords counsell, to wit,
that they themselues shall be gathered as sheaues into the
barne▪
                to be threshed & beatē in pieces by Gods people.
            
                Fourthly, God will plague wicked men, as well as reward
godly men for their speeches.Mat. 12. 36. 37 
               By thy wordes thou
shalt be iustified, (saith our Sauiour) and by thy wordes thou
shalt be condemned: And, Wee must render an account for euery
idle word: which euidently sheweth, that God hath
the soueraigntie of mens tongues.
            Now seeing that the Lorde hath the gouernement
thereof, this serueth
            First, to teach vs, that therfore wee should craue assistanceVse 1.
from him for the well ordering of the same. Euen
as that holy Prophet doth, where he saith, Set a watch ô
Lord before my mouth, and keepe the doore of my lips: God
will haue the ordering of them by his prouidence,Psal. 141. 3. whether
we will or not: but by his grace hee will not guide
them, vnles we sue vnto him in that behalfe: therefore
let vs beseech him so to sanctifie & purifie our harts, that
out of the abundance thereof, our tongues may speake
vnto his praise, and to our owne, and others edification.
            Secondly,Vse 2 that we should not be afraid of performing
any good dutie, in regard of mens tongues; for though
they threaten, and raile, and slander, and traduce vs, yet
they shall not hurt vs, for God will hide vs from the
scourge of the tongue,Iob. 5. 27. Isa. 45. 16. 17. so that no such weapons shall
preuaile against vs: for the Lord made the tongue, and
the men themselues that speake therewith; and there is
no voice, nor sound that proceedeth out of the mouth,
but the Lord hath the ordering thereof: and therefore
let vs sue vnto him, as the Apostles did, saying, O Lord
behold their threatnings,
               Act. 4. 29. behold their reuilings, and doe
thou iudge betwixt vs and them: and thou which hast
the disposing of all mens tongues, preserue thy seruants
from the hurt that may befall vs through the same.
            The ende of the fourth Sermon.
         
         
            
            A
BRIEFE TRACT
CONCERNING ZEALE,
wherein the properties of true
Zeale are described, and the
contrarie discouered,
            
               GOdlie zeale is a vertue very requisite
and necessary for all Christans: not
so rare and seldome found: as precious
and vsefull where it is found;
as being the verie life and soule of
sound Christianitie, and one of the
principal Fountains & Well-heads,
whence manie other vertues of the
spirit doe spring and issue foorth.
            The excellencie of this grace doeth appeare, as by
manie other arguments, so by this, that the Saintes are
thereby described; where they are saide to bee a people
[zealous of good workes:] this is the ende of their
redemption,Titus 2. 14. and this is one speciall effect and marke
of their iustification, that they doe not onely desist
from their former euill workes, and fall to the practise
of the contrarie good workes, but that they are zealous,
both to doe them, and in the doing of them:
they shake off the sluggishnesse of the flesh, and striue
for the feruencie of the spirit,Rom. 12. 1
                     •
                  . in all duties that they owe
either vnto God or men.
            
               
For this vertue, amongst many others, are the penitent
Corinthians commended:2. Cor. 7. 11. 
               Behold this, that yee haue
beene godly sorrowfull, (saith Paul) what zeale it hath
wrought in you! &c. Till such time as the Apostle had rebuked
them by an Epistle, they were either not at all, or
very slightly touched with the sense of their owne sins,
and therefore they set light by the offences of others, insomuch
that when abominable incest (such as had not
beene heard of amongst the Gentiles) was committed
among them, yet they tooke it not to heart, nor at all
mourned for it,1. Cor. 5. 1. 2. nay they let the offender goe vncensured,
who should haue beene (as afterwards he was) excommunicated,
and deliuered vp vnto Sathan, for the
healing of his owne soule, the preuenting of the like
sinnes in others, and the stopping of the mouthes of
wicked blasphemers, who would be readie heereupon
to speake euill of the holy name of God, and of the professours
and profession of Christianitie. Thus cold and
carelesse were they, till the Apostle had sharply reprooued
them: but after that they had well disgested his
speeches, and thorowly considered of all matters, they
fell to lament for their owne corruptions, and for the
transgressions of others, and were zealous against all
wickednesse, and for all manner of goodnesse in themselues
and others. This was the effect of holy griefe in
them, and this will be found in all that attaine to that
repentance which is vnto life: in which regard, when
the Lord would worke a cure vpon the luke-warme
Laodicians,
               Reu. 3. 19. he biddeth them, be zealous, and amend. That
was their sinne, that they were key-cold, and euen frozen
in the dregges of securitie, exercising themselues in
sundrie good duties (for that must needes be, because
they were a Church) but neuer regarding with what
loue vnto God or men they performed the same: therefore
the Lord vrging them to reformation, willeth
them [to be zealous, and amend] implying, that these two

euer goe hand in hand, to wit, sound repentance, and
godly zeale: yet so, that as euery one is of greater
growth in the body of Christ, so this grace is of greater
strength in him: as is euident in Dauid, who speaketh
thus of himselfe (and that by the inspiration of Gods
holy spirit,Psal. 119. 139. and therefore cannot but speake truely) My
zeale hath euen consumed me, because mine enemies haue
forgotten thy word. Weaker Christians haue some good
motions of griefe for mens offances: but the Prophet
was exceedingly wrought vpon by his zeale, so that it
did euen spend him, and consume him, in regard of the
fearefull breach of Gods commandements, which he
obserued in his very enemies. And the like we find in
another place:Psal. 69. 9. 
               The zeale of thine house hath eaten me: and
the rebukes of them that rebuked thee are fallen vpon me.
Thus was the holy man of God touched, yea tormented
with the things whereby Gods glory was impaired,
as if he had beene laden himselfe with reproaches and
disgraces.
            But most admirable was the zeale of Moses and Paul,
               Exod. 32. 32. Rom. 9. 3.
who for that feruent desire that they had of aduancing
Gods glory, could haue beene content to haue had
their names put out of the booke of life, and to be
separated from the Lord, so that his great name might
be magnified in sparing and sauing their brethren the
Israelites.
            Now because our hearts may easily deceiue vs in this
matter of zeale, either by perswading vs that we haue it,
when we are farre from it; or that we altogether want
it, when in some good measure we haue attained vnto
it: therefore will it not be amisse to set downe some
rules, whereby we may trie whether our zeale be currant
or counterfeit.
            First,Rules of true zeale. therefore touching the matter about which
this holy zeale is to be exercised, it must be good: according
to the saying of the Apostle: It is good alwaies to 
                  
be zealous in [a good matter:]
               The matter must be good. and it was before shewed,
that Gods people must be zealous of [good workes:] otherwise,Gal. 4. 18.
if the matter be euill, the more earnest any is,
the more sinfull: neither is such earnestnesse worthy
the name of zeale, being nothing else but a diuellish
and fleshly heate, or rather a kinde of frenzie and madnesse.
Such was the zeale of Idolaters that would mangle
and cut themselues, and that would offer their children
in the fire in honour vnto their gods. Such was
the zeale of the Scribes and Pharises,
               1. King. 18. 28 Ier. 7. 31. who would compasse
sea and land to make one a Proselite: that is, one of
their owne sect.
            With this violent and mad zeale was Paul carried before
his conuersion (as he himselfe confesseth in plaine
tearmes, Acts. 26. 11. and Phil. 3. 6.) when he was enraged
against Christians, and spared no paines nor cost to
make them denie and blaspheme the name of Christ.
            Heere then is to be condemned the zeale of ignorant
Papists and Brownists, and such like, who are very hotte
indeed (for he must needes runne whom the diuell
driues) but in euill causes, as might easily be prooued,
and may hence, if by no other arguments, be probably
concluded, in that they vse the diuels owne weapons (to
wit, lying, standering, railing, cursed speaking, and the
like) in the pursute of the same.
            But much more damnable and vile is their zeale to
be esteemed, who against their knowledge and consciences,
doe violently and maliciously oppose themselues
against the Gospell, and the professors thereof,
and stand for falshood and wickednesse, and the practisers
thereof: as did those wretched Pharises that set
themselues against our Sauiour, and committed the sin
against the holy Ghost.We must know the thing to be good for which we are zealous.
            
            A second rule is, that as the matter in which we are
zealous, must be good in it selfe, so it must be knowne
vnto vs to be of that qualitie. True zeale must begin

where the word begins,Rom. 14. 23. and ende where it ends: for otherwise
it cannot bee of faith, which is euer grounded
on the word; and whatsoeuer is not of faith is sinne. We
must not therefore content our selues with an honest
meaning, and hope that wee haue a good zeale towards
God, when we haue no warrant for our hope: but must
so acquaint our selues with the Scriptures of God,Rom. 10. 2. that
our zeale may be according to knowledge.
            Which rule discouereth the corruptnes of their zeale,
whether close hypocrites, or weake Christians, who are
led on meerely by the examples of good men, whome
they affect, much to like of, and earnestly to stand fot
such things, as they perceiue them in their practise to
obserue, and to make conscience of: and if there be but
a word spoken against any of the things that they haue
taken a liking of, they are maruellously stirred with indignation
thereat, and grow passionate and vehement
against the parties, though they haue neuer so good a
meaning in that which they speake: Yet let them bee
vrged to prooue out of the word the necessitie of those
duties which they so earnestly presse, they can say little
or nothing to the purpose for them; and so grow manie
times either to dislike and forsake all if they bee hypocrites,
or at least to bee discouraged, and to bee at a
stand, if they be weaklings in Christ Iesus. And whence
proceed these inconueniences but from this, that they
are zealous for things that in themselues, and vnto others
are good and holie, but not thoroughly discerned
of them to bee of that nature: the consideration whereof,
should make vs to sit sure in matters of godlinesse,
not building vpon the example of good men, but vpon
the truth of the good word of God, and then our foundation
shall neuer faile vs.
            A third propertie of true zeale is, that it beginneth 
in our selues,Zeale must begin at home. and after proceedeth vnto others: for neuer
can that man be truely zealous to others, which neuer

knew to be zealous to himselfe. Those are the most
skilfull Physitions and best able to deale with others,
that haue first wrought a cure vpon their owne soules.
Therefore our Sauiours aduice is,Luke. 6. 42. 
               Cast out the beame out
of thine owne eye first, and then shalt thou see perfectly to pull
out the moate that is in thy brothers eye. We must then first
of all iudge our selues, and cast the first stone at our
selues, that so finding how vgly and noisome a thing
sinne is, and that by experience in our selues, we may be
at defiance with it, wheresoeuer we finde it, and neither
flatter others in their euill courses, nor yet too rigorously
and vnmercifully rebuke them for the same.
Those that haue beene pinched with sicknesse and are
recouered, can by the smart which they haue felt, pittie
others in the like case: euen so they which haue beene
stung with sinne themselues, can more easily be moued
to shew compassion towards poore sinners like themselues,
because by the feeling of misery, men learne the
practise of mercy,Heb. 2. 17. 18. in that Christ suffered and was tempted,
he is able to pittie and to succour those that are
tempted.
            Against this rule doe all hypocrites offend, who will
wade very deepely into other mens soules, and very
bloodily gore other mens consciences, who yet neuer
once purged their owne vncleane sincks at home, nor
drew one drop of blood out of their owne corrupt
hearts. Such were the Pharises, who pleased themselues
much in iudging and censuring our Sauiour and his
Disciples;Luk. 16. 15. & 18. 9. but were so farre from condemning themselues
as faultie in any thing, that they iustified themselues
before God and men. Such also are the Brownists,
which are readie to burst their bowels with crying out
against disorders abroad, and yet neuer reforme their
owne soules at home: for if they did, they would also
reforme their liues and their families. But what kind of
zeale these mens is, wosull and late experience still crieth

in our eares: for manie of them being so zealous
to others, but onely through some secret loue of the
world, when they had that which they sought for, made
knowne their hollow & their rotten zeale, in that without
griefe of conscience, they could suddenly rush into
a profound worldlinesse: and without all godly sorrow,
could (after they had satisfied their greedie and fleshly
zeale) not onely more hardlie seare vp their owne consciences,
but also be so changed, that they could sowe vp
their lippes, and spare their words from speaking in like
manner againe to others, and so are neither zealous to
themselues nor others.
            Heere also are all such to be censured as faultie, that
can prie and make a priuie search into the wants of others,
accounting the same wants no wants in themselues.
The father saith, this my childe doth amisse:
and the childe, in this my father faileth: the husband
knoweth, what the wife should doe; and the wife, what
the husband should doe, &c: euery one in the meane
time neglecting their owne duties; whereas indeed euery
ones principall care should bee, to know and doe his
owne dutie, and to be grieued where he commeth short
of the same. And thus much for the third rule, that
true zeale must beginne in our selues.
            Now further we are to vnderstand, that there must be 
an order kept in being thus zealous: namely,Wee must make greatest account of the weightiest matters. that first
and especiallie wee make conscience of the principall
matters of the word, and after of the lesser, as our Sauiour
telleth the Scribes and Pharises: These things ought
yee to haue done,
               Matth. 23. 23. (that is, the weightier matters of the
Law) and not to haue left the other vndone: viz. matters of
smaller importance.
            Which sheweth, that their zeale is verie corrupt and
faulty, who as our Sauior saith, straine out a Gnat, & swallow
a Camell; who are very hot about matters of ceremonie,
but altogether cold in matters of substance: as

also theirs that (on the other side) will crie out against
them that rob by the high-wayes side, & yet they themselues
make no conscience of pilfring, & cosoning, and
secret defrauding of their neighbours: as if small sinnes
were not to be left as well as great.
            Another rule of true zeale is, that wee looke as carefully
 to our hearts before God, as to our carriage before
men: for so the Lord commandeth,We must look to the inside, as well as to the out-side, 
               Clease thy heart,
ô Ierusalem, &c: how long shall thy euill thoughts remaine
within thee?
               Ier. 4. 14. And againe, Purge your hands, yee sinners, and
[your hearts] yee hypocrites.
               Iam. 4. 8.
            
            Which serueth to ouerthrow the hypocrisie of such
Pharises, as make cleane the vtter side of the cuppe and platter,
but within are full of bribery and excesse,
               Matth. 23. of pride, disdaine,
selfe-loue, and hatred.
            Now that wee may the better trie our selues by this
rule, two things are to be obserued,
            I. That wee feare to commit any sinne secretly, and
when wee are alone, as well as when wee are in the presence
of men. So did Iob, and so did Ioseph: and this
mooued them so to doe,Ioh. 31. euen that the Lord did behold
them,Gen. 39. and could punish them for secret, as well as for open
offences.
            Which condemneth them of grosse dissimulation,
that are loth to be accounted ill, and yet make no conscience
to be ill. What is this, but to be painted sepulchers,
that are faire to looke vpon, but within full of rotten
bones? Wee may deceiue men,Matth. 23. but God is not deceined:
and therefore let vs beware of this hypocrisie: and
so much the rather, because the Lorde hath fearefully
discouered and plagued them, that in outward shew haue
borne a great countenance of religion, and yet haue liued
in secret filthinesse, and other vile sinnes, which in
time haue come to light to their shame and ruine.
            
                The second thing to be obserued, is, that we haue an
eye to the priuie corruptions that lurke in our hearts,

and maintaine continuall warre against them, as Paul
did, Rom. 7. and this we should the rather doe, because it
is a fearefull, and yet an vsuall iudgement of God, and
that vpon many professors, that making no conscience
of entertaining wretched lusts and vile affections secretly,
they haue broken foorth to the committing of
the grosse actions, and so haue shamed themselues publikely.
And this is a iust stroke vpon those that would
rather seeme to be, then in truth desire to be godly, that
making no conscience of their thoughts and inward
desires, they should in time be so giuen vp, as to make
no conscience of their words or deeds.
            The sixth rule is, that wee be more strict vnto our 
selues then vnto others,Wee must be more strict to our selues then to others. and more seuere against our
selues, then against others, giuing more libertie vnto
them, then wee will take vnto our selues. And first concerning
seuerite vnto our selues, such ought to bee our
acquaintance with our inward and outward corruptions,
and so grieuous ought they to be in our eyes, that
our heate being spent vpon our selues, wee may thinke
the sinnes of others more tollerable, and so learne by
the sight and sense of our owne sores, to deale more
mildely and meekely with others,Titus. 3. 1. whose corruptions
(either for greatnes or multitude) we cannot so thorowly
see as wee may our owne.
            Secondly, as we must deale most sharpely against our
selues, so must we be ready to giue more outward libertie
vnto others then to our selues. And for this we haue
the example of Abraham, who was so strict to himselfe,
that he would not take of the King of Sodome so much
as a threed or latchet,Gen. 14. 23. 24. and yet he would not denie Aner,
Escol and Mamre, their liberty. So Iob, as he would not
permit to himselfe,Iob. 1. so neither would he deny to his
children their liberty of feasting. But especially the example
of Paul is notable for the confirmation of this
point: for seeing that in some places he could not so

conueniently liue of other mens charges, as at Corinth
and Thessalonica,
               1. Cor. 4. 12. 1. Thess. 2. 9. he would labour with his owne hands,
rather then be chargeable to any of them: yet he
would not that all men should be tied by his example
to doe the like: and therefore he laboureth much in
his Epistles about this,1. Cor. 9. 1. Tim. 5. 18. that Ministers ought to be prouided
for: so strict was he to himselfe; such liberty left
he vnto others.
            Whence we may easily perceiue, that it is rather a
Pharisaicall pride, then any Christian zeale, to be too
tetricall and rough in vrging men so farre, that whosoeuer
in euery point is not so strict and precise as our
selues, we cast them off as dogges and prophane persons,
and such as are vnworthy of any account or countenance.
            
                The next propertie of true zeale, is, not to be blinded
with naturall affection,Zeale condemneth sin in friends as wel as in foes. but to discerne and condemne
sinne, euen in those that are neerest and dearest vnto
vs. That was it that made Christ so sharply to rebuke
Peter,
               Mat. 16. 23. and Paul to deale so roundly with the Galathians
and Corinthians.
               Gal. 3. 1. 1. Cor.
            
            Many offend against this rule, who will neuer reprooue
sinne in their friends, till God reuenge it from
heauen; wherein they are farre from true friendship:
for whereas they might by admonishing them of their
faults in time, preuent the iudgements of God, they do,
through a false loue, pull the wrath of God vpon them
whom they loue most dearely. Hee loueth most naturally,
that hath learned to loue spiritually: and hee
loueth most sincerely, that cannot abide sinne in the
partie beloued, without some wholesome admonition.
            But doe not manie now adayes seeme zealoussie to
mislike sinne in strangers, who can winke at the same
fault in their kindred, in their wiues, in their children,
in their parents? as if the diuersitie of persons could
change the nature of the sinne. This blind zeale God

hath punished, and doth punish his children. Isaac did
carnally loue his sonne Esau for meat, & for a peece of
venison.Gen. 25. 28. 
               Dauid was too much affected to Absalon and
to Adoniah for their comely personage, so as his zeale
was hindered in discerning sinne aright in them. Now
Iacob was not so deare to Isaac, and Salomon was more
hardly set to schoole, and made to take paines: but behold,
God louing Iacob, and refusing Esau, (howsoeuer
Isaac loued Esau better then Iacob) made Esau more
troublesome, and Iacob more comfortable vnto him.
Absalon and Adoniah, brought vp like Cocknies, became
corasiues to Dauids heart: Salomon more restrained and
better instructed, was his ioy, his crowne, his successor
in his kingdome. This disease is so hereditary to many
parents, louing their children in the flesh, rather then in
the spirit, that the holy Ghost is faine to cal vpon them
more vehemently, to teach, to instruct, and to correct,
as knowing how easily nature would coole zeale in this
kinde of dutie. Indeed many will set by their wiues, children,
and kinsfolkes, if they be thriftie, like to become
good husbands, wittie and politicke, or if they be such as
for their gifts can bring some reuenue to their stocke, or
afford some profit vnto them; how deepe sinners soeuer
they be against God, that maketh no matter, it little
grieueth them: whereby they bewray their great corruption,
that they are neither zealous in truth of Gods
glory, nor louers aright of their children, because they
can be sharpe enough in reprehension if they faile but
a little in thriftinesse, and yet are too too cold in admonition,
if they faile neuer so much in godlinesse.
            Well, let these fleshly zealous men lay to their heart
the blinde affection of Heli,
               1. Sam. 2. & 3. & 4. who being the deare childe
of God, was seuerely punished of the Lord, for that he
was not zealously affected to punish the grosse and foule
offences of his children: but blessed are they that can
forget their owne cause, and euen with ieopardie of

nature can defend the quarrel of God, labouring hencefoorth
to know no man after the flesh, nor suffering any
outward league so to bleare and dazle their eyes, as
that they should not espie sinne in their dearest friends
to reforme it, or that they should not discerne vertue in
the greatest aliens to reuerence it.
            
                Now whereas many haue great courage to rebuke
such as either cannot gainsay them,Zeale opposeth itselfe against the sins of the mighty. or gainsaying them,
cannot preuaile against them, heere commeth another
property of zeale to be spoken of, and that is, that it feareth
not the face of the mightie, neither is it dismaied
at the lookes of the proud and loftie, Such was the courage
of Iob, who besides that he made the young men
ashamed of their liberty, & afraide of his grauity, made
euen the Princes also to stay their talke,Iob. 29. 8. 9. and to lay their
hands on their mouthes. And yet heere we must beware
of their hasty zeale, who will not sticke to charge the
children of God to be without zeale, if presently and
abruptly they rush not into an open reprehension of
men that are mightie in authoritie, as though no regard
of time, place, or persons were to be had: which opinion
many by weakenesse of iudgement defending, find neither
fruit in others, nor comfort in their owne consciences,
when they doe admonish in that presumptuous
maner: for that hunting after feruentnesse without the
spirit of meeknesse, and casting off all consideration of
a godly opportunitie, they rather exasperate then humble
the parties admonished: and they themselues rather
depart with confusion and shame, for such posting
on without warrant of wisedome, then with comfort of
heart for any duty done, Neither am I heere ignorant
how great danger of trouble of minde commeth to many,
in that they, being so curious obseruers and waiters
of opportunity, doe for some ease of the flesh, vnder
the cloake of this wisedome, altogether leaue off that
godly dutie. Wherefore, as we affirme that wisedome

and loue mixed together do deeply enter into the most
prefract & prodigious spirits; so we mislike their fearefull
delay of duty, who hauing a meane occasion offered
them from the Lord, doe not zealously and earnestly
rebuke sinne, though in some higher personages.
            Out of this may issue another frutit of holy zeale,
namely when we are zealous in their behalfe who can
neuer recompence vs againe, and that in defending
their right against oppressors that are craftier & mightier
then they. Thus Iob deliuered the poore that cried,
               Iob. 29. 12. 
               the
fatherlesse and him that had none to helpe him. He was the
eyes to the blinde, and feet to the lame, at whose hands no reward
was to be looked for.
            Another most excellent and glorious propertie of 
pure zeale is,Compassion to be ioyned with zeale. to be humbled in our selues for those sins
which we espie and censure in others, and so to nourish
an holy compassion towards them.
            Heere is an excellent and infallible difference betweene
godly zeale and fleshly heat, viz when our anger
for our brothers falling doth not feed it self vpō the
party, because of our wrath, but vpon his sinne, because
of our zeale; we still retaining a tender affection towards
the person of the offender. When our Sauiour
Christ went about to heale the man that had the withered
hand, the Pharises that stood by murmured,
because hee would heale on the Sabbath day: herevpon
it is said, that he looked about him angerlie, & yet it
is added, that he sorrowed for the hardnes of their harts.
Marke here in this notable example,Mark. 3. 5. how anger and sorrow
meete together: Anger, that men should haue so
little knowledge of God, and loue of ther brother: sorrow,
that through ignorance they were so foulie ouerseene.Matth. 23. 37.
So likewise in zeale of his father,Luk. 19. 41. 42. Christ looked
on Ierusalem, with an hatred to their sinne, and yet with
pittie of their miserie which was at hand, which appeareth

in that he wept ouer it.
            Marke this in all the Prophets from time to time, as in
Isay, Ieremie, Ezekiel, Daniel, &c: whether they did not
vtter their message in heauinesse of spirit: and when
they most threatned the people for their sinnes, obserue
if they were not most grieued and feared, least
they should be executed vpon them. This is a blessed
temperature, thus to mingle griefe with zeale: but that
is an ouer-reaching zeale, that feedeth more on the person
then on the sinne.
            Wherefore wee must craue this speciall grace at the
hand of God by prayer, to be gouerned by a right zeale,
and that we may trulie discerne the difference betweene
fretting anger, and pining zeale. Which if all sorts of
men would labour for, receiuing this rule in iudgement,
and obseruing it in practise, it would breede a great deale
more conscience in ministers, magistrates, and masters,
when they are to admonish their inferiours. Alas wee
see manie, who can mangle and martyr a man for some
offence, who neuer learned for conscience sake to
mourne for those in firmities, which so bitterly they inueigh
against in others. The Apostle Paul was of another
temper:2. Cor. 12. 21. 1. Cor. 4. 
               I feare (saith he) to the Corinthians, left when
I come, my God abase mee among you, and I shall bewaile many
of them, which haue sinned already, &c: he knew nothing
by himselfe, (as hee telleth them in another place) yet
could he not but lament and be humbled for their offences,
who were a part of his Apostolike charge. So
Samuel, in the zeale of Gods glorie, spares not flatly to
tell Saul of his sinne, notwithstanding his great authoritie:
and yet in loue and compassion to his person,1. Sam. 15. 35. hee
was alwayes bent to lament Sauls case, and earnestly to
pray for him, till the Lord forbad him to doe so anie
longer, 1. Sam. 16. 1.
            If wee could keepe this golden mixture, wee should
stop the mouthes of the aduersaries, who accuse vs to be

full of rancour and malice, if wee be angrie as enemies
to their sinne, but grieued in that for sinne they are become
enemies to God.
            Further, wee must know, that true zeale maketh vs as 
willing to be admonished,True zeale maketh men desirous of admonition. as carefull to admonish: and
that not only of our superiours, which is an easie thing,
because there wee must of necessitie yeeld: but also of
our inferiours, whom we may seeme to contemne. All
men will graunt, that a childe ought willingly to be admonished
of his father, or a seruant of his maister: but
fewe will in practise giue this, that a father should listen
to the aduertisement of his sonne, or that a maister
should receiue an admonition of his seruant. Howbeit
Iob saith, hee durst not contemne the iudgement of
his seruant or of his maide, when they did contend with
him, because in a dutie of pietie, he looked to them,Iob. 30. 13. not
as seruants, but as brethren; he looked not to the speaker
onely, which in respect of his calling was his inferiour,
but vnto the things spoken in the ordinance of
God, vnto whom Iob himselfe was an inferiour, and before
whom he knew there was no respect of persons.
            Howbeit to correct the preposterous boldnesse of
some, wee adde thus much, that inferiours must rather
aduise than admonish: aduertise rather then reprehend
their superiours, that so still they may offer their pure
zeale of the glorie of God in vnfained humilitie, left
through their corrupt zeale, they do not only not profit
their superiours, but most iustly exasperate them against
them.
            Another rule is, that in pure zeale wee be patient in 
our owne causes, & deuoure many priuate iniuries;Wee must be most feruent in Gods causes but
hote and feruent in Gods causes. Manie can be as hote
as fire in their owne priuate matters, who are as colde
as ice in things that concerne Gods honor and glorie.
            But it was otherwise with Moses: When anie priuate

wrong was offered vnto him by the Israelites, he was
meeke as a lambe, and would with wisedome speake
mildly vnto them to pacifie them, and pray earnestly
vnto God to pardon them: but when they fell to Idolatrie,
and worshipped the golden calfe,Exod. 32. 19. 20. (a matter which
neerely concerned the glory of God) his wrath waxed
hot, and he cast the tables out of his hands, and brake them in
peeces, and burnt the calfe in the fire, and ground it to powder,
and made them drinke of it, being strewed vpon the water;
and after caused a great number of the principall doers
in this wickednesse to be slaine by the sword. This also
is the commendation of the Church of Ephesus, that
they had much patience, and yet could not forbeare those
which were euill,
               Reuel. 2. 2. 
               but examined them which said they were
Apostles, and found them liars.
            
            This rule well obserued, would sow vp the lips of the
aduersaries, who though for a time they thinke vs to
be cholloricke, and men out of our wits, madly reuenging
our priuate affections, yet one day they should
confesse, that we sought not our owne commoditie, but
Gods most precious glory.
            And to stretch this examination of our hearts one
degree further, let vs beware of that corruption, which,
springing from selfe-loue, will giue vs leaue to reioyce
in good things, so long as they be in our selues, but repineth
at the sight of them in others: which will permit
vs to be grieued at euill things in our selues, and
yet make vs to reioyce to see the same in others.
            True zeale (hauing Gods glory for the obiect thereof)
loueth good wheresoeuer, and in whomsoeuer it is:
true zeale hateth sinne wheresoeuer and in whomsoeuer.
True zeale loueth friends as they be Gods friends:
true zeale hateth aduersaries, so farre as they be Gods
aduersaries: true zeale loueth a good thing in the most
professed enemie: true zeale hateth sinne in the most

assured friend.
            If wee be perswaded that our enemies bee Gods
children, howsoeuer wee disagree in some particulars,
yet wee must swallow vp manie priuate iniuries, and
more reioice in them as they be Gods seruants, then be
grieued at them, as they haue iniuried vs.
            Indeed true Zeale is most grieued at the sinnes of
the godly, because so much are their sinnes more grieuous
then the sinnes of others, by how much they
came neerer to the image of God then others.
            The last rule is, that wee keepe a tenour of zeale in 
both estates,Zeale must be constant in all estates. to wit, of prosperitie and aduersitie. Wee
must especiallie looke to that whereunto wee are most
readie, that is, whether wee be more zealous in prosperitie,
and fall away in aduersitie; or whether we be more
feruent in affliction, and ouer-whelmed in abundance:
whether by the one we are not puffed vp with securitie
and secret pride, and whether by the other we be not
too farre abased and discouraged; or, which is worst of
all, quite driuen out of the way: for many in time of
peace are religious, who seeing persecution to follow
the Gospell, begin (like those that are compared to
stonie ground) to step backe,Luke. 8. 13. and at last vtterly to renounce
their former profession.
            Others so long as they may haue credit by embracing
the Gospell, will seeme to goe farre; but when discredit
comes, they forsake all: contrarie to the practise
of Dauid, who saith, The bandes of the wicked haue
robbed mee, yet haue I not forgotten thy Law.
               Psal. 119. 61. Verse. 161.
            
            And againe,
            Princes did persecute mee without cause, but mine heart
stood in awe of thy Word.Verse 141.
            
            And for disgrace hee saith,
            
               
I am small and despised yet doe I not forget thy Word.Verse. 141.
            
            Others on the contrary part, so long as God exerciseth
them with any crosse, are zealous professours, who
beeing set aloft, and comming once vnto promotion,
begin to grow secure and carelesse of all duties towards
God or men, as is to be seene in the lsraelites from time
to time.
            We see manie in time of their miserie to hee much
humbled;Psal 63. 34. &c. and whiles they want liuings and preferments,
we see both Preachers and people in outward appearance
very godlie,Iudges. who hauing obtained that which
they sought for, haue their zeale vtterly choked.
            Doe not many pray for the continuance of the peace
of the Gospell, that they themselues might continue in
peace and prosperitie? Doe not manie mourne in the
aduersitie of the Gospell, because they are grieued for
their owne aduersitie! Oh great corruption of our
hearts! Oh bottomles pit of hypocrisie! If wee were
ashamed that wee are no more grounded on the word,
and that wee can bee no nore holie and vpright in our
hearts, surely the Lord will so gouerne vs; that he would
not suffer either prosperitie to quench our zeale, or aduersitie
to discourage our hearts.
            This is then our triall herein, if when we are in greatest
prosperitie, we can mourne with them that mourne
in the Lorde; and when wee are in greatest aduersitie,
wee can reioyce with them that reioyce in Christ.
            This is a sure token wee loue not the Gospell, nor fauour
the word, because wee haue a loue to prosperitie,
neither are zealous to see the word contemned, because
wee haue an hatred of aduersitie. Daniel concerning
outward things was an happie man, as being neere to
the Crowne: and yet when hee saw the God of Israels
glory to be defaced, and his seruants and seruices to be

trodden vnder foote, hee could content himselfe
with nothing so much, as with fasting, weeping, and
prayer.Dan. 9.
            
            And Paul on the other side being in bonds for the
testimonie of Iesus Christ, and concerning his outward
man in a miserable case, reioyced greatly, and was as it
were reuiued when he heard that the Gospell flourished,
and that the faith and loue of the Saints
was still continued.1. Thess. 3. 6. 7. 8. This zeale should we
much labour for, that in all estates we
might be rightly affected towards
God and men.
            FINIS.
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
         
      
   