
      
         
            
            
            A DISCOVRSE
OF THE
medicine called
Mithridatium,  declaring
the firſte beginninge, the
temperament, the noble
vertues, and the true
vſe of the ſame: Compiled rather
for thoſe which are
to vſe it, then for
the learned.
            1585.
         
      
      
         
            
            
            ¶A BRIEFE DISCOVRSE
OF THE MEDICINE
called Mithridatium.
            
               WEe doe read in ye 
               Romaine
hiſtories, that
Mithridates a Puiſante
king of Pontus
& Bithinia, for cauſing
all ye 
               Romaines
in Aſia to bee ſlaine,
and the Proconſul
Oppius to bee caſt in
priſon, was aſſaulted by Silla, diſcomfited by
Lucullus, and laſtly vtterly vanquiſhed by
Pompey the great: and when this valiaunte
king perceiued himſelfe to be ouercome, and
that he was to be taken of his enemies: firſt
he deſtroyde his wyfe & daughters with poyſon,
and then tooke the ſame poyſon, deſiring
rather ſo to dye, then as a captiue to fal into ye
hands of his enemyes: But hauing dronken
much of the poyſon, could not dye therewith,
and then cauſed his ſeruant Biſtocus a frenchman
(as it is written) to kill him with a
ſword. Such was the magnanimity of this
mighty king to eſcape the hands of the Romaines,
yt he might not bee caried to Rome,
               
and in captiue maner be ſhewed in triumph.
For this noble king was not only valiante in
warre, but alſo in phiſicall matters very expert,
had the knowledg of many hearbes, and
making tryall of ſundry ſimples that doe reſiſt
poyſon in men condemned to dye, as Galen
writeth in his firſt booke de Antidotis, and
finding ſome to remedy ye poyſon of Spiders,
ſome of Scorpions, ſome to doe good againſt
the byting of Vipers, others of mad Dogs,
many to remedy the poiſon of hearbes, and ſo
ſundry others to help the venime of ſundry
poiſons: he endeuoured to make a mixture
of diuerſe ſimples, hoping thereby to haue a
ready remedy againſt all kindes of poiſon, &
the ſame was termed after his name Mithridatium:
wherein he was nothing deceiued.
For this noble king in his life time vſed much
and often ye medicine. And (as it is written) being
ſubdued by the Romaines, and making
choiſe rather to dye then to be led captiue to
Rome, attempting to kill him ſelfe with poiſon,
and taking of it great quantity, tooke no
harme thereof, for that his body (as ye hiſtory
ſaith) by vſe of ye medicine altered, & reſiſted
the action of the poiſon. Notwithſtanding
his wife and two daughters dyed before
his face wich the ſame poiſon. Since that

time, the efficacy and ſtrength of ye medicine,
hath in all ages (euen vnto theſe our dayes)
bene confirmed. For after that Pompey the
great had cōquered this valiante king, ſearch
made in his Cloſets, amongſt ſundry Iuels,
many ſecret medicines to expell diuerſe poiſons,
and to cure other internall diſeaſes,
were founde: where alſo was the deſcription
of this medicine. And albeit Pompey, as a
martiall man, had greateſt care of other
matters, yet aduertiſed what goodnes might
come by ſuch ſecret medicines, commaunded
one Pompeius Lineus his libertine, well
ſeene in ſciences, to conuert all thoſe medicines
written in the Pontike tongue, into latine.
And it doth appeare by the hiſtory, that
many volumes of phiſicall maters were there
founde, which peruſed and conſidered of by
Aſclepiades, in thoſe dayes a famous phiſition
in Rome, were by him commended, and at
his petition tranſlated into latine, whereof
Pliny writeth in his 25. booke. Of ſo many
excellent medicines left by Mithridates, none
was ſo highly eſteemed, & ſo well accompted
of in all reſpectes, as that termed Mithridatium:
whoſe excellent vertues againſt poiſon
were firſt approued in Mithridates owne
body, and after confirmed by ye 
               Romaines.
            
            
               
In trueth a man may iuſtly blame the hiſtoryographers,
which in deſcribing the noble
actes of Pompey the great, doe ſo ſlenderly
paſſe ouer this his facte, in tranſlating of this
medicine experienced of this noble king. For
in my iudgemēt things iuſtly weighed, none
of all Pompeyes valiante feates of armes, no
not the royall triumph made at Rome to declare
the victory in cōquering king Mithridates,
hath ſo largely aduaunced his name,
as the making knowen to the world of this
medicine. For the profit of yt victory came only
to Rome, and the triumph and praiſe for ye
ſame done at yt time in Rome: But the profit
of this medicine hath bene by his meanes imparted
to ye whole world, & the cōmendation
and praiſe for the ſame, is iuſtly to be yeelded
from all the world in all ages and times: So
that as all the world is greater then Rome, &
all times more then one age, ſo doubtleſſe
more renowne is due vnto Pompey for diuulging
of this medicine, then by the conquering
of this king, or by the triumph for the
ſame. Although in the Emperoure Nero his
time, ſucceeded a learned phiſition called Andromachus,
who to the imitation of this medicine
compounded an other, adding to the deſcription
of Mithridatium the fleſh of Vipers,

and ſome other ſimples, which medicine
he called Theriaca, of the Greeke worde

                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , which doth ſignifie a wilde and venemous
beaſt, whereof the Viper is one. Yet
this ought not to imbaſe any praiſe due to
Mithridates for compounding of Mithridatium.
For all men doe know that it is eaſier
to adde to a thing done, then to finde out the
ſame, and greateſt praiſe is to be geuen to the
firſt inuentor. So that the diſhonour yt came
to Mithridates by Pompey his victory was
not ſo great, as the praiſe and commendation
for the inuenting and compounding of Mithridatium.
And his calamity to be ouerthrowen
is greatly eaſied, his ignomy to be
cōquered after a ſorte aduaunced, that by the
ſame this medicine was diuulged, which
happely would not haue bene performed, at
ye leaſt ſo generally, had he dyed otherwayes,
and not bene by Pompey ouercommed. For
had not Mithridates in him felfe approoued
the excellency of the medicine, purpoſing to
haue killed him ſelfe rather then to come into
the handes of the Romaines, ſurely the notable
vertues of the medicine would not ſo
well haue bene belieued. And had not this
king in that his miſerable eſtate made triall
in his owne body, who would haue belieued

that a mans body might by any meanes be
brought ſo ſtrongly to reſiſt poiſon? Who but
one in ſo deſperate a caſe, would attempt to
take ſtrong poiſon vpon the credit of any medicine?
Great good therefore to the whole
world this ouerthrowe of Mithridates did
breede: And great renoume thereby came,
not to the conqueroure onely, but to the conquered:
to the one for inuenting, to the other
for diuulging of ſo great a medicine, which
for theſe two thouſand yeares hath bene of all
men in all ages had in great eſtimation, not
in Pontus onely & Bithinia, & Greece adioyning
to the ſame, but in all other nations and
countryes where any learning is, commended
by all writers, Grecians, Arabians, and
Latiniſts. And what greater aſſurance can
there be of the notable vertues of this medicine,
then the confirmation of the ſame from
Mithridates to this our time, then that all
phiſitions of the world in all ages, times, and
places, in Greece, in Arabia, in Italia, in all
partes of Germany, in France, in Spayn, in
Portingal, in Hungaria, in England, in
Scotland, Moſcouia, Tartaria, Sueuia, yee
in all partes of Aſia, Aphrica, and Europa,
euen amongeſt the ſaluage and barbarous nations,
hath and doth greatly eſteeme of Mithridatium,
               
and ſo of Theriacle, and ſeeke
and prouide for them to ſerue their countryes
in caſes of neede. How carefully all princes &
rulers, hath & doth take order for the well cō
               pounding
of theſe medicines. Doubtles had
not experience confirmed their excellent qualyties,
the eſtimation would not haue ſo many
yeares continued: but longe before this
our age, would haue bene diminiſhed, and by
this time come to nothing. Great therefore
are theſe medicines, and in a heigh degree to
be eſteemed. And albeit great prayſe and cō
               mendation
is due to both medicines (I meane
Mithridatium and Theriacle) yet greateſt
praiſe is to be geuen to Mithridatium. Firſt
becauſe of his antiquytie, which was of Mithridates
inuented, & approued many yeares
before Theriacle was compounded. For long
after Mithridates was ouerthrowen▪ 
               Andromachus
phiſition to Nero ye Emperour, & very
expert in cōfecting of medicines) as Galen
writeth in his firſt booke de Antid.) with
diligence conſidering the compoſition of Mithridatium,
chaunged ſome of the ſimples,
toke out ſome, and added others, ſuppoſinge
by that alteration to make the medicine more
perfite, & of mightyer force againſt poiſon. In
which conſideration he added the fleſh of vipers

to the compoſition of Mithridatium,
and leauing out ſome ſimples vſed of Mithridates,
added others, in number moe, and (as
he thought) of greater power againſt poyſon.
Whereby it may reaſonably bee gathered, yt
               Andromachus not fully ſatiſfied with the cō
               poſition
ſet downe by Mithridates, ſuppoſing
ſome defect in it, by that his alteration, endeuoured
to make an other medicine in all degrees
more perfite, in which no want might
be found, and ſo he addreſſed the ſame, and called
it Theriaca. Whereby no doubt ſome
good time after, Mithridatium was leſſe eſteemed,
and the credit thereof much imbaſed,
vntill time by longe experience had ſufficiently
declared, wherein Theriacle doth excell
Mithridatium, and in what poynts Mithridatiū
               
is not onely not inferiour to Theriacle,
but of more efficacy then it.
            So Galen in his firſt booke de Antidot.
writeth. Becauſe of the fleſh of Vipers in Theriacle,
it is much better in the byting of the Viper
then Mithridatium. But in all other effects,
Theriacle can not onely not doe more then Mithridatium,
but is inferiour. The ſame Galen
in 2. de Antidot. writeth in like ſorte. We will
begin (ſaith he) with the deſcription of Mithridatium,
for it is ſtronger againſt many poiſons

then Theriacle, though this be better againſt
the byting of the Viper. Whereby we
may gather yt where Andromachus endeuouring
to make a more perfit medicine, then yt
lefte of Mithridates, did in ſome part accompliſh
his purpoſe, leauing a medicine excelling
the other in one particular thing, but not
of like efficacy generally. It happened therefore
in this caſe (if a man may compare natures
actions to arte) as in ye framing of mā,
who doth in all actions exceede all creatures,
yet not ſo generally, but yt in ſome one action
ſome one beaſt doth excel man, as we reade yt
the Aegle hath perfiter ſighte then man, the
Dogge doth paſſe man in ſmelling, the Ape
in agility, the Tiger in ſwiftneſſe. But whoſoeuer
will with reaſon conferre all actions,
he ſhall find in all together, that man paſſeth
all creatures, for ſuch is his conſtitution and
temperature, that moe and perfiter actions
doe proceede from man thē any one creature.
So it came to paſſe, that Andromachus indeuoring
to make a medicine of greater perfection
then Mithridatium, obtayned that in
one thing his medicine excelled, but in many
other was inferiour to Mithridatium. For a
man may gather the vertues of theſe two medicines,
at large diſplaied in Galens workes,

into three orders. Firſt that they are good
againſt the byting and ſtinging of venemous
beaſtes, be they Serpentes, Scorpions, mad
Dogges, or others. Secondly they ſerue to
cure all kinde of poyſons taken into the body.
Thirdly to remedy other inwarde diſeaſes.
Now it is certaine, and long experience hath
confirmed, that both theſe medicines haue
ſtrong and mighty vertues to remedy al three
kindes of effectes: yet no doubt one of them
is in ſome effectes of more power then the other.
As Galen writeth that Theriacle for ye
byting of Vipers, is ſtronger then Mithridatium:
In other it doth exceede Theriacle.
So we may iuſtly conclude with Galen, that
againſt the byting & ſtinging of beaſtes, Theriacle
hath more force: But for inward poiſons
& inward diſeaſes, truly Mithridatium
is of more might. Wherefore albeit both medicines
are noble, & greatly to be deſired, yet
Mithridatium is to be accompted of greater
price, as hauing more generally ſtronger vertues,
and ſeruing to moe purpoſes.
            And it may be obiected, that in Theriacle cō
               piled
by Andromachus are many ſimples added,
which haue great vertue againſt diuerſe
kindes of poyſons, and happely are therein of
more efficacy, then thoſe in Mithridatium,
               
left out by Andromachus in his Theriacle.
Whereby it may be coniectured, that Andromachus
making choyſe of the ſimples, ſelected
ſuch as were of greateſt force to remedy
poiſons, & omitted the weaker, adding in their
place, ſome other of more ſtrēgth: ſo it is probable,
yt 
               Theriacle ſo compiled, is of greater
myght in all kinde of poyſons. But Galen in
his workes declareth, that experience in his
time did ſhewe the contrary, and reaſon confirmeth
the ſame. For let the ſimples in Theriacle
be in number moe, and in qualytie of
greater efficacy, yet it muſt be remembred,
that it is certayn, that when in compoſitions
ſome one ſimple is ſet as the baſe and ground
of that medicine, that that ſimple doth drawe
the force and ſtrength of all ye reſt to his property
and action, and ſo euery ſuch compound
is ſpecially good in that one thinge for which
it was deuiſed. Now when Andromachus
did make the fleſh of vipers as the baſe and
grounde of his Theriacle, it foloweth that the
ſame doth drawe to it the qualities and vertues
of all the ſimples in Theriacle: ſo it doth
come to paſſe, that Theriacle is far better thē
               Mithridatium, againſt the bytinge of vipers
and ſuch venemous beaſts. And for that all other
ſimples in it, are caried by the fleſh of the

vipers, to exercyſe their force ſtrongly therin,
they haue the leſſe power to remedy other poiſons.
When no ſuch thinge was intended in
the compoſition of Mithridatium, it is agreable
to reaſon that the ſimples in it euery
one retayneth his owne power and property,
and ſo one ſuch quality or forme doth
reſulte by the myxture, of great ſtrength againſt
all poyſons. Moreouer it is certayne
that in the compoſition of Mithridatium, are
fewer ſimples in number then are in the confection
of Theriacle, then it followeth that
when like quantity of both is taken, as for example,

                  ʒ j, ſurely a greater portiō of euery
one ſimple is taken in Mithridatium, and
leſſer in Theriacle, the leſſer quantity muſt
needes haue leſſer ſtrength in remedyinge other
poyſons, ſaue that, to the which the baſe
or grounde doth call them. So it remayneth
fyrme that Galen writeth, as obſerued in his
time, that Theriacle is in deede better then
Mithridatium in bytinge of vypers and like
beaſtes, and that Mithridatium exceadeth
th'other in remedying all other poiſons taken
into the body and inward diſeaſes. Wherefore
in this our countrey where no ſuch perill
and danger is of vipers, Mithridatium by
good reaſon ought to be reputed of greater eſtunation
then Theriacle.
            
            
               
               Of the compoſition of Mithridatium.
               
                  IT ſhall not be amiſſe in this
place, to declare the compoſition
of this medicine. And
it is to be noted, that where
all writers doe greately cō
                  mend
it, yet certayne it is,
that they do not in one ſorte deſcribe the makinge
of the ſame. But almoſt euery authore
hath a ſeuerall deſcription, differinge in the
number of the ſimples, and alſo in ye proportions
and quantities. In time paſt ye Apothecaries
in making of Mithridatium, folowed
moſt the deſcription of Nicolaus Praepoſitus,
of Auicenna, and of Nicolaus Mirepſicus,
ſome of Aetius, ſome of Paulus. The former
deſcriptions contayninge aboue one hundred
ſimples, were long and laborious, and required
many ſupplyes, for ſimples vnknowen.
Wherefore in theſe our later daies, in which
learned men haue examined euery thing perfitly,
the moſt part haue commended one of ye
three compoſitions expreſſed by Galen in 2. de
Antid. of the which, two were taken (as Galen
wryteth) out of the bookes of Andromachus.
The firſt found without name is attributed

to Andromachus, as compounded by
him, of others ſuppoſed the very ſame, which
was found in the cloſets of kinge Mithridates,
& after tranſcribed in the workes of Andromachus.
The ſecond deſcription is alſo
recyted out of Andromachus bookes, vnder
the names of Antipater and Cleophantes.
The thyrd is referred to Damocrates: It doth
not appeare by any thing written by Galen,
which of theſe three compoſitions is beſt to be
folowed. And ſo of ye learned men of our time,
ſome hath vſed the one, and ſome the other.
Many doe beſt like of the firſt deſcription attributed
to Andromachus, both for that Andromachus
by the opinion of Galen and of all
other auncient wryters, was adiudged very
ſkilfull in cōpounding of medicines, & therein
did farre excell all phiſitions of his time,
and alſo becauſe it may bee iuſtly gathered,
that that deſcription is the very ſame, which
Mithridates vſed. For in ye 
                  Andromachus
was phiſition to Nero the Emperour of
Rome, it appeareth that he obtayned to ſee
and to conſider, of all the bookes which
found in Mithridates cloſet, were tranſlated
into latine by Lineus the grammarian, and
brought to Rome. And it is not agreable to
reaſon, that Andromachus ſtudying to make

a more perfit medicine then that which came
vnder the name of Mithridatium, woulde
alſo inuent an other vnder the ſame name.
But it is very probable that Andromachus
with diligence peruſinge the recept of Mithridatium,
vſed of Mithridates, would leaue
it in ſuch forme as Mithridates compoūded
it, and deuiſe an other by the ſame, which hee
meant to make more perfite. Andromachus
therefore not alteringe the deſcription of Mithridatium,
but leauing it in the ſame forme
as it was founde, confected an other, which he
called Theriaca. And where we doe reade in ye
2. de Antid. of Galen, an other recept ſet
downe vnder the name of Theriaca Mithridatis,
with aſſertion that the kinge vſed the
ſame: yet it ſeemeth not to be yt 
                  Mithridatium
which was foūd in the cloſet of that king. For
all writers doe confeſſe, that Andromachus
long after added to that recept of Mithridates,
the fleſh of vipers: ſo that Mithridatium
compounded by Mithridates had not in it the
fleſh of vipers, and that Theriacle which Galen
in that place calleth Theriaca Mithridatis,
doth receaue the fleſh of vipers, ſo it foloweth
that it is not the Mithridatium vſed
of Mithridates. And he that will with diligence
peruſe that recept mentioned of Galen,
                  
by the name of Theriaca Mithridatis, ſhal
                     •
                  
finde it in ye ſimples not much differing from
Theriaca Andromachi, and many things repeated
twyſe in diuers clauſes doth argue an
imperfection: that Galen may be thought in yt
place to ſpeake after ye common opinion, whē
hee affirmeth it to be the ſame which Mithridates
vſed, being in deede farre different
from that medicine. Wherefore we may reaſonably
conclude, that the firſt recept tranſcribed
by Galen in 2. de Antid. out of Andromachus
workes, is in truth the ſelfe ſame
that Mithridates vſed, and in mine opinion,
in that reſpect the better to be liked, and the
rather to be followed. For what better aſſurance
can we haue of the true and perfect confection
of this medicine, then that which was
deliuered by Mithridates? and what deſcription
can more aſſure vs of the effects of this
medicine, then yt compoſition which Mithridates
followed, who firſt gaue ſo notable
proofe of the medicine, and thereby the firſt
credite to the ſame? So that if by diſcourſe of
reaſon it may be proued, that an other deſcription
is more artificiall and more agreable
to the rules of confection of medicines: yet in
mine opinion this deſcription, being the ſame
that Mithridates vſed, ſet downe happely by

the king, more according to experience then
art, is rather to be folowed then any other,
thought more cunningly addreſſed. Neuertheleſſe
it is not to be deemed that kinge Mithridates
was altogether vnſkylfull, when
many volumes concerning phiſike were found
in his cloſet, & tranſlated into latine, brought
to Rome. And it appeareth that he taking
delight in medicinall matters, had about him
dyuerſe phiſitions, who mighte artificially
diſpence the ſimples in Mithridatium. And
Galen in the ſayd booke de Antid. commendeth
the diſcription of Mithridatium attributed
to Andromachus: whereby it appeareth,
that this deſcription of Mithridatium
is not addreſſed altogether without arte. For
which cauſe, ye learned of our time, haue great
reaſon to preferre that deſcription of Mithridatium
before others. Albeit ſome do more
eſteeme the compoſition of Damocrates, as
with more arte and more cunning diſpenſed.
Notwithſtanding becauſe it is very likely yt
the precept attributed to Andromachus, as
found in his bookes, is the ſelfe ſame that
Mithridates vſed, and hath of many, in this
our countrey, of late yeares bene folowed: I
thought beſt in this place to expreſſe ye ſame,
as I doe finde it in Galen, in 2. de Antid. and

is in many antidotary bookes allowed, which
is as foloweth.
               
                  
                     
                        Rec. glicirrizae
                        
                           ʒ vij. ob. iiij.
                     
                     
                        Spicae nardi
                        
                           ʒ vij. ob. iij.
                     
                     
                        Croci, cinnamomi,
Zinziberis.
                        ana. ʒ vij. ob. ij.
                     
                     
                        Galbani.
                        
                           ʒ vij.
                     
                     
                        Castorei, costi,
                        ana. ʒ vj. ob. ij.
                     
                     
                        Scordij, iunci odorati,
                     
                     
                        Opoponacis,
                     
                     
                        Terebinthinae.
                     
                     
                        Seminis dauci.
                        
                           ʒ vj. ob. iij.
                     
                     
                        Opobalſami,
                        ana. ʒ vj. ob. iiij.
                     
                     
                        Thlaſpios.
                     
                     
                        Thuris, myrrhae,
                        ana. ʒ vj.
                     
                     
                        Succi hyppociſtidis.
                     
                     
                        Polij, Se
                              •
                           elios,
                        ana. ʒ v. ob. ij.
                     
                     
                        Cypheos, Caſiae.
                     
                     
                        Stiracis
                        
                           ʒ v ob. iiij.
                     
                     
                        Petroſelini
                        
                           ʒ iiij. ob. iij.
                     
                     
                        Opij.
                        
                           ʒ iiij. ob. ij.
                     
                     
                        
                           Nardi gallicae,
                        anae ʒ. i
                              ••
                           .
                     
                     
                        Seminis feniculi,
                     
                     
                        Nardi indicae,
                     
                     
                        Gentianae,
                     
                     
                        Mei athamantici,
                     
                     
                        Roſarum ſiccarum,
                     
                     
                        Cardamomi, Folij.
                     
                     
                        Aniſi,
                        
                           ʒ. iij
                     
                     
                        Acori, Hiperici,
                        ana ʒ ij
                     
                     
                        Gummi Acaciae,
                     
                     
                        Phu pontici.
                     
                     
                        Scinci, 
                        
                           ʒ ij. ob. ij
                     
                     
                        Vini choi, & mellis Attici deſoumati,
                        ana q. ſ.
                     
                  
               
               BEcauſe many learned men of this age doe
beſt allowe the deſcription of Mithridatium,
deliuered by Damocrates, as more artificially
done, in which the rules of compounding
of medicines are more exactly followed,
and is in truth eaſier to be made of the Apothecaries,
better digeſted in orders, not hauing
ſo ſmall diuiſions in the proportions, as
this attributed to Andromachus, and ſo may
better be made of the Apothecary in what
quantity ſhall ſeeme good to him: therefore

I doe thinke it not amiſſe in this place to recite
that deſcription alſo of Mithridatium of
Damocrates, as the ſame is expreſſed in the
ſecond booke of Galen de Antidot.
                   that ſuch
as ſhall thinke better to follow the ſame, may
by this pamphlet knowe the ingredience,
which is this.
               
                  
                     
                        Rec. Mirrhae, croci,
                        ana. ʒ. x
                     
                     
                        Agarici, Zinziberis,
                     
                     
                        Cinnamomi, thuris,
                     
                     
                        Spicae, Nardi,
                     
                     
                        Thlaſpios,
                     
                     
                        Seſelis, ſtechados,
                        ana. ʒ. viij
                     
                     
                        Opobalſami, coſti,
                     
                     
                        Iunci odorati, ſtyracis,
                     
                     
                        Galbani, terebinthinae,
                     
                     
                        Piperis longi, castorei,
                     
                     
                        Sucoi hypocistidis,
                     
                     
                        Opoponacis,
                     
                     
                        Folij malabathri recētis,
                     
                     
                        Caſsiae ligneae,
                        ana. ʒ. vij
                     
                     
                        Polij, ſcordij, Seminis
                     
                     
                        dauci, bdellij,
                     
                     
                        Piperis albi, cypheos,
                     
                     
                        Carpobalſami,
                     
                     
                        
                           Nardi celticae, Gūmi,
                        ana. ʒ. i
                              •
                            boni ponderis.
                     
                     
                        Petroſelini, Opij, Cardamomi,
                     
                     
                        gentianae, Seminis
                     
                     
                        feniculi, dictāni,
                     
                     
                        Foliorum roſarum,
                     
                     
                        Aniſi, aſari, acori,
                        ana. ʒ. iij
                     
                     
                        Phu, ſagapeni,
                     
                     
                        Succi glicirrizae,
                     
                     
                        Mei Athamantici,
                        ana. ʒ. ij 
                              •
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        Acaciae,
                     
                     
                        Ventris ſcinci,
                     
                     
                        Sem. hiperici,
                     
                     
                        Vini & mellis
                        q. ſ.
                     
                  
               
               
                  PLiny in his 22. maketh mention of a kinde
of Mithridatium made of two dry Walnuts,
two Figges, xx. leaues of Rhue, one
graine of falte: Aetius and other writers die
recite the ſame. And they greatly cōmend it
againſt poiſon, & other peſtilentiall diſeaſes.
            
            
               Of the quality and temperament
of Mithridatium.
               
                  
                  IT is of all men of our age cō
                  feſſed,
and taken for a truth,
that medicines compounded
haue their vertues, and doe
their effectes according to the
nature of the ſimples whereof
they are compounded. So it muſt needes followe,
that Mithridatium compounded of many
ſimples, hath diuers & ſundry properties, &
thoſe agreable to the ingredience. And wheras
in Mithridatium are ſimples differing in
quality, ſome hauing power to heate, ſome
other to coole, yet the greateſt number are in
quality whot and dry. And albeit theſe being
contrary, and repugnant, do make alteration
the one with the other: notwithſtanding it
muſt needes follow, that thoſe reactions not
being infinite, at the laſt one forme and quality
muſt reſult in the compound, agreable to
the natures of thoſe ſimples, which doe beare
and cary dominion. Now whereas in Mithri
                     
                        •
                     atium
ye moſt ſimples haue quality to heate
and dry: it followeth that Mithridatium
hath a whot and dryinge power. And as compounds
muſt haue a time of fermentation, and
rypening (for the reactions of the ſimples are
not perfited in a moment) So the quality or
forme which doth aryſe by the workinge of

one ſimple with an other, hath not his perfection
preſently after ye mixture, but a certayne
ſpace of time muſt be geuē before we can iuſtly
expect the true action of the medicine compounded,
as proceeding from the forme of the
medicine, which doth reſulte by fermentation
of the working of the ſimples in ye compound.
So that before ye due time, we may not loke for
the vertues aunſwerable to the compoſition,
but that ſome one ſimple aboue the reſt may
ſhew his quality, that the compound medicine
may do an effect aunſwerable to that ſimple,
and not as proceeding from the whole cōpoſition.
In which reſpect, Galen wryteth that
Theriacle newly made, doth greately prouoke
ſleepe, by reaſon that Opium (that is the ioyce
of Poppy prepared) myngled in it, being of
greater force then other ſimples, before fermentation
doth exerciſe his quality more then
the reſt: and after that his quality is by fermentation
with other ſimples broken, he can
not ſo ſtrongly do his operation. So Theriacle
after the iuſt time of fermentation doth not ſo
mightely prouoke ſleepe, as newe Theriacle
doth. The ſame is obſerued in Mithridatium,
and all other compounds, that immediately
after myxture, the qualities of the ſimples
are ſtrongeſt, and ſhewe their powers

beſt. But certaine it is, that after due time of
working, when the compound is fully rype, no
one ſimple doth worke in it according to his
owne nature, but by the reactions one common
nature doth reſult, which cannot be attributed
to any one or moe ſimples, but may
be truely ſayd a common nature aryſinge out
of all the ingredience, and from that forme the
actions of the compound do proceede. Which
forme is to vs not certainely knowen, ye effects
are beſt learned by experience. Wherfore it is
very wyſely wrytten of Ioannes de ſancto Amando
in his expoſition vpon the antitodary of
Nicolaus, that it is better alwaye to vſe a medicine
compound exerciſed, then one lately inuēted
whereof we haue no experience. For although
we may by diſcourſe of reaſon gather
that ye compound, as Mithridatium, is whot,
and dry, becauſe ye ſimples wherof it is made,
are the moſt part whot and dry, and then experience
doth confirme this coniecture: yet other
qualities of Mithridatium and of other
compounds are not ſo eaſely knowen by any
diſcourſe or method, but chiefly learned by experience.
For the cōmon forme from whence
many ſecrete vertues doe procede, is not knowen
by any learning or methode. So it muſt
needes follow, that the actions of ye ſame forme

are not learned by methode or doctrine, but
chiefly by experience. In which reſpect alſo,
we haue reaſon to retaine the deſcription deliuered
by Mithridates, before any other, for yt
that noble king gaue better proofe in himſelfe
of the vertues of the medicine, then any other
hath of it by any other compoſition.
            
            
               That Mithridatium is not ſo whote as Theriacle,
compounded after Andromachus deſcription,
which is in theſe dayes moſt
followed: and that it may more
ſafely bee vſed.
               
                  Some learned men of
our time, by reaſon go
about to diſcourſe, and
prooue, yt 
                  Theriacle is
not in quātity ſo whot
as Mithridatium, &
in that reſpect doe inferre,
that it may more
ſafely bee vſed. Which they doe gather,
for that in Theriacle a greater quantity of
Opium (that is the ioyce of Poppy prepared)
is, then in Mithridatium, whoſe cooling
power doth much abate the heating qualities
of other medicines. This argument in theſe

two medicines newly made, before fermētation
is perfite, may take place. For then in deede
euery ſimple retayning his owne vertue, Opium
may remitte the whot qualities of the reſt:
at what time neither of theſe medicines is generally
to be vſed, but for ſome ſpeciall point,
as Galen to prouoke ſleepe, doth counſell new
Theriacle. But after fermentation is perfited,
all the ſimples one altering the other, euery
one hath qualities ſo broken, that not one
retayneth his owne nature: then ſurely the cō
                  mon
forme reſulting, doth follow the ſimples
which doe beare dominion, and they in both
theſe medicines are whot and dry, and ye whot
and dry ſimples in Theriacle are moe in number,
and of greater force, then in Mithridalium:
as may appeare to him that will compare
both confections. Whereby it followeth that
the common quality aryſinge in Theriacle,
doth heate more then that in Mithridatium.
Neyther the increaſe of Opium doth in proportion
aunſwere the ſtrength of heating in it:
neither hath it any ſuch force ſo greately to
contemper the ſimples, as theſe men doe imagine.
For although Opium hath ſpeciall property
aboue other medicines to induce ſleepe,
yet his cooling quality (of many writers) is not
accompted ſo great, for it hath ſo ſtrong bitternes:

that many doe ſuppoſe that it hath a myxt
nature, conſiſting of many whot partes: if it
be true that Galen wryteth in his 5. booke of
ſimples, that all bitter thinges are whot, and
being certaine yt 
                  Opium doth ſtupefy, & ſtrongly
cauſe ſleepe, it is of ſome inferred yt that power
doth rather proceede of a property of ſubſtaunce,
then altogether depend of his cooling
quality. Wherefore it is not without reaſon
affyrmed by learned men wryting hereof, that
Mithridatium doth not ſo ſtrongly heate as
Theriacle: and experience doth alſo confirme
the ſame. For who ſo vſeth theſe medicines,
doubtles he ſhall finde that Theriacle rightly
compounded after Andromachus deſcription
(which is in all this treatiſe to be vnderſtood,
and is in theſe dayes of the Apothecaries moſt
commonly made, and ſo of the wyſer ſort in
moſt vulgare vſe) doth heate more then Mithridatium,
which is confeſſed of the wryters,
commenting vpon the antidotary of Nicolaus,
and in this our age of many learned
men affyrmed. For which cauſe, many in theſe
dayes without daunger do vſe Mithridatium
when neede requireth. In ſōmer time, & whot
ſeaſons, very few and ſeldome Theriacle. And
Galen doth expreſly forbyd to gieue Theriacle
to children. More ſafe therefore is the vſe of

                  Mithridatium then of Theriacle, not onely in
reſpect of the heating quality, which ſeemeth
leſſe, & more gentle in Mithridatium: but alſo
in reſpect that a greater quantity of Opiū
                  
is in Theriacle. For admit that Opium by fermentation
ſuſtayneth great alteration, notwithſtāding
ye common forme of Theriacle taketh
ſome infection of Opium, yt ſome effecte
declining to his nature, doth alſo proceede,
and the more, if that ſtupefying and dormitory
power in Opium, doth depend rather of property
of ſubſtance, thē of manifeſt cooling quality,
as ſome do argue. For the properties of
ſubſtance in medicines, haue not like alteration
by fermentation, as the manifeſt qualities
haue by reaction: we may therefore feare the
common and often vſe of Theriacle for ye quantity
of Opium in it. For like reaſon, often vſe
of Theriacle may be ſuſpected, becauſe of the
fleſh of vipers added to it, as the baſe & groūd
of the medicine. For notwithſtanding ye great
care of the place, of the time, of the kinde obſerued
in taking and chooſing of the viper, the
diligence in preparing, the care of myxture
with other things, for the better correction of
the malignity of ye beaſt, which hapely might
remaine in the fleſh: yet a man may doubt of
ſome errour cōmitted▪ in ſo daūgerous a caſe.

And though all thinges therein bee ryghtely
done, yet ſome little quality of the nature of ye
beaſt will remayne, that a man may ſuſpect
often to vſe the medicine. And where kinge
Mithridates was expert in phiſicall matters,
it is not to be adiudged but that he did aſwell
know the nature of the fleſh of vipers, as hee
knewe the venime of the beaſt: ſo it is very
likely that he purpoſing to compounde a medycine
to be often taken for his ſafty againſt
poiſon, did of purpoſe make it without the
fleſhe of vipers, knowing that if he ſhold haue
added that, he myght not with like ſafty haue
dayly vſed ye ſame. And what learned men doe
ſo often in theſe dayes counſell Theriacle, as
do Mithridatium? and we doe in this our time
with leſſe danger and more ſecurity, for the
meaſels, the ſmale pockes, the wormes, and for
internal diſeaſes in children, geue Mithridatium▪
                  
then Theriacle. We may therefore in
mine opinion iuſtly conclude, that Mithridatium
is a medicine more generally to be vſed,
& may oftener and with more ſafty be geauen
then Theriacle.
               
            
            
               Of the age and keeping of
Mithridatium.
               
                  
                  Wwhere we haue ſufficiently declared
that compounde medicines
muſt haue a time of fermentatiō
before they be brought
to vſe: this place requireth that
we doe declare the tyme, when Mithridatium
is ſufficiently fermented and come to his perfection.
Galen in his bookes de Theriaca doth
write exactly of the time of fermentation of
Theriacle, affirming that it is throughly concocted
in xii yeares, not denying but yt it hath
concoction in ſhorter time, as in 5. and in 7.
yeares, ſo that we are to iudge that Theriacle
is not ſufficiently ripe to bee vſed before fiue
yeares, and in 7 yeares is better digeſted, & in
xij yeares hath his full fermentation, and perfect
concoctiō. Yet Aetius and Paulus Aegineta
doe meaſure the concoction of Theriacle in
ſhorter time. For Aetius ſayth that Theriacle
is fermented in xij monethes, and that it may
be vſed after one moneth in ſome caſes, and ſo
affirmeth that it endureth to thirty yeares.
Where Paulus appointeth ye age of Theriacle
to be twenty yeares, therein he doth not greatlye
differ from Aetius: for hee making the
terme of Theriacle to be 30 yeares, doth alſo
ſay that then it is good in light diſeaſes. So
that by Aetius, Theriacle may be vſed after xij

monethes, and continueth in good perfection to
20. yeares, and after declineth, that at 30. yeares
it is aged, yet may it be vſed in deſeaſes which
are not very great. Our later writers doe generally
better allowe of Aetius & Paulus opinion
for the age of Theriacle, then of Galens:
and ſome ſuppoſe an errour or fault in yt place
in Galen: and ſo they doe affirme yt 
                  Theriacle
is fully concocted in the ſpace of xij monethes,
and then may bee ſold of the Apothecary: and
that the ſame being well kepte, will continue
in good ſtrength 20. yeares, and after doth decline
and waxe weaker, and yet may be vſed
when it is 30. yeares olde, but it is then as an
old man decayed, and weake of ſtrength.
               Of Mithridatium the former writers haue
ſet downe no time of concoction, leauing to a
wyſe man to determyne of yt, which is written
accordingly of Theriacle. For bycauſe theſe
two medicines are confected of many ſimples,
not greatly differring, they haue many things
cōmon: ſo as yt which is of ye one affirmed, may
bee applied to the other. Notwithſtanding as
in the number & nature of ye ſimples, they doe
not in all poynts agree: ſo no doubt in ye age of
theſe medicines ſome difference is to be allotted:
yet ſuch, as a man exerciſed in theſe matters,
may eaſely ſupplye. For in that Theriacle
                  
hath in it the fleſh of vipers, and a greater
portion of Opium, then is in Mithridatium, it
is certaine that Theriacle requireth a longer
time to his concoction: for the fleſh of vipers
muſt haue perfect fermentation with the ſimples
for his correction. In like ſorte Opium
doth aſke a long time of fermentation, & for yt
cauſe Galen. 12. de Method. Medend. ſaith, yt
                  Philonium is not to bee vſed in a yeare after
it is compounded, and that the vſe of it after
ij. iij. or iiij. yeares, is more without daunger.
Whereby hee geueth vs to vnderſtande, that
medicines which doe receaue Opium, require
longe time of fermentation: ſo that Theriacle
receauing a greater portion of Opium
then Mithridatium, ought to haue a larger
ſpace to be concocted, then it. Now if Theriacle
hath his perfection in one yeare, ſurely
Mithridatium is throughly fermented in ſixe
monethes, and may be kept in good ſtrength,
not only as ſome haue writen to three, or fours
yeares, but to x or xij yeares: and except we
ſhall to ſuch time proroge his olde age, there
will be no proportion in ye times. For if Theriacle
being cocted in one yeare, doth laſt to 20.
yeares before it doth waxe olde, ſuerly by the
lyke proportion, Mithridatium not well fermented
vnder ſix monethes, may iuſtly be ſaid

to cōtinue in good efficacy to 10. or 12. yeares.
And as Theriacle after 20. yeares waxeth old &
feeble: ſo Mithridatium after 10. or 12. yeares
doth decline, that being 20. yeares old, is then
decayed and of litle force. As we may probably
determine theſe times, ſo there can be no
certainty ſet to leade vs to the time. For if the
ſimples be not in good perfection, or the ſame
orderly and well according to art compoūded,
or otherwayes the medicine not well kept:
then it will ſooner wax old, & loſe his ſtrength.
But as Galen writeth, to theſe great medicines,
great care muſt be had of the choiſe of ye
ſimples, that they may be had in ye readieſt perfection.
And like diligēce muſt be gieuen, that
the confectioner may in all pointes doe his duty,
not in making only, but alſo in keeping ye
medicine. And therefore princes are greatly to
bee commended, which doe by theyr authority
prouide, that theſe medicines myght be well
ordered. And for that many doe in theſe dayes
procure Mithridatium, to haue it in their
houſes ready to vſe, it is good to know yt it is
beſt kept in veſſels of glaſſe, of ſiluer, and of
gold, and that it is not ſo good to keepe ye ſame
in Tinne veſſels, for that they are often corrupted
with ledde, and gather a ceruſe matter,
as Galen writeth in his firſt booke de Antid. I

wiſh therefore that the marchaunts may hereof
be admoniſhed, which doe commonly bryng
Theriacle from Venice, in veſſels of ledde,
wherby no ſmall daūger may grow in ſo noble
a medicine, & ſo greatly eſteemed. So wee
muſt not fill the veſſell to the toppe, as we ſay
brime full, but leaue ſome reaſonable ſpace,
for the medicine to worke, to exhale, & breath:
and for that cauſe, Galen counſayleth to open
the veſſell ſomtymes.
            
            
               Howe to knowe good Mithridatium.
               
                  WEe doe read in ye booke of Galen
de Theriaca ad Piſonem,
                   &
in his bookes de Antidot. how
diligently hee labored to gieue
certen notes and rules, how a
man might know the goodnes
of Theriacle, and when the ſame was perfit:
and ſo did in thoſe his workes ſet downe both
rules and proofes thereof. So carefull in old
time wryters were, that wee might be aſſured
of the goodnes of theſe noble medicines, ſeruing
in ſo great affectes, and in ſuch common
vſe. But ſuch is y• malice of many which ſeeke
gaine, that of the greater price a thinge is, the
more ſophiſtication they vſe in it: yt if meanes
were not declared, to diſcerne the good from

the bad, the ſophiſticated from ye true: no man
might aſſure himſelf of the certaintie of any
thing in eſtimation. It is therefore very neceſſary,
to ſhew how men may know when Mithridatium
is good and perfite, and when the
ſame is naught & corrupted. And for y• 
                  Galen
in his foreſaid bookes, hath labored to declare
this in Theriacle, we will apply the ſame to ye
examination of Mithridatium. For in yt theſe
medicines haue a great affinitie, they doe in
moſt thinges ſo concurre, that ye ſame which is
ſaid of ye one, may be applyed to ye other. Firſt
therefore in conſiſtence of ſubſtance, if Mithridatium
be well and artificially compounded,
it ought to haue an equality of ſubſtance, not
drie nor ouer liquide, and moyſte, not to ariſe
in clots and lumpes, but it muſt be in ſubſtance
coherent, equall, and ſmooth. In ſmell
it muſt reſēble the ſimples whereof it is made,
and yet not to offer to the noſe, the ſmell of any
one ſimple aboue the reſt, but to yelde a common
odoure ariſing by fermentation of all the
ſimples, not peculier to any one, nor vngratefull,
but anſwerable to the ingredience, reſembling
no rottennes, nor muſtines.
               In like ſort, the taſte muſt not expreſſe any one
ſimple, but be as a common ſapore, reſulting of
all the ſimples: ſo that if in taſting of Mithridatium
                  
you may manifeſtly diſcerne or diſcry
any one ſimple in it, ſurely that Mithridatium
is not well confected. Therefore it may not
haue in it any exceſſe of vngratefull bitternes,
which doth ſometimes happen, when the confectioner
doth either take hony ouerold, or
boyle ye ſame ouermuch. So it may not ſhew
to the taſte any ſowrenes, which happeneth if
the wyne vſed be not well choſen, or not well
handled in the compounding.
               It ſeemeth that Andromachus in his Theriacle
had a great care of the coloure of it, and
for that cauſe only (as ſome do write) did adde
vitreoll prepared, to yelde to it an exact blackneſſe.
But Mithridates attending rather the
goodnes, then by coloure to pleaſe ye eye, had
no ſuch care of the coloure, and ſo is thought
to put nothing into Mithridatium to gieue it
any freſher coloure then the ſimples woulde
yeelde. Notwithſtanding Mithridatium truly
made, hath his coloure conuenient ariſing of
the ſimples, which ought to be a little rednes
declining to yealowneſſe, which coloure, after
due fermentation, doth appeare with ſome
freſhenes, & by time in keeping, the ſame doth
decline to an obſcure darknes. Although at ye
firſt it may be thought hard to iudge of Mithridatium
by theſe ſignes, yet after a man

is exerciſed in often vewing, taſting, and ſmelling
of Mithridatium, his ſauoure, coloure, &
taſte will be ſo familiar, that a man ſhall quickly
diſcerne the true from the mingled, the ſophiſticated
from the right compoūded. A man
therefore that wil iudge herein, muſt often ſee,
taſte, and ſmel to Mithridatium, vntil his ſenſes
bee throughly acquainted with the qualities
of the medicine, and then hee ſhall not bee
eaſely deceaued.
               For better certainty of the perfection and
goodneſſe of Theriacle, Galen doth mention
of certaine experiments to be made for triall
thereof: as to gieue the ſame to ſuch as haue
ben either hurt externally by ſome venimous
beaſte, or haue taken inwardly ſome poiſon.
Whereof princes haue made trial in cōdemned
perſons, caſting thē to vipers, or gieuing
vnto them ſome ſtrong poyſon, & after cauſing
them to take of Theriacle the quantity
of a nutte: and experience declared, that
ſuch as tooke Theriacle eſcaped the venime
of the poyſon, and they which tooke it not, dyed.
Which proofe experienced in Theriacle,
may alſo be applied to the triall of Mithridatium,
and in that by all auncient writers Mithridatium
is reputed of greater force then
Theriacle, in curing all poyſons inwardly taken:

It followeth, that if it be good and truly
made, it muſt remedy ſuch as haue taken
poiſon into the body. And becauſe cōmon
perſons haue not like oportunity to make this
experiment in men cōdemned, as princes haue:
therefore we may in other beaſts (as in dogs,
in cokes and hennes, being domeſticall creatures)
experience the ſame, geuing to theſe
beaſts ſome poiſon, and after Mithridatium:
and if the beaſt doe take no harme by the poiſon,
we may be aſſured of the goodneſſe of the
medicine. And ye like is to be expected, if you
gieue the remedy before the poyſon be taken.
For the medicine doth not onely defend the body
from the venime of the poiſon, after it is taken:
but alſo preſerue, if it be firſt vſed: as we
read of king Mithridates. In like maner Aetius
biddeth vs to gieue to a doue, to a henne, or
to a dogge, the quantity of two ſcruples of
Opium, and ſtraight after to miniſter to the
ſame, Mithridatium, diſſolued in ſome liquore,
and if it be good and pure, the beaſte
ſhall ſuſtaine no harme by the Opium.
               
               
                  Galen deliuereth as a certaine ſigne of the
perfect goodnes of Theriacle, to gieue it to
one that hath taken a purgatiue medicine.
For (ſaith he) if it be perfect good, the medicine
will not purge at all: if after the taking

of Theriacle, ye medicine doth his operation, &
purge neuertheleſſe: ſurely then yt 
                  Theriacle
is vnperfect, & not good. We do not read this
ſigne applied to Mithridatium: yet I ſee no
cauſe but yt we may proceede in like maner to
try ye goodnes of it. For it is certaine yt no one
ſimple is in ye cōpoſition of Theriacle (which
may be ſayd to ſtay ye working of ye purgatiue
medicine) which is not in Mitrhridatiū. For
where Theriacle doth aboūd with ye fleſh of vipers,
put as the baſe of the medicine, no wryter
hath attributed to yt parcell any ſuch property.
The like may be ſayd, if you diſcourſe
through all the ſimples added to this confection
of Theriacle, and not in Mithridatium.
Therefore it ſeemeth moſt agreeable to reaſon,
that the property to ſtay the working of a
purgation, doth proceede from the common
forme of Theriacle: and ſo we may with like
reaſon expect the ſame effect in Mithridatidatium,
and rather in Mithridatium, becauſe
all writers doe confeſſe that it is of greater
force for inwarde poiſons, and inward affects,
then Theriacle. Therefore I may cōclude, that
Mithridatium gieuen after a purgatiue medicine,
will better ſtay or diminiſh ye working
thereof, then Theriacle: and our experience
in common practiſe, doth confirme the ſame.

For in this our age, who doth after purgatiue
medicines (to bridle their ouerworking) ſo
often gieue Theriacle, as Mithridatium?
Wherfore no doubt we may make triall of ye
perfection and goodnes of Mithridatium, in
like ſorte as Galen writeth of Theriacle, that
is to ſay, to miniſter to one a purgatiue medicine,
and after to gieue to the ſame man a reaſonable
quantity of Mithridatium: and if the
medicine doth not worke according to his nature,
or that his operation be leſſe thē it ought
to be, ſurely that Mithridatium is very perfect
and good. Otherwyſe, if ye medicine doth
proceede in his action to purge, and the ſame
appeareth not diminiſhed by the taking of
Mithridatium, then we may greatly doubt of
the goodnes of the Mithridatium.
               
            
            
               How we may make good Mithridatium,
in theſe dayes.
               I am not ignorant that diuers later writers
do conſtantly affirme that in this our time we
cannot make either good Theriacle or good
Mithridatium, for that they ſay we do lacke
many ſimples going into their compoſitions,
and muſt vſe others to ſupply, and ſo may iuſtly
doubt whether ye ſupplies doe in all points

aunſwere the true ſimples, and they which we
haue are brought from farre coūtryes, long
iournies, ſome by lād, ſome by ſea, eſpecially, to
vs in England, whereby they may be thought
greatly weakned, and to looſe much of their
ſtrength and vertues, before we haue them.
So they conclude, that we cannot by any diligent
meanes, make theſe medicines in that
perfection as the auncient writers did, and ſo
we may not ſo exactly looke for the effects of
theſe medicines promiſed by the olde writers.
Whereto it may bee ſayd, that in parte this
allegation is true, and in deede a fewe yeares
paſt, when this fault was found, it was more
truer then now it is. For in truth when good
learning began to ſpring after barbariſme,
thē in deede great was ye wāt of true ſimples,
not in theſe two medicines only, but in many other
moe. But now in this our time all things
are called to a better examination, and it is certain
that few ſimples are now ſacking, namely
to ye making of Mithridatium: and it is alſo
euident yt the care of phiſitions and of ye Apothecaries
(I meane of ye better ſort) is ſo honeſt
and ſo great, yt they doe not only diligently
procure from ye places (where the ſimples
which goe to the compoſitions of theſe medicines
do grow) the very true: but alſo prouide

that the ſame may in thoſe coūtries be gathered
out of conuenient places, in due times and
ſeaſons. And ye help of ſo many and great nauigations
into forrain dominions (more in theſe
our dayes vſed, then of longe time before vs)
doe gieue ſo good oportunity to haue true and
good ſimples, yt to ſay truly what I do thinke
of this our age, I doe verily belieue that we
haue as true and as good ſimples, as Galen
had in his time: eſpecially ſuch as are requiſite
to the making of Mithridatium. For
we do reade what a dooe Galen made to haue
pure and good Cinnamum, and made it an
Emperoures worke to procure the ſame, and
in lacke of Cinnamum did ſometimes ſubſtitute
double quātitie of Caſia. Whoſoeuer wil
with diligence examine the ſackes of Canella,
brought from the new found coūtries in great
plenty in theſe dayes, may eaſely finde the perfect
kindes of Cinnamum, agreable to the deſcription
of ye old wryters: & alſo the true Caſia.
We may alſo vnderſtād, how in old time
things were ſophiſticated by the monumēts of
old writers. And who doth not now perceaue
and acknowledg many errors in Di
                        •
                     ſcorides
bookes, in deliuering the deſcriptions of ſimples,
not ſo well knowē in his time, as now by
theſe nauigatiōs made manifeſt? Many things

written by the auncient authors, by heareſay,
are now to the eye made euident and knowen.
Wherefore it is true yt now in this age things
are ſo exactly examined, & ſo diligently ſought
for, and ſo painfully cared for: that in truth I
doe ſuppoſe we may make in this time Mithridatium,
in very good perfection: and the ſimples
wanting, are few in number: y• ſubſtitutes
for the ſame, by learned men ſo well conſidered
of, & ſo aptly appointed: that we neede not ſo
greatly to doubt thereof, but may iuſtly expect
th'effects attributed to the medicine, if not in
ſo large manner as the auncient writers haue
deliuered, yet in ſuch reſonable ſorte, yt we may
eſteeme of the medicine, as of a precious iewel,
as of a thing good againſt ſome drie-poiſons, &
diuers internall and peſtilentiall diſeaſes.
            
            
               Mithridatium made in England is rather
to bee choſen, then that which is
brought from Venice and other
countryes beyond the
Sea.
               SOme haue ben of opinion, that Theriacle &
Mithridatium may better be made in other
countryes, (as namely at Venice, and Conſtantinople)
then in England: affirming that

moe and better ſimples are growing there,
which wee doe lacke: and that ſuch ſimples
which are found neither in theſe countreys,
nor in England, but are procured from ye eaſt
and weſt Indians, do ſooner and in better perfection
come to thoſe places, then to vs. Surely
if things be rightly weighed, this allegation
is not true. For the partes of Italy, and the
territories about Conſtantinople, haue very
few or no ſimples growing in their ſoyles,
which do not ſpring in England, required to
the compoſition of Mithridatium, and many
are founde in England in better perfection
thē there. As namely, who doth not graunt the
beſt ſaffron to be in England, & all trauelers
which come into England, do confeſſe that our
ſoyle doth produce very good plantes (as
namely Scordium) in better kinde than other
countreys: and ſome ſtrangers do ſend into
England often for ſome of our ſimples, which
do go into the compoſition of Mithridatium.
It is alſo well knowen, that ſtraunge herbes
tranſplanted hither, and ſome of ſeedes ſowen,
doe very kindely ſpring in England, which is
alſo confeſſed of ſome later writers in theyr
Herballes. And where few ſimples requiſite
to make Mithridatium are wanting (as not
growing in England) it ſeemeth moſt true,

that they which doe growe here, are moſt
kindly for vs (for natiue things are beſt aggreable
to our conſtitutions.) So yt whereas the
moſt ſimples in number required to the compoſition
of Mithridatium, are found naturally
to ſpring in England: I ſee no cauſe why
we ſhould not beſt allow of it made heere: neither
ought ye paucitie which we do lacke, to
draw vs better to eſteeme of a forrayne medicine
made of all forrain things. And as I dare
affirme that in this countrey we do lacke as
few ſimples which go to the making of Mithridatium,
as any of the forenamed places: ſo
I may iuſtly pronounce, that ſuch which are
wanting to them, and to vs alſo, may and are
as eaſily, and in as ſhort time tranſported to
vs, as to them. For in theſe dayes, the ſpices
and other thinges brought from ye 
                  Indians by
nauigation to Liſhburn, and thence to other
coūtreys of Europe, may as ſoone be tranſported
to vs as to Venice. Where in times paſt
ſuch marchandiſe were caried from the eaſt
Indians to Alexandria by land vpon Camels,
that trade is now decayed, and for ye moſt part
ſuch drugges are imported by ſea, and ye ſhips
doe commonly light in ſome part of Portingal:
ſo that it is eaſie to ſee that our Apothecaries
in England, may with as good conueniency

procure thē from thoſe places, and in as
good perfection, as the marchaūts of Venice
or of Conſtantinople. Neuertheleſſe if any
thing lacking with vs, doe come to Venice: it is
ſoone tranſported thence to Antuerp (as in the
ſpace of 24. dayes) & ſo to vs. Wherefore I doe
not cōceaue, why any man ſhould thinke yt our
Apothecaries in England, cānot make Mithridatiū
                  
in as good perfection as other coūtries
doe: but rather we ought to adiudge ye contrary,
that it made here, is in as good perfection,
and more agreable to our natures & conſtitutions,
then yt which is cōpounded in other countreys,
as altogether made of ſtraūge ſimples,
which haue no affinity with our bodies. And if
we do with iudgement cōſider how vncertaine
wee are of the true confection, when it is done
in places ſo farre from vs: it may make vs
greatly to feare, leaſt they which do cōpound ye
medicine, hauing more care to gaine, then truly
to diſpence ye ſame, will neither make choiſe
of the beſt ſimples, neither vſe diligence in the
mixture. And if the princes of the countryes
with carefull lawes prouide, that the confectioners
ſhall doe their duties truely, in compoū
                  ding
and obſeruing the things needeful to the
well handling of ſo noble a medicine: who can
aſſure himſelfe of the truth of the marchaunt▪
                  
in tranſporting ye ſame? whoſe profeſſion is by
his marchaundize to gaine, & ſo no doubt will
vſe meanes euery way to increaſe his profite,
that we may iuſtly ſuſpect, that they doe very
ſeldome bring into England from Venice
or Conſtantinople, any Theriacle or Mithridatium
vnmingled: & the better ſkill they haue
in their trade, with more arte they can ſophiſticate
their wares, to deceaue the iudgement
of the buyer, that I greatly doe doubt yt litle
or none at all of theſe medicines are brought
true and ſincere vnmixed: as hath bene tryed
when ſtraungers in England haue purpoſly
examined both Theriacle and Mithridatium
compounded in London, with other brought
from the ſayd countryes, & haue gieuen praiſe
to that made in London: as maiſter Hughe
Morgane her Maieſties Apothecary can witnes,
whoſe confections haue bene better commended
by ſtrangers, then any of other places.
Farther whereas of Mithridatium there are
diuers deſcriptiōs, not all of like goodnes (as
I haue before declared) how can we tell what
compoſitions the confectioner followed? hereof
ye marchaūt not hauing care, can not informe
vs: ſo we remaine vncertaine of the true knowledge
of the medicine, not hauing knowledg of
the ſimples vſed in that wee buy: and as wee
know not aſſuredly what kinde of Mithridatium
                  
we doe buy: ſo we remaine vncertaine of
the medicine. And where wee haue declared yt
                  Theriacle & Mithridatium haue their times
of fermentation, of their duraunce, and that
after a certaine age they decline, waxe old, &
feeble: we cannot know the time of that which
is forraine made: ſo we haue vncertaine medicine,
and ſhall be vncertaine how long we may
keepe the ſame. All which circumſtances may
be eaſly knowne, in that which is made in England.
Galen in his bookes doth not allowe
of Theriacle kept in Tinne veſſels, affirming
that they are corrupted with ledde, the cer
                     •
                  ſe
whereof doth corrupt ye medicine. What ſhall
we then ſay to our marchauntes, which doe
bring Mithridatium & Theriacle from other
countryes in veſſels of ledde? doe not theſe
medicines take of ye veſſels great corruption,
and notwithſtanding are ſolde to the great annoyance
of the Queenes ſubiects? Wherefore
if we doe truely weigh in the ballance of reaſon,
that which I haue here written) and yet
much more may in this matter be ſayd) ſurely
we ſhall not onely confeſſe that none of theſe
medicines, ſpecially Mithridatium, made in
forraine places, are, or ought to be ſo greatly
eſteemed, as thoſe which are made at home in
England. And we may truely confeſſe that we

are luſtly puniſhed in expending our money vpon
forraine things, when we haue & may haue
better at home. And it is very lamentable to
conſider, yt ſtraungers doe dayly ſend into England
a falſe & naughty kinde of Mithridatium,
& Threacle, in great barrelles, more then a
thouſand weight in a yeare, and vtter ye ſame
at a lowe price, for iij. d. or iiij. d. a pound, to ye
great hurt of Her Maieſties ſubiects, and no
ſmale gaine to ſtraungers purſes. Wherefore
to conclude, I do counſell all Engliſh men rather
to buy Mithridatium truly made in England,
then that which is brought from other
coūtryes. And here it is to be wiſhed, that our
moſt gratious Soueraigne thereof informed,
may by Her magiſtrates doe, as in olde time
Emperoures of Rome did, that is, by her edict
take order, that our Apothecaries may
with care and diligence ſelect the ſimples
which doe go to the making of this medicine,
that the true may bee gotten in their beſt perfections,
and the ſame truely choſen may bee
rightly diſpenſed, and in all pointes according
to arte well ordered, the time of fermentation
duely obſerued, the maner of keeping, in good
ſorte performed: and ſo all things rightly adminiſtred
by her Maieſties carefull ordinaunces,
I doe not doubt, but yt wee ſhall in this

our countrie haue both Mithridatium & Theriacle
in good perfection, that we may finde
the great effects and noble vertues of both, ſo
largely deliuered by the auncient writers in
their monuments.
            
            
               Of the vertues and propertyes of
Mithridatium.
               
                  
                     GALEN in his bookes de Antidot.
doth not particulerly expreſſe the
properties of this medicine: but generally
enunceth, that it doth good
againſt all poiſons, and is ſtronge to remedy
many inwarde diſeaſes. It doth appeare by ſō
                  dry
places in Galen, that Mithridatium hath
all the vertues which Theriacle hath,
and is inferior to it only in the curing of the
byting of vipers, and ſuch other venemous
beaſtes: in other things it doth excell Theriacle.
Then where Galen at large diſplayeth ye
faculties & vertues of Theriacle in his bookes
De Theriaca ad Piſonem, & ad Pamphilianū, he
needed not particularly to ſet downe ye properties
of Mithridatium. For it doth ſuffice for
vs to looke into ye qualities & powers of Theriacle
to learne the faculties of Mithridatiū.
But ye latter writers in all their antidatories

doe expreſſe ye ſame at large. In which bookes
we do reade thus.
               
                  Mithridatium is next in qualitye and vertue
to Theriacle, and doth little differ from it,
ſaue that Theriacle is in temperament hoatter,
and ſtronger againſt ye biting of ſerpents.
Concerning other properties of Mithridatium
confueſly numbred in theſe bookes,
it will not be amyſſe to reduce them to a
methode and order: So we may affirme
that the effects and vertues of Mithridatium
doe conſiſt in two ſpeciall points. Firſt to preſerue
from infirmities, then to cure diſeaſes.
For as Galen writeth, this medicine doth not
onely cure affects which are ingendred, and
helpe to remedy poiſon taken: but vſed before,
doth ſo defend, yt poiſon gieuen after ſhall doe
no harme, as happened to king Mithridates,
when he would haue poiſoned himſelfe, Who
ſo vſeth Mithridatium in health, ſhall in ſuch
ſorte make his body ſtrong, yt neither poiſō, nor
other diſeaſe ſhall eaſely harme him. And as
man conſiſteth of body and ſoule, ſo Mithridatiū
                  
doth in both exerciſe his vertues. His properties
are ſuch, that it quickeneth the ſenſes,
cleareth the minde, and ſharpeneth the
witte. Which actiones it perfourmeth
by clenſing the inſtrumentes which doe

ſerue to theſe fūctions, from groſſe and thick
vapours. And where oftentimes many fumes
doe aſcend, by the which the animal ſpirits
are obſcured, the vſe of Mithridatium doth
diſſipate, extenuate, & conſume the ſame: wherby
theſe animal facultyes & powers are cleared,
and ſo a perfite minde is preſerued in a
whole body. For Mithridatium maketh
ſtrong all parts which doe ſerue for nutrition,
increaſeth naturall heate, openeth obſtructions,
expelleth ſuperfluity, wherby the naturall
faculties of the body doe perfectly performe
their functions, the ſtomacke in good order deſireth
and digeſteth alimentes, the liuer maketh
good and perfit bloud, and ech parte putteth
from him his excrementes in conuenient
order and time. So the hart receiuing
pure bloud, maketh good ſpirits fit for his actions,
which he orderly ſendeth to the animal
partes, & to other members of ye body. Wherby
all the principall partes being in their perfections,
doe euery way well diſpence through
the body, that it remayneth in good order to
performe all actions. And whereas mā is ſubiect
to many caſualties, Mithridatium vſed as
is ſayd, ſo defendeth the body, that no poiſon
ſhall eaſely harme it. Whereof Mithridates
gaue proofe, w
                     ••
                   by longe vſe of this medicine.

ſo altered the conſtitution of his body, that no
poiſon could annoye it.
               In peſtilentiall ſeaſons, it preſerueth ſuch
as do vſe it: where of we haue examples, not
only in auncient writers, but alſo in our daily
experience.
               Now concerning ye parte curatiue, though
the ſame may be gathered by that which is
already written in preſeruatiō: yet it is better
for order ſake to repeate one thing often, then
to be thought inſufficient by omitting any
thing. Wherfore we may ſay with the olde authors
(which proofe alſo confirmeth) that Mithridatium
remedyeth diſeaſes of the minde,
taketh away ſtraunge imaginations, helpeth
melancholy phantaſies & paſſions, which
drawe men often to deſperation. This it performeth
by altering the bloud, opening the
ſplene, by chaunging and diſſipating the vapores
arriſing of the melancholy humore,
and yeelding to the animall ſpirits pure and
good exhalations, and by comforting the
hart. And where oftentimes colde and groſſe
fumes do aſcend ſo plentifully, that the wittes
are dulled, the ſenſes and diſcourſe of reaſon
either greatly impaired or cleane taken away,
the iudgment and memory hurt or aboliſhed:
Mithridatium by his ſweete brethings quickeneth

the ſame, reduceth the braine to his
temperament, altereth, conſumeth, & ſpendeth
thoſe vapoures, and bringeth man to his naturall
ſtate, and when it is newe, it induceth
ſleepe, and remedieth the furyouſnes of many
madmen.
               No man needeth to doubt of the mighty
power of Mithridatium, in curing all kind of
poiſons either outwardly receaued or inwardly
taken, being to that purpoſe chefly deviſed,
and of long time experienced to be therin
of great force. Although for the biting and
ſtinging of venemous beaſtes, it is ſuppoſed of
leſſe might then Theriacle: yet it is of all men
confeſſed much ſtronger to cure poiſons, taken
into the body by potion, or otherwayſe. So his
might is great to heale all peſtilent (all and
malignante diſeaſes, cureth the plage, feauers
which depend of naughty and malignant cauſes,
helpeth the french pocks, the ſmall
pocks, the meaſels: and in all other inward
diſeaſes which are great, and ſuch as other
medicines can not remedy, Mithridatium is
found to haue a ſpeciall grace to cure them.
And in ſuch deſperate diſeaſes & caſes, when other
remedies will not ſerue, then we ought to
flye to Mithridatium, as Galen writeth of
Theriacle.) For being a noble medicine of

great powre, it is not to be vſed in euery affect
of little moment.
               Wherefore it is written that Mithridatium
cureth all infermities of the head in men, and
women, if the ſame doe come of a cold cauſe:
namely it helpeth the melancholy madnes, the
Falilng ſicknes, ye Hemicrane or meagrame, ye
paines in the eyelids and browes, the watring
of the eyes, the paines of the eares, of the teeth,
of the mouth, of the iawes, the ſquinancy,
the appoplexy, the litargie, and ſuch other cold
diſeaſes of ye head: in which caſes it is inwardly
dronken, & alſo outwardly applyed, ſprede
in the forme of an emplaſtre: it comforteth ye
hart, & doth good in the paſſions of the ſame.
               It helpeth the diſeaſed of the breaſt, cureth
the cough, ſhortnes of breath, ſpitting of
bloud, the pleuriſy and ſtiches of the ſide, the
phthiſike & other inward diſeaſes of the breaſt
and loūgs. In theſe later cauſes, eſpecially for
ſtiches, it is applyed outwardly, ſpred emplaſtre
waies, and in the chough and ſuch other
diſeaſes, it is inwardly miniſtred with ſome
conuenient liquor: for ſo it cutteth the groſnes
of the phlegme, and maketh it eaſy to be auoydid,
openeth the pipes, and enlargeth all thoſe
parts which doe ſerue for breathing.
               To proceede to the affects of the ſtomake, it

prouoketh appetite, remedieth ouer much deſire
to eat, termed Canina appetentia: for it drieth
ſuperfluous, & reſolueth & correcteth corrupte
humores: it helpeth concoctiō, by increaſing
of naturall heate, cureth euill belks, & inflation
of the ſtomacke: for it breaketh winde,
and will not ſuffer any thing to corrupt in
ye ſtomacke: it ſtayeth vomiting by ſtrengthening
the ſtomacke: by keeping the ſtomacke
cleane from winde, ſuperfluous, and euill
humores, it taketh away the abhorring of
meate.
               It doth great good in all diſeaſes of the
belly, paynes in ye guts, called the Iliaca paſſio,
the bluddy flix, and all other fluxes gieuen
with the decoction of the flowers of the pomegranate
called Balauſtia. In the colike of the
belly it is very good, and to eaſe the paynes of
the belly after a purgatiue medicine, it hath a
ſpeciall vertue. For it taketh away the malignitie
of the medicine, breaketh winde, and doth
ſtrengthen parts wekened by the purgatiue
medicine. It nouriſheth diſeaſes & paynes
in the ſydes and about the mydriffe, it helpeth
the infirmities of ye kidnes, and of the bladder,
breaketh the ſtone, remedieth the paſſions of
the matrix, prouoketh the naturall courſes in
women, and ſtoppeth the ſame if they doe abound.

For it openeth the paſſages by extenuating
that which by groſnes doth ſtoppe the
wayes: and by making nature ſtronge, ſtaieth
fluxes, which commonly do grow immoderate
by weaknes. It diminiſheth ye ſwellings & hardnes
of ye matrix, & of other parts, it doth remedy
ye barrennes in women, & maketh them fertill.
Mithridatiū
                   is accompted a ſpeciall good
remedy againſt the payne of the ioynts, to cure
the goute and the Sciatica, for that it drieth ſuperfluous
humores, ſtayeth the reume, & maketh
all parts ſtronge. But it muſt be gieuen,
not at the firſt, when the payn beginneth, but ater:
when the rage of the paine is paſt, and the
body ought firſt to be purged before you gieue
Mithridatium. And it vſed before the fits of
the goutes, maketh greatly for preſeruation,
to keepe one from often acceſſiōs of ye goute. It
helpeth ye diſeaſes of the ſineues, ye reſolution, yt
paulſye, the crampe, ye diſeaſes called Tetanos
Ambroſtotonos, and Opiſtetanos: for it augmenteth
naturall heate, diſſolueth, by euaporatiō,
humores ſoken into ye ſyneues, & reſtoreth
the ſpirits and ſtrength. It helpeth the ſhaking
fits of feauers, & geauen twyſe or thriſe
halfe an houre before the fitte, oftentimes it
doth cure the feauer quartan and the quotidian.
            
            
               
               Of the vſe of Mithridatium.
               THe better to know the vſe of Mithridatium,
we are to conſider the time moſt conuenient
to gieue it, the quantity, & the maner
of gieuing. For the time, we may with Galen
counſaile to miniſter the ſame in no wyſe
vpon a full ſtomacke, but after concoction is
perfit. The vſuall time and beſt to take it, is in
the morning faſting, it is not ſo good to gieue
it when the ſtomacke and firſt veines are full
of crude and rawe humoures. And before it
be gieuen, it is good to procure the belly to be
looſe, according to Galens counſell in miniſtring
of Theriacle, in his booke ad Pamphilianum.
               
            
            
               Of the quantity.
               AS Galen writeth in his booke de Theriaca
ad Piſonem, ſo we may affirme that one
quantity of Mithridatium is not to bee gieuen
to all men, in all times▪ and in all diſeaſes.
And the better to finde out the iuſt quantity,
wee are to remember, that Galen in the ſayd
booke mentioneth of two quantityes gieuen
of Theriacle, the one referred to a haſell nut,
the other to a beane of Aegypt. And for that he
alſo affirmeth, yt in ſtrong diſeaſes the greater
quantity is to be gieuen, and the leſſer in
light▪ diſeaſes, and ſo in great infirmities hee

miniſtreth the quantity of an haſell nut, and in
diſeaſes of leſſe force, vſeth the portion of the
beane of Aegypt: it is euident that the haſell
nut importeth the greater quantity, and the
beane the leſſer. So that by Galen the greateſt
quātity to be gieuen of Theriacle, is meaſured
by an haſell nut, and the leaſt by a beane
of Aegypt. And the forme of ſpeach which Galen
vſeth to expreſſe theſe quantities, in my
iudgement doth importe the bigneſſe, and not
the weight of the things. For Galen in euery
place writeth ad magnitudinem fabae aegyptiae, &
ſo ad magnitudinem nucis auellanae, to the michelty
or bignes of a beane of Aegypt, the bignes
of an haſel nut. Which maner of ſpech hath
relation to the bignes & not ye weight. We are
therefore to conſtrue Galen, that in great diſeaſes
Theriacle is to be miniſtred, that his
bulke may bee equall with the bignes of an
haſell nut, and in other diſeaſes, of a beane of
Aegypt. Maſſarius in his booke de ponderibus
reducing theſe things to weight, ſaith that
Paba Aegyptia importeth a ſcruple and a halfe,
that is, halfe a drachine: and that nux auellana
ſignifieth a drachine. So if we will by weight
meaſure the quantities, the greateſt which is
to be giuen of Theriacle is a drachine, and the
leaſte is halfe a drachine.
               
               
                  
In that Mithridatium is like to Theriacl
                        •
                     ,
it may be gieuen in like quantity. And becauſe
it is more gentle, and not in quality ſo whot as
Theriacle, and not receiuing the fleſh of vipers,
nor ſo great quantity of Opium, it is a
more ſafe medicine▪ & ſo may be gieuē in greater
quantity, that wee neede not be bounde to
an haſell nut, nor to a beane of Aegypt, but
may as cauſe ſhall require exceede both. For
which cauſe the writers of our antidatory
bookes, not without reaſon doe affirme, that
Mithridatium may bee miniſtred to foure
Drachines, that is halfe an ownce. And Duraſtantes
in his cōmentary vpon Luminare Maius
bringing the quantity of a nut, and of a
beane to ye weight, ſaith that an haſell nut ſignifieth
an ounce, and ye beane of Aegypt halfe
a ſcruple, and becauſe the one proportion is very
great, the other ouer litle: therefore he putteth
his ſenſure, that an haſell nut containeth
ij. Drachines, or iiij. Drachines at ye moſt. And
the beane of Aegypt one Drachine, or ij. Drachines
at the moſt. So that by his opinion we
may miniſter Theriacle to ij. or iij. Drachines,
when the diſeaſe and the caſe ſo requireth.
Wherefore wee neede not greatly to feare to
gieue Mithridatium in ſo large a quantity as
is preſcribed in our antidotaryes, that is, to

miniſter it to halfe an ounce. Neuertheleſſe
in theſe dayes wee doe very ſeldome miniſter
Mithridatium ſo largely: for moſt cōmonly
we follow the preſcript of Galen, and gieue of
it the quantity of a beane, or of an haſell nut.
In meaſure wee preſcribe the halfe a drachine and
two ſcruples, and in mighty diſeaſes, and vrgent
cauſes we offerre one drachine, and very
ſeldome doe procede to a greater quantity:
which proportions in my iudgement are moſt
vſually to be kept. Yet by this diſcourſe it appereth,
yt we are not ſo to be reſtrained to theſe
quantities, but that we may vpon occaſions
gieue a greater quantity, if the patient, the
diſeaſe, & other circumſtances doe ſo require.
And hereby alſo it appeareth, that we cannot
ſo determine the quantity of this medicine,
nor of any other, that the ſame may alway be
obſerued: but the certaine appointment of the
ſame muſt bee left to the diſcretion of him
which doth miniſter the medicine, to preſcribe
the quantity according to the circumſtances
of the preſent caſe. And therefore it ſhall not
be amiſſe here to conſider more particularly of
the circumſtāces, whereby we may the better
attaine to coniecture the iuſt quantity to bee
gieuen in the preſent caſe. Firſt therefore wee
are to conſider the countrey where the party

which is to take the medicine, doth inhabite, &
here alſo the time of yeare. And as Galen writeth
of Theriacle, that in the Eaſt partes & in
hoate coūtryes, in ſommer and hoate ſeaſons
it is not to be miniſtred: ſo we may affirme
of Mithridatiū, yt in hoate coūtryes & ſeaſons
we ought to refraine frō much geiuing of it.
Wherefore when occaſion is to gieue in ſommer,
we muſt preſcribe a leſſer quantity then
in winter, and in the ſpring time. So we may
gieue a bigger quantity in theſe north parts,
then in hoater countreyes. The like reſpect
is to be had of the liquore in which wee gieue
it, that in hoate places & ſeaſons it be mingled
with a cold liquor, as with water: and in cold
countries and times with a whot liquore, as
with wyne.
               The like conſideration is to bee had of the
temperament of the body, and of the age. In
which reſpect Galen doth forbid cholerike &
hoate conſtitutions to take Theriacle. And
ſuch muſt with more warineſſe vſe Mithridatium,
and in leſſer quantity and mingled with
ſome conuenient liquore, moderate the heate
of the medicine.
               Concerning age, Galen doth forbid the gieuing
of Theriacle to children, for (ſaith he) the
mightines of the medicine doth exceede the

ſtrength of children, and diſſolueth their bodies:
and telleth an hiſtory of a childe deſtroide
by taking of Theriacle. We may therefore admoniſhe
phiſitions of theſe dayes, which doe
often & boldly gieue Theriacle to yonge children
for the wormes: let them conſider what
warrant they haue ſo to doe: it is to be feared
leſt they endaunger thereby ſo tender bodyes.
And we are to be circumſpect in gieuing Mithridatium
to children, and to be very wary
in ye miniſtring of it, leſt we do harme therin.
And yet I do thinke we may with more ſafety
miniſter Mithridatium then Theriacle. To
yong men & ſuch as haue much natural heate,
we may gieue this medicine: but neither oftē,
nor in great quantity, & in water rather then
wine. To mē of yeres which are in ye declining
age, in greater quantity, and in wyne. In reſpect
of the diſeaſe we are ſo to meaſure the
quantity of the medicine, that in a mighty and
a ſtrong diſeaſe, we gieue a greater quantity.
Therefore as Galen wryteth of Theriacle, ſo
we may determine of Mithridatium. In ſtrōg
poyſon, and to ſuch as are bitten and ſtinged
with virulent beaſtes or mad dogs, we gieue a
greater quantity: in other diſeaſes the quantity
of the medicine ought to be according to
the greatnes of the ſicknes. So when there is

time to digeſt the medicine, we may appoynt
a greater quantity: when little time is for concoction,
then leſſer quātity ſerueth. The like
conſideration is to be made in all theſe circū
                  ſtances
of ye liquore, in which the medicine is
to be diſſolued, the ſame to be of a greater or
leſſer meaſure, according to ye circumſtances:
whereof we are to ſpeake more particularly
in the maner of gieuing.
            
            
               Of the manner of gieuing of
Mithridatium.
               
                  By that we doe reade in Galen in his
bookes de Theriaca and de Antidot.
yt appeareth that thauncient phiſition
did ſeldom, or not at all gieue
either Theriacle or Mithridatium dry, and
not diſſolued in ſome liquor▪ and the reaſon
may be, for that they gaue it moſt commonly
before or after poiſon, or to preſerue or cure
ſome peſtilentall ſicknes, which depended of
a malignant cauſe. In which reſpect, it ſeemeth
requiſite to miniſter the medicine in lyquid
forme, that it might haue the ſpeedy paſſage
through the body, and come to the heart,
that the ſpirites comforted, might the better
exſiſt and the ſooner expell the venyme, and the
malignity of the affect. For not only Mithridatiū
                  
                  
and Theriacle, but all other medicines
taken in a ſolide and dry conſiſtence, doe ſtay
in the ſtomacke longe, and ſuſtaine greater alteration,
than when the ſame is gieuen in a liquid
forme. For which cauſe when we haue intent
to comfort the ſtomacke, to help digeſtiō,
to breake wyn
                     •
                  e in the ſtomacke and belly,
then it is conuenient to gieue Mithridatium
in drie ſubſtāce. When intention is to remedy
diſeaſes in more inward parts of the body, in
all venimous, peſtilential and malignant cauſes,
we gieue the medicine diſſolued with ſome
liquore. And as we reade in Galen, that hee vſed
not alway one liquore, ſo he maketh mention
of theſe, of water of Mulſa, that is water &
hony, which we do cal meade or meath, of mulſum,
that is wyne and hony mingled, of acetum
mulſum, that is wine, hony and vineger, of poſca,
that is water & vineger, of certaine decoctions
made of hearbs, rootes, and ſeedes. And
it is to bee ſeene by Galens diſcourſe, that hee
made choiſe of the liquores by indication taken
of the countrey, of the time of the yeare, of the
age and complexion of the patient, and of the
nature and diſpoſition of the diſeaſe. So that
he gaue a hoat liquore, as wine or wine or wine & hony
in cold countryes and times, in aged men, &
ſuch as were not of hoate complexions, and

had not much naturall heate, & in diſeaſes not
ouer hoate, & in ſtrong poyſons. Cōtrariwiſe
in hoate regions, in ſommer time, in ſuch as
were in the flower of their age, and had cholerike
and hoat conſtitutions, dry bodies, and
did abound with naturall heate, in hoate
cholerike ſikneſſes, in great feauers, he made
choiſe of a colde liquore hauinge regarde
that the liquore might contemper and mitigate
in ſome part the quality of the medicine.
Which intētions applied to ye gieuing of Mithridatium,
it wil be eaſy to chooſe a fit liquore▪
when we are to miniſter the ſame in it.
For the ſame circumſtances will ſoone induce
vs to make choiſe of a conuenient liquore▪
wee may alſo learne by Galen, that as the
circumſtnunces are to leade vs to appoyncte
the quality of the liquore, as is aforeſayde:
So the diſpoſition of the diſeaſe will teach
vs to apt a conuenient liquore in ſubſtaunce:
for it is agreable to reaſon, that ſuch a liquore
bee gieuen, which may not only mitigate
the quality of the medicine, but with hauing
alſo property to doe good in that diſeaſe,
may further the action of the medicine. So by
good reaſon in peſtilentiall agues, in malignant
diſeaſes, the pockes, ye meaſels, we doe
gieue Mithridatium with the diſſolued water

of Dragon, or of Carduus benedictus, or in
ſome like decoction, and we doe in ſuch caſes
many times mingle with ye ſyrupe de acetoſitat
                        •
                     
citri ſyrupe acetoſus, which things doe not only
mitigate the heate of the medicine, but alſo
help and further his action. In ye cough, and
diſeaſes of the breaſte and ſyde, wee may with
Galen chooſe wine and water called mulſum
when ye patient is without a feauer: in a feauer
with water and hony called mulſa. In ſuch
a
                     •
                   are ſhorte breathed, it is beſt gieuen with
vineger compoūded with ſcilla, to them which
ſpit bloude, at the beginning, with water and
hony, which we call meade, after, with water
only, but the medicine wil be more effectuall, if
you doe boyle the rootes of Comfry in it. In
diſeaſes and paine of the belly, with water. In
ſtoppages of the lyuer, they yealew Ieaundes,
the Dropſie, with an opening decoctiō, as the
decoction of the rootes of Aſara bacca. And in
reſpect of the drouth in the Dropſie, it may be
gieuen in meade. In diſeaſes of the kidnes
and bladder, with the decoction of perſley, and
in vlcers of the kidnes, with wine and water,
in excoriation of the guttes, with a decoction
of Sumach: to thoſe which haue the falling
ſicknes, if they be leaue, with meade, & it were
two lōge, and to litle purpoſe thus perticularly

to runne thorough all diſeaſes. we may eaſely
appoint a cōuenient liquore, and preſcribe ye
quantity of ye medicine, & of the liquore, by yt
which is written, and thought I haue for example
ſake (for examples doe beſt teach) diſcourſed
in many diſeaſes, appointing ſuch liquores
which Galen doth vſe and beſt allowe
of, yet I doubt not but an expert man will for
the preſent caſe, diuiſe much better, by indication
taken of the circumſtaunces before
mentioned, That a man well weighing theſe
thinges, may quickely knowe the true vſe of
Mithridatium, and ſo not erre in the miniſtration
thereof, but gieue the ſame to the greate
good of thoſe, which ſhall take it, and to the honour
of God, whoſe goodneſſe gieueth ſucceſſe
to al medicines, to worke health
where and when it pleaſeth
his holy wiſdome.
            
         
      
   