
      
         
            
            
            CONSIDERATIONS
TOVCHING
THE NEVV CONTRACT
FOR
TOBACCO,
AS THE SAME HATH
beene propounded by Maister
DITCHFIELD, and other
vndertakers.
            Printed 1625.
         
      
      
         
            
            
            CONSIDERATIONS
touching the new Contract for
TOBACCO.
            As the same hath been propounded
by Maister Ditchfield, and other
vndertakers.
            IN all contracts, especially of so publique nature,
there are two principall qualities thought most
considerable, Iustice and Profit: For actions
vniust want the blessing of God: and vnconcionable
dammage drawes on the complaints and murmures
of men.
            The former Contract for Tobacco, hauing ben dissolued
by the Lords, as not being beneficiall to the
Plantations: it was hoped and expected that a new
Contract to succeede in planting thereof, should
haue reiected the former errors, and ben wholly bent
to the comfort of the now languishing Colonyes: But
the same hauing ben taken into the carefull consideration
of sundry persons, well willer to the plantations,
and many factions now partially affected, who
neither had any hand as furthering the former Contract;
nor came with any preiudice against this latter
when it was first broached. It hath appeared vnto thē
so full of all kinds of vniustice both to the Adventurers
and planters, and so bent to the certaine and



suddaine ruine of the plantations, that they haue
thought themselues bound both in dutie and conscience
to deliuer these Reasons insuing against it.
            
               
                  The new Contract therefore, as it hath ben deliuered
by parts in the meeting, wee conceiue to be these.
                  1 That the To
                           •
                        acco being henceforth to be made
all in roule, two hundred thowsand weight thereof
shall be taken off by the Contractors and no more, at
two shillings foure pence the best sort, and 16. pence
the other: and one third to be payd for it in hand,
the other two thirds at 6 and 6 Monthes.
                  2 That the King shall haue yearely 10000 pound
certeine rent, and that 5000 pounds more shall be
bestowed vpon the plantations
                  3. That for the third yeare, the Planter shall haue
two shillings 4 pence, and three shillings if their be
profite, & 250000. weight taken off; & the King shall
haue 15000. pounds, & 5000. to the Plantation.
                  4. That all the Tobacco of the plantation shall be
brought to the port of London, and if more doe
come then 200000. the Contracters to take out of
the whole what they will, & then to ship out the rest
into Turkey & he bound not to bring it in againe, nor
to sell it to any that are like to doe so.
               
            
            
               Reasons against this Contract.
               the whole what they will, and then we shall shift out
the rest into Turkey, and be bound not to bring it
in againe, nor to sell it to any that is like to doe so.
               It seemeth very hard that these Colonies in this
their Infancie, should haue worse conditions imposed
vpon them for their Marchandize, then any
other to our knowledge in the world, for their



goods being their owne, and they borne for subiects
they shall be commaunded to bring all into this
port of London, and yet not certaine to vent the
one moyitie of their Marchandize. For, the Colonyes,
if they stand and prosper, cannot make so little
as 400000. weight a yeare; and these Contractors
will take off onely 200000. Againe, for the particular
Adventurers and Planters, there shall no man
be certaine to haue any taken off, some onely the
Contractors particular friends; which the Contractors
having libertie to choose & refuse what they
list, there is an open gate for all parts of partialitie
in that kind. The Contractors and their freinds
making great quantities. Then for those great quantities
of Tobacco which shall be refused, what shall
become of them? They must be sent into Turkey:
new Marchants must be sought; disgraced were offered
them; losse by long keeping and shrinking;
double charge by new fraught, that the poore plā
                  ter
and Adventurer were much better to giue it away
in the plantatioe, then here after so great charge
to sell it for a little or nothing.
               2 Touching the price of two shillings 4 pence
for the best sort, and 16. pence for the rest: it is
to be knowne and considred, that of long time by
agreement betweene the Companies and Colonyes,
the Tobacco in Virginia it selfe, is valued at 3 shillings
the pound, and in Summer Ilands at 2 shillings sixe
pence: which price they planters there refusing to abate,
and the Adventurers and Marchants here not
able to giue, hath occasioned the selling of wares vnto
them at double and treeble their values, they having



their no money, but paying for all in Tobacco.
See then in what state this contract doth place them.
Their Tobacco must now be all made into roule, to
the greater wast of the commoditie, and greater
charge and labour of the planter aud maker, whereas
leafe Tobacco in Forraine parts doth sell much better,
being made thus, it is all to be brought to the port of
London, and so into the custome house, where it must
abide the Contracters pleasure and leasure, what &
whose they will take, and what and whose they will
leaue: the charge of fraught and shrinking, cannot
be valued at lesse then 4 pence the pound: so the
cleere price commeth of the best to 2 shillings and
12. pence the rest. Now experience hath shewed,
that in every yeares returnes of Tobacco, there hath
been some few Countries that haue farre exceeded
the rest in goodnes, these then must be taken for Tobaccoes
of the best sort, and paid for at the best price,
and all the rest being aboue 20. times as much in
quantitie, and not attaining to the goodnes of the
former, must necessarily in right and truth be made
Tobacco of the other sort, and consequently rated at
the lower price, the Contracts stiftnes refusing to
haue more then two sorts. In conclusion the Adventurer
and planter, can by this contract expect little
more then 12. pence the pound for his Tobacco. And
this at the best hand, for so much as the contracters
shall be pleased to take off: for, as for the remaines
refused, which must goe into Turkey, if he gets 4. the
pound, hee may thinke himselfe well dealt with by
those that need to giue no maner then the list, And
for this 12. pence: it shall be paid, one third part in



hand, and the other two thirds, at 6 and 6 moneths.
And this being the maine substance of this cōtract,
it cannot but be apparent vnto all men of experience
in the affaires of the plantations, that the Adventurers
and Planters, shall not sell their Tobacco for
one halfe of that which it standeth them in. For as
for trusting to the hope of that clause in the Contract,
that after two yeares, if their be profit, the
price shall be raysed to 2. shillings and 3. shillings,
that comfort is small, the time being long, the hope
vncertaine; and even that price being too little to
make them sauers. And thus much touching the particular
estates of the Adventurers and planters wherin
they are to be placed by this new contract.
               3. But now thirdly to come to the generall Plantations
themselues, and to enter into consideration,
whether by vertue of this Contract they are likely to
subsist and prosper: It is here first to be considered,
that the plantations having been founded vnder his
Maiesties gracious amity, at the excessiue great charges
of the Adventurers and planters, and so continued
for many yeares, with small or no retribution
except to some few persons: and the atempts of
setting vp Staple commodities, as Iron, Silke, wines
&c. though persued with great constancie, care and
charge, haue hetherto failed by sundry misaccidents.
To thinke the bestowing now of 5000. pounds a
yeare vpon the plantations, and that drawne from
the labours, and as it were, from the blood of the
planters, will raise them vp from that great decay,
into which during the space of those latter two years
they haue apparently fallen; is like to proue a great



and dangerous error, whereas the only meanes remaining
to advance the plantations, was the incouragement
of the Adventurers thether, especially in
person, with hope of wealth, good government and
Iustice. Experience hauing shewed that after the
publique stocke was vtterly exhaust, and the Lotteries
ended, yet the plantation in Virginia did exceedingly
increase by the multitude of Families, and
other particular persons, transported thether at their
owne charge, vpon the a foresaid hopes and incouragements,
till the fatall blow of the Massacrie given
those a broad, and the great molestations and disheartnings
of the company and Adventurers heere
at home, cast the Collony into that consideration
in which now it languisheth. But whensoever it
shall please his gracious Maiestie, to reviue and renewe
the former hopes and incouragements, it will
no doubt restore the former life to the plantation;
the remaines whereof this contract must needes extinguish,
which is thus to be demonstrated. The
onely commoditie for Marchants in both the plantations:
is at this day no other then Tobacco, whereby
their apparell, tooles, implements, and all other
necessaries (except victuall) are procured, there are
at this day in both the Colonies, at the least 3000.
persons. This allowance of 200000. weight to both
the Plantations, commeth but to 65. pound weight
of Tobacco the person, which at 12. the pound weight,
cometh to 3. pound 5. shillings, out of which all the
planters in the Sommer Ilands, and such as are Tenants,
or Servants in Virginia, pay halfe to their
owners, whether Land-lords or Masters: so that to



themselues their remaines for their maintenance,
only 32 shillings 6 pence the peece. The charge of
transporting a person to Virginia, cannot be lesse at
this day then 20 pounds, which being a thing so generally
knowne, must needes disharten all future
planters from going, and force the present Adventurers
rather to send for their seruants home, then to
mainteyne them at a parpetuall charge without hope
of profit. And this hath diuers of them already openly
declared, we conclude therefore that to imagine,
that the bestowing of 5000. pound a yeare
vpon the Colonies, and that drawne from the hard
labours of the poore planters themselues will vphold
the plantations, when they shall find that they
can be no longer masters of their owne goods, but
must be forced to transport them, when they cannot
vent them, to put them into their hands, who shall
take and refuse what themselues please, and sell them
before their faces, perhaps at a Noble a pound, and
giue them but 6 pence after a yeares attendance for
their goods, with the fraught and all other charges
and losses: & this example also in Tobacco ingendring
a feare of the like measure in all other commodities
whensoeuer they should be raysed. That wee say as
before in our vnderstanding to be a very great error,
and of pernitious consequence to hoth the plantations.
No lesse then to draw 40 ounces of blod from a
tender weake Infant, and then to make him a restoratiue
out of fiue ounces of the same blood.
               4. Now in the last place, seeing this contract is
so much magnified as tending to the great and certaine
good of the plantations, wee will take a little



paines to make inquirie by way of reasons for whose
benefite in truth, it hath been set on foote.
               By force of this Contract, and by vertue of his
Maiesties Proclamation, getting into their handes
the sole sale of all Tobacco to be expended either in
this vertue, or the kingdome of Irelad. It is not to
be thought but they will advance the price (after the
nature of all Monopolies) at least to as high a rate
as it hath borne in former times, that is to 8 or 9.
shillings the pound; but admit they will begin first
with a Noble a pound, two hundred thousand Nobles
commeth vnto sixtie six thousand, six hundred
sixtie six pounds 13 shillings 4. pence. His Maiesties
rent out of the plantations commeth vnto 15. thousand
pounds: the planters and the Adventurers
part after the rate of 18. pence the pound, which in
probabilitie is like to be the highest medium commeth
vnto 15000. pounds. So the charge in the
whole comming vnto 30000 pound. Thereis 36000
pound, and one thousand markes remayning to
themselues in way of retribution for their paines &
adventure; and as themselues say to appease all such
stormes as may arise. To great a proportion to be
drawne from the plantations, to allow them scarce a
sixt part of their owne, and to bestowe almost foure
six parts vpon men no better deseruing. In the former
Contract, what clamor and complaint against
25000. pounds to haue ben raised for Saleries, and
all other charges, which came to little more then a
pennie vpon the pound? Whereas these men professe
that under 12 pence a pound gotten at least,
they would not medle with it, and they hoped for



farre more. By computation of the former contract
there was to come 60000 pounds at least, to the benefite
of the plantations; whereof the 4 part is now
is thought a sufficient portion, and yet that Contract
was said to be pernitious to the Colonies, and
this beneficiall. Indeed to doe equall right vnto
both, the contract is better then the former, in that
it excludeth all forraine Tobacco which with great
violence was pressed vpon the former for the first
two yeares; but this is to be attribued to his Majesties
great grace, giving a favorable eare to the sute
of the Commons in Parliament, as appeareth in his
Majesties late proclamation. In the debating of the
former Contract it was alleadged against it, by such
as are now great furtherers of this, that though
the planters Tobacco were sold at 5 shillings the pound
yet by reason of his Maiesties third, they should be
loosers; and now 16 pence a pound is thought price
sufficient. This excessiue gaine of the contracters &
vndertakers, we conceiue vndoubtedly to be a thing
vniust, and tending to the immediate destruction of
the plantations, for whatsoever they get the planter
looseth, and where the planter looseth, the Colony is
so much impouerished: For whatsoever the planter
makes, that goes all backe to the plantation againe,
and what the contracter gets, it remaineth with him
to his owne inriching. For, as for the returning of
5000. pounds to the plantations which this heavie
contract adnexed; It is in truth to send one hundred
men thether, and to stay thousands from thence.
The strenght and prosperitie of the Colony consisting
in multitudes of people.
            
            
               
               5. Some things we are forced to adde touching
the proceeding of this Contract.
               1 First, whereas the Adventurers of the Sommer
Ilands remaine still a Company, and are restrained
by their Letters Pattents from ordering of matters
of Trade but in a Quarter Court: This Contract
hath been sought to haue ben concluded, in a meane
and extraordinary meeting, and no Court at all,
when few were present, and those few mens silence
also entred as a consent, not many of them vnderstanding
it, and those that vnderstood it being amazed,
at so great Iniustice.
               2 Secondly, the Virginia Company being now
discharged, it had been fit the Colony had been consulted
about it; and not to dispose of other mens
states and goods, without their consent and knowledge.
               3 Thirdly, the very manner of treating of this
Contract, hath bred a suspicion of very indirect proceedings:
for first it hath been framed secretly and
in the darke: it hath been published but by fragments,
and some principall parts concealed. Some
of the Commissioners appeare to be the cheife and
principall Contracters: other some, though they do
not appeare; yet they are partners with them in their
Trading, are Contracters, which plainely shewes
that they haue an interest in it. And so the same men
are the Contriuers and makers of the bargaine for
themselues, and buyers and sellers, of one and the
same wares; and take away and set the prizes of other
mens goods, for their owne inordinate lucre.
               
                  
4. Lastly, vnder pretence of doing althings orderly,
they haue made a Commitie of themselues,
as in the behalfe of the Colonyes and planters, to
Treate with their fellow Commissioners the Conracters
for speedier payments.
               And most of these men haue they chosen to be
Committies whom the Adventurers and
planters haue a long time complained off
for their exorbitant wrongs to one or
both the plantations.
               Many other exceptions may be taken, but these
shall suffice at this present.
            
            FINIS.
         
      
   