
      
         
            
               
                  
                  
                  AN ADVERTISEMENT TO THE ENGLISH SEMINARIES, AMD IESVITES: Shewing their looſe kind of writing, and negligent handling the cauſe of Religion, in the whole courſe of their workes.
                  By IOHN DOVE Doctor in Diuinity.
                  
                     IEREMY 47. 10.
Curſed be he that doth the worke of the Lord negligently.
                  
                     TAM ROBVR. TAM ROBOR. NI=COLIS ARBOR IOVIS. 1610.
                  
                  
                     LONDON, Printed for SIMON WATERSON dwelling in Pauls Church-yard at the ſigne of the Crowne. 1610.
               
               
                  
                  
                  TO THE MOST REVEREND FATHER IN GOD, MY VERY GOOD Lord, TOBY, by the prouidence of God, Lord Arch-biſhop of Yorke, Primate, and Metropolitan of England.
                  
                     MOST Reuerend Father in God, my eſpeciall good Lord. Albeit there is no end in 
                     Eccleſi. 12. 12. 
                     writing many books, and much reading is a wearineſſe to the fleſh (as the wiſe man ſpeaketh:) yet doth the condition of this preſent age require a multitude of bookes: neither ought we to be weary, ſo long as the labour onely is ours, the cauſe Gods, and

not our owne. Our Aduerſaries are neuer weary of withſtanding the truth, they neuer ceaſe to prouoke vs by bookes, our names are daily traduced in their papers, that vnleſſe the Spirit of God waxe cold, and the zeale of his houſe be quenched in vs, we cannot be ſilent. And as your Grace hath laboured theſe fourty yeares without intermiſsion, like a ſilfull Maiſter-builder of Gods houſe, a painefull huſbandman in the Ʋineyard, a vigilant Paſtour ouer the flocke, and were neuer yet weary of weldoing: ſo my truſt is this ſmall volume ſhall not ſeeme tedious, which heere I offer vnto your reading, and humbly preſent vnto your Grace. Since your Grace hath bene called to the office of a Biſhop, (as with S, Paule, it is a worthy 
                     1. Tim. 3. 1. worke) ſo it hath bene with you,

all your time hitherto, a worke rather then a promotion, neither haue you fainted vnder ſo great a burthen. My prayer is for you, that God wich hath begun this good worke in you, will alſo performe it vntill the day of Jeſus Chriſt. That as you haue deſerued that good report which the godly Emperour Theodoſius 
                     
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . Sixtus Senenſis, Biblioth. ſanctae lib. 4. in the Church of Conſtantinople gaue of S. Ambroſe then Biſhop of Milanie: ſo you may contiuue ſtill another Saint Ambroſe in our Church, to the glory and honour of God, to whoſe goodneſſe and mercy I commend your Grace, and your godly labours.
                  
                     Your Graces moſt humble in the Lord. IOHN DOVE.
                  
               
            
            
               
                  
                  
                  THE INTRODVCTION DECLARING WHAT IS THE drift and intent of the Author.
                  
                     I Acknowledge my ſelfe with Saint Paul to be a debter vnto all men, to Rom. 1. 14. the Greeke and the Barbarian, to the wiſe and the vnwiſe, ſo farre as lyeth in me to win ſome of all ſorts to Ieſus Chriſt. Hauing already by the will of God, publiſhed a ſhort treatiſe of perſwaſion to the ignorant Recuſants, to reconcile themſelues to our Church: I hold it my duty to ſpeake ſomewhat to them alſo which fit in the chaire of Moſes; which would be accounted the great Maſters in Iſraël, guides of the blinde, lights to them which ſit in darkneſſe, inſtructers of them which lacke diſcretion, and teachers of them which are vnlearned. My purpoſe is not to ſpeake of all points concerning which there is controuerſie and difference betweene them and vs, (for ſo ſhould I make a tedious volume) but onely by inſtance in ſome few places for example ſake, in liew of all the reſt, to aduertiſe them of ſuch errours as dayly they commit in the whole courſe of their writings, when they handle the cauſe of religion, to the preiudice of the cauſe it ſelfe which they take in hand, and to the ſlander of learning. That I may vſe the words of the Apoſtle: This is not to caſt away the cloakes of ſhame, 2. Cor. 4. 2. but ſtill to walke in craftineſſe, to handle the word of God deceiptfully, and not in the declaration of the truth; neither ſo doing can they approue themſelues to their owne

conſciences in the ſight of God. They would beare the world in hand, that they are more exact in their iudgement, more painfull in their ſtudies, more acute in their arguments, more aduiſed in their anſwers, more diligent in all things they vndertake, then any other of the contrary religion; whereas, due examination being had, it doth appeare they ſlubber vp many things negligently, and performe them looſely. They deſpiſe all our Schooles of learning, in reſpect of their owne Vniuerſities; as if ſolid learning, and true Schoole-diuinity were no where taught but among themſelues, they hold all others to be ſuperficiall: and yet contrary to all Schoole-learning they ſuppreſſe the truth by fallacies throughout their bookes, they tranſgreſſe the rules and lawes of diſputation, and in no place will they ſtand to the orders receiued in Schooles. Their yong frye of Seminaries and ſeed-men, which are trained vp vnder them, ſee not with their owne eyes, but receiue their ſophiſmes for true ſyllogiſmes, vpon the credit & truſt which they repoſe in their teachers; as if it were impiety to call any thing into queſtion which their Readers haue taught them; or hereſie to examine their grounds by the rules of Art, which are the true touch-ſtone and onely try all of arguments. In their diſcourſes which they publiſh, they vſe ſuch prolixity, that the matter which is plaine and obuious to any man of reaſonable capacity, ſeemeth perplexe, and very difficult: they deliuer the ſtate of the queſtion ſo vncertainly, that the reader looſeth himſelfe as in a labyrinth, not conceauing what is the ſcope and drift of the Author, whether he hold the affirmatiue part or the negatiue. In the end, hauing ſeemed to ſtand long in oppoſition againſt vs, they concurre with vs. They alledge no other arguments in defence of the religion which they do maintaine, but ſuch as haue bene oftentimes anſwered by Caluin, Beza, Kemnitius, and other Proteſtant Writers: which arguments being already anſwered, are of no validity, and therefore we expect they ſhould reply againſt

the anſwers, and not produce the ſame things againe. Neither will their diſciples take notice of any anſwer, but alledge theſe triuiall things for nouelties, and rare inuentions, as neuer heard of before.
                  Theſe things are but Satan transformed into an Angel of light, deceptio viſus to deceiue the world, as the Babylonian The Hiſtory of Bell and the Dragon. Prieſts did the King Aſtyages, making him beleeue that Bell did eate and drinke, and was a liuing God; when he was but a dead Idoll. The King at the firſt, becauſe hee found the doore of the temple ſealed vp with his owne ſignet, the meate deuoured, and the wine drunke vp which hee ſet before the idoll, but ſaw not the priuy entrance which was vnder the table, cryed out with a lowd voyce: Great art thou ô Bell, and in thee is no deceipt. But when Daniel ſhewed him the footing of the Prieſts, and their wiues and children, in the aſhes which he ſtrewed on the pauements, and the priuy doore which they came in at; he confeſſed there was deceipt in the Prieſts of Bell, and he ſaw plainly, that Bell was no God but an idoll. So my purpoſe is to finde their falſhood by their footing, to ſhew how they enter in at the falſe doore, and go not the right way; to detect their ſleights and iuggling caſts, whereby they aduance errour and falſhood, but ſtand in oppoſition againſt the truth. Foraſmuch therefore as if the Goſpell be yet hidden, it is hidden to them which are loſt; the Lord of his mercy take away from their diſciples and followers, that veile or couering, which vntill this time hath continued vntaken away, and remoue from them the ſpirit of ſlumber, that hereafter ſeeing they may ſee. The Lord of his goodneſſe endue the teachers themſelues with his grace, that henceforth as ſincere Paſtors, and faithfull Stewards of his word, they may walke in ſimplicity, and handle his word plainly in the declaration of the truth, that they may approue themſelues to euery mans conſcience in the ſight of God: that when the chiefe Sheepheard and Archbiſhop of our ſoules ſhall appeare, they may receiue

an incorruptible crowne of glory, through Ieſus Chriſt our Lord, Amen.
               
               
                  CHAP. 1.
                  
                     Of the Head of the Church.
                  
                  ANd that I may firſt with Saint Iohn the Baptiſt, lay the axe to the roote of the tree; becauſe the Cardinall deriueth the Popes ſupremacy from S. Peter, let vs therefore Mat. 3. 10. examine by what right he entituleth S. Peter to that ſupremacy. Bellar. de Rom. Pont. lib. 1. c. 10. For his ſupremacy being ſhaken, the Popes authority which is grounded vpon it, cannot ſtand. Our Sauiour vpon Saint Peter his confeſſion, where he ſaith: Thou art the Chriſt, the Sonne of the liuing God: anſwered: Thou 
                     Mat. 16. 18. 
                     art Peter, and vpon this rocke will I build my Church. It is as impoſſible to reduce theſe words into a true ſyllogiſme, or forme of argumentation, as it was for the Oracles to ſpeake Caeſar. Bar. in apparat. 13. Exod. 8. 19. when the Sonne of God had enioyned them ſilence, or for the Aegyptians to make lice when the finger of God was againſt them. Euery lawfull ſyllogiſme muſt conſiſt onely of three parts, or termes, as they call them; but here are fower, Petrus Petra, perſona Petri, & ſtructura Eccleſiae: the perſon of him that made the confeſſion, his name, his confeſſion it ſelfe which is called the rocke, or foundation ſtone; and the building of the Church. His perſon, and his name, where it is ſaid: Tues Petrus, thou art Peter: the confeſſion or foundation ſtone, vpon this rocke: the aedifice or building it ſelfe, will I build my Church. The medius terminus, or argument, whereby euery concluſion ought to be proued, muſt bee one and the ſelfe ſame as well in the Minor propoſition as in the Maior: but here it cannot be ſo, for it is Petra in Maiori, & Petrus in Minors, the rocke in the Maior, and Peter in the Minor, as if they ſhould conclude in this manner: The rocke is the foundation of the Church; but the Apoſtle which made this confeſſion, is Peter: therefore the Apoſtle which made this confeſſion is the foundation of the Church. But this

is not in Moode and Figure, the medius terminus being not the ſame in both propoſitions. Therefore if they will correct it, and reduce it into a true forme, they muſt conclude in this manner: Whoſoeuer is the rocke, he is the foundation of the Church. But the Apoſtle which made this confeſſion (meaning Peter) is the rocke: therefore the Apoſtle which made this confeſſion, is the foundation of the Church. And then, beſides that they do confound the confeſſion and the confeſſor, S. Peters perſon and his doctrine, which are two ſeuerall and diſtinct things, the Minor is vntrue, and contrary to the aſſertion of our Sauiour Chriſt. For he doth not ſay: Tues Petra, thou art the rocke; but tues Petrus, thou art Peter: nor ſuper hunc Petrum, ſed ſuper hanc Petram aedificabo Eccleſiam; vpon this Peter, but vpon this rocke will I build my Church. 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . So then, where he ſaith THOV, he ſpeaketh of his perſon; and mentioning PETER, he telleth what is his name; ſpeaking of the ROCKE, he iuſtifieth his religion, being three ſeuerall points beſides the aedifice and building of the Church, whereof that religion is the foundation ſtone.
                  Now before we proceed any further in this argument, let vs auoyde ſuch exceptions as the aduerſary bringeth againſt the analyſing of this text. Firſt, Bellarmine obiecteth, De Rom. Pontifice. l. 1. c. 10. that our Sauiour ſpake in the Syrian tongue, and in that language this one word CEPHAS is nomen proprium viri, & commune ſaxi, the proper name of a man, and a name common to all ſtones, as alſo in the Greeke tongue 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      ſignifieth both Peter and a ſtone; and it is plaine in the Syriac text he ſaid: Thou art Cephas, and vpon this Cephas will I build my Church. And thereupon he concludeth, that Cephas in the firſt place ſhould not ſignifie his name, and in the ſecond the rocke, as I deliuered in my Analyſis, but in both places the rocke; ſo that there may be tres tantùm termini, onely three termes or parts to make a true ſyllogiſme, and conſequently that Peter is the rocke. To which I reply: there can be no good argument drawne from the authority

of the Syriac text, not onely becauſe of the ambiguity of the word, which maketh the matter doubtfull, according to the grammaticall conſtruction, and very vncertaine; but alſo becauſe that text is diſalowed by the Church of Rome: whereas the Latine text, out of which I made this Analyſis maketh for me, and is vpon paine of anathema to be receiued as authenticall; and ſo I touch him to the quicke, and ſlay him with his owne ſword. As Cephas according to Grammer ſignifieth both the name of a man, & a ſtone, yet in this place it cannot ſignifie both of them; becauſe it is otherwiſe in the Greeke, which is the originall, & without exception, and in the vulgar Latinetranſlation, which do make that very plaine, where the firſt Cephas is Peter, and the ſecond a ſtone: and ſo that which is, or might ſeeme to be ambiguous, and yeeld matter of controuerſie in the Syriac, is cleared in theſe editions, and all ambiguity is taken away, there is no ſtarting-hole left for the Sophiſter to cauell vpon. Concerning the Syriac text Bellarmine maketh doubt, where he writeth thus: De teſtamento 
                     De verbo Dei. l. 2. c. 4. 
                     nouo maior eſt dubitatio, Of the whole edition of the Syriac new testament, there is a greater doubt, whether it were written in that tongue by the Authors themſelues or no? Againe, hee deliuereth his owne iudgement in theſe words: Quod ſi editio Syriaca aetate horū patrum poſterior eſt, vt ego quidem mihi certè perſuadeo, non poteſt eius authoritas tanta eſſe vt cum editione Graecâ aut Latinâ meritò comparari poſſit, vt interim illud non omittam, quod non deſunt etiam quaedam in eâ editione quae viris doctis & pijs non admodum placeant. If the Syriac edition be of leſſe antiquity then theſe Fathers (meaning Clemens Alexandrinus, Origen, Euſebius, Athanaſius, & others of whom there he ſpake) as I certainly perſwade my ſelfe it is, it cannot be any way of equall authority, with the Greeke and Latine; beſides, that many things are found in that edition diſtaſting to men, both godly and learned. Againe, Valde probabile eſt Euangelium Matthaei, & epiſtolam Sancti Pauli ad Hebraeos Syriacà linguà ſcripta eſſe: There is great probability onely that
                     
S. Matthew his Goſpel, and S. Paule his Epiſtle to the Hebrews were written in the Syrian tongue. There he doth not take it as a cleare caſe that S. Matthew his Goſpell was written in Syriac by himſelfe, but onely he leaueth it as a probable coniecture. But the Greeke he will haue to be without exception: Conſtat nouum teſtamentum Graecè ſcriptum ab ipſis 
                     De verbo Dei, lib. 2. cap. 7. 
                     Apoſtolis vel Euangeliſtis, quorum nomina in titulis ſingulorum librorum vel epiſtolarum praefiguntur, exceptis duntaxat euangelio Matthaei & Marci, et Epistola ad Hebraeos. It is manifeſt that the new testament was written in Greeke by thoſe Apoſtles or Euangeliſts whoſe names are praefixed to euery booke or Epiſtle, excepting the Goſpels of S. Matthew and S. Marke, & the Epiſtle to the Hebrews. But Athanaſius exiſtimat ab Apoſtolo Iacobo Matthaei euangeliū in Graecam linguam eſſe tranſlatū; alij verò Iohāni Apoſtolo; at alij ipſi Matthaeo eam tranſlationē attribuunt: ſed cuiuſcun
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         ſit, it a recepta est ab Eccleſiâ illa trāſlatio, acſi eâ linguâ ſcriptū fuiſſet euangeliū Mathaei. Athanaſius thinketh S. Matthews Gospel was tranſlated into Greeke by S. Iames the Apoſtle, others by S. Iohn the Apoſtle, others by S. Matthew himſelfe; but by whomſoeuer it was tranſlated, the Greeke tranſlation is ſo approued by the Church, as if it had bene originally written in that tongue. Againe: Ita
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         Graeca editio noui teſtamenti vniuerſa Apoſtolos & Euangeliſtas authores habet: Therefore all the Greeke edition was ſet forth by the Apoſtles and Euangeliſts, And as for the vulgar Latine edition it is by the Councell of Trent impoſed vpon all Romiſh Catholickes Concil. Trid. Seſſ. 3. vpon paine of excommunication, to be receiued as authenticall, and without exception. Therefore according to the rules of their Catholicke religion, I argue againſt the Catholickes more ſafely and firmly out of the Greeke and Latine which are plaine, and of whoſe authority they make no queſtion, then Bellarmine doth againſt vs out of the Syriac, which is both ambiguous, and of no authority in the Church to build vpon. So then, for aſmuch as by the decree of that Councell, nothing can be held for truth in the Syriac which is repugnant to the Latine, but the Latine

maketh for vs; I conclude that my Analyſis of the text, is without exception, let him refute it if he can.
                  Now this being the queſtion, whether the Church be founded vpon the perſon, or vpō the doctrine of Saint Peter? If they ſay, vpon his perſon: I reply: the Church was from the beginning of the world, and it ſtood as firme as now it doth, before the conuerſion of S. Peter. When S. Peter was not, the Church was one and the ſame which now it is, and it could not ſtand without a foundation. But the faith which he profeſſed, was more ancient then himſelfe, euen from the beginning common to the whole Church; ſo that the Church might well be builded vpon that faith, though not vpon Saint Peter, nor vpon the perſon of any ſinfull man. And therefore our Sauiour ſaith: he will build his Church, that is the members of the Church vnder the Goſpell, which make but vnam Eccleſiam aggregatam, one Church ioyntly with that which was vnder the time of nature, and the time of the law, vpon the ſame foundation, being all ſtones of the ſame building. But Bellarmine alledgeth out of Saint Chryſoſtome Hom. 55. in Matth. Where he De Rom. Pont. lib. 1. cap. 10. ſaith: Tues Petrus, & ſuper te aedificabo Eccleſiam meam, Thou art Peter, and vpon thee will I build my Church. And Hom. 4. in Eſaiae cap. 6. Quid autem Petrus ille baſis Eccleſiae? What ſhall we ſay of Peter the foundation of the Church? As if Saint Chryſoſtome did not acknowledge the doctrine, but the perſon, not the confeſſion, but the confeſſor himſelfe, to be the foundation of the Church. To the firſt place I anſwer: I haue examined, but finde no ſuch place in that Homily, but that which is contrary to it. But ſuppoſing that to be true, which he hath ſo faiſified, I anſwer to it, as likewiſe to the ſecōd place which is rightly by him produced, that it is but the fallacy of aequiuocatiō. For he alledgeth that out of Chryſoſtome, as a speech proper, which is but metonymically vnderſtood. It is a figure called Metonomia cauſae. So Abram ſpeaketh to the rich man: They haue Moſes and the Luk. 16. 29. Prophets; meaning not the men themſelues which were

dead, but their bookes which were extant. So Saint Paul 
                     Eph. 2. 20. teacheth that we are built vpon the foundation of the Prophets and Apoſtles, that is: vpon the faith which is taught in the Propheticall and Apoſtolicall writings; ſo that there is but one faith, one ground or foundation, vpon which the old Church from the beginning, and the new Church vnder the Goſpell are builded vpon: theſe two being but one, as before I haue deliuered. And that the meaning of Saint Chryſoſtome is metonimicall, and not proper, Chryſſ. hons. 55. in Mat. it appeareth by his owne expoſition of himſelfe, where he ſaith in the ſame Homily, contrary to that which Bellarmine hath alledged: ſuper hanc Petram aedificabo Eccleſiam meam, id eſt, fidem & confeſſionem, I will build my Church vpon this rocke, that is, vpon this faith and confeſſion which thou haſt made. And it is iuſtified to be a true expoſition by the conſent of other Fathers, as of Saint Hilary, which ſaith: ſuper hanc confeſſionis 
                     Lib. 6. de Trinit. Lib. 4. de Trini
                           •…
                        
                      
                     Petram aedificatio Eccleſiae eſt, vpon this rocke of confeſſion, is the Church founded. And of Cyrillus, which ſaith: Petram opinor nihil aliud quàm inconouſſam & firmiſſimam diſcipulifidē vocauit, He called the faith of S. Peter arocke, becauſe it was ſtedfast as a rocke that cannot be moued.
                  
                  And by the way to preuent that which may in ſubtilty, but not in ſincerity be obiected againſt vs; that the foundation muſt be anſwerable to the building, but we which are builded vpon that foundation, are all liuing ſtones, and 1 Pet. 2. 5. we come to him which is alſo a liuing ſtone, diſallowed of men, which is Ieſus Chriſt; as the building is perſonall, ſo there muſt be a perſonall foundation, the perſons of men are theſe liuing ſtones: I anſwer, the onely true and proper foundation of the Church is Chriſt, as the Apoſtle teacheth: No other foundation can any man lay, then that which 
                     1. Cor. 3. 11. 
                     is already layed, which is Ieſus Chriſt. I will therefore explaine the meaning of Saint Chryſoſtome, Saint Hillary, and Saint Cyril, in what ſort faith may be verified to be the foundation of the Church; and yet with a due reſeruation of that prerogatiue which belongeth to our Sauiour Chriſt,

and which Saint Paul aſcribeth to him; and ſo I will reconcile Luther l. de poteſtate Pope. Caluin Inſtit. li. 4. c. 6. ſect. 6. 
                     Luther which ſaith, faith is the rocke, vnto Caluin which affirmeth, that this rocke is Ieſus Chriſt. As a gold ring of very ſmall weight, hauing a precious ſtone in it of great value, may be iuſtly eſtimated at an high price; not for the due value of the gold it ſelfe, but for the worth of the precious ſtone which is ſet in it, it may be ſaid to be worth an hundred pounds; ſo faith is ſaid to ſaue, though ſaluation belong to Ieſus Chriſt; and to be the foundation of the Church, though Chriſt be properly that foundation, becauſe he is the obiect of our faith: and our Sauiour Chriſt and faith are ſo inſeparably ioyned together, that they cannot be diuided one from the other, or conceiued one without the other. Thus haue I briefly declared how the Church is not founded vpon S. Peter: But ſuppoſe it could be proued, how can it be deriued from him to the Pope? The office of Apoſtleſhip was perſonall, and died with S. Peters perſon. The Apoſtles were equall in authority. It was ſaid to them all: Go and preach, as well as to Peter. 
                     Math. 28. Mat. 16. That which was ſaid ſeuerally to Peter: To thee will I giue the keyes, was ſaid ioyntly to all the Apoſtles; Whoſe ſinnes 
                     Ioh. 20. 23. 
                     ye remit, they ſhall be remitted. And this confeſſion of Peter was made in the name of them all: ſo ſaith Theophilact, and Theoph. in Mat. 16. Ambroſe in Pſal. 38. Saint Ambroſe. But if it were granted that Saint Peter was aboue all the reſt of the Apoſtles, this giueth no preheminence to the Pope being no Apoſtle. For Apoſtleſhip conſiſteth in theſe things; They were immediatly called of God; they ſaw our Sauiour in the fleſh; they could giue the holy Ghoſt by impoſition of hands; the Spirit of God did ſo direct them, that in their writings they could not erre: which things belonged perſonally vnto them, but are not left hereditary to the ſucceeding ages. The foundation being thus ſhaken, the building falleth of it ſelfe.
                  That I may come nearer to the man of Rome, to diſcuſſe this queſtion, whether there ought to be one head miniſteriall of the Church vniuerſall militant vpon the

earth or no? Bellarmine to proue the affirmatiue part, argueth De Rom. Pontifice. l. 1. c. 9. out of Ariſtotle in this manner: A Monarchy is the best, & moſt abſolute ſtate of gouernment: therefore the gouernment of the vniuerſal Church ought to be monarchicall. I anſwer: It is a fallacy called Ignoratio Elenchi, in ſo much as Ariſtotle his Antecedent, and Bellarmine his Conſequent, are not vnderſtood, Ad idem, ſecundum idem, &c. A Monarchy is the beſt ſtate of ciuill gouernment, and for one country, but not of Eccleſiaſtical gouernment, nor for the whole world. No one ſecular Prince is ſufficient to gouerne a world, neither if any one man could be ſuppoſed ſufficient, could it ſtand with iuſtice that one ſhould gouerne a world; becauſe no man can attaine to be ſuch a Monarke, but by oppreſſion, and violent inchroching vpon the dominions of other Princes. Againe, a Monarchy is the beſt ſtate of ciuill gouernment of one country; but the Eccleſiaſticall gouernment cannot ſimply be ſo, but onely when the Church ſo gouerned is in ſuch a country as is ſubiect to one ſecular Prince, and not in an Ariſtocraticall, or Democraticall ſtate: becauſe the Miniſters of the Church muſt be ſubordinate to the ſupreme ſecular magiſtrates, and the Eccleſiaſticall gouernment of the Church muſt be ſubordinate and anſwerable to the ciuill gouernment of the country where that Church is. Againe, as one man cannot gouerne the ciuill ſtate of the world: ſo much leſſe can one man be head of the whole Church; all authority both ciuill and Eccleſiaſticall being deriued from our Sauiour Chriſt, which is both the head of the Church, and the Prince of the Kings Eph. 1. 22. Apoc. 1. 5. Ma. 28. 18. of the earth, and all power is giuen to him from God his Father both in heauen and earth. Our Sauiour Chriſt is conſidered two manner of wayes: as he is God, ſo is hee the King of the whole world by the right of his creation: as he is the Redeemer, ſo is he the Head of the vniuerſall Church by right of his redemption: as he is God, he hath his Vicegerents ouer the world, and they be his ſecular Magiſtrates. Ego dixi, vos dij eſtis, I haue ſaid ye are Gods. But Pſal. 81. 6.
                     
as hee is the head of the Church he hath no Copartener nor Vicegerent: no copartener, for ſo he were an vnperfect mediator: no vicegerent among men, for no man is able to ſupply his place in that behalfe, which I proue by this argument: The office and worke of his mediation proceedeth from his two natures, God and Man, which concurre in one action of the ſame perſon; ſo that he which ſupplyeth his office, muſt be of an infinite power, which is not to be found in any man beſides himſelfe. Now leſt it ſhould be obiected that he hath ſaid of Miniſters alſo: Ego dixi, vos dij eſtis, I haue ſaid ye are Gods, as well as of Princes, Ioh. 10. 34. and therfore it ſhould be concluded that they are his vicegerents for the Church, as Princes for the common wealth: I anſwer, the argument doth not hold. For as both Princes & Miniſters haue their authority deriued from him, ſo after a different manner; Princes as vicegerents: Miniſters onely as actiue inſtruments. For the keyes of the Church being in number but two: the one of the Word & Sacraments, the other of Gouernment: In the opening and ſhutting with theſe keyes which is the execution it ſelfe, are to be conſidered two things, the actiue inſtrument, and the principall agent. The Miniſters are onely the actiue inſtruments, to preach to the outward eares of men, when God alone giueth the gift of Faith, & conuerteth the heart inwardly as the principall agent: they conferre the outward elements only in the miniſtration of the Sacraments: hee alone ſealeth remiſſion of ſinnes, and giueth inward graces: they lay hands vpon men to ordeine them Miniſters, which is the outward calling: he doth call them inwardly, and make them able by giuing them his holy Spirit: they teſtifie and pronounce before the congregation in iure fori, that wicked men are excommunicated out of the Church; but God onely ratifieth it in iure poli, and cutteth them off from being members of Chriſt, and ſhutteth the kingdome of heauen againſt them. From the Head to all the members muſt be ſuch an influence as poſſible cannot

be from any ſinfull man, as I haue deliuered in my former Treatiſe. Thus you ſee how idly and weakly the Popes ſupremacy is by them defended. And therefore vnleſſe ſtronger arguments be alledged, and more ſubſtantially proued, they cannot iuſtly blame vs for withdrawing our neckes out of the obedience to the ſea of Rome.
               
               
                  CHAP. 2.
                  
                     Of Image Worſhip.
                  
                  BEcauſe they write, that worſhipping images they commit no idolatry, in that they diſtinguiſh betweene an Bellar. de imaginib. lib. 2. c. 5. 1. Reg. 7. image & an idoll: that an image is the repreſentation of ſomthing that is in the nature of things, as in Salomons temple were the images of Lions, and Oxen: but an idoll is made onely to repreſent ſomewhat that neuer was, as the idols of Mercury and Iupiter, which are but falſe Gods of the Gentiles, Gods by imagination, and not indeed. And therefore they hold it for a ſlander to their religion, that their images are called Idols. Let the firſt queſtion therefore be concerning the truth of that diſtinction, that yee may examine their fiue reaſons whereby that diſtinction is by them auouched. Firſt, ſaith Bellarmine, Images which are a true repreſentation of ſomewhat, are neuer called Idols in the holy Scriptures; as in Salomons temple: The images, but not the idols of Lions, and Oxen. To which I anſwer: firſt, it is but a kinde of 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      or contention about words, which, be they vnderſtood howſoeuer, be they confounded or diſtinguiſhed, the worſhipping of them is the breach of Gods commandement, where we are forbidden to worſhip any grauen image, or Exod. 20. the likeneſſe of any thing. Secondly, this negatiue proofe drawne from Scriptures, is no ſufficient argument, but contrary to the lawes of diſputations, as is plainly ſet downe in the Topic called Pronunciatum, Authoritas non valet 
                     Rodolphus Agricola. 
                     in negatiuis. Thirdly, I bring inſtance againſt him, out

of the holy Scriptures, where the image of a Calfe is called an Idoll. For ſo ſaith Saint Stephen: 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , they made a calfe in thoſe daies, 
                     Acts 7. 41. 
                     and offered ſacrifice to an idoll. There in plaine termes the image, or true repreſentation of a calfe, is called an idoll. By this you ſee what ſmal credit is to be giuē to this diſtinction, and what falſe grounds Catholike doctrine is builded vpon. Againe, Idols by Bellarmine himſelfe are called ſtatuae, and are ſo tranſlated in the Latine, 1. Kings 10. 16. 17. and what is ſtatua but an image? Secondly, ſaith he: An idoll is in the Hebrue tongue. Leuit. 19. 26. Num. 23. Oſe. 6. a vaine thing, a falſe thing, a lye, alwaies ſignifying ſome falſe repreſentation, a falſe image, and not a true image; as Abacuc. 2. 18. Which reaſon becauſe it is but colewoorts twiſe ſodden, a mere tautologie, and all one with the former, I anſwer to it as before. Thirdly, he argueth out of Saint Paul 1. Cor. 8. 4. We know an idoll is nothing. It is ſomething (ſaith he) in respect of the matter whereof it is made, as wood, ſtone, mettall; but nothing in reſpect of the forme, becauſe it repreſenteth that which is not. To which I anſwer as before, by deniall, in as much as the golden calfe, being for the matter gold, repreſented that which in forme was ſomewhat, a bodily ſubſtance, animal mugibile, a lowing beaſt. And that I may make a better expoſition of Saint Pauls words, out of S. Paul himſelfe, of that propoſition: Idolum nihil eſt, an idoll is nothing: as in matter it is ſomething, ſo in reſpect of any diuine vertue in it, which the idolater aſcribeth to it, it is nothing. And againe, by the analogie of that place, it is nothing either in reſpect of ſanctification or pollution of thoſe meats which are offered to it. And if there be any that cannot, or will not be ſatisfied with this anſwere, let them reply againſt it. Fourthly, ſaith he: S. Hierom vpon Abac. 2. & Zach. 13. compareth hereſies and idole together, becauſe as an idol is a falſe image, ſo an hereſie is a falſe imagination. To which I anſwer: S. Hierom might as iuſtly haue compared hereſies with images, which are many times as vnlike the man for

whoſe pictures they are made, as hereſy is different frō the truth. But he fayleth in the maine point of his compariſon, becauſe this propoſition is not generally true, that an idol is a falſe image, becauſe the calfe in Horeb, of which I firſt ſpake, was both an idoll and a true image. Fiftly, out of Euſtachius lib. 11. Odyſs: (ſaith he) an idoll is properly ſuch a repreſentation as the ſhadowes of men, flying phantaſies, and imaginations of the braine, which we thinke we ſee, when nothing is before our eyes, ghoſts, apparitions of ſuch as be dead. To which I anſwere out of the vulgar Latine Bible, which is of better authority with the Church of Rome then euer Euſtachius was: that the word image, is alſo vſed in the ſame manner, as: In imagine tranſit homo, Man paſſeth away as an 
                     Pſal 39. 
                           •…
                        . Iob. 4. 16. 
                     image or a ſhadow. And Iob ſaith: In the thoughts of the viſions of the night, when ſleepe falleth on men, feare came vpon me, and dread which made all my bones to tremble, and the winde paſſed before me, and made the haires of my fleſh to ſtand vp: then ſtood one, I knew not not his face, & imago, animage was before mine eyes, and in ſilence heard I a voyce, &c. Thus vnder a colour and ſhew of learning, hath he made an idle and fruitleſſe diſcourſe, to intangle the ſimple reader, with no ſmall preiudice to the Romiſh religion, which is defended by ſuch ſleight ſhifts, rather then by manifeſt truth.
                  This ſcruple being remoued, it remaineth in the ſecond place, that we diſcuſſe this queſtion: whether images are to be worſhipped or not? And herein the practiſe of the Romiſh Church is contrary to the doctrine they do teach, becauſe in their Churches they worſhip images, & ſet them vp to be worſhipped; and inioyne the people to adore them; and yet not able to ſtand in the defence thereof, by their Writers they forſake their old defence, and by their Canons deny that any diuine worſhip is due vnto them. For the Councell of Trent hath theſe wordes: Imagines 
                     Concil. Trid. Seſſ. 25. 
                     Chriſti & ſanctorum honorandae ſunt, modo tamen in imaginibus non collocetur fiducia, nec ab ijs aliquid petatur, nec in ijs eſſe credatur aliqua diuinit as, ſed ſolum honorentur propter eos quos nobis

repraeſentant: Images are to be honored (not to be adored:) and they are to be honoured onely with ſuch limitations, that we put no truſt or confidence in them; that we pray not vnto them; that we aſcribe not any diuine vertue to them, but onely they are to be honored for their ſakes whoſe images they are, and whoſe likeneſſe they repreſent to vs. There you ſee plainly what their doctrine is, how they deny them adoration. And yet by their practiſe, they do not onely proſtrate themſelues before them, as the Gentiles did before their idols, but plainly ſhew in action, that they ſuppoſe ſome diuine power to be in them, in that they pray to them, and by their long peregrinations weary themſelues in viſiting ſome images rather then others; yea they trauell very farre to proſtrate themſelues before the images of our Sauiour Chriſt, and the virgin Mary, and other Saints in farre countries, when they haue in their owne Churches at home the images of the ſame Saints; yea farre more beautifull then are abroad. Bellarmine ſaith: Omnes cruces ador amus, we adore all images of the croſſe: And yet by his owne expoſition, this word ador 
                     De imag. Sanct. lib. 2. cap. 12. 
                     amus, we adore them, is no more then if he had ſaid; We honour them, and thinke reuerently of them, or vſe them reuerently; becauſe they be for exerciſe of deuotion, and make difference betweene them and other things which are appointed only for ciuill vſes. And to make good this his expoſitiō, he referreth vs to that decree of the Councel of Trent, which before I haue alledged. Moreouer he ſheweth, that as there is one adoration which is religious belonging to God; ſo there is an other onely officious, belonging to all Eccleſiaſticall rites and ceremonies; and ſuch things as are vſed in the Church. And to that purpoſe he alledgeth the authority of the 2. Councell of Nice, which ſpeaketh more in fauour of images then all other Councels, and decreeth in this ſort: Imagines ſunt venerandae, non quidem cultu latriae, ſed honore illo quo proſequimur 
                     Concil. Nic. 2. Act. 7. 
                     ſacras literas, vaſa ſacra: Images are to be worſhipped; but how? not with ſuch worſhip as belongeth to God; but onely to be

honoured, as the Church bookes, and the Church veſſels. (But I thinke no Catholicke, holdeth that the Bible, the Baſen, the Font, and the Chalice, are to be worſhipped by adoration.) And ſo they call them ſacras imagines, ſacred images; as they call other things which belong to the Church, res ſacras, holy things; as the Communion cuppes, vaſa ſacra, holy Chalices; the Font, lauacrum ſacrum; their Prieſts, perſonas ſacras; their Churches, Aedes ſacras; their Bibles, Biblia ſacra: and yet adore them not. And thus, as men aſhamed of themſelues, they qualifie the matter by ſuch ſubtilties among the learned, to auoid ſuſpition of idolatry, & continue the people in ignorance and groſſe idolatry. Againe, whereas Aquinas, and other Catholicke Doctors, haue before deliuered in groſſe tearmes, that images are to be worſhipped, cultu latriae, with diuine worſhip, or ſuch worſhip as is due vnto God. Bellarmine to qualifie the matter, and to reduce them to the meaning of the Councell De imag. li. 2. cap. 25. of Trent, would ſeeme to make a more milde expoſition of theſe words, coigning this diſtinction: Inter ſanctos & eorum imagines, & reliquias, betweene the Saints themſelues, and their images and reliques. So inter Chriſtum & eius imagines & reliquias, betweene our Sauior Chriſt, & his images & reliques. And ſo he hath written that the images & reliques are to be worſhipped with the ſame worſhip, as they whoſe images & reliques they are; and ſo the images & reliques of Saints with the worſhip of doulia, and of Chriſt with latria; But yet at the length, as a Cow that giueth a paile full of milke, and then kicketh it downe with her heele, he doth by a diſtinction ſo qualifie the matter, and ſet downe ſuch a ſtate of the queſtion, whereby all is ouerthrowne. For, ſaith he, that worſhip which is called latria, and that which is doulia, are of two ſorts, one is cultus verus, a true worſhip, which is due to the perſons themſelues: the other but analogicus, an analogicall, or equiuocall worſhip onely, which is due to the images and reliques. But what difference is betweene analogum, and analogatum, a liue Saint, and the picture

of a Saint, I referre the conſideration thereof to the iudgmēt of all Scholers which haue learned but Ariſtotle his Antipredicaments. As a painted man, or analogical man is no man, ſo analogical worſhip is no worſhip; a painted man is but the reſemblance of a man, ſo analogicall worſhip is but a reſemblance of worſhip, and not worſhip it ſelfe. But it is hard to deuiſe how they ſhould make ſuch a reſemblance of worſhip before the image, and not worſhip the image. And howſoeuer, if it were poſſible, yet the Apoſtle teacheth how they ought to auoid all ſhew of euill. And thus hath he auoyded that which was alledged againſt him by aequiuocation, which is contrary to the law of Schooles.
                  To leaue their doctrine, & come to their ſcandalous practiſe, we charge them with breach of the ſecond commandement, becauſe they fall downe before their images, Bellarmine in defence thereof, ſaith: They do not cultū tribuere 
                     De imag. l. 3. cap. 11. 
                     ſimulacris tāquam Dijs, worſhip their images as Gods, but onely they worſhip God in the images of God, & Saints in the images of thoſe Saints before whom they fall downe, and that ſuch worſhip is not prohibited in holy writ. Now therefore vpon this point let vs ioyne our iſſue. If to proſtrate themſelues before the image, and ſay they worſhip not the image, but God in the image, might be lawful; then might both Iews & Gentiles which did the like, haue excuſed their idolatry, foraſmuch as neither of them hold their idols to be Gods when they fall downe before them. For knowing by the light of nature there was a God, but knowing him not as he ought to be knowne, nor in what ſort he ſhould be worſhipped, they framed idols, & worſhipped him in thoſe idols; & yet for ſo doing, they were condemned in the holy Scriptures, becauſe he being a Spirit, would be worſhipped in Spirit, but not in an idol; and ſo he will not be worſhipped in an image. Concerning the Iewes, which were idolaters, they knew their golden calfe was no God, but worſhipped God in the calfe. Bellarmine therefore asketh why they ſaid: Faciamus 
                     De imag. l. 2. cap. 13. Exod. 23. 
                     Deas qui praecedant nos: let vs make Gods to go before vs?

& Hi ſunt Dij qui eduxerunt te de terra Aegypti: theſe be the Gods which brought thee out of Aegypt? I anſwer, their maner was to call idols Gods; but Deos repraeſetatiuos, gods by repreſetation, becauſe they made thē to repreſent God, vſing the figure called enallage numeri, Gods for God, the plural number for the ſingular. I anſwer him alſo by his owne diſtinction, they did meane Deos analogicos non veros, Gods analogically but not truly & vniuocally vnderſtood. So in the ſtory of the Iudges, ſpeaking of Micha the idolater, the text ſaith: This man Micha had an houſe of Gods, the holy Ghoſt would Iudg. 18. 5. not call his idols Gods but in this ſenſe, becauſe they were idols. There it is plaine that in the Scriptures that which is knowne & vnderſtood to be no God but an idol, yet is called a God. And that I may ſomwhat inlarge this point for the better ſatisfaction of the reader. The Iewes knew that God in particular which brought thē out of Aegypt before Exod. 19. 9. 11. the golden calfe was made; for a little before he came down in their ſight vpon mount Sina, they heard him ſpeake with Exod. 20. 19. their own eares, he appeared in thundering & lightning; his preſēce was ſo terrible they were afraid, they ſaid to Moſes: Talke thou with vs and we will heare thee, but let not him talke with vs leſt we dy; & therfore could not think this calfe which they made afterward, to be the ſame God; which could not ſpeake, nor terrifie them at all, and conſequently they held it to be but an analogicall or repreſentatiue God. But ſaith Bellarmine, though firſt they knew him, yet whē they made the calfe they had forgotten him. How proueth he that? Fecerūt 
                     Pſal. 105. 
                     vitulū in Horeb, they made a calfe in Horeb, they worſhipped the molten image, & forgat God which ſaued them, and did wonderfull things in Aegypt. To which I anſwer by diſtinction, that forgetfulneſſe is of two ſorts; one which is ignorance, when a man letteth ſlip out of his memory that which once he knew, or heard, or ſaw, as when Peter heard the cocke crow, he remembred the words of Ieſus: the other of ingratude, as where it is written: The Butler did 
                     Mat. 26. 75. 
                     not remember Ioſeph, but forgat him, that is, he was ingratefull 
                     Gen. 40. 23 
                     to him. And in that ſenſe the Iſraelites forgate God.

Againe, any impiety, negligence, preſumption, diſobedience, is called forgetfulneſſe; as Dauid ſpeaketh: The wicked ſhall be turned into hell, and all they which forget God.
                     Pſal. 9. 17. And  that the forgetfulneſſe of the Iewes, could not be the obliuion of ignorance, I proue by the text it ſelfe: cras erit ſolemnitas Iehouae, tomorrow ſhall a ſolemne feaſt be kept to the God Iehoua. (Which Iehoua is the proper name of the God of heauen, knowne then onely among the Iewes) ſo that they worſhipped Iehoua in the calfe. But, ſaith Bellarmine, Reſpondeo fortè Iudaeos illos qui plures Deos veros eſſe tradebant, non putaſſe hoc nomen eſſe proprium ſed appellatiuum: Peraduēture thoſe Iewes which held a multitude of true Gods, thought that Iehoua was not a name proper to one, but common to many. To which I reply: That beſides religion muſt not be grounded vpon Bellarmine his PERADVENTVRES, and idle coniectures, how can he auoid this text parallell vnto that, to ſhew what was the opinion of the Iewiſh Idolaters, where Mica his mother ſaith: Sanctificaui, & voui Iehouae, &c. I haue ſanctified the ſiluer, and dedicated it to Iehoua, to 
                     Iudg. 17. 3. 
                     make a molten Image? Foraſmuch as there by his owne words, Ieboua & ſculptile, God and the molten Image, are two ſeuerall things, votum quod eſt ſculptile, & numen cui ſculptile vouetur, the vow which is the molten image, and the God Iehoua, to whom the image is deuoted, ſhe could not thinke that image to be Iehoua. To come to the worſhip of the Gentiles, what anſwer doth he make to theſe arguments? Firſt they did, vni Deo plura ſimulacra erigere, erect many idols to one God. For example, they acknowledge but one Iupiter, yet in euery country were idols of Iupiter: therefore they made a difference betweene the God himſelfe and his idoll: conſequently they did not thinke the idoll to be a God. His anſwer is, Habuerunt alios Deos in coelo, alios interrâ; 
                     De imag. li. 2. cap. 13. 
                     nec putauerunt abſurdum ſi vnus Deus coeleſtis, vt Iupiter vel Apollo haberet interrâ multos collegas minores, id eſt, multa idola eiuſdem nominis: The heathens had ſome Gods in heauen, ſome on earth; neither did they thinke it an abſurdity

that one God in heauen, as Iupiter or Apollo, ſhould haue many fellow Gods inferiour vpon earth, that is, many idols to beare their names. And I pray you what is this anſwer, but a confeſſion, or grant of that which I haue alledged, that the heathens accompted their Gods which they thought to be in heauen, to be Gods indeed, & theſe vpon earth, before whom they proſtrated themſelues, to be but idols, and repreſentations of them which were in heauen? therefore they did not thinke they were Gods. Secondly, they framed dayly new idols, and yet ſaid not that they made new Gods. His anſwer is: Putarunt Gentes ſenouos Deos facere, ſaltem terreſtres: The Gentiles ſo doing, thought at the leaſt, they made ſuch Gods as were vpon earth, although not ſuch as were in heauen: which is no more then he ſpake before to the firſt obiection, a grant of that which I haue obiected. Thirdly, Mutarunt ſimulacra pro arbitrio, nec tamen Deos mutarunt: They changed their idols at their pleaſure, whereas their Gods continued the ſame. To it he ſaith: Reſpondeo Ethnicos eâdem ſtultitiâ quâ putabunt Deos poſſe fieri manibus hominum, potuiſſe etiam credere Deos aliquos potuiſſe deſtrui manibus hominum: As the heathens in their fooliſhneſſe thought they could make Gods with their hands: ſo in as great folly they thought they could destroy the Gods which they had made. And this is no more then was in the anſwer to the firſt obiection, where he confeſſed that in the opinion of the heathen, their idols were but idols, and no true Gods. Fourthly, S. Auguſtine relateth, that when the Gentiles were accuſed of idolatry, they anſwered that: Non colebant idolum, ſed numen quod per idolum ſignificabatur: 
                     Auguſt. in Pſal. 113. 
                     they did not worſhip the idoll, but the God which was repreſented by it. This obiection Bellarmine repeateth in his 2. booke and 11. chapter. But in the 13. chapter, where he taketh vpon him to anſwer the arguments going before, as I haue ſhewed, he paſſeth this ouer with ſilence.
                  But to to come the reaſons which Bellarmine produceth againſt vs for proofe of this defence. If (ſaith he) they did

not beleeue theſe idols to be very gods, but repreſentations only of God, and ſo worſhipped not them, but God in them; why do the Prophets labour ſo much to perſwade them that they were no gods? I anſwer: whatſoeuer we proſtrate our ſelues before Eſay 46. Pſa. 13. Act. 19. in our prayers, conſequently we make it our god, not by our opinion, but by that adoration, which is the proſtrating of our ſelues before it; not directly, but by a conſequent. And becauſe the people did ſo, the Prophets, and S. Paul in thoſe places by him cited, do not ſo much labour to proue them no Gods, as if the people had thought them to be ſo, but becauſe they proſtrated themſelues before them, and ſo by a conſequent made them gods. But (ſaith Bellarmine) if they did not thinke them to be gods, why did they inuocate, and call vpon them? why did they pray vnto them vnleſſe they thought that they did heare them? I anſwer out of the Roman Catechiſme which holdeth this doctrine: that they muſt pray to the images of ſaints in the Romiſh Churches, not 
                     Catechiſ. Rom. pars. 4. cap. 6 ſect. 3. 
                     thinking that the images can heare them, but that the ſaints, which by thoſe images are repreſented, ſhould heare them when they pray before their images. The words are theſe. Quum ad imaginem ſancti alicuius quis dominicam orationem pronunciet, ita tum ſentiat ſe ab illo petere vt ſecum oret, ſibi
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         poſtulet ea quae Dominicae orationis formulâ continentur, & ſui deni
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         ſit interpres & deprecator apud Deum. When any man ſaith the Lords prayer before the image of any ſaint, let his meaning be thus, that he craueth of the ſaint himſelfe whoſe image it is, that the ſaint would pray with him, and obtaine for him thoſe petitions which in that forme of prayer are comprehended, and ſo that he would be for him inſteed of an interpreter, and a spokes man for him with God. So then, as the Catholike prayeth to the image of the ſaint, that the ſaint his ſelfe may heare him, and not the image: likewiſe, the Gentile prayeth to the idoll, not that the idoll, but God ſhould heare him. Other arguments he produceth, weaker then theſe, as namely: That the Gentiles thought their idols to be gods, becauſe they were ſo taught by their Prieſts; and the world did ſo beleeue, becauſe

the idols did ſeeme to speake, when indeed, not they, but the diuels spake out of them, as alſo becauſe they had the ſhape of men, they thought they had in thē life & motion. To which I anſwer: their Prieſts did not ſo teach them, neither did the world beleeue that they were gods, but analogically as before: For the Gentiles held that God was a ſpirit and not a body; the diuels ſpeaking out of them could not make the Gētiles beleeue they ſpake, no more thē the friers ſpeaking out of the rood-loft maketh the Catholike thinke that the image in the rood-loft ſpeaketh. Again, the diuels ſpeaking out of them did imitate God, which ſpake out of the fiery Exod. 2. buſh, whē it could not ſeeme probable that the buſh ſpake, but God out of it. Laſtly, that their idols had the ſhape of men, it maketh againſt him, for that ſhould be an inducement rather to make them thinke they were no gods, but rather men.
                  And to conclude, that I may not be tedious, concerning the erecting of images in the Church, whether it be lawfull or no? They alledge for proofe of the lawfulneſſe thereof the example of God himſelfe, which commanded images to be erected in the temple of Salomon, and thereupon conclude, we may by that warrant erect images in Catechiſ. Rom. pars 3. cap. 2. Bell. de imaginib. li. b2. cap. 5. our Churches; which is but to deceiue the ſimple with a fallacy called, A dicto ſecundum quid, ad dictum ſimpliciter. Salomon lawfully erected images in his temple hauing receiued a commandement from God; therfore we may erect them in our churches, when God hath not giuen any ſuch commandement. The Iſraelites lawfully robbed the Aegyptians, Exod. 11. 2. when God appointed them ſo to do; but we may not do the like, hauing no ſuch diſpenſation from God. He is liberrimum agens, a free agent, and aboue his law; but we are vnder it, and may not breake it without warrant from him. God ſaith: Non facies tibi ſculptile, thou ſhalt make to 
                     Exod. 20. 
                     thy ſelfe no grauen image; and yet we may Deo ſculptilia facere, make grauen images to God, that is, when he doth ſo appoint it, and ſo Salomon did.
               
               
                  
                  CHAP. 3
                  
                     Of Predeſtination.
                  
                  FOr the better vnderſtanding what predeſtination is, it behoueth vs to know firſt; that God hath written three bookes, the one of nature, to hold vs without excuſe, in which we may reade there is a God; and that is the fabrike of the world. The other of Grace, to ſaue our ſoules, which is the holy Bible, where he hath manifeſted himſelfe in his Rom. 1. 20. Pſal. 19. 1. 2. Tim. 3. 
                           •
                        5. Sonne. The third of life, for our farther aſſurance, which is his ſecret counſell, and it he reſerueth to himſelfe in his owne boſome. In it we cannot reade particularly whoſe names are written, becauſe it is not publiſhed as the two Apoc. 20. 15. Apoc. 5. 1. other are, but it is ſealed vp with ſeuen ſeales, and none can open it, but the Lambe Chriſt Ieſus. Yet out of the booke of Grace we are taught that ſome few are written in the booke of life, and the lambe Chriſt Ieſus hath reuealed to S. Paul his choſen veſſell ſeuen leaues of that booke, containing ſeuen heads, or principall chapters, to giue vs ſome ſmall light and taſte thereof, that we may not be meerly ignorant of ſo much as in his wiſedome he thought fit to impart vnto vs.
                  The Apoſtle hath theſe words: We know that all things worke together to the beſt to them that loue God, euen to them 
                     Rom. 8. 28. 89. 30. 
                     that are called of his purpoſe, for thoſe whom he knew before he hath predeſtinated to be made like the image of his Sonne, that he might be the firſt-borne among many brethren. Moreouer, whom he hath predeſtinated, them he called, whom he called, them he iustified, whom he iuſtified, them alſo he glorified. And in another place: He hath choſen vs in him (meaning Chriſt) before the foundation of the world, that we ſhould be holy and 
                     Eph. 1. 4. 5. 
                     blameleſſe before him in loue, who hath predeſtinated vs to be adopted through Ieſus Chriſt, vnto his ſelfe, according to the good pleaſure of his will. In which words are deliuered theſe ſeuen principall heads, to wit, Purpoſe, Fore-knowledge,

Predeſtination, Election, Vocation, Iuſtification, Glorification, which all of them I define after this manner.
                  His purpoſe is his eternall and immutable decree in generall, that he will be glorified by his creatures.
                  Fore-knowledge is his eternall and immutable decree, proceeding meerly from his will and pleaſure, that he will be glorified by the ſaluation of men. Which fore-knowledge called in Latine praeſcientia, is not deriued of the verbe ſcio, which ſignifieth barely to know, but of ſ
                           •
                        iſco, which is 
                        So Beza in annot. main in Rom. 8. So Bell. de grat. & lib. arbit. l. 2
                           •…
                        . 13. 2. Tim. 2. 19. Mat. 7. 23. 
                     antè decernere, to know with a certaine decree, or determination that he will haue it to be ſo, as where it is written: This foundation remaineth ſure; God knoweth who are his. And againe where our Sauiour ſaith in the goſpell to the falſe apoſtles: I know you not. For otherwiſe, though the foreknowledge of God be immutable, it cannot be the cauſe that any thing ſhould come to paſſe; for nothing cometh to paſſe becauſe he knew it would be ſo, but becauſe he ordained that it ſhould be ſo.
                  Predeſtination is his eternall and immutable decree, proceeding onely from his will and pleaſure, that he will be glorified by the ſaluation of ſome particular men aboue the reſt, as where it is written: I haue loued Iacob, and hated 
                     Mal. 1. 2. Rom. 9. 13. 
                     Eſau.
                  
                  Election is his eternall and immutable decree, proceeding from his will and pleaſure, that the whole lumpe being a lumpe or maſſe of iniquity, they which are predeſtinated to be veſſels of honour ſhould be ſeparated from the other clay, which ſerueth to make veſſels of wrath and deſtruction. And all theſe foure go before the conception of Rom. 9. 13. man, the other three follow after, not in Gods ſecret determination, but onely in his execution, two of them in this life, and the other in the life to come.
                  Vocation is an action of eſpeciall grace in this life, in which by the holy Ghoſt inwardly working, the Miniſter of the word outwardly preaching, and the will of man vnfainedly conſenting, man is effectually conuerted to the

faith, and piety of life.
                  Iuſtification is a ſentence of grace in this life, out of which they which are effectually called, are by him through Chriſt abſolued from ſin, and conſequently from the ſentence and decree of death.
                  Glorification is an action of glory in the life to come, by which corruption being caſt off, he doth cloath them with immortality after the ſimilitude of the reſurrection of Ieſus Chriſt.
                  Theſe are ſubordinate one to the other, the firſt foure being before one another in order but not in time; becauſe they are eternall: the other three, though in Gods booke they be alſo eternall in reſpect of his determination, yet in reſpect of the men that are called, iuſtified, and glorified, as they are acts proceeding from his decrees to execute and accompliſh that in them which God hath decreed, not only in order but alſo in time, they follow after, as they are not in eternity but in time. Theſe things being duly conſidered, let vs come to the ſtate of the queſtion.
                  Our doctrine is, that God by eternall decree hath ordeined ſome to ſaluation, others to damnation; the cauſe which moued him ſo to do, being not in them, but only in himſelfe, and that is onely his will and pleaſure. The ſubiects therefore of this diſputation are two ſorts of men, Paucitas ſaluendorum, the paucity, or ſmall remnant of them which are ſaued. And concerning them, Bellarmine his defence is all one with ours; that they are ſaued, no cauſe being in themſelues, but onely in God, without any foreſight of any thing in them. He ſaith it is a doctrine conſonant to 
                     Degrat & lib. arbit. l. 1. cap. 10. 
                     Scriptures, to the tradition of the Church, & to reaſon grounded vpon Scriptures and Fathers. The difference betweene him and vs is only concerning them which are comprehended in the ſecond ranke, which is numeroſitas damnatorū: the great multitude of them which are damned. Of them he ſaith: Caluiniani contendunt homines ante praeuiſionem paccati ad mortem 
                     Degratiâ & lib. arb. l. 2 cap. 16. 
                     deſtinatos quod cum Dei iuſtitiâ pugnat: It cānot ſtand with the

iuſtice of God to ordeine men to deſtruction without foreſight of ſome cauſe to be in themſelues. Our anſwer is: God ordeined them to deſtruction of his owne will, not for their ſinnes, and yet not being without ſinne, but bringing with them into the world from their natiuity and conception, ſufficient matter of condemnation before his decree ſhould be put in execution: as the Hebrues when they were in Aegypt did both build for Pharaoh, and alſo finde ſtraw their ſelues to make morter for the building. We diſtinguiſh Exod. 5. 7. 
                     inter vaſa ipſa, & vniuerſam maſſam, betweene the veſſels in particular which are made to condemnation, and the whole lumpe out of which they are faſhioned and framed. Though they were ordeined to damnation for no iniquity which was particularly in themſelues; yet that there might be no iniuſtice with God, he had a generall reſpect to the mould of iniquity whereof they were made. He hated Eſau in his owne perſon, not for any thing that was in Eſau, but there was matter enough in the whole lumpe out of which he was created, wherefore he ſhould hate him. Saint Auguſtine ſaith: Merito iniuſtum videretur quod fiunt vaſa ad perditionem niſi eſſet in Adam vniuerſa maſſa damnata: It might 
                     Eucherid. ad Laur. c. 98. 
                     ſeeme iniuſtice that any ſhould be veſſels ordeined to deſtruction, had it not bene ſo, that the whole lumpe out of which thoſe veſſels were formed, had bene damned before in Adam. So he maketh the foundation of this decree to be the fall of Adam; and yet ſo, that the fault and guilt of condemnation ſhould reſt in themſelues; and yet this fall of Adam not to be an antecedent or cauſe of this decree, but a conſequent or ſequele of that decree. But concerning the veſſels in particular which are comprehended in this lumpe, the Apoſtle ſaith: God hated Eſau that his purpoſe might remaine according to election, not by workes, but by him that calleth, 
                     Rom. 9. 11. where he plainly deliuereth this doctrine: That God in this reprobation of Eſau, reſpected nothing in his perſon, but the cauſe which moued him to this hatred, was onely in himſelfe. If the aduerſay alledge (as vſually he doth) that albeit God did

no hate him ex operibus, for his euill workes which were in in him, becauſe then he was vnborne: yet he did hate him ex praeuiſis operibus, becauſe he foreſaw thoſe euill workes which afterward when he ſhould be borne he would commit: I anſwer: That obiection is preuented, and fully ſatisfied by the words themſelues in that which followeth after. Concerning the words themſelues Saint Auguſtine ſaith: Si futura opera quae Deus vti
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         praeſciebat vellet intelligi, nequaqum diceret non ex operibus, ſed ex futuris operibus, eo
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         modo iſtam ſolueret 
                     Euchirid. ad Laur. cap. 98. 
                     quaeſtionem, immò nullam omnino quam ſolui opus eſſet faceret quaeſtionem: If the Apostle had vnderſtood foreſight of workes to be any cauſe, he had not ſaid as he did NOT OF WORKES, but he would rather haue ſaid: God hated him becauſe of the workes which he foreſaw in him, and ſo he would not onely haue reſolued this queſtion, but alſo haue made it ſo plaine, that it ſhould haue bene without queſtion. But in the words which follow, Saint Paul expreſſeth his owne meaning to be as I haue deliuered, firſt by making anſwer to this obiection: Is there iniquity with God? God forbid. For fleſh would obiect that it were iniuſtice condemnare hominem non natum, to condemne the child vnborne: To which obiection he anſwereth: It is no iniquity, which anſwer in defence of Gods iuſtice, had bene needleſſe, and the obiection as fruitleſſe, if it were ſo that God did in his decree condemne him out of a foreſight of ſinne, which he knew he would commit, foraſmuch as God in his foreſight could not be deceiued, and his decree was not to be executed vntill the ſinne were committed, and that were in mans iudgement no iniquity or iniuſtice. Secondly he cleareth the matter by inlarging that point to make it more apparant to mans capacity, where he ſaith: He will haue mercy vpon whom he will haue mercy, and where he will, he hardeneth. And againe, it is not in him that willeth (meaning mans indeuours) nor in him that runneth (meaning the workes of man) but in God that ſheweth mercy. There he, reacheth that the onely law of iuſtice, and rule whereby God in his predeſtination and

reprobation is directed, and the higheſt cauſe which moueth him thereunto, is onely his will. Non poteſt iniuſte agere cuius volunt as eſt iuſticiae regula: He cannot do iniuſtice which is tyed to no other rule of iuſtice, but his will. Whatſoeuer is the will of God, the ſame with him is iuſtice. Hauing thus layed open the ſtate of the queſtion, and ſhewed briefly what is our defence, let vs examine what may be ſaid againſt vs.
                  Our aduerſaries which we are to conclude withall, are Bellarmine and Becanus, two famous Ieſuites. Bellarmine ſeemeth in words ſomewhat to diſcent from vs by wilfull miſtaking both of vs and of Saint Auguſtine, from whom he would deriue the grounds of his diſputation, as a man that will not ſee that which plainly he ſeeth. He goeth about the buſh by ſleights and ſubtilties, that he might at the leaſt, beare the world in hand he ſtandeth in oppoſition againſt vs, but when he commeth to the point, he diſcenteth not from vs. As for Becanus which hath written after him, he would be thought to ſee more then others did before; and therefore feedeth his owne phantaſie with new trickes, and buſieth the reader with ſtrange conceipts farre fetched, and nothing pettinent to the matter. In his whole tract hee beateth the ayre, and fighteth with his owne ſhadow, but commeth nothing neere vnto that which is cardo queſtionis, & prora quaſi, & puppis totius controuerſiae, the maine matter now in controuerſie betweene him and vs. But that we may firſt come to Bellarmine.
                  
                  Of reprobation he ſpeaketh thus: Cauſâ reprobationis 
                     De gratiâ & lib. arb. lib. 2. c. 16. 
                     partim ad ſolam Dei voluntatem, partim ad peccata prauiſareferenda eſt, The cauſe of reprobation is partly the meere will of God, and partly the foreſight of ſinne. In theſe termes he ſeemeth to impugne vs. But afterward he explaneth his meaning by a diſtinction, ſaying: Reprobatio duos actus comprehendit, vnum negatiuum, alterum affirmatiuum, Negatiuus eſt: Non habet Deus voluntatem eos ſaluandi, & quantum ad

illum actum, nulla datur eius cauſa ex parte hominum. Affirmatiuus eſt: Habet Deus voluntatem eos damnandi, & huius cauſa eſt praeuiſio peccati; There are two acts of God in his reprobation, the firſt negatiue, the other affirmatiue. His negatiue act is this: He hath no will to ſaue them, and of that act there is no cauſe at all in men, but onely in himſelfe. The affirmatiue act is this: He hath a will to damne them, and the cauſe of this is the foreſight of ſinne. For proofe of the negatiue ſaith, Bellarmine: God hated Eſau, antequam aliquid mali agiſſet, non ſolum coram hominibus, ſed etiam in praeſcientià Dei, before he had done any euill, not onely in the ſight of men, but alſo in the fore-knowledge of God. He hated him (ſaith he) not for originall ſinne, for then ſhould he as well haue hated Iacob, becauſe originall ſinne was common to them both; nor becauſe he was worthy of hatred, for ſo they were both, and ſo he ſhould haue hated all men, and elected none, becauſe all were worthy of hatred. By the way (ſaith he) it is to be noted, that theſe words: to hate, to harden, which in termes are affirmatiue, in ſenſe are negatiue, as odiſſe est nolle diligere, indurare nolle miſereri, to hate, is not to loue, to harden, is not to be willing to ſhew mercy. Againe (ſaith he) that a man is hardned, though it be a puniſhment for ſinnes paſt, yet it is an effect of this reprobation, ſo that God doth harden him becauſe from eternity he appointed him to be a reprobate. Laſt of all (ſaith he) facere vaſain contumeliam, to make men veſſels of diſhonour; though being vnderſtood in this ſenſe: deputare ad contumeliam, to depute them to diſhonour and ſhame is affirmatiue; yet, being thus vnderſtood: Facere vaſa qualia requirit totius maſſae conditio, & ſic relinquere, & nihil aliud addere, to make them ſuch veſſels as the nature and condition of the whole lumpe requireth, and ſo to leaue them, and do no further act, is negatiue, and of all theſe there is no cauſe in men, but onely in God. But for proofe of the affirmatiue, which is: Habere voluntatem damnandi, to haue a will to damne them (ſaith he) that is by reaſon of the foreſight of ſinne, we haue inſtance. Ite maledicti in ignem aternum, Go ye curſed into euerlaſting fire, the cauſe of this damnation is ſhewed to be in themſelues: 
                     Math. 29.
                     
                     I was hungry, and ye gaue me no meate, &c. Bonus Deus eſt, iuſtus Deus eſt, God is good, and God is iuſt, he can 
                     Auguſt. lib. 3. aduerſus Iulianum cap. 18. 
                     ſaue, though men haue not deſerued ſaluation, becauſe he is good, but he cannot condemne them vnleſſe they haue deſerued condemnation, becauſe he is iuſt. Condemnare aliquem ſine culpà eſt punire ſine cauſà, quod iniuſtum eſt, To condemne a man without fault is to puniſh without cauſe, and that cannot ſtand with iuſtice. So farre goeth Bellarmine.
                  
                  Now, that I may ſpeake to euery point, I will firſt repeate his words: Reprobation (ſaith he) hath two parts, one negatiue, that God will not ſaue, the cauſe of that is in God, the other affirmatiue, that God will condemne, the cauſe thereof is in man. Firſt, I ſay this is no lawfull diſtinction, to make a diuerſity of that which is an identity; for there is aequipollentia in re, they be different onely in termes, but are equipollent one to the other in ſubſtance. He ſheweth out of Saint Auguſtine that to hate, and to harden, which in termes are affirmatiue, are in matterall one with nolle diligere, nolle miſereri, not to loue, not to haue mercy, which are negatiue. But after the ſame manner I come vpon him, Deus vult damnare, God will condemne, is a propoſition in voyce affirmatiue, and equiuolent to this: Deus non vult ſaluare, God will not ſaue, which is negatiue. And as there is no meane betweene loue and hatred, mercy and induration, but he that is not loued of God is hated, he that findeth no mercy is hardned: So, in Gods predeſtination there is no meane or third thing betweene ſaluation and damnation, but neceſſarily by this decree, he that is not ſaued muſt be damned, he that is not ſeparated from the lumpe of iniquity muſt be left to continue in the lumpe of iniquity, no meane betweene ſeparation from it, and continuance in it.
                  But ſecondly, to leaue his idle termes to himſelfe, which ſauour of ſubtiltie, and not of ſubſtance, and which make that to ſeeme darke and obſcure, which is as cleere as the day light; I will ſhew plainely out of himſelfe that in doctrine

he conſenteth with vs: For, concerning this affirmatiue act God will condemne Eſau, which he ſaith is an act of Gods reprobation, let him acquit himſelfe if he can. I would know whether he will haue it to be a part of reprobation, as it is in ipſo decreto, in the decree it ſelfe, or in decreti executione, in the execution of the decree? in intention or in action? one of them it muſt be.
                  The decree it ſelfe which is Gods intention is eternall, the action which is the execution of his decree, is temporall. If he meane it is to be referred to the decree it ſelfe, I proue by his owne argument, that then the cauſe why he would condemne Eſau, was not in Eſau, but only in God. For, he framed his argument to proue the negatiue part in this manner: That God would not ſaue Eſau, it was not becauſe he foreſaw ſinne in him, for then he ſhould not haue ſaued Iacob; for he foreſaw ſinne in Iacob as well as in Eſau. So I come vpon him with his owne argument: That God would condemne Eſau, it was not becauſe he foreſaw ſinne in him; for then he would haue condemned Iacob, becauſe he did foreſee ſin in Iacob as well as in Eſau; Therefore, as Bellarmine inferreth: the cauſe was onely in God that he would not ſaue Eſau. So I inferre, the cauſe was only in God that he would condemne Eſau. But if he meane that the affirmatiue part is to be referred to the condemnation which is the execution of reprobation, which is temporall, and not to the decree it ſelfe, which is eternall (as needs he muſt) and it appeareth plainely by his words following that ſo he meaneth, we hold with him, and his defence is all one with ours. For, how doth he proue the affirmatiue part: That God will condemne them, it is in themſelues? but by this ſentence of Scripture, Math. 25. Go ye curſed into eternall fire, the cauſe being ſhewed to be in themſelues: I was hungry, and ye fed me not. Theſe words are a finall ſentence to be pronounced at the end of the world, and not the decree it ſelfe, which was before the beginning of the world, theſe words put the decree in execution, and are a ſentence publiſhed to the world by the

mouth of our Sauiour Chriſt, whereas reprobation is a ſecret which God reſerueth to himſelfe in his owne boſome. And, whereas he calleth this finall ſentence of the Iudge reprobation, it cannot properly be ſo called, but onely by the figure called metonimia effectus pro cauſa, where the effect is vſed for the cauſe; for this is condemnation, and not reprobation, an effect of reprobation, but not reprobation it ſelfe.
                  And, where for proofe of the affirmatiue part he ſayth out of Saint Auguſtine, Condemnare ſine culpâ oſt punire ſine 
                     Auguſt. l. 3: aduerſ. Iulian. cap. 18. 
                     cauſâ quod iniuſtum eſt, To condemne without fault, is to puniſh without cauſe, and that is againſt iustice; I hold with him, God cannot in his iuſtice puniſh or condemne any man which hath not deſerued condemnation or puniſhment: but what is this to reprobation? Peter Martyr acknowledged ſo much long before Bellarmine his workes came forth, where he ſayd: Peccata ſunt cauſa cur condemnantur, non tamen cur 
                     Petrus Martyr locorum comclaſſis. 3. cap. 1. 
                     à Deo reprobantur, Sinnes are the cauſe why men are damned, and yet no cauſe why men are reprobates. So where he ſaith that God doth make veſſels of diſhonour, the cauſe is in himſelfe; but that he doth deputare ad contumeliam, appoint them to wrath and diſhonour: It is in the men themſelues, we conſent with him, in as much as this deputation is an action which is temporall, but that making of veſſels of wrath is a decree which is eternall. Peter Martyr ſaith: Peccata ſunt cauſa damnationis quae fit in tempore, ſed non reprobationis quae fuit ab aeterno, Sinne is the cauſe of damnation which is in time; but not of reprobation, which was before time, ſinne is an effect of reprobation, and therefore it cannot be a cauſe of reprobation. As the Apoſtle Saint Paul, and Bellarmine his ſelfe do ſhew, 
                        Eph. 1. 4. De gratiâ & lib. arb. l. 2. cap. 10. that good workes are no cauſe, but an effect of election: ſo the argument followeth: ſinne is not a cauſe, but an effect of reprobation. The ſinne of Pharaoh was hardneſſe of heart, he would not let the people go; this could not be the cauſe why God eternally did reiect him, but God reiected him eternally; and therefore in time he hardned his heart,

that he ſhould not let the people go.
                  Laſt of all, there are two ſorts of cauſes, one the higheſt, an other ſubordinate, which go betweene the decree, & the execution thereof. So that albeit Gods will was the firſt and higheſt cauſe that he ordained ſome to damnation: which cauſe was onely in himſelfe; yet there are found other cauſes inferiour and ſubordinate, ſufficient to ſtand with the rule of iuſtice, that his decree ſhould be put in execution, as hardneſſe of heart, infidelity, and other ſins, which cauſes are inherent in the men themſelues.
                  
                     Becanus writeth in this manner: The doctrine of predeſtination 
                     Euchirid. cap. 1. (ſaith he) is vnderſtood two manner of wayes: either according to the Catholike defence, that God did, poſt praeuiſionem originalis peccati, quum vniuerſae eſſet maſſa perdita, aliquos aligere ex ſuâ miſericordia ad gloriam, alios in maſſâ perditionis relinquere vt eſſent vaſa in contumeliam, After he foreſaw originall ſinne in the whole lumpe being corrupted, of his mercy chooſe ſome to be veſſels of honour, and leaue others in the lumpe of perdition to be veſſels of diſhonour: Or according to Caluin, that God before he fore ſaw originall ſinne, Ex maſſâ integrâ, Out of the lumpe being ſound, ordained ſome to life, others to death without any offence of theirs or their parents. And as it is taken in that ſecond ſenſe he argueth againſt Caluin, and out of this diuiſion ſo made by himſelfe, he frameth his diſputation.
                  By the way, before we come to his arguments. Firſt, it is ſuperfluous and idle, to ſuppoſe that God did predeſtinate antè aut poſt praeuiſionem peccati, before or after the foreſight of originall ſinne, becauſe he did both praeuidere & praedeſtinare ab aeterno, foreſee and predeſtinate from euerlaſting, with him there is nihil prius aut poſterius, nothing before or after, becauſe he is before all time. Againe, this were to impute ignorance vnto God, as if ſome thing had bene to come to paſſe which once he did not foreſee. Thirdly, our queſtion is not of the time when? but of the cauſe why God did predeſtinate? I confeſſe with Bellarmine theſe

termes: Poſt praeuiſionem operum & expraeuiſis operibus, After 
                     Degrat & lib. arbit. l. 2, cap. 10. 
                     the foreſight of workes, and out of a foreſight of workes (making this foreſight to be the cauſe) are all one, ſo that he diſputeth not of the time when? but of the cauſe why God did predeſtinate? But, with this Ieſuite it is otherwiſe, as it appeareth by the ſequele of his diſputation; and therefore he commeth not neere the queſtion which he propoſeth. As alſo, maſſaintegra & corrupta, the ſtate of innocency and of ſinne, though in time they ſucceeded one another; yet in Gods foreſight they were both at once. But let vs come to his argument.
                  That God did not predeſtinate any man to life ex maſſâ integrâ, out of the lumpe being ſound, before he foreſaw originall ſinne in him, he taketh vpon him to confirme by two reaſons, the firſt is this: If God did ſo, then the decree of predeſtination was before the decree of Chriſt his incarnation, but that decree of predeſtination was not before the decree of Chriſts incarnation; Therefore God did not predeſtinate man to life out of the lumpe being ſound, before he foreſaw originall ſinne in him. He proueth the ſequele of the Maior; becauſe the foreſight of ſinne is more ancient then the decree of incarnation: for had not Adam ſinned, Chriſt had neuer bene incarnate. He proueth the Minor, becauſe elſe our election had not bene grounded vpon the merits of our Sauiour Chriſt. For Saint Paul ſaith: Elegit nos in Chriſto, he hath choſen vs in Chriſt, &c. To which Eph. 1. 4. I anſwere: This is 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , a skirmiſh with his owne ſhadow, but no combat with Caluin, becauſe he obtrudeth that to Caluin which is not his doctrine. Caluin doth not hold that God did predeſtinate any man to life ex maſſâ integrâ, out of the lumpe being ſound: for the lumpe being ſound, men were in ſtate of life iure creationis, by the right of their firſt creation, and if the lumpe had continued ſound, there had bene no vſe of predeſtination; for that is grounded vpon Chriſt his merits, which were to take place maſſâ perditâ, & corruptâ, the lumpe being corrupted. And much leſſe did Caluin hold that God did predeſtinate or ordeine

to death, ex maſſâ integrâ, out of the lumpe being ſound. For, beſides that it was impoſſible that man ſhould dye, the whole lump 
                        〈◊◊…〉
                     uing in the firſt integrity, it could not ſtand with Gods iuſtice. But Caluins doctrine is, that God did ab aeterno ante 
                           〈◊…〉
                         creatam, multò magis antè maſſam integram aut corruptam, eternally before the lumpe was created, and therfore before the integrity or corruption of it, predeſtinate out of it by his decree, ſome to life, ſome to death, foreſeeing that it ſhould be corrupted. For in his predeſtination, he had a generall reſpect to the whole lumpe, which hee foreſaw ſhould be corrupted, though not to the corruption of euery particular veſſell which was to be framed out of that lumpe: ſo his predeſtination which was decreed from eternity was executed in time, after the lumpe had receiued corruption; for ſo long as it cōtinued ſound, there could be no vſe of predeſtination, nor poſſibility of death. And ſo, euen as they which are ſaued, are the children of God before they are borne, by eternall predeſtination, but not by actuall adoption vntill they be ſanctified; likewiſe they which are damned, be eternally by reprobation before they are born, but not actually before they be infected with ſin, the children of Belial, and veſſels of deſtruction.
                  Secondly, how could there be praeuiſio peccati in maſſâ integrâ, aforeſight of ſinne in the lumpe being ſound? when integritas maſſae & originale peccatum, the ſoundneſſe of the lumpe and originall ſinne cannot ſtand together? God did foreſoe that the ſound lumpe ſhould be infected, but not ſo long as it continued in integrity. The lumpe ſo long as it was found, conſiſted but of two perſons, Adam and Eue, both which are ſaued, by all mens confeſſion: how then did God predeſtinate any to damnation out of the lumpe being in integrity? I confeſſe that in reſpect of the corruption of the whole lumpe which God did foreſee, there was firſt aforeſight of ſinne, then a decree that Chriſt ſhould be incarnate, and then the decree of predeſtination founded vpon the merits of Ieſus Chriſt, which were in order, & as we do

apprehend them, one before the other; yet in eternity, with God they were altogether, but in reſpect of maſſa integra, the lumpe being ſound, there were none of theſe; ſo that this ſyllogiſme confuteth not Caluin.
                  
                  His ſecond argument is this: Infants (ſath he) dying without baptiſme, according to Caluins doctrine, are ſaued by the faith of their parents; therefore God hauing a respect to their faith predeſtinated them, non ſine intuitu operum, not without a foreſight and relation to ſomewhat which was in the perſons of thoſe men. To which I anſwer: That in the ſtate of innocency Baptiſme was not inſtituted, neither was Faith preached, and therefore he diſputeteth idlely. Againe if he had brought this argument to proue predeſtination after the lumpe was corrupted, to proceed from any thing that God reſpected in man: It were but a Fallacie, non cauſa pro cauſà. For faith which God foreſaw in any man, is not the cauſe why hee did predeſtinate him to ſaluation, but contrarily his predeſtination is the cauſe why man is comprehended vnder the couenant of Grace, and why hee giueth him faith that hee may bee ſaued. For whomſoeuer he vouchſafeth the end, them alſo he vouchſafeth the meanes whereby they may attaine to that end. Gods predeſtination conſiſteth with good workes as it doth with faith, though he predeſtinateth freely without the merit of good workes, the workes being an effect and end of Gods election, and not the cauſe that moued Eph. 1. him to elect vs: for the Apoſtle ſaith: He choſe vs that we might be holy, and not becauſe we were holy, or becauſe he did foreſee that we ſhould be holy. And his election is made ſure to vs by good works, which are the effects and fruits thereof. 2. Pet. r. 10.
                  
                  Againſt reprobation, or predeſtination to death, ante praeuiſionem originalis peccati ex maſſà integrâ, before the foreſight of originall ſinne, out of the lumpe being ſound, he argueth in this manner: Firſt, God decreed to create man to perpetuall happineſſe, where it is ſaid: Faciamus hominem, let vs make 
                     Gen. 2. 
                     man according to our owne image. Secondly, he decreed not

that man ſhould dye vnleſſe he were diſobedient: Quacun
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         die, 
                     Gen. 2. 
                     what day ſoeuer thou ſhalt eate of the middle tree, thou ſhalt dye. Thirdly, he decreed to ſhew mercy to all mankinde rather then cruelty, vniuerſae vie eius miſericordia, all his waies are mercie. 
                     Pſal. 24. 
                     Yea God was mercifull euen to the reprobates, becauſe he gaue his Sonne to be the Redeemer of mankinde. And there digreſſing from his argument, he exclaimeth againſt Caluin, as if Caluin ſhould ſay, that God did execute cruelty vpon mankinde, elect but a few, and damne a great multitude, condemne man before his cauſe is heard, ſtirre man vp to commit ſinne, that thereupon he might take occaſion to puniſh him. My anſwer is as before. Firſt, that he did not foreſee any originall ſinne that could be in man ſo long as man was to continue in the ſtate of innocency; and therefore he doth but beate the aire as before, to proue that againſt Caluin, which Caluin neuer meant, that God ſhould predeſtinate any man to death the lumpe being pure: for reprobation and the ſtate of innocency could not ſtand together. As he created man to euerlaſting happineſſe, ſo he decreed not that man ſhould continue in that happineſſe. As his decree of death was but conditionall, if man were diſobedient: ſo he gaue not man conſtancy to perſeuer in obedience. As all the wayes of the Lord are mercy, ſo his mercy belongeth onely to the faithfull, but he gaue not to all the gift of faith. As he was mercifull euen to the reprobates, in that he gaue his Sonne to be a redeemer of the whole world; ſo this benefite did not extend any way to the reprobates, but onely to the elect. Hee gaue him to bee a ſufficient Redeemer of the whole world, if the whole world would haue receiued him, but he was an effectuall redeemer onely to the beleeuers. He offered his grace through Chriſt to all men, euen to the reprobates, but he ſealed and confirmed it onely to the elect. So theſe arguments refute not Caluin. And that I may anſwer his exclamations. This cannot be cruelty in God, but as the Apoſtle ſaith: It is iuſtice. Nunquid deo non licebit quod figulo licet? May not God do as much as the Potter may do? Neither Rom. 9. 21.
                     
is this to condemne men the cauſe being not heard: for the whole lumpe being corrupted, the particulars could not be cleare, neither was any particular to expoſtulate with God, the whole lump being iuſtly damned, more then Moſes was to be admitted to plead for himſelfe why he ſhould not be caſt into the water, when it was decreed generally that all male children of the Hebrues ſhould be caſt into the water. Exod. 1. It was ſufficient without further arguing the caſe, that Moſes was a male childe of the Hebrues: ſo it was ſufficient that Eſau was the ſonne of Adam. That God elected but a ſmall remnant, and damneth many millions, it is no new doctrine, our Sauiour ſaith: Many are called, but few are choſen. Saint Auguſtine ſaith: God is glorified as well by deſtroying, as by ſauing of mankinde, elſe he would not create ſo 
                     Ad optatum epiſt. 157. 
                     many millions whom he knew before ſhould be damned. If all (ſaith Auguſtine) which are borne of Adam ſhould be ſaued: lateret beneficium quod donatur indignis, Gods mercy to them which are ſaued (which are indeed vnworthy of ſaluation) would not appeare. Plures Deus facit damnandos quàm ſaluandos incomparabili multitudine, vt reiectorum multitudine oſtenderetur quàm nulli momenti eſt apud Deum iuſtū quantalibet numeroſitas iuſtiſſimè damnatorum, at
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         vt hinc quo
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         intelligant qui ex ipſâ damnatione redimuntur, hoc fuiſſe maſſae illi vniuerſae debitum, quod tam magnae eius parti redditum cernerent: God ordeined more to condemnation then to ſaluation without all cō
                        pariſon: firſt, that it might appeare by the maier part of them which are damned, how little God, which is ſo iuſt regardeth the deſtruction of whole multitudes of ſinners, which are moſt iuſtly puniſhed. Secondly, they which are redeemed from that damnation, may by their owne redemption confeſſe when they ſee the maior part damned, that that damnation was due to the whole lumpe, which was adiudged to the greater part. And laſt of all, if he thinke it an hard ſpeech in Caluin to ſay that God inciteth men to ſin, that ſo he might take occaſion to puniſh them, let Saint Paul anſwer it out of whom Caluin did alledge it, Rom. 9. 17. 18. where he ſaith: God hardened, and God ſtirred vp Pharaoh,

                     for this purpoſe, that he might ſhew his power in him, and that his name might be declared through all the earth. To conclude, whereas he obiecteth, 1. Tim. 2. It is the will of God that all men ſhould be ſaued. And Oſe. 13. Perditio tua ex te, ſalus ex me Iſraël, that thou art damned it proceedeth from thy ſelfe, that thou art ſaued it is to be aſcribed to me, ô Iſraël: And therefore inferreth that the cauſe of predeſtination is in our ſelues, & not in God: I anſwer firſt to Saint Paul, It is his will that all ſhould be ſaued, that is his reuealed, but not his ſecret will, and to Hoſe, our deſtruction is of our ſelues, and yet it is of God that men are predeſtinated to deſtruction, for as much as there are two cauſes of damnation, one principall, which is his will, and that is outward, and not in men: the other ſubordinate which commeth betweene the decree and the execution of the decree, which is damnation, and that is ſinne, matter worthy enough of damnation; and that is inherent in man. And thus you ſee the ſaying of the Apoſtle verified of this Ieſuite, Volentes eſſe Doctores legis non intelligunt quid loquuntur, ne
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                        
                      
                     1. Tim. 7. 
                     de quibus affirmant. They would bee Doctors of the law, and yet vnderstand not what they speake, neither whereof they affirme.
                  
               
               
                  CHAP. 4.
                  
                     Of inuocation of Saints.
                  
                  THe Church of Rome hath bene, for many yeares paſt, charged with the crime of idolatry, for yeelding that worſhip to dead mens ſoules which is due onely to God. Being not able to ſtand any longer vpon the iuſtification of themſelues, the matter appearing ſo fowle, they flye frō their firſt holds, and deuiſe new defences to auoide that grieuous imputation; and yet ſtill to retaine their ancient ſuperſtition. Therefore concerning inuocation of Saints, Bellarm de ſactorum bea
                           •
                        . lib. 1. cap. 17. they deliuer this doctrine: Non licet à ſanctis aliquid petere, vt nobis tanquam auctores aliquid concedāt, ſed vt corū precibus

à Deo nobis beneficia concedantur: It is not lawfull to pray vnto Saints as authors and giuers of any good thing which they ſhould beſtow vpon vs, but onely as helpers and mediators vnto God in our behalfe, that by their praiers for vs, we may more eaſily obtaine at the hands of God ſuch things as we ſhall aske. Being charged that their practiſe is contrary to this doctrine, that in the practiſe of their religion throughout their Churches they pray ſtill in as groſſe maner, as before they did, howſoeuer in their Schoole-diuinity they dare not maintaine it, to cleare themſelues they ſay: Si quis dicat ſancte Petre miſerere 
                     Bellar. Ibidem. 
                     mei, quantum ad verba ſic licet dicere, ſed ſenſus intelligendus eſt: Miſerere mei orando pro me, da mihi aditum coeli, id eſt precibus impetra: It is lawfull to pray in theſe termes: S. Peter haue mercy vpon me, open to me the gate of heauen: but that praier is not to be vnderſtood as it is conceiued in thoſe expreſſe words, but in another ſenſe, which is this: Pray for me that I may obtaine mercy, by thy praiers obtaine for me that the gate of heauen may be opened vnto me, To which I reply, that the common people among them are no Schoole-men, and therefore this euaſion doth not make their prayer to bee leſſe idolatrous then it was before. This is but to hold the people ſtill in darkneſſe, and to rob God of his honour by the fallacy of equiuocation. But let vs examine the grounds of this defence: They alledge the words of the Apoſtle: I magnifie my office to try if by any meanes I might 
                     Bell ibidem. Rom. 11. 14. 
                     prouoke them of my fleſh to follow them, and might ſaue ſome of them. And in another place: I am made all things to all men, that I might by all meanes ſaue ſome. To theſe words I anſwer: 1. Cor. 9. 22. they are ſufficient to proue that while Saint Peter liued, God ſtirred him vp as an inſtrument of his glory to bring men to the kingdome of heauen, and to ſaue their ſoules, but not after he was departed out of this life. So 1. Tim. 4. 16. Timothy taking heed to learning, and continuing therin, might both ſaue himſelfe, and them which heard him, when he liued, but not after his death. For who knoweth not, that verbum Dei eſt officio ſeruatrix humani generis? the word of God hath a

ſauing power, and that the miniſtery of the Goſpell is the ordinary meane to ſaue mens ſoules? But what is this to Saints departed, whoſe miniſtery ceaſeth, or to proue the lawfulneſſe of prayer to the dead which do not heare vs? S. Paul ſpake of ſauing men in his life time, not after his death, by his preaching to them, not by their praying to him that he ſhould pray for them. This is no true kinde of argumentation, but a fallacy called Ignoratio Elenchi.
                  
                  The defence of the Romiſh Church being this: that Saints are to be inuocated after they be dead, not as authors, but as mediators; let this be the queſtion betweene vs: whether any ſuch inuocation is commended vnto vs in the holy Scriptures, or no? Eckius, one of their greateſt Euchirid. com. locorum cap. 15. Schoole-diuines that euer was in the Vniuerſitie of Ingolſtad, maketh this free confeſſion, that innocation of Saints is not expreſsly commanded in holy Writ: Explicitè ſanctorum inuocatio non eſt praecepta in ſacris literis: Not in the old teſtament (ſaith he) becauſe the people of themſelues were prone to idolatry, and the Saints departed were then in Limbus, and not in heauen. In the new testament the Apoſtles wrote no ſuch thing, left ſuch doctrine ſhould be a meanes to bring the Gentiles backe againe to idolatry as alſo becauſe the Apoſtles their ſelues would not be thought ſo ambitious as to ſeeke their owne glory after their death. I deſire them therefore with Chriſtian ſobriety to ſpeake to theſe foure points.
                  Firſt, the wiſedome of the holy Ghoſt being ſuch, that in the whole body of the Bible, ſuch inuocation was not ſo much as once named for feare of idolatry, how can it be denied but this inuocation hath at the leaſt ſome affinity with idolatry? or why ſhould the Church of Rome either withſtand, or go beyond the wiſedome of God, to maintaine & publiſh that in their humane policy, which God in his diuine wiſdome thought fit to be ſuppreſſed and concealed? or why ſhould not the perill of idolatry bee as carefully ſhunned now as then it was?
                  Secondly, foraſmuch as the confeſſion of Bellarmine is:

                     Dico illa omnia ſcripta eſſe ab Apoſtolis quae ſunt omnibus neceſſaria, 
                     De verbo Dei lib. 4. cap. 10. 
                     & quae ipſipalam omnibus vulgo praedicarūt, that all things which are neceſſary for the Church to know, or which the Apoſtles in their Sermons by word of mouth did publiſh & teach are written by the Apoſtles, but this inuocation is not mentioned in their writings; and therefore was neither taught by them nor held neceſſary to ſaluation. Why doth the Church of Rome ſo vehemently maintaine it? S. Paul ſaith: No mā muſt 
                     Rom. 12. 3. 
                     preſume to vnderſtand aboue that which is meet to be vnderſtood, but that euery man muſt, ſapere adſobrietatem, vnderſtand with ſobriety. And what it is plus ſapere quàm oportet, to vnderſtand aboue that which is meet, and not according to ſobriety, he ſheweth in another place: ſupra id quod ſcriptum eſt ſapere, when 
                     1. Cor. 4. 6. 
                     any man ſhall preſume beyond that which is written.
                  
                  Thirdly, if inuocation of Saints were neceſſary for the eaſier obtaining of mercy at the hands of God, and the readier way to ſaue mens ſoules; and yet the Apoſtles forbeare to publiſh this doctrine, becauſe they would not be thought ambitious, they were not faithfull Stewards of the word, nor ſo carefull of the Church of Chriſt as behoued men of that holy vocation for humane reſpects neglecting their office. Furthermore, they did contrary to the rule of Saint Paul, in concealing the truth of religion, which was to do euil, that good might follow, which imputation Rom. 3. 8. cannot without great impiety bee layed vpon ſuch ſanctified veſſels. Nay which is more, how can it ſtand with that which Saint Paul teſtifieth of himſelfe, where he ſaith: I haue kept nothing backe, but haue ſhewed you all the councell of 
                     Act. 20. 27. & 35. 
                     God. And againe, I haue ſhewed you all things.
                  
                  Fourthly, in the ſame chapter Eckius hauing deliuered that ſuch inuocation is no where expreſſed in the holy Scriptures; yet taketh vpon him to produce many expreſſe places to proue the ſame; I would therefore bee ſatisfied with what conſcience he could aledge thoſe places to reſiſt a knowne truth?
                  But to come to Bellarmine, when Mathias was to be elected

in the place of Iudas, the Apoſtles prayed after this manner: Thou Lord, which knoweſt the hearts of all men, 
                     Act. 2. 24. 
                     ſhew whether of theſe two thou haſt choſen. In which words it is expreſſed that hee which onely is infinitely wiſe, hath reſerued the knowledge of mens hearts to himſelfe. But this is a ground or principle agreed vpon betweene vs both, that we may pray vnto none, but onely to him which knoweth the heart: He anſwereth: that not onely God, but alſo the Saints departed are 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , ſearchers and vnderſtanders of the ſecrets of mens hearts. I reply: That belongeth onely to the Creator, which made the heart. For, ſaith Salomon, Heare thou in heauen 
                     1. Reg. 8. 39. 
                     in thy dwelling place, and be mercifull, and do, and giue euery man according to all his waies, as thou knoweſt his heart, for thou onely knoweſt the hearts of all the children of men: He diſtinguiſheth in this manner: Non tribuunt Catholici 
                     De ſactorū beat lib. 1. cap. 16. 
                     ſanctis mortuis diuinitatem, id eſt, vim cognoſcendi mentium cogitationes. Cognoſcunt quidem preces noſtras, non vt ſunt in mentibus noſtris, ſed vt ſunt in Deo quem vident, & qui eas ipſis oſtendit. The Catholickes aſcribe not to Saints departed any Deity, as if they had power in themſelues to bee diſcerners of mens thoughts. And yet they conceiue our prayers, though not by any inſight into vs, or inspection into the inward and hidden man, but by viſion in the Maieſtie of God, whom they do ſee, and who reuealeth our prayers vnto them. Againſt this anſwer I diſpute in this manner out of his owne booke in another place: If Saints conceiue our prayers in ſuch ſort, as is aforeſaid, then it is by a generall illumination De ſanct. beat. lib. 1. cap. 20. or viſion, by which at their firſt entrance into the ſtate of happineſſe, in the Maieſty of God, they ſee all at once, or elſe ſucceſſiuely by a ſpeciall reuelation from God, at ſuch times and ſeaſons onely as prayers in particular are made vnto them, he ſtandeth in doubt what he ſhould anſwer, whether it be by ſuch a generall illumination, or ſuch eſpeciall reuelation? by which of them it is, or whether it be by any of them, or not, he cannot tell.

For he ſaith: Ex his duabus prior videtur ſimpliciter probabilior tamen poſterior ſententia eſt magis idonea ad conuincendos hereticos: It is more probable it ſhould be by viſion, and yet it is a more ſafe defence againſt the heretickes, to hold that it is by reuelation: In which words you ſee what weake grounds he buildeth vpon, which are onely, probabilitas, & ſtudium contradicēdi, the firſt probility, or humane coniecture: the ſecond, a vaine deſire of contradiction, to withſtand his aduerſaries in diſputation; whether it be by truth or falſhood, right or wrong, by certainty or vncertainty, by hap or good cunning, he careth not. I reply therefore: If Saints heare vs not, it is very idle to pray vnto them, if it were poſſible that they could heare vs: but if we cannot reſolue our ſelues that they do heare vs, our praiers can neither be effectuall, nor yet made with a good conſcience. That they cannot be effectuall, it is the doctrine of Saint Iames: Euery thing which 
                     Iam. 1. 6. 
                     we aske muſt be asked in faith, and not with doubting, &c. That ſuch prayers are made with an ill conſcience, and are ſinne, it is the doctrine of Saint Paul: He that doubteth 
                     Rom. 14. 23. 
                     is condemned, becauſe hee doth it not of faith: and whatſoeuer is not of faith, is ſinne. Let euery man bee fully perſwaded in his minde. But we cannot be aſſured that they heare vs, ſeeing there is no ground nor proofe thereof in the holy Scriptures: neither can the claſſicall Authors and and maintainers of that doctrine, yeeld any plaine or firme reaſon to ſatisfie either vs, or their owne ſelues, how it may be ſo, that we ſhould beleeue it, and ſubſcribe vnto it.
                  He alledgeth many arguments in defence of inuocation of Saints, as mediators to pray for vs, which arguments haue bene alledged long before his time by Eckius, and other Catholicke Doctors. And they haue bene long ſince anſered by Peter Martyr, Caluin, Kemnitius, & other Proteſtant writers, before his booke came forth. Now it was to be expected for the Catholike credit of Bellarmine, ſo great a Doctor, that he ſhould not haue produced theſe old

arguments againe whoſe anſwers were publiſhed in print ſo long ſince: for that is no cunning, but he ſhould haue bene furniſhed with new ſtuffe, or at the leaſt, haue replyed vpon the anſwers, (hic labor, hoc opus eſt) which he hath not done. The anſwers therefore being ſo ſufficient, that hee doth not reply vpon them, as his proofes are but the ſame which were before, ſo it ſhall be ſufficient to anſwer them as they were anſwered before, and ſo to ſatisfie old arguments with old anſwers.
                  
                     Saints (ſaith Bellarmine) do pray for the good eſtate of the whole Church in generall, and for ſuch men in particular as do pray vnto them, and we ought to pray vnto them, that they would particularly pray for vs. And that I may ſpeake to theſe three propoſitions, although I deny not the firſt, that Saints do pray for vs in generall: yet I will examine the validity of his arguments which he alledgeth for proofe thereof, to ſhew how weake the grounds are which they build vpon, and ſo I will in order deſcend to the reſt, only to ſet downe his arguments, and Kemnitius his anſwers to thoſe arguments publiſhed in print long before, for the ſatisfaction of others by whom they were before obiected, as followeth?
                  
                     That Saints departed do pray generally for the whole Church.
                     
                        BEll.
                        Hieremy 15. The Lord ſaid to me, though Moſes De ſanct. be at. lib. 1. cap. 18. 
                           and Samuel ſhould ſtand before me, yet my affection could not be towards this people. Therefore Moſes and Samuel being dead, both then could, and vſually at other times did, pray for the people, alioqui inepta eſſet Dei loquutio; otherwiſe God had ſpoken theſe words impertinently, as if a man had ſaid: If my Oxe pray for thee, he ſhall not preuaile, meaning that Oxen cannot pray.
                        
                     
                     
                        Kemnitius.
                        We deny not but Saints departed do pray Exam. decret. Trid. pars 3. for the whole Church, but it cannot be proued by this

text. Firſt, a conditionall propoſition proueth nothing vnleſſe the condition were performed, but Moſes and Samuel did not thē ſtand before God; therfore they made no interceſſion for the people. Secondly, by the confeſſion of the Church of Rome they were then in Limbus, as all other Saints departed, vntill the death of our Sauiour Chriſt; therefore they could make no interceſſion. Thirdly, the idolatry of the people was ſo odious in the ſight of God, that if Moſes and Samuel had bene aliue to make interceſſion for the people, as in their life time they did, yet God would not heare them. Fourthly, this ſuppoſition was made of Moſes and Samuel being aliue, and not after their death. To which I adde my owne anſwer, this argument is a fallacy called the ignorance of the Elenche.
                        
                     
                     
                        Bellarm.
                        2. Maccab. 15. Iudas in a viſion ſaw Onias the Prieſt, and Ieremy the Prophet, pray for the people, but that booke of Maccabes is held for Canonicall. Concil. 3. Carthag. cap. 47.
                     
                     
                        Kemnitius.
                        Firſt, that is but a dreame, and not a ſtory, & is related to animate the Souldiers to fight valiantly. Secondly, notwithſtanding the relation of this dreame, neither Iudas Maccabeus, nor yet his army, did inuocate Onias, or Ieremy, but onely God. Thirdly, that booke is vnderſtood to be Canonicall for examples of life, but not for' points of doctrine; and therefore maketh not for this purpoſe.
                     
                     
                        Bellarm.
                        
                           Apoc. 5. 8. The 24. Elders fell downe before the throne, hauing their phials full of odours, which were the praiers of Saints.
                        
                     
                     
                        Kemnitius.
                        Theſe praiers as they were their owne, and not of other men which were made vnto them; ſo they were onely a thankeſgiuing to God for their owne redemption, & for the redemption of the whole Church, but no interceſſion.
                     
                     
                        Bellarm.
                        2. Pet. 1. 15. I will endeuour therefore alwaies, that

ye may be able to haue remembrance of theſe things after my departure.
                        
                     
                     
                        Kemnitius.
                        Saint Peter did this endeuour, by his epiſtle while he liued, not by his praiers after he was dead.
                     
                     
                        Bellarm.
                        
                           Luk. 16. The glutton in hell praied for his kindred, much more do the iuſt in heauen pray for the whole Church.
                        
                     
                     
                        Kemnit.
                        Firſt, we muſt not forſake the Scriptures to receiue inſtruction from them which are damned in hell, which being forſaken of God, ſeeke for comfort any where rather then at the hands of God. Secondly, this is but a parable, and not a ſtory. Thirdly, if it were a ſtory, yet this prayer is not heard. Fourthly, he ſaw Abram whom he prayed vnto, and receiued anſwer from him: what is this to Saints departed, whom we ſee not, neither heare them make any anſwer? Fifthly, the glutton remembred in what ſtate he left his kindsfolks when he departed; but they might haue repented after his departure, for any thing that hee knew. This proueth not that the dead know the ſtate of them which are aliue, neither yet that they pray for the Church in generall.
                     
                  
                  
                     That Saints departed do pray for particular men which pray to them.
                     
                        BEllarm.
                        
                           The Saints do not onely pray forvs, but alſo take 
                           De ſanct. beat. lib. 1. cap. 18. 
                           charge ouer men, and whole Countries and Prouinces, as the Angels do. Concerning the Angels we haue proofe Toby. 12. Zach. 1. Apoc. 8. Dan. 10. Pſal. 19. Matth. 18. And much more the Saints departed, which are as the Angels, Luk. 20. and haue a prerogatiue aboue Angels, becauſe they are members of the body of Chriſt, and are neerer vnto vs, and better able to haue a feeling of mens infirmities, being men themſelues.
                        
                     
                     
                        Kemnit.
                        The booke of Toby is not Canonicall to proue Exam. decret. Trid. pars 3. any point of faith, but onely for examples of good life. That Angell in Zachary is our Sauiour Chriſt, which

maketh interceſſion for his Church, and his praier is his owne, which is there mentioned, and not the praier of the Church. The Angel in the Apocalips, which offereth the praiers of the Saints, is expreſſed Heb. 9. to be our Sauiour Chriſt, the mediator of the new Teſtament: which maketh his appearance in our behalfe, Heb. 13. through him we offer our ſacrifices of praiers to God. Againe, to the Angels God reuealeth ſo much concerning the affaires of men on earth, as appertaineth to the miniſtery of thoſe Angels, and they haue the charge of men committed vnto them. But it cannot be proued that the like charge is committed to Saints departed; neither can the argument follow which is drawne from Angels to men. That Saints departed are like the Angels in heauen, is ment there onely concerning ſingle life, that they marry not, as it appeareth by the text. And this is not onely the expoſition of Kemnitius; but alſo of the Engliſh Seminaries themſelues, in their notes vpon the ſame place, printed at Rhemes. And whereas Bellarmine alledgeth for proofe, that Saints departed haue the regiment of whole Prouinces, becauſe it is written, Apoc. 2. He that ouer commeth, ſhall haue power ouer nations: It is to be vnderſtood of the diſcipline and doctrine of the Church in this life; whereby nations ſhall be conuerted, but not of any gouernment of theirs after they be deceaſed.
                     
                     
                        Bellarm.
                        The Fathers make for vs.
                     
                     
                        Kemnit.
                        The Fathers were falſified by the Papiſts. See Kemnitius at large, how he ſatisfieth the obiections out of the Fathers.
                     
                     
                        Bellarm.
                        It is alſo proued by many apparitions of Saints, which appearing to men in dreames, haue teſtified that particularly they did pray for vs.
                     
                     
                        Kemnit.
                        This can be no proofe without teſtimony out of the word of God. For Moſes ſaith: Deut. 13. 5. Thou ſhalt not hearken to the words of the Prophet, or

vnto the dreamer of dreames; for the Lord your God proueth you, to know whether yee loue the Lord your God with all your heart, and all your ſoule, &c. Heb. 1. In times paſt God ſpake many waies to our Fathers by the Prophets, but in theſe laſt dayes he hath ſpoken to vs by his Sonne. And poſt illam poſtremam patefactionem non eſt expectanda reuelatio alterius noui dogmatis: After God hath deliuered his will vnto vs this laſt time by his Sonne, we muſt not looke for any latter reuelation by which any new doctrine ſhould be reuealed vnto vs.
                     
                  
                  
                     That Saints are to be inuocated.
                     
                        BEllarm.
                        
                           Iob. 5. 1. Call now if any will anſwer thee, and to which of the Saints wilt thou turne? De ſanct. beat. lib. 1. cap. 19.
                        
                     
                     
                        Kemnit.
                        The meaning is not that Iob in his calamity ſhould flye to the Saints for ſuccour, but that inſtance could not be giuen in any Saint whom euer God puniſhed, without iuſt cauſe.
                     
                     
                        Bellarm.
                        
                           Iob. 33. 23. If there be an Angell with him, one of a thouſand, to declare vnto man his righteouſneſſe, then will hee haue mercy vpon him, and ſay: Deliuer him that he go not downe into the pit, for I haue receiued a reconciliation.
                     
                     
                        Kemnit.
                        If there be preſent a miniſter of Gods word, (for miniſters are called Angels) and out of the word of God he ſhall ſhew vnto man what is right and iuſt, and ſo the miniſtery of the word ſhall be applyed for comfort to the terrified and diſtreſſed conſcience, God will worke by this miniſtery repentance vnto ſaluation.
                     
                     
                        Bellarm.
                        
                           Exod. 32. 13. Moſes praieth for the people in theſe words: Lord remember Abraham, Iſaac, and Iſraël, thy ſeruants, &c. In which is to be noted: that when Moſes thought not himſelfe ſufficient to pacifie the wrath of God, he was glad to flye to the helpe of the Patriarkes, which Patriarkes, becauſe then being in Limbus, did not ordinarily vnderſtand or conceiue

the praiers of the liuing: therefore it was not the cuſtome in the old Teſtament, to ſay: O holy Abram pray for me; but onely in thoſe daies men praied vnto God: but in their praiers, they alledged the merits of Saints departed, that by the merits of thoſe Saints their praiers might more eaſily be heard. So Dauid. Pſalm. 131. Lord remember Dauid with all his troubles. And many other places are parallell vnto theſe.
                     
                     
                        Kemnit.
                        In the praiers which are recited in the old Teſtament, oftentimes the good workes of the Patriarkes and Saints are mentioned, to ſhew, that they which ſo praied, relyed vpon the promiſes and couenants, which God made with the Patriarkes and Saints departed, while they liued. That they flye not vnto them for helpe it is plaine by their doctrine which they profeſſe. Eſay. 63. 16. Abraham is ignorant of vs, Iſrael knoweth vs not; yet thou, ô Lord, art our Father. Neither doe they mention the workes of the Patriarkes in this ſenſe, as if they ſhould ſay: Heare vs, ô Lord, for their ſakes, becauſe they haue deſerued it at thy hands; but heare vs Lord for thy promiſe which thou diddeſt make, for thy oathes ſake, which thou diddeſt ſweare vnto them, when they beleeued thee, obeyed thee, and did thoſe workes.
                     
                     
                        Bellarm.
                        In the Scriptures, as 1. King. chap. 7. Rom. 15. &c. They do pray to the lining Saints, that they would pray for them. Much more then is it lawfull to inuocate the dead Saints, whoſe ſoules do reigne with Ieſus Chriſt. If it be not lawfull, then, either becauſe they will not, or becauſe they cannot heare vs, or becauſe they vnderſtand vs not, or elſe becauſe it is derogatory to God, or to our Sauiour Chriſt. But it cannot be ſaid that they will not, becauſe being in heauen their charity is greater then whē they were on earth: neither that they cannot, becauſe, if they could being ſtrangers and pilgrims vpon earth, much more can they in heauen, which is their natiue country; neither that they vnderſtand not, foraſmuch as the Angels, Luk. 15. vnderſtand when a ſinner is conuerted, but the Saints are like to the Angels, as before

it was proued; neither that it is a diſhonour vnto God, or to our Sauiour Chriſt, for then had it bene a diſhonour to them to inuocate the Saints liuing.
                     
                     
                        Kemnit.
                        An argument cannot be drawne from thoſe things which are done vpon earth, to proue what is done in heauen, without ſome teſtimony of the Scriptures. For the eye hath not ſeene, nor the care hath not heard, neither can the heart of man conceiue the things which are in heauen, further then by the Scriptures they are reuealed. Secondly, if any man ſhould deſire them which are liuing to pray for him in that manner as the Papiſts pray to dead Saints; that by their interceſſion & merits they may bee heard, the praiers vnto the liuing, were alſo derogatory to the Prieſt-hood of Ieſus Chriſt. To the other parts contained in that diuiſion, is anſwered before.
                     
                  
               
               
                  An Anſwere to the Booke intituled, PROTESTANT PROOFES OF CATHOLICKE RELIGION.
                  IT pleaſed God I publiſhed a ſhort Treatiſe of perſwaſion to the ignorant Recuſants, to reconcile themſelues to our Church. I might happily haue perſwaded them, at the leaſt, to be halfe Conuerts, as Saint Paul did King Agrippa 
                     Act. 26. 28. Mat. 13. Mat. 10. 13. to bee halfe a Chriſtian, had they not beene as a plot of ground vnapt to receiue good ſeed; and like thoſe houſes, with whom for their vnworthineſſe the peace of the Apoſtles could not abide. The points which eſpecially I vrged, were proued out of Bellarmine, their owne Doctor, and in the places by me produced, I falfified nothing; but dealt ſincerely, let the learned diſproue me, if they can. If they examine my arguments according to the lawes of Schooles, they ſhall finde nothing falſe that may iuſtly bee denied; nothing equiuocall, that needeth diſtinction: ſo

that they muſt either anſwere me with ſilence, or elſe, if they deale ingeniouſly, ſay with the inchanters: Digitus 
                     Exod. 8 19. Sozom. lib. 6. cap. 7. & 10. 
                     Dei eſt, It is the finger of God, and make as open a confeſſion of euiction, as Iulian the Apoſtata did, when hee cryed out: 
                        Ʋiciſti Galilaee, Thou haſt gotten the victory thou Galilean: yet haue I beene contradicted, but how iuſtly, let the learned reader iudge. An author without a name, printed a booke at Paris, Anno 1607. with this Title: The firſt part of Proteſtant proofes for Catholicke Religion and Recuſancy, taken onely from the writings of ſuch Proteſtant Doctors as haue bene publiſhed ſince the reigne of his Maieſty. Which booke is nothing elſe but an vndigeſted Chaos, or Miſcellanea of halfe ſentences rudely conſarcinated together, a confuſed heape of places, ſome meerely diuiſed by himſelfe, and not to be found in theſe Proteſtant Doctors; ſome wreſted and falſly applied; ſome truly alledged; but impertinent to the argument hee taketh in hand: all of them being praemiſſes without concluſions, to make an idle ſhew of proofe where nothing is proued; and of a confutation where nothing is confuted. Theſe proofes he ſaith, he collected out of the bookes of the reuerend Father in God, the Lord Biſhop of Wincheſter, Doctor Suckliffe, Doctor Field, Doctor Downam, Doctor Morton,, Mr. Egerton, and my ſelfe, among many others, in defence of his Recuſancy, and Romiſh religion. But hee hath not vndertaken to anſwer any of our books; neither can any iudicious man hold ſuch recital of our words, to be a confutation of our works. Of theſe learned Writers, and reuerend men, I ſay with the parents of the blinde man: Aetatem habent, they are ſufficient 
                     Ioh. 9. 21. 
                     to anſwer for themſelues; and therefore I vndertake nothing in their behalfe, onely for Apology of mine owne ſelfe, I may truly ſay: Becauſe it is as impoſſible for him to make a iuſt reply againſt me, as it was for the Centurion to deny the power of God in our Sauiour Chriſt, when being Mat. 27. 54. conuicted by euident demonſtration, he ſaid: Verè filius Deieſt, In truth he was the ſonne of God: Therefore he hath

with Elimas peruerted the ſtraight waies of the Lord, and Acts 13. 10. withſtood the truth by indirect and ſiniſter meanes, as Iamnes and Iambres reſiſted Moſes; For I preſſed them by way Exod. 7. 11. 13. of ſound reaſon, and ſtrong argument, he hath dealt by Elenches and Sophiſmes, as the Apoſtle ſpeaketh: 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , deceiuing them by paralogiſmes. Iam 1. 22.
                  
                  Firſt, he hath theſe words. The greateſt number of Proteſtant writers, Doctor Succliffe, Doctor Doue, &c. do teach there is no matter of faith, no materiall or ſubstantiall point or difference in religion betweene Proteſtants & Puritants, but they are of one Church, faith, and religion. But we doubt whether they will ſtand to their poſitions they writ, in Queene Elizabeth daies, ſeeing they defend they may often change (at the leaſt at the change of euery Prince. Doue perſwaſion Pag. 31. Wherein let the reader iudge whether he hath dealt with me ingenuouſly or no? For I ſpake only of the manner of compiling our Seruice booke, he chargeth me as if I had ſpoken of faith, materiall and ſubſtantiall points of religion. I ſpake of fact, what we did concerning our Seruice booke, and they concerning their Breauiry, which haue changed 
                        See the preface of Pope Pius 5. in Breuiarum Rom. ex decreto Synodus Trid. reſtitutum. as often as we, he ſpeaketh of right, as if I had ſaid, we not onely then might, vpon ſuch good conſiderations, as then iuſtly moued vs, but alſo may euer hereafter, when there is no ſuch iuſt cauſe to induce vs thereunto, change and alter our faith and grounds of religion. My words were antagoniſticall, and by way of obiection from them, with anſwere to their obiection, he doth make relation of them, as if they were dogmaticall, and as a grounded concluſion maintained among vs. Therefore I charge him with two fallacies. The firſt is, Fallacia accentus. For when wordes ſpoken interogatiuely are repeated indicatiuely, or words ſpoken ironically, as if they were ſpoken plainely, or by way of obiection, as if they were dogmaticall, and all ſuch like are referred to that fallacy. Secondly, he citeth part of my words, which are the obiection: and leaueth out the other part, which are the anſwere, which is comprehended

vnder the Elenche, called Fallacia diuiſionis, of which one ſpecies is: Quando citatur imperfecta ſententia, non integra, when part of the words are recited which the Sophiſter thinketh may ſerue his turne, the other part is omitted, leſt the whole ſentence ſhould make againſt him.
                  
                  Secondly, he writeth thus: The viſible Church of Chriſt is a congregation of faithfull men, in which the pure word of God is preached, the Sacramēts duly adminiſtred, according to Chriſts ordinance, in all things that are of neceſſity required to the ſame, Couel, Field, Doue, be of the ſame minde, Perſwaſ. page. 23. I confeſſe, I am of the ſame minde, not onely in theſi, but alſo in hypotheſi: that our Church is ſuch a congregation, that Gods word is truly preached, and the Sacraments duly adminiſtred among vs, according to Chriſt his inſtitution. But this is not with Sampſon, to fetch meat out of the eater. Iudg. 14. 14. Our words make for our ſelues, but yeeld no aduantage to our aduerſaries, among whom neither Gods word is truly preached, nor the Sacramēts duly adminiſtred. Therefore they are idlely produced by him, to delude the reader in making a ſhew of proofe for their religion, and of confutation for ours, when there is no MEDIVS TERMINVS, wherby any thing ſhould be proued or confuted. And if he apply it by hypotheſis to the Church of Rome, that it is ſuch a viſible cōgregation, &c. and that therfore Recuſants may ſafely continue in it, and refuſe to communicate with vs, we were neuer of that minde, neither can that be any Proteſtant proofe. But it is a Petitio principij, begging of the queſtion, which he taketh as granted when it is denyed.
                  Thirdly, thus: M. Williats words. To errors of doctrine which are not fundamentall, euen the true Church of Chriſt is ſubiect. So Field ordinarily in his bookes of the Church: ſo Sutcliffe, Doue Perſwa. pag. 31. 32. But what doth he cōclude out of theſe words? That therefore Recuſants may wilfully maintaine the errours of the Church of Rome, rather then be reconciled to our Church, which is purged from ſuch errors? Theſe words are no Proteſtant proofe of Catholike religion:

                     Hoc eſt ludere, non argumentari, this is to play the wanton, not the Logitian.
                  Fourthly, he chargeth me in this manner: Concerning doctrine. Doctor Doue writeth in theſe termes: In fundamentall points of doctrine, the greateſt Papiſts in the world agree with vs. Perſwaſ. page. 11. Theſe are my words; I deny them not. Moreouer, I did inſtance in theſe fundamentall points, wherein they conſent with vs, and thereupon I inferred, that they did raſhly condemne vs for heretickes, what then followeth? will he therefore inferre, that either holding the fundamentall points therefore their ſuperſtitions and errours may ſafely be maintained? or that therefore they may be iuſtly excuſed for not communicating with vs, as if their conſenting with vs in fundamentall points, ſhould be a cauſe why they ſhould the rather abhorre our Church & religion? It is a ſufficient preiudice to the cauſe of their religion, that they diſpute in ſuch looſe manner. Againe, he ſaith: So Doctor Doue in his whole Treatiſe neuer chargeth the Church of Rome, either with ſchiſme or hereſie, but laboureth to excuſe themſelues, offering that we ſhall communicate with them, without any change of opinion; and yet hee ſetteth downs this for an infallible poſition: THIS PROPOSITION IS VNDOVBTEDLY TRVE: NO HERETIKE, OR SCHISMATIKE IS TO BE COMMVNICATED WITHAL. Perſwaſ. pag. 5. In that I haue not charged them with ſchiſme or hereſie, I haue ſhewed that we are more charitable to them, then they are to vs, which do charge vs with both. In that hee ſaith: I onely laboured to excuſe our ſelues, as if I had proued nothing to cleare vs from that iniuſt aſpertion, I referre him to the place it ſelfe, where I haue made due proofe that we are free from both hereſie and ſchiſme, by ſuch ſound reaſons as this Author cannot anſwer. But whereas he ſaith it is offered on my part, that they ſhall at their pleaſure communicate with vs without change of opinion, he burdeneth me with an vntruth by himſelfe diuiſed, and not to bee quoted out of any of my

bookes. In ſo writing, he may fill vp a volume, but he ſhall neuer ſtrengthen his owne cauſe, of weaken ours. Moreouer (ſaith he) he giueth vs ſecurity that by no poſſibility (according to the former reaſon of generall Councels) the Romane Church can be iudged hereticall. His words bee theſe, pag. 14. No Church can be condemned and iudged hereticall by any priuate cenſure, but it muſt be publicke, by a generall Councell, as he there expoundeth himſelfe, and is granted before. But what doth he cōclude out of this? That becauſe the Church of Rome is not condemned by a generall Councell to bee hereticall; it muſt needs be therefore orthodoxall? This is ſuch a conſequent as neither Proteſtants, nor any other of ſound iudgement will grant.
                  Fifthly, he chargeth me thus: Touching Sacraments, he alledgeth pag. 27. 28. that according to our definition of a Sacrament, there are as many as we teach; and this ſhall not breede any iarre betweene vs; that therefore we ſhould refuſe to communicate together. And tranſubſtantiation it ſelfe ſhall be no barre: but if we will receiue at their hands, they will not examine how we expound theſe words: Hoc eſt corpus meum, This is my body. pag. 29. And of diſcipline he writeth: In that Councell of Trent they ſet forth ſuch wholſome Canons concerning diſcipline, as were fit for a reformed Church. I deny not theſe words, but I deny that they make any thing for the defence of Recuſancy. Concerning the word Sacrament, as it is a name diuiſed by man, but not found in the Scriptures: ſo it is not any matter of ſaluation to vary about the number of Sacraments; eſpecially among them with whom it is not agreed what a Sacrament is: For, where words are not vnderſtood, ad idem, ſecundem idem, &c. nothing hindereth, but contrary, or contradictory propoſitions may be both true, as to ſay: There are ſeuen, and there are not ſeuen Sacraments: For ſo concerning the number of Sacraments they and we differ in words when we may eaſily agree in ſubſtance. The word Sacrament is ſtrictly taken with vs, and ſo according to M. Caluin his definition; it is an outward ſigne

ordeined of God to be cōtinued in his Church, as a part of his diuine Seruice, offering to all men, but ſealing onely to the faithfull his inward grace, for the ſtrengthening of their ſaith, & the applying of Chriſt his death vnto them. And ſo there can be but two, according to the confeſſion of Saint Auguſtine: A reſurrectione Domini quaedam pauca 
                     De doct. Chriſti lib. 3 cap. 9. 
                     ſignapro multis, eademque factu facillima, intellectu auguſtiſſinta obſeruatione caſtiſſima ipſe Dominus & Apoſtolica tradidit diſciplina, baptiſmum & coenam Domini: Since the Lord his reſurrection, our Sauiour his ſelfe, and from him his Apoſtles, haue commended to vs for outward ſignes, or ſeales, a very few in ſteed of many, and thoſe for performance moſt eaſie, for ſignification moſt ample, for obſeruation moſt pure and holy, and they are Baptiſme, and the Lords Supper. But this word Sacrament is more largely taken in the Church of Rome for a ſigne in generall, although it do not apply vnto vs, and repreſent before our eyes the death of Ieſus Chriſt. And it is defined to be Signum rei ſacra an outward ſigne of any holy thing. And according to that definition, there may be not Cathechiſ. Romannus pars 2. de. ſacram. ſect. 3. only 7. but alſo 70. Sacraments. Of tranſubſtantion, hauing firſt proued that the bread and the wine in the Euchariſt cannot be tranſubſtantiated; and yet not denying them to be the body and bloud of our Sauiour, becauſe he hath ſaid they are ſo, I ſaid: in that we both agree, onely the difference betweene vs, is, how the words: This is my body, are to be vnderſtood? whether really or ſacramentally, properly or myſtically? And that it ſhould be no barre or ſcruple to their conſciences in what ſenſe we vnderſtand it, ſo as we deliuer it to them according to the inſtitution of our Sauiour Chriſt: and that if they will in all other things ſubmit themſelues to the lawes of our Church, we will not preſſe them ſo farre in examining them how they expound the words, but rather yeeld ſo much to their weakneſſe in this one poynt, vntill God ſhall reueale a further meaſure of the knowledge of his truth vnto them. So theſe words of mine import nothing in fauour of tranſubſtantiation.

Thirdly, the Councell of Trent hath ſet downe wholſome Canons cōcerning diſcipline, as in part the 3. Lataran Coū
                     cell did long before; as namely, for preaching, and Concil. La. tar. 3. Can. 13. & Con. cil. 4. Later. Can. 29. learned miniſters, &c. And the reformed Churches of England, Scotland, Germany, Netherland, Geneua, haue receiued many of thoſe Canons, although they come from the Pope, as deeming them fit for a reformed Church. But theſe my words make nothing for the allowance of that Councell it ſelfe, or of the points of doctrine there concluded; neither yet of their Recuſancy, among whom for the moſt part, theſe Canons of diſcipline are not receiued.
                  Sixthly, Concerning the Popes ſupremacy, of Europe there can be no queſtion. For, generally Proteſtants agree with Field, Doue, Ormerod, that the regiment of the Weſt Churches (among which this nation is one) belonged to the Pope of Rome. Page. 29. 30. I ſpake of the Popes ſupremacy, and my words are theſe: What authority ſoeuer the Pope had ouer the Latine Church, or Weſt part of the world, it hath bene giuen him by humane conſtitutions onely, and generall conſent of Princes and States, which they ſuffered him to enioy during their good liking, and no longer. And hauing thus ſhewed that the Popes authority ouer other Churches, was not by diuine inſtitution, but onely by humane permiſſion; not certaine, but during the pleaſure of Princes and States: my words fauour not his ſupremacy ouer vs in England, out of which by conſent of Prince and Parliament, hee hath beene abandoned long ſince. And therefore, I ſay, the Biſhop of Rome is little beholding to me for his title of ſupremacy: This is a very looſe and negligent kinde of diſputation.
                  Seuenthly, ſaith he, Doue Perſw. pag. 15. referreth the queſtion what books be Canonicall Scriptures to the two Doctors, S. Auguſtine and S. Hierom. His words be theſe: Catholikes proue them to be Canonical out of S. Auguſtine: we, that they be Apocripha, out of S. Hierome; both which Doctors: are of no ſmal authority in the Church of Rome: therefore in this we differ no

more from them, then S. Hierome did from S. Auguſtine. Therefore I hope for many cauſes Proteſtants will giue place to us in this queſtion. I deny not, but the queſtion being propounded concerning the bookes of Toby, Iudith, Baruch, Eccleſiasticus, Wiſedome, the Maccabes, and the fragment of Eſther, whether they were Canonicall, (as the Church of Rome doth hold) or Apocripha, as our Church maintaineth? I anſwered: that foraſmuch as there is Canon fidei, & morum, One Canon or rule of good life, another of faith: and that may be Canon morum, quodnon est fidei, Arule and patterne of good life for vs to follow, which is not a ſufficient ground of doctrine to build our faith vpon: they were both Canonicall, and Apocripha: Canonicall, according to Saint Auguſtins, for rules of good life: Apocripha, according to S. Hierome; becauſe they were no true grounds of doctrine. And ſo the Church of Rome and our ſelues, rightly vnderſtanding one another, as Saint Hierome and Saint Auguſtine vnderſtood themſelues, there needed not be any difference concerning this point betweene vs. But how can he inferre vpon this: that therefore we muſt giue place to him in this queſtion? As Saint Hierome gaue no place to Saint Auguſtine, ſo will we giue no place to any; onely I wiſh they would better vnderſtand both vs and themſelues, and giue place to the truth. And, foraſmuch as they allow both of Saint Hierome, and Saint Auguſtine, to be Orthodoxall Doctors, they cannot receiue S. Auguſtine his opinion, but they muſt alſo embrace S. Hieroms expoſition, where it is explained what is the meaning of S. Auguſtine, where hee alloweth thoſe bookes to be Canonicall.
                  Eighthly, ſaith he, Concerning the vulgar Latine tranſlation allowed among Catholikes, D. Doue writeth thus, pag. 16. We grant it fit, that for vniformity, in quotation of places in Schooles, and Pulpits, one Latine text ſhould be vſed, and we can bee contented for the antiquity thereof, to preferre the old vulgar tranſlation, before all other Latine bookes; and ſo much we yeeld to the Councell of Trent. The praemiſſes are mine, but what is

his concluſion? Becauſe we aſcribe to the vulgar edition, more then to all other Latine tranſlations; and therein agree with the Church of Rome: and becauſe we yeeld to the Councell of Trent ſo farre as reaſon doth require, and no further; but diſagree both from the Church of Rome, and that Councel in things which are erroneous: Concedendo vera, negando falſa, will he therefore take this for a Proteſtant proofe of his Catholicke religion? Non taliauxilio, nec defenſoribus iſtis Roma caret: If the Church of Rome had no better champions, it would not ſtand.
                  Ninthly, Doctor Couel writeth: No tranſlation whatſoeuer is authenticall Scripture. And Doctor Doue addeth: All tranſlations haue many faults. page. 16. In ſo writing, I write the truth. For onely God is free from errour; and therefore only the originall text is authenticall Scripture. All men are ſubiect to errours, Omnis homo mendax, but all tranſlations are the workes of men. But how idlely is this brought in as a Proteſtant proofe of Recuſancy? well may it ſerue againſt Recuſants, which aſcribe more to the tranſlation thē to the originall. If no tranſlation be authenticall, then it followeth as a firme conſequent, that the vulgar Latine edition cannot be authentical, howſoeuer the Councel of Trent hath impoſed it vpon vs as authenticall.
                  Tenthly, For this time and place (ſaith he) I will only make amplification of Doctor Doue, his grant & confeſſion, which followeth in theſe words: When the Maſſe was firſt put down, King Henry had his Engliſh litourgie, and that was then iudged abſolute without all exception. But when King Edward came to the Crowne, that was cōdemned, and another was in the place; which Peter Martyr, and Bucet did approue as very conſonant to Gods word. When Q. Elizabeth began her reign, the former was iudged to be full of imperfections, and a new was diuiſed, & allowed by conſent of the Clergy. But about the middle of her reigne, we grew weary of that booke, & great meanes haue bene wrought to abandon it, & eſtabliſh another, which although it was not obtained; yet we do at the leaſt, at euery change of Prince, change our

booke of Common praier, we bee ſo want on we know not what we would haue. Pag. 31. Hitherto his words, and he freely confeſſed errours in all theſe ſtates and changes. For defence whereof, beſides that theſe words are written by way of obiection from them, rather then any confeſſion made by our ſelues: I did not ſo much as intimate that there were errours in all theſe ſtates and changes, as he vniuſtly chargeth me; but onely that in the Seruice bookes of King Henry, and King Edward, ſome things were iudged to ſauor of the ſuperſtitions of the Church of Rome. But as for the Seruice booke which was allowed by Queene Elizabeth, it ſtood not only during her time without alteration, but alſo it is ratified by his Maieſtie, and allowed of by the State; albeit by ſome particularmen it hath bene impugned, as nothing elſe can be by the wit of man ſo well deuiſed, but mans wit can diſpute againſt it. And as for thoſe errours which were reformed in the books of K. Henry, and King Edward, they were the ſuperſtitions onely of the Church of Rome, the land being not then ſufficiently reformed, nor purity of religion ſo perfectly eſtabliſhed, as now it is, becauſe the Biſhops & Clergy men by whom thoſe bookes were written, their ſelues were too much ſo wred with the Romiſh leauen. And our daily renouncing thoſe ſuperſtitions, and receiuing greater light of the Goſpell, could be no Proteſtant proofe that we ſhould any way fauour their ſuperſtitions.
                  Eleuenthly, he writeth thus: Why may we not ſay with the Councell of Florence, cited by M. Williat for Generall, and the Patriarkes of the Apoſtolike ſeas there preſent, and the Councel of Conſtance, not of vnequall authority, & the Councell of Trent (to paſſe others) with 6. Cardinals, 4. Legats, 3. Patriarkes, 32. Arch-biſhops, 228. Biſhops, and 5. Abbots there aſſembled, (as Doctor Doue telleth vs) that Proteſtancy in all places is falſe, and Catholicke religion true; where no Proteſtant Church can ſhew any one ſuch like authority for their cauſe? The third part of ſuch an aſſembly would haue bene a great countenance to Proteſtant religion, farre greater then euer it had, or is likely to procure.
                     
To which I anſwer: Firſt, concerning the Councell of Florence, in all thoſe 25. Seſſions which in it were: held, 15. of them being at Ferraria, where the Councell began, and the other at Florence, where the Councel was concluded, there is ſcarce any one point of religion touched, of which there is any controuerſie betweene Proteſtants and Recuſants; onely while it was at Ferraria, before the acts of the firſt Seſſion, the queſtion of Purgatory was ſuperficially diſputed. Therefore that Councell was farre from cōdemning Proteſtancy, or approuing Catholike religion. Secondly, of the Councell of Conſtance, which he will haue to be of no leſſe authority: Bellarmine his ſelfe denyeth it to haue any authority at all, or credit of a generall De Concil. l. 1. cap. 7. Councell, alledging that it is in the Catalogue of thoſe 15. Synods which the Catholicke Church hath not receiued. It ſeemeth therefoe that this Author was not well acquainted with the generall Councels. Thirdly, as I confeſſed ſuch a number of Prelates to be preſent at the Councell of Trent, ſo I alledged reaſons why it could not bee a lawfull councell; which he is ſo farre from anſwering, that he paſſeth them ouer with ſilence. As alſo he ſpareth to repeate the reſidue of my words, which make againſt him, according to his accuſtomed fallacy, wherein I derogated from the credit of this aſſembly, ſhewing that they were there onely at the end of the Councell, being then newly created by the Pope to countenace the Synod, and ſo to ſubſcribe to all concluſions for forme ſake. But at the beginning, when matters were argued, there were but forty Biſhops, and foure Legates, too ſmall an aſſembly to deſerue the name of a generall Councell. Albeit, it is not a bare multitude of ſuffrages, and preſence of Biſhops, that can giue coūtenance to a generall Councell. For the whole multitude of Prieſts and others cryed againſt our Sauiour Chriſt: Crucifie him. The Kings ſtood vp, and the Princes tooke councell together againſt the Lord, and his annoynted. Mat. 26. 50 Pſal. 2. 2.
                  
                  
                     
So then, if he argue from the Councell of Florence, to condemne our religion, I deny his antecedent. If from the Councell of Conſtance, I deny his argument: If from the Councell of Trent, it is but a Fallacy, Petitio principij; becauſe hee taketh that for a proofe, which is the matter in diſpute.
                  
               
            
         
         
            
               
                  
                  
                     
THE ANSVVER TO A TREATISE INTITVLED: A SEARCH MADE INto matters of Religion: By FRANCIS WALSINGHAM, Deacon of the Proteſtants Church, before his change to the Catholicke. Dedicated to the Kings Maieſtie.
                  Againſt Luther, Caluin, Zuinglius, Beza, Iewel, Williat, Doue, Rogers, and other Proteſtants.
                  
                     IEREMY 47. 10.
Curſed be he that doth the workes of the Lord negligently.
                  
                     LONDON, Printed for SIMON WATERSON, dwelling in Paules Church-yard, at the ſigne of the Crowne. 1610.
               
            
            
               
                  
                  
                  THE ANSWER TO A TREATISE INTITVLED: A Search made into matters of Religion, by FRANCIS WALSINGHAM, Deacon of the Proteſtants Church, before his change to the Catholicke, dedicated to the Kings Maieſty: Againſt Luther, Caluin, Zuinglius, Beza, Iewel, Williat, Doue, Rogers, and other Proteſtants.
                  
                     IN my perſwaſion to the Recuſants to reconcile themſelues to our Church, I vſed theſe words: The ignorant Recuſant pretendeth his conſcience, ſaying: It is againſt my conſcience to come to Church; and, whatſoeuer I do againſt my conſcience, is ſin. I confeſſe, whatſoeuer is done without teſtimony or warrant of conſcience, is ſin to them that do it, be that which is done in it ſelfe neuer ſo lawfull; becauſe the Apoſtle ſaith: He that doubteth, is condemned if he eate, becauſe he eateth not of faith; and whatſoeuer is 
                     Rom. 14. 
                     not of faith, is ſinne. In which words, by faith, is vnderſtood conſcience. But by the way, they muſt ſee that their conſcience be rightly informed, elſe it will bee their damnation. Out of which words, M. Walſingham maketh this collection: That I ſeemed to him, ſubſtantially to iuſtifie out of theſe words of S. Paul, the Recuſancy of Catholickes, if they can proue they haue a good ground, or motiue of conſcience. It is true, one abſurdity being granted, many others will follow. Therefore

to this hypothetical propoſition, I anſwer, by granting the Maior, and denying the Minor. For they cannot proue they haue any ſuch good ground or motiue of conſcience; therfore their Reculancy is not iuſtified out of theſe words. It is but Petitio principij, a begging of the queſtion. Againe, he ſaith: If their conſcience were erroneous, and grounded vpon falſe grounds, and principles: yet, ſo long as that perſwaſion endureth, it ſeemeth they may not be forced. The inſufficiency of which argument I will lay open by the like. Hee that hath not examined himſelfe, may not come to the Lords table, leſt he eate and drinke vnworthily; and ſo 1. Cor. 11. 28. 29. eate and drinke his owne damnation, not diſcerning the Lords body. Shall this want of examination of a mans ſelfe, be therefore a warrant to any man to liue like an infidell? neuer to examine himſelfe? and ſo neuer to come to the Lords table? and ſo to be exempted from the authority, and coactiue power of the Church? He muſt be forced to examine himſelfe, and communicate: So the Recuſant, whoſe conſcience is erroneous, and founded vpon falſe principles, muſt be forced to renounce his errours, to build his religion, vpon ſounder principles, to receiue inſtruction, and informe his conſcience better, and ſo to come to the Church.
                  He taketh vpon him to diſproue my definition of conſcience, which is, that it is an application of a generall knowledge, grounded vpon Gods word to particular actions and intents. He ſaith: This definition is defectiue, being not ſo large as the thing that is defined; becauſe the heathens which know not Gods word, yet haue a conſcience grounded onely vpon the law of nature. I anſwer, that if conſcience be by him Rom. 2. 14. vniuocally vnderſtood, (as all things ought to be which are defined) my definition cannot be diſproued. But when he inſtanceth in the conſciences of heathen men, he flyeth to equiuocation, whereas an equiuocall thing cannot bee defined. In like manner, if I ſhould define religion to be a rule of faith and life, grounded vpon Gods word, he might

take the ſame exception againſt it, and ſay, that the religion of the Turkes is grounded vpon the Alcaron; the religion of the Iewes is grounded partly vpon the Talmod: the religion of the Catholickes partly vpon the Traditions of men. If I define a man to be animal rationale, a body indued with a reaſonable ſoule, he may likewiſe ſay that definition agreeth not with a painted man, or the picture of a man. As ſpeaking of religion, I define not falſe religion; but the true Chriſtian religion: and ſpeaking of a man, I define not an equiuocall, or analogicall, but an vniuocall man: So I define not a darke and erroneous, but a ſound, and true vnderſtanding conſcience. As for the heathens, they haue yet left ſome reliques of the image of God, which are reaſon & vnderſtanding. Therefore the Apoſtle ſaith: The Gentiles which haue not the law, do by nature the things contained in the law, hauing not the law, they are a law to themſelues, which ſhew the effects of the law written in their hearts, their conſciences alſo bearing witneſſe, and their thoughts accuſing one another, or excuſing: that is, the Gentiles haue not the law abſolutely, and in ſuch perfect manner as the Iewes, to whom God deliuered euery precept of the law expreſſely by writing; yet they haue, will they, nill they, written in their hearts ſome feeling of religion, and are able to put a difference betweene vertue and vice; which ſufficeth onely to their damnation. They do by nature, ea quae legis ſunt, the things contained in the law: that is, they command things which are honeſt, forbid the things which are vniuſt, ſet downe puniſhments for theft, adultery, and ſuch like offences. But by the way: Aliud eſt facere quod lex iubet, aliud facere quod lex facit, aut ea quae legis ſunt facere. It is one thing to doe what the law commandeth, (for that they do not, that were to keepe the law) another thing to do the things contained in the law, or to do as the law doth: that is, onely to command the things which the law commandeth, and to forbid what the law forbiddeth; which onely the Gentiles do. Neither

do they that fully, but onely in ſome part, concerning outward things; but are farre from the knowledge of true piety to ſaue their ſoules. So then, the conſcience of the Gentiles being ſufficiently inſtructed without Gods word, by the light of nature, onely to their condemnation, what doth that concerne my purpoſe which define a conſcience rightly informed, and ſufficiently grounded to ſaluation?
                  He goeth about to diſproue my definition of hereſie, which I defined to be: an errour ſtiffely and obſtinately maintained and defended; not by a conſequent, but directly impugning ſome article of faith. Which definition he ſaith is alſo defectiue, becauſe it is not ſo large as the thing which is defined. His words are theſe: For if we looke into all the hereſies recorded by Ireneus, Tertullian, Epiphanius, Saint Auguſtine, &c. we ſhall not find the leſt part directly, and expreſſely, againſt any article of the Apoſtles Creed, which M. D. Doue a little after doth ſay he meaneth, as of the Pelagians, which holdeth that a man may do good workes by the power of his owne free will without grace, the Aetians, that faith was ſufficient without good workes to life euerlaſting, and that Christ had reuealed more to them, then to the Apoſtles, the Aerians that denied prayer, and ſacrifices for the dead, and ſet fasts of the Church. Neither can D. Doue proue that his owne example of the Arian hereſie by him alleaged, did directly impugne any article of the Creed, but by a conſequent. For Arius denied the equality of the Sonne with the Father, and by a conſequent his Godhead, and ſo by a conſequent the ſecond article of the Creed: Ieſus Chriſt his onely Sonne our Lord.
                  
                  Firſt, I anſwer, he hath not dealt ingenuouſly with me. For I did not in my definition of hereſie reſtraine Faith only to the Creed of the Apoſtles, as the place it ſelfe will plainely ſhew; for I did mention not onely that Creed, but alſo the Creed of Nice, of Epheſus, of Conſtantinople, Perſwaſ. pag. 13. which I ſayd we hold, and alſo the text of the Bible, to free vs from hereſie.
                  
                     
Secondly, the Pelagian holding that a man could do good workes by the power of his owne free will without grace: directly impugneth faith, euen the text of the Bible, where it is written: We are not ſufficient of our ſelues to thinke 
                     2. Cor. 3. 5 
                     any thing as of our ſelues, but our ſufficiency is of God. O Lord I 
                     Ier. 10. 23. 
                     know that the way of man is not in himſelfe; neither is it in man to walke and direct his ſteppes. All the imaginations of the 
                     Gen. 5. 1. Cor. 2. 14. Col. 2. 13. 1. Cor. 12. 3. Iam. 2. 14. 
                     thoughts of mans heart are onely euill continually. The naturall man perceaueth not the things that are of God. We are dead in ſinnes. No man can ſay that Ieſus is the Lord, but by the Spirit of God. The Aëtian ſaying: Faith without good workes is ſufficient to eternall life, directly, denieth the doctrine of the Bible: What auaileth it my brethren, though a man ſay he hath faith when he hath no workes? can the faith ſaue him? If faith haue no workes it is dead. Whereas the Aetian holdeth that Chriſt hath reuealed more to him then to the Apoſtles, it is expreſſely, and directly againſt the Scriptures, where S. Paul ſaith: I haue kept nothing backe, but haue ſhewed you 
                     Act. 20. 27. 
                     all the counſell of God. That the Arians denied the Godhead of Chriſt, not by a conſequent onely, but directly, witnes S. Auguſtine, and Epiphanius. For S. Auguſtine ſaith that Ad quod vult. cap. 49. Contra ha
                           •
                         reſes l. 2, 1. 2. they held: Filium eſſe creaturam, That the Sonne of God was a creature. And Epiphanius: Non veritus eſt ipſe ac diſcipuli eius creaturam vocare eum qui omnia creauit, verbum ex patre ſine tempore, & ſine principio genitum, Both he and his diſciples feared not to call him a creature which created all things, euen the word which was begotten of his Father, without time, and without beginning. As for Aerius he could not be an hereticke for denying prayer and ſacrifice for the dead, and ſet faſts of the Church; For as much as prayer and ſacrifice for the dead are contrary to ſound doctrine, and faſts are a matter of indifferency, and not of faith. That he was condemned for an hereticke, it was not ſo much for theſe opinions, as for that firſt being a Schiſmaticke, becauſe he could not obtaine a Biſhopricke he became an Arian, as it appeareth by S. Auguſtine, his words are theſe: Doluiſſe

fertur quod Epiſcopus non potuit ordinari, & in Arianorum haereſim lapſus propria quo
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         dogmata addidiſſe dicens: orare pro 
                     Aug. de haereſ. cap. 35. 
                     mortuis, vel oblationem offerre, non oportere, &c. He was diſcontented becauſe he could not obteine a Biſhopricke; and thereupon he fell into the hereſie of the Arians, to which he added ſome opinions of his owne, ſaying: it was not lawfull to pray, or offer ſacrifice for the dead, &c. Theſe poſitions of his, S. Auguſtine doth not call hereſies, but onely opinions. Likewiſe Epiphanius. Therefore adhuc ſaluares eſt, my definition of Epiph. contra haereſ. l. 3. tom. 1. haereſi 75. hereſie remaineth ſound, and not to be by him gaineſayd. But by the way, that I may giue good ſatisfaction to the reader concerning this poynt. We find in the catalogue of hereſies many reckoned vp, which are ſo farre from directly impugning faith, that indeed they do not at all impugne the faith, as that of Aerius, which denied prayer and ſacrifice for the dead, and the ſet faſts of the Church. To which I anſwer out of S. Auguſtine. Firſt, theſe Fathers which make ſuch long catalogues of hereſies, do not write as if they in their owne iudgements did hold all theſe to be hereſies; but onely they deliuer what opinions in ſeuerall ages haue bene condemned as hereticall, leauing it to the priuate iudgement of the reader, whether they were iuſtly condemned as hereticall, or not: but their ſelues deliuer not what is their owne iudgement. For ſaith he: Quid faciat haereticum, regulari quâdam definitione comprehendi, ſicut 
                     Prafat. ad Quod vult. 
                     ego exiſtimo, aut omninò non poteſt, aut difficillimè poteſt: To deliuer by a lawfull definition what thing maketh an hereticke, in my opinion it is impoſſible, or at leſt, of great difficulty. Againe, Epiſt. ad Quod vult. that in the catalogue of hereſies the Fathers do not agree concerning the number of them, but ſome recken vp more, ſome fewer, he ſaith: Quod vti
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         non eueniſſet, niſi aliud vni eorū videretur eſſe haereſis, & aliud alteri, The cauſe was for that ſuch an opinion as ſeemed hereſie in the iudgement of one Father, in the iudgement of another was not hereticall. And concerning Epiphanius the Biſhop of Cypris, & Phileſtrius Biſhop of Brix; which both writ of hereſies: the one making a

longer Catalogue then the other, he ſaith: Procul dubio in eâ quaeſtione vbi diſceptatur quid ſit haereſis, non idem videbatur ambobus, & reuer à hoc omnino definire difficile eſt: & ideo cauendum, quum omnes in numerum redigere conamur, ne pretermittamus aliquas quum hareſes ſint, aut enumeremus aliquas quum haereſes non ſint: That which ſeemed an hereſie to one of them, did not ſeeme ſo to the other; and to define truly what is hereſie, is very hard: and they which will write the Catalogue of hereſies, muſt be very circumſpect, leſt they leaue out of the Catalogue, ſome opinions which are indeed hereticall, & put in others which are no hereſies. Secondly, the Fathers in thoſe Catalogues did not vnderſtand this word Hereſie, ſo ſtrictly as in our age it is vnderſtood; but generally for euery ſect in religion, differing from the receiued opinion of the Church, as Epiſt. ad Quod vult. it appeareth by S. Auguſtine in the words going before, where hee maketh an hereſie and a ſect all one, ſhewing: Quantum inter ſe differunt de numero ſectarum. How much Epiphanius and Philaſtrius diſcent concerning the number of ſects? where he calleth them ſects, which before he called hereſies. And it is no maruaile though with thoſe Fatheres, all hereſies do not directly impugne the Faith, when by thē onely ſects are vnderſtood. But to make euery opinion an hereſie which not only, directly, but alſo by a conſequent impugneth faith, as M. Walſingham will haue it, is to make no difference betweene errour and hereſie; but De corrup. artib. to call euery errour in religion an hereſie, as Ludouicus Ʋiues ſpeaketh: Haereſis nomen rebus leuiſſimis impingitur, The name of hereſie is layd vpon euery light matter. And De haereſ. l. 1. cap. 7. of him it may one time or other be verified which Alphonſus de Caſtro ſpeaketh: Idcirco fit, vt hiqui tam leuiter de haereſi pronuntiant, non expendentes de quâre loquantur, ſaepè ſuà ipſorum ſagittâ feriantur, incidant
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         in eam foueam quam alijs parabant. It happeneth that they which ſo raſhly call euery thing hereſie, not conſidering whereof they ſpeake, bee oftentimes beaten with their owne weapon, and fall into

the pit which they digged for others.
                  I ſhewed, pag. 10. how Puſillanimity maketh men ſometimes do contrary to their owne conſcience, as Cardinall Pole, who dying ſaid: The Proteſtants are the honeſter men, I would be a Proteſtant, were it not for the Church of Rome. This I brought for example to illuſtrate, not for argument to proue. For exempla non probant, examples proue not. He turneth it another way, ſaying: I broughtit for a reaſon to proue that Proteſtants are no heretickes.
                  In defence of our Church, that it could not be accounted hereticall, I called into queſtion the authority of the Councell of Trent by which it was condemned, alledging diuers exceptions againſt that Councell, that it could not be a lawfull generall Councell, the paucity of the Biſhops which were there preſent, their partiality, the definition of a generall Councell cited by Bellarmine, which could no Tomo. 1. contro. 4. cap. 4. way be verified of that aſſembly. Hauing produced theſe arguments to diſinable that Councell, he doth not ſo much as repeate any of them; much leſſe doth he anſwer them: onely he ſaith, that it ſeemed to him a ſlight argument, and to giue more aduantage to my aduerſary, then defence to my ſelfe and my cauſe. I reply, that it is no maruaile though a man of ſlight iudgement, which paſſeth ouer all other things of moment ſo ſlightly, doe eſteeme thoſe arguments to be ſo ſlight, which his ſelfe cannot anſwer.
                  To perſwade Catholikes to come to our Church, I ſhewed how the learned among them, do come euery day nearer to our religion, and more and more fauour our opinions. He ſaith it is a dreame. I wiſh this dreamer to awake out of ſleepe, and with greater vigilancy to conſider of the particulars as they are produced by mee, I ſaid:
                  Firſt, the learned Catholickes agree with vs concerning the bookes of Scripture which be Canonicall, which Apocripha, I writ in this maner: The bookes of Toby, Iudith, Baruch, Eccleſiaſticus, Wiſdome, Maccabes, the fragment of

Eſther, they hold to be Canonicall, according to S. Auguſtine: We, to be Apocripha, according to S. Hierome; and in this point we differ no more from them, then Hierome did from Auguſtine, which did both agree, and were eaſily reconciled. S. Hierome interpreting S. Auguſtines meaning: that they were Canonicall enough to proue rules of life, not grounds of doctrine and faith. Thus haue we deliuered long ſince. But Bellarmine De verbo Dei. l. 1. c. 7. 8. 9. 10. 11. 12. 13. 14. 15. 
                     handling this queſtion at large, replieth not againſt vs: nay, hee doth not ſo much as mention this diſtinction of Canons of faith, and Canons of good life. Therefore we take it as a thing granted by the lawes of diſputation, that he holdeth as we hold, reſteth ſatisfied with our anſwer, & the caſe to be cleare betweene vs both. M. Walſingham bluſheth not to deliuer a notorious vntruth, ſaying: that Bellarmine handleth this diſtinction at large, and refuteth the ſame in his firſt booke, De verbo Dei, cap. 10. In which booke and chapter, no ſuch thing can be found.
                  Secondly, they agree with vs cōcerning the Bible, which is the beſt and trueſt edition. For wheras we holding the originall text only to be authenticall, the Councell of Trent Decret. 3. Seſsionis. obtrudeth to vs the vulgar Latine tranſlation. Bellarmine preferreth the original before the Latine, as we do. M. Walſingham is not aſhamed to charge me that I haue abuſed both the Councell of Trent and Bellarmine. That I haue not abuſed the Councell, witneſſe the Councell it ſelfe: that I haue not abuſed Bellarmine, witneſſe Bellarmine De verbo Dei, lib. 2. cap. 11.
                  Thirdly, they agree with vs concerning the ſufficiency of the Scriptures, that in them are deliuered all things neceſſary to ſaluation, contrary to the ancient doctrine of the Church of Rome. So Bellarmine, De verbo Dei, lib. 4. cap. 10. He is not aſhamed to ſay: In reading the place hee hath diſcouered a notable fraude. Whether I haue dealt fraudulently or ſincerely, let the reader iudge. But wherein lyeth the fraude? He ſaith that Bellarmine ſpeaketh theſe words onely by way of anſwer to an obiection.

I conclude therefore it is no fraude. If I had taken that for poſitiue doctrine which was ſpoken by way of obiection, it had bene fraude in me; but ſeeing it is an anſwer to an obiection, it is no fraude, but ſincere dealing.
                  Fourthly, they hold with vs that Purgatory is a tradition, and not to be found in the holy Scriptures, witneſſe Bellarmine de verbo Dei. l. 4. c. 4. He thinketh to auoid vs by ſaying that Bellarmine ſpeaketh onely antagoniſtically, by way of obiection out of Luther, and not dogmatically out of his owne iudgement; which is but Petitio principij, a begging of the queſtion. For it was queſtioned by me, whether Bellarmine ſpake out of his owne iudgement, or not? and the affirmatiue was by me proued & concluded. He bringeth no proofe for the negatiue part, but onely maketh that for his allegation, which is the queſtion it ſelfe.
                  Fifthly, they diſcent not from vs about the authority of the Scriptures, that it is aboue the authority of the Church; witneſſe Bellarmine de verbo Dei. lib. 3. cap. 10. He repeateth the words, but maketh no anſwer to them.
                  He chargeth me with Papiſtry, becauſe I confeſſed that our Church was condemned as hereticall by the Councell of Trent; which is but Petitio principij: for I denyed our Church to be euer the more hereticall for the cenſure of that Councell, whoſe authoriry I diſinabled by ſufficient reaſons, to which he maketh no anſwer: and therefore in that place I haue not played the Papiſt.
                  Whereas I exhorted the Recuſants, diligently to reade, as well our writers, as their owne; our anſwers as well as their obiections; and then to examine their owne iudgements before they paſſe their ſentence againſt vs to condemne vs of hereſie: He maketh two anſwers: firſt, that they haue already done ſo, to which I reply: they haue done it partially. Secondly, that vnlearned men and women are not able to do ſo; and therefore they muſt relye vpon the iudgement of the Catholicke Church. To which I reply, that if they be not able, the fault is in the the Catholicke

Church of Rome, which holdeth the people ſtill in ignorance, whereas S. Iohn teacheth, that they ought to be of ſuch knowledge, as to try and examine the Spirits: and the Citizens of Berea are commended by the holy 1. Ioh. 4. 1. Act. 17. 11. 2. Cor. 4. 3. Ghoſt, becauſe they were able to examine Saint Pauls doctrine. And I ſay with the Apoſtle: That if the Goſpell bee hidden, it is hidden to them which are loſt.
                  I alledged that few things are in our booke of Common praiers, which are not taken out of the Bible, or out of that which was good in the Maſſe booke: ſo that if they allow of the Bible & their Maſſe booke, they cānot diſallow of our Seruice book. He anſwereth in theſe words: If all the Seruice booke were taken out of the Bible it ſelfe, (as moſt of all heretical Seruice hath bene in euery age pretended to be) yet might the collection and combination be ſuch as might make it vnlawfull and peſtiferous: as when the Arrians did ſing: Gloria patri cum filio, & per filium, and the Catholickes, & filio. The difference in ſound of words, was ſmall; but in ſubſtance and malice execrable. To which I reply, that foraſmuch as he maketh ſuch a ſuppoſition, but ſheweth no ſuch collection or combination in our Seruice booke; neither any thing in it like to that of the Arrians, he ſpeaketh idlely, and to no purpoſe; neither is any thing thereby derogated from the credit of our Seruice booke.
                  To the Recuſants which obiect that there are diſſentions among vs: I anſwered, that ſo there were among them: I named Eckius, Pighius, Thomas, Scotus: nay, there were diſſentions among the Apoſtles themſelues: ſo that diſſention is no argument to diſinable vs from being the true Church, for in religion we agree. M. Walſingham chargeth me with three abſurdities: the firſt of ignorance or folly; for that Eckius, Pighius, Thomas, Scotus diſſented onely in matters diſputable, and not determined by the Church for points of faith. In which words he maketh the Church of Rome to be ſo negligent in their determination of matters of religion, as if they held the doctrine of iuſtification, wherein

                     Eckius and Pighius diſagreed, and of merit wherein the Thomiſts and Scotiſt diſagreed not to appertaine vnto faith, and to be matters ſo indifferent, as if they afforded onely cauſe of diſputation, but needed not to be diſcided.
                  The ſecond abſurditie he ſaith is impiety, for that the Apoſtles contentions were not about matters of different doctrine. I ſay no more are ours. The third he ſaith is ridiculous audacity, to deny ſo abſolutely diſagreement in matters of religion among vs, whereof the whole world can be witneſſe out of our owne books, and inuectiues one againſt another. To which I anſwer, that albeit ſome particular factious ſpirits among vs write ſeditious pamphlets one againſt another, this imputation cannot iuſtly be layd vpon our Church, which by all manner of good meanes ſuppreſſeth diſſention, but maintaineth peace and vnitie. Thus much I thought fit to deliuer, not for anſwer to his diſgracefull ſpeeches vttered againſt me, which I paſſe ouer with ſilence, as not touching the cauſe of religion, but in defence onely of the truth which I tooke in hand, that our aduerſariēs may vnderſtand how we haue not ſuffered thoſe things ſo looſely to paſſe our hands, which they ſo looſely haue publiſhed againſt vs, to the view of the world, And ſo leauing them to the mercy of the Lord, my prayer is: Vincat Christus, cadat haereſis, that falſhood may ſtill be detected, and truth may get the vpper hand.
                  Amen.
                  FINIS.
                  
               
            
         
      
   