
      
         
            
            
            
               A
TIPE OR FIgure
of Friendſhip.
Wherein is liuelie, and compendiouſlie
expreſſed, the right nature and propertie
of a perfect and true
friend.
            
            Alſo a concluſion at the end in the
praiſe of Friendſhip.
            
            Written by. W. D.
            
               Non aurum, non adamas, fulget ſplendidius, quam
bonorum mentes conſentientes.
            
            
               
                  •
               mprinted at London by Thomas Orwin,
and Henry Kirkham. 1589.
         
         
            
            
            TO THE WORSHIPful
and worthie fauourers of learning,
Maſter William Cravne, and
and Maſter VVilliam, Parker, Citizens
and Merchants of London
W. D. wiſheth allearthly proſperitie,
and heauenly
felicitie.
            
               THE ancient Grecians (as Aristotle
writeth) accuſtomed to erect
the Temples of the Graces called
Charites in the midſt of their Cities,
to the ende that the Citizēs
might thereby be admoniſhed of
Amitie, mutuall Beneuolence, &
Charitie: In regard whereof worſhipfull
friendes,) conſidering
with my ſelfe the imbecillitie of our nature, the malignitie
of mortall mindes, and the dangerous daies of this our yron
age, finding a lamentable defect of Friendſhip, and fearing a
finall fall & decay of the ſame; I, not wallowing in wealth,
being farre from the abilitie of building a Temple of the
Grecian Graces, haue according to my ſlender facultie framed
a Figure fully fraught with the glorious gifts of a Goddeſſe:
more worthie to be purtraied with the cunning pencill
of Protogenes, than ſo dimlie adumbrated with the running
penne of Agatharcus. Which if it deſerue not to be ſcituated
in the midſt of the Citie as the Grace Aglaia, nor to
bee placed on ſome high pinnacle as the Image of Minerua,
yet it may be ſuffered in the corners and Suburbes of the
ſame in the honour of Amicitia. Through whoſe beneuolent
aſpect and goodneſſe, ſome men may bee perhaps the
ſooner moued to Amitie, Friend
                  •
               hip, and gratefulnes. We
read that Apelles by a picture cauſed the Aegyptians to abhorre

& hate derraction, as a mōſtrous copeſmate of vices,
& I wiſh this preſent Figure may be analectiue to our Anglians
to entertaine & imbrace Friendſhip as a mightie cō
               panion
and aide to vertues. And foraſmuch as Friendſhip
doth chiefly conſiſt inter duos, and can haue no eſſence but
inter bonos, I haue been the more emboldened (although
vnknowen) to preſume of your Worſhips fauourable acceptance
hereof: who, as popular fame pronounceth, as wel
for your accuſtomed curteſie towards all men, as alſo
for your continual Amitie and brotherly loue one towards
another in faithfull ſocietie, doo rightly reſemble friendſhips
nature and propertie: to whome I humblie preſent
and offer the ſame. Wherein, if my preſumption ſhal breed
preiudice, or cauſe me to be checked with diſlike, I ſhal be
choked with deſpaire for euer practiſing my pen againe in
anie ſuch petite pamphlet, yea though it were to my familiar
frends. Thus wiſhing your Worſhips all manner of
temporall benefites, and ſpirituall bleſsings, I end and humblie
take my leaue.
            
               Your Worſhips to vſe:
Walter Dorke.
               
Inuitat ad magna qui gratanter ſuſcipit modica.
         
      
      
         
            
            The Figure of
Friendſhip.
            
               AS the life of man generallie, lieth open
to many miſeries, ſo is it ſpeciallie
relieued by two remedies, according to
that worthie ſaying: Tristia cuncta exſuperans
aut animo, aut amico. That is to
ſay all things are to be ouercome, either
with the forteſied power of a patient
minde, or with the fortunate preſence of a faithfull friend.
What comfort can there bee more propitiate or preſent to a
penciue mind, than to powre out the plaints thereof into the
ſecret boſome of a ſincere friend, by whoſe ſweete communication
is receaued a ſodaine delight, and ſoueraigne conſolation,
as a moſt cordiall medicine againſt any corraſiue.
            
               Architas of Tarento teacheth vs that life is no life being
led without the loyal loue and liking of ſome that are liuing:
neither is his ioy, any ioy, that dooth not enioy ſome friend
with whome he may be iointly ioyned in ſocietie: for if a man
ſhould climbe vp to the ſkies, & take a ful view of the brightneſſe
of the heauens, and contemplate the beautifulneſſe of
the ſtarres: and behold all the wonderfull workes of GOD
vpon the face of the earth: the admiration thereof would be
but vnpleaſant without ſome friend to whome hee might
make relation of the ſame.
            
               Scipio Minor when he went foorth of his houſe at any time
would earneſtly endeuour himſelfe to finde out ſome companie
among whome hee would make one his familiar friend
before he retourned home againe: ſaying there is no better
poſſeſsion than the fruition of a friend.
            
            
               Titus Veſpaſianus the Emperor on a certaine time finding
by feeling his owne conſcience that he had not pleaſured any
perſon the day paſſed, complained with this clauſe, Diem Amici
perdidi. I haue (ſaith hee) loſt a day, by neglecting the
duetie of a friend.
            
               Dioniſius the Tirant was ſo amazed at the friendſhip

of Damon and Pithias that it tranſlated his minde from
being tirannous towards them, to become almoſt amorous
with them, as it may appeare by his owne petition. Rogo vt
me quoque in vestram amicitiam recipiatis. I beſeeche you
(ſaith he) receaue me alſo into your ſacred ſocietie.
            King Darius doubted not to ſay, hee had rather enioy his
faithfull friend Zopirus free from wounded face and deformitie,
then a hundred ſuch cities as Babilon with al their welth
and ſuperfluitie.
            
               Achilles being demaunded of Aiax, which were the
greateſt labours that euer hee ſuſteined; anſwered, the labours
that hee endured for his friends. And beeing againe
demanded of the ſame, what trauailes and paines ſeemed to
him moſt pleaſant: ſaid, the trauailes and paines he tooke for
his friends. Signifying thereby, that a man indued with an
heroicall heart ſhould alwaies bee inflamed with a deſire of
doing good to his friend. And to the like end and purpoſe, a
certain Philoſopher cōpared a perfect friend to a good proportioned
horſe in ſeauen properties as followeth, hauing

                  A little head by humble conuerſation.
                  A ſharpe eare to be quick of hearing & ready at euery call.
                  A ſoft mouth to the end his tongue be temperate.
                  A hard hoofe to endure trauaile.
                  An open hand to doo good deedes.
                  A ſure foote to continew in amitie.
                  A bay colour for his good renowne.
               
Some alſo affirme that true friends ought to bee like mulberie
trees which bring foorth their fruite at ſuch times, that
they neither feare the froſts of May, as the vines doo; nor the
miſtes of October, as the Peaches and Quinces doo. Thus
among the auncient Romaines and Grecians friendſhip
hath been had in great reuerence, but throw the iniquitie of
our time it is now become, tam rara auis in terris, that a
man may as ſoone ſee a black Swan, as find out a faithfull
friend.
            And here I imagine ſome man may aſke me a double queſtion.

Firſt, whether the late famous Famelie of loue, which
begā to creep in among vs, haue any fellowſhip with Friendſhip.
Secōdly, whether the Holy league may be linked in the
golden chaine of charitie, or contained in the ſiluer band of amitie.
To them both I anſwere negatiuely: and firſt as for
the familie of loue, I thinke them fitter to be termed the familiars
of luſt, and of the familie of Lucifer: they are a ſect giuen
to ſenſualitie, ſtirred vp by ſome infernall Furie, to
make a confuſion of al things generallie, the which is ſo odious
that as I loath to think of it, ſo wil I leaue to ſpeak of it.
            And as for the holy league, which ſome call the helly lake
or helliſh legion, how farre they are from amitie or honeſtie,
France can beſt Iudge, of whoſe loyaltie they haue had experience
but too lately. The firſt original and birth of thē was
like to an vntimely monſter ripped out of the bowells of rebellion,
and foſtered vp with the poyſoned teats of treaſon,
and will be ſtill mainteyned by their miſtres abhomination,
vntill the breath of Gods wrath worke their deſtruction.
Wherfore the Friendſhip yt is ſpoken of in this place, is not
the tirannicall friendſhip of the holy league, nor the filthie
friendſhip, of the falſe named familie of loue, nor the froward
friendſhip which a man may finde at Billingſgate for a boxe
on the eare, nor the profitable friendſhip which is among
Merchants, nor the pleaſant friendſhip which is among
Courtiers, nor the common friendſhip which is among
Clownes: but it is the true, perfect, and vnfeyned friendſhip,
which is neither for pleaſure partely, nor for profit chiefely,
but for vertues ſake onely.
            And becauſe no man ſhould be deceiued, as the Painter who
ſuppoſed light colours to be linnen cloath, I haue ſet downe
certaine Articles, precepts, or ſtatutes of the lawe of Amitie
appertaining to the foreſaid Figure: the which, whoſoeuer
dooth not obſerue and performe, cannot obtaine the
name of a ſincere friend.
            Firſt, That Friendſhip is to be eſteemed more than all
wordly things.
            
               
2 Friendſhip is onely among good men, and cannot be
where vertue is not.
            3 A faithfull Friend is as a mans owne ſelfe.
            4 Friendſhip muſt not be deſired for profit or gaine.
            5 Friendſhip cannot be changed no more than Nature,
but is of continuance.
            6 Couetouſnes is a great plague to Friendſhip.
            
            7 Flatterie is an vtterenemie to Friendſhip.
            
            8 A man muſt neither grant to his Friend, nor requeſt
anie thing of him that is vnlawfull or vnhoneſt.
            9 If our friends conſpire againſt the commonwealth,
we ought to forſake them, and alſo reueale them.
            10 Friends muſt not flatter, but boldly and freely aduertiſe,
admoniſh, and counſell one another.
            11 The chiefe triall of a Friend is in time of neceſſitie.
            12 True friendſhip is hard to be found amongſt great
men.
            13 A faithfull Friend in weale and woe is all one.
            14 A Friend muſt neither be a tale carrier, nor a tale
creditour.
            15 Friends ought to remember good turnes.
            16 A reuerent and modeſt baſhfulneſſe ought to be in
Friendſhip.
            17 Pleaſant ſpeaches and curteous manners bee not
the worſt ſawces in Friendſhip: but lumpiſh ſadneſſe, and
ſullen ſowreneſſe ought to be in anie wiſe ſhunned.
            18 A truſtie Friend is a great treaſure.
            19 We cannot doo too much in Friendſhip.
            20 Among Friends all things ſhould be common.
            Finally, they are all included in this definition.
            
               Friendſhip is a perfect conſent and agreement with beneuolence
& charitie in all things, appertaining as well towards
God as men.
            Theſe precepts duely conſidered, a true Friend may bee
eaſily diſcerned, & yet you may ſooner by definition declare
what he is, thā by demonſtratiō ſhew where he is: for friendſhip

deſcribed in this forme and faſhion hath been long ſince
as one baniſhed from euerie Nation, not hauing any certain
place to make abode in: No not in Rome; for they are too
couetous, ſuperſtitious, and vainglorious: Not in Turkie;
for their Mahomet is too monſtrous: in India, they are too
rude and barbarous, in Italy proud and ambitious, in Spaine
diſdainfull, vile and vicious: in France craftie, fierce and furious:
in Germanie and Denmarke they dedicate themſelues
to Bacchus. But I would I could iuſtly report our ſelues to
be cleere from all theſe vices, & more apt to embrace Friendſhip
here in England: for that it hath the name and fame to
be a moſt flouriſhing Iland, where religion hath appeared,
where peace and concord hath been placed, and the people accounted
bleſſed manie yeares; which God continue for euer.
And here in this point, I cannot paſſe without ſome reuerēt
and honorable mention of the Quéenes moſt excellent Maieſtie:
neither can anie man ſufficiently admire the moſt abſolute
and rare perfections of her Highneſſe heroicall minde;
by whoſe regall beneuolence & bountie, full many are made
happie, whoſe great mercie, abundant naturall clemencie, &
vnſpeakable lenitie (euen towards her greateſt enemies) do
merit immortal memorie. And if I ſhuld particularly ſpeak
of her Maieſties mightie Friendſhip to forreine Princes: if
I ſhould declare her gracious inclination and readineſſe in
aiding the oppreſſed: if I ſhould ſhewe her godlie zeale in
planting the Goſpell: and to be ſhort, if I could but in the
leaſt part expreſſe her princely care, pitie, and pietie towards
her owne people and countrey, it woulde ſéeme ſuch, and ſo
great, that it might well make all other Princes and Potentates
rather amazed to heare it, than apt to imitate it.
What ſubiect would not ſhew himſelfe as faithfull as Zopirus?
What Courtier would not contend to be as conſtant
as Curtius? What Noble man would not offer both life and
ſeruice, as farre foorth as King Codrus to the good of ſo gracious
a Gouerneſſe?
            Wherefore, if Friendſhip were thus imbraced in the

Court, there ſhould be no Gnatho ſo often with filed tongue
flattering, nor Thraſo ſo commonly with brazen face bragging:
nor Davus ſo continually with double heart diſſembling.
Currifauourers and clawbackes, ſhould be contemned
as irkſome and perillous: Sicophants and Shifters,
ſhould be pronounced as execrable & odious: Paraſites and
platter-friends, ſhould be proclaimed as peſtilent and pernicious.
            In like manner in the Citie, if they would whip out the
ſpaniels that will fawne when they are emptie, and beat out
the dogges that will bite when they are full, and feare away
the crowes that will eate vp quicke bodies, and flap out the
flies that will ſting Alexander, and ridde themſelues of the
Friers fleas that are bred in euerie corner; then ſhould they
not haue ſo manie wilful murthers to moleſt them in the day,
nor ſo manie ſecret robberies to diſquiet them in the night:
then ſhould not our hearts be ſo much heated with hatred &
ſpitefulneſſe, nor our tongues ſo tipped with taunts and bitternes,
nor our déeds ſo diſtained with miſchiefe and noughtineſſe:
then ſhould reaſon rule onely in the head, & treaſon
ſhould be trodd vtterly vnderfoote: then ſhould Cities bee
gouerned peaceably, and people in all places liue proſperouſlie:
which God grant continually.
            SO neceſſarie, great & infinit are the cōmodities of Friēdſhip,
that they ſeeme to take the Sunne out of the world,
which would remooue Friendſhip from amongſt vs: without
the which, nothing is ſo well ſtaid, but it may bee ſoone
deſtroyed, nothing ſo ſtrong but it may eaſely be beaten
downe, nothing ſo firmly ſettled but it may be vtterly ſubuerted:
yea without Friendſhip no houſe can be wel guided,
no Citie well gouerned, no Countrey ſafe preſerued, no
State long continued, no nor anie thing in the vſe of man
rightly ordered. It is ſo conuenient for the Court, and ſo fit
for the Countrey; it is ſuch a treaſure abroad in the warres,
and ſuch an ornament to the Citie in time of peace; that as

               Tully teſtifieth, there is no gift giuen of God to man (Sapience
only excepted) more agreeable to nature, more comfortable
to the heart, more pleaſant to the minde, or more profitable
to a Publique weale: although ſome rather regard riches,
other more eſteeme health, manie chieflie preferre honour,
moſt of all vainely delight pleaſure: but yet neither
the vſe of riches, nor the worſhip of wealth, nor the praiſe of
honour, nor the delight of pleſure, nor the happines of health,
may bee compared with Friendſhip: for which way ſoeuer
thou takeſt, it turneth with thee: if thou goe forward, it followeth
thee: if thou call, it is at hand: if thou looke for it, it is
linked vnto thee: in no place is it excluded, at no time out of
ſeaſon, in no cauſe troubleſome: wherefore it may be well
ſaid, that wee vſe neither water, nor fire, nor earth, nor aire,
in more places than we doo Friendſhip. It maketh proſperitie
to ſhine moſt glorious, and cauſeth aduerſitie to ſeeme
nothing grieuous. It ſuffereth neither the heart to be daunted,
nor the courage in any caſe quailed: wherefore being abſent,
yet are they preſent: being needie, they haue inough:
being poore, they haue plentie: being weake, are ſtrong: yea
and I had almoſt ſaid that which is more ſtrange, being dead
are aliue: inſomuch, that the death of the one ſeemeth bleſſed,
and the life of the other nothing blemiſhed, ſo great is the honor,
ſo gracious the remēbrance, ſo godly the zeal that is bred
in Friends one toward another. He yt loketh vpon his faithfull
Friend, doth behold a perfect patterne of his owne perſon,
being as it were an Alter ego, that is another himſelfe.
What was it that cauſed Phocion to ſay, he neuer denied any
thing to his faithfull friend Nicocles, was it not Friendſhip?
What was it that vrged Damon to yeelde himſelfe a pledge
for the life of his companion Pithias, was it not Friendſhip?
What was it that mooued Titus to come downe from the
Bench of authoritie, and accuſe himſelfe to acquite Giſippus
from miſerie, was it not Friendſhip? What was it that inflamed
Pilades to preſent his owne perſon to ſaue the life of
Oreſtes, was it not Friendſhip? To be ſhort, what was the

reaſon that the two honourable Romanes, Scipio and Laeli
                  
                     ••
                  s
ſo greatly loued: inſomuch that one houſe ſerued them
both, one face, one ioint ſtudie, one delight, one conſent
in all things: not onely in priuate affaires, but alſo in publique,
in trauailes, in voyages, in ſoiourning, at home and abroad
all were alike common: was not this a laudable kind
of Friendſhip? Yea, to make our ful period, (thogh Friendſhips
praiſe be infinite) ſuch is the force therof, that mightie
Kings haue deſired it, it is ſo glorious: famous Philoſophers
haue honoured it, it is ſo ſpecious: cruell tyrants haue
been amazed at it, it is ſo victorious: al men in general haue
praiſed it, it is ſo precious: and yet few haue effectually at
any time attained vnto it, it is ſo miraculous.
            FINIS.
            
         
      
   