
      
         
            
            
            Of Diuorcement.
            A SERMON
PREACHED AT
Pauls Crosse the 10. of
May. 1601.
            By Iohn Doue, Doctor of
Diuinitie.
            LONDON
Printed by T. C. 1601.
         
         
            
            
            The Preface.
            
               I Had not published my
late Sermon, the world
beeing alreadie so full of
bookes, had I not bene
mistaken by some which
vnderstood it not, & vniustly
traduced by others
which heard it not, reporting
of it, as they would haue it, and not as
I deliuered it, not so much offended with the
Sermon, as with the Preacher. They take exceptions:
Against the matter, as if the doctrine
were not sound. Against my words, and
maner of deliuering it, as irreuerend, because
I presumed not onely to speake against Beza
without crauing pardon, without ascribing
praise and commendation otherwise due to his
great deseruings, but also to passe him ouer
slightly, calling him by his bare name, without
addition; as if so doing, I did Peccare contrà formam
sanorum verborum,
               1. Tim. 1. 13. not keepe



the patterne of wholsome words. Against the
text it selfe, as vnseasonable for the time, and
vnpleasing to the auditory. Against my diuision
and reading of the text, as straunge and insolent,
the like neuer heard of before: as if I had
offered violence to the holy scriptures.
            I answere with the Apostle: I passe litle
to be iudged by you,1. Cor. 4. or of mans iudgement. I
haue builded vpon no other foundation then
that which is already laid,1. Cor. 3. that is, Iesus Christ:
whether I haue builded gold, siluer, pearles, or
timber, haye stubble, whether my worke will
abide, and proue such for the which I shall receiue
wages, or not: let it bee made 
                  •
               a
                  ••
               est,
I feare not that day, I refuse not the 
                  〈◊〉
                tryall,
which is the onely true iudge of all mens
workes. The holy Ghost hath taught me in the
meane while that the Ministers of Christ must
passe through many things,
                  
                     •
                  . Cor. 6. honour and dishonour,
good report and bad report, as deceiuers,
and yet true.
            M. Beza cannot blame me for dissenting
from him, because he hath done so by S. Augustine
and all the Fathers: nor for vsing his
name without addition, because hee hath done
the like by S. Paul and all the Apostles. I dare
not follow S. Paul farther then hee is a follower
of Christ,1. Cor. 11. and therefore must dissent frō


               
               Beza when he dissenteth from Christ. I was
not then ignorant how thanklesse an office it
was to speake of him, whose authoritie is with
some, more canonicall then the canonicall
scriptures, to name Beza before them which
haue onely heard of his name, but knowe not
how to spell it, (for they call him Bezer, as
also Bellarmine they call Bellamye,) they
would bee Doctors of the Lawe,1. Tim. 17. but knowe
not what they speake, or whereof they affirme,)
it is very likely they haue read his
workes, and are able to iudge of his doctrine.
But I came thither to preach Christ, not
to commend any man, for so had I not beene
the seruant of Christe. And this I may
speake without offence: M. Beza hath
not deliuered all truth, but left some to others
to bee deliuered. And therefore I exhort
them that they would not condemne this doctrine
because hee holdeth the contrarye,Epist. Iudae v. 10. & 16. least
they immitate the false Prophets which
speake euill of the thinges which they knowe
not, and haue mens persons in admiration,
whom also they knowe not, and so commit
grosser Idolatrie by worshipping a man, then
Saint Iohn did by worshipping an Angell.
            If an Angell from heauen preach new doctrine,Apoc. 19.


               
he is accursed,Gal. 1. 8. much lesse may the doctrine
which any man publisheth, be presently
receiued without further triall, Eô nomine,
because hee taught it:1. Iohn. 4. but the spirit must be
tried, the doctrine must be examined, be the
credit of the Doctor neuer so great.
            I haue alwaies opposed my selfe against
popularitie, as an enemie to true godlinesse,
supposing that they which preach mortification,
ought their selues to bee mortified from
vaine ostentation of great auditories, ambitious
desire of many followers, and glorying in
multitudes of Disciples,Ioh. 6. 15. by the example of
our Sauiour, which withdrew himselfe from
the multitude, when he sawe they would take
him vp and make him a King. And therefore
haue I refrained to intrude my selfe into such
great assemblies; as also that I might not defraud
mine owne congregation, but contented
my selfe to keepe my station in mine owne
watch-tower, ouer that flocke onely, ouer
which God hath made me an ouerseer. I desire
his glory and not mine owne: I say with Iohn
the Baptist,Ioh. 3. 30. he must increase, and I must decrease.
But beeing called to that place of so
great expectation, I thought it fit to choose
mine owne text; in which choise, if the wiser
sort of men will say I haue erred, I will craue



pardon for mine error.
            I was required by the Magistrate, vpon
shorter warning then ordinary, to supply a
course, which else had stood voyd; so that my
tongue was become the pen of a swift writer:
yet haue I not by reason of haste,Ier. 48. done the
worke of the Lord altogether negligently, neither
was I with the Disciples carelesse what
I should speake,Math. 10▪
                looking that it should be giuen
me in that houre; but my heart did with the
Prophet Dauid,
               Psal. 45. first indite the matter before
I spake it. In expounding this text, I did as
Daniel expounding a dreame,Dan. 2. vse both prayer
and meditation: and I assure my selfe, I
haue according to the Apostles rule,1. Tim. 2. shewed my
selfe approued vnto God, a workeman which
needeth not to be ashamed diuiding the word
aright. And whosoeuer will stand to the Cathechisme
and rudiments of Christian religion,
and submit himself to the rules of Logicke,
will he, nill he, he must confesse, that my reading
and diuiding the text is very naturall,
and no way forced. Concerning this point, I
am to satisfie a kinde of men differing from the
other of which I spake before, which will haue
marriage after diuorcement, as well of the
partie innocent as of the nocent, to be adultery;
and yet the diuorcement it selfe, which they



graunt to be a dissolution of marriage, to be
lawfull, so that they will build without a foundation,
and make a consequent without an antecedent.
For how can marriage after diuorcement
be vnlawfull, if the diuorcement it selfe
stand good? How is it possible to graunt a diuorce,
but with full power to marry againe?
when the first mariage is lawfully dissolued,
what can hinder a second marriage? But to
strengthen their error▪ they except against the
diuision of my text: they will haue it to be but
categoricall, which I haue said to be hypotheticall,
they alleadge that no proposition can be hypotheticall
vnlesse it be conditionall. To oppose
themselues against me, they except against the
Cathechisme it self, against the grounds of Logicke,
by which they lay themselues open to no
small reproach. Euerie young scholler which
hath learned Seron can tell thē that all hypotheticall
propositions are not conditionall, but
some copulatiue, some disiunctiue, and that all
propositions are hypotheticall, which may bee
resolued into two categoricalls, and that therfore
these words as they are set downe in Saint
Matthew, and more plaine in S. Marke, and
most plaine in S. Luke, the commas and points
being in all three alike obserued: to wit, Vxor
                     •
                  m
dimittens, & aliam ducens, maechatur,


               
That is, both he which diuorceth his wife, and
he which marrieth an other, committeth adultry,
are an hypotheticall copulatiue proposition,
and containe in them two categoricalls: Vxorem
dimittens maechatur, & vxorem aliam
ducens maechatur, Both of them being without
exception perfectly true propositions in
Logicke, according to the definition and forme
of a proposition. But for as much as I haue diuided
my text according to forme, which is the
very life of all diuisions, my diuisions is iustified
who haue diuided the whole text into three
propositions. The case being cleare concerning
the forme, that this text conteineth three
true propositions, they can contend with mee
onely about the matter of the first proposition,
whether it bee Secundum qualitatem in 
                     •
                  e,
vera or falsa. They aske how it can be adulterie
for a man to put away his wife, when hee
dooth not onely abstaine from the second
marriage, from all carnall knowledge, but
also from coueting of any other? Adulterie
say they, consisteth onely in carnall knowledge,
and in coueting, and no writer of credit will
say that there can bee any other adulterie.
By which wordes they make Saint Chrysostome
to bee a Writer of no credite,Dè inuent. sanctae crucis. Hom 20.
which saieth: Viro casto qualiscun
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   vxor



bona videtur, quia perfecta charitas vitia
non sentit. Qui diligit vxorem, de soluendo
matrimonio legis praecepta necessaria,
non habet, vbi autèm de soluendo matrimonio
lex requiritur, illic iam odium demonstratur,
vbi odium inuenitur, illìc iam
fornicatio esse cognoscitur. A chaste man
will thinke well of his wife though faultie, because
perfect charitie will not espie offences.
He which loueth his wife, thinketh the lawe of
diuorcement superfluous and very needlesse:
but where aduantage of lawe is required for
the vndoing of marriage, there hatred appeareth;
but where there is hatred of a mans wife,
there is also fornication. Againe, Quemadmodùm,
si videas hominem assiduè amicitias
medicorum colentem, exipsâre statim
intelligis quià infirmus est: sic & cùm
videris siuè virum siuè mulierem dè dimittēdis
vxoribus aut viris legē interrogantes,
cognosce quia vit iste lasciuus est, & mulier
illa meretrix est. Euen as that man which
continually resorteth to the Phisitian to aske
aduise, sheweth that his body is not sound: so
when man or wife asketh counsell of the Lawyer
how they may be diuorced, the man so doing
is vnhonest; the woman so doing, is adulterous.
Likewise, they make Vrsinus to be a



writer of no credit, which interpreteth this
commaundement, Thou shalt not commit
adulterie, in this maner. The scope and drif
                  •
               
of this commaundement (saith hee) is the preseruation
of chastitie, and the vpholding of
marriage, and all things are by it forbidden,
which any waies are causes, or effects, antecedents,
or consequents, contrary to chastitie, or
contrary to marriage. But say I, by diuorcement
marriage is dissolued, and therefore not
vpheld or maintained by such a diuorcemēt as
is allowed to be good; and yet with a restraint
from a second marriage, men and women are
caused to burne in lust, and defrauded of that
benefit which God hath appointed to be a remedie
against fornication: and therefore by it,
chastitie is not preserued, and by a consequent
adultery is committed. But to answere them
in a word, how hee which diuorceth his wife
committeth adultery, he committeth adultry
two maner of wayes: first as a principall offender,
because he breaketh wedlocke; for so diuorcement
is defined the dissolution of marriage,
or vntying of the knot of sacred wedlocke:
and the briefest sort of the English and Duch
Cathechismes, haue in stead of thou shalt not
commit adultry, in more generall termes, thou
shalt not breake wedlocke: whereby it is the



iudgement of the Churches of England and
Germanie, that all breach of the law of wedlocke
is adultery: and wedlocke is in no degree
so highly broken as by diuorcement▪ by which it
is dissolued. Secondly he committeth adulterie
as a partie accessary, for he giueth his wife allowance
to marry againe, which my aduersaries
do confesse to be adultery. That the intent
and meaning of diuorcement is to vndoo the
first marriage, and giue license to the second
marriage, who can speake better thē the Iewes
themselues, of whom the Christians did learne
it, and the Christian Churches which doo receiue
it and put it in practise? That the diuorcement
which was permitted by Moyses,
was with permission also to marry again, it appeareth
by Moses himself. Deut. 24. That it is
so among the Iewes, in these dayes it appeareth
by the very forme of their Schodule or Bill of
diuorcement, which hath these words, do vxori
meae potesttatem eundi quò velit, nubendi
cui velit. I giue my wife libertie to goe
whither she will, and to marry whom she will.
That it is so vnderstood among the Christian
Churches where diuorcement is practised, it is
plaine by the confession of M. Beza in his
booke De diuortio, as in my Sermon I haue
declared. As for my maner of reading, let them



readie as I haue read it, or as it is in the originall,
all is one in substance, (I did it but for
explication sake, as an Interpretor, not as a
bare reader) they cannot vnderstand it otherwise
then I did read it: let them diuide it as I
did, or otherwise, it will make a difference in
outward forme, the doctrine will be the same.
Onely this aduertisement I will be bold to giue
to some kind of Preachers in our Church: that
true preaching doth not consist in heaping vp of
common places, in prolixitie and length of
speech, in multitudes of quotatiōs of Authors,
chapters and verses, nor in rash deliuering of
doctrine taken by tradition, vpon the bare relation
& credit of others, without further examination.
But he which will expound such a
text as this is, must suppose it to be like the
Hebrew Bible, which needed the Chalde paraphrase
that the Iewes might vnderstand it:
the rocke in the wildernesse which was to bee
cleft by Moses his rodde before water would
issue out of it:Ex. 17. the Land of promise,Psal. 59. which was
not presently discouered:1. Reg. 18. the heauē which was
shut vp, and opened but by Elias his prayers,
before it rayned:Deut. 25. the corne which was troden
with the oxes foote, and rubbed by the hands
of the Disciples before it was eaten:Math. 12. the booke
to be vnsealed by the Lambe, before the mysteries
in it could be reuealed:Apoc. 5. the face of Moses,


               
which had a vaile or couering before it,Ex. 34. to bee
remooued before his beautie could appeare:Iud. 14. & 15
the tooth in the Asses iaw-bone, and the Lyons
carkasse which required Sampsons strength,
before his thirst could bee quenched, before
sweetnesse could be drawne out of the strong,
or meate out of the eater: the handling of it
may not be triuiall or vulgar.
            Hauing thus according to my poore talent,
deliuered that which I hope will not be offensiue
to the godly, because it is cōsonant to Gods
word, nor scandalous to the state, as tending to
schisme, or maintenance of strife, because it is
according to the Decree established the last
Parliament, by the generall consent of the
Cleargie; my humble desire is, that the world
would so thinke of vs, as of the Ministers of
Christ, and disposers of the secrets of God, of
whom it is required that euery one should bee
found faithfull, and to thinke of mee concerning
M. Beza, that I do blesse and magnifie
God mightily for all the good parts which are
in him, that I am Famulus seruorum Dei,
touching all the true seruants of God, I liue to
do God and them seruice. And so I commend
them to the gracious protection of him whom
they serue.
         
      
      
         
            
            A SERMON PREAched
at Paules Crosse the 10. of
Maye, 1601.
            
            
               
                  Math. 19. verse. 9.
I say vnto you, that whosoeuer shall put away
his wife (except it be for whoordome)
and marrie an other, committeth
adulterie: and whosoeuer marrieth her
which is diuorced, committeth adulterie.
            
            
               AN answere to a question,
propounded by the
Pharisies to our Sauiour
Christ, concerning
diuorcement of Wiues
from their Husbands,
and by a consequent, of
Husbands from their
Wiues, whether it be lawfull or no? The
answere is negatiue, that no diuorcement
is lawfull. For, first he sheweth that no man
may put away his Wife for any cause. Secondly



hee prooueth it, for as much as if
any man hath put away his wife, hee hath
done it of fact onely, and not of right,
and his fact is held vnlawfull, according
to Gods word, because hee may not
marrie any other while she liueth. Thirdly,
hee prooueth that hee which hath
put away his wife can marrie no other
while she liueth, because shee can marrie
no other while he liueth. For these three
conclusions do necessarily followe: The
first. If the putting away of a mans wife
be of this nature that still shee continueth
his wife: then it is no diuorcement. The
secōd: If the putting away of a mans wife
be of that effect that shee is no longer his
wife: then he is no longer her husband.
The third: If shee be no more his wife,
shee may marrie an other, and if he be no
more her husband, he may marrie an other,
therefore the knot of matrimonie is
dissolued, and both are free. But our Sauiour
teacheth that neither of them is at
libertie to marrie againe, therefore that
the bond of matrimony remaineth firme,
and therfore that there can be no diuorcement.
These things are easily apprehended,
but the difficultie is, how these cōclusions



may be collected out of this text.
            May it please you to vouchsafe mee
your attention, and laying aside all preiudicate
opinions, not to passe your censure
against me before you haue heard all that
I will say. For, if you come with preiudice
your harts shalbe made fat,
                  
                     •
                  sa. 6. 9. et
                     •
                  
                  ▪
                your ears heauie,
your eies blinde, as the Prophet speaketh,
that hearing you shal not vnderstād,
that seeing plainly you shal not perceiue.
If ye condemne me before ye haue heard
me, then do ye not followe the Apostles
rule.1. Thess. 5. 21. 
               Omnia probate, quod bonum est tenete.
trie all things, & hold onely that which is
good: and then are ye not sincere hearers
of Gods word, therefore heare and then
iudge. If ye cōdemne this doctrine as erronious
because to you it seemeth strange,
and you do not sufficiently conceiue it (I
speak to the vnlearned) then do you measure
Gods truth by your owne errour, the
power of God by your own weaknes, the
depth of gods wisdome by the shallownes
of your owne reach. Vrsinus before his Catechisme,
alledgeth sixe reasons why mē
reading the scriptures (albeit learned) yet
vnderstand thē not, whereof one is preiudice,
tenne why reading they profit but a



litle, whereof fiue are these: ignorance of
the true drift and scope of that which
they read, they follow not the analogie of
faith, they conteine not themselues within
the bounds of diuinitie, they contemne
the iudgement of the Interpreters, they
stand too peremptorily vpō the bare word
and letter. Among sixe rules which he giueth,
for the better vnderstanding of any
Text, one is a true desire to learne, and
zealous intent to goe away better instructed.
Another I adde of mine owne obseruation,
which is this: the right vnderstanding
of the Text, consisteth much in the
true reading of the same; for, if ye mistake
in reading, ye cannot but faile in vnderstanding.
And because many of this Auditory
are defectiue in all these points, I
desire you according to these Premisses,
to heare me with indifferencie, and not
with preiudice, as condemning me because
Beza and Melancthon and others are of
a contrarie opinion, to waigh well the true
drift of our Sauiour in this Text, to follow
analogiam fidei & loci, the analogie of faith
in generall, and of this place in particular,
to cōteìn your selues within the bounds of
diuinitie, that ye harken to the Interpreters,



I meane the auntient Fathers which
were nearest to Christ, and farthest from
corruption: that ye dwell not vpon bare
and naked letters, that ye heare me with a
desire to learne, and according to mine
owne rule, that ye would heare how to
read this Text, because many Diuines do
not read it rightly, and therefore no maruell
though they expound it falsely. For,
legere & non intelligere est negligere, to read
and not vnderstand, is not truly called reading,
but mere negligence: Balthazar
could read the Characters written by the
hand in a wall,Dan. 5. 
                     •
                   5. 
               mene tekel peres hee hath
numbred, he hath weighed, hee hath diuided:
so could the wise men of Babell, but a
more exact kinde of reading was required
of Daniel, that was, to read and vnderstand,
and he read it in more ample maner then it
was written: God hath numbred thy Kingdome,
and finished it, thou art weighed in a ballance
and found too light, thy Kingdome is diuided
and giuen to the Persians. Wherefore
let vs not read cum neglectu sed cum intellectu,
not ignorantly but intelligently; not
as Balthazar, but as Daniel; as readers
which know what they read, else it is in
vaine to read.
            
               
               I say vnto you, &c. In which assertion
is a kind of Elleipsis or want of words,
which defect, as it is verie common in
the Greeke & Hebrew, so it is commonly
supplied by the learned Reader and
Translator, by addition of words to make
the sence perfect, as Daniel did. Do not
entertaine so irreligious an opinion of me
as if I should adde any thing of mine
owne vnto Gods word, & yet where the
originall Text is obscure and vnperfect
like vnto this, somewhat must be added
out of Gods word, which by the circumstances
of the place & very cōnectiō and
coherence of it, doth appeare to be necessarily
vnderstood, but so that the additiō
be printed in other characters, that it may
be distinguished from the originall. And
least this kinde of reading the scriptures
should seeme straunge and insolent, Beza
in his Latine translation of the new Testament
dooth the like, not in so fewe as
an hundred places, wee will instance for
example sake. S. Paul writeth in this
maner.2. Thess. 2. 3 
               Let no man deceiue you by any
meanes, for except there come a departure
first, and the man of sinne be disclosed: which
words are so imperfect, that they carrie



no sence; but Beza in his Latine translation
readeth it otherwise, by adding these
words in other characters: The day of
the Lord shall not come. Let no man deceiue
you by any meanes, for the day of the Lord shal
not come, vnlesse there be a departure first,
and the man of sinne bee disclosed. Which
addition is necessarily vnderstood by the
circumstances of the place, for in the
next verse going before, hee shewed that
the day of Christ was not so neare as the
Thessalonians supposed, and in this verse
he sheweth a reason: because there must
come a departure first. Likewise in the
same Chapter, S. Paules words are these:
The mistery of iniquitie doth alreadie worke,Vers. 7.
onely that which withholdeth, vntill it be taken
away. Which Beza readeth in this maner:
The misterie of iniquitie doth alreadie
worke, onely that which withholdeth, shall
withholde vntill it bee taken away: and so
according to the office of a faithfull Trāslator,
maketh that plaine in the translation
which was obscure, by reason of
the Elleipsis in the originall, and yet
was not wanting in the originall because
it was necessarily vnderstood. In like
manner: this Text being Elleipticall or



defectiue for want of words, and the sence
of it obscure and darke; wee must adde
words in the English, but in other Characters,
and read in this maner.
            
               I say vnto you, that according to the permission
of Moyses, He that putteth away his
Wife vnlesse it be for whoordome, committeth
adulterie, and if he marrie an other, he
committeth adulterie: and whosoeuer marrieth
her that is diuorced committeth adulterie.
Which words, we must of necessitie vnderstand
to be inserted, because else wee
shall not onely leaue the sence maimed
and imperfect, but also include a manifest
contradiction to that which our Sauiour
concluded in the words immediately going
before, as I shall shewe vnto you.
Wherefore our new Diuines for want of
right reading this Text, do misconster it
foure wayes. First, they thinke our Sauiour
speaketh affirmatiuely that diuorcement
is lawfull, whereas he speaketh negatiuely,
that diuorcement is not lawfull.
The second, they take this answer to bee
particular; as if in some one case, that is, in
case of adulterie, and for some persons, as
when one is nocent and the other innocent,
diuorcement were lawfull, whereas



it is vniuersall that no diuorcement is lawfull,
be the case whatsoeuer, or the persons
whosoeuer. The third, they suppose it to
be hypotheticall, because he saith: whosoeuer
putteth away his wife except it bee
for fornication, &c. as if that were aequipollent
with this: if a man putteth away
his wife for fornication, it is no adulterie,
whereas it is catagoricall, because this exception
in the Parenthesis (vnlesse it be for
fornication) is meerely voyd, and no exception
at all, as I will make manifest vnto
you, and of no more validitie then if it
were left out. The fourth, they thinke
that in these words are comprehended but
two propositions, whereas there are three:
for, though our Sauiour saith: Hee that
putteth away his wife and marrieth an other
committeth adulterie, naming adulterie
but once, yet it is twise vnderstood,
both in the putting away of his wife, and
in the marrying of an other, and therfore
all one as if he had said: he that putteth away
his wife committeth adulterie by putting
her away, and if he marrie an other, he
committeth adulterie also by marrying an
other, like that saying of our Sauiour: He
that breaketh the least Commaundement and



teacheth men so, shall be called the least in the
kingdome of Heauen. Which words, do not
import onely that the breach of the commandemēt
together with so teaching, maketh
a man the least in the kingdome of
heauē, but also the breach it self, although
he do not teach it, as S. Iames sheweth: so
he that putteth away his wife committeth
adultry,Iacob. 2. 10. though he doth not marry any other.
Wherfore according to that which I
haue deliuered vnto you, I diuide my text,
as it naturally diuideth it selfe, into three
propositions, the first beeing as a text, the
other two as a glosse or exposition; to wit,
the second an exposition of the first, & the
third an expositiō of the second; the first,
which is the text, that there can be no diuorcement,
where he saith: it is adultery
for a man to put away his wife although
he marry no other: the second, a proofe
that there can be no diuorcemēt, because
he which putteth away his wife can marry
no other; where he saith, it is adultry to
marrie an other; the third, a proofe of the
second, that he which putteth away his
wife can marrie no other, because his wife
which is put away can marry no other.
And of these three propositions in they
due place.
            
               
               Concerning the first proposition, that there
can be no diuorcement, and that it is the
drift of our Sauiour in this text to disanull
all diuorcements.
               
                  I say vnto you, whosoeuer putteth away his
wife) I shewed you before, how there was
an Elleipsis or want of words to be supplied.
Not as though I would by that supply
of words serue mine owne turne, or seeke
to aduantage my selfe, for I neede not,
and if we cōtent our selues with the bare,
naked and imperfect words of the Greeke
text, which the aduersary vseth for his
best and onely aduantage, no diuorcement
can be prooued ot of them. That
I may examine the bare words: who so
putteth away his wife except it bee for
fornication committeth adulterie: It is
no good consequent that therefore if a
man put away his wife for fornicatiō, it is
no adultery: nor this; hee that putteth
away his wife and marrieth an other, committeth
adultry, therefore if he put her away
& marry no other it is no adultry, as it
may appeare by the like.Leuit. 1
                        •
                     . 1
                        •
                     
                   
                  Moses saith: Thou
shalt not take a wife with her sister while



shee liueth: will you therefore argue out of
these words, that when a mans wife is
dead, he may marrie her sister? Our Sauiour
saith:Marc. 16. 16 
                  Whosoeuer beleeueth and is babtized,
shall be saued. Will you therefore conclude
against S. Ambrose that Theodosius
the Emperour which did beleeue and was
not baptised, was not saued? The holy
Ghost saith:Mat. 1. 18. 
                  Ioseph knew not Mary vntill
shee had brought foorth her first borne
sonne, & that Mary was found with childe
before Ioseph and shee came together: will
you therefore conclude with Heluidius the
Hereticke against S. Ierome,
                  Hieron. cō
                     tra 
                        •
                     eluidiū
                   that Mary
was not a perpetuall Virgin, and that shee
was the mother of other children? and that
after the birth of Christ,Math. 28. 
                  Ioseph and Mary
came together? Our Sauiour saith, I will
be with you till the end of the world. Paul
saith,
                     
                        •
                     . Cor. 15. 
                  Christ shall sit on the right hand of his
Father vntill he make his enemies his footestoole:
                  Decretal. lib. 5. Tit. 40 cap. 6. verba intelligenda sunt, non secundum quodsonāt, sed secundū mentem proferentis,
will you therefore conclude that
Christ shall leaue vs after the end of the
world? or cease to sit on his fathers right
hand after his enemies are subdued? You
will aske me then, if these words: (Except
it be for fornication) be no exception, but
meerely Idle, why doth our Sauiour vse



them?Hilar. Intelligentia dictorum ex causis est assumenda dicendi, quia non sermonires, sed reisermo est subiectus. or how can it stand with the nature
of the holy Ghost to speake idlely? These
words are not idle, and yet make nothing
in fauour of diuorcement. S. Augustine answereth
in this maner. Si ille maechatur qui
dimissâ vxore fornicatrice aliam ducit, cur ergo
dominus interposuit causam fornicationis?
in
                        •
                     mo, cur non dicit simpliciter: qui dimissâ
vxore aliam ducit, maechatur? If he which
putteth away an adulterous wife and marrieth
an other,De adulterinis coniugijs. lib. 1. cap. 9. committeth adultery in so
doing, why did our Sauiour put in this caution,
saying, except it be for fornication?
Why did he not say rather absolutely, that
he which putteth away his wife and marrieth
an other committeth adulterie? Quiae
dominus illud quod grauius adulteriū est commemorare
voluit quam id quod est minus, nam
grauius adulteriū est pudicâ vxore dimissa aliā
ducere quàm impudicâ, vt Iacobi quarto, sciē
                     ti
bonū facere & non facienti peccatum est illi,
nūquid idcirco peccatum est illi qui nescit bonū
facere &, ideo nō facit
                        •
                     vtrum
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      peccatum est,
sed illud maius istud minus, ita in his adulterijs,
sed vtrum
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      est adulterium. Because our Sauiour
would speake of that adulterie especially
which was most heinous, rather then
of the other which is a lesse offence, for it



is a more grieuous adulterie to put away
a chaste wife and marry an other, then to
put away a dishonest wife & marry again,
euen as according to the Apostle.Iac. 4. 17. 
                  To him
that knoweth how to do well, & doth it not, to
him it is sin. Wil you therfore cōclude, that
to him which knoweth not how to doo
wel, & therfore doth it not, to him it is no
sin? Both are sins, that greater and this lesser,
so both these are adultry, though one
be greater & the other lesser. But for your
farther satisfaction, mine owne answer is
this: These words of our Sauiour (except it
be for fornication) do shew that the drift of
our Sauiour was two-folde, to shew what
was supposed to be lawfull by the permissiō
of Moses, & what was indeed lawful according
to the word of God, for they affoord
two seueral constructions, secundum
permissionē Mosaicam & veritatē euangelicā
                  
according to the permissiō of Moses, and
the truth of the Gospell, according to
Moses his permission, which was a man,
and did like a man, diuorcement was permitted,
onely in case of adulterie, but according
to the immutable and incorrupt
veritie of the scriptures, Christ denieth
diuorcement to be lawfull, as by the analogy



of this place doth appeare. For, whē
our Sauiour saith: wherefore I say vnto you:
marke vpon what occasion our Sauiour
doth say these things vnto them? conferre
the beginning of the Dialogue or conference
of the Pharisies and our Sauiour,
with the end of the same, and his purpose
will appeare. Wherevpon doth our Sauiour
deliuer this definitiue sentence concerning
diuorcement vnto them, but vpon
their falsifying and belying the words
of Moses, which hee restoreth to the true
sence and meaning thereof? In the beginning
of the cōference, the Pharisies asked
Christ tempting him & saying: Is it lawful
for a man to put away his wife for euery
fault, making no mention of marrying
againe? He answereth, it is not lawfull for
any fault, and prooueth his deniall by arguments
drawne; first from the nature of
marriage, that which is but one cannot be
diuided, vnitas est indiuisibilis, but the man
and wife are one; therefore they cannot
be diuided. The Maior is a principle in
Arithmaticke,Gen. 2. 14. 1. and cannot be denied: the
Minor is Ipse dixit a principle in diuinitie.Cor. 6. 16
Secondly,Eph. 5. 3. frō the definition of diuorcement,
no man can seuer thē whom God



hath ioyned together, but to diuorce, is to
seuer man and wife, whom God hath ioyned
together,Deut. 24. and this in effect is all that
may be saide of this question. But, the
Pharisies not satisfying themselues with
this answere, reply against it, and presse
him with the authoritie of the scriptunre.
Moyses say they, commaunded the man
to giue his wife a Bill of diuorcement and
put her away. Hee answereth them, that
in so alleadging the words of Moyses, they
falsifie the Texte three maner of wayes.
First, whereas they say Moyses commaunded,
it is not so, for Moyses did but suffer
them for the hardnesse of theyr hearts;Math. 5.
there is great difference betweene a commaundement
and a tolleration, they be of
sundrie natures. In deed our Sauiour saith
It hath bene said: Let him giue her a Bill of
diuorcement. Which words doo import a
commaundement, but by whom was it
said? only by the Iewes, according to their
receiued errour, for God neuer said it, as
also in the same place: Yee haue heard how
it hath bene said, thou shalt loue they neighbour
and hate thine enemie.
                  Math. 5. 43. But if ye read the
place of scripture to which it hath relation,Leuit. 19. 18
ye shall finde they haue misreported of it:



for there is mention onely of the loue of
our neighbour,If any obiect that the history is otherwise related in Marke▪ I answere with Greg▪ Decretal. lib. 5. Tit. 40. cap. 7. Nihil obstat narrandi diuersit as &c. not of the hatred of our
enemie, that is but their owne collection.
Secondly, whereas they build vpon this
tolleration of Moyses, it is no sufficient
foundation to ground vpon, because Moyses
in this his tolleration did not permit diuorcement
as a thing honest and lawfull,
but that he did as a man, to beare with the
hardnesse of their hearts, dispence with
them in this case, contrary to Gods word,
where hee saith: From the beginning it was
not so. But whatsoeuer is contrary to the
first institution of marriage as it was in the
beginning appointed of God is adulterie.
For we are not to regard the receiued errour
of the Iewes, but the truth of Iesus
Christ▪ as Ignatius saith ad Philadelp.Vrsinus Doctr. Christ. 2. parte, in 7. praecep. Scopus precepti non maechaberis, est conseruatio castitatis & munitio coniugij. Quicquid ergò facit ad castitarem & muniendum coniugium, hâc Jege praecipitur, contrarium prohibetur. Sub adulterio prohibentur omnia vitia castitati contraria, & corum cognatae species, causae, occasiones, effectus, antecedentia, consequentia. Antiquitas
mea Iesus Christus est. My antiquitie
is Iesus Christ. And S. Ambrose: de virginibus:
Nos noua quae Christus non docuit iure
damnamus, quoniam via fidelibus Christus est,
si ergo Christus non docuit quod docemus, nos
illud detestabile iudicamus. Wee doo iustly
condemne all doctrine as noueltie which
Christ hath not taught, because he is the
onely teacher whom the faithful must follow:
if therefore Christ be not the author



of that which is taught, wee adiudge it a
damnable doctrine that is taught. And
Cyprian Lib. 2. Epist. 3. Si solus Christus audiendus
est, nō debemus attēdere quid aliquis antè
nos faciendum putauerit, sed quid qui ante omnes
est Christus prior fecerit ne
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      sequi oportet
hominis consuetudinem sed dei veritatem. If
the sheepe of Christ doo heare his voyce
onely, wee must not bee inquisitiue what
others haue done before vs, but what
Christ which is before all hath appointed
to vs, neither must we follow the customes
of man, but the truth of God. Bigamy was
permitted to the Patriarkes, yet vnlawfull:
so diuorcement to the Iewes, though vnlawfull.
It were very hard if our Sauiour hauing
thus pronounced diuorcement to bee
vnlawfull and repugnant to Gods institution,
should in this text being the next
verse following after, contradict himselfe
and allowe it to be lawful. Thirdly, whereas
they falsifie Moses, as if Moses did tollerate
diuorcement for any cause, saying: Is
it lawfull for a man to put away his wife for any
fault? Our Sauiour doth lay before them
their errour, affirming that Moses in that
place which they alleadge, did not permit
diuorcement for any cause but onely for



one cause, and that cause is heere specified
to be adulterie, where he saith: whosoeuer
(according to Moses his permission) putteth
away his wife except it be for whoordome,
committeth adulterie. And yet he explaineth
that againe saying: that according to
truth he cannot put her away for adulterie,
because he can marry no other, neither
can she marry any other, but both shall be
adulterous. But, for the better satisfying
of your selues, conferre this place of Mathew,
with that of Deuteronomie, which is
the ground of all this disputation, and you
shal finde that the Pharisies haue not dealt
ingenuously, but very falsely.
               The words of Moses are these.Deut. 24. 
                  If a man
take a wife, if so be that she find no fauour in his
eyes because he hath espied some filth in her.
There is the onely cause, hee doth not say
any cause, but one cause, which is filth; but
filth is according to the Hebrew phrase
adulterie, as it appeareth by the fourth
verse of the same Chapter, where whoordome
is called by the generall name of
filth. So these words of our Sauiour are
not onely a farther explanation of that
texte of Deuteronomie which the Pharisies
had corrupted, but also a definitiue



sentence, and positiue point of doctrine,
that diuorcement being so common, was
helde among the hard-hearted Iewes as
lawfull, because it was suffered by Moses,
contrarie to the commandement of God,
and first institution of marriage, which was
from the beginning of the world. Moreouer,
because the Pharisies aske why did
Moses command to giue a Bill of diuorcement
and put her away? and Christ answereth;
Moses did but permit: some Diuines
do grossely mistake the sence thereof, affirming
these words to include partly a commaundement,
according to the words of
the Pharisies, partly a tolleratiō according
to the words of Christ; to wit, a tolleration
onely to put away their wiues, and a commaundement
that if they would vse the libertie
of this tolleration graunted vnto
them, yet that they should first giue a Bill
of diuorcemēt, that all proceedings might
be according to order, but they are deceiued
by reading the vulgar translation, and
other corrupt Interpreters, for they translate
it: Let him write her a Bill of diuorcement;
which translation hath brought
them into this errour. But according to the
Hebrew, Tremelius translateth in this maner:



                  If a man take a wife and shee finde no fauour
in his eyes, because he hath espied filth in
her, in so much that he do giue her a Bill of diuorcement,
&c. Here is no such commaundement,
as let him giue her a Bill; but onely
a supposition, if he doo giue her a Bill of
diuorcement, (because vnlesse the Bill
were first giuen,Vide Chrysost. in Lib. de libel. repud. the diuorcement was not
tollerated) so that Moses is so farre from
commaunding, that he doth not so much as
tollerate it in expresse words, but onely
pèr tacitum consensum, by not forbidding it
expresly, & so supposing such an enormitie
to bee committed according to their
practise; onely he commaundeth this, that
after it is done, if the woman after her departure
marrie an other, that then shee
shall not returne to her first husband againe.
               And, whereas some Diuines take it prò
concesso, as a thing graunted, that the formall
writing a Bill of diuorcement, did ratifie
the diuorcement & make an act lawfull,
it is cleane contrary. You will say
then, if the Bill could not adde strength to
the diuorcement to make it good,L. Ideser, dom. in monte why was
it giuen? S. Augustine answereth, that a
Bill of diuorcement was first deuised to



shewe the Iewes how vngodly a thing diuorcement
was, for as much as it was lawful
for none to write Bills of diuorcement,
but onely the Scribes and learned Doctors
of the Lawe, to whom onely it appertained
by their office, scribere sacras liter as
to write in the holy tongue, and because
it was euen among them held for a crucell
and vnnaturall fact for a man to put away
his wife, and this Bill of diuorcement
could not bee ingrossed suddenly, but
it required time and space: when the
plaintiue resorted to the Scribes office to
haue the Bill drawne, the Scribe was
first to lay open to the partie grieued the
vnlawfulnesse of such proceedings, and
to perswade him by all meanes to desist
from so badde a purpose, and bee reconciled
to his wife againe, and to take better
deliberation, and repaire to the office some
other time, to trie if the partie grieued
could by such delayes be better aduised in
colde bloud. But if so be that hee continued
obstinate and vntractable, that his
hatred towards his wife could not be pacisied;
then of two euils the least was chosen,
to auoyd a greater mischiefe: rather
then the Iewe should murther his wife, it



was vltimum refugium, the onely refuge
left, to giue a Bill of diuorcement. Tremelius
in his notes vpon this place, obserueth
these foure things: First, that this tolleratiō
of which we spake, did extend onely to
that time present, when they were in the
wildernesse, and not to be endured after
they should liue vnder a setled estate in the
land of Canaan, because it is written in the
fourth verse of that Chapter, Thou shalt not
suffer the land to sinne, which the Lord shall
giue thee to inherit; so that there was an
inhibition or restraint against Iosue and his
successors that they should suffer no diuorcements.
The second, that this fact
was euen then manifestly condemned by
Moses when it was permitted, because hee
saith in the 4. verse: The woman which is
put away and marrieth an other, is polluted
by the fact of her husband which did
put her away, and so giue her occasion to
marry an other, and that is abhomination
in the sight of the Lord. The third, that
diuorcement is as vnlawfull as poligamy
or marriage of many wiues, of which
neither haue any warrant out of the
word, but that the Iewes liuing then
not by precept but by example, not of



the godly,Gen. 4. but of the wicked, learned poligamy
of their fathers, of which the first was
Lamech, and diuorcement of the Aegyptians,
which were Infidels. The fourth, this
tolleration of Moses was not in regard of
Gods people in generall, but onely of the
Iewes in particular, which could not by any
arguments be perswaded to renounce the
poligamy of their auncestors, or diuorcement
of the Aegyptians.
               Hauing spoken of the analogy of this
place in particular, to shewe that the purpose
of our Sauiour Christ was to disanull
diuorcement: I come to the analogy of
faith in generall, to shew what faith it selfe
hath taught vs to beleeue concerning this
question. Whosoeuer putteth away his wife,
&c. which words giue me occasion to define
diuorcement, and to shewe what it is
for a man to put away his wife. In which
definition I must followe the example of
Aristotle, which defined the things which
were not. For when hee hadde shewed
howe impossible it was, that there
should be either vacuum or infinitum, yet
defined them both, onely supposing those
things to bee, which the nature of things
doth not afforde. In like maner I say:



                  Diuortium est non ens; diuorcement is a
thing which is not, nor cannot bee, and
that the Iewes did diuorce their wiues
onely in their grosse imaginations, because
being put away, yet they continued their
wiues, and their seperation was breach of
wedlocke, euen as in the story of Elisaeus,
they which came to apprehend the Prophet
were strooken with blindnesse, so that
when they thought they were at Dothan,
                  2. Reg. 6. Gen. 3. 8. Ionas. 1.
their eyes being opened they found that
they were in Samaria: and as Adam, when
he thought to hide himselfe from God in
the thicket, was still in his presence: and as
Ionas thought himselfe safe from daunger
by flying to Tharsis, when he was most in
ieopardie: so they thinke themselues innocent
by giuing Bills of diuorcement, when
they liue in adulterie and are nocent; but
supposing that to bee which cannot bee, I
will define diuorcement out of the scriptures,
to prooue that there can be no diuorcement.
Our Sauiour saith: Whom God
hath ioyned let no man seperate. In which
words, is conteined the definition of diuorcement,
Diuortium est seperatio viri &
coni
                        •
                     gis authoritate humanâ qui coniuncti sūt
authoritate diuinâ. Diuorcement is a seperation



of man and wife by the law of man,
which are ioyned together by the lawe of
God. But that is an impossibilitie that man
should make a nullitie of that which God
will haue to continue firme and stable, that
man should vndoo, & make to be of no validitie,
which God doth ratifie & make to
stand good: that mans errour should make
an vnitie to be a number, an indiuisible
thing to be diuided, truth to be no truth,
marriage to be no marriage, something to
be nothing, set thē at libertie which in nature
do, & must continue bound. Our Sauiour
Christ hath thus defined diuorcemēt
as you haue heard, and out of his owne definition
of diuorcement, hath argued to
prooue that there can be no diuorcement;
and if ye will stand to the definition of our
Sauiour Christ, you must confesse that
there can be no diuorcement.
               The same may also be prooued by the
definition of marriage,Lo
                        •
                     o com▪ de cōiugio. which Melancthon
defineth in this maner. Matrimonium est
legitima & in dissolubilis coniunctio vnius maris
& vnius faeminae. Marriage is a lawfull
and indissoluble ioyning together of one
man and one woman. But, if marriage
be such a coniunction as is not capable of



any dissolution as he tearmeth it:Loco com▪ de diuortio. hee forgetteth
himselfe in the next tract after,
where hee affirmeth that for adulterie a
man may put away his wife and marry an
other, that if a man bee boysterous, froward,
cyclopicall, barbarous to his wife,
if hee bee crabbed, rogish, the wife
may put him away and marry an other:
that if hee neglect his family, the Magistrate
may warrant her to marry an other.
Others doo define marriage to the
same effect as Melancthon did, but in
more wordes: That marriage is a lawfull
and perpetuall ioyning together of man
and wife by the consent of them both,
for the begetting of children, auoyding
fornication, and mutuall comfort. In
which definition, the materiall cause of
marriage is man and woman, the finall
cause mutuall comfort, procreation, auoydance
of sin: the efficient cause the mutuall
consent of them both, but the formal cause
which is the very nature, essence, and life of
the same, is their lawfull and perpeutal ioyning
together, but whatsoeuer is to a man
perpetuall, is during life: these thinges
being so, it cannot stand with faith that
marriage should bee dissolued,Rom. 7. 2. the parties



liuing. The Apostle saith therefore:
The woman which is in subiection to the
man, is bound by the law to the man while
he liueth, but if the man be dead, she is deliuered
from the law of the man; in which
words hee sheweth how the knot of marriage
cannot be vntied but by death.1. Cor. 7. 16 And
to the married I commaund, not I, but the
Lord: let not the wife depart from her
husband, but if shee depart, let her remaine
vnmarried, or be reconciled vnto her husband:
In which words, where hee saith:
first, let not the wife depart, secondly, if she
depart, let her remaine vnmarried; he intimateth
two maner of departures, the first,
is a vinculo, a rupture of the knot of marriage:
the second a mensâ & thoro, from bed
and boord; the first he saith may not bee,
because it is contrary to the institution of
marriage; the second, if vnhappily it followe,
that for the incontinencie of the one
partie, the other partie be grieued and
cannot be reconciled vnlesse they depart,
yet that departure be but for a season, vntil
they can be reconciled againe, and that is
no diuorcement. For there are three departures
from the marriage bedde which
are lawfull, two priuate, the third publike:



the first with the consent of both parties,1. Cor. 7. 5.
one dispensing with the other, where the
Apostle saith: Defraud not one an other, except
it be with consent for a time, that yee may
giue your selues to fasting and prayer, and againe
come together, least Sathan tempt you
for your incontinencie. The second, in case
of necessitie, it is lawfull for the man to dispense
with himselfe, as if the woman be infected
with a contagious disease, that hee
cannot doo the office of an husband without
manifest daunger of his life, and it is no
fraude because it is not voluntarie. The
third, if the wife be an adulteresse woman,
because it is a publike scandall, he may by
the publike magistrate be seperated from
his wife for her chastisement vntill shee
shew manifest tokens of amendment. And
yet as the Magistrate must be very sparing
to interpose his authoritie in such a case,Tho. Aqui. in 1. Cor. 7. as
to enter betweene the barke and the tree:
so againe, there be seuen exceptions which
debarre the Magistrate from graunting any
seperation from bedde and boord, although
incontinencie be euidently prooued:
as, if the woman be inforced by violence
not giuing consent,Gen. 24▪
                   as Dinah was: if
by plaine and simple ouersight shee bee



deceiued,Gen. 29. taking one for an other, as Iacob
was when Laban put Leah in his bedde in
steed of Rachel: if the woman by great
presumptions in lawe, and the generall
view of the world, supposing her husband
by his long absence to be dead, doo by
publike allowance without guilt of conscience
marry an other: if her husbande
himselfe be consenting to her adultery, as
Sara gaue her maide Agar to lie with Abram,
                  Gen. 16.
for then it is his fault as well as hers:
if hee by refusing to accompany with her
hath abused her weaknesse and so giuen
her occasion to fall, he cannot with a good
conscience be a plaintiue against her: if he
knowing his wife to bee incontinent do
beare with her for the present time, hee
ought not afterward to complain, because
lawe doth suppose a reconciliation & forgiuenesse
of the crime, and after forgiuenesse
there ought to bee no punishment.
But the greatest occasion is this: if the woman
be able to plead compensatiō against
her husband;Iohn. 8. that is, if he haue bene incontinent
as well as she, as our Sauiour wrote
with his finger in the dust concerning the
woman taken in the act of adulterie: Hee
which will throwe the first stone at her



must be guiltlesse himselfe.Grat. decret▪ pars ricausa 32. The Canon
lawe saith:quaest. 6. 
                  Nihil iniquius quàm fornicationis
causâ dimittere vxorem qui & ipse cōuincitur
fornicari,cap. 1. ex Aug. dè ser. in monte. occurrit enim illud: qui alterū
iudicas teipsum condemnas. Qua propter
quisquis vult fornicationis causâ dimittere
vxorē,cap. 8. prior debet esse à fornicatione purgatus.
                  Rom. 8.
Nothing can lesse stand with iustice then
that an adulterer should put away an adulteresse,
for in iudging her, according to the
rule of the Apostle he condemneth himselfe;
therfore he which wil accuse his wife,
must first looke well that he be cleare himselfe.
Againe:Ro. cap. 
                        •
                     . 
                  Quales vultis vxores vestras
inuenire, tales sitis & vos, intactam quaeris, intactus
esto, puram quaeris, noli esse impurus. Be
to your wiues as you will that they shal be
to you; will you haue them continent,
your selues must be chaste; he which will
haue his wife to be Sara, himselfe must be
Abraham; he which will haue his wife to be
Rebecca, himselfe must be Isaac; he which
will haue his wife to bee Rachel, himselfe
must bee Iacob; hee which will haue his
wife to bee Elizabeth, himselfe must bee
Zachary. And I counsell all hard-hearted
husbands, which seeke diuorcement
from their wiues, to consider if they themselues



haue not bene some occasion of that
euill which they lay to their charge? whether
compensation may iustly be pleaded
against them or not? and to remember the
story of Iudah,
                  Gen. 3
                        •
                     . which iudged his daughter
in lawe Thamar worthy of death for playing
the harlot, whom he himselfe had defiled,
not knowing her because her maske
was on her face, but vpon the sight of a
cloake, a staffe and a ring which hee had
left with her, confessed her to be more
righteous then himselfe. But none of these
seperations which I haue rehearsed, can vntie
the knot of matrimonie, neither are
they to bee intended to continue for euer,
but for a time, therefore they are no diuorcement.
S. Chrysostome saith:Lib. de libello repudij. 
                  Ne mihi
leges ab exteris cōditas legas praecipientes dari

                        •
                     ibellum repudij, & diuell
                        •
                     . Ne
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      enim iuxta
illas iudicaturus est te Deus, in illâ diè quâ vē
                     turus
est, sed secundùm suas, vt ipse statuit. In

                        •
                     pso formationis modo legem induxit quam ego
nùnc scribo. At quaenam illa est? Haec vti
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                     :
Eam sibi quis
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      vxorem seruet semper quam
initio sortitus est, haec lex antìquior est, quam
illa dè libello repudij, & in tantùm quantùm
Adam ipso Mose. Doo not tell me of mens
new lawes concerning diuorcement, but



of Gods olde lawe concerning marriage,
for God at the day of iudgement shall not
iudge thee according to the lawe which
man hath deuised, but according to that
which his selfe hath commaunded. But the
positiue lawe which God prescribed to
man in his creation was this, that hee
should during life cleaue vnto that wife
which he hath at the first taken vnto him.
And that lawe of marriage is by so much
more auncient then this of diuorcement, as
innocencie is before sinne, and Adam before
Moses. Againe: Quemadmodum serui
fugitini etiamsi domum herilem relinquant,
catenam secum habent attrahentem: it à &
mulieres etiamsi viros relinquant, legem habēt
prò catenâ se p
                        •
                     rsequentem, & adulterij accusantē,
accusantem etiam recipientes. As when
a seruant runneth from his M. the chaine
of bondage doth pursue him, and bring
him backe againe to his maister, so when a
woman leaueth her husband, the lawe of
Matrimony is as a chaine to draw her back
againe to her husband, to lay adultry to her
charge for her departure, and adultery to
their charge which shall receiue her.
               In which words he speaketh plainly, it is
adulterie for man and wife to depart, and



it is adulterie for them to marry againe.
Moreouer: Mulier quàm diu vixerit maritus
subdita est legi, quae autèm subdita est legi,
etiamsi millies libellum repudij det, adulterij
ligabitur lege. The woman is bound
by the lawe to the man while hee liueth,
but shee which is bounde by the lawe,
shall bee an adultresse by the lawe, if shee
leaue her husband, notwithstanding a
thousand Bills of diuorcement.
            
            
               Concerning the second proposition, that
hee which hath put away his wife can
marrie no other while she liueth.
               The second followeth the first as a necessarie
consequent, because a man cannot
put away his wife, he cannot marrie an other.
For, numerosum coniugium, multitude
of wiues is not permitted, no man may bee
the husband of two wiues. The grounds
are laid downe alreadie in the handling of
the first proposition, so that it shal be sufficient
in the second to answere the reasons
of them which maintain cōtrary doctrine,
and because in so short a scantling I cannot
touch them all, I will speake of some. The
differences of opinions which they hold



are these; some, that the man by priuiledge
of his Sexe may marry againe, but the woman
may not: others, that the partie innocent
may marry, but the nocent may not:
of which I shall haue fitter occasiō to speake
when I come to the third proposition, and
in the handling of this proposition I will
answere Beza, which alleadgeth 7.Lib de diuortio. reasons
why a man may diuorce his wife for incōtinencie,
& that after diuorcement is graunted,
both the man and the woman, the offended
and the offendor may marry again.
               His first argumēt is this: Christ being asked
what he held concerning that diuorcement,
which in his daies was in vse & practise
among the Iewes, which was not only
a seperation frō bed and boord, but also a
dissolution of the knot of marriage, that libertie
was giuē to marry againe? answered,
that in case of adultery it was lawfull. To
which I answere, that as Beza alleadgeth, so
our sauiour Christ did speak of that diuorce
mēt, which was thē practised & vnderstood
to be a dissolution of marriage, & intended
that they might marry againe. But how did
our Sauiour speake of it? not affirmatiuely,
but negatiuely, as before I shewed;
so that this argument is a fallacie called



                  petitio principij, and he disputeth ex non coucessis,
taking that as graunted which from
the beginning we haue denied: he vnderstandeth
the answer of our sauiour to be affirmatiue,
which is negatiue: to be particular,
which is vniuersall: to be hypotheticall,
which is categoricall: to containe but two
propositiōs, which comprehendeth three,
and so constereth this text contrary to the
analogy of faith, and of this place, contrary
to the iudgement of the soundest Fathers,
the Canon lawe, the practice of Christ his
Church, from the Apostles vntill his owne
time, yea contrary to the nature of wedlock,
to the expresse words of our Sauiour, as I
haue shewed.Grat decret 2. pars. 32. causa. 7 quaest. 1. & 2. cap Aug. de bono coniugali▪ cap 7. The Lawe saith: Interueniente
diuortio, non abeletur cōfaederatio nuptialis,
it a vt si coniuges sint seperati, cùm illis
adulterium committant, quibus etiam fuerint
post repudium copulati. They which are seperated
remaine man and wife after seperation,
and they liue in adulterie if they
marrie other, because the knot of marriage
abideth firme.Dè adult. con
                        •
                     ug. li. 2. cap. 4. Againe saith S. Augustine,
euen as he which hath once receiued the Sacrament
of baptisme, cannot be vnbaptized againe
while he liueth; so they which haue entred
into the holy estate of marriage, cannot be



vnmarried againe while they liue. And as
one Councell saith:Concil. 
                  placuit secundum euangelicam
& apostolicam doctrinam,Mil
                           •
                        uitan cap. 17. vt ne
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      dimissus
àb vxore nèc dimissa à marito, alteri cō
                     iungantur,
sèd it à maneant, aut sibi reconcilientur.
It is the doctrine of the Apostles
and Euangelistes, that neither the man nor
the woman which are parted, shall marry
againe, but either refraine from marriage,
or reconcile themselues one to the other.
Neither must they beeing reconciled, bee
married a new as some of late haue practised
among vs, because the knot being not
broken the first marriage is firme.
               His second obiection: that it is iniustice
to punish the innocent for the nocent:
but if when diuorcement is graunted,
yet the plaintiue which hath sued the
diuorce, shall be restrained from marriage,
he must either be in daunger of burning in
lust, because he cannot containe, or else be
compelled to receiue again his adulterous
wife which was diuorced: then is it all one
as if there had bene no diuorcement. So
Augustines answere is:Ad Pollentium. lib. 2. cap. 10. 
                  Lex diuina non est
mutanda proptèr querelas hominum, si querelas
incontinentium velimus admittere, necesse
est quamplurima adulteriae permittere. Mans



complaint of iniustice must not alter the
law of God. And if the Magistrates eares
shall bee open to such complaintes, the
high way shall bee laide open to incontinent
liuers. Innocentius hath sayd well to
the purpose, a woman may bee long sicke
of an infectious disease, which crosse is remedilesse,
why cannot the husband as
well conteine in case of adulterie as of sicknesse?
and where Beza replieth that the
case is different betweene a diseased
person whom the hand of God hath afflicted,
and one which by adulterie hath
made a voluntarie breach of wedlocke:
that is no replye, because in respect of
the plaintiue which hath not the gift
of continencie the gift is all one, and
yet sometimes it falleth out, that women
haue daungerous infections, not
onely by the hand of GOD, but also
by theyr owne misdemeanour of themselues.
               The third,1. Cor. 7. is an allegation of the Apostle:
He which cannot abstaine, must marry,
but a man which is seperated from his wife
may want chastitie, and therefore must marry.
I answere S. Paul out of S. Paul, hee
which cannot containe let him marry, but



let him marry in the Lord, nubat in domino,
not otherwise, but he cannot marry in the
Lord which is married alreadie; hee cannot
take a second wife which is not freed
from the first: therefore if he cannot containe,
let him bee reconciled to his wife,
that is a present remedie against fornication.
               The fourth: hee asketh (whereas S.
Augustine saith the man is bound to forgiue
his wife vppon repentance) what if
her repentance bee but fayned? and
what if after forgiuenesse there bee a
relapse into adulterye againe? why
should a Christian bee bounde to such
an inconuenience? I answere, that whereas
hee thinketh it an hard condition for
a man to forgiue his wife vppon repentance,
beeing not assured whether shee
repent vnfainedly or no; nor resolued
whether shee will afterwarde remaine
chaste or no: The like may bee obiected
against them which are excommunicated
by the keyes of the Church, which
shewing themselues penitent doo craue
absolution, and to bee receiued againe
into the congregation of the faithfull:
hee which is to pronounce absolution cannot



iudge of the contrition of the inward
man, and yet hee must absolue, and leaue
the rest to God, which knoweth the secrets
of the heart. Man can goe but by
outward appearance, and in charitie hope
the best. So must a man doo by his wife;
We must not negare lapsis paenitentiam, dispaire
of them that fall, because they may
arise againe.Mat. 18. Christ beeing asked by Peter
how often a man must forgiue his brother?
answered, seuentie times seuen, but
if a brother, much more a wife. Therefore
saith S. Augustine:Adpoll. l 2. Durum tibi videtur
adulteri coniugi reconciliari?cap. 6. & 
                           •
                        . durum non erit
si fides adsit. Cur adhùc deputamus adulteros
vèl baptismo lotos vel paenitenta sanatos?
Doth it seeme an hard condition to thee
to be reconciled to thy adulterous wife? If
it seeme difficult, then faith is wanting:
where is charitie, if we condemne them
still to bee adulterous which are cleansed
by the water of baptisme, and washed by
the teares of repentance? He rendereth a
reason of this doctrine. In the olde Lawe
men were frobidden to receiue such women
as were polluted by adulterie, beeing
so hainous offence as it could not be cleansed
by sacrifice, but vnder the new Testament



by the bloud of Christ,1. Sam. 18. which is a
more worthy sacrifice then all the rest, all
offences are forgiuen, and therefore Dauid
as a figure of the new Testament receiued
Saules daughter an adulterous woman; and
since,Iohn. 8. Christ hath said to the woman, I will
not condemne thee, sinne no more; Quis
non videt ignoscere debere maritum cui ignouisse
videt Dominum? shal not the husband
forgiue her whom Christ hath forgiuen?
or esteeme her as polluted whom the
bloud of Christ hath cleansed? Quibus hoc
Christi factum displicet, hos non seueros castitas
fecit, sed ipsi aegroti medicum reprehendunt,
in adulteros adulteri saeuiunt. They which
like not of this iudgement of Christ, are
not so seuere against others because themselues
are chaste, but themselues beeing
sicke, mislike their phisition; and punish
adultery, being adulterous themselues; like
the men which brought the woman to our
Sauiour to be stoned, their selues being offenders.
I aske saith he, whether it bee
lawful to put her to death by the law of the
Romanes, or to put her away by the lawe
of God? Si licet, melius est vt ab vtro
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      se
temperet, & a licito illâ peccante supplicio, &
ab illicito illâ viuente coniugio, quum eni
                        ••
                     


                     
vtrum
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      secundum legam Christi sit illicitum,
siuè adulteram occidere, siuè illâ viuente aliam
ducere, ab vtro
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      est abstinendum, nec illicitum
prò illicito faciendum. If it be lawfull to doo
either, yet is it better to do neither of thē.
Not to do all which in extremitie we may,
but to abstaine frō that lawful punishment
when she offendeth, & this vnlawfull marriage
while she liueth. But seeing both are
vnlawfull by the law of Christ, which neither
determineth that adulterie should be
punished with death, neither alloweth a
man to marry againe while the adulteresse
liueth; both are to be forborne, and one
sinne is not to be requited with an other.
               The fi
                     •
                  t: If the husband may not put
away his wife for adulterie and marry an
other, then must the gap be opened to dishonestie,
and a chaste man must will he, nil
he, be subiect to an harlot. That which he
alleadgeth against vs, maketh most of all
for vs, the restraining of marriage after diuorcement
is so farre from giuing occasion
to be vnchaste, as it keepeth many within
the bounds of chastitie, which otherwise
would not containe: for who seeth not that
if they which bee diuorced may marry againe,
when husbands and wiues are weary



one of an other, they will confesse adultry
that they may be diuorced & mary others?
               The sixt,Concil. Aulatensis can. 10. is a decree of an aunciēt Councel,
that such mē as take their wiues in adulterie,
themselues being chaste, and are prohibited
to marry others should be perswaded
to refraine while their wiues are liuing.
This also maketh for vs, for the fathers in
that councell were so farre from allowing
the second marriage, that they withstood
it two wayes, praecepto & consilio, both by
commaundement, and also by aduice: by
commaundement, because they say by
lawe it was prohibited: by aduice, because
they vsed perswasion to the contrary,
hauing power of themselues by their
decree to haue made it lawfull, had they
not held it according to the word of God
to be vnlawfull.
               The last,Epiph. co
                        •
                     
                     tra Cathores. is the authoritie of Epiphanius,
saying: that if a man marry a second
wife, his first beeing diuorced, hee is
not subiect to the censure of the Church,
so as hee conuerse but with one, and
forsake the company of the other: but
in such case his frailtie is tollerated. In
which words, what doth Epiphanius say
more then wee haue saide already, that



the Church hath sometimes tolerated thē
which haue put away one wife and married
an other: which practise if it were honest,
and iust, & consonant to Gods word,
what needed a tolleration? Moses had not
bene said to haue tollerated diuorcement,
other Magistrates vsurie, other stewes, other
drunkennesse, if these things had bene
lawfull.
               As for Melancthon which affirmeth that
if the husband be vnkinde to his wife, and
neglect the care of his family, the Christian
Magistrate may warrant her to marry an
other: his assertion is like the charters of
great Princes, which write teste meipso, witnesse
my self. For soundnesse of reason, testimony
of scriptures, grounds of diuinitie,
he can haue none in the fauour of so monstrous
an opinion, neither doth he alledge
any. If he haue any shewe of proofe to
ground his absurditie vpon, it can bee but
this.1. Tim. 5. 
                  He which careth not for his family hath
denied the faith.
                  1. Cor. 7. And if the vnbeleeuing
husband will needes depart, let him, for
a brother or sister is not subiect in such
things. But these words were concerning
such as were married, during the time of
their infidelitie before they were cōuerted



to the faith; of which sort we haue none
in Christian Common-wealthes; and yet
not so as if an vnbeleeuing husband could
be forced by the Magistrate to depart;
onely if he will depart saith the Apostle,
let him depart, but if hee bee content to
dwell with her, she must not forsake him:
and still this conclusion standeth firme, if
he do depart, so long as his wife liueth hee
may not marry.
            
            
               Of the third proposition, the woman which
is diuorced may not marry.
               Whosoeuer marrieth her which is diuorced
committeth adulterie. It followeth then,
that she remaineth stil his wife from whom
she was diuorced, else it were no adulterie
for a man to marry her, and if shee remaine
his wife, then is he still her husband, notwithstanding
the seperation, therefore it is
no diuorcement.De adule, Coniug. li. 1. cap. 11. So saith Augustine: Illud
qui dimissam duxerit maechatur, quo modo verum
esse potest? nisi quia ea quam duxit vxor,
aliena est priori marito à quô dimissae est adhuc
viuenti? sienim suae, non alienae vxori miscetur,
tùm non maechatur, at maechatur, ergo aliena
est cui miscetur, si antèm aliena est, tùm non



                  cessat illius essa vxor à quo dimissa est, si autem
cessat, tum huius alterius est cui nupsit, et si huius,
tùm non maechus iudicandus est sed maritus.
That saying of our Sauiour: hee that
marrieth her which is diuorced commiteth
adultry: how can it be true? vnlesse because
the woman which he hath married, is an other
mans wife: that is, his from whom she
was diuorced, so long as he liueth? for if he
marry no mans wife but his owne, then is it
no adultery: but it is adultery, therefore
shee is an other mans wife, and not his
owne, else he could not be iudged an adulterer,
but her lawfull husband.Chrysost. de lib. re. pudij. 
                  Seruis
quidèm licet mutare dominos viuentes, vxori
autem non licebit viros commutare viuentes,
alioqui adulterium perpetrabit.
                  
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     
                   A seruant
hath more libertie in the bondage
of his seruice, then a woman in the freedome
of her wedlocke, hee may chaunge
maisters, shee may not chaunge husbands,
while her first husband liueth. Secundae
nuptiae priore marito viuente pollutio sunt
non matrimonium. For if shee take an other
husband she is defiled, but she is not married.
If then he which marrieth her that is diuorced
cōmitteth adultery, why doth Beza
allow her to marry? His answere is: Whosoeuer



marrieth her which is diuorced, vnlesse
she be diuorced for adultery, committeth
adultery by marrying her, but if
she be diuorced for adulterie she may lawfully
marry. By which answere doo but
vouchsafe to take knowledge of the great
inconueniences which shall bee brought,
and burdens which shall be laide vppon a
Christian kingdome. They which be married,
wil vpon their discontentments commit
fornication that they may be vnmarried,
then it will bee no more then this:

                     
                        〈◊〉
                      fatuū fateor, quem calceus vrget et vxnor,
If a mans shooe pinch him, no more but
goe to the shoomakers shop and buy a new
paire of shooes: if a mans wife grieue him, a
present remedy, to go to the church & mary
a new wife. And thē shal the questiō be,
who shal keep the children? S. Augustine is
of a cōtrary iudgemēt to Beza.De adult. coniugijs. lib. 1. cap. 9. Qui dicimus:
Qui mulierem praetèr fornicationém dimissam
ducit maechatur, nō ideò maechari negamus qui
eāducit quae proptèr fornicationē dimissa est, vter
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                     
enim est maechus, qui ob fornicationem dimittit
& aliam ducit, & etiàm qui citrà fornicationem
dimittit & aliam ducit, non enim
ex hoc alter maechus negatur quoniam alter
maechus exprimitur. Wee which say, hee is



an adulterer which marrieth her which is
diuorced, vnlesse she be diuorced for adulterie:
doo not therefore denie but he is an
adulterer also which marrieth her that is
diuorced for adulterie, for they are both
adulterers, whether it be for fornication or
not: if they marrie her which is put away.
For the affirmation of the one to be an
adulterer, is not a denial but that the other
also is an adulterer. Although saith he, S.
Mathew by expressing one adulterer, and
concealing the other, hath made it hard to
vnderstand, yet other Euangelists speaking
in a generalitie haue made it plaine, that it
is to be vnderstood of both, because Marke
saith:M
                        •
                     c. 10. 11. 
                  Whosoeuer shall put away his wife and
marry another, committeth adulterie against
her: and if a woman put away her husband
and marrie an other,Luc. 16. 18. she committeth adultery.
And S. Luke hath the same. Qui ergo not
sumus vt dicamus: Est qui maechatur vxore
dimissa alteram ducens, & est qui hoc faciens
non maechatur, quū euangèlium dicat omnem
maechari qui hoc facit? Who is man that hee
should distinguish more subtilly then the
holy Ghost hath distinguished? saying:
some men which put away their wiues and
marry are adulterers, and others are not,



when S. Marke and S. Luke being expositors
of S. Mathew, shewe that all are adulterers
which marry them which are put away,
bee the cause of their diuorcement
whatsoeuer? Neither can this answere of
Beza satisfie, that in Geneua adultery is punished
with death, and so all controuersies
are ended; for then what needeth diuorcement?
If when the man hath put away his
wife for adultery, the Magistrate doo put
her to death, the case is cleare, he may marry
againe: not because shee is diuorced,
but because she is dead. But many Christian
Lands haue no such lawe as to punish
adulterie with death, neither are Christians
bound to take examples by Iewes and
Turkes which did, and do the same. The
lawe of the Gospell hath imposed no such
commaundement vpon vs, but euery kingdome
hath Christian libertie to establish
such ciuill lawes, as the wisedome of the
land shall see fit for the state to beare. It
doth not make against vs that by the lawe
of God adultery was punished with death
among the Iewes, no more then that by
the Iawe of God, theft was not punished
with death among the Iewes, but with restitution
of foure and fiue-folde. It was



not lawfull among the Iewes to gather the
glaynings of their owne haruest,Ex. 22. 1. nor to let
the bodies of them which are hanged to
hang all night to sowe two sorts of graine
together as Wheat and Rye in one field,Leuit. 19. 9
for Christians these things are lawful.Deut. 21. 23. God
gaue three lawes vnto the Iewes, one moral
which remaineth stil in force among all
nations the second ceremoniall, which was
abrogated by the death of Christ: the third
iudiciall for ciuill gouernment, which did
belong to the Iewes only but punishment
of adultery with death was a part of the iudiciall
lawe, and therefore bindeth not vs
to obey it which be Christians. But S. Hierome
saith:Ad Amandum presbyterum. 
                  Omnes occasiones Apostolus amputaens

                        •
                     partè definit viu
                        •
                     nte viro adulteram
asse mulierem si alteri nupserit. The Apostle
preuenteth all qu
                     ••
                  kes and euasions,
setting it downe as a positiue doctrine, that
what woman soeuer marrieth while her
first husband liueth, she committeth adultery:Ad Apollēt. li. 2. cap. 4.
And S. Angustine: Licitè dimittitur
coniux proptèr causam fornicationis, sed manet
vinculū prioris proptèr quod reus sit adulterij
qui dimissam duxerit, etiā ob causam fornicationis.
                  Canon. apost. 47.
A woman may bee seperated
from her husband for fornication, but still



shee is his wife, and he which marrieth her
committeth adultry, although she were put
away for fornication. In so great a cloude
of witnesses of our side, wee may bebolde,
notwithstanding the iudgement
of Beza, and the late writers of the reformed
Churches.
               The Libertines of our age, now liuing,
giue a prerogatiue in this case to the man
aboue the woman, because of the Sexe,
because the one is a man, the other but
a woman; as if the one might marrie,
but not the other, abusing the word of
God to their owne damnation, turning
the grace of God into wantonnesse.Vindiciae contrà tyrannos. Euen
as others will prooue rebellion and
high treason out of the scriptures, that
the people are aboue their King: out of
the scirptures, so will they take libertie
to themselues out of the scriptures, to
maintaine theyr vncleane and licentious
life, as that the man may put away the
woman and not commit adultery in marrying
an other, but the woman may
not doo the like, because, say they, the
man may haue many wiues, but the
woman may not haue many husbandes.
Theyr proofe is the saying of Nathan


                  
to Dauid.
                  
                     
                        •
                     . Sam. 12. Thus sayth the Lord: I annoynted
thee King ouer Israel, deliuered
thee out of the hand of Saule, gaue thee
thy Lordes house, and thy Lordes wiues
into thy bosome, and if that hadde not
beene inough, I would haue giuen thee
such and such things: why then hast thou
taken Vrias his wife? Innocentius the third
maketh answere, that Dauid and the Patriarkes
hadde by particular dispensation
from God, multitude of wiues, and were
excused of poligamy, which wee are not:
euen as Iacob tolde a lye,Gen. 27. the Israelites robbed
the Aegyptians,Ex. 11. 2. 
                  Sampson murthered
the Philistines,Iud. 16. 30. the Leuites compassed the
walles of Iericho,
                  Iosua. 6. 15. with their Trumpets of
Rammes hornes vpon the Sabaoth day,
but wee may not do the like. But saith he:
Christiana religio adulterium in vtro
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      sexu
aquali ratione punit.
                  Innocentius Epist. 3. ad Exeuperiun. De 10 chordis cap. 3. Christian religion punisheth
adulterie in man and woman both
alike. And Augustine: Tu exigis hoc ab vxore
& non vis reddere hoc vxori? Marriage
duties must be kept as well of the man as of
the woman.
               Others there be, which make a distinction
betweene the partie innocent and the
partie nocent; as if the one might marry,



but not the other. But that the partie nocent
may marry as well as the innocent, I
prooue by these foure reasons. The first,
the custome and practise of the Iewish
Church when Moses liued, from whence
the Christians haue learned diuorcement,
Moses saith:Deut. 24. 
                  If a man take a wife, and shee
finde no fauour in his eies, because he hath espied
filthinesse in her, in so much that he doo giue
ger a Bill of diuorcement, and she marry an other,
and her second husband diuorce her in
like maner, or die, let her not returne to her
first husband againe, after shee is defiled. By
which word it is euident, that when Moses
liued, women which were diuorced for
adulterie did marry againe, as well as their
husbands which did diuorce them. The
second, is the set forme of words which the
Iewes at this time doo vse in their Bills of
diuorcement, which is after this manner.
In the sixt of the Sabaoth, the 12. of the
moneth of Adar, the yeare of the creation
of the world, 5306. in the Citie of Cremona,
lying vpon the Riuer of Poe in Italy;
I Samuel Carmin, the sonne of Rabbi Daniel
Saphard, doo of mine owne vuluntarie
motion send away from mee, my wife Rachel,
the daughter of Rabbi Ezra Parizol,


                  
and do giue her free liberty to depart whether
she will, and marry whom she will:
and that there may be no let
                     •
                  e or hinderance
to the contrary:Sixti senensis Biblioth. sanct. lib. 2. ex libro Rabbi Mosis d
                           •
                         Co
                           •
                        i.
                   I haue giuen her
this Bill of diuorcement, subscribed and
sealed according to the constitution of
Moses and Israel, in the presence of these
witnesses: Mardochi Gabriel, Elias Cephat,
Manuel Pandin. The third, the definition
of diuorcement, which is giuen by our Sauiour
Christ in the Gospell: it is a seperating
of them by the lawe of man, which are
linked together by the law of God, which
is as much as the vntying of the knotte of
marriage so that if the knot be vntied, both
are free. The husbād & the wife are relat
                        •
                     ,
one cannot be without the other: if she be
boūd, she is some bodies wife, thē he which
diuorced her is her husband: there cānot be
a wife without an husband, nor an husband
without a wife. The 4. wheras they which
speak in fauour of the party innocent, take
aduantage of the words, & argue thus: He
which putteth away his wife, vnles it be for
fornication, and taketh an other, cōmitteth
adultry▪ therefore if it be for fornication, it
is no adultry. If that kinde of arguing bee
good, I can by the same, prooue that the



partie nocent may likewise marry, & thus
I argue: He which marrieth her which is
diuorced, vnles shee be diuorced for fornication,
committe
                     •
                  h adultry▪ therefore if he
marry her which is diuorced for fornicatiō,
it is no adultry. Thus haue I prooued that
neither man nor woman, nocent nor innocent,
may marry againe: and leauing doctrine,
I come to exhortation.
               S. Paul saith: I am a debter to all,Rom. 
                        •
                     
                   both
to the wise and the vnwise, I haue ministred
already strong meate vnto thē which
are men, I must now giue milk vnto them
which are babes, and do as the Scribe did▪
which when the Iew did demaund of him
a Bill of diuorcement, did disswade him:
So, that I may disswade all that intend it,
and perswade them which haue alreadie
done it, to receiue their wiues into fauour
againe. Iohn the Baptist came in the spirit
of Elias,
                  Mal. 4. to turne the hearts of the fathers
to the children. I pray God that I
may come also in the spirit of Elias and
Iohn the Baptist, to turne, not onely the
hearts of the fathers to the children, but
also the husbandes to theyr wiues: which
dooing, I shall doo a worke of charitie, a
peece of seruice acceptable vnto God.



Why should a man diuorce his wife? why
should hee not vpon her repentance receiue
her againe after shee is put away?
S. Peter w
                     •••
                  eth to all husbandes in this
manner.1. Pat. 
                        •
                     . 7. 
                  Ye husbands, dwell with your wiues
as men of knowledge, giuing honour vnto the
woman as vnto the weaker vessell, euen as
they which are heires together of the grace of
life, that your prayers bee not interrupted▪
                  
In which I obserue the generallitie that
husbands must dwell with their wiues, and
not depart from them: the fiue particulars,
how they must dwell with them; as
men of knowledge. Wherein doth this
knowledge or discretion consist? in giuing
honour to the woman? why should the
man giue honour to the woman? because
shee is the weaker vessell. Why should her
weaknes be so much respected, as that honour
should be giuen to her fragilitie? because
notwithstanding her weaknes & infirmity,
she is an heire & co-heire of saluation
as well as her husband, and therfore he
must respect her as himselfe. What is the
mischiefe and inconuenience which else
may followe? God cannot be well serued
betweene them both, because their praiers
will be interrupted.
               
                  
The Husbandes then must dwell with
their wiues, what that is, it is explaned by
Saint Paul, the best expositor of Saint Peter;
(Be it spoken with circumcised hearts)
The husband (saith Paul) must giue due benevolence
to the wife,1. Cor. 
                           •
                        . & the wife to the husband
                        •
                     
                  
what that is he sheweth afterward, (let no
man thinke that vncleane which the holy
Ghost hath spoken) The wife hath not power
ouer her owne bodie but the man; and the man
hath not power ouer his owne bodie, but the
woman. Againe: Defraude not one an other
except it be for a time, that yee may giue your
selues to fasting and praier, and come together
againe, least sathan tempt you for your incontinency.
To dwell with a mans wife, is to be
an helpe vnto her, as Ioseph was to Mary▪
                  
hee which hath not a care of his familie,1. Tim. 5.
hath denied the faith: but he which forsaketh
the company of his wife, doth neglect
his family two manner of wayes: first
cōcerning thrift, secondly cōcerning good
name and same, because both of them shall
be suspected to be incontinent liuers.
               Husbands must dwell with their wiues
as men of knowledge.Ephe. 5. The man is the womans
head,1. Cor. 11. as Christ is the mans head, and
God is Christs head, the woman is but the



Image of the man, as the man is the Image
of God. But there must needes be more
perfection in the head wherein are all the
senses, vegetation & vnderstanding, thē in
the bodie which hath but vegetatiō & one
only sense, that is feeling; in the body, then
in the shadowe; in the archetypus or first
forme, then in the Image of the same. All
beasts in the old lawe were vncleane, and
vnfit for sacrifice, which did not ruminate
and chewe the cudde: there was represented
discretion, but men must be better thē
are beastes, therefore they must liue discreetly
with their wiues, but a discreet man
will of himselfe cōsider, that by how much
he excelleth his wife in knowledge vnderstanding
and all maner of perfection, so he
ought to conceale many infirmities in the
woman, to deuour, and as it were swallow
vp many indignities which do arise of her
weakenesse. God saith: Hencefoorth my
spirit shall not 
                        〈◊〉
                      with man because bee is
flesh: you 
                     〈…〉
                   set your wit to theirs,
they are but flesh, and you in comparison
of them are spirit. And 
                     •
                  as a belee
                     •
                  ing husband
may sanctifie & 
                     〈◊〉
                   an vnbeleeuing
wife 
                     〈◊〉
                   so discreet man may reforme
an vndiscreet wife, euen as when the bodie



is out of temper, it is in the wisedome of
the head to cure the bodie, and bring the
disordered members into order.
               Husbands must giue honour vnto their
wiues. There is one honour which the inferiour
doth owe to his supeririour,1. Pet. 2. 
                  Feare
God, and honour the King. Another which
superiours owe to their inferiours, and all
one to another,1. Cor. 1
                        •
                     
                     ▪
                   
                  Honour all men. In giuing
honour, goe before one an other. All members
(saith Paule) are not alike, but on those
members which we thinke most dishonest, we
put most honestie on: vpon our vncomely parts
we put most comelines on, for our comely parts
need it not, but God hath tempered the bodie
together, and giuen more honour to the member
that lacketh. And so must husbands do
to their wiues.
               The woman is the weaker vessell, and
the man himselfe is but a vessell, and
notwithstanding his strength hee is but weake.
He doth not say: Giue honour to the 
                     ••
                  
                  man
because she is good, but because she is
weake: not for her vertue, but for her fragilitie:
for your selues are so, or may be so
Brethren saith Paul,Gala▪ 5. 
                           〈◊〉
                        . If a man be suddenly taken
in an offence, you which be spirituall, must
restore such an
                        •
                     one with the spirit of meeknes,



considering 
                        •
                     est thou also be tempted, beare one
an others burden▪ 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      fulfil the law of Christ.
We haue 
                     〈…〉
                   examples of womē which
were 
                     〈◊〉
                   vessels.Gen. 3. The woman was the
first in the preuarication and not the man.
Abraham beleeued the Angell when Sara
laughed.3. Tim. 
                        •
                     . 
                  Lots wife did looke back towards
Sodome,Gen. 18. Lot did not.Gen. 19. 
                  Moses his wife repined
at her childes circumcision, himselfe
did not.Exod. 4. 
                  Sara was so hard h
                     •
                  rted as to turne
Agar out of doores,Gen. 21. 
                  Abraham was not. Iezabel
could without remorse of conscience
set downe the whole plot and proiect how
Naboth should loose his life and his vineyard,1. Reg. 21.
                  Achab could not.Math. 20. The wife of Zebedeus
could audaciously aske of our Sauiour
Christ that her sonnes might sit on his
right hād & his left, her husb̄d could not.
Salomons wiues corrupted him,1. Reg. 21. he corrupted
them not.Iudg. 1
                        •
                     . and 16. 
                  Sampsons wife betraied him,
he betraied not her. Some of these offen
                  
                     ••
                  
were worse thē adultery, yet their husband
did not nourish hatred against them.
               Though they be weake vessells; yet are
they heires of the kingdome of heauen as
well as their husbands.
                     
                        〈…〉
                     
                   Christ was borne
a man,1. Tim. 2. but borne of woman, that he might
sanctifie both man and woman; through



childbirth the woman shalbe saued, if they
continue in the faith, and loue, and holinesse,
with modestie. The word of God
hath giuen precepts of godly life vnto women,
that liuing godlily as did Elizabeth,
Sara, Anna, Rebecca, they might be saued,
The man and wife are to liue together in
the life to come, not as a man and wife, but
as the Angels and Saints in heauen, why
then shal they liue asunder vpon the earth?
               If they liue not together, theyr prayers
shalbe interrupted. This reason alone is
sufficient to compose and qualifie all greeuances
between man & wife. They ought
to pray together, for prayer is a principall
part of Gods seruice; and if they will haue
God to be deuoutly serued, al grudges and
quarrels must be layd aside.Pro. 18. God heareth
not the prayers of them which be sinfull:
no greater sinne then continuall fostering
of hatred and inward malice.Iosua. 
                  Iosua saith, I
and my house will serue the Lord:Luc. 1. Zacharie
and his wife with him walked in the ordinances
of God without reproofe. And it is
the maner of you Citizens when you are
dead, to haue your wiues and your selues
pictured vpon your graues, lifting vp your
hands and praying together. But it is plaine



mockery to be pictured praying together
vpon your graues when you are dead, if so
be that you doo not pray together in your
houses while you are aliue: and therefore
learne by the marble monuments and pictures
of the dead, what yee ought to doo
while ye are aliue.Deut. 
                        •
                     2. I ende with Moses, beseeching
God that my doctrine may be as
the raine, and my speech as the deawe of
heauen and the showre vpon the hearbes,
and as the great raine vpon the grasse, For
I will publish the name of the Lord: giue
ye glory vnto our God. To this God the
Father, the Sonne, and the holy Ghost,
be all power, glory and dominion,
both now and for euermore.
Amen.
               FINIS.
               
            
         
      
   