
      
         
            
               
               The ſignes that doe declare a perſon to be infected with the PESTILENCE.
               
               1 GReat paine and heauineſſe in the head.
               2 Great heat within the body, and the outward parts cold, and ready to ſhake, being thirſty and dry.
               3 Some paine and difficultie in breathing.
               4 Great deſire to ſleepe, and yet cannot, and ſometime is vexed for want of ſleepe.
               5 Swelling in the ſtomacke with much paine.
               6 Diuers and heauie lookes of the eyes, ſeeing all things of one colour, as greene or yellow, and the eyes changed in their colours.
               7 Loſſe of appetite, vnſauorie taſte, bitterneſſe of the mouth, ſowre and ſtinking.
               8 Wambling of the ſtomacke, and a deſire to vomit, and ſometime vomiting humors, bitter, and of diuers colours.
               9 Heauineſſe and dulneſſe in all the body, and a faintneſſe and weakeneſſe in all the limbs.
               10 Riſings in the necke, vnder the arme, or in the flanke, or in ſome other part of the body.
            
            
               Preſeruatiues againſt this Diſeaſe.
               EAte euery morning as much as the kernell of a Nut▪ of this Electuarie which I ſhall keepe alwaies ready for you; or of Treacle mixed with Conſerues of Roſes, or Dioſcordium, the quantity of two white Peaſon. Likewiſe eate ſomething euery morning before you goe abroad, as Butter, Walnuts, Rue, a Potcht-egge with vinegar, or the like.
               Let your chambers be ayred morning & euening with good fires, wherein put luniper, Frankencenſe, Storax, Bay-leaues, Vinegar, Roſe-water, Roſin, Turpentine, Pitch, Tarre, or Brimſtone.
               When you goe abroad, chew in your mouth, the roote of Angelica, Gentian, 
                     •…
                  edoarie, Turmentill, or the like.
               Alſo I haue prepared Tablets to weare about your necke, of which I did ſee great experience the laſt great Sickeneſſe: As alſo Pomanders to ſmell too.
            
            
               Remedies after a perſon is infected.
               1 FIrſt, be carefull with all ſpeed to vſe remedyes betimes, for delay in this ſickeneſſe is dangerous.
               2 Secondly, if the ſickeneſſe begin hot with paine in the head, and the party be of a full body let him be let bloud in the Liuer vaine in the right arme, except he feele any ſoreneſſe, then let him bleed in that arme on the ſide grieued.
               3 Thirdly, foure houres after if he be not let bloud, let him take tenne graines; if it be a Childe vnder 7. yeares old, then take but 5. graines, of this red powder in a little Methridatam, or in the pappe of an Apple, and one houre after, drinke ſome poſſit-Ale, made with Medeſweet and Marigold flowers: keepe the bed, and ſweat two or three houres, according to ſtrength, but refraine from ſleepe next day let him take white powder, one dramme, in the poſſit▪drinke, and ſweat as before▪ doe this three, foure, and fiue dayes: But be ſure he goe to ſtoole once a day.
               In the ſteed of the powders, you may take Methridatum one dramme and a halfe▪ of the beſt London Treacle one dramme; mixe them with Carduus Benedictus, or Angelica, or Scabious waters, or the poſſit-drinke before mentioned, and ſweat well, as before.
               The Methridatam or London▪
                   Treacle, you may haue the beſt that I know, at the ſigne of the Angell, ouer againſt the great Conduit in Cheape-ſide, lames Rand.
               
               4 Fourthly, once in foure or fiue houres, take Broth or Maſe-Ale in poſſit-drinke, wherein boyle as before.
               If he be very dry, let him take of Syrupe of Endiue and Sorrell, of each three ounces; water of Roſes and Bugloſſe, of each one ounce, Syrupe of Lymons, two ounces; mixe them, and let him take as often as he is dry one ſpoonefull.
               5 Fiftly, if any ſore or botch appeare, vſe meanes with ſpeed to draw it forth: as this is very good. Take a great Onion, and cut off the head, and make a hollow place in the middle▪ fill that full of good Treacle, put on the head againe, and roſt it in the embers: when it is ſoft roſted peele it, and ſtampe it in a morter, & lay it hot vnto the ſore, and renew it freſh once in ſixe houres: Or take this Poultes, two Lilly-rootes, Mallowes two handfuls, cut and bruiſe them, Linſeed, foure ſpoonfuls beaten; boyle theſe in water till they be ſoft & thicke, then put to them, 12. Figs, Rayſins ſliced and ſtoned one handfull, mixe & work theſe with the other, in a morter, & put to them oyle of Camomile three ſpoonefuls, warme it, & with a cloth binde it on the ſore, ſhift this twice a day
               When the ſore is broken vſe this, Turpentine one ounce, & the yolke of an egge, oyle of S. Iohn. Wort, Methridatam, of each half a dram, mixe al theſe together, & lay it on the ſoare, this wil heale it
               6 Sixtly, when they are well, before they goe abroad, take a purge.
            
            FINIS.
         
      
   