
      
         
            
            
               A true Copie of a writing Teſtimonial by aucthority deuiſed and commaunded, to ſatisfie the world, and to cleere Zachary Dow, of London Draper and his Children, from the reproach of a hand wryting, falſely compacted and maliciouſly publiſhed in Blackwell Hall and elſe where againſt him, and alſo from that moſt iniurious Clayme of 238. li. vpon the ſame wryting made by one Sara Babington now Sara Gough the wife of Iohn Gough as appeareth.
            
            
               TO all Chriſtian people to, whom this preſent writing ſhall come, Iohn Gough of Hoddeſon in the Countie of Hertford, Gentleman, and Cittizen and Marchanttador of London, and Sara now wife of the ſaid Iohn Gough, and late wife and Adminiſtrator of all and Singuler the Goods Chattells Rights and debts which late were of Edwyn Babington, late Cittizen and Draper of London deceaſed, ſend greeting in our Lord God Euerlaſting. Whereas there was found out a wryting in the nature of a Receipt ſuppoſed to be the hand of Zachary Dow, Citizen and Draper of London▪
                wherein was expreſſely ſet downe, the Somme of two Hundred thirtie eight pounds, little more or leſſe, of lawfull money of England, and the ſaid comme to be the late Queenes money, receiued by the ſaid Zachary Dow, at the handes of the ſaid Edwyn Babington, predeceſſor of me the ſaid Iohn Gough, and late huſband of the ſaid Sara, who by vertue and force of the Adminiſtration aforeſaid, made clayme as her right, to the ſaid wryting in the nature of a Receipt, and to the ſomme of money mencioned in the ſame, which ſaid wryting is now loſt & cannot be found. Now know yee therefore that we the ſaid Iohn Gough and Sara wife of the ſaid Iohn Gough, hauing duly weighed and conſidered the inualidity of the ſaid writing in nature aforeſaid, do for vs and either of vs, our Heires, Executors, adminiſtrators, and aſſignes, and euery of vs for euer, vtterly diſclayme the ſame and the ſomme of money, therein conteyned, and euery part thereof. And alſo (not noely) acquit, exonerate and diſcharge the ſaid Zachary Dow, his heires executors, and adminiſtrators, and euery of them for euer, of, for, and from all indempnity, incombrance, moleſtation Contumely, & impeachment whatſoeuer which may from vs, either, or any of vs, if it ſhould hereafter be found, be inferred or inflicted vppō the ſaid Zachary dow▪
                his executors, adminiſtrators, or aſſignes or any of them. But alſo bynde our ſelues and either of vs our heires executors, adminiſtrators, and aſſignes and euery of vs vnto the ſaid Zachary Dow, his heires, executors, adminiſtrators and aſſignes, firmely by thieſe preſents, inſtantly to deliuer or cauſe to be deliuered vnto the ſaid Zachary Dow, his executors or aſſignes the ſaid wryting in nature aforeſaid, (if the ſame happen to be found at any time hereafter) without any fraude or further delay.
            
               In witnes whereof we the ſaid Iohn Gough and Sara wife of the ſaid Iohn Gough, haue herevnto ſet our hands and ſeales the Eight and twentith day of Nouember▪
                      in the Eight yeere of the Raigne of our Soueraigne Lord, Iames by the grace of God King of England, Fraunce, and Ireland▪
                      Defendour of the faith &c. And of Scotland, the foure and fortith 1610
               
            
            
               7 Pſal: 14 Verſe.
               
                  Behold he ſhall trauaile with wickednes:
                  For he hath conceiued miſchiefe,
                  But he ſhall bring forth a lye.
               
            
         
      
   