
      
         
            
            
            LECTVRES
ON THE XV.
PSALME:
Read in the Cathedrall Church of
S. Paule, in London.
            Wherein besides many other very profitable and
necessarie matters, the question of Vsurie is
plainely and fully decided.
            By GEORGE DOVVNAME, Doctor
of Diuinitie.
            Whereunto are annexed two other Treatises
of the same authour, the one of Fasting,
the other of Prayer.
            LONDON,
Printed by Adam Islip for Cuthbert Burbie,
and are to be sold in Paules Church-yard
at the signe of the Swan.
1604.
         
         
            
            
            TO THE MOST HIGH
AND MIGHTY KING, IAMES
BY THE GRACE OF GOD KING
of great Brittaine, Fraunce and Ireland, defender
of the Faith, &c.
            
               YOVR Maiesties gracious
acceptance of
my Treatise concerning
Antichrist, hath
emboldened me to dedicat
these my labours
vnto your Highnesse,
which are in no other
respect worthie of your royall patronage, but
that they haue bene imployed in the explanation
of an excellent Psalme of the royall
Prophet Dauid; whose writings the holy
Ghost hath the rather commended to posteritie,
that by his example Kings and Princes
might be admonished to spend part of their
time, which they may spare from their royall
administration, in heauenly meditations, and
spirituall exercises: whereby they might gather

assurance to themselues, that after their
earthly kingdome is ended, they shall inherit
an euerlasting kingdome in heauen: for although
it be a singuler fauour of God vouchsafed
vnto them, that they should so beare the
image of his power and authoritie amongst
men,Psal. 8
                     •
                   6. as that they should bee called Gods:Exod. 22. 28.
yet godly and Christian kings, are not so
much to glorie in the fruition of their temporall
crownes and kingdomes; as to solace
themselues in the comfortable expectation
of that incorruptible crowne of glorie, which
is laid vp for them in heauen: For which
cause King Dauid thought it to be his dutie,
to giue all diligence (as Peter since hath exhorted
vs all) to make his calling and election
sure:2. Pet. 1. 10. and by vndoubted testimonies
and infallible tokens, to gather assurance vnto
himselfe, that hee was the true child of
God. And that he should not take his marks
amisse, (as men are apt to deceiue themselue
in this point) he intreateth the Lord in
this Psalme to reueale vnto him the vndoubted
marks of the sons & heires of God: which
hauing learned by the information of the holy
Ghost, he publisheth them, to the common
good of the Church: Shewing as it

were from the Oracle of God, that not all
that professe the true religion, nor all that are
able to discourse therof; but those that walke
worthie of their calling, that behaue themselues
as it becōmeth the children of the light,
that is, that liue vprightly, worke righteousnesse,
speake the truth from their hearts, &c.
are the sound members of the Church militant
vpon earth, and shall bee inheritors of
glorie in the Church triumphant in heauen.
The meditation and practise of which things
I do so much the more boldly commend to
your Maiestie, because it euidently appeareth
by your former both studies in priuat, and also
speeches in publicke, and writings published,
you haue propounded Dauid to your
selfe as a patterne for imitation. And now as
a Minister of God, I exhort your Highnesse
to immitat him still, as in speaking and writing,
so especially in the conscionable practise
of Christian duties: that you may bee
more and more (as he was) a man according
to Gods owne hart, walking before the Lord
as he did in truth, and righteousnesse,1. King. 3. 6. and
vprightnesse of heart; and gouerning and
guiding the people of God, according to the
integritie of his heart,Psal. 78. 71. 72. and the singuler wisedome

of his hands. So shall the Lord take
pleasure in you, as he did in him, and will not
onely giue your Highnesse long and prosperous
dayes, but will also blesse your posteritie
after you, and establish them in the
throne of these kingdomes for euer, to the
euerlasting glorie of his name, and the perpetuall
good of his Church: which mercies
the Lord graunt for his
Christs sake. Amen.
            
            Your Maiesties
obedient and loyall subiect,
George Downame.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            LECTVRES ON
the 15. Psalme.
            
               Verse 1.
A Psalme of Dauid.
                Lord, who shall soiourne in thy Tabernacle,
who shall dwell in the mountaine of thy holinesse?
            
            
               THis Psalme of Dauid,
               The Argument of the Psalme. is a
Psalme of doctrine: wherin
the Kingly Prophet
sheweth by what markes
and notes a sound member
of the Church militant,
and a true citizen of
the kingdome of heauen
may bee discerned and
knowne. And it is set
downe in forme of a dialogue betwixt Dauid and the
Lord, consisting on two parts; Dauids question, Verse 1.
and Gods answer, in the rest of the Psalme. The occasion
of the question seemeth to haue beene the disguising
and counterfeiting of many professors in all ages,
who liuing in the Church, and not being of it, but as
goats among the sheepe, and as tares among the corne,
doe notwithstanding by an externall profession of religion,
and false opinion of true pietie, deceiue not only
others, but sometimes themselues also. For many there
are, who place all religion in the performance of the

outward worship. And therefore such persons, if they
frequent the Church, heare the word, receiue the sacraments,
call vpon God with the rest of the congregation,
they imagine that they haue sufficiently discharged
their dutie, though their life and conuersation be irreligious
and vnrighteous. Yea and not a few seeme to repose
such trust and affiance in the very name of the
Church, that if they imagine themselues to bee in the
true Church, and doe not gaine say the doctrine therein
professed, they take no further care for their saluation,
but liue securely, as though all the members of the visible
Church, were also members of the inuisible; and as
though all which haue the externall Church to their
mother, had also God to their spiritual father in Christ.
Wherefore, to the end that men should no longer deceiue
themselues with vaine opinions & fond conceits,
the Prophet hauing first consulted as it were with the
Oracle of God, setteth downe certaine marks or notes
of a true Christian and citizen of heauen, wherby euery
man may discerne himselfe. And withall he teacheth
that in a sound and liuely member of the Church, an
externall profession of the faith, and an outward communion
with the Church of God, is not sufficient, vnlesse
the vprightnesse of our life be answerable to our
profession. And the same is confirmed by our Sauiour
Christ:Mat 7. 21, 22, 23. 
               Not euery one that saith vnto me Lord, Lord, shall enter
into the kingdome of heauen, but he that doth the will of my father
which is in heauen. Many shall say vnto me in that day, Lord, Lord,
haue not wee prophecied in thy name, and cast out diuels in thy
name, and done great wonders in thy name? And then will I professe
vnto them, saying, I know you not, depart from me you workers
of iniquitie.
            
            But now let vs search out the true sence and meaning
of this question.The meaning of the words. Ver. 1. By the names of Tabernacle and
Mountaine, we are to vnderstand the two parts of the
Catholicke or vniuersall Church: For the Tabernacle

signifieth the Church militant vpon earth; the holy
Mountaine, the Church triumphant in heauen. By sojourning
in the Tabernacle, is vnderstood the short
and transitorie abode of Christians, as it were pilgrims
in the earth, as in a strange land: by dwelling in the
Mountain of God, is signified their perpetuall & eternall
rest in heauen, as in their owne countrey. Wherein
the Prophet alludeth vnto that materiall Tabernacle,
which was called the Tabernacle of the assembly or
congregation; and to the mount Moriah, where the
Temple was placed:2. Chro. 3. 1. the one whereof was a type of
the Church militant vpon earth; the other was a figure
of the Church triumphant in heauen. I am not ignorant,
that both members are by some expounded of the
Church militant, and by others of the Church triumphant:
but I follow that exposition which seemeth best
to agree with the words and meaning of the holy ghost.
For the varietie of phrase plainely argueth diuersitie of
matter; sojourning in Gods Tabernacle, being much
different from dwelling in the Mountaine of his holinesse.
And the conclusion of the answere in the last
words of the Psalme, which without doubt doth render
the true meaning of the question, belongeth both
to this life and to that which is to come. He that doth these
things, shall not beremooued for euer: that is, he shall neither
fall away from the grace of God in this life, nor be excluded
out of Gods glorious presence in the life to
come. The sence therefore and meaning of the question
is this,2. Tim. 2. 19. Lord, thou searcher and trier of the hearts
and reines of men, who art acquainted with all secrets,
and best knowest who are thine, for as much as there is
so much vnsoundnesse and hipocrisie among them that
professe thy name, and frequent the places of thy worship,
that many deceiue others with a counterfeit shew,
and some beguile themselues with a false opinion of religion,
declare, I beseech thee, vnto thy Church some

tokens and cognisances of a true and sound Christian,
whereby the sheepe may be discerned from the goats,
and the wheat from tares: shew vs Lord who is a sound
member of the Church militant here on earth, and shal
be an inheritor of glorie in the Church triumphant in
heauen: who is a true subject of thy kingdome of
grace, and shall be an heire of the kingdome of glory.
            And this was the meaning of the question. Now let
vs come to the words of this text. Wherein wee are to
consider two things:The diuision 
                     〈◊〉
                   the text. Vers. 1. the parts of the question, and the
partie to whom it is propounded. Of the parts wee are
to speake, first, seuerally of either, and then joyntly of
both together.Esay 40. 22. The former part: Lord who shall soiourne in
thy Tabernacle? By Tabernacle some (as I said) vnderstand
heauen, which elsewhere in the Scriptures is called
Gods Tabernacle:
               Psal. 104. 2. and not vnsitly, seeing the Lord
stretcheth out the heauens as a curtaine, and spreadeth them out as
a tent to dwell in. But howsoeuer the name Tabernacles
is sometimes figuratiuely vsed to signifie heauenly and
euerlasting habitations.Luke 16. 9. Notwithstanding, it more properly
signifieth tents in warre, and the flitting habitations
of warfaring men. And that by Tabernacle is here
meant the Church militant, the other word of soiourning
doth import. For heauenly Tabernacles are not tents
to sojourne in, but mansions of perpetuall habitation,
and euerlasting rest.
            
               Basill by Tabernacle vnderstandeth our flesh,In Psal. 15. which
the Apostle calleth the 
                     •
                  arthly house of our Tabernacle:
               2. Cor. 5. 1. for
our bodies are not onely Tabernacles,2. Pet. 1. 13, 14. but Temples also
of God.1. Cor. 3. 16. & 6. 19. As if this were the sence: Lord, who is he,
who hauing sojourned as a stranger in this flesh of ours,2. Cor. 6. 16.
shal at the length rest with thee in thine heauenly kingdome?
And surely, the sence which he giueth is godly,
for it teacheth, that those which shall for euer rest in the
mountaine of Gods holinesse, do liue in this flesh as pilgrims
and strangers,Col. 3. 5. mortifying their earthly members.

Notwithstanding his exposition is not fit. For according
to this interpretation, the former part of the question
containeth the answere to the latter: for so hee
sayth, He that hath soiourned as a pilgrim in the flesh, he shall
dwell in the holy mountaine.
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . Most fitly therefore by Tabernacle
we may vnderstand the Church militant, which
elsewhere is called the Tabernacle of God,Psal. 61. 5. &c. Th
                     •
                   Church militant is the Tabernacle of God. and sometimes
the house, sometimes the Temple of God. For a
Tabernacle is a militarie mansion, and as it were a portable
house which hath no fixed seat or setled place.
            Now whereas the holy ghost calleth the Church of
God a Tabernacle,The first vse. we learn first, that the life of a Christian
is a warfare,Iob. 7. 1. as Iob saith, wherein we are to fight against
the enemies of our saluation, which fight against
our soules, namely, the flesh, the world, and the diuell:
Whereupon, the Church of God vpon earth is called
the Church militant. It behooueth therefore euery one
of vs that would bee esteemed a true member of the
Church, to behaue our selues as Christian souldiours,
fighting vnder the banner of Christ. And for as much
as our aduersarie the Diuell goeth about like a roaring
Lion,1. Pet. 5. 8. seeking whom he may deuour;Iob. 1. and seeing the
flesh lusteth against the spirit,Gal. 5. 17. sending out of the heart
as it were a furnace,1. Tim. 6. the sparkles of foolish and noisome
lusts, which fight against our soules:1. Pet. 2. 11. and the world
likewise, partly by the desires thereof, partly by bad examples,
carrieth vs away,
               1. Cor. 7. 31. 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . to embrace the world, to mind
earthly things, to serue Mammon, and to place our paradise
here on the earth: It behooueth vs therfore both
to prepare our selues to this combat, and therefore not
to bee secure or to sleepe, as others, but to stand vpon
our guard, to be sober and vigilant, and to arme our
selues with that complete armour of God described.1. Pet. 58.
               Eph. 6. and also in the fight valiantly to encounter,Eph. 6. 14, 15, 16, 17. and
constantly to withstand our spirituall enemies, to resist
the diuell,sam. 4. 7. and hee shall flie from vs, with the shield of

faith to quench his fierie darts, and with the sword of
the spirit, which is the word of God, to refell his assertions,
and repell his assentations. So to vse the world, that
we doe not ouer-vse it,1. Cor. 7. 31. so to possesse worldly things,
that we be not possessed of them: but rather renouncing
worldly lusts,Tit. 2. 12. and being wained from worldly desires,
to meditate and mind heauenly things.Psal. 131. 2. To crucifie
the flesh with the lusts thereof,Col. 3. 2. and to mortifie our
members which are on the earth,Gal. 5▪ 24. liuing not according
to the flesh,Col. 3. 5. but according to the spirit.
            This warfare is to be entertained, this warre is to be
maintained of vs, if we would be esteemed sound members
of the Church militant, who sojourning in the Tabernacle
of God, doe fight in his campe against our spirituall
enemies. But on the other side, if we execute the
workes of the diuell, giuing our selues ouer vnto sinne
and iniquitie; if with Demas we embrace the world, following
after pleasures, riches, honours; if we conforme
our selues to this present world and the examples therof;Rom, 13. 14.
if wee take thought for the flesh to fulfill the lusts
thereof: then are we souldiors indeed, but in the diuels
campe; we fight, but vnder Sathans banner, against
God, against the spirit, against our owne soules. So farre
are we either from sojourning in Gods Tabernacle for
the pre
                  ••
               nt or from hope of resting in the mountaine of
his holinesse for the time to come.
            Secondly,The second vse. whereas the holy ghost calleth the Church
of Christ vpon earth, a Tabernacle, we may learne, that
neither the Church it selfe, nor the members of it, haue
any firme or fixed seat of habitation on the earth: for
Tabernacles and Tents are made to that end, that they
may be remoued frō place to place. Yea, the Tabernacle
of God was a moueable temple, eftsoones changing
his seat.1. Cor. 10. And as those Israelits were types vnto vs, so was
that Tabernacle a type of the militant Church. For
euen as that Tabernacle, after it was once made, wandered

vp and downe in the desert, and after sojourned
for a while, now here, now there, sometimes in Shilo,
sometimes among the Philistims, somtimes in Keriathjarim,
&c. and neuer found any setled place, vntil it was
transported into the mountaine of God:2. Chron. 3. 1. & 5. 5. so the Church
of God wandreth many times as a pilgrim in the desert
of this world,Heb. 11. 37, 38. forced oft times to change her seat, tossed
too and fro, persecuted, molested, banished, and neuer
findeth any assured place of constant rest, vntill it
bee translated into the celestiall mountaine of Gods
holinesse.
            Thirdly,The third vse. whereas the Church is called the Tabernacle
of God,1. Tim. 3. 15. as elsewhere in the Scriptures the house
and temple of God,2. Cor. 6. 16. wherein God dwelleth and manifesteth
his presence;Eph. 2. 21. we may learn that the Lord dwelleth
as it were in his Church,Apoc. 3. 12. and after a singular maner
is present therein.2. Thess. 2. 4. For to this end the Lord commaunded
the Tabernacle to be made,Exod. 25. 8. that he might dwell among
them: and againe, whereas he promiseth by Moses, To set
his Tabernacle among them,
               Leuit. 26. 12. 
               and walke among them. The Apostle
expoundeth his setting his Tabernacle, to bee his
dwelling among them.2. Cor. 6. 16. 
               You are (saith he) the temple of the
liuing God. As God hath said, I will dwell among them, and I wil
walke there. And to the same purpose elsewhere hee is
said to be and to walke in the middest of his people,Esay 12. 6. to
dwell in Sion,Deut. 13. 14. and to walke in the middest of the seuen
golden candlesticks,Psal. 9. 12. & 132. 13. that is, of the seuen churches. Now
the consideration of Gods presence in his Church,Apoc. 2. 1.
ought to make vs warie and circumspect, that wee may
so behaue our selues as in the presence of God, who
searcheth the hearts and reines of men. For the Lord is
not onely present to reward those which worship him
in spirit and truth, but also to punish and afflict those
which feare not to sinne in his presence. Wherefore the
holy ghost, as he chargeth the Israelits not to feare their
enemies,Deut. 20. 3. because God did walke with them, and was

among them a consuming fire to destroy their enemies:Deu
                     •
                  . 9. 3.
so hee commaundeth them to abstaine from sinne, because
God was among them a consuming fire,Deut. 6. 15. & could
not abide any filthinesse, especially spirituall vncleannesse
among them.Deut. 23. 14. This therefore must teach vs to set
God alwayes before our eyes, and to behaue our selues
as in his presence: knowing that wee are more than
shamelesse sinners, if wee feare not to sinne in the sight
and presence of God.
            But although the Lord bee present euery where in
his Church after a speciall manner,God more especially present in the assemblies of the Church. yet more especially
he is present in the assemblies of the Church and congregations
of his people gathered together in the name
of Christ, as Christ himselfe hath promised, Matt. 18. 20.
Where two or three are gathered together in my name,
               Mat. 18. 20. 
               there am I in
the middest of them. Therefore in the old Testament, those
who were excluded from the assembly of the Church,
thought themselues banished from the face & presence
of God.Gen. 4. 15. The consideration whereof as it must affect vs
with an earnest desire and serious care of frequenting
the Tabernacles of God, to visit his face and to behold
his presence, so it must teach vs to behaue our selues in
the assembly of Gods saints, as in the presence of God.
Dauid when he was exiled, or otherwise excluded from
the assemblies of the Church, he desired nothing more
than that hee might haue libertie to come vnto the Tabernacle
of God, and to appear in the presence of God.
See Psal. 27. 4.Psal. 27. 4. 
               One thing haue I desired of the Lord, that I will
require, euen that I may dwell in the house of the Lord all the daies
of my life, to behold the beautie of the Lord, and to visit his temple.
And Psal. 42.Psal. 42. 1. 2. 4. 
               As the Hart brayeth for the riuers of waters, so
panteth my soule after thee O God. My soule thirsteth for God, euen
for the liuing God, when shall I come and appeare before the presence
of God,
               Psal. 84. 1▪ 2. &c 
               &c. Likewise Ps. 84. O Lord of hosts how amiable are
thy Tabernacles: my soule longeth, yea fainteth, that I might come
to the Courts of the Lord: my heart and my flesh crie out after the

liuing God, &c. And when he had liberty to come to the
Tabernacle,Psal. 122. 1. he rejoyced in nothing more. Psal. 122. Ireioyced
when they said vnto me, we will go into the house of the Lord.
And again Psal. 84.Psal. 84. 4. 10. he judgeth them blessed that dwell
in the house of the Lord, and preferreth one day spent
in the Courts of the Lord, before a thousand elswhere.
But as I said, the presence of God must also moue vs to
behaue our selues reuerently and religious
                  •
               y, that before
we come vnto the house of the Lord,Eccles. 4. 17. & 5. 1. we look vnto
our feet, that is, examine with what affections wee
come; and not onely so, but also to put off the shoes of
our feet,Exod. 3. 5. that is, our corrupt affections, that we may bee
readie to heare rather than to offer the sacrifice of
fooles,Ios. 5. 15. for the place of the assembly being sanctified by
Gods presence, is holy ground. And that when we are
entred into the assembly, we may after the example of
Cornelius,
               Act. 10. 33. behaue our selues as in the presence of God.
Those which come before an earthly prince, either to
speake vnto him, or to heare him speake, how carefull
are they to behaue themselues in all comely reuerence!
how much more ought wee in all reuerence and feare
appeare before the glorious majestie of the great God,1. Sam. 1
                     •
                  . 7.
the King of kings,Why the holy ghost doth vse the phrase of soiourning. and Lord of lords, especially considering
that the Lord doth not behold vs as man doth,
but looketh especially vnto the heart. Our abode in the
Church militant,
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . is signified in the word soiourne. Hebr.

                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               . Graec. 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , who shall soiourne. Sojourning
(saith Basil) is a temporarie abode, signifying not a setled
life, but transitorie or passing on, in hope of trans
                  •
               ation
to a better estate. This word therefore the holy-ghost
doth vse to signifie, that a citizen of heauen is a
pilgrim on earth, and that his life here is a pilgrimage.True heires of heauen, and pilgrims on ea
                     •
                  th.
And so Peter calleth the time of our life, the time of our
pilgrimage. And Iacob professeth, that the daies of his pilgrimage
(meaning his life) were few and euill.
                  
                     •
                  . Pet. 1. 17. And
likewise Dauid,
               Gen. 47. 9. I am a stranger (saith he) before thee,
                  
                     •
                   Chro. 2
                     •
                  . 15. and

a pilgrim, as all my forefathers were. In a word, it was
the profession of all the faithfull, That they were strangers
and pilgrims vpon the earth.
               Heb. 11. 13. Here therefore wee are taught
so many as desire to be citisens of heauen, to behaue
our selues as pilgrims on the earth.1. Pet. 2. 11, 12. Who being exiles in
a forraine land, desire to come vnto our owne country.
He that hath a good patrimonie in his owne countrey,
great wealth, kind and able kinred and friends, and is
forced for a time to sojourne in a strange land, where
he is ill intreated, disturbed, molested, assailed by his enemies
on euery side, hee will affect nothing in that
strange countrey, neither will he set his heart vpon any
thing there, but his mind is vpon his countrey, desiring
nothing more than to returne thither. But our countrey
is in heauen, where we haue an euerlasting inheritance,
an incorruptible and inestimable treasure, where, is
God our heauenly father, Christ our eldest brother, and
the rest of our brothers and sisters, the Patriarchs, Prophets,
Apostles, Martyrs, and all the quire of heauenly
Saints and celestiall spirits: and wee are pilgrims for a
time here vpon earth, where we are hated & ill intreated,
assaulted with the temptations of Satan, the world,
and the flesh, subject to many inward infirmities and
outward troubles. And therefore it behooueth vs not
to set our hearts on worldly things, or to place our paradise
vpon the earth. For if our hearts be on the earth,
how is our treasure in heauen? if the earth be our countrey,
how are we citizens of heauen? Wherefore, if we
bee pilgrims in the world, let vs not bee addicted to
worldly desires, let vs not mind earthly things, but being
wained from worldly cogitations, let vs mind those
things which be aboue. Let vs vse the world, as though
we vsed it not, and let vs be so affected towards earthly
things as pilgrims and wayfaring men are toward such
delights or commodities as they see in their journey, or
at their inne. Which if they vse as meanes to further

them in their journey: yet they set not their hearts vpon
them. And yet assuredly▪ our abode in this life, in respect
of our continuance in the mountaine of Gods holinesse,
is not so much as the time of our lodging or bait
in an Inne. Therefore howsoeuer such as be but earthwormes,
doe crawle as it were vpon the earth, and mind
earthly things. Yet must we remember, that we are citisens
of heauen,Phil. 3. 19, 20. and pilgrims on the earth. Are wee
pilgrims, liuing (as it were) exiled from our celestiall
countrey and heauenly father?Phil. 1. 23. What ought wee then
more feruently to desire than to be in our country, and
that this earthly Tabernacle of our body being dissolued,2. Cor. 5. 1.
wee might dwell in that habitation made without
hands, eternall in the heauens? Are we such pilgrims as
indeed desire to be in our countrey? Let that then bee
our chiefest care and indeuour to trauell into our countrey.Mat 6. 33.
Let vs first seeke the kingdome of God, and his
righteousnesse, and carefully vse the meanes of our saluation.
And let vs thinke, that if wee bee pilgrims, wee
must also be wayfaring men. Are we wayfaring men in
this life? then will wee vse hac vita vt via,
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . Basil. This life as a
way; and the things of this life as they may bee helpes
vnto vs in this way. Let vs make choise of the high, and
as it were the Kings way, which leadeth vnto heauen,
the way of true faith and vnfained repentance. Let vs
insist and persist therein,Mat. 7. 14. though it bee a narrow and an
afflicted way. Let vs walke before God in the duties of
our lawfull callings, and in those good workes which
God hath prepared for vs.Eph. 2. 10. 
               This is the way, let vs walke therin.
Let vs not returne to our sinnes,Esay. 30. 21. let vs not de
                  •••
               ne
from the way of Gods commaundements either to the
right hand or to the left: let vs not stand at a stay, nor
looke backward with Lots wife, and much lesse goe
backward; but with Paule,
               Phil. 3. 14. let vs doe one thing, forgetting
that which is behind, and striuing to that which is
before, let vs make on towards the marke, vnto the

price of the high calling of God in Iesus Christ, knowing,Mat. 10. 22.
that whosoeuer perseuereth to the end, he shall bee
saued. And this was the former part of the question,
concerning a true member of the Church militant,
which the holy ghost hath expressed in these wordes:
Who shall soiourne in thy Tabernacle? calling the Church militant,
the Tabernacle of God; and teaching, that hee
which is an heire of the kingdome of heauen, is a pilgrim
on earth.
            Now followeth the later part of the question,The second part of the question. which
is concerning the member that shall bee of the Church
triumphant, and inheritour of the kingdome of heauen,
in these words, Who shall dwell in the mountaine of thy holinesse?
               What is meant by the mountain of God.
The kingdome of heauen by a metonymy of the
signe, he calleth the mountaine of God. For the mountaine
of God was a type of the kingdome of heauen.
And this mountaine was either the land of Canaan,
which was a type of the coelestiall Canaan, as it is said
Exod. 15.Exod. 15. 17. Thou shalt plant them, O Lord, in the mountaine
of thine inheritance, in the place which thou hast
made for thine habitation: or else the mount Sion,
which elsewhere is called the mountaine of Gods holinesse,Psal. 2. 6.
and was a type of the heauenly Ierusalem: or
lastly,Heb. 12. 22. the Mount Moriah, where the Temple was placed,
which is somewhere called the mountaine of the
congregation,Esay. 14. 13. standing on the North part of Sion; and
is therefore called the holy mountaine,Psal. 48. 2. because it was
the place of the holy assemblies, which the Lord sanctified
for his habitation and for his worship: and this
al
                  ••
                was a type of the temple of God, that is to say, of
heauen.Psal. 11. 4. Whereas therefore heauen is called the mountaine
of God, it is a metonymy, such as wee find elsewhere
in the Psalmes,Psal. 3. 4. 
               I cried vnto the Lord, and he heard me
out of the mountaine of his holinesse, that is, heauen. And thus
the most interpret this place: as namely, among the
Greekes Basil saith this mountaine doth signifie, 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               .

               The supercelestiall religion,
               Heb. 12.
               which is euery way conspicuous and bright (which some call
Coelum Empyrium) wherof the Apostle speaketh. Heb. 12. Among
the Latines P. Lombard. in thy holy mountaine, that is,
saith he, In euerlasting blisse, where is the vision of peace
(signified in the name Ierusalem) and the supereminence
or height of charitie, where none contendeth in
fight, but resteth in euerlasting peace.
            Now heauen is called the mountaine of God for
these causes.Why heauen is called the mountaine of God. First, because it was figured by the mountaine
of God, euen as Christ is called our Passeouer.
Secondly, because of the height thereof, whereby it is
eleuated farre aboue the earth. For albeit, in respect of
vs who are now placed within the compasse of heauen,
and behold Comavam coeli superficiem,
               1. Cor. 5. as it were the inward
roofe thereof, it cannot so fitly be called a mountaine:
notwithstanding as it is the throne of God, who
sitteth on the globe of heauen, as it were his throne, and
as it is the seat of the blessed spirits, whose conuersation
is in the highest heauen, as it were in the top of an
hill, it is not vnfitly called the mountaine of God. Vnto
this mountaine, if we should ascend but in thought, as
Scipio once did in his dreame, and from thence should
behold the earth; we should easily contemne this inferiour
world with the desires thereof. For the whole
globe of the earth together with the water, which seemeth
none so great vnto vs, if we could see it from the
highest heauens, would appeare vnto vs like a mote in
the sunne. But if withall we felt the vnspeakable joyes
of heauen, and from thence should cast downe our eies
vnto this valley of teares, there to behold the vanities
of vanities, and nothing but vanitie in vexation of spirit,
as Salomon saith, it cannot be expressed with how feruent
a desire we should be inflamed to haue our habitation
in heauen. Peter when as hee was present in the
transfiguration of Christ in the mount Thabor, and

had a tast of the heauenly glory, he was straightway rauished
therewith, and desired greatly to remaine there.
Lord (saith he) it is good being here, let vs make three Tabernacles,
               Mat. 17. 4.
               &c. Thirdly, heauen is called a Mountaine, because it is
a safe place, free from all hazard or possibilitie of danger,
where the blessed spirits dwell on high safe from all
danger and feare of euill.Esay. 33. 16.
            
            But heauen is not onely called the mountain of God,
but also the holy Mountaine,H
                     •
                  ly mountain. or (which is all one) the
Mountaine of his holinesse, because it is sanctified by
the presence of God. For which cause, Sion also and
the mount Moriah are called the holy mountaine of
God:Exod. 3. 5. For where the Lord doth manifest his presence,
that is a holy place, namely, because of Gods presence
sanctifying it. But in the highest heauen the Lord doth
principally manifest his presence, and reueale his glory.
Wherefore, if mount Thabor after the transfiguration
of Christ there wrought, and the presence and glory of
God there manifested,2. Pet. 1. 18. was for that cause called the holy
mountaine; how much more doth the highest heauen,
where Christ sitteth at the right hand of his father in
majesty and glory, deserue to be called the holy mountaine
of God? The Scriptures ascribe such holinesse to

                  •
               his mountaine of God, as nothing may enter therein
which is not holy. Which must teach vs (beloued) to
follow after holinesse;
               Apoc 21. 27. 
               without which we shall neuer see God. Verely
verely I say vnto you (saith Christ our Sauiour) except a man
be borne of water and of the spirit,
               Heb. 12. 14. 
               he cannot enter into the kingdome
of God.
               Iohn. 3. 5.
            
            Our abode in the mountaine of God,The phrase of dwelling expounded. is expressed
in the word dwelling: whereby two things are signified,
Perpetuitie & Rest. Perpetuitie: for there the children
of God remaine not as pilgrims for a time, but as
citisens and heires for euer.Hebr. 9. 15. Whereupon the kingdome
of heauen is also called an heauenly inheritance,Luke 16. 9. wherin
are euerlasting habitations,
               1. Pet. 1. 4. and an inheritance immortall, and

vndefiled, & that fadeth not away, reserued in heauen for vs. I wil
not stand to proue this point, being the last article of our
Creed, cōfirmed by manifold testimonies of scripture,
which often mentioneth eternall life, eternall saluation,Dan. 12. 2. 3.
eternall kingdome: let vs rather labor by all good
meanes to make sure our calling and election to this eternall
kingdome,Mat. 25. 46. that the meditation therof may teach
vs,Heb. 5. 9. first,2. Pet. 1. 11. to contemne in respect thereof the momentarie
vanities of this present world:2. Pet. 1. 10. accounting it more than
madnesse, if for the temporarie fruition of sinne wee
shall depriue our selues of Gods presence,Psal. 16. 11. 
               where there is
fulnesse of ioy, and at whose right hand there are pleasures for euermore:
               2. Cor. 4. 17.
if for light and temporarie trifles we loose a superexcellent
eternall weight of glorie in heauen. Secondly, with
patience and comfort to run the race of afflictions set before
vs,
               Heb. 12. 1. 2. 
               looking vnto Iesus the author and finisher of our faith, who for
the ioy that was set before him, endured the crosse, and despised the
shame,
               Rom 8. 18. 
               and is set at the right hand of the throne of God. For the
and light afflictions of this life,
               2. Cor. 4. 17. 
               are not worthy the eternall weight
of glorie that shall be reuealed, which notwithstanding they
procure vnto vs, whiles we looke not on the things which are seene,
but on the things which are not seene. For the things which are
seene, are temporall: but the things which are not seene, are eternall.
Againe the word dwelling, importeth rest. For there the
children of God doe not wander as pilgrims, neither
are subject to any molestations, but doe wholly rest from
their labours.
               Apoc. 14. 13. And for that cause the kingdome of heauen
is called the rest of God,
               Psal. 95. &c. and as it were an eternall Sabboth.
In respect whereof,Heb. 4. the land of Canaan was a
type of our heauenly countrey. For as to the Israelits,
after they had for many yeares wandered as pilgrims
through the desert, the land of Canaan was the mountaine
of their perpetuall habitation and rest: euen so
to vs, after wee haue finished our pilgrimage through
the desert of this world, there remaineth an heauenly
Canaan, that Sabbatisme or rest of God, which the

Apostle testifieth,Heb. 4. 9. is left to the people of God. But as
against those Israelites, which after they were brought
out of Aegypt, and were in the way towards the land of
promise, by their infidelitie and contumacie prouoked
God, the Lord sware in his anger, that they should neuer
enter into his rest: so shall it happen to so many of
vs, as professing our selues to bee redeemed out of the
bondage of the spirituall Pharao, shall notwithstanding
neither truly beleeue in Christ, nor repent of our sinnes,
but prouoke the Lord by our infidelitie and disobedience.Heb. 3. 7. &c.
Wherefore, as the holy ghost sayth, To day if you
shall heare his voice, harden not your hearts as in the
prouocation, and as in the day of temptation in the wildernesse,
where your fathers tempted me, &c. to whom
I sware in my wrath, that they should not enter into my
rest.Heb. 6. 11. Let vs studie therefore to enter into that rest, least
any of vs fall after the same ensample of disobedience.
And let vs take heed least at any time there be in vs an
euill heart of infidelitie to depart from the liuing God.Heb. 3. 12.
For the vnfaithfull shall be excluded,Apoc. 21. 8. but so many as
beleeue,Heb. 4. 3. shall enter into that rest. And as Iosua (who also
is called Iesus) brought the Israelites into that rest:Heb. 4. 8. so
Christ, the true Iesus and Sauiour of his people, bringeth
all those that beleeue in him into this eternall rest.
For he not onely died, that hee might purchase by his
bloud this rest for vs, and ascended into heauen, to
prepare eternall mansions for vs:Iohn. 14. 2. but also, when wee
are to leaue this earthly Tabernacle of our bodies, he
sendeth his holy Angels to conuey our soules into the
bosome of Abraham,
               Luke. 16. 22. and to place them in this mountaine
of God.
            By that which hath beene said, wee see what difference
there is betwixt the Church militant on earth,
and triumphant in heauen. For this is a Tabernacle of
warre; that, a mountaine of peace. In this we sojourne
for a time as pilgrims from God, or, as the Apostle

speaketh,2. Cor. 5. 6. 
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , in that being
remooued from the bodie, we dwell with God, or,
as the same Apostle speaketh,2. Cor. 5. 8. 
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               .
Here is trouble, there is ease; here is the valley
of teares, there is the kingdom of happines & glory;
here is the combat and fight, there is quiet & perpetual
rest; here we are in our way, there in our countrey.
            Hitherto we haue spoken of the parts of this questiō
seuerally,Of the parts of the question ioyntly. now we are in a word to intreat of thē ioyntly
& together: For both parts are to be vnderstood of one
& the same party or subiect: out of which cōiunctiō we
gather two things: the first, that those which shall dwell
in the holy mountain, do first sojourne in Gods Tabernacle;
the second, that those which do here sojourne in
the Tabernacle of God, shal also rest in the mountain of
his holines. The former serueth for our instruction, teaching
vs that none shalbe mēbers of the Church triumphant,
but those which haue bin mēbers of the Church
militāt, none shalbe heires of heauē, but those that haue
bin pilgrims on earth. All men desire to rest in the holy
mountain of God: but how few behaue thēselues as pilgrims
in his Tabernacle? 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , saith Basil, such men
are geason, all desire with Balaam to die the death of the
righteous, but few do care to lead the life of the iust: all
desire glory, but few do care for grace: al are desirous of
the end, which is saluatiō, but few are careful of the subordinat
means. The latter serueth for our consolation,
assuring vs that all the true mēbers of the Church militant,
shall be members of the Church triumphant; that
all the children of God (as all the faithfull are) be also
heires of eternall life; that those which are obedient
subiects in the kingdome of grace, shall be inheritors of
the kingdome of glory; that those who are pilgrimes
on earth, shall be citisens of heauen: For this is the
priuiledge of a true Christian, noted in the end of the
Psalme, that being once in the state of grace he shall neuer

be vtterly remoued. Herein therefore the faithfull
may solace themselues, that although they are despised
and abused in the world, yet they are heires of eternall
life, and citizens of the kingdome of heauen.
            And so much of the parts of the question:Of the party to whom this question is propounded. now we
are to consider of the party to whom it is propounded.
For as touching this most weightie question, the Psalmist
consulteth with the Lord, the collector of his
Church, and the giuer of eternall life. And there may
two reasons be giuen why in this question he appealeth
vnto the Lord. First, because in determining this question,
we are not to stand to the iudgement of men, but
of God onely: For mens iudgement whether they deliuer
their opinion concerning others, is very vncertaine;
or touching themselues, it is many times deceitfull.
For as touching themselues, how many are there
especially in the Church of Rome, who boast of the
name of the Church, and in comparison of themselues
contemne all others as heretiques or schismatiques; because
they presume that they are in the Catholique
Church, obseruing the rites of their Church, and beleeuing
as their Church beleeueth; when as in truth
they are members of Antichrist, and nothing lesse than
the true members of the Catholicke and inuisible
Church of Christ. And therefore no maruell, if many
who liue in the face of the true Church, do falsly iudge
themselues to be sound members of the same. Neither
are we to stand to mens iudgement concerning others:
For the iudgement of the vngodly is corrupt, and of
the godly vncertaine. The wicked iudge the true
members of the Church indeed,1. Cor. 4. 13. to be the scum of the
world and off-scouring of all things; them they hate,
contemne, persecute, excommunicate, either as impious
or as hereticall, euen as our Sauiour Christ hath
foretold,Iohn 16. 2. 
                     •
                  
                
               They shall excommunicate you, yea, the time shall
come, that whosoeuer killeth you, will thinke that he doth God good

seruice. The world doth loue her owne, but hateth those
which are Christs,Iohn 17. 14. as our Sauiour sayth, the world hateth
them because they are not of the world, euen as I am not of the
world.
               Iohn 15. 18. 19. And againe, if the world hateth you, know that it hated
me first: if you were of the world, assuredly the world would loue
her owne. But now because you are not of the world, but I haue
chosen you out of the world, therefore the world doth hate you. But
the iudgement also of the godly concerning others, is
vncertaine: For there is a twofold iudgement, the
judgement of

                  Charitie,
                  Certaintie.
               
By the iudgement of Charitie
                  •
                the faithfull judge euery
professed member of the visible Church,Phil. 1. 7. when they
speake of the particular persons, to be a member of the
inuisible, elected, called, justified, sanctified; howbeit,
they know in generall,1. Iohn 2. 19. that many are in the Church,
which be not of it,
                  
                     •
                  at. 22. 14. and that many be called, but few are
chosen. The judgement of Certaintie appertaineth only
to God, who onely is the searcher of the heart. As
the Prophet Ieremie sayth,Ier. 17. 9. 10. 
               The heart is deceitfull and wicked
aboue all things: who can know it? I the Lord search the heart and
trie the reines, that I may giue to euery man according to his wayes,
and according to the fruit of his workes. Seeing therefore wee
are to stand to the judgement of God, and not of men,
let vs labour to approoue our selues not to men,1. Thes. 2. 4. but to
the Lord, who trieth the heart.
            Secondly, the Prophet deuolueth this question to
Gods judgement, that we may vnderstand the answere
which ensueth to be without exception: as being the
aunswere not of man but of God,2. Tim. 2. 19. who best knoweth
who are his;Mat. 25. 32. who also in the end of the world shall separate
the sheepe from the goates. Whe
                  •
                
               
                  〈…〉
                let no
man deceiue himselfe any longer, either 
                  〈…〉
                title
of the Church, or with a faire shew of an outward profession,
&c. but let him know this for a certaine truth, as
it were from the Oracle of God, That he is not such an

one as shall either sojourne in the Tabernacle of God,
or dwell in his holy mountaine, vnlesse the description
of a sound Christian and citisen of heauen, which is
comprised in this answer of the Lord, agree vnto him.
And of this answer we are now to speake.
            For when as Dauid,
               Gods answer. as if he had bene the high Priest
standing before the propitiatory, had consulted with
the Oracle of God; The Lord maketh aunswere as it
were from betwixt the Cherubins, therein fully satisfying
his demaund. For being demaunded who shall sojourne
in the Tabernacle of God, and rest in his holy
mountaine: He answereth, That he which walketh vprightly,
and worketh righteousnesse, &c. shall neuer beremooued. In
which answere we are to consider two things, the description
of a sound Christian, in the whole body of the
Psalme: and his priuiledge, in the last words, he that doth
these things shall neuer beremooued.
            
            The description consisteth wholly of the effects,Of the description in generall.
whereby the Lord would haue a true citisen of the
kingdome of heauen to be tried and knowne, as our
Sauiour saith; By their fruits you shall know them. But here
it may be demaunded first, Why doth he not rather describe
a sound member of the Church and heire of heauen,
by his faith, or by the profession thereof; seeing to
faith the kingdome of heauen is promised, and seeing
also the profession of the true faith maketh one a member
of the visible Church? I answer, because faith is an
inward and hidden grace, & many deceiue both themselues
and others by a profession of faith: and therfore
the holy ghost will haue euery mans faith to bee tried
and known by the fruits thereof. And howsoeuer eternall
life be promised to faith, and eternall damnation be
threatned against infidelitie, yet the sentence of saluation
and condemnation shall be pronounced according
to workes, as the euidence of both. Secondly, it may be
demaunded, Why among all the fruits of faith (which

are almost innumerable) he maketh choise of those duties
which we owe to our brother: especially considering
that the duties which we owe immediatly to God,
are more principall, wherein also consisteth our religion
and pietie towards God. As for example, the true inuocation
of the name of God, the sincere profession of
the faith, the sauing hearing of the word, &c. Answ. We
are to consider, that this question is propounded of such
as liuing in the visible Church, would seeme to be religious,
making a profession of the faith, hearing the
word of God, and calling vpon his name, viz. which of
them (because all are not religious which would seeme
to be so) are indeed sound members of the Church, and
heires of heauen. For of those which are openly prophane,
and doe not so much as make a semblance of religion,
there is no question to bee made: For without
question there is no place for such in the kingdome of
heauen. Now that wee may rightly discerne of those
which professe religion, who among them are sound,
who vnsound; the markes and tokens are not to bee taken
from the outward duties of Gods worship, as prayer,
hearing of the word, receiuing of the sacraments,
and much lesse the obseruation of humane traditions
(for all these things hypocrits also are accustomed to
do;) but from the duties of charitie and righteousnesse,
which we owe to our brethren: For the touchstone
of pietie and true religion towards God, is charitie
towards our brother.1. Iohn. 3. 10. 
               Herein (saith Iohn) are the
children of God knowne, and the children of the diuell: whosoeuer
doth not righteousnesse, is not of God, neither he that loueth
not his brother. The
                  •
               e is no man almost in the Church
who will not affirme that he beleeueth in Christ, that he
loueth God, that he is the disciple of Christ: How then
shall he be tried?Gal. 5. 6. True faith worketh by loue, and is to
be manifested by workes,Iam. 2. 18. & 26 without which it is to be judged
dead. The true loue of God must shew it selfe in

the loue of our brother.1. Iohn 
                     •
                  . 20. 
               For if any man shall say, that he loueth
God, and hateth his brother, he is a lyar. The true disciple
of Christ is knowne by brotherly loue. Hereby (saith our
Sauiour) shall all men know you to be my disciples,
               Iohn 13. 35. 
               if you loue one
another. Now in the loue of our neighbour, all the duties
of the second Table are summarily comprised.Rom. 13. 9. Let no
man therefore so deceiue himselfe, as to thinke, that he
is truly religious towards God, if hee liue vnjustly or
vncharitably among his neighbours. For our religion
towards God is to bee esteemed according to those
fruits which appeare in our calling and conuersation
with men. For hereby according to the Scriptures, is all
our religion and pietie towards God to bee examined
and tried. And for this cause, in describing a citizen of
heauen, he reckneth vp those duties which are to be exercised
towards our brother, that by them as it were
certaine cognisances, the true seruant of God may bee
discerned from the slaue of the Diuell. And so elsewhere
in the Scriptures the like questions receiue not
vnlike answers.Psal. 24. 3. 4. 6. As Psal. 24. 3. 4. 6. Esay 33. 14. 15. 16.Esay 33. 14. 15. 16.
            
            Hitherto I haue spoken of the description in generall,The parts of the description.
now we are to descend to the seuerall parts and
branches thereof: of them, some are generall, others
more speciall. I call those generall, which summarily
comprise all the duties of a good man, in the 2. verse,
namely, that he be vpright in heart, just in his deeds, and
true in his words. The more speciall are contained in
the rest of the Psalme, whereby the child of God is
described, partly 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                by way of deniall, that he slandereth
not, that he doth not euill vnto his neighbour,
that he receiueth not an ill report against him, that he
breaketh not his oath, that he putteth not to vsury, that
he receiueth no rewards; partly 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , that hee contemneth
the wicked and honoureth the godly. And
these specials may bee vnderstood as branches of the
generall: For he that is vpright is not partiall, but behaueth

himselfe towards men as they behaue themselues
towards God, honoring those that honor God,
and despising those that contemne the Lord. He that
is iust, is not iniurious to his neighbour, neither is he an
vsurer or briber. He that loueth the truth, he is true in
his oath and promises, he detesteth slandering both in
himselfe and others, hauing neither a tongue to vtter,
nor an eare to heare slaunders. Or you may conceiue
thus, that a citizen of heauen is here described by ten
notes, whereof foure is affirmatiue, signifying the vertues
wherewith he is indued; and six are negatiue, signifying
those speciall vices which hee is carefull to
auoid.
            Of these notes we are to speake in order. The first
whereof is Integrity or vprightnesse, in these words:
He that walketh vprightly.
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  
                To walke, in the Hebrew
phrase, signifieth either generally, to liue, to order a
mans life: or more specially, to liue, or to walke in a
calling, or else to professe religion. Hereupon in the
Scriptures our life or course of liuing, our vocation,
our religion, is called a way. But the generall signification
which comprehendeth the other, best fitteth
this place. This word therefore the holy Ghost doth
vse to teach vs, that this life of ours is a way, and that
we are way-faring men,Psal. 119. 1. whom it behoueth to be vpright
in our way, as the Psalmist elsewhere speaketh.
            Now, if we be trauellours or way-faring men, we
are to be carefull of three things. First, that we go in
the right way: For if we go out of our way, the farther
we go, the farther we shall be from our iourneys end.
And therefore as Christ himselfe exhorteth enter,
               Mat. 7. 13. yea,
striue to enter at the narrow gate:
               Luke 13. 24. 
               for wide is the gate, and broad
is the way which leadeth vnto destruction, and many there be
which go in thereat, because strait is the gate, and narrow is the
way that leadeth vnto life, and few there be that find it. This
way is the true religion of Christ, which in the Scriptures

is called the way,
               Act. 9. 2. 
               the way of life, the way of peace,
the way of saluation:Psal. 16. 11. teaching two things especially,
repentance towards God,Luke 1. 79. and faith in our Lord Iesus
Christ.Act. 16. 17. For by faith we come vnto Christ, who is the
way,Act. 20. 21. 24. 14. 15. 16. the truth, and the life, and by repentance we bring
forth the fruits of faith,Iohn 6. 35. namely, good workes, which
God hath prepared for vs that we should walke in
them,Iohn 14. 6. 
               This as I say is the way,
               Eph. 2. 10. 
               let vs walke therein.
               Esay 30. 21.
            
            2. The next thing whereof we must be carefull, is,
that being set in the right way we go forward therein,
proceeding from faith to faith, and from a lesse measure
of grace vnto a greater, till at length we come to a
perfect or growne stature in Christ. For neither must
we stand still in this way, neither must we go backe:
for if we do so, how shall we come to our iourney's end?
The Apostle Paule although he had proceeded very
farre in this way, he thought it not his duty to surcease,
but the nearer he came to his marke,Phil. 3. 14. 15. the more he striueth
towards it▪ forgetting those things which 
                     •
                  e behind. And thereupon
inferreth, whosoeuer therefore are perfect or growne men,
let them be of this mind. Must those that are perfect be of
this mind? how much more behooueth it vs, who are
but of small growth in comparison, to giue all diligence
that we may increase and grow vp in grace,
that as the Apostle exhorteth,
                  
                     •
                  . Thes. 4. 1. we may abound more?
For not to go forward in this way, is (as one faith) to
go backward: euen as a boat which is caried against a
swift streame, either it is rowed forward, or else it runneth
backward. We must take heed therefore le
                  •
               t we
be non-proficients, and let vs feare lest when we cease
to be better, we begin to be worse.
            The third thing is, that we be vpright in the way,
neither treading awry by secret dissembling, nor halting
downeright, betwixt God and Mammon, betwixt
Christ and Antichrist:1. King. 18. 21. As the Israelites in Achabs time
halted betweene God and Baal, and those counterfeit

Christians,Phil. 3. 18. 19. of whom Paule complaineth Phil. 3. there be
many, saith he, which walke, that is, maketh a profession
of Religion, of whom I haue told you heretofore, and now I tell
you weeping, that they are enemies to the Crosse of Christ, whose
end is destruction, whose God is their belly, and their glory is to their
shame, who mind earthly things.
            
            But of Integrity we are to speake more at large, forasmuch
as it is here set downe as the first and principall
marke of a true Christian. The Hebrew word 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               
is vsually translated perfect, not that it signifieth such an
one as is altogether free from sinne, or is indued with
righteousnesse, for so this note would agree to no man
liuing:Prou. 20. 9. For, who can say that his heart is cleane? yea if we say
that we haue no sinne,
               1. Iohn 1. 8. saith Iohn the beloued of Christ, we
deceiue ourselues, and there is no truth in vs: for, in many things
we offend all,
               Iam. 3. 2. and there is not a righteous man vpon earth, which
doth good and sinneth not.
               Eccles. 7. 22. But it signifieth him who in the
desire and purpose of his heart is free from hypocrisie,
dissimulation and guile, whom we call Vpright. For
N
                     •
                  ah, Iacob, Iob, Dauid, Ezechias and others▪ are said in the
Scriptures to haue bene perfect, that is, vpright men
who all notwithstanding had their faults.2. Chron. 15. 17▪
                Yea, Asa is
said 2. Chron. 15. to haue had a perfect or vpright heart
all the dayes of his life,Chap. 16. and yet in the next Chapter
there are recorded three sinnes of his together, that he
rested vpon the King of Syria, that he committed the
Prophet to prison, that in his sicknesse he trusted in the
Physitions more than in God. The perfection therfore
which is signified in this word, is not so much to be
measured by the goodnes of the outward act or worke,
but by the vnfained will, sincere desire, and vpright indeuour,
aspiring towards perfection. For the Lord accepting
the will for the deed, esteemeth of the sincere:
will, and vnfained indeuour, for perfect obedience in
his children; insomuch that vprightnesse euery where
in the old Testament goeth vnder the name of perfection;

and those things which are done with an vpright
and entire heart, are sayd to be done with the whole
heart, and with a perfect heart.
            
               Thamim therfore we may rightly interpret vpright, that
is, void of dissumulation; and it may be two wayes considered,
as it is referred to God, and so it signifieth sincere,
or void of hypocrisie: as it is referred towards
men, and so it signifieth simple, or void of guile. So
that he in this place is said to bee vpright, who is void
of hypocrisie towards God, and free from guile towards
men.
            And first we are to speake of vprightnesse in respect
of God, in handling whereof I purpose to obserue this
order. First, to shew what it is. Secondly, that it is, as
here it is made, a note proper to the children of God.
And thirdly, because we are not to be idle hearers of
this discourse, we are to try and examine our selues
whether this note agreeth vnto vs or not. And fourthly,
if we do find our defectiuenesse therein, either in
whole or in part, we are by certaine forcible arguments
to be stirred vp to embrace it. And lastly, we are to
shew the means whereby to obtaine it.
            1. What vprightnesse is towards God,What vprightnesse is. it may be
gathered by those phrases of speech whereby it is expressed
in the Scriptures. For first, to be vpright, it is to
walke with God, or before God, (as the Lord saith to
Abraham,
               Gen. 17. 1. 
               Walke before me and be vpright) that is, so to lead
our liues as in the sight and presence of God, who seeth
the hearts, and searcheth the reynes of men: when as
the Scripture therefore sayth of Enoch, Noah, Abraham,
Isaacke, and others, that they walked before God, it
signifieth that they walked, that is, liued vprightly, as
in the presence and sight of God, admitting him to be
the witnesse and iudge of all their actions and dealings:
thus were Zachary and Elizabeth sayd to be righteous before
God,Luke 1. 6. that is, vpright persons. And in this sence

vpright actions are said in the Scriptures to be done before
the Lord.Luke 1. 73. 74. In the song of Zacharie we are said to be
redeemed from the hand of our spirituall enemies, to
this end, that we s
                  •
               ould worship the Lord in holinesse
and righteousnesse before him, that is, not as in the sight of
men, who see but the outward shewes, but as in the sight
and presence of God, who seeth and respecteth the
heart.2. Cor. 12. 19. Thus are we with the Apostle to speake, as before
God in Christ:
               2. Cor. 2. 17. thus are we to preach, as before God: thus are
we to heare,Act. 10. 33. 
               as before God, with Cornelius.
            
            2. Againe,Gal. 2. 14. to be vpright, is 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , to walke with a
rightfoot, neither couertly treading awry with Peter,
Gal. 2.1. Kin. 18. 21. nor openly halting, with the Israelits, 1. King. 18.
            3. It is also (as I said) to be void of hypocrisie and
doubling, not to haue an heart and an heart, or to bee
double minded, but to be single hearted. Thus those
things which be vpright, are said to bee 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , vnfained,
and to be performed not with an heart & an heart,
or with a heart diuided or parted, but with an entire or
whole heart. After this manner, the holy ghost speaking
of the Zebulonits.1. Chron. 12. 33. 1. Chron. 12. 33. that they came to
Dauid, nor with an heart and an heart,
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   Vers. 38. doth afterwards expound
himselfe, when speaking of all the Tribes, hee
saith, they came to Dauid with an vpright heart. On the other
side, hypocrits and dissemblers, they speake (as the
Psalmist saith) with an heart and an heart,Psal. 12. 2. and are therfore
called 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               ,Iam. 1. 8. double minded men.
            4. Lastly, this vertue of Vprightnesse is commended
vnto vs vnder other names, viz. synceritie, and truth:
Sinceritie being opposed to mixture, and truth to falsehood,
both which hypocrisie is. Sincere is that which is
without mixture,Sincerum quasi sine cera. as clarified honey is sine cera, without
wax, or as bread without leauen. For which cause, the
vertue of sinceritie is commended vnto vs vnder the
type of the vnleauened bread,1. Cor. 5. 8. with which the feast of
the Passeouer was to be celebrated. As contrariwise,

hypocrisie is signified by leauen,Luke 12. 1. and is called the leauen
of the Pharisies. There were other types also of
the law, wherin the mixture of hypocrisie & doubling
was condemned, and contrariwise sinceritie commaunded
vnto vs. As for example, when the Lord forbad
the Israelits to plant their vineyards with diuerse sorts,Deut. 22. 9, 10, 11.
or to sow their fields with diuerse kinds of seed, or to
plow with an oxe and asse together,Leuit. 19. 19. or to weare garments
of linsey wolsey. But it is also called Truth, as
1. Cor. 5. 8.1. Cor. 5. 8. for this is the truth which the Lord requireth
in the inward parts.Psal. 51. 6. 
               Psal. 51. 6. and wherein he is to bee
worshipped,Iohn. 4. 24. and called vpon. He is therefore said to
walke vprightly,Psal. 145. 18. who behauing himselfe as in the sight
and presence of God, walketh with a right foot without
hypocrisie or dissimulation, in sincertie and truth.
            2.
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . Now that vprightnesse is a proper note to the citisens
of heauen, it may easily appeare by the reciprocall
conuersion which is betwixt them. For if all the citisens
of heauen be vpright, and all that be vpright are
citisens of heauen, then is it manifest, that vprightnesse
agreeth to all that be the sonnes and heires of God, and
to them alone. First then, that all which be heires of the
kingdome of heauen, are vpright, it is euident. For those
that are not vpright, haue none inheritance in heauen.
As Peter telleth Simon Magu
                     •
                  , that he had no part in the
Communion of Saints, because his heart was not right in the
sight of God.
               Act. 8. 21. For hypocrits (as all be that are not vpright,
for not to be vpright, is to be an hypocrite, and not to
be an hypocrite, is to be vpright) neither shall they sojourne
to the end in Gods Tabernacle, neither shal they
rest in the mountaine of Gods holinesse, but contrary to
the priuiledge of the vpright in the last verse, they shall
beremooued both by defection, whereby they seperat
themselues from God in this life; and by exclusion,
whereby they shall bee seperated from God in the life
to come.
            
               
As touching the former, as constancie and perseuerance
is an vnseparable companion of vprightnesse, so
hypocrisie is accompanied with inconstancie, and is
commonly punished with defection.
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   Iam 1. 8 
               The double minded
man is inconstant in all his waies.
               1. Iohn 2. 19. And the Apostle Iohn doth
teach vs, that those which be in the Church, but are not
of it (that is to say, hypocrits) are permitted by the just
judgement of God to fall away, that their hypocrisie
may be detected. And to the same purpose, Bildad the
Shuhite,Iob. 8. 11, 12, 13 
               Can arush (saith he) grow without mire, or can the
grasse grow without water? Though it should be greene, and not
plucked vp, yet shall it wither before any other hearbe. So are the
paths of all that forget God, and the expectation of the hypocrite
doth perish.
               Iob. 27. 8. And as touching the life to come, Iob sheweth
that the hypocrite hath no hope, when God doth take
away his soule. For all their reward they receiue in this
life:Mat. 6. 2. 5. as our Sauiour Christ saith, Verily Isay vnto you, they
haue their reward. They are therefore in no expectation
of reward,Iob. 13. 16. 
               for the hypocrite shall not come into the presence of
God, but are or may be in certain expectation of punishment.
For our Sauiour Christ, when he would signifie,
that the wicked seruant shall certainely be condemned,
he saith, That hee shall haue his portion with the hypocrites,
               Mat. 24. 51.
               where shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth. Those therefore
that be heires of the kingdome of heauen, they be not
hypocrites and dissemblers, but such as are vpright.
Which must teach vs, as wee desire to perseuere in the
faith to the end, and to attaine to the end of our faith,
which is the saluation of our souls; so to humble ourselues,
               Mic. 6. 8.
               to walke with our God, in sinceritie and vprightnesse of
heart.
            Now that all those also which be vpright, are citisens
of heauen, it may euidently be prooued out of the
Scriptures.Psal. 84. 11. For as the Psalmist saith, the Lord will giue
grace and glory (grace in this life, and glory in the life
to come) and no good thing will 
                  •
               ee withhold from

them that walke vprightly. Grace he giueth them with
perseuerance, for the vpright man buildeth vpon the
rocke,Mat 7. and therefore no temptations shall vtterly ouercome
him. He is not onely in the Church, but also of it,
and therefore certainely shall remaine in the communion
of the Church:1. Iohn. 2. 
                     •
                  9. and whosoeuer continueth to the
end,Mat. 24. he shall be saued. Againe, doth the holy ghost call
any blessed, that are not heires of the kingdome of heauen?
But the vpright are by the testimonie of the holy
ghost happie and blessed. Blessed are those that are vpright in
their way.
               Psal. 119. 1. 
               Blessed are those in whose heart there is no guile, that is,
hypocrisie.
               Psal. 32. 2. And to this purpose belongeth that testimony
of Salomon,
               Pro. 20. 7. as Tremellius readeth, the just man that walketh
in his vprightnesse, is blessed, & blessed are his children
after him. And yet the holy ghost is more plain in
testifying this truth.Pro. 28. 18. 
               Prou. 28. 18. He that walketh vprightly,
shall be saued. Psal. 140. 13.Psal. 140. 13. 
               The vpright shall dwell in thy presence.
               Mat. 5. 8.
But most plaine, Mat. 5. 8. Blessed are the pure in heart
(for so hee calleth the vpright) for they shall see God, they
shall haue the vision of God, and enjoy his glorious
presence, in the fruition whereof consisteth our eternall
happinesse. And therefore most fitly, not onely in this
place, but elsewhere also in the Scriptures, is Vprightnesse
made the note and cognisance of the sonnes and
heires of God.Deut. 32. 15 & 33. 5. 26. For this cause Israel is called Ieschurun
to signifie,Esay. 44. 2. that whosoeuer is a true Israelite, is vpright.
Iacob himselfe is commended for this vertue. And of
those that are pure in heart,Gen. 25. 27. it is said Psal. 24, This is Iacob.
               Psal. 24. 4. 6.
So Psal.
               Psal. 73. 1. 73, when the Prophet had said, that God is
good to Israel, in the next words he expoundeth whom he
meant by Israel, namely, the pure in heart. So also our Sauiour
Christ speaking of Nathaniel,
               Iohn 1. 48. 
               Behold (saith he) a true
Israelite in whom there is no guile. For as the Apostle saith,Rom. 2. 28▪ 29.
he is not a Iew which is one outward, but he is a Iew, which is one
within, that is to say, the vpright.
            3. Seeing then as we haue heard, all that are vpright

are citisens of heauen, and contrariwise, all that be citisens
of heauen be vpright; it behooueth vs diligently
to trie and examine our selues, whether this note doth
belong vnto vs or not. For vnlesse we be vpright, wee
shall not rest in Gods holy mountaine; but must looke
to haue our portion with hypocrits, where is weeping
and gnashing of teeth.Mat. 24. 51. To this purpose I will set down
certaine signes and tokens, whereby the vpright and
the hypocrits may be discerned.
            1. And first, the studie and endeuour of the vpright
is to approue himselfe to God, to walke before him,1. Thess. 2. 4. to
discharge a good conscience:1. Cor. 4. 3. the testimonie wherof he
greatly esteemeth and preferreth it to the judgements
of men concerning himselfe. On the other side, the hypocrites
care is to approue himselfe to men, neglecting
the testimony of his owne conscience: and therefore
those good things which he doth, he doth to be seene of
men; and the euill which he omitteth, he leaueth vndone,
least he should be seene of men: for if men be not
acquainted with his doings, he neither careth to doe
good, nor feareth to doe euill.
            2. It is the propertie of vpright men to yeeld simple
and absolute obedience to the word of God, denying
themselues, their owne affections and reason; but
to obey humane precepts, so farre forth as they are not
repugnant to the law of God. But it is the fashion of
hypocrits to obey the commaundements of God, so
further than themselues thinke good, as appeareth in
the example of Saul:
               1. Sam. 15. and more strictly to obserue the
traditions of men,Mat. 15. 6. than the commaundements of God.
            3. A third signe of an vprightman is, so to contemn
the world, and to be wained from worldly desires, as
that hee preferreth the keeping of a good conscience,
before the obtaining of any worldly desires: knowing,
that it will not profit a man to gaine the whole world,
               Mar. 8. 36. 
               and to loose
his owne soule. For he that is not addicted to the world, it

is a good sign that he professeth religion, not for worldly
and by-respects. But the hypocrits guise is to seeme
religious, and to be a wordling; to professe religion, and
to mind earthly things; to diuide himselfe betwixt God
and Mammon,Phil. 3. 19. to giue to God the outward shew, to the
world,Mat. 6. 24. his heart: not first and principally to seeke the
kingdome of God & his righteousnesse, but to professe
religion in a secondarie respect, so farre forth as it jumpeth
with the fruition of his worldly desires, and consequently
to preferre the gaine of the world before the
keeping of a good conscience, and to be ready to sinne,
that he may obtaine any worldly desire.
            4. The propertie of an vpright man is to hate sinne
as well in himselfe as in others, and to bee exercised in
judging himselfe. But the manner of hypocrits is, to
hate sinne in others, but not in themselues; to be busie in
prying into other mens behauiour, and to neglect their
owne; to be quick-sighted to discerne, and very censorious
to judge the offences of their brethren, but haue
neither eyes to see, nor consciences to condemne their
owne sinnes: and as our Sauiour Christ saith of such hypocrits,Mat. 7. 3. 4.
               to see a mote in their brothers eye, and not to discerne a
beame in their owne.
            
            5. The vpright man repenteth of all sinne, hauing an
vnfained purpose and resolution to abstaine from all
sinne, and not to retain any one, howsoeuer besides and
contrary to his purpose hee may faile in some particulars.
But the hypocrite, howsoeuer he may be brought
to abstaine from diuerse sinnes whereunto he is not so
much addicted, yet he will be sure to cherish and retain
some sinne or sinnes that are more deare vnto him, from
which he will by no meanes be reclaimed. Example inMar. 6. 20.
               Herod, who reuerenced Iohn Baptist, and when he heard him, did
many things which Iohn aduised him vnto, and heard him
gladly: but doe Iohn what he could, he would not forgoe
Herodias his brothers wife.
            
               
6. It is the propertie of the vpright, to loue and reuerence
the good and godly for their godlinesse sake, and
to contemne and despise the wicked, though mightie in
the world, because of their wickednesse: as it followeth
Vers. 4, For the world doth loue her own, and hateth those
which belong to Christ.Psal. 15. 4. But hereby we know that we are translated
from death to life,
               Iohn 15. 19. 
               because we loue the brethren. But it is the
manner of hypocrits to stomacke the godly,1. Iohn. 3. 14. to enuie thē
which are better than they, and not to brooke them that
be had in better estimation than themselues. And thus
were the Pharisies affected to Christ.
            7. It is the propertie of the vpright to preferre the
greater & weightier duties before the lesse, the substance
before circumstances, the workes either of pietie or mercie
before ceremonies. But it hath alwayes beene the hypocrits
guise to neglect the greater duties, and to affect
the obseruation of the lesse, to preferre circumstances before
the substance, and ceremonies before the workes either
of pietie or charitie,Luke 13. 15. to place the height of their religion,
either in obseruing or vrging ceremonies, or contrariwise,
in refusing them, and inueighing against them, to
straine out gnats, and to swallow cammels,Mat. 12. 2. 7. to tythe mint
and cummin,Mat. 23. 23, 24. and to neglect the weightier duties of the
law, judgement, mercie, and faith. Consider to this purpose
two examples of the Pharisies and Priests. When
Iudas brought them backe the money which they gaue
him to betray Christ, they would not put in into the treasurie,
because it was the price of bloud:Mat. 27. 6. but the precious
bloud of Christ himselfe they were not afraid to spill, and
to draw the guilt thereof vpon their consciences. They
were not afraid to be defiled by giuing Christ the immaculat
lambe of God through enuie vnto death,Iohn 18. 28. but they
were at the same time afraid to goe into the common hall
least they should be defiled.
            8. Another note of an vpright man, is Humilitie. For
when a man is indued therewith, it is a plaine signe, that

he hathMic. 6. 8. 
               humbled himselfe to walke with his God. As contrariwise,
pride is the companion of hypocrisie, as the Prophet
Habacuc saith,Hab. 2. 4 
               Behold, he that lifteth vp himselfe, his soule is not vpright
in him. For he that walketh with God (as the vpright
man doth) cannot lightly be lifted vp with pride. Indeed
whiles we looke vpon the earth, and behold other men
whom we conceiue to be any way our inferiours, we may
perhaps take some occasion to be lifted vp in a conceit of
our owne excellencie: but hee that hath God before his
eyes, and setteth himselfe alwayes in his presence, he will
be readie with Abraham (although an excellent Patriarch)
standing before the Lord,Gen. 18. 27. to confesse his owne vilenesse;
with Esay that eloquent and zealous Prophet,Esay. 6. 5. to crie out,
That he is a man of polluted lips;Iob. 42. 5. 6. with Iob the patterne of
patience, when he seeth God, to abhorre himselfe, and to
repent in dust and ashes; with Peter being in the presence
of Christ,Luke 5. 8. whom he perceiued to be God, to acknowledge
himselfe a sinfull man.
            9. Againe, the vpright man being indued with a good
conscience, is confident in good causes, and couragious
in time of perill,Pro. 10. 9. as Salomon saith: He that walketh vprightly,
walketh boldly.
               Pro. 28. 1. And againe, The righteous are bold as a Lyon:
but the hypocrite contrariwise, by reason of his bad conscience
is ouertaken with feare,Esay. 33. 14. as the Prophet Esay speaketh,Pro. 28. 1.
and such doe flie when none pursueth.
            
            10. It is the priuiledge of an vpright man to bee constant
in good things, and to perseuere to the end, keeping
also a continued course of pietie: for the vpright man is
he which hath built vpon the rocke,Mat. 7. 24. and therefore cannot
vtterly be ouerthrown by any blasts or tempests of temptations:Luke 8. 15.
it is he which receiueth the seed into good groūd,
and therefore taketh root downward, and bringeth forth
fruit vpward with patience: he being not only in the church
but also of it, shall surely remaine in the Communion of
the Church; and as the Psalmist here saith, shall neuer be remooued.
               Iam. 1. 8. But contrariwise, the double minded man is vnconstant

in all his wayes: his religion and goodnesse is as a morning
cloud, and as the morning dew it goeth away:
               Hos. 6. 4. his profession is

                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                
               for a time, for hauing receiued the seed among
stones,Luke 8. 13. and wanting root, when the Sunne of temptation
ariseth,Mat. 13. 21. he fadeth away; hauing built vpon the sand, whē
the blasts of temptations arise,Mat. 7. 26. his building falleth to the
ground. Hereunto we are to referre patience in affliction,
as a note of the vpright: wherupon affliction is called

                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               ,Iam. 1. 3. the trial of our faith, or 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , whereby

                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               ,1. Pet. 1. 7. those that are found and approued, are knowne
from those which be 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , vnsound.
            11. And to conclude, it is the propertie of the sound
and vpright, to joyne together pietie towards God, and
charietie towards our neighbour, the loue of God, and the
loue of our brother:1. Iohn 4. 20. for it cannot be, that a man should
loue the Lord truly, whom he hath not seene, and loueth
not his brother whom he hath seene: neither do we loue
our neighbour aright, vnlesse we loue him in and for the
Lord.
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . And therefore no man can loue his neighbour as
he ought, vnlesse he loue the Lord much more. The loue
of God therefore, or pietie, if it be sound, will shew it selfe
in the loue of our brother, or in the duties of righteousnesse;
and the loue of our brother, or righteousnesse, if it
be sincere, must be deriued from the fountaine of pietie.
Contrariwise, it is the hypocrits guise to seuer these two,
which the holy ghost hath joyned together, holinesse and
righteousnesse, the obedience of the first and second Table
of the law. For there are many as glorious professors
among vs, as the Pharisies were among the Iewes, who
making profession of religion and pietie towards God,
doe altogether neglect the duties of charitie and righteousnesse
towards men. And againe, many there are among
vs as famous for ciuile vertues, as Aristides or Socrates
among the heathen, who resting in a ciuile conuersation
and outward honestie among men, are void of all religion
and of the feare of God. Both sorts are hypocrits, the

righteousnesse of the former not exceeding the righteousnesse
of the Phariseyes, who notwithstanding their
glorious profession were notorious hypocrits: the righteousnesse
of the latter professing themselues to be Christians,
not exceeding the righteousnesse of the heathen,
who knew not God.
            Now I come to the fourth point, namely, to consider
by what arguments we may be stirred vp to embrace this
vertue, if we want it, or to continue and increase therein,
if we haue it. The arguments may be reduced to three
heads, the excellency, the profit, the necessitie of vprightnesse.
 The excellency of it is so great, that the Lord
accepteth of the vpright indeuour of his children, as perfect
performance; insomuch that vprightnesse (as I haue
said) goeth in the Scripture vnder the name of perfection.
Neither are we otherwise to vnderstand the duties,
which in the word of God are said to bee done with the
whole heart, but that they are performed with an entire
or vpright heart. Therfore those that are vpright, though
they be subject to many infirmities,Luke 1. 6. yet they are esteemed
as just, and that before the Lord, the Lord accepting in
 his vpright seruants, the will, for the deed. Againe, wheras
Christ the bridegrome is said to be delighted with the
beautie of his spouse,Psal. 45. 12. this may not be vnderstood of the
outward apperance,Cant. 1. 5. 6. for so she is something blacke and
browne, by reason of affliction, and the cause thereof
which is sinne; but of the inward beauty, in respect wherof
she is sayd to be all glorious and beautifull within,Psal 45. 13.
which is that vprightnesse or truth in the inward parts,Psal. 51. 6.
                wherewith the Lord is delighted. For this we are also to
adde, that vprightnesse is that wherewith the Lord is especially
delighted: insomuch that to be vpright, and to
please God, in the Scriptures do signifie the same thing:
for whereas it is sayd of E
                     •
                  och Gen. 5.Gen. 5. 22. 24. that he walked before
God,Heb. 11. 20. that is, that hee liued vprightly; it is by the
Apostle thus expounded, That he was sayd to haue pleased

God.
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  
                And the Hebrew word which signifieth to be right
or vpright, doth signifie also to please, that we may know
that he which is right before God, doth please him. As
it is sayd in the Prouerbes,Prou. 11. 20. 
               They which are peruerse in heart are
an abhomination vnto the Lord, but such as are vpright in their way
are his delight. Now this must needs be an excellent virtue
that goeth vnder the name of perfection, which the Lord
esteemeth as the inward beautie of his spouse, which is
not onely pleasing vnto God, but as it were the pleasing
of him.
            But let vs come to the profit, by which consideration
most are led,Psal. 4. 6. as it is sayd Psal. 4. There be many that say, who
will shew vs any good, that is profit. The profit of vprightnesse
may be shewed first in generall, that God is good
and gracious to thē that are vpright. As the Psalmist after
many conflicts,Psal. 73. 1. at length resolueth, Psa. 73. 1. But yet God
is good to Israell, to those that are pure in heart. And this goodnesse
he manifesteth by doing good to them, and causing
all things to worke together for their good, according
to the prayer of Dauid Psal. 125.Psal. 125. 4. 5. 
               Do good O Lord to those that
are good and vpright in heart, but those that turne aside by their crooked
wayes, them shall the Lord send away with the workers of iniquity.
Neither is the goodnesse of God sparing towards
them: For he is a Sunne, that is,Psal. 84. 11. an author and giuer of all
comfortable blessings, and a shield, that is, a protector of
them from all euill, He giueth grace, and glory, and no good
thing doth he with-hold from those that walke vprightly. More
specially the benefits wherewith the Lord doth crowne
the vpright, are either temporall, or spirituall: For as salomon
saith Prou. 2.Prou. 2. 7. 
               The Lord hath laid vp for the vpright, substance,
that is,Prou. 2. 21. whatsoeuer is truly good, and verse 21. The
righteous shall inhabit the land, and the vpright men shall remaine
in it. And as the Lord bestoweth good things vpon the
vpright, so he preserueththem from euill, and is therefore
sayd to be 
                  
                     •
                   shield to them that walke vprightly:
               Prou. 2. 7. or as Dauid
saith,Psal. 7. 10. 
               My shield is in God who giueth saluation, or preserueth the

vpright in heart, according to the saying of the Prophet
Hanani,
               2. Chro. 16. 9. 
               The eyes of the Lord, saith he, behold all the earth, to
shew himselfe strong with them that haue a perfect, that is, an vpright
heart towards him. The spirituall blessings which God
bestoweth on the vpright, are as the Psalmist speaketh,
Grace & Glory:
               Psal. 84. 11. Grace in this life, Glory in the life to come.
The graces which God bestoweth on the vpright, are
many: for sanctifying graces are so linked together, as it
were in a golden chaine, that where some be in truth (as
they are in the vpright) all are in some measure. Among
many others, these spirituall blessings accompany vprightnesse,
Comfort in affliction, and Ioy in the holy
Ghost;Gen. 22. 18. and (which before I spake of) Confidence or spirituall
securitie in worshipping the Lord without feare,Luk. 1. 73. 74. 75.
(which is the blessednesse promised to the faithfull in all
nations, in Abrahams seed, according to the exposition
of Zacharias, Luk. 1.) and also Constancy and Perseuerance.
As touching the former before not touched: Forasmuch
as the vpright (building, not vpon the sand, but vpon the
rocke) haue layd a good foundation against the day of
triall, therefore when as they are afflicted, they faint not,
neither are ouermuch discouraged, but with Dauid in his
greatest distresse, do comfort themselues in the Lord
their God, 1. Sam. 30. 6. And being assured that the Lord
will cause all things,
               Rom. 8. 28. euen their afflictions, to worke to their
good,
               Iob. 13. 15. they resolue with Iob to put their trust in him, though he
kill them. But the vpright haue not onely comfort, but ioy
also in the holy Ghost.Eccles. 2. 26. For God doth giue to him that is good in
his sight, (that is, to the vpright) wisedome, and knowledge, and
ioy.
               Prou. 15. 15. For the vpright haue a good conscience, and a good
conscience is a continuall feast: For this is our reioycing (saith
the Apostle) the testimony of our conscience,
               2. Cor. 1. 12. 
               that we haue had our
conuersation in simplicitie and godly purenesse. And this was
Ezechias his stay when he had receiued the sentence of
death, and which he vsed as an argument vnto the Lord,
to obtaine the lengthning of his life, and preuailed, Lord,
               
saith he,2. King. 20. 3. 
               I beseech thee remember how I haue walked before thee in
truth, and with an vpright heart, and haue done that which is good
in thy sight. For howsoeuer the vpright are sometimes vnder
the crosse:Psal. 97. 11. yet there is light sowne for the righteous, and ioy
for the vpright in heart, which in due time will sprout forth:
yea,Rom. 5. 3. 4. 5 in the mids of their affliction they do reioyce, knowing that
tribulation bringeth forth patience, and patience experience, and experience
hope, and hope maketh not ashamed.
               Psal. 16. 8. And seeing the vpright
do with Dauid, set the Lord alwayes before their
eyes, for he is at their right hand, therefore they must say
with him, I shall not be remoued, wherefore my heart is glad, and
my tongue reioyceth, my flesh also doth rest in hope. With these and
such like blessings the Lord doth reward the vpright in
this life: for after this life eternall saluation abideth them.
He that walketh vprightly,
               Pro. 28. 18. saith Salomon, shall be saued, but he that
is peruerse, or walketh peruersly, in two waies (as double minded
men do) he shal fall in one, or as some read, at once. And to
omit other testimonies, the holy Ghost testifieth in this
place, That he which walketh vprightly shal dwell in the
holy mountaine of God. Finally to conclude all blessings
vnder one blessednesse it selfe is promised to the vpright:
Blessed are those which are vpright in their way.
               Psal. 119. 1. 
               Blessed are the pure
in heart,
               Mat. 5. 8. 
               for they shall see God. And this blessednesse doth not
onely belong to themselues, but it redoundeth also to
their posteritie.Pro. 20. 7. 
               Blessed is the iust man that walketh in his vprightnesse,
               Psal. 112. 2.
               and blessed are his children after him. And againe, The
generation of the vpright shall be blessed.
            
            But it may be you expect examples,Plato. 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . which one calleth
the hostages of our speech, whereby that may appeare
in particuler experience, which the Lord hath confirmed
in generall promise. Let Noah therefore be an example,
whom the Lord because of his vprightnesse,Gen. 7. 1. preserued
in the vniuersall deluge. And likewise vpright
Abraham,
               Gen. 15. 1. to whom the Lord was a shield, and an exceeding
great reward. Dauid professeth, that for as much as he
was vpright before God,Psal. 18. 23▪ 24. the Lord therefore rewarded

him according to his righteousnesse, and the purenesse of
his hands in his sight. And the same is confessed by Salolon
his sonne,1. King. 3. 6. 
               Thou hast (sayth he vnto the Lord) shewed
vnto thy seruant Dau
                     •
                  d my father great mercy, when he walked before
thee in truth, and in righteousnesse, and in vprightnesse of heart
with thee.
               2. King. 20. 3. 5. Of Ezechias you heard before. But omitting other
examples, let vs call to mind the example of Enoch, by
which being the first in this kind, we may best conceiue
what account the Lord maketh of Integritie.Gen. 5. 24. For when
as he walked before God vprightly,Heb. 11. 5. the Lord did therfore
translate him out of this valley of teares, that he
should not see death, and assumed him into heauen, where
he might inioy immortall glorie.
            But if neither the golden reason of excellency can
moue vs, nor the siluer reason of profit allure vs; then
must the yron reason of necessitie enforce vs to Integrity
and vprightnesse of heart. For first, such is the necessity
thereof, that without Integritie the best graces we seeme
to haue are counterfeit, and therefore but glorious sinnes,
the best worship we can performe is but hypocrisie, and
therefore abhominable in Gods sight. For vprightnesse
is the soundnesse of all graces and virtues, as also of all religion
and worship of God, without which they are vnsound
and nothing worth. And first, as touching graces,
if they be not ioyned with vprightnesse of hart, they
are sinnes vnder the maskes or vizards of virtue; yea, as
it may seeme double sinnes: for as Augustine sayth, Simulata
aequitas est duplex iniquitas; quia & iniquitas est,
& simulatio: Fained equitie is double iniquity; both because it is
iniquiti
                     •
                  , and because it is 
                     •
                  aining.
               1. Tim. 1. 5. Wherefore in the Scriptures
it is required that our faith should be 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                
               vnfained,
               2. Tim. 1. 5.
that is,Act. 15. 9. such a faith as inwardly purifieth the hart, and
outwardly worketh by loue,Gal. 5. 6. otherwise it is not a true and
a liuely,Iam. 2. but a counterfeit and dead faith.Rom. 12. 9. Likewise our
loue must be 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                
               vnfained,
               1 Pet. 1. 22. that is, as Iohn saith, we
must loue not in speech and tongue,
               
                  
                     •
                  . Iohn 3. 18. 
               but in deed and truth; Or as

               Paul speaketh, our loue must proceed from a pure heart, a good
conscience and 
                     •
                  aith vnfained.
            
            Our wisedome also must be 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                
               without dissimulation,
               Iam 3. 17.
not that mixt or Machiuilian prudence, which politicke
men in the world so greatly praise, being mixed
with hypocrisie and deceit,Mat. 10. 16. but that prudence of serpents
tempered with the simplicitie of Doues: otherwise it is
as Iames saith,Iam. 3. 15. 
               earthly, carnall, and diuellish.
            
            Lastly, our repentance and conuersion vnto God
must be 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , vnfained and from our whole hart. For
it is not the renting of the garments,Io
                     •
                  l. 2. 12. 13. but of the heart that
pleaseth God.Esay. 58. 5. Neither is it the bowing of the head like a
Bul-rush, but the humiliation, the melting, the contrition
of the heart that is acceptable before him. Such as was
the repentance of Iosiah, 2.2. King. 22. 19. King. 22. not as that of Achab,
1.1. King. 21. 27. King. 21. nor yet as that of the dissembling Israelites,
who made semblance of repentance and turning to God,Psal. 78. 34. 36. 37.
               but their heart was not vpright with him. If therefore without
vprightnesse our faith be dead, our loue cold, our wisedome
diuellish, our repentance counterfeit, then is vprightnes
no lesse necessary to saluation, then I say not any
one of these graces, but thē all. But as those graces which
we may seeme to haue without vprightnes are coūterfeit;
so our religion & worship of God without it is hipocrisie.
For although it be the common practise of mē, not only to
content themselues with a profession of religion & pietie
towards God, neglecting the duties of charitie towards
men, but also to rest in an outward and bodily worship:
notwithstanding it is no true religion before God,Iam. 1. 27 which
is altogether wanting in the duties of charitie, neither is
the outward worship without the inward acceptable vnto
God.Mic. 6. 6. 7. This is notably declared in the Prophecy of Micah,
where to the hypocrite demanding wherewith he should
come before the Lord, and bow himselfe before the high
God, and making large offers, if outward seruice
would stand for good payment, Shall I come before him, saith

he, with burnt offerings, and Calues of a yeare old? will the Lord
he pleased with thousands of Rammes, or with ten thousand riuers of
oyle? shall I giue my first borne for my transgression, the fruit of my
body for the sinne of my soule?
               Vers. 8. Answer is made, He hath shewed
thee, ô man, what is good, and what the Lord requireth of thee; surely
(towards men) to do iustly, and to loue mercie; and (towards
God) to humble thyselfe to walke with thy God. The reasonable
seruice,
               Rom. 12. 1. that is, the spirituall worship of God, is that liuing, holy,
and acceptable sacrifice vnto God.
               Iohn 4. 24. For God is a Spirit, and they that
worship him, must worship him in spirit and truth. As for bodily exercise,
that profiteth little,
               1. Tim. 4. 8. yea, if it be seuered from the spirituall
it hurteth much.Esay 29. 13. Therefore the Prophet denounceth
the fearefull judgements of God against those, who
comming neere vnto him with their mouth, and honoring
him with their lippes, do notwithstanding remoue
their heart farre from him.
            But the truth of this doctrine will more clearely appeare,
if we shall descend into the particuler consideration
of the seuerall parts of Gods worship. As first of
prayer: to the acceptable performance whereof, there is
required vprightnesse, not onely in the action it selfe, but
also in the life of him that prayeth. For as touching the
action it selfe, it is not sufficient to moue the lippes, or to
vtter a certaine number of words as Papists and other
hopocrites do; but our prayer, if it shall be acceptable,
must also be a prayer of theCol. 3. 16. heart, and of theEph. 6. 18. spirit,
aPsal. 25. 1. lifting vp of the soule, aLam. 3. 41. lifting vp of the
heart with the hands, aPsal 62. 8. Lam. 2. 19. 
                     •
                  . Sam. 1. 15. pouring forth of the soule before
the Lord: and to pray aright, is to pray with our
Psal. 111. 1. whole heart, with anPsal. 119. 7. vpright heart, out of a2. Tim 2. 22. pure
heart, withPsal. 17. 1. lippes vnfained: finally, it is to pray in
Psa. 145. 18. truth, that is, in vprightnesse, and to this vpright prayer
is the promise of hearing our prayer restrained. Psal. 145.
18. The Lord is neere to them that call vpon him: What to all?
yea, to all (saith the Prophet, of purpose excluding hypocrites)
that call vpon him in truth. For the Lord in our

prayers doth not so much regard our tongue as our heart.
As for them which draw neare vnto the Lord with
their lippes, and are remooued from him in their heart,
they abuse the Maiesty of God,Hos 7. 13. 14. whiles crying vnto him,
but not from their hearts,Psal. 78. 36. they lye vnto God, and go about
to deceiue him with their lippes, and by their hypocrisie
to cast as it were a mist before his eyes. But herein
they are greatly deceiued: For how soeuer masking vnder
the vizards of hypocrisie, they may hide themselues
from men: yet before God such maskers do as it were
daunce in a net, for before him all things,Heb. 4. 13. euen the secrets
of mens hearts are naked and open.Prou. 15. 11. 
               Hell and destruction are
before the Lord, how much more the hearts of the sonnes of men? But
as I said, vprightnesse also is required in the life of him
that prayeth.Psal. 66. 18. To which purpose we haue a notable testimony
of Dauid. Psal. 66. If I regard wickednesse in mine hart
(sayth he) the Lord will not heare me.
               Esay1. 15. For the Lord heareth
not hypocrites: and such as turne away their eare from
hearing,Prou. 
                     •
                  8. 9. that is, obeying his law, their prayer is abhominable.
            Let vs now come to the ministerie of the word, to the
preaching and hearing whereof, righteousnesse is necessarily
required. To the preaching of the word, that we
may be able to say with the Apostle,2. Cor. 2. 17. that we are not as many
which make merchandise of the word of God, but as of sincerity,
but as of God in the sight of God we speake in Christ. And againe,
so we speake, not as they that please men,
               1. Thes▪ 2. 4. 
               but God which trieth our
hearts: For if we should seeke to please men,
               Gal. 1. 10. 
               we were not the seruants
of Christ. Now he doth behaue himselfe vprightly
in the ministerie of the word,2. Tim. 2. 15. who as the Apostle admonisheth
Timothie, doth studie and indeuour to shew himselfe approued
vnto God, a workeman that needeth not to be ashamed, diuiding
the word of truth aright. Who hath the testimony of his owne
conscience, that he setting aside all sinister respects, doth
sincerely and from his hart seeke the glory of God in the
saluation of the people, and not himselfe or his owne, either

profit or praise. Of which Integritie they come very
short, who seeking not to profit their hearers, but to please
them, endeuour not to approoue themselues to God, but
to carnall men, neither seeke the glory of God, but their
owne praise, nor the saluation of the people, but their own
profit and preferment in the world.
            But as in the minister that preacheth, so also in the people
that heareth the word of God,Eccles. 4. 17. Vprightnesse is required.
To which purpose, before they come to the house of
God, they ought to looke to their feet, that is, their affections,
and to put off the shoes of their feet, that is, their corrupt
affections, and with sincere affections they are to desire
the sincere milke of the word,1. Pet. 2. 1. that they may grow
thereby. The purpose and desire of him who commeth
to the hearing of Gods word, must be to performe therein
an holy and vpright worship vnto God; and with all
good conscience and sinceritie to vse the ministerie of the
word, as the power of God to our saluation, &c. But they
that come to heare the word, either for fashion sake, because
we haue such a custome, as carnall professors vse to
doe, or because the lawes of men require it, as those which
among vs are popishly affected, or because they would
seeme to some, that they are religious, or at the least not
irreligious, as dissemblers doe, or because they would see
and be seene, as many proud and vaine persons do, or because
they would take a nap, as some secure and s
                  •
               outhfull
persons doe, or because they would carpe and snatch
at the preachers words, as malitious persons doe, or because
they would heare and judge of the gifts of the preacher,
and so giue their censure of his sermon, as diuerse
glorious professours vse to doe, or if they come with the
same affection to a sermon, as they goe to a stage-play,
that is, to be delighted, as those which haue itching eares
vse to doe, or if they come into the assembly, as Cato was
wont to come to the stage, namely▪ that in shew of his dislike
he might goeout againe, as some conceited and humorous

persons vse to doe, or to passe the time, because
they haue nothing else to doe, as some that liue inordinatly,
either wholly neglecting their calling, or hauing no
honest calling to walke in; all which are practised by hypocrits
of diuerse sorts, assuredly they are farre from that
integritie which is required in those that come to heare
Gods word.
            When we are come to the ministerie of the word, our
dutie is to take heed how we heare,Luke 8. 18. as our Sauiour Christ
admonisheth. For our bodily presence wil not suffice, vnlesse
we behaue our selues vprightly in the hearing of the
word. Our first dutie therefore is, when we are come into
the assembly, to set our selues in Gods presence, that we
may say with vpright Cornelius,
               Act. 10. 33. we are here present before
God to heare all things that the minister hath in commission
to deliuer vnto vs from God: and when the minister
speaketh, we are to look higher than to him, remembring
that hee is an embassadour of God in Christs stead,2. Cor. 5. 20. by
whom the Lord speaketh vnto vs: and therefore as hee
which speaketh must speake as the Oracles of God,
               1. Pet. 4. 11. so he which
heareth 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , the word preached,
               1. Thess. 2. 13. must heare it not as the
word of man, but as it is indeed the word of God. Our next dutie
is to heare the word with an vpright desire to profit by it,
and an vnfained purpose to practise it.Act. 8. 6. In regard of the
former, we are diligently to attend to the word,Luke 19. 48. and as it
were to hang on the preachers mouth,Heb. 2. 1. as being loath to
let any thing s
                  •
               ip from vs,Esay 42. 23. but carefully to lay it vp in our
hearts for our future vse, and in a word so to heare, as wee
desire to be heard: For want of this vprightnesse they
offend, who being present in body, are absent in mind,
their eares going on pilgrimage, their minds going a
whoring after the vanities of this life, and their heart, as
Ezekiel speaketh,Ezec. 33. 31. going after their couetousnesse; but especially
they offend, who when they should listen to the
word of God, doe giue themselues ouer to sleepe. In regard
of the latter, our dutie is to heare the word of God

with an honest and good heart,Luke 8. 15. and therein to retaine it;
or as Salomon saith to keepe it in the mids of our heart,Pro. 4. 21. that
there it taking root, may bring forth fruit with patience.
As for them,Eze. 33. 31, 32. who with Ezechiels auditours come to heare
the word, without any true purpose to performe it; as they
shew themselues to be hypocrits in deceiuing others,Iam. 1. 22. 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . so
they play the sophisters in beguiling themselues.
            The like may bee said of receiuing the Sacraments.
For what would it auaile vs,Act. 8. 21. 23. if with Simon Magus wee bee
baptized, and beleeue with a generall faith? For vnlesse
our hearts be vpright within vs before God, we may remaine
as he did in the gall of bitternesse, and bond of iniquitie.
Or what would it profit vs, if after the example of
Iudas Iscariot we be admitted to the Lords table, and could
so cunningly carry our selues,Mat. 26. 22. as euery one of the Apostles
should be more ready to suspect the mselues than vs?
for if our heart be not vpright within vs, but that we giue
the outward face and shew to God, and set our hearts vpon
the world, halting betwixt God and Mammon, and
esteeming gaine to be godlinesse;Iohn 12. 6. we may be theeues, yea
diuels as he was.Iohn 6. 70. And not to insist any longer in the seuerall
parts of Gods worship, this may be said of all externall
worship in generall, that so oft as it is seuered from
the inward & spirituall worship of God, it is hypocritical
and detestable in the sight of God. To which purpose the
Lord professeth by his Prophet,Esay 66. 3. 
               That he which killeth a bullocke,
is as if he slew a man: he that sacrificeth a sheep, as if he cut off a
dogs necke: he that offereth an oblation, as if he offered swines bloud:
he that remembreth incense, as if he blessed an idole. Wee must
therefore beware least we rest in the performance of outward
seruice, or cōtent our selues with opere operato, the deed
done; which is the rotten pillar of popish superstition. For
it is not sufficient to doe that which is right, vnlesse we do
it with an vpright heart.2. Chro. 25. 2. 14 If with Amaziah wee doe that
which is right, but not with an vpright heart, we may fall
away as he did. Wherefore that exhortation which the

Apostle maketh to mens seruants, much more belongeth
to vs,Col. 3. 23. who are the seruants of God, namely, That we shold
performe our duties towards him from our heart, not in
eye-seruices, as men-pleasers, but with simplicitie of heart
fearing God, and from our hearts obeying the holy will
and commaundements of God.Rom. 6. 17. Out of all which it appeareth
euidently, that without vprightnesse of heart,
neither the graces of the spirit, which wee may seeme to
haue, are of any worth; or our worship, of any account
with God. But howsoeuer the most excellent graces
without it be glorious sinnes, and the most glorious worship
counterfeit, yet on the other side, where vprightnesse
is, the graces which we haue, though as small as a graine
of mustard seed, and our worship, though performed in
much weakenesse, is acceptable vnto God.
            The second argument is taken from the authoritie of
God himselfe, auowing the necessitie of vprightnesse.
And hereunto appertaineth first the testimonie both of
the holy ghost in this place, affirming, That those who are
to dwell in Gods holy mountaine, are such as walke vprightly;
as also of our Sauiour Christ,Mat. 5. 20. 
               Matth. 5. denying,
that we shall euer enter into the kingdome of heauen, vnlesse
our righteousnesse exceed the righteousnesse of the Scribes and
Pharisies. The righteousnesse which the Pharisies obserued
themselues, and taught others to obserue, was altogether
outward, whereby they abstained from outward and
more grosse offences, neglecting inward and s
                  •
               cret corruptions.
Secondly, the commaundement of God enjoyning
vprightnesse. For this is the especiall dutie which
we are to performe towards God,Mic. 6. 8. 
               viz. that wee bumble our
selues to walke with our God. For when the Lord was to establish
his couenant with Abraham and his seed, this condition
he requireth to be performed on their part,Gen. 17. 1. 
               to walke
before him, and to be vpright. This is that which Dauid commendeth
to Salomon as his last will and testament,1. Chron. 28. 
                     〈◊〉
                  
                
               Know
thou the God of thy father, and serue him with an vpright heart and

a willing mind,
               Ios. 24. 14. which Iosua in his last speech commendeth
to the people of Israel, that they should worship the Lord in
spirit and truth. As Moses also before had charged them.
Deut. 18.Deut. 18. 13. 
               Thou shalt be vpright therefore before the Lord thy God.
For seeing the Lord is a spirit,
               Iohn 4. 23▪ 24. 
               he will therefore be worshipped in
spirit and in truth. And as himselfe is a spirit, so is his law spirituall,
restraining not onely the hand and tongue,Rome. 7. 14. but also
the heart. Now the commaundement of God imposeth a
necessitie, not absolute indeed, but with this condition, If
we will auoid his curse. Thirdly, the same is prooued by
the oath of God,Luke 1. 73. 75. which he sware vnto our father Abraham,
that he would giue vs, who are the sonnes of Abraham,
and heires of promise, that being deliuered out of the
hands of our enemies, we should worship him without
feare in holinesse and righteousnesse before him. For as the
commaundement of God imposeth the necessitie of dutie,
so the oath of the Lord imposeth a necessitie of certainetie,
or as the schoolemen speake, of infallibilitie. And
therefore if we doe not walke vprightly, worshipping the
Lord, as before him, it is as certaine as the oath of the Lord
is true, that we can haue no assurance that wee are redeemed
by Christ out of the world, to raigne with him in his
holy mountaine.
            The third and last argument, enforcing the necessitie
of vprightnesse, may be this: For either wee must be vpright,
or hypocrits. There is no third: for not to bee vpright,
is to be an hypocrite, and not to be an hypocrite, is
to be vpright. But we may in no case be hypocrites. For
hypocrisie is a sinne most odious vnto God, most foolish
in it selfe, most pernicious to them that are infected therewith.
It is most odious vnto God: for as the vpright are
the Lords delight,Pro. 11. 20. so the hypocrit is an abhomination
vnto him.Luke. 16. 15. 
               For that which is highly esteemed among men, is abhomination
in the sight of God. And not without cause: For all hypocrisie
and doubling is a double if not a triple sinne: for
counterfeit pietie is double impietie, both because it is impietie,

and because it is counterfeit. And as hypocrisie is
a counterfeiting, it containeth also two sinnes opposed to
simplicitie and truth; both which are comprised in integritie,
viz. falshood opposed vnto truth, as it is mendacium
facti, and deceit or guile opposed vnto simplicitie, as duplicitie
or doubling. The hypocrite in respect of his falsehood
and disguising, in the Greeke tongue is called 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               ,
that is, a stage-player, who although perhaps he be little
better than a rogue, representeth sometimes the person
of a prince or monarch. Those therefore are hypocrits,
who lead their life as it were vpon a stage, cloaking
sinne vnder the shew of vertue, hauing some 
                  •
               orme or
vizard of pietie, but denying the power of it,2. Tim. 3. 5. 
               Qui in superficie
boni sunt, sed in alto mali, as Augustine speaketh, who
seeme to honour God with their lips,Mat. 
                     •
                  5. 8. but remooue their
heart farre from him; who desiring to seeme good, but not
to be so, and not to seeme euill,Mat. 23. 25. but to be so; make cleane
the outside of the cup, and of the platter, but within they
are full of briberie and excesse:Mat. 23. 27. and are therefore compared
by our Sauiour Christ to painted sepulchres, which
appeare beautifull outward, but are within full of dead
mens bones and all filthinesse. And as the fruit which
groweth neere to Mare mortuum, when it is ripe maketh
a faire shew, but within is full of cinders or ashes, as some
write:Mat. 23. 28. so these men outwardly appeare righteous vnto
men, but within they are full of hypocrisie and iniquitie.
            But as in the disguising of hypocrits there is falshood,
so in their doubling there is guile, wherby they indeuouring
to deceiue both God and man, do in the end beguile
themselues. And therefore not vnworthily is hypocrisie
in the Scriptures tearmed guile.Psal. 32. 2. And first, they foolishly
goe about to deceiue God,Iohn 1. 47. the searcher of the heart, when
they hope by a counterfeit semblance of religion to blear
his eyes, and by vaine shewes to please him, whiles they
securely abound with more hidden and secret sins: which
seemeth to haue been the hypocrisie of the Israelits, reprooued

by the Prophet Esay, chap. 58.Esay 58. 2. After this maner
doe they offend: first, when they pray with fained lips,
pretending such things in their prayer, as they do not intend,
asking such things with their lips, as they do not desire
with their heart, promising such things as they mean
not to performe, and bearing the Lord in hand with the
Pharisie, Luke 18. that they be such persons as indeed they
are not: for these men, after the example of the Israelits,
whose heart was not right within them, goe about to deceiue
the Lord with their mouth,Psal. 78. 36. 37. and with their tongue
they lie vnto him. Secondly, when as they either commit
secret sinnes, that God may not see them; or hauing sinned,
doe seeke to conceale their sinnes from God, that he
may not know them: for such is the folly of hypocrits,
that because they whē they hide themselues, see not God,
they imagine that God seeth not them; like to the silly
woodcocke, which when she hath so hid her head, that
she seeth no body, she imagineth that no body seeth her.
Thirdly, whereas the whole course of their life is leaud
and dissolute, they will seeke to pacifie God with some
outward obseruations, and those perhaps deuised by
themselues: And this is the ordinarie practise of Papists,
who when they haue fearefully sinned against God,Esay 1. 11. &c. they
will make him a plaster of their owne satisfactions.
            But the most vsuall practise of hypocrits is to deceiue
men, to whom they desire especially by outward shewes
to approoue themselues, pretending a profession of religion
both to their worldly and their wicked respects. To
their worldly respects, when as vnder the profession of
religion they seeke the world, and the things which are
in the world, subordinating religion to their worldly desires,
and professing Christianitie in a secondarie respect,
so farre foorth as it standeth with the obtaining or retaining
of their worldly desires, &c. To their wicked respects,
when they make religion a cloke for their wickednesse.
Thus heretiques to countenance their errours, prepretend

holinesse:Mat. 23. 14. Thus the Pharisies vnder a pretence
of long prayers,Iohn 12. 5, 6. deuoured widdowes houses: Thus Iudas
couered his couetousnesse vnder a pretended care for the
poore:1. King. 21. 9. Thus Iesabell when she intended the murder of Naboth,
proclaimeth a fast:2. Sam. 15. 8. 
               Absolon when he intended treason
against his father,Mat. 28. 13. 16. pretended the keeping of a vow: H
                     •
                  rod
professed to the wise men, that he would goe and worship
Christ, when he meant to kill him.
            Againe, the hypocrite seemeth to sinne with an high
hand against the light of his conscience, detaining the
truth in vnrighteousnesse, seeing the better things, and
following the worse.In Esay 1
                     •
                  . And therefore Hierome sayth, That
in comparison of two euils, it is lesse to sinne openly, than
to faine holinesse.
            But hypocrisie, as it is double iniquitie, and therefore
most odious vnto God, so is it extreame folly: for the hypocrite,
whiles he seeketh to deceiue not onely man, but
God also, who cannot be deceiued, he beguileth himselfe.
For he that would seeme religious,Iam. 1. 26. and hath not learned
to refraine his tongue, but letteth loose the reines to his
vnbrideled tongue, as hypocrites vse to doe in censuring,
backbiting, and slaundering their brethren, such an one
deceiueth his owne heart, his religion is vaine. Likewise,
he that is an hearer of the word,Iam. 1. 22. but no doer of it (that is
to say, an hypocrite) such a one deceiueth himselfe; and is
indeed that foolish man,Mat. 7. 26. who (as our Sauiour sayth) doth
build vpon the sand. Those that content themselues with
the shining lampe of an outward profession, wanting the
oyle of grace in their hearts,Mat. 25. 3. are by our Sauiour Christ
compared to the foolish virgins. For seeing it is better to
be good than to seeme so, and worse to be euill, than to
seeme so, is it not extreame folly in hypocrites to chuse
to be euill rather than to seeme euill, and to seeme good
rather than to be good? The folly of these men therfore
is worthily noted by Chrisostome;
               Oper. imperf. in Matth. 
               Hypocrit, saith he, if it bee
good to be good, why wilt thou seeme to be that which thou wilt not

be? If it be euill to be euill, why wilt thou be that which thou wilt not
seeme to be? If it be good to seeme good, it is better to be so: if it be euill
to seeme euill, it is worse to be so. Wherfore, either seem to be that which
thou art, or be that which thou seemest to be. Againe, is it not extream
folly for a man, that he may haue with thē of Sardis
the name that he liueth, to be content to be dead;Apoc 3. 1. & that
he may seem to be in the number of thē that shalbe saued,
willingly to be in the number of thē that shall be cōdemned?
Lastly, hypocrisie is pernicious to him that is infected
therewith, because it is a sinne which the Lord doth grieuous
                  •
               y
punish both in this life, & in the world to come: in
this life, first by defection, & consequently by detection.
For those which be in the Church, but not of it, they are
subiect to defection or falling away, & thē the Lord suffereth
to fall away, that their hypocrisie may be detected,1. Iohn 2. 1
                     •
                  . as
the apostle Iohn sheweth. For the hypocrit is he which hath
receiued the seed into stony ground, & therfore wanting
moisture & root,Luke 8. 13. is not able to indure the Sun of tēptation,
but is like the rush without water,Iob. 8. 11▪ 12▪ 13 or like the grasse on the
house top, which withereth before it be plucked vp. Vpon
triall therefore the hypocrite faileth, and by his failing
his vnsoundnesse is detected. And this is the reason wherby
the sonne of Syrach dissuadeth from hypocrisie:Eccles. 1. 35. for
God (saith he) will discouer thy secrets, & cast thee down
in the middest of the congregation, because thou camest
not in truth vnto the feare of God, but thine heart is full of guile.
And likewise our Sauiour,Luke 12. 1, 2. 
               Beware (saith he) of the leauen of
the Pharisies, which is hypocrisie. For there is nothing couered that shal
not be reuealed, neither hid, that shall not be knowne. And as touching
the life to come, there is such assurance of the hypocrites
damnation, that our Sauiour Christ, when hee
would signifie,Mat. 24. 51. that the wicked seruant, Math. 24, should
certainely be condemned, he saith, He shal haue his portion
with hypocrits, where shall be weeping and gnashing
of teeth.Mat. 5. 8. For as the vpright or pure in heart are blessed, because
they shall see God:
               Iob. 13. 16. so are the hypocrites accursed, for

they shall not see him. Againe, so pernicious is hypocrisie
to the double minded man, that there is lesse hope of
an hypocrite than of an open sinner: first, because he sinneth
against the light of his conscience: secondly, because
by his outward shewes he bleareth the eyes of men, wherby
he escapeth those admonitions and reproofes, whereby
the open sinner many times is reclaimed. And lastly,
because in his pride and selfe-loue hee posteth ouer all
publick reprehensions and exhortations to the open sinners,
because he is assured, that in the opinion of others
they belong not vnto him. And this is that which our Sauiour
Christ sayth to the hypocriticall Scribes and Pharisies,Mat. 21. 31.
That Publicans and harlots should goe into the kingdome of
God bef
                     •
                  re them.
            
            Seeing therefore vprightnesse is a grace so excellent,
that it goeth vnder the name of perfection, and is esteemed
as the beautie of Christs spouse, wherewith hee is
especially delighted: so profitable, that to them which
walke vprightly, the Lord denieth nothing that is good,
but giueth them Grace in this life, and Glory in the life to
come, and not onely maketh them blessed, but their posteritie
also after them: so necessarie, as that without it our
best graces are counterfeits, and our best worship of God
hypocrisie, and our selues hypocrits, who shall neuer see
God, but shall haue our portion with hypocrits, where is
weeping and gnashing of teeth; how doth it behooue vs
to labour for this grace, which is so excellent in it selfe, so
pleasing vnto God, so profitable and necessarie vnto vs,
and contrariwise to auoid the contrary sinne of hypocrisie
which is so odious vnto God, so foolish in it selfe, and
so pernicious vnto vs? And to this purpose, that wee may
come to the fifth and last thing, let vs obserue these few
rules:Psal. 16. 8. first, let vs according to the example of Dauid,
learne to set God alwayes before our eyes, and our selues
in the sight and presence of God. And to this end let vs
meditate euermore both of his omnipresence, remembring

that he is alwayes present with vs in all places, neither
can we possibly auoid his presence,Psal. 139. 7. as the Psalmist
teacheth: as also of his omniscience, remembring, That
the eyes of the Lord are in euery place beholding the euil and the good,
               Pro. 15. 3.
and not only looking vnto the outward actions and speeches,
but also beholding the inward affections of the
heart,Psal. 139. 2. and cogitations of the mind, euen before wee conceiue
them, that so we may learn to walke with our God,
approouing our selues vnto him, and so behauing our
selues, as those which haue their conuersation in the sight.
and presence of God. Who knoweth not how decently
and reuerently we carry our selues whiles wee are in the
sight and presence of our superiours, especially of our
prince. Therefore Senec a admonisheth his friend Lucilius,
that he would set before him Cato or Laelius,
               Epist. 11. in fin. or some other
graue and reuerend man, that he might liue as in his sight:
for as he sayth, Magna pars peccatorum tollitur, si peccaturis testis
assistat: a great part of our sinnes is taken away, if when
wee are about to sinne, there bee a witnesse by vs. How
much more would the presence of almightie God strike
a reuerence into vs,Heb. 11. 27. if we had the eyes of Moses, the eyes of
faith, whereby he saw him that is inuisible, and is alwayes
present with vs: especially, if wee considered, that the
Lord seeth not as man seeth, for man looketh vnto the
outward appearance,1. Sam. 16. 7. but the Lord beholdeth the heart;
and that not onely the bodies of men, but the soules also
are manifest before him. Hell and destruction are before
the Lord,Prou. 15. 11. how much more the hearts of the sonnes of
men? By this argument Dauid exhorteth Salomon his sonne
to vprightnesse,1. Chro. 28. 9. 1. Chron. 28. And thou my sonne Salomon,
saith he, Know thou the God of thy father, & serue him with an vpright
heart & with a willing mind; for the Lord searcheth all hearts,
and vnderstandeth all the imaginations of thoughts.
            
            Secondly, to the meditation of his omnipresence and
omniscience, let vs adde the consideration of his omnisufficiencie,
remembring as the Prophet Hanani said to

               Asa, That the eyes of the Lord behold all the earth,
               2. Chron. 16. 9. 
               to shew himselfe
strong with them that are of an vpright heart towards him, and that
as Salomon saith,Pro. 2. 7. 
               He is a shield to them that walke vprightly, and
not that onely,Psal. 84. 11. but as Dauid sayth, He is the Sunne (that is, author
of all comfortable blessings) and a shield (that is a preseruer
and protectour from euill) the Lord will giue grace and
glory, and no good thing will he withhold from them that walke vprightly.
And this is the argument which the Lord vseth to
moue Abraham to integritie,Gen. 17. 1. 
               Gen. 17. I am God all-sufficient,
walke before me and be vpright. For assuredly, if we did effectually
call to mind Gods all-sufficiencie, we would neuer
be so foolish, as to play the hypocrits, approouing our
selues to men rather than to God; seeing he is all-sufficient
to crowne vs with blessings, & to shield vs from euill.
Whereas men can neither doe vs good, vnlesse God bee
pleased to vse them as his instruments, whereby hee will
conuey his blessings vnto vs, neither can they do vs harm
vnlesse God doe vse them as his rods, whereby to correct
vs.
            Thirdly, to the former let vs joyne a serious meditation
of the last judgement: namely, that God all-sufficient
who is euery where present, and is acquainted with al our
secrets,Rom. 2. 16. shall one day iudge the secrets of men: and will bring
euery worke vnto iudgement with euery secret thing,
               Eccles. 12. 14. 
               whether it bee
good or euill. Let vs therefore set God before our eyes, sitting
in judgement, remembring that we must all appeare before
the iudgement seat of Christ,
               2. Cor. 5. 10. 
               that 
                     •
                  uery man may receiue according
to those things which he hath done in the body, whether good or
euil, whether open or secret, whether alone or with others,
whether in light or darkenesse, by day or by night. For
darkenesse hideth not from God,
               Psal. 139. 12. 
               but the night shineth as the day, the
darkenesse and light are both alike. Let vs not therfore content
our selues with an externall profession of religion, and
outward shew of vertue, when as our hearts be not vpright
within vs, but are possessed with hypocrisie, and abound
with secret sinnes. For an externall profession seuered

from vprightnesse of heart, shall no whit auaile
thee at the day of judgement, for God shall judge the secrets
of men, but it shall be very prejudiciall vnto thee,
increasing thine horrour and confusion. For how shalt
thou be confounded, thinkest thou, who hast made a profession
of religion, when the bookes being opened, and
thy secret sinnes laid open before all the world, thou shalt
be conuicted of hypocrisie, & condemned of many foule
sinnes vnrepented of, which thou hadst laboured to conceale
from the world? And with what horrour shalt thou
be striken,Mat. 24. 51. supposest thou, when thy portion shall be assigned
thee with the hypocrits, where is weeping and
wailing, and gnashing of teeth? Remember that many in
the day of judgement shall say,Mat. 7. 22, 23. Lord, Lord, haue not we
prophecied in thy name, and cast our diuels in thy name,
and done many great workes in thy name? to whom the
Lord shall answere, I neuer knew you, depart from mee
you workers of iniquitie.Mat. 25. 3. 12. Call to mind the fiue foolish
virgins, who hauing lampes, but no oyle, were excluded.
If therefore we would not depart ashamed from our Sauiour
Christ at his comming, wishing the mountaines to
fall vpon vs, and to couer vs from his sight, but would
stand before the sonne of man with comfort, let vs endeuour
to approoue our selues in the meane time to Christ
our judge, walking before him in vprightnesse of heart,
and so demeaning our selues, as those who thinke that of
their most secret thoughts, words, and deeds there must
an account be giuen to God, who searcheth the heart and trieth
the reines,
               Ier. 17. 10. 
               that he may giue euery man according to his waies, and
according to the fruit of his workes.
            
            Fourthly and lastly, let vs follow the aduise of Salomon,
Prou.Pro. 4. 23. 4. Aboue all obseruation to keepe our heart. For the heart, as
it is the fountaine of life, so of liuing well or ill; from
whence all our speeches and actions, as it were streames,
doe flow and proceed. Those things which come out of the
mouth (sayth our Sauiour Christ) come from the heart.
               Mat. 15. 18, 19. 
               For out of

the heart come euill thoughts, murders, adulteries, fornications, thef
                     •
                  s,
false testimonies,Luke 6. 45. slaunders. And againe, The good man out of the
good treasure of his heart bringeth 
                     •
                  oorth good things, and the euill
man out of the euill treasure of his heart bringeth forth euill things:
for out of the aboundance of the heart the mouth speaketh, and also
the hand worketh. If therefore we desire, that our actions
and speeches may bee good and pure, wee must first
haue our hearts purified by a true faith:1. Tim. 1. 5. that so our loue
and obedience may flow from a pure heart, and good
conscience, and faith vnfained. For it cannot be, that the
streames of our actions should be good and sincere, if the
fountaine of our heart be corrupt. Wherefore in reforming
our liues, our first and chiefe care must be for the
purging of our hearts, as our Sauior Christ admonisheth,
Mat. 23. Cleanse first (saith he) the inside of the cup and platter,
               Mat. 23. 26. 
               that
the outside of them may be cleane also.
               Iam. 4. 8. And Iames, Purge your heart
you double minded (saith he) and not your hands onely. For
what will it auaile vs to drie vp the streames, whiles the
fountaine springeth: or to lop off the boughs, whiles the
body and root doe remaine vntouched? Surely, if with
Amaziah we shall doe those things which be right,2. Chro. 25. 2. 14 but not
with an vpright heart, we shall fall away as he did. If with
Simon Magus we professe our selues to beleeue,Act. 8. 21. and joyne
our selues to the Saints of God, notwithstanding we may
be as he was in the gall of bitternesse and bond of iniquitie,
if our heart be not vpright within vs. This neglect of
the heart is the cause of all hypocrisie, making men double
minded, bearing as wee say, two faces vnder a hood.
Wherby it commeth to passe, that the most glorious professours
sometimes become like to Summer fruit, which
many times being faire and mellow on the outside, is rotten
at the core.
            Now, that we may the rather be stirred vp to a diligent
obseruation of our heart, we are briefely to consider these
two things. First, that the heart of man is deceitfull and
wicked aboue all things,Ier. 17. 9. and therefore cannot sufficiently

be watched. And secondly, that such as is the qualitie of
the heart, such is the qualitie of the man in the estimation
of God.
            Hetherto we haue spoken of integritie, as it is referred
vnto God: it followeth now, that wee should intreat
thereof, as it hath reference vnto men. For as wee must
walke before God in truth and sinceritie without hypocrisie;
so must we haue our conuersation among men in
simplicitie and singlenesse of heart, without dissembling
or guile. For euen in our conuersation among men, wee
are to haue God alwayes before our eyes, that as in his
presence and sight wee may in singlenesse of heart performe
such duties as we owe vnto men.Col. 3. 22. For howsoeuer
simplicitie is accounted folly in the world, and worldly
wisedome, consisting of dissimulation and deceit, be euery
where extolled: yet if we would be esteemed citisens
of heauen, and pilgrims on earth, it behooueth vs to bee
fooles in the world, that we may become truly wise, as the
Apostle exhorteth,2. Cor. 3. 18. 1. Cor. 3. Let no man deceiue himselfe. If any
man among you seeme to be wise in this world, let him be a foole, that
he may be wise, for the wisdome of this world is foolishnesse with God.
Not that I would haue simple men to be fooles, but that
wise men ought to be simple.Mat. 10. 16. For true wisdome is tempered
with the simplicitie of doues.Iam. 3. 17. And that wisedome
which is from aboue, is pure, and without hypocrisie.
Whereas on the other side, the wisedome of the world,
consisting of dissimulation and deceit, is by the censure
of S. Iames, earthly, carnall, and diuellis
                     •
                  .
               Iam. 3. 15. It is true indeed, that
in the world simplicitie is deemed folly, and simple men
are accounted as idiots, and innocent men esteemed fools.
For such a generall wickednesse hath possessed the minds
of most men, that now adayes no man is called innocent,
but such as want wit to doe euill. And contrariwise, that
mixed prudence is commended in the world, which is

                  •
               oyned with h
                  •
               pocrisie and deceit. Which notwithstanding
it were easie for any man to attain vnto, who makes

no conscience of dissembling, lying, facing, swea
                  •
               ing, forswearing.
But in the Scriptures simplicitie is both commended
and commaunded as a note of the citisen of heauen,
without which there is no entrance for a man into
the kingdome of God. Christ commaundeth his followers
to be wise indeed as serpents, but withall to be 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               ,Mat. 10. 16. that
is, simple or sincere, without any mixture of guile, as doues
are without gall. And likewise Paule would haue vs wise vnto
that which is good,
               Rom. 16. 19. 
               but simple vnto euill. In regard hereof the
primitiue Church,Act. 2. 46. 
               Act. 2. is highly commended, that they
conuersed together in singlenesse of heart: and herein especially
the Apostle glorieth,2. Cor. 1. 1
                     •
                  . 2. Cor. 1. That in simplicitie and
godly purenesse, and not in fles
                     •
                  ly wisedome, he had had his conuersation
in the world.
               Iohn 1. 48. And no maruell, for it is the note of a true
Israelite to be without guile: and such the holy ghost pronounceth
blessed. Christ our Sauiour in respect of this simplicitie
is called a lambe;
               Psal 32. 2. and those that will be his followers,
must not be foxes or wolues, but as they are called in
the Scriptures, sheepe, following the steps of our Sauiour
Christ,1. Pet. 2. 21▪ 22. 
               who did no sinne, neither was there guile found in his mouth.
And hereunto let vs adde the testimonie of the holy ghost
in this place, affirming, That those which shall dwell in
the holy mountaine of God, are such as walke vprightly,
that is, without hypocrisie towards God, without guile
towards men.Mark. 12. 15. Now this guile or dissembling, or doubling,
or hypocrisie (for so sometimes it is called) which is
opposed vnto simplicitie,Luk. 20. 23. is twofold, in word, and in fact:
in word, when one thing is said, and another thought,
which in the Scriptures phrase,Psal 12. 2. is speaking with an heart
and an heart.
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . I liad. 9. This diuorce betwixt the mind and the
tongue, is detestable vnto God, and odious to ingenious
men: sometimes also it is called in the Scriptures a deceitfull
tongue,
               Zeph. 3. 13. which the Lord sayth should not be found in the
remnant of Israel.
               Psal▪ 109. 2. Sometimes, a mouth of deceit, as Psal. 109.
such as is described Psal. 55. The words of his mouth are softer
than butter,
               Psal 55. 2
                     •
                  . 
               whiles warre was in his heart: his words were more supple

than oyle,Ier. 9. 8. yet were they swords: and Ie
                     •
                  em. 9. their tongue is an
arrow shot out, and speaketh deceit: one speaketh peaceably to his
neighbour with his mouth, but in his heart he layeth ambushments
for him.
               Vers. 9. But what followes? shall I not visit them for these things
saith the Lord? Or shall not my soule be auenged on such a nation as
this? If therefore wee would escape the judgements of
God,Psal. 34. 12, 13. and desire to liue a long and prosperous life, We must
keepe our tongues from euill, and our lips, that they speake no guile,
following, as I said before, the simplicitie of the lambe of
God,1. Pet. 2. 22. in whose mouth there was found no guile.
            Dissembling in fact is, when one thing is pretended,
and another intended, or as Augustine speaketh, Dolus est
cum aliud agitur,
               In Iohan. 1. 
               aliud fingitur. In which doubling, the wisdome
of our Polititians, brought vp at Machiauels feet▪
doth principally consist: the practise whereof is now
growne so vsuall, that commonly it is said, Qui nescit dissimulare,
nescit viuere: he that knoweth not how to dissemble, knoweth
not how to liue. Howbeit, more truly it is said, and by
warrant of Scripture,P
                     •
                  o. 10 9. 
               Qui vadit planè, vadit sanè, He that walketh
plainely, walketh safely. Prou. 10. He that walketh vprightly,
walketh safely, but he that peruerteth his wayes, shall be knowne,
namely, as an example to others. The highest degree of
this deceit, is that which we call cony-catching or cousenage:
when as a man by cunning trickes and artificiall
fetches ouerreacheth his neighbour: when with his tongue
concinnat dolum,
               Psal. 50. 19. 
               he trimly forgeth deceit▪
                and in his deeds layeth
wait for his brother,Ier. 5. 26. 
               setting snares and nets to catch men, as
fowlers doe for birds, or as cony-catchers doe for rabbets,
bunting his brother with a net,
               Mic 7. 2. as the Prophet Micah speaketh.
Now as simplicitie in the Scriptures is commended vnto
vs as a note of the true sheepe of Christ, imitating the
simplicitie of the lambe of God: so deceit and guile is
condemned as a propertie of those, who resemble the
image of Satan the old serpent, the forger of deceit, and
the father of lies. For if he be a true Christian, in whom
there is no guile, what is hee in whom no simplicitie or

plaine dealing is to be found? If in the remnant of Israel
a deceitfull tongue shall not be found,Zeph. 3. 13. then belong not
they to the Israell of God, who with their tongues doe
forge deceit. If true Christians be the sheepe of Christ,
resembling his simplicitie, in whom there was found no
guile: what then are those foxes and wolues, who imitate
the old serpent in subtiltie and deceit? If those which
shall rest in the holy mountaine of God, be such, as doe
walke in vprightnesse and simplicitie, then haue they no
inheritance in the kingdome of heauen, who walke in
dissimulation and deceit. And this may further appeare
by the Lords prohibitions, censures, and threatnings denounced
against deceit.Le
                     •
                  . 19. 11. It is forbidden, Leu. 19, You shall
not lie,
               1. Thess. 4. 6. 
               nor vse deceit one towards another. And 1. Thess. 4, We are
charged not to goe beyond or ouerreach our brother,
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . 
               or to defraud him
in any matter. It is censured as a sinne odious vnto God. A
man of deceit God hateth.
               Psal. 5. 7. It is reckoned Rom. 1, among the
crimes of the Gentiles,Rom. 1. 29. giuen ouer to a reprobate sence,
that they were full of guile.
               Ezec. 22. 12. And Ezec. 22, among the abhominations
of Ierusalem, for which destruction is threatened
against it, that they made gaine of their neighbours by deceit. And
lastly, the judgements of God are denounced against it,
Psal.
               Psal 55. 23. 55, The deceitfull men shall not attaine to the halfe of their
dayes.
               1. Thess. 4. 6, 1. Thess. 4. 6, The Lord is a re
                     •
                  enger of such things, namely
of cousenage and deceit. And in the place before cited,
shall I not visit them for these things,
               Ierem. 9. 
                     •
                  . 
               saith the Lord? or shall not my
soule be auenged on suc
                     •
                   a nation as this?
            
            To conclude therefore this first note: seeing vprightnesse
is made a proper marke of the true child of God,
and citisen of heauen, whereas contrariwise, dissimulation
and deceit are the brands of the wicked: it behooueth
euery one to apply this note to himselfe. Doost thou walk
vprightly without hypocrisie towards God, without
guile towards man?Mat. 5. 8. happy and blessed art thou: for thou
shalt see God, and as thou now art a sound member of the
Church militant, so shalt thou be an inheritour of glory

in the triumphant. Doest thou not walke in sinceritie towards
God, and simplicitie towards men, but in hypocrisie
and dissimulation? then most fearefull is thine estate,
vnlesse thou repent,Act. 3. 21. for thou hast no part or fellowship in
the doctrine of saluation, or in the communion of Saints,
but thy portion shall bee assigned thee with hypocrits,Mat. 24. 51.
where is weeping and gnashing of teeth.
            The second note of a citisen of heauen, is Righteousnesse:
For to the Prophet, demaunding who is a sonne and
heire of God; the Lord answereth, He that worketh righteousnesse.
Where first we are to consider the sence of the
words, and then are wee to shew, that the working of
Righteousnesse is a proper marke of those, who liuing in
the Church, are appointed to eternall life.
            Iustice is that vertue which giueth to euery one that
which is due vnto him. And it is either vniuersall or particular.
The vniuersall, summarily compriseth al those duties
which we owe to our neighbour: and is therefore said
to containe all other morall vertues within it, according
to the testimonie of the auntient Poet, which to this purpose
is alleadged by some.Theognis, vers. 147.
            
            
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  ,
               In iustice is all vertue summarily comprised.Arsiot. Ethic. lib. 5. cap 3.
               
            
            The particular Iustice is either Distributiue, or Commutatiue.
The Distributiue is that, which hauing place in
distributing rewards or punishments, obserueth a Geometricall
proportion, according to the worthinesse of
men, or their deserts. The Commutatiue iustice is that,
which hauing place in Contracts, obserueth an Arithmeticall
proportion in the equalitie of the things commuted.
            But of the vniuersall righteousnesse, this place is especially
to be vnderstood, the summe whereof is that
law royall,Iam 2. 8. as Saint Iames calleth it, Thou shalt loue thy neighbour
as thy selfe:
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  
                Wherein all the precepts of righteousnes,
that is to say,Rom. 13. 9. of the second Table are summarily contained.
               
And the rule of exercising this righteousnesse, is that law
of nature commended vnto vs by our Sauiour Christ,
M
                     •
                  t.
               Mat. 7. 12. 7, Whatsoeuer you would that men should do to you, euen so do
you to them, for this is the law and the prophets. Which sentence is
sayd so to haue pleased the Emperour Alexander S
                     •
                  uerus,
               Lamprid in Alexandr.
that in his pallaces and publicke buildings he caused it to
be written and engrauen: and when he punished any
man, he caused this saying to be proclaimed by the crier,
Quod tibi non-vis, alteri ne 
                     •
                  eceris. Do not to another what
thou wouldest not haue done to thy selfe.
            
            Now the exercise or working of this righteousnesse is
here made a note of the child of God. For he doth not
say, he that can talke of righteousnesse; nor he that delighteth
to heare anoter man speake thereof; nor he
which professeth righteousnesse, or maketh a pretence
thereof; but he that worketh righteousnesse shall dwell in the
holy mountaine of God. For there are some which can
notably discourse of righteousnesse, than whose life nothing
is more vnjust. And there are others, who with Eze
                  
                     ••
                  iels
auditors delight to heare the Minister preaching of
righteousnesse,Ezec. 33. 32. as if he were some skilfull Mulitian that
hath a pleasant voyce, but it is to heare onely, and not to
practise. There be many also who with the Pharisies
say and do not;Mat. 23. which professe righteousnesse, but do not
practise it.
            Qui Curios simulant & Bacchanalia vivunt.
            But with the folly of these men the holy Ghost meeteth
in diuerse places of the Scripture,Mat. 7. 21. 
               Mat. 7, Not euerie
one that sayth Lord Lord shall enter into the kingdome
of heauen, but he that doth the will of my father which is
in heauen.Rom. 2. 13. 
               Rom. 2, Not the hearers of the Law are just before
God, but the doers of the Law shall be justified,
Iam.
               Iam. 1. 22. 1, Be ye doers of the word, and not hearers onely, deceiuing
your selues,Mat. 5. 20. &c. Mat 5, Vnlesse your righteousnesse exceed
the righteousnesse of the Scribes and Pharisies, (who sayd
and did not) you shall not enter into the kingdome of heauen.
               
Wherefore brethren let no man deceiue you,
               1. Iohn 3. 7. not he that heareth,
nor he that speaketh, not he that professeth or pr
                  •
               
               tendeth,
but he that worketh righteousnesse, he is righteous.
            
            Neither is that to be omitted that the holy Ghost speaketh
in the present tence, thereby signifying a continuall
act, as Basill hath obserued: Marke (saith he) the accuratnesse
of the speech; he doth not say, who hath wrought, but he which worketh.
For it is not one action that maketh a vertuous man, but it behooueth
a man in his whole life to keepe a constant course of well doing.
For Iustice is an habit induing a man with a perpetuall
and constant will to do euery man right.See Thom. 2. 2. 9. 58. 1.
            
            But here some will object: The Scriptures testifie that
there is not a righteous man vpon the earth,Rom. 3. 10. 
               Rom. 3. There
is not a iust man, no not one. If therefore the righteous onely
shall be saued,1. Pet. 4. 18. and scarcely they, as Peter saith, How can
any man liuing hope to be saued, seeing there is not a just
man vpon earth,1. King. 8. 46. that doeth good and sinneth not, as Salomon
professeth.Eccles. 7. 22.
            
            I answer: If we should be summoned before the Iudgement
feate of Gods justice, and the Lord should deale
with vs summo iure, according to extremitie, exacting at our
hands that full and perfect righteousnesse which is required
in his law:Psal. 143. 2. assuredly the Lord entring into judgement
with vs, no man liuing could be iustified. But we
must appeale from the judgement seat of Gods justice to
the throne of his mercy: and from the sentence of the
Law concluding all vnder sinne, to the sentence of the
Gospell, pronouncing all those that truly beleeue in
Christ, not just onely, but also blessed: that so being clothed
with the righteousnesse of Christ by faith, we may
in him be justified, though vnjust in our selues in respect
of legall righteousnesse. Now those which truly beleeue
in Christ, are sayed to be righteous two wayes: before
God by Faith, that is, by the righteousnesse of Christ, apprehended
by Faith: before men by the fruits of Faith,
that is, by righteousnesse inherent in vs, and performed

by vs. For those which beleeue in Christ, their Faith is
imputed vnto them for righteousnesse; because they apprehending
Christ, who is our righteousnesse, and by the
same Faith being vnited vnto him, his righteousnesse and
obedience is imputed vnto them, and accepted of God
for them, as if they had performed the same in their owne
persons.
            But they who are justified by the righteousnesse of
Christ, are also sanctified by his spirit, regenerated, and
as it were created a new to good workes,Eph. 2. 10. which God
hath prepared for vs,Rom. 6. 18. that we should walke in them. For
so soone as we are deliuered by Christ out of the bondage
of sinne, we become the seruants of righteousnesse:
That as in former times we gaue our members as seruants
of sinne vnto vnrighteousnesse,verse 19. we should from henceforth
giue them as seruants of righteousnesse vnto holinesse.
And howsoeuer the best obedience of the faithfull
is but an imperfect obedience ioyned with manifold
infirmities and wants, and stained with diuerse corruptions,
wherewith they are infected, and sinnes whereinto
they fall, in so much that Esay compareth the righteous
works of the faithfull to menstruous clouts; notwithstanding
the Lord beholding them in Christ,Esay 64. 6. and accepting
their will for the deed,Iob. 1. 1. and sincere indeuour for the performance,
not onely themselues are termed righteous, but
are also said to worke righteousnesse.Luke 1. 6. And this working
of righteousnesse, the perfection whereof is not to be
measured by the perfectnesse of the worke,Act. 10. 22. but by the
vprightnesse of the will,Heb. 11. 33. and sinceritie of the indeuour aspiring
towards perfection, is an vndoubted note of a
true citisen of heauen, who in this Psalme is described.
And that the Lord accepteth those for true members of
the inu
                  •
               sible Church, who worke righteousnesse, the
Scriptures testifie:Act. 10. 35. 
               In euery nation, saith Peter, he that seareth
God and worketh righteousnesse is accepted of him. And this is so
vniuersall a note of the children of God, and so proper

vnto them, that whosoeuer worketh righteousnesse he is truly said
to be borne of God;
               1. Iohn 2. 29. and he that worketh not righteousnes is
not of God,1. Iohn 310▪ 8. but of the diuell. But as they that worke righteousnes
are the seruants of God in the kingdom of grace,
so shall they raigne with him in the kingdome of glory.
For that which is said in the beginning of this Psalme,
That he which worketh righteousnesse shall rest in the
mountaine of God; and in the end, That he shall neuer be
remoued; the same is cōfirmed by the holy ghost in other
places of Scripture.Esay. 33. 15, 16. 
               Esay 33, He that walk
                     •
                  th in righteousnes,
&c.
               Pro. 10. 30. 
               he shall dwell on high. And Prou. 10, The righteous shall neuer
be remoued.
               Psal. 69. 28. And so certaine is the saluation of the righteous,
that the booke of the liuing,2. Tim. 4. 8. is the booke of the
just:Psal. 69. 28. eternall glorie is the crowne of righteousnesse: the
rising againe vnto glory,Luke 14. 14. is the resurrection of the just.
And as justice containeth all those vertues which haue
reference to our neighbour, so the reward of it is the
heape of all rewards, namely, blessednesse. For as the
Scriptures testifie,Psal. 106. 3. 
               blessed are those that worke righteousnesse;
and not onely they,Mat. 5. 6. but those also which hunger and thirst
after righteousnesse are blessed.
            
            Wherefore seeing not onely in this place, but elsewhere
also in the Scriptures eternall life is promised to
those that worke righteousnesse; the consideration of this
reward ought to be a motiue to prouoke and stirre vs vp
to the exercise of justice: Which I do not speake to this
end, as though the workes of justice were to be performed
with that mind, as that we should hope thereby to
be justi
                  •
               ied before God, or by them to merit eternall life;
for that is an opinion sacrilegious and blasphemous against
Christ, whose justice alone, apprehended by faith,
justifieth vs before God, and maketh vs accepted vnto
eternall life.Phil. 3. 9. 9. In respect of which justice we are to esteeme
all our owne merits (if we had any) as dung, that we may
gaine Christ, and may be found in him, not hauing our
owne righteousnesse, which is of the Law, but that which

is by the Faith of Christ, the righteousnesse which is of
God through faith.
            And therefore if we desire that the workes of righteousnesse
which we do performe, should be acceptable vnto
God, they are not to be performed to that end that we
might by them attaine to justification or saluation: for
good works performed to that end are glorious sins: but
in doing the workes of righteousnes, these ends are to be
propounded. First, in respect of God, that we may glorifie
him: for which end we were elected, created, redeemed,
regenerated. For by the workes of righteousnesse
God is glorified.Iohn 15. 8. 
               Her
                     •
                  in, saith our Sauiour Christ, is my
father glorified, that ye beare much fruit. For which cause Paul
prayeth for the Philippians,Phil. 1. 11. that they might be filled with
the fruit of righteousnesse, which are by Iesus Christ vnto the glorie
and praise of God. Neither is God glorified in vs alone, but
in others also, which are the wit
                  •
               esses of our good deeds.
Therefore Christ exhorteth vs,Mat. 5. 16. 
               so to let our light shine before
men, that they seeing our good workes may glorifie our father which is
in heauen. And Peter likewise counselleth vs so to haue our
conuersation honest among the Gentiles,
               1. Pet. 2. 12. that by our good workes
which they shall see, they may glorifie God in the day of the visitation.
            Secondly, that we may testifie our thankfulnesse vnto
God for all his benefits bestowed vpon vs, and may auoid
the punishment which is due to vnthankfulnes. For
whereas the Lord in lieu of all his benefits, both temporal
and spirituall, as election, vocation, redemption, regeneration,
expecteth at our hands these fruits alone, of holines
and righteousnes; assuredly it were vnthankfulnes
vntollerable, if either we should be barren of good fruits,
or bring forth euill fruit. For wherefore hath the Lord
elected vs? that we might be saued howsoeuer we should
liue? No, but he hath elected vs that we should be holy and without
blame before him in loue?
               Eph. 1. 4. Why hath Christ redeemed vs
from the hand of our spirituall enemies? that being freed

from them we might sinne the more freely? No, but that
being deliuered from the hand of our spirituall enemies,
               Luke. 1. 74, 75. 
               we might
worship him without feare, in holinesse and righteousnesse before him
all the dayes of our life. Wherefore hath he freed vs from the
seruitude of sinne? that we might haue freedome to sin?
No,Rom. 6. 18. & 22. he hath freed vs from sinne, that we might be the
seruants of righteousnesse: and being now freed from sinne, and made
seruants vnto God, we haue our fruit in holinesse, and the end euerlasting
life. Why did he beare our sinnes in his body vpon
the crosse? that we liuing in sin should not die for them?
No,1. Pet. 2. 24. he bare our sinnes in his body on the tree, that we being deliuered
from sinne, might liue in righteousnesse. Wherefore doth he
regenerate vs by his spirit, and as it were create vs anew?
that we should doe nothing our selues? NO, Wee are the
workmanship of God, created in Christ Ksus to good workes, which
God hath prepared,
               Ehp. 2. 10. 
               that we should walke in them. Why doth hee
bestow his temporall benefits vpon vs? that like well
pampered horses we should kicke against our Lord and
Maister? No, he crowneth vs with his manifold blessing,
to this end,Psal. 105. 45. that we might keepe his statutes and obserue his
lawes. For what else doth the Lord require of thee which
art the people of God,Deut. 10. 12. in lieu of all his mercies, but to
feare the Lord thy God, to walke in all his wayes, and to loue him, and
to serue the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soule?
that thoukeepe the Commandements of the Lord, and his ordinances
which he commaundeth thee for thy wealth? Let vs remember
that we are trees of righteousnesse which the Lord hath
planted in his garden,Cant. 4. 12, 13. that is, his Church, that we may
bring forth the fruit of righteousnesse. But if he shall
come to seeke fruit (as euery yeare he commeth) and
shall find none,Luke▪ 3. 6, 7. howsoeuer he may forbeare for a time,
yet at the length he shall cut downe the vnfruitfull trees:
for he cannot abide that they should cumber the ground,
and make it also barren. Let vs remember that we are the
branches of the vine,Iohn 15. 2. which if we be vnfruitfull, the Lord
wil cut off.Mat. 3. 10. Let vs consider that the axe is layd to the root

of euery tree; that euery one which bringeth not forth
fruit, may be cut off and cast into the fire.
            Againe, in respect of our neighbour we are to worke
righteousnesse, that we may helpe him either with the
benefit or the example of our good worke. For the benefit
of justice belongeth to others. For whereas other
vertues are referred to the good of him that hath them;
justice onely seemeth to be the good of another man: for
justice attendeth the duty of one man to another;
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . but in
other vertues is attended the duty of the inferiour faculties
vnto reason,Arist. Eth. 1. 
                     •
                  . c. 3. as one saith. But thou mayst helpe thy
neighbour also by the example of thy good worke.Thom. 2. 2. For
when thou goest before thy brother with the light of thy
good example,q. 100. 1. Pet. 3. 1. thou shalt gaine him vnto Christ, if he be
not already wonne vnto him,1. Pet. 2. 12. that he also may glorifie
God in the day of the visitation. Or if he be already ingrafted
into Christ, by thy good example thou shalt edifie
him,2. Cor. 9. 2. and as the Apostle testifieth of the Corinthians,
thou shalt prouoke him to good workes.
            Lastly, we are to performe the workes of righteousnesse,
in respect of our selues, as being both profitable
and necessary forts, profitable: First, because by them
we may make sure our calling and our election;2. Pet. 1. 10. as Peter
teacheth, they being so many testimonies vnto vs thereof.
True indeed it is,Rom. 9. 11. 2. Tim. 1. 9. that we were elected without respect
of workes,Rom. 3. 28. and we are called by grace, not according
to workes,Eph. 2. 8. 9. we are justified by faith without workes, and
by grace we are saued through faith, and not by workes.
But if a man would know whether he be elected, called,
justified, and shall be saued, (as we are bound to giue diligence,
that we may haue a firme knowledge of these
things) we are not to pry into the secret counsell of God,
but we are to examine our selues by our fruits: for both
we and others are to be discerned by our fruits. As our
Sauiour saith,Mat. 7. 16. 201 
               by their fruits you shall know them, do men gather
grapes of thornes, or 
                     •
                  igges of thistels? a bad tree cannot bring forth

good fruit. By the fruits therefore of righteousnes we may
euidently discerne our selues to be sanctified. And none
are sanctified but such as first are justified; and whosoeuer
are justified are effectually called, and none are effectually
called, but such as are elected; and none are elected,
but such as shall be saued.Ia
                     ••
                  . 2. 18. To this purpose Iames sheweth
that the faith whereby we are justified, must be demonstrated
by good workes.1. Iohn. 3. 14. And Iohn affirmeth, that by the
the loue of our brethren (which is all one in effect with
righteousnesse) we know that we are translated from
death vnto life. Againe, good workes are profitable, because
they haue the promises both of this life, and of that
which is to come.
            They are also necessary, not as the causes of our justification
and saluation, as though we were either justified
by them, or saued for them; but as necessary fruits of faith
and testimonies of our justification, according whereunto
the sentence of saluation shall be pronounced: for although
vnto the act of justification good workes do not
concurre, as any causes thereof, yet in the subject, that is,
the partie justified, they concurre as fruits of our faith,
and consequents of our justification. For as breathing is
such a fruit or consequent of life, as where that is, we
judge the body to liue; where that is not, we judge it to
be dead: so is the exercise of righteousnesse and performance
of good workes, such a consequent of faith, as that
where good workes are, the faith is liuely; where they
are not at all,Iam. 2. 26. the faith is dead. They are necessary also in
respect of saluation, not as the causes thereof, but partly
as the way;Eph. 2. 10. for we are his vvorkmanship created vnto
good workes, which he hath prepared for vs to walke in
them,
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  . and therefore they are fitly sayd to be Vni regum,
non causa regnandi, The way to the kingdome, not the
cause of reigning: and partly as the euidence, according
vnto which the Lord proceedeth in judgement to the
sentence of saluation.Mat. 25. 34. 35. Come you blessed of my father

(sayth Christ the judge) inherit you the kingdome prepared
for you from the foundations of the world: For I
was an hungrie and you gaue me meat, I thirsted and
you gaue me drinke, &c. It is most certaine that Christ
our Sauiour by his obedience hath merited and purchased
eternall life for all those that beleeue in him, according
to the maine promise of the Gospell, that whosoeuer
beleeueth in him shall be saued. By that righteousnes
and obedience of Christ, apprehended by faith, & not by
or for any righteousnes inherent in vs, or obedience performed
by vs, are we made sonnes & heires of God, entituled
vnto the kingdome of heauen, acquitted from our
sinnes, and accepted vnto eternall life. Notwithstanding,
seeing all that be in the Church professe themselues to
beleeue, whereof many deceiue either themselues with
an opinion, or others with a profession of faith; therefore
the Lord proceedeth vnto judgement, according to the
fruits either of faith, or infidelity: taking for granted, that
in those who are members of the true visible Church,
where good workes are there is faith, and where are no
good workes there is no faith. And therefore it behoueth
vs, as we desire either to haue assurance of our saluation
whiles we liue here, or to heare the comfortable sentence
of saluation pronounced to vs in the day of judgement, so
to be carefull to demonstrat our faith by good workes.
And hereby it appeareth against the malicious slaunder
of the Papists, that although we deny good workes to be
meritorious of euerlasting life, yet we do not teach men
to cast off all care and well doing.
            Now for the auoiding of errour: Whereas the workes
of righteousnesse are made a proper note of the sons and
heires of God, we are first to restraine this part of the
Lords answer to that subject whereof Dauids question is
propounded, namely, to those who liue in the true visible
Church, and professe the name and religion of God.
Of these, because there be many hypocrites and vnsound

professors among them, Dauid desireth to be informed,
who are the true professors. The Lord answereth: He
that worketh righteousnesse, and so by his good workes
doth demonstrat his faith. There are many workes materially
good to be found, not onely among heretickes
and idolatours, as the Papists, but also among Turkes
and Pagans. But we speake not of those that are without,
for they are not within the compasse, either of Dauids
question, or Gods answer. And secondly we are to
know that all works in respect of the matter, or the thing
done, seeme to be good workes, are not straightwayes
the workes of righteousnesse, neither doth he which performeth
them alwayes worke righteousnesse. For it is
not a good and a true worke of righteousnesse indeed,
vnlesse it proceed from the right fountaine, vnlesse it be
done in a right maner, and to a right end. As touching
the fountaine, it is a good rule of Gregory: That the
streames of righteousnes towards our brother, must be
deriued from the fountaine of pietie towards God. For
we loue not our brother aright, vnlesse we loue him in
and for the Lord, and we cannot loue him in and for the
Lord, vnlesse we loue the Lord much more: and we loue
the Lord, because we are by faith persuaded, that he loueth
vs first, his loue being shed abroad in our hearts by
the holy Ghost: and we cannot beleeue in God and
Christ our Sauiour, vnlesse we know God aright, and
vnderstand the mysterie of our saluation by Christ. If
therefore we be ignorant persons, we haue no faith, if we
be vnfaithfull persons, we haue no true loue or feare of
God, nor any other sanctifying grace: If we haue no
true loue of God, we haue no true loue of our brother.
For euen as the loue of God, seuered from the loue of our
neighbour, is hypocrisie; so is the loue of our neighbor
seuered from the loue of God, counterfeit. The good
workes therefore that are done, either by an ignorant
person, or by a more ciuill honest man, who is void of

faith, of religion, of the loue and feare of God, although
materially they be good: yet are they euill as they proceed
from him. For whiles the tree is euill, the fruit
cannot be good, whiles the person is not accepted as
just in Christ (as none but the faithfull are) his actions
cannot be acceptable:Heb. 11. 6. for without faith it is impossible
to please God.1. Tim. 1. 5. And this is that which the Apostle saith,
that the end and consummation of the commandement
is loue, out of a pure heart, a good conscience, and
faith vnsained.
            In respect of the manner, our good workes must be
performed vprightly,2. Chron. 25. 2 not in hypocrisie and dissimulation:
otherwise it is vnfained and counterfeit. For
though we doe that which is right, yet if we doe it not
with an vpright heart, we doe it not rightly, neither
can we be sayd to worke righteousnesse.
            In respect of the end, we are to perfome good
workes, that by the discharge of our duty God may be
glorified. But if our end be, to be seene of men, if to
win praise and glorie to our selues, if to merit of God,
and as it were to bridle him by our good deed, all our
workes, though neuer so glorious in the eyes of the
world, yet are they splendida peccata, that is to say,
glorious sinnes. To this purpose we are to remember, that
we are to worship God,Luke 1. 75. not onely in holinesse, but in
righteousnesse also: and we worship him in righteousnesse,
when as in a sincere obedience to God we seeke
by performing the duties of righteousnesse to our brother
to glorifie God. From this note therefore of Gods
children, we distinguish the seeming good workes, first
of infidels without the Church, or of more naturall men
within; because there can be no true righteousnesse or
loue of men, without faith, pietie and loue of God. Secondly,
of hypocr
                  •
               tes and dissemblers, who do no good,
but for sinister and by-respects, and therefore their righteousnesse
being hypocrisie, is double injustice. Lastly,

of all Pharisaicall and Popish justiciaries, who by their
good workes thinke (such is their Satanicall pride) to
make God beholding vnto them, and to merit heauen to
themselues, most sacrilegiously & injuriously vnto Christ
our Sauiour, placing the matter of their justification, and
the merit of their saluation in themselues.
            In a word, that is no true righteousnesse which is seuered
from holinesse; neither is that a worke of righteousnesse,
which is not a righteous worke rightly done, as that
is not, which is done in hypocrisie, or to an ill end. He
therefore vndoubtedly is the sonne and heire of God,
who professing the true faith, laboureth to demonstrat
his faith by good works; his faith working by loue, and
his loue proceeding from faith vnfained: who in vpright
obedience towards God, seeketh by the exercise of
righteousnesse, and discharge of his dutie towards his
neighbour, to glorifie God.
            The third note of the child God is Truth, which the
holy ghost expresseth in these words, and speaketh the truth
in his heart. Which words (sayth Augustine) are not thus to
be vnderstood,De 
                     〈◊〉
                   ad Consent. as though keeping the truth in the heart,
we should vtter vntruth with our mouth. But the holy
ghost vseth this phrase of speech, because a man may
with his mouth vtter the truth, which will nothing auaile
him, if he hold not the same in his heart. Wherefore although
this phrase of speaking the truth in his heart,
seeme somewhat harsh, notwithstanding, if it be rightly
vnderstood, it doth more fully expresse the disposition of
a man which is addicted to the truth, than if it had been
said from the heart. Thus therefore I read, who speaketh the
truth which is in his h
                     •
                  rt, that is, who vttereth with his tongue
the truth which he hath conceiued in his mind. For that
we may be vcraces, that is, speakers of the truth, there is a
double conformitie or agreement required, which is here
expressed, the one of the speech with the mind (namely,
that we should speak as we thinke) the other of the mind,

with the thing it selfe (namely, that wee should conceiue
in our mind, according to the truth of the matter.) For as
the rule and measure of truth in words, is the agreement
of them with our thoughts: so the rule and measure of
truth in our thoughts, is the agreement thereof with the
things themselues. It is true indeed, that in some sciences
either agreement alone sufficeth vnto the truth: as in
morall philosophy he is 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , a speaker of the truth,
who speaketh as he thinketh, although perhaps he thinketh
otherwise than the thing it selfe is: And in Logicke
he is said to speake the truth, who speaketh as the thing
is, although perhaps he thinketh otherwise: But in diuinitie
both, as I said, is required. Neither can we be said, if
either be wanting, to be veraces, that is, such as speake the
truth which is in our heart: for he which deliuereth an
vntruth, supposing it to bee true, howsoeuer hee bee free
from the vanitie of lying, yet he cannot be said to bee a
speaker of the truth; for in his mouth he vttereth an vntruth,
though in his heart he be well affected to the truth.
Contrariwise, he that speaketh the truth which he thinketh
to be false, he is a lyar, though he speake the truth,
because he hath truth in his mouth, but not in his heart.
Such a one therefore,Psal. 12. because hee speaketh with an heart
and an heart, may not vnworthily be said to lie. For ment
                     •
                  ri
est contra mentemire: to lie, is to speake otherwise than a
man thinketh. Wherefore, that a man may bee said to
speake the truth which is in heart, there is a double agreement
required, the one of the tongue with the mind,
the other of the mind, with the things themselues. And
to this double conformitie in speaking the truth, there is
opposed a double falshood, namely, when a man speaketh
either that which is false, or falsely. He speaketh
that which is false, who speaketh otherwise than the
thing is, whether he thinkes it to be so, or otherwise. He
speaketh falsely, who speaketh otherwise than hee thinketh.
He which speaketh a falshood, supposing it to be

true, is not so much to be blamed for lying, as for vnaduifednesse
and rashnesse. For we ought to be sure of those
things which we affirme. But he which either speaketh
that which hee knoweth to bee false, or speaketh that
which is true falsely, that is, animo fallendi, with a purpose
to deceiue (as the diuell sometimes doth) he is a lyar: neither
can you easily determine, whether is in the greater
fault: for as the one hath lesse truth in his mouth, so the
other hath more deceit in his heart.
            Now that the loue of the truth, and likewise the detestation
of falshood is to be reckoned among the notes of
Gods children, it is testified, not onely in this place, but
also elsewhere in the Scriptures.Zeph. 3. 13. 
               Zeph. 3. The remnant of Israell(that is, the true members of the Church, which shall
remaine) shall not speake lies, neither shall a deceitfull tongue bee
found in their mouth.
               Prou▪ 13. 5. And Prou. 13. A righteous man hateth lying
words, but a wicked man is so addicted vnto lying, that he
stinketh as it were, and is confounded. And whereas it is
said in the end of the Psalme, He that doth these things,
shall neuer be remooued. The same is testified by Salomon,
Pro.Pro. 12. 19. 12. The lip of truth (meaning thereby the man which
speaketh the truth) shall be established for euer. And whereas
in the beginning of the Psalme it is promised, that he shal
rest in the mountaine of Gods holinesse, the same we read
performed,Apoc. 14. 5. 4. 
               Apoc. 14. where it is said of those 144000, in
whose mouth was found no guile, that they were redeemed
from among men, being the first fruits vnto God and
the lambe.
            But it will be obiected, that euery man is a lyar, according
to that of the Apostle, Let God be true, and euery man a
lyar.
               Rom. 3. 4. If therefore none shall dwell in the holy mountaine
of God, but such as are speakers of the truth, who then
shall be saued? I answere, that no man indeed vpon the
earth may be said to be so perfectly true, but that sometimes
he faileth of infirmitie, so farre hath the father of
lies, the diuell, infected vs with his falshood. But that if we

aspire and contend towards that perfection, embracing
and louing the truth, detesting and abhorring lies, and
haue a setled purpose and vnfained resolution to obserue
the truth in all things, so farre as God shall enable vs; assuredly howsoeuer we may sometimes faile of infirmitie,
as Sara once did, and Peter also through feare; notwithstanding
our infirmities being pardoned through and for
the perfect obedience of Christ, and our leasings couered
with his veritie, who is the truth, the Lord will accept of
vs in his fonne, as those which speake the truth in their heart:
because the true desire and purpose of our heart is alwayes
to obserue the truth. For we must distinguish betwixt
those, who hating falshood, doe sometimes (though
seldome) fall thereinto, and those which haue got a custome
and habit of lying, and are delighted with vntruth:
for the former may be verified of the faithfull, but the
latter cannot.
            The vse which we are to make of this doctrine, is this,
That seeing the truth of our speech is a matter of so great
weight and consequence, as that the holy ghost in this
place hath set it downe, as one of the marks of Gods children,
we are to be stirred vp to embrace the truth, and to
abhorre lies.
            And to this purpose let vs in the first place consider,
that whereas the facultie of speech is of so great vse in
our life, as that without it wee should seeme to liue like
beasts, notwithstanding all this vse of our speech dependeth
vpon the truth thereof. For take away truth from
the speech of men, and it were better men should bee
dumbe than able to speake. Of truth therefore there is
great necessitie,1. Tim. 2. 4. not onely in religion (for without the
knowledge of the truth wee cannot attaine to saluation)
but also in our whole life. Lying contrariwise peruerteth
the vse of speech, and maketh it not onely vnprofitable,
but hurtfull also, it taketh away faith from among men,
and in a manner dissolueth humane societies, which without

mutuall contracts and negotiations (wherein truth
doth rule) cannot be maintained, &c.
            Secondly, whereas God is truth, and the authour of all
truth; and contrariwise, the diuell is a lyar, and the father
of lies; let vs consider whose image it behooueth vs to represent:
for his children we are,Iohn 8. 44. whose image we do bear,
the wit, the children of God, if we be speakers of the truth;
the children of the diuell if we be lyars.
            Thirdly, as there be two fathers; of those which speake
truly, God; and of lyars, the diuell: so there are two kingdomes
whereunto all appertaine, the kingdome of light,
and the kingdome of darkenesse. The language or dialect
of the former, is truth; of the latter, lying: If therefore
thou wouldest know to whether kingdome thou
doest appertaine, thou mayest know by thy language.
            Fourthly,Ios. 7. 19. by the profession of the truth, as our brother
is profited,Leu. 6. 2. so is Gods glory aduaunced: but by lying,
wee sinne not onely against our neighbour, but also
against God.
            Fiftly, for those causes, Truth in the Scripture is commended vnto vs, and commaunded, but vntruth is forbidden
and condemned. Wherefore (saith the Apostle) cast
off lying,Eph. 4▪ 25. and speake euery man the truth vnto his neighbour,
for we are members one of another. Where the Apostle
vseth two reasons; first, because we are renewed in
the holinesse and righteousnesse of truth, according to the
image of God, that we may be true, as he is true: Secondly,
because we are members of the same body, and therefore
ought to maintain truth among our selues. But especially
in the ninth commaundement is truth commanded,
and all falshood forbidden. But it may be you desire testimonies
of either seuerally. As of truth commaunded,
Zachar.
               Zach. 
                     •
                  . 16. 8. These are the things that you shall doe: Speake yee euery
man the truth vnto his neighbour: execute iudgement truly and vprightly
in your gates.
               Verse 19. And againe, Therefore loue the truth and
pe
                     •
                  ce.
               Exod. 23. 7. Of falshood forbidden, Exod. 23. Thou shalt keepe

thee farre,Leu. 19. 11. 
               
                  
                     •
                   verbo mendac
                     •
                  , from a lying word. Leu. 19. Ye
shall not steale, nor deale falsely, nor lie one vnto another.
Where theft and lying, as they vse to goe together, so are
they joyned as companions: and hard it is to say, whether
is the worse sinne.Ec
                     •
                  les. 1. 20. 23, 24, 25. 
               A lie (sayth a wise man) is a wicked
shame in a man: yet is it oft in the mo
                     •
                  th of the vnwise. A theefe is
better than a man that is accu
                     •
                  tomed to lie: but they both shall haue
de
                     •
                  truction to heritage. The conditions of lyars are vnhonest, and their
shame is euer with them. And hereunto let vs adde that prohibition
of the Apostle,Col. 3. 9. 
               Col. 3. Lie not one to another, hauing
put off the old man with his practises, and put on the new, &c.
            Sixtly,Psal. 51. 8. as God doth loue the truth, as being himselfe
not onely true,Pro. 12. 
                     〈◊〉
                  . but truth it selfe: so he abhorreth lying, as
one of the things which he especially hateth.Pro. 6. 17.
            
            Seuenthly: And hereunto accordeth the judgement also
of all ingenious men, euen among the heathen and
others: who commend truth, as a most excellent vertue,
as a most sacred possession,
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , Philo Ind. as the Sunne in the world, as
that one thing wherein men may become most like vnto
God. Wherefore Pythagoras being demaunded, What that
was, in doing whereof, men might especially be like vnto
God? answered, 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , If they speake the truth. And
therefore another sayth, 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               ,Men
                     •
                  nder. 
               It is alwaies
best to speake the truth. Contrariwise, they condemne lying
as a most foule and shamefull vice, and vnworthy an honestman.
To lie (sayth one) is a base thing, but truth is noble.
And therefore of all reproches,
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . Apollon. an ingenious man
can least brooke this, that another to his face should say,
Thou lyest. But if the very heathen people doe so highly
esteeme of Truth, how much more doth it become vs
Christians to loue and embrace it,Deut. 32. 4. who are his children,
that is the Truth, who are redeemed by him that is the
Truth,Iohn 14. 6. and vnto whom wee are to conforme our selues;
who are regenerated by the spirit of truth,Iohn 16. 13. by whome we
are to be led into all truth,Iohn 17. 17. who are sanctified by the word
of God,Iohn 18. 37. which is the truth, who are of the truth so many

as are of God. Therefore nothing lesse becommeth a
Christian than lying, nothing more than truth.
            Eightly, but if no other arguments will preuaile with
vs, let vs consider on the one side, what rewards the Lord
hath promised to them that speake the truth, and on the
other side, what 
                  •
               udgements he hath denounced against
lyars. To the speakers of truth, the Lord hath promised,
that they shall neuer be remooued, that they shall be established
for euer, that they shall dwel in Gods holy mountaine,
as before hath beene shewed: against lyars, the Lord
hath threatened fearefull judgements, A false witnesse shall
not be vnpunished,
               P 
                     •
                  0. 19, 5. 
               and he that speaketh lies
                     •
                   shall not escape. For first
he is punished with infamie, and looseth his credit, insomuch
that no man will beleeue him, when he speaketh
the truth:Eccles. 34. 4. For as one sayth, What truth can be spoken of a lyar?
Secondly, he is discarded of the godly, he that telleth lies
(sayth Dauid) shall not remaine in my sight.Psal. 101. 7. But these are
light punishments in comparison of those that follow, for
God doth not onely punish lyars, but also destroy them,
Psal.
               Psal. 5. 6. 5. Thou shalt destroy them that speake lies. Prou. 19. A false
witnesse shall not he vnpunished,
               Pro. 19. 9. 
               and he that speaketh lies, shall perish.
For God destroyeth them either with a temporall death,
as Ananias and Sapphir
                     •
                  , because they had lied, were
stricken dead,Act. 5. 
               Act. 5. or with eternall: for who so euer loue
or make lies,Apoc. 22. 15. shall be excluded out of the heauenly Ierusalem,
and shall haue their part in the lake which burneth
with fire and brimstone,Apoc. 21. 8. which is the second death.
            Ninthly, and lastly, seeing the holy ghost hath reckoned
Truth among the markes of Gods children, it behoueth
vs as we desire to haue any assurance, that we belong
vnto the Lord, or shall dwell with him in the mountaine
of his holinesse, so to loue and embrace the truth,
and to detest and abhorre falshood.
            And thus haue we shewed in generall, that lying is
wicked and detestable, and that the truth is to bee loued
and embraced of all those who would be held citisens of

heauen. But here are two questions to be decided of vs.
First, Whether it be lawfull for a Christian man at any
time to lie. Secondly, Whether he be bound alwayes to
professe the truth, and how farre forth.
            As touching the former, we are to hold a distinction
of lics or vntruths: for an vntruth is either vnproperly
so called, or properly: that is vnproperly called an vntruth,
which being true in sence, is false onely in shew of
words, as figuratiue speeches and fabulous parables: the
lawfulnesse where of is warranted by the vse of speech in
the Scriptures: for howsoeuer, if we respect the sound of
the words, they seeme to containe some falshood, yet if
we regard the sence and meaning of the speaker (as it is
fit we should) they expresse the truth, either 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               ,
more significantly, or more profitably. More significantly,
as figuratiue speeches; especially such as we call Hyperbolae,
where of there are some examples in the Scriptures.Gen. 32. 12.
As when the holy ghost would signifie a very great
or innumerable multitude,1. Sam. 13. 5. he vseth to compare it with
the sand of the sea.Psal. 78. 27. And likewise, Iohn the Euangelist,
when he would signifie,Iohn 21. 25. that Christ our Sauior did work
very many or rather innumerable miracles, and other acts
worthy to be registred, he sayth, That if euery one of
them should be set downe in writing, he supposeth, that
the whole world could not contain the books that should
be written.
            And as for fabulous parables, they hide not the truth,
but more profitably lay it foorth, that it may be more
clearely discerned, and more sincerely acknowledged:
for the truth is more clearely discerned, when as by a fit
s
                  ••
               ilitude (for such these parables are) it is illustrated.
And it is more sincerely and vnpartially acknowledged,
when the person of whom it is meant, is withdrawne. For
better doe men comprehend vnder the person of another,
what is to bee thought of themselues: examples
hereof, see 2. Sam. 12. 1. Mat. 21. 33. 41. Iudg. 9. 7. 2. King. 14. 9.

and 2. Chron. 25. 18. 19. A lie or vntruth, so properly called,
is such a speech, as in sence and meaning at the least is
false. And such an vntruth is deliuered either for no cause
at all, as that which is called merum mendacium, a meere lie,
or else for some purpose. The meere lie is that which is
vttered, neither with a desire to hurt, nor purpose to helpe
any, but onely in a vanitie and pleasure taken in lying:
Which sheweth our notable vanitie and pronenesse to lying,
that many are delighted therewith for it selfe. But
this vanitie especially sheweth it selfe in those persons,
who in all their speeches almost loue to tell of strange
and wonderfull things. And of this kind of lie there can
be no question, but that it is vnlawfull.
            The lie which is told for some cause, is either to hurt
some man, or to pleasure him. That which is told to hurt
any body, it is called mendacium perniciosum, a pernicious or
hurtfull lie: neither can there be any controuersie, but that
this is wicked and diuellish. The lie which is told to pleasure
any, is either mendacium iocosum, the merry lie, or, officiosum,
the lie for aduantage. And of these two sorts is all
the controuersie. For there are which thinke these lies either
to be no sinnes at all, or else not mortall sinnes, because
they seeme to them not to breake that commaundement
wherein lies are forbidden. For these lies (say
they) are not spoken against our neighbor, but rather for
him: namely, either to delight him, as the jeasting lie; or
to helpe him, as the officious lie. I answere, that the ninth
commaundement, whereof they speake, is generally to
be vnderstood: for first, vnder false testimonie we are to
vnderstand all false speech concerning our neighbour,
and not onely false speech, but also all vaine talke. For
the Hebrew word 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                signifieth both. As also the other
word 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , which is vsed in the third commaundement.
And in the fift of Deuteronomie,Deut. 5. 20. where the law is repeated,
Moses in the ninth commaundement, in stead of 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               ,
putteth 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , that wee may vnderstand not onely false

speech to be forbidden, but also that which is vaine. Againe,
the word 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                doth signifie not onely against thy
neighbour, but also for him. For the preposition 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                signifieth
both,Esay 59. 12. to wit, both against, as Esay 59, Our sinnes do testifie

                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               ,Gen. 30. 33. against vs: and also for, as Gen. 30, My righteousnesse
shall answere 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                
               for me, or shall testifie in my behalf.
In the ninth commaundement therefore is forbidden not
onely false speech (as euery lie is) but also vaine speech
(as the jeasting lie commonly is;) and not onely that false
or vaine speech which is against our neighbour, but also
that which is for him, whether it be for his delight, as the
jeasting lie, or for his profit, as the officious lie. Augustine
out of the words of the Apostle,De mendacio ad Consent. 
               I. Cor. 15. where the Apostle
confesseth, That if Christ be not risen againe, then he
and other the Apostles should be false witnesses of God:
For (saith he) we haue testified of (or as the word may signifie,
against) God, that he hath raised vp Christ, &c. he gathereth,
that that is said to be a false testimonie against any, which
is falsely said in his praise. Seeing therefore these two
sorts of lies are forbidden in the decalogue, it is euident
by the confession of the Schoolemen themselues, that
they are not onely sinnes, but also mortall sinnes.
            2. Againe, a lie is euill in generall, and is generally
forbidden in the Scriptures.Apoc. 21. 8. 
               Apoc. 21. to all yers without
exception eternall death is denounced. And agreeably
to the Scriptures,Eecles. 7. 13. 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  
                the sonne of Syrach, 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , saith he, 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               :
Doe not thou make no manner of lie. The Hebrew
word, which signifieth a lie, signifieth iniquitie, that wee
might vnderstand euery lie to be a sinne.
            3.De interpr. 1. 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . Euery lie is against nature. For seeing words naturally
are the notes of our thoughts, as the Philosopher
saith, it is against nature and against dutie, that a man
should signifie in words that which he doth not thinke in
his heart;See Thom. 2. 2. q. 110. or that the will should direct the tongue to vtter
that which is contrarie to the illumination of the
mind.Ethic. 4. Whereupon the Philosopher sayth, That euery

lie is in it owne nature euill and to be auoided.
            4. Augustine reasoneth thus. The truth teacheth not
that we may lie at any time:1. Iohn 2. 21. for no lie is of the truth. Therefore
it is not true that we may lie at any time.
            5. We can doe nothing (sayth the Apostle) against
the truth,2. Cor. 13. 8. but for the truth, 2. Cor. 13, but euery lie is against
the truth: yea vpon euery lie followeth the losse of truth,
which to God is most deere.
            6. Againe (sayth Augustine) the law is the truth. Psal. 119. yea God is the truth, therefore that which is against
truth, is against the law, yea and against God.
            7. And hereunto wee may adde the testimonies of
Augustine,
               Moral. y. 8. cap. 2. 
               No lies are iust, for all are sinnes.
            
            8. And of Gregorie, Euery lie is iniquitie: for so much
it dissenteth from equitie, as it discordeth from veritie.
For whatso
                  •
               uer is opposed to vertue, is sinne: euery lie
is opposed to truth, which is a vertue, therefore euery lie
is a sinne.
            9. Euery lie is of the diuell, therefore euill. Iohn 8. 44.
            10. The conscience of euery man when he lieth, accuseth
him of sinne.
            But let vs consider them seuerally. And first as touching
the merry lie, we are to hold a distinction, namely,
that there is a merry lie, which vnproperly is called a lie,
when as in shew of words a false thing is vttered, but yet
by the jesture or pronuntiation of him that so jeasteth,
it may appeare, that something else which is true, is signified
by him: and that such a jeast as vnder the shew of an
vntruth doth hide a truth, may sometimes be vsed of a
Christian man, I dare not denie. But that which properly
and in the meaning of the speaker is a lie, may in no sort
be vsed of a Christian. First, because it is not onely false,
but also vaine and idle:Mat. 12. 36. and if of idle words an account
must be giuen, how much more of lies? Secondly, the
Prophet Hoseas inueigheth against those,
                  
                     •
                  os. 7. 3. who with their
lies make princes merry. Now, if princes, to whom being

oppressed with great cares, mirth is most needfull, may
not be made merry with lies, who then may? Thirdly, a
lie may not be vttered to helpe a man, or to deliuer him
out of danger, as shall straightwaies be shewed, mueh
lesse may it be told to delight him. For as the schoolemen
truly say, Bonum utile prefertur delectabili, a profitable good
is preferred before a delightfull,De mendac. ad Consent. nay, the truth it selfe is
not spoken to the end to delight men, as Augustine sayth,
much lesse may a lie. Fourthly, Epaminondas the heathen
man, shall rise in judgement against those who make no
conscience of speaking merry lies:Aemilius prob. for he was so strict an
obseruer and louer of the truth, that hee could not abide
that a lie should be spoken, no not in jeast. And to these
reasons you may adde those arguments which before
were produced to prooue a lie generally to be euill.
            But the chiefe controuersie is concerning the officious
lie; for therein now adayes the policie of worldly men
especially consisteth. But let vs see by what arguments
they commend this office forsooth of lying. First, because
it is not against Christian charitie (say they) to help
our brother with a lie:1. Cor. 13. 6. yea, but Christian charitie (say I)
abhorreth lying,2. Cor. 13. 8. and rejoyceth in the truth, and those
which are Christians, so long as they keepe a good conscience,
they can do nothing against the truth, but for the
truth.
            2. Yea, the honest friendship of Heathen men was
contained within the limits of truth. The Philosopher in
his Morals professeth,Eth. 1. 
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               ,
to be a godly thing to prefer the truth, before his friends.
And those which were of the better sort among them,
were wont to professe themselues friends one to another,

                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                vnto the altars, to which they vsually came
when they were to testifie a truth: that it may be a shame
for Christian men in respect of friendship, to goe beyond
the bonds of truth.
            3. Christian Charitie requireth not onely that wee

should do good, but also that we should do it well and by
good means:Rom. 3. 8. For this a rule in Diuinity, that Euill is not to
be done, that Good may come thereof. Those things only which
are good and lawfull are to be done of vs, committing
the euent to God.
            4. Christian charitie doth not require that for another
mans commodity thou shouldest cast away thy selfe. But
God will destroy those which speake lies:
               Psal. 5. 6. and as the wise man
saith,VVisd. 1. 11. 
               The lying mouth destroyeth the soule.
            
            Secondly, they proue this kind of lying to be lawfull,
by the examples of the godly. For first, say they, Abraham
the father of the faithfull, that he might escape danger,
said that his wife Sarah was his sister.Gen. 12. 10. 16. & 20. 2. To this objection
Abraham himselfe aunswereth. Gen. 20. 12, In very
truth she is my sister,Gen 20. 12. the daughter of my father, though
not of my mother, and she also is my wife. Abraham therfore
vttered no vntruth, but onely concealed part of the
truth: He did not say (sayth Augustine) she is not my wife, but he
sayd, she is my sister: he therefore concealed some part of the truth,
but he deliuered no vntruth: when be concealed that she was his wise,
he professed she was his sister.
            
            Againe (say they) the Midwiues are commended,Exod. 1. 17. 19. 20.
which that they might preserue the male-children
of the Hebrewes aliue, told an vntruth. But there is no
necessity that we should graunt that they did lie, for it
is very likely that diuerse of the Hebrew women hauing
notice of the kings edict, did not send for the Midwiues,
but were without their helpe (being strengthned by
God, and perhaps holpen by other women) deliuered.
But suppose they had told a lye, yet we must distinguish
betwixt their lie and their preseruation of the infants:
For the preseruation of the children was a worke of mercy,
and of the feare of God; but their lye had beene a
worke of infirmity and of the feare of men. Neither did
they tell a lye (if they lied) to saue the infants, but hauing
preserued before the infants, they told a lye for their

owne safety.Moral. 18. 6. 2. So sayth Gregory, Parcendo, conatae sunt infantum
vitam tegere; mentiendo, suam: By sparing, they endeuoured
to preserue the life of the infants; by lying, their
owne. They are therefore commended for sauing the infants,
they are not commended for lying.
            Thirdly,Ios. 2. they obiect the example of Rahab, who is
commended in the Scriptures,Heb. 11 3
                     •
                  . because she receiued the
spies,Iam. 2. 25. hid and sent them away, and by a lie saued their life.
Such examples as are doubtfull, charitie bindeth vs to interpret
into the better part: I answere therefore with Tremellius
and Iunius, that there is no necessitie we should interpret
her answere as a lie; for it may be, that others had
lodged with her being an Inne-keeper, of whom shee
made that answere: God so disposing by his prouidence,
that she might truly giue notice of some of her guests,
which were gone, and might also in faith and charity conceale
others. But if shee had lied, yet her lie is not commended,
whereinto she fell by infirmitie, (and no maruell
if she so fell, being a new conuert from paganisme) but
that her worke of faith and loue. Vnto both these examples,
Augustine answereth thus:Contra mendac. ad Consent. Whereas it is written, that
God dealt well with the midwiues of the Hebrews, and
with Rahab the harlot of Iericho, it was not because they
lied, but because they were mercifull towards the men
of God. Wherefore not their lying was rewarded, but
their good will, Benignitas ment is, non iniquit as mentientis.
            
            Now, if they shall obiect other examples of the godly,
I answere with Augustine in the same place, When as examples
of lying are produced out of the holy scriptures,
either they are no lies. but are so supposed to be, whiles
they are not vnderstood (of which sort are some speeches
which were prophetically vttered, as that of Iacob to Isaac,
which Augustine sayth was a my sterie and not a lie) or if
they be lies, they are not to be imitated, because they cannot
be just. And secondly, the rule of our cōscience is not
to be drawn from the examples of men, but from the

commaundements of God. They were men, and therefore
they might fall, but these slips of theirs were in their godly
life, as blemishes in a beautifull face, which wee are to
behold as euidences of humane frailtie, that we may be
made more warie and circumspect, and not to imitate
them as examples.
            In the third place they vrge certain cases, wherin if we
shall hold it vnlawfull to lie, they say it is a hard doctrine,
and which cannot be borne. For first (say they) seeing
the most men now adaies are readie for euery petty commoditie
to lie; it were to great simplicity, if not folly, if
to compasse great matters a man would refuse to lie: for
this were the high way to beggery.
            But what sayth Salomon?
               Pro. 23. 23. 
               Buy the truth, but sell it not. And
our Sauiour Christ,Mar. 8. 36. 
               What will it profit a man, if he shall gaine
the whole world and loose his owne soule? as the lying tongue
casts away the soule. But these men are like to prophane
Esau, who for a messe of pottage sold his birth-right; sauing
that they for matters of like value and lesse necessity
do sell their inheritance in heauen. Wherefore as
Augustine truly saith,De mencacio ad Consent. No man can euince that it is lawfull
at any time to lie, vnlesse he be able to shew, that an euerlasting
good may be obtained by a lye: But so much doth
euery one depart from eternity, as be discordeth from verity.
            
            2. But say they, what if our owne or our brothers
life being endangered, might be redeemed by a lie,
shall it not be lawfull in that case to lie? I aunswere with
Augustine, That death which foolish men do feare, who
feare not to sinne, killeth the body and not the soule: But
the lying tongue slayeth the soule. It is therefore most
peruersly said, that the one ought spiritually to die, that
the other may corporally liue. Seeing therefore by lying,
eternall life is lost, we may not lie to preserue any
mans temporall life; no more than we would thinke it
our duty, if by our witchcraft, theft, adultery, we could
saue a mans life, to play the witches, theeues, or adulterers,

to that end. Nay rather according to that counsell
of the wise man,Eccles. 4. 33. We are to striue for the truth vnto
death.
            3. But suppose, say they, that if thou wilt lye
thou mayst saue thy chastitie, if thou wilt not lye thou
shalt be forced to fornication, or some other sinne which
is more grieuous than lying; must we not of two euils
chuse the lesse? This case of compensatiue sinnes, wherby
a more grieuous sinne is as they suppose redeemed by
a lesse, doth trouble many. But although of two euils of
punishment, the lesse is to be chosen, yet this holdeth not
in sinnes: For if I may not sinne, that good may come
thereof, then may I not commit one sinne, that another
may be auoided. Neither as I suppose can they alleadge
any case wherein a man shall so be concluded betwixt
two sinnes, as that he may not haue an issue without committing
a new sinne. What then will you say, ought one
rather to cōmit whordome than to make a lye? I answer
first with Augustine, If you aske whether he ought to do;
I say, he ought to do neither. For if I shall say he ought
to do the one, I should allow that one: when as indeed I
disallow both. But if you aske, whither he ought to auoid,
who cannot shunne both, but may escape the one?
I answer, he ought to auoid his owne sinne rather than an
others, and rather the lesse, if it be his owne, than the
greater, if it be anothers. For although manslaughter be
a more grieuous sinne than theft: yet it is worse to steale,
than to be killed. Secondly, he thatlyeth that he may not
be forced to whordome, or some other sinne; to auoid an
vncertaine sin, he runneth into a certaine. Thirdly, neither
may they be sayd to commit sinne, vpon whom
whordome is enforced against their will: for they do
but receiue wrong, whereas the others which enforce
them, do commit the sin. Neither is whordome which is
enforced vpon another against their will, in respect of the
sufferer, a corruption, but a vexation: For the mind remaining

vncorrupt the body is not corrupted. Who
therefore seeth not whether a man ought rather to auoid
the permission and suffering of another mans sinne, which
he cannot hinder; or the doing of his owne.
            4. But what if by my lie I may further the saluation of
my brother, may I not lye in that case, as for exāple, of an
hereticke to make a true Christian, and to reclaime a heathen
man from paganisme to Christianitie? Neither may
we lie in this case,Lib. cont. Mendacium ad Consent. as Augustine proueth at large: for when as
the Priscillianists, who were a pernicious sect of heretiks,
did so cloke their heresie that they could hardly be discouered;
diuerse professors of the truth, faining themselues
to be Priscillianists, denied the true faith, that they
might insinuat themselues into the company of the Priscillianists,
that so they might be discouered, and reclaimed
to the profession of the truth. This fact of theirs
Augustine condemneth. Neither doubteth he to affirme
that the professors of the truth, that they might discouer
the heretickes, did lie more perniciously, or at lest more
dangerously, than the heretickes did lie in couering their
heresie from them. And againe, farre be it from a Christian
(saith he) that he should deny and blaspheme Christ,
to the end that he might make another man a Christian,
Et percando quarrat inueniendum, quemsi tale doceat, perdat inuentum,
And by casting away himselfe seeke to find another, whom
being found be shall also (if he teach him such doctrine) cast away.
For if this once be granted, That it is lawful to lie for thy
neighbours good, yea, for his saluation; all faith will be
abolished: for thou shalt not bee able to say any thing
wherein he may not thinke that thou doest lye for his
good. And that it is not lawfull to lie for the saluation
of men, hereby it is euident: Because we may not lie for
Gods cause.Iob. 13. 7. 8. 1. Cor. 15. 15. 
               Iob. 13, For whosoeuer will lye for God, he
shall be found guilty of false witnesse against God. And
thus it appeareth that we may lye for no cause.
            1. And that we may abide firme and resolute in this

truth, let vs first hold this as a firme principle in Diuinity;
We may not do cuill that good may come thereof.
               Rom. 3. 8. For those that
say we may, their damnation is just. But to lye is to doe
euill, as hath bene proued, therefore we may not lye that
good may come thereof. Yea but (say they) actions are to
be esteemed according to their end: Therefore to lye to a
good end, is good. That is true in things which be in
their owne nature indifferent, but lying is in it owne nature
euill and vnjust.
            2. We are to consider that we are not to lye for our
owne life or safety, otherwise Peter had not offended
when being in feare of his life, he lied, saying that he
knew not Christ: and therefore we are not to lye for the
life or safety of another.
            3. Euery lie is pernicious, if not to the neighbour,
yet to the speaker. For euery lie is cōtrary to the vertue of
truth, and therfore is a lye; contrary to the law, & therfore

                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               ,Gal. 3. 10. 
               a sinne, or transgression of the law: and euery transgression
of the law maketh vs subject to the cursse of the
law. Therefore the lye which in respect of the neighbor
is officious, in respect of the speaker is pernicious. Therefore
no lie is lawfull.
            What then will you say, is the truth alwayes to be professed?
            2. That is the other question: Whereunto I answer,
That the truth is neuer to be denied, that an vntruth is
neuer to be affirmed, and yet notwithstanding the truth
is not alwayes to be professed. For the profession of the
truth is sometimes necessary, sometimes free and in our
owne choice, sometimes vnseasonable. Necessary, when
as the consideration of Gods glorie, our neighbors good,
or our owne duty, requireth it at our hands: As first in
causes spirituall, when a man is called to an account of
his faith and religion: for then the Christian Apologie
and constant profession of the faith is necessary. 1.l. Pet. 3. 15. 
               Pet. 3. 15,
Be ready alwayes to giue an answer to euery man that

asketh you a reason of the hope that is in you: For as
with the heart we beleeue vnto righteousnesse,Rom. 10. 10. so with
the mouth we confesse vnto saluation. He that confesseth
me (saith Christ) before men,Mat. 10. 32, 33. him will I confesse
also before my father which is in heauen. But whosoeuer
shall deny me before men, him will I also deny before
my father which is in heauen.
            In causes ciuile, as in the place of judgement, when as a
man is lawfully called as a witnesse to testifie the truth:
For then, as we are forbidden to beare false witnesse, so
are we commanded to beare witnesse to the truth.
            The profession of the truth is vnseasonable, when as
there being no necessity of vttering it in respect either of
Gods glory, our neighbors good, or our owne duty, it is
joyned with our own or our neighbours danger or harme;
for then the truth may, yea must be concealed either in
whole or in part.
            It is free and in our owne choice, when it is neither
necessary, nor vnseasonable: for then we may either professe
it or conceale it. And herein as in all other, Christs
action must be our instruction: For whē as he was conuented
before the Priests and Pharisies, whom he perceiued
to offend of prepenced malice, he would answer nothing
to their demands, lest he should seeme to cast holy things
before dogs,Mat. 7. 6. or pearles before swine, which would not
onely trample the truth vnder their feet, but also persecute
the professor thereof.Mat. 27. 11. 21, 1. Tim. 6. 13. But before Pontius Pilat he is
said to haue witnessed a good confession:Iohn 18. 36, 37. For not onely
he confessed himselfe to be the King of the Iewes, but also
made this profession, For this cause am I borne, and for
this cause came I into the world, that I should beare witnesse
vnto the truth,Iohn 18. 20, 21. &c. Againe, when the Priests questioned
with him concerning his doctrine, he sendeth
them to his hearers. For it was against all equity that he
should accuse himselfe. But when the high Priests adjured
him that he should plainely tell whether he was the

sonne of God or not; then although the profession of the
truth were ioyned with manifest danger of his life, notwithstanding,
seeing it so neerly concerned the glory of
God, the good of his followers, and the conuiction of
his aduersaries,Mat. 26. 63, 64. he made a notable confession of the truth.
            And that the truth sometimes may be concealed, it
may be proued by the authoritie of God himselfe: For
when as the Lord appointed Samuel to go to Bethlehem
to annoint Dauid king, Samuel desired to be informed how
that might safely be done; for if Saul should heare thereof,
he would be sure to kill him. The Lord therefore
teacheth him this godly pollicy: Thou shalt take an
heifer with thee,1. Sam. 16▪ 2. and say, I am come to sacrifice, or as some
read, to selebrate a feast to the Lord. Whereas therefore
Samuel was sent to Bethlehem for two causes, he was by
the commandement of God to conceale the more principall:
which teacheth vs that the simplicity of doues is to
be tempered with the wisedome of seruants. The same
is proued by the example of Abraham,
               Gen. 20. 12. which himselfe
doth justifie: for whereas Sara was not onely his sister
(according to the Hebrew phrase) but also his wife; he
professed the one, that she was his sister; and concealed
the other, that she was his wife: when as therefore the
profession of the truth not necessary, is joyned with the
damage or danger, either of our selues or others, and so
is vnseasonable; howsoeuer, we may neither deny the
truth, nor vtter an vntruth: yet we may, or rather must
conceale the truth, either wholly or in part. As for example.
An innocent man who is persecuted for righteousnesse
sake, is sought for by his persecutors that
he may be brought to punishment, committeth himselfe
to your fidelitie and safe custody: The persecutors come
and demaund of you where this partie is: What will you
do in this case? If you tell where he is, you betray the innocent:
If you knowing where he is, shall say you
cannot tell where he is; or shall say he is where you thinke

he is not, you shall lye. Will you offend in lying against
your owne soule, or in treachery against the innocent?
Forsooth the circumstances are to be considered. If you
plainely see that notwithstanding whatsoeuer you shall
say he cannot be concealed, it is all one in respect of the
innocent partie, whether you conceale the truth or confesse
it: For neither by confessing the truth shall you betray
him, nor by concealing it, saue him. If it be doubtfull
whether by concealing the truth he may be preserued
or not, hide the truth so much as thou mayst, and by
telling some other truth as Ra
                     •
                  ab did, diuert the fury of
the persecutors another way. But if the partie be so hid
that vnlesse thou discouer him he cannot be found, and
perhaps thou be asked concerning the very place where
he is, whether he be there or not: here, if you say nothing
you betray him, if you say I cannot tell, you lye. Therefore
as Augustine faith, A man in such a case must say, I
know where he is, but I will neuer tell you: for which
Christian humanitie whatsoeuer you shall constantly endure,Lib. cont. Mendacium
it is so far from being▪ worthy of blame, that it is to
be commended. And here unto belongeth that memorable
example recorded by Augustine in the same place, of
a certaine Bishop, Firm
                     ••
                  s by name, but more firme (as he
saith) in resolution: For when as messengers sent from a
persecuting emperour, enquired of him concerning a
Christian (whom he had hid as secretly as he could)
where he was: he answered them, that neither could he
lie, neither would he betray the man: neither could they
by any tortures make him to discouer the partie. Whereupon
they bring him to before the emperour, who admiring
the constancie and courage of the Bishop, was content
for his sake to pardon the other. Likewise in heathen
writers the constancy of Zeno the Philosopher is
highly commended:Plut
                     •
                  rch. de gar
                     ••
                  ulitate. who rather than he would be forced
by any tortures to vtter secrets against his will, he
did bite off his tongue and spit it in the tyrants face.
            
               
And thus much may suffice to haue spoken of the
three generall notes: this onely remaineth, that we should
apply them to our selues. Wherefore from this proposition
of the holy Ghost (Those that walke vprightly, worke
righteousnesse, embrace the truth, are such as shall inherit the kingdome
of heauen: and reciprocally those that shall inherit the kingdome
of heauen are such as walke vprightly, exercise iustice, speake
the truth in their hearts,) let vs consider what euery mans
conscience will assume: for if thy conscience shall make
this assumption, But I walke vprightly, worke righteousnesse,
embrace the truth, though with great imperfection,
yet with my true endeuour and vnfained purpose
and desire of mine heart; then vpon these premises will
follow this happy conclusion, Therefore thou are one of
those that shall inherit the kingdome of heauen. But on
the other side, if this be the assumption which thy conconscience
maketh, Thou playest the hypocrite before
God, and dealest deceitfully with men, thou liuest vnjustly,
and followest after lies; vpon these premises it will
follow necessarily, That thou art not such an one as shall
inherit the kingdome of heauen. And therefore as thou
wouldest hope to be saued, so repent of these sinnes, and
embrace the contrary vertues which are here set downe
as the proper notes of Gods children.
            But let vs come to the fourth note, which (as also the
third whereof euen now I spake) respecteth the tongue,
and the same in part may be sayd of the eight.
            Now whereas the holy Ghost among the ten notes of
Gods children, taketh two or three from the toung, it appeareth
that great regard is to be had of the tongue. For
howsoeuer many make but light account of their words,
which are (they say) but wind; notwithstanding, the
holy Ghost affirmeth, that death and life are in the power of
the tongue, and as men loue to vse it, so shall they eate the fruit thereof.
And Christ our Sauiour after he had said,Prou. 18, 2
                     •
                  . that men
are to giue an account of their idle words, he adjoyneth

this reason,Mat. 12▪ 34. for by thy words, saith he, thou shalt be iustified,
and by thy words thou shalt be condemned. Wherefore let vs
learne to gouerne our tongue, otherwise we shall be conuicted
by three notes out of this Psalme, that we neither
are sound members of the Church militant, nor shall be
inheritors of glory in the Church triumphant; but
rather shall shew our profession of religion (though otherwise
neuer so glorious) to be but vaine. For as Iames saith, If
any man among you seemeth religious,
               Iam. 1. 26. 
               and refraineth not his tongue,
but deceiueth his owne heart; that mans religion is vaine.
            
            Moreouer betwixt the third note and this fourth,
there is great assinitie. For thereby are signified two duties
of the tongue which may not be seuered, the contrary
affirmatiue being vnderstood vnder this negatiue,
namely that the speech of the vpright man concerning
his neighbour is full of charitie, whereby▪ The is so farre
from defaming him by vncharitable slaunders, as that he
sheweth himselfe greatly to tender his good name. For
in all our speech concerning our neighbour, these two
things are required, That our talke be the speech of verity,
and of charitie:1. Cor. 13. 6. For charity reioyceth in the truth: and truth
must be spoken in charitie,
               Eph. 4. 15. as the Apostle saith, 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               ,
speaking the truth in loue. Neither sufficeth a true speech vnlesse
it proceed from charitie, nor a charitable speechvnlesse
it be joyned with verity. Truth without charitie is
malicious, and charitie without truth is a lyar.
            But let vs come to the words themselues; He that slandereth
not with his tongue. The Hebrew word 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                signifieth
to play the espie, and by a metaphor, to backbite or
slander: For backbiters and whisperers after the maner
of espies, go vp and downe dissembling their malice,
that they may espie the faults and defects of others,
whereof they may make a malitious relation to such as
will giue eare to their slaunders. So that backbiting is a
malitious defamation of a man behind his backe.
            Now that I may speake of this matter according to

the scope of the holy ghost in this place, I am to shew,
first, that those which be heires apparant of the kingdom
of heauen, neither are nor should be backbiters; and secondly,
that all sorts of men besides them, doe slaunder
with their tongues. For so shall it appeare, that this is a
proper note of the sonnes and heires of God, agreeing to
them all, and to them alone.
            And that the citisen of heauen doth and ought to abhorre
from backbiting, the horrible wickednesse of this
sinne doth euince. For first Leuit. 19, where it is straightly
forbidden,Leuit. 19. 16. the tale-bearer is compared to a pedler, Thou
shalt not walke about with tales and slanders, as it were a
pedler among thy people; so much 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                signifieth. For
as the pedler hauing bought his wares of some one or
more, goeth about from house to house, that he may sell
the same to others: so backbiters and tale-bearers gathering
together tales and rumours, as it were wares, goe
from one to another, that such wares as either themselues
haue inuented, or haue gathered by report, they may vtter
in the absence of their neighbour to his infamie and
disgrace.Psal. 50. 20. Likewise Psal. 50. it is condemned as a notable
crime, which God will not suffer to goe vnpunished,
Ezec.
               Ezec. 22. 9. 22. it is reckoned among the abhominations of I erusalem,
for which destruction is denounced against it: and
Rom. 1.Rom. 1. 29. 30. among the crimes of the heathen, giuen ouer vnto a
reprobat sence, this is placed, That they were whisperers
and backbiters.
            But the detestable abhomination of this sinne may
more clearely appeare, if we consider either the causes
from whence it springeth, or the fruits and effects which
it bringeth forth. It ariseth of enuie and hatred: for therfore
backbiters slaunder other, either because they hate
them as their enemies, or enuie them as their betters. In
both respects, backbiting is numbred among the murthers
of the tongue: and for that cause, the backbiters
tongue (which being inflamed with rancour and enuie, is

worthily said to be set on fire from hell) is sitly compared
to a bow,
                  
                     •
                  am. 3. a sword, a razour, an aspe, and other deadly
things.Ier. 18. 18. For those which smite with their tongue, they bend their
tongue as it were a bowe of lies:
               Ier. 9. 3. out of which they shoot bitter
words as it were arrowes:
               Psal. 120. 3. wherewith they shoot at the vpright
in secret,Psal. 64. 3, 4. they shoot at him suddenly and feare not.
They whet their tongue like a sword,Psal. 64. 3. and pronounce
words like a piercing sword,Pro. 12. 18. yea their words are swords.
Their tongue is like to a sharpe razour.Psal. 55. 21. They haue sharpened
their tongues like a serpent,Psal. 52. 2. 
               venenum ptyados, the
poyson of the spitting aspe (which sendeth his poysonPsal. 140. 3.
farre off) is vnder their lips.Iam. 3. 6. 8. In a word, their tongue is a
fire, a world of wickednesse, an vnruly euill, full of deadly
poyson.
            But consider withall the fruits of backbiting: for the
backbiter is not a single manslayer, but hee killeth three
men as it were with one stroke. For which cause euery
false witnesse, and consequently euery backbiter, who is
one of the worst kinds of false witnesses, is said to be an
arrow,Pro. 25. 18. an hammer, and a sword: an arrow, in respect of
him that is absent, whom he woundeth a farre off, in his
good name, in his goods, in his friends, and sometimes in
his life.Eccles. 7. 3. Of his good name he alwayes spoyleth his neighbour,
which is more precious than ointments,Pro. 22. 1. and more
to be desired than great riches; and therefore doth offer
him greater wrong, than if hee had robbed him of his
goods.Sonne of Syrach 
                     •
                  . 15. Wherefore as that wise man exhorteth, Bee not
counted a tale-bearer, & lie not in wait with thy tongue;
for shame doth follow a theefe, but euill condemnation
is vpon him that is double-tongued. Againe, that which
is stollen, may be restored againe; but the blot of infamie
can neuer be wiped away: against the biting of the sycophant
(which is backbiting) there is no remedie:
theeues also may be preuented or shunned, but who is
able to escape or auoid the slaunder of the tale-bearer?
But the backbiter doth not onely spoile his neighbour of

his good name, but sometimes also of his goods, as we see
in the example of Ziba, who by slaundering his master
Mephibosheth,
               2. Sam. 16. 4. obtained his goods. Againe, the backbiter
or tale-bearer increaseth hatred among enemies, & soweth
discord among friends. For as Salomon sayth, Without
wood the fire is quenched,Pro. 26. 20. and without a talebearer strife
ceaseth.Pro. 16. 28. And againe, a froward person soweth strife, and
a tale-bearer maketh diuision among princes: and therefore
the backbiter doth not onely rob a man of his goods
and good name, but sometimes also of his friends. But to
bereaue a man of his friends, is a greater wrong than easily
can be imagined:Pro. 18. 24. for a friend oftentimes is nearer and
dearer than a brother.Mat. 5. 9. Now if they be happy which are
peace-makers, then cursed are they that sow hatred among
friends: for this is that seuenth thing which the
Lord doth especially abhorre.Prou. 6. 19. And as the peace-makers
are the sonnes of God, so are tale-bearers the children of
the diuell, whose conditions in slaundering and sowing
discord, they doe resemble. Lastly, the slaunderer sometimes
bereaueth his neighbour of his life,Ezec. 22. 9. and carrieth
tales to shed bloud:1. Sam. 22. 9. 11 as appeareth in Doeg, of whom Dauid
complaineth,Psal. 52. 2. 4. 
               Psal. 52. that his tongue did cut like a sharpe
razour, and that hee loued all words that might destroy.
For howsoeuer the tale-bearers words doe oftentimes
come out with sighs, as though he pitied the party whom
he doth backbite,Pro. 26. 22. yet they descend into the bowels, and
pierce the heart, and therefore the backbiters tongue,
as you haue heard, is compared to most deadly things.
            2. To him that receiueth the slaunder, the backbiter
is an hammer to knocke him on the head, Eius enim aurem
dum inficit animam interficit: for whiles he infecteth his ear,
he destroyeth his soule, casting thereinto the seeds of suspition,
hatred,1. Sam. 22. 11. and contempt, as 1. Sam. 22. which afterward
bring forth most damnable fruits.
            3. Lastly, to himselfe hee is a sword, destroying his
owne soule, by committing that sinne which is most odious

vnto God:Leu
                     •
                  t. 19. 14 for he which slaundereth his neighbour
behind his backe, he committeth the same offence with
him that raileth on the deafe, and is like to him that smiteth
his neighbour secretly;Deut. 27. 24. which whosoeuer doth, he is
accursed. And therefore no maruell, though this be said
to be that seuenth sinne which God doth abhorre;Prou. 6. 19. for
there is no sinne which maketh a man so like the diuell, as
this doth: for from slaundering and backbiting he hath
his name 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               ,2 Tim, 3. 3. which is a common name to him with all
slaunderers.Tit. 2. 3. But as the Lord doth greatly detest backbiting,
so doth he grieuously punish it;Psal. 50. 20, 21. and not only them,
but also the places that harbour them;Psal. 52. 5. and not only in this
life,Ezec. 22. 9. but in the life to come: for if raylers shall not inherit
the kingdome of God,1. Cor. 6. 10. much lesse shall slaunderers. And
therefore it is euident, that this vice (I speake of the habit
or custome of backbiting, for in many things we sinne all;
and he is a very perfect man that neuer offendeth in his
tongue) is not incident vnto a citisen of heauen.Iam. 3. 2. This note
therefore agreeth to all them that shall inherit the kingdome
of God. It remaineth therefore, that I should shew
how it agreeth to them alone: for backbiting is so common
a vice, that it is naturally in all men: for vnto all doth
the Apostle apply those testimonies,Rom. 3. 12, 13. They haue all gone
out of the way, there is none that doth good, no not one,
their throat is an open sepulchre, the poyson of aspes is
vnder their lips. And therefore none are freed from it,
but those which are regenerate: neither is this vice seene
alone in them that are prophane and openly wicked, but
also in them who would seeme to be religious. For those
which would seeme religious, and yet be not so, these for
the most part place the top of their religion, in inueighing
against the faults of others, that is to say, in backbiting:
as though other mens want of religion would proue
them to be religious. But this custome argueth him that
vseth it, to be an hypocrit and a vile person. For as Iames
sayth,Iam. 
                     •
                   25. If any man would seeme to be religious, and doth

not refraine his tongue, but deceiueth his owne heart,
that mans religion is vaine. And it is truly said of Hierome,
It is the propertie of vile persons to make others vile: and
those which cannot be commended by their own desert,
doe seeke to be commended in comparison of others.
Wherefore as we desire to be accounted heires of heauen,
so let vs learne to keepe our tongues form backbiting;
and in tender care of our brothers credit, to couer his
offences, especially such as sauour of infirmity, as Sem
and Iaphet once did couer the nakednesse of their father:Pron. 10. 1
                     •
                  .
For as hatred (which often bursteth forth into slaundering
and backbiting) raiseth contention,1. Pet. 4. 8. so charitie couereth
the multitude of offences.
            What then, will you say, are the offences of our neighbour
so to be buried, as that it is not lawfull for a man to
mention them?
            As touching the vices of others, this is the duty of euery
honest man:Gal. 6. 1. First in presence. If a brother be ouertaken
with some lesse offence, we are to admonish him in
the spirit of meeknesse: if he offend more grieuously, we
are to freely to reproue him,Leu. 19. 17. and not to suffer sinne to rest
vpon him.De interiori domo cap. 42. Wherefore as Bernard saith, If thou wilt rebuke
an offender, reproue him to his face, and bite him
not behind his backe:Prou. 27. 5▪ 6. For open rebuke is better than secret
loue. The wounds of a louer (that is to say, euen his
sharpest reprofes) are faithfull, but the kisses of an enemie
are to be prayed against.Psal. 141. 5. And Dauid to the like purpose,
Let the righteous (saith he) smite me, and I will
esteeme it a benefit, let him reproue me and it shall be a
pretious oyle that shall not breake mine head. Wherefore
we are in this behalfe to follow the direction of our
Sauiour Christ:Mat. 18. 15, 16, 17. 
               If thy brother offend against thee (that is, in
thy sight, for an offence committed before thee, is a scandale
vnto thee) go and reproue him betweene thee and him alone: If
he shall harken vnto thee, thou hast won thy brother: But if he shall
not harken vnto thee, take vnto thee one or two, that by the mouth of

two or three witnesses euery word may be established. And if he will
not vouchsafe to heare them, tell it vnto the Church, and if he refuse
to heare the Church also, let him be vnto thee as an heathen man and
a publican. And this is the course which we must take
with him that is a brother.
            But if he be a sonne of Beli
                     •
                  l, or one that is openly profane,
such as the Scriptures calleth a scorner, who maketh
a scoffe of all religion; with such when they offend before
vs, we are to take another course: For although our
hearts ought to be grieued and vexed at the wickednes
of prophane persons,2. Pet. 2. 7. 8. as Lots was among the Sodomits;
though we ought to mourne for the sinnes of our neighbours
and countrimen,Ezec. 9. 4. 6. as those who were marked in the
forehead, that they might escape the common destruction;Psal. 119. 158.
though it ought to be an irkesome thing vnto vs,
as it was to Dauid, to fee the transgressors which keepe
not the word of God; finally though with Dauid
                     •
                  
                we
ought to weepe riuers of waters,Psal. 119. 136. because men keepe not
Gods law: notwithstanding, priuat admonition or brotherly
reprofe is not to be vsed to wards desperat sinners,
or prophane ruffians.Mat. 7. 6. For holy things, as our Sauiour
Christ aduiseth, are not to be cast before dogges, neither
is precious pearle of brotherly admonition to be thrown
before swine: for they will not only trample it vnder
their feet, but also turne vpon thee, to offer thee violence
or disgrace. And to the same purpose is the aduice of
Salomon. Prou. 9,Prou. 9. 7, 8, 9. He that reproueth a scorner, purchaseth
to himselfe shame, and he that rebuketh the wicked getteth
himselfe reproch. Rebuke not a scorner lest he hate
thee, but rebuke a wise man and he will loue thee. Giue
admonition to the wise, and he will be the wiser; teach a
righteous man and he will increase in learning. And
such ought to be our behauiour in presence of him that
offendeth.
            As for those which be absent, we are not, behind our
neighbours backe,Prou. 10. 18. to publish their shame: For he that vttereth

infamie is a foole. The secret faults of our neighbours,
especially such as are committed of infirmitie, we
are to conceale and couer▪
               1. Pet. 4. 8. For loue couereth the multitude
of sinnes. Neither are we to vtter the rest, vnlesse
we be vrged thereunto by some necessitie, which may
concerne either thy neighbour or thy selfe. Thy neighbour
I say, either to whom, or of whom thou speakest:
and for him of whom thou speakest, it may be necessary
that his sinnes, as it were his diseases, which by priuat admonition
could not be cured, should be declared vnto a
superiour, that hath authoritie or gouernment ouer him,
as it were his Physition to cure him. But herein we must
be carefull that this delation or acquainting of the superiour
with the faults of the inferiour,Mat. 18. 15, 16, 17. do follow vpon our
priuat admonition, if conueniently it could be vsed, and
proceed from our loue towards the partie whose good
we therein do seeke.Gen. 37. 2. Thus Ioseph told the faults of his
brethren to Iacob their father; Thus they of the houshold
of Chloe notified the vices of the Corinthians to Paul.
               1. Cor. 1. 
                     •
                  1.
Now to the party to whō thou speakest, it may be necessary
that he should be premonished of another mās faults,
when there is danger that either the injurie thereof will
redound to his losse, or the contagion of them will infect
him. When the injurie is feared, we may say to our neighbour,
Take heed of such a man, for he intendeth such a
mischiefe towards you.Act. 23. 16. Thus Pauls sisters sonne certified
him how certaine Iewes lay in waite for him. Thus
Iohanan with other captaines, premonished Gedaliah of the
slaughter intended against him by Isma
                     •
                  l.
               Ier. 40. 14. When infection
is feared (as nothing is more infectious than the company
of the wicked) we may say, Take heed you enter not into
familiar acquaintance with such a man for he is giuen to
drunkennesse, to whordome, to swearing, &c. or he is in
the number of such sinners, with whom familiar acquaintance
is not to be entertained. 1.1. Cor. 5. 11. Cor. 5. 11.
            For thy selfe it may be necessary to declare another

mans fault, when thou mayst not conceale it, vnlesse thou
wilt be guiltie of the same offence, as in the matter of
treason, and sometimes of other crimes. And this is that
which the son of Syrach aduiseth in this behalfe,Eccles. 19. 8. Declare
not other mens maners, neither to friend nor foe. And if
the sinne appertaine not vnto thee, that is, if thou shalt
not by thy silence be enwrapped in the guilt thereof, reueale
it not: But if vpon no necessitie thou shalt vtter the
offences of thy neighbour which is absent, thou playest
the part of a slanderer, yea of the diuell. And how soeuer
this vice of backbiting and slandering be a very grieuous
fault, as hath bene shewed: yet there is no sinne more
common, none more vsuall, none lesse regarded; so common,
that it is in euery bodies mouth almost, euen of those
that would seeme religious; so vsuall, that there is no feast,
no meeting, no communication almost among mē, which
is not full of rumors and ill reports of other men; whiles
some of hatred defame others, others of enuie detract
from them, others of selfe-loue desire themselues preferred
before them. And so ordinarie a fault it is among mē,
that most men when by ill speaking they defame and
disgrace their neighbour, they do not perceiue themselues
to offend. But if we be Gods children, how commeth
it to passe that we are 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , that is, diuels, and carry
the diuell about vs, as a slandering and lying spirit in our
mouthes?
            Yea,Obiection. 1. but so long as I speake the truth of my neighbor
(saith one) I am not to be blamed. Answer. 1. Yea, but
few tale-bearers or backbiters are able to say so much of
themselues truly, whose maner is either to inuent tales of
themselues, or else to such reports as they haue heard, to
adde of their owne. 2. Howsoeuer in shew of words
talebearers sometimes do seeme to speake the truth, yet
in respect of their purpose and intent (which is, that their
neighbour may seeme worse by their report than indeed
he is) they are to be accounted liars and slaunderers.

It was true which Doeg reported to Saule concerning Dauid
and Abimelech the priest:1. Sam. 22. 9, 10 but because by his narration
he would haue Saule to gather that Abimelech had conspired
with Dauid against him,1. Sam. 21. 6▪ 9. he is condemned of falshood
and lying. Psal. 52. 3. But suppose the euill report which
thou vtterest concerning thy brother,Psal. 52. 2, 3, 4. be true, yet if it proceed
from hatred of his person, thou art a backbiter and
slaunderer: For euen as he is a murtherer that killeth a
malefactor without judgement, without calling; so he is
a slaunderer, who vpon no necessitie diffameth his brother,
though he deserue so to be spoken of.
            2. Yea but I (sayth another) in reporting the faults of
my neighbour, haue regard to his credit: for I tell them
to my friend, with this caution, that he shall tell no bodie.
            Indeed so doe backbiters vse to say: I haue a secret
to tell you, but you must keepe it to your selfe. But whether
should I say is greater, your mallice, or your folly?
that which you would haue concealed, your selfe doe vtter.
For if you would haue it concealed indeed, why doe
you not trust your owne tongue rather than another
mans? or how can you require that of another, which you
cannot obtaine from your selfe?
            3. Yea, but he is my friend, and he will keepe it secret.
So hath he friends, and they also haue friends, by whom
the ill report or slaunder may be spread farre and neere.
Follow therefore the aduice of Iesus the sonne of Syrach,
Declare not other mens manners,
               Eccles. 19▪ 8, 10, 11. 12. 
               neither to friend nor foe, and if it bee
not sinne to thee, reue
                     •
                  le it not. If thou hast heard a word against thy
neighbour, let it dic with thee, and be sure it will not burst thee. A
foole trauaileth when he hath heard a thing, as a woman which is about
to bring forth a child: as an arrow that sticketh in ones thigh, so
is a word in a fooles heart, that is, it must out.
            4. Yea, but I doe so report my neighbours fault, as
that it may appeare I am sorry for him. Or rather (say I)
that thou mayest appeare to be an hypocrite, such as Bernard
describeth:Serm. in Ca
                     •
                  . 24 
               You shall see them sometimes (sayth he) to send
               
deepe sighes before a slaunder: and so with a kind of grauitie, and
slownesse of speech, with a sad looke, and deiected countenance, and
dolefull voice, the slaunder is vttered, being so much the more credible,
as to them that heare it, it seemeth to be vttered with an vnwilling
heart, and with the affection of him that condoleth, rather than
of one that is maliciously affected. I am very sorry for him (saith one)
because I loue him, but I could neuer reclaime him from this fault.
And another, I had (saith hee) certaine notice of this matter, but it
should neuer haue been blazed abroad for me; but seeing the matter
is made known by others, I cannot denie the truth, with greefe I speake
it, but so
                  •
               t is. And then be addeth: it is great pitty, the man hath
good parts, and otherwise he is well qualified, but in this matter (to say
the truth) he cannot be excused. This is that which Salomon
sayth,
               Pro. 18. 8. & 26. 22. 
               Prou. 18, The words of a tale-bearer are like the words of
them that are wounded (that is, they be dolefully vttered) but
they goe dowue into the bowels of the belly, that is, they inflict,
though hidden, yet deadly and incurable wounds.
            By this which hath beene said, it appeareth what is the
dutie of euery good Christian, namely, to admonish or
reprooue our brother (if need be) to his face; but behind
his backe to say nothing of him but good, vnlesse we be
compelled thereto by necessitie: and that to this end, either
that his neighbour of whom hee speaketh may bee
cured from the corruption of the sinne; or he to whom he
speaketh, may be freed either from the injurie or from the
contagion of the sinne; or he who speaketh, may be preserued
from the guilt of the sinne, which by silence hee
should incurre. This Christian dutie is duly to be practised
of vs all who would be accounted the sons and heirs
of God: and with so much the greater diligence & care
we are to eschew the foule vice of backbiting and slaundering,
as it is more common in vse, and more hard to
bee left.
            And to this purpose there are some things to be considered
of vs, some things to be done. Consider, first the
grieuousnesse of this fault: for euery slaunderer is a manslayer,

striking his brother in secret, and wounding him as
it were behind his backe; yea, as I said before, killing
three men with one stroke: he is a serpent which biteth
secretly: a diuell, deprauing also such things as are well
done. Consider, that by backbiting thou makest thy selfe
guiltie of the breach of two commaundements, to wit,
the fixt and the ninth. Consider, that in other sinnes men
communicat with beasts, but in this, with the diuell himselfe.
Consider, that all thy slaunders are registred in the
booke of Gods prouidence; and howsoeuer the Lord
seemeth for a time not to regard them, yet he will reproue
thee, and set them in order before thee. Consider, how
much thou wouldest be abashed, if thy neighbour whom
thou backbitest, should take thee with the manner, and
t
                     •
                  nquam lupus in fabula,
               Psal. 50. 21. heare thy tale: how much more
oughtest thou to be ashamed, seeing God himselfe doth
heare thy slaunders? Consider, when thou art about to
speake of thy neighbours faults, with what mind thou
speakest of them: for if of hatred, of enuie, of selfeloue,
if to diffame him, or by disgracing him to grace thy selfe;
bid Sathan auaunt, who seeketh to be a lying and slaunderous
spirit in thy mouth. Lastly consider, that of idle
words an account is to be made, how much more of malicious
and slaunderous words?
            There are three things also to bee put in practise, that
we may auoid this sinne. First, wee must flie curiositie,
whereby men vse to prie busily into other mens behauiour,
and securely neglect their owne: So doth Plutarch
not vnfitly define curiositie,De curio
                     •
                  it 
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , a desire
to be acquainted with other mens euils. For there are
many curious persons and busie bodies,Plutarch de curiositate. who with Lamia
or the witch in the fable put on their eyes when they goe
abroad, but lay them aside when they come home. Such
kind of persons Peter by an elegant name calleth 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               ,
superintendents ouer other mens affaires,1. Pet. 4. 15. and as
it were bishops ouer other mens dioces. And Paule likewise

fitly describeth such kind of women,1
                     •
                   Tim. 5. 13. 
               which being idle,
learne to goe about from house to house: yea, not onely idle, but also
prattlers and busie bodies, speaking things which are not comely. We
are indeed to obserue one another,Heb. 1
                     •
                  . 
                     •
                  4. to prouoke vnto loue
and good works: but we are not like busie bodies, to pry
into the conuersation of others, that espying their wants,
we should censure them, disgrace or diffame them. Wee
may not be many masters to censure others:Iam. 3. 4. For in many
things we offend all.Rom. 2. 1. 
               Therefore thou are inexcusable, ô man,
whosoeuer thou 
                     •
                  rt that iudgest: for in that thou iudgest another, thou
condemnest thy selfe, for thou that iudgest, doest the same things. And

                  •
               hereunto belongeth the exhortation of our Sauior Christ
Mat.
               Mat. 7. 1, 2, &c. 7, Iudge not, that you be not iudged. For with what iudgement
you iudge, you shall be iudged, and with what measure you meat, it
shall be measured to you againe. And why seest thou the mote that is
in thy brothers eye, and behold a beame is in thine owne eye? Hypocrit,
first cast out the beame out of thine owne eye, and then shalt thou
see clearely to cast the mote out of thy brothers eye.
            
            The second thing therefore is, that we should be conuersant
in judging of our selues, and should, as Plutarch
sayth, turne our curiositie inward. For as Bernard well
sayth,De interiori Demo, cap. 42. 
               Woe be to that man who neglecteth to amend his owne life,
and ceaseth not to carpe at the life of others. If thou wilt be carping,
r
                     •
                  tort thine owne sinnes vpon thee: behold not other mens faults, but
thine owne. For if thou view thy selfe well, thou wouldest neuer detract
from others. Defile not thy mouth with another mans sinne, neither
backbite him that offendeth, but be sorry for him. For backbiting
is a grieuous sinne.
               Tom. 4. ho
                     •
                  il. 3. ad popul. 
               Chrysostome sayth, The diuell bringeth
men into this custome, That enquiring into other mens
liues, they should neglect their owne: for he that maketh
busie enquirie into the life of others, hath no leisure to regard
his owne.
            Thirdly, wee are to imitate the example of Dauid.
Psal.
               Psal. 39. 1. 39. 1. I said (that is, I fully purposed and set downe
this resolution with my selfe) I will obserue my wayes, that I
sinne not with my tongue: I will keepe my mouth as it were with a

bridle. For if we let loose the reins to our vntamed tongue,
we shall find it to be as Iames sayth,Iam. 3. 6. a world of wickednes.
And because it is a hard thing to tame our tongues,
which Iames calleth an vnruly euill,
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  
               
               ▪ we are with the same
Dauid to pray vnto God in this behalfe,Psal. 141. 3. 
               Set a watch, O Lord,
before my mouth, and keepe the dore of my lips. For of our selues
we are not able to gouerne our tongues,Iam. 3. 7, 8. as Iames sayth, For
the whole nature of beasts, and of birds, and of creeping things, and
things of the sea, is and hath been tamed of the nature of man: But
the tongue can no man tame. And hereunto belongeth that
storie of Pambus recorded in the tripartite hystorie of the
Church.Lib. 8▪ cap. 1. For he being vnlettered, went to a learned man
to be taught a Psalme; and when he had heard the first
verse of the 39. Psalme, I said I will obserue my wayes,
that I offend not with my tongue: he desired his master
to stay there, for that was sufficient for one lesson. And six
moneths after, being reprooued by his teacher, that hee
came not in all that while to take out a new lesson, he answered,
that as yet he had not learned that one verse. And
being long after demaunded, whether as yet he had learned
it, he said, That in 49 yeares he had not so learned
that lesson, that he was able to performe it. For as Iames
sayth,Iam. 3. 2. 
               If any man sinne not in word, he is a perfect man, and able to
bridle all the body. And as he is perfect, so also blessed, as that
wi
                  •
               e man sayth,Eccles. 14. 
                     •
                  . 
               Blessed is the man who offendeth not with his
mouth. It remaineth therefore, that euery one should apply
this note to himselfe. For as those which find themselues
to be giuen to backbiting and s
                  •
               aundering, mustrepent
of this sinne, if euer they hope to rest in the mountaine
of Gods holinesse; because as yet they bee not so
qualified, as they are who shall inherit the kingdome of
God, whose propertie it is, not to slaunder with their
tongue: so those who professing religion, haue learned
to bridle their tongue, and in tender care of their neighbours
good name, doe loue to speake charitably of them,
may by this note among others gather assurance vnto

themselues, that they be the children of God.
            The fift note is expressed in these words, That doth none
euill to his neighbour. Where first we are to vnderstand the
meaning of the words. By neighbour who is meant, all doe
not agree. The vulgar sort esteemeth no man their neighbour,
who is not vicinus, neare them in dwelling. The
Scribes and Pharisies accounted no man their neighbor,
who was not their friend: for so were they wont to say,
Thou shalt loue thy neighbour,
               Mat. 5. 43. 
               and hate thine enemie. But Christ
our Sauiour extendeth the signification of neighbour, to
our enemies also:Mat. 5. 44. and Luke10, being demaunded by an
expounder of the law,Luke 10▪ 37. Who was his neighbour? he euinceth,
That the Samaritane, though hated of the Iews for
his countrey sake, was that Iewes neighbour who had
fallen among theeues; and consequently, that euery Iew
was to shew himselfe a neighbour to any Samaritane or
stranger in the like case. And in the law it selfe the Lord
so expoundeth himselfe;Exod. 23. 4, 5. for whom, in Exod. 23, he calleth
thine enemie,Deut. 22. 1, 2, 3. the same in Deut. 22, where the same law is
repeated, he calleth thy brother. Now neighbour and
brother is vsed in the same sence in the Scripture, as
Leuit.
               Leuit. 19. 17. 19. 17. Thy neighbour therefore is not onely hee
which is nigh vnto thee in place, or neere in friendship,
but also he who is neere vnto thee in nature, as euery man
is partaking the same humane nature with thee, whether
he be friend or foe, thy countryman or stranger. For all
men are brethren among themselues, hauing one father,
which is God, and one mother, which is the earth. All are
neighbours,Act 17. 26. being neare one vnto another in nature, all
made of one blood,Esay 58. 7. all one flesh. For euen the poorest
man that hath not a clout to couer his nakednesse, he is
thy flesh, that is, of the sameflesh with thee, and therefore
art to pittie him, & not to hide thy selfe from him. By the
word neighbour therfore we vnderstand any man whatsoeuer,
euery man being neere vnto vs in nature, and
neerely joyned to vs by the common bond of humanitie.

For therefore doth the holy ghost vnder the names of
neighbour & brother, in the Scriptures signifie any other
man whatsoeuer, to teach all men so to be affected one
to another, as it becommeth louing neighbours and
brothers.
            By Euill we are to vnderstand any harme, injurie, losse,
or hinderance whatsoeuer, done either to the soule of his
neighbour, or to his bodie, chastitie, goods, or good name:
for to the soule harme may be done, by scandales in life
or doctrine, that is to say, by euill examples, or erronious
opinions: to the bodie, by violence; to the chastitie, by
fornication and adulterie; to the goods, by theft or robberie;
to the good name, by slaunders and ill reports. So
that in these words the holy ghost assigneth to the citisen
of heauen, such innocencie towards all men, that willingly
he will doe no harme to any man, whether friend or
foe, whether countryman of stranger, whereby either his
soule may be scandalized, his body hurt, his or her chastitie
violated, his goods impaired, or his good name impeached.
And further, vnder this negatiue, the affirmatiue also
is required in those which are and shall bee citisens of
heauen, namely, That they do not only abstain from euill,
but also that they bee willing and ready to doe good to
their neighbour,Mat. 5. 44, 45. that is, not only to their friends and welwillers,
but also to their enemies.
            Thus haue we the meaning of the words. Let vs now
come to the scope and purpose of the Psalmist, that is, to
shew, that this innocencie is a peculiar note to the sonnes
and heires of God, as belonging to them all, and to them
alone: for it is the propertie of Gods children to be more
readie to suffer than to offer wrong.1. Cor. 6, 7. For euen Socrates,
though a heathen man, could say, That it is better 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               ,
to suffer iniurie, than to doe wrong. For from offering
euill to any, they are restrained by these considerations:
First as touching any other men whatsoeuer, they call to
mind and consider, that they were created according to

the same image of God; and consequently that they
cannot be hurt,Gen. 9. 6. but that the image of God also shall be
violated. They consider that they are their brethren, of
the same nature, of the same bloud, of the same flesh,
which affinitie maketh euen beasts of the same kind to
loue one another: and therefore that he which hurteth
or wrongeth another, offendeth against humane nature,
and violateth humanitie it selfe. And therefore are louingly
and courteously affected towards all men, not
willingly doing any thing to others which they would
not that others should do to them in the like case.
            And as concerning those which be of the houshold of
faith (in which number when they thinke of particulars
they esteeme all that professe the same faith with them)
to them they thinke themselues tied by a neerer bond of
loue: For those they embrace as brothers; not onely in
respect of creation, but also in respect of adoption, as
brothers not onely in nature, but also in Christ: them
they loue and affect not onely as neighbours who are
neere vnto them in nature, but also as those who are one
with them in Christ,Gal. 3. 28. as being fellow members of the
same bodie whereof Christ is the head. And therefore
they easily perceiue that no wrong can bee offered to
them,Act. 9. 4. which doth not redound to Christ himselfe: for
what good or euill is done to his members,Mat. 25. 40. 45. Christ esteemeth
it as done to himselfe.
            Wherefore the children of God are so farre from any
course or custome of doing ill to their neighbours, that on
the contrary, their desire and indeuour is to do good to
all men,Gal. 6. 10. but especially to those which be of the houshold
of faith. For first as touching the soules of their brethren,
their desire is to liue without offence,Act. 24. 16. and not to hinder
the saluation of their brethren, either by prouocation,
counsell,1. Ioh. 2. 10. or example: For he that loueth his brother abideth in
the light, and there is no scandale in him. Nay they desire to be
so farre from hindering the saluation of others, as that

they acknowledge it to be their dutie, to further by all
good meanes the saluation of their brethren, and to win
them to Christ: and to that end obserue one another, to
stirre them vp to charitie and good workes.Heb. 10. 24. They instruct
the ignorant, reclaime those that erre, admonish
those that are backward and exhort them,1. Thes. 5. 14. reproue those
that are fallen and restore them, comfort the weake minded
go before others in good example, and by all good
meanes desire to edifie them. Neither are they hurtfull to
them in temporall matters, but labour as much as in them
lieth, to preserue the life, the chastitie, the goods, and
good name of their neighbour. Neither doe they good
onely to them that deserue well at their hands, but also to
those that deserue ill,1. Sam. 24. 18. they requite good for euill, & striue
(if it be possible) to ouercome euill with goodnesse.Rom. 12. 21. For
howsoeuer the wicked deserue ill of them, yet they will
not defile their hands with doing ill,1. Sam. 24. 14. but with Dauid they
will say according to the ancient prouerbe: Let wickednesse proceed
from the wicked, but my hand shall not be vpon thee. For if we
be the true children of God, we will doe as our Sauiour
Christ exhorteth,Mat. 5. 44, 45. 
               Mat. 5, Loue our enemies, blesse them that curse
vs, do good to them that hate vs, and pray for them which hurt vs
and persecute vs, resembling therein the disposition of our
heauenly father, who maketh his sunne to arise on the euill and on
the good, and sendeth raine on the iust and vniust. This is
the studie and indeuour of Gods children, howbeit sometimes
they faile through infirmitie, contrary to their
purpose.
            But in the rest who are not Gods children, this innocencie
cannot be found: for although all men almost are
readie to alleadge, that they neuer did any man hurt, as
though it were a very easie thing for a man to containe
his hands from euill:
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . yet as Basill saith, This is a dutie
hard to be performed, and requireth great diligence, neither
is it comon to the reprobat, but peculiar to the childrē
of God: for as Iohn saith, The whole world (that is, the

whole company of the wicked) lieth as it were buried in
euill.
               1. Iohn. 5. 19. And as Paul testifieth, This is the common corruption
of all that are not regenerat by the spirit of God, not
to do good but euill.Rom. 3. 10. 12. 
               Rom. 3, There is none righteous, no not one:
all are gone out of the way, they are become altogether vnprofitable,
there is none that doth good, no not one &c.
            
            And as in respect of Gods children, that prouerbe is
verified, Homo homini Deus, Man towards man resembleth the
goodnesse of God, so in respect of the rest, that other is no
lesse true, Homo homini lupus, Man is as a wolfe to man: For
that we may descend to particulars; If any man receiue
an injurie, who either may or dares requite it, he will neuer
lightly (vnlesse he be the child of God) suffer it to go
vnreuenged. For not to reuenge the lest injurie that may
be, it is with most men esteemed cowardise: For that
which the children of God thinke to be a glorious thing,
namely to passe by an offence; that, the rest account to
be ignominious.Prou. 19. 11. 
               The vnderstanding of a man maketh him long-suffering,
and it is his glory to passe by an offence. Now the children
of God abstaine from reuenging wrongs (which the
rest will neuer suffer to go vnreuenged) for these causes:
First, because they acknowledge Gods singular prouidence
in all things, and are assured that nothing can happen
to them which the Lord himselfe hath not before ordained.
And therefore when wicked men do them any
wrong, they acknowledge them to be the instruments of
God, which being euill he vseth well, to their either
chastisement or triall: and therefore they will not with
the dogge snarle at the staffe, neglecting the smiter, but
they wil looke vp vnto God, and as Esay speaketh, Turne
vnto him that smiteth them. Dauid when he was reuiled
by Shemei, acknowledged Shemeis cursed tongue which
was set on fire from hell,2. Sam. 16. 10. to haue bene the Lords instrument
to correct him: when Iosephs brethren feared lest he
would reuenge the injurie which they did vnto him in
selling him into Egypt,Gen. 45. 5. 7, 8. he acknowledgeth that God by

their meanes had sent him thither for the preseruation of
the Church.
            Secondly, because they are indued with charitie towards
all men; and therfore if it be good that the injurie
should be dissembled, they are content to couer it and to
burie it in the graue of obliuion:Prou. 10. 12. For as hatred stirreth vp
strife, so loue couereth the multitude of offences. But if it be not
good either for their neighbour, or for themselues, or for
the common wealth, that the injurie should be put vp,
then flye they to the magistrat: for he is the minister of
God to take vengeance on him that doth euill:Rom. 13. 4. or if the
magistrat neglect his dutie in this behalfe,Ier. 51. 36. then do they
commit their cause to God,Luke. 18. 7. 8. who hath promised to reuenge it.
            Thirdly, because they know all priuat reuenge to be
vnlawfull and condemned in the Scriptures, as Leuit. 19,Leuit. 19. 18.
               Thou shalt not auenge, nor retaine a purpose of reuenge against the
children of thy people: but shalt loue thy neighbour as thy selfe, I am
the Lord. And Rom. 12, Deerly beloued auenge not your selues,
but giue place to the anger,
               Rom. 12. 19. namely of God: For it is written,
vengeance is mine, I will repay, saith the Lord. But especially
Math. 5,Mat. 5. 38. 39. For when as the Pharisies had wrested that law
Talionis, of requiting like for like (which the Magistrates were
to obserue in punishing the offences of men committed
against their neighbor) vnto priuat reuenge, Christ opposeth
himselfe against this corruption, Ye haue heard that
it hath bene sayd (saith he) an eye for an eye, and a tooth for a
tooth. But I say vnto you, resist not euill: but whosoeuer shall smite
thee on the right cheeke turne to him the other also. Which words
we are to vnderstād 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , that is to say, comparatiuely, or
spoken by way of comparison. For Christ would haue vs
to be so farre from desire of reuenge, that he would haue vs
readie rather to receiue a second injurie, than to reuenge
the former. And hereunto appertaineth that admonition
of the Apostle.1. Thes. 5. 15. 1. Thes. 5. See that none recompence
euill for euill vnto any man, but euer follow that which is good, both

towards your selues, and toward all men.
            
            Fourthly,Psal. 94. 1. because they know that the Lord (who is
the God of reuenge) hath threatned to auenge those that
reuenge themselues:Ezec. 25. 12. And well is it said of the sonne of
Syrach,
               Eccles. 28. 1. he that seeketh vengeance shall find vengeance of
the Lord, and he will surely keepe his sinnes. For as
Christ himselfe saith Mat. 6,Mat 6. 15. 
               If you do not forgiue men their
trespasses,
               Mat. 18. 35. 
               neither will your heauenly father forgiue you your
trespasses.
            
            Now if this be the propertie of Gods children, not to
requite euill for euill, we may easily conceiue in what
number those Caualliers, and fool-hardie fellowes are to
be reckoned, all whose courage and manhood consisteth
in offering and reuenging injuries, who also vpon euerie
occasion are readie to quarrell and fight. But let these
men know, First, that all priuat reuenge is vnlawfull,
and that if euerie priuat man might be his owne caruer,
the magistrat should carrie the sword in vaine: Secondly,Rom. 13. 4.
that all fighting (vnlesse it be in lawfull battell) is
murther in the sight of God: Thirdly, that he which taketh
the sword, viz. not deliuered vnto him by warrant
from God, (as it is to the magistrat, to the souldier in lawfull
battell,Mat. 26. 52. to the priuat man in case of present necessitie)
shall perish with the sword: Fourthly, that it is a most
fearfull thing, either to kill, or to be killed (as oft it happeneth)
in priuat fight: for he that killeth is a murtherer,
who so polluteth the land with bloud as that it cannot
be purged but by his owne bloud. Not to speake of
that which euerie man knoweth, that manslayers haue
none inheritance in heauen, but shall be excluded out
of the heauenly Ierusalem,Apoc. 22. 15. and shall haue their part in
the lake that burneth with fire and brimstone;Apoc. 21. 8. which is
the second death: in the meane time who is able to vtter
what horror of conscience vsually accompanieth those
who are guiltie of murther? Neither is their case better
who are slaine in fighting a priuat quarrell: For if as the

tree falleth, so it lieth: how fearfull may we thinke their
estate to be after death, who in thirsting after another
mans bloud do shed their owne bloud; and in a desire to
murther another, are murthered themselues.
            Wherfore whē we are stirred vp to fighting or reuenge,
let vs remember the Apostles aduice, Ephes. 4,Ephes. 4. 27. Not to
giue place to the diuell: for vndoubtedly they are inspired
with a fatanicall spirit, who breath out reuenge.
Wherefore Dauid when Abishai stirred him vp to reuenge,2. Sam. 19. 22.
               Shemai answered, What haue I to do with you, ye sonnes
of Zeruiah, that this day you should be vnto me 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , in
stead of Satan.
            
            But to returne to my purpose. This is a common
thing to all them that are not citisens of heauen, that so oft
as either they can or dare, they are readie to requite euill
for euill: and verie manie proceed further, who not only
do euill to them that haue deserued ill, but manie times
also either through hatred, or hope of gaine, doe ill to
those who are innocent, neither haue deserued euill at
their hands. Yea manie there are who render euill for
good, and seeke to harme them of whom they haue receiued
good. Seeing then all other men, who be not the
sonnes and heires of God, are so accustomed to euill doing,
it cannot be hoped that they should vse to practise
the affirmatiue in doing good: For may we thinke that
those who vse to do euill, not onely to them that deserue
ill, but also to the innocent, and those that deserue well,
that they will be readie to do good offices to them that
deserue not, and to requite euill with good? Or is it credible
that those who are carelesse of their owne saluation
should be carefull for others, to winne them to Christ?
Nay, the greatest number are affected as Cain was, who
being demaunded by the Lord concerning his brother,
asked if he were his brothers keeper. Yes verily, we are
all appointed keepers of God,Heb. 10. 24. to obserue one another,
To stirre vy one another to loue,
               1. Cor. 13. 5. 
               and to good workes: for loue seeketh

not her owne things, but is also carefull for others. And those
which be the children of God, are also members of one
and the same bodie, among whom is the communion of
Saints. But others are so farre from promoting the saluation
of their brethren, that by all meanes they seeke to
hinder the same, whiles either by prouocation, counsell,
or example they bring them into sinne, which is the cut-throat
of the soule, & so become murtherers not of mens
bodies, but (which is more grieuous) of mens soules.
Wherefore seeing this Innocencie agreeth to all the sons
and heires of God, and onely to them, it is of good right
reckoned among their proper notes, not onely in this
place,Psal. 24. 4. but elsewhere also in the scriptures, as Ps. 24, Where
to the like question, Who shal ascend into the mountaine
of the Lord, &c. the like answer is shaped, He that hath
Innocent hands, and a pure heart, &c. And as the Psalmist
in this place affirmeth, that he which doth none euill
to his neighbour shall neuer be remoued, but shall rest in
the holy mountaine of God;Esay. 56. 2. so the Prophet Esay pronounceth
that man blessed, who keepeth his hand from
doing any euill.
            It remaineth therefore that euerie one should apply
this note to himselfe: for howsoeuer all men almost will
affirme that they neuer did harme to their neighbor, yet
it is to be feared lest this Innocencie can be found but in
a few, especially of those who would seeme more wise
and politicke than others: for such is the generall wickednesse
of these times, that none but fooles are counted
Innocent. And therefore those which would be citisens
of heauen,1. Cor. 3. 18. they must be content to be esteemed fooles in
the world, that they may be wise to God.
            Now followeth the sixt note, in these words, And receiueth
not an euill report against his neighbour. The word

                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                signifieth an opprobrious speech, or as the Septuaginta
translate, 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , a reuiling and slanderous speech, a
sinister or euill report tending to the infamy of our neighbour.

The verbe 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , admitteth diuerse significations.
The first and principall is, to take vp: and so a slaunder
may be taken vp either in the mind, to thinke, or deuise it,
or in the tongue to vtter it, or in the eare to harken or
to giue eare to it: all which Gods children are to
auoid: For as touching the first, howsoeuer many men
thinke their wicked thoughts to be free, yet notwithstanding
the Scriptures teach vs that they are repugnant
to charitie;1. Cor. 13. 5. for as the Apostle saith, Charitie thinketh none
euell:
               Prou. 24. 9. that they are sinnes, for the wicked thought of a foole is
sinne: that they are not onely forbidden; for so the Prophet
Zacharie saith,Zach. 8. 17. 
               Let none of you imagine euill in your heart against
his neighbour;
               Gen. 6. 5. & 8. 21. but also punished, for the holy Ghost
doth note that the Lord destroyed the world by the vniuersall
deluge, Because the thoughts of mens hearts were continually
euill:
               Prou. 15. 26. that they are an abhomination to the Lord: and consequently
that we are to bewaile them,Act. 8. 22. and craue pardon
for them,Esay. 55. 7. and also to repent vs of them, Let the vnrighteous,
saith the Prophet, forsake his owne imaginations, and returne
vnto the Lord: For therefore is repentance called 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               ,
because it is a changing of the mind. And to conclude,
those that will walke vprightly before God, they must
labor to approue not onely their outward behauiour, but
also the secret thoughts of their minds, and affections of
their harts, to him that trieth and searcheth the harts and
r
                  •
               ynes of men, & especially looketh to the hart. Neither
are the children of God to take vp in their mouthes, that
is, to vtter (which is a second signification of the verbe
nasa) slanderous reports:Pro
                     •
                  . 12. 18. for the tongue of the godly wise is
healthfull, being readie to heale the good name of his
neighbour, and not to wound it; whether before his face,
by railing, scorning, cursing; or behind his backe, by
whispering and slandering. And thus some do read this
place (and vttereth not a reproch,) which translation seemeth
not to be so fit: because we may not thinke that the Prophet
in such breuitie of speech, would reckon one and the

same note twice; for according to this reading, the fourth
note should differ litle or nothing at all from this. Neither
are the children of God to take vp ill reports with their
eares, or to giue eare vnto them, or to receiue them; for
that is a third signification of the word which the Chaldey
paraphrase, and the Greeke and Latine translations
do embrace, viz. to receiue: for so the Septuagints (to
omit the rest) do read 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , and
receiueth not an ill report against his neighbours. To
these we may add a fourth signification of the verbe,
which is to beare or endure: according vnto which, the
meaning of the Prophet may be this, that the child of
God cannot brooke a slanderer, neither can he endure to
heare his neighbour defamed. By neighbour (as was
said before) we are to vnderstand, not onely those who
are neere vnto vs in place (which most commonly are
called neighbours) or in friendship, but those who are
neere vnto vs in nature (as all men are) whether they be
remoued from vs, either in place, as forreiners and strangers;
or in affection, as foes. The meaning therefore of
the words is this, that he who shall inherit the kingdome
of heauen, shall be so farre himselfe from backbiting his
neighbour, or slandering him, as that willingly he heareth
not the slanderous reports of talebearers, neither can he
endure that the good name of his neighbour (which is so
deere vnto him) should be violated.
            For surely the good man, to whom the glorie of God
is deere, and who also tendereth either the fame or saluation
of his neighbour, he taketh no delight in hearing
the faults of his brethren. For by offences Gods glorie is
obscured, the saluation of our brethren hazarded, their
good name impeached, and the judgements of God prouoked.
Whosoeuer therefore taketh pleasure in hearing
of the offences of others, he also delighteth to heare those
things whereby God is dishonored, our brothers saluation
hindered, their good name impaired, and the judgements

of God procured: which is scarcely incident to a
godly man, whose propertie it is rather to mourne for
the dishonour offered to God, and to be sorie for the infamie
of his brother, and to pitie his miserable condition,
in that by his sin he hath exposed himselfe to the iudgements
of God, both in this world and also in the world to
come.
            As for the rest who, being of this world belong not to
the heauenly Ierusalem, forasmuch as they are full of enuie
and selfe-loue, they thinke the commendation of
others to be to their disparragement, and esteeme the dispraise
of others as a praise to themselues, and therefore
take pleasure to heare the vices and offences of others,
their eares being like to cupping-glas
                  •
               es, readie to receiue
the worst things. And this is so common a vice,
though few obserue it in themselues, that scarcely there is
any meeting or conference of men, wherein the vices of
others are not both maliciously related, but willingly
heard, and so heard, that they may be reported againe to
others. Whereby it appeareth, that this charitable disposition
whereby a man so tendereth the credit and good
name of his neighbour, as that neither himselfe will defame
him, nor willingly heare the slaunderous reports of
others, is particular to the children of God, and heires of
eternall life; and therefore not vnworthily reckoned
among the notes which are proper to them.
            Here therefore we are taught, if we would be accounted
citisens of heauen, so to tender the good name of
our brethren, as that we will not willingly heare the slanders
of talebearers and backbiters. And forasmuch as this
dutie is of so great moment and importance, as that the
holy Ghost reckoneth it as one of the ten markes of
Gods children, let vs briefly consider and weigh the arguments
whereby we may be stirred vp to the practise
thereof.
            Consider therefore both the discommodities which

follow vpon the receiuing of ill reports, & also the commodities
which accompanie the repelling or rejecting of
slaunders. For if thou hast thine eares open to talebearers
and slaunderers, thou becommest accessarie to their
sinne, and guiltie of the same offence with them. Now a
slaunderer, as I haue shewed heretofore, is a manslayer,
killing three men as it were with one stroke, a serpent biting
in secret, a diuell. To this foule offence hee maketh
himselfe accessarie, who willingly receiueth tale-bearers,
and hearkeneth to their slaunders. For if there were not
a receiuer of tales,
                  
                     〈…〉
                  
                there would not be a tale-bearer. For
as in the crime of theft, he is accessarie, which receiueth
wittingly stollen goods: so in this crime of backbiting,
he is accessarie, who willingly receiueth the whisperers
reports: yea, is more guiltie of his neighbours infamie,
than the other is of fellonie. A theefe by himselfe may
steale, and without a receiuer may rob his neighbor of his
goods: but a tale-bearer or slaunderer cannot rob a man
of his good name, nor yet impaire his credit, vnlesse there
be another to heare and to admit his slaunders: well may
he shew his owne mallice, but him that is absent, he cannot
hurt.De interiori do
                     •
                  o. Wherfore Bernard doubteth not to affirme, That
tale-bearers and tale-hearers are guiltie alike. And againe,De considerat. 
                     〈◊〉
                  . 2. infine.
Whether is more damnable (sayth he) to be a teller
or a receiuer of tales and ill reports, it is hard to say: For
as the tale-bearer hath the diuell in his tongue, so the tale-hearer
hath the diuell in his eare.
            But if you would vse to stop your eares against tale-bearers,
and giue them the repulse, either by a frowning
countenance, or some sharpe reproofe, these commodities
would follow thereupon: first, you should preserue the
good name of your neighbour, which is perhaps as deare
vnto him, as his life: secondly, you should keepe your
selfe cleare from the guilt of this sinne.Dum aurem inficit, animam inter
                     ••
                  it. Bern. For as I said before,
the backbiter whiles he i
                  •••
               cteth the eare, he destroieth
the soule, casting therei
                  ••
                the seeds of suspition, hatred,

contempt. Thirdly, if you shall so tender the credit
of your neighbour, though no friend to thee, as that you
cannot with patient eares heare his good name impeached;
hereby you may gather, that you are the child of
God, for as much as this note of the sonne and heire of
God agreeth vnto you. Lastly, you shall cure the slaunderer
himselfe of this noysome disease:
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . for reproofe is the
cure of such. For as Chrysostome sayth, If tale-bearers shall
perceiue,Hom. 3. ad popul. 
                     •
                  om. 4. that wee mislike them more than the parties
whom they seeke to diffame, they will cease from this
euill custome, and amend their fault; and commend vs,Ian. 5. 20.
who haue reclaimed them from that sinne, as those who
haue saued them.
            Wherefore beloued, let vs learne to carry our selues
wisely towards tale-bearers,Eph. 5. 11. that we do not communicat
with their sinnes, but rather reprooue them. Let vs either
by countenance, or speech, or turning away, make it apparant
to the tale-bearer, that we mislike his course. Let
vs shut our eares to Sycophants, & turne them away with
a frowning countenance. For euen as the North wind
driueth away the raine (and is therefore called 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , as
it were the clearer of the skie;Pro. 25. 23.) so (sayth Salomon) doth an
angry countenance the slandering tongue. A man ought
not therefore to smile vpon the tale-bearer, but to giue
him an angry looke: for if with a pleasant countenance
you shall giue eare to the tale-bearer, you shall encourage
him to slaunder: but if you shall heare him with some
shew of mislike,Hieronym. he will learne (as one sayth) not willingly
to speake that, which he shall perceiue is not willingly
heard.
            But we are not onely by countenance, but also (if need
be) by speech to put the tale-bearer to silence. If therfore
it shall happen (as oft it happeneth) that a tale-bearer
speaketh euill of a man for that which is good, you may
shape him this answere: This is a matter for which you
ought to commend him; whereas therefore you maliciously

peruert that which is well done or said, you play
therein the part of the diuell, and make your selfe subject
to the fearefull curse of God, Esay. 5,Esay 5. 20. 
               Woe vnto them that
speake euill of good. If hee speake euill for a matter that is
doubtfull, you may reply to this effect; Herein you ought
Christianly to interpret his doing or saying:1. Cor. 13. 5. Charitie is
not suspitious, neither will suffer vs easily to beleeue that
which is euill concerning our neighbour, but alwaies expoundeth
doubtfull things in the better part: But if it
were euill as you say, yet what should either he be the
better to be backbited, or you for backbiting, or I for giuing
eare to your words? If for an euill thing, but such as
is secret: admonish him to keepe it to himselfe, and priuatly
to deale with the partie by way of admonition or
reproofe: tell him, that the secret faults of our brethren
are not to be diuulged: and that charity couereth the multitude
of offences. If for a manifest offence, and yet but
a small fault: tell him, that it is a slip of humane infirmitie,
and that in many things we offend all, and happie is
the man that faileth onely in small things. If for some
great offence, say, What will it profit me to heare that
another man is wicked? if he hath any vertues, I pray
you tell them me, but his vices declare to himselfe; if he
be such an one as you speake of, he is to be pitied rather
than scorned, and we are to behold him as a glasse of our
weakenesse. Wherefore let him who thinkes that he standeth,
take heed least he fall: We are subject to the like
faults, and it is to be ascribed to the grace of God, if wee
doe stand. If he be his enemie whom he backbiteth, tell
him▪ That ill will neuer speakes well and that a malicious
report proceeding from hatred, deserueth no credit. For
whom men do hate, of them they doe thinke ill & speake
ill: for them they behold through their owne affection of
hatred, as it were a coloured glasse, which maketh them
and all that they do, to seeme euill and odious vnto them.
If he be his friend, tell him, that he dealeth vncharitably

to speake ill of that party who hath deserued wel of him.
If he alledge, that he sayth nothing but the truth, tel him,
that we must speake the truth in loue:Eph. 4. 15. and therefore it is
not sufficient, that our speech be true, vnlesse it be charitable.
If you plainely perceiue his speech to be false, defend
the innocencie of him that is absent,1. Sam. 20. 32. as Ionathan did
the innocencie of Dauid, against his owne father. If you
may be so bold with him, bid Sathan auaunt, tell him, that
he which falsely slaundereth, is a diuell, and a manslayer,
who with one blow (as it were) seeketh to destroy three,
&c. howsoeuer it is, let it appeare, that thou art not well
pleased with tale-bearers, that thine eares doe long to
heare not the dispraise but the commendation of thy
neighbour: if he haue any to commend, that thy eares
are open to his discourse of vertue: but if either he must
needs be speaking, or thou hearing of faults, turne your
curiositie towards your owne offences. For how can you
be excused, if neglecting your own faults, you busily pry
into the vices of others.
            But howsoeuer, all men are to auoid sycophants and
tale-bearers, yet magistrats especially are to take heed of
them, and such as be in authoritie: for by how much the
greater their authoritie is, so much the more pernicious it
will prooue, if they giue eare to sycophants and slaunderers.
Putiphar hauing giuen credit to the false accusation
of his wife, cast innocent Ioseph into prison: Saule hauing
hearkened to their words,1. Sam, 24. 10. who said, Behold Dauid seeketh
euill against thee: persecuted Dauid. And likewise he
beleeuing the malicious report of the sycophant Doeg, put
to death all the priests of the Lord which were at Nob.
Dauid himselfe giuing too hastie credit to the calumniation
of the pickthanke Siba,
               1. Sam. 22. 17. disinherited Mephibosheth.
               2. Sam. 16. 4. 
               Ahasuerosh
hauing giuen eare to the diuellish suggestion of
wicked Haman,
               Esther 3. 10. sent foorth an edict to destroy the whole
nation of the Iewes. Wherefore it behooueth princes
especially, not onely in countenance or words, but also

with the sword, or other reall punishments to represse the
tale-bearer and the sycophant. For as one well sayth,
Princeps qui delatores non castigat,
               Suetonius. 
               irritat, A prince that doth
not correct slaunderers, hee doth prouoke them. And
therefore notable is that profession of Dauid, and worthie
of all Christian princes to be imitated,Psal. 101. 5. 
               Him that priuily slandereth
his neighbour, will I destroy.
            
            By this which hath beene said, it is manifest, that wee
are not to giue eare to slaunderers: notwithstanding, for
better euidence I will adde, that to hearken willingly to
tale-bearers, is a thing vnlawfull, hurtfull, and shamefull:
vnlawfull, because God hath forbidden it, Exo. 23. 1,Exod. 23▪ 1. Thou
shalt not receiue a false report. Yea a heathen man could
say,Thuci. 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . That it is no honest thing either for men to deliuer
slaunderous reports one to another, or for the hearers to
receiue them. And how hurtfull it is, there is euidence
sufficient in our mother Eue, who because she gaue eare
to the father of all liers and slaunderers, the diuell, ouerthrew
as much as in her was, both her selfe and her whole
posteritie. It is also a thing of ill report, because it is a
signe of a wicked man. For as Salomon sayth, The wicked
giueth heed to false lips,
               Pro. 17. 4. 
               and a liar hearkeneth to the naughtie tongue.
Whereas contrariwise, the detestation of slaunders and
false reports, is a good signe of the child of God, as the
Prophet here sheweth.
            But some man will say, Is it neuer lawfull for a man to
heare another report the faults of his neighbour, being
absent? I answere, that it is lawfull, when either it is profitable
for him that is absent, or expedient for thee which
hearest, or necessarie for him that speaketh. It is profitable
for the partie absent, when his faults are intimated vnto
thee, hauing authoritie ouer him, that he may be reclaimed.
It is expedient for thee, when by the fault of him
that is absent, there is danger to thee either of injurie or
infection: For he that is forewarned in such a case, is forearmed.
Necessarie for him which speaketh, when silence

would make him accessarie to the offence concealed.
Otherwise of them that are absent, nothing is willingly
either to be spoken or heard, but that which is good.
            And thus haue we had in this verse three notes of the
citisen of heauen, which are so many branches of charitie,
to wit, a charitable tongue, a charitable 
                  〈◊〉
               , and a
charitable eare. All which euery one is bound to apply
to himselfe, &c.
            Now followeth the seuenth note, vers. 4. In whose eyes a
vile person is contemned, but he honoureth those that feare the Lord.
Pagnin and others read thus,Aben Ezra D. Kimhi. 
               Who despiseth himselfe in his owne
eyes, and abaseth himselfe. And true indeed it is, that the children
of God, howsoeuer they endeuour to lead an inoffensiue
course of life, notwithstanding they thinke very
meanely of themselues: for the more holy euery man
is, the greater sence he hath of his owne corruption; and
the more perfect he is, the more he feeleth and acknowledgeth
his owne imperfection. But albeit this assertion
be true, yet this exposition doth not fit this place. For the
Prophet maketh a plaine opposition or Antithesis betweene
the contrarie dispositions of Gods children, towards
men of contrarie disposition: namely, that they
reuerence those who feare God, and contemne those
that despise the Lord. And so the words sound, Contemned
in his sight is the reprobate. So also the Chaldee paraphrast
expoundeth, The vile person is despised before him. And
Hierome, The wicked man is despised in his eyes. The Septuaginta,
whom the vulgar Latine translation followeth, 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               ,
The wicked is set at nought in his
sight. And likewise R. Shalomoh, as Bucer reporteth, vnderstandeth
the words thus, That those who are for their
wickednesse truly contemptible, are despised of the citisens
of heauen.Esay 53. 3. Neither doth the participle 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                signifie
him that despiseth himselfe,Ierem. 22. 28. but simply, despised, as may
appeare by other places of Scripture.Mala. 1. 7. & 2▪ 9 Neither is the conjunction
copulatiue in the Hebrew text.Dan. 11. 21.
            
            
               
This note therefore containeth an opposition or Antithesis
of the contrarie disposition in the child of God,
towards men that are contrarie betwixt themselues. And
therby it is signified, that he without partialitie or respect
of persons is so affected towards men, as he judgeth them
to be affected towards God, to wit, that he contemneth
those that contemne God, though they seeme honourable
in the world: and contrariwise, that hee honoureth
those that honour God, although they be contemned in
the world. For the children of God▪ labour (as their dutie
is) to conforme their judgements to the judgement of
their heauenly father: and therefore they honour those
whom God would haue honoured, and despise those
whom God would haue despised. But God would haue
those honoured that honour him, and those that despise
him, hee would haue despised, as himselfe professeth
1. Sam. 2,1. Sam. 2. 30. 
               Those that honour me, shall be honoured: but those that contemne
me, shall be contemned.
            
            Now of this opposition there are two parts, which
being such as are not to be seuered, doe therefore belong
to one and the same note. For whosoeuer doth truly and
without respect of persons despise the wicked, because
of their wickednesse, the same will also honour the godly
for their godlinesse, and contrariwise. But as these two
branches are to be joyned together; so also they are generally
to be vnderstood: Otherwise they doe not seeme
to be perpetuall notes of Gods children. For this is not a
sufficient note of a good man, that hee contemneth the
wicked, vnlesse also he reuerence the godly. For whom
a man hateth, them commonly he thinketh to be wicked.
And therefore if the contempt of the wicked were a
sufficient note of a godly man, then all that be haters of
their brethren, would challenge this title of godlinesse to
themselues. But the godly man doth not only despise the
wicked, but also he honoureth the godly. Neither doth
he set at naught this or that wicked man, onely from

whom perhaps he hath receiued some wrong, or whose
outward estate is contemptible in the world: neither
doth he honour only this or that godly man, from whom
perhaps he hath receiued some good turne, or whose outward
estate is honourable in the world; but generally he
hateth and contemneth all those that be wicked for their
wickednesse sake; and contrariwise he loueth and reuerenceth
all those that be godly for their godlinesse sake:
for either affection, if it be sincere, must be generall, and
without respect of persons.
            But howsoeuer these two branches are not in vse and
practise to be seuered, yet are we to entreat of them seuerally.
And first of the former part: In whose eyes a reprobate
or wicked person is contemned. The Participle 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                signifieth
reprobated, 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , as Ierem. 6,Ierem. 6. 30. 
               Reprobat siluer are
they called, for the Lord hath reprobated them: the Chaldee paraphrase
expoundeth it vile; the Septuagints respecting the
meaning rather than the word it selfe, 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , that is,
wicked, or one that liueth wickedly. For thereby they
giue vs to vnderstand, who they are that are to bee held
for vile and reprobat persons, namely, the wicked: but
not euery one that sinneth, is to be held for a wicked or
vile person; but in whom sinne reigneth, who committeth
sinne with greedinesse, who is to euery good worke
reprobat,
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . and giuen ouer to a reprobat sence: such kind
of men,Tit. 1. 16. though neuer so mighty or wealthy in the world,
are notwithstanding vile persons and contemptible.Rom. 1. 28. In
which sence, Antiochus Epiphanes, Dan. 11, though the sonne
of a mightie king, who for his greatnesse was called Antiochus
the great,Dan. 11. 21. is called a vile person: for sinne maketh
men vile; and so they seeme in the eyes of the godly. By
eyes he meaneth the eies of the mind, the judices and discouerers
whereof are the eyes of the body: for in whose
judgement or estimation another man is contemptible,
his contempt will shew it selfe in the eyes.
            Now that this contempt of the wicked is a note of

Gods children, it may appeare, because it agreeth to them
all, and to them alone: to them all, because the Lord hath
placed betwixt the godly and the wicked, betwixt the
seed of the woman and the seed of the serpent,Gen. 3. 15. perpetual
emnitie:Prou. 29. 27. insomuch that a wicked man is abhomination to the
iust, and he that is vpright in his way, is abhomination to the wicked,
as Salomon sayth: For they are citisens of contrarie kingdomes,
the one of the kingdome of light, the other of the
kingdome of darknesse: they are souldiours warring in
contrarie campes, the one in the campes of Michael, the
other in the campes of the old dragon: they are sonnes
of contrarie parents, the one the children of God, the
other the children of the diuell. As therefore there is opposition
betwixt light and darkenesse, betwixt Michael
and the dragon, betwixt God and Sathan, so also betwixt
the godly and the wicked. Secondly, for as much as the
wicked hating and despising God, are hated and despised
of him; therefore the godly (who are the children of
God) are in like sort affected towards them: Doe not I hate
them O Lord (sayth Dauid) that hate thee,
               Psa. 139. 21, 22 
               and am not I vexed with
those that rise vp against thee? yea I hate them with the perfection of
hatred, and esteeme them as mine enemies. Such was the affection
of Mardocheus towards wicked Haman,
               Est. 3. &c. And thirdly,
seeing it had been better for the wicked that they neuer
had been borne,Mat. 26. 24. as our Sauiour sayth concerning Iudas:
and seeing also, when they are to depart out of this
life, they would be glad to be returned to nothing, and at
the day of judgement shall wish,Luke 23. 30. that the mountaines
would fall vpon them,Apoc 6. 16. that they might be hid from the
lambe, and consequently in respect of their sinnes are as
vile as nothing, and as light as vanitie; therefore vt homines
nihili, as men of no account 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , they are set at nought
by the children of God, as the Septuaginta and the Latine
interpreter translate this place. But as this generall
contempt of the wicked agreeth to all Gods children, so
also to them alone.Iohn 15. 19. For the world doth loue his own, and those

that are of the world do loue worldlings: and howsoeuer
sometimes they are at variance among themselues,
yet will they readily combine themselues against
the godly,Luke 23. 12. as Herod and Pilat against Christ.
            Hereby therefore it appeareth that the generall contempt
of the wicked is a note of the citizen of heauen.
But you will say; what if wicked men bee magistrats or
gouernours, are we not to honour them? Surely as they
be wicked men who haue altogether defaced the image
of God, according to which they were created in holines
and righteousnesse, they are to be contemned: but as
they are magistrats, bearing before vs the image of
Gods power and authoritie; honor and obedience is due
vnto them in the Lord: for we are to obey euill magistrats,
though not vnto euill. If therefore we would be
esteemed the sonnes and heires of God, the wicked are
to be vile in our sight. And if we are to contemne and
despise the wicked, then their company is to be auoided,
and no familiar acquaintaince or friendship is to be entertained
with them: for such is the hatred and contempt
which the children of God haue conceiued against the
wicked, that they can scarcely looke on them with patience.
Elisha protesteth,2. King 3. 1
                     •
                  . that had it not bene for Iehosaphat,
he would not so much as haue looked vpon I
                     •
                  horam the
sonne of Achab, though a king: For as the holy Ghost
here saith, In the eyes of the godly the wicked are contemned.
Wherefore as when a man seeth a serpent or
snake, his heart riseth with in him: so in the child of God
when he seeth a man whom he perceiueth to be one of
the ofspring of the old serpent, there is a certaine rising
of the heart against him; so farre is he from entring into
a league of amitie with the wicked: For friendship and
familiar acquaintance is for the most part procured by
likenesse of maners, according to the old prouerbe, Pares
cum paribus facilimè congregantur, Like will to like. And great
reason there is why the godly should shunne the companie

and familiartie of the wicked. First, because they
mislike their maners and detest their vices: Dauid therfore
professeth,Psal. 26. 4. 5. that he had not haunted with vain persons, nor kept cō
                  pany
with the dissemblers, that he hated the assembly of the 
                     •
                  uill, and
had not companied with the wicked. Secondly, lest they should
be infected with the contagion of their sinne:E
                     •
                  cles. 13. 1. For he that
toucheth pitch shall be defiled therewith, and he that is familiar with
the proud shall be like vnto him:
               Prou. 13. 20. so saith Salomon, He that walketh
(that is conuerseth) with the wise, shall be wise, but a companion
of fooles (that is to say of the wicked, for they are Salomons
fooles) shall be afflicted, that is, as hee becommeth
guiltie of the same sinnes with them, so shall he be partaker
of their punishments. The same is testified by the
verie heathen themselues:1. Cor. 15. 
               Menander, whom the Apostle
citeth in a case not vnlike, 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                (saith he) 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               ;
Conuersing with the wicked, thy selfe also shalt become wicked.
And another,

                  
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     .Theog
                           ••
                        s.
                  
               
               Of the good thou shat learne good things: but if thou be conuersant
with the wicked, thou shalt loose that vnderstanding which thou hast▪
A little leauen,
               1. Cor. 5. 6. saith the Apostle, doth leauen the whole lumpe.
And as it is cōmonly said, one rotten sheepe is able to infect
a whole flocke: wherefore as we are carefull to auoid
the presence of him that hath the plague, or some other
contagious disease, so ought we much more to auoid the
companie of those who are ouergrowne with a leprosie
of sinne: for no contagion of any bodily disease doth so
easily infect the bodie, as the spirituall diseases of a friend
or companion doth corrupt the soule. Thirdly, because
by the company and presence of the wicked, the godly
are hindered from the duties of pietie: wherefore Dauid,
Depart from me
               Psal. 119. 115. (saith he) ye wicked, that I may keepe the commandements
of my God. Fourthly, that the sinners may be
ashamed and so conuerted: For which cause the Apostle
aduiseth vs not to haue our conuersation with any, who

being called a brother, that is, a Christian,1. Cor. 5. 11. 
               is a fornicatour, or
couetous, or an idolater, or a railer, or a drunkard, or an extortioner,
with such a one eate not, that is, haue no priuat familiaritie
with him: for although we are not to forsake their company
in respect of publicke communion either in the
Church (for then should we also forsake the assemblies
of the Saints,Heb. 10. 25. as the maner of some is) or in the commonwealth
(for then should we be wanting in our dutie towards
our countrie, and leaue the managing of matters
to the wicked onely) yet are we not priuatly to accompanie
with them, for the reasons aforesaid.
            Againe, if it be the propertie of the godly to contemne
the wicked, then doth he not in any wise flatter the
wicked in his sinne: For flatterie, whether it be for the
flatterers profit, it is a base sinne; or whether it be for the
harme of him that is flattered, it is a most odious sinne.
The former kind (which more properly are called parasits)
like dogges doe fawne vpon a man for his meat:
howsoeuer in the end like Acteons dogs they deuour their
maister: the latter are like Scorpions, which when they
fawne vpon a man will sting him with their taile: the
former are fitly resembled by the Iuie, which embraceth
the oke to sucke out his moisture: the latter, like to conycatchers
when they flatter their neighbour,
               Prou. 29. 5. 
               they spread a net for
his steps:
               Diogenes. wherefore the Cinicke Philosopher being demanded,
of all beasts which was most noysome? he answered,
of wild & sauage beasts, a tyrant; of tame beasts,
a flatterer. Neither was it vnfitly said of another, That
it is better for a man to fall 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               ,Antisthenes. for crowes
do prey vpon the dead, but flatterers on the liuing. Those
then that are giuen to flatterie, may easily discerne how
farre they are from the behauiour of the godly: For as
Salomon saith,Prou. 28. 4. 
               They that forsake the law praise the wicked; but
they that keepe the law set themselues against them. And againe,
He that sayth to the wicked (as flatterers vse to doe) thou art
righteous,
               Pro. 24. 24, 25. 
               him shall the people cursse, and the multitude shall abhorre

him; but to them that (in steed of flattering) rebuke him, shall
be pleasure, and vpon them shall come the blessing of goodnesse.
            
            Now followeth the other part of the opposition concerning
those that honour God: But he honoreth those which
feare the Lord. The godly by a Synechdoche he calleth
such as feare God. For the sanctifying graces which are
the seuerall branches of godlinesse, as faith, loue, feare,
&c. they are so linked together as it were in a golden
chaine, that where any one of them is in truth, there the
rest be in some measure, and for that cause some one
of them is sometimes put for all. Seeing therefore the
feare of God is a principall part of pietie, in which sence,
Psal. 111,Psal. 111. 10. it is called caput sapientiae, the head or chiefe point
of wisdome, that is, true godlinesse, it is no maruel though
many times it be put for all religion, as Deu. 6. & 10.Deut. 6. 13. & 10. 12. & be
said. Eccles. 12,Eccles. 12. 13. to be the whole dutie of man which must
teach vs, that those which haue no feare of God, haue no
religion in them. Now he is said to feare God, who being
truly persuaded both of the infinit power of God, as also
of his fatherly loue towards him in Christ, aboue all
things feareth to offend God, that is, he is afraid of nothing
so much as to displease God, whom he acknow
               
                  ••
               dgeth
to be a gracious and mercifull father to him in
Christ. And whereas by sinne God is displeased, therefore
he feareth more to sinne, & by sinne to offend God,
than to displease all men, than to be depriued of all his
goods, friends, and commodities of this life, yea of life
it selfe. Wherefore he that feareth God departeth from
euill:Prou. 8. 13. 
               yea the feare of the Lord is to hate euill, and is therefore
said to be a wel-spring of life,
               Prou. 14. 27. 
               to auoid the snares of death. Those
therefore that feare the Lord, the Scripture doubteth not
to call blessed, as Prou. 28,Prou. 28. 14. 
               Blessed is the man that feareth alwayes.
And Psal. 112.Psal. 112. 1. & 128,Psal. 128. 1. 
               Blessed is the man, yea blessed is
euerie one that feareth the Lord. Now the child of God being
rightly informed out of the Scriptures▪ concerning the
estate and condition of the godly, he reuerenceth and

honoureth those that feare the Lord. And why? First,
because he knoweth that howsoeuer they are contemned
and dispised in the world, as the scum of the world, and
ofscouring of all things,1. Cor. 4. 13. notwithstanding they are happie
and blessed, and that they are in the world as gold
among the durt. Secondly, he loueth and reuerenceth
the godly,1. Sam. 2. 30. because he knoweth that God honoreth those
that honor him,In oculi
                     •
                   f
                     ••
                  re. 
                     •
                  ach. 2. 8. and that according to the Latine phrase,
he doth beare them in his eyes, insomuch that whosoeuer
hurteth them, they seeme to hurt, as it were, the apple of
his eye. Thirdly, because he vnderstandeth that those
which feare God are the sonnes and heires of God, the
brethren and fellow heires with Christ, the temples of
the holy Ghost: yea fellow members with themselues of
that bodie, whereof Christ Iesus is the head, and therefore
whosoeuer loueth and honoreth them, in them loueth
and honoreth Christ.
            Hereby it appeareth that vertue and true godlinesse
make men true noble and honorable, as contrariwise sin
and vngodlinesse make men base and contemptible: and
therfore all that are louers of vertue and pietie, they cannot
but honor those who are vertuous and godly. And as
this agreeth to all the godly, to loue, reuerence, and honour
those that feare God, and to performe all good offices
of brotherly loue towards them; so it agreeth to
them alone. For the world (that is the vniuersall companie
of those who are not citisens of heauen) loueth only
those who are of the world. As for the rest who are
not of the world, but are chosen out of the world, for that
verie cause the world doth hate them, as our Sauiour
Christ doth testifie.Iohn. 15. 19. Seeing therefore this dutie of honoring
the godly is proper and peculiar to the children
of God, it is not vnworthily made a note of the citizens
of heauen. For Iohn also in his Epistle, wherein he setteth
downe diuerse notes whereby men may discerne themselues
to be the children of God, he reckoneth this as

one of the principall,Iohn. 3. 14. 
               We know (saith he) that we are translated
from death to life, because we loue the brethren. And so
Obadiah that he might approue himselfe to Elias as one
that feared God,1. Kin. 18. 12, 13. he alleadgeth that fauour and honour
which he had vouchsafed to the Prophets and seruants
of God in the time of Iezabels persecution. Neither is
there any more certaine way to testifie our loue towards
God, than by louing and honoring the children of God:
For our goodnesse cannot reach vnto God, and therefore
is to bee extended towards his Saints vpon earth.Psal. 16. 2, 3 Neither
can it be that we should loue our brother aright, vnlesse
we loue God much more. And therefore if we loue
our brethren as we ought, it is an euident signe that we
loue God: for he that loueth his brother aright, loueth
him for Gods sake: and he that loueth his brother for
Gods sake, he cannot but loue God much more, according
to the rule of reason, 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               
               For which any thing is, that is much more.
            
            But as I said before, we may haue in this place a most
certaine note of a citizen of heauen, if we shall joyne both
the members of the opposition: For whosoeuer despiseth
the wicked, though honored in the world, because
they despise God, and are despised of him; and contrariwise
honoreth the godly, though despised in the world,
because they honour God, and are honored of him; and
consequently contemneth the wicked, because they are
wicked, or for their wickednesse sake; and therefore honoreth
the godly, because they are godly, or for their
godlinesse sake: he doth euidently shew himselfe not to
be of the world, but of God. A notable example of both
we haue in Elisha the Prophet, 2. King. 3, For when Iehoram
the king of Israel being in great distresse for want of water
in that expedition against the Moabites, did therfore
with Iehosaphat the king of Iuda, and the king of Edom
come vnto him to aske counsell of the Lord; Elisha maketh
answer to Iehoram the king of Israel being the sonne

of Achab and Iesabel, an Idolater, What haue I to do with thee?
Get thee to the Prophets of thy father, and to the Prophets of thy mother:
and when he had intreated him not to say so, and had
signified in what distresse he and the other two kings
with their armies were: Elisha replieth, As the Lord of hosts
liueth, in whose sight I stand, if it were not that I regard the presence
of Iehosaphat the king of Iuda (who was indeed a godly king)
I would not haue looked towards thee, nor haue seene thee. But then
is this note most euident, when the wicked (whom the
godly man contemneth) abound in wealth and flourish
with honour, and contrariwise the godly (whom the
good man honoureth) are poore and 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , contemptible
in the world. For this, as Basill truly saith, is a token
of a noble mind,
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . to despise the wicked though honorable in
the world. And thereof also men haue another notable
example in Moses the man of God, who judged the Israelites
when they were grieuously oppressed in Egypt, to
be more happie than all the gallants in Pharaos court, who
liued in all prosperitie.Heb. 11. 24, 25. And therefore by faith refused to be
called the sonne of Pharao his daughter, chusing rather to be afflicted
together with the people of God, than to haue the temporarie fruition
of sinne. And surely beloued, if a man haue an eye to
the recompence of reward; as Moses had, who would
not chuse rather to bee godly Lazarus,
               Luke 16. than vngodly
Diues.
            
            We see therefore, if we desire to be in the number of
Gods children, how we are to be affected towards other
men, namely, that we loue, reuerence, and honor the godly,
though contemned in the world; and contrariwise,
despise and set at naught the wicked, though honoured
in the world. But this wee cannot doe, vnlesse wee bee
throughly persuaded, that vertue and pietie maketh men
though in poore estate, truly noble and honourable: and
contrariwise, that sinne and vngodlinesse maketh men,
though mightie in the world, vile and contemptible. Neither
can we indeed be of this persuasion, vnlesse we ourselues

be louers of vertue and godlinesse, and haters of
sinne and iniquitie. From hence also there doth or may
arise both notable terrour to the wicked, and singular
comfort to the godly, terror to the wicked, because howsoeuer
they flourish in the world, notwithstanding they
are despised of God and his children, as men of none account:
consolation to the godly, because howsoeuer they
are contemned and abused in the world, yet are they dear
and precious to God, and to all the sonnes and heires of
God. And thus much may suffice to haue spoken of the
seuenth note.
            The eightfolloweth in these words: He that sweareth to
his owne hinderance, and changeth not. The Greeke translation
of the Septuagints, which the vulgar Latin doth follow,
readeth, he that sweareth to his neighbour, and deceiueth
him not: for it seemeth, the booke which the seuentie
translated,Chald. paraphr. wanted prickes, and that therefore they did
read 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                
               regna for 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                
               rang,
               Hieronym. the difference onely being in
the prickes.Aben Ezra &c. Others translate the word l
                     •
                  harang, to afflict
himselfe, expounding it of the vowes of fasting, whereby
the body is afflicted, and the flesh subdued. But the holy
ghost seemeth not to speake of a vow made to God, but
of an oath made to man: neither when hee speaketh of
afflicting the body,
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  
                doth he vse that word harang, which
signifieth to doe euill,Leuit. 23. 27. 29. 32. but the phrase of afflicting the soule.
And besides, this note is reckoned among other duties of
charitie and righteousnesse towards our neighbour.Num. 30. 14. The
words therefore are to bee vnderstood of that faith,Psal. 35. 13. or
fidelitie which the godly man keepeth in performing his
oathes and promises,Esay. 58. 5. although the performance of them
be joyned with his owne losse. And in the like answere
returned to the like question,Psal. 24. 4. 
               Psal. 24, this note in the same
sence is specified, Nor hath not sworne deceitfully, as those do
which meane not to performe their oath. The meaning
therefore is, that such is the fidelitie of a godly man in
keeping his promise, that if he promise any thing, especially

vnder the religion of an oath, he will be sure to performe
it, though it be to his owne hinderance.
            Here therefore we are occasioned to speake both of
the making and keeping of oathes: and concerning the
same to discusse these two questions: first, whether it be
the propertie of a godly man to sweare, or not: and secondly,
whether hauing sworne, he be alwayes bound to
performe his oath, or not: For in respect of both, there are
extremities to be auoided on both sides. Some thinke a
Christian man may not sweare at all, others make no conscience
of swearing at all. Some thinke, when they haue
once sworne, they are to performe their oath, though neuer
so wicked: others will keepe their oaths, though neuer
so honest, no further than may stand with their owne
aduantage.
            Now for the rectifying of our judgement in this behalfe,
we are generally to consider, what account is to be
made of an oath. And first we are to shew what an oath
is,
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . Arist. and wherefore ordained. An oath is an attestation or
calling vpon God to bee a witnesse and judge in such
things as cannot otherwise be demonstrated: and it is
of two sorts, assertorie and promissorie. An assertorie
oath (so called, because it hath place in assertions) is a calling
vpon God, to be both our witnesse, that we affirme
the truth, and also our judge and auenger, if we lie. A
promissorie oath (so called, because it hath place in promises)
is a calling vpon God as a witnesse of our true purpose
to performe, and as our surety for performance, and
as our judge or auenger, if either we be deceitfull in promising,
or vnfaithfull in performing.
            Now an oath was ordained to supplie the want of
other arguments, and the insufficiencie of humane testimonies,
to the end, that a needfull truth, which otherwise
could not be knowne, might by this meanes be acknowledged:
for an oath hath place neither in matters manifest
nor generall, as where is question of right; but in things

doubtfull and particular, where is question of facts, either
past or to come. Wherein when as they cannot by
other certaine and necessarie arguments be demonstrated,
men flie to testimonies. And because humane testimonies
haue little force in prouing by themselues, therefore
they flie to oathes, wherein God is called vpon as a
witnesse of such matters as are either affirmed concerning
things past, or promised concerning things to come.
And so great religion there is of an oath among all men,
that euen by the law of nations, that is held for certaine
and true, which is affirmed vnder the religion of an oath,
though otherwise it could not be proued. For this is engrauen
in the hearts of all men, That there is a God, to
whom all secrets are knowne, who also is the patron of
truth, and auenger of falshood: and therefore to call
vpon him as a witnesse and a judge in that which is not
true, it is supposed to be a greater sinne than any man
that is not a desparat A theist may be thought to commit:
For may it be thought that any man almost is of such outragious
wickednesse, as that he feareth not to call vpon
God whom he knoweth to be a defender of truth and reuenger
of falshood, to beare witnesse with him that he
affirmeth the truth, and to execute vengeance on him if
he speake an vntruth, when he knoweth himselfe to lie?
For what were this but wilfully to prouoke the Lord,
and as it were to dare him to execute his fierce indignation
vpon him?
            And hereby it appeareth, that an oath is an holy ordinance
of God, seruing greatly for his glorie, and for the
profit and necessitie of men. It is glorious vnto God: because
when men flie to the name of the Lord as a strong
tower and sanctuarie of truth, he is acknowledged not
only by him that sweareth, but also by them that receiue
the oath, to be first omnipresent and omniscient, that is,
one who is present in euerie place, and is acquainted with
all secrets: secondly, true and a maintainer of truth, and

reuenger of falshood: thirdly, just, and therefore willing;
omnipotent, and therefore able, to punish those that
sweare falsly. And these attributes of God are so acknowledged
and celebrated in euerie lawfull oath, that
to sweare by the Lord,Esay. 45. 23. is to confesse vnto God,
               Rom. 14. 11. and in the
Scriptures it is accounted as none of the meanest parts of
his worship,Deut. 6. 13. & 10. 20. 
               Thou shalt feare the Lord thy God and serue him, and
shalt sweare by his name. Which must put vs in mind whensoeuer
we do sweare, that by our oath we are to glorifie
God, and to performe a solemne worship vnto him:
which was also further signified both by the solemne
forme of imposing an oath,Ios. 7. 19. and the solemne rite of taking
an oath among the Iewes.Iohn 9. 24. The forme of imposing
an oath,1. King 8. 31. was this, Giue glorie to God: the maner in deposing,
was to stand before the Altar:Cic. pro Cornel▪ Bal. & pro Placc
                     •
                  . which was also the custome
of the Athenians and Romans.
            And as an oath is glorious vnto God, so is it also profitable
and necessarie for men.
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . For an oath being as one
saith, the greatest proofe among men, it giueth satisfaction
to our neighbour, who otherwise would not be satisfied:
It is the chiefe bond of truth, whereby men either
bind themselues to God,Num. 30. 2. as in voluntarie oaths; or are as
it were enforced to speake the truth, as in oaths imposed:
for as one well saith,Plutarc. Quest. Rom. 
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , an oath is
the freemans racke. It is the chiefe preseruatiue against falshood,
the remedie against contention, and as the Apostle
saith,Heb. 6. 16. 
               The end of all controuersies among men.
            
            These premisses duly considered, it will not be hard to
determine the former questions. For as touching the first:
if an oath be (as hath beene shewed) an holy ordinance of
God, making greatly for the glory of God, and profit of
men; then whosoeuer shal refuse to sweare, when just and
necessarie occasion is offered, he sinneth against Gods
glorie and the loue of his brethren. Here therefore is to
be refuted of vs the heresie of the Manichees, renewed
by the Anabaptists, who thinke it altogether vnlawfull

for a Christian to sweare, though enjoyned thereto by a
magistrat. But they sinne against the third commaundement,
and they erre, not knowing the Scriptures. For
where the Lord forbiddeth vs to sweare in vaine, there he
commaundeth vs to sweare aright, for the discharge of
our dutie in the confirmation of a necessarie truth, to
Gods glory, the good of our neighbour, or the clearing
of our selues. And surely, if it were vnlawfull to sweare
as they would beare vs in hand, then should we by swearing
offend either against the glory of God, or the good
of our brother. But an oath as you haue heard maketh
for both: and by the neglect thereof wee sinne against
both. And that an oath is lawfull, it may appeare by the
examples of those whom we cannot deny to haue sworn
lawfully. For first, the most faithfull seruants of God,
both before the law, and since, haue vsed vpon just occasion
not onely themselues to sweare, but also to impose
oathes vpon others.Gen. 21. 23. 31. & 26. 28. Examples of swearing in Abraham
and Isaac to Abimelec,
               Gen. 31. 53. 
               Iacob to Laban, Elias to Obadiah, Elisha
to Iehoram,
               1. King. 18. 15. &c. of oathes imposed, by Abraham vpon his
seruant,2. King. 3. 14. 
               Gen. 24,Gen. 24. 2, 3. and by Iacob vpon Ioseph, Gen. 47,Gen. 47. 29, 35. by Ionathan
and Dauid mutually, 1. Sam. 20. And if it might be objected
(as truly it cannot) that these seruants of the Lord
in these oathes offended, yet other examples may be added,
which are without exception: For it may not bee
thought, that those holy men of God, who were the penmen
of the holy ghost, did offend in penning of the scriptures;
but in the very penning of the scripture they haue
vsed diuerse oathes,Rom. 1. 9. & 9. 1. especially Paule in his epistles:2. Cor. 1. 23. & 11, 32. yea in
the scriptures are recorded oathes of the holy Angels,
who are free from sinne:Gal. 1. 20. and to conclude with the example
of all examples,Phil. 1. 8. the Lord himselfe is sometimes
said to haue sworne.1. Thess. 2. 5. Apoc. 10. 6. But an oath is not onely warranted
as lawfull,Gen. 22. but also commended as good,Heb. 6. 
               Psal. 63. 11,Psal. 63. 11. euery
one that sweareth by the Lord, shall bee commended,
where (as in this place) to sweare by the Lord aright, is

made a proper note by which a godly man is described.
Neither is it onely commended as good, but also commaunded
as necessarie. And it is necessarie, not onely by
necessitie of dutie, in respect of Gods commaundement,
enjoyning this dutie as a singular braunch of Gods worship:Deu. 6. 13. 10. 20
but also by necessitie of certainetie,Ier. 4. 2. or as the schoolmen
call it infallibilitie, in respect of the oath of the Lord,
which cannot be vntrue.Esay 45. 23. 
               By my selfe haue I sworne (sayth the
Lord) the word is gone out of my mouth, that euery knee shall bow
to me, and euery tongue shall sweare by me.
            
            But the Anabaptists object the prohibition of Christ,Mat. 5. 34.
               Mat. 5, But I say vnto you, sweare not at all: therefore it is not
lawfull to sweare at all. Whereunto I answere, that the
purpose of our Sauiour Christ being not to abrogate the
morall law of God,Mat. 5. 17. as himselfe professeth, but to expound
it, and to deliuer it from the grosse corruptions and
deprauations of the Scribes and Pharisies, we may not
thinke, that hee doth absolutely and wholly forbid this
dutie of swearing, which as we haue heard, is expressely
commaunded in the law of God. Whereas therefore the
Scribes and Pharisies taught first, that the third commaundement
was to be vnderstood of perjurie onely or
false swearing, euen as they vnderstood the sixt and seuenth
commaundement of outward murther onely, and
adulterie: and secondly, that not all false swearing is forbidden,
but onely when the name of God is interposed,
or something else, which immediatly belonged to his
worship, as the gold of the temple, which was consecrated to
the Lord,Mat▪ 23. 16, 18 and the gift vpon the Altar, which was offered vnto
God: Our Sauiour Christ sheweth that in the third
commaundement is forbidden not onely perjurie and
false swearing by the name of God, but also all rash and
ordinarie swearing in our common talke, whether by the
name of God, or by any of his creatures: Because the
offence committed in swearing amisse by them,Mat. 5. 34, 
                     〈◊〉
                  . redoundeth
to the dishonour of God.Mat. 23. 
                     〈…〉
                  
                Our Sauiour therefore

speaketh not of publicke oaths before a magistrat (for in
them they sware by the name of God alone) but of priuat
oaths in their ordinary talke and communication, and
in respect thereof he commandeth vs not to sweare at all,
neither by the name of God, nor by any of his creatures:
For so he saith,Iam. 5. 12. 
               But let your communication be yea, yea, nay, nay:
which Iames expresseth thus, Let your yea, that is your affirmation,
be yea; and your nay, that is your negation, be nay:
that is to say, if you haue occasion to affirme any thing,
let it be sufficient to say, yea; and when you are to denie
any thing, let it be sufficient to say nay. Neither doth our
Sauiour Christ simply condemne all oathes in our ordinarie
talke, but such as are needlesse or superfluous: For
so he saith,Mat. 5. 37. Whatsoeuer is 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , that is, redundant aboue
these, it is of euill. For an oath is not a good thing, but
vpon necessitie, and therefore is not to be vsed but vpon
necessitie: for a necessary good without the bonds of necessitie,
is not good.
            Hereby therefore it appeareth, that as here it is made
a note of a godly man to sweare, and hauing sworne to
keepe his oath, so it is lawfull for a Christian man to take
an oath: prouided alwayes that those duties be obserued
in swearing, which the holy Ghost hath required in
oathes. As first in respect of the object, that we sweare
by the Lord alone: for seeing what we sweare by, that
we deifie and make our God; therefore we forsake the
true God, if we sweare by that which is not God, and
consequently by this sinne prouoke the Lord to execute
his judgements, not onely vpon vs, but also vpon the
countrie wherein we liue. As he saith by his Prophet
Ieremie to Ierusalem,Ier. 5. 7. 
               How should I spare thee in this, thy children
haue forsaken me. How so? they haue sworne by that which
is not God.
            
            Secondly, in respect of the manner: that we sweare in
truth,Ier. 4. 2. judgement, and righteousnesse. In truth, that we
may be able to say with the Apostle,Rom. 9. 1. 
               I speake the truth in

Christ, I lie not, my conscience bearing me witnesse in the holy Ghost:
In judgement, that is aduisedly and vpon necessarie occasion:
In righteousnesse, promising by oath nothing
but that which is lawfull and just. Thirdly, in respect of
the end, that by our oath God may be glorified, our duty
discharged, controuersies appeased, our brethren satisfied,
our innocencie cleared.
            And forasmuch as the child of God who is here described,
is carefull to performe these duties required in
oathes, we may bee assured that he is none of these rash
and ordinarie swearers: but as he knoweth an oath to
be an holy ordinance of God, wherein the holy, glorious,Deut. 28. 58.
and dreadfull name of the Lord our God is vsed
and called vpon; so he will be carefull in all good conscience
to sweare holily and reuerently. And as he
knoweth that an oath is not good but whē it is necessarie,
so he will not sweare vnlesse he be drawne thereto by necessity:
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  
               
for so much seemeth to be implied to the Hebrew
word which is 
                  〈◊〉
               , and signifieth to be sworne, rather
than to sweare. As for those which sweare vpon no necessitie,
vsually and ordinarily in their common talke,
they do most vilely prophane and pollute the holy name
of God, turning the sanctuarie of truth and veritie, into
a common house of vanitie;Exod. 20. and therefore are such as
the Lord will not hold guiltlesse.Eccles. 23. 11. For as the sonne of
Syrach saith, A man that vseth much swearing is ful of iniquitie,
and the Plague shall neuer go from his house.
Yea so farre are the common swearers from being reputed
the children of God, as that by the judgement of Salomon
it is a note of a godly man to feare an oath, and a
badge of a wicked man to make no conscience of swearing:
For when hee would by this particular signifie
that which he had affirmed in generall, that the wicked
and the good are manie times alike in their outward
estate,Eccles. 9. 2. 
               He that sweareth (sayth he) as he that feareth an oath.
            
            Thus much may suffice to haue spoken of the former

question cōcerning the taking of oaths: it remaineth that
I should intreat of the other, concerning the keeping of
oaths, viz. whether all oaths are to be performed, or not?
Whereunto I aunswere, that all oaths, which are lawfull
and in our power, are religiously and faithfully to be performed
and kept: For this faithfulnesse is both commanded
and commended to vs in the Scripture, and the contrarie
vnfaithfulnesse condemned, Num. 30,Num. 30. 3. 
               Whosoeuer voweth
a vow vnto the Lord, or sweareth an oath binding himselfe by a
bond, he shall not breake his promise, but shall do according to all that
proceedeth out of his mouth. Neither is it commanded among
matters of lesse importance, but among the weightier
points of the law, Mat. 23,Mat. 23. 23. it is commended vnto vs: First,
by the example of the Lord himselfe, whose fidelitie in
keeping of his promises is to bee imitated of vs, if we
would be reputed his children: Secondly, by this testimonie
of the holy Ghost, where it is made one of the
notes of Gods children; as also Psal. 24:Psal. 24. 4. Thirdly, by the
promise of great blessing;Prou. 28. 20. for as Salomon saith, A faithfull
man shall abound in blessings. As for vnfaithfulnesse in breaking
promises and oaths, it is condemned as one of the
sinnes of the heathen, who were giuen ouer to a reprobat
mind, Rom. 1. 30,Rom. 1. 30. where he saith they were couenant breakers,
and punished in Sauls posteritie, because he had broken
the couenant made by oath with the Gibeonites:2. Sam. 21. 6.
and in Zedekiah who had broken the oath and couenant
which he had made with Nebuchadnezar,
               2. Chron. 36. 13. in regard whereof
Ezekiel saith,Ezek. 17. 15. 19. 
               Shall he breake the couenant and be deliuered?
As I liue saith the Lord, I will surely bring mine oath that he hath
despised, and my couenant that he hath broken, vpon his owne
head, &c.
               Peiorare (saith Tully) non est fals ūiurare, sed quod ex animi 
                     •
                  ui sententia iuraris, id non fa 
                     ••
                  r
                     •
                  periurium est. 3. de offi
                     •
                  . For not to performe an oath, when a man may
lawfully and is able to performe it, is perjurie: For perjury
properly is not to sweare falsly, but not to performe
the oath which thou hast made. Mat. 5. 33. But what if the
thing which by oath is promised, be either vnlawfull, or
not in our power? If when we take the oath, we know it

either to be vnlawfull, or not in our power, we sinne fearfully
in swearing thereto: For he that sweareth to performe
that which he knowes to be vnlawfull, if he hath a
purpose to performe it, he sinneth with an high hand, of
setled purpose and full resolution, which he feareth not
to bind with an oath; and therein to call vpon God both
as his suretie that he shall performe it, and as his judge
and reuenger, if he do not: If he hath no purpose to performe
it, he sweareth falsly, and deceiueth his neighbor
vnder the religion of an oath, and prophaneth the name
of God, whom he calleth to witnesse an vntruth; and that
which is worst of all, he desparatly tempteth God, and as
it were dareth him to his face, when he feareth not to call
vpon God to execute his vengeance on him, if he performe
not that which he hath no purpose to performe:
If he knoweth it to be a thing to him vnpossible, or not in
his power, and yet will sweare to do it, he wilfully forsweareth
himselfe, and desparatly prouoketh God to
execute his vengeance on him, and in all respects sinneth
as the former, who sweareth to that which he hath
no purpose to performe. But if at the first the matter do
not appeare to be either vnlawfull or vnpossible, and yet
afterward proue so, then he which so deposeth, sweareth
rashly and vnaduisedly: For we ought to be well assured
both of the lawfulnesse and possibilitie of a thing before
we may presume to bind our selues by oath to the performance
of it. Howsoeuer it be, an oath so soone as it appeareth
vnto vs to be vnlawfull or impossible, it is void
of none effect, neither doth it bind vs: for an oath may not
be the bond of iniquity, neither can it tie vs to impossibilities.
If therefore thou hast sworne to a thing vnlawfull,
thou hast sinned in swearing vnlawfully, and for that
thou art to craue pardon at the hands of God: but that
which thou hast vnlawfully promised, thou maist not
wickedly performe.Isidor. Vnlawfull oaths are laudably broken,
and damnably kept, as one saith, in swearing so, thou

hast sinned; but it is no sinne to breake an vnlawfull
oath, he that performeth it addeth sinne vnto sinne, and
vnto a lesse sinne manie times he addeth a greater, to the
rashnesse of swearing, the wickednesse of performing▪
               Mar. 6. 23.
               Herod made a rash oath, and as it proued, also a wicked
oath: which if he had not performed he had sinned no
further in that matter; but by performing it, vnto the
rashnesse of his swearing, he added fearfull murther of the
holy man of God.1. Sam. 25. 22. 32. 33. 
               Dauid also tooke an vnlawfull oath to
reuenge himselfe vpon Nabal: but when by Abigail he
was informed of the vnlawfulnesse thereof, he not onely
desisteth from his purpose and breaketh that oath: but also
blesseth God that had sent her, & blesseth her that had
kept him from shedding blood or reuenging his owne
quarrell. If further it be demaunded, What if that which
a man promiseth by oath, cannot be performed without
his losse or hinderance? The holy Ghost resolueth vs in
this place, That it is the propertie of Gods children to
keepe their oath, though it be to their hinderance. But
what if a man be forced to sweare to that which is against
his profit? if it be not also vnlawfull, he is to performe
it.
To vnlawfull oaths we ought not to suffer our selues
by any meanes to be forced. But if through feare or infirmitie
we haue yeelded to take an vnlawful, oath, we haue
sinned in swearing, but we are not bound to performe it.
            The ninth marke or note, whereby the holy ghost describeth
a sound Christian and citisen of heauen, is, That he
doth not giue out his money to vsurie: but contrariwise (for vnder
the negatiue wee are to vnderstand the affirmatiue)
justly getteth his goods, and charitably exposeth them to
the benefit of others, as it is said Psal. 112. 5, A good man
is mercifull, and lendeth: and againe Psal. 37. 26, The righteous
man is euer mercifull, and lendeth.August. & Luther in hunc Psalm. I will first speak
of the negatiue. And because, as some worthie writers
testifie, it is but a small matter not to put forth money vnto

vsurie, I will afterwards shew, that it is required of euery
Christian, both (quoad 
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               ) in respect of the possession,
that he get his goods justly: and also (quoad 
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               ) in respect
of the vse, that he be willing freely to communicate
them to the reliefe of others.
            
               M. Luther writing on these words, sayth, Iste versus non indiget
expositione sed impletione: This verse needeth not to bee
expounded for the rectifying of our judgement, but to
bee performed in our practise for the sanctifying of our
life. For in Luthers time, and in all the ages before him, although
many practised vsurie, as they did other kinds of
theft and robberie, yet there was neuer any controuersie
among the learned concerning the lawfulnesse of vsurie,
more than of other kinds of theft, but all with one consent
condemned vsurie and vsurers vnto hell. But if Luther
were liuing in these our times, and vnderstood besides
the common practise of vsurie openly, and the cunning
shifts whereby it is cloaked, the open defence also thereof
vndertaken not only by vsurers themselues, who haue
learned many subtile distinctions and instances to justifie
their trade; but also by diuerse diuines, otherwise godly
and learned, who haue either spoken or written more
wittily than truly, in fauour of vsurie: assuredly he would
confesse, that there is scarcely any one morall point of
diuinitie, which needeth more fully to be expounded, and
more exquisitly to be discussed. And although it may
not be expected at my hands in this mediocritie or meannesse
of gifts, that I should more fully and more learnedly
discourse of this controuersie, than it hath been handled
by others, men of greater reading and riper experience:
yet seeing the holy ghost in this place reckoneth
abstinence from vsurie among the markes of Gods children,
whereunto we are now by order come, hauing alreadie
intreated of those which goe before, I may not
nor will not refuse to set downe what we are to hold concerning
this controuersie, and as God shall enable me to

determine this question: That if vsurie shall be found to
be lawfull and warrantable by the word of God, the vsurers
may hereafter practise it in faith (which hetherto it is
more than probable they could neuer doe:) or if it shall
appeare to be vtterly vnlawfull, that they wholly abstain
and desist from the practise thereof, as euer they hope to
rest in the mountaine of Gods holinesse.
            
               
                  
                     
                        Of the name of Vsurie, and of contracts in generall.
                        
                           VSurie hath his name of the Latine word Vsura,
which in the first signification thereof, signifieth
the vse or fruition of any thing, as of money, Cic. 1.
Tuscul. Natura dedit vsuram vitae tanquam pecuniae.
                        
                        Secondly, Vsura signifieth any accession, addition,
ouerplus or increase aboue the principall, which is yeelded
to the creditour in respect of the vse of money lent or
forborne, or of any thing else which is spent in the vse.
And this increase is either voluntarie or exacted. The
voluntarie increase is a free gift, gratuitie, or reward,
which the borrower or debtour hauing gained by the
imployment of the money borrowed, voluntarily and
freely giueth to the lender, in testimonie of his thankfulnesse
for the benefit receiued; which some call vsuram or
foenus liberale. The exacted increase, is that which the creditour
demaundeth either as a recompence of some losse or
hinderance which he sustaineth through the default of
the borrower, or as a gaine couenanted for loane. The
former is called Vsura compensatoria, recompencing vsurie or
interest; the latter is termed Vsura quaestuosa, or foenus,
gainefull vsurie.
                        Of the liberall Vsurie (if I may so call it) which is nothing
else but a thankfull reward, or gratuitie, as also of
the recompencing vsurie or interest, there is no question
to be made, but that in themselues they are lawfull: but of
the gainefull vsurie is all the controuersie. And thus the
Latine word Vsura is distinguished; the English word

Vsurie, though deriued thence, yet is otherwise vsed: for
neither is it taken at any time for vse, or for liberall vsurie,
or recompencing vsurie, but onely for gainefull vsurie,
whereof our question is. And in this sence it is taken
two wayes, either for the gaine it selfe, couenanted or
principally intended for loane, which in Latine is properly
called foenus; or for the contract it selfe of lending for
gaine, which properly is called foeneratio. Of the contract,
the holy ghost speaketh in this place, whereby a man giueth
or putteth forth his money to vsurie.
                        Whereas therefore Vsurie is a contract, let vs briefely
distinguish those contracts which concerne the alienation
or permutation of goods, that it may the better appeare,
what kind of contract it is: for such contracts are
either for the perpetuall alienation of goods, or but for a
time. The perpetuall alienation, if it be liberall and free,
is giuing: if for recompence, then is it a commutation either
of ware for ware, which is called barterie; or of money
for money, which is called exchange; or of ware for
money, which is selling; or of money for ware, which is
buying. The alienation which is but for a time, is either of
the vse onely, or of the propertie also: that which is of
the vse only, if it be liberall and free, is called commodation,
or lending to vse; if for recompence or hire, then is it
called location, or letting to hire; that which is not onely
of the vse, but of the propertie also, if it be liberall and
free, it is called mutuation, or lending to spend; if illiberall
and for gaine, it is called vsurie.
                     
                  
               
            
            
               
                  
                     
                        What Vsurie is.
                        Wherefore the contract of vsurie is nothing else but
illiberall mutuation, and may thus briefely be defined:
Vsurie is mutuation, or lending for gaine. This briefe definition
doth fully set forth the true nature of vsurie, and
sufficiently distinguisheth it from all other contracts
whatsoeuer.
                     
                  
               
            
            
               
For first I say it is mutuation or lending, wherein all
learned men almost, whether they write for vsurie or against
it,Sum. Angel. 
                     •
                  . vs
                     •
                  a. doe agree. In solo mutuo (sayth one) vero vel interpretatiuo
consistit vsura secundum omnes doctores, that is, Vsurie according
to all the Doctors, consisteth only in loane, whether
it be a bare contract of loane, or else cloaked vnder
some other contract, which may be resolued or reduced
vnto loane.De Vsur. c. 8. Likewise Car. Molinaeus, the chiefe patrone of
Vsurie, It is the common opinion of all (sayth hee) that
Vsurie properly is not committed but in loane: and again
loane is the subject of vsurie.Subiectum vsurae mutuum. Which is also presupposed
in the Scripture, Exod. 22. 25, If thou lend money to my people,
namely and especially to the poore with thee, thou shalt not be as
an exactour or as an vsurer vnto him, you shall not impose vsurie vpon
him. And the same, if need were, might be prooued by
the other relatiue, which is borrowing: for lending and
borrowing are relatiues. And if he which taketh vp money
vpon vsurie, be a borrower, then he that giueth or
putteth it forth vnto vsurie, is a lender.
            The contract therefore of Vsurie is a contract of lending:
and whatsoeuer is not a contract of lending either
plainely or couertly, that is not a contract of vsurie. Now
in the contract of mutuation or lending, diuerse things
concurre, which also belong to the nature of vsurie.
            1. That it is of such things as are spent in the vse, and
consist in quantitie, that is to say, in number, weight, or
measure; as money and victuals, corne, wine, oyle, &c.
which are particularly mentioned, Deut. 23. 19. Leuit. 25. 37.
Neh. 5. 11.
            2. And therefore is alienation not onely of the vse,
but also of the propertie, from which the vse (of such
things as are spent in the vse) cannot be seuered.
            3. As the propertie is transferred to the borrower, so
the borrower standeth to the hazard of the thing borrowed.
            4. That it is not a perpetuall alienation of that which

is lent but for a time, which time being expired, the borrower
is bound to restore the principall.
            5. Because the thing borrowed is to be spent in the
vse, therefore the borrower is bound not to restore the
selfesame particular which he borrowed, but so much in
the same kind or of the same value.
            6. It belongeth to the nature of lending, that it bee
free and liberall. But herein vsurie peruerteth the contract
of lending, being illiberall and for gaine: for vsurie
is a contract of lending, wherein the creditour or lender
requireth of the borrower not onely the principall in the
equiualent or full value thereof, but also an ouerplus or
gaine. And this is that which followeth in the definition,
as the difference to distinguish it from free lending, that
it is for gaine.
            By gaine is meant any addition ouerplus or increase
ouer and aboue theThe summe lent, we call the principall: the Latines, sortem, the Grecians, 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   & 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . principall, whether it be money or
money worth, required not for the indemnitie of the creditour,
to saue him harmelesse, but for his aduantage to
make him a gainer by lending; for that onely is to bee
esteemed gaine, which is an ouerplus, clearely gotten
aboue the principall. And whereas I say it is either mony
or money worth: this money worth reacheth farre, not
onely to goods and wares, but also to labours and seruices,
and whatsoeuer else being valuable by money, may
lawfully be let or sold for money. And when I say that
vsurie is lending for gaine, it is meant, that in the first act
of lending vpon vsurie, or afterwards in the forbearing,
whereby that lending is continued, gaine is, if not couenanted
for, yet at the least intended. So that where there
is a couenant or intent of gaine by loane, whether it be in
the first act of lending, or afterwards in the forbearing, it
is vsurie: and contrariwise, where there is neither a couenant
nor intent of gaine in lending or forbearing, there is
not vsurie, though there be an ouerplus or increase receiued
ouer and besides the principall. Now, that Vsurie is

thus to be defined, it is euident: first, because as all vsurie
is lending for gaine (as no man of learning will denie) so
reciprocally all lending for gaine is vsurie; neither can it
truly be referred to any other contract: as I will make it
plaine anone, when I shall shew, how Vsurie by his definition
is distinguished from all other contracts whatsoeuer.
Secondly, because all lending for gaine, and all gaine
required for loane, is in the Scriptures condemned vnder
the name of vsurie.
            The Hebrew word Neshek is the ordinarie name to
signifie vsurie, as foenus in Latine, or 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                in Greeke, or
vsurie in English. For the mony which is lent vpon vsurie,
is called Noshek, a biter, or which biteth: and the Hebrew
phrase, which signifieth to be lent vpon vsurie, is to
bite, as appeareth plainely, Deut. 23. 19, Thou shalt not lend
vpon vsurie to thy brother money or meat, or any thing else, Asheriishak, which biteth, that is, which is lent vpon vsurie: for
whatsoeuer the vsurer lendeth, it hath teeth and jawes to
eat and consume the substance of other men; his corne or
victuals which were made to be eaten, doe eat; and his
money which was made to be spent, doth wast the substance
of others. And therefore Hebrew writers doe
teach, that in the name of vsurie is included an admonition,
not to borrow vpon vsurie: for he which taketh money
vpon vsurie, taketh as it were a serpent into his bosome.
Now the money which is lent vpon vsurie, is said
to bite or gnaw, because it biteth & gnaweth away some
of the borrowers goods, which when it is repaid, it bringeth
with it to the lender: and for this cause the vsurer
who lendeth forth his mony vpō vsurie, is said in the same
place,Deut. 23. 19. Lo Tasshik.
                to cause his mony to bite; and the gaine or ouerplus,
whether it be more or lesse, which the money lent
vpon vsury hath bitten away from the borrower, whither
he be rich or poore, is call Neshek.
            
            And further that Neshek is the ordinarie word in the
Scriptures to signifie vsurie, and also that all increase and

gaine aboue the principall exacted for loane is vsurie, is
manifestly proued by the other words which the holy
Ghost vseth to expound the word Neshek, and to signifie
vsurie; those are Tarbith and Marbith, both deriued from
the same root Rabah, which signifieth to increase: & they
are fitly translated incrementū, augmentum, increase; amplius,
more: so that he which exacteth an increase or gain aboue
his principall, or requireth more by couenant than hee
lent, he taketh Tarbith or Marbith, that is vsurie. The Grecians
translate it 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , that is, sayth Balsamon Nysseni scholiastes,
when a man doth lend any thing that hee may receiue
more than he gaue. And that these words are vsed
for exposition of Neshek first the text it selfe in the Scripture,
Leuit. 25. 36, 37. Pro. 28. 8. Ezec. 18. 13. & 22. 12. doth
plainely proue: Where these words being vsed as Synonyma,
that is, as words of the same signification, Tarbith
and Marbith, are set after Neshek, 
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , that is, by way of
exposition. This is also testified by D. Kimhi writing vpon
Ezech. 18, where he setteth this downe as the receiued opinion
of the Iewes,Hu Neshek hu Tarbith. that Neshek and Tarbith are all one. And
the same is confessed by Caluin himselfe, that wheras vsurers
auoided the name Neshek, which signified biting, as
they doe the name vsurie among vs, as being odious; and
therefore alledged, that they tooke not Neshek but Tarbith,
as among vs they will not be thought to take vsurie, but
consideration,In Exod. 22. 25 Leuit. 25. 36, 37 vsance, or interest: therefore the Lord forbiddeth
as well Tarbith as Neshek, whereby hee condemneth
generally Quamlibet sortis accessionem (sayth Caluin) any
addition or increase aboue the principall. And vpon Ezechiel,
cap. 18. he sayth, The Prophet condemneth not only
Neshek, which signifieth biting, but also Tarbith, which
he translateth incrementū, increase: hoc est (sayth he) quicquid lucri
sibi auari homines conciliant ex mutuo, that is, whatsoeuer
gaine couetous men doe get to themselues by loane. And
the like may be said of 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                and foenus, which are the fruit
or birth of money, be it more or lesse. Lastly, this is the

receiued opinion of the most approoued and ancient writers
in the Church of Christ, as of Ambrose, Hicrome, and
Augustinc, to which wee may adde the authoritie of the
counsell held at Agatha, all which are to this purpose cited
by Gratian,
               Caus. 14. q. 3. to prooue, that whensoeuer any gaine is
exacted for loane aboue the principall, it is vsurie: for
whereas some imagined, that they committed not vsurie,
because they tooke no increase or gaine in money, but in
wares and other commodities,Lib. de Tob. c. 14. 
               Ambrose sayth, Et esc
                     •
                   vsur
                     •
                  
est, & vestis vsur
                     •
                   est, & quodcunque sorti accedit vsur
                     •
                   est: quod

                     •
                  elis ei nomen imponas, vsur
                     •
                   est: Meat is vsurie, and garment
is vsurie, and whatsoeuer is added ouer and besides the
principall, it is vsurie; giue it what name you will, it is
vsurie.Lib. 6. in Eze. 18. 
               Hierome likewise: Some think (sayth he) that vsurie
is onely in money; which the holy Scripture foreseeing,
taketh away the ouerplus of euery thing, Vt plus non recipi
                     •
                  s
quam dedisti, That thou receiue no more than thou
diddest giue. Againe, some (sayth he) for money lent, receiue
gifts of diuerse kinds, and they doe not vnderstand
that it is called vsurie and increase, whatsoeuer it be that
they receiue aboue that which they gaue. And to the
same purpose is that which is alleadged out of the counsell
held at Agatha, Vsur
                     •
                   est vbi amplius requiritur quā datur,
It is vsurie, when more is required than is lent. Augustine
goeth further,In Ps 36. If thou (sayth he) hast lent money to any
man, of whom thou lookest to receiue more than thou
gauest, not money alone, but any thing more than thou
gauest, whether it be wheat, or wine, or oyle, or any thing
else; if thou expectest to receiue more than thou gauest,
thou art an vsurer.
            Vpon which testimonies Gratian concludeth, behold
it is euidently declared, That whosoeuer for loane is exacted
aboue the principall,Lactant. de vero cult. 1. 6. c. 18. it is vsurie. Lactantius also speaking
of vsurie, sayth, To receiue more than thou gauest,
it is vnjust: and afterwards addeth, That a justman will
not defile himselfe with such gaine. Likewise, all increase

whatsoeuer required for loane, in the ciuile law also is accounted
vsurie. Lastly, the common lawyers are of the
same judgement: For Glanuile, who was lord chiefe Iustice
of England in the dayes of Henry the second, teacheth,
that vsurie is committed, when a man hauing lent any
thing that doth consist vpon number, weight, and measure,
doth take any thing ouer and aboue his loane,
Lib. 10. cap. 3.
            And thus it appeareth, that the true nature of vsurie is
expressed in this definition. Let vs now see how by this
definition vsurie is distinguished from other contracts,
and also other things which may seeme to haue some affinitie
therewith: for of the rest it is needlesse to speake.
            It is therefore distinguished I. from all liberall contracts,
as that of donation, or free gift▪ of mutuation, or free
lending to spend; of commodation, or free lending to vse;
because they be free and liberall, but vsurie is illiberall
and for gaine.
            2. From all lawfull buying: because in buying there
is a perpetuall alienation of money, in vsurie but for a
time: and therefore in the contract of buying & selling,
the seller is not bound to restore the money againe; but in
the contract of vsurie, being a contract of mutuation or
loane, the debtour is bound after a time to restore the
money againe. Whereby it appeareth, that a contract of
buying rents, whether for euer, or for a mans life, wherein
there is an absolute bargaine and sale, and a perpetuall
alienation of the principall, howsoeuer there may be injustice
therein, if equalitie be not obserued, yet is it not
vsurie: for the subject of vsurie is loane, and by the contract
of loane the borrower vndertaketh after a time to
repay the principall.
            3. From lawfull Location or letting to hire: which is
the rather to be obserued, because some imagine, that
money and other things which are lent vpon vsurie, may
as well be let as other things. But there is great difference

betwixt vsurie and the lawfull contract of Location
or letting. And first they differ in the subjects: so that
the things which be lent vpon vsurie cannot bee let,
namely, to that vse for which they are lent, and those
things which be let cannot be lent vpon vsurie.
            
               
                  
                     Vsurie is in those things
which are spent in the vse, and
consist in quantitie, standing
in number, weight, and measure.
                     Location, is of such
things as are not spent
in the vse, neither stād
in number, weight, and
measure.
                  
                  
                     The subject of vsurie, are
such things as haue no fruitful
vse in themselues, but the gain
which is to bee raised by imployment
of them, is to be imputed
to the industrie and skil
of the imployer.
                     The subject of location,
haue a fruitful vse
in thēselues naturally.
                  
                  
                     The vse of things lent vpō
vsury cannot bee seuered, or
reckoned apart from the propertie
and dominion; because
they are such things as are spēt
in the vse, and therefore if you
vse them, you spend them.
                     The fruitfull vse of
things lent, may be seuered
and reckoned apart,
and is valuable by
it self, as of lād, goods,
house, &c. which remain
in the vse vnspēt.
                  
                  
                     In the cōtract of loane, whether
free, or vpon vsury, the
lender graunteth to the borrower,
not only the vse, but also
the propertie of the thing
lent, frō which the vse of that,
which we lend to be spent in
the vse, cannot be seuered: hēce
it is called mutuum, because by
lending it is made ex meo tuum.
                     
                     In the contract of location,
the letter granteth
to him that taketh
to hire, the vse only of
the things, retaining
the propertie to himselfe.
                  
                  
                     Because that which is
the subject of loane and
vsury is spent in the vse, and
is lent to be spent; therfor
                           •
                        
the borrower is bound to
restore, not the same particular
which he borrowed,
but so much in quantitie
or full value in the same
kind, without any impairing
or diminution.
                     Because that which is
the subject of commoditie
and location is lent &
let, not to bee spent, but
only to be vsed; therfore
he that taketh the same to
vse, is bound to restore
the selfe same particular
which for the most part
is impaired and made
worse in the vse.
                  
                  
                     As in mutuation and
vsurie, the propertie is
translated to the borrower,
so with the propertie also
the hazard wholly appertaineth
to the borrower:
for the verie contract of
mutuation includeth in it
an obligation binding the
borrower, that whatsoeuer
becommeth of this particular
which he borroweth,
he shall restore the full value
thereof at the day appointed,
in the same kind.
And to this purpose the
borrower maketh promise,
either by word or writing,
entereth into bonds and
statutes, laying his goods
to pawne, or his lands to
morgage, giueth sureties,
to assure and secure the
creditor for the principall.
                     As in location the vse
is communicated to the
hirer, but the letter retaineth
the propertie; so the
perill and hazard of the
thing, if it shall miscarie
without the default of
the hirer, belongeth to
the letter, and not to the
hirer; because it came
for his hire, Exod. 22. 14.
And it is a rule in law,
To whom the hazard
appertaineth, to him the
fruit and profit belongeth.
                  
               
            
            
               
To conclude therefore, things that stand in quantitie,
in number, weight and measure, as money, meat,
and drinke, wine, oyle, &c. and are lent to be spent, Non
cadunt in commod
                     •
                  tum aut locatum, they cannot be let. For in
such things, contrarie to the contract of Location, the
propertie with the vse is transferred to the borrower, and
hee becommeth owner for the time thereof: neither is
there in such things themselues any fruitfull vse, which is
valuable by it selfe, being spent in the vse: but if there
arise any gaine, it is to be ascribed to the skill and industrie
of the borrower, who is the owner for the time of
that which he borroweth. Neither is he to restore the
same particular, impaired by the vse, but the full value in
the same kind with better rather than worse: neither doth
the lender but the borrower stand wholly to the hazard
and perill. And therefore the letting of such things as
are not lettable, is nothing but meere vsurie vnder another
name. Indeed if such things as stand in quantitie, as
money and such like, be not lent to be spent according to
that vse for which they were ordained, but to some other
vse and purpose; the lender communicating onely the
vse, and retaining the propertie, requiring again the selfesame
particular to be restored, himselfe also perhaps standing
to the hazard, if it miscarrie without the borrowers
default; thē this contract is not mutuation (for therby the
property is alwaies altered) or vsurie, but cōmodation, if it
be free; or location, if it be for hire. Howbeit, this hire, vnlesse
the letter do stand to the hazard, or vnlesse the thing
be impaired in the vse, ought to be little or nothing: for if
there be inequalitie betwixt the hire and the vse, though
there be not vsurie in such a cōtract, yet there is vnjustice.
            4. From the contract of partnership: wherein one
man hauing perhaps no skill in merchandise, committeth
a stocke of mony to another, being a marchant or tradesman,
to the end that he may imploy the same in some lawfull
traffique, and couenanteth with him not onely to be

partner with him in a proportionable part of his gaine, if
it please God to make him a gainer, but also to partake
with him in the losse, which without his default hee shall
sustaine. For here, although there be expectation of gain,
yea and a requiring and taking of gaine for the most part,
yet there is not vsurie: for in partnership, the propertie of
the money is not transferred vnto him that receiueth it,
but remaineth in him which did deliuer it, and at his hazard
and perill it is imployed: and therefore in partnership
there is not so much as loane, and much lesse vsurie:
for as Molinaeus truly saith, In contraectu societatis cessat subiectum
vsur
                     •
                  , scil. mutuum: in partnership the subiect of vsurie
ce
                     •
                  seth, viz. loane. For in loane the propertie is transferred
to the borrower, and with the propertie the hazard: so
that if the principall miscarry, it miscarrieth to the borrower;
it is safe to the lender, by the very contract of mutuation
or lending, wherein the borrower secureth the
lender by such securitie as the lender thinketh sufficient,
whether it be his word, or his bill, or his bond, or his
pawne, or his suretie, for the repayment of the principall.
In the contract of partnership, he that deliuereth his money
to the other, doth not couenant absolutely for the restitution
of his principall, and much lesse for gaine, but
conditionally, according to the euent or successe of the
negotiation; couenanting as well to be partaker of the
losse as of the gaine. But the contract of mutuation or
free lending, bindeth the borrower by an absolute couenant
to restore the principall: and the contract of vsurie
bindeth the borrower by an absolute couenant, not only
to repay the principall, but also to yeeld the ouerplus couenanted
for. And this absolute couenant is not an abuse
besides the nature of this contract (as some haue imagined)
but as the absolute couenant of the restitution of the
principall is included in the contract of mutuation, so the
absolute couenant not only of repaying the principal, but
also of paying vsury, is included in the cōtract of actual, or

as they call it, formall vsurie: and is so of the nature of
this contract, that where this absolute couenant is not,
there is not actuall and formall vsurie. For if there be a
couenant onely in euentum lucri, to gaine if he gaine; or a
bare expectation of gaine for loane without any further
couenant, but for the restitution of the principall, then is
the former not formall vsurie, though it bee mentall and
actuall in part, and the latter is but mentall vsurie: & not
then neither, if as on the one side there is a couenant of
partaking gaine, if there be gaine; so on the other side
there be a couenant of partaking losse: or as there is expectation
of gaine, if the borrower gaine, so there be an
vnfained purpose of bearing part of the losse, which the
borrower without his default shall sustaine: for then the
former is the contract of partnership; and the latter in
respect of the outward act, is the contract of lending: but
in regard of the purpose of the heart, intending gaine
where there is gaine, and purposing to beare part of the
losse where there is losse, it is partnership. Where by the
way we are to note, that howsoeuer vsurers doe build
their practise vpon the judgement of some diuines, yet
no godly learned diuine doth allow the vsurie which is
vsually practised. And I am persuaded, that if they vnderstood
this absolute couenant or expectation of gaine,
without purpose of hazarding the principall or any part
thereof, to be of the very nature of an vsurious contract,
as indeed it is, they would neuer haue spoken or written
word in the defence of vsurie. For they would not haue a
man to make an absolute couenant for gaine, but in euentum
lucri, that is, that he may couenant, if the borrower
shall raise a lawfull gaine, to haue part thereof. And they
define that vsurie which they allow, to be partem lucri, part
of the borrowers gaine. So that by their judgement, if a
man borrow money, not to make a gaine of it, but otherwise
for his necessarie vses, of such an one no gaine is to
be required: or if the borrower, which takes vp money,

hoping to raise a gaine thereby, shall not gaine, of him
there is no gaine to be exacted. But if the borrower shall
not onely bee no gainer, but notwithstanding hee hath
vsed his skill and diligence in his trade, shall also prooue
a looser, the constant judgement of learned diuines in this
case is, That the lender, which for his loane either couenanteth
or looketh for gaine, must be content to beare
part of the losse: so that the difference which is in substance
of matter betwixt those diuines which seeme to
speake for vsurie, and vs that speake against it, is very
small. They allow that contract, in which there is a conditionall
couenant for gaine, if the borrower gaine, with
an vnfained purpose of partaking in his losse: We allow
that contract wherein there is a couenant, as of partaking
in the gaine when there shall be gaine, so of bearing part
of the losse, when there shall be losse, without his default
that receiued the money to employ it, that so there may
be equalitie. Which contract in substance differeth little
from the former: for if thou must haue an vnfained purpose
to beare part of the borrowers losse, and art bound
in conscience to put that purpose in execution, when he is
a looser; why shouldest thou not make thy couenant accordingly,
if thou hast to deale with an honest man?
And why mayest thou not as well make thy contract so,
if the purpose of thy heart be vpright, as to thinke, that
after thy contract is made, thou art bound in conscience
so to deale? Now if thou diddest couenant equally to
beare part of the losse, as well as to reape part of the
gaine, then were thy contract neither vsurie nor loane,
but partnership, which is a lawfull contract. Indeed, I doe
confesse, it is more fit many times that the borrower
should stand to the lenders courtesie, than the lender altogether
to the borrowers fidelitie: and therfore though
there be a couenant on the one side, in euentum lucri, to
partake in the gaine, if there shall be gaine; and on the
other side, but a purpose of bearing part in the losse, so

that purpose be vpright and vnfained, I would not altogether
condemne such a contract. It were therefore to
be wished, that men hauing learned to distinguish vsurie
from other lawfull contracts, would according to the
scriptures simply and absolutely condemne it, rather than
they should by seeming to allow and commend vnder the
name of vsurie some other lawfull contract (which indeed
are not vsurious) giue an occasion of so great offence
to couetous worldlings: who when they heare
some vsurie allowed by diuines, they doubt not (such is
our naturall selfeloue) that the vsurie which themselues
practise, is to be warranted, though their practise differ
neuer so much from the judgement of all learned and
godly diuines.
            5. It is distinguished from three other things, to which
the name of vsurie especially in the Latine tongue is assigned,
but are not this gainefull vsurie, wherof we speak:
the first of these is the aduenturers vsurie, which in Latin
is called nauticum, or m
                     •
                  ritimum 
                     •
                  oenus, and is a gaine or allowance
made for money, which is transported beyond
the seas, at the perill and hazard of the creditour, contrarie
to the contract either of gainefull vsurie or free loane,
and seemeth to draw neere to partnership, the manner
whereof is thus: I deliuer to a marchant who is to trauell
beyond seas, a summe of money for him to vse in negotiation,
as he thinketh best for his aduantage, conditioning
with him, that if his ship miscarie, I will loose not
onely my hope of gaine, but also the principall it selfe:
but if his ship shall come safe to land, by the ariuall wherof
hee is sure of good gaine, I looke for an allowance
proportionable to that hazard which I sustaine. And this
hazard, men were wont to vndertake, either for the
whole voyage, couenanting for a certaine gaine, if the
ship arriued safe at the same port from whence it first set
forth (which kind the Grecians call 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               ); or else
but for the one part of the voyage, as from one port to

another;Budaeus de Asse Glare
                     ••
                  us de Asse. cap. 12. Ho
                     •
                  oman de vsuris. as from London to Venice, which they called

                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               . But for as much as couetous men were apt to vse
this practise as a cloke to couer their vsurie, pretending
great aduenture or hazard when there was little or none,
& to exact an vnreasonable gaine far aboue the proportion
of their aduenture or hazard: Therefore Iustini
                     •
                  n
stinted this vsurie at 12 in the hundred: And the Canon
Law is thought wholly to condemne it. Decr. Greg. l. 5. ti
                     •
                  .
devsuris Q. Nauiganti. But as Hotoman hath shewed, the
text is either corrupted, the word (not) being omitted
(for Gregorie in that chapter setteth downe three cases,
wherof this is the first, which he exempteth from vsury:)
or else the law is verie vnreasonable, seeing where is hazard,
there may be gaine required as the due price thereof.
And therefore aduenturers vsurie may be allowed,
not onely in tr
                     •
                  iectiti
                     •
                   pecuni
                     •
                  , that is, in money sent ouer
the sea at the creditors perill; but also in other cases
wherein the creditor sustaineth the like hazard: Prouided
alwayes, that there bee an aduenture or hazard in
truth, and not in pretence onely: and also that the gaine
be proportionable to the hazard.
            The second is that which some call liberall vsurie, being
indeed a gratuitie or free gift, which the borrower
finding himselfe much benefited by the lenders curtesie,
doth of his owne accord in testimonie of his thankfulnes,
freely giue to the lender, who neither intended when he
lent, nor expected whiles he forbore, any gaine, and much
lesse couenanted for it: For in this case, although the lēder
receiue some allowance aboue the principall, yet he committeth
not vsurie: because neither the contract which
he made, was lending for gaine; neither is the ouerplus
which he receiueth, a gaine, either couenanted, or intended,
or required for loane; but a gratuitie or thankfull
curtesie, which may with good conscience be giuen and
receiued from an able and willing gi
                  •
               uer. For as the lenders
curtesie hath not made him vncapable of a good

turne from the borrower, which before hee had lent, he
might haue receiued: so doth it bind the borrower to
duties of thankfulnesse, which they call 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , especially
if he haue well gained by that which the creditor
could not well forbeare.
            The third, is that which is called vsur
                     •
                   compens
                     •
                  tor
                     ••
                  ,
recompencing vsurie, which we call interest: For although
interest among Lawyers be of a more large signification,
as belongeth not onely to loane, but also to some other
contracts: yet as it is referred to loane, it is in effect the
same with recompencing vsurie, which is nothing else
but a just recompence which the debtor, hauing through
his default bene the effectuall cause of the creditors hinderance,
doth owe vnto him by the law of nature. And
that hinderance may be twofold, damnum emergens, losse
arising, or lucrum cessans, gaine ce
                     •
                  sing: But this ceasing
gaine which must come into estimation, must not be vncertaine
and doubtfull, but certaine: or at lest very probable.
For if the creditor through the default, either incurre
losse, or be hindered of certaine gaine, it is verie
equall that thou shouldest make him such recompence
quanto creditoris interest, as he is damaged or hindered by the delay.
And it is very lawfull that the creditor should prouide
for his owne indemnitie in this behalfe: For it is against
equitie (as the Apostle saith in a like case) that to the creditor
should be 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               ,2. Cor. 8. 13. and to the debtor 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               ; but the hinderance
is to be recompenced, that there may bee 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               ,
that is, it is vnjust that the creditor should sustaine losse or
hinderance through the debtors default: or that the
debtor should bee enriched with the creditors losse or
hinderance: But equitie requireth that a full recompence
be made, that the creditor may receiue his owne without

                  •
               olle or hinderance; and the debtor hauing bin through
his delay the cause of the creditors hinderance, should
sustaine the penalty of his owne, either negligence or vnfaithfulnesse:
For interest in respect of the creditor, is a

just recōpence of his hinderance sustained by the debtors
fault; & in regard of the debtor, it is a penaltie: For which
cause it is called cōpensatori
                     •
                   vsur
                     •
                  , in respect of the creditors
losse, so also punitoria vsur
                     •
                  , in respect of the debtors defalt.
As for example, I lend thee one hundreth pounds, which
thou vndertakest to repay at the end of six moneths:
which time being expired, and thou either through negligence
or vnfaithfulnesse failing of thy promise, I incurre
a losse (perhaps by forfeiture of a bond, pawne, or
by taking vp money vpon vsurie to preuent that losse)
or else hauing necessarie occasion to imploy my mony to
my certaine or very likely gaine, am hindered of that
gaine: In this case I may lawfully prouide for mine indemnitie,
by exacting an equall recompence at thine
hands: and thou art bound in conscience to make good
this losse or hinderance which through thy default I sustaine.
But here certaine cautions are to bee remembred.
            First, that interest be esteemed not according to the
gaine or benefit which the borrower hath reaped by the
imployment of the money, but according to the hinderance
or losse which the creditor sustaineth through the
borrowers default.
            Secondly, that interest is not to be required, nisipost morā,
but only after delay & defalt cōmitted by the borrower:
for vntill then, the borrower (vnlesse he were such a one
as could compell the creditor to lend) is not the effectuall
cause of the creditors losse.
            Thirdly, that not alwayes after delay it is to be required,
but onely then, when the creditor hath indeed sustained
losse or hinderance by the borrowers delay.
            Fourthly, that he do not voluntarily incurre any losse,
meaning to lay the burthen thereof on the borrower, but
do his true endeuour to auoid it, either in whole or in
part.
            Fiftly, that when he suspecteth losse or hinderance by

the debtors delay, he descend not vnto extremities with
those who haue broken day, not through negligence or
vnfaithfulnesse, but through want and necessitie, which
they did not foresee: and let him remember, that where
is no fault, there ought to be no punishment.
            Sixtly, that the estimation of the interest be not referred
to the creditors owne arbitrement (for it is not fit that
euerie creditor should be his owne caruer) but committed
to the judgement of some other honest and discreet
men. [And for as much as it is supposed that the creditor
might (to preuent his losse) borrow according to the rate
permitted by law,I cos qui § cae
                  
                     •
                  eros Cod. lib. q. 
                     •
                  it. 32. c. 26. therefore Iustini
                     •
                  n stinted recompencing
vsurie, at six in the hundred.] Which conditions being
obserued, it is lawfull for the creditor to require an
ouerplus besides his principall: which ouerplus, notwithstanding
is not vsurie. For there is great difference
betwixt vsurie and interest. In vsurie, the lender intendeth
and seeketh gaine; by interest, he onely prouideth
for his indemnitie. Vsurie is intended, or perhaps couenanted
for in the very contract: interest is not intended
at the first, but happeneth after delay. Vsurie is a
gaine which from the time of the contract, vntill the time
of payment, accrueth to the lender: interest is a recompence
of the losse, which after the day appointed for
payment, the creditor sustaineth through the borrowers
default.
            When as therefore men pretend the honest name of
interest to their gainfull vsurie,Lib. de definit. appellat. it is pernicious Sophistrie,
sayth Melancthon.
            
            And thus you haue heard what vsurie is. Now we are
to proceed to a threefold destinction thereof. And first,
that vsurie is either inward and mentall, or outward and
actuall.Mentall vsury. The mentall is a lending for gaine without couenant,
that is, when the creditor onely intendeth and
looketh for gaine by lending and forbearing his money,
but doth not indent or couenant with the borrower for

gaine. And this may be called the vsurie of the heart:
for the Law of God being spirituall,Rom. 7. 14. doth not onely restraine
the hands, and outward man; but also the intent
and purpose of the heart: in so much that morall actions,
though in shew good, are to be judged euill, if they proceed
from an ill intent, and tend to an ill end: For he that
intendeth euill, hath the like euill will with him that worketh
euill: And he which by lending onely intendeth his
owne gaine, he lendeth for gaine. And therefore, if actuall
vsurie be euill, then the intent and purpose thereof is
also euill. For lending is a worke of charitie, and an act
of liberalitie, wherein if we haue true charitie, we respect
not our owne profit, but the benefit of the borrower.
Wherefore as Augustine saith,In Psal. 36. If thou lookest to receiue
more than thou gauest, thou art an vsurer. And hereunto
the most writers referre the speech of our Sauiour, Luk.
6. 35, 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , Lend, looking for nothing; that
is, for no gaine or profit thence: For as the Canonists
and Schoolemen say, Sola spes vsurarium facit, hope alone
maketh an vsurer: But that is thus to be vnderstood.
            1. When the expectation of gaine is the cause of our
lending; and when our owne profit is principally intended,
that is, when we so lend for our owne gaine, as that
were it not for the expectation of gaine, we would not
lend: For if our chiefe regard bee to helpe our neigbour,
and haue but a secondary respect to our owne profit, as if
that were not we would notwithstanding lend for charity
and humanitie sake; this secondarie respect maketh not
an vsurer, though it something detract from the puritie of
our loue, and the commendation of our loane.
            2. When there is expectation and purpose of gaine,
without any intent of partaking in the losse: For when
the lender so intendeth his owne gaine in the borrowers
gaine, as also he purposeth vnfainedly to beare part of
his losse, this intent is not vsurious. For although his
outward act bee a contract of loane; yet in respect of the

purpose and intent of his heart it is partnership: when as
therefore the lender principally intendeth his own gaine,
without purpose to beare part of the borrowers losse, that
intent or expectation of gaine maketh an vsurer. An
vsurer I say, before God, but not before man: an vsurer
in the inward court of conscience, but not in the outward
and ciuile court, which taketh no notice of mentuall vsurie:
neither can it be punished by the lawes of men, who
cannot search the heart.
            Outward and actuall vsurie is,Actuall vsurie. when the creditor doth
not onely intend certaine gaine by lending, but also couenanteth
for a certaine summe to be allowed him at a
certaine time, or times. This in the Scriptures is called
imposing of vsurie, Exod. 22. 25, Thou sh
                     •
                  lt not impose vsurie
vpon him: wherefore in actuall vsurie, a couenant is made
for certaine gaine; and in that couenant the verie forme
of actuall vsury consisteth: For which cause some do call
such a contract, Formall vsurie. And this couenant
vseth to be confirmed by obligation, either verball, as
bils and bonds; or reall, as pawnes, or morgage; or personall,
as suretiship; whereby the creditor is secured for
the receit, and the debtor bound for the payment, both of
the principall and also of the vsurie. But in this actuall
and outward vsurie, there is a couenant vsually made for
the payment, not onely of a certaine summe, but also at
certaine times. The summe is proportionated or rated
according to the quantitie of the principall, or stocke
which is lent, and according to the length of the time:
For by how much the principal is greater, & the time lō
               ger,
so much greater allowance is made. Now the principall,
be it more or lesse, is reduced to the rate of an hundred,
to the imitation of the Grecians and Latines: For
whereas the Mina among the Grecians contained an
hundred Drachmas, they brought the principall to the
rate of the Mina, and the vsurie was reckoned according
to the number of Drachmas. The Romans also reduced

the principall to the centenarie number. And because
the centesim
                     •
                   vsur
                     •
                   (an vsurie of the hundred part, that is, of one
in the hundred monthly) was the greatest which by law
was permitted among them, therefore it was esteemed as
As or assis vsurarum, that is, as the grosse or totall summe of
vsurie: and all lesser vsuries were tearmed by the parts of
the Assis. And for as much as the Assis containeth twelue
Vncias, and euery Vncia is the hundred part of the principall,
which was payed monthly for the centesimae vsurae;
hence it is, that the diuerse notes of vsurie among vs may
easily be reckoned, according to the Romane computation.
            For the centesimae vsurae, which were one in the hundred
monthly, are in a twelue month (which is a yeare) twelue
in the hundred.
            So Deunx is 11. dext
                     •
                  ns or decumo. 10. Dodrans. 9. Bes. 8.
Septunx.
               Molinaeus. 7. Semi
                     •
                  . 6. Quincunx. 5. Triens, that is, the third part of
the centesim
                     •
                  ,
               Semis ad trientem 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , Lat. sescupla sei
                     •
                   sesquialter. 4. Quadrans, which is the fourth part of the
centesima, 3. Sextans, which is the fixt part of the centesima,
2. Vncia, which is the twelfth part of the centesima, is one
in the hundred by the yeare. As touching the time, vsurers
among the Grecians and Romans,Hinc liber faenebris pecuniae Kalendarium dictum. were wont to couenant
for their vsurie to bee paid monthly. For which
cause,Faeneratori
                     •
                  . Haec ol
                     •
                  m consuetudo fuit, ut vltra statutum K
                     •
                  lend
                     •
                  
                  rum diem, in Idus concederens dilationem. l taq, solitum er
                     •
                  t, ut quae in Kalendis faenerauerant, idibusreciperen
                     •
                   & relegerent. Chabot. in Hora. epod. 2. 
               Basil calleth vsurers 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , monthly exactours;
and compareth them to those vncleane spirits,
which cause the monthly fits of the falling sicknesse.
And according to that summe which was monthly payed,
was the vsurie named: if the hundred part of the principall
was payed monthly for vsurie (which was after
twelue in the hundred by the yeare) it was called centesi
                  
                     •
                  ae
vsurae, and among the Grecians vsur
                     •
                   drachm
                     •
                  lis: if the
150 part (which was after eight in the hundred by the
yeare) it was called bes centesimae: if the 200 part (which
was after six in the hundred by the yeare) semis or dimidi
                     •
                  
centesimae: if the 300 part (which was after foure in the
hundred by the yeare) it was called triens or tertia pars centesimae.
               
Seeing therefore vsurie was payed monthly, and
had the name of that summe which was monthly payed,
it were too great an absurditie for any man to imagine (as
some haue done) that Semisses vsurae are fiftie in the hundred,Vid. Budaeum de Asse. fol. 24 & 25 that is, halfe of the principall; or trientes, to bee the
third part of the principall: for then Semisses vsurae should
be fiftie in the hundred monthly, and trientarium 
                     •
                  oenus
should be after 33 pound, 6 shillings, 8 pence, monthly
for an hundred, &c. Whereas Antonius Pius is commended
for exercising trientarium soenus, as the least which then
was in vse, that with his substance he might heape mony.
And accordingly Iustinian, when he stinteth vsurie, permitteth
gentlemen and noblemen to take tertiam partem
centesimae, that is, foure in the hundred: and to march
                  ••
               ts,
Vsque ad bessem (not sortis, but) centesimae, that is, 
                  •
               fter eight in
the hundred.
            Secondly,Open vsurie. Vsurie is either manifest, or couert. The manifest
vsurie is a plaine contract of lending for gaine: as
when a man lendeth 10 pounds, with this couenant expressed,
that at the yeares end he shail receiue 11 pounds.
And this vsurie commonly is contained within those
limits and bounds, wherewith the positiue laws of countries
doe stint and circumscribe it.
            The couert vsurie,Couert vsurie. is a couert lending for gain; which
is practised either when men being ashamed of vsurie,
seeke some honest pretext to hide their couetousnesse; or
not being contented with that moderat vsurie which is
permitted by humane lawes, find out other deuises, which
some call mysteries, whereby they may defeat the lawes
which stint vsurie, and may exact without danger of the
law, immoderat and excessiue gaine. But this mysticall
vsurie is not vnworthily of some called terrestris pyr
                     •
                  tic
                     •
                  ,
land-pyracie. Now it is called couert vsurie, because
whereas vsurie is a contract of lending for gaine, this in
apparance seemeth to be a contract either not of lending,
or not for gaine. When it seemeth not to be a contract of

lending, it is cloaked vnder some other contract, which is
to be resolued into loane: for vsurie masketh sometimes
vnder the vizard of selling, or buying, or letting, or partnership,
or exchange, or aduenturers vsurie: examples of
all which are to be produced:Vsurie in selling. and first of selling. For
when the seller exacteth an ouerplus, more than the just
value of the ware, onely for the time of forbearance
which himselfe graunteth to the buyer, hee committeth
vsurie.
            When I say an ouerplus aboue the just value, I cal that
a just value, when there is an equalitie betwixt the ware
and the price, according to the common estimation at the
time of the sale: but of that equalitie there is some latitude;
and we may not thinke that price to bee vnjust,
which is but a little vnder or ouer the precise Arithmeticall
equalitie. And therefore the seller who graunteth
time, so long as he keepeth himselfe within the latitude
or compasse of an ordinarie and equall price, he may not
be thought to commit vsurie. And it may so fall out, that
the buyer will not bee brought to giue the equall price,
vnlesse he may haue some time graunted for the payment:
In which case, though the buyer may perhaps
thinke that he payeth the dearer for the forbearance, yet
there is no vsurie, because the seller doth not sell the dearer
for time. And when I say (onely for the time of forbearance)
I insinuate, that there may be some other reasons,
why the seller graunting time, may sell the dearer:
as first, when he knoweth, that the value of the thing will
be more at the day of payment, than at the day of sale, he
may sell it for so much more, as in all likelyhood it will be
clearely more worth his charges & hazard (if there shall
be any) and the impairing or deminishing of the thing (if
it be subject therunto) for the mean time being deducted.
And secondly, if the thing which he selleth hath a fruitfull
vse, and yet notwithstanding, that vse shall bee in all
likelyhood of no lesse price at the day of payment, than

it was at the day of the sale, hee may take so much the
more, as the fruitfull vse of the thing is in the meane time
clearely worth, the estimation of the hazard and charge
being deducted. As for example, when a man selleth
land, and graunteth time for the payment, &c.
            I adde, for the time which himselfe graunteth to the
buyer, because if the buyer, detaining the price longer
than the appointed time, shall bee an effectuall cause of
losse or hinderance to the seller, he is to allow him interest,
and the seller may with good conscience exact it of
him; especially if not through want, but through negligence
and vnfaithfulnesse, he vseth delay.
            But when a man selleth his ware for more than the just
price, onely because he gi
                  •
               eth time to the buyer, he doth
indeed sell time, which is not his to sell, and vnder the
contract of selling he committeth vsurie: for when the
seller is content to graunt time to the buyer for the payment
of the price agreed vpon, it is all one, as if hee lent
that money for such a time: for the voluntary forbearing
of money due to him for his ware, is all one with loane:
and vpon such forbearing the buyer becommeth a debtour,
and the seller a creditour. As for example, thou sellest
me ware for 11 pounds, to be paid at the end of six
months, which thou wouldest haue sold for 10 pounds in
present money: This men may call what they will, but it
is vsurie, after the rate of twentie in the hundred. Likewise,
if a man selling a cow, or some other commoditie
worth fortie shillings, to a poore man, shall agree with
him, because he is not well able to pay so much together,
to take twelue pence a weeke for a yeare, vnder a colour
of accommodating the poore man, and condescending
in his sale to his meane abilitie, he requireth an vsurie of
thirtie in the hundred.
            But will you heare a mysterie? A gentleman in his
need commeth to an vsurer to borrow a hundred pounds,
the vsurer tels him he hath no money, but (sayth hee) to

accommodate you, I will helpe you with a commoditie
worth an hundred pounds: which commoditie you may
commit to such an one (meaning his broker) and he will
sell it for you. The gentleman taketh the commoditie, entereth
into a bond of two hundred pounds for the payment
of an hundred, and perhaps with vsurie for the said
commoditie: he intreateth the broker to sell it for him,
promising him a reward. The broker vndertaketh the
matter, and willeth the gentleman to repaire vnto him
the next day: in the meane time he selleth it to the same
vsurer for fourescore pounds, or an hundred markes. So
that vnder the colour of selling a commoditie, the vsurer
lendeth but fourscore or an hundred marks, for which he
will receiue a hūdred, or perhaps a hūdred & ten pounds.
Notwithstanding, the gentleman finding his present
need supplied, is wel eased for a time, like to a man which
in the fit of an ague hath drunke a cup of cold water: but
when the day of payment commeth, he is in greater distresse
than before; for now being not able to pay, he forfeiteth
a bond of two hundred pounds. But you may not
thinke, that the vsurer will straight way sue the bond: No,
rather than he will deale extreamely with him, hee will
giue him a new day, and it may be, feed his prodigalitie
with more money, to the intent that he may morgage his
land to him, for the payment both of the new debt, and
of the former summe, with vsurie: which payment the
vnthriftie gentleman being not able to make, the vsurer
hauing according to that curse, Psal. 109. 11, gotten his
lands into his net, he maketh a prey of him. And thus the
possessions of many gentlemen, become the prizes, as it
were, of our land-pyrats.
            Secondly,Vsurie in buying. vsurie is cloaked vnder the contract of buying,
when a man for the payment of money beforehand
to him that needeth present money, buyeth any commoditie
vnder that, which in all likelyhood will be the price
or true value thereof at the time of the deliuerie. I say

               to him that needeth present money. For otherwise, no man will
sell his commodities vnder foot, vnlesse he haue need of
readie money. And therefore this aggrauateth the fault
of such buyers, who take aduantage by their neighbours
necessitie, and seeke to gaine by their need. This is after a
sort as the Prophet Amos
               Amos 8. 6. speaketh, to buy the poore for
siluer, and the needie for a paire of shooes.
            I adde, vnder the true value, because if it bee doubtfull
whether the commoditie will beare a greater or lesse
price at the time of the deliuerie thereof, such a contract
is not to be blamed as vsurious. But when there is certaintie
that the price will be greater, then is vsurie committed
in such a contract: for the laying downe of mony before
hand to a man that standeth in need thereof, is in effect all
one, as if he lent him so much mony to be repaid in ware.
When as therefore he couenanteth to receiue ware of
greater value than his money commeth to, he lendeth for
gaine, and so committeth vsurie.
            As for example: a farmer wanting money to pay his
rent, entreateth an vsurer to lend him money vntill Midsummer;
and finding him backward, offereth him consideration:
nay (sayth he) I will not require vsurie of thee,
I will deale better with thee than so, we will take a course
to supply one anothers want: for as thou wantest money
now, so shall I want corne then; here is sixteene pounds,
for which thou shalt giue mee at Midsummer twentie
quarters of good wheat. This bargaine the farmer is
content to accept, rather than to forfeit his lease, albeit he
knoweth well ynough, that at Midsummer his corne is
like to be better worth than twentie pounds.
            Againe, a countreyman commeth to a farmer, that is
at great charge in the inning of his haruest, and vnderstanding
that he wanteth readie money to defray his expences,
vpon occasion of speech maketh him this offer,
to let him haue eight pounds in readie money, if the farmer
on New-yeares day will deliuer to him twenty quarters

of barley, which at that time are like to be worth 11
or 12 pounds: so that for the forbearing of eight pounds
foure moneths, he would gaine three or foure pounds.
            This kind of vsurie is often practised in buying of rents
or annuities: But forasmuch as some are too fauourable
towards such contracts, and others too austere against
them, it shall not be amisse briefly to determine what we
are to hold in this point. For where is on the buyers part
a purpose and an absolute couenant for the perpetuall
alienation of his money, and on the sellers part no couenant
for the redeeming of his rent, it is plaine that in such
a contract there is no loane, and therefore no vsurie:
Howbeit if equality be not obserued, there may vnjustice
and oppression be committed.
            When as therefore a man hauing an hundred pounds,
(on which he is loath to spēd being his stocke) buyeth an
annuitie or rent during his life, of twentie marks, or 14
or 15 pounds, as shall be thought most equall; such a contract
is lawfull and just, and is especially to be commended
to single men or women who haue no charge depending
on them.
            Or if a man bee willing to leaue a rent or annuitie to
others after him, he may buy for his hundred pounds
a proportionable rent, perhaps of fiue or six pounds for
euer, to the payment whereof the sellers lands may be
liable. But what if a man buy a rent for a certaine and
difinit time, as for ten or twentie yeares? I answer, if it be
a true contract or bargaine and sale, and a proportionable
rate obserued, that it is not vsurie, no more than by the
payment of a fine, to diminish the rent. Howbeit vsurie
many times is cloked vnder such contracts: As for example,
A man borroweth, or alreadie oweth an hundred
pounds, which because he is not able to pay at once, the
creditor for it doth, as it were, buy of him a rent of twenty
pounds a yeare for ten yeares, which is a greater vsurie
than of ten in the hundred: For the borrower paying

yearely ten pounds of the principall, doth notwithstanding
pay yearely ten pounds for vsurie, as though no part
of the principall had bene in the former yeares paid.
            And thus we are to judge of those contracts wherein
there is an absolut couenant for the alienation of the principall.
But the greatest controuersie is concerning those
bargaines wherein the seller of a rent reserueth libertie to
redeeme it, and the buyer couenanteth vpon the repayment
of the principall to sell it backe againe, or rather to
release it. I aunswere, if the buyer of the rent giueth as
much for it as it is worth in the common estimation of
men, the couenant of releasing it to the seller when he
shall redeeme it, maketh not the contract vsurious. For
that couenant maketh the buyers bargaine the worse, and
not the better. If therefore the seller require this couenant,
that by paying the principall he may redeeme the
rent, not because of the inequalitie of the rent, but onely
because he would not haue his lands liable to such a
rent charge; this couenant which maketh his case so much
the better, doth so much the more free the buyer from
vsurie. But when this couenant of redeeming the rent is
made, because of the inequalitie of the rent, it is alwayes a
cloke of vsurie: For neither the seller meaneth perpetually
to alienate the rent, the greatnesse whereof forceth
him so soone as he able to redeeme it, neither doth the
buyer otherwise than in taking a pawne or morgage intend
the perpetuall alienation of his principall. But you
will say, in this contract is not loane, because the buyer
hath no right to demaund his principall: Neither doth
he need, for the seller will be sure so soone as he is able to
repay it. And therefore such a bargaine is rather a contract
of oppignoration or morgage, than of buying or
selling. And euen as he which hath a pawne of better value
than his principall, needeth not as in respect of his
owne profit to be ouer-hastie with the borrower for the
payment of his principall, which indeed he hath no right

to require, hauing a pawne of more worth in lieu therof,
and yet is truly said to haue lent vpon a pawne: so he
which hath a round rent assured vnto him, the right
whereof is of more worth than his money, though hee
may not, nor need not demaund againe his principall,
may truly be sayd to haue lent as it were on a pawne or
morgage, and in lending to haue committed vsurie; because
euen as in the contract of Antichresis, he hath the
fruit and profit of the thing pawned vntill the principall
be payd, and yet looketh either to haue the principall
wholly payed, allowing nothing back for the rent which
he hath receiued in the meane time, or the same rent to be
continued for euer.
            Wherfore M. Luther writing on this Psalme, saith Nostro
autem seculo 
                     •
                  oelicissima est vsura, &c. In our age vsurie is most
happy, being by the authority of the Bishop of Rome, become
justice & a lawful cōtract, the name of vsurie being
remoued,Extrau. com. de emptione & 
                     •
                  endi
                     •
                  . cap. I. & Contractum emptionis & venditionis annui census cum condition: reuenditionis non esse vsurarium. and a new name inuented, wherby it is now called
contractus redemptionis, The contract of redeeming, or, buying
againe. For this is now called a fine figure, and by this justice
the whole world at this day is justified, especially
the Cleargie, and that monster reigneth securely, the
Gospell being by this meanes extinguished, and all the
righteousnesse thereof with the kingdome of God, Necsic
tamen Antichristum adesse vllus credit: and yet not thus neither
doth any man belecue that Antichrist is come: And for the same
cause the greatest patrons of these contracts do confesse,Molin
                     •
                  us.
that they haue succeeded in roome of the old vsurie, from
which they differ little in substance. For what difference
is it whether I assure a man ten pounds a yeare out of certaine
lands, vntill I repay vnto him an hundred pounds,
or enter into a bond of two hundred pounds for the payment
of an hundred and ten, this bond beeing renewed
yearely vntill the principall be payd? yet this difference
there is, that as in some respects the new vsurie is better
than the old; so in other respects, worse. Better, because

the creditor cannot force the debtor to the payment of
the principall at once: Worse, first, because the debtor is
fo
                  •
               ced to greater securitie. Secondly, because whereas
the old vsurie by, the ciuile law, was to cease and to determine
so soone as it had matched the principall; and whatsoeuer
was payd more, was to be abated from the debt,

                  〈◊〉
                
               
                  ••
               at he which payeth yearely ten pounds for an hundred,
should by the ciuile law, bee wholly 
                  〈◊〉
                charged o
                  •
               
the debt in the end of twentie yeares. But in the 
                  〈…〉
               
there is no regard had of equalling the princi
                  •
               
in so much that the increase may by manie degree
                  •
                ex
               
                  ••
               ed
the stocke it selfe.
            In this argument therefore we are to hold the mean
                  •
               ,
neither condemning all buying of rents (though it be
with condition of selling backe againe the same) nor yet
allowing all.
            We are not to condemne the buying of rents at an
equall rate and indifferent price, as lands and rents in the
common estimation of men are valued: As namely, after
the rate of twentie yeares purchase, which is the rate obserued
in this contract of redemption, by the imperiall
law of Germ
                  •
               nie. For the preception of this rent is not
vsurious: First, because this is not a contract of loane,
but of buying and selling: Secondly, because the rent
which he receiueth is the fruit of that which is his owne,
raised out of such lands as are at his perill: wheras in vsurie,
the creditor receiueth profit of that which now is not
his, the propertie being transferred vnto the borrower,
and with the propertie the hazard. Neither doth the
couenant of selling backe or releasing the rent to the seller
when he shall redeeme it, disproue the propertie or
dominion which the buyer hath therein, but onely circumscribe
and restraine it: As when I giue a man a commoditie,
with this condition, he shall not allienat it to any
other; I giue him the propertie and dominion of the
thing, though restrained.
            
               
Neither are we to allow those bargaines wherein a
greater rent is bought, than the money is worth: for such
contracts, if they be absolutely made for the perpetuall
alienation of the rent to the buyer, and of the money to
the seller, though they be not vsurious, yet are they vnequall
and vnjust. But if they bee conditionally made
with this couenent, that the seller by the payment of the
principall, may redeeme and so extinguish the rent, then
are they vsurious, because a perpetuall alienation either
of the rent by the seller, or of the principall by the buyer,
is not intended, but a great rent by way of morgage,
according to the contract of Antichresis, made ouer vnto
the buyer, both for his assurance in receiuing of his
principall in the end, and for his vsurie allowed for his
loane in the meane time. And forasmuch as such contracts
are vsually practised in the Church of Rome, and
not onely permitted but allowed and authorised as just
and lawfull by the Pope of Rome, this euidently proueth
that the Romish Church is deeper in this sinne of
vsurie, than the reformed Churches, whom notwithstanding
the Papists condemne for this sinne: For albeit the
sinne is practised among vs, as much perhaps as among
them, yet do not our lawes allow vsurie as good, but permit
it onely, as euill, and permit it with limitation and
restraint, as shall be shewed.
            But will you heare a mysterie practised in buying?
A man hauing vrgent occasion to vse present money,
commeth to an vsurer to borrow fortie pounds for three
moneths: the vsurer pretendeth that about that time
he shall haue occasion to lay out his mony for wheat, and
therefore couenanteth with him that at the end of three
moneths he shall for his fortie pounds deliuer vnto him
fiftie quarters of good wheat, or for want thereof fiue
and fortie pounds: which he saith not, either that he needeth
corne, or that the borrower hath corne to sell; but
that vnder this pretence of buying corne, he would exact

an vnreasonable gaine, viz. of fiue in the fortie lent for
three moneths, which is after fiftie in the hundred by the
yeare.
            Thirdly,Vsurie in letting. vsurie is practised vnder the colour of letting,
so oft as men would seeme to let things which are
not letable, when as indeed they lend for gaine things to
be spent in the vse, as money, victuals, and such other
things as consist in quantitie, that is, in number, weight,
and measure: For such things neither haue in themselues
a fruitfull vse which may be let, neither are they to be referred
in the same particular impaired by the vse, neither
doth the propertie or hazard thereof as in things let, appertaine
to the letter.
            But behold some other mysteries. A farmer wanting
money to store himselfe with cattell, commeth to an vsurer
to borrow twentie pounds, and being loth in his need
to receiue a repulse, offereth vsurie. It is not my maner,
saith he, to put out my mony to vsurie, but here is twentie
pounds for thee with which thou maist buy thee eight
kine: these eight kine I will let thee for so many ryals
yearely, prouided alwayes that thou shalt from time to
time make good this number of kine, allowing me the
hire for the full number, that is to say foure pounds vsury
for twentie pounds, which is after twenty in the hundred.
To another, comming to borrow the like summe, he deliuereth
20 pounds, pretending that the borrower shall buy
therewith an hundred sheepe: this hundred sheepe, saith
he, I will let thee yearly for so manie shillings, so as thou
wilt vndertake to make alwayes my stocke good: which
he saith not, that the borrower should bestow his mony in
sheepe, but that vnder pretence of letting, he might exact
fiue in twentie, which is after fiue and twentie in the
hundred: otherwise if indeed he did let cattell or sheepe
for an indifferent rate, and stood to the hazard of them,
the conaract were lawfull. But in those vnreasonable couenants,
the cattell which to the hirer are mortall and

subject to many casualties, are intended to bee immortall
and free from all hazard to the letter.
            And for as much as the contract of Facio vt des as the
Lawyers speake, whereby a man letteth out his labour
for reward, may fitly be reduced to the contract of Location,
therefore to this head such mysteries are to be referred
as are practised vnder pretence of that contract. As
for example, a poore man commeth to his neighbour to
borrow 20 shillings, he hauing some small skill in Scriueners
craft, pretending that he wil lend his mony freely,
so he may euer haue it againe vpon small warning, is content
to lend his mony for a moneth, promising when that
moneth is expired he will lend it him for another moneth
if he can forbeare it, and so from moneth to moneth; only
in regard of his paines he is to haue at the renewing of his
bond euerie moneth twelue pence, which (besides one
shilling allowed him for a couple of bils or bonds)
amounteth to twelue shillings in the yeare, which is after
threescore in the hundred.
            Fourthly,Vsury in partnership. vsurie is committed vnder the colour of
partnership, so oft as the creditor couenanteth to partake
in the gaine, not minding to beare part in the losse: For
the mony which is to be imployed he will haue acknowledged
to be his in respect of the gaine, but the borrowers
in respect of the losse.
            Fiftly,Vsurie in exchange. vsurie is practised vnder exchange. Now exchange
is either of ware for ware, or of money for mony.
The former is called barterie; wherein vsurie is committed,
when the first deliuerer of his commoditie requireth
more of the other than his commoditie is worth, in respect
of the time which he graunteth to the other for the
deliuerie of his ware.
            Exchange of money, is either for money presently deliuered,
or by bils of exchaunge assured. In the former
which is practised by money-exchaungers (whom the
Scriptures cail 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                and 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               ) there is no loane,Iohn. 2. 14. 15.
               
and therefore no vsurie, though they vse not to exchange
without gaine: For seeing it is their trade wherein they
spend their time, labour and cost, to accommodate men
in that behalfe, a competent gaine is to be allowed vnto
them.
            Exchange of money for money to be receiued vpon
bils, is either without gaine, as when English money is exchanged
for the just quantitie there, in other money, according
to the publicke and knowne valuation thereof:
or else it is for gaine; and that is either the bankers exchange,
or the merchants exchange. The bankers are
they which are more properly called 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                Trapezites,Mat. 25. 27.
whose dealing in exchange by bils is twofold: For somtimes
they giue bils, and sometimes they take: they giue
thus; A man being to trauell to Venice, deliuereth to a
banker an hundred pounds, which he desireth to receiue
at Venice: The banker, because hee is at charge with
keeping seruants there, as also for that he taketh vpon
him the safe deliuerie of the money, freeing the traueller
from the trouble and hazard of the cariage, thinketh
himself worthy perhaps of 4 or 5 pounds for assuring him
an hundred at Venice; and accordingly for his hundred
pounds receiued here, giueth him a bill, vpon the deliuerie
whereof at Venice, he shall be sure to receiue ninety
six pounds. In this contract there may be vnjustice, if
the banker require too much gaine, but there cannot be
vsurie on his part, whiles he lendeth not: nor on the trauellers
part, whiles his principall is not increased but diminished.
Againe sometimes they take bils: as thus, An
English man being arriued at Venice, and hauing occasion
to vse mony there, taketh of a banker an hundred
pounds, in Venice coine, giuing him a bill for the payment
perhaps of an hundred and foure pounds of English
money, in London: this ouerplus if it were required in
respect of the time of forbearing, it were vsurie; but being
required in this regard, because the banker vseth a

chargeable trade to free men from the trouble, charge,
and hazard of conueying their money to Venice, and is
content to receiue it at their home, taking the whole labour,
charge and hazard vpon himselfe, it is as lawfull as
the former. For this allowance is not made in respect of
the loane and time of forbearing, but in respect of the
place of payment, in which respect the banker taketh a
trouble, charge, and hazard vpon himselfe to free the traueller
therefrom.
            The merchants exchaunge of money by bils, is that
which is not made according to the publicke and known
valuation of coynes in diuerse countries, but according
to such prices thereof as merchants do set among themselues,
respecting the length of time betwixt the loane
and payment, and increasing the price of the money lent,
according as the time is longer. And first, there is consideration
had of the place whereunto the bill of exchange
is directed: for according to the distance, is the price
proportionated, and commonly where the money is lent,
it is of a higher price, than where it is payd. But suppose
the money be lent vpon a bill of exchange, to be exhibited
at Midleborough: In the next place consideration is
had of the time, and the partie which taketh vp the money
is demaunded whether he will haue it at sight, or at
vsaunce, or at double vsaunce, &c. At sight, that is, whether
he will giue his bill for the present payment of the
money at the sight and presentation of the bill to his
factor or friend that dealeth for him at Midelborough:
At vsaunce, that is, whether he will haue it for a moneth
longer, or at double vsaunce, that is, for two moneths.
When the partie hath signified for how long he would
haue the money, enquirie is made how the exchaunge
goes that day from London to Middleborough, which
euerie broker in the exchange can tell. To day perhaps
twentie shillings sterling at sight is valued at foure and
thirtie shillings and foure pence of the Zelanders coine,

and it may be to morrow at foure and thirtie shillings
and six pence, and so vp and downe as the price of corne
riseth and falleth in the market. And euen as there be
hucsters and ingrossers of corne, by whose meanes the
price of corne many times is much enhaunsed; so are
there some who maketh a trade of exchaunging, and
combining themselues together, do find meanes to engro
                  ••
               e
the money as it were into their hands, especially
against such times as they know there will be greatest vse
of money, that then they may put it forth at what prices
themselues list. Well, suppose the partie would haue the
money at sight, being to allow for euerie twentie pounds
sterling as the exchange goeth, perhaps foure and thirtie
and six pence of that coine, which is currant at Middleborough:
where in exchange the English money is not
so high rated, commonly by two pence or three pence in
the pound, as in the exchange at London: and so contrariwise
the Zelanders coyne higher rated in their exchange
commonly by two pence or three pence here in
the exchange at London; so that the lender commonly
gaineth either way so much in euerie pound for the
loane of his money a few dayes, (as those too well know
to their great losse, which take vp mony both by exchange
and rechange.) But if the partie will haue the money
at vsaunce, then euerie pound sterling is higher rated
by foure pence: if at double vsaunce, then the price is raised
eight pence: so that when twentie shillings sterling
in the Zelanders money is valued at foure and thirtie
shillings and foure pence at sight; at vsaunce it is foure
and thirtie shillings and eight pence; at double vsaunce
fiue and thirtie shillings, which is a gaine of fiue markes
(of their coyne) in the hundred pounds sterling for two
moneths: and of twentie pounds of their money in an
hundred pounds sterling by the yeare.
            In this exchange there are these faults: Money which
was ordained to be the price of all wares, and the measure

of all bargaines, is not onely made a ware, contrarie to
the nature thereof (nam quod medium est venditionis non potest
esse terminus;) but also the price thereof, which ought to be
certaine and certainely knowne, and by publicke and soueraigne
authoritie established and setled in euery commonwealth
(for that is the rule and measure, whereby all
things are prized, 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               ,Eth. 5. 5. as the Philosopher sayth)
the price I say thereof, whereby all things are prized, is
made vncertaine, for the gaine of some other men, to the
endammaging of the commonwealth.
            2. Those which make a trade of dealing by exchange,
doe either find meanes themselues to raise the
price of money, or else doe lie in the wind, till the prizes
being raised, they may lend it forth for greater gaine.
            3. In exchange at sight, vsurie is committed by them
which seeke gaine thereby, though somwhat mystically,
the lender being sure almost at all times to be a gainer by
his loane. Notwithstanding, I doe not absolutely condemne
those marchants, who dealing by exchange at
sight, do not thereby seeke gaine, but mutually serue one
anothers turne, following the prices as they go in the exchange,
being as well content as occasion serueth, to borrow
after this manner, as sometimes they are entreated to
lend, sometimes also, though very seldome, they prouing
no gainers by this loane. Howbeit, their dealing were
more commendable, if in their exchange they could and
would follow the common and known prices of coynes,
appointed by publicke and soueraigne authoritie: For it
may seeme strange, that priuat men should take vpon
them to alter the value of princes coynes.
            4. But as for vsance and double vsance, there is no
question to be made but vsurie, yea great vsurie is therein
plainely committed, at the rate of twelue in the hundred
at the least.
            Now the marchants exchange is either reall or counterfeit:
the reall is, when bils of exchange, whereupon

money hath beene deliuered, are in deed and in truth
transported to the place appointed beyond seas, to the
end, that thereby so much money may be receiued there
to the lenders behalfe, as by the manner of dealing in exchange
before specified, is due.
            The counterfeit exchange is, when in imitation of the
reall exchange, mony is deliuered vpon bils of exchange,
with mention also of the places of exchange, not to the
intent that the bils should be transported for the satisfying
of the creditour beyond seas, but that the lender keeping
the bils at home with him, may haue the like allowance
which marchants haue for the same time, dealing by
exchange and rechange, betwixt the places named: the
reason of which practise is, because the gaine which is
reaped by exchange, is greater than any other which is
tollerated by the magistrat: insomuch, that they which
put forth their money in this counterfeit exchange, are
supposed to gaine after sixteene or twentie in the hundred.
And therefore this kind of exchange may most
worthily be called Cambium siccum, that is, drie exchange;
because it is void of charitie,Sum. A
                     •
                  gel. voce vsura. § 54 being indeed a griping vsurie,
practised vnder the colour of merchandizing exchange:
howbeit the former also by the doctrine of the
schoolemen is to be called dry exchange.
            6. Lastly, vsurie is practised vnder pretence of the aduenturers
vsurie, when a man couenanteth for gaine in
lending, vnder pretence of hazard, when indeed the
principall is not hazarded: as when a man lendeth an
hundred pounds, with this condition, if himselfe and two
or three other, which he shall name, or any of them, shall
be aliue at the tweluemonths end, that the debrour shall
pay him a hundred and ten pounds, otherwise he shal pay
but fourescore and ten pounds. For if hee should name
but one, it were seuen to one, that he should be liuing at
the yeares end, but numbring three, it is more than twentie
to one, that some one of the three shall suruiue: this

therefore is but a cloake of vsurie.
            And thus we haue heard of vsurie, practised in such
contracts as hauing the names of other contracts, doe not
therefore seeme (though indeed they be) contracts of lending.
Now we are briefely to speak of vsurie cōmitted,
whē there seemeth to be no contract of lending for gain.
            As first, vsurie is sometimes practised vnder a colour
of free lending; as when a man lending an hundred
pounds in light or crackt angels, and other money not
currant, couenanteth with the borrower, that he shall repay
him in good and currant money. Such was the vsurie
practised of old by the Iewes in the time of Ezechiel, a
little before the captiuitie:The shekel of the Sanctuarie 320 gerahs. Exod. 30. 13. For as some write, they hauing
ordained a new shekel, exceeding the old two and
thirtie graines, so that whereas the ciuile or Mosaicall
shekel (which was but halfe of the holy shekel) weighed
an hundred and threescore graines,W. H. de asse▪ ex Munstero & D. Kimhi in Exod. 30. the new weighed an
hundred ninetie and two; they would lend after the old
shekel, but they would be payed according to the new.
            Secondly, vsurie is practised in lending vpon pawnes.
For although by taking a pawne which the debtour may
spare, the lender may lawfully prouide for his securitie &
indemnitie: yet when gaine is sought thereby, it is a
cloake of vsurie. As first, when he lendeth vpon a pawne
which is much better than his money, in hope to get the
pawne, it is a spice of vsurie. Againe, when the creditour
couenanteth to haue and enjoy the fruitfull vse of the
pawne in lieu of his loane, abating nothing of the principall;
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  .
this contract of the lawyers is called Antichrests,
wherein at the first sight appeareth some shew of equalitie
and justice, That as the debtour vseth the creditours
money, so the creditour should vse and enjoy the debtours
house and lands: But indeed this contract is vnjust
and vsurious: vsurious, because it is nothing else but lending
for gaine. For when the debtor yeeldeth to the creditour
the vse of his house and land for the vse of his money

it is all one, as if he allowed him the rent of the house
and land for vsurie. Vnjust also and vnequall; first, because
the house and land, which is let for ten pounds a
yeare, and pawned for an hundred pounds, is worth two
hundred or perhaps three hundred pounds: and therefore
it is vnequall, that for the vse of an hundred pounds,
which is spent in the vse, and is not lettable, the borrower
should yeeld the fruitfull vse of his house and ground,
which being worth two or three hundred pounds, may
be let for ten or twelue pounds a yeare. Besides, the creditour,
though he hath the profit of the house and land,
yet hath he not the propertie, neither doth he beare the
hazard thereof: and therefore reapeth the fruit of that
which is not his owne, and whereof he beareth not the
hazard. But to the borrower belongeth both the propertie
and the hazard of the money borrowed. Wherefore
the Scripture condemneth the vsing of things layd to
pawne, as lying in cloathes pawned, Amos 2. 8, I meane
such an vse, as whereby the thing pawned is diminished
or impaired. But among vs there are vsurers which commit
double vsurie, not onely couenanting for vsurie in
money, but also impairing the thing pawned (as plate or
garments) by the vse thereof.
            Thirdly, vnder lending vpon bonds. For although it
be lawfull for a man to take bonds for his indemnitie, and
thereby by way of interest to saue himselfe harmelesse;
yet if thereby he seeke for gaine, he committeth vsurie.
As for example, one comes to borrow of thee twentie
pounds for a tweluemonth: thou sayest, thou canst not
forbeare thy money so long, therfore thou wilt lend him
so much freely vpon his bond for a month, hoping, that
he which came to borrow for a twelue-month, will not be
in case to pay within a month. The month therefore being
expired, and payment not made, thou exactest more
of him, than by a contract of vsurie thou couldest haue
couenanted for. But whether in taking bonds thou playest

the vsurer, or not, thou mayest discerne by this note:
for it thou desirest in thine heart, that he may keep touch
with thee, and not incurre the forfeiture of his bond, it is
a signe, that thou prouidest onely for thine indemnitie:
but if thou wishest that he should rather breake his day,
than keepe touch with thee, it is a signe, that thou lendest
for gaine, and takest a bond, not that he should pay the
sooner, but the more. But if thy disposition be such, that
thou wouldest not lend to a landed man, if thou diddest
thinke that he would keepe touch, then doest thou lend
not to helpe thy neighbour, but to vndoe him: and whiles
thou layest a net for thy brother, thy selfe fallest into the
snare of the diuell.
            4. Lastly, vsurie is practised vnder the colour of interest,
so oft almost as men agree for interest aforehand.
For although some haue distinguished interest, that there
is a casuall interest,Molinaeus. Interesse casuale momentaneum. Promisiuum & successiuum. Interesse vsurarium. which they confesse is not to be regarded
but after delay: & a promiscuous or successiue interest,
which as they say may be couenanted for proratione
temporis, according to the proportion of the time, which
they call intervsurium; and confesse it to be called in the
law vsurious interest;Fr. Hotoman. yet those of soundest judgement
doe hold, that interest is not to be allowed, nisi post moram,
but after delay: for graunt intervsurium, or successiue interest
(as they call it) to be lawfull, then can you not but allow
of all vsurie. For first, interest is to be measured, not
ex parte debitoris, but ex parte creditoris. And therefore no respect
is had therein, whether the debtour do gaine thereby,
but onely whether the forbearing of the money be an
hinderance to the creditour, or not. And secondly, if it be
lawfull for a man to agree, according to the proportion
of the time, for so much gaine as the lawes permit; euery
lender may pretend, that by the forbearing of his money
he shall be so much at the least damnified, & therefore
may couenant for so much at the least by way of interest.
            Notwithstanding, I will not denie, but in some case a

man lawfully require and take interest, though the borrower
haue not made delay: as namely, when by the borrowers
authoritie, or otherwise, the creditor (who cannot
without his losse, or certaine hinderance of some just and
lawfull gaine, forbeare his money) is as it were forced to
lend to a man, whose estate or abilitie is such, that he may
better vndertake to saue the lender harmelesse, than the
lender may want his money: prouided alwayes, that it
be true interest, in respect either of certaine losse to be incurred
by want of the money, or of certaine hinderance
of just and lawfull gaine to be sustained. For in this case,
the borrower being the effectuall cause of the lenders
hinderance or losse, and being better able to beare that
imposition of interest, than the lender is to forbeare his
money, I doubt not, but the lender may by requiring interest,
prouide for his owne indemnitie.
            We haue heard two distinctions of vsurie: the third and
last remaineth, viz. That vsurie is either simple, or compound:
the simple, wheu vsurie of the principall onely is
exacted: compound, when vsurie not onely of the principall
is required, but of vsurie also, and is therefore called
vsurie of vsurie, 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , Aristoph. Nub. 5. As for example,
when a man hauing lent an hundred pounds for a
tweluemonth, after ten in the hundred, is content for a second
yeare to forbeare both the principall and vsurie:
there is due to him the first yeare by simple vsurie, a hundred
and ten pounds: but the second yeare by vsurie of
vsurie,Accessio accessionis iure ciuili non conceditur. a hundred and one and twentie pounds. And for
as much as vsurie of vsurie was euer condemned, it hath
beene an auncient practise of vsurers, to joyne the former
yeares vsurie vnto the principall, and so anew to couenant
for the vsurie of the whole summe. Which contract
of the Grecians is called 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , and of Tully, renouati
                     •
                  
fanoris, renewing of vsurie.
            We haue shewed what vsurie is, and how many wayes▪
it is committe
                  •
                
               
                  •
               ow we are to consider the qualitie of it,

               viz. whether it be lawfull, or not: for this, the couetousnesse
of these times hath made a controuersie, which in
former ages was neuer doubted of. But not to hold you
long in suspence, I will in this short assertion determine,
what we are to hold concerning this question: Which
assertion I will afterwards not only proue by testimonies
of Scriptures, and by other arguments, but also defend
and maintaine against the objections of those who hold
the contrarie opinion. My assertion therfore is this, That
all vsurie (which I haue defined to be mutuation, or lending
for gaine) whether it be mentall or actuall, whether
manifest or couert, whether simple or compound, is simply
and in it owne nature vtterly vnlawfull: howsoeuer
some vsurie is worse than other, according either to the
estate of the borrower, or the quantitie of the vsurie.
            I will begin with the law of God, which in three places
forbiddeth vsurie, viz. Exod. 22. 25. Leuit. 25. 35, 36. Deut.
23. 19: against which places the patrones of vsurie bring
many exceptions, which by the grace of God shall be refuted.
But I will chiefely insist on that place of Deuteronomie,Deut. 23. 19.
               Thou shalt not lend vpon vsurie to thy brother, the vsurie
of money, the vsurie of meat, the vsurie of any thing that may be lent
vpon vsurie. That is, thou shalt not lend for gaine to thy
brother, neither money, nor meat, nor any thing els which
consisteth in quantitie, as in number, weight, and measure,
and is spent in the vse, and wherein vsurie is vsually
committed.
            Against these allegations there are diuerse exceptions
taken; as first concerning the words wherby vsurie is signified
in the Scripture: For in that place of Deuteronomie,
and in this Psalme, not all vsurie (say they) is forbidden,
but Neshek, that is, morsurie, or biting vsurie, which biteth
and damnifieth the neighbour. For there is (say they)
a certaine toothlesse or not biting vsurie, which doth not
hurt but helpe the neighbour. But I haue shewed before
that Neshek is the common and ordinarie name whereby

all vsurie is signified in the Hebrew tongue. And therefore
this word doth not distinguish one kind of vsurie
from another, but in generall signifieth, that all vsurie is
biting. And in like sort, he which lendeth for gaine, is
called Masshik, and he which taketh vp vpon vsurie,
though for his gaine, is called Nashuk, the money which
is lent for gaine is called Noshek, that is, which biteth (as
appeareth euidently by this text) because when it is repaid,
it biteth and as it were gnaweth away some part of
the borrowers substance for an ouerplus or gaine to the
creditour, which is called Neshek, as it were the bit. So that
all vsurie in it owne nature is biting, because it biteth or
shreddeth away some of the borrowers substance. And
although perhaps the borrower by reason of his wealth
feeleth not this biting, or else licketh himselfe whole by
biting of others; yet vsurie is a gaine which is bitten and
shred away from the borower, and that either to his losse,
or (as hereafter shall be shewed) to the hinderance of the
commonwealth, whose common profit in all contracts is
especially to be regarded.
            Secondly, I haue shewed before, that Neshek is all one
with the other words Tarbith and Marbith, whereby any
gaine or cleare increase aboue the principall required for
loane, is signified: and therefore the least gaine required
for loane, is Neshek, and condemned for vsurie in the scripture:
as Leuit. 25. 36, Thou shalt not take of him vsurie or
increase: which the old Latine translation readeth thus,
Thou shalt not take vsurie of him, nor more than thou gauest. And
vers. 37, Thou shalt not lend him thy money vpon vsurie, nor thy
victuals for increase, that is, as Ambrose readeth, in amplius recipiendum,
to receiue more. Vpon which words he sayth, Has
sententia dei omne sortis excludit augmentum,
               Lib. de Tobia. cap. 15. 
               This sentence of God
excludeth all increase aboue the principall. Whereunto you may
adde, Pro. 28. 8. Ezech. 18. 8. 13. 17. and 22. 12: in all which
places these words are not onely vsed promiscuously to
signifie the selfesame thing, but the latter words Tarbith
               
and Marbith are euer added as the exposition of Neshek.
And therefore those words which the holy ghost confoundeth,
let not vs distinguish; and much lesse vpon this
friuolous distinction let vs build our practise, or hazard
the eternall saluation of our soules. For you know who
hath said,Eze. 18. 13. He that putteth forth to vsurie, or taketh increase,
shall he liue? he shall not liue, he shal die the death,
and his bloud shall be vpon him.
            But against this truth concerning one and the same
signification of Neshek and Tarbith, they raise againe diuerse
other exceptions, in which they shift from one to another,
because they haue no sure ground to stand vpon.
First they say we must distinguish betwixt Neshek and Tarbith:
for Neshek is restrained to money, and Tarbith to corne and victuals,
Leu. 25, and therefore they are deceiued, who thinke that Tarbith
of money is forbidden.
            
            As if they should haue said, Tarbith, that is, the increase
of corn and victuals, is indeed vnlawfull, but the vsurie or
Tarbith of mony is not vnlawfull, vnlesse it be Neshek. And
yet themselues allow as great increase for corne as for
money. But I answere first, that Neshek is the vsurie not of
money onely, but of corne and victuals, and euery thing
else which is put to vsurie; as appeareth plainely Deut. 23.
19, where also euery thing which is put to vsurie, is called
Noshek. For so he sayth, Thou shalt not take the Neshek of
money, the Neshek of victuals, or the Neshek of any thing
else Asher jisshak, which is put to vsurie. Secondly, that
there is the like reason for mony and other things, which
consisting in quantitie, are spent in the vse: and therefore
it had beene all one, if the Lord had said, Thou shalt not
lend thy money, be Marbith, for increase; nor thy victuals,
be Neshek, for vsurie. Thirdly, the Prophets vse these
words indifferently for the same thing, as Ezech. 18. & 22.
Prou. 28. 8, Yea, but (say they) the Prophets, who are the interpretours
of the law, must be expounded according to the law. Nay rather
if they be interpretours of the law, the law is to be interpreted

by them. But they vse to vnderstand the word
Tarbith as an exposition of Neshek signifying more plainely
that same thing which is meant by Neshek; and therefore
these words in the Law are so to be vnderstood.
            2. Their second exception is, that Tarbith doth signifie
not euericincrease, or accession, but multiplication; and therefore
by that name, Vsurie, vnlesse it be an expressiue or multiplied increase,
is not forbidden: But how doth this answer agree with
the former, wherein it was said that Tarbith of money
was not condemned, but of corne and victuals? or may
we thinke that an expresse and multiplied increase of
money is to be allowed? And therefore this is but a meere
shift, as well as the former: For not onely all antiquitie
haue vnderstood by this word, any gaine, ouerplus or increase
whatsoeuer aboue the principall, but the most learned
also of those new writers, who write but too fauourably
of vsurie, acknowledge that hereby all increase or
accession aboue the principall is condemned, as before
hath bene shewed. Yea, but Rabah from whence Tarbith is
deriued, signifieth to multiplie, as Deut. 17. 16, where the king is
charged not to multiplie horses: for he is not forbidden to haue many
horses; but to exceed in gathering a multitude of them. But say
I, in the next verse he is by the same word forbidden to
multiplie wiues, not that an excessiue multitude only, but
all pluralitie of wiues is forbidden.Leuit. 18. 18. And as Tarbith in
the Scriptures;Mal. 2. so 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                in Hebrew writers, is deriued
from the same roote, whereby notwithstanding the least
and easiest vsuries are signified. And as I deny not but
that Rabah signifieth to multiplie, so I affirme that sometimes
it signifieth to grow or increase, and sometimes including
a comparison, to be more or greater, as 1. Re. 4. 30.
Gen. 43. 34. and Hiphil to augment or to make greater or
more, as Psal. 71. 21. and in the same chapter of Leuit.
verse. 16. 1. Chron. 4. 10. Exod 30. 15.
            So that Tarbith and Marbith doth signifie any increase
whatsoeuer,Leuit. 25. 16. when more is required than was lent.

And if any shall further vrge the force of the word multiplying,
I answere, that in vsurie there is multiplying,
and such a multiplying, as mony being put forth from six
moneths to six moneths vnto vsurie of ten in the hundred,
and the vsurie also put forth to increase (whether
to the same man or to others, that maketh no difference,
in the nature of the thing) doth almost double the
principall in seuen yeares, and euerie seuen yeares doubleth
the former summe, so that 1000 pounds being thus
put forth for seuen times seuen yeares, which is no long
time, multiplieth it selfe to 128000 almost, and in seuen
yeares more to 256000, &c.
            3. Others haue found out this euasion,H. Z. That Tarbith
signifieth vsurie of vsurie. Which interpretation if we
shall follow, we must confesse that the Lord condemneth
no vsurie of corne and victuals,Leuit. 25. 36. vnlesse it be vsurie of
vsurie, which is absurd. This therfore is a certaine truth,
that Neshek, Tarbith, and Marbith, are words of the same
signification, whereby all gainefull vsurie whatsoeuer, is
condemned in the Scriptures.
            4. Others, who would faine prooue the lawfulnesse
of vsurie out of the Scriptures, haue found out (as they
thinke) another word of a middle and indifferent signification.
And therefore howsoeuer they confesse that
all Neshek, Tarbith and Marbith are forbidden, for they
signifie biting and excessiue vsurie: yet Masshah, whereby
moderate vsurie is signified, is not onely allowed and
commended, but sometimes also commaunded towards
the rich.
            Whereunto I answer, that Masshah properly signifieth
an exaction, and in those places which concerne lending
and borrowing, it signifieth in respect of the creditour
mutuum, in respect of the debtour debitum, but such a debt
as the creditor lendeth vpon securitie, and therfore meaneth
to exact againe from the debtor, as Deut. 15. 2. and
24. 10. Prou. 22. 26. And that in the Scriptures it is not

vsed in the signification of vsurie. For whereas they object
Nehem. 5. 7. 10, I aunswere, that the word there is not
Massbah, but Massa, proceeding from another root, and
signifying a burden, as Tremelius also, and Iunius translate
it. Or if it did signifie vsurie (as indeed by that burden is
meant vsurie) yet is it there condemned.
            Yea but Nasshah the verbe, whence Massbah is deriued,
signifieth to lend vpon vsurie.
            
               Nasshah signifieth properly to exact, and is vsed in the
signification of lending with purpose to exact that which
is lent, whether it be freely lent or for gaine; as when men
lend vpon bonds, sureties, or pawnes (in which sence the
words 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                and faenerare, are often vsed in auncient diuines.)
And when it is vsed in the signification of free
lending, it doth not signifie that charitable lending,
whereunto our Sauiour exhorteth, Lu. 6. 35, but that ciuile
lending vpon sufficient securitie, which although it be
lawfull towards the rich, and them that be of abilitie, yet
is it not allowable towards the poore, to whom we ought
to lend looking for nothing againe. Wherefore the Lord
faith Exod. 22, when thou lendest to the poore thou shalt
not be Kenosheh, like an exactor vnto him, neither in imposing
vsurie vpon him, verse 25. nor yet in taking a pawne
of him,Deut 24. 12. 
               verse 26. Ezek. 18. 7. 12. 16. But in the signification
of lending for gaine or vsurie, it is neuer allowed in the
Scriptures, or vsed in the better part. And if any man
can alledge any one pregnant testimonie of Scripture,
where Masshah signifying vsurie, or Nassbah signifying to
lend vpon vsurie, is either commended as good, or allowed
as lawfull (which I am sure no man is able to do)
I will yeeld in the whole controuersie. And yet this is
the chiefe ground of a tedious and disorderly discourse
written,The Treatise beginne
                     •
                  h thus, The question of vsurie, &
                     •
                  
                but not printed in English, in defence of vsurie:
wherein though there is great shew made of learning,
yet do I not find manie things worth the aunswering.
Those reasons which haue anie shew of reason shall by

the grace of God in due place receiue their answer. For
as touching this point, whereas the Author of that Treatise
alledgeth for the warranting of vsurie, and lending
vpon vsurie, as commended vnder the name of Masshah
and Nassbah, Deut. 24. 10. and 15. 2. 2. King. 4. 7. Prou. 22.
26, 27. Esay. 24. 2. Ier. 15. 10. any indifferent man that is of
judgement will easily acknowledge, that there is scarcely
any shew of reason in these allegations, as the bare repetition
of the places will sufficiently shew. Deut. 24. 10,
When thou lendest thy brother any loane (namely which
thou purposest to exact againe; for so much, as I said, is
implied in the word) and therfore the English Geneua
translation readeth, When thou shalt aske againe of thy
neighbour any thing lent, thou shall not go into his
house to take his pawne: Tremelius and Pagnin read thus,
Cum mutuaueri
                     •
                   proximo tuo vllius reimutuum, &c.
            
            The meaning of Deut. 15. 2. is this, euerie creditor shall
forbeare to exact his debt of his brother in the seuenth
yeare, which is the yeare of remission or freedome: in
2. King. 4. 7. Elisha biddeth the widdow hauing sold her
oyle, to pay her creditor: Prou. 22. 26, 27, Be not of them
which are sureties for debts; if thou hastnothing to pay,
why should he (namely thy creditor) take thy bed from
vnder thee? In all which places the word is not vsed in
the signification of vsurie. And the like may bee said of
the other two places, Esay. 24. 2. Cannosheh Caasher noshe 
                     •
                  o,
It shall be to the exactor, as to him of whom he exacteth:
and so Ierome readeth, Sicut qui repetit, sic qui debet, and the
Septuaginta, 
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , and Ier. 15. 10, I haue neither
lent to them, neither haue they lent to me: and so Tremelius
and Iunius read, Non dedi mutuum, neque mutuo dederunt
mihi: or if any shall imagine that the signification of vsurie
is in these two places expressed, (which indeed cannot
be proued, though some translations read so) yet is vsury
neither commended nor yet condemned therein. But I
shall haue occasion to speake of them both, when I shall

intreat of borrowing vpon vsurie.
            Now I proceed to a second exception, which they
make against the allegation of Exod. 22, out of the place
it selfe: For say they, there is the like reason of taking vsurie, and
of taking and keeping a pawne, vers. 25, 26, 27. but a pawne may
be taken of the rich, and being taken may be kept, therefore in like sort
vsurie may be taken of the rich.
            
            But I answer, that there is not the like reason of taking
vsurie and pawnes: the creditor in taking a pawne, onely
prouideth for his indemnitie, that he be no looser; but in
taking vsurie he requireth gaine: and yet to take a pawn
of a poore man, or such a pawne as thy neighbor, though
not so poore,Deut. 24. 6. 10, 11, 12, 13. cannot spare; it is a cruell and vncharitable
part,Exod. 22. 22. forbidden in the law of God. The sence therefore
of that place is thus much, That they should not afflict or
oppresse the poore; but contrariwise relieue thē by loane,
and in lending, that they should not onely abstaine from
seeking gaine by vsurie, but also that they should not
prouide for their indemnitie by taking pawnes. And
therefore by this place we are commanded, if our abilitie
may afford so much, to lend to our needie brother, without
hope not onely of gaine, but also of recouerie of the
principall, he being not able to repay. In this place therfore
there are two degrees: The first, that we oppresse
not the poore, but relieue them with free loane. Secondly,
that in loane wee should bee so farre from seeking
gaine by vsurie, that we should not take a pawne of
them for our indemnitie.
            Their third exception is against the allegation out of
Leuit. 25. 37, from whence they reason thus, The vsurie of
corne is as much forbidden as of money, but not all vsurie of corne is
forbidden, but onely that which is great and excessiue: and therefore
not all vsurie of money is forbidden, but that which is great and excessiue.
The assumption they proue first by the confession
of those who haue been the greatest scourgers of vsurie,
who confesse some vsurie of corne to be lawfull. For answer

whereof, we are to know that vsurie is not alwayes
commited in corne and such like commodities, whose
prices do rise and fall, so oft as more corne or other ware
is required than was lent, vnlesse more in worth and value
be required: For commonly foure bushels of wheat in
Iune, are worth fiue or six in October; and therefore if
a man should lend corne in Iune to receiue the equall
worth thereof by all likelihood in October, though in a
greater quantitie, it were no vsurie, because it is no lending
for gaine. Otherwise it is the receiued opinion of
the learned, that vsurie is committed in all those things
which are spent in the vse,Deut. 23. 19. as money, meat, corne, wine,
oyle,Nehem. 5. 11. when more in worth and value is required than
was lent.
            Secondly, they alledge the example of Ioseph, to proue
that vsurie of corne is not vnlawfull vnlesse it be excessiue:Gen. 47. 23, 24, 25.
               For Ioseph was verie good to the Egyptians, and yet notwithstanding
for seed-corne once giuen, be required a fift part for euer.
Which example if it were thus rightly alledged, it would
proue that for a quarter of corne lent in a deare yeare, it
would be not onely a lawfull, but a bountifull act to require
a quarter at the lest to be paid yearely for euer. But
indeed this example of Ioseph hath no affinity with vsurie:
For when the Egyptians money and cattell were spent,Gen. 47. 18, 19.
and now had nothing left them wherewith to buy food
for themselues, and seed for their ground; in this extremitie
they come to Ioseph in the seuenth which was the last
yeare of the famine, and offer to sell themselues and their
land to Pharao for food and seed: whereupon Ioseph being
not to deale for himselfe but for the king, accepteth their
offer, and buyeth both them and their land to the kings
vse, and in testimonie that the right propertie and dominion
of the land appertained to Pharao, he remooueth the
people of the land from one side of Egypt to another.
When as therefore the right and propertie of the lands
of all the Egyptians,Verse 20. excepting the priests, appertained

to Pharao, he graunted the same vnto the Egyptians, thus
remoued as it were in fee farme, reseruing the fift part of
the fruits for a rent to the kings vse. And therefore in
this example there is no vsurie, vnlesse it bee vsurie for a
man hauing bought lands of one man to let them out to
another at an easie rent.
            Their fourth exception is out of both those places,
Exod. 22. 25. Leuit. 25. 35. viz. That vsurie is forbidden towards the
poore, and therefore it is lawfull towards the rich: and some adde,
That not all vsurie towards the poore is condemned, but that onely
which biteth and oppresseth them: For there may some vsurie be
imposed vpon the poore, which shall not bite them, but rather heale
the bite which their pen
                     •
                  rie hath made.
            
            To omit the common practise of vsurers, who out of
their brothers want take aduantage of seeking the more
gaine; I answer, that this euasion is verie friuolous: for
Deut. 23. 19, there is no mention of the poore, but all vsurie
is forbidden towards a brother, whether he be rich or
poore; meaning by brother anie either Israelit or proselit,
or as Clemens Alexandrinus speaketh,
                  Strom. 2. 
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               . And
in this generall sence including both rich and poore, the
learned among the Iewes haue vnderstood this law, and
vnto this day it is obserued among them, as appeareth by
the booke of R. Abraham, lately set foorth in Latin, called
Vox Dei. And our Sauiour Christ Luke 6. 34, giuith this tetimonie
to the verie sinners of his time among the Iewes,
that they would lend one to another, that they might receiue

                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , so much as they lent. And therefore it is certaine
that not so much as the lest vsurie was lawfull towards
a brother, whether he were poore or rich. Indeed
if the Lord in the Scriptures had put such a difference betwixt
the poore and the rich, as hee did betwixt the
Israelit and the Canaanit, To the rich thou mayest lend
vpon vsurie, but to the poore thou shalt not lend vpon
vsurie; then vsurious contracts with the rich might with
good conscience be practised. But Deut. 23. 19, 20, he maketh

opposition not betwixt the poore and the rich, but
betwixt an Israelit and a Canaanit: and in other places
of Scripture, as Psal. 15. Prou. 28. Ezek. 18. and 22, all vsurie
and increase is absolutly and generall without condition
or limitation condemned. In these two places, viz. Exod.
22. and Leuit. 25. mention is made of the poore and needie,
because the commaundement of loane is especially
made for their good: and because vsurie imposed vpon
them is a more grieuous sin. But may we conclude from
hence (as indeed the author of the aforesaid english Treatise
concludeth) We may not take vsurie of a poore man,
therefore we may take it of the rich: Then by the same
reason we may conclude, wrong is not to be done to the
poore, the widdow, the fatherlesse, or stranger; therefore
wrong may be done to the rich, to the maried wife,
to the children that haue their parents liuing, to those
which be not strangers:Prou. 22. 22. or when Salomon saith, Rob not
the poore because he is poore; we might infer, therefore
thou maist rob the rich because he is rich. But the Lord
oftentimes when he speaketh against the sinnes of the
sixt and eighth commandements,Exod. 22. 22. 23, &c. maketh expresse mention
of the poore and helpelesse,Zach. 7. 10. because all wrong, violence,
robberie and oppession exercised towards them,
are most grieuous and indeed crying sinnes. And not
onely in that respect doth the Lord sometimes mention
the poore and needie in the prohibition of vsurie, but also
because those onely which haue need, haue just occasion
to borrow. And as the needie haue most occasion to
borrow, so are they most subject to the oppressions and
injuries of the welthie: For as we commonly say,
Where the hedge is lowest, there euerie one goeth
ouer.
            Howbeit the signification of a needie brother is not to
be restrained to them which are of base condition, but is
to be extended also to those who being of good callings
are come behind hand, or fallen into need, not hauing

meanes of their owne to supplie their want: For if men
haue meanes of their owne, they ought not to borrow;
For the holy ghost in the borrower presupposeth need,Deut. 15. 7, 8, 9
and to the same purpose Plato prouided by law, that no
man should fetch water at his neighbours well, vntill
himselfe hauing first digged, 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               ,
vnto the potters earth, vnder which there is no water, did
find his owne ground to be without water. And it is truly
said of Plutarch,
               Plutarch, 
                     〈…〉
                   non fae
                  
                     •
                  erand
                     •
                  . 
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , That the law prouideth
for their helpe who want meanes of their owne. And
therefore to those who haue no need to borrow, we need
not lend. But if we do lend we must lend freely: or if we
will looke to gaine by those which need not our helpe,
we must deale with them by some honest contract of negotiation.
For loane is such a contract as God hath appointed
to be free; and where it is not free, he hath condemned
it with fearefull termes vnder the name of vsury.
For as Chemnicius well faith,Loc. com. tom. 2. de pauper
                     •
                  a. cap. 2. In humane societies God
would not haue all things set to sale; but hee requireth
that some duties should be free, which are deformed and
depraued, if either they be sold as things venall, or let to
hire as mercenarie duties. And surely, sayth he, if the Scriptures
in the contract of loane should graunt vsurie to be exercised towards
the rich, the dutie of free lending would soone be abolished,
and those who haue need to borrow should not bee able
to borrow freely: for euerie man will thinke he giueth
to the needie so much as he might gaine of the rich (and
you may be sure that will not bee much) and therefore
God should then haue prouided worse for the poore,
when hee intended to haue prouided best for them: for
mens necessitie manie times is such that they must needs
borrow, and better vpon vsurie than not at all. And therefore,
that liberalitie and free lending should not faile, the Scripture oftentimes
doth simply and generally condemne vsurie.
            
            And whereas they say, that not all vsurie of money towards
the poore is forbidden, Exod. 22. 25, but that whereby

he is oppressed, nor all increase of corne and victuals
is condemned, Leu. 25. 36, vnlesse it be a multiplied and excessiue
increase: I answer first, that all vsurie imposed vpō
the poore and needie, is an oppression of them. Whereas
therefore they vrge, that Exod. 22, oppression is forbidden
first generally, and after particularly in the seuerall sorts
of it; and that some doe so read that place, You shall not oppresse
him with vsurie, &c. themselues do prooue that which
I said, that all vsurie imposed on the poore, is a kind of oppression.
And yet to say the truth, the words of the text,
Exo. 22. 25, are, You shall not impose vsurie vpon him: and
Leuit. 25. 36, Thou shalt not take vsurie of him. The same
doth Zanchius and others confesse, that there is no vsurie
imposed on the poore, but it is a biting and hurting of
him.Cal. in Ezek. 18. A p
                     •
                  upere semper foenus exigere nefas eri
                     •
                  . 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . And it is not likely, that the biting of penurie will
be healed with the biting of vsurie. No man (sayth Basil)
healeth one wound with another.
            2. Againe, I answere, that Exod. 22. the Lord doth not
onely forbid oppression of the poore, but also commaundeth
the relieuing of them by loane; and withall giueth
charge, that in lending to the poore and needie, they
should not onely abstaine from vsurie, but also from taking
of pawnes. And surely, if the taking of pawns from
the poore, be in their opinion an oppression of them, whē
as by pawnes the creditour onely prouideth for his indemnitie;
how much more is all imposing of vsurie vpon
them, an oppression of them, seeing thereby he doth not
onely prouide for his indemnitie, but also requireth more
than he lent, seeking gaine out of his brothers need? The
like is to be said of Leuit. 25. 35, 36, When thy brother with thee
shall fall into want, and his hand shall shake (that is, shall want
meanes of his owne to supply his want) thou shalt sustaine
him, (namely by loane, as it were by putting a staffe into
his hand to stay him vp) the stranger also, and the soiourner, that

                     〈◊〉
                   may liue with thee. Thou shalt take no 
                     〈◊〉
                   of him, nor vantage,
but thou shalt feare thy God, (where by the way wee gather,

that those who take vsurie of the needie, haue not the
feare of God before their eyes) that thy brother may liue with
thee. From whence also we may inferre, that he which imposeth
vsurie on the poore, taketh a course to eat them vp
that they may not liue with him.
            Yea but say they, the poore sometimes is relieued by vsurie. I
graunt he is relieued and eased for a time by the loane,
though not by the vsurie; for that, when the principall
is to be repaid, gnaweth and biteth some part of the poor
mans substance from him, and so increaseth his want, and
by little and little eateth him vp. Money lent vpon vsurie
to a poore man to supply his need, may not vnsitly be
compared to a piece of new cloth sowed vpon an old
garment: for that, although it couer the rent for a time,
and seemeth to haue mended the garment; yet after a
while, the new cloth fretteth the old, and bringeth away
part of it, and so maketh the rent much worse. This therfore
is but a cruell relieuing of the poore and needie. For
the like might be said of a victualler, who selling a penny
loafe for six pence to a man readie to die for hunger, doth
relieue him in his want, and preserueth him from death,
but yet his and the vsurers mercies are cruell,Pio. 12. 10. as Salomon
sayth of all the wicked.
            Thirdly, if the Lord straightly commaund free loane
towards them that be in need, then questionlesse all vsurie,
be it neuer so small, is forbidden towards the poore:
but the former is certaine, as we shall shew out of Deut. 15.
8. &c. Luk. 6. 35. And therefore the least vsurie that may
be, is forbidden towards the poore, and that vnder the
name of Neshek and Tarbith, that wee should no longer
dreame, that no vsurie is Neshek, vnlesse it be great, nor
Tarbith, vnlesse it be excessiue.
            Their fift and last objection is, that the law which forbiddeth
vsurie, is not morall, but judiciall, and therefore
not belonging to vs. They prooue it to be a law judiciall,
because Deu. 23. 20, vsurie is permitted towards a stranger.
            
               
I answere first, if it were a judiciall law, yet the equitie
thereof, which is perpetuall, would appertaine to vs, viz.
That vsurie is not to be imposed vpon a brother: But behold
we Christians are all brethren in Christ, this difference
of Iew and Gentile being taken away. Neither can
there any sufficient reason be giuen, why we should not
deale as charitably one with another, as the Iewes were
bound to deale among themselues, seeing we are not only
brethren in Christ, but also members of the same bodie,
whereof Christ is the head; especially seeing our Sauiour
hath propounded himselfe for a patterne, that we
should loue one another as he hath loued vs, and hath
made this mutuall loue the cognisance of true Christians.
Hereby (sayth he) all men know you to be my disciples, if
you loue one another. If therfore it were vnlawfull for the
Iews to require any vsurie, whether it were more or lesse
of a brother, whether he were rich or poore; much lesse
is it lawfull for Christians, whom it behoueth more than
the Iewes to be wained from couetousnesse and worldly
cares, and to whom some things are vnlawfull, which to
the Iewes because of the hardnesse of their hearts, were
permitted. But indeed the law forbidding vsurie, is morall,
as diuers of the most learned patrones of vsurie doe
confesse, whose names, because their memorie otherwise
is blessed, I will conceale. For it cannot be denied, but
that theft, oppression, and whatsoeuer is vnjust and vncharitable,
is forbidden in the morall law of God; but
vsurie is a kind of theft and oppression, it is vnjust and
vncharitable, as hereafter it shall be prooued, therefore it
is forbidden in the morall law of God.
            2. The law which commaundeth free lending, is not
judiciall but morall, and is therefore renewed by our Sauiour
Christ: therefore the law which forbiddeth vsurie
or lending for gaine, is morall. For the same law which
commaundeth the affirmatiue, condemneth the negatiue.
            
               
3. Vsurie is reckoned in the Scriptures among the
transgressions of the morall law: yea, somewheres it is
raunged among the abhominations, that is, the most grieuous
crimes forbidden in the law: as Eze. 18. and 22. 12,
where the Prophet, as Basil hath well obserued, 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               ,In Psal. 15. placeth among the greatest
euils, the taking of vsurie and increase.
            4. Biting vsurie and excessiue increase, is without
question forbidden in the morall law, as an high degree
of theft and oppression. But the vsurie which the patrones
of vsurie vnderstand to be forbidden in the law, is
biting vsurie, and excessiue increase. Therefore the vsurie
which the patrones of vsurie themselues vnderstand
to be forbidden in the law, is forbidden in the morall law
of God.
            5. Whereupon followeth another consequent, That
seeing the same vsurie which is forbidden in the law, is
permitted towards a stranger, therefore this permission
of vsurie is prooued to be judiciall, and the prohibition
morall.
            But for the better vnderstanding of this law we are to
consider who is meant by stranger in this place. The Hebrew
word vsed here is 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , wherby is meant not euery
stranger which is not an Israelite by birth. For on him
that was either 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , that is aduena, a proselite, dwelling among
them, who though he were a stranger by birth, was
a brother in religion: or 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , inquilinus, a stranger by
birth, but not by dwelling or affection, but such an one as
dwelled friendly among them, though not circumcised,
(as appeareth Exod. 12. 43, 45, 48.) vsurie was not to be
imposed, Leu. 25. 35, (Thou shalt relieue him, viz. the brother,
the stranger also and sojourner, that he may liue with
thee) but onely on him that was 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , extraneus, or histis (as
the word histi was wont to signifie) an aliant, as by birth, so
also in dwelling, in religion, in affection. See Obad. vers. 11.
and Lament. 5. 2.
            
               
Now in this sence the word may signifie either more
generally any one that was a meere aliant from the commonwealth
of Israel, or more specially such aliants as
were the remnants of the Canaanits. If we vnderstand
this permission of vsurie to be extended towards all aliants,
there might be two causes rendered, why the Lord
permitted the same: the one, the hardnesse of the Iewes
hearts: the other, the vnjustice of the Gentiles. For the
Lord as a wise law giuer, in his judiciall lawes permitteth
in a ciuile respect some things euill in themselues for the
auoiding of a greater mischiefe, not to allow or justifie
the same from the guilt of sinne, as before him in the court
of conscience; but to exempt the same from ciuile punishment
in the externall court before the magistrate: as
for example, the hardnesse of the Iews hearts being such,
that when they set their affections on other women, and
waxed wearie of their wiues, they would either put them
away to their shame and vtter vndoing, or else tyrannize
ouer them, if they continued with them; the Lord therfore
by a ciuile or judiciall law permitted men to put away
their wiues without the crime of adulterie, so as they
could giue them a bill of diuorcement, wherein they
should giue testimonie to their wiues chastitie. And yet
whosoeuer did put away his wife without the crime of
fornication, howsoeuer he were by this ciuile permission
free from punishment of the magistrat, notwithstanding,
he was guiltie of adulterie before God, as our Sauiour
Christ teacheth, Matth. 19. So the hardnesse of the Iewes
harts, and couetousnesse being such, that if they were not
permitted to practise vsurie towards strangers, they
would exercise it against their brethren; and likewise,
the injustice of the Gentiles with whom they did traffique,
being such, as they would be sure to exact vsurie
of the Iews: therefore, that neither the Gentiles by inequalitie
of negotiation should eat vp the Iewes, nor yet
the Iewes should oppresse one another by vsurie, it might

be, that in these ciuile respects the Lord permitted it towards
the Gentiles. And therefore as the permission,
which gaue leaue to the Iews to put away their innocent
wiues with a bill of diuorcement, doth not disprooue the
law forbidding adulterie to be morall, but prooueth it
selfe to be judiciall: so the permission of vsurie towards
strangers, doth not prooue the law forbidding vsurie to
be morall, but it selfe is euidently prooued to be judiciall.
And as he which without the crime of adulterie putteth
away his wife, is notwithstanding that ciuile permission
an adulterer before God: so hee which practiseth
vsurie, as permitted to him either by the law of Moses,
against any stranger, or by the ciuile lawes of men, is notwithstanding
a theefe before God.
            But in my judgement we shall more rightly expound
this place, if by stranger wee doe not vnderstand any
stranger, but that stranger, that is to say, the remnants of
the Canaanites, by whose impouerishing the L. would
haue the Iewes enriched. For first the words are not Lenokri,
as Dent. 14. 21, but Lanokri, that is, extraneo ifti, as Tremellius
and I
                     •
                  nius translate, adding this exposition, extraneo
ifti, to this stranger, that is, to the reliques or remnants of
the Canaanits, whom the Lord had appointed to destruction,
and would haue by little and little consumed. And
to the like purpose Ambro
                     •
                  e expoundeth this place: But
perhaps (sayth he) you will say,
               
                  
                     •
                  ib, de Tob. c. 15 
               it is written, thou shalt lend vpon
vsurie to a stranger, &c. Who then was the stranger? but the Amalekite,
but the Amorrhite, but the enemies of the people of God? there
(sayth he) exact vsuric, whom thou desirest to hurt worthily; against
whom thou goest to warre lawfully, on him thou mayest lawfully impose
vsurie: whom thou canst not easily ouercome by warre, on him
thou mayest easily wreakethy selfe by vsurie. Ab hoc 
                     〈◊〉
                   am exige,
quem no
                     •
                   sit crimen occidere. Take vsurie of him whom thou mayest
lawfully kill: therefore, vbiius belli, ibietiam ius vsurarum, against
whom there is right to wage warre, against them there is right to
practise vsurie.
            
            
               
And this exposition seemeth therefore the rather to
be embraced, because when these remnants of the Canaanites
were rooted out, all vsurie afterwards is generally
and absolutely forbidden, without exception of any
as Psal. 15. Prou. 28. 8. Eze. 18. and 22. Rabbi Salomo, as Lyranus
reporteth in Exod. 22. 25. denieth it to be lawfull for a
Iew to take vsurie of a stranger. And the Hebrew glosse
so vnderstandeth this text,Psal. 15. That hath not giuen his money
to vsurie,De arcanis cathol. verit. lib. II. cap. 4. 
               no not to a Gentile, sayth he. Which P. Galatinus
also doth note to haue bin the judgemēt of the Rabbines.Tom. 5. lib. 6. in Ezek. 18.
And this progresse Ierome well obserued. Vide profectum: See
the proceeding (sayth he) of the holy ghost, In the beginning
of the law vsurie is forbidden onely towards brethren: but in the
Prophet it is forbidden towards all, without limitation.
            But this permission, or if you will, allowance of vsurie
towards the Canaanite doth no more prooue the law against
vsurie not to be morall, than the allowance of
manslaughter in warre doth prooue the law forbidding
murther, to be judiciall. For although the law condemning
vsurie be neuer so perpetual or morall, yet notwithstanding
as all other commaundements of God, so is it to
be vnderstood with this limitation and restraint, namely,
vnlesse God otherwise appoint. It is a morall law which
forbiddeth other theft as well as vsurie; but if the Lord
by speciall warrant allow the Israelites to spoyle the
Egyptians at their departure out of Egypt, they may lawfully
doe it. It is a fearefull sinne forbidden in the sixt
commaundement of the morall law, if a father shall kill
his onely sonne: but if the Lord appoint Abraham to kill
his owne sonne, he is authorised to doe it. For if princes
may dispense with their owne lawes, much more is this
pr erogatiue royall to be graunted to the Lord, whose wil
is the rule of justice, hauing this priuiledge, that whatsoeuer
it willeth, is therefore just, because he willeth it.
            Whereas therefore some object, That if vsurie be permitted
towards a stranger, therefore simply it is lawfull: I answer,

if it be permitted, it is thereby rather prooued to be vnlawfull
in it selfe: For if it were lawfull in it self, it should
not need to bee permitted, as the putting away of a
mans innocent wife, being a thing simply and in it selfe
euill, was notwithstanding permitted to the Iewes.
            Yea, but now all difference of brother and stranger is taken away:
and therefore that which is lawfull towards one, is not vnlawfull towards
another. Assume, but vsurie is lawfull towards one, that I
denie. It was lawfull towards the stranger, because it
was allowed by a judiciall permission, or dispensation;
but is not now lawfull, because by the morall law it is generally
and perpetually forbidden. Yea, but now difference of
brother and stranger is taken away: It is true indeed among
those that beleeue in Christ, otherwise there are brothers
and strangers still. But what is hereof to bee inferred?
Surely, if all difference of brother and stranger be taken
away, then is not vsurie lawfull among those that professe
the name of Christ: for we are all brethren in Christ,
and therefore that which is not lawfull among brethren,
is not lawfull among vs. For I hope none will bee so absurd,
as to conclude, that all difference of brother and
stranger being taken away, we are all aliants and strangers
one to another, and therefore that vsurie among vs
may be lawfull, as it was lawfull for the Israelits towards
the Canaanits. But how was it permitted towards the
stranger? Surely as a grieuous punishment, whereby the
Lord would haue him impouerished and consumed. If
therefore the Lord permitted or allowed vsurie to bee
exercised onely against the Canaanits, whom he had appointed
to destruction, and whom he would haue by degrees
wasted and consumed, Deut. 7. 22. and also permitted
it to this end, that thereby they might be wasted and impouerished:
doest thou thinke that thou canst in charitie
impose the same vpon thy brother?
            And thus haue I manifestly prooued, that all vsurie or
lending for gain is condemned in the morall law of God:

howsoeuer the judiciall law allowed the practise of it towards
that aliant, that is to say, the Canaanite.
            To these places of the law, I will adde the example of
Nehemias that godly magistrat,Neh. 5. 11. in the fist chapter of that
booke: for when as the needier sort had made complaint
that whereas they being imployed about the building of
the wals of Ierusalem, and neglecting their owne particular,
were fallen into want, by reason of their great
charge of wife and children, and wanting means of their
owne, had beene forced to borrow of the wealthier sort
corne, wine, & oyle, for their sustenance, & mony for payment
of the kings tribute: so it was, that the wealthier
sort had not only taken their houses, lands, and vineyards
to pawne, but also exacted of them for vsurie the hundreth
part ouer and aboue the principall: Nehemias therfore
hearing this complaint, was greatly offended with
these rich men, who contrarie to the law of God required
vsurie of their brethren, and causeth them not onely to
remit this vsurie of the hundreth part, which he calleth a
burthen,Vers. 7. & 10. and would haue the people eased thereof; but
also to restore vnto thē their lands, their vineyards, their
oliue grounds, and their houses which they had taken to
pawne. Where the centesima vsura, that is, the vsurie of the
hundred part, which as it seemeth was permitted by the
laws of the Persians, as after it was by the laws of the Grecians
and Romans (among whō it being exacted monthly,
was an vsurie of 12 in the hundred) is plainly condemned.
But against this allegation I find three exceptions:
the first, that the vsurie which is here condemned, was exacted of
the poore; and they doe not denie, but that vsurie is vnlawfull toward
the poore: I answere, that although these borrowers were
in want, yet were they not such poore men as these patrones
of vsurie imagine: for they had houses, lands,
vineyards, and oliue grounds, and in regard thereof were
to pay tribute to the king: but now being cast behind
hand for the reasons aforesaid, were forced to borrow,

and being not able to borrow without a pawne, nor yet
without allowance of vsurie, had yeelded in their necessitie
not onely to pawne their houses and lands, but also to
graunt an vsurie of twelue in the hundred to their creditours.
And therefore this place prooueth, that men of
wealth ought to lend freely not onely to the poore and
base sort of people, but also to men of better place and
calling, being in need.
            The second exception is,C. Molin. that some vnderstand this
place not of the creditours taking vsurie for loane, but of
the gouernours exacting allowance of their needie brethren
for their maintenance. Which they prooue, because
vsurie was execrable among the Iewes: and therefore
the centesima or hundreth part here mentioned, was not
vsurie, but the hundreth part of their rents and goods
which they payd for the stipends of their gouernours.
            First to their reason I answere: that to so many of the
Iews as feared God, vsurie was execrable, as I partly obserued
before out of Leuit. 25. 36. but it is the want of the
feare of God, which Nehemias objecteth vnto the rich
men in this place, vers. 9. who neglecting or forgetting
the law of God in this behalfe, had learned the customes
of the Medes and Persians, in requiring vsurie
for loane.
            Secondly, as touching the objection it selfe, to the priuat
judgement of one or two I oppose the generall and
receiued opinion of all the learned besides, who either
expound or translate this place, vnderstanding the same
with one consent of vsurie. And that this is the true
meaning of the place, appeareth both by the complaint
of them which were oppressed, (who borrowing money
for the kings tribute,
                  See Ezr. 4. 13. & 7. 24. and corne and victuals for their sustenance,
were faine to pawne their houses and lands, yea
some had bound ouer their children to their creditours)
and also by the remedie prouided by Nehemiah, which
was, that the creditours should restore their pawnes, and

remit the hundreth part of the money, corne, wine, and
oyle: for these were the particulars which they had lent,
and for the loane whereof they required, vsur as centesimas,
that is, vsurie of the hundreth part.
            Thirdly, out of this place the aforesaid author of the
English Treatise laboureth to prooue the lawfulnesse of
vsurie by the example of Nehemiah himselfe and his followers,
who had lent vpon vsurie to these men; for so he
readeth vers. 10. for euen I my brethren and my seruants
did lend them vpon vsurie money and corne: the word
is Noshim, of the verbe Nashah, which as I haue said before,
signifieth either to exact, or to lend with purpose to require
or exact againe that which is lent; and so in this
place is interpreted two wayes, either in the sence of free
lending (as the most do read) wherein Nehemiah commendeth
his owne example to be followed; or in the sence of
exacting, as Tremellius and Iunius translate. As if Nehemias
had said, If your dealing with your brethren were to be
allowed, then much more might I and my brethren and
seruants exact of them that which is due vnto vs: But
that (as afterwards he sheweth) he had forborne all the
time of his gouernment:Vers. 14, 15. &c for the sence which that authour
giueth, is repugnant to the text it selfe. For why
should Nehemiah bee so angrie with the other wealthie
men, if himselfe and his followers, who were to giue
them example of charitable dealing, had practised the
same thing? or how could he reprooue them so sharpely,
if himselfe were guiltie of the same offence? or would
he alledge his owne practise of vsurie, to persuade them
to desist therefrom? or if hee condemne vsurie in himselfe
and his followers, as well as in the rest (as he doth, if
that interpretation were good) how is vsurie justified by
his example?
            Now I come to those places of Scripture wherein
vsurie is generally and absolutly condemned, and they
are foure. The first is the text which we haue in hand,

where,Psal. 15. vnto the Prophet demaunding who shall sojourne
in the Lords Tabernacle, and who shall rest in the
mountaine of his holinesse, He that giueth not his money to
vsurie, that is, that lendeth not for gaine. Out of which
place this syllogisme may bee gathered; whereunto let
euerie vsurer consider how he shall be able to answer before
the Lord. He that shall inherit the kingdome of
heauen doth not put forth his money to vsurie, but thou,
(say I, to the vsurer or him that lendeth for gaine) dost
put forth thy money to vsurie, thou therefore (vnlesse
thou repent) shalt not inherit the kingdome of heauen,
but shalt be cast out of the heauenly Ierusalem, and shalt
haue thy part in the lake, which burneth with fire and
brimstone, where is weeping and wailing and gnashing
of teeth:De Teb. c. 15. For as Ambrose inferreth vpon this place, If therefore
he be blessed (saith he) that hath not giuen his money to vsury:
then no doubt he is accursed who hath put forth his money to vsurie.
Yea but (saith the vsurer) the word here vsed is Neshek,
which signifieth biting, and therefore so long as I bite
no bodie, this conclusion includeth not me. Whereunto I
answer, that Neshek is the generall word whereby all vsurie
is signified, and therefore that all lending for gaine is
Neshek, as I haue manifestly proued before. Neither is it
called Neshek because the lender biteth, but because the
money lent vpon vsurie biteth or gnaweth away some
part of the borrowers substance, and so he which lendeth
causeth his money to bite, as the Hebrew words do plainly
signifie, Deut. 23, 19. And therefore consider well whether
this distinction of biting & not biting vsurie, grounded
vpon the notation of the word (which indeed distinguisheth
not one kind of vsurie from another, as though
one did bite and another did not bite, but rather impor
               
                  •
               eth
that all vsurie is biting) be so sure a distinction as thou
wilt aduenture thy saluation thereupon.
            The second testimonie is of the wise king Salomon,
               Prou. 28. 8.
               Pro. 28. 8. He that increaseth or multiplieth his riches by vsurie and

increase, gathereth them for him that will be mercifull to the poore:
that is, riches gotten by lending vpon vsurie and by taking
increase, shall be translated from the couetous vsurer,
who is commonly cruel and vnmerciful to the poore,
vnto the liberall and bountifull man who will be mercifull
to the poore: For the translation of riches threatned,
is an euident argument of vnjust possession. From hence
therefore all that are addicted to wealth are to be exhorted,
that as they desire the continuance of their riches
which are so deere vnto them, so they would not gather
the same by vsurie.
            Against this testimonie they make three exceptions:
The first, that not all vsurie or increase is here condemned, but biting
vsurie and multiplied increase. I answer, that all gaine or
cleere increase aboue the principall couenanted for, or
exacted for loane, is Neshek and Tarbith here condemned,
as I haue proued before.
            Secondly they object, that the prouerbe speaketh of him who
lending vpon vsurie to the poore, oppresseth them thereby, for so much
the prouerbe doth not obscurely signifie, that goods taken from the
poore by couctous vsurers, shall by iust and liberall men be restored
vnto them againe. This collection I denie not to be wittie,
but I denie it to be sound. For no more can necessarily
be gathered hence, but thus much as I sayd, that goods
vnjustly gotten by men couetous and vnmercifull, shall
be transferred from them, to the liberall and mercifull.
To which purpose the holy ghost often speaketh in other
places of Scripture, as Prou. 13. 22, The riches of the sinner
is laid vp for the just: Eccle. 2. 26; Vpon the sinner the Lord
sendeth trouble and molestation to gather and scrape together,
that he may giue to the man that is good before
him: Iob. 27. 16, 17, Though the wicked should heape vp
siluer as the dust, and prepare raiment as the clay, he may
prepare it, but the just shall put it on, and the innocent
shall diuide the siluer.
            The truth of which commination daily experience

doth proue, for seldome doe vsurers children thriue or
come to good. And that which commonly is sayd, De
male quasitis non gaudet tertius haeres, is verified by Salomon,
Eccles. 5. 12, 13.
            And for as much as vsurours doe not vse to trust the
poore but with small summes, out of which ariseth a small
increase; it is not therefore likely that great riches are
gathered by vsurie exacted onely of the poore: and therfore
the prouerbe seemeth to speake of vsurie required
not only of the poore, but also of the richer sort, to whom
the greater summes lent, do raise greater gaine.
            Thirdly, they object that the prouerbe speaketh of him whose
trade and profession is to seeke gaine by vsurie, and whose great
wealth hath no otherwise risen but by vsurie.
            
            To which I answer, If to lend vpon vsurie were a
thing lawfull, why should not the custome or trade of
lending vpon vsurie be lawfull, as well as the custome or
trade of seeking gaine by other lawfull contracts. But
now say the patrons of vsurie, it is vtterly vnlawfull to
make a trade of vsurie. Yea Caluin plainely affirmeth,
that whosoeuer maketh a profession of vsurie,
               In Ezek. 18. 
               he ought to be
excluded from the companie of men, and that he ought not to be suffered
in the Church of God, for an vsurer is euer a theefe. How then
can lending vpon vsurie, though but for once or twice, be
lawfull? for if it were lawfull for once or twice, why not
for three or foure times? and if so oft, why not for fiue or
six times? and if so, why not for ten or twentie, or for so
oft as you will?
            Now if you lay these three exceptions together, you
shall perceiue that this patron of vsurie would haue none
to be cōdemned by this place, but such as making a trade
of exacting great and excessiue vsurie of the poore, do
thereby alone gather great wealth: so that there can
scarcely be found any so wicked an vsurer, who may not
by these exceptions elude and shift off from himselfe this
so plaine a testimonie against all vsurie.
            
               
I proceed to the third testimonie, Eze. 18, which if there
were no more, might alone suffice for the condemnation
of all vsurie whatsoeuer: For there the holy Ghost, vers. 8,
and 17, describing a just man that shall surely liue, among
other markes he reciteth this twice, And hath not giuen forth
vpon vsurie, neither hath taken any increase: And againe desciphring
a wicked man who should not liue but die the
death; he setteth downe diuerse notes, any one whereof
should (without repentance) be sufficient for his condemnation:
for so he faith, vers. 10.Verse. 10. and 11,Verse. 11. If a just man be
get a sonne that is a theefe, or a sheder of bloud, if he do
anie one of these things: though hee doe not all these
things, but either hath eaten vpon the mountaines, or defiled
his neighbors wife,Verse. 12. or hath oppressed the poore and
needie, or hath spoiled by violence, or hath not restored
the pledge, or hath lift vp his eyes vnto the idols, or hath
committed abhomination, or hath giuen forth vpon vsurie,
or hath taken increase,Verse. 13. shall he liue? he shall not liue,
seeing he hath done all these abhominations, he shall die
the death, and his bloud shall be vpon him. Where we 
may note that not onely the act of couenanting for gaine
in the contract of loane, but the exacting also of an ouerplus
or cleare increase, though perhaps without any couenant
going before, is condemned. And that it is condemned 
not onely among other crimes forbidden in the
morall Law, but also is reckoned among those abhominations:
for the cōmitting of any wherof without repentance:
the Lord denounceth certain death; asking with indignation,
that any man should make a question whether
vsurie be a damnable sinne, or whether the vsurer dying
in that sinne without repentance should bee saued, That
hath (saith he) giuen forth vpon vsurie, or hath taken increase, shall
he liue? he shall not liue, he shall die the death, and his bloud shall be
vpon him. And lastly, that all vsurie or taking increase is 
generally forbidden, without limitation of circumstances.
Whereas therefore the holie Ghost setteth downe

this proposition, Whosoeuer putteth forth his money to vsurie, or
taketh increase, shall surely die, meaning thereby eternal death.
It is a wonder if the conscience of the vsurer do not from
thence assume and conclude thus, But thou lendest forth vpon
vsurie, thou takest increase, therefore if thou continuest in this
sinne, thou shalt surely die eternally, and thy bloud shall be vpon
thee.
            
            Against this allegation they object, first, that the generall
which is here forbidden, is oppression of the poore: of which generall,
this is one speciall kind, biting or multiplication: The former of
money, the latter of other things. If therefore vsurie be so tempered
that it oppresse not the poore, it is not forbidden: much losse, if it relieue
him.
            
            I aunswere, that to speake properly, nothing is here
commaunded or forbidden, but certaine notes are recited
both of the just man who is to be saued, from the fift
verse to the tenth: and also of a wicked man who should
not liue but die, from the tenth verse to the fourteenth:
And that among the notes of the just man, abstinence
from oppression, is not set downe as a generall including
other specials, but as a distinct note: or if it were set
downe as the genus of vsurie, what other thing could be
concluded thence, but that all vsurie is oppression. Now
in the catalogue of those markes whereby a wicked man
is deciphred,Verse 12, 13. betwixt oppression of the poore and vsury,
idolatrie is placed: which is a sufficient argument that
vsurie is not here set downe as a species of oppression of
the poore and needie before specified; howbeit this is
to be acknowledged, that vsurie so often as it is exercised
towards the poore, is an oppression of them. But if
you desire to know the true genus of vsurie, you may say it
is theft: For vsurie is the lenders theft, which if it be exercised
towards the poore and needie, is also oppression
and robberie.
            Secondly, they object that in this place of Ezekiell, the
retaining of the pledge is as well cōdemned, as the taking

of vsury: But the retaining of a pledge is somtimes lawful,
therfore also vsurie. I answer, that by the same reasō other
malefactors might defend their robberie & idolatry, and
such other abhominations, some whereof are here inter
               
                  •
               erted
betwixt the detaining of a pledge & taking vsury.
But hereby you may perceiue the strange dealing of these
men: for whereas among nine or ten notes one onely is
found which is not simply euill, namely the retaining of
a pledge; hence they will conclude that there is the same
reason of taking vsurie, and of keeping a pledge. Why do
they not rather gather seeing vsurie is reckoned among
eight or nine other notes, which be of things simply euill
and abhominable, that vsurie in like sort is simply euill
and abhominable? and that is Ambrose his collection, Vide,
saith he, quemodo foeneratorem cum idololatra copulauit, quasi crimen
equaret, See how he hath coupled the vsurer with the
idolater, as though hee would haue vsurie esteemed an
equall crime with idolatrie.
            There remaineth the last testimonie, Ezech. 22, against
which no such exceptions can be taken. For among other
abhominations, for which the Lord threatneth destruction
against Ierusalem, this is reckoned, verse 12, Thou hast
taken Neshek, Vetarbith, vsurie and increase: from whence we
may plainely gather, that seeing vsurie is called an abhomination,
and is reckoned among things not only simply
euill, but also 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , as Basill obserueth, the most
outragious transgressions of the morall law, that it also is
of the like nature; and that it is such a grieuous sinne as
that it pulleth downe the wrath of God, not onely vpon
the vsurer himselfe, but also against the country wherein
he liueth. And here we are to obserue that the taking of
vsurie and increase is so condemned for such an abhomination
as I haue said, as that no such exception can with
anie shew of reason be objected against this place as against
the former: For here is no mention either of the
poore, as though it were committed against them alone,

or of the detaining of a pledge as though vsurie were to
be matched therewith, for it is matched with murther,
idolatrie, incest, and other such abhominations, neither
that it is in this place so subjected to oppression as a species
thereof, but generally and simply it is condemned as
a grieuous abhomination, whereby the vsurer prouoketh
the vengeance of God not onely against himselfe, but also
against the societie wherein he doth liue.
            And thus we see all vsurie or lending for gaine, by diuerse
testimonies of Scripture to be plainely and manifestly
condemned.
            Of which doctrine the couetous worldlings are apt to
make this vse, If it be so that we may not by the word of God lend
vpon vsurie, then surely we will not lend at all. Answer, it is a
greater sinne not to lend at all to a man who is in great
need, than to lend vnto him vpon vsurie: Euen as it were
a greater offence altogether to denie food to him that is
almost famished, than to sell it vnto him at an vnreasonable
rate. And therefore manie commonweales do tollerate
such vsurie as is not immoderat, for the good both
of the borrower and also of the lender: Of the borrower,
because his necessitie manie times is such, that it is farre
better for him to borrow vpon vsurie, than not to borrow
at all: Of the lender, because to lend vpon moderat
vsurie to them that must needs borrow, is a lesse sinne
than not to lend at all. But as the afore cited places condemne
the negatiue, and forbid lending for gain, so there
are diuerse manifest testimonies of Scripture injoyning
the affirmatiue, and commaunding vs to lend freely.
And therefore as we are to abstaine from vsurie because
God forbiddeth it, so must we practise free loane because
God commaundeth it. These places because they are so
manie euidences against vsurie, I will the rather recite:
And first, that in Deut. 15, where the Lord hauing prouided
by law, that in the seuenth yeare no debt should be
demaunded; and foreseeing that hereby the couetous

would take occasion when the seuenth yeare should draw
neere, to refuse to lend to them that were in need; therefore
vers. 7. and 8. the Lord straitly chargeth them not only
at other times to lend freely to their needie brother,
but euen then also when the seuenth yeare was at hand.
His words are these, If any one of thy brethren with thee
be poore and needie within any of thy gates in thy
land which the Lord thy God giueth thee, thou shalt not
harden thine heart, nor shut thine hand from thy poore
brother, but thou shalt liberally open thine hand vnto
him, and thou shalt in lending lend, that is, freely lend him
sufficient for his need which he hath. Beware that there
be not a wicked thought in thine heart, to say, the seuenth
yeare, the yeare of freedome (wherein debts were not to
be required) is at hand; nor that thine eie be euill towards
thy needie brother, so that thou wilt not giue vnto him,
and so he crie vnto the Lord against thee, and it be sinne
vnto thee. Thou shalt freely giue vnto him, and let not thine
heart be euill when thou giuest vnto him; for because of
this the Lord thy God shall blesse thee in all thy workes,
and in all that thou puttest thine hand to. In which words
the Lord not onely commandeth them straightly, to lend
freely to their brethren being in need, not onely at other
times, but euen immediatly before the yeare of remission
wherein no debts were to be demaunded: but also vseth
two effectuall reasons to persuade them to the voluntary
and cheerefull performance of this dutie. The former,
because if they should refuse to lend to their brother in
his need, it should be a sinne vnto them, and good reason:
for we are not absolut Lords of that which we haue,
but onely the Lords stewards, who must one day giue an
account of our stewardship, and therefore we are bound
in conscience so to imploy those goods which hee hath
committed to our trust, as he appointeth. And therfore
seeing the Lord commaundeth those which be of ability,
as his stewards to lend to them that are in need, it is a

sinne vnto them if they shall refuse to lend freely vnto
them. The second reason to persuade men cheerfully to
lend to them which are in need, is the gracious promise
of God: For because of this, the Lord thy God shall
blesse thee in all thy workes, &c. Now if this promise
with some others in the word of God doe not preuaile
with vs in this behalfe, we shall bewray notable infidelitie.
If a poore man bring vnto thee a rich man to be his
suretie, thou wilt not feare to lend vnto him: but when the
Lord becommeth a poore mans suretie, nay promiseth
himselfe to be thy paymaister and to make thee full recompence,
thou wilt not take his word; no not his written
word, Prou. 19. 17, He that dealeth graciously with
the poore, whether it bee by free giuing or free lending,
lendeth vnto the Lord, and the Lord will recompence
him that which he hath giuen.
            But lest any should alledge, though falsly, that this is a
judiciall law, and therfore bindeth not them: I will therfore
produce two testimonies out of the Gospell of our
Sauiour Christ. The former, Mat. 5. 42, Giue to him that
asketh, and from him that would borrow of thee turne
not away. What then (will you say) is euerie one bound
to lend to euerie one that asketh? I answer, respect is to
be had of thine abilitie, and of his necessitie, and also (if
it be not a case of vrgent and present necessitie) of his
honestie: If his necessitie vrge him to borrow, and thine
estate enable thee to lend, thou art bound to lend vnto
him, especially if his honestie deserue to be respected.
The other testimonie is Luke. 6. 35. 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               ,
Lend, looking for nothing thence: which words
though they be diuersly read and expounded, yet in euerie
sence they commaund the dutie of free lending.
            The word 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                admitteth diuerse significations, as
first to bring into despaire; according to which sence thus
much is insinuated, that those which refuse to lend vnto
men in their need, cause them to despaire. But this sence

is not incident vnto this place, vnlesse we read as indeed
the Syriacke interpreter doth, insteed of 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                for 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               ,
lend causing no man to despaire. For they that go on
borrowing they go on sorrowing, and when others will
not lend when they must needs borrow, they are out of
heart and do as it were sinke vnder the burden of their
want. When as therfore thy brother commeth to borrow
of thee for the supply of his want,Mat. 5. 42. turne not thy face from
him,Deut. 15. neither harden thy hart towards him, nor shut thine
hand from him,Leuit. 25. 35. but when his hand doth shake, stay him
and hold him vp, suffer him not to sinke vnder his necessitie.
            Secondly, it signifieth to despaire, or to be out of hope.
In which sence our Sauiours words may thus be expounded,
Lend, nothing despairing of recompence: as if he
should haue said, let not distrust or despaire conceiued at
thy neighbours want, keepe thee from lending, as though
thou shouldest be a looser by thy loane, but lend him
freely for the supply of his want, though he be not likely
either to repay the principall, or to doe thee as good a
turne. For your reward, saith our Sauiour Christ, shall be
great,Prou. 19. 17. God himselfe will be your pay master: as elsewhere
he hath promised.
            Thirdly, it signifieth aliunde sperare, to hope from anie
thing: as if hee had said, looking for nothing thence,
that is, either from your courtesie of lending, or of the
thing that is lent: from or by reason of your courtesie of
lending, looke for nothing; that is, for no profit or benefit
of your owne. In lending, respect not your owne good
or profit, but the benefit of the borrower. Which generall
sence is very fit & apt, including in it these two particulers,
of either whereof some do vnderstand this place,
that is, either of the like good turne, or of vsurie. 1. Of
the like good turne, as if our Sauior had said, Lend where
you do not looke to borrow or to receiue the like benefit,
either because they are vnable or vnthankfull; not

that it is vnlawfull to lend where a man may looke to
borrow or to receiue the like courtesie: but our Sauiour
would not haue vs rest there, for sinners will lend to sinners
to receiue the like; but his meaning is, that we
should not onely lend to our friend and such as are both
willing and able to make vs recompence, but also to
others who are either vnwilling or vnable to shew the
like courtesie to vs. And thus Zanchius expoundeth this
place, conferring it with the like in the fourteenth
Chapter of the same Gospell,Luk. 14. 12. When thou makest a dinner
or supper call not thy friends, nor thy brethren and
kinsmen, nor thy rich neighbours, lest they also bid thee
againe, and a recompence bee made thee: but when
thou makest a feast call the poore, the maimed, the lame,
and the blind, and thou shalt bee blessed, because they
cannot recompence thee: for thou shalt be recompenced
at the resurrection of the just. Not that it is simply
vnlawfull for a man to inuite his friends and rich neighbours,
but that of the two sorts, the poore are the rather
to be inuited; for the other is but an act of common ciuilitie
                  •
               ,
but this is a worke of Christian charitie, which
shall not want his reward.
            Secondly, it is expounded of vsurie, which is the most
vsuall interpretation of this place, as if our Sauiour had
said, Lend, looking for no gaine from thence, as Henry Stephen
also in his marginall notes translateth, Nihil inde lucri 
                     〈◊〉
                   antes,
hoping for no gaine thence. Yea Zanchius sometimes
so readeth, but with this addition, scil. Ob officium mutuation is, hoping for nothing thence that is for the dutie of
lending. And in this sence all authors almost that haue in
former times written against vsury, vnderstand this place:
For according to this (which as I said is the most common)
interpretation, all vsurie, whether it be actuall or
mentall, is by these words most plainely condemned: and
whereas some of latter times (as you shall heare) vnderstand
this nothing of the principall, others affirme, that you

might as well put out the word lend, and say giue, because
the contract of lending presupposeth both in the lender
an intent of alienating the principall but for a time,
and in the borrower a couenant, to restore after a time
the principall.
            Lastly, it is expounded as I said, of the principall or
the thing lent: and then the sence must be this, Lend, looking
for nothing thereof againe. As if he should haue
said;
Lend not only to such as from whom you may hope
by reason of their abilitie or such securitie as they shall
giue you, to receiue your owne againe; but also to such,
as by reason of their want you cannot hope to receiue
the principall againe. And this by the context it selfe
doth seeme to haue beene the meaning of our Sauiour
Chirst in this place: for (sayth he) in the former verses, If
you loue them that loue you, and doe good to them that
doe good to you, and lend to them of whom you hope
to receiue, viz. that which you haue lent, what thank shall
you haue? for euen sinners and such as are meere natural
men, void of the grace of God, doe loue them of whom
they are loued, and doe good to those that doe good to
them, and lend to such as themselues, that they may receiue
as much againe: but you (sayth our Sauiour) loue
not onely your friends, as sinners doe, but also your enemies,
and doe good to those of whom you looke for no
good, and lend not onely to them of whom you hope to
receiue your owne againe (for so much sinners are readie
to doe one to another) but also to those of whom you can
haue no hope to receiue your owne againe. So that

                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , vers. 35. is all one with 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , vers. 34. And
therefore our Sauiour Christ requireth an higher degree
of loue, than abstinence from vsurie: for he would haue
vs to lend not onely without hope of gaine, but also if
need require, without hope of recouering the principall.
And (which is duly to be obserued) he giueth this testimonie
to the very sinners of his time, That they would

lend to sinners, that they might receiue 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               
               ▪ so much againe.
For as I haue shewed before, when wee lend by
mutuation, we doe not looke to receiue the same particular
againe, as in commodation; but 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , so much as is
equiualent thereunto. Whereof we may necessarily inferre,
that those which will not lend to receiue so much
againe, but more, are worse than the very sinners among
the Iewes. And therefore that which our Sauiour vttered
concerning the Pharisies, may well be said of those sinners
in respect of vs: vnlesse our righteousnesse exceed
the righteousnesse of these sinners of whom our Sauiour
speaketh,Mat. 5, 20. we shall neuer enter into the kingdome of heauen:
but if our righteousnesse be exceeded by them, how
shall wee escape the condemnation that is to come?
Against this testimonie alledged out of Luk. 6, I find three
exceptions made by one and the same authour. They say
this place maketh nothing against vsurie, first because Christ speaketh
not of negotiation and gainefull contracts, such as vsurie is, but
of the relieuing of the po
                     •
                  e, as appeareth vers. 30.
            
               Answ. If our Sauiour doe not in expresse words forbid
vsurie, as he doth, if the words are so to be read, Lend
looking for no gaine; yet he doth by consequent forbid it:
First, in that he commaundeth free lending: Secondly, in
that he giueth testimonie to the very sinners, That they
would lend to receiue their owne againe. And therefore
sayth, it is not a thing thanks-worthie before God, if men
will no otherwise lend, but to receiue as much againe.
Thirdly, in that he would haue vs lend without expectation
of the principall it selfe, or any part thereof: and
therefore if our neighbour is to be holpen (as Beza sayth)
without regard of recouering the stocke, much more are
all vsurious contracts forbidden.
            Neither doth our Sauiour Christ speake onely of relieuing
the poore, but also of ciuile lending, wherein a
man looketh to receiue his owne againe: for we may not
so vnderstand our Sauior Christ, as though he did forbid

men to loue their louers, or to do good to those that haue
deserued well at their hands, or to lend to such of their
friends and acquaintance, as will restore what they haue
borrowed; for they that will not do thus much, are worse
than the very sinners of whom our Sauiour speaketh:
but he requireth a higher degree of Christian loue in
those that be his followers, viz. to loue not only those that
loue vs, but also them that hate vs; to doe good not only
to those that do
                  •
                good to vs, but also to them that deserue
ill at our hands; to lend not only to those who will repay,
but also to such, as of whom we cannot hope to receiue
that which we lent: so that our Sauiour Christ requireth
both, as in a copulatiue sentence (the notes whereof be, not
onely, but also) but commendeth the latter especially vnto
vs. For whereas lending proceedeth from one of these
three fountaines, as Zanchius also hath obserued, namely,
either from couetousnesse, when men by lending seeke
their owne gaine, as vsurers doe vse to lend; or from naturall
courtesie and ciuilitie, when men lending freely to
gratifie their friends, intend to require their owne againe,
as ciuile honest men (whom notwithstanding our Sauiour
Christ calleth sinners) were wont to lend; or from Christian
charitie for the Lords sake, as true Christians are
willing to lend: our Sauiour Christ is so far from allowing
the first, that he would not haue Christians to rest in
the second. And whereas men doe chuse rather to lend
after the ciuile manner, vpon securitie to receiue the principall,
rather than after the Christian manner for charitie
sake, not taking so much care for our principall, as to help
our Christian brother, because the former seemeth to
stand rather with their profit, our Sauiour Christ therefore
euen in this respect also preferreth the latter. For if
men will lend onely vpon securitie to receiue their principall,Mat. 5. 46.
what thankes haue they, sayth our Sauiour, or as
Matthew reporteth, what reward haue they? for sinners
will so lend, to receiue recompence from men by the repayment

of the principall. But they that are readie to
lend for the Lords sake in Christian charitie towards
their neighbour to supply his want, though they haue no
hope to receiue their principall at the borrowers hand,
their reward shall be great, and in stead of recompence at
the borrowers hand, they shall receiue plentifull recompence
from the Lord. Secondly they object, That what our
Sauiour Christ commaundeth, he commaundeth to be performed towards
an enemie, but I am not bound to lend to mine enemie, vnlesse
he be oppressed with want: therefore this commaundement enioyneth
this dutie of free lending onely towards such as be oppressed with
want.
            
            I graunt, that we are not bound to lend to any but to
such as be in want. But if I be bound to lend freely to
mine enemie, being oppressed with want, or to an vngodly
man in his extreame need, for that also may be gathered
out of this place; how much more am I bound to lend
freely to one, that being not an enemie, is also of the houshold
of faith? But the former they themselues confesse,
and reason prooueth it. For if I ought to help and relieue
the oxe or asse of mine enemie failing vnder his burden,Exod. 23. 4. 5.
how much more am I bound to helpe and succour himselfe,
failing and fainting vnder the burden of his want?
See Rom. 12. 20. & Prou. 25. 21. Thirdly they alledge, That
our Sauiour Christ doth not forbid expectation of gaine, but of the
principall it selfe: for vers. 34. he teacheth that one sinner wil lend
to another, that he may receiue so much as he lent. And therefore that
they which will approoue their pietie, must lend, though they bee not
like to receiue any thing againe.
            
            I answere, if men ought to lend without prouiding
for their indemnitie in receiuing the principall, if so their
brothers need require; much more ought they to lend
without requiring an ouerplus ouer and aboue the principall.
And againe, if sinners be content to lend without
gaine, so they may haue their owne againe; what shall we
thinke of those who will not lend to receiue so much as

they lent, vnlesse they may receiue more? And lastly, if
our Sauiour Christ allowed of vsurie, he would acknowledge,
that the lender should doe an act worthy of great
thanks, if he would lend freely, though vpon couenant
to receiue his owne againe: for he that should lend an
hundred pounds; should besides the supplying of his
neighbours want, do him as great a pleasure, as if he gaue
him ten pounds out of his purse: but when as he sayth, if
you lend to them of whom you hope to receiue that
which you lent, 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               ; what thank shal you haue?
he euidently sheweth himselfe to be so farre from allowing
vsurie, that he would not haue men to rest in ciuile
lending. But the Lord acknowledgeth no further benefit
done by lending, than the supply of the borrowers want,
and signifieth, that he which lendeth in assured hope to
receiue his owne, hath full recompence made him by the
borrower, when he restoreth the principall in the full value
thereof; whereas they which lend without hope of receiuing
the principall at the borrowers hands, shall receiue
a great reward at the hands of God.
            And thus haue we heard out of the written word of
God, what is his both reuealed will and also judgement
concerning vsurie. His will, both in that hee straightly
commaundeth free loane, and also seuerely forbiddeth
lending for gaine. His judgement, not onely in that he
censureth vsurie as a fearefull sinne, and calleth it an abhomination,
but also in that accordingly hee threateneth
his fearefull judgements, both temporall against
the vsurer himselfe, and that which is more, against the
countrey wherein it is commited;Eze. 22. and also spirituall, asking
with indignation, Whether an vsurer should liue? &
plainly affirming that he shall surely die,Eze. 18. 
               moriendo morietur.
Now the will of God is the rule of justice, and whatsoeuer
hee willeth, it is therefore good and just because he
willeth it; and consequently, simple and absolute obedience
must be performed thereunto, whatsoeuer arguments,

impediments, or inconueniences can be pretended
to the contrarie. And therefore though no other reason
could be giuen why men should lend freely and not for
gaine, yet this alone were sufficient, because God would
haue vs lend freely, and not for gaine. It ought to haue
beene argument sufficient to our first parents to restraine
them from the forbidden fruit, That God had forbidden
it; though they had other reasons to induce them to eat
thereof. And as in that case, so in this, it is sinne and folly
to enter into disputation against the word of God, according
vnto which we shall be judged in the last day.
            But as by the written word of God the 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                or vnlawfulnesse
of vsurie is sufficiently prooued, so also by
other euident arguments and testimonies it may be conuicted
to be sinfull both in it selfe and in the judgements
of all those who haue liued in former ages. Whereupon
it will also follow, that the vsurer sinneth not onely
against the law of God, but also against the light and
law of nature.
            And thus he sinneth against his

                  neighbour.
                  God.
                  himselfe.
               
            
            Against his neighbour. For whereas there are two duties
especially to bee practised towards our neighbour,
that is to say, Iustice and Charitie; justice, to giue euery
man his owne;1. Cor. 10. 24. & 13. 5. and charitie, not to seeke our owne but
other mens profit; justice, to do no man wrong, charitie,
to do good to all: vsurie offendeth against both, as being
both vnjust and vncharitable. Which copulation is duly
to be marked. For whereas some alledge, that vsury is not
against charitie, when neither the lender nor borrower is
hurt thereby; it shall hereby appeare, that if at any time it
may seeme not to bee opposed to charitie as an hurtfull
thing, yet is it alwaies opposed as an vnjust and vnequall
thing. For first, the generall law both of justice & charitie

is this, As you would that men should doe to you, so doe
you to them likewise.Luke 6. 31. But when you haue need to borrow,
you would that men should lend you freely,Mat. 7. 12. and not
impose vsurie vpon you: therefore in like case, when
others would borrow of you in their necessity, you ought
to lend them freely, and not impose vsurie vpon them.
            But against this argument diuerse things are objected:
First, by this reason (say they) no man ought to let his horse or house
for hire, or to sell his ware for an equall price. For who would not rather
borrow things to vse freely, than to take them vpon hire? and who
would buy ware, if he might haue it giuen him?
            
            I answere, not euery thing which we would that men
should doe to vs, are we to doe to them; but that which in
equitie and with good conscience we desire to be done
to vs: otherwise, he which desireth to be slaine, might lawfully
kill others. But by commodation, a man cannot desire
in equitie and with a good conscience to borrow
freely that which is lettable, nor by free donation to receiue
that which is saleable, vnlesse it be of some speciall
friend, or of some that looketh for as good a turne at our
hands, or in case of present or vrgent necessitie: for that
were to desire another mans losse, without making of recompence.
But he which hath need to borrow by mutuation,
may in equitie and with a good conscience desire
to borrow freely of him that is able to lend, because
he doth not onely purpose yea couenant to make full
recompence, by restoring the full value of that which he
borroweth (for so much is implied in the very contract
of mutuation) but also if he be an honest man, will be as
willing to gratifie his creditor wherein he lawfully may,
as now he desireth to be holpen by him.
            2. Againe, some who exercise moderat vsurie, alledge
for the justifying of themselues, That if they had occasion to
borrow, they would be willing to borrow vpon vsurie, after eight or
ten in the hundred. Yea, they would thinke themselues beholding to
such an one as would lend vnto them after that rate. And therefore

they doe as they would be done vnto in the like case. I answer first,
that no man ought to desire to borrow, but for need: and
therefore, what men which do not borrow for need, may
desire, it is not materiall. And secondly, that no man
which borroweth for his need, is willing simply or with
an entire will to borrow vpon vsurie, but vpon a conditionall
necessitie, for auoiding a greater mischiefe. As he
which casteth his goods into the sea to lighten the ship in
a dangerous tempest, is simply vnwilling to cast away his
goods; and yet is willing so to doe, vpon a conditionall
necessitie to saue his life. And as he which falling among
theeues, giueth them his purse, being forced thereto by a
conditionall necessitie, viz. if he will saue his life, being
simply vnwilling to forgoe his money: so he which in his
necessitie yeeldeth to pay vsurie, doth it (as the Poet
speaketh) 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , willingly, for auoiding a greater
inconuenience, but simply against his will. For that which
a man doth not integra voluntate,
               Qui non integravoluntate consentit. inuitus appellatur. Hotom. de vsur. 
                     ••
                  s
                     •
                  metus 85. D. de ad. haered. 
               with an entire will, he doth
inuitus, against his will,
               Eth. 3. 1. say the Lawyers. Which alwaies
happeneth in these mixt actions, wherein the agent is (as
the Philosopher sayth) to be esteemed 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , that is, not
willing.
            
            When as therefore they object, Volenti non fit iniuria,
Wrong is not done to him that is willing: I answere, that neither
is the borrower simply willing, neither is that axiome generally
true; for then Ioseph had not sinned against his mistresse,
if he had graunted her desire, neither had Sauls armour
bearer beene worthie of blame,1. Sam. 31. 4. if at Sauls owne request
he had killed him, being the annointed of the Lord.
But Ioseph confesseth,Gen. 39. 9. that he should haue sinned fearefully,
if he had yeelded to her desire:2. Sam. 1. 9. 10, 14. And Dauid putteth
to death that pickthanke, who had (as he said) at Sauls
owne entreatie slaine him. And therefore, seeing vsurie
is as well forbidden in the Scriptures, as murther or
adulterie, it is not the borrowers entreatie that can make
it lawfull.
            
               
Yea but say they, The borrower is willing, he seekes to me, he
intreates me, yea & of his owne accord he offers me vsurie. I answer,
and yet is he not simply willing thereto, but his necessity
for auoiding a greater inconuenience, maketh him seeme
willing to that whereunto he is simply vnwilling: For
doth not the mariner in the tempest vse all expedition
with earnestnesse to cast out his goods, as though he earnestly
desired to be rid of them, and yet is indeed vnwilling
to be depriued of them? Doth not the partie which is
fallen among theeues and is afraid of his life, earnestly intreat
them to take his goods, and readily giue his purse
and what else he hath, so they will spare his life; and yet
simply is vnwilling to loose his money if otherwise he
could chuse? Or if that example mislike the vsurer, suppose
a man in extremitie of hunger comming to another
to buy bread, who meaning (as the vsurer commonly
doth) to take aduantage by his neighbours want, seemeeth
vnwilling to sell him any food: will not this party
in his extremitie offer the other twelue pence for that
which is not worth two pence, and intreat him that he
would take his money, and perhaps tell him that in so doing
he shall saue his life? and yet no man is simply willing
to giue twelue pence for that which is worth but two
pence, or if he were, his desire would not excuse the receiuer.
It is euident therefore that the vsurer breaketh the
generall law of justice and charitie, in doing to others as
he would not that others should do to him, and also in taking
another mans goods without the others mans good
will.
            But I will shew you seuerally, first, that vsurie is vnjust:
and secondly, that it is vncharitable. All illiberall
contracts are vnjust, wherein commutatiue justice is not
obserued; and commutatiue justice is not obserued
where is not equality kept of the things committed, whether
the commutation be of the things themselues for recompence,
or of the vse onely for hire. Now that there

may be equality, allowance is to be made of the necessary
cost, hazard and labour which appertaine thereto, for all
these are valuable: as for example. A merchant trauelling
beyond seas, buyeth commodities there at an easie
rate, which hauing transported into his owne countrey,
he may with a good conscience sell so much dearer, according
to the proportion of his necessarie labour, cost,
and hazard. And where none of these considerations
are, there ought to be no gaine: or if there bee, there is
inequalitie, and so vnjustice. But you will say: what if a
man sustaine losse, is not allowance to be made thereof?
If any man hath bene the effectuall cause of that losse, he
and no other is to make recompence: but if losse be sustained
by the hand of God, we must beare it as a crosse
which the Lord hath laid vpon vs, and not presume to
lay it vpon any other mans shoulders who hath not bene
the effectuall cause of our losse.
            But now (say I) vsurie is an illiberall contract, and although
it be in truth no other contract but lending for
gaine, yet it putteth on the habit of letting, exchange,
partnership, and is not onely an vncharitable lending,
as shall be shewed, but also an vnjust letting, an vnequall
exchange; and an vnconscionable partnership. And first,
it is a most wicked and vnjust kind of letting, agreeing
with true letting in nothing else but in taking an ouerplus:
for first as I haue shewed heretofore, Location is of
such things as are not spent in the vse, but haue a fruitfull
vse in themselues which may be valued apart from the
propertie and dominion: and therefore he which letteth
any thing, he alienateth the vse for an equall price, retaining
to himselfe the property. But vsurie is of such things
as are spent in the vse, and are lent to bee spent, neither
haue they anie fruitfull vse in themselues which may be
valued apart from the propertie, because they be spent
in the vse; and therefore hee which putteth forth vpon
vsurie alienateth not onely the vse but the propertie also,

from which, as it is the subject of mutuation or vsurie, the
vse cannot be seuered. As for example, If I let an house
or a peece of ground, &c. I let the fruitfull vse which is
in themselues naturally, retaining still the propertie to
my selfe: But he which putteth forth money, or meat, or
any thing else that is spent in the vse, he cannot let the
fruitfull vse of them, or value it apart from the property,
for there is no such fruitfull vse in them that can bee valued
apart, and therefore with the vse if he lend them to
be spent, he must needs alienat the propertie also. For
the vse of money and victuals and such like things (as
they are the subject of mutuation) is the spending and distraction
of them; & if any fruit or profit be raised by the
distractiō of them, it is to be ascribed to the industrie and
skill of him that doth imploy them; and consequently
the gaine, if there be any, of right belongeth to him, who
being now the owner thereof (for as I sayd, in mutuation
the propertie is transferred to the borrower) bestoweth
his skill and industrie to raise a profit out of that
which is his owne.
            Secondly, in location the letter alienating the vse only
and not the propertie, is to receiue againe the selfe
same particular, after it hath bene vsed of the hirer, being
for the most part impaired in the vse, in respect whereof
there is a second reason of demaunding and taking the
hire. But in vsurie, the lender alienating not onely the
vse but the propertie also, couenanteth to receiue againe
not the selfe same particuler impaired in the vse, but the
full value thereof in the same kind, without any impairing
or diminution of the principall, and therefore in vsurie
there is no such reason of an ouerplus, as in location.
            Thirdly, in location the letter as he retaineth the propertie
of that which is let, so he also beareth the hazard
thereof. In so much that if it miscarie without the hirers
default, it miscarieth to the letter, and not to him: for he
is onely to pay the hire, Exod. 22. 14, in respect whereof

there is a third reason of the hire demaunded, as being in
part the price of the hazard. But in vsurie the lender as
he alienateth the propertie with the vse, so also with the
propertie he transferreth the hazard to the borrower: in
so much that if the principall, or any part thereof miscary,
it miscaries to the borrower, it is safe to the lender, by the
verie contract of mutuation.Luit. §. pen. C. de fur. Now it is a principle in the
law, Vbi periculum, ibi lucrum collocandum est, To whom the hazard
belongeth, to him appertaineth the gaine:
               Hotom. ex Pom. in l. is qui, 13. And that no man
ought to reape gaine by that whereof he beareth not the
hazard:§ 1. D. commod In si non fuerunt. 20 in si. l. si igitur. 55. eod. &c. and againe, That there is no gaine allowable by
law, which hath no hazard joyned with it.
            Lastly, the letter many times is at charge about such
things as he doth let, as in repairing of houses, in keeping
of houses, &c. which may be a fourth reason of demāding
hire: but there is no such respect in vsurie. Nay the vsurer
hauing transferred the propertie of that which is lent, to
the borrower, & with the propertie the labor which is to
be imployed, the hazard which is to be sustained, the cost
which is to be borne for the raising of any commoditie
by the imployment of the money; notwithstanding, he
would haue the money to be thought his, in respect of the
gain, though the borrowers in respect of the losse. Now if
you lay these things together, you shall in part perceiue
how vnjust & vnconscionable a gaine vsurie is, euen then
when the borrower seeketh to be a gainer by the imploimēt
of that which he hath borrowed. 1. In that the vsurer
letteth that which is not lettable, & requireth an hire for
the fruitful vse of that which hath in it self no fruitful vse,
but is spent in the vse; and therefore being not valuable
by it selfe, ought not to bee paid for by it selfe, as it is,
when in respect thereof an hire is required ouer and
aboue the principall. Secondly, in that hee requireth
gaine or hire for another mans industrie and skill, hazard
and charge imployed about that which now is not the
vsurers, but the other mans which vseth his skill and

paines, and beareth the hazard and cost about it; the
vsurer in the meane time hauing nothing to do with the
money, hauing transferred the propertie thereof to the
borrower, neither yet bearing the hazard or charge, or
being at the paines of the imployment of the money.
            But against this argument, diuerse things are objected.
First, they say money is not spent in the vse. I answer, it is spent
to the borrower so soone as hee hath vsed it, though the
substance thereof remaine in other mens hands: and it is
lent to be spent. For therefore the borrower is bound by
the contract of mutuation to restore not the same particuler
(for that is to be spent and gone) but so much: and
it is all one to the vsurer, not onely by the contract of
vsurie, but of mutuation, whether the principall be kept,
or spent, or lost, or imployed to aduantage, the borrower
being bound alike, whatsoeuer becommeth of that particuler,
to restore the full value of the principall. It is nothing
to the lender how the money lent be vsed, for the
time of the loane, so that the principall bee restored in
due time.
            2. Yea but although the money itselfe remaine not to the borrower
after he hath vsed it, yet it remaineth in the equiualent, that is, in
some commoditie or ware which hath bene bought therewith, by vttering
whereof, some gaine may be raised.
            I answer, first, that it is all one to the vsurer by the verie
contract of vsurie, whether I giue the money borrowed,
or loose it, or mispend it, or pay a debt with it, or
buy a commoditie with it; and if I buy a commoditie,
whether it be such as is to be spent in necessarie vses, as
victuals and such like, or whether it be to remaine with
me, or be a ware which I would sell to others. And likewise
the vse of money is one and the same, viz. the distraction
or spending of it: For whatsoeuer I doe with the
money, and howsoeuer I vse it, whether to my losse or
gaine, I am by the very contract of vsurie bound to restore
the principall with the vsurie, and therefore these

are but friuolous pretences. But suppose I buy a commoditie
which I meane to sell for gaine: first, I imploy
my skill and industrie according to my trade, for the following
whereof I am at charge; I onely beare the hazard
of the bargaine, which many times falleth to my
losse; and lastly, the commoditie which I sell is mine
owne, and therefore the gaine as well as the losse, if there
be any, belongeth of right to my selfe and no man else.
But as I said, whether I gaine or lose by the imployment
of the money, I am bound alike by the contract of vsury
to pay the principall with the increase, and therefore my
gaine, is no more the cause of his gaine (though that be
pretended) than my losse, because in both hee gaineth
alike.
            3. Obiection. But although money it selfe hath no fruitfull
vse,Eccles. 10. 19. yet as Salomon saith, money answereth all things, and therefore
with money I may buy that which hath a fruitfull vse, as namely
cattell, house, or lands, &c. and what reason can be giuen why I may
not as well let my hundred pounds in money, as my hundred pounds
worth of cattell, houses or lands, which I buy with my money?
            Answer. Your money cannot bee let for the reasons
aforesayd, and being lent it is the borrowers, who bearing
the hazard of it besides his paines and charges, is to
reape the gaine thereof: but cattell, house and lands, may
be let, they haue a fruitfull vse which is valuable, they remaine
yours notwithstanding they be let, and the hazard
of them appertaines to you.
            4. Suppose a man of better estate than my selfe, borroweth of
me an hundred pounds, and therewith buyeth lands, and out of his
land receiueth the fruits or rent thereof. What reason is there that he
should receiue a rent for the land bought with my money, and I in the
meane time haue none allowance for my money?
            I answer, in such a case thou needest not lend, or if
thou doest, thou mayest lend thy money vpon this condition,
That so much land as is bought therewith shall be
morgaged vnto thee, that so the bargaine may be thine,

and the rent thereof paid to thee, vntill thou receiue
thy principall. But you will say? Might I not as well lend
my money for gaine? I answer, no: for if he besides the charges
do also beare the hazard of the land which hee hath
bought and is his owne, it is good reason that he should
haue the fruits thereof. And what reason is it that when
he which beareth all the charge and hazard, receiueth
scarce fiue pounds a yeare, he should allow thee ten? But
if thou takest the bargaine into thine hands, the fruit that
riseth, is of thine owne; and as thou bearest the hazard,
either in respect of the title, or in regard of some common
calamitie, so is it good reason thou sholdest haue the profit
thereof. As for the other, he sustainenth no disaduantage:
for by this means he may be assured of the land
which he desireth, when he can procure the money: and
if he neuer procure the money, it is no reason he should
euer haue the lands.
            5. Againe, whereas I said that money being lent is
the borrowers, both in respect of the propertie, and also
of the hazard, and therefore the profit thereof belongeth
to the borrower and not to the lender, who hath transferred
from himselfe both the propertie and the hazard
for a time; the vsurer demaundeth, What reason is there
(saith he) that I should lend my money, and by lending make it
another mans, without recompence?
            
            I answer, if you do but lend your money, the borrower
is bound by the very contract of loane to make you recompence
by restoring the principall in the full value
thereof. Yea, but why should I make that which is mine another
mans, and transferre the dominion and propertie from my selfe to another,
if I may not require some gaine therefore? I answer, because
the Lord himselfe hath so straightly commaunded
thee who art of abilitie, to lend freely to thy brother being
in need,Deut. 15. 8, 9. as that if thou refusest to lend vnto him, it is
sinne vnto thee. And secondly, because he hath most
straightly forbidden all lending for gaine, and condemneth

it as an abhomination, which whosoeuer committeth
he shall not liue, but die an euerlasting death. And
thirdly, because the patrons of vsurie themselues do confesse,
That for the dutie or curtesie it selfe of lending, that
is, of making that which is mine to be thine for a time, no
gaine ought to be required, or if there be, it is damnable
vsurie. Whereupon I inferre another consequent, that if
thou mayest not require gaine for the act of lending it
selfe, whereby thou makest that which is thine to be another
mans for the time, because the Lord forbiddeth it,
and the patrons of vsurie confesse so much; then canst
thou not require a gaine, much lesse a certaine gaine, not
onely out of the profit which hee may perhaps reape of
the money which now is his, and whereof besides his
skill, industrie and charge, hee alone doth beare the hazard,
but also out of his losse. Thus therefore it appeareth
that vsurie is a very vnjust letting.
            2. It is also a very vnequall exchange, when for an
hundred pounds deliuered, an hundred and ten pounds
is required.
            Why, But by this reason, you will say, you condemne all
gaine, and negotiation for gaine. May not the merchant lawfully for
his wares bought in another countrey for one hundred pounds, require
one hundred and ten here? I answer as before, that there are
three considerations, viz. of necessarie cost, industrie, and
hazard; for all or any whereof, a proportionable gaine
may bee allowed, but where none of those are found,
there ought to be no gaine: consider then whether any
of these are to be found in vsurie or not: doth the vsurer
therefore take any paines for the gaine which he requireth
by vsurie? Nothing lesse. Vsurie is a gainefull idlenesse,
whereby men do eat of the sweat of other mens
browes. For whether they eat or drinke, sleepe or wake,
worke or play, their gaine by vsurie commeth in alike.
Is he at any cost for the getting of this gaine? Not of an
halfepenie. Doth hee beare any hazard? It is no part of

his meaning. He requireth a couenant of the borrower
for the payment both of the principall and also of the
vsurie, at a certaine time; and for the performance of that
couenant, before he will lend his money he will be sure
of so much securitie as himselfe thinketh to be sufficient,
whether it be by bonds or statutes, by pawnes or sureties:
so that if the principall or any part thereof be lost, it
is lost to the borrower, but it is safe to the vsurer, by the
very contract of vsurie, ratified by other securities.
            What then is the reason of this excesse or inequalitie
in the contract of vsurie, that for an hundred pounds,
one hundred and ten pounds of the like mony should be
required?
            
               Forsooth, saith one, this gaine I require for the forbearance of
my money? Why, but say I, if thou lendest thy money for
a time, thou must needs forbeare it for the time of the
loane. And if thou must lend it freely and take no gaine
for the courtesie of lending, thou must also forbeare it
freely, and take no gaine for the courtesie of forbearing
for the time of the loane. Yea but I forbeare it to my hinderance,
and therefore so much as I am hindered, I may lawfully require by
way of interest.
            
            Hinderance I confesse is to be recompenced by him
who is the effectuall cause thereof, and interest I haue
shewed before to be lawfull: and therefore if the borrower
through his default bee the effectuall cause of the
lenders losse, the lender may with a good conscience require
interest, and thereby prouide for his owne indemnitie.
But indeed the borrower, vnlesse hee forced the
creditor to lend, is not the effectuall cause of the creditors
losse, vntill he hath made delay. Neither is the creditor
after delay to demaund interest, vnlesse by the delay he
incurre some losse, or sustaine hinderance of some lawfull
and certaine gaine.
            
               We confesse (say they) that the casuall or moment anie interest,
               Molin.
               whereof you speake, is not to be allowed or regarded but after delay:

but the promiscuous or successiue interest is to be allowed according
to the proportion of the time of the loane euen before delay. And
what is this successiue interest I pray you? Forsooth an allowance
to be made for the forbearance of money, pro rata temporis,
according to the rate and proportion of the time, which is also called,
inter vsurium, and by our vsurers, interest. I heare new names,
but the thing thereby signified is the grosse and common
vsurie which is forbidden in the Scripture, and hath bene
condemned in all ages, as I haue shewed heretofore. For
interest is to be esteemed not according to the borrowers
successe in the imployment of money, but according to
the hinderance which the lender sustaineth by the forbearance
of his money, and thereof it hath the name. And
whereof is the hinderance which he sustaineth? Forsooth
of so much gaine as either himselfe might haue raised by
his money in the same time, or another would haue allowed
him according to the lawes.
            Wouldest thou then haue imployed it thy selfe? Perhaps
it is but a vsurious pretence. But be it so: How wouldest
thou haue imployed it? By negotiation or traffique?
That is not likely: Vsurers loue not to bee aduenturers,
there is too much hazard in traffique. But if thou wouldest,
it may bee thou shouldest haue bene a looser: and
therefore set thy feare of losse by aduenturing, which
thou escapest by not hazarding the principall, against
your hope of gaine which you looked to receiue, if you
had aduentured, and let thy possible gaine which thou
hast missed, bee recompenced with the possible losse
which thou hast escaped. And know this, that the hinderance
of vncertaine gaine is not to be allowed after delay,
much lesse before: neither can vncertaine hopes be
sold with a good conscience for certaine gaine, especially
to those that do not buy them.
            Yea but another would haue allowed mee after ten in the
hundred.
            But lawfull interest is an allowance of lawfull gaine:

After delay made by the borrower, the lender cannot
with a good conscience by way of interest require allowance
for the hinderance of either vncertaine or vnlawfull
gaine, much lesse may it be required before hand, and
yet much lesse may it be couenanted before hand.
            Yea but what reason is there that I should susteine hinderance
without recompence?
            Lay aside vsurious pretences. Canst thou not indeed
without thine hinderance forbeare thy money? consider
then the estate of him that is to borrow. Is he a prodigall
gentleman, or riotous person? feed not his riot and vanitie.
Is he a couetous tradesman that seekes to compasse
great matters, and to bee an engrosser or forestaller of
commodities, to the prejudice of the common wealth?
make not thy selfe accessarie to his couetous practises, to
such thou oughtest not to lend. Hath the partie no great
need to borrow? to such thou needest not lend, or if thou
doest, thine hinderance, if thou sustainest any, is meerely
voluntarie, and of such an hinderance thou canst require
no recompence of him who hath not bene the effectuall
cause thereof. Is the partie an honest man, and hath need
to borrow? then if the Lord hath enabled thee to lend,
thou art bound to lend, though thou shalt sustaine some
hinderance, yea though thou shouldest hazard the principall,
thou must willingly yeeld to both, as imposed of
the Lord: neither must thou seeke gaine out of his need,
but lend freely for the Lords sake, who requireth this dutie
at thy hand, and will be sure to recompence thee not
by ten in the hundred, but by hundreds for thy tens, if not
in this life, as many times he doth, yet in the life to come.
Lend, saith our Sauiour Christ, looking for nothing
thence, and your reward shall be great, &c.
            If then the forbearance of the mony,Interesse vsurarium. and this vsurious
interest (as the Law doth terme it) be not a good reason
to justifie the inequalitie which is in vsurie, what other
reason may there be thereof?
            
               
Forsooth, sayth another, the vse of the money. Why,
but the selling of the vse of a thing is the letting of the
thing, but money cannot be lawfully let, as I haue sufficiently
prooued. The vse of money is the spending of it, as
the vse of victuals is the eating of it: and in things spent
in the vse, thou canst not without great inequalitie require
one allowance for the thing, and another for the
vse, which cannot be reckoned apart from the thing, or
seuered from the propertie. If thou lend me ten loaues,
thou shouldest deale very vnequally with mee, if thou
shouldest require eleuen; or if hauing taken the price of
the loaues themselues, thou shouldest also demaund a
price for the vse, which is the eating of them: and in like
sort, if hauing lent me ten pounds, thou shouldest require
eleuen, that is, ten for the principall, and one for the vse,
which was nothing but the spending of the money. But
this indeed is not the reason of the ouerplus demaunded,
though sometimes it be pretended. For, that in truth is
the reason of the vsurie simply, according to which the
vsurie is proportioned; the vsurie being lesse when that
is lesse, and greater when that is more: that is, the time of
forbearance or successiue interest, whereof I spake euen
now. If you say, it is the time of the vse, I answere, as the
time of the vse of meat is the time of eating it, so the time
of the vse of the mony borrowed, is the time of spending
it. For after it is once spent, as perhaps it is the same day it
is borrowed, the borrower neuer vseth it more, though it
were lent him for a long time, it is gone from him, and to
him (as the lawyers speak) extinguished. Now if the same
day, after I haue vsed, and in the vse spent your money, I
hauing receiued as much elsewhere, should bring you so
much as I borrowed, you would require nothing for the
vse or yet for the time of the vse; which notwithstanding
had beene one and the same, if you had lent and forborne
the money for a tweluemonth. This then is not the matter,
neither the vse, nor the time of the vse.
            
               
               No saith the vsurer, I require not allowance for his vse in spending
the money, but for the vse of the money employed to his aduantage.
For what reason is there that another man should gaine by my
money, and not make me partaker of his gaine? This also is another
vsurious pretence. For in the contract of vsurie the
lender maketh an absolute couenant for certaine gaine,
without respect of the borrowers either losse or gaine:
and by vertue of the same contract, demaundeth his certaine
allowance or gaine, as well out of the borrowers
losse, as out of his gaine. The borrower you say borroweth
the money, that he might employ it to his gaine; and
therefore you couenant for gaine by this loane: For why
should he gaine by your money, and not you? I answere,
though he intend to vse the money to his aduantage and
gaine, yet many times he prooueth no gainer, but rather a
looser. What then is the reason of your demanded gaine?
is it not sufficient for him to loose the employment of his
labour and skill, vnlesse out of his losse, he also make you
againe? And hereby also it appeareth, that the best kind
of vsurie (I meane when gaine is required of those onely
that borrow to gaine) is an vnconscionable partnership:
For there is no lawfull partnership, where is not partaking
in the losse as well as in the gaine. The vsurer will
partake in the borrowers gaine, but in the losse he will
haue no part. Yea whiles he seeketh, nay couenanteth for
certaine gaine out of the vncertaine negotiation of the
borrower (which is most vnequall) he exacteth the same
gaine couenanted for, as well out of the borrowers losse,
as out of his gaine: which is most vnconscionable. But
what if I couenant for gaine in euentum lucri, that is, to gaine, if he
gaine; but if he doe not gaine, then to require securitie onely for my
principall? That practise is farre more tollerable than the
other, yet this also is vnequall, vnlesse as you couenant for
gaine, if he do gaine, so you be also content to beare part
in that losse, which without his default he shall sustaine.
But why should be gaine with my money, and I haue no part therein?
               
because the money being his for the time, he bestoweth
the paines and the cost in the employment of it, and also
beareth the hazard thereof alone. Wherefore if thou wilt
couenant for gaine to be raised by the employment of
thy money, thou must by way of partnership put it forth
to be occupied, and not hauing transferred the propertie
thereof, to beare the hazard of the negotiation; that it
being still thine, and occupied at thine hazard, a proportionable
part of the profit which is raised thereof may in
justice and equitie belong to thee. Otherwise, if thou wilt
not enter into a contract of partnership, this is all which
thou mayest lawfully do: Lend thy money to an honest
and a thriftie man, taking securitie onely for the principall,
and referre the rest to the blessing of God, and the
borrowers fidelitie and thankfulnesse; but remember this
withall, that to thine expectation of gaine, there must be
an answerable purpose of partaking in the losse. Or if
thou wilt couenant for gaine if he doe gaine, thou must
also be content to beare part with him in the losse. But
you will say: If I may receiue from the borrower an ouerplus, which
of his owne accord he giueth to me in testimonie of his good will and
thankefulnesse, why may not I couenant with him therfore? especially
seeing it is a generall rule of all contracts, that what I may receiue
from another when he willingly offereth it, I may exact the same of
him, so that prouision be made for his indemnitie? Nay rather this
is a rule of contracts, That whatsoeuer I cannot lawfully
take of my neighbour, I ought not to couenant for it: but
I ought not to take gaine of the borrower when he is a
looser, and enrich my selfe by his losse, and therefore I
ought not to make an absolute couenant for gaine, whether
he gaine or loose. But on the other side, it is lawfull
sometimes to receiue things voluntarily giuen, which it
were vtterly vnlawfull to couenant for beforehand. Many
things are honestly receiued, which cannot honestly
be demaunded, and much lesse by couenant be exacted.
It is lawfull in the commonwealth for priuat men, when

the magistrats haue done them justice, and defended them
from wrong, in testimonie of their loue and thankfulnesse
to bring them some present: in the church it is lawfull for
the ministers hauing beene freely preferred by their patrones,
to giue them some gratuitie in token of their loue
and thankfulnesse: and it is lawfull for the magistrat and
patron to accept of such gratuities, the magistrat hauing
intended justice, and not respected rewards; and the patrone
hauing regarded nothing else but the discharge of
his dutie in preferring a worthie man. But if the magistrat
should couenant with the priuat man, to doe him justice
for reward, it were the detestable sinne of briberie,
and selling of justice: and if the patrone should indent
with the minister for reward, it were the sacrilegious
sinne of symonie. In like case it is lawfull for a creditour,
who hauing intended the helpe of his brother, and not his
owne profit, by free loane, to accept from the borrower a
gratuitie in testimonie of his loue and thankfulnesse: but
if he should beforehand couenant with him therefore, it
were the damnable sinne of vsurie.
            And whereas they add, That we may make such a couenant,
so we prouide for the borrowers indemnitie: I answere,
that the contract of actuall vsurie including an absolute
couenant for gaine, prouideth for the lenders certaine
gaine, as well out of the borrowers losse, as out of
his gaine, which is most vnequall and vnconscionable.
            Thus haue I prooued vsurie to bee an vnjust and vnequall
thing. Whereupon doth follow the proofe of the
second point, that it is also an vncharitable thing: for
where there is no justice, there can be no charitie. But my
meaning is to prooue, that as it is an vnjust and vnequall
thing in it selfe, so it is an hurtfull thing to our neighbour.
And this I will prooue first in generall. For vsurie, as it is
an illiberall, so also an vncharitable lending, not onely
peruerting and deprauing, but also euerting and extinguishing
that most necessarie act and dutie of charity and

liberalitie, that is to say, free lending: and consequently is
most hurtfull and pernicious both to priuat men in particular,
and to humane societies in generall. Now this is a
principle, That whatsoeuer peruerteth & ouerturneth an
act of vertue, especially such a necessarie act to humane
societies, it is not onely a vice, but a detestable vice: for
nothing is opposit to vertue but vice. As for free lending,
it is a commendable act of liberalitie, and a necessary dutie
of charitie. There are two acts of liberalitie, dono dare,
& mutuo dare,
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . Basil. to giue freely, and to lend freely. And this
latter, whereby one man doth supply the necessities of
another, is so necessarie, that humane societies cannot
stand without it. Vsurie hauing stept into the roume of
free lending, you shall heare vsurers and patrons of vsurie
not ashamed to say, that commonwealths cannot stand
without vsurie: without lending indeed they cannot, but
without vsurie they both might and ought. And surely, if
lending were taken away, necessitie would driue many
men into desperat courses; as the Syriack interpreter vnderstood
that speech of our Sauior, Luke 6. 35, Lend, causing
no man to despaire.
            But vsurie peruerteth and depraueth this necessarie
act of liberalitie and charitie, turning it vnto an act of
selfeloue, couetousnesse, and crueltie. For whereas by the
ordinance of God, and by the law of nature, lending is
free and charitable, intending the good of the borrower,
and not of the lender; vsurie hath made it illiberall and
vncharitable, intending the lenders profit chiefely, if not
onely, and seeking yea couenanting for the lenders gaine
as well out of the losse of the borrower as out of his gain.
The propertie of charitie is not to seeke her owne,1. Cor. 13. 5 & 10. 24. but
the good of others; and whereas other vertues serue for
the good of the subject wherein they are, the acts of charitie
and liberalitie are referred to the good of others:
Lending therefore being an act of liberalitie and charitie,
ought to respect the good of the borrower, if not only,

yet chiefely: but lending by vsurie is made an act of
selfeloue, wherein the good of the borrower is sought either
not at all, or but in a secondarie respect, as it serueth
to further the lenders gaine. For indeed the lender by
vsurie couenanteth absolutely for gaine, which happeneth
sometimes out of the borrowers losse, and somtimes
also out of his gaine, which the vsurer will pretend to
seeke and respect, but the truth is, he will neuer look after
his neighbours profit, vnlesse therein he may be sure to
find his owne gaine.
            The vsurers lending therefore is an act of selfeloue,
and it is also an act of couetousnesse. For whereas lending
proceedeth from one of these three fountains, either
from Christian charitie, or from ciuile loue and humanitie,
or from couetousnesse; he is said to lend in Christian
charitie, who lendeth for the Lords sake to his needie
neighbour, looking for nothing againe; in ciuile charitie
or courtesie, who lendeth to pleasure his friend, looking
for his owne againe; in couetousnesse who looketh for
more than his owne. For indeed, what is 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , that is,
couetousnesse, but an vnlawfull desire of hauing more? If
any man object, that by the same reason I condemne all
gaine which men doe seeke after by other contracts: I
answere, That in the lawfull contracts of negotiation, a
man may as well seeke his owne profit as another mans;
for therefore they were ordained, that by the mutuall
communication of things vpon equall conditions, both
parties might be mutually profited. And moreouer, the
gaine which is gotten by them, may well stand with that
equalitie which in commutatiue justice is required. But
lending was not ordained to be a contract of negotiation,
but an act of charitie and liberalitie, wherein the lender
should not respect his owne gaine, but the borrowers
good; and the gaine which is sought for by lending, doth
not nor cannot stand with equalitie and justice, as I haue
prooued before. Whereas therefore lending was ordained

of God to be a contract, whereby the lender should
seeke the good of the borrower, without respect of his
owne profit, so far should he be from doing wrong therein;
the vsurer hath made lending a contract, wherein he
seeketh for his owne gaine not onely vncharitably, without
respect of the borrowers either profit or losse; but also
vnjustly, seeking gaine where he beares no hazard, and
taking another mans goods without his good will.
            Lastly, whereas lending is an act of bountie and mercie,
as the Psalmist sayth,Psal. 37. 26. & 112. 5. A good man is mercifull and
lendeth: vsurie hath turned it into an act of inhumanitie
and crueltie.
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  
                For as Basil well sayth, In very deed it is an
excesse of inhumanitie, when the borrower wanting necessaries,
and seeking to borrow for the comfort of his
life, the lender should not content himselfe with the principall,
but should out of the want and necessitie of his
needie brother seeke gaine and aduantage vnto himselfe.
And therefore as it is said of the good man, that he is mercifull
and lendeth: so may it be said of the vsurer, that he
is cruell and lendeth. For that which is said of wicked
men in generall, may principally be applied to the vsurer,
That his very mercies are cruell. For when he would
seeme to support a man, he doth supplant him; when he
seemeth to cure,Prou. 12. 10. he inflicteth a deeper wound; and when
he seemeth to haue relieued a man, he casteth him into
greater want.In Decalog. And therefore Luther doubted not to call
the vsurer, a blood sucker of the people. And in the judgement
of the wise Cato,
               Cato interrogatus. Quid faenerari? quid, inquit, hominem occidere? Cic. de off. in fine. Hug. Card. it is no more lawfull to be an vsurer
than to be a murtherer. Thus you see how vsury hath
peruerted lending, conuerting it from a work of charitie,
liberalitie, and mercie, into an act of selfeloue, couetousnesse,
and crueltie. And for this cause the vsurer is not vnfitly
compared by some, to the Magicians of Egypt: for
whereas the Lord hath ordained the contract of lending
to be as a staffe which the wealthier man is to put into the
hands of his neighbour,Leuit. 25. 35. to stay and support him when

his hands doe shake, and himselfe doth shrinke vnder the
burthen of his want, the vsurer hath turned this staffe into
a serpent.
            But vsurie doth not only corrupt and depraue the dutie
of lending, but also extinguish all free loane where it
taketh place, drying vp the fountaine of loue, whose
streames were wont to run foorth to the refreshing of
others. And it doth not onely harden the heart, and shut
vp the hands, and close the bowels of compassion in the
vsurers themselues, as wofull experience sheweth; but in
others also it hath made the dutie of free lending, to seeme
so great a benefit, and of so high a price,Append. in Psal. 15. that as Bucer truly
sayth, A man may seeme now adayes to be very impudent,
that shall desire to borrow freely: For he that lendeth
freely, doth for the most part make this estimation
of his benefit, that besides the forbearance of his money,
wherewith he doth pleasure the borrower, he doth as
much for him besides, as if he gaue him the tenth part of
the principall out of his purse. And thus by meanes of
vsurie, charitie is frozen among men, and the bowels of
compassion shut vp; needie men are driuen vnto extremities,Luke 6. 35.
and the wealthier sort depriued of that great reward
which is promised to those that lend freely.Deut. 15. 10. & 23. 20.
            
            But I will shew more particularly, how vsurie offendeth
both against priuat and publicke charitie, as being
euer hurtfull and pernicious either to the particular men
that doe borrow, or else to the body of the commonwealth,
whose common profit is in all contracts especially
to be regarded. The partie that taketh vp mony vpon
vsurie, doth either borrow for the supply of his necessitie
and want, or else to raise a gaine by the employment
of the money to his best aduantage. Hee that imposeth
vsurie vpon him that borroweth for meere necessitie, in
stead of helping him increaseth his need, & vnder a shew
of relieuing him, he seeketh his vndoing: for such a one
commonly, the more and the longer he borroweth, the

more vnable he is to pay, and so at length is brought vnto
extreame penurie, vsurie hauing turned all his substance
into debt, and eaten him out of house and home. And
therefore, though the vsurers sometimes doe vaunt, how
kindly they deale with their debtours in forbearing them
from yeare to yeare: yet the truth is, the longer they forbeare,
the greater is their gaine, and though they deferre
the borrowers misery, yet in deferring it, they do increase
it: and therefore by some are not vnfitly compared to
the greedy cat, which though for a while she plaieth with
the silly mouse, yet in the end she will be sure to deuour it.
And here I cannot omit that notable speech of the authour
of the worke vnfinished vpon Matthew,
               Apud Chr
                     •
                  sost. tom 3. homil. 12. in fine. though it
be commonly cited by those which write of this argument.
Christ therefore (sayth he) commaundeth vs to lend, but not
vpon vsurie. For he that lendeth vpon vsurie, at the first sight seemeth
to giue his owne, but indeed he is so farre from giuing his owne, that
he taketh that which is another mans: for he seemeth to relieue a mans
necessitie, but indeed casteth him into a greater necessitie. He looseth
him of one bond, and binds him with more: neither doth he lend for
the righteousnesse of God, but for his owne gaine. For the vsurers money
is like the biting of the Aspe; for euen as he which is bitten of the
Aspe, goeth to sleepe, as if he were delighted, and through the pleasantnesse
of his sleepe dieth: so he which borroweth vpon vsurie is delighted
for a time, as one that had receiued a good turne: and so
through the pleasure of the imagined benefit be doth not perceiue how
he is taken captiue. For euen as the poyson of the Aspe, secretly conveying
it selfe into all the members, corrupteth the whole bodie: so
vsurie dispersing it selfe through all the borrowers goods, conuerteth
them into debt. And euen as leauen which is put into meale, infecteth
the whole lumpe, & drawing it to it selfe, turneth it into the nature of
leauen: so when vsurie entreth into any mans house, it draweth all his
substance vnto it, and turneth it into debt. But the patrones of
vsurie themselues confesse, that vsurie imposed vpon a
man that borroweth for need, is euer a biting and damnifying
of him, and that men ought by the commaundement

of God to lend to such freely: and therefore I shall
not need to prooue such vsurie to be vncharitable.
            If therefore the borrower taketh vp mony to imploy
it to his gaine, it may be, that hauing vsed all his skill, and
employed all his industrie in the occupying of it, he shall
not be able to gaine so much clearely as will pay the vsurer;
but allowing more than all his gaine to the vsurer,
and getting nothing but his labour for his pains, and gaining
nothing towards his liuing but losse, at length becommeth
a bankrupt. And that this also is vncharitable,
I shall not need to prooue, seeing the patrones of vsurie
themselues allow no vsurie, but that which is part of the
borrowers gaine. But suppose the borrower doe gaine,
yet notwithstanding the contract of vsurie is neuerthelesse
vnequall and vncharitable, because the vsurer couenanteth
for certaine gaine out of the borrowers vncertaine
traffique, and whether he gaine or loose, whether he
sinke or swim, or whatsoeuer become of the principall,
whether it be lost by fire, or be taken away by theeues, or
miscarrie by any other calamitie, he hauing made an absolute
couenant for the restitution of the principall with
vsurie, is by vertue of the same to demaund it as well out
of the losse of the borrower, as out of his gaine. And
therefore although in respect of the euent, the borrower
be not bitten or damnified, yet the contract of vsurie is
neuerthelesse vnequall and vncharitable. But although
vsurie in this case be not hurtfull to the borrower, yet is it
very hurtfull to the commonwealth, and especially to the
communaltie which payeth this vsurie: for whosoeuer
thriueth by occupying money borrowed vpon vsurie, he
hath so pitched the prices of his commodities, as that besides
a competent gaine raised for the maintenance of
himselfe and his charge, he also hath gathered vp an ouerplus
of a tenth part for the vsurer. And thus by vsurie
the prices of all commodities are enhaunced, whiles the
sellers who borrow vpon vsurie, if they will thriue, must

needs make the buyers pay two shillings in the pound
more than otherwise were sufficient. But you will say, He
that borroweth vpon vsurie, must sell as others doe, which doe not
borrow vpon vsurie; and therefore vsurie is not the cause why the prices
of things be raised. I answere, because they which doe
borrow vpon vsurie, must needs sell for so much as they
may gaine both for themselues and the vsurers; therfore
the rest doe pitch the prices of their commodities accordingly:
otherwise they which occupie with money borrowed
vpon vsurie, could neuer thriue: but because somtimes
they doe thriue, it is euident, that all of the same
trades doe so pitch their prices, as if all did borrow vpon
vsurie.
            Thus vsurie cloggeth the commonwealth with a very
great and I had almost said an intollerable burthen. For
this cannot be doubted of, but that many millions of
pounds are put out to vsurie in this land yearely, partly in
money borrowed vpon vsurie, partly in wares taken vp
on trust, whether by marchants thēselues, or by retailers
from them, or by the particular buyers from the retailers:
the vsurie of euery million (which are many) after ten in
the hundred, being an hundred thousand pounds. Of
which burthen the commonwealth might be eased, if
vsurie could be abolished. Wherefore as he which imposeth
vsurie vpon his needie brother, doth cruelly oppresse
him; so he which lendeth vpon vsurie to those which
borrow to gaine thereby, with engrossers and forestallers,
and such like publicke theeues, he doth his indeuour
that the prices of all things may be inhaunced, and maketh
himselfe guiltie, as accessarie at the least of publicke
theft.
            By this which hath beene said, we may easily answere
their objections, who alledge first, That by vsurie charitie is
not broken, when both the lender and the borrower are gainers.
                For when the contract of mutuation, which the Lord
hath ordained to be an act of charitie and liberalitie, is

turned into an act of selfeloue and couetousnesse, it cannot
be denied, but that charitie is violated, and liberalitie
set to sale. But when out of the vncertaine negotiation of 
the borrower, the lender couenanteth for certaine gaine,
and accordingly exacteth his couenanted gaine, as well
out of the borrowers losse, as out of his gaine, it must
needs be graunted, that vsurie is vncharitable, vnjust, and
vnconscionable. But though priuat charitie were not violated,
yet the publicke is, for when both the lender and
borrower be gainers, the commonwealth doth pay the
vsurie.
            2. And whereas againe they alledge, That many by
employment of money borrowed vpon vsurie, haue growne rich: I will
not answere with Basil, 
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , that is, but
I thinke more (sayth he) haue come to the halter; but I thinke
more haue prooued bankrupts. And although some for
a time may seeme to be rich by that which they haue
borrowed vpon vsurie, yet vsurie at the length consumeth
them and eateth them vp. Neither doth this prosperous

                  •
               uent of the borrower justifie the contract of vsurie,
which couenanteth for gaine not in euentum lucri, but
absolutely, and therefore out of his losse as well as out of
his gaine. And lastly I adde, that the more the borrower
is inriched by this means, the more the commonwealth is
damnified.
            But besides that hinderance which hath been mentioned,
the commonwealth sustaineth many inconueniences
by vsurers, as being not only vnprofitable, but also hurtfull
members thereof.
            For they which liue in idlenesse, and walke inordinatly,
gathering wealth by vnlawfull meanes, they are vnprofitable
members of the commonwealth, and vnprofitable
burthens of the earth. For as in the naturall bodie
there is not, so in the body politicke there ought not to
be any member which hath not his vse and function seruing
for the good of the whole body: But vsurers (I mean

especially such as make a trade of vsury) they liue in idlenesse:
for vsurie,Plin. as one well sayth, is quaestuos a segnities,
gainefull idlenesse; they walke inordinatly, seeking gain
by a trade of sinne, euen as the common theefe or baud
doth: for what is an vsurer, but as Bernard sayth, fur legatis,
a theefe, which for the hardnesse of mens hearts the laws
doe tollerate. The Philosopher matcheth the vsurer with
the baud: and to the same purpose obserue the cohaerence,
Deut. 23. 18, 19. It is a wonder therefore, that in the
hiue as it were of the commonwealth, such drones are
suffered, which liue of the sweat, yea blood of other men:
who out of other mens labour attaine ease, out of other
mens hazard gaine securitie, out of other mens losse reap
gaine.
            For whereas vsurers desire to be borne with, because
they haue no other trade to liue by, therein they are most
intollerable.In Psal. 128. Heare what Augustine sayth, Audent etiam
f
                     •
                  eneratores dicere, Non habeo aliud vnde v
                     •
                  uam, &c. Vsurers also
are not afraid to say, I haue no other meanes to liue. The same might
the robber, the burglar, the baud, and the witch, alledge for themselues:
as though this especially were not to be punished in them, that
they haue chosen to themselues artem nequitiae, an art or trade of
wickednesse whereby to liue, and will thereby sustaine themselues,
whereby they may offend him, by whom all are sustained. But
why will they not follow some other trade of life? because
they being giuen to idlenesse, and daring not trust
Gods prouidence with their goods, they therfore follow
this trade, though neuer so vnjust, because it promiseth
them great gaine, without either pains, or cost, or hazard,
whereunto other professions are subject. And for this
cause againe, vsurie is a great hinderance to the weale
publicke, and would be much more, if men could be persuaded
of the lawfulnesse thereof. And therefore it cannot
truly be denied (though the patrones of vsurie giue
out the contrarie) but that they doe a very profitable and
necessarie seruice to the commonweale, who doe

effectually either speake or write against vsurie. For certainely,
if men could be persuaded out of the word of God, that
vsurie were lawfull, it would be the vtter decay (as it is already
in part) of all honestarts and occupations. For who
would toile and moile, who would carke and care, who
would beare the charge and hazard of other professions,
for an vncertaine and it may be no gaine; who might be
assured, that the time, which is the parent of vsurie, as Basil
sayth, would bring him in without his labour, without his
cost, without his hazard, a very great and certain gaine?
For to omit the practises of those vsurers, that know how
by an hundred pounds to gaine fortie or fiftie pounds by
the yeare; who knoweth not, that mony continually put
foorth to vsurie after ten in the hundred, doth in seauen
yeares almost double the principall, and in euery seauen
yeares double the former summe. So that 1000 pounds
let out after this rate from three months to three months,
ariseth in seuen yeares to almost 2000, in 14 yeares to
4000, in 21 years to 8000, in 28 to 16000, in 35 to 32000,
in 42 to 64000, in 49 to 128000, in 56 to 256000 pounds
in 63 to 512000, in 70 yeares to more than a million, and
that is ten hundred thousand pounds. Who would not sel
his lands and goods and all that he can spare to raise a
stocke of money, that thereout he might by vsurie reape
so great and so certaine a gaine, if once in his conscience
he were assured, that vsurie is lawfull? Yea husbandrie it
selfe (from which through the blessing of God there
doth arise many times so great increase)Exod. 2. would be in smal
request,Haec vbi loc
                     •
                  tus foenerator Alphius, if vsurie might be esteemed as lawfull as it. Alphius
the vsurer, in Horace, hauing recounted all the commendations
of the country life, and seeming for the time
to be rauished therewith,I am i am futurus rusticus, Omnem relegit idibus pecuniā: Quaerit calendis ponere. resolued straightwayes to be a
countreyman: and hauing to that end gathered vp his
money in the ides of one month, he seeketh to put it forth
to vsurie in the beginning of the next. Hence it is, that
gentlemen when they can scarce raise an hundred pounds

a yeare for their lands without racking their rents; are so
readie to sell them, and hauing put the price thereof to
vsury (perhaps for three or foure hundred pounds a
yeare) giue ouer hospitalitie and betake themselues to
some priuat house in a citie, where they may liue priuatly
at small charge, as though they were borne for themselues
alone. Hence also it is that tradesmen hauing
once gotten a good stocke, giue ouer their trade and traffique,
and giue themselues wholly to vsurie. And the
rest whose stocks are not great, do follow traffique, but
so as either they borrow money of the wealther vpon
vsurie to traffique withall, or else take vp their
wares on trust at an high rate, and sell them againe for
time at an higher price to such as do retaile, and they lastly
do vtter them to particuler men at an excessiue rate.
And therefore hence proceedeth in part the deernesse of
all things, as I haue shewed before.
            Again, there is such inequalitie in vsurie that many men
being consumed therby, the wealth of the country where
it is cōmonly practised, commeth into the hands of a few.
Now polititians haue obserued,Bodin de rep. lib. 5. ca. 2. that nothing is more
dangerous for the conuersion or euersion of kingdomes,
than the great wealth of a few, and the great want of the
most; and that is no way so much effected as by vsurie.
And therefore the enriching of a few by the impouerishing
of many, through vsurie, hath bene (as the histories
of all ages do testifie) an vsuall occasion of raising seditions
and ciuile contentions in common weales, when the
feare of God hath not cōtained men within their bounds,
as it alwayes ought to do. 
                  
                     •
                  ane vetus vrbi foenebre malum, &
seditionum discordiarumque creberrima causa, Vsurie, saith Tacitus,
hath bene an old mischife to the citie of Rome,Anal. lib. 6. and
the most frequent cause of seditions and ciuile discords.
In all cities,In Esay 58. saith Ierome, it is the greatest cause of sedition.
It is manifest,Lib de difinit. appellat. saith Phil. Melancthon, that by reason of the
inequalitie which is in vsurie, the greatest part of men

where it is vsed are impouerished, and that for the same
cause seditions haue often bene raised in kingdomes. A
spice whereof we may see, Nehem. 5.
            And yet these are not all the mischiefes which come
to the common wealth by vsurie: for ouer and besides all
these, it pulleth downe the fearefull judgements of God
vpon that country wherein it being publickly allowed, is
vsually and openly practised; as appeareth by that destruction
threatned against Ierusalem for this sinne, Ezek.
22. 12, 13. Thou hast taken vsuri
                     •
                   and increase, and hast gained
from thy nei
                     •
                  ghbour by deceit, and hast forgotten me, saith the Lord
God, wherefore behold I clap my hands because of thy gaine, that is,
(as appeareth out of the former chapter) I will,Ezee. 21. 14. 17. as it were
by clapping of hands, set other nations vpon thee to
ouercome thee, &c.
            Wherefore wise men when they haue considered not
onely the wrong which is done to particuler men, but also
the manifold inconueniences and mischiefes which
come to the common wealth by vsurie, they haue confidētly
affirmed, that vsurers are worse than other theeues,
and that it were better for the common wealth that there
should be a thousand theeues in it, than an hundred vsurers.
For the further proofe whereof, I referre you to the
writings of that worthie Bishop Iewell vpon 1. Thes. 4. 6.Chrysost.
Yea some haue not doubted to say, that the vsurer is to be
esteemed as a common enemie to all men. Luther saith,
An vsurer is a blood-sucker of the people:In decalog. & as a worme
in an apple or nut consumeth all that is within, so an vsurer
deuoureth the substance of the cittie by wonderfull
and secret meanes.
            Now if any man shall object that notwithstanding all
that hath bene said, vsurie may seeme profitable and necessarie
vnto common wealthes, because the lawes of all
common wealthes haue allowed the practise thereof. I
answer, first, that seldome or neuer haue the lawes of any
countries allowed of vsurie: But euer the Lawgiuers

when they saw any hope of abolishing it altogether, haue
wholly condemned it: or if the couetousnesse and hardnesse
of mens hearts would not suffer them to conceiue
any such hope, they haue laboured to restraine it onely,
and to keepe it within some compasse, that it should not
be ouer-burdensome either to the borrowers or to the
common wealth. Among others, Solon, Lycurgus, and Plato
in his booke of Lawes, haue wholly forbidden it. The
ancient Romans who are renowmed for wisedome and
politicke justice,Taci
                     •
                  . annal. lib. 6. first stinted vsurie at one in the hundred,
and by the lawes of the twelue Tables ordained
that if any vsurer should take aboue one in the hundred,Duodecim tabulis sanctum ne quis vnciario faenore amplius exerceret. De re rustica.
he should be punished fourefold; whereas a theefe by
the same lawes was to be punished but twofold. Whereby
you may gather, saith Cato, how much they esteemed
an vsurer to be a worse common-wealths man than a
theefe. Within one hundred and three yeares after (as
Bodin hath obserued) and that Duilia rogatione, it was reduced,
ad semuncias,
               Semunciarium foenus. saith Tacitus, that is, to halfe a pound in
an hundred; and the next yeare after, that also was abolished,
Genucia rogatione,
               Bodin ex Liu. lib. 7. saith Bodin, whereby it was enacted,
Ne vllo modo foenerari liceret, that it should not be lawfull
at all to lend vpon vsurie, as Alexander ab Alexandro reporteth.
Afterwards when vsurie grew to an head again,
it was sometimes stinted at six, and sometimes at foure in
the hundred, and sometimes altogether prohibited. At
length Iustinian so accommodated the limitation of vsurie
to the diuerse estates and conditions of men,
                  
                     •
                  od. lib. 4. tit. 32 lib. 26. that to
them which could better forbeare their money, lesse vsurie
should bee permitted, and to them which could
worse forbeare it, more. To Noblemen therefore and
Gentlemen who vse not to occupie their mony for gaine,
he permitted Trientes, that is, foure in the hundred: To
merchants and tradsemen, who liue by the imployment
of money in negotiation, he permitted besses, that is, eight
in the hundred: And to all other men semisses, that is, six in

the hundred: And in traiectitijs pecunijs, that is, in money
sent beyond sea at the creditors perill, and in two other
cases, he granted centesimas, that is, twelue in the hundred.
But in these latter times the ciuile Law hath beene corrected
according to the canon Law: For in the Diet held
at Augusta by Charles the fift, all vsurie is condemned;
and in steed thereof a contract of buying rents after fiue
in the hundred (which is after twentie yeares purchase)
allowed, with a couenant of releasing or selling backe
the same, when the seller shall tender the principall. And
not the Popes onely by their canon law, but euen Ma
                     •
                  omet
also in his Alcoron hath forbidden all vsurie.Azoara. 4. vid. centur. 7. Magdeburg.
            
            But forasmuch as some patrons of vsurie haue taught,
that a Christian man may with a good conscience take
so much vsurie as the lawes of the countrey wherein he
dwelleth do permit, and withall confesse that he cannot
with a good conscience take aboue that rate which is limited
by the lawes; it behoueth vs therefore to enquire
what our lawes haue determined concerning vsurie. And
to omit the lawes of former times wherein vsurie hath
bene sometimes restrained and stinted, as in the time of
Henry the eight; sometimes altogether forbidden, as in the
time of Edward the sixt; and to come to those lawes which
now are in force, which are as concerning this matter
and other criminall causes, of two sorts: the canon Law,
wherein it is not disagreeable to the word of God; and
the penall statute made in the 13 yeare of Queene Elizabeth.
The canons of the ancient councels do wholly and
absolutly forbid and condemne all vsurie, and the ancient
Bishops of Rome were of the same judgement, but as
I noted before, and as Bodin also hath obserued, the latter
Bishops de via deflexerunt, are turned out of the way: For
although according to the rest of their Antichristian hypocrisie
they do in word and in shew condemne all vsury,
permitting not so much as Christian buriall to him that
dieth an vsurer; yet indeed they haue allowed, yea as

               Bodin saith,Etrau. com. Calisti. 3. & Martini 5. de emptione & venditione cap. 1. & 2. brought in a contract of redeeming rents
which as it is practised by their leaue and allowance, is
worse than the vsurie allowed any where else. But as in
other things so in this point, where the Canon law swarueth
from the word of God we do forsake it, and where
it agreeth therewith, we embrace it.
            And as touching the statute made in the thirteenth
yeare of Queene Elizabeth, howsoeuer the most (looking
to the practise of vsurers and conniuencie of magistrats,
and not to the act of Parliament it selfe)Anno 13. Eliza. cap. 8. do imagine that
vsurie, after the rate of ten in the hundred, is thereby allowed;
yet the truth is, that it is not so much as permitted
thereby. Not allowed: for it is an act against vsurie as
being a sinne, yea and a detestable sinne, as the statute
it selfe doth call it: wherein also it is acknowledged, that
all vsurie is forbidded by the Law of God. Not permitted:
for as all vsurie aboue ten in the hundred, is thereby
to be punished with the forfeiture of the triple value of
the principall: so all vsurie, whether it be after the rate of
ten in the hundred, or vnder, though it were but of one
in the hundred, is to be punished with the forfeiture of
the vsurie or increase. From hence therefore the argument
of the patrons of vsurie in England, may easily be
returned vpon themselues: So much vsurie and no more,
say they, may with good conscience be taken, as the laws
of the land do allow and permit. But now say I, the laws
of the land do not allow, no nor yet permit ten, nor fiue,
nor yet one in the hundred; therefore in England a man
cannot with a good conscience take after ten, nor fiue,
nor yet one in the hundred.
            But suppose that humane lawes did permit vsurie, as
our statute doth in the case of orphanes only, doth not the
permission sufficiently argue the thing in it selfe to bee
euill? and if the thing be euill in it selfe, can the permission
justifie the practise of it before God? No, the law of
man may cleere thee from ciuile penalties in the outward

court, and before the magistrat: but it cannot cleere thee
from the guilt of sin in the court of conscience, and from
the penalties that are due to the same by the morall law
of God. Neither is the law of man, but the law of God,
the rule of thy conscience: and therefore though man
had nothing to punish in thee for thy vsurie, yet the
Lord hath more than ynough to condemne thee for the
same.
            But you will say, May humane lawes permit such
things as be euill? For answer, I will set downe the true
and learned sentence of reuerend Beza in his Annotations
vpon Mathew, Chapter 19. verse 8. The morall law (saith he)
because it respecteth the conscience, it simply commaundeth good
things and forbiddeth euill: But ciuile lawes, if they be well ordained,
they do indeed commaund nothing which God hath forbidden,
and they forbid nothing that God hath commaunded, but by the
wickednesse of men they are forced onely to moderat many things
which they cannot wholly abolish: and these are the things which are
sayd to be permitted by lawes. As for example, Christian charitie
forbiddeth to lend vpon vsurie: notwithstanding many magistrats
do see that in respect of traffique and dealings among men, they cannot
simply forbid vsurie. Therefore (which is the onely thing which
remaineth for them to do) they stint vsurie. But may a man therefore
with a good conscience lend vpon vsurie? No surely: For the rule
of our conscience is to be fetched not from the ciuile lawes of men, but
from the word of God. Nay the ciuile lawes themselues doe not allow,
but rather condemne that which they doe onely tolerat, forced
thereto by the wickednesse of men. Thus also the Lord by Moses making
ciuile lawes, doth not commaund diuorces (for so he should haue
bene contrarie to himselfe) but to such as could not bee got to retaine
their wiues, hee commaunded them to giue their wiues a bill of diuorcement,
that prouision might be made for them against their husbands
crueltie: and yet for all that, they which put away their wiues
ceassed not to be adulterers before God. So say I againe, The
lawes of men do not commaund nor allow vsurie: (For
so should they be contrarie to the lawes of God) and yet

to them who cannot be got to lend freely, they permit to
lend vpon vsurie, so as they do not exceed such a stint;
that prouision might be made for men that be in need,
both that they might borrow, and also that when they
must needs borrow, they should not be too much oppre
                  ••
               ed.
And yet for all this, as he was an adulterer that
put away his wife vnlesse it were for the crime of adulterie,
as our Sauior there proueth;Mat. 19. 8. so is he guiltie of theft
before God, who practiseth vsurie though it be permitted
by men. But as I sayd, our law doth not permit vsury
as men commonly imagine, but is as well contriued
(considering the iniquitie of the times) as could almost be
wished. Onely these two things I desire may be now
considered of in parliament; First, whether it were not
more behoofefull for the common weale, if vsurie
were stinted at six rather than at ten in the hundred;
or rather that all vsurie being forbidden, men should
be allowed to vse in steed thereof, the contract of redemption,
in that manner which before I approued,
buying a rent after fiue, as in Germanie; or (because of our
greater vse of money in traffique by reason of our more
commodious nauigation) after six in the hundred, or
more, if more be thought more equall, with a couenant of
redemption in the behalfe of the borrower, or rather seller,
if he desire it. For first it may seeme vnreasonable,
that wheras of an hundred pounds worth of land (which
is fruitfull by nature) a man can hardly raise a rent of fiue
or six pounds a yeare; an hundred pounds in money
which hath in it selfe no fruitfull vse, should without his
paines, cost, or hazard, yeeld him ten pounds a yeare.
Secondly, it would in mine opinion be a notable meanes
to diminish the number of vsurers, and also to ease both
the borrowers in particuler of oppression, and the
common wealth in generall of that great burden of vsurie
whereof I spake before. And thirdly, it would be a
meanes to preuent both the vsuall committing of this

sinne, and also the punishment which God hath threatned
for the same.
            The second thing which I desire may be considered
of, is, the permission of vsurie in the behalfe of orphanes.
For if it be simply euill, it cannot bee good in them, neither
can the respect had of them make it good in others.
And it is a principle in Diuinitie,Rom. 3. 8. Euill may not be done,
that good may come thereof. Augustine giueth this charge
(which afterwards was placed among the canons of the
law) That men should not lend vpon vsurie,De verb. domi. homil. 35. though they
would giue that which is gotten by vsurie as almes to the
poore.Caus. 14. 9. 5. And Chrysostome, when some made this excuse, I
lent indeed vpon vsurie,
               In Matth. homil. 57. 
               but that which I gained thereby I gaue to the
poore: he sayth plainely, that God doth not accept such sacrifices:
and addeth, that it were better not to giue to the
poore, than so to giue. It is a good rule in the Canon law,
if one cannot be relieued without another be hurt, it
were better neither should be holpen, than either wronged.
Charitie as it rejoyceth in the truth, so also in justice:
and therefore whatsoeuer is vnjust and against the law of
God, it cannot be charitable. Neither doth charitie require,
that I should sinne to do another man good, or to
cast away my soule by sinne, though it were to saue another
mans life. For he that shall be saued, doth not put
forth his money to vsurie: and he that doth,Psal. 15. shall he liue
saith the Lord?Ezek. 18. he shall not liue, but he shal die the death.
Wherefore vsurie being simply euill, and generally forbidden
in the word of God, it cannot in any case be exercised
with a good conscience.
            You will say then, What shall become of Orphanes,
if they may not be maintained with the increase of their
stocke, but be forced to liue vpon their stocke, and so to
spend it?
            Answer. You might better aske, what shall become
of those Orphanes who haue no stocke: for whom notwithstanding
the Lord doth graciously prouide, according

to his mercifull promises. I answer therefore that
orphanes and widowes haue a notable priuiledge of diuerse
gracious promises peculiarly made to them:Psal 68. 5, & 14. 6, 7. Let
them therfore,
                  
                     •
                  er. 49. 11. or their friends for them, depend vpon the
gracious prouidence and promises of God, in the vse of
lawfull meanes: Let them either imploy their goods in
some honest trade or negotiation, wherein they haue as
good cause to expect a blessing from God, as any other;
or let them deale by partnership: or if other meanes faile,
let annuities be bought for their liues, or lands, or rents
purchased for euer, or let some other honest course be tataken
which wise men can easily deuise, if they list, how
orphanes may be maintained, without impairing of their
stocke,
            Againe, if any man to make good the former objection
concerning the profitablenesse of vsurie to common
weales,Molin. shall alledge (as some haue done) that the ciuile
law alloweth thereof, and doth not onely permit,
but authorise vsurie according to the rates aforesaid. I answer,
that by the law it selfe it euidently appeareth, that
it doth not allow it as good, but permit it as euill, for the
auoiding of greater inconueniences; and permit it with a
threefold restraint. The first, in respect of the quantitie:
for the law stinteth the merchants vsurie at eight, the
gentlemens and noblemens vsurie at foure, and the vsury
of other men at six in the hundred. The second restraint
is in respect of the continuance: For the ciuile law prouideth
that when the vsurie which in the continuance of
the loane hath bene paid already, doth amount to as great
a summe as the principall it selfe, that then it shall ceasse,
and whatsoeuer is paid afterwards should be reckoned in
the principall: As for example, ten in the hundred do
match the principall in ten yeares, after which time no
more vse is to be payd: or if any be payd, it is to be abated
in the principall. The third restraint is in respect of
the compound vsurie, which is called vsurie of vsurie; for

that is absolutely forbidden by the ciuile law. Which two
latter restraints doe also prooue, that vsurie by the ciuile
law is judged a thing euill in it selfe. For if vsurie of ten
in the hundred be lawfull for ten years together, why not
for the eleuenth and twelfth, &c. the principall being still
forborne? and if the vsurie of the principall be lawfull
the first yeare, why is not that vsurie of the vsurie being
lent to the same man the second yeare, as lawfull as if it
were lent to another man?
            But whatsoeuer other lawgiuers haue judged of vsurie,
it is plaine, that the Lord, who is the supreme, and in
respect of the conscience, the onely lawgiuer, condemneth
all vsurie by his law morall; neither by his judiciall
law permitted the same to be exercised by the subjects of
that commonwealth which he ordained, among themselues.
And therfore it cannot without contumelie against
the wisedome of God be affirmed, that a commonwealth
cannot well stand without vsurie; especially considering
that the holy ghost hath made the vsuall practise of vsurie
countenanced by the state, a note of a corrupt state.
For so the seuentie interpreters,Psal. 55. 11. 
               Psa. 55. 11, for the Hebrew
Toc read 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , which as some thinke is deriued thence, and
the auncient writers doe read the place thus, Vsurie and
deceit depart not from her streets.Ezck. 22. 12. And the Prophet Ezechiel,
chap. 22. 12, among other enormities, or as he calleth
them abhominations of the citie Ierusalem, he reckoneth
this for one, Thou hast taken vsurie and increase. And contrariwise,
among the notes of a good gouernour this is mentioned,
Psal. 72. 14, That he should free his subjects from
vsurie, (for so againe the auncient interpreters doe read)
and violence: a notable example whereof we haue in
Nehemias that godly magistrat, chap. 5. And hereunto we
may adde the judgement of that notable Historiographer
and wise Polititian Cornelius Tacitus,
               Lib. 6. annal. who, as he judgeth
vsurie to be a mischiefe to the commonwealth, so he
noteth, that it was repressed in the auncient commonwealth

of the Romanes, when their manners were farthest
from corruption.In Ezek. 18. And to conclude, Caluin himselfe
is of this judgement, that an vsurer ought not to be suffered
in a well ordered commonwealth.
            And thus you haue heard how vsurie offendeth
against our neighbour, as being both vnjust and vncharitable.
Now let vs briefely consider how the vsurer sinneth
against God, not only mediatly by vnjustice and vncharitablenesse,
but also immediatly by impietie and vngodlinesse.
            For first seeing the practise of vsurie cannot stand with
the true feare of God, as may be gathered out of that opposition,Leuit. 25. 36.
               Leuit. 25. 36, Thou shalt take no vsurie of thy
needy brother, nor increase, but thou shalt feare thy God:
it is euident therefore, that they which take vsurie of
them which borrow for need, do not walke in the feare of
God,Nehem. 5. 9. as Nehemias telleth the vsurers of his time.
            Secondly, the vsurer sinneth against God by disobedience
and contempt: for he disobeyeth the commaundements
of God, straightly commaunding free loane, and
sharply forbidding vsurie, and contemneth the threatenings
of God denounced against the same.
            Thirdly, by infidelitie, in not belieuing the gracious
promises of God made to those who lend freely: For as
Chrysostome hath well said, 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , Vsurie is the off-spring
of infidelitie. And therefore, whereas the Lord
hath promised to such, that they shall be the children of
the most high,Luke 6. 35. that they shall be blessed, and receiue great
reward at his hands;Deut. 15. & 25. 20. those that will not beleeue these
promises, are to feare, that they are not the children of
God, and that in stead of that blessing and reward promised,
there remaineth to them the fearfull curse of God,
and condemnation.
            Fourthly, by diffidence, ending commonly in prophanenesse.
For the Lord would haue our faith concerning
spirituall blessings in heauenly things, to be exercised

and confirmed by our affiance reposed in his goodnesse
for temporall blessings in earthly things, as may be
gathered by the order of the fourth and fifth petitions of
the Lords prayer. For if we cannot find in our hearts to
depend vpon the goodnesse of God for these vile and
transitorie things; how can we persuade our selues, that
we truly beleeue in him concerning the forgiuenesse of
our sinnes, and eternall life? The Lord therefore would
haue vs, whether we want meanes, or whether we haue
them, as well in the vse of meanes as in the want of them,
to depend vpon his prouidence, and to cast our care vpon
him. If he lay a crosse vpon vs, or seeme to depriue vs
of our goods, it is his good pleasure that we should flie
vnto him by prayer: if he vouchsafe to blesse vs, thankes
are to be giuen vnto him, as to the authour of all good
things. In a word, in all estates it behooueth a true Christian
to walke with God, and to haue dayly recourse
to him.
            But the vsurers whole endeauour is to settle himselfe
and his estate as it were out of the gunshot of Gods prouidence:
he will not deale by husbandrie or traffique, because
of the hazards whereunto either of both is subject;
that is to say, because of his diffidence in God, to whose
prouidence he dare not trust his goods: and therefore
he will make sure worke for himselfe, that he shall not
need to stand to Gods courtesie. The practise of vsurie
shall be as a tower of Babel vnto him, that whether God
doe blesse the traffique of men, or not, or whether it goe
well or ill with husbandrie, he will be sure both of his
principall and of his gaine. All is one to him, whether the
marchants gaine or loose, sinke or swim, whether there be
famine or plentie, faire weather or foule, he feareth no
flouds. He looketh not vp to heauen with the good husbandman
or godly marchant, either to craue the blessing
of God vpon his labours, or to returne thankes for the
same: but is so wholly addicted to the earth and to his

vsurious cogitations, that he is seldome seen to looke vp:
insomuch, that many times by his very looke and gate an
vsurer may be discerned. In a word, his chiefe indeauour
is, that in respect of worldly things he may haue nothing
to doe with God: and so at length of a faithlesse man he
becommeth also prophane, hauing forgotten God, as for
this sinne the Lord chargeth Ierusalem,Ezek. 22. 12. 
               Ezech. 22. 12: neither
is God,Psal. 10. 4. I meane the true God, in all his thoughts.
For his God Mammon doth wholly possesse his heart:
 and therefore hee sinneth also by idolatrie. For seeing
the root of vsurie is couetousnesse (which is the root
of all euill) it cannot be denied, but that euery vsurer is
couetous: And euery couetous man is an idolater, Eph. 5. 5.
and a seruitour of Mammon, Mat. 6. 24, and therefore no
true seruant of the Lord. Now you must remember, that
for couetous persons and idolaters,1. Cor. 6. 9, 10. there is no inheritance
in heauen.
            And therefore the vsurer as he sinneth against God by
manifold impietie, so also against himselfe by desperat
folly. For as euery notorious malefactor may truly be
said to cast away himselfe, and is guiltie of selfe-murther,
as it is said of Korah and his complices,Num. 16. 38. 
               Num. 16. 38: so the
vsurer likewise pulleth vpon himselfe the fearfull judgements
of God, and is guiltie of his owne ouerthrow. For
the Lord hath threatened not onely the translation of
their goods from them in this world,Prou. 28. 8. 
               Prou. 28. 8, but also as
touching the world to come, that they shall not dwell in
the mountaine of Gods holinesse (as may be gathered
out of this Psalme) but that they shall die the death (meaning
thereby the death of the soule:) and that you may
know to whom the cause of the vsurers damnation is to
be imputed,Ezek. 18. 13. it is added, and his bloud shall be vpon him. And
that is it which Leo sayth,De Ieiun. 10. mensis serm. 6. 
               Foenus pecuniae funus est animae, The
gaine of vsurie is the graue of the soule.
            
            Wherefore what extreame folly and desperat madnesse
is this, for the vsurie, that is, as it were, the tenths of

thine owne money, to cast away thy soule, which thou
oughtest not to hazard for the gaine of the whole world.
For as our Sauior sayth, What will it profit a man though
he should gaine the whole world, if he loose his owne
soule?Mark. 8. 36. 
               Mar. 8. 36.
            To these arguments I might adde if it were needfull,
the testimonies of all wise and learned men who haue liued
vntill our age: for first, the Philosophers, though
heathens, haue written and spoken against it: the fathers
of the church haue with one consent condemned it euen
to the pit of hell: the Christian councels haue seuerely
censured it: the schoolemen, though corrupt in many
other things, yet herein they retaine the doctrine of the
primitiue Church: the godly learned diuines of this age,
and namely of this our Church, doe for the most part inueigh
against it: those few among vs that seeme to defend

                  •
               surie, doe in substance differ little from the rest, erring
especially in this, that vnder the odious name of vsurie
they defend and maintaine a lawfull contract of partnership,
as I haue shewed before. And because the judgements
of those learned men, who seeme not to condemne
all vsurie, are of such force with vsurers, that they seeme
to build their practise vpon their authoritie; I will also
take this hold from them, and out of their writings manifestly
demonstrate before their eies, that the vsurie which
is practised in the world, is not allowed of any godly
diuine.
            For first, though they thinke a man may now and then
lend vpon vsurie, such cautions obserued as they prescribe,
yet they hold it to be vtterly vnlawfull for a man
to be an vsurer, or to make a trade of it. Now whereas
they doe not denie, but that a man may make a trade of
gaining by any honest or lawfull contract, this euidently
sheweth, that euen out of their assertions it may be prooued,
that vsurie is not a lawfull contract. Quisquis ex professo
foeneratur (sayth Caluin)
               
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  . in Eze. 18. 
               ille omnino debet ab hominum consortio

reijci. Whosoeuer is a professed vsurer, he ought to be
excluded out of all humane societie. And againe, an vsurer
ought not to be suffered in the Church of God.
            Secondly, they absolutly condemne vsurie of vsurie,
which in it selfe is no more vnlawfull than vsurie of the
principall. Vsura vsurarum iudicio bonorum omnium etiam apud
infideles damnata semper & infamis fuit. Iun. in Leuit.
            
            The conditions whereby they circumscribe vsurie, are
these and such like.
            As first, That it be not required of them, who being in
want, doe borrow for the supply of their necessitie; but
onely of those who borrow mony to make a gaine thereof:
And that their lending to such, doe not hinder them
from free lending to those which would borrow for
need.
            2. That they require not gaine of him which borroweth
for gaine, vnlesse he be a gainer. And therefore
they define that vsurie which they allow, to be part of
the borrowers gaine, and but such a part as the borrower
may liue of the rest.
            3. That he which lendeth for gaine, must not onely
require no gaine, but also must be content to beare part
of the borrowers losse, if without his owne default he
prooue a looser.
            4. That the end of this lending must bee charitie,
wherby the lender is bound to seeke the borrowers good
rather than his owne.
            5. That in this contract he respect the good not only
of the borrower, but also of the commonwealth: and
therefore that he require not so much gaine as the partie
cannot raise by lawfull meanes.
            6. That this lending be agreeable to naturall equity,
which is to be judged of not by mens practise, but by the
word of God.
            7. That it be contained within those limits which the
laws of euery countrey concerning vsurie do appoint.
            
               
These cautions men must obserue, or else they may
not build their practise vpon the authoritie of godly learned
men; who haue by these and such like conditions so
qualified vsurie, as that where they be obserued, there is
no vsurie, or at least no actuall vsurie committed.
            And because the authoritie of that excellent instrument
of God, I. Caluin, is much pretended for the defence
of vsurie, I will therefore shew you briefely, how little
encouragement vsurers can truly receiue from him.Resp
                     •
                  n. de vsur. He
sayth it is more than a rare thing, that the same man shold
be an vsurer and an honest man. Nay, he sayth,In Ezek. 18. That an
vsurer is euer a theefe and a robber: and although hee
sayth, it may happen sometimes, that a man may in some
case take vsurie, and cannot precisely bee condemned
therefore, yet he setteth downe this assertion: But we must
alwayes hold it to be a thing scarcely possible, that he which taketh
vsurie, should not wrong his brother. And therefore it were to be wished,
that the very name of vsurie were buried and vtterly blotted out
of the memorie of men.
               Resp. de vsur. And in another place, It were to be wished
(sayth he) that all vsurie, yea and the name of it were banished
out of the world.
            
            Hauing thus by testimonies of scripture and by other
arguments and testimonies prooued vsurie to be vnlawfull,
it now remaineth, that for the better satisfying of the
reader, I should answere such arguments as are made in
defence of vsurie.
            But that you may not thinke, that the patrons of vsurie
doe promiscuously defend all vsurie, therefore they
circumscribe that vsurie which they allow with these
conditions: first, That it be moderat; secondly, That it
be not required of the poore and needie; thirdly, That it
be not hurtfull to the borrower. Where, by the way we
are to obserue, that no man of vnderstanding goeth about
to justifie that vsurie which is commonly practised in the
world: in which, being immoderat for the most part,
though it be but after ten in the hundred, there is seldome

or neuer any thing else looked after but the lenders securitie,
without respect, whether the borrower be wealthie
or needie, or whether he shall gaine or loose thereby.
            But let vs examine these three conditions seuerally:
for as touching the first, whereas I haue prooued before,
that euery ouerplus or gaine required for loane, is that
vsurie which is condemned in the Scriptures, and that it
is a thing in it selfe simply euill and vnlawfull, therefore I
say with learned Chemnicius,
               
                  The schoolemen say, Vsura est peccatum non solum in se, sed etiam secundum se, & ideo ex nulla circumstantia bene potest fieri. Sum. Angel. That when men make question
of moderat vsurie, whether that be lawfull, or not,
they might as wel make question, whether moderat adulterie,
or moderat lying, or moderat theft is lawfull: for as
adulterie, as lying, as theft are things in themselues simply
euill and vnlawfull, and therefore cannot well bee
done, so is vsurie, as I haue prooued. It is a good saying
and a true of D. Wilson in his booke of vsurie, That there
is no meane in this vice, more than is in murther, theft, or
whoredome: and as the stealing of one penny is theft, so
is the least vsurie, though it be but of a penny.
            And as touching the second, whereas they allow moderat
vsurie taken of the wealthie: I answere (as before)
That if God in his word had made this difference of
vsurie in respect of the poore and the rich, as he doth in
respect of the Israelite and the Canaanite, To the poore
thou shalt not lend vpon vsurie, but to the rich thou
mayest; their practise had beene justifiable, who require
vsurie of the rich: but the Lord in diuerse places of the
Scripture in generall tearmes absolutely condemneth all
vsurie, as I haue shewed. And therefore, if because in the
prohibition of vsurie in one or two places there is mention
made of the poore, we may inferre, that therefore
vsurie is lawfull towards the rich; by the same reason the
most notorious sinnes against the sixth and eighth commaundements
may be justified, if they be not committed
against the poore and helpelesse, because in the prohibition
of those sinnes, there is expresse mention made in

diuerse places, of the poore, the fatherlesse, the widdow,
the stranger, and such others as are helpelesse. And therfore
when the holy Ghost saith, Prou. 22. 22, Rob not the
poore because he is poore; the robber might by the same
reason justifie his robbing of the rich.
            And lastly whereas they allow vsurie, so it be not joyned
with the hurt of the borrower: I answer, that by the
same reason they may justifie the officious lye which is
vttered to helpe and not to hurt the neighbour. But charitie
as it rejoyceth in the truth, so also in justice; and as a
lye, so also vsurie is euer opposed to charitie, if not as an
hurtfull thing to our neighbour, yet as an vnjust thing in
it selfe. And it is a rule in Diuinitie,Rom. 3. 8. That we may not do
euill, that good may come thereof: and therefore vsury
though it were not hurtfull, yet were it vnlawfull. But as
it is vnlawfull in it selfe, so is it euer hurtfull, if not to the
borrower in particuler (as most commonly it is, in the
judgement of Caluin) yet (as I haue before shewed) to
the common weale, which is worse. Besides in the contract
of vsurie there is an absolut couenant for gaine: and
therefore no prouision made for the borrowers indemnitie,
seeing by the very contract of vsurie, the same gaine
is to be required out of the borrowers losse as well as out
of his gaine. Whereas therefore they say, vsurie is to be
allowed, when prouision is made that the borrower shall
not be hurt or damnified thereby: it is all one as if they
had sayd, that vsurie is then to be allowed, when it is no
vsurie.
            But let vs consider their reasons, which are of three
sorts, viz. proofes out of the Scripture, with other arguments
and testimonies.
            Their proofes out of the Scriptures are these. First the
example of Ioseph, Ge. 47. which I haue heretofore shewed
to haue none affinitie with vsurie.
            Secondly, out of Deut. 15. 1, 2, 3, 4, the author of the
aforesayd English Treatise would prooue, that in the seuenth

yeare of freedome the rich debtor was by the appointment
of the Lord himselfe to pay his debt with the
vsurie thereof, though the poore were exempted from
payments of debts that yeare: for so it is sayd vers. 4.
Saue when there shall be no poore with thee: as if the Lord
bad said (saith he) prouided alwayes that thy rich debtor shall haue
no such priuiledge, &c. And how is this proued? Forsooth
because the word Masshah which (as he saith) signifieth
vsurie, and the verbe Nashah which signifieth to lend vpon
vsurie, are there vsed. But I aunswere, that Masshah in no
place of Scripture signifieth vsurie, and in that place signifieth
a debt which the creditor lendeth with purpose
to exact againe: but there the Lord taketh order that it
should not be exacted in the seuenth yeare. And Nashah
in this place as appeareth by the text it selfe, and by the
consent of all writers, signifieth onely to lend with purpose
to exact againe that which is lent. For otherwise the
Lord should allow the lending vpon vsurie to the poore,
and the exacting of it also, so it were not in the seuenth
yeare. But that author absolutly condemneth all vsurie
towards the poore: yea he affirmeth (though without
reason) that the exacting of the principall alone from the
poore is vsurie. But of the signification of these words
I haue sufficiently spoken before. As for the prouiso which
(as he saith) followeth, vers. 4, it appeareth by the reason
following, that it is not an exception of the rich,Quicquid fit, ne patiamini vestra culpa quenquam esse inter vos mendicum. Calu. 
               for the
Lord shall blesse thee, &c for the words as Iunius readeth, and
Caluin expoundeth them, are thus to be red, Only because
thy brother ought not by thy meanes to become poore,
or be impouerished, and therefore are a reason of that
law of remission. For seeing in that yeare of Sabbath the
ground was to rest, and men had not the meanes of raising
profits whereby to pay their debts as in other years;
therefore if the creditors should that yeare haue exacted
their debts, they would haue brought many to beggerie:
for the preuention whereof, the Lord saith he instituted

this law concerning the remission of debts in that yeare
of freedome. And that the creditors should not alledge
for themselues, that they should be vnable to forbeare
their money so long; the Lord addeth another reason,
being a promise, That if they kept that & other his commandements
hee would blesse them in the land,Verse 4, 5, 6. and so
blesse them, that they should be able to lend to many nations,
and should not need to borrow of them. So that in
conclusion, this being not an exceprion of the rich, and
the word Masshah not signifying vsurie, there is no shew
of reason in this allegation.
            Thirdly, no more is there in the next out of Pro. 22. 16,
which notwithstanding the same author commendeth as
a notable place to proue that the rich ought to giue interest
or increase. He that oppresseth the poore (saith Salomon)
to increase himselfe, and giueth to the rich, shall surely come to pouertie:
whence he inferreth these consequences: First, that it is
as great a fault to giue or lend freely to the rich, as to oppresse the
poore by taking vsurie of them, because the same punishment, Viz.
pou
                     •
                  rtie, is awarded to both. And secondly from the contrary,
that it is as lawful and good to lend to the rich with a iust increase, as
to giue or lend freely to the poore: and that the like opposit blessing of
plenteousnesse equally belongeth to both. As if Salomon had also said,
he that giueth to the poore freely and cheerefully, and lendeth to the
rich to increase himselfe, shall vndoubtedly attaine to great riches.
Thus you see how a partiall and prejudicat mind, seeketh
rather to draw the Scriptures to it selfe, than to conforme
it selfe to the Scriptures. This prouerbiall sentence is
diuersly expounded: the most of them, that I haue
seene, expound the latter clause as a punishment of the
former. As if this were the sence and meaning of this prouerbe,
That he which seeketh to enrich himselfe by oppressing
the needie, shall contrarie to his expectation, either
by bribes giuen to magistrats that he may escape the
punishments which by the lawes belong vnto him, or else
by forfeiture of his goods into great mens hands, fall into

pouertie. Others obserue here to be noted two practises
of worldly men, which they read copulatiuely; that is, to
take from the poore and to giue to the rich, both of them
in their intent and purpose referred to the enriching of
themselues, but by the just prouidence of God so disposed,
that in the euent they tend to their impouerishment.
As if Salomon had said, He that taketh from the poore to
enrich himselfe, and giueth to the rich, that from them he
may receiue greater benefits (which commonly is the
end of gifts giuen to great men) shall by the just judgement
of God come to pouertie: or as one vnderstandeth
this prouerbe, He that oppresseth the poore to
enrich himself: also who giueth to the rich small things,
that he may receiue from him greater matters, and that he
may do it, oppresseth the poore in the meane while, that
he may haue to giue to the rich; hee shall surely come to
pouertie.
            But suppose the holy Ghost did here match these two
as equall sinnes, to take from the poore▪ and to giue to the
rich; yet the latter is not generally to bee vnderstood, either
as a sinne in it selfe, as though it were simply vnlawfull
to giue any thing to the rich, or as great a sinne as to
lend vpon vsurie to the poore: but with limitation to
such things as are giuen to the rich, being vnjustly taken,
or vncharitably withheld from the poore. Howsoeuer
it is, the holy ghost doth not speake here of lending at all,
and therefore those two collections from hence are absurd
and impudent, either that lending freely to the rich
is as great a sinne as lending vpon vsurie to the poore; or
that lending vpon vsurie to the rich is as good a thing in
his kind, as lending freely to the poore. Which wicked
and shamelesse assertions of this patron of vsurie,
I wish, may bee an admonition both to others that
haue taken vpon them the defence of the same cause,
that through the partialitie of their affections they
runne not into the like extremities; and also to vsurers,

that they relie not much vpon such patrons, nor hazard
their saluation vpon their credit: who are now growne
to this passe, as to call vertue vice, and vice vertue.
Would a man thinke it credible, that a Christian man hauing
knowledge and learning joyned with a profession
of the truth, should euer conceiue, and much lesse commit
to writing, That to lend freely to the rich is as great a
fault as to lend vpon vsurie to the poore; and to lend
vpon vsurie to the rich as lawfull and good a thing, as to
lend freely to the poore? O tempora! 
                     •
                  o mores! in which it is
a sinne not to be an vsurer, and a vertue not to be liberall,
friendly, courteous, or ciuile. In which, religion is made
to countenance vsurie for a vertue, and to condemne liberalitie
and humanitie for a vice.
            
               Fourthly, they alledge, Ier. 15. 10. I neither lent vpon vsurie,
neither haue they lent me vpon vsurie. Whence they gather, that
lending vpon vsurie is of the same nature with borrowing vpon vsurie,
and both of them are there mentioned as indifferent things.
            I answer that the Prophet speaketh not of lending
vpon vsurie, or borrowing vpon vsurie, though some
translations so read; but of lending vpon securitie, or
with purpose to exact that which is lent. And this signification
better fitteth the purpose of the Prophet, which
is to shew the contentious disposition of the people, who
contended with him when he had giuen them not onely
no cause (as he had done if hee had bene an vsurer) but
none occasion of cursed contention: for he had forborne
all worldly (though otherwise lawfull) contracts, from
whence many times contentions arise among men: as if
he had said, I did neither meddle nor make with them in
worldly affaires, neither bought nor sold, neither borrowed
nor lent, and yet they contend. Or if the Prophet
had spoken of vsurie in this place, it would serue rather
for the condemnation of borrowing vpon vsurie, which
in manie cases is vnlawfull, than for justification of lending
vpon vsurie, which in no case is lawfull; the Prophet

disclaiming the one as well as the other, as causes, or
at the lest as occasions of contention.
            
               And these with some few other before confuted, are
all their allegations out of the old Testament. Let vs
come to the new: for (as some of them say,) It is not to be
omitted that the Apostles of Christ in their sundry catalogues of sinnes
do neuer once make mention of vsurie, which is an argument that it is
lawfull, especially seeing in the Romane empire vnder which they liued,
it was commonly exercised euen vnto twelue in the hundred, as
also among the Iewes, to whom Iames, Peter, and Iohn did write.
            I answer, first, although it be not forbidden by name
in the new Testament, yet that proueth it not to bee lawfull.
An argument drawne from the testimonie of some
one part of the Scripture negatiuely, doth not hold; it is
sufficient that it is forbidden in the old Testament, and
namely in the morall law of God, which is common and
perpetuall. And farre be it from vs to thinke that Christ
in his Gospell alloweth any sinne which is forbidden in
the morall law, as I haue prooued vsurie to be. Againe,
there are many other sinnes forbidden in the morall law,
which are not once mètioned in the new Testament. For
to seeke no further, biting and griping vsurie is condemned
in the morall law, and is a thing in the confession of
all, simply and vtterly vnlawfull; and yet thereof is no
mention made in all the new Testament: and therefore if
this argument be good, no vsurie at all, be it neuer so immoderat
or excessiue, is vnlawfull.
            Secondly I answer, that vsurie is forbidden and condemned
in the new Testament, not indeed expresly and
by name, neither is that needfull, for many things are
contained in the Scriptures, which are not expresly mentioned
in the Scriptures. There be, I doubt not, some
sinnes condemned in the morall law, which neither in
the law, nor gospell, nor any where in the Scriptures are
once named; for the condemnation whereof it is sufficient,
if it may by just consequence be deducted out of the

Scriptures. But vsurie is condemned both in the old Testament
and the new: In the old, expresly and by name;
In the new, by necessarie consequence, as sometimes vnder
the contrarie affirmatiue: for where free lending is
commaunded, as Mat. 5. 42, not free lending (that is, vsury)
is condemned; sometimes vnder the general, as Eph. 4. 28.
1. Thes. 4. 6, Let him that stole steale no more, Let no man
oppresse or defraud his brother, 1. Corinth. 6. 10. neither
theeues nor couetous persons shall inherit the kingdome
of God. Sometimes abstinence from vsurie is commanded
vnder the arguments of the greater and lesse, as Luke
6. 35. Lend looking for nothing thence. For if I must
lend without respect of mine owne profit, or without expectation
of any benefit or gaine thereby, as the most expound
that place; then much more must I lend without a
couenant, especially without an absolut couenant for
gaine. And if I must lend without hope or expectation
of recouering my principall, as others vnderstand that
place, then much more must I lend without expectation
of a gain and ouerplus aboue my principall: and if without
expectation of gaine, much more without a couenant
for gaine. Hence Ierome saith, In euangelio,
               Hieronym. in Ezech. 18. 
               virtutis augmentum
est,
               Ambros. de Tobic. cap. 15. 
               & Ambrose, euangelium dicit quod est plenius. Sometimes
againe by an argument drawne from the lesse.
Euen sinners, saith our Sauiour,Luk. 6. 34. are willing and readie to
lend one to another without vsurie, how much more doth
it become you that are Christians to lend one to another
without vsurie? Do sinners, who are but naturall and ciuile
men, in common courtesie and humanitie lend one
to another, to receiue their owne without increase, and
shal it not be a shame to such as professe themselues members
of Christ, to be behind sinners? And whereas they
affirme that vsurie was in the time of Christ and his Apostles
commonly practised among the Romanes and the
Iewes, I greatly doubt of the truth of that assertion, in respect
of the Romanes, seeing Tiberius in the latter part of

his reigne had vsed effectuall meanes for the abolishing
of vsurie,Lib. 1. cap. 7. as Alexander ab Alexandro reporteth: but
much more in respect of the Iewes, among whom the
practise of vsurie was forbidden by the law of God, and
to whom in the sixt of Luke our Sauiour giueth this testimonie,Luke 6. 34.
That the very sinners among thē would lend one
to another to receiue as much as they lent.Iam. 5. 3. 
               Iames also in
his Epistle findeth fault with the rich men of that time,
that they suffered their gold and siluer to rust, which they
would not haue done if they had bene addicted to vsury:
and therefore the lesse practise of vsurie in those times,
may be some reason why it is not expresly mentioned in
the writings of the Apostles. And hereunto I might add
the testimony of some Historiographers,Vincent. Magdeburg ex P. Cantore. who affirm that
vsurie in the primitiue Church, & in the time of the Apostles
was most odious among all that professed the name
of Christ. But (say they again,) What if our Sauiour Christ beso
far from condemning vsurie, that he approueth it: for when as he condemneth
that slouthfull seruāt because he had not occupied his talent,
he saith, that he should haue put forth his mony to the bankers, that at
his cōming he might receiue his own with vsurie,
               Mat. 25. 27. 
               Mat. 25. 27. Where
(say they) our Sauior speaketh of vsurie as of a lawfull gaine: and
withall signifieth, that it is better for a man, who hath no other lawful
trade to gain by, to put forth his mony to vsury, than to haue it idle by
him. And how is it proued that Christ speaketh of vsury as
of a lawful gain, seeing this is not Christs own speech, but
by him assigned to a worldly master? Forsooth, because by
this Lord or master, Christ himselfe is represented: and therefore it is not
likely that he would assign to him such a speech as should contain any
dishonest thing in it. Answ. First, it may be doubted whether
this lord or master would haue had his mony put forth to
vsury, though he speake of receiuing it again with vsurie.
For when any thing is restored to a man with increase,
that increase by a metaphoricall speech is called vsurie.
As for example: the earth is sayd by the Orator neuer to
repay that which it receiued, without vsurie, and therefore

that is called naturall vsurie.Cic. de senect. The Lord is said to repay
him that is mercifull to the poore, as it were with vsurie.
Likewise when men shal haue imployed the gifts of God
to the glorie of God and good of his Church, the Lord
when he shall call his seruants to an account, wil acknowledge
that he hath receiued his owne with vsurie: and this
(as also the former) is called spirituall vsurie, whereof the
holy Ghost speaketh in this place. Againe, when the
debtor hauing gained by the imployment of the money
borrowed, doth restore the principall, with the increase of
a free gift or gratuitie, the creditor may be said to receiue
his owne with vsurie: and that is called liberall vsurie.
Likewise if a man should deale by way of partnership
with a merchant or exchanger, which in this place is called
a Trapezite, to receiue part of their gaine when they do
gaine; he may be said when by partnership he proueth a
gainer, to receiue his owne with vsurie.
            But suppose this speech were so to be vnderstood, as
that this Maister would haue had his seruant to haue put
forth his money to vsurie: yet this prooueth not, that
Christ doth therefore approue vsurie. First, because the
maister speaketh of himselfe according to that opinion
which his seruant had conceiued of him; Thou knowest
me to be an hard man,Luke 19. 22. who (as vsurers vsually doe) take
vp which I laid not downe, and reape where I sowed
not, and gather where I strewed not, why then diddest
thou not accommodate thy selfe to my disposition, and
do thy best indeuour that I might receiue mine own with
vantage? Or if thou wert so idle as that thou wouldest
not according to my commaundement,Luke 19. 13. 
               Luke 19. 13. take
the paines, or so diffident and distrustfull, as that thou
wouldest nor beare the hazard of negotiation; yet at the
lest thou mightest haue committed it to the bankers.
From whence you may gather by the way, that the
course of vsurie fitteth them best, who are both idle and
distrustfull. But this speech of this maister, who representeth

our Sauiour Christ, doth no more prooue, that he
alloweth vsurie, than that he acknowledgeth himselfe to
be an hard and austere master, who taketh vp where he
laid not downe, &c.
            And suppose againe, that our Sauior Christ had compared
himselfe to a master who was an hard man indeed,
and would require his seruants to put forth his money to
vsurie; yet this would not be a sufficient warrant either
for the hardnesse or austeritie of masters, or yet for the
vsurie practised by the seruants. For euen as here hee
compareth the bestowing of his gifts vpon his seruants,
(that they employing them and vsing them to his glorie
and good of their brethren, and increasing them in the
vse, he might seeme to receiue his own with vauntage) to
a straight and austere masters deliuerie of talents to his
seruants, that they might occupie or traffique therewith,
to the end that he might make vs all carefull to vse and
imploy the good gifts of God according to our seuerall
places and callings, remembring that we shall be called
to a straight account for the same: so elsewhere he compareth
his comming to the suddain comming of a theefe,Mat. 24. 43.
to the end that he might make vs vigilant and watchfull:Apoc. 16. 15.
and yet me thinkes this should be but small warrant for
theeues suddainly to breake into mens houses.
            Yea but (say they) though theft it selfe be vnlawfull, yet the
wisedome of theeues in chusing a fit time, in respect whereof the comming
of Christ is compared to their comming, is not vnlawfull. To
omit, that the comming of Christ is compared to the
comming of theeues onely in respect of suddainnesse: it
cannot truly be said, that the wisdome of theeues in chusing
their best oportunitie, is lawfull: for all such wisdom
Iames calleth earthly,Iam. 3. 15. carnall, and diuellish. Yea, but you
will say, although the vnjust stewards dealing with his
master were vnjust and vnfaithfull, Luke 16. 8, yet our sauiour
Christ commendeth his wisdome. I answere, euen
as in that place our Sauiour Christ, though the dealing of

that steward were vnjust, yet commendeth his wisdome;
not that he simply allowed thereof, for it was (as Iames
sayth of all such wisdome) earthly and diuellish, but commendeth
it to his disciples, to be imitated in spirituall
things, that we likewise should make vs friends with the
riches of iniquitie, that when we must giue vp our stewardship,
we may be receiued into euerlasting habitations:
So in this place he speaketh not of vsurie as of a lawfull
gaine, but commendeth the wisedome and care of the
children of this world (who are wiser in their generation
than the children of light) to be imitated of the faithfull
in spirituall things. For as worldly men hauing receiued
talents from their master to occupie for his best aduantage,
vse not to keepe his mony idle by them, but do their
best indeuour to increase the stocke committed to them,
by traffique or negotiation; or if they be idle or distrustfull,
will commit it to the bankers, that their master may
receiue his owne with vsurie: so those who haue receiued
spirituall gifts and graces from God to be employed
to his glory, ought not to burie or to hide them, but ought
to imploy them as it were by traffique and mutuall communication
of them for the common good of the church;
that by the imployment of them, the Church being profited,
and the gifts themselues increased, the Lord may
receiue his owne with vantage. For such is the bountie
of the Lord, that he accounteth the good of the church
and the increase of his graces in his seruants, to be his
owne gaine.
            Thus haue I shewed, that although the similitude be
pressed for the proofe of other matters than for which it
is brought, yet nothing can be concluded thence for the
justifying of vsurie. But now I answere further, That a
similitude ought not to be pressed for the proofe of any
matter besides the purpose for which it is bought: otherwise,
from parables and similitudes a man might inferre
very many absurd consequences. It is therefore a principle

among schoole-diuines, that Theologia symbolica non est
argumentatius: that is, That arguments drawne from symbolicall
and parabolicall speeches, prooue nothing in diuinitie.
And Basil speaking of this very parable, giueth
this rule, 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               
Parables doe not in their specialtie,Ascet. quest. 254 or seuerally
by themselues yeeld full rules or documents, but
they lead a mans mind to the argument or cause which is
in hand. The scope therefore and purpose of this parable,
is to teach vs, that for as much as we are all to giue a
straight account vnto God of those gifts and talents
which we haue receiued from him, it behooueth vs therfore
diligently and carefully to vse and imploy them,
that by the imployment of them our brethren being profited,
and the graces themselues being increased in vs,
God may haue the glorie, and we euerlasting comfort.
This doctrine our Sauiour Christ illustrateth by a parable
or fained example of a master, who hauing at his departure
into a strange countrey giuen talents to his seruants
in diuerse degrees to be occupied, at his returne
calleth them to an account, how they haue imployed his
talents, and accordingly rewardeth the diligent & faithfull,
and punisheth the idle and vnfaithfull seruant, taking
from him his excuses, and condemning him out of his
owne mouth: this was the proposition of the similitude,
the reddition (which is not expressed) is this: So our Lord
and master, both when he ascended into heauen gaue, and
also since by his spirit giueth gifts and graces to men, to
some more, to some lesse, that we may imploy them to his
glory, and to the good of our brethren; and at his return
in the day of judgement, he shall call vs all to an account,
how we haue imployed our talents; and so many as he
findeth to haue beene diligent and faithfull seruants, he
will reward with euerlasting joy and happinesse; but such
as haue buried the gifts of God by idlenesse and vnfaithfulnesse,
he will punish, taking from them their friuolous

excuses, and euen condemne them out of their owne
mouth. When as therefore they say, that our Sauiour
Christ in this parable signifieth, That it were better for a man
to put forth his money to vsurie, than to keepe it idle by him: I answere,
That this is altogether besides the purpose and intendment
of our Sauiour Christ in this place: His drift is
to shew, that as worldly masters require their seruants to
increase their worldly wealth by one meanes or other,
and will not admit their excuses which they pretend to
their idlenesse and vnfaithfulnesse: so the Lord requireth
of all his seruants, that they should vse all diligence to
imploy his spirituall gifts to his glorie: neither will he
accept the friuolous pretences of such as are idle and vnfaithfull.
And to this purpose onely, as I take it, is this
speech concerning the putting forth of the mony to the
bankers, vsed; not that the like is to be done or can be
done in spirituall things.
            3. Againe, they alledge the authoritie of Iohn Baptist,
               Luke 3. 12, 13.
for when as the Publicanes, who fermed the customes,
tolls, and tributes in euery prouince, and vsed to put forth
money which they gathered, vnto vsurie, demaunded of
him, what they should doe; Iohn Baptist answered, Exact
nothing aboue that which is appointed you. Which the
author of the aforesaid English Treatise vnderstandeth
thus, That they should not in taking vsurie exceed the centefima,
that is, twelue in the hundred: as if Iohn had approoued vsurie,
so it exceeded not that rate.
            I answere, That the Publicans who came to Iohn, were
not Romanes, of the worshipfull order of knights, or
other Gentiles, but certaine of the Iews, who being called
soc
                     ••
                   publicanorum, the Publicanes associats, as Beza rightly
judgeth, were hired by the Romane Publicanes to helpe
and assist them, in gathering the customes, tolls, tributes,
and reuenewes which were due in Iurie, being a prouince
to the citie of Rome: for which cause, though they practised
not vsurie, these Publicanes being Iewes, were hated

and detested of the other Iews, and esteemed as most
notorious sinners, insomuch, that they might not enter
into their assemblies, both because they associated themselues
vnto Gentiles, and also assisted them in a businesse
most odious to them, viz. in exacting tributes and tolls
from them, being a free people. These Publicans therefore
being in this common disgrace, and comming to Iohn
Baptist to be baptized, propound this question to him,
Whether it were lawfull for them to exact the tributes in
behalfe of the Romanes; or if it be, how they were to
demeane themselues, and to that purpose aske him, What
shall we doe? Vnto which question Iohn answereth thus,
Require or exact no more than is appointed for you.
Which answere most plainely concerneth their dutie in
exacting of tributes, tolls and customes, that they should
extort no more than was due, as the Publicans by forged
cauillations many times did.Luke 19. 8.
            
            Vnto these testimonies the same authour addeth two
more, Mar. 4. 25, To him that hath, it shall be giuen: and
Act. 20. 35, It is a more blessed thing to giue than to receiue:
but I will not trouble the reader with them.
            And these are their allegations out of the Scripture.
Now I desire euery Christian in the feare of God and
without partialitie to compare these allegations which
haue beene made for vsurie, with those testimonies of
Scripture which before I produced against it: & namely
with that one, Ezek. 18. 13, He that lendeth vpon vsurie,
or taketh increase, shall he liue saith the Lord? he shall not
liue, but he shall die the death, and his blood shall be vpon
him. And let him vprightly consider to which part he
ought rather to incline: For this may not be denied, but
that if vsurie may be lawfully practised, it is to be done in
faith, that is, in a sound persuasion out of the word of
God, that it is lawfull. But whereupon shall this found
persuasion be grounded? On a few far-fetched allegations
drawne into the defence of vsurie perforce, contradicted

with such manifest testimonies of scripture, and confuted
by most euident arguments?
            But it may be, though their allegations out of scripture
be weake, yet their reasons are strong. Though they
were neuer so strong, yet ought we rather to denie our
owne reason, than not to yeeld simple and absolute obedience
to the word of God. But let vs examine their
strength.
            And first, that vsurie so qualified as I said before, is not
vnlawfull, they prooue first by the name thereof. For say
they, Although the name vsurie in English tongue be odious through
the abuse of the ignorant, yet in the learned tongues it is of a middle
and indifferent nature.
            
            
               Answ. By the learned tongues, are commonly vnderstood
the Hebrew, Greeke, and Latine: the first
and ordinarie name of vsurie in Hebrew is Neshek, in
Greeke 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                in Latine foenus. Neshek signifieth biting,
and is deriued from the same verbe which oftentimes
in the scripture is ascribed to the biting of serpents.

                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                is deriued either of the Hebrew Toc, which signifieth
deceit and by the Grecians is translated 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                
               Psal. 55.
13 & 72. 14. as also Isb Tecachim, Prou. 29. 13. The man of
deceit, is commonly vnderstood to be the vsurer, and so
by diuerse is translated. Or else of the verbe 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                to signifie
(as the Philosopher rightly noted) that vsurie is a
monstrous and vnnaturall contract, whereby money, and
other things which naturally do not fructifie nor haue no
fruitfull vse, but are spent in the vse, are made against nature
to fructifie and to bring forth gaine. For which cause
Ch
                     •
                  ysosiome calleth vsurie a pestiferous wombe.In Math. homil. 57. Others
giue this reason of the Greeke name, that vsurie is called
Tokos, because it breedeth griefe to the borrower, or as
Ambrose sayth,De Tob. cap. 12. because it worketh in the borrowers soule
griefes answerable to the paines of childbirth. In Latine
it is called foenus, either quasi foetus, as Nonius Marcellus
and others haue taught, by the same reason that it is

called 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                in Greeke, because it is as it were the monstrous
and vnnaturall brood of that which is borrowed:
or else it is named, foenus, quasi funus (for in many Latine
words u is changed into oe dipthong: as in Pomoerium for
Pomurium, and Moenia a muniendo) because it is the graue of
the borrowers state, and of the lenders soule. Wherefore
Ambrose sayth,Se
                     ••
                  . 6. de Ieiunio 10. mensis. 
               Nihil interest inter foenus & funus. And Leo
sayth, Foenus pecuniae, sunus animae.
            
            The other words, viz. Tarbith and Marbith in Hebrew,
signifying increase, and vsura in Latin, were as Caluin faith
deuised by vsurers themselues, when as the odious names
of Neshek and foenus did seeme to make their practise odious.
And therefore disclaiming Neshek and foenus, they
professed themselues to take Tarbith and vsura; euen as
vsurers among vs and the French refusing the name vsurie,
as growne odious, haue deuised the names of interest,
vse, and vsance. But for as much as the vsurers among the
Iewes, vnder the name Tarbith exercised Neshek, among
the Romans vnder the name vsura practised foenus,
euen as the vsurers among the French, as Caluin sayth, and
also among vs, vnder the names of interest, vse, & vsance,
practise plaine vsurie; therefore the words Tarbith and
Marbith are euery where taken in the ill sence, and are forbidden
as well as foenus: and vsura among the latter Latine
writers growne as odious as foenus. Quid foenus & Calendarium
& vsura,
               Lib. 7. de benif. sayth Seneca, nisi humanae cupiditatis extra
naturam quaesita nomina? What is foenus and the Kalender
(for so the vsurers debt-booke was called) and vsurie, but
names of mens couetousnesse sought out besides nature?
And therfore it is a wonder, that any learned man should
affirme, that the name of vsurie in the learned tongues is
of a middle and indifferent nature. Wherefore from these
premisses this first argument may be retorted vpon them
which made it. For if as the names of things be, such
commonly be the things, for 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                sayth Aristotle,
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , names doe follow or imitate the things: and

               Plato calleth names the similitudes and resemblances of
things;
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   in Craty. then, odious and detestable names, are arguments
of odious and detestable things: but the names of vsurie
are odious, as hath beene shewed, for which cause the vsurers
themselues do auoid them, and are ashamed of them,
and therefore such a thing is vsurie it selfe.
            2. Obiection. No vsurie is forbidden by the law of God and
by the law of nature, but that which is hurtfull, and ioyned with
the hurt or losse of the neighbour.
            But some vsurie is not hurtfull but rather helpefull to the neighbor.
Therefore some vsurie is not forbidden.
            First, the proposition is vntrue, and of dangerous consequence:
for the law of God forbiddeth all vsurie in
generall, as a thing in it own nature and in his whole kind
simply vnlawfull, without any such restraint or limitation,
euen as it condemneth adulterie, lying, theft, or any
other notorious sinne. And therefore, if it were lawfull
thus to argue in fauour of vsurie, mincing the commaundement
of God in an intollerable presumption, and restraining
and limitting the same out of our owne braine:
why may it not be lawfull so to argue in defence of other
sinnes; as indeed some haue done in defence of lying,
which as you heard before is generally forbidden as a
thing simply euill, and yet some haue taken vpon them
the defence of such lies as are not hurtfull but helpefull
to the neighbour. And why might not the pick-thanke
as well haue justified his murthering of Saule, if he had
according to his owne report slaine him in charitie, and
at his owne intreatie to end his paine, being past recouerie,
and to preuent the scornings of the Philistimes,
which he feared more than death?
            But they prooue their proposition thus.
            Vsurie is not forbidden, but as it is against charitie, for charitie is
the summe of the law, and he which obserueth the rules of charitie,
keepeth the law.
            But that which is not hurtfull to the neighbour, is not against

charitie, therefore that vsurie which is not hurtfull to the neighbour,
is not forbidden.
            
               Answ. Charitie, which is the summe of the law, hath
reference towards God; towards our neighbour, not only
in priuat, but also in publicke; and towards a mans
selfe. And in this sence I acknowledge the proposition
of this syllogisme to be true, viz. that vsurie is not forbidden,
but as it is repugnant to charitie. But hereby the assumption
of this syllogisme is prooued to be false, for
there be many things which are not perhaps hurtfull to
our neighbour in particular, with whom we deale, which
are notwithstanding repugnant to charitie. The officious
lie helpeth the particular neighbour, in whose fauour it is
told, yet because it is repugnant to veritie, it is repugnant
to charitie. God who is truth hath forbidden all vntruth,
and he will destroy euery one that speaketh lies: The lying
mouth destroyeth the soule: therefore no lying can
stand with that charitie and obedience which we owe to
God, nor with that loue which we owe to our own soules.
So in like sort suppose that the borrower sometimes is
not hurt by vsurie, but rather holpen; yet notwithstanding
all vsurie is against charitie, for the practise of it cannot
stand with charitie and our allegiance to God, who
hath forbidden it, denounced his judgements against it,
made gracious promises to them that will do the contrarie:
nor with our charitie and dutie to our countrey, vnto
which vsurie is in many respects noysome, as hath beene
shewed: nor with that loue which we owe to our owne
soules; for whosoeuer putteth foorth to vsurie, or taketh
increase, he shall not liue, but die the death. And
moreouer, you may remember what I haue before prooued,
that vsurie is euer repugnant to charitie, if not as
a hurtfull thing to our neighbour, yet as an vnjust thing
in it selfe.
            Yea but say they againe, to proue the former proposition,
That vsurie which is ioyned with the hurt of the neighbour, is

condemned, therefore that which is not ioyned with the hurt of the
neighbour is not condemned.
            
            
               Answer. I denie the consequence: for there are
other respects which make vsurie vnlawfull, besides
the hurt of the neighbour, as euen now I shewed. By
the same reason the patrones of officious lies might argue
thus: God forbiddeth vs to tell a lie against our
neighbour; therefore the lie which is not against the
neighbour, but for him, is not forbidden. But you will
say, All lying is forbidden: so is all vsurie, as I haue alreadie
prooued.
            And thus I haue shewed against the proposition, that
all vsurie is vnlawfull, though all were not hurtfull. Now
I add against the assumption of the first syllogisme, That
all vsury is hurtfull: hurtfull I say, either to the borrower,
as commonly it is, or else to the commonwealth, as before
hath beene prooued.
            Obiection. 3. Vsurie is not vncharitable neither in respect
of the borrower, nor yet in regard of the commonweale:
the former they prooue thus. There is no propertie of
charitie which may not well stand with vsurie. No not that, charitie
seeketh not her owne: for I am not otherwise bound to loue my neighbour
than my selfe. Nay rather the debtor should offend against charitie
in too much seeking his owne, if he would haue another mans
money freely, by which he is sure in all likelyhood to gaine.
            
               Answer. In traffique and negotiation it is lawfull
for a man as well to respect his owne gaine, as another
mans good. But in lending, which is an act of charitie,
and a contract ordained for the good of the borrower,
to seeke gaine, it is against charitie, which seeketh not
her owne. We ought to lend by the commaundement of
Christ, not respecting our profit or gaine, but the good of
the borrower. But the vsurers charitie is, by his lending
to seeke ease out of the borrowers labour, securitie out
of his hazard, and gaine as well out of his losse as out
of his gaine.
            
               
Againe, out of the vncertaine negotiation of the borrower
to couenant for certaine gaine, it is not onely vncharitable
but also vnjust and vnequall. But in the contract
of actuall vsurie there is an absolut couenant for certaine
gaine, as I haue proued before, which the borrower
whether he shall gaine or loose is absolutly bound to pay
together with the principall. And this absolut couenant
for certaine gaine, is not an abuse happening besides
the nature of the contract, but of the verie nature
and essence of actuall vsurie. But the borrower (you say)
is in a maner sure to gaine. Why then (say I) will you not aduenture
with him? for if the lender will be content to hazard
his principall, so as he will not onely looke for no
gaine but when the borrower gaineth, but also will bee
content to beare part with him in his losse, hee shall not
deale by vsurie, but by partnership.
            And whereas they say that the borrower should offend
against charitie in seeking too much his owne, if hee
would desire to borrow freely, &c. I answer by distinction,
Men borrow either to supply their need, or to procure
gaine: Of the former there is no question, but that
they may with good conscience desire in their necessitie
to borrow freely: onely men must beware, how they fall
into this necessitie. As for them which borrow for gain,
you may consider their dealing in the time, either of the
borrowing, or of the payment. In the time of borrowing,
he doth not therefore sinne against charitie, if he will not
out of his vncertaine traffique promise certaine gaine to
the lender, who will beare no hazard with him: Indeed if
the lender will be content to beare part of the losse, the
borrower ought to yeeld him part of the gaine. At the
time of payment he is bound to be thankfull to the creditor
if he haue gained, and willingly to afford him some
part of that gaine wherewith it hath pleased God by the
creditors meanes to blesse him, especially if the creditor
could not well forbeare his money. As touching the latter

point, that vsurie offends not against publike charitie,
they indeuour to proue by these two reasons. Because it
is both profitable and necessarie to common weales. It is
profitable: For if the creditor haue no skill in any trade or traffique,
and the borrower hauing skill wanteth a stocke, not onely both
they shall be gainers, but the commonwealth also shall receiue good by
the imployment of the one mans stocke, and of the others skill, whereas
contrariwise the common wealth should sustaine losse, if neither the
creditors money be occupied, nor the borrowers skill imployed.
            
            I answer, there are other lawfull meanes whereby
mens money may better be imployed for the good of the
common weale, than by vsurie: For when the borrowers
do gaine by that which they haue taken vp on vsurie, the
common wealth commonly payeth the vsurie, as hath
bene shewed. But why wilt not thou imploy thy mony
thy selfe in some honest contract? Is it because thou wilt
take no paines, nor beare any aduenture, but wilt be sure
to prouide for great and certaine gaine with ease? Then
art thou an vnprofitable member in the commonwealth,
liuing of the sweat of other mens browes, &c. Or hast
thou any lawfull reason either because of thy calling, age,
or condition, that thou canst not indeed imploy thy money
thy selfe? then mayest thou buy either lands or rents
after that maner which before hath bene shewed, or else
thou maiest deale by partnership. But you must remember,
there is no partnership without partaking in the losse
as well as in the gaine.
            
               That vsurie is necessarie they prooue, Because as the
world now goeth, and as mens maners now are, no common weale can
stand without it.
            Answer. If that be true, then vsurie is proued to bee a
necessarie euill: and this necessitie argueth not the lawfulnesse
of vsurie, but the wretched estate of the world,
which as Iohn saith, lieth in euil.
               1. Iohn. 5. 19. For to say absolutly that cō
               monweales
cannot stand without vsurie, were derogatorie
to the wisedome of God, who would not suffer vsurie

in that cōmonweale which he ordained, as hath before
bin shewed. But whence ariseth this necessitie? the necessity
of borrowing & so of lending ariseth frō mens wants,
and hardly can humane societies stand without that contract:
but the necessitie of vsurie ariseth of mens couetousnes
and hardnesse of their hearts. For although there may
be a necessitie of borrowing vpon vsurie, when men that
must needs borrow cannot borrow freely, yet there is no
other necessitie why men should lend vpon vsurie, but
that which their owne couetousnesse (when they haue
once said they will be rich) hath imposed vpon them:1. Tim. 6. 9. for
vnlesse thy neighbour haue need to borrow, there is no
necessitie of lending at all imposed vpon thee. But if thy
neighbour haue great need to borrow, and thou be well
able to forbeare, the Lord hath laid a necessitie of dutie
vpon thee to lend freely, which without sinne thou canst
not auoid. Or if there be a necessitie that thou shouldest
imploy thy stocke to gaine, there be other lawfull contracts
to that purpose, so that thou shalt not need (vnlesse
it be for idlenesse and distrust) to deale by vsurie. Now
if a pretended necessitie, arising from the hardnesse of
mens hearts, and setled resolution to go on in the practise
of vsurie, contrarie to the commaundement of God, be of
sufficient force to justifie vsurie; then by the same argument,
may any other sinne be justified.
            
               Object. 4. It belongeth to magistrats to determine of ciuile
contracts, and therefore vsurie is so farre forth lawfull, as they by
their lawes allow it.
            
               Answer. The rule of our conscience is not the law of
man but the law of God: and it is a principle, That the
law of the inferiour cannot dispence with the law of the
superiour. If therefore the Law of God condemne all
vsurie, no law of man can make any vsurie lawfull.
            Againe, we are to distinguish betwixt allowing
and permitting: no good lawes allow vsurie as good,
though some permit it as a thing euill, for auoiding of

greater euils. Magistrats are faine sometimes to permit
and tollerat that which they are not able altogether to
amend. Moses for the hardnesse of mens hearts permitted
the husbands to put away their wiues, so that they did
giue them a bill of diuorcement, wherein their wiues innocencie
should be cleered; not that he allowed thereof,
but that he would prouide for the wiues safetie, deliuering
them from the furie or tyrannie of their husbands.
But notwithstanding this permission, whosoeuer put away
his wife hauing not broken the bond of wedlocke
by committing adulterie, by the sentence of our Sauiour
Christ, himselfe committed adulterie.Mat. 19. So the magistrats,
by reason of the couetousnesse and hardnesse of mens
hearts are forced to tollerat vsurie, so it be kept within
such bonds as they prescribe, not that they allow thereof,
but that they might prouide for the good of those who
haue need to borrow, both that they might borrow, and
also that borrowing they should not bee too much oppressed.
But notwithstanding this legal tolleration, he that
lendeth for gain is an vsurer & a theefe before God. And
therefore as the judiciall permission of Moses in the case of
diuorcements, so the ciuile permission of magistrats in the
case of vsurie, doth not serue to cleere a man from the
guilt of sinne before God, but onely to exempt the partie
from ciuile punishment. And yet it cannot be truly said
that our lawes do so much as permit any vsurie, excepting
in the case of orphanes. Wherefore this argument
may also be retorted vpon our patrons of vsurie: for seeing
as they say, magistrats haue authoritie by their lawes
to determine of ciuile contracts; and seeing our lawes determine
of all vsurie as of a sinne, allowing none at all as
good, but punishing it as euill, and not so much as permitting
any, except in the case of orphanes; hereof it is
to be inferred, that no vsurie among vs can be practised
with a good conscience.
            
               Object. 5. If letting be lawfull, then vsurie also is lawfull, for

vsurie is letting of money; but letting is lawfull, therefore vsurie.
            
               Answer. To the prosyllogisme or proofe of the proposition:
I haue before sufficiently shewed that vsurie cannot
be cōmitted but in things which are lent to be spent;
and therefore as they are the subject of vsurie, they are
not lettable. And as for the proposition it selfe, you haue
heard, that although letting in it selfe be a lawfull contract,
yet vsurie in it selfe is simply and vtterly vnlawfull.
But why may not money be let as well as other things?
Because none of those respects are incident vnto money,
for which hire is lawfully required. For first, things
which may be let haue a fruitfull vse in themselues, which
a man may let and alienat for a time, reseruing the propertie
to himselfe; but money and those other things
which are the subject of vsurie, which consisting in quantitie
are spent in the vse, haue no fruitfull vse, which either
may be seuered from the propertie, or valued apart,
as though it might be let or alienated, the propertie reserued.
Secondly, the partie which hireth things that be
let, after he hath according to the contract of hiring enjoyed
the vse thereof, he restoreth the selfe same particular
which he tooke to hire, being for the most part impaired
in the vse. The partie which borroweth money and
such other things as consist in quantity, after he hath spent
the same, is not to restore the same particular which he
hath spent, impaired in the vse, but the full value of the
principall, with better rather than worse. Thirdly, he
that letteth any thing to hire, as he retaineth the propertie,
so he beareth the hazard thereof: but it is concontrarie
in vsurie: for the money being once lent, the
propertie is transferred to the borrower, and with the
property the hazard. To omit the cost and charge which
the letter to hire many times is at, with those things
which he letteth: wheras the vsurer is at no cost at all.
            There being these foure considerations, why letting
is lawfull, and vsurie vnlawfull, the patrons of vsurie

take exception against the first, neglecting the rest. For
(say some of the most learned of them,) It is but an ignorant
obiection which is made out of Aristotle, that vsurie is a gaine
contrarie to nature, because money begets not money: seeing the Scripture
condemneth the increase of meat as of money.
            
            
               Answer. Be it so, for there is the same reason of mony and
of other things which are spent in the vse. Let the Reader
therfore judge whether Chrysostome and Ambrose which
make this objection out of Aristotle, or he which vseth this
reason, were more ignorant: for it were as monstrous to
require gaine for the fruitfull vse of meat being spent in
the vse, besides the price of the meat it selfe, as to require
a gaine for the fruitfull vse of money which is spent in
the vse, besides the full restitution of the principall. Yea
but money, though it be not fruitfull in is selfe, yet by negotiation it
bringeth forth greater increase them other things which are let.
            
            
               Answer. The gaine which is raised out of any thing
which hath not a fruitfull vse in it selfe but is spent in the
vse, is not the fruit of that thing, but of his skill and industrie
which doth imploy it. No more haue other things (say
they) no not the earth it selfe, without the labour and industrie of him
that vseth the same.
            
            
               Answer. We must distinguish betwixt fructum and questum,
fruitfull vse, and gaine. The fruit or fruitfull vse ariseth
from the nature of the thing it selfe, and as the
Lawyers speake, Ex ipso cui
                     •
                  sque rei corpore, and such is the
fruit or fruitfull vse of things that be let, as of cattell, their
yong ones, their milke, their wooll, their labour in drawing,
and cariage of the earth, both that which groweth
within it, as mettals and minerals, &c. and also that which
groweth vpon it, as hearbes and trees and their fruits.
Likewise of artificiall things, as of houses, the commoditie
of dwelling, of ships, the commoditie of sailing,
&c.
            
               Questu
                     •
                  , or gaine, is that which ariseth not out of the
nature of the thing it selfe, but is gotten by negotiation

or making of contracts, as buying and selling, &c. And
thus those which haue skill and will be at the paines and
charge, may raise a gaine not onely out of those things
which haue a fruitfull vse of themselues, as those which
buy such commodities to sell them againe vsually do, as
horse-coursers, drouers, and other trades men; but also
out of such things as are spent in the vse, which as the
Lawyers speake, Non corpore sed quantitate constant, as victuallers,
mony changers, salters, vintners, and such as buy
these kinds of commodities to sell them againe, vsually
do. Now if things which haue a fruitfull vse in themselues
cannot be let in respect of any gaine which may be
raised out of the buying and selling of them; much lesse
may those things which in themselues are not lettable,
because they haue no fruitfull vse, neither are to returne
in the same particuler, be let in respect of any gain which
may perhaps be raised by the imployment of them in negotiation.
            If you say that although things cannot bee let to this
vse, because they are not to returne in the same particuler,
yet they may be sold to this vse, and in respect thereof
may be sold the dearer: I answer, that all commodities
are, and indeed ought to be sold cheaper to such as buy
to fell them againe, than to others who buy for their own
vse; otherwise they which deale by retailing, which is a
necessarie trade, should either themselves be continuall
loosers, or be forced to enhance the prices of commodities,
to the prejudice of the common-wealth. Onely the
vsurers who ought to lend freely to those which are in
need, do thinke they may put forth their mony and commodities
at an higher rate, to those which meane to imploy
them vnto gaine; whereby such persons become either
banquerups, if their gaine be not great, or oppressors
of the common weale, if it be.
            But suppose that money hath a fruitfull vse in respect
of the gaine which is raised by the imployment of it, yet

to whom ought the profit arising out of the vse thereof
appertaine? surely to him who hauing the property of the
money, doth also beare the hazard, sustaineth the charge,
taketh the paines, vseth his skill in the imployment of it,
that is to say, to the borrower: to whom the losse also if
there be any, wholly appertaineth. If you say that by the
same reason the Landlord ought not to receiue any rent for the ground
which he letteth: I answer, first, that the land hath a fruitfull
vse in it selfe, answerable to the rent, both without mans
helpe, as in medowes, pastures, woods, and mines, &c.
and also with, as in arable grounds, wherein the rent is
proportionated according to the fruitfulnesse thereof.
Secondly, that the propertie of the ground belongeth to
the Landlord, and therefore the profit belongeth partly
to him in respect of the fruitfull vse of that which is his,
partly to the tenant for his labour and charges.Colonus mercedem, si qua calam it
                     ••
                  s a ciderit, non debet. l. ex conducto. §. 1. & 7. Dig. lib. 19. tit. 2. Thirdly,
the Landlord beareth the hazard of the ground, not only
in respect of the title, but also in respect of calamities,
which happening, he is as well to loose his rent, as the tenant
his labour and charges.
            Againe, they alledge two other reasons, in respect
whereof they do imagine that money may as well be put
to hire as other things: The one is, the propertie of continuance
which it hath, being not subiect to be consumed, as other things, and
namely as cattell are: The other, because by mon
                     •
                  y a man may
buy any thing which is vsually let. The former reason is to litl
                  •
               
purpose: for money though it continueth in it selfe
and is not perished, yet it continueth not to him that vseth
it: for to him that vseth it, it is spent; to him that vseth it
not, it is vnprofitable: whereas other things remaine in
the vse, and continue profitable to them which vse them.
The latter I haue answered before: for although hire may
not be taken for money, yet I doe not deny but that hire
may be taken for things which are bought with money,
if they bee not such as are spent in the vse: for besides
other respects before mentioned, hee that letteth that

which he hath bought, he standeth to the hazard of it;
but so doth not he that putteth forth his money to vsury.
These with some others which before I refuted when I
propounded mine owne arguments, are the chiefe objections
which are made in defence of vsurie. The rest,
which I haue either read or heard, are either of small
weight, or altogether impertinent.
            Of the former sort are foure other arguments of mine
English author:Obiect. 6. as first, If men may not sell the dearer
for time, then wo-worth to all merchants and occupiers,
whose vse is to sell the dearer for time.
            
               Answer. He might as well haue said, If men may not
lend vpon vsurie lawfully, then wo-worth to all vsurers,
whose vse is to lend for gaine. But (say I) the former is
true both in this proposition and in the former, as I haue
proued heretofore, and therfore the conclusion of a fearfull
woe is to be inferred against those, who will notwithstanding
all that which hath bene said, continue still in
the practise either of open vsurie, or of selling dearer for
time, which is couert vsurie.
            Secondly,Obiect. 7. 
               Either all contracts o
                     •
                   gaine are vsurious, or those
onely which are vniust and vnequall: but it is absurd to say that all
contracts for gaine are vsurious (and that he proueth valiantly
and at large) therefore those onely are vnlawfull, which are vniust
and vnequall. All this I graunt: what then? And therefore
by consequent vsurie is not vnlawfull. But how is that consequence
proued? mine author had rather the reader
should take it for granted, than put him to proue it: for I
haue made it manifest before, that all vsurie is vnjust, vnequall,
and vncharitable.
            
               Thirdly,
               Obiect. 8. Either men must lend vpon vsurie, or else let their money
he idle by them: but the latter ought not to be done, therefore the
former may.
            To the proposition I answer, That there is no necessitie
in that disjunction, for men must neither lend vpon
vsurie, nor yet suffer their mony long to lie idle by them,

but part they are to communicate to the vse of others, according
to the rules of charitie and liberalitie: part they
are to spend for their owne vse, according to the rules of
frugalitie: and the rest they may imploy in some honest
contracts, according to the rules of justice and thrist, or
good husbandrie.
            
               Fourthly,
               Obiect. 9. To lend vpon vsurie and to borrow vpon vsurie are
relatiues, therefore if to lend vpon vsurie be a sinne, it is a sinne to
borrow vpon vsurie, and if to borrow vpon vsurie be lawfull, than is
it lawfull to lend vpon vsurie.
            I deny the consequence, which is grounded vpon a
false supposition, that there is alwayes the like reason of
relatiues. The same author saith that the vsurer and the
poore are as relatiues, therfore by this reason, if it be a sin
to be an vsurer, it is a sinne also to be poore. In like sort,
the oppressour, and he that is oppressed, the robber, and
he that is robbed, are relatiues; but shall we hence conclude,
that if to be robbed, or oppressed is not a sinne,
therefore it is not a sinne to rob or to oppresse?
            To borrow vpon vsurie is lawfull onely vpon necessitie,
as I shall shew, but hee that yeeldeth to pay vsurie
when he is to borrow vpon necessitie, is oppressed, and
therefore be which imposeth vsurie vpon him, is an oppressor.
And in this consectarie drawne from relatiues,
there is indeed par ratio the same, or equiualent reason,
on both sides. The borrower vpon vsurie is oppressed,
therefore the lender vpon vsurie is an oppressor. And
contrariwise.
            The rest of the arguments which I find vsed in defence
of vsurie are impertinent, seruing to proue the lawfulnes,
not of gainefull vsurie, whereof is the question; but either
of liberall vsurie, or recompencing vsurie and interest, or
of some other lawfull contract.
            
               And first for liberell vsurie.
               Obiect. 10. Equitie requireth that he who
hath gained well by the imployment of money borrowed, should allow
some part of his gaine to the lender, especially if hee could not well

forbeare his money.
            
               Secondly, Againe the lender hath holpen thee to thy gaine,
therefore thou oughtest to make him partaker thereof.
            
               Thirdly, Charitie requireth that he which hath raised great
gaine out of my money, should impart some part thereof to me.
            
               Fourthly, We must do to others as we desire that others should
do to vs. But when others haue gained well by our money, we could
be content to be partakers of that gaine.
            
               Fiftly, Should a richer man occupie a poorer mans stocke, and
gaining well thereby, make him none allowance? should be grow rich
with another mans hinderance?
            These reasons prooue that the borrower is bound in
thankfulnesse, when hee hath gained well by that which
he hath freely borrowed, to impart some portion of his
gaine to the lender, especially if without some hinderance
to himselfe hee could not forbeare his money so
long. From whence this conclusion may be inferred.
            That which the borrower ought willingly to giue,
the lender may receiue.
            The borrower ought willingly to giue some part of
his gaine which he hath raised by the money freely
borrowed of him who could not well forbeare it:
            Therefore the lender may receiue such part of the
borrowers gaine, as he doth willingly impart vnto
him.
            All this I graunt: but hereby the contract of vsurie,
wherein is an absolut couenant for the receiuing of the
principall with an ouerplus, whether the borrower gaine
or loose, is nothing at all justified.
            The second ranke of impertinent arguments fight for
interest or recompencing vsury,Obiect. 11. of which sort there are in
the aforesaid english Treatise, fiue, distinguished by notes
of number, that author (as it seemeth) laboring more for
number than for weight of arguments.
            
               First, Shall the debtor (saith he) being an able man, by seeking
delayes gaine time after time at his pleasure, to the losse, hurt, and

trouble of his creditor, without recompence?
            
               Secondly, Is it reason that a rich man should withhold any
mans money against his will, and make his priuat gaine thereof?
            
               Thirdly, The father in law making delayes for the payment of
that portion which he promised with his daughter, is to make allowance
by way of interest to his sonne in law, who beareth the charge
and burden belonging to marriage.
            
               Fourthly, When the creditor being disappointed of his money at
the day of payment, is forced himselfe to take vp so much after ten in
the hundred, may not he require the same to be allowed him of the
debtor, through whose default he sustaineth that losse or hinderance?
            
               Fiftly, When the suretie is compelled through the debtors default
to pay the debt which he vndertooke for him, the debtor is bound to
make him recompence, of what losse or hinderance hee sustaineth
through the debtors default.
            All this I graunt: but gaineful vsurie differeth much,
as I haue shewed before, from recompencing vsurie or
interest: for it is great reason that he which seeketh to
be no gainer by loane, should be no looser. Neither
ought any man to be enriched with another mans losse.
But whosoeuer hath bene the effectuall cause of the creditors
losse or hinderance, he ought, if he be able, to make
him recompence.
            
               Sixtly, To these another reason may be added, which
is the onely argument grounded vpon the Scriptures,
which I find in one learned patron of vsurie. There is the
like reason of ceassing from labour, and forbearing of money: but he
that causeth a man to ceasse from his labour, is to make him recompence
according to the law,Exod. 21. 19. Exod. 21. 19. therefore he which causeth
another man to forbeare his money, is to make him recompence according
to the time of forbearance.
            I answer, first, that there is not the like reason, betwixt
a mans labour, and the vse of money: A mans labour being
lettable, and yeelding to the labourer, if he worketh,
certaine wages. Secondly, although there were the like
reason betwixt them, yet nothing could bee prooued

hence, but the lawfulnesse of interest or recompencing
vsurie: For the law speaketh not of allowance to bee
made for a mans voluntarie ceassing from his worke, but
when he ceasseth against his will, hauing beene smitten
and wounded by another man, so that he cannot worke;
in this case the smiter is to make him recompence for the
losse of his time and ceassing from his labour. In like case
allowance is not to be made for voluntarie forbearing or
lending of money: but when the creditor forbeareth it
against his will, to his losse and hinderance, through the
debtors default; the debtor hauing bene by his delay the
effectuall cause of the creditors losse, is to make him recompence.
            7 Lastly, He which hauing bought wares maketh default of payment,
is by the ciuile law to pay vsurie to the seller, from whom the
price is detained against his will to his losse and hinderance.
            
               Answer. I deny not but that if the price were equall, the
like allowance is to be made in this case, as after delay in
that which is borrowed: but this allowance is not gainefull
vsurie, but recompencing vsurie or interest.
            There is another sort of impertinent arguments,Obiect. 12. which
serue to proue the lawfulnesse, not of vsurie, but of the
contracts. As first of the gainefull contracts of negotiation
and traffique, in buying and selling: for some haue
a conceit, that if any contracts of gaine be lawfull, vsurie
(which they like so wel) cannot be vnlawfull. And to this
purpose the author of the English Treatise proueth, first,
that merchandise is lawfull, by the description of the vertuous,
godly, and wise woman, Prou. 31. 18. 24.
            Secondly, That buying of rents and lands is lawfull.
            Thirdly, That the gaine of drouers and grasiers is
warrantable: from all which, as so many arguments, he
would haue vs inferre, that therefore vsurie is lawfull.
But vnlesse he can proue that men may as well lend for
gaine, as buy and sell for gaine (which I haue before disproued)
these arguments are to little purpose.
            
               
Secondly, He alledgeth the lawfulnesse of the ciuile
lending, whereby a man lendeth expecting the like courtesie
againe: as for example, When a man lendeth where
he hopeth to borrow as much another time; when a miller
lendeth money to a baker, to the end he may grind at
his mill; when a scriuener lendeth mony to a gentleman,
to the end that hee should haue his writings made with
him, &c. But although this ciuile lending with expectation
of the like courtesie, be not so commendable as the
Christian and charitable lending, which is without respect
of our owne good or profit, euen as the inuiting of
our able friends is not so laudable as the feasting of the
poore and helpelesse, yet is it lawfull, so long as the
courtesie expected is not valuable by money, or such as
is commonly and lawfully bought and sold for money.
Such is the courtesie of lending expected from them of
whom we borrow, the courtesie of their custome in frequenting
our shops to buy our wares, or to haue their
worke done with vs, and such like. Howbeit if we couenant
with the borrower for these courtesies, they may be
clokes of vsurie: as if I bind him to lend who will be more
like to borrow, & more willing to pay vsurie for the former
loane, than to lend as much more (which hath bene a
practise of some dissembling vsurers:) or if I require his
custome, with this purpose, to make him pay the more
for my worke or ware, because he is in my danger, or beholden
to me. Otherwise, if he haue a peni-worth for his
peny, and be as well dealt with as others that are no way
beholden to vs, euen by the naturall obligation which
bindeth all men to thankfulnes, he is bound to shew that
courtesie to those who haue well deserued of him, rather
than to others.
            And these are the arguments which are brought for
vsurie, which also I would desire the Christian reader to
compare with those which haue bene brought against it.
Now we are to descend to their testimonies, which are

partly the publicke allowance of lawes in these dayes,
and common practise of most rich men in all Christendome,
partly the priuat judgements of diuerse learned
and reuerent men of this age.
            Of the lawes I haue spoken before: that none allow
vsurie; though some with certaine restraints doe permit
and tollerat it as an euill thing, for the auoiding of greater
mischiefe. The commen practise of rich men doth
not proue vsurie to be lawfull, but themselues to be couetous
and void of charitie. As for the judgements of
godly learned men: I answer, That none such do allow
that vsurie which is practised in the world, or if any do, I
oppose to them the judgements of many more worthie
and learned men in this age, the testimonies of all the
learned in former ages, both Christian and heathen, the
censures of Councels, the authoritie of the word of
God.
            Now if the conscience of any be not clearly conuicted
by the euidence of truth, which I haue deliuered concerning
the vnlawfulnesse of vsurie, I will for their sakes
add a further consideration; whereby it shall appeare,
that although we were not sure that vsurie is vnlawfull,
yet it cannot be practised with a good conscience. First,
because it cannot be done in faith, that is to say, in a sound
persuasion out of the word of God,Rom. 14. 23. that it is lawfull: and
whatsoeuer is not of faith is sinne. Wherefore, if thou
doest but doubt of the lawfulnesse of vsurie, thou art to
abstaine from it, being well assured, that this is the safer
course, for men are not to doe that which they doubt of,
but euer in doubtfull things they must chuse the safer
way. But it is to be feared, that many vsurers do not only
doubt of the lawfulnesse of vsurie, but euen in their own
consciences condemne it, and yet against their conscience
doe practise it: for they had rather be vsurers than
seeme so. Yea they account it a reproch to be called an
vsurer: and although they practise the thing, yet they

auoid the name, and in stead of vsurie vse these names,
vse, vsance, consideration, interest: and as they auoid the
name, so many times they cloke the thing it selfe with diuerse
other pretences, as hath beene shewed.
            Againe, vsurie is a very odious thing and of ill report:
the very heathen by the light of nature detest it. Tully
sayth, such gaines are to be misliked which are odious,De off. lib. 1. as
namely that of vsurers. Columella sayth,De re rustica. lib. 1. That vsurie is odious
euen to those whom it seemeth to helpe.Polit. 1. 
               Aristotle saith,
it is hated most worthily:Mostellar. Nullum aedipol hodie genus homin
                     •
                   est te
                     •
                  rius, Nec minus bon
                     •
                   cum iure quam Danisticium. for as Plautus well saith, There
is no worse kind of men this day, or that deale with lesse
right, than the vsurers. Alexander ab Alexandro reporteth
in detestation of vsurie, that very many nations did so abhorre
it, that whereas they punished a theefe twofold,
they punished an vsurer fourefold. As for Christians,
vsurie in auntient time was so odious among them,Lib. 1. cap. 7. that if
any were but suspected to be an vsurer,Vide Centur. 12. cap. 4. inter peccata 7. praecepti. his house was
counted the house of the diuell, no neighbour would
fetch fire at his house, or haue any thing to doe with him,
children would point at him in the streets:See D. Wilson, fol. 13 6. b. yea, by the
laws of Christians they are diffamed persons. The scriptures
as you haue heard, censure vsurie as an abhomination,
that is, as a sinne to be abhorred. And Psal. 109. 11, the
holy ghost vseth this interpretation against the wicked:
Let the exactour (meaning thereby the vsurer,
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  . as all translations
almost besides some English doe read) ensnare all that
he hath. Whereby it may be gathered, both that to be an
vsurer is an odious thing, and that it is a curse to fall into
his snare.
            Now the Scriptures teach vs,Phil. 4. 8. that we should doe such
things as are honest and of good report,Rom. 12. 17. prouiding for
honest things not onely before God,1. Thess. 5. 22. but also before men,
abstaining from all shewes of euill.
            Seeing therefore vsurie is and alwayes hath beene a
thing so odious and of so bad report, no Christian can
practise it with a good conscience.
            
               
And thus I hope this question of vsurie is sufficiently
decided.
            Now let vs consider what vse this doctrine affordeth;
which briefely is thus much: that seeing vsurie is so detestable
a sinne, as hath beene shewed, we should therefore
take great heed, that we be not guiltie thereof, either as
principals or as accessaries.
            The former vse concerneth either those who haue not
as yet beene attainted with this sinne, or those that haue
practised it. Those who haue not defiled themselues
with this vnjust gaine, are taught to confirme their resolution
of abstaining from vsurie, and the rather, seeing
the holy ghost in this place maketh it a note of a sound
Christian and citisen of heauen.
            As for those who haue practised this sinne, their dutie
is to repent thereof, whereunto they may be mooued by
this argument: Those that shall dwell in the mountaine
Gods holinesse, are such as doe not put forth their money
to vsurie. Thou (say I to him that is an vsurer) puttest
forth thy money to vsurie, therefore thou shalt not dwell
in the mountaine of Gods holinesse, namely, vnlesse thou
repent. And againe Ezech. 18, He that putteth foorth to
vsurie and taketh increase, he shall not liue, but die the
death, viz. vnlesse he repent and turne from his wickednesse:
for that condition is to be vnderstood by warrant
of the Lords owne exposition, Ezech. 35. 14, 15, When I
shall say to the wicked (as he sayth to the vsurer, chap. 18.
13) Thou shalt die the death: if he turne from his sinne,
and doe that which is lawfull and right, to wit, if the wicked
restore the pledge and giue againe that he had robbed,
and walke in the statutes of life without committing
iniquitie, he shall surely liue and not die.
            Now vnto repentance, besides the inward loathing of
the sinne and sorrow conceiued for it, is required (as that
testimonie out of Ezech. 33. 14, 15, plainely sheweth) both a
desisting from the practise of vsurie, and a restitution of

that which hath beene gotten by vsurie with the harme
of others. For the first: it is the expresse commaundement
of God by the Apostle, Eph. 4. 28, Let him that
stole, steale no more: and by Nehemiah more particularly
in this case of vsurie, chap. 5. 10, Let vs cease from this burthen,
meaning vsurie: forsaking of sinne accompanieth forgiuing
of sinne: He that confesseth his sinne and forsaketh it, shall
haue mercie, Prou. 28. 13. Neither may we thinke that God
remitteth those sinnes, which we our selues retaine. But
this point needeth no proofe. If vsurie be a sinne, and we
guiltie of it, our conscience telling vs that it is a sinne, we
cannot be saued, except this sinne be forgiuen vs; and it
will neuer be forgiuen of God, vnlesse also it be forsaken
of vs. Now vpon this forsaking of sinne, will follow the
second dutie of repentance, namely restitution, as a necessarie
consequent thereof. Which restitution whosoeuer
maketh not, being able to restore, he neither hath
vnfained repentance for this sinne, nor any sound assurance
of the forgiuenesse thereof. He hath not repentance:
for he doth not forsake the sinne of theft and vsurie,
that continueth in it; and he continueth therein, that
doth not make restitution. For so oft as a man remembreth,
that whatsoeuer he hath vnjustly gotten by vsurie
or any other kind of theft, to the damnifying of others, is
not his owne, but theirs whom he hath wronged, and yet
refuseth (being able) to restore the same, so often he committeth
theft.Si res alienae propter quam pec
                     •
                  atum est, cum reddi possit non redditur, non agi
                     •
                  u
                     •
                   poe
                  
                     ••
                  tentia, sed fingitur. Therefore Augustine sayth, That men doe
repent indeed, but counterfeit repentance, if when they
are able to restore other mens goods, wherein they haue
offended, they doe not restore them. Zachaeus so soone as
he repented him of his former life, promised restitution.
Iudas hauing not true repentance, but onely a remorse for
his sinne,Luke 19. 8. not 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                but 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , restored the thirtie pieces
of money,Mat. 27. 3. for which he had betrayed his master.
            But as he hath not repentance that maketh not restitution,
if he be able, so neither hath he any sound assurance

of remission. It is a true saying of Augustine, Non
remitti peccatum,
               Epist. 54. ad Macedon. 
               nisi restituatur ablatum, That the sinne is not
remitted, vnlesse that which hath been vnjustly taken, be
restored, namely, if the partie be able to restore: for whiles
a man continueth in a sinne, he cannot beleeue the forgiuenesse
thereof; and he continueth therein, vntill he
make restitution. To restore, is to cease from doing
wrong, therefore he that will not restore, doth not cease
from the wrong.
            But it is further to be considered, to whom and when
this restitution is to be made, and how farre foorth. To
whom? Surely to him that hath sustained losse or harme
thereby, Leuit. 6. 5. Num. 5. 7, 8, that is, either to the vse of
the debtour if he hath beene bitten, or to publicke and
godly vses, if the commonwealth hath been endamaged.
            When? So soone as thou desirest remission of thy sin,
and reconciliation with God. For so the Lord hath expressely
commaunded, Num. 5. 6, 7, 8. Leuit. 6. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7,
viz. that first the sinne must be confessed to God: secondly,
restitution is to be made to the partie offended the
same day that thou seekest reconciliation with God, if
not before: and thirdly, a sacrifice was to be offred, &c.
the equitie whereof remaineth vnto vs; that in the third
place we should call vpon God for the forgiuenesse of
our sinne, desiring him for and by the sufficient sacrifice
of Christ (which was prefigured by the sacrifices of the
law) to forgiue our sinne. Many will seeme to seeke reconciliation
with God, but neuer thinke of making amends
to their brother offended. But our Sauiour Christ
teacheth vs another lesson, Matth. 5. 23, 24. For whereas
the priests and Pharisies taught (as the Papists doe now
adayes) that the sinnes of the people were expiated by
those oblations, whereof they themselues had the profit.
Our Sauiour Christ therefore affirmeth, That no man is
reconciled vnto God, or that his oblation is acceptable
vnto him, that seeketh not to satisfie his brother offended.

If therefore (sayth he) thou bringest thy gift, that
is, thy peace offering, whereby thou seekest reconciliation
with God, and there remembrest that thy brother hath
ought against thee, that is, that thou hast offended him
and not made him amends, leaue thy gift there, and goe
and first be reconciled to thy brother, and then come and
offer thy gift.
            How farre forth is this restitution to be made, that is,
of what vsurie, and of how much? Not of mentall vsurie,
where gaine for loane is intended only and expected:
For howsoeuer that intent corrupteth the act of lending,
yet it polluteth not the free gift of the borrower, which is
voluntarily giuen in testimonie of thankfulnesse. And
therefore it bindeth not the lender to restitution to bee
made to the neighbour whom he hath not wronged, but
to repentance towards God.
            For the quantitie: so much at the least is to be restored
as hath beene gotten by vsurie with the harme of others:
or if the offendour be not able to restore so much, yet he
must restore so much as he is able. The Lord in his law
commandeth, that the offender should restore the whole
summe, and also adde a fift part vnto it, Leuit. 6. 5. Num. 5. 7.
And Zachaeus,
               Luke 19. 8. to testifie his repentance, promiseth fourefold:
that those men may know how farre they be from
true repentance, who will restore nothing at all.
            I am the briefer in this matter, because this doctrine of
restitution is not peculiar to vsurie, but generally belongeth
to all sorts of vnjust getting. If therefore any shall
thinke or say, Durus est hic sermo, This is a hard or harsh doctrine,
which is not so esteemed in respect of other kinds
of theft: I answere, the harder this doctrine seemeth to
vsurers than to other theeues and robbers, the more desperat
is their estate than of others. And this may be another
argument to aggrauat the grieuousnesse of this sin,
That wheras other theeues and robbers, if once they be
discouered, acknowledge their fault, and are willing to

make restitution, vsurers though conuinced of this sinne,
yet stand in defence thereof, and thinke not themselues
bound to make restitution.
            But as we may not be guiltie of this sinne as principals,
so neither as accessaries. For they are worthie of death
not onely that commit sinne, but also that consent thereunto,
Rom. 1. 32. And this lesson concerneth either brokers
or borrowers vpon vsurie.
            As touching brokers, there is no question, but if vsurie
in it selfe be vnlawfull, then the practise of brokers and
scriueners, which are factors for vsurers, as spies for
theeues, is also vnlawfull and wicked: not onely because
they helpe the vsurer to rob his neighbour, and contriue
the bargaine betwixt him and the debtour: but also because
they haue many shifts and deuices to wring from
the borrower a fee for themselues, as it were for their
brocage, besides the vsurie which is to be allowed to the
creditour.
            But the greatest controuersie is concerning borrowers
vpon vsurie: for some doe hold, that all borrowing vpon
vsurie is generally and simply lawfull, affirming that the
borrower vpon vsurie neuer offendeth:Rainerius Pantheolog. tis. devsur. cap. 2. others contrariwise
doe hold all borrowing vpon vsurie to be generally
and simply vnlawfull, as well as lending vpon vsurie:
others againe do hold, that borrowing vpon vsurie is neither
generally lawfull nor generally vnlawfull, but in
some cases lawfull, and in some other vnlawfull; which
assertion holding the meane, seemeth to bee true rather
than either of the other, which run into contrarie extremities.
The cases therefore are to be distinguished.
            1. For first men borrow vpon vsurie, either for necessitie,
and so vnwillingly: or without necessitie, and
so willingly. For necessitie, when a man (who is not to
beg) must needs borrow for the supply of his want, and
cannot borrow freely: For men who are able to repay▪
are not to beg or craue; and those who shall not in their

owne opinion be able to repay, they are not to borrow:
for borrowing impheth a promise of repaying, which
promise a man ought not to make, vnlesse in his own purpose
and persuasion he shall be both willing and able to
performe it: for there is no necessitie of sinning, no outward
inconuenience being so great, as to sinne. The first
thing then required in borrowing vpon necessitie, is, that
the partie which borroweth shall be in his owne persuasion
able to repay.
            The second, that he be in present want, in respect of
the necessitie either of nature, person, or state. Of nature,
as when a man wanteth food or apparrell: of person, as
when a man wanteth necessaries for his familie & charge
depending on him: of state, as when a man wanteth present
meanes for the maintenance of his credit and estate
in that calling wherein God hath placed him; and consequently,
for auoiding of discredit, or of some notable
impairing of his estate.
            The third, that it be not a sleight, but an vrgent necessitie.
            The fourth, that the partie who is to borrow, haue no
present meanes of his owne to supply his want. For he
that hath meanes of his owne to supply his need, though
it be by selling of any thing which he may spare, hath no
vrgent necessitie to cause him to borrow.
            The fift and last is, that being by vrgent necessitie forced
to borrow, he cannot borrow freely: and therefore
for auoiding of a greater inconuenience, is faine to yeeld
to a losse.
            Without necessitie men do borrow vpon vsurie, when
there is no necessitie that they should borrow; either first
because they cannot borrow without sinne, as when they
cannot persuade themselues that they shall be able to repay:
or secondly, because they be not in want, and therefore
borrow not for need, but either for pride, for ryot, or
for couetousnesse: for the satisfying of any wherof, there

is no necessitie: or thirdly, because it is no vrgent but a
sleight necessitie, which may easily be either auoided or
vndergone: or fourthly, because they haue present means
of their owne, whereby their want may better be supplied:
or fiftly and lastly, when they may (if they will be so
much beholden to others) borrow freely.
            2. The second distinction, which after a fort is implied
in the former, is, that men borrow either for good and
lawfull causes, or for bad and vnlawfull purposes. For
there is no necessitie of borrowing for wicked and sinfull
respects.
            3. The third, that vsurie is either offered by the borrower,
or imposed by the lender. And that it is offered
either at the first, or after the lenders plaine deniall or
pretended excuses.
            4. The fourth, that men borrow vpon vsurie, either
with assurance of future means to heale the biting of vsurie
without the injurie of others, or impouerishing of
themselues, or without any such assurance.
            5. The fift, that the necessitie whereupon men borrow,
is either contracted and drawne vpon themselues
by their own default: or else it is a blamelesse necessitie.
            By helpe of these distinctions it will not be hard to
cleare this controuersie, which otherwise is very intricat.
For hereby it wil appeare, that neither all borrowing vpon
vsurie is to be allowed, nor all generally to be condemned.
            For against the former assertion, which alloweth all
borrowing vpon vsurie, we are to hold, that the borrower
vpon vsurie offendeth either first, when he borroweth
without necessitie; or secondly, to ill purposes; or thirdly,
when he induceth the lender to lend vpon vsurie; or
fourthly, when in respect either of the time to come he
shall not haue meanes to cure the wound which vsurie
hath made, without doing wrong to others, or impouerishing
himselfe; or fiftly of the time past, when as

through his owne former default he hath brought himselfe
into this necessitie. For although his necessity when
he is once in it, may excuse his borrowing, being rightly
qualified according to the foure former distinctions, yet
his fault in drawing vpon himselfe wilfully or negligently
this necessitie, cannot be excused.
            But these fiue points need further explication. First
therefore I say the borrower offendeth, who borroweth
vpon vsurie without necessitie in any of those fiue respects
before mentioned, that is, if either he find himselfe
vnlike to repay that which he borroweth, or if he be not
in want, or if his necessitie be not vrgent, or because he
hath sufficient meanes of his owne, or if he might borrow
freely if he would.
            For as touching the first: On those who haue no
good hope or assurance that they shall be able to repay,
the Lord hath not laid a necessitie to borrow, and much
lesse vpon vsurie, but to seeke releefe by other lawfull
means: for although the vsurer deserue to be deceiued,
and by the auncient lawes of this land, it hath bene decreed
that it should be no fault to deceiue an vsurer; to
which purpose Plato prouided also by law,5. de Legib 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . that it should
be lawfull for the debtour when the creditor hath lent
vpon vsurie, to pay neither the vsurie nor the det: yet I
do not see how a man can with a good cōscience borrow,
& in borrowing promise the repayment of that which he
purposeth not to repay, especially seeing the holy Ghost
maketh it a note of the wicked,Psal. 37. 21. to borrow that which
they neuer meane to restore.
            As touching the second and third: they offend as accessarie
to the sinne of the vsurer, who borrow vpon vsurie
without necessitie, yea without vrgent necessitie: for
such, hauing no vrgent necessitie to compel them to borrow,
do willingly borrow vpon vsurie, and voluntarily
consent to the vsurers sinne. Now this is the sentence of
the holy Ghost, that they are worthie of death, not onely

who commit sinne themselues, but also willingly consent
to the sinne of others, Rom. 1:
               Rom. 1. 32. and therefore he hath giuen
vs in charge, to haue no fellowship with the vnfruitfull
workes of darkenesse, but rather to reprooue them,
Ephesians. 5.Eph. 5. 11.
            
            Such are they who borrow not for any great need,
but for pride, riot, or couetousnesse.
            For pride and ostentation: as those who desiring to
seeme better and wealthier than they are, refuse to containe
themselues within the compasse of their calling and
estate, but desiring to beare an higher saile in respect of
their diet, apparell, familie and port, take vp money vpon
vsurie: but such persons sinne, first, in respect of the vsurer,
to whose sinne they make themselues accessarie; seeing
there is no necessitie why their pride and vanitie
should be satisfied. Secondly, in respect of themselues,
offending against the rules of frugalitie and thrift: for
whiles they desire to seeme rich, they become poore, vsurie
conuerting their substance into debt.
            For riot: as those who being addicted to gaming or
to other pleasures, as whoredome, drunkennesse, bellycheare,
and such like, take vp money vpon vsurie, that
there may not want matter either to maintaine their gaming,
or nourish their pleasures; for such men, so they
may haue present money to satisfie their lust, they care
not vpon what conditions they procure it. But as these
are of all borrowers vpon vsurie the most foolish, so those
which lend vnto them to these vses, are of all vsurers the
most wicked; and either of them is accessarie to the others
sinne. The riotous person to the sinne of the vsurer,
wherunto he voluntarily and without any necessitie consenteth
at the least, if also he doe not mooue and induce
the lender thereunto. The vsurer not only to the borrowers
riot, whereunto he affoordeth matter, but also to his
vtter vndoing, which he furthereth not onely as an accessarie,
but as a principall also.
            
               
Wherefore these two sorts of men, I meane the proud
and riotous persons, they are to be dissuaded from their
sinne by this argument among many others, That besides
their owne sinnes, which are too heauy for them to beare,
they make themselues accessarie to the sin of the vsurer.
For as Plutarch sayth well, 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , delicacie,
riot, and excesse hath set vp vsurers. For if these men
would liue soberly and frugally according to their calling
and estate, and would cut out their garment (as we
say) according to their cloth, they should not need to flie
to the vsurer. Wherefore as others when they be in the
vsurers danger, flie to sanctuaries; so to preuent this danger,
the best course for these men were, to make vnto
themselues a sanctuarie of frugalitie, as Plutarch speaketh.
            Lastly for couetousnesse, as those which seeke to enrich
themselues by borrowing vpon vsury. And this their▪
couetousnesse, for which they borrow, is commonly joyned
either with oppression and hard dealing, or with hypocrisie
and dissembling, or with deceit and cousenage.
Some therefore borrow for couetousnesse joyned with
oppression and hard dealing: and of this kind there be
diuerse sorts. First, those who borrow money vpon moderat
vsurie, that they may put it forth againe vpon griping
vsurie: a generation of men not so much to be confuted
by a minister, as punished by the magistrat. Secondly,
such tradesmen as hauing set downe with themselues,
that they will be rich;
               1. Tim. 6. 9. and being therefore not content
to traffique with their own stocke, to the intent they
may compasse great matters, and perhaps that they may
play the engrossers, they take vp money vpon vsurie: But
these men offend, first, in maintaining the vsurer, and consenting
to his sinne; secondly, by making the buyers pay
their vsurie; thirdly, by inhaunsing the prices of such
commodities as they 
                  •
               ell, as before hath beene shewed.
But as these men consent to the sinne of the vsurer, so is
the vsurer also accessarie to their oppression of the buyer;

and both of them conspire to the robbing of the commonwealth.
            Thirdly, those which borrow money on vsurie to
purchase lands or houses: for besides that they offend
in maintaining the vsurer and consenting to his sinne, in
buying lands with money borrowed vpon vsurie, either
they ouerreach the seller, taking aduantage of his want,
or by racking of their rents, make their tennant pay the
vsury; or themselues must liue by the losse, if buying lands
after twentie yeares purchase, and so receiuing after fiue
in the hundred, themselues doe pay after ten in the hundred;
or else they must abate so much of their hospitalitie
and housekeeping to the hurt of the poore, and perhaps
betake themselues to some corner in a citie, where they
may liue priuatly and obscurely, as if they were born only
for themselues.
            Againe, there are which borrow for couetousnesse,
joyned with hypocrisie and dissembling: as those which
being indeed rich, doe borrow vpon vsurie, that they may
seeme poore, and seeming poore, may auoid the communication
of their goods, either to the publicke vse of the
Church, as in contributions, or of the commonweale, as in
subsidies and taxes, or to the priuat necessities of their
brethren. Would you borrow of them? alas, their estate
is such, as that themselues are faine to borrow, and that
vpon vsurie. Thus besides their wilfull communicating
with the vsurer in his sinne, they offend through couetousnesse
and hypocrisie.
            But the most wicked sort of borrowers are those which
borrow for couetousnesse, joyned with deceit and cousenage.
A generation of men in these dayes, who neuer
minding to repay, borrow, or otherwise take vp on trust,
they care not how much, nor vpon what conditions; and
when their credit will extend no further, they become
voluntarie bankrupts; and by that meanes forcing their
creditors to take a third or fourth part of their debt, they

enrich themselues with other mens goods: the most vile
and basest cousenage that euer was practised. And thus
we haue heard the three first cases, wherein men borrow
without necessitie.
            The fourth is, when men haue sufficient and conuenient
meanes of their owne to supply their want. And I
call those conuenient meanes, in this case speaking by
comparison, which would not bring a losse vpon vs
much greater than the biting of vsurie. For whiles a man
hath meanes of his owne, he ought not to borrow of others,
and much lesse vpon vsurie. Wherefore Plato would
haue it prouided by law, That no man should fetch water
from his neighbours well, vntill himselfe had digged
vnto the potters earth. The Scripture alwayes speaking
of loane, presupposeth the borrowers want. Why therefore
doest thou goe to the vsurer, seeing thou hast in
thine owne store a remedie against thy necessitie? thou
hast plate or other stuffe which thou mayest spare, yea
thou hast some lands, which thou mightest better sell than
borrow vpon vsurie. Againe consider, that to be in state
to borrow,Deut. 28. 12. & 44. & 15. 6. it is a crosse, but to borrow vpon vsurie, and so
to fall into the vsurers nets, it is a curse, which we should
not be hastie to draw vpon vs,Psal. 109. 11. vnlesse it be for auoiding
of that which is a greater curse.
            The fift and last case is, when men borrow vpon vsurie,
who might if they would borrow freely. Yea, but I
had rather (sayth one) giue ten in the hundred, than make my
selfe so much beholden to any man. Why, but thou professest
thy selfe when thou borrowest, much beholden to the
vsurer, and so art, vnlesse thou dissemblest; and wilt thou
be beholden to him rather than to thy friend? or if thou
wilt be no more beholden to thy friend than to him, why
maiest thou not giue to him voluntarily as much one way
or other, as thou wouldest to the vsurer vpon couenant?
But this euidently sheweth, that thou chuse
                  •
               t rather to
giue another man occasion of sinning by the practise of

vsurie, than to giue thy friend occasion of well doing by
exercising his liberalitie: and therefore canst not by any
meanes excuse thy selfe from a wilfull consenting to
the vsurers sinne. Neither mayest thou hope to bee exempted
from partaking in the vsurers punishment, if
thou wilt be partner in his offence. Thus then he offendeth
who borroweth vpon vsurie without necessitie: and
that offence reacheth also to those, who without necessitie
borrow vpon vsurie, though not directly, when as
they taking vp of wares vpon trust, doe pay the dearer
for the time.
            The second point wherein a borrower vpon vsurie
may offend, is, when as he taketh vp money to ill purposes:
as when he borroweth to maintaine his vnlawfull
gaming, to nourish his vnhonest pleasures, to execute his
couetous designes, &c. for if it be not lawfull to doe ill
that good may come thereof;Rom. 3. 8. much more is it vnlawfull
to doe ill, that euill may come thereof. And therefore
he which borroweth for any ill purpose, he sinneth
not onely in borrowing as an accessarie to the vsurers
sinne (accessarie, I say, because he willingly consenteth
thereto; and he consenteth willingly, because there is no
true necessitie of borrowing to an ill purpose) but also he
sinneth in that for which he borroweth: and besides the
vsurers sinne to which he is accessarie, he addeth another
of his owne, wherein he is principall.
            The third thing wherein the borrower vpon vsury may
sin, is, if he induce the lender to lend vpon vsurie, who either
would haue lent freely, if it were needfull, or if it were
not needfull, would not haue lent at all: for he which induceth
another into any sin, which otherwise he were not
willing to haue committed, seemeth of the two to sin the
more fearefully: as the serpent which tempted Eue, and
as Iezabell who prouoked Achab. But that it may appeare,
when the borrower induc
                  •
               th the lender to vsury, & when
not, we are to remember the third distinction before mentioned.

For it is one thing for the borrower to offer vsurie
of his owne ac
                  •
               ord, and another to yeeld vnto it vpon
necessitie, being imposed by the lender: for he that
doth onely yeeld to vsurie vpon necessitie, being imposed
on him by the lender, cannot truly be said either to
induce the lender vnto vsurie, or willingly to consent
thereto. Againe, there is difference to be made, whether
a man that would borrow, offer vsurie at the first motion
of borrowing, or after the other parties refusall whom
he desireth to lend: For seeing in a case of vrgent necessitie,
it is a greater sinne for him that is of abilitie not to
lend at all, than not to lend freely; therefore he who being
in vrgent necessitie, intreateth an able man who hath refused
to lend at all, that he would lend though it be vpon
vsurie, cannot truly be said, either to induce him into sin,
or willingly to consent thereto: for he doth not induce
the lender into sinne, when onely he intreateth him to auoid
the greater sinne; neither doth he willingly consent
to that, which he maketh choise of onely as the lesse euill.
As for example, a man being diseased with some dangerous
sicknesse, commeth to a Phisition to be cured,
promising an equall reward: the Phisition refuseth to
meddle with him; the partie being in this extremitie,
offereth the Phisition ten times the value of his cure, so
he will not refuse to heale him: to refuse the cure altogether,
is in a case of extremitie, the greater sinne in the
Phisition; this therefore the sicke partie desireth him to
auoid: to pay an vnreasonable fee, is a lesse euill to himselfe,
and therefore that he maketh choise of. Suppose a
man vpon the way to faile vnder his burthen, or to bee
in any other distresse (as wee are subject to many casualties)
nay, suppose a mans horse or cart to be ouerthrowne,
and himselfe not able to relieue himselfe or
his cattell; therefore another able man passing by,
who both could and ought to succour him in this case,
he intreateth his helpe: the partie churlishly refusing

his aid, he offereth him that which is tenne times more
worth than his labour, so that he would not refuse to
helpe him in his need. In like case, a man being in great
need, and readie to faile vnder the burthen of his present
want, commeth to an able man, who both could and
ought to relieue him, and intreateth him to lend him
twentie pounds: the partie vnchristianly refusing, hee
sayth, Sir, if you will lend me this money in my need, I
will make you allowance according to the statute. Why
this borrower should be accessarie to the sinne of vsurie,
and not the other distressed persons accessary to the sinne
of oppression and extortion, as indeed they are not, I
cannot conceiue. But if at the first motion thou offerest
vsurie to the lender, thou inducest him vnto vsurie: and
whatsoeuer thy case be, thou art accessarie to his sinne.
But you will say, he is a knowne vsurer: of whom if I do
but aske to borrow freely, I shall be sure not to borrow
at all. Answer. Thou knowest not how God may moue
and incline his heart to thee: and it may be, that if not in
regard of thy need, yet in regard of thy friendship, or
thy friends, or some other respect, he will not reject thee.
Why but he is a notorious vsurer alreadie, and therefore
my motion will not induce him to be an vsurer. Distinguish
betwixt the habit and the act: though thou doest
not induce him to be an vsurer, yet thou inducest him to
commit an act of vsurie: euen as a whoremonger alluring
a common harlot to follie, though he doe not induce
her to be a whore, for that she is alreadie, yet hee
induceth her to the actuall committing of whoredome.
            The fourth case, wherein borrowers vpon vsurie may
offend, is, when they haue no good assurance of any future
meanes to repaire the losse which vsurie inflicteth,
without either the damnifying of others, or impouerishing
of themselues. In respect of others therefore they
offend, when as they purpose to make other men pay
their vsurie: As he which borroweth money vpon vsurie,

with purpose to put it forth at an higher rate, or that buyeth
wares either vpon trust, and so payeth the more, or
with money borrowed vpon vsurie, with purpose to
pitch his prices so, as that he will gaine sufficient both for
himselfe and the vsurer too, and thus becommeth an
hurtfull member to the commonweale: or buyeth lands
with money borrowed vpon vsurie, meaning so to racke
his rents, as that his poore tennants must pay his vsurie,
and so becommeth an oppressor of others.
            In respect of themselues, they offend when as they
know no good meanes to cure the wound which the biting
of vsurie will make: but first borrow of one, and
then to satisfie him, of another, and so of a third, &c. the
debt in euery change of the creditour being increased
one tenth part, vntill at length vsurie hath consumed
their whole estate. Vnlesse therfore thy commings in do
so much exceed thy expences as thy vsurie commeth to,
assure thy selfe, the longer thou borrowest vpon vsurie,
the more will be thy want. Neither mayest thou thinke,
by changing thy vsurious creditors to better thine estate:
for it fareth with such a man as with him who sticketh
deepe in the myre and clay, who lifting vp the one leg,
in hope to get out, thrusteth the other the deeper in, and
then to get out that, shifteth to the other, but the oftener
he shifteth, the deeper he plungeth himselfe: or, that I
may vse Plutarch his similitude, it happeneth to them who
change their creditours, as to a man, which being fallen
into the dirt, turneth himselfe vp and downe; for the
more he turneth, the more is he bedirted. If therefore thy
future meanes are not like to be better than the present,
extend thy present meanes to the vttermost, for the supply
of thy want, and where they be defectiue, acknowledge
thy want, and stand to the fauour of others. For if
thou canst not beare a lesse burthen, now when thine
estate is better, how wilt thou beare a greater, when thine
estate shall be weaker than now it is? Well therefore

maiest thou vse that rediculous prouerbe which Plutarch
mentioneth, 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , I am not
able to beare a goat, lay on me an oxe.
            The fift and last thing wherein borrowers vpon vsusurie
do sometime offend, is when the necessitie whereupon
they do borrow, is not a blamelesse necessitie, but
drawne vpon themselues through their owne default, as
by riot, or any excesse, or through negligence, or improuidence:
For although their borrowing vpon such a necessitie
may be excused, if they do not induce the lender
to commit vsurie, &c. yet they cannot be excused for casting
themselues into that necessitie.
            Their assertion therefore which hold all borrowing
vpon vsurie to be lawfull, is by no meanes to be retained,
seeing it is manifest that borrowers may and often doe
offend so manie wayes. Neither may it be hoped that
vsurers will make conscience of lending vpon vsurie, vntill
men haue learned to make conscience of borrowing
vpon vsurie.
            Now we are to proceed to the other contrarie assertion,
which affirmeth generally all borrowing vpon vsurie
to be vnlawfull: for although I must confesse, that I
neuer read any author either Papist or Protestant, new or
old, that maintaineth this assertion, yet for as much as I
vnderstand it to be the priuat assertion of some well disposed
persons, who are worthie to bee loued and reuerenced,
and whose arguments are worth the scanning, I
will therefore somewhat insist vpon this point.
            But first you are to remember, that I doe not justifie
borrowers vpon vsurie, vnlesse themselues and their borrowing
be qualified according to those fiue points which
before I recited: for although the borrower is to be condemned
which faileth in any one of those fiue, yet he is
not to be approued or excused, vnlesse there be a concurrencie
of them all: namely, vnlesse he borrow, first,
vpon vrgent necessitie and not otherwise; secondly, for

good and lawfull purposes; thirdly, without inducing the
lender vnto the sinne of vsurie; fourthly, hauing future
meanes to repaire the losse which by vsurie he sustaineth,
and that without endamaging or wronging others; fiftly,
his necessitie whereon he borroweth, being not drawne
vpon himselfe by his owne fault, but being a blamelesse
necessitie. Which fift point I added, as required to the
justifying not of the act of borrowing vpon vsurie, but of
the person of the borrower; for the act of borrowing,
without it may be excused, so the other foure do concurre
therein: but the person of the borrower cannot be
cleered, who by his default hath pulled vpon himselfe
that necessitie: That therefore sheweth, that howsoeuer
it may be lawfull to borrow on vsurie in a case of vrgent
necessitie, yet men must take heed that they doe not
through their owne default cast themselues into this necessitie.
            But let vs consider the arguments which may be objected
against this truth; by answer whereunto, it shall appeare,
that there are no Scriptures nor sound reasons
against it, but Scriptures and reasons for it.
            First therefore it may be objected,Obiect. 1. that there is no
warrant in the word of God for borrowing vpon vsurie,
and therefore that it cannot be done in faith: and whatsoeuer
is not of faith is sinne.
            
               Answer. Many things are contained in the Scriptures
which are not expressely mentioned in the Scriptures,
as verie many other particulers besides this in question;
which notwithstanding may all be proued lawfull by just
and necessarie consequence out of the Scripture: as for
example, Where the generall is acknowledged to be no
sinne, there also the specials which are contained vnder
the same, are warranted. Thus therefore I argue.
            To be oppressed is acknowledged in the Scriptures
to be no sinne.
            To borrow vpon vsurie in case of vrgent necessitie

(with such cautions as before I specified) is to be oppressed.
            Therefore to borrow vpon vsurie in a case of vrgent
necessitie, is acknowleded in the Scriptures to be sinne.
            The proposition I prooue, because the Scripture promiseth
mercy to them that are oppressed, whether by
vsurie, or taking of pawnes, or by any other meanes, as
Exod. 22. 23. 27. To be oppressed therfore is a thing not reproued
of God, but pitied.
            If you shall reply, that the proposition is to bee vnderstood
of those who are oppressed wrongfully and
against their wil, which cannot be verified of those which
borrow vpon vsurie: I answer, that whosoeuer is oppressed,
is wrongfully oppressed and against his will: for
there is no oppression but it is wrongfull, neither can a
man be oppressed but against his will: for vol
                     •
                  nti non fit iniuria,
he that is willing, is not oppressed. The proposition
therefore is generally true. It may be therefore that you
will alledge against the assumption, That he which borroweth
vpon vsurie is not oppressed, because he is willing
to borrow vpon vsurie, yea and so willing that he
seeketh to the vsurer, and intreateth him to lend, offering
to giue him consideration according to the statute, that is
to say, vsurie.
            I answer, he that borroweth vpon vsurie in a case of
vrgent necessitie, with such cautions as before haue bene
specified, doth yeeld to vsurie against his will, yea although
he both offer and promise it: For in cases of vrgent
necessitie, men seeme many times willing to that
which is indeed against their will. When a man is in danger
of shipwracke, as before I haue shewed, how will he
bestirre himselfe to vnlade and lighten the ship, and with
such earnestnesse cast his goods into the sea, that he may
seeme to be very willing to be rid of them: and yet the
thing which hee willeth, is not the casting away of his
goods, but the safetie of his life: To cast away his goods

he is simply vnwilling, and yet against his will vpon a
conditionall necessitie he seemeth willing to do it. Or (to
come neerer the question in hand,) A needie man desirous
to borrow, which without giuing securitie he cannot
obtaine, bringeth forth a pawne to the creditor (who
by the law might not enter into the borrowers house to
take it) but such a pawne as indeed he cannot spare,D
                     •
                  ut. 24. 10. but
his necessitie is such that hee offereth it, and bringeth it
forth, deliuereth it to the creditor to be kept as a pawne,
vntill he restore the money borrowed: notwithstanding
the creditor if he receiue this pawne and keepe it, he oppresseth
the borrower,Exo. 22. 26, 27. and the borrower is oppressed:Deut. 24. 6, 10, 11, 12, 13.
For indeed he was not willing to giue that pawne which
he could not spare,Ezek. 18. 7. 12. but his necessitie for the auoiding of a
greater mischiefe made him seeme willing to that wherunto
he was simply vnwilling. In like case a mā compelled
by vrgent necessitie to borrow, and being not able to
borrow freely, offereth to his creditor, who otherwise
will not lend, consideration after tenne in the hundred;
this creditor if he shall lend vpon this couenant, or require
this consideration, he oppresseth the borrower, and
the borrower is oppressed: For this borrower was no
more willing to pay vsurie than the other was to giue his
pawne, but his necessitie for auoiding a greater inconuenience,
made him seeme willing to that, whereunto
simply he was vnwilling.
            The assumption therefore may be proued by this vnanswerable
argument.
            He that lendeth vpon vsurie to him that borroweth
for vrgent necessitie, oppresseth the borrower:
            Therefore he which borroweth vpon vsurie for vrgent
necessitie, is oppressed, and that as I haue
shewed, both wrongfully and against his will.
            Againe, the like case are warranted in the word of
God, and by the law and light of nature: for why may I
not giue vsury, or promise to giue it in my necessitie? you

will say, because the lender cannot take it without committing
a sinne, which the Lord hath forbidden vnder
paine of damnation. If then I shew that in cases of necessitie,
one man may offer that to another which the other
without committing a damnable sinne cannot receiue,
then is this question prooued by an argument of equals.
Suppose then a man fallen into the hands of robbers and
murderers, to whom he promiseth for the safegard of his
life to giue them not onely that which is about him, but
also such a summe of money besides: as the ten men mentioned,
Ier. 41. 8, offered to Ismael and the cut-throats that
were with him, such treasures as they had in the field for
the safetie of their liues: Or suppose a man being in sicknesse
or hunger, to offer ten times the value of the meat or
medicine which he needeth, to a greedie cormorant that
will take no lesse for the same. If you say these cases of
necessitie concerne a mans life, and it is not to be doubted
but that a man may giue all that hee hath to saue his
life: it is true indeed, but yet a man may not sinne to saue
his life. May I not sinne to saue my life, and may I giue
for the safetie of my life that to another which he cannot
receiue without a more haynous sinne than the sinne of
vsurie, as in these cases euen now specified? then it is apparant
that in a case of necessitie, a man may lawfully offer
and giue that to another which the other cannot receiue
without committing of such a sinne as the Lord
hath forbidden vnder paine of damnation. And this is
true not onely in those cases that so neerely touch a mans
life, but in all other cases of necessitie. A poore man
hauing need to borrow, and not being able to borrow
without giuing such a pawne as he cannot spare, is by his
necessitie compelled to deliuer that pawne,Exo. 22. 26▪ 27. which the
lender cannot receiue and keepe without committing a
damnable sinne.Deut. 24. 6. 22. And that he may lawfully giue such a
pawne,E
                     •
                  ech. 18. 12. when his necessitie is such as that he may much
better want that pawne, than be without that which he

would borrow, there is no question: for the children of
God and such as are noted to haue feared God, when
other pawnes haue failed, haue bene faine to bind ouer
their sonnes and daughters to their creditors.2 King 4. 1. If my
house be in danger to fall presently without the carpenters
helpe,Nehem. 5. 2. 5. my cattell being diseased or hurt, in danger
to miscarie without present cure; my corne or hay lying
abroad in daunger to be spoiled vnlesse presently it be
inned; or if any such other casualtie happen wherein
there is necessitie of present helpe; is it not lawfull for
me to giue, yea to offer and promise to such vnconscionable
men, as taking aduantage at my necessitie will not
otherwise helpe me, six or seuen times the value of that
which in equitie were due vnto them: and yet it cannot
be d
                  •
               nied but that euery one of these doth sinne worse
than the vsurer.
            I will add onely one other instance which will make
this matter euident. Suppose I want food or apparell,
or any other necessaries for myselfe, or those that belong
to me, and that also I want present money to buy that I
need, and present meanes whereby to make readie money;
I am forced therefore to take it vp on trust for
three or six moneths, according as I shall be able to make
payment: The partie which selleth these commodities,
because he is to giue day of payment, he will not let me
haue that vnder eleuen shillings which he would sell for
ten shillings of present money: Well, my necessitie is
such as I had rather giue twelue shillings, perhaps twenty
shillings than not buy that which I came for: may I
in this case of necessitie lawfully promise to pay at the
end of six moneths eleuen shillings for that which of
present money is worth but ten shillings? as I thinke no
man can truly denie: and may I not as lawfully in a case
of no lesse necessitie promise to the lender after ten in the
hundred? Will you heare? this partie which selleth thus
much the deerer for time, lendeth vpon vsurie, as I proued

before, and that after twentie in the hundred: therefore
this buyer borroweth vpon vsurie, which by this
example appeareth in a case of necessitie to be lawfull.
            But you will alledge in the second place,Obiect. 2. that all borrowing
vpon vsurie is condemned in the Scripture. I answer,
that all lending vpon vsurie is indeed condemned
in the Scripture, but that all borrowing vpon vsurie is
condemned, it cannot bee prooued out of the word of
God.
            It may be you will alledge Ierem. 15. 10. and Esay. 24. 2.
In the former place the Prophet Ieremie professeth of himselfe
(as some translations read) that neither he had lent
vpon vsurie, neither had they lent to him vpon vsurie.
            
               Answer. Suppose that the Prophet did indeed speake
of lending and borrowing vpon vsurie; yet hereof it
would not follow, that therefore all borrowing vpon
vsurie is vnlawfull: it may not be doubted but that there
are many things lawfull either of themselues, or at lest in
cases of vrgent necessitie, which the Prophet Ieremie neuer
practised. It may be that he might as truly haue said,
I neitherFor his purchase of the field in Anathoth, was afterwards Chapter 32, and then not vnd
                     •
                  rtaken by him of his owne accord, as a worldly contract for his own profit, but enioyned of the Lord, as a type and assurance of the restitution of the I
                     •
                  wes after the
                     •
                   captiuitie, verse 7, 8▪ 15, 43, 4
                     •
                  . bought of them nor sold to them, I neither
lent to them vpon pawnes or other securitie, neither haue
I borrowed of them vpon securitie. Would it therefore
from hence follow, that all buying and selling, all lending
and borrowing vpon securitie is vnlawfull? Yea but the
Prophet disclaimeth the practise of lending vpon vsurie,
as a thing vnlawfull, therfore the like is to be vnderstood
of borrowing vpon vsurie. The Prophet abstained indeed
from lending vpon vsurie, because it was vnlawfull,
but thereof it doth not follow, that therefore he abstained
from borrowing also, because it was simply vnlawfull. It
may be, he had no need to borrow vpon vsurie: and therfore
that had beene vnlawfull to him, without necessitie,
which in a case of vrgent necessitie is lawfull to another.
But the Prophet indeed, if he speake of vsurie at all, disclaimeth
both lending and borrowing, not as vnlawfull

things, though to him both of them had beene perhaps
vnlawfull, but as occasions of contention. For the purpose
of the Prophet is to shew the contentious disposition
of the people, who contended with him that had giuen
them no occasion of contention; which he prooueth
by these two particulars of lending and borrowing (whether
freely or vpon vsurie) which are the most vsuall occasions
of suits and contentions among men: therefore
the Prophets meaning was not to professe, that he had
done no vnlawfull thing, but that he had giuen the contentious
people no occasion of contention.
            But what if the Prophet speake not of vsurie at all
in this place, as indeed he doth not, but onely of ciuile lending
vpon securitie, that is, when a man lendeth with purpose
to exact againe that which he lendeth. The verbe
Nashah which here is vsed (as heretofore I haue shewed)
signifieth in this argument exacting that which a man
hath lent, or lending with purpose to exact that which is
lent. Neither is there any necessitie that we should vnderstand
the word in any place where it is vsed in the Scripture
of lending vpon vsurie. Howbeit, the word Nosheh,
which signifieth an exactour, sometimes is vnderstood
of the vsurer, because he of all creditours is the greatest
exactour. And because the vsurers aboue all others will
be sure to lend vpon securitie, purposing to exact not only
their owne but also an ouerplus, therefore some translatours
vnderstand the word (which signifieth no more
but to exact, or to lend with purpose to exact) of vsurious
lending. Thus R. Dauid Kimhi, vnderstandeth this
place of lending in generall.Lib. Radic. Thus Tremellius and Iunius
translate,The Greeke: 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . 
               Non dedi mutuum neque mutuo dederunt mihi, or as
some vnderstand the place, I am not in debt to them, nor
they to me. Neither ought that to trouble any, that the
Latine translation hath the word foenerare, or other Latin
authours that follow it; for both in it and them the word
foenerare is often vsed in the sence of free lending, as appeareth

by these places, Deut. 15. 6. & 28. 12. 44. Prou. 19. 17.
& 22. 7.As those which c
                     •
                  me from Gnaba
                     •
                  , and Lauah. where the Hebrew text and other translations
haue those words, which signifie free lending: as also
Luke 6. 34, likewise Ecclesiast. 29. 1. 2. Out of which places
it is euident, that as the word 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                in Greeke authours,
so foenerare and foenerari in Latine translations (which also
may be said of diuines who haue written in Latine) are
more often vsed in the signification of free lending, than
of lending vpon vsurie. And euen in this place where
the Prophet sayth, Non foeneraui, according to the Latine,
Ly
                     •
                  anus expoundeth it thus, i. Non commodaui, I haue not
lent. But you will say, Where Nashah is construed with the
preposition 
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , as in this place, it signifieth lending vpon vsurie.
No such matter. Indeed some Hebrew writers haue imagined,
that Nashah simply signifieth to borrow; but with
the preposition, to lend; and so expound and read this
place, I haue not borrowed, neither haue they lent to me;
that is, I neither sought to borrow of them, neither did
they lend to me of their owne accord. But the truth is,
that Nashah signifieth to lend, and where 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                is added, it is
a note (as the English to) of the Datiue case, hauing reference
to the partie which borroweth,Nos
                     •
                  im Bahem. as Nehem. 5. 10. I
and my brethren (sayth Nehemiah) lend to them mony and
corne: vnlesse we will with my aforesaid English author
absurdly affirme, that Nehemiah and his followers did
lend to their needie brethren vpon vsurie. Or if I would
in like sort vrge the signification of the word Nosh
                     •
                  h
(which is more often vsed to signifie an vsurer, than the
verbe Nashah to lend vpon vsurie) I might bring a manifest
example out of the Scriptures of a man which feared
God to prooue the lawfulnesse of borrowing vpon vsurie,
which the Prophet Elisha was so farre from condemning,
that he helped the widdow of that partie by miracle
to pay her debt, and as the Greeke translation hath

                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , the vsurie, 2. King. 4. 1. 7.
            The place therefore in Ieremie is thus to be read I ha
                  •
               e

not lent (meaning the ciuile kind of lending vpon securitie,
for so much the word signifieth) neither haue they
lent to me. And therefore as I haue no cause to contend
with them, besides the duty of my calling in striuing
against their sinnes, so neither haue I giuen them any occasion
to contend with me, and yet I am a man of contention
and strife to the whole land, (which may be vnderstood
both actiuely in respect of their opinion of him, and
passiuely in respect of their behauiour towards him) and
euerie one doth curse me.
            And as this translation doth best expresse the force of
the Hebrew text, so doth it best fit the scope and purpose
of the Prophet, which is to shew the vntoward disposition
and contentious behauiour of the people towards
him; who when as he neither cōtended with them
about any worldly affaires, nor yet gaue them any occasion
to contend with him (he had neither lent nor borrowed,
he did neither meddle nor make in any worldly
dealing or traffique with them, from which contentions
vsually arise among men) yet they contended with him,
and judged him a contentious man, and for that cause
cursed him. But the signification of vsurie is not so fit, for
the Prophet meaning as I sayd to set forth their vntoward
and contentious behauiour towards him, would
signifie that he had giuen them not onely no cause, but
not so much as any occasion of contention and hatred:
for although he had not dealt by vsurie with them, nor
any way wronged them, but yet had otherwise intermedled
with them by ciuile lending and borrowing, or
other worldly affaires, they might haue had though no
just cause, yet diuerse occasions of contending with him:
neither was vsurie so vsuall among the Iewes, as that
he should mention it as the vsuall and ordinarie cause of
contention among them. And thus much I hope may
suffice for answer to that allegation out of Ier. 15. 10.
            The other testimonie is out of Esay 24. 2: where the

Prophet hath these words, as some translations read, Like
lender like borrower, like giuer like taker to vsurie.
            
            But this allegation, though it did speake of lending
and borrowing vpon vsurie (as I haue shewed there is no
necessitie to graunt so much, seeing the words may thus
be read, the exactour, as he of whom he doth exact) yet it
would prooue nothing concerning this controuersie: for
there the Lord threatneth such a confusion of all estates,
and ouerturning of the commonweale, that all men of
dignitie and abilitie being bereaued of that which they
had, and so made equall with them of low degree and
poore estate, the people should be as the priest, the seruant
as the master, the handmaid as the mistresse, the buyer
as the seller, the lender as the borrower, the exactour
or vsurer, as he of whom he exacteth.
            And thus much concerning the testimonies of Scripture.
 Now let vs consider what other reasons may be alledged
against borrowing vpon vsurie.
            1. As first, that lending and borrowing vpon vsurie
are relatiues, and therefore if to lend vpon vsurie be vnlawfull,
it cannot be lawfull to borrow vpon vsurie.
            I answere as before, that relatiues are not alwayes of
the like nature and qualitie: for to offer wrong and to
suffer wrong, to oppresse and to be oppressed, are relatiues;
and such relatiues are to lend vpon vsurie, and to
borrow vpon vsurie through necessitie: for to lend vpon
vsurie to him that borroweth for vrgent necessitie, it is to
offer wrong, and to oppresse: therefore he which vpon
necessitie yeeldeth to pay vsurie, doth suffer wrong, and
is oppressed.
            Thus therefore I may reason from the light of nature,
as before I did from the Scripture.
            To suffer wrong is not sinne.
            The borrower which vpon necessitie yeeldeth to pay
vsurie, doth suffer wrong. Therefore he doth not
sinne therein.
            
               
The proposition is an axiome of Aristotles in his Ethicks,
where proouing,Eth. 5. c. 11. that it is a lesse euill to suffer injurie than
to offer injurie, he setteth downe this principle,

                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               . To be wronged or to suffer injurie,
is without sinne and vnjustice.Eth. 5. c. 5. 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . And in another place he
sayth, That just dealing is a meane betwixt offering injurie
and suffering wrong, the one is to haue too much,
the other too little. But yet (sayth he) justice is a mean not
as each other morall vertue is, a meane betwixt two contrarie
vices; but as a meane betwixt too much and two
little, that is to say, as an equalitie: from which whosoeuer
swarueth, runneth into both the extreames: for
where too much is giuen to the one, too little is giuen
to the other. As for example, the vsurer in taking from
the borrower more than his own, leaueth to the borrower
lesse than his owne.
            2. You will say, to be meerely oppressed, or onely to
suffer wrong, we graunt to be no sinne: but the borrower
vpon vsurie willingly consenteth to that vsurie which is
imposed vpon him, yea he intreateth the vsurer, that hee
will so lend vnto him; and therefore he is guiltie of his
owne harme, & accessarie to the oppression of the vsurer.
            I answer, he that borroweth vpon necessitie with such
cautions as before I mentioned, is guiltie neither of the
one nor the other: For first in respect of himselfe, wheras
there are two euils propounded vnto him, the one, the inconuenience
or mischiefe, for auoiding whereof he desireth
to borrow, as perhaps the forfeiture of an hundred
pounds: the other, the losse which he shall sustaine by
vsurie, which perhaps is fiue in fiftie; the one whereof he
must needs incurre: therefore this latter being the lesser
euill, and hauing the respect of a good or eligible thing,
in comparison of the greater euill, he maketh choise therof;
not minding or desiring his owne losse, but hoping to
redeeme a greater losse with a lesse. And yet he doth not
willingly consent to the payment of vsurie, but his necessitie

for auoiding a greater euill maketh him seeme
willing to that wherunto he is simply vnwilling, as I haue
said before. And as touching the vsurer, whereas the borrower
perceiueth him resolute to run into one of these
two sinnes, either not to lend at all, or else vpon vsurie,
from both which it is not in his power to keepe him,
therefore the former (which is, not to lend at all to him
that vpon vrgent necessitie is desirous to borrow) being
the greater sinne, than the latter, which is to lend vpon
vsurie, his desire is to keep both the lender from the greater
sinne, and himselfe from the greater euill.
            Why, but you will say, if the borrower would not entreat
the other to lend, he should not need to fall into eito
either of both those sinnes.
            I answere, when a man is in a case of vrgent necessity,
it is not onely lawfull for him, but also he is bound in conscience
to vse lawfull meanes to come out of the same.
When as therefore he wanteth presentmeans of his own,
it is lawfull for him to borrow, hauing an honest purpose
to repay, yea and to desire those whom God hath enabled,
to lend vnto him. In desiring the able man to lend,
thou onely moouest him to a worke of charitie and liberalitie:
but if vpon this motion of thine, his couetousnesse
cause him to sinne, either by refusing to lend at all,
or by requiring vsurie; well may that motion (as many
other good and lawfull things are) be an occasion of his
sinne, but there is no cause thereof but his owne couetousnesse
and the hardnesse of his heart, and thou art not
accessarie to his sinne. But if at the first motion thou intreatest
him to lend, with promise of vsurie, then thou inducest
him to sinne, and art accessarie to his offence (as I
haue shewed before) either by making him an vsurer who
was none before, (and so art deeper in the sinne than hee)
or at least by inducing him to the actuall committing of
vsurie. Which being the vsuall custome of borrowers vpon
vsurie (whose manner is to goe to the vsurer, or to his

broker to take vp on interest (as they call it) so much money
as they desire, perhaps an hundred pounds, where no
mention being made but of the principall (for the other
is presupposed) bonds are drawn of two hundred pounds
for the payment of a hundred and ten pounds) it cannot
be denied, but that in this respect alone (not to mention
the rest) the most borrowers vpon vsurie are accessarie to
the sinne of vsurie. At the first motion therefore thou
mayest not offer vsurie, but only desire to borrow: which
if thy need require, thou mayest lawfully doe. But what
if the couetousnesse of the partie who is able and therefore
ought to lend, and the hardnesse of his heart be such,
that vpon thy motion of borrowing he wil either require
vsurie, or refuse to lend altogether? in the former case, if
thy necessitie be such, that thou must needs borrow, and
knowest not where to borrow freely elsewhere, thou
mayest lawfully yeeld to the vsurie imposed: for in yeelding,
thou keepest both him from the greater sinne,
(which is not to lend at all) and thy selfe from a greater
mischiefe.
            Why but you will say, ought I not to admonish him at
the least, and to dissuade him from the practise of vsurie,
seeing my yeelding to pay, and my silence in not reproouing
vsurie, may argue that I approoue it, and therefore
am guiltie thereof, as accessarie thereto?
            I answere, that difference is to be made of the partie
with whom you deale: for if the partie be tractable and
of any hope, that Christian course of charitable admonition
and brotherly reproofe is to be taken with him; but
if he be a desperat sinner (such as common vsurers commonly
are) whom if you admonish or reprooue, you shall
not profit him but hurt your selfe, before such an hog the
precious pearle of Christian admonition and brotherly
reproofe is not to be cast.Mat
                     •
                  h. 7. 6. Prou. 9. 7, 8.
            
            But me thinkes a man of a tender conscience (you will
say) should hardly seeke to such a man. So I say also: for

if his necessitie doe not driue him, he should not seeke to
such an one neither hardly nor at all. But seeing God
hath enabled him to lend, and the magistrat doth tollerat
him to this end, that he may supply the wants of men
which are in necessitie: why may not I, vpon whom the
Lord hath laid a necessitie of borrowing, seeke to borrow
of him who ought to lend to me? so long as I induce
him not to sinne, nor persuade him to any thing which is
not good.
            But you will say, if the partie be a common vsurer,
you know beforehand, that either he will lend vpon vsurie,
or not at all: and therefore seeing vpon your motion
he will take occasion to sinne, you ought rather to forbeare
it, than that by your motion you should giue him
occasion of sinning, which for no temporall commoditie
you ought to doe.
            I answere, that it is vnknowne to me, how the Lord
(who would haue the wealthie men tried by the signification
of their want who are in need) will moue his heart:
and therefore so long as I mooue him onely to that good
which he ought to doe, if he will thereby take occasion
to offend,See Thom. Aq. sum. 2. 2. q. 78. 4. ad 2. it is an offence taken and not giuen. And for as
much as this passiue offence is not of ignorance or infirmitie,
but of a resolued malice and of a setled resolution
in euill, such as was the scandale of the Pharisies, Mat. 15.
14. it is to be neglected, neither am I being in a case of vrgent
necessitie to forbeare asking to borrow for feare of
this passiue scandale.
            But the latter point is more difficult, viz. whether after
deniall made by him who was intreated to lend, a man in
case of vrgent and extreame necessitie may offer that
condition to him, which if he shall accept, he shall offend
by vsurie. As for example, if vpon his deniall he should
reply, Refuse not I pray you to lend vnto me, for my necessitie
is such, as that rather than I would not borrow, I
would yeeld to very hard conditions; require what allowance

you thinke good, or impose what condition you
please, if it be not too vnreasonable, I will yeeld to it.
Such an offer I haue shewed before by like instances, not
to be vnlawfull: to which I will adde some others. Suppose
a man in extremitie of hunger to come to another
who hath victuals, intreating him to let him haue some
food for his readie money: the other, though he perceiueth
his need, refuseth: wherupon he replieth, Refuse not
I pray you to sell me food, for such is my necessitie, that
rather than I would not buy victuals at this time, I would
yeeld to what price you shall require, demaund what
you will, though it be the double price, &c. Or suppose
the same man in the like want of necessaries either for
himselfe or such as belong vnto him, but wanting readie
money, commeth to one who hath such commodities to
sell, who refusing to sell without readie money, the other
desireth him to let him haue them, though he pay the dearer
for them. The partie thus selling the dearer, committeth
vsurie. And suppose againe, that the partie who is
intreated to lend, pretendeth as vsurers many times doe,
that they haue no money to pleasure the borrower with:
whereupon the borrower intreateth him to helpe him
with some commoditie whereof he may make money:
the lender (intending perhaps to buy the same himselfe
vnder hand) lets him haue a commoditie, which he sayth
is worth an hundred pounds, and causeth the borrower to
enter into a bond for the payment of so much: when as
notwithstanding, the borrower when he selleth the commoditie,
cannot perhaps procure fourescore pounds for
it. These examples with those before mentioned, may
prooue, that a man in present distresse may make such an
offer, which being extorted from him by his owne necessitie,
and by the hardnesse of their hearts with whom he
hath to deale, is, by his owne necessitie compelling him,
to make choise of the lesse euill, and by the hardnesse of
their hearts, whom he dissuadeth from the greater sinne,

to be excused, which otherwise were not warrantable.
            3. But it may be objected againe: He without whom
the vsurer cannot actually accomplish his sinne, is partner
of his sinne. Without the borrower vpon vsurie, the
vsurer cannot actually commit the sinne of vsurie, therefore
the borrower is partner of the vsurers sinne.
            The proposition being generally vnderstood (as it
must, or else the whole argumentation is a paralogisme) is
vntrue: for although it be true in those sinnes which are
committed betwixt a couple by the voluntarie and mutuall
consent of both parties, yet where the one partie
yeeldeth not voluntarie consent, but is a patient, and the
object rather of the others wrong than an agent with
him, it is vtterly false. The sinne of rape can no more be
committed without the innocent partie that is rauished,
than the sinne of whoredome without the companie of
an harlot; and yet no man will say, that she which is rauished
is partner of his sinne that committeth the rape.
The robber by the high way cannot commit robberie,
vnlesse the way faring man doe trauell that way: so likewise
one man cannot oppresse, vnlesse there be another
to be oppressed, nor impose vsurie, vnlesse there be another
on whom it is to be imposed: and yet he that is oppressed
is not partner of the oppressours sinne, nor the
borrower who vpon necessitie borroweth vpon vsurie,
of the vsurers sinne. Indeed he that willingly and without
necessitie maketh that contract of vsurie, he is not
oppressed; neither may it be denied but that he is partner
of the vsurers sinne. But he that vpon necessitie and
against his will yeeldeth to the payment of vsurie, he is
oppressed; neither can it truly be said, that he is partner
of the vsurers sinne: for whosoeuer is oppressed, is
wrongfully oppressed and against his will: and whosoeuer
is wrongfully oppressed and against his will, he is
no partner of the oppressours sinne. When as therefore
it is said, If there were no borrowers vpon vsurie, there

would be no vsurers: to prooue that all borrowers are
partakers in the sinne of vsurie, it might as well be said,
That if there were no trauellers by the high way, there
would be no robbers by the high way: if there were
none to suffer wrong, there would bee none to offer
wrong; if there were none to be oppressed, there would
be no oppressours; to prooue that the robbed, the wronged,
the oppressed are guiltie of the robberie, wrong, and
oppression that is done vnto them. For I haue prooued
before, that the borrower vpon necessitie yeelding to
vsurie, is wronged and oppressed.
            4. Againe, if it be objected, That we may not doe ill
that good may come thereof: neither may we vse vnlawfull
meanes though to good ends, neither ought any
worldly necessitie force vs to sinne; all this I freely confesse,
and withall professe, that if all borrowing vpon
vsurie were an euill thing, (meaning the euill of sinne) if
to borrow vpon vsurie vpon necessitie, were to vse an
vnlawfull meanes; or if it were to sinne, that this euill
were not to be done, though much good might come
thereof, this vnlawfull meanes were not to bee vsed,
though our end and intent be neuer so good, and that no
necessitie should compell vs to commit this sinne. But
this is the matter in question, which must be prooued, and
not taken for graunted. For the contrarie part I haue
prooued, That to borrow in time of need is a lawfull
meanes, and to yeeld to vsurie vpon necessitie, with such
cautions as before haue bin specified, is not to do an euill,
namely of sin, that good may come thereof, but to suffer
a lesse euill, namely of losse, for the auoiding of a greater.
            Hitherto we haue spoken of the negatiue, that is to
say, of that which the sound Christian and citisen of heauen
doth not, viz. That he doth not put forth his money
vnto vsurie. Now we are briefly to consider the affirmatiue,
which euerie true Christian in respect of his goods is
bound to do: For whereas the vsurer offendeth two

wayes, both in respect of the vse, that hee exposeth his
money to vsurie; and in respect of his gettings, that he increaseth
his wealth by vsurie: we are to shew that two
contrarie duties are required of euery faithfull man, both
in regard of the 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , that is, the getting, that hee get his
goods lawfully; and also in respect of the 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , that is, the
vse, that hee freely communicate them to the good of
others. Of just getting, because it is equally opposit to
the vice mentioned in the next note, I will intreat after I
haue spoken thereof, as being the common affirmatiue
to both these negatiues.
            The communication of our goods, whether by free
giuing or free lending, to the good of others, as our abilitie
shall afford, and their necessitie require, is that spirituall
vsurie which the Lord (who so seuerely condemneth
all worldly vsurie) doth highly commend vnto vs
in diuerse places of the Scripture, affirming, That those
who are bountifull towards the poore and needie, whether
by free lending or free giuing, doe lend as it were
vpon vsurie to the Lord,Prou 19. 17. who will repay and recompence
them with aduantage. Wherevpon Augustine, Deus
noster qui te prohibetesse foener atorem,
               In Psal. 36. Con
                     •
                  . 3. 
               iubet te esse foeneratorem, &
dicitur tibi, foener
                     •
                   Deo: Our God (saith he) who forbiddeth thee to
be an vsurer, commandeth thee to be an vsurer, and to thee it is sayd,
Lend, as it were vpon vsurie to the Lord: To which purpose we
are elsewhere exhorted, to distribute or communicate vnto the
necessities of the saints. And againe,Rom. 12. 13. 
               To do good and to destribut forget
not,
               Heb. 13. 16. 
               for with such sacrifices God is pleased.
            
            But there are three obstacles and impediments of free
lending and free giuing, by the remouing whereof we
may be effectually persuaded to put in practise this spirituall
vsurie. The first is an erronious conceit of worldly
men, who imagine that the goods which they possesse
are their owne, to dispose of as themselues thinke good;
and therefore that they are not bound to distribut or
communicat them to others, &c.
            
               
But the Scriptures do teach vs that we are not absolut
Lords of that which we enjoy,Luk. 16. 1
                     •
                  . but the stewards of the
Lord, who hath committed these goods as talents to be
imployed to his glorie in the good of our brethren, and
that of our stewardship we are one day to render a
straight account: neither may we thinke that our account
will be accepted, if we shall refuse to imploy the
good gifts of God to such vses as he hath appointed. If a
noble man should commit a certaine summe of money to
his steward, appointing him to destribut the same to the
reliefe of the poore; would not euery man esteeme that
steward to be worse than a theefe, if hee should conuert
that money to his owne vses? or if the Princes Almoner
should not communicat vnto the poore the money committed
to his trust, but withhold it from them, or diuert
it to other vses, would not euery man condemne him in
like sort? But we are the Lords stewards, and so many
as are of abilitie are the Lords Almoners; and therefore
if when God hath commanded vs to communicat or destribut
some part of our goods to the poore and needie,
are not we as bad or rather worse than theeues, if we being
of abilitie shall refuse to communicat to the necessities
of our brethren? Let vs then consider whether the
Lord hath not required this dutie at our hands.
            The precepts of free lone I haue mentioned before:
and for almes and free giuing the Scripture is plentifull,
charging not onely the rich to be apt to communicate
and so to be rich in good workes,1. Tim. 6. 17. 18 but euerie one that is
not poore, to giue almes according to their abilitie:Luke. 11. 41. and
we must not onely giue if we be able, but also we must
doe our indeuour that we may bee able, and if other
meanes faile, we ought to lobour and worke with our
hands that which is good (that is,Eph. 4. 
                     •
                  8. to take paines in some
lawfull calling) that we may haue to giue to him that needeth.
Yea if the necessitie of our brethren so require, we
are to make sale of our goods and possessions for their
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  . 12. 33.
               
releefe, according to the commaundement of our Sauior
Christ,Act. 4. 34. and the practise of the primitiue Church. And
these duties of free lending and free giuing are to be performed,
readily, without delay, Pro. 3. 27, 28, constantly,
without wearinesse, 2. Cor. 8. 11, cheerfully, without grudging:
for the Lord loueth a cheerfull giuer, 2. Corinth. 9. 7.
And that we should not thinke these duties to bee arbitrarie,
or the neglect of them not to draw vpon vs either
guilt or punishment; therefore the Lord besides his
manifold precepts straightly enjoyning these duties, hath
added both seuere censures, and dreadfull comminations
against the neglect thereof,De. 1
                     •
                  . 9, 10, 11. it is censured as an euident
signe of no loue of God,1. Iohn. 3. 17. 1. Iohn. 3. 17. as a sinne, Deut. 15. 9.
yea as a sinne of Sodome, Ezech. 16. 49.
            The comminations are either generall,Prou. 28. 27. as Prou. 28. 27,
He that hideth his eyes (from the poore) shall abound
with curses; or speciall, in this life, that hee shall not obtaine
any thing at the hands of God: For he that stoppeth his
eare at the crying of the poore,
               Prou. 21. 13. 
               he shall also cry & not be heard: in the
life to come, that he shall bee cast into euerlasting fire
which is prepared for the diuell and his angels: For such
shall be the sentence of Christ our judge at the last day,
Depart from me you cursed,
               Mat. 25. 41, 42. 
               into euerlasting fire, for I was an hungred
(viz. in my poore members) and you gaue me no meat, I
thirsted and you gaue me no drinke,
               Luke 16. 2. 
               &c. Seeing therefore our
goods are not our owne but the Lords, whose stewards
we are, it cannot bee denied but that we are to imploy
them as our Lord and maister appointeth: and seeing our
Lord and maister appointeth vs, and that vpon paine of
damnation, to communicat them to the necessities of our
brethren, as their need shall require, and our abilitie afford;
it behoueth vs as we tender our owne saluation, so
also to tender the distressed estate of our poore brethren.
            The second impediment is couetousnesse, joyned with
distrust: for when as men are couetous they will not lay
forth any thing, vnlesse it be for their aduantage: and being

distrustfull they imagine that what is giuen, is lost.
But hereunto I will oppose, as an antidote, the gracious
promises of God made to those who are gracious to the
poore, whether by free giuing or free lending. Thou saist
thou wilt not giue because thou knowest not what want
thy selfe may haue: but what saith the holy Ghost,Prou. 28. 27. 
               To
him that giueth vnto the poore shall be no want: but to him that hideth
his eyes, shall be plentie of cu
                     •
                  ses. Thou wilt not lend to the
needie, because thou doubtest that what is lent to them
will neuer be repaid: But what saith the spirit of God?
He that hath mercy on the poore,
               Prou. 19. 17. 
               lendeth vnto the Lord, and the Lord
will recompence him that which he hath giuen. To which you
may adde, Deut. 15. 10. & 23. 20. Luke 6. 35. Seeing therfore
the Lord hath made such gracious promises to those that
are mercifull towards the poore and needie: were it not
extreme infidelitie to imagine, that by our liberalitie towards
the poore we should become loosers; seeing he
hath promised to repay what is lent, and to reward what
is giuen? Nay, so farre shalt thou be from losse or hinderance
by the charitable communicating of thy goods, as
that this is the surest way not onely of sauing them that
they be not lost, but also of laying them forth to increase:
For whereas we are stripped of all other our goods by
death, which turneth vs as naked out of this world as we
came into it; these which we haue charitably giuen, do
remaine vnto vs after death. And therefore as they
which trauell into forraine countries, doe not cary their
mony with them, partly for feare of robbing by the way,
and partly because it would not be currant in the countrey
whereunto they trauell, but deliuer it to the bankers
vpon a bill of exchange, whereby they may be assured to
receiue their money: so we, being to depart out of this
life, for as much as we cannot take our money with vs,
neither is it currant in heauen, ought to commit it to the
poore and needie, as it were the Lords bankers, vpon his
promise in his word, as it were his bill of exchaunge,

whereby he assureth vs of full recompence in the life to
come: Wherefore that which we commit to the poore
according to the rules of charitie, Illud non amittimus, sed
promittimus, That we do not loose, but as it were send before
vs. And that is it which our Sauiour saith,Luke 16. 9. 
               Make you
friends of this Mammon of iniquitie, &c. For it is most certaine
that we shall be put out of the stewardship by death, neither
shall the administration of these temporal goods any
longer appertaine vnto vs. What course therefore may
we take, that when we are put out of our stewardship, we
may haue some benefit and comfort by the imployment
of our goods in the time of our stewardship? we are by
the charitable exposing of our goods, to make vs friends
of this vnrighteous Mammon, that when we shall be put
out of this stewardship, we may be receiued into euerlasting
tabernacles.
            Againe, the charitable exposing of goods, in the
Scriptures is compared to sowing of seed in the ground,
2. Cor. 9. 6,2. Cor. 9. 6. Therefore as the husbandman casteth his seed
into the ground in hope of good increase in time of haruest,
although his seed do rot in the meane time, and die
in the earth; so we should cast our seed vpon the poore, as
it were the Lords plowed land, in certaine assurance of a
plentifull increase in the great haruest, at which time it
shall be sayd,Mat. 25. 34, 35. 
               Come you blessed of my father, inherit the kingdome
which is prepared for you: for when I was hungrie, you gaue me
meat, when I was thirstie, you gaue me drinke; &c. That therefore
which hindereth men from giuing almes (that is a
couetous desire of bettering our estate) would chiefly
stirre vs vp thereto, if we yeelded any credit to the promises
of God. Wouldest thou then thriue by vsurie?
lend not vpon worldly vsurie to men, who will pay thee
but ten in the hundred, but lend vpon spirituall vsurie
vnto the Lord, who hath promised to repay an hundred
fold.
            The third and last impediment, is hardnesse of heart,

shutting vp the bowels of compassion in the richer sort,
and taking from them all feeling and regard of other
mens necessities. For the remoouing whereof, let the richer
sort consider, first, that the poorest Christian that
liueth, is his owne flesh, Esay. 58. 7. Secondly, that he is his
brother in Christ, redeemed by the same most precious
bloud of Christ. Yea thirdly, that he is a fellow member
of the same bodie, whereof Christ is the head: and
therefore in the fourth place that Christ esteemeth that
giuen to him,Mat. 25. 40. 4
                     •
                  . which is giuen to his poore members; and
that to be denied to himselfe, which is denied to one of
them. Consider then with me, if any man ought to deny
vnto Christ an almes, who hath not denied himselfe to
vs: or if any should, whether he were not to be esteemed
a most wicked and hard hearted man. If you shall say,
farre be it from vs that we should deny any thing to
Christ our Sauiour, and yet are hard hearted towards the
poore; I would aduise you to call to mind the excuse
which the wicked shall make at the day of judgement,
with the answer of Christ the judge: When (say they) did
we see thee hungrie,
               Mat. 25. 44, 45. 
               or thirstie, or a stranger, or naked, or sicke, or in
prison, and did not minister vnto thee? To whom our Sauiour
answereth, Verily I say vnto you, in as much as you did it not to
one of the least of these, you did it not to me, Mat. 25. 44, 45, where
also we may obserue that the sentence of saluation and
condemnation shall be pronounced at the last day, according
either to the performance or neglect of this dutie.
Wherefore as we tender the saluation of our soules,
so let vs thinke our selues bound not onely to abstaine
from all worldly vsurie, which I proued to be a damnable
sinne; but also to practise this spirituall vsurie, wherin
we hauing lent vnto the Lord, shall be sure to receiue
a plentifull reward.
            THere remaineth the tenth and last note of the sound
Christian and citisen of heauen, in these words, Nor taketh

reward against the innocent. Now rewards are taken either
by way of briberie to p
                  •
               ruert judgement, or by way
of trecherie to betray innocent bloud. To peruert judgement,
bribes are taken: first, by judges and those that belong
to them,1. Sam. 8. 3. after the example of the sonnes of Samuell,
who when they were appointed judges did not walke in
the wayes of their father (for he was free from taking rewards, 1. Sam. 12. 3.) but turned aside after lucre, and taking
rewards, peruerted judgement. Secondly, by counsellors
and aduocats,Act. 24. after the example of Tertullus, who
(so he might haue his fee) cared not what false calumniations
he vttered against the Apostle Paul. Thirdly, by
witnesses who are hired to giue false witnesse against the
innocent, according to the example of those who were
suborned against Na
                     •
                  oth,
               1. King. 21. and against our Sauiour Christ,Mat. 26, 59, 60. & 28. 12▪ 15.
both before his death and after his resurrection. Of trecherie
also we haue examples in the Scriptures, as of Dalila,
               Iud. 16. 5, 18. who for reward betrayed Sampson into the hands of
the Philistines;Mat. 26. 15. & 27. 4. and of Iudas the traytor, who for thirtie
peeces of money betrayed our Sauiour Christ.
            But that I may speake to the intendment of the holie
Ghost in this place, I am to shew, that this is a note of
Gods children, to be free from rewards: For the Lord in
other places also of the Scripture, propoundeth abstinence
from rewards as a note of the godly; and contrariwise
the taking of rewards, as a certaine badge of the
wicked. For as touching the former, when question was
made who should dwell with a consuming fire,Deut. 4. 24. that is,Heb. 12. 19.
God: the Prophet Esay maketh answer Chapter. 33,Esay. 33. 15. 
               He that
refuseth gaine of oppression, and shaketh his hands from taking of
gifts, &c. he shall dwell on high. The same is testified,Prou. 15. 27. 
               Prou. 15. 27. He that is greedie of gaine, troubleth his owne house: but he
that hateth gifts, shall liue. On the other side, taking of bribes
is acknowledged in the Scripture to be an vndoubted token
of the wicked,Prou. 17. 23. 
               Prou. 17. 23. (The wicked man taketh a
gift out of the bosome (to wit, of the giuer) to wrest the wayes of

iudgement.) Of accursed persons,Deut. 27. 25. 
               Deut. 27. 25. (Cursed be he
that taketh a reward to put to death innocent bloud. And all the
people shall say Amen.) Of reprobates and castawayes,Iob. 15. 34. 
               Iob.
15. 34. (Fire shall deuoure the houses of bribes, that is, of them
that take bribes.) And Psal. 26. 9, 10,Psal. 26. 9. 10. where the Prophet
praying that he might not be destroyed in the destruction
of the wicked and reprobat, he describeth them by this
note, Gather not my soule (saith he) with the sinners, nor my life
with the bloudie men: in whose hands is wickednesse, and their right
hand is full of bribes.
            
            The vse which we are to make of this doctrine is thus
much, That seeing abstinence from rewards is made by
the holy Ghost a note of the righteous which shall be saued;
and contrariwise, taking of rewards an vndoubted
marke of the wicked, who if they continue in this sinne
shall be condemned: therefore it behooueth vs to shake
our hands from taking of rewards, if we would haue any
hope or assurance that we shall dwell in the mountaine of
Gods holinesse: For they that shall dwell in the mountaine
of God, are such (saith the holy Ghost) as doe not
take rewards against the innocent. Wherefore if thou
doest take rewards, and that against the innocent (for the
innocent partie doth not vse to giue bribes, therefore
bribes are commonly taken against the innocent) how
canst thou hope that thou shalt euer inherit the kingdome
of God? But these 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , these takers of rewards, doe
not only depriue themselues of all true hope of saluation,
but also incurre most certainely the just vengeance of
God, which they pull not onely vpon themselues and
their houses, as I shewed before out of Deut. 27. 25, Prou.
15. 27, Iob. 15, 34, but also vpon their countrey, which
should be more deare vnto them than themselues; 
                  〈◊〉
               
therefore said to destroy it, Prou. 29, 4:
               
                  
                     〈…〉
                  . 29 4. For among the 
                  〈…〉
               
abhominations, for which the Lord doth threat
                  ••
               
               
                  •
               struction against Ierusalem, this is none of the least,

                  
                     •
                  zech. 22. 12, In thee haue they taken gifts to shed bloud,
               Ezech 22. 1
                     •
                  . 
               thou hast

taken vsurie and increase, &c. But that which is spoken to
all, seemeth to be spoken to none. I will therefore conuert
my speech to all the sorts of them that take gifts seuerally,
as to corrupt judges, aduocats, and witnesses.
For as touching traitours, whom euery one knoweth to
be worse than common cut-throats and murtherers (because
to the murther of the innocent, whereof they are
guiltie, they adde persidious trecherie) I shall not need to
speake.
            First therefore and principally I am to speake to judges,
officers, and magistrats: for now adayes briberie
hath so corrupted publicke places and functions, that
euery petite office, whereof the stipends and lawfull fees
are but small, is notwithstanding by such corrupt wayes
and indirect meanes as are found out, sufficient to gather
great wealth.
            But let such men besides the generall arguments, before
vsed, consider with me how dangerous this kind of
filthie gaine is, how wicked, and how pernicious. The
danger is shewed, Deut. 16. 19, Wrest not thou the law (sayth
the Lord to judges and officers) nor respect any person,
               Deut. 16. 19. 
               neither
take reward:
               Exod. 23. 8. 
               for the reward blindeth the eyes (not of the vnwise
onely, but) of the wise, and peruerteth the words (not of the wicked
onely, but also) of the iust. But the grieuousnesse of
this offence will more clearely appeare, if besides the
danger to themselues, we shall consider how greatly they
offend both against God and their neighbour: against
God;Exod. 22. 28. for judges and magistrats are by the holy ghost in
the Scriptures called Gods,Psal. 82. 6. because they are the Lords
substitutes, sustaining his person: and the judgement
which they execute, is not the judgement of man but of
God. And that is the argument which I
                     •
                  hosophat vsed,
when he exhorted the judges, whom he had ordained,
to the vpright performance of their dutie;2. Chron. 19. 6. 
               Take heed what
you doe (sayth he) for you execute not the iudgements of man, but
of the Lord, and he will be with you in the cause and iudgement.

Wherefore now let the feare of the Lord be vpon you, take heed and
doe it, for there is none iniquitie with the Lord our God, neither respect
of persons, nor receiuing of reward. Whosoeuer therefore
peruerteth judgement, as much as in him lieth, he maketh
God (whose judgement it is) vntrue and vnjust.
            Secondly they offend against that justice which ought
to be exercised towards our neighbour: first, because
they doe most grossely abuse the commonwealth, of
whom they receiue both authoritie and maintenance,
that they may doe much mischiefe thereunto. Secondly,
because they are as the Prophet Esay speaketh,Esay. 1. 23. companions
of theeues. Thy princes (sayth he) are companions of theeues:
euery one loueth gifts and followeth after rewards. Neither doe
they onely helpe the wicked to spoyle his neighbour, but
themselues also doe rob and spoyle them, and that also
vnder the colour and shew of judgement and justice. So
that whereas the Lord hath ordained the judgement seat,
to be a rocke of defence and refuge for the innocent and
guiltlesse, they haue made it an hill of robbers. Thirdly,
because they haue not onely set judgement and justice to
sale (which is an abhominable practise) but also as the
Prophet Amos speaketh,Amos. 2. 6. 
               They sell the righteous for siluer, and
the poore for a paire of shoes. Such judges Demosthenes compared
to a paire of scoles, which alwaies incline on that side
whence they haue receiued any thing. And surely, a small
weight many times will make them to incline to the wicked,
who seeketh to corrupt them, and to decline from
right,Prou. 28. 21. 
               Prou. 28. 21, To haue respect of persons it is not good: for
that man will transgresse for a piece of bread. It were therefore
to be wished, that justice and judges now adaies were
such, as they were wont to be painted: for justice was
blindfolded, and judges were pictured without hands:
whereby was signified, that judges should not receiue
rewards, nor respect persons, which is commonly a consequent
of rewards.
            Vpon the greatnesse of this offence followeth the

third thing, namely that is is pernicious to them that vse
it: for therefore doth the holy ghost denounce a feareful
woe against such persons,Esay 5. 23. 
               Esay 5. 23. Woe be to them which iusti
                     •
                  ie
the wicked for a reward, and take away the righteousnesse of
the righteous from him, therefore, as the flame of fire deuoureth the
stubble, and as the chaffe is consumed of the flame, so their root shall
be as rottenness, &c. But it is onely pernicious to themselues,
but also to the countrey wherein they liue, as I
haue in generall shewed,Ezek. 22. 12. Ezek. 22. 12. and thereunto wee
may adde the testimonie of the Prophet Micah,
               Mic. 3. 11, 12. chap. 3.
11, 12. for when as hee had said, that the heads or princes
of Ierusalem did judge for rewards, and the priests did
teach for hire, he inferreth; Therefore shall Sion for your sake
be ploughed as a field, and Ierusalem shall be an 
                     •
                  eape, and the mountaine of the house as the high places of the forrest.
            
            I come to corrupt lawyers and aduocats; who so often
take reward against the innocent, as they doe take vpon
them the defence of such causes, as they in their owne
conscience are persuaded to be euill and vnjust. Which
being so common a fault among lawyers, as that very few
which plead causes either in ciuile or ecclesiasticall courts
doe seeme to make any conscience thereof, to whom all
is fish that commeth to their nets; therefore all lawyers
are to be exhorted to apply this note vnto themselues.
For if those which shall be saued, are such as doe not take
a reward against the innocent, as the holy ghost here witnesseth;
how then can they be saued, whose vsuall practise
is to take rewards against the innocent? And that they
may the more effectually be dissuaded from this sinne, let
them a little consider with me, how fearefully they sinne
against God, their neighbour, and themselues. Against
God, whiles they seeke to ouerthrow the truth, and to
peruert the Judgement, which is the Lords. Secondly,
against their neighbour. And in this regard, euery corrupt
lawyer is, as Salomon sayth of euery false witnesse, an
hammer,
               Prou. 25. 1
                     •
                  . 
               a sword, and a sharpe 
                     •
                  rrow, an hammer or mallet to

the judge, a sword to his client, and an arrow to his adursarie.
For whiles our lawyers doe their indeuours, as
the Greeke sophisters were wont 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , that
is, to make the worse cause the better, they doe as it were
knocke the judge on the head, amasing him so and dazeling
his eyes, that he may not see and pronounce the truth.
To their client they are as two edged swords, wounding
him two wayes, to wit, in body and soule. As touching
his bodie and outward estate, they notably impouerish
him to enrich themselues, and plucke off his feathers to
feather their owne nest: for as the fowlers 
                     •
                  age is full of birds,
so the houses of these faulconers are full of riches gotten by deceit,
               Ier. 5. 26. 27.
               as Ieremie speaketh. The soule also of their client they
wou
                  •
               d, when they animate him to goe on in offering
wrong to his neighbour, and cause him to sinne against
his owne soule.
            To the aduersarie, being indeed the innocent partie,
euery Tertullus is a sharpe arrow, wounding him either in
bodie, goods, or good name; against all or any whereof
they care not what vntruths and slaunderous calumniations
they vtter, so their cause may therby be aduantaged.
            Lastly, they sinne against themselues and their owne
soules, first, because they aid the wicked vnto euill which
is forbidden, Exod. 23. 1. and is reprooued, 2. Chron. 19. 2, as
also Psal. 50. 18. When thou sawest a theefe, thou consentedst vnto
him, and is condemned, Rom. 1. 31. Secondly, because they
haue sold their tongues to speake likes: for an euill cause
cannot be maintained but by manifold vntruths. Now
riches or treasures gotten by a deceitfull or lying tongue, is vanitie
tossed too and fro of them that seeke death, Prou. 21. 6.Prou. 21 6. And
therefore it is greatly to be feared, least these men as they
haue set their tongues, so also their 
                  •
               oules to sale: for
that is truly affirmed of all couetous persons. Eccles. 10. 9.
            The like is to be said of euery false witnesse, who for
reward is suborned to testifie vntruths, That hee sinneth
against God, whose judgement he seeketh to peruert;

against the judge, whom he endeuoureth to auert from
justice and truth; against the parties who suborneth him,
to whom he consenteth vnto euill; against the innocent
partie, whom by his false testimonie he hurteth, and
sometimes killeth him with a word; against his owne
soule; for seeing a false witnesse is an abbomination vnto the
Lord,
               Prou. 6. 18. 
               Prou. 6. 18, therefore he shall not escape, but surely perish,
               Prou. 19. 5. 9.
               Prou. 19. 5. 9. And yet this is not all that may be said
in detestation of false witnesse bearing: For seeing witnesses
in places of judgement doe not deliuer their testimonies
but vpon an oath; therefore euery false witnesse
is guiltie not onely of false witnesse bearing, but
also of perjurie: whereby he polluteth the holy name of
God▪ wrongeth the innocent, abuseth the judge, and all
that are present, and that vnder the religion of an oath;
hee citeth the Lord himselfe, and that in the place of
judgement to testifie an vntruth, and (which is most fearfull)
he tempteth the Lord, and as it were dareth him in
the audience of allthat are present to execute his fierce
wrath and indignation vpon him. For in othes wee call
vpon God not onely to be our witnesse, that we sweare
truly, but also to be a reuenger of vs, if we sweare falsely:
therefore he which sweareth that which he knoweth to
be vntrue, he prouoketh the Lord, and as it were dareth
him to take vengeance vpon him.
            Thus then we see by these two last notes, what the
sound Christian and citizen of heauen doth not, to wit,
that neither priuatly in contracts, nor publickely in place
of judgement, he getteth his goods vnlawfully: as for example,
by vsurie, or briberie. Now we are briefly to
consider the contrarie affirmatiue: namely, that euery
sound Christian maketh conscience of his gettings, hauing
a true purpose and vpright endeuour to obtaine and
procure the commodities of this life onely by good and
lawfull meanes, And that we may all of vs in like sort
be persuaded to make conscience of this duty, let vs haue

in our minds these considerations: first, that riches are
fitly compared to thornes, which, if we be not carefull
in the gathering of them, will pricke and wound, not the
hand but the conscience; yea, and if we be ouer-greedie
of them, will pierce vs through with many sorrowes:1. Tim. 6. 10.
and secondly, that so oft as they (being offered to our desire)
cannot be compassed by good and lawfull meanes,
they are the baits of the Diuell. And therefore we are
not to lay hold vpon euerie commoditie which is propounded
vnto vs, but we are to looke vnto the lawfulnes
of the meanes: for if we attaine them by vnlawful means,
we do with them swallow the hooke of the Diuell. And
this is a certaine truth, that those which will be rich,
               1. Tim. 6. 9. that is,
which haue set downe with themselues that they will attaine
to wealth, whether the Lord do giue them lawfull
meanes or not; they fall into temptation and snares of the
Diuell, for he cannot lay any bait of commoditie to entrap
them, which they will not be readie to obtaine by
sinne, which is the very hooke of the Diuell.
            Thirdly, we are to acknowledge that it is the blessing
of God which maketh rich, Prou. 10. 22, and that the Lord
doth not blesse ill gotten goods, see Prou. 13. 11. and I
                     •
                  rem.
chapter 17. 11.
            Fourthly, that better is a little with righteousnesse, than
great reuenews without equitie, Prou. 16. 8. Psal. 37. 16, and
that it is better to be in meane estate with a good conscience,
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . Hesiod.
than with the shipwracke of a good conscience to
be rich.
            Fiftly,, that goods justly gotten, are the good gifts of
God, and pledges of his loue towards thee, if also thou
hast grace to vse them well: but contrariwise, that ill gotten
goods, obtained by sinne in the seruice of the diuell,
they are the wages which the prince of this world giueth
to his seruants, and are as Nazianzene sayth, the earnest
penny of perdition: or that I may speake more effectually,
they are the price of mens soules, for which couetous

men,Ec
                     •
                  les. 10. 9. who haue set their soules to sale, doe sell them
to the diuell.
            Lastly, let vs esteeme that onely to be gained, which
is gotten lawfully. And when any thing which we desire
cannot be gotten lawfully, let vs remember, that as
the Apostle sayth,1. Tim. 6. 6. 
               Great ga
                     •
                  e is godlinesse with contentednesse:
Whereas contrariwise, in that which is vnjustly gotten
thre is exceeding great losse. And therfore the heathen
man did well aduise vs, to chuse losse rather than vnhonest
gaine: for the one (sayth hee) will grieue thee but
once,
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . Chilo. and the other for euer. For indeed, what is gained
in that which is gotten by sinne? an earthly commoditie,
which to a worldly man is not onely vaine and vnprofitable,
but also hurtfull. But what is lo
                  •
               t? thy soule:
For the wages of sinne as death, and the soule that s
                     ••
                  neth shall die.
Now if the soule should bee weighed in the ballance of
Critol
                     •
                  us against al the commodities of the world, it
would ouerweigh them all. Wherefore let that diuine
Oracle of our Sauiour Christ alwaies sound in our eares,
What will it profit a man, if hee shall gaine the whole world, and
loose his owne soule. Mar. 8. 36. should we not sinne to gaine
the whole world, and shall we be readie to sinne for euery
trifle in the world? Would not the whole world be a
sufficient ransome to redeeme our soules, and shall wee

                  •
               ell our soules to the diuell for euery nothing in this
world? Was Esau prophane and foolish, who in his hunger
sold his birthright for a messe of pottage, and are not
we much more prophane and foolish, if for matters of
like value but lesse necessitie, wee shall make away an
euerlasting inheritance, yea, an eternall kingdome in
heauen?
            And thus much may suffice to haue spoken concerning
the description of the sound Christian and citizen
of heauen. Now followeth the priuiledge of euery
sound Christian, who is qualified according to that description,
viz. That he shall neuer bee remooued: for so

sayth the holy ghost, He that doth these things, shall neuer bee
remooued. Where we are to consider two things: first, who
it is to whom this priuiledge belongeth; and secondly,
what this priuiledge is: the partie to whom it belongeth,
is, He that doth these things. He doth not say, he that knoweth
these things, nor he that can discourse of these matters,
but he that doth these things. For as we judge of the
health and soundnesse of the heart, not by the words of
the mouth, or colour of the countenance, but by the pulse
of the arme: so of the soundnesse and vprightnesse of
the heart, judgement is to be made not so much by the
words or countenance, as by the fruits of the hands. It is a
good thing to say well, but we are no sound Christians or
citizens of heauen, vnlesse also we doe well.Mat. 7. 2
                     •
                  . 
               Not euery one
that sayth vnto me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the kingdome of heauen,
but he that doth the will of my father which is in heauen. It is
a good thing to read and heare, and by reading and hearing
to know the will of God, but we shall neuer attaine
to happinesse, vnlesse we be also carefull to doe it.Apoc. 1. 3. 
               Blessed
it 
                     •
                  e which readeth (sayth Iohn the Diuine) and blessed are they
which 
                     •
                  e are the words of this prophecie (but he stayeth not there)
and obserue (sayth he) the things which are written therein. It is a
good thing to haue the word of God preached and a miserable
thing to be without it, as Salomon sayth,Prou. 29. 18. 
               Prou. 29. 18.
but he that so heareth it as that he keepeth it, ô happie is
he. They are blessed (sayth our Sauiour Christ) that 
                     •
                  eare the
word of God and keepe it.
               Luke 11. 28. And againe, If you know these things,
               Iohn 13. 17.
               happie are you if you doe them. We are therefore from hence
to bee exhorted vnto well doing: For seeing a sound
Christian and citizen of heauen is to be discerned by doing
these things,2. Pet. 1. 10. as the holy ghost here teacheth, it behoueth
vs by doing them to make our calling and election
sure. For if we doe these things, we shall neuer fall, as Peter
also by the same spirit affirmeth.
            The priuiledge it selfe is, that he shall neuer be remooued, or
as some read, that he shall not fall for euer: not for euer, that

is, neuer, as Iohn 13. 8. Thou shalt not wash myfeet for euer. And
the same priuiledge in the same words is repeated, Psal.
112. 6. The good man shall neuer be remooued: and Prou. 10. 30.
The righteous shall neuer be remoued.
               Psal. 112. 6. And this priuiledge doth
so truly and properly belong to euery sound Christian,Prou. 10. 30.
as that to the holy ghost in this place it is one & the same
thing to be a sound Christian, and to be such an one as
shall neuer be remoued. For when D
                     •
                  uid had demanded,
Who shall soiourne in tby Tabernacle, and who shall rest in thy holy
hill? that is, Lord, by what tokens may a sound Christian
and heire of the kingdome of heauen be discerned? The
Lord maketh answere, He that walketh vprightly and
worketh righteousnesse, and speaketh the truth which is
in his heart, &c. he is a sound Christian, and heire of the
kingdome of heauen. But he vseth not those words, but
in stead of them he vseth these to the same sence, He shall
neuer be remoued. Whereupon it plainely followeth, that
euery vpright and sound Christian is such an one as shall
neuer be remoued.
            These words therefore affoord this most comfortable
doctrine, That the perseuerance, & consequently the saluation
of the vpright, of the righteous, of the faithful and
sound Christian, is certaine. And this truth is elsewhere
in the Scriptures most plainely and plentifully taught, as
shal be shewed, when my treatise of Perseuerance, which
I haue alreadie finished, shall be thought fit to be published.
In the meane time, let vs from this doctrine gather
this vse, That seeing it is the priuiledge of the vpright &
sound Christian neuer to be remoued, we ought therfore
by walking vprightly, by exercising righteousnesse, by
speaking the truth from our hearts, &c. labour to
make our calling and election sure; for
if we doe these things, wee
shall neuer fall.
            FINIS.
         
      
      
         
            
            The Faults escaped are thus to be corrected.
            PAg. 8 lin. 20. care. p. 9. l. a fine 10. jagur. in Mar. l. a f. 5. are. p. 13. l. 1.
region l. 15. concauam. l. a f▪ 10. now l. a f. 5. vanitie and▪ p. 15. l. 18. &
19. the short & light. p. 16. Marg. for Heb 6 11. 
                  •
               . Heb. 4. 11. p. 19. l. 12. Charitie.
p. 23. l. 10. foure are, p. 24. l. 8. I said the▪ p. 25. l. 2. make. l. 11. with perfect
righteousnes. p. 27. Mar. l. 8. Be lo-leb valeb. p. 40. l. 2. & 3. Salomon p.
43. l. 22. for righteousnes r. vprightnes. p. 59. l. a f. 6. & p. 79. l. 16. & 27. ingenuous.
p. 67. l. 15. fruits. p. 69. l. 22. for vs. Profitable. p. 70. l. a f
                  •
                
               vi
                     •
                  
regni. p. 71. l. a f. 8. care of well. p. 72. l. 10. workes which in l. vlt. meere ciuile
p. 73. l. 13. they are fained l. 11. bribe l. 23. but splendida. l. a. f. 8. By this
l. a. f. 6. of meere p. 74. l. 18. child of God p. 75. l. a. f. 10 in his heart p. 76. l. vlt. But yet p. 79. l▪ 15. seuenthly, herunto. p. 80. l. 3. eightly, if p. 90. l. a▪ f.
13. pereundo quaerat p. 91. l. 17. and therefore a vice. p. 93. l. 14. celebrate l.
18. serpents p▪ 101. l. 21. we are freely. p. 102. l. 7. Scripture. l. 14. is the pr.
p. 103. l. 12. premonished p. 117. l. 9. & 10. to reuenge, answered. p. 121. l.
18 are not onely mal. l. 24. peculier p. 125, l. 20. howsoeuer all. p. 129. l. a.
f. 5. indices p. 137. l. 12. 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               
               ▪ 
               
                  •
               . 15. we haue p. 145, l. 18. implied in. p. 146. Ma.
l. a. f. 8. peierare. p. 147. l. 9. & 10. void, and of. p. 154. l. 5 by this. p. 155. l. 10.

                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               . p. 136. l. a. f. 5. whatsoeuer p. 159. col. 2. l. 2. cōmodation. p. 164. l. 7.
contracts p. 166. l. 9. as belonging. l. 19. thy default l. 22. quanti l. 26. 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               . p.
167. l. 3. cause as it l. 12. certain, or. p. 170. l. vlt. of the drachmae. p. 171. l. 10.
diuerse rates l. 16. decunx l. 17. quincunx. Mar. l. 5. sesquialtera l. 10. foenerat
                     •
                  rum
haec. p. 172. l. 9. Antoninus. l. 11. helpe. p. 179. l. 16. Rome made. p. 180.
l. 3. to giue. 182. l. 11. restored p. 183. l. vlt. 
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                p. 184. l. 8. thereof p.
186. l. 6. who making l. 12. twentie shillings l. 19. then in. p. 187. l. 9. some
few p. 191. l. 19. pro rata temporis p. 192. l. 22. Nubibus. As p. 196. l. 7. excelsiue
l. a▪ f. 5. in hiphil. p. 198 l. 7. & 9. & l. a▪ f. 9. & l. 199. l. 5. Nashah. p. 203.
l. 4. generally. 207. l. 14. shal men. p. 208. l. a▪ f. 3 & 4. hostis. p. 209. l. 22 would
p. 216. l. 3 the Lord answereth, he that p. 222. l. 22. because his p. 235. l. a▪
f. 3. commuted. p. 238. l. 15. of horses. p. 244. l. 6. interusurium. p. 252. l. 4

                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                & l. 6. 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               . p. 259. Mar. l. 1. Epod. 2. p. 260. l. 11. wealthier
p. 262. l. a. f. 4. trientes. p. 263. l. 12. Alcoran p. 264. l. 16. forbidden. p. 287. l. a.
f. 3. brought. p. 301. l. af. 8. cariage. Of p. 306. l. 2. secondly, the lender p.
308. l. 22. but of other. p. 310. l. 4. reuerend▪ p. 311. l a▪ f. 13. imprecation. In
Marg. l. 11. danisticum. p. 313. l. a▪ f. 9. & 10. do not repent. p. 314. l. a▪ f. 12.
all-sufficient. p. 317. l. a▪ f. 8. lesse. p. 330. l. 4. acknowledged in the Scriptures
to be no sinne. p. 339. l. 10. and too. p. 345. l. 18. n vsurie. p. 350. l. 4.
praemittimus.
            
         
      
   