
      
         
            
            
            THE
French Hiſtorie.
That is;
A lamentable Diſcourſe of three of the chiefe, and moſt famous
bloodie broiles that haue happened in France
for the Goſpell of Ieſus Chriſt.
            Namelie;

                  1 The outrage called The winning of S. Iames his Streete, 1557.
                  2 The conſtant Martirdome of Annas Burgaeus one of the K. Councell, 1559.
                  3 The bloodie Marriage of Margaret Siſter to Charles the 9. Anno 1572.
               
            
            Publiſhed by A. D.
            
            
               All that will liue godlie in Ieſus Christ, ſhall ſuffer perſecution.
               1. Tim. 3. 2.
            
            
            Imprinted at London by Thomas Orwin for
William Ruſſell, dwelling at Exeter.
1589.
         
         
            
            
            To the right worſhipfull her louing Bro-Maſter
Pearſe Edgecombe, of Mount Edgecombe
in Deuon. Eſquier, mercie and peace
from Ieſus Chriſt.
            
               RIght worſhipfull, and my louing
Brother, I haue heard it often &
truelie reported; That, Lawes
maie be broken, but Nature cannot
be forgotten. I finde the force
of this in my ſelfe: if I finde not
the like in you, I blame not your
nature, but the contrarie croſſings of thoſe politique affections
that hinder the working of it. VVhen I had ended
this preſent Pamphlet, I ſaw that the ſimplicitie of
it required a Patron; & the often remembrance of your
former curteſies inforced me to make bolde with you.
Conſider not therefore the worthineſſe of the worke, but
rather the will of the worker: for though the one maie
iuſtlie be condemned, yet the other deſerues to be accepted.
This Booke which proceedes vnder your protection,
if you conſider the matter, I aſſure you it is most
excellent and well worth the reading: but if you weigh
the manner, I confeſſe it is baſe & ſcarce worth the ſeeing.
This is therefore my deſire; that the ſimple attire of
this outward forme, maie not diſcourage you from ſeeking
the cōfortable tast of the inward ſubſtance. You ſhall

find here manie things for comfort worthie the conſidering,
and for policie the obſeruing. This hath beene
my ordinarie exerciſe for recreation at times of leaſure
for a long ſpace togeather: If I were ſure that you
would but take halfe ſo much pleaſure in reading it, as
I haue in collecting and diſpoſing it: I ſhould not neede
anie farther to commend it. If you finde anie thing that
fits not your liking, remember I pray, that it is a womans
doing. The thing it ſelfe will ſufficientlie prooue
this to be true. Thus committing the patronage of this
my recreation vnto your protection, and you withmy
good ſiſter in law your wife, & all your children to the
Lords tuition, I ceaſe to troble you: Honiton, the 25.
day of Iulie. 1589.
            
               Your louing Siſter
Anne Dowriche.
               
            
         
         
            
            PEARSE EDGECOMBE.
            
               
                  The ſharpeſt EDGE will ſooneſt PEARSE and COME vnto AN end.
                  Yet DOWT not, but be RICHE in hope, and take that I doo ſend.
                  A. D.
               
            
            
               P PVt not your truſt in fading earth puft vp with fainting ſtaies;
               Poſſeſſe the Lord, ſo ſhall you ſtill perſiſt in godlie waies.
               E Exalt your eies from common ſhapes, eſteeme not of this pelfe;
               Expreſſe in deeds what faith you haue, examine wel your ſelfe.
               A As windes diſperſe the wau'ring chaffe, and toſſe it quite away;
               All worldlie pompe ſhall ſo conſume, and paſſe without delay.
               R Repleated oft with wandring change recount your life to be;
               Remember wel, no bleſſed fruite remaines on curſed tree.
               S So ſhal you trace the perfect path ſaluation to attaine;
               So ſhal you ſee this glittering gloſe ſet out to be but vaine.
            
            
               E EXtinguiſh then the carnal courſe exempted from aboue;
               Expell the qualmes of fond delights, excell in godlie loue.
               D Depart not from the liuing Lord, delight to read his word;
               Delaie no time, for he doth ſtill defend vs with the ſword.
               G Giue to your God your ſoule & life, good gain inſues thereby;
               Grieue not the Spirit that warneth you great dangers for to flie.
               C Caſt all your care on him alone, care for no other praie,
               Conſidering he your greateſt griefes can quicklie take awaie.
               O Of all things lent vnto this life one thing accompt the beſt,
               Onelie the truth & feare of God, on which our ſouls muſt reſt.
               M Make no accompt of truſtles traſh, moleſting miſers minde;
               Mark how theſe maskers oftētimes much care & ſorow finde.
               B Beware betimes of had I wiſt; be not theſe pleaſures vaine?
               Beleeue in Chriſt, and ſo you ſhall be ſure to liue againe.
            
         
         
            
            To the Reader.
            
               AMongſt manie excellent precepts which Saint Paul
gaue vnto the Church, this is to be conſidered; Let al
things be done vnto edifying. If this had been of
all men well conſidered, manie things which now flie
abroad, might well haue been ſpared. That my onelie
purpoſe in collecting & framing this worke, was to
edifie, comfort and ſtirre vp the godlie mindes vnto
care, watchfulneſſe, Zeale, & feruentneſſe in the cauſe of Gods truth; you
ſhall eaſilie perceiue by the chuſing and ordering of theſe ſingular examples
which hereafter inſue. In which theſe ſpeciall circumſtances are to be
conſidered. Firſt, The great furie and rage of Sathan likelie to bee diſplaced
from his Kingdome of error and blindnes; the franticke madnes of
the ignorant poſſeſſed people, delighting in darkeneſſe, and ſtriuing to vpholde
the Kingdome of their Maſter; and the prompt facilitie and readines
of Sathans miniſters to put in execution anie kinde of wickedneſſe: al
which is to be ſeene both in the firſt example of The winning of Saint
Iames his Streete, & in all the reſt of the booke. Secondlie, The power,
maieſtie, & dignitie of the Diuell, poſſeſſing the chiefeſt States of the
earth, & ſeeming to the outward appearance to weild the Truth vnto his
obedience, in ſuppreſſing the ſtrongeſt that dared openly to withſtand him:
in the Storie of Annas Burgaeus. Thirdlie, The policie and crafte of
Sathan and his members in deuiſing by ſubtiltie to circumuent the godlie;
vnder the ſhadow of trust, to exerciſe tyrannie; vnder the colour of
courteſie to practiſe crueltie; and vnder the vaile of a ſacred oath, to couer
moſt ſhamefull villanie. This is to be ſeene in the third example, of the miſerable
Maſſacre at the bloodie marriage. We had need therefore to be
watchfull, ſtrong, and wiſe: watchful in praier, that we be not taken ſleeping;
ſtrong in faith, that we be not ouerthrowen by Sathans might; wiſe
as ſerpents, that we be not deceaued by the diuels allurements. We are to
learn alſo, what trust we ought to repoſe in the promiſes and oaths of profeſſed
Papiſts, what ſhewe ſo euer they make of loue and frendſhip. Here
as in a glaſſe, you ſhall plainlie ſee the picture of all the morall vertues moſt
liuelie deſcribed, in the ſtrange patience, the godlie perſeuerance, the comfortable

orations, ſweete ſpeeches, and the constant and famous endings of
theſe ſacred Martires. Whereſoeuer thou ſhalt finde the Diuel brought
in Poëticallie to make any oration to the King and States of France, as in
manie places he is: then vnderſtand, that vnder thoſe ſpeeches are expreſſed
all the ſubtilties, villanies, cruelties and policies that were deuiſed, and
by diueliſh meanes put in practiſe againſt the godly, more liuely to ſet them
down in their colors, as if it came from the diuels owne mouth, as no doubt
it came from his ſpirite. Againe, in all the orations of the Martirs, &
of the King, the Queene, the Guiſe, and all other that haue ſpeaches in
this booke, marke that of purpoſe the nature both of the perſon that ſpeaks
and alſo of the matter that is ſpoken, are liuely ſet downe: ſo that here are
not bare examples of vertue and vice, but alſo the nature and qualities of
thoſe vertues or villanies are manifeſtly depainted to them that will ſeeke
for it. The noble Martirs of England are knowen ſufficientlie almoſt to
all; theſe excellent French Histories were ſeene but of few, being in worthineſſe
nothing inferior vnto the other.
            The cauſes why I haue deſcribed it in verſe are 3. Firſt for mine owne
exerciſe, being a learner in that facultie; Secondlie, to reſtore againe ſome
credit if I can vnto Poëtrie, hauing been defaced of late ſo many waies by
wanton vanities. Thirdlie, for the more noueltie of the thing, and apt facilitie
in diſpoſing the matter framed to the better liking of ſome mēs fantaſies,
becauſe the ſame Storie in effect is alreadie tranſlated into Engliſh
proſe. Many of theſe orations that are here fully & amplie expreſſed, were
in the French Commentaries but onely in ſubſtance lightly touched, and
the ſumme ſet downe without amplifying the circumſtance, and yet heere
is no more ſet downe, than there is ſignified. I haue alſo, for the more terror
vnto the wicked, diligentlie collected the great plagues and iuſt iudgements
of God ſhewed againſt the perſecutors in euery ſeuerall History, &
haue ſet them downe ſo in order, and amplified them by the like iudgments
againſt ſinners out of the word and other hiſtories, that euerie proud perſecutor
may plainly ſee what puniſhment remaineth due vnto their wicked
tyrannie. To ſpeake trulie without vaine glorie, I thinke aſſuredlie,
that there is not in this forme anie thing extant which is more forceable
to procure comfort to the afflicted, ſtrength to the weake, courage to the
faint hearted, and patience vnto them that are perſecuted, than this little
worke, if it be diligentlie read and well conſidered. So wiſhing that all
the excellent and rare wits that now flouriſh in England, and ſhew them
ſelues manie times in vaine deuiſes, would all learne to conſecrate their

ſingular giftes to the glorie of God, the edifying of his Church, and the ſaluation
of the ſoules of Gods choſen. Then would the Lord ſtill bleſſe their
labours, and giue their names a perpetuall memorie.
            So I commit thee to Gods protection, and commend this my pleaſant
exerciſe to thy good liking: which, if I perceiue to be accepted, thou ſhalt
incourage mee to proceede, to make thee acquainted with more excellent
actions. Honiton in Deuon, this xxv. of Iuly. 1589.
            
               A: Dowriche.
            
         
         
            To the Reader that is frendlie to
Poetrie.
            VVhat ſo thou be that readſt my Booke,
            Let wit ſo weigh my will;
            That due regard maie here ſupplie
            The want of learned Skill.
            
               A: D:
            
         
      
      
         
            
            THE FRENCH
Hiſtorie.
            
               
                  AS walking on a daie,
               the woods and forreſts nie:
               In ſhrilling voyce, and mournfull tunes,
               me thought I heard one crie.
               Which ſodaine feare ſo daſht
               my blood and ſenſes all,
               That as one in a traunce I ſtaid
               to ſee what would befall.
               A thouſand thoughts oppreſt my fearfull wauering braine,
               In muſing what amid the woods that fearful voice ſhuld mean
               I feard leaſt theeues had robd and caſt ſome man aſide:
               Becauſe it was the common waie where men did vſe to ride.
               Among the ſauage beaſts that in theſe woods remaine,
               I doubted leaſt ſome trauler ſtood in danger to be ſlaine.
               But caſting feare apart, I ranne toward the place,
               To ſee the wight that did lament, and waile his wofull caſe.
               Alone, no perill nigh, within a buſhie dale,
               A ſtranger ſate: I got aſide to heare his dolefull tale.
               O noble France (quod he) that bor'ſt ſometime the bell,The pitifu
                        •…
                      mentation 
                        〈◊〉
                      godlie Fre
                        •…
                      Exile, whi
                        •…
                      for perſecu
                        •…
                     on forſooke 
                        〈◊〉
                      Countrie.
               
               And for thy pleaſure and thy wealth all Nations didſt excell!
               How art thou now of late with miſchiefe ſo poſſeſt,
               That al the Realmes of Chriſtendome thy falſhoods do deteſt?
               Where is thy vernant hiew? thy freſh and flowring fame?
               "What fell vnluckie ſpot is this, that ſo dooth ſtain thy name?
               "Where is thy mirth become? where is thy ſmiling cheere?
               "Wher is thy ioiful peace, that erſt did make thee ſhine ſo cleer?
               
                  
"Where are thy youthlie troopes, the Nobles of thy Land?
               "Where is thy faith; without the which, no realm can euer ſtād.
               "Where is the mutuall loue that Prince and people had?
               "Where is the noble vnion, that makes the Countrie glad?
               "Where is the due regard that Princes ought to haue;
               "From all the bands of tyrannie their people for to ſaue?
               "Where is thy pitie gone, where is thy mercie fled;
               "That Lion-like in euerie place ſuch Chriſtian blood is ſhed?
               "But theſe of late to thee ô France haue bid adieu,
               "That rigor reignes in mercies ſeate: alas, it is too true.
               "For hauing no remorſe to heare thy childrens grone,
               "Like as a widow comfortleſſe thou ſhalt be left alone.
               "For they that feare the Lord, and haue for him a care,
               "Haue learnd too late the coſtlie wit thy treaſons to beware.
               "Therefore thy children haue their natiue Coaſts reſignde,
               "With better hope in forrein Lands more mercie for to finde.
               "And that which is the worſt, I ſee thou doſt not waie
               "The Spiders ſpite, that long hath woue the web of thy decaie.
               "Therefore if thou wilt know the cauſe of all thy woe;
               "Then mark the iudgements of the Lord, from which thou cāſt not goe.
               "If Iuda now (ſaith he) ſhould aske the cauſes why
                     
                        •
                     emie 9. 12.
               
               "Their Land was like a wilderneſſe that no man paſſed by;
               "He makes no long delaie, but bids the Prophet ſhow,
               "This plague doth alwaies follow them that do deſpiſe his law.
               "For they that Idols ſerue, and from the Lord doo ſhrinke,
               "They ſhal be fed with bitter gall, & wormwood water drinke.
               "And why at ſundrie times was Egipt plagued ſo?
               "But for becauſe he would not yeeld to let Gods people goe.
               "Why was the Lord with Saul ſo wroth and full of ire,Samuel 15.
               
               "In ſparing Agag and the beaſts the people did deſire?
               "For he had now accurſt both Agag and his Land,
               "Commanding Saule without remorſe to kil them out of hand:
               "Becauſe this Amalek would not at all vouchſaue
               
                  
"Within his Land Gods choſen locke a paſſage for to haue:
               "But falſlie did conſpire to worke their open ſhame,Exedus 17. 4.
               
               "To ſnare their feete they laie in waite from Egipt as they came.Numb. 24. 20.
               
               "And thou Ieruſalem, what ſinne did file thy fall,
               "When Titus and Vaſpaſian did tumble downe thy wall?
               "Why did the Lord depart from thee that waſt ſo braue,
               "And to thy foes made thee a pray, a ieſt, a ſeruile ſlaue?
               "Becauſe amiddes thy mirth thy God thou didſt forget,
               "And wouldſt not haue his prophets liue, but didſt thē il intreat.
               "O France therefore be wiſe, learne ere it be too late
               "By theſe examples, to begin theſe bloodie ſinnes to hate.
               "For thou with Iuda land haſt done thy God great wrong,France compared with Iuda, Egipt, Agipt and Ieruſalem.
               
               "To ſerue and ſet vp other Gods to runne a whoring long.
               "Thou haſt for wooden Gods, Gods liuelie Image ſpilde:
               "And with the ſtreams of chriſtiā blood the ſtreets & canels fild
               "Thou haſt with Egipt long Gods word in priſon pent▪
               
               "And wilfullie refuſde the light that he to thee hath ſent.
               "The M
                        •
                     ſes that begins this light for to vnfolde,
               "Thou ſeekſt to lap him preſentlie in chaines and irons colde.
               "Thou doſt with Amalek with all thy wit aſſaie
               "To lie in waite that in thy land the truth may haue no waie.
               "And thou a cruell nurſſe to Gods elect haſt been,
               "To blemiſh thus the ſhining light that in thee hath bin ſeene.
               "And with Ieruſalem Gods Prophets thou haſt ſlaine,
               "That in thy popiſh ignorance thou mighteſt ſtill remaine.
               "If Iuda ſhall be fed with wormwood mixt with gall;
               "If wilfull Egipt plagued were that kept Gods Church in thral;
               "If God no pitie ſhowde, and mercie none would haue
               "Vpon the land of Amalek, nor man nor beaſt to ſaue;
               "And if the blinded pride that in Ieruſlem dwelt,
               "Could not eſcape Gods heauie wrath, but man & childe it felt.
               "What ſhall become of thee thou blinde and bloodie land?
               "How doſt thou think for to eſcape Gods iuſt reuenging hand?
               
                  
"But ſith I doo not doubt God will reuenge our caſe,
               "And for his choſen when he liſt prouide a dwelling place;
               "I will no more lament in ſad and mourning ſtile,
               "But thanke the Lord that ſet me ſafe within this pleaſant Ile.
               "O happie England, thou from God aboue art bleſt,
               "Which haſt the truth eſtabliſhed with peace and perfect reſt.
               "God giue thee therewithall a good and thankfull minde,
               "That to thy louing God no waie thou ſhew thy ſelfe vnkinde.
               "But ſtill thou maiſt remaine as thou haſt been of yore,
               "A Nurſe to Gods afflicted flock, that he maie bleſſe thee more?
               "But now will I depart, the Lord direct my waie,
               "And ſend me in this pleaſant Ile ſome ſimple ſlender ſtaie:
               "Till God grant me returne, or otherwiſe prouide.
               
                  The French 
                        ••
                     lgrime ha
                     
                        ••
                     ng eſpied the 
                        •
                     uthour com
                     
                        •
                     eth to him. But is not that an Engliſh-man that I haue yonder ſpide?
               
                  The t
                        •••
                     g be
                     
                        •
                     eene them. Wel met my frend, tel what thou art that mak'ſt this mone?
               And whie within theſe deſart woods art thou thy ſelfe alone?
               
                  The Pilgrim. "I am a ſtranger wight, and France my natiue ſoyle,
               "Frō which, of late, by luckles chance, & need, am forſt to toyle.
               "Such troubles and ſuch warres of late haue there befell,
               "That ſuch as feare the Lord aright no ſuretie haue to dwell
               "Within that wofull Land: ſo God me hether ſent
               "To liue with you in happie ſtate, which he this Land hath lēt.
               
                  The Engliſh
                     
                        ••
                     n the Au
                     
                        ••
                     or. Oh happie then am I: my frend I thee deſire
               Come goe with me, for of theſe warres I greatly long to hear.
               And if that thou wilt ſtaie, as long as thou wilt craue
               My houſe as thine, and all therein thou ſhalt be ſure to haue.
               Therefore my frend I praie, thy wit and tongue prepare,
               The cauſe of all theſe bloodie broiles in verſe for to declare.
               And firſt of all deſcribe the matter, and the man,
               The place, the time, the manner how this Ciuill warre began.
               
                  The Exile. "O Sir, but this requeſt doth pierce my wounded hart,
               "Which gladly would forget again my woful countries ſmart.
               "For who can well diſplaie the treaſons and the guiles,
               
                  
"The bloodie murders mercileſſe, the ſnares and craftie wiles
               "Which France hath put in vre theſe thirtie yeeres and more,
               "The like of which in Chriſtendome was neuer ſeene before?
               "But ſith it is your will to know the wofull ſtate hate.
               "Of Chriſts afflicted Church in France, which Antichriſt doth
               "Come reſt you here a while, and marke what I ſhall tell,
               "Great warres & broiles I muſt declare, God grāt it may be wel.
               "And firſt to pitch the plot that you doo ſo deſire,
               "I will vnfolde the cheefeſt cauſe that kindled firſt this fire.
            
            
               ABout the verie yeere of Chriſt his Incarnation
               A thouſand fiue hundred fiftie ſeuen by iuſt cōputation:The Frēch P
                        ••
                     
                     grime deſcribeth the cauſ
                        •
                      of the Ciuill warrs in Fr
                        •••
                     
                  
               
               
                  Henrie ware the Crowne the ſecond of that name,
               In whoſe vnhappie Reigne began this fearfull fierie flame.
               For now in France began Gods truth for to appeere,
               Whoſe ioiful beames in Germanie at this time ſhone ful cleer.
               But as the Iewes ſometimes Gods Prophets did deſpiſe,
               And as the Scribes and Phariſies did ſet their whole deuiſe
               To ſhade the ſhining light, which God to them had ſent:
               So France in furie blindlie ſet againſt Gods truth is bent.
               Which truth but latelie ſowen, and ſcant appearing greene,
               They ſeeke by force, by fire & ſword to roote & raze it cleene.
               But though proud Pharao did Gods choſen long oppreſſe,
               Yet ſtill amiddes the fierie broiles his people did increaſe.
               So now amiddes the flame Gods word a paſſage found,
               Which did increaſe his choſen flocke by force of ſiluer ſound.
               VVhich ſound in Gods elect did worke ſuch ſodaine change
               In all eſtates, that at the firſt in France it ſeemed ſtrange.
               Gods mightie Spirite did worke his mercie ſtill was preſt,
               That ſome of all eſtates were calde their blindneſſe to deteſt.
               Though riches be a let, and noble birth ſome ſtaie,
               That verie few of theſe (ſaith Chriſt) do finde the perfect way:
               Yet God to bring to paſſe the worke he did intend,
               
                  
Did alſo raiſe ſome Noble men the poorer to defend.
               So now they fall at ſquare, now here began the ſtrife:
               For Sathan could not beare to ſee a new reformed life.
               That Propheſie is true (for Chriſt did ſpeak the word)
               I came not to giue peace to mine, but ſtrife, debate, & ſword.Matth. 10. 34.
               
               The ſonne againſt the ſire,Luke 12▪ 31. one frend againſt another,
               The word ſhal brothers part, & ſet the daughter gainſt the mother.
               So fel it out in France, his word did now deuide
               His choſen, from the reſt of thoſe that tooke the aduerſe ſide.
               The Land deuided thus, two parts there fell at firſt;
               Gods people were in number leaſt, the greater was the worſt.
               Now Sathan was afraid, for now he ſtriued ſore
               To keepe the King and chiefeſt States in blindnes as of yore.
               It pincht him to the quicke to loſe his kingdome ſo,
               It greeude him to the hart that he ſhould let his ſeruants go.
               He ſits not idle now, he calls his wits in place,
               Some cunning knacke for to contriue to help him in this caſe.
               His wilie wilfull craft by long experience bred
               Hath taught him now an ancient feat to cruſh the goſpels head.
               Now ſummons he his men and ſeruants to appeere;The firſt crati
                     
                        •••
                      of the diuell 
                        〈◊〉
                      the king, the Queen mother 
                        •
                     nd Court of 
                        •
                     aris.
               
               Now help me at this need (quoth he) my frends & felows deer:
               Now is the time to ſtirre while matters yet be newe,
               While blinded mindes in doubting hang, not knowing what istrue.
               For if the word of God do once begin to ſhine,
               "Then farewell all, I ſhalbe faine my kingdome to reſigne.
               "But if you will agree and follow mine aduiſe,
               "We ſhall cut off this ſowen word, as faſt as it ſhall riſe.
               "And firſt we muſt giue out ſome vile and leud report
               "Of ſuch as doo profeſſe the truth, and ſuch as doo reſort
               "Vnto their Sermons: ſo this waie it will be beſt,
               "To make the King and manie more their dealings to deteſt.
               "And when as they ſhall meete in Church to ſerue the Lord,
               "VVee'l ſaie they do defile thēſelues, to make thē more abhord.
               
                  
"And when in fields they ioine their ioifull Pſalmes to ſing,
               "VVee muſt giue out that they conſpire which waie to kill the King.
               "So to their filed talke the King will giue no heed,
               "But giue vs leaue, and ioyne with vs againſt them to proceede.
               "And manie that ſhall heare this ſmooth inuented lie,
               "VVil neuer ſeek the truth: but then condemne them by & by▪
               
               "So ſhall we haue our will, ſo ſhall we ſet a ſtaie
               "For thoſe that ſeek to know the truth to ſtop thē in their waie.
               "And that we maie the more their dealings quite deface,
               "I muſt deuiſe to point you all your office and your place:
               "For ſome muſt Captaines be to lie in waite for blood,
               "And burne them in their temples all, to doo your maſter good
               "And ſuch muſt alwaies be abroad to range the coaſts,
               "In euerie place to lie in waite, and meete them at their hoaſts.
               "And ſome muſt ſtaie at home to lie in Princes eare,
               "That of theſe men within his ſight not one may dare appeare.
               "If force will not preuaile, if Nobles take their part,
               "By flattrie then ſome muſt attempt theſe Nobles to ſubuart.
               This ſaid it was agreed, the Counſaile cried, Amen.
               And euerie one to plaie his part did giue his promiſe then.
               O poore vnhappie place, ô France how art thou led,
               Thou gleanſt the ſap of deadlie food in ſteed of liuelie bread.
               The Mother Queene as cheefe dooth promiſe to begin,
               By treaſon ioynd with flatterie to trap them in her ginne.
               And he that was ordaind to watch the Princes hall,
               VVas bloudie Lewes of Loraine towne that filthie Cardinall.
               And they that tooke in hand falſe rumors for to ſowe,
               VVere Prieſts, & friers, with deuice Gods truth to ouerthrow.
               The Captaine
                     •
                   that were glad to take this cauſe in hand,
               The blinded Guiſ
                        •
                     s were, which ſwore to lead this bloudy bād.
               Now let vs ſee the end, how theſe their parts doo plaie;
               And marke where all things fal not out as we haue heard them ſaie.
            
            
               
               The firſt outrage and horrible murder of the
the Godlie, called The winning of
Saint Iames his Streete.
               
                  
                     NOw at this verie time
                  when Philip King of Spaine
                  
                  
                     In the raigne of Henrie the ſecond, Anno 1557. Came to Sanquintines, garded with
                  a great and mightie traine:
                  The Conſtable of France
                  
                  to meete him made ſome haſt,
                  VVhoſe power was vanquiſht there,
                  and he fellPhilip King of Spaine hauing married Marie Queene of Englande, gaue the Conſtable of Frāce a great ouerthrow, which afterward was called the ouer throw of Laurence Day. priſoner at the laſt.
                  The faithfull which beheld great danger nigh at hand,
                  VVhich God did threatē now to fal, on thē, their prince, & lād.
                  VVith one conſent they meete, to God they crie andThe godlie in danger fall to pra
                           •
                        er, as their best refuge. praie:
                  VVhich is the onlie meanes for ſin Gods heauie wrath to ſtay.
                  But once aboue the reſt, as in S. Iames his ſtreete
                  In Paris towne they did agree great numbers for to meete,
                  To pray vnto the Lord to quench this flaming fire,
                  They might receiue his Sacraments, & eke his word to heare;
                  
                     The wicked cannot abide 
                           •
                        nie good exerciſe. The ſpies that laie in waite ſuch vantage for to get,
                  In tumult armde the common ſort their houſes to beſet.
                  VVhoſe follie thus abuſde, which furie did incenſe,
                  VVith weapons rann, as if theſe men had done ſome great offence.
                  The faithfull cloſed thus, no waie there was to flie,
                  TheThe violent and mad rage of Sathan againſt the word. rage and tumult was ſo great, they yeelded all to die.
                  To God they did commend their bodies and their life,
                  And with their hūble ſutes aſſaid, to ſwage their raging ſtrife.
                  But all could not preuaile, their words could not be heard,
                  For furie to their iuſt excuſe did giue but ſmall regard.
                  But God that neuer failes his ſeruants at their neede,
                  By ſtretching out his helping hand, did ſtand thē now in ſteed.
                  
                     
For as to Peter once in priſon cloſelie pent,
                  To loſe his lockes and ſet him free an Angel there was ſent;A certain gate in this aſſault by the prouidence of God was wonderfullie opened, for the ſauegard of manie, when the houſes were on euerie ſide beſet.
                  
                  So God now made a waie a paſſage ſtrange to giue,
                  By opening of a mightie dore the weaker to releeue.
                  By which the fainter ſort without all danger fled,
                  The greater ſort were taken then, and ſtraight to priſon led.
                  Among which godlie troope that did their bodies yeeld,
                  Were women of great parentage which were with ſhame reuilde
                  (Of them whom furie fed) to priſon as they went,
                  Yet for all this theſe noble mindes their deedes did not repent.
                  And that which was the worſt,Murder with Sathans Miſters, findeth more frendſhip thā the truth. in priſon where they were,
                  The theeues and bloodie murtherers did find more fauor ther.
                  For they that death deſerude were taken from their clinke,
                  And in their colde & vglie pits which breathd a deadly ſtinke
                  Theſe men were thruſt & bound, & kept with watch & ward,
                  That al acceſſe of worldly ioy from them might quite be bard.
                  Yet now becauſe they had not roome inough for all,
                  In diuers wardes alone to pen, theſe captiues thus in thrall;
                  Great numbers they were faine together for to place,
                  To comfort them God did deuiſe to bring it ſo to paſſe.
                  The priſons now did ring with Pſalmes and ioifull ſongs,The exerciſe of the godlie.
                  
                  They praied god whē he thoght beſt to eaſe thē of theſe wrōgs
                  When this was noiſde abroad and ſome were thither ſent
                  To know the cauſe:Commandement was giuē by the King, that ſome meet men ſhould be choſen to conſider the cauſes of theſe captiues. then this was found the ſum of their intēt,
                  
                     The cauſe of this great tumult. At firſt when they did meete, a lecture there was red
                  In vulgar tongue out of Gods book, wherby their ſoules were fed.
                  Then did the preacher ſhow, & there he did recite
                  The vſe of that moſt ſacred feaſt whereof S. Paule did write,
                  Vnto the Corinthes once: In which he ſhewed plaine
                  The vſe and abuſe of the ſame, to comfort or to paine.
                  When this was done, againe they fell vpon their knees,
                  And for the King & Cōmons all they praied with watrie eies:
                  That God would yet withhold his iuſt reuenging hand,
                  
                     
And bleſſe with perfect truth & peace, their King, & eke their land.
                  Then did they all receiue Communion bread and wine
                  To ſtaie their faith in Chriſt his death, whereof this a ſigne.
                  Now this was all the hurt which they did then procure▪
                  
                  For which this raging tumult roſe, & they theſe paines indure.
                  But marke the creeping craft of Sathan in this caſe,
                        
                           ••
                        thans wick
                        
                           •
                        d policie, by 
                           •
                        is miniſters to 
                           •••
                        face the 
                           •••
                        uth with 
                           •••
                        ined lies.
                  
                  How he by falſe report doth ſeeke the truth for to deface.
                  His ſeruants now he ſends, and bids them ride in poſt,
                  Theſe new inuented lies to ſpread abroad in euerie Coaſt.
                  Firſt how the Lutherans,
                     
                        
                           •
                        he firſt lie 
                           ••
                        at Sathan 
                           •
                        readeth a
                        
                           ••
                        inſt the god
                        
                           ••
                        . (ſo Sathan did them name)
                  Great wickednes did put in vſe in places where they came.
                  And how that in the night when other were at ſleape,
                  In darkneſſe where no candles were, great numbers on a heap
                  
                      Of men and women both together did reſort
                  To match themſelues; for to fulfill a ſtinking filthie ſport.
                  
                      And how theſe godlie men all ſitting in a round,
                  Vpō the tables where they ſate, great dainties there were foūd,
                  As wine, and bellie cheere, and each with others wife,
                  In theſe their priuie Bacchus feaſts did lead a filthie life.
                  
                      And how among the reſt to worke their wicked will,
                  Their vſage was (ô ſhameleſſe lie!) their infants for to kill.
                  Theſe godlie men (ſaie they) that ſeeme to ſhine ſo cleere,
                  Now vnder ſhow of godlie life moſt filthie doo appeere.
                  The Monkes as Legates leaud of Plutoes bloodie minde,The diuels am
                        
                           •
                        aſſad
                           •
                        rs.
                  
                  Do ſweate & ſome to blaze abroad this ſtinking helliſh wind.
                  As men that were moſt fit to ſpread this lying ſame,
                  Which in their liues as dooth appeare do dailie vſe the ſame.
                  But they in open place theſe matters ſo dilate,
                  That in the mindes of blinded fooles, they raiſe a deadlie hate
                  Againſt theſe ſeelie ſoules, which neuer meant this ill,
                  That eke the common ſort did long theſe godlie men to kill.
                  And not the common ſort are now deceiud alone,
                  But this aſſailes the Noble men, and ſtrikes the Princes throne.
                  
                     
Which lie no ſooner came before the Princes face,Princes are many times abuſed by lying Paraſites.
                  
                  But ſtood in hope by Sathans meanes, to finde aſſured grace.
                  Whoſe minde by light beleefe in furie ſo was bent,
                  That to deſtroy theſe hurtles men he plants his who
                        ••
                      intent.The chiefe angels of Sathan which fight againſt Michael our Chriſt, are the wicked Princes & potentates of the world, Reuel. 12. 7.
                  
                  So now he giues in charge to haue their dealings tri
                        ••
                     
                     ▪
                  
                  And choſen men he did appoint the ſame for to decide.
                  Theſe men in office put, no time could idle ſpend,
                  But hard againſt theſe ſeely ſheepe their woluiſh wits do bend.
                  This poore afflicted flocke that now in priſon laie,
                  In godlie ioy, but worldlie greefe did paſſe the time away.
                  And they that were in faith more ſtronger than the reſt,
                  To cōfort thoſe that were but weak,They that of the Lord haue receiued greater portion of knowledge and faith, are boūd to comfort the weaker. their will was euer preſt.
                  And thoſe that were at large did trudge from place to place,
                  To eaſe the outward greefe of ſuch as ſaw this heauie caſe.
                  Declaring by the word that this came not by chance:
                  But God was he for ſome intent which lead this woful dance.
                  Perchance to ſhew his will,The comfortable ſpeeches of the godlie one tewards another. perchance to trie their faith,
                  Perchance to plant his hidden truth by their moſt happy death:
                  Perchance to be a meanes their foes for to confound,
                  As once amids the flouds he ſtrake proud Pharao to the groūd.
                  "Perchance amidſt our mirth, our God we did forget:
                  "And youthly bent, to vain delights perchance our mind did ſet
                  "So God in mercie now to call vs home againe,
                  "And ſee our ſelues: hath thought it good to let vs feele ſome paine.
                  Yet ſtill amids the flame let this be all our reſt,Patience a notable token of Gods election, and loue.
                  
                  That all things done to Gods elect are alwaies for the beſt.
                  Thus did they ſtill remaine; to God they did commend
                  Themſelues,Faſting and praie
                           •
                         the onelie beſt weapōs of the godlie 
                           •
                        n aduerſitie. their caſe, content to beare what euer God ſhould ſend.
                  And now with ſolemne faſts & praier put in vre,
                  And eke by writing they aſſaie, ſome fauor to procure.
                  The King they doo requeſt that truth might trie their deedes,The godly captiues write to the King.
                  
                  That Iuſtice cicle might deuide the Roſes from the weedes;
                  That fickle flying tales from credit might be bard,
                  
                     
"Till that by iuſt and equall proofe both parties haue ben heard.
                  "And if it were his will that they might now diſpute,
                  "They doubted not by written word the Sorbons to confute.
                  Yet this could not preuaile for all this good deuice:
                        
                           ••
                        thaa alwaie 
                           •••
                        idie at a 
                           •••
                        ch.
                  
                  For ſome ſtood by, that told the king, their writings al were lies
                  The godlie greeued thus, as reaſon did them binde,
                  By other letters trie to change the Kings affected minde.
                        
                           〈◊〉
                         earneſt 
                           •••
                        ters the ſe
                        
                           ••
                        d time wr
                           •
                        t
                        
                           ••
                        n to the king, 
                           〈◊〉
                         the innocent 
                           •••
                        tiues.
                  
                  In which they warne his Grace to looke vnto himſelfe,
                  Not to preferre before his God this wicked worldlie pelfe.
                  And therewithall to view the ſtate of that his Land,
                  How all things proſpered well which he did take in hand,
                  "So long as to the truth he bent a willing eare,
                  And to the godlie Chriſtian flocke a faithfull heart did beare.
                        
                           〈◊〉
                         his K. Henry 
                           〈◊〉
                         2 was once 
                           〈◊〉
                         enimie to 
                           〈◊〉
                        e Pope, and 
                           •••
                        emed to fa
                        
                           •••
                        r the Goſpel.
                  
                  But ſince he brake his faith he gaue the Germaine band,
                  And to that greaſie Prieſt of Rome againe did giue his hand,
                  How all things ſince haue gone a cleane contrarie waie,
                  "And nothing proſpered well ſith he the truth did ſo betraie.
                  "And now ô Prince (quoth they) except thou do repent,
                  "Aſſure thy ſelfe to plague this ſinne the Lord is fullie bent.
                  "And he that now hath lent to thee this happie Raigne,
                  "Will for thy ſinne moſt ſurelie turne thy pleaſure into paine.
                  "The Conſtable of France a looking glaſſe may be,
                  "In whō the end of ſwelling pride your Grace may plainly ſee.
                  "Who proudlie ſwearing ſaid, If he returned ſound,
                  "He would not ceaſe till he had quaſht Geneua to the ground.
                  But God that ſits aboue his follie did deride,
                        
                           ••
                        od for his 
                           •••
                        ercie manie 
                           ••••
                        es giueth 
                           •••
                        yrants little 
                           •••
                        wer.
                  
                  And at Sanquintines did confound his purpoſe and his pride.
                  So he that latelie ſwore againſt the Lord to fight,
                  Was taken captiue by the foe, his armie put to flight.
                  "Of wicked wilfull wits this is the wofull end,
                  "When fancie rulde by witles will, their ſtrength will ſtriue to bend
                  "Againſt the Lord. But now ô King we do not care;
                  "For whatſoeuer God ſhall ſend we willing are to beare.
                  
                     
But yet of this be ſure,The bloud of the Martirs i
                           •
                         the ſeede of the Church. the blood that thou dooſt wring
                  From vs vniuſtlie, is the ſeed whereby the Church doth ſpring.
                  And though our bodies be conſumed in the flame,
                  Yet of our aſhes God will raiſe that ſhall defend the ſame.Truth, the true Phoenix.
                  
                  To ſhade the ſhining light, no wit can well preuaile:
                  So vaine, to ſtriue to ſtaie the truth which God doth nowe reueale.
                  Thus while the Godlie worke their cauſes to defend,
                  The wicked impes of Sathan lurke to bring them to their end.
                  But one aboue the reſt their death did dailie craue,
                  
                     Munerius that bloodie wretch, that falſe and periurde knaue.
                  Who hauing now of late by falſhood crackt his fame,
                  Did hope by hate of Gods elect againe to winne the ſame.Such are worthie men to be the diuels ch
                           •
                        
                        pions.
                  
                  And hauing now attaind the Princes bill aſsignd,
                  In Paris towne before the States he ſhewes the Princes minde:
                  Which was, that preſentlie (all buſineſſe ſet aſide)
                  The King would haue the priſners calde, their dealings to be tride.
                  And that they ſhould proceed to iudge, & eke beleue
                  According to the euidence Munerius then ſhould geue.
                  Theſe letters being read, the Senate all agree
                  Not to receiue Munerius,
                     He that ha
                           •
                         bin once falſe for ſworn is n
                           ••
                         to bee receiue a witnes in a 
                           〈◊〉
                         matter. nor anie thing that he
                  Should laie againſt the life of thoſe that faithfull were,
                  For that himſelfe had falſt his faith, which latelie did forſwere.
                  And yet they did proclaime, that they would not refuſe
                  If anie other would ſtep forth the faithfull to accuſe.
                  So, willing to performe the Kings intended minde,
                  Their cankred mallice plant the plot to haue the daie aſsignde,
                  When theſe afflicted ſoules from priſon to their dome,
                  Before the whelpes of Pilates brood to iudgement now ſhould come.
                  The daie is come, and they that were before ordaind
                  To ſhew the glorie of the Lord, could not be now conſtraind
                  By all their braue deuice the truth for to denie:The wicked make quicke diſpatch in 
                           〈◊〉
                         demning the godlie.
                  
                  But for the ſame amidſt the flame they willing were to die.
                  The bloodie ſentence paſt, (which was the Kings deſire)
                  
                     
The valiant troope of godlie men were drawne vnto the fire,
                  And chained to their ſtakes all naked as they ſtood:
                  Vnto the Lord their crie was heard from out amids the wood.
                  But to the wicked troope which longd to ſee that daie,
                  They knowing ſure their cauſes good, this or the like did ſay.
               
               
                  NOw ſhall you haue your will,
                        
                           •
                        he triumph 
                           〈◊〉
                         the godlie o
                        
                           •••
                        r their ene
                        
                           •
                        ies, euen in 
                           〈◊〉
                         midſt of 
                           〈◊〉
                         fire. now ſhall you do your worſt:
                  Now ſhal ye haue out guiltles blood, for which ye lōg did thirſt.
                  We feare not of this death, we know that al muſt die,
                  Yea happie are thoſe ſillie ſoules whō thus the Lord doth trie.
                  O welcome ioifull daie, ô welcome happie paine;
                  "A crowne immortall with this fleſh,
                        
                           •
                        m. 1. 2. we ſhall receiue againe.
                  "Now hath the Lord here brought,
                        
                           •
                        b. 5. 17. and placte vs in this death,
                  "Not for becauſe he hates his truth,Cro. 32 31 but for to trie our faith.
                  "The counſell of the Lord hath ſent what we receaue,
                        
                           •
                        ct. 4. 28.
                  
                  "And you to vs ſhal doo no more than God ſhall giue you leaue.
                        
                           ••
                        oheſ. 1. 11. 
                           〈◊〉
                        
                     
                  
                  "And you that are our foes,
                        
                           •
                        hil. 1. 28. beware the deadlie ſigne,
                  "Which ſhowes you none of Gods elect, while thus ye doo repine
                  "Againſt his knowen truth: for which we vndertake
                  "To ſpend our blood in his defence, and ſuffer for his ſake.
                  "The blood of Abel cride for vengeance to the Lord,
                        
                           ••
                        neſ. 4. 10.
                  
                  "Which fell on Cain & al his ſeed, (whō men & earth abhord)
                  "From which the Lord defend both you, and eke our land:
                  "O Lord reuenge not this our wrong, but ſtay thy furio
                        •
                     s hand;
                  "And giue them yet ſome ſpace for to repent this thing;
                  "And for our death we doo forgiue both them & eke our King.
                        
                           •
                        ct 7. 60.
                  
                  "Whoſe life the Lord preſerue in health and perfect peace,
                  "And grāt that vnder him the truth may haue ſome ioiful eaſe.
                  "And though you haue ſome power this fleſh for to deſtroy,
                  "Yet cannot vs your rage deuide from Chriſts immortal ioy.
                  "And though our breakfaſt ſeeme to fleſh and blood ſome paine,
                  "Yet ſhall we ſup with Ieſus Chriſt, and eaſe receaue againe.
                  "Into thy bleſſed hands, ô Lord our ſoules receaue:
                  
                     
"For of this earth and earthlie traſh ô Lord we take our leaue.
                  Thus on the Lord they cride, which was their onelie truſt,
                  Till that the flame had ſtaid their voice, & bodie burnt to duſt.
                  Now we that doo remaine our parts are yet to plaie,
                  But when ô Lord our time ſhall come, grant vs like happy daie.
                  And when our triall drawes, no matter where nor when,
                  That God will giue like conſtant faith; let vs crie all Amen.
               
            
            
               The iudgements of the Lord ſhewed vpon theſe bloodie perſecuters
in this firſt outrage, by the example of manie the like out of the
Scriptures.
               
                  BVt let vs heere behold
               Gods iudgements iuſt and true,
               Which neuer faile to follow them,
               which doo his truth purſue.Geneſ. 4. 15.
               
               As wicked Caine did long
               poore Abels blood to haue,
               So did the Lord marke him to be
               a vile and vagrant ſlaue.
               When Eſau did intend his brother for to kill,Geneſ. 27. 41.
               
               The Lord did bleſſe good Iacob ſo, he could not haue his will.
               When Pharao followed faſt Gods people to haue ſlaine,Exod. 14. 27.
               
               Amiddes the flouds then iuſtlie fell both he and all his traine.
               As Miriam grudgde againſt the truth which ſhe did know,Nomb. 12. 20.
               
               So did her fault ſoone finde her out a leaper white as ſnow.
               When Korath and his mates good Moſes did depraue,Nomb. 16. 33
               
               The earth did gape, and they went all aliue into the graue.
               And whil'ſt at Bephidim Gods people did remaine,Exod 17. 8.
               
               The Amalecks of Eſaus brood poore Iacob would haue ſlaine.Deut. 25. 17.
               
               But God did not forget this foule and filthie thing,1. Sam. 15. 33
               
               Which after ſmote with fatall ſword,Wiſdom. 11. 
                        •
                     
                   both them and eke their King.
               
                  
Though Saul did perſecute Gods choſen Prophet long,1. Sam. 19. 10.
               
               Yet did the Lord at length reuenge poore Dauid & his wrong:
               For now the hand that itcht this Dauids blood to ſpill,1. Sam. 31. 4.
               
               Was it that framde the deadlie blade his maſter for to kill.
               That Nabal which refuſde his helpe to Dauid ſend,1 Sam. 25. 10.
               
               Was ſtriken ſo,verſ. 38. that there he made a ſhort and wofull end.
               And Shimei that reuilde King Dauid to his face,2. Sam. 16. 5.
               
               It was not long but that he died in poore and wofull caſe.1. King. 46. 1.
               
               And as Achitephel great miſchiefe did intend,2. Sam. 17. 1.
               
               So did the Lord from traitors all his choſen ſtill defend:
               Whoſe counſell being quaſht (for ſo the Lord aſsignde,
               He got him home & hangd himſelfe to caſe his careful minde.verſ. 23.
               
               So Ierebeam felt Gods iudgements ſharpe and colde,1. King. 13. 4.
               
               Whē he thruſt out his wicked hand his Prophet for to hold.
               So Iezabel which did Elias once purſue,1. King. 19. 3.
               
               VVhen Iehu came to Iezrael, her faithfull ſeruant threw
               Her carcaſſe headlong downe from window high to ſtreate,2. King. 30.
               
               VVhere trāpled down the greedy dogs her curſed fleſh did eat.
               Gainſt Chriſt the Pilate which wrong iudgement erſt did giue,Euſe. eccl. hiſt.
               
               Did kill himſelfe,2. booke 7. as one that was not worthie for to liue.
               And when againſt the truth proud Herodes hand was bent,Chapter.
               
               He killed Iames,
                  Ibid cap. 9. and Peter was in priſon cloſelie pent:
               The Angel of the Lord of pride did ſhow the price,Acts. 11. 23.
               
               That in a while his curſed corpes was eaten all with lice.
               As Iudas was content his maſter to betraie,Matth. 26. 47.
               
               So guiltie conſcience did conſent to worke his owne decaie.Acts. 1. 18.
               
               Like as in former age to rebels ſtout and ſtrong,Maxentius, 
                        〈◊〉
                      
                     
                        •
                     ulianus, Va
                     
                        •
                     ens, being per
                     
                        •
                     ecuters of the 
                        •
                     aithfull, had he like end Munerius put 
                        •
                     o open ſhame and baniſhed its countrie.
               
               Gods iuſtice hath been plainlie ſeene in lieu of curſed wrong▪
               
               So all this faithleſſe troope, which leudlie did conſpire
               This murder in S. Iames his ſtreete, haue likewiſe felt his ire.
               For firſt the Praetor, which Munerius had to name,
               For iuſt deſert, in publike view receiued open ſhame.
               And yet beſides all this, they ſtraightlie did proclaime,
               
                  
That he ſhould voide his natiue ſoyle, & not returne againe.
               But whil'ſt he was in holde his conſcience did confeſſe,
               This plague was iuſt; for that he ſought Gods choſen to oppres
               AA Iudge that gaue ſentence, was ſtrikē with ſodaine death. Iudge that ſentence gaue againſt his knowen faith,
               An angel ſtrake him from the Lord with ſharp & ſodain death.
               Another Iudge that was now ſicke and like to die,
               "Cride out;O the dedlie ſting of a guiltie conſcience. I ſee my iudgement iuſt, for that vile caitiffe I
               "By mallice haue been faine Gods people for to kill:
               "Who praie, and liue moſt godlie bent according to his will.
               TwoTwo others cruell in the former ſlaughter, died ſodainlie in the ſight of all mē. others being cheefe in murder that was paſt,
               By ſodaine death in view of all like vengeance now doo taſt.
               And otherOther two as they returned from the murder, fell at contention, and at laſt were ſlaine one of an other. two which now of blood had dronke their fill,
               As they came from this murther, they did one other kill.
               Now let vs learne by this, Gods truth for to imbrace,
               That we feele not by due deſart his anger in like caſe.
            
            
               The notable, famous, and conſtant Martirdome of Annas Burgeus,
which, being one of the Kings Counſell, was burnt for the
Goſpel of Ieſus Chriſt.
               
                  
                     ABout this verie time
                  by force of ſodaine iarre,The ſecond example of the French crueltie.
                  
                  Betweene the Kings of Spaine and France,
                  
                  was likelie to be warre.
                  But Herode to agree
                  with Pilate was content,Luk. 23. 12.
                  
                  And for to murder Ieſus Chriſt
                  
                  they both doo ioyne conſent.
                  So now there was a league, where both did giue their word
                  To roote and raſe Gods ſowen truth, by fagot, fire and ſword.
                  TheThe graffe that greeued Sathan, was the Truth, which now in France increaſed dailie: which was the cauſe of this preſent Perſecution. graffe that Sathan greeues did yet begin to ſpring,
                  
                     
The tree of life ſome ioyfull frute as now did ſeeme to bring.
                  Whoſe bud enameld greene, and bloſſome ſweete to ſee,
                  Inraged Sathans fierie moode with mallice; ſo that he
                  In furie headlong runnes: he frets, he fumes, he raues,
                  And of the King ſome ſpeedie helpe in preſent danger craues.
                  
                     The ſpea
                        
                           ••
                        s of the 
                           ••
                        uell to K. 
                           •
                        enrie the 
                           ••
                        cond. "The fate that files my fall, ô King faith he, is this;
                  "Your Senate fauours truth too much, your Iudges too remiſſe:
                  "They are not ſharpe inough to ſhred appearing ill,
                  "They ſuffer impes of Luthers ſect too much to haue their will.
                  "The The King appointed an aſſemblie to be 
                           •
                        ade, to conſider of the Edict of Ca
                        
                           ••
                        ellobrian. King not well content, prouideth out of hand
                  "Some new aſſemblie to be had, to haue this matter ſcand.
                  "The Senate being ſet, the Kings Attorney firſt
                  
                     The ſpeaches of the godlie againſt the Papiſtes crueltie. "Doth grauely ſhew vnto them al; how that the K. doth thirſt
                  "To haue them all agree in matters touching faith,
                  "And to conſent that Luthers brood ſhould all be put to death:The ſpeaches of the K. Attornie 
                           •
                        o the Aſſemblie.
                  
                  "For that ſome ſtrife of late there was betweene them found,
                  "Cōcerning this. But to their ſhames this iarring would redoūd.
                  "Becauſe for Heretikes ſome firſt would haue them tride,
                  "And ſome would haue them baniſhed, & ſome would haue thē fride.
                  "And therefore wiſheth all with him to giue conſent,
                  That death might end this ſtrife, which thing the king hath alwaie ment.
                  This was a This was Sathans ſubtiltie to bewray ſuch of the Iudges, as were ſuſpec
                        
                           •
                        ed for Religion: which after was the cauſe of Annas Bargaeus death. ſubtill ſlight the godlie to betray;
                  That ſuch as ſpake againſt the ſame, their cōſcience ſhould bewray.
                  But yet amōg the reſt ſome freely ſpake their minde;
                  That reaſon for ſo cruell act as yet they could not finde.
                  "The King would haue (ſaie they) but Heretikes to die:
                  "And what are they but ſuch as dare the Scriptures to denie?
                  "If anie ſuch be found, let them be wroong to death;
                  "Becauſe the word is all our ſtaie, and Author of our faith.
                  "But if for Heretikes the godlie ſhould be ſlaine,
                  "God would reuenge their blood, and we by this ſhould reap no gain.
                  "And thoſe which you do think the truth do now denie,
                  "Their reaſons, deeds & faith we ſee, wherein they ſtoutlie die.
                  
                     
"Therefore if from the Lord this counſell doo proceede,Acts. 5. 39.
                  
                  "To ſtriue againſt the ſame, it were a vaine and ſinfull deede.
                  Thus did the better ſort their godlie thoughts bewraie;
                  Which being croſt with coūter cranks, was cauſe of their decaie.
                  For Satan fearing leaſt their ſentence would preuaile,
                  Sent two in poſt vnto the King theſe dealings to reueale.
                  The limbes of Pluto which this bloodie meſſage went,
                  
                     Egidius and Minardus were fit hounds for ſuch a ſent.2. Counſellers of the ſame Senate.
                  
                  Who comming to the King moſt falſelie did declare,
                  "That in the Senate ſuch were found which ſtoutly now did
                  "Religion to deride,The Orati
                           ••
                         of the wicked Counſellors to the K. colourea with lies, the more to moue him to wrath. and ſpeeches let to fall dare
                  "That for his Lawes and Edictes paſt they made no count at al.
                  "Now therefore is the time your Grace muſt looke about,
                  "That ſpringing ſhowes of future ill your wiſedome may roote out.
                  "For if you ſhould permit theſe rebels thus to thriue,
                  "Great perill is leaſt of your crowne your Grace they would depriue.
                  The King inflamed thus, doth make no long delaie,
                  But to the Senate where they ſate he takes his readie waie.
                  Where placed in his throne, and hauing pauſde a while,
                  Thus ſpake in preſence of them all in high and princelie ſtile.
               
               
                  "THe Lord that lendeth all and weeldes the golden ſpheare
                  "Hath ſent vs now a wiſhed peace,The ſpeac
                           •
                         of K Hem the ſecond vnto the S
                           •
                        
                        nate. deuoid of forreine feare.
                  "Which peace is aye confirmde by bande of ſolemne vowe;
                  "And plighted faith of ſolemn match, which none can diſalow.
                  "Yet one thing there remaines to perfect this my State;
                  "That in Religion one conſent might baniſh all debate.
                  "Which is the onelie cauſe that moues my penſiue heart
                  "In this your meeting for to ioyne, and beare a carefull part.
                  "This is therefore in few our craue and eke requeſt;
                  "That euerie man doo ſhew his minde as he ſhall thinke it beſt.
                  Here ſome that had before in words been verie rife,
                  Began to ſtaie; and doubted much the danger of their life.
                  
                     
Yet there were ſome which now a noble courage take,
                  
                     Annas Burgeus as the chiefe this doubtfull ſilence brake.
                  
                     The not a
                        
                           ••
                         Oration 
                           •
                        f Annas Burgaus, 
                           •
                        eliuered 
                           •
                        efore the King in the 
                           ••
                        at houſe. "Who lifting vp his hands, in heart began to praie,
                  "With thankes to God that he did liue to ſee that happie daie
                  "Wherein the Lord had wrought ſuch care within his grace,
                  "That he would bēd his willing eare to iudge ſo weightie caſe.
                  "The cauſe ſaith he is Chriſts which we haue now in hand,
                  "For which the Lord wil ſurely bleſſe both you & eke your lād.
                  "This is the bleſſed He ſetteth 
                           •
                        ut the po
                        
                           •
                        er & ver
                        
                           •
                        ue of the 
                           •
                        ord of god, and what a 
                           •
                        leſsing it 
                           •
                        ringeth to them that 
                           ••
                        wfullie re
                        
                           ••
                        iue it. Arke that came to Edomes hall, 
                  "For which the Lord hath bleſsing ſent on him, his houſe & al.
                  "This is the duſtie booke which good 2. 
                           •
                        im. 6. 11. 
                     Hilkiah found:
                  "Which read before the King, did giue a ſweet & ſiluer ſound,
                  "This is the Angel which to 
                        
                           〈◊〉
                         Cren 15. 1 & 16. 8. 
                     Gedeon did appeare:
                  "This is the deaw vpon the fleece, which ſet him void of feare.
                  "This is the ſword that made blinde 
                        
                           〈◊〉
                         2. Kinges. 22 8. 
                     Balaams Aſſe to ſpeake.
                  "This is the Iudg. 6. 11 37. flame the Prophet forſt his ſilence for to breake.
                  "This is the Numb 22 23. 28. liuelie ſpring, which cooles the thirſtie heate
                  "This is the ſhining lanterne, which giues light vnto our feete.
                  "This is the 
                        
                           •…
                        rem. 20. 9 flame that earſt by night did ſhew the way:
                  "This is the bleſſed cloud that led Gods choſen in the day.
                  "This is 
                        
                           •…
                        ſal 42 1 
                           •…
                         119 
                           •…
                         5. 
                           •…
                         13. 21. 
                     Elgathes flake that made his offering fume:
                  "And this the 
                        
                           •…
                         Kinges. 18. 31. 2. King. 1. 10. Numb. 16. 15 blaſt which frō the Lord great rebels did cōſume.
                  "This is the mightiePſalm. 19. 5, 9. voyce that makes the mountaines ſhake,
                  "This makes the Liban cedars ſtoop,Ierem. 20. 9 & fearful hindes to quake.
                  "And this the pleaſantEſa. 55 1. wine to weake that comfort giues:Pſal 42 1. & 119. 
                           •
                        05.
                  
                  "And this the wholſom1 Pet. 2 22. milk wherby the ſucking Infant liues.
                  "Now as the Lord doth bleſſe the land that loues the ſame:Exod 13. 21.
                  
                  "So for contemners of his truth he ſtill prouides a ſhame.
                  "For why cameHoſhea the King and al Iſrael were carried captiue to Babylon by the King of the Aſsyrian for diſpiſing the Woord and Commandements of the Lord 2. Kinges 17. 4, 5, 6. 
                     Aſhur vp Gods choſen to moleſt,1. Kinges. 18. 31.
                  
                  "And led the King with Commons all in Babel for to reſt?2. King. 1. 10.
                     Numb. 16. 15.
                  
                  
                     
"But for becauſe they all their God did often grieue,
                  "Which hated truth, & were content their faith to idols giue.
                  "And if he doo not ſpare a King; ô King take heed:
                  "If people all to thraldome goe; this land, ô Lord had neede
                  "To weigh the curſed cauſe of this their finall fall;
                  "Leaſt for the like, the like conſume our King and Cōmons all.
                  "Now is theReue. 10. 2
                           •
                        
                      Angell come with open booke in hand,
                  "Which long ere this was ſealed cloſe from vs & eke our land.
                  "Now muſt the godlie craue of this to eate their fill:
                  "So God with plentie will not faile to loue and feed them ſtill.
                  "Now ſee this Angel which to vs doth offer grace,
                  "Is Ieſus Chriſt, which by his death our ſins doth quite deface.
                  "If weHeb. 4. 16 by liuelie faith of him can take good hold,
                  "Then voide of feare before the Lord to come we may be bold.
                  "It's he that ſhewes theLuk. 24. 3
                           •
                        
                      way the truth to intertaine,
                  "It's he that45 cleares the blinded eyes, it's he that parteth plaine
                  "The truth from popiſh lies, the ſonne from myſtie ſhades;
                  "It's he that cals our ſtraying ſteppes from Sathans ſinfull trades.
                  "O well is he that can this booke this truth imbrace;
                  "O ill is he that ſhall refuſe when Chriſt doth offer grace.
                  "And though this booke at firſt be ſweete vnto our taſt;
                  "Yet Sathans rages makes the ſame ſeeme bitter at the laſt.
                  "And what though Sathan rage, what though the ende be gall?
                  "Shall bitter blaſts make vs forſake our Chriſt, our life, and all?
                  "No, God forbid, ô King, that he ſhould knock in vaine:
                  "Leaſt being gone we iuſtlie doubt when he will come againe.
                  "As yet he ſtands without, and knocketh at thy dore;
                  "O King receue that bleſſed gueſt, that he may bleſſe thee more.
                  "If thatApo. 3. 2
                           •
                        
                      we let him in, his promiſe is to ſtaie:
                  "But when from vs he ſhall depart, ô moſt vnhappie day.
                  "TheLuk 14. 1 ſupper is preparde, the Angels ſent to call
                  "The ſtraying gueſts of this your Land vnto his ſacred hall.
                  "But if by fond excuſe we ſhun his profered grace,
                  
                     
"He ſhuts the doore and will admit ſome others in our place.
                  "The marriage of the Lambe,
                        
                           〈◊〉
                         19. 7. & 18. 2. that bleſſed Lambe is nie;
                  "Which makes with al her Romiſh trickes that whore of Babel flie.
                  "Then happie is the man & bleſſed from the Lord,
                  "That with the Lambe maie haue a place, & ſit at ſacred bord.
                  "If now we ſee the light that danted Saul to ground,
                        
                           〈◊〉
                        . 9. 3, 4.
                  
                  "If now we heare that ſacred voice, that ſweete & ioiful ſound:
                  "Then let vs now inquire, what voice it is that calls;
                  "And let vs yeeld vnto the truth; that from our eies the ſcaies
                  "Of darkneſſe may depart. For vaine it is to kicke;
                  "And labour loſt for wilfull colte to ſtriue againſt the pricke.
                  "And if the hidden Truth the Lord will now reueale;
                  "To daunt the ſame (ô noble King) your force ſhal not preuaile.
                  "What Giant can withſtand of Truth the piercing might?
                  "What earthlie force of ſhining Sunne at noone can quēch the light?
                  "If Truth do conquere Kings;
                        
                           〈◊〉
                        . 3. 12. 
                           〈◊〉
                         4. 33, 40 if Truth do cōquere al?
                  "Then leaue to loue theſe Popiſh lies, let whoriſh Babel fall.
                  "Greeue not that bleſſed Spirit of life that ſeales the band,
                        
                           •
                        atth. 16. 18.
                  
                  "For which king Dauid did requeſt;
                        
                           〈◊〉
                        . 21. 15. by which we vnderſtand
                  "Our calling to be ſure,
                        
                           〈◊〉
                        . 6. 10. our ſtriuing not in vaine;
                  "By which we know we are ordaind for Chriſt to ſuffer paine.
                        
                           ••
                        ue. 18. 2.
                  
                  "Now ſith we haue the ſeale from feare that makes vs free,
                        
                           〈◊〉
                         4 30.
                  
                  "And ſhining light frō popiſh ſhades the Lord hath made vs ſee:
                        
                           ••
                        al. 50. 11
                  
                  "We may no longer then diſſemble in this caſe:Pet. 1. 10
                  
                  "But what we thinke muſt plainlie ſhowe (ô King) before your face.
                  "We cannot (as you would) the certain Truth denie;
                        
                           •
                        ill. 1. 29
                  
                  "But that defend:
                        
                           〈◊〉
                        . 8. 15. though for the ſame we wer cōdemnd to die.
                  "And whereas you doo thirſt to ſucke the guiltleſſe blood
                  "Of them whō you name Lutherans,
                     Cor. 13. 8 ô King we think not good
                  "To ſtrengthen that deuice which Sathan did inuent:
                  "Leaſt that with Caine our bloodie fact too late we ſhould repēt.
                  "For thoſe whom you doo hate, and puſh with heauie hand;
                  "In verie truth are godlie men, the beſt in all your land.
                  
                     
"Whoſe faith you doo not ſee, whoſe life you doo not know;
                  "Take heed leaſt you in them doo ſeeke the Lord to ouethrow.
                  "Which feate by wāton will if now your Grace aſſay;
                  "Be wiſe in time, leaſt that in this, you frame your owne decay.
                  "But this we thinke the beſt, that ſtraight way out of hand
                  "A lawfull Counſell may be calde to haue the matter ſcand.
                  "Till which, let godlie men whom enuie cannot ſtaine,
                  "In lieu of all their curſed wrong, in reſt at home remaine.
                  "But if to this (ô King) you ſtoppe your princelie eare:
                  "Leſt God with blindnes ſtrike your hart,Rom. 1. 18. 28. your frēds may iuſtly feare.
                  "For they that doo not care aright to ſerue the Lord,
                  "He leaues them to their filthie luſts to make thē more abhord.
                  "Remember Ahabs fall that ſolde himſelfe to death;1. Ki. 21. 20
                  
                  "Forget not thoſe two wicked men which long withſtood the faith.
                  "Corrupted men ſhall fade,Exod. 7. 11. 12. Iannes & Iābres. the reprobates ſhall die:
                  "God wil not long maintein their raign that ſhal his truth denie.2 Tim 3. 8. 9
                  
                  "Their madneſſe ſhall be plaine, their follies ſeene, & then
                  "The godlie ſhall deride the rage of ſinfull wicked men.
                  "Becauſe (ſaith God) you ſtaid to come when I did call,Prou. 1. 26
                  
                  "I will be deafe when you lament, and laugh when you do fall.
                  "VVhich plague the Lord withhold frō you & eke your land;
                  "The lord preſerue your noble grace, & ſhield ye with his hand.
                  "That long in perfect peace your Grace may rule and raigne;
                  "That in your time Gods knowen truth may once reuiue again.
                  "And this is all we wiſh, and this the worſt we craue;
                  "That Chriſt will open once your heart, by faith your ſoule to ſaue.
                  "This ſaid, he ſate again. The King in fierie heate
                  "Scant able to forbeare ſo long; ſpake thus from out his ſeate.
               
               
                  "INdeede,The King anſwere v
                           •
                         to Burge
                           ••
                         wherein 
                           〈◊〉
                         ſhewes his deadlie anger and mallice against the Tru
                           ••
                        
                      and is it ſo? well then we knowe the worſt:
                  "To ſpeake or thinke as we haue heard we deemd no ſubiect durſt.
                  "But now with griefe we ſee that this infectious ſeed
                  
                     
"Hath taken rooting in our Court, whereof this is the ſeed.
                  "But moſt we maruell whie the Nobles of our land
                  "So blinded are, that they wil needs theſe matters take in hand?
                  "We thought it moſt vnlike that men ſo graue and wiſe,
                  "Should euer ſtoop to giue conſent vnto ſo leaud deuiſe.
                  "But now we muſt correct our minde and former thought,
                  "And giue theſe new religious mē the guerdō they haue ſought
                  "And truſt vs, ſo we will, now that we know the crue,
                  "We doubt not but the proudeſt ſhall this day & dealings rue.
                  "Now ſith we know the good, the reſt ſhall know our minde:
                  "We doubt not for theſe bleding woūds ſome healing ſalue to find.
                  "Such tooles we haue in ſtore to fel this rotting moote,
                  "That quicklie ſhall pul vp and raſe the branches with the roote.
                  "This ſeede of Luthers ſect which now begins to ſpring,
                  "Shall to the fields where it doth growe a wofull harueſt bring.
                  "It's time to looke about, it's time to ſet ſome ſtay:
                  "For if we ſleepe, we ſee there be that watch for our decay.
                  "But they ſhall haue their meede, they ſhall not loſe their hire.
                  "They ſhortlie ſhal with ſorrow feele the waight of Princes ire.
                  Thus ſaid, in raging wiſe he turneth quite about;
                  And pauſing ſtaid a while, as one that ſeemde to doubt.
                  But yet ſuch rankor roſe and boiled in his breaſt,
                  That preſentlie he gaue in charge that there they ſhould arreſt
                  
                     Annas Burgeus as the chiefe, and him to priſon bring:
                  Who was, he thoght the only root by whō the reſt did ſpring.
                  When this was ſaid,
                        
                           •
                        urgeus ſent 
                           〈◊〉
                         Priſon. and that the King had ſo decreed,
                  
                     Mongomerie Captaine of the gard was he that did the deede.
                  Now good Burgeus is in linkes and irons faſt,
                  Which ſodaine fall did ſore appall, & make the reſt agaſt.
                  The King vnwilling was to haue the cauſe deferd:
                  But time and Iudges were aſsignde to haue the matter heard.
                  But ſuch appointed were to iudge this weightie caſe,The Biſhop of 
                           ••
                        aris & De
                        
                           ••
                        echaris.
                  
                  Which hated him, and ſought the truth by falſhood to deface.
                  
                     
Which partiall minded men Burgaeus did refuſe;
                  And to the Senate did recount their olde and ancient vſe:
                  Which was, if anie one of them did chance to ſlide;
                  The order was by all the reſt his dealings ſhould be tride.
                  Which they no ſooner gaue the King to vnderſtand;
                  But letters came, which did command him anſwere out of hād.
                  The letters read, he ſaid; my Prince I will obaie:
                  But otherwiſe you had not heard a word of me this daie.
                  Then queſtions were propoſde of Saints, and Popiſh Maſſe,
                  Of Purgatorie, and ſuch traſh as then in credit was.
                  Whereof he ſpake his minde, and freelie did proteſt;
                  That all theſe leaud and filthie toyes in heart he did deteſt.
                  
                     Burgaeus proteſtatio
                           •
                         concerning Poperie, & Popiſh ceremonies. "I ſerue (ſaid he) no Saint, but Chriſt my onelie ſtaie;
                  "I will not yeeld to anie man his honor to betraie.
                  "He is the Sacrifice by death that made me free;
                  "He is the onelie Paſchall Lambe that ſhed his blood for me;
                  "He is the onelieChriſt ou
                           〈◊〉
                         onelie Purgatorie. heate by faith that purgeth ſinne
                  "In them that now beleeue, or thoſe that heretofore haue bin.
                  "Therefore I doo defie your popiſh arifles all,Heb. 1. 3.
                  
                  "And thanke the God that giues me grace to come whē he doth call.
                  Which anſwere being made, to ſentence they proceede;
                  Who was condemned then: for that the King had ſo decreed.
                  The ſentence being read, he had but one refudge;
                  He did appeale toBurgaeus appealed often from this vniuſt ſentence: but ſeeing his appealations could not bee admitted, he laſtlie appealed to Ieſus Chriſt. Ieſus Chriſt, as his ſupernall Iudge.
                  And being ſent againe to place from whence he came,
                  He was content for Chriſt to beare this grief, rebuke & ſhame,
                  But Sathan did reioyce his matters framde ſo well;
                  Whoſe bloodie minde had caſt the plot Chriſt Ieſus to expel.
                  Great troubles did he ſtirre, and miſchife ſtill deuiſe
                  To ſhred the truth in euerie place ſo faſt as it ſhould riſe.
                  And though Burgaeus did from ſentence oft appeale;
                  Yet Sathan ſeeking for his blood this thing could not preuaile.
                  So now from out againe the priſon he was brought,
                  
                     
And thenBurgaeus 
                           〈◊〉
                         his 
                           •…
                        ecea
                        
                           •…
                        taine 
                           〈◊〉
                         Or
                        
                           •…
                        
                      diſgraded ſolemnly, which thing the Biſhop ſought.
                  Which being done, he gaue a ſweete and ſmiling cheare,
                  And being not diſmaide at all, he ſaid deuoide of feare.
                  
                     
                        
                           •…
                        ſpea
                        
                           •…
                         Bur
                        
                           •…
                         his 
                           •…
                        ding. "I thanke my God that lent me life to ſee this daie,
                  "Wherein theſe badges of the Beaſt are taken cleane awaie;
                  "That Antichriſt hencefoorth in me maie claime no part;
                  "Whoſe whoriſh art and Romiſh raggs I hate with al my hart.
                  "This Popiſh ſinfull oyle I gladlie here doo leaue;
                  "For this, of God a glorious crowne I know I ſhall receaue.
                  "If you could ſee the waie that leadeth vnto life;
                  "If you could know the perfect truth, thē ended wer this ſtrife.
                  "But yet you are too dull, your eies are yet too blinde;
                  "Farewell therefore you Romiſh ragges, which here I leaue behind.
                  "For theſe (my God) when I before thee ſhall appeare;
                  "Giue me (ô Lord) a quiet heart, a conſcience voide of feare.
                  "So ſhall I ſtouthe ſtand and ſtill profeſſe thy name;
                  "So ſhall my foes be turned backe, and quite be put to ſhame;
                  "So ſhall I gladlie goe vnto that wiſhed place;
                  "And in defence of this thy truth, my ſtake I ſhall imbrace.
                  "Now Sathan doo thy worſt, I will appeale no more,
                  "The truth (I know) which I profeſſe is it that gals thy ſore.
                  "Now let me know (I pray) my ſentence and my doome;
                  "My blood it is which you do ſeeke, now let my ſentence come.
                  Which being ſaid, indeed, they did prouide againe
                  The final ſentence to pronounce, which ſhould for aie remain:
                  Which then in ſolemne wiſe with words demure and graue,
                  By Pilates brother was pronounſt, who once like ſentēce gaue.
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           〈◊〉
                         ſentence 
                           〈◊〉
                         a
                        
                           •…
                         Annas 
                           〈◊〉
                         pro
                        
                           •…
                        d by the 
                           •…
                        ris, the 
                           〈◊〉
                         9. Burgaeus, I pronounce the ſentence of thy death,
                  For that thou like an Heretike haſt ſlidden from our faith.
                  And tied to a ſtake, there ſtill remaine thou muſt
                  Till that thy fleſh by fierie flakes be all conſumde to dust.
               
               
                  Which when Burgaeus heard he did no white repine:
                  But cheerfullie for Chriſt he ſaid, my life I will reſigne.
                  
                     
ToThe ſpeaches and behauiour of Burgaeus at the receauing of his ſentence. God he lifted vp his hands with thankfull hart
                  That he was worthy made, for Chriſt to feele this ioiful ſmart.
                  And meeklie kneeling downe with holie Stephen didBurgaeus praieth for his perſecutors & forgiueth thē. praie
                  For them that had moſt wrongfully condemned him that day:
                  That God in mercie would his Iudges all forgiue,
                  And not to laie vnto their charge the ſin that might thē grieue.
                  So he forgaue them all, though they in fierie moode,
                  For ſeeking Chriſt, had long deuiſde to ſhed his guiltles blood.
                  But heere we may not paſſe, what counſell ſage and graue,
                  And to the Senate what he ſaid, and what aduice he gaue.
               
               
                  "AS thus.The Pathet. call ſpeaches of Burgaeus to the Senate of Paris at his condemnation. Are Plutoes Nymphes inſtald within your breſt?
                  "Doth dire Megara now poſſes the place where Chriſt ſhuld reſt.
                  "Hath Sathan (which deceite and lies hath vſed long,
                  "Inforced you againſt the truth and Chriſt to practiſe wrong?
                  "And are you gone ſo farre, that you can be content
                  "For loue ye beare to Sathans lies, to kill the innocent.
                  "VVhat, is there not a God that ſearcheth euerie vaine?
                  "And will he not reuenge the blood of Abel ſpilt by Cain?
                  
                  "And can you now accompt the truth to be a lie?
                  "And can you think within yout hart that Chriſt can go awrie?
                  "And dare you to blaſpheme that great and ſacred name?
                  "And feare you not by fained gloſe his Goſpell to defame?
                  "And will you be ſo bold to ſaie that we doo ſtraie,
                  "Vvhich haue for vs the written word, & Chriſt our only way?
                  "Vve are the ſonnes of God whom thus you doo purſue,
                  "If you perſiſt, you ſhall too ſoone perceiue it to be true.
                  "Vve know that he doth liue, his voice doth ſhew his loue:
                  "If you refuſe his profered word, your ſinnes ſhall you reproue.
                  "By him we can doo all; If he doo hide his face
                  "Vve maie not hope without his help for mercie, loue, or grace.
                  "Vvhat boldneſſe is it then for aſhes, filth, and claie,
                  "By fond attempt for to reſiſt the thing that he ſhall ſaie?
                  
                     
"And can you be content that Chriſt for to depraue;
                  "Whoſe wounds haue waſht our ſinnes, whoſe mercie doth vs ſaue?
                  "Shall we denie our King, our Prince, our ioy, our might?
                  "Shall we conſent to do him wrong, that doth defend our right?
                  "He is our princelie Guide, our Captaine, and our ſtaie;
                  "He wakes for vs when we do ſleepe, & keepes vs from decay.
                  "Then heare, what ſhall we doo? Shall feare make vs to flie?
                  "Shall anie earthlie force make vs our Captaine to denie?
                  "Shall we vnconſtant be our duetie to forgoe?
                  "Shall we repaie ſuch curteſie to him that loude vs ſo?
                  "No, no, we are but earth, to earth we muſt returne;
                  "O happie earth, if (earth) for Chriſt thou be content to burne.
                  "Our time is heere but ſhort, our deadlie foe but weake;
                  "The Lord is able when he liſt his mallice for to breake.
                  "But what would Sathan haue? what doth this fleſh require?
                  "But onelie this; that from our God and truth we ſhould retire.
                  "If anie doo blaſpheme, we muſt them not controll:
                  "If anie wilie wantons ſinne, we muſt their deedes extoll.
                  "If truth be troden downe: If we will liue at eaſe,
                  "We muſt be then with heauy hearts cōtent to hold our peace.
                  "Which ſith we doo refuſe, you runne with open crie;
                  "Loe theſe are wicked Rebels, which moſt worthie are to die.
                  "And are we Rebels then? how will you prooue this thing?
                  "Yes ſir; you doo refuſe, with vs to Baal your offrings bring.
                  "O mercie now good Lord! what wicked times are theſe?
                  "How long ſhal theſe vngodlie men keep theſe vngodlie waies?
                  "How long wilt thou forbeare to bridle this their luſt?
                  "And when ſhall all their fleſhlie pride be raked in the duſt?
                  "Why dooſt thou winke ſo long? whie doſt thou ſo delaie?
                  "Why doſt thou not cut off thoſe Impes, that ſtir this fierie fray?
                  "But if it be thy will that they ſhould longer raigne:
                  "And if thou thinke it beſt for vs that they ſhould yet remaine:
                  "Reſtraine them yet (good Lord) leaſt they doo go too farre;
                  
                     
"For they againſt thy godlie Saints intend a cruell warre.
                  "And till thy pleaſure be for to deſtroie them quite;
                  "Withhold their cruell iawes (ô Lord) with thy moſt mightie Bitt.
                  "Haue mercie ſtill on vs (ô louing Father deere;
                  "Maintaine vs in defending thee, from danger, fals and feare.
                  "And make them Lord to know, that they thoſe Rebels are:
                  "That frō the ſimple (which do ſeek) the light & truth debarre.
                  "And while that I haue breath I will declare the ſame;
                  "That Sathan may not with his lies thy bleſſed truth defame.
                  "Is this a Rebels part when men to Princes giue
                  "Their bodies, goods, and al things els without repine & griefe?
                  "Is this a traitors pranke vnto the Lord to praie;
                  "That he will keepe both Prince & Land from troble & decaie:
                  "And that he will vouchſafe to take from them the myſte
                  "Which keeps thē from the knowledge of their ſauior & their Chriſt.
                  "Or rather is not this a moſt rebellious part;
                  "To ſeeke by all rebellious meanes Gods glorie to ſubuart?
                  "To giue the honor due vnto the Lord alone,
                  "To Saints that you haue made: or els, to ſenſeles ſtock & ſtone?
                  "To vſe blaſphemous oathes; to ſuffer common ſtewes;
                  "To iuſtifie your owne deuice; and ſuch like filthie vſe?
                  "Your Conſcience ſhall be iudge, to you I doo appeale:
                  "Hath God deliuered you the ſword againſt his truth to deale?
                  "If not, beware betime, and marke what I ſhall ſaie;
                  "This mallice which you beare to Chriſt will be your own decaie.
                  "And what, are you ſo blinde, that you perceaue not this;
                  "How in this ſentence you pronounce, that you are none of his?
                  "Recount within your ſelues and call to minde at large,
                  "Where anie ſinne or wickedneſſe be laid vnto our charge.
                  "If not; then iudge againe, and tell me if you can:
                  "VVhich is the beſt; to ſerue the Lord, or follow ſinfull man?
                  "Now if you loue your goods, your credite, and your life;
                  "If you preferre before your God your houſhold, child, or wife:
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     
"Then know you are not fit with Chriſt to haue a part;
                  "But feare, leaſt for your ſinne in hell you finde a laſting ſmart?
                  "But if you doo not feare the iudgements of the Lord:
                  "Yet know, your deeds in forreine lands to ſtrāgers are abhord.
                  "How manie ſinfull actes, and deedes deuoyd of wit,
                  "That ruddie purpled Phalaris hath made you to commit?
                  "Who for his curſed gaine hath ſet about the King,
                  "Such as wil Prince and Commons all to deadlie ruine bring.
                  "And when that Beaſt doth bid, you runne at euerie call;
                  "You racke & teare Gods knowen truth, not caring what befall.
                  "To pleaſe him, you doo yeeld the godlie to torment
                  "With ſuch outrage, as you are forc't the ſame for to lament.
                  "But what; me thinkes I ſee the teares tril downe your cheeke?
                  "What, haue I ſpoken that which now your conſcience doth miſllike?
                  "Well, then beware betime, for yet the time is wel;
                  "But if you ſhun this profered grace, beware the paines of hell.
                  "Your conſcience muſt be knowen, your deeds muſt al appeere;
                  "Then call for grace, and ſo repent while yet you tarrie heere.
                  "But if you quake in reſt as Felix did before,
                  "And if you feare without remorſe your paine wilbe the more.
                  "You ſee how they reioice whom you condemne to die;
                  "No terror can aſſaile the heart on Chriſt that doth relie.
                  "We waie not all your force, your mallice, and your ſtrife;
                  "We doo accompt this cruell death to vs a happie life.
                  "Why ſhould it grieue my heart for Chriſt to hang or burne;
                  "For little paine, I know the Lord great pleaſ
                        •
                     re will returne.
                  "But they vnhappie are, and curſed from aboue,
                  "Which from thēſelues & others ſeek the truth for to remoue.
                  "But this I know from Chriſt nothing ſhall me depart,
                  "And from aſſured hope in him none ſhall remoue my heart.
                  "For though you teare my fleſh, and heart to pouder grinde;
                  "Yet this ſhall neuer ſo preuaile, as once to change my minde.
                  "And when that you haue done the worſt you can deuiſe;
                  
                     
"Vve know that in the latter day with Chriſt we ſhall ariſe.
                  "This death therefore to vs we recken little paine:
                  "For we beleeue aſſuredlie that we ſhall liue againe.
                  "Now hap what maie befall, to hang, to burne, to frie
                  "I haue profeſſed Chriſt: and ſo, a Chriſtian I will die.
                  "Vvhy therefore doo we ſtaie? Come hangman doo thy part;
                  "Thy fact in this, loe heere I doo forgiue with all my heart.
                  "And this he did repeate, Come hangman doo the deed;
                  "Till that the ſtouteſt heart that heard, for griefe began to bleed.
                  "Put out, put out (ſaid he) your franticke fierie brands;
                  "That Chriſt may onlie rule & reign, ſet to your helping hands.
                  "Repent your wicked thoughts forſake your filthie waies:
                  "And if you hope to haue releaſe, then vſe no more delaies.
                  "But why doo I ſo long draw this forſaken breath?
                  "Farewell my mates; for now behold, I goe vnto my death.
                  Thus hauing ſaid his minde, and readie to depart;
                  The hangman takes, and ties his hands, and laies him on a cart.
                  In which he was conuaid vnto a place faſt by;
                  Where chained to a ſtake, it was ordainde that he ſhould die.
                  The ſtreetes of Paris towne were kept with watch and ward,
                  There went with him of armed mē foure hūdred for his gard.
                  The waies on euerie ſide that lead vnto the place
                  Were ſtopped vp, as if they had foreſeen ſome doubtful caſe.
                  And where we plainlie ſee theſe tyrants all afraid;
                  The godlie man for all this broile was not a whit diſmaid.
                  For when he was vnbound, there was in him no feare:
                  He put his clothing off himſelfe with bold and conſtant chear.
                  Where ſtanding naked then and ſtript vnto his ſkin,
                  With cheerefull voyce he did at laſt this heauie ſpeach begin.
                  
                     Bur
                           ••
                        us 
                           •
                        
                        ſeth but this ſhort ſpeach t
                           •
                         the People, for ſo he had promiſed before: wherevpon the vſe of his tongue was permitted vnto him, which to others was deut
                           ••
                        
                      The cauſe why I am come (good people) to this death:
                  Is not for murder, theft, or wrong; But for a liuelie faith.
                  Which ſaid, he held his peace: and kneeling on the ground,
                  
                     
VVith ſighes he praid, til to the ſtake by hangmā he was boūd.
                  VVhere he did oft repeate;
                        
                           〈◊〉
                         laſt 
                           〈◊〉
                         of An
                        
                           •…
                        geus 
                           •…
                        ied to 
                           •…
                        ke. 
                     O Lord forſake not me,
                  
                  Least by the fraileneſſe of my fleſh I hap to ſlide from thee.
                  O Lord receaue my ſoule into thy bleſſed reſt,
                  Giue me thy ſtrength while I doo liue O Lord I thee requeſt.
                  Thus with a quiet minde, and heart deuoide of ſtrife,
                  For Chriſt amidſt the fierie flame, he yeelded vp his life.
               
               
                  BVt 
                        
                           •…
                        cluſion of 
                           •…
                        ench pil
                        
                           •…
                        : with a 
                           •…
                        tion of 
                           〈◊〉
                         and li
                        
                           •…
                        f Bur
                        
                           •…
                        
                      what a ioy is this to vs that doo remaine,
                  That God dooth giue to his elect ſuch ſtrength to conquere paine.
                  This is the godlie end that bleſſed man did make,
                  VVhom life & honor could not bēd his Chriſt for to forſake.
                  He liude with good report, his death deſerueth fame,
                  And he hath left vnto his foes a leaud and filthie ſhame.
                  A rare and paſsing ſigne no doubt the Lord did giue,
                  To ſee that noble conſtancie in him while he did liue.
                  VVhoſe conſtant death in France and blood did ſow the ſeede
                  VVherby the church did much increaſe, & godly yet do feed.
                  He came of honeſt houſe, in learning ſpent his youth,
                  And beeing plac'te in high degree he ſought to learn the truth.
                  VVhereof when he had felt the ſweete and pleaſant taſt,
                  He ioinde himſelfe vnto the Church, & ſticks to them at laſt.
                  VVell, he is gone before; and we that are behinde:
                  Lord grant to vs in Ieſus Chriſt like faith and conſtant minde.
               
               Amen.
            
            
               
               The iudgements of the Lord which fell vpon King Henrie the ſecond
after he had cauſed Burgaeus to be impriſoned Anno 15
                     •
                  9. Dilated
by the examples of Ahab, Amaziah, and Zedechiah, wicked
Kings, which vſed the like crueltie againſt the word.
               
                  THe Lord on Elies ſonnes
               and ſinnes, this ſentence gaue;
               They that doo loue and honor me,
               great honor ſtill ſhall haue:
               But they that doo deſpiſe
               my word,1. Sam. 2. 30. my law, and will;
               They ſhall be ſure of euerie man
               to be abhored ſtill.
               Which ſentence of the Lord for euer ſhall be true:
               As by examples we may ſee of ſuch as doo inſue;
               For when as Ahab was in fond and fooliſh rage
               To Ramoth Gilead ſtoutlie bent, vniuſtlie warres to wage:
               A Prophet from the Lord did tell him verie plaine,
               That if this warre he took in hand King Ahab ſhould be ſlain.
               But to the priſon ſtraight this Prophet then was led;
               The king gaue charge that he ſhuld be with bread & water fed,
               Till he returned ſafe from Gilead home againe:
               But what befell? It came to paſſe the King indeed was ſlaine.
               So Amaziah (which by idolls did offend)
               Vnto the Prophet would not yeeld his willing eare to bend.
               But did with bitter ſcoffes and ſcornes reproue the word:Cron. 25. 16. 2
               
               For which he was by Iehu ſpoild, and taken by the ſword.
               So Zedekiah proud from ſinne would not returne:
               But Rebel-like,Iere. 36. 23. the word of God he did with fire burne.
               And Ieremie by him was oft in priſon pent;Iere. 20. 2. 
                        〈◊〉
                      32. 3. & 38
               
               Becauſe he ſaid, the King and all to Babel ſhould be ſent.
               But let vs ſee his ende; the King of Babel came,
               
                  
Who toke him captiue with his men,
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      9 5. & put them al to ſhame.
               And he that was content Gods Prophet to diſgrace,
               Was forc'te to ſee the murder of his ſonnes before his face;
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      6.
               
               His eies that would not ſee Gods truth and ſhining light,
               The King of Babel put them out as they deſerude of right.
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      7.
               
               So Henrie King of France which all his force did bend
               Againſt the truth,
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      ſe
                     
                        ••
                     
                   did from the Lord receaue a fearfull end.
               For now amidſt the ruffe of all their mirth and ioy,
               When euerie man deuiſed how the godlie to deſtroie.
               The time appointed came, for marriage of the King,
               Which to the Court & Courtiers did great mirth & pleaſure bring.
               And for the greater pompe of all this princely traine,
               A ſolemne Iuſt the youthlie King by Crier did proclaime:
               In which he meant to ſhew his manhood and his might.
               And being horſt with limber ſpeare in armor ſhining bright,
               He choſe among the reſt (the challenge now begun)
               
                  Mongomerie Captaine of his gard againſt him for to runne.
               Which he did oft refuſe, and wiſelie did withſtand,
               Till that the King the fatall ſpeare put in his Captaines hand.
               Where charging with their ſpears, & forcing might & main,
               A ſplinter pierſt the Princes eie, and ranne vnto his braine.
               The King with ſodaine wound and bleeding much diſmaid,
               Within the next adioyning houſe to bed he was conuaide.
               Where plungd with grieuous pain, his conſcience did lament
               The wrong which he had done to thoſe whō he to priſon ſent.
               "I greatlie feare (ſaid he) leaſt I haue done ſome ill
               "Againſt Burgaeus and the reſt,
                     
                        〈…〉
                      it whoſe blood I ſought to ſpill.
               But Elimas the witch doth ſpend his curſed winde,
               From ſuch remorſe to keep in thral the Kings afflicted minde:
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      is 
                        ••
                     he Car
                     
                        ••
                     f Lo
                     
                        ••
                     
                  
               
               "It is (ſaid he) thy foe, that doth aſſault thy faith;
               "In which take heed that thou remain ſtil conſtant to thy death.
               This heauie hap befell (as manie men haue tolde)
               Nere to the place wherein as then Burgaeus was in hold.
               
                  
And manie did obſerue that he did kill the King
               Which was commanded to the Iaile Burgaeus for to bring.
               The King did often brag thoſe eies of his ſhould ſee
               
                  Burgaeus burnt; but loe the Lord did alter that decree.
               For ere Burgeus was vnto the fire led,King Henry died the 10
                        •
                      Auguſt, an
                        •
                      1559.
               
               
                  Mongemerie had thoſe eies of his thruſt cleane out of his head.
               Now here we plainlie ſee the life, and heauie end
               Of thē which perſecute the truth, which God doth often ſend.
               And let vs warning take by this moſt fearfull fate,
               For to returne and loath our ſinne, before it be too late.
               Amen.
            
            
               The bloodie marriage, or butcherlie murder of the Admirall of
France, and diuers other noble and excellent men, at the marriage
of Margaret the Kinges owne ſiſter, vnto Prince Henrie
ſonne to the Queene of Nauarre, committed the 24. of August
in the Citie of Paris Anno 1572.
               
                  
                     NOw haue you heard before,
                  of faggot, fire, and ſword
                  Inhaunſt by Sathan, for to quell
                  Gods truth and bleſſed word.
                  But now I muſt begin
                  ſuch treaſon to vnfold,
                  As former times for crueltie,
                  And ages new and olde
                  Haue neuer ſeene the like in Chriſtendome, till now
                  When ſacred faith by flatterie, and oath of Princelie vow
                  By treaſon, did contriue to ſhed the guiltleſſe blood
                  Of thē which now by peace did ſeek to do their coūtrie good.
                  For when the Lord did ſend his truth into the land,
                  He raiſed vp ſome Noble men to take this cauſe in hand.
                  
                     
Among the which, as chiefe and ſouereigne of the field,
                  There was Prince Henrie of Nauarre, with ſuch as would not yeeld
                  Vnto the Guiſian race; the Prince of Condee next;
                  The Admirall,
                        
                           〈◊〉
                         Co
                        
                           ••
                        rall 
                           〈…〉
                        . and D' Andelot, with others that were vext
                  By bloodie Guiſes band, who daily did inuent
                  How to oppreſſe the word of truth,
                        
                           〈◊〉
                         an
                        
                           ••
                         ro
                        
                           ••
                         
                        
                           •
                        tine 
                           ••
                        terie. which Chriſt had thether ſent.
                  But when as Sathan ſaw by words and dealings plaine,
                  That manie Princes were in armes this truth for to maintaine.
                  It galde him to the heart, that where he did deuiſe
                  To choake the word, that euen there the more it did ariſe.
                  He ſummons all his mates theſe matters to debate,
                  How they might choak this ſpringing ſeed before it were too late.
                  Where all within a round they come without delaie,
                  To whom this bloody captaine then theſe words began to ſay;
                  "There is a ſubtill veyne that feedes this cankred ſore:
                        
                           〈…〉
                        .
                  
                  "For now the deeper it is launcte it riſeth ſtill the more.
                  "Vve ſee that fire and ſword cannot at all preuaile,
                  "Vve ſee that al our bloody broiles their courage cannot quaile.
                  "Vve ſee how Noble men their forces dailie bend
                  "To counter croſſe our planted plots, this cauſe for to defend.
                  "Two ciuill warres are paſt, the third is now in hand;
                  "Vve ſee how ſtoutlie they are bent our forces to withſtand.
                  "Therefore we muſt deuiſe to plaie ſome other part,
                  "Or elſe in vaine we take in hand theſe Princes to ſubuart.
                  "Now lend your liſtening eares, and marke what I ſhall ſaie;
                  "A ſecret thing I haue bethought which here I will bewraie:
                  "You muſt make ſhow,
                        
                           〈◊〉
                        
                      as though you loude to liue at eaſe;
                  "As wearie of theſe broiles, you muſt intreate to haue a peace.
                  "The King as chiefeſt man this plaie muſt firſt begin,
                  "By louing letters, words, and cheere at firſt to bring them in.
                  "And looke what they miſlike, the King muſt raſe it out,
                  "And yeeld to all things they requeſt, to put them out of doubt.
                  "The King muſt ſhew ſuch face to them aboue the reſt,
                  
                     
"As though he did vnfeinedlie of all men loue them beſt.
                  "The worſt of all their band the King muſt intertaine
                  "With ſuch good will, that no miſtruſt in anie maie remaine.
                  "And he muſt make them know, as though of late he felt
                  "Some pricke in conſcience for the cauſe againſt the which hee delt.
                  "And that he will forgiue al quarrels that are paſt,
                  "In hope that this their new goodwil with loue might euer laſt
                  "And he muſt make complaint, as though he did of late
                  "Miſlike the dealings of the Guiſe, and ſuch as they doo hate.
                  "And then the Guiſes muſt awhile from Court retire;
                  "For thus you ſhall intrap them all, and haue your full deſire.
                  "The King muſt yeeld to all that they requeſt or craue,
                  "And he muſt grant for to cōfirm the thing that they wold haue.
                  "The Mother Queene in this muſt alſo play her part,
                  "That no ſuſpect of treaſon maie remaine within their heart.
                  "And here you muſt giue out, as though you would imploie
                  "Their ſeruice in ſome forreine warres, which dooth your State annoie.
                  "As if you would not truſt the weight of ſuch affaires
                  "To anie man, but them alone; whoſe faith and watchfull cares
                  "You long haue tried: and ſo you maie your plot prepare
                  "By theſe and ſuch like fained things, to trap them in your ſnare.
                  "If this preuaile not; then I ſtand in fearfull doubt,
                  "What practiſe next to put in vre to haue them rooted out.
                  "Now therefore ſay your minde, if thus it be not beſt
                  "To cut them off, that ſo againe we all may liue in reſt.
                  The Counſell did agree, this was the onelie waie,
                  And euerie man did giue his word, this ſentence to obaie.
                  And that they would deuiſe ſuch things to put in vre,
                  As beſt might fit this curſed plot, and make the ſame moſt ſure.
                  Which Sathan hearing roſe, and thankt them with his heart,
                  That they to him ſo willing were:The King do
                           ••
                         preſentlie put in practiſe Sathans counſell. and ſo they did depart.
                  Then preſentlie the King in poſt a meſſage ſent
                  Vnto the Admirall, to whom he ſhewed his good intent.
                  
                     
"Which was,Kinges 
                           〈◊〉
                         and 
                           ••
                        ing 
                           •••
                        ſſage 
                           〈◊〉
                         Ad
                        
                           •
                        l. that he was loath more ciuill warres to haue,
                  "And that he greatlie did deſire his ſubiects for to ſaue.
                  "I will (ſaid he) forget, yea pardon and releaſe
                  "All former griefes, ſo that you will now yeeld to haue a peace.
                  "Which might be now to me a cauſe of paſsing ioie;
                  "For that I meane in forreine warres your ſeruice to imploie;
                  "And firſt we doo require, that we may ioyne our band,
                  "Againſt the man that cauſeth all theſe troubles in our land.
                  "Our Armies being ioynde, we may the ſtronger goe
                  "Againſt the Duke of Alua, whom we know to be our foe.
                  "Great matters moue our minde againſt the King of Spaine,
                  
                  "For he hath taken Florida, and late our ſiſter ſlaine.
                  With lies of like deuiſe the godlie to betraie,
                  Requeſting him moſt earneſtly that he would come awaie;
                  And that he ſhould obtaine what ſafetie he would craue:
                  Yea, for his ſuretie there, that he his faith & oath ſhould haue.
                  The meſſage being done, the Admirall as wiſe,
                  Within himſelfe did halfe ſuſpect the plot of this deuiſe.
                  And though that manie things did ſome ſuſpition bring:
                  Yet all things els he doubted more than falſhood in the King.
                  He thought the promiſe ſure, and firmelie did beleeue,
                  No treaſon could be ment, wheras the king his word did giue.
                  The Admirall as one that was deuoide of feare,
                  And willing for to heare of peace, vnto the King gaue eare.
                  So now the ciuill broiles which manie did intend,
                  By this deuiſe were pacified and brought vnto an ende.
                  It cannot be expreſt what ſhewes of frendlie minde,
                  Both in the King and Courtiers all the Admirall doth finde.
                  His frends likewiſe, which had the Goſpell long profeſt
                  As Countie Rouchfaucoult and eke Theligni with the reſt,
                  Like grace and fauor found: which made them ſo reioyce,
                  That to conſent vnto the King they all did giue their voice.
                  And if in former warres the Admirall had loſt
                  
                     
Either caſtles, houſes, townes or fermes what euer it ſhuld coſt;
                  The King commanded ſtraight for to reſtore them all,
                  And all things els which he of right of anie man could call.
                  And thoſe whom he perceiude the Admirall to loue,
                  He blinded them with great rewards, ſuſpition to remoue.
                  Beſides, he did command out of his purſe to giue
                  To him an hundred thouſand pounds his loſſes to relieue.
                  And when as it did chance his brother for to die,
                  The Cardinall Chaſtilion: the King then preſentlie
                  The fruites and profites all of liuings all one yeare,
                  Vnto the Admirall he gaue his charges to forweare.
                  Yet not content with this, one thing aboue the reſt
                  The King moſt frendlie did: the which the godlie liked beſt.
                  He wrote to Philibert the Duke of Sauoie then,
                  That he ſhould ceaſe for to moleſt or grieue thoſe godly men,
                  The which in former warres the Goſpel did defend;
                  And that to ſuch he ſhould leaue off his rigor to extend.
                  And that the Admirall might no miſliking finde,
                  He did by gentle meanes appeaſe the Duke of Guiſes minde:
                  He tride to make them frends, & brought the ſame to paſſe;
                  Although it on the Guiſes part a fained frendſhip was.
                  The Cardinall likewiſe that was their greateſt foe,
                  To chuſe a Pope, made thē beleeue to Rome that he would go.
                  So all things being done, t'abandon all ſuſpect,
                  What they miſlikte, the King would ſeeme the ſame for to reiect.
                  So that about the king they onelie credit winne
                  Which did defend the Goſpel, & which latelie were come in.
                  But nothing did preuaile to put them out of doubt
                  So much as one thing, which as now the king did go about.
                  Which was, that he did wiſh his ſiſter for to match
                  Vnto Prince Henrie of Nauarre: by this in hope to catch
                  Them all within his ſnare▪ for this he did conclude,
                  Not for good will, but mere deceipt the godlie to delude.
                  
                     
Which match the King would haue conſummate out of hand,
                  That ſo it might remaine (ſaid he) a ſure and perfect band
                  Of that vnfained loue, and inward heartie care,
                  Which we to thoſe that loue the truth & goſpel now do bear.
                  Vvhich made them all reioice, and quite caſt off their feare,
                  Vvhen in the King they did behold ſuch loue & frendly cheer.
                  Yet ſome did here alledge, that conſcience did reſtraine
                  The Prince to match with her, which yet did ſeeme for to remaine
                  In loue with Popiſh rites; to which the King replide
                  That he to eaſe thoſe ſcruples all ſuch order would prouide
                  Vvhich they ſhould not miſlike: For he would there diſpence
                  Vvith all ſuch rites and orders, as might breed the leaſt offence.
                  Vvhich Courtiers all miſlike, and openlie repinde;
                  Much doubting leaſt vnto the truth the King had bin inclinde.
                  The Admirall againe was much confirmde beſides
                  By other ſignes, not douting now their falſhoods & their ſlides.
                  The godlie did reioice to ſee the King ſo bent
                  Not thinking of the treacherie & treaſon that they ment.
                  So, matters being paſt and parties all agreed,
                  In Paris towne to haue them ioinde by both it was decreed.
                  The Queene of Nauarre now (a rare and vertuous dame)
                  Vvith others to the Princes Court in full aſſurance came.
                  Vvhere hauing ſtaid awhile, ſhe tooke her leaue to ride
                  To Paris, for this ſolemne feaſt the better to prouide.
                  The King to like effect, by meſſage did requeſt
                  The Admirall that he would goe to Paris there to reſt.
                  And ſee that nothing want for that appointed day,
                  And that himſelfe would after come, and make no long delaie.
                  And that he might not feare the mallice and the rage
                  That Paris men did beare to him; he ſaid he would aſſwage
                  The ſame himſelfe: and ſo he preſentlie did write
                  To Marcel Prouoſt of the towne (perceiuing well their ſpite)
                  That he ſhould intertaine and vſe in frendlie wiſe
                  
                     
The Admirall and all his traine, that nothing might ariſe
                  Which might offend his minde or burſt to anie flame:
                  For if ther did, he ſwore he wold moſt fiercely plague the ſame
                  The King and Queene alſo vnto the like effect
                  Vnto the Duke of Aniow did their letters now direct.
                  So that the Admirall not doubting anie foe
                  Reſolude himſelfe, and did prouide to Paris for to goe.
                  Where being come, he found, the king and all the reſt
                  VVith frendly welcoms, ſo as more he could not wel requeſt.
                  But whilſt that euerie man was buſie to prouide
                  Within the court, moſt ſodainly the Queene of Nauarre dide:
                  Which afterward was knowen (as ſome haue plainlie ſaid)
                  That by a paire of gloues perfumde this treaſon was conuaide.
                  Which leaud and ſinfull deede was now no ſooner done;
                  But that the Kingdome of Nauarre deſcended to her ſonne.
                  Heere-manie did reioyce in hope of perfect reſt,
                  Yet this vnequall bloodie match the Guiſes did deteſt..
                  That diſmall daie is come, the marriage muſt begin,
                  Where were aſſembled ſolemnlie the chiefe of euerie kinne.
                  And for becauſe the Maſſe their minds might grieue no more,
                  The mariage was ſolemniſed before the great Church dore
                  Of Paris, with ſuch words as both were well content:
                  Which done, into the church the Bride in ſolemn maner wēt
                  To heare a Popiſh Maſſe, both ſhe and all her traine;
                  Her husband walkt without the doore till ſhe returnde againe.
                  Then home at laſt they goe with mirth and paſsing ioy;
                  They little thought this pleaſant day would ende with ſuch annoy.
                  And now begins the plaies, the dancings and the ſport,
                  Which were performd by Iuſty youths that thither did reſort.
                  The King and Nobles all in pleaſures are ſo mad,
                  That for to talke of great affaires, no leaſure could be had.
                  And now the Admirall from Court had gone his way,
                  Had not ſome cauſes of the Church inforced him to ſtaie.
                  
                     
Now from the wedding night, fiue daies are come and paſt:
                  When as the King and Senate were contented at the laſt
                  In counſell for to ſit ſuch matters to decide,
                  As beſt might fit their fained warres in Flanders to prouide.
                  Which ended, neere about the middle of the day
                  As euerie man vnto his houſe did take his readie waie,
                  The Admirall himſelfe, with other Nobles moe
                  Along the ſtreetes (not doubting hurt) in pleaſant talk do goe:
                  A harquebuſſe was ſhot from other ſide the ſtreete,
                  Which charged was with bullets two the Admiral to greete.
                  Which curſed blow did wound and ſtrike this Noble man,
                  That thorough both his valiant armes the leaden pellets ran.
                  Which done, althogh the woūd did tuch him ſomwhat neer,
                  Yet nothing danted with the ſtroke, he ſaid with wōted cheer
                  From yonder houſe it came, goe looke who is within,
                  What vilde vnworthie trecherie is this they doo begin?
                  And therewithall he ſent in haſt vnto the King,
                  Such as might ſhow vnto his grace this bad & ſhamefull thing.
                  The meſſage being done (the King as then did plaie
                  At tennis with the Duke of Guiſe) he fiercelie threw awaie
                  His racket in a rage, as though it grieude his heart,
                  That thus the Admirall was hurt and ſtreight he did depart
                  Vnto his Caſtle, where a while he did remaine
                  Cloſe with his brother of Nauarre till he might heare againe
                  More certaine newes: but now the matter was too plaine,
                  That this aſſault was ſurelie made by one of Guiſes traine.
                  Now whileſt theſe greeuous woūds the ſurgeons had in cure,
                  He ſent Theligni to the King (becauſe he was not ſure
                  Where he ſhould liue or die) for to deſire his Grace,
                  That he would now vouchſafe to come vnto that ſimple place
                  Where he did lie: for that he had a ſecret thing
                  To tell him, which did much concerne the ſafetie of the King:
                  Which was no ſooner ſaid, the King was well content,
                  
                     
And with the man the meſſage came without delaie he went.
                  They went likewiſe that ſought the Admirall to kill,
                  The Mother Queen, with al her mates, no dout for great good will.
                  Which all no ſooner did within the dore appeere,
                  But that the King ſaluted him with ſweete & friendlie cheere:
                  "Alas my deereſt frend,The faine words of the King to the Admirall. how camſt thou to this place,
                  "Where wounded now I ſee thee lie me thinks in heauie caſe.
                  "What arrant villaine wrought this leaud and ſinfull act,
                  "Would God I knew the wicked wretch that did commit thef fact:
                  "For though (my Admirall) the hurt be done to thee,
                  "Yet the diſhonor of the fact, and ſhame redounds to me.
                  "Both which I will reuenge by death of God I ſweare,This King was a horrible blaſphemer, and vſed this and ſuch other like filthie othes.
                  
                  "As like in France was neuer ſeene, to make ſuch wretches feare.
                  Such ſpeeches had the King, & queſtions manie more
                  Concerning Iudges, health & griefe, and how he felt his ſore.
                  To which the Admirall with milde and quiet minde
                  Such anſwere gaue, as moude them much ſuch patience for to finde
                  In him that had receaude ſuch cauſe of deadlie ire:
                  Who did requeſt, but onelie that the King would ſtraight inquire
                  Vpon the fact: which was I ſurelie know ſaid he
                  Procured by the Duke of Guiſe, for great good will to me.
                  Which deede the Lord reuenge as he ſhall thinke it beſt;
                  For if I die, I hope by faith with Chriſt to be in reſt.
                  The reſt he did deſire a while to ſtand awaie,
                  For that he had ſome ſecret thing vnto the King to ſaie.
                  "Which done,The ſecret ſpeaches betweene the Admirall, & the king after the Admirall was wounded. he thus began; O King this life to ſaue,
                  "Is not the thing (I thank the Lord) that I do greatly craue.
                  "For this I know is true, we all muſt pay a death
                  "To God our maker, which hath lent this vſe of liuelie breath.
                  "But to your Maieſtie the great good will I bare
                  "Is it which now aboue the reſt dooth moſt increaſe my care:
                  "To ſee you now beſet with ſuch as wiſh no good
                  "Vnto your health, your crown & life, & ſuch as ſeek the blood
                  
                     
"Of you and of your frends, to ſpill your noble race;
                  "That ſo they may in future time your Princelie ſtocke deface.
                  "And ſo at length ingraffe a ſtrange Italian weede,
                  "VVhich may in France moſt furelie choake the Princes royall ſeede.
                  "This is the onelie marke to which they doo aſpire;
                  "This is the onelie wood ô King that doth mainteine the fire
                  "Of theſe your ciuill warres, (although they doo pretend
                  "Religion, and ſome other thing) this is the chiefeſt end
                  "Of all their drift. Therefore ô King beware by time,
                  "Mark this Eclipſe, whilſt yet ye ſee the Moone is in her Prime.
                  "I ſaie the leſſe, becauſe I know your Grace is wiſe,
                  "You ſhall in time moſt plainlie ſee this plot of their deuiſe
                  "Your wiſedome dooth perceaue (I hope) whom I doo meane,
                  "For of the ſame with griefe before I heard you oft complaine.
                  "For though that I doo lie heere wounded as you ſee,
                  "The chiefeſt treaſon they intend is not alone to me:
                  "But to your noble Grace, whoſe death they daily craue,
                  "Whoſe life by treaſon long ere this & now deſire to haue.
                  "I know when God ſhall take this fraile and wretched life,
                  "Some will not ſticke to ſay, that I was cauſe of all the ſtrife.
                  "But God that is aboue, and you my witneſſe be,
                  "How deare the ſafegard of my Prince, & peace hath bin to me.
                  "God grant you ſee in time your frends from fleering foe,
                  "That ſtill in ſafetie you may reigne deuoide of griefe and woe.
                  "Now I can ſaie no more, but God preſerue your Grace,
                  "And ſhield you from your fained friends which beare a double face.
                  "And this amidſt your mirth I praie remember ſtill,
                  "That they that ſeek to haue my life, do beare you no good wil.
                  Vvhich ſaid, the King did giue ſuch ſpeach as he thought beſt:
                  And then in loud and ſolemne words in hearing of the reſt
                  He did with frendlie cheere requeſt the Admirall
                  Vnto his Court for to remooue, what euer ſhould befall.
                  And others ſpake likewiſe vnto the ſame intent:
                  
                     
His ſimple meaning could not ſee the treaſon that was ment.
                  But yet vpon aduiſe, his frends did thinke it beſt,
                  Not knowing what may there betide, the K. he ſhould requeſt,
                  That he would them aſsigne ſome of his Graces gard,
                  Before his gates both night & day to keep their watch & ward
                  The motion being made, the King was well content,
                  And ſaid; to this their good deuiſe he gladly gaue conſent.
                  And that he would prouide to haue it ſurelie knowne,
                  That of his life he made accompt no leſſe than of his owne.
                  And that he would preſerue with care more tenderlie
                  The Admirall, than he would keepe the apple of his eie.
                  For that he did admire the valure of his minde,
                  Vvho little thought in mortall man ſuch courage for to finde.
                  The Duke of Aniow then commanded out of hand
                  One C
                           •
                        ſsin Captaine of the gard, to ward with Princes band
                  The gates and ſtreates wherein the Admirall did lie;
                  Vvhich was no ſooner ſaid, but was performed preſentlie.
                  This C
                           •
                        ſsin that was ſet with watch to ward the gate,
                  Vvas one that did the Admirall in heart moſt deadlie hate.
                  And farther, for to put the matter out of doubt,
                  They did conſent that he ſhould haue his truſtie frends about
                  The place where he did lie: which came of no good will;
                  But hoping rather all by this the eaſier for to kill.
                  And this among the reſt a bloodie practiſe was,
                  Vvhich cloaked guile by Sathans art too ſoone was brought to paſſe.
               
               
                  BVt heere the Prologue endes,The Queene Mother ledd
                           •
                         out the King the Duke of Aniow, 
                           •
                        onzag
                           ••
                        , Tan
                           •
                        
                        gues, the Coū de Rets calle
                           •
                        , Goudin, into her gardes c
                           ••
                        led Tegliers. and heere begins the plaie,
                  For bloodie mindes reſolued quite to vſe no more delaie.
                  The Mother Queene appeares now firſt vpon the Stage,
                  Vvhere like a diueliſh ſorcereſſe with words demure and ſage
                  The King ſhe cals aſide, with other truſtie mates
                  Into a cloſe and ſecret place, with whom ſhe now debates
                  The great deſire ſhe had to quit them all from care,
                  
                     
In planting long a bloodie plot, which now ſhe muſt declare.
                  "O The Ora
                        
                           •…
                        ion of the Queene mother vnto the King. 
                           •…
                        nd other of 
                           〈◊〉
                         bloodie 
                           •…
                        unſaile. happie light (quoth ſhe) ô thrice moſt happie daie;
                  "Which thus hath thruſt into our hands our long deſired pray:
                  "We haue them all in hold, we haue the chiefeſt faſt:
                  "And thoſe for whom we waited long we haue them all at laſt.
                  "Vvhie ſhould we longer ſtaie? what can we farther craue?
                  "Vvhat are not all things come to paſſe which wee doo long to haue?
                  "Doth not our mightieſt foe lie woūded in his bed,
                  "Not able now to helpe himſelfe, which others long hath led?
                  "The Captaines captiue are, the King of Nauarre ſure;
                  "The Prince of Condee, with the reſt that miſchiefe did procure
                  "Are cloſe within our wals, we haue them in a trap;
                  "Good fortune (loe) hath brought them al, & laid thē in our lap.
                  "By force or flight to ſaue their liues it is too late,
                  "If we (to cut off future feare and cauſe of all debate)
                  "Doo The queen other was good ſcho
                        
                           •…
                         of that 
                           •…
                        uel of Flo
                        
                           •…
                        nce, Ma
                        
                           •…
                        iuel, of 
                           •…
                        bom ſhe 
                           •…
                        rned ma
                           •…
                         bad leſ
                        
                           •…
                        s, as this. take the profered time: which time is onelie now;
                  "And wiſedome matcht with policie our dealings doth allow.
                  "Vve neede not feare the ſpot of anie That a 
                           •…
                        ince muſt 
                           •…
                        t care to 
                           〈◊〉
                         acomp
                        
                           •…
                         cruel, ſo 
                           •…
                        at anie 
                           •…
                        ir came 
                           •…
                        at. 8. The Politico.
                      cruell fame:
                  "So long as we maie feele ſome eaſe or profite by the ſame.
                  "For wiſedome doth allow the Prince to plaie the 
                        
                           〈◊〉
                         
                        Leſſon. 
                        
                           〈◊〉
                         Prince 
                           〈…〉
                         of a Foxe and a Lion: a Foxe to allure and deceiue, a Lion to deuour without 
                           〈…〉
                         occaſion is offered. Foxe,
                  "And Lion-like to rage: but hates the plainneſſe of an Oxe.
                  "Vvhat thogh ye do3. Leſſon, That a Prince may not doubt to forſweare, to deceiue, & 
                           •
                        emble. forſwear? what thogh ye break your faith?
                  "Vvhat thogh ye promiſe life,That a 
                           ••
                        ince muſt 
                           〈◊〉
                         care to Accomp
                        
                           •
                        d cruel, ſo at anie 
                           ••
                        ſit come 
                           •
                        it. 8. The 
                              〈◊〉
                            Politico.
                      & yet repay it with theirThis is a wholſome ſcholemistres for a yong King. death?
                  "Is this ſo great a fault? Naie, naie, no fault at all:
                  "For this we learne we ought to doo, if ſuch occaſions fall.
                  "Our Maſters doo perſwade a4 Leſſ: That a prudent Prince is 
                           〈◊〉
                         to keep faith, where anie ill may grow by it. King to cogge and lie,
                  "And neuer keep his faith, whereas his danger growes thereby.
                  "Cut off therefore the head of this infectious ſore:
                  "So maie you well aſſure your ſelues this Byle wil riſe no more.
                        
                           〈◊〉
                         Leſſon.
                  
                  "The Captaines being ſlaine,Prince 
                           〈…〉
                         the natures of a Foxe and a Lion: a Foxe to allure, and deceiue, a Lion to deuour without 
                           〈…〉
                         ben occaſion is offered. the ſoldiers will be faint;Theſe be the pillars, & this the fruite of Popiſh religiō.
                  
                  
                     
"So ſhall we quicklie on the reſt performe our whole intent.
                  "Plucke vp therefore your ſprites, and play your manlie parts,
                  "Let neither feare nor faith preuaile to dant your warlike harts.
                  "What ſhame is this that I (a woman by my kinde)
                  "Neede thus to ſpeake, or paſſe you men in valure of the minde?
                  "For heere I doo proteſt, if I had bene a man;
                  "I had my ſelfe before this time this murder long began.
                  "Why doo you doubting ſtand, and wherefore doo you ſtaie?
                  "If that you loue your peace, or life; procure no more delaie.
                  "We haue them in our hands, within our Caſtle gates,
                  "Within the wals of Paris towne the maſters & their mates.
                  "This is the onelie time this matter to diſpatch;
                  "But being fled, theſe birds are not ſo eaſie for to catch.
                  "The towne of Paris will moſt gladlie giue conſent,
                  "And threeſcore thouſand fighting men prouide for this intent.
                  "So ſhall we quicklie ſee the ende of all our ſtrife,
                  "And in a moment ſhall diſpatch theſe rebels of their life.
                  "But if we ſtand in feare, and let them ſcape our hand;
                  "They will procure in time to come great trouble in our land:
                  "For if the Admirall his ſtrength receaue againe,
                  "Can anie doubt but that he will be mindfull of his paine?5. Leſſon: That it is a ſimple thing to thinke, that newe benefits can make olde miuries to be forgott
                           •
                        .
                  
                  "It is a ſimple thing for Princes to beleeue
                  "That new goodwil an ancient hate from galled hearts cā driue.
                  "Therefore if we permit theſe Rebels to retire,
                  "We ſoone ſhall ſee by warres againe our Countrie ſet on fire.
                  "This is a womans minde, and thus I thinke it beſt:
                  "Now let vs likewiſe heare I pray the ſentence of the reſt.
                  This counſell of them all was liked paſsing well;
                  And in reſpect of preſent ſtate, all others did excell.
                  Some doubting, muſed long which were the better waie,
                  The King of Nauarre and the Prince of Condee for to ſlaie;
                  Or els to ſaue their liues in hope they would recant:
                  Becauſe the proofe of perfect yeres they both as yet did want.
                  
                     
But It was of 
                           •…
                        oſt thought 
                           •…
                        ſt, partlie 
                           •…
                        r age, partlie 
                           •…
                        r affinitie 
                           •…
                        ake, that the King of Na
                        
                           •…
                        arre ſhould be 
                           •…
                        ued. And for 
                           •…
                        e Prince of 
                           •…
                        ondee, the o
                        
                           •…
                        nion of 
                           •…
                        on
                        
                           •…
                        ague tooke 
                           •…
                        ace that he 
                           •…
                        ould with 
                           •…
                        are of death 
                           〈◊〉
                         drawen frō 
                        
                           •…
                        eligion. here, they did preuaile (as God, no doubt would haue)
                  Vvho thoght it beſt in this aſſalt theſe princely youths to ſaue.
                  Becauſe they were in hope, that when thoſe impes ſhould ſee
                  Their mates tormēted thus, they would moſt willingly agree
                  To bow where they would bind, to go where they would cals
                  And to forſwere their former faith would make no dout at all.
                  But all the reſt remaine condemned for to die
                  Vvhich cruell verdit muſt be put in practiſe preſentlie
                  The It was de
                        
                           •…
                        eed, that this 
                           •…
                        urder ſhould 
                           •…
                        egin about 
                           •…
                        idnight of 
                           •…
                        e night next 
                           •…
                        llowing. night that ſhould inſue then next without delay,
                  Beginning ere the ſame were ſpent long time before the day.
                  The Duke of Guiſe was thought the fitteſt of the traine
                  To take in hand this bloodie plot to haue the godlie ſlaine.
                  Concluding thus, they goe each one vnto his place,
                  The godlie doubting nothing leſſe than this ſo heauie caſe.
               
               
                  HEere is the firſt part plaide; and heere I doo lament,
                  My ſlender ſkill wants fitted phraſe the ſequele to depaint.
                  The Duke in office put begins for to prepare,
                  So that in troopes the armed men ranne buſling here and there
                  With noiſe & threatning words, as though ſome tumult were
                  Preparing now in euerie ſtreete; which made the wiſeſt feare
                  Vvhat would inſue. At length the Admirall did heare
                  This tumult, and not knowing how the truth for to inquire;
                  He ſent vnto the King to know the full intent,
                  Vvhy in the night in riot wiſe theſe armed people went
                  Thus raging in the ſtreetes: and where it were his will?
                  If ſo, he would not feare; but reſt in hope of ſafetie ſtill.
                  "The King returned word, and wilde him not to feare:
                  "For this was done by his aduiſe, yet not in euerie where,
                  "But in ſome certaine waies theſe armed men were ſet:
                  "The fooliſh rage of leaud attempts by this in hope to let.
                  O leaud and filthie lie! vnſeemlie for a King:
                  Vvhat Turke or Diuell could deuiſe, a more vnworthy thing.
                  
                     
For when the Duke of Guiſe had all in order ſet,
                  And nothing reſted which might ſeem their purpoſe for to let:
                  He Marcell calls in haſt, and wills him haue a care
                  That all the maſters of the ſtreetes ere midnight did repaire
                  Vnto the Counſell hall, where they ſhould heare at large
                  Great matters frō the King himſelf of ſtrāge & ſpeciall charge.
                  The meſſage being done, they all without delaie
                  Aſſembled were,This Carron
                           •
                         was made ne
                           •
                         Prouoſt of t
                           •
                         Marchants. to know the thing the Guiſes had to ſaie.
                  Where Prouoſt Carron roſe with ſtomacke ſtout and bolde,
                  And garded with a Guiſian troope, this bloodie meſſage tolde;
                  "My frends (quoth he) giue eare,Carrōs bl
                           ••
                         die crati
                           •
                         to the Cit
                           ••
                        zens of P
                           •••
                        ris. and marke what I ſhall ſaie,
                  "The Kings intent is preſentlie this night without delay,
                  "Thoſe Rebels to deſtroy; which now theſe latter yeeres
                  "Bore armes againſt his Grace: which thogh they be his peeres,
                  "Yet will he quite pull vp, and roote the lawleſſe race
                  "Of thē, that long haue ſought by force his dealings to diſgrace.
                  "And what a happie time (I praie) my mates, is this;
                  "When faſt within our Citie wals the Captaine cloſed is
                  "That ſiercelie brued the broile of this our doubtfull ſtrife,
                  "And manie times hath put vs all in danger of our life?
                  "Their truſt by treaſon trainde, is cauſe of this deceite:
                  "Oh happie ſhe that wrought the molde of this ſo cunning feat.The Que
                           ••
                         mother 
                           〈◊〉
                         the chiefe deuiſer of this blood ſtratagen
                           •
                        
                     
                  
                  "Their frēds will proue their foes, ſweet pleſures wil haue pain;
                  "And being here they are not like to ſee their homes againe.
                  "Their chambers priſons are, their beds ſhall be their graue:
                  "And ere the day appeere we muſt a glorious Conqueſt haue.
                  "Be ſtrong therefore my frends, make ſharpe the fatall knife;
                  "For of theſe Rebels ere the day not one ſhall ſcape with life.
                  "Their leader and their guide lies wounded in his bed,
                  "And therefore as the chiefeſt foe, we'ill firſt haue off his head.
                  "And when we haue diſpatcht the Rebels we haue heere,
                  "We'ill likewiſe ranſack all the Land of like that ſhall appeere.
                  
                     
"This is the Kings intent, this is his Graces minde,
                  "To doo this feate, let him in vs a willing courage finde:
                  "And for a token when this murder ſhall begin,
                  "The warlike trumpet ſhall not ſound,
                        
                           •
                        cck
                           •
                        ſein
                           •
                         
                        
                           ••
                        as the 
                           •
                        reat bell of 
                           •
                        he Pallaice 
                           •
                        hich was 
                           •
                        ccustomed 
                           •
                        o be rong 
                           ••
                        elie for 
                           •
                        reat cauſes nor banner ſhalbe ſeene;
                  "But Tockeſeine ſhalbe heard this bloodie newes to bring,
                  "For then begin, when as you heare this Pallace bell to ring:
                  "The badge which you ſhall bear by which you ſhal be known,
                  "Shalbe a Linnen cloath of white, made faſt about the brawne
                  "Of left ſide arme; and eke, a croſſe vpon your cap,
                  "Of white likewiſe: and theſe keepe faſt what euer chance may hap.
                  "And this is all (my frends) that I haue now to ſaie,
                  "Come follow me, and let's begin and vſe no more delaie.
                  This while the Duke of Guiſe did ſhew his whole intent
                  Vnto the Captaines of the gard, and bad them giue conſent
                  With courage to performe ſo great and famous act;
                  Which ſeruice as the caſe did ſtād, they might not lōg protract
                  Now ſhortlie after this,This Cheua
                        
                           •
                        ier was the 
                           •
                        aſtard ſonne 
                           •
                        f K. Henrie of France. the Duke with manie more
                  (Accompanied with the Cheualier and armed men great ſtore)
                  
                     The Duke of Guiſe and the 
                           •…
                        heualier come 
                           •…
                        o the Amirals 
                           •…
                        ouſe.Came poſting to the gate which C
                           •
                        ſsin tooke to keep,
                  Woe worth the time whē they did truſt the wolfe to gard the ſheepe.
                  The Admiral knew wel the tumult of this rout;
                  Yet this, nor anie thing could make his valiant heart to doubt:
                  For though he had but few, ſcarce tenne within the place;
                  Yet nothing could at all preuaile to make him doubt his caſe.
                  "For oft he would repeate the Kings aſſured loue,The Admiral aduertiſed of this 
                           •
                        tir, comfor
                        
                           •
                        eth himſelf & his copa
                        
                           •
                        y, with the 
                           ••
                        mēbrance of the kings 
                           •
                        oue & his 
                           •
                        aths often 
                           •
                        iuen for keep
                        
                           •
                        ng the peace.
                  
                  "Approoued by ſo manie ſignes as you haue heard aboue:
                  "What though the Cōmons riſe? what thogh the tumult rage?
                  "When they ſhal ſee the princes gard, their malice wil aſſwage.
                  "I know the King will not by treaſon falſe his faith,
                  "Thogh for the ſame there might enſue the hazard of his death.
                  "The oath that he hath ſworne ſo oft to keepe the peace,
                  "No Chriſtian conſcience can aſſent at all for to releaſe.
                  
                     
"His mother gaue her faith, his brothers ſware likewiſe,
                  "The publique recordes of the Land doo witneſſe this deuiſe.
                  "What band may ſurer be? what more may you deſire?
                  "What can we farther wiſh? And yet if more you doo require
                  "The Queene of England is a witnes of the ſame,
                  "The Prince of Aurendge,
                     The marriage of the Kings ſister was ſolemn
                           •…
                         ſed but ſixe daies before
                           •…
                        
                      & the States that from the Germaines came;
                  "This Royal match likewiſe my hart doth wel aſſure
                  "That ſuch a ſeale of perfect loue for euer will indure:
                  "Which marriage latelie made with counſell graue and good,
                  "The King will not permit to be ſo ſoone defilde with blood.
                  "For what would ſtrangers ſaie if ſuch things ſhould befall?
                  "But ſuch things Lord be farre from vs, & Lord preſerue vs all?
                  "What would the future age of impes as yet vnborne;
                  "What would all Nations thinke, if we by truſt ſhould be forlorne?
                  "The ſtout and conſtant minde, & honor of the King
                  "Will neuer giue conſent I know to doo ſo leaud a thing.
                  Thus whileſt among the reſt the caſe he did debate,
                  His truſtie keeper Coſsin came and knocked at his gate.
                  Who was no ſooner come within the outward dore,
                  But that there came in after him of armed men great ſtore.
                  Then after went the Lords, the Nobles, and the reſt;
                  For to diſpatch this noble man, whom they did moſt deteſt.
                  And thoſe whom Coſsin found within to lie or ſtand,
                  He ſlew them with a Partiſan which he had in his hand.
                  Which wofull newes when as the Admirall perceiude,The Admiral
                           ••
                         perceiuing the treaſon that was in tended againſt him, prepareth himſelfe with cōfort to receaue his death, and patientlie commēdeth his ſoule to God, whileſt his enemies were a breaking open the dores vpon him.
                  
                  "Wo worth the time (quoth he) that I by truſt haue been deceiude.
                  "Wel, now the time is come, I may no longer doubt;
                  "Come lend your help, my frends (I pray) frō bed to lift me out.
                  "To Chriſt my onelie hope my ſoule I doo betake,
                  "And in this place from off my couch this life I will forſake.
                  "Then ſtāding on his feet his night gown on his back:
                  "Shift for your ſelues my frends (quoth he) that you goe not to wrack.
                  
                     
"And haue no care for me; for I am well content
                  "This life to yeeld vnto the Lord, which he to me hath lent.
                  "It greeues me not to die, Gods will is alwaie beſt;
                  "From future feares I know with Chriſt my ſoule ſhalbe in reſt.
                  "This plot is not preparde alone to murder me;
                  "But for the raſing of that truth, which they are loath to ſee.
                  "The godlie for to ſpoile which haue receaude the word,
                  "Theſe tyrants ſeeke with cruel hate by falſhood and by ſword.
                  "Which word vnto my power I alwaies did defend▪
                  
                  "The mallice of which godly courſe hath broght me to my end.
                  "Which doth reioyce my heart & ſoule exceedinglie;
                  "That for his truth the Lord hath thought me worthy for to die.
                  "For though our ſinnes doo cauſe theſe troubles in our land:
                  "Yet ſhall theſe tyrants not eſcape the Lords reuenging hand.
                  "And though our God doo ſeeme from vs to hide his face,
                  "And armes our foes with cruell death his people to diſgrace:
                  "Yet if we be content, his mercie will retire.
                  "Haue mercie Lord vpon thy Church, ô Chriſt I thee deſire.
                  "And you ô traitors vilde that laide this trothleſſe traine,
                        
                           ••
                        e Admi
                        
                           ••
                        l inua
                           •
                        
                        
                        
                           ••
                         againſt 
                           〈◊〉
                         wicked 
                           •
                        aſon of 
                           〈◊〉
                         Queene 
                           •
                        ther, the 
                           ••
                        ng, and 
                           〈◊〉
                         Duke Guiſe.
                  
                  "Againſt the Lord haue lifted vp your wicked harts in vaine.
                  "For you are puffed vp with hope that is not ſure;
                  "For theſe our paines, you ſhal receaue the pains that ſhal indure.
                  "And you that dare to lift your hands againſt the Lord,
                  "Before your death moſt iuſtlie ſhall of all men be abhord.
                  "Though yet you doo not feele the ſentence that is due
                  "To this your bloodie traitors act, yet know that you ſhall rue
                  "Your breach of plighted faith, your deepe diſſembling hart;
                  "There is a God will iudge vs all, that will reuenge our ſmart.
                  "The paine that we receaue doth breed eternall ioy;
                  "But for the wrōg that you haue done the Lord wil you deſtory
                  "O Lord confirme my faith, which now muſt here be tride;
                  "Reach me thy hand (ô Chriſt) that I from thee may neuer ſlide.
                  
                     
"My fearfull fleſh is weake, my heart and will is preſt:
                  "Forſake me not my God, but now receaue me to thy reſt.
                  "Let not this irkſome ſhade, this darke and dolefull night
                  "Keepe from my heart in this aſſault thy ſweete & pleſant light:
                  "For though the worldlie Sunne mine eie ſhall ſee no more,
                  "Thy bleſſed Sonne let me enioy, whom I by faith adore.
                  "And whereas I diſpaire no more to ſee the day,
                  "In ſteed of that, thy louing face ſhew me (my God) I praie.
                  "Loe then, a bleſſed chance, and happie change for me;
                  "That from this vale of wretched life with Chriſt in ioy ſhalbe.
                  "Now let theſe traitors come, the feare of death is paſt;
                  "And fainting fleſh that did rebell, hath yee 
                        
                           •
                        
                      ded at the laſt.
                  "Now doth my ſoule reioice, my heart moſt gladlie ſaie;
                  "Thou Sonne of God, my Sauiour come, my Chriſt now come thy waie?
                  "For here againe to thee my ſoule I do commend,
                  "And to thy poore afflicted Church ô Lord thy mercie ſend.
                  "So ſhall they be at reſt, ſo ſhall they praiſe thy name;
                  "Let not theſe tyrants longer Lord thy ſeruants put to ſhame.
                  "Leaſt they doo proudlie bragge, and ſaie within their heart;
                  "Vvher is the God whō they do ſerue, that now ſhuld take their part.
                  "Come quicklie Lord therefore, & make no more delay
                  "To ende theſe fierce and bloodie broiles; Amen, Amen, I ſaie.
                  By this came vp the ſtaires ere ended were his words,Three wicked, varlets brake into the Adm
                           ••
                        rals chamber, whoſe names were, Benui
                              •
                           
                         a Germaine, Coſſin a Gaſcoine, Attin a Picard.
                  
                  One Benuiſe & two other mates with targets & with ſwords.
                  The chamber broken vp, this Benuiſe ſwearing came
                  Vvith ſword drawn to the Admirall, & asking for his name;
                  Art thou the Admirall? the man not much appalde,
                  Vvith quiet minde gaue anſwere thus; Indeed ſo am I calde.
                  Then ſeeing Benuiſe bend his naked ſword to ſlaie,
                  My frend (quoth he) that bloodie blade I pray thee for to ſtaie,The Admira
                           •
                         laſt words.
                  
                  And haue reſpect vnto my age, and weake eſtate
                  To which by treaſon wrought by trust I haue bin drawn of late.
                  
                     
But beaſtlie Benuiſe would to this no anſwere giue:
                  But ſwearing, to this Noble man his pointed ſword let driue,
                  And thruſt him to the heart:The cruell and 
                           ••
                        wardly mur
                        
                           •
                        er of the Ad
                        
                           ••
                        irall. but yet not fullie dead,
                  With force he laid a mightie blow & ſtrake him on the head.
                  With that came Attin in with Piſtoll in his hand,
                  And ſhot him in the wounded breaſt; yet did he ſtoutlie ſtand:
                  Till Benuiſe came againe with third repeated wound:
                  And ſlaſht him on the thigh: which done, he fel vnto the groūd
                  Where he gaue vp the ghoſt. The bloodie Guiſe that ſtaid
                  This while within the lower court, with lifted voice now ſaid
                  Hoe Benuiſe haſt thou done? who ſtraightwaie did replie,
                  Yea ſir this happie deed is done, and that moſt perfectlie.
                  Then ſaid the Duke of Guiſe Come throw him down to me:
                  That where it be the ſame, or not, we here may quicklie ſee:
                  For now our Cheualier will thinke it but a lie,
                  Except at window throwen out he ſee him with his eie.
                  Then Benuiſe, with his mates to put them out of doubt,
                  Tooke vp this bloodie corſe: & ſo from window caſt him out.
                  Where from his wounded head ſprang out ſo freſh a flood,
                  That vizard-like his face was all imbrued with goarie blood.
                  Whereby they could not well at firſt diſcerne his face:
                  Till that the Duke of Guiſe himſelfe firſt kneeling in the place
                  Had with his napkin wipte the clotted blood awaie,
                  And ſearching viewed euerie part; he roſe without delay,
                  And crying to his crue deuoide of feare and ſhame:
                  It's he (my frends) I know him well, truſt me it is the ſame.
                  The Duke deſcending then from out the ſtately gates,
                  With bloodie hart and curſed mouth he cride vnto his mates;
                  "O happie lucke that we ſo good beginnings haue,
                        
                           •
                        e wicked 
                           •
                        eches of 
                           •
                        e bloodie 
                           ••
                        iſe after 
                           •
                        e murder 
                           •
                        he Ad
                        
                           ••
                        rall.
                  
                  "Lo Fortune frames her willing hand to giue that we do craue.
                  "And ſith it pleaſde the fates at firſt ſuch hap to ſend,
                  "It giues me cauſe of future hope to ſee ſome happie end.
                  
                     
"Come on my valiant hearts, ſo place your warlike bands,
                  "That marching forward to the reſt, not one may ſcape our hāds
                  "This is the Kings decree, this hath he giuen out;
                  "We do no more than he commands, to put you out of doubt;
                  "Let pitie take no place till Rebels all be rid,
                  "Thus ſaith the king, feare not therfore to do what he doth bid.
                  "Let nothing now preuaile to dant your hardie minde;
                  "No,The right picture of bloodie Tyrant. though with teares they pitie craue, let thē no mercie find.
                  "Haue no remorſe vnto the yong ne yet the olde;
                  "Without regard to anie one to kill them all be bolde.
                  "Now ſanctifie your ſwords, and bath them in the blood
                  "Of theſe religious Rebels, which do meane the King no good.
                  "So ſhall we quicklie finde a path to perfect peace;
                  "So ſhall we ſee aſſured meanes at length to liue at eaſe:
                  "For if we can recount the troubles that are paſt;
                  "Then happie time wherein we may diſpatch them all at laſt.
                  Vvhich ſaid; he bad in haſt the Tockeſein for to ring,
                  Vvich ſounding bell appointed was the fatall newes to bring
                  Vvhen as this raging rout this murder ſhould begin:
                  Vvhich they performde, as though they had no men, but monſters bin.
                  And therewithall deuiſe a larum for to raiſe
                  Pretending with ſome ſolemne lie the people for to pleaſe.
                  So now the trumpets ſound this lie and ſhamefull thing,
                  That certaine traitors were in armes about to kill the King.
                  Heere,Gonzagues a Italian cut of the Admiral head, & ſent it to the Pope. one among the reſt from Rome that latelie came,
                  (Deſirous by ſome valiant act perhaps to get a name)
                  Cut off the bleeding head (imbrude with reaking blood)
                  Of that moſt worthie Admirall in hope to doo ſome good;
                  And ſent it ſtraight to Rome as Lorraine had requirde,The Cardin. of Lorraine.
                  
                  A preſent welcome to the Pope, which he had long deſirde.
                  His hands cut off by ſome, by ſome his ſecrete parts,
                  Declares what hate to ſhining light lies hid in blinded harts.
                  
                     
His hackt and mangled corpes by ſpace of certaine daies
                  Vvas dragde by raſcals all along the ſtreetes and filthie waies.
                  At length this ruſticke rage, as furie thought it meete;
                  At common gallowes of the towne did hang him by the feete.
                  Thus came this Noble man to this vnworthie death,
                  Thus doo the Papiſts learn to break the vow of plighted faith.
               
            
            
               The Admirall being ſlaine, they likewiſe murdred most cruellie not
onelie all ſuch frends, Phiſitians, Preachers, and al other that were
found hidden in the Admirals lodging, but alſo as manie as were
ſuſpected to be of that religion within the towne or anie where els,
were lamentablie put to the ſword, as here folowing we may plainlie
ſee.
               
                  THeſe furies frying thus,
               yet thus were not content:
               But in the houſe, from place to place,
               like greedie hounds they went.
               To ſearch the chambers all
               and corners of receipt;
               That from the wolfe the ſheep might ſaue
               his throate by no deceipt.
               And ſuch as ſleeping were found naked in their bed,
               Or gone to hide or ſaue themſelues they firſt cut of their head,
               And after fiercelie pierſt with wounds both great and deepe;
               Vvhich being done, like cruell currs they throw thē on a heap.
               Among which wofull troope two Noble youths there were
               And Pages of moſt worthie birth which likewiſe died there.
               Vvith theſe, among the reſt a man of noble fame,
               The Countie Rouchfoucault was forſt at length to taſt the ſame.
               Vvhom for his pleaſant wit the King did ſeeme to loue;
               Yet in this furie nothing might the King to mercie moue.
               
                  
But now in haſt muſt be to death vntimelie ſent,
               To yeeld againe vnto the Lord the life that he had lent.
               So him at firſt De Nance commanded was to kill;
               But he moſt ſtoutlie didMounſier De Nance Captaine of the gard, refuſeth to kill the Countie Rouchfoucault. refuſe this guiltleſſe blood to ſpill.
               
                  His ſpeeches vſed both priuatelie to his frends, and alſo to the King vpon the refuſall. "Shall I, ſaid he, conſent to doo this fearfull thing
               "To ſhed this blood, becauſe I am commanded by the King?
               "No, God forbid, I know I haue a ſoule to ſaue;
               "So bloodie ſpot, to ſaue my life my name ſhall neuer haue.
               "I know there is a day, a day thatReu. 6. 10. Saints deſire;
               "When of our deeds the king aboue a reckoning will require.
               "Obaie the
                  Rom. 13. 1 
                  King; that's true,1. Pet. 2. 13 in things that honeſt be:
               "When I obey in wicked heſts,Tit. 3. 1. wo worth the time to me.
               "For Ioab did not well2. Sam. 11 16. King Dauid to obay,
               "When wickedlie the King him bad Vriah for to ſlay.
               "Thoſe Elders did offend which ſhewde themſelues too prone,
               "Thoſe wicked letters to obey poore1. King. 21▪ 11. 
                  Naboth for to ſtone.
               "And curſed1. Sam. 22 18. 
                  Doeg which obaide a wicked will,
               "Shall curſed ſtand for that he did the Lords annointed kill.
               "A murder to be done the King doth now requeſt,
               "My God cōmands the contrary: now which to chuſe wer beſt?
               "The King doth threaten death, and God doth threaten hell,
               "If for the King I ſhould forſake my God, ſhould I doo well?
               "Vvhat others ſee ô King,His ſpeeches to the king. I cannot well diuine,
               "To kill the vncondemned man it is no charge of mine.
               "To ſlaie my deadlie foe except there were ſome cauſe
               "I would not yeeld; much leſſe my frēd againſt our ſacred laws.
               "What enuie doth report, ô King I cannot ſaie;
               "But this my frend a faithfull man to me hath been alwaie.
               "Therefore I praie your Grace your rigor to aſſwage,
               "Or bid ſome other whom you liſt to execute your rage.
               "In matters that be good if that you liſt to vſe
               "My ſeruice, you ſhall ſee that I no perill will refuſe.
               
                  
Therefore I praie your Grace this anſwere for to take,
                     
                        •
                     . Sam. 22. 17.
               
               Which vnto Saule his Soldiers once were not afraid to make:
               
                  De Nance to kill his frend no wight ſhall euer ſee,
               Though for refuſall he were ſure beheaded for to be.
               Take heed (ô noble King) what ſprite you follow now;
               Let no man force you doo the thing that God doth diſallow.
               While good king Dauid was by whoredome brought a ſleep,
               He did the thing, which being wakt did force his hart to weep
               While Saule in mallice was againſt good Dauid bent,
               He ranne to that which afterward with teares he did lament.
               And whileſt that Iezabel great miſchiefe did intend
               Againſt poore Naboth, ſhe at laſt came to a fearfull ende.
               Looke well therefore (ô King) before you leap too farre,
               Leaſt in the end this teſtie ſcab do breed a laſting ſcarre.
               Well I can ſaie no more, but God preſerue your Grace,
               And graunt your ſoule when breath is gone with him a reſting place.
               But this could not preuaile this noble man to ſaue,Whē De Nāce 
                        •
                     ad refuſed to 
                        ••
                     l the Countie Rouchfeucault 
                        •
                     ne Laberg an duernois offe.
               
               For bloodie Doeg did attend his office for to haue.
               For which, an Auernois a man of cuſed fame
               Made offer there, before the King that he would do the ſame.
               The King was well content this office for to giue
               To him,
                     
                        •
                     ed to do it, if the K. would giue him his of 
                        •
                     ice, which was to be Captaine of the horſmen ſo that this Noble man of life he would bereaue.
               We ſee how Sathan doth by glorie mixt with gaine,
               Worke to procure this worthy wight the ſooner to be ſlaine.
               There fell in this aſſault (for mallice to the truth)
               
                  Theligni famous for his wit,The death of Theligni ſonne in lawe to the Admirall. a rare and paſsing youth:
               Who for his manlie heart and courage did excell:
               For which, the King in outward ſhewe did ſeeme to loue him wel.
               Now when the time was come that martird he ſhuld be.
               "With courage bold,The wordes of Theligni vttered before his deth he ſmiling ſaid; O welcome death to me.
               "It grieues me for to liue ſince faith from Princelie ſeate
               "Abandonde is, and in her place raignes falſhood and deceite.
               
                  
"It grieues me for to ſee this ſad and irkſome daie,
               "Wherein ſo great and famous King, a traitors part ſhuld play.
               "It grieues me for to heare poore ſoules deceiued crie
               "Too late,The Admirall at firſt doubting ſome policie and il meaning, ſtaide a while, & durst not truſt the King: but at length euercome with the perſwaſions of Theligni his ſonne in law, & other his frends that there could be no hurt ment, they all being deceiued with the Kings curteſies, he yeelded and came in vpon truſt. for that they did too much on Princes oath relie.
               "Woe worth my harmleſſe heart too ſoone that did beleeue,
               "And to the kings diſſembling words too ſoone did credit giue.
               "Woe worth the wicked time when firſt I did begin
               "To worke the meanes, for to perſwade my father to come in.
               "Woe worth my lying tongue which firſt aſſaid to bring
               "My fearfull Father in the minde, that he ſhould truſt the King.
               "How oft did I commend the Kings aſſured loue?
               "How did I thinke that nothing might vs frō the ſame remoue?
               "How oft did I recount the Kings repeated oath?
               "How many frendly ſignes were ſeene of force to bind vs both?
               "How often did I vrge there was no cauſe of feare,
               "Becauſe for this we ſaw the King moſt willing for to ſweare?
               "But ſith it is too late this error to lament,
               "My truſting hath deſerued death; and therefore am content.
               "Sith I am not the firſt whom truſt hath thus betraid,
               "To ſuffer death for no offence I am the leſſe diſmaide.
               "And ſince my greateſt hope hath wrought me moſt deſpite,
               "What ſhall I ſaie? I ſaie no more: but Lord receaue my ſprite.
               Thus came this noble impe vntimelie to his graue,
               For that he to aBeware of the guilfull promiſes of the Papiſts. Papiſts oath too great afliance gaue
               And thus fell manie moe of Nobles here and there,
               Whoſe names & valiant acts, were now to lōg for to declare.
               Thus did thoſe lawleſſe bands go raging vp and downe
               From houſe to houſe, they ſought to ſpoyl the welthieſt of the town.
               So they that beggers were when firſt this ſtirre began,
               At laſt with rich and flowing welth the chiefeſt credit wan.
               This while the Duke of Guiſe theſe words repeated ſtill,
               With crying voice, Kill, kill the knaues, this is the princes wil.
               
                  
And leaſt the ſouldiers ſhould waxe faint with bloodie toile;
               "Now rid thē al my frēds (quoth he) & you ſhal haue the ſpoile.
               Thus did they all a day from morning vnto night
               With bloodie ſwords runne vp and down: no doubt a heauie ſight.
               They ſpared none they knew, no ſex could pitie finde,
               The rufull crie of tender babes could not aſſwage their minde.
               In great triumphing ioye of this their warlike feate,
               The bodies ſlain frō windowes hie they throw into the ſtreat.
               So that there was no way, no lane or paſſage by;
               Vvhere murdred men you might not ſee in heaps together lie.
               Now whilſt within the towne theſe things a dooing were;
               The King of Nauarre and the Prince of Condee did appeere
               Before the King.
                     
                        •
                     he King of 
                        •
                     auarre, and 
                        〈◊〉
                      Prince of 
                        ••
                     onde
                        •
                      were 
                        〈◊〉
                      to the king For ſo before it was agreed
               To ſaue theſe youths to farther hope the counſell had decreed.
               For they their lodging had within the Caſtle wall;
               Vvhich for defence is alway thought the ſureſt place of all.
               Theſe Princes being gone,
                     
                        •
                     heſe Princes 
                        〈◊〉
                     , frends, 
                        〈◊〉
                     , with all 
                        ••
                     eir ret
                        •
                     nue 
                        〈◊〉
                      moſt cru
                     
                        ••
                     lie ſlaine. and onelie had awaie,
               The reſt were left vnto the ſword to die without delaie:
               Their ſeruants & their frends, their tutors with the reſt
               Could not preuaile to ſaue their liues by ſute ne yet requeſt;
               But thruſt without the dores, and kneeling in the place,
               The gard of Switzers ſlew them all before the Princes face.
               And ſtill betweene the ſtroke they cried all amaine
               Vpon the Kings fidelitie; but faith was calde in vaine.
               Yet none amongſt them all ſo much lamented was,
                     
                        •
                     he lamenta
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      murder of 
                        •
                     onſieur De
                        •
                     uilles.
               
               As Mounſieur de Pilles that he ſhould come vnto ſo hard a paſſe.
               Becauſe among the reſt he paſt them all ſo farre
               For godlie zeale in truth, and eke for proweſſe in the warre.
               Vvho lying in his bed ſomwhat before the day,
               And hearing noiſe of armed men leapt out to ſee the fray:
               And marking well the voyce in place and time of truce,
               Of cries and killings euerie where, it made him much to muſe.
               
                  
Vvhich dump De Nance did break, who did this meſſage bring
               That ſtraight to void the place he was cōmanded by the king;
               And that he ſhould depart (his weapons left behinde)
               From out the Court and Caſtle gate ful ſore againſt his minde.
               Vvhich was no ſooner ſaid but Pilles was forced out
               Among the bloodie weapons of that rude vnrulie rout.
               To hope for longer life he ſaw it was but vaine:
               He ſaw ſuch cruell rage, and eke the bodies that were ſlaine?
               Vvhere lifting vp his voice, ſo that the King might heare,
               Theſe words he ſpake before them al, deuoid of fainting feare.
               "O falſe vnworthie King,The vehement word of Monſieur De Pilles, vppon the Kings traitrous infidelitie. ô whelpe of ſauage kinde!
               "O traitrous heart in kinglie breaſt! ô baſe polluted minde!
               "Is this a Princelie part, by treaſon to procure
               "The murder of thy chiefeſt frends? Is this thy Popiſh lure,
               "To traine vs in by truſt, to thruſt vs thus to death?
               "Is this thy ſolemne Kinglie oath? is this a Princes faith?
               "Is this thy frendlie cheere? Is this thy fawning face?
               "Is this the fruite of Romiſh faith? ô falſe diſſembling race!
               "And dooſt thou honor ſo thy ſiſters ſpouſall daie?
               "And couldſt thou finde no other time thy treaſons to bewraie?
               "Is this the truſt that is in mother, ſonne, and kinn?
               "Let France thē curſe the man that did firſt bring this kinred in.
               "How are thy wits bewitcht? what furie doth inrage
               "Thy tigers heart, that nothing can thy thirſt but blood aſſwage?
               "And waſt thou not afraid to giue thy leaud conſent
               "To murder them, which to beleeue thy promiſe were content?
               "Vvhere are thy frendlie words? where is thy feined loue?
               "Vvhat, hath thy flintie heart forgot there is a God aboue?
               "And thinkſt that thou ſhalt ſhed our guiltleſſe blood in vaine?
               "Shall not the Lord (ô wretch) of thee require the ſame againe?
               "How dareſt thou to behold the creatures of the Lord;
               "Vvhen for thy falſe and bloodie fact this place ſhalbe abhorde?
               
                  
"What anſwere canſt thou make to this vnhappie towne,
               "Which for thy traitrous act ſhall looſe his glorie & renowne?
               "What anſwere canſt thou giue to manie a weeping childe?
               "To manie matrones husbandles what reaſon canſt thou yeeld?
               "And deemſt thou not that God will plague this ſinfull land
               "For this our blood? & fearſt thou not Gods iuſt reuēging hand?
               "Yes though at this our greefe thou proudlie now doo ieſt,
               "Yet God will not forget the blood of them that be oppreſt.Pſal. 19. 12
               
               "Did Ioab die in peace that had by treaſon ſlaine
               "Two noble men?
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      Sam. 3. 27 & 20. 10. Did not his blood requite the ſame againe?
               "Did Abſ
                        •
                     lom likewiſe that wrought his brothers death
               "By treaſon,
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      Ki. 2. 34. vnder frendlie ſhow, and falſing plighted faith,
               "Thus proſper long?
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      Sam. 13 28. No, no, for God did quicklie ſend
               "To this rebellious wicked wretch a ſwift and fearfull end.Sam 18. 9
               
               "Be ſure therefore of this, and marke what Pilles hath ſaid,
               "That this our blood by ſhedding of thy blood ſhalbe repaid.
                     
                        •
                     onſieur De 
                        •
                     lies prophe
                     
                        •
                     eth the kings 
                        •
                     rrible death which ſhortlie 
                        •
                     fter came in
                     
                        •
                     ed ſo to paſſe
               
               Which ſaid, from off his backe he put a coſtlie cloke,
               And to a frend among the preſſe, the ſame thus ſaying toke.
               Take this, and let the ſame a token ſtill remaine,
               That Pilles thy frend by treaſon was here moſt vniustlie ſlaine.
               With that he did commend his ſoule vnto the Lord,
               Vpon his knees with lifted eies ſtill waiting for the ſword.
               Then one of Princes gard to end this bitter ſtrife,Monſieur De 
                        •
                     illes murdred 
                        〈◊〉
                      one of the 
                        •
                     ard with a Partiſan.
               
               Thruſt thorough Pilles with partiſan, who yeelded ther his life?
               This was the cruell ende of that moſt famous man;
               To read the ſame without remorſe, I thinke no creature can.
               This Rout in Paris ſtreates which poſted vp and downe,
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      Hundreth 
                        ••
                     ouſes in Paris 
                        ••
                     icked.
               
               Foure hūdred houſes ſacked haue within that wicked towne.
               The King therewith directs his letters out in poſt,
               To Cities all his meſſage flies in haſt to euerie coaſt,The king commanded al C
                        •
                     
                     
                     
                        ••
                     es in his land to follow the example of Paris, in murdring as manie as profeſſed the reformed religion.
               
               That they (as Paris had) with murder ſhould oppreſſe
               
                  
As manie in their townes, as did the Goſpell there profeſſe.
               Which leaud and bloodie charge, a wonder is to ſee,
               How glad and willing to obaie moſt townes and Cities be.
               But one among the reſt,The butcherlie murder committed vpon the profeſſors of the Goſpel at Li
                        •
                     ns in France. a place of ancient fame,
               Did Lion-like behaue her ſelfe, as Lions was her name.
               For though in other townes by murder manie fell;
               Yet Lions for her cruell hart, all others did excell.
               Where then, vnhappie then, a Lion as the chiefe
               One Mandelot was Gouernor a blacke and bloodie theefe,Mand
                        •
                     lot Gouernor at 
                        〈◊〉
                     
                  
               
               Vvho hauing once receiude theſe letters from the King,
               Vvith greedy mind, he ſets abroach this vile vnworthie thing.
               Vvho cauſed out of hand his Crier to proclaime
               That al within the towne which did the Goſpel then maintain
               Should preſentlie reſort vnto a certaine place
               Vvhere Mandelot would haue them al appeere before his face.
               This meſſage being done, the godlie doo obay,
               And to the place appointed them they came without delaie,
               Vvhere Mandelot they found with viſage pale and ſad,
               Vvho nothing ſaid, but bids them all to priſon to be had.
               The godlie trapped thus, and thus to thraldome ſent;
               As ſheepe vnto the ſlaughter they to priſon meeklie went.
               Vvhere lying in the Clinke their feete and hands were bound,
               And by the cruell Iailors were laid proſtrate on the ground.
               Then Mandelot commands the hangman for to call,
               Vvhom he enioynes to enter in with axe to kill them all.
               But this ſo fearfull fact the hangman did refuſe,
               "And bad him for ſo wicked act ſome fitter man to chuſe.The cōm
                        •
                     n hangman of Lions, had more grace & h
                        •
                     neſtie th
                        ••
                      Mandelot the Gouernor
               
               "For I will not defile my hands with guiltleſſe blood,
               "Nor giue conſent (ſaid he) to doo the thing that is not good.
               "On ſuch as are condemnde by Iuſtice and by law,
               "I onelie am in publicke place my deadlie blade to draw.
               "The man repelled thus, inuents another waie;
               
                  
"He wills the ſouldiers of the towne theſe priſners for to ſlaie:
               "But they likewiſe replide;The garriſon ſouldiers alſo refuſe to commit this vilde 
                        ••
                     urther. that they would not diſtaine
               "The glorie of their martial feates, with fame that they had ſlain
               "Poore ſimple naked men bound proſtrate at their feete,
               "It is a ſeruice (ſir ſaie they) for ſouldiours farre vnmeete:
               "And therefore if you haue this murder thus decreed,
               "Chuſe out ſome other men that liſt performe ſo hard a deed.
               "Yet if in Rebell ſort their banners were diſplaide,
               "To put them all vnto the ſword we would not be afraid.
               "But now ſith that we know no fault that they haue done,
               "Let them (for vs) proceed heerein that haue the ſame begun.
               Againe refuſed thus, the man with furie bent,
               For all the butchers of the towne, he ſtraight his meſſage ſent.
               To whom in ſauage ſort his minde he did vnfolde;
               And had them goe & kill them all whom he had laid in holde.The butchers more cruell & 
                        •
                     loodie, than 
                        •
                     ither hangmā 
                     
                        •
                     r ſouldiers, obey this wicked Tyrant, in committing this horrible murder.
               
               Theſe beaſtlie butchers then no conſcience made at al▪
               
               But with their blodie butchering kniues like tigers they do fall
               Vpon theſe ſillie ſoules, in murder fiercelie bent,
               Not like to men, but rather as ſome furies had been ſent
               From hell, to ſtop the courſe of Gods afflicted word;
               So quicklie did theſe helhounds put theſe people to the ſword.
               Here ſome that proſtrate were, and did for mercie crie,
               And other ſome vnto the Lord that lift their voices hie,
               They killed not, but did their hands cut off at firſt,
               And after chopt in ſauage ſort with blood to quēch their thirſt
               Such ſhrikes and wailing cries from priſons did rebound,
               That euerie corner of the towne might hear their woful ſoūd.
               The mournfull mothers wept, whom nature did compell,
               To ſee theſe hoūds before their face their louing babes to quel
               The tender infant doth for help to father crie,
               The wofull father cannot helpe his childe before he die.
               The husband to his wife, the frend to frend doth call,
               
                  
With heauie ſighes lamenting this their moſt vnhappie fall.
               And they that ſtrongeſt are to weake doo comfort giue,
               That ſo they may be ſugred words their fainting harts relieue.
               Of theſe captiued ſoules ſuch was the piteous plight,
               That verie Papiſts did lament to ſee this cruell ſight.
               And ſome that loude the Pope, theſe dealings did deteſt;
               Who for their credit did not thinke this rigor to be beſt.
               And manie women of the towne deuoide of crime
               With horror of this ſodain feare, had child before their time.
               For from the commonThe blood was ſeene to runne warme & ſmoking through the ſtreetes of the towne into the riuer of Some. Gaole in ſight of ſhining Sunne,
               The ſmoking bloud from ſtreat to ſtreat with grief was ſeen to runne.
               But one amongſt the reſt, an old & aged man
               CaldeThe valiant & conſtant death of Francis Collute marchāt of caps with 2. yong men his ſons 
                  Francis Collute, for his faith a laſting credit wan.
               To whom with bloodie axe when butchers did reſort,
               Vpon his Sonnes with teares he fell, and did them thus exhort;
               "You know (quothThe godlie & zealous oration of Francis Collute to his 2 ſonnes, lying with them vpon the ground, readie to be ſacrificed. he) my Sonnes, what pain & tender care
               "Your louing Father from your youth hath had for to prepare
               "Your hearts to know the Lord, his truth to intertaine;
               "Which farre ſurmounteth fading wealth, & hope of worldlie gaine.
               "Now is our harueſt in, now muſt our fruite appeere,
               "Now wil the Lord require accompt how we haue liued here.
               "The finall axe is laid to roote of falling tree;
               "And how we hav the truth imbrac't, the world forthwith muſt ſee.
               "Be ſtrong therefore my Sonnes, refuſe not profred death;
               "Which from the Lord is ſent to be a triall of our faith.
               "But how ſhould we be ſtrong, when fleſh doth dailie fall?
               "O Lord increaſe our faith, that we maie come when thou doſt call.
               "And from the Lord I know this butchring axe is ſent,
               "Who Sathans ſword hath loſed now no doubt for ſome intēt.
               "This is no new deuiſe which Sathan puts in vre;
               "For they that will imbrace the truth of this ſhall ſtill be ſure.
               "For vnto Truth belongs both fier, ſword and racke,
               "And naked Truth hath alwaies tied a whip vnto her backe.
               
                  
"The ages that are paſt doo yet declare the ſame,
               "Whoſe conſtant death for Chriſt, depaints the glorie of their name.
               "For as the ſillie ſheepe betweene the Lions iawes.
               "And like the meek & wailing doue in goſhauks greedie pawes
               "So is the preſent ſtate of Chriſts afflicted flocke,
               "Who are content with Chriſt to lay their head vnto the block
               "Feare not therefore to taſt this cup of ioyfull paine,
               "That with the Lord in laſting ioy we all may meete againe.
               "Let nothing force your faith from Chriſt to goe aſtraie,
               "For I your Father (as your guide) will lead you firſt the waie.
               "One houſe hath helde vs all, one Chriſt hath been our ioy;
               "This ſweete and noble vnion let Sathan not deſtroy.
               "And let vs ioyne in one this death for to imbrace,
               "So ioynd with Chriſt we ſhalbe ſure with him to haue a place.
               "I was not he that gaue your vſe of liuelie breath;
               "I am not he that ſets the time and order of your death.
               "It is the Lord alone, which will reſtore againe
               "A better life, if for his law by death we ſuffer paine.
               "Come, let vs gladlie giue our throate vnto the knife;
               "And for our Chriſt let vs reioyce to leaue this wretched life.
               "And ſaie you all with me; ô Lord from theſe our bands,
               "Receaue (we praie) our ſinfull ſoules into thy bleſſed hands.
               "And lend vs Lord thy grace and mercie to the end,
               Thy bleſſed helpe to come to thee, ô Lord of mercie ſend.
               And this repeating oft the butchers with their blade,
               Their bodies then with deadlie woūds a bloody preſent made.
               Then ioyning on the ground they claſped all in one;
               Where groueling lay in folded armes the father with the ſonn
               Which ſodaine heauie chance ſuch wofull ſight did giue,
               That iuſt remorſe of cauſeles death a flinty hart would grieue.
               Thus hath this bleſſed man receaud a happie place;
               The Lord grant vs that be behinde like portion of his grace.
               Amen.
            
            
               
               A cruell, cowardlie, and traitrous murder, committed in Angiers
in France, vpon one Maſſon de Riuers a famous and godlie preacher,
by a wicked enemie called Monſorrell, who was ſent by the
King to Angiers in poſt, to commit the like murder there, as was
in Paris.
               
                  NOw Lions fare thou well,
               to Angiers will I goe,
               Wherein alſo the godlie flocke,
               lackt not a deadlie foe.
               For there was dwelling then
               a famous learned man;
               Vvho for his paines and godlie life
               a worthie credite wan.
               He was the firſt that dar'de the Goſpell for to preach
               In Paris towne:He was the firſt that laid the foundation of the Church at Paris. where firſt the ſame to manie he did teach.
               
                  Maſſon De Riuers was this godlie preachers name,
               Vvho had the Sorbons manie times by learning put to ſhame.
               Now when in Paris towne the murder was at moſt,
               The bloodie Curre Monſorrell was to Angiers ſent in poſt.
               Vvho was no ſooner come within that wofull towne,
               And that from off his barbed houſe he was deſcended downe.
               But that he did inquire where Maſſon then did dwell,
               For that he had vnto the man ſome ſecrete thing to tell.
               And comming to the houſe, before the entrie dore
               He met with Maſſons wife; to whom he vſed then great ſtore
               Of filed words, as though he meant nothing amiſſe,
               And like a Courtier courteouſlie ſalutes her with a kiſſe:A Iudas kiſſe
               
               And where is now (I praie) your husband to be had?
               To ſee the good man ere I went, I would be verie glad:
               For that with him I haue a word or two talke.
               In yonder garden ſir (quothAn honeſt & louing wife m
                        •
                     
                     ſtrusting no hurt, betraiea
                        ••
                      her husbād to a flattring murderer. ſhe) my husband now doth walk.
               
                  
And ſo ſhe did direct the traitor to the place;
               Where comming, he moſt courteouſlie good Maſſon did imbrace.
               "And canſt thou tell (quoth he) whie I am 
                     •
                  ether come?The ſpeech
                     
                        ••
                      of Mon
                     
                        •
                     rrel to Maſſon.
               
               "It is to doo the Princes will, whereof this is the ſumme.
               "The King commanded hath that now without delaie,
               "Within this place I ſhould not miſſe thy life to take awaie.
               "And that thou maiſt be ſure the King hath thus decreed;
               "Lo here are letters from his grace, which letters thou ſhalt read.
               With that he plucked forth a Piſtoll readie bent
               Full charged, and to Maſſons heart now readie to be ſent.
               "My friend (ſaid Maſſon) ſtaie,The ſpeech
                     
                        ••
                      of Maſsō 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      Riuers 
                        ••
                     ttered be
                     
                        •
                     re his deth on me ſome pitie take:
               "And to my God, ere that I die, let me my praiers make.
               "I meruaile whie the King this murder ſhould intend;
               "I know not anie thing wherein his lawes I did offend.
               "It doth become a King a Princelie heart to haue:
               "And not vniuſtlie for to kill the people he ſhould ſaue.
               "And what are you that can the vncondemned kill?
               "And what are you that ſeeke my life, which neuer ment you il?
               "And why ſhould you deſire to ſuck my guiltleſſe blood,
               "Which in the Lord vnto my power haue ſoght to do ye good?
               "But ſtaie; I know the cauſe: you hate the ſhining light
               "Of Gods eternal Truth, which now you thinke doth ſhine too bright.
               "But frend take heed how that thou welter in the dark
               "Take heed of Gods eternall, plague & Cayns accurſed marke.
               "The men that meate refuſe with famine ſhalbe pinde,
               "To ſatisfie their hungrie ſoules, they ſhall no comfort finde.
               "And they that knowen Truth doo wilfullie reiect,
               "Shalbe deceiude by lying ſprites their follies to correct.
               "I weigh not for to die, ſith death the Lord hath ſent;
               "But more to view thy wretched ſtate it maketh me lament;
               "For after death with me I know it ſhall be well;
               "But for this murder thou maiſt feare leaſt thou be ſent to hell.
               "There is a fearfull lawe, let it be rightlie ſcand;
               
                  
"The Lord himſelf hath trulie ſaid that blood pollutes the land.Numb. 35. 23
               
               "The Land from bloodie guilt ſhall not be cleanſde or quit,God is ſo mindful of blood wrōg fullie ſhed, that he maketh dumb creatures dem. tund vengeance thereof.
               
               "But by his blood which wrong fullie the murder did commit.
               "Take heed therefore (good frend) and yet beware in time,
               "Pollute not this ſo famous place with this ſo bloodie crime.
               "But yet if thou obey a Princes wicked word,
               "Know in the end that thou likewiſe ſhalt periſh by the ſword.
               "Now if my hoarie haires no mercie can procure;
               "Yet let the ſafetie of thy ſoule to pitie thee allure.
               "And if the wailing teares of this my wofull wife,
               "Can not by anie meanes preuaile with thee to ſaue my life;
               "Yet ſee theſe ſillie babes, and weigh their wofull mone,
               "Which fatherleſſe before their time ſhould now be left alone.
               "If nothing yet but blood can quench thy hot deſire,
               "Then in the ende be ſure to taſt the Lords reuenging ire.
               "Haue mercie Lord on me, whom Sathan would deſtroie;
               "Thy godlie flocke he ſeekes to quell, thy Truth for to annoie.
               "Let them not longer Lord exalt their pridie crowne:
               "Let thē not ſcape that dailie ſeek to throw thy kingdom down.
               "Thy promiſe is my hope, thy word is all my ſtaie:
               "My comfort is the liuing Lord, which ſhields me from decaie.
               "While Chriſt is on my ſide by faith that makes me free,
               "By death or life I little feare what man can doo to me.
               "To thee my liuing God for mercie now I call,
               "So in this place my promiſd vowes ſhalbe performed all.
               "O Lord receaue my ſoule, the force of death deſtroie,
               "That preſentlie before thy face I may appeare with ioy.
               "O Chriſt thy pitie ſend, with mercie come to me;
               "For from my youth & tender yeres my hope hath bin in thee.
               "My heart is fixed Lord, my heart is ſurelie ſet;
               "To ſaue my ſoule (my God) let not my ſinnes be anie let.
               "Now to thy bleſſed hands whether I die or liue:
               "My ſinfull ſoule, receiue it Lord, I gladlie here doo giue.
               
                  
"And thou that hether cameſt to plaie this bloodie part;
               "Loe this thy wicked deed I doo forgiue with all my hart:
               "Deſiring God that this my blood now ſet at large,
               "Vvhen he doth come maie not at all be laid vnto thy charge.
               "Come ſtaie no longer now if God ſhall giue thee power
               "To take my life, thē welcom thrice this ſweet & happy hower;
               His wife he kiſsing bade her ſorow to repell,
               Vvith her his babes he did imbrace, and bade them al farewel.
               But Lord what rolling teares, what ſhrikes and piteous cries
               Betweene the wife and louing babes were ſent to airie Skies.
               But this could not perſwade the traitor to depart,
               Vvho framde his readie dagg to ſtrike pore Maſſon to the hart.
               Then Maſſon kneeling downe, content his life to leaue;
               The bullet meeklie to his breaſt from Piſtoll did receaue.
               Vvhere falling to the ground, his bleſſed life did yeeld
               Vnto the Lord, with quiet heart as meeke as anie childe.
               Vve ſee what worthie men the Papiſts haue deſtroid,
               God grant vs grace that doo remaine their treaſons to auoide.
               Amen.
            
            
               
               The Iudgement of the Lorde againſt this bloodie and periured King
of France, Charles the 9. Dilated by the ſentence of God in the
lawe against murder; by examples both out of the Scriptures, &
other Authors, concerning the horrible end that hath fallen vpon
wilfull murderers; and laſtlie, the bloodie death of this blood-ſucking
King himſelfe.
               
                  NOw let vs ſee the ende
               of this periured King,
               And let vs weigh in future time
               what fearfull fruite did ſpring
               From falſed faith. And firſt
               I brieflie will repeate
               The ſentence of the mightie God
               gainſt murder and deceate.
               Then ſhall we plainlie ſee how that in euerie land
               The Lord according to his law with iuſt reuenging hand
               The bloodie tyrants ſtrikes, with all their faithleſſe crue;
               As by examples we maie ſee of ſuch as ſhall enſue.
               Vvho ſo ſaith God ſhall ſhed the blood of man in vaine,
               Shall with the ſhedding of his blood requite the ſame againe.Gen. 9 6.
               
               And he that by deceite hisExod. 21. 14▪
                   neighbour ſhall betraie,
               Or ſhall with guile preſumptuouſlie his brother ſeeke to ſlaie:Numb. 35. 20.
               
               He ſhall not ſcape,The blood of man is of ſo great price with the Lord that he wil not onelie require it of men, but alſo of the very dumbe creatures. Gen. 9. although he to the altare flie.
               ButIoab the wi
                        ••
                     
                     full murderer was taken frō the altar by Salomon & ſlaine. 1. King. 2. 31. drawen foorth he iuſtlie ſhall without all pitie die.
               Such curſed bloodie men Gods plague doth follow ſtill;
               For wicked KingAbimelech ſlew 70. of his brethren, & ra
                        •
                     gned 
                        〈◊〉
                      king Iud 9 5 at laſt he periſhed by the iuſt iudgement of God. 
                  Abimelech who was content to kill
               His ſeuentie brothers all the kingdome for to haue:
               From iuſt reuenge he could not long his curſed carkaſſe ſaue.
               For from a womans hand a milſtone downe was ſent
               Frō off a wall: which with the weight his brain pan al to rent.
               
                  
And after by his Page was thruſt vnto the heart
               With ſword,
                     
                        •
                     dg. 9. 53. 54. leſt that a womās ſtroke his glory ſhuld ſubuert.
               As Triphon bee
                     
                        •…
                     g Tutor and 
                        〈◊〉
                      counſellor 
                        ••
                     to yong king 
                        ••
                     tiochus, and 
                        •
                     uing deutſed 
                        ••
                     th himſelf a 
                        〈◊〉
                      of conſpira 
                        〈◊〉
                      to kill his 
                        〈◊〉
                      after, thoght 
                        •
                     at Ionathan 
                        •
                     ing hie prieſt the Iewes, 
                        ••
                     uld be a hin 
                        ••
                     rance vnto is attempt, 
                        ••
                     ing a frend 
                        ••
                     to Antio
                     
                        ••
                     us. Therfore 
                        ••
                     iphon fein
                     
                        ••
                     g great frēd
                     
                        ••
                     p vnto Ionaan, with flat 
                        ••
                     ing words ſo 
                        ••
                     ained him by 
                        ••
                     ust, that hee 
                        •••
                     rſwaded him 40 thouſand 
                        〈◊〉
                      which Io
                     
                        •••
                      than broght 
                        ••
                     th him, that ſhould ſende paie all ſa
                     
                        ••
                     ng one thouſand: with which ſmall companie when he was entered into the Citie Ptolemais vnder truſt of aſſured promiſe to haue the Citie deliuered vnto him by Triphon: and being come within the gates, hee 
                        〈◊〉
                      by Triphon taken priſoner, and all his men ſlaine. 1. Maccab. 12. 41. Ioſephus Antiquit, Iud lib. cap. 10.
                  Triphon did intrap with face of frendlie cheere
               Good Ionathan, to whom he did a faithfull frend appeare:
               So did he quicklie feele the weight of falſed word,
               Who ſhortlie was by Simon
                  But Triphon inioyed not this trecherie long: for he was ſtill cruellie purſued by Simon 
                        〈◊〉
                      brother of Ionathan, & at laſt in Apania was taken & put to the ſword. Whoſe trecherie was 
                        ••
                     ight picture of K. Charles his villanie. ſlaine, and iuſtlie put to ſword.
               I read alſo of oneAriſtobolus after he had put his mother & brother to 
                        ••
                     ath, greeued in conſcience, fell into ſuch horrible extremitie, that blood came from him both by vo
                     
                        ••
                      & otherwiſe til it brought him to his end. 
                  Ariſtobolus by name,
               Who hath for murder left behinde a blacke & bloodie fame.
               For firſt he did conſent with famine for to pine
               His mother, for becauſe ſhe would the kingdome not reſigne.
               And alſo was content by death to make away
               
                  Antigonus his brother deere, which was his owne decaie.
               For when the deed was done, he felt a preſent griefe
               In conſcience for ſo cruell act; which then without reliefe
               Did dailie ſo torment his ſore afflicted hart,
               That freſh remorſe did often giue new cauſe of greater ſmart.
               At length fromThe Image of K Charles his iudgment. griſlie corſe his blood by peacemeale came;
               For brothers blood frō earth did call his blood to quit the ſame
               And thus in fearfull wiſe he yeelded vp his breath:
               So was his fierce & wicked life repaide with worthie death.
               OurCharles 
                        〈◊〉
                      9 by the iuſt ſtroke of Gods reuenge died of bleeding at al parts of his bodie where was anie iſſue. 
                  Charles like vnto this from Gods reuenging hand
               By bloodie death, repaies the blood he ſhed within his land.
               From eares, from noſe, frō mouth, from hart that was ſo ſtout,
               Frō euery part his blood was ſeen, wher blood might iſſue out.
               The man that would not yeeld when men did mercie craue,
               For mercie cries vnto the Lord but mercie none can haue.
               
                  
For he that will not help the poore when they dooth call,
               Shall call himſelfe when he hath need, & not be heard at all.
               The heart that was ſo proud, now feeles the bitter paine
               Whereat he ieſted when he ſaw his faithfull ſubiects ſlaine.
               The eares that would not heare the poore afflicted crie;
               But greedelie to ſucke their blood would credit euerie lie,
               With blood are ſtopped vp that they ſhall heare no more:
               Such heauy plagues for wicked men the Lord hath ſtil in ſtore.
               The mouth that would not ſpeake to doo his brother good,
               Inſteed of words doth vomit out the clotts of filthie blood.
               The noſe that did deteſt of Truth the pleaſant ſmell,
               From filthie heart doth willinglie the ſtinking blood expell.
               So that we plainlie ſee, that blood for blood doth craue,
               And he ſhall not eſcape that ſeekes his brothers blood to haue.
               Then curſed be the mouth andChristopher Thaune Preſident of the Parliament, with a wicked Oration commended the K. for that he had by treaſon and flattery now ouercome them, whom by arms he could not vanquiſh. man that did perſwade
               This wretched King that he was in a good and godlie trade,
               In that he did by guile the godlie ſo allure:
               And afterwards by treaſon did their wiſhed death procure.
               Much like ſaid he you be toLewes the 11 was wont to ſay, Qui neſcit diſſimluare. neſcit regnare, he that cannot diſſemble, knoweth not howe to ra
                        •
                     gne. 
                  Lewes which heretofore
               Said in the Latine that he knew one ſentence & no more.
               
                  Which was; That he which Truth in words will alwaies bring,
               And not diſſemble; knoweth not the skill to be a King.
               NaieThe riht iudgment of the godlie concerning this bloodie act. this was rather like the red and cruell raigne
               OfMithridates cauſed with one letter 150000. Romanes to be ſlaine. 
                  Mithridates, who did cauſe of Romanes to be ſlain
               A hundred fiftie thouſand once by meſſage that was ſent,
               Whē outwardlie there did appear nothing but frendſhip mēt.
               The King ofPeter of Arragō ſlew 8000. Frenchmē. 
                  Arragon like mate of curſed crue,
               By like deceit in Sicill once eight thouſand Frenchmen ſlew.
               ToPhilip of Macedon ſuffred miſerie by breaking often his oath. 
                  Philip once it was his ruine and his death:
               In that he often brake his oath, and vow of plighted faith.
               Then happie is the man, that timelie can beware
               Of Popiſh treaſon, which doth ſeeme great fauor for to beare.
               
                  
"NOw haue you heard at large the chiefe of bruted broile,The Concluſion of the French Pilgrime vnto the Engliſh man.
               
               "That lately for the Truth hath bin in France my natiue ſoil.
               "The Lord grant England peace and mercie from aboue,
               "That from the Truth no trouble may their fixed heart remoue
               "With wiſhed life and health Lord long preſerue and keepe
               "That Noble Queene Elizabeth chiefe Paſtor of thy ſheepe:
               "And that ſhe maie finde out, and hunt with perfect hate
               "The Popiſh hearts of fained frends before it be too late:
               "And that in wofull France the troubles that we ſee,
               "To England for to ſhup the like, may now a warning be.
               "And where our wound is ſeene as yet ſo freſh to bleede,
               "Lord grant to England that they maie in time take better heede.
               "Now ſith you doo perceaue of France the wofull caſe;
               "Good ſir I pray you giue me leaue to ſe
                     •
                  ke ſome other place.
               "I feare that I haue ſtaid and charged you too long,
               "In warping forth theſe bloodie broiles in rude & ruſtick ſong.
               "Not ſo good frend,The Engliſhman to the French Pilgrime. but if with me thou wilt remaine;
               "I ſhall not think it anie charge, nor count it anie paine
               "To heare and keepe thee ſtill: but if thou wilt depart,
               "For thy diſcourſe take this reward, & thanks frō frendlie hart.
               "And ſo (my frend) farewell, Lord ſhield thee from annoy,
               "And grant vs al that we may meete with Chriſt in perfectioy Amen.
               
                  Lord Ieſus Christ, the praiſe be thine:
               
               
                  For bleſsing of this worke of mine.
               
               
                  Anna Dowriche,
               
               Giue God the praiſe.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
               Ʋeritie purtraied by the French
Pilgrime.
            
               
            
            FRom Seate ſupernall of coeleſtiall Ioue
            
            Deſcended Truth, deuoid of worldlie weed;
            And with the brightneſſe of her beames ſhe ſtroue
            Gainſt Sathan, Sinne, & Adams fleſhlie Seed;
            Reproouing wrongs, bewailing worldlings need;
            Who thinke they ſwim in wealth (blinded by guile):
            Yet wanting Truth; are wretched, poore & vile.
            The World reproou'd; in rage attempts hir wracke,
            Sathan aſsiſts, malicious Men deuiſe
            Torments for Truth, binde ſcourges at hir backe,
            Exclaime againſt hir with blaſphemous cries;
            Condemning hir, exalting earthlie lies:
            Yet no despite or paine can cauſe hir ceaſe;
            She wounded, ſprings; bedeckt with crowne of Peace.
            FINIS.
         
      
   