
      
         
            
            
            AN ALARVM TO THE LAST IVDGEMENT.
            OR An exact discourse of the second comming of Christ, and of the generall and remarkeable Signes and Fore-runners of it past, present, and to come; soundly and soberly handled, and wholesomely applyed.
            Wherein diuers deep Mysteries are plainly expounded, and sundry curiosities are duely examined, answered and confuted.
            By T. D. Bachelor of Diuinitie.
            
               LVKE 21.28.
               When these things begin to come to passe, then hold vp your heads, for your redemption draweth neere.
            
            
               LONDON, Printed by Nicholas Okes for Matthew Law, and are to bee sold at the signe of the Foxe in Paules Church-yard. 1615.
         
         
            
            
            TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL AND REligious, the Major, and Aldermen of Harwich in Essex, and to all the deuout and zealous Christians and Parishioners, both of Douercourt and Harwich, a plentifull encrease of all inward and outward happinesse.
            
               
                  ALBEIT (Right Worshipfull, and most deerely beloued) some haue causelesly doubted of, and others haue damnably denyed, a maine and principall Article of the Christian Faith; namely, the visible and glorious descent of our

               Lord Iesus from heauen to iudge both the quick and the dead, whose comming wee thirstingly and continually expect and pray for; yet it is cleere and very demonstrable, by the current of sacred Scripture, and by due obseruance of the ruinous estate of the world, and the daily accomplishment of the fore-runners and generall Signes of the last day; that the ends of the world are come vpon vs,
               
                  1. Cor. 10.11.
                That the end of all things is at hand,
               
                  1. Pet. 4.7.
                and that these are the very last times: For
            First, if in the Apostles times it was so neere his period and consummation, yea consumption; how much more neere is it in our times, sith that so many hundreds of years are long agoe expired? And what if the Lord seemeth to stay long,

and to deferre his comming, yet this delay is nothing, being compared with Eternity, and a thousand yeares with God are but as one day,
               
                  2. Pet. 3.8.
                and the Lord will in the meane time, haue the number of his Elect fulfilled, and the sinnes of the Reprobate grow to their full measure and ripenesse.
            Secondly, it is certaine that the glorious Gospell hath, euen in the Apostles times, beene solemnely published and proclaimed to the whole (habitable) world, so that such a solemne and generall Legacie and Embassage is not againe to bee expected.
            Thirdly, the ancient and mightie Romane Empire, that in former ages had the commaund of some two hundred and fifty Countries, Kingdomes and Prouinces, is now so impaired, wasted and weakned,

that it hath lost all his former Maiestie and Dominion, and retaineth onely a bare and naked image, and picture, of that it formerly enioyed:
                  2. Thess. 2.
                        •
                     .
                So that that, which by it puissance kindred Antichrists comming, being taken away, and the thousand yeares of Satans binding being expired,
                  Apoc. 20.2
                Antichrist is confessedly come.
            Fourthly, Antichrist (I meane that Italian Priest and Romish Caiphas) hath beene (by his excesse of tyrannie and superstition) reuealed, euen in the yeare of Christ, 607, and sithence; but from the yeare 1517, vnto our daies, he hath bene not so much discouered, as by the Breath of Gods mouth, that is, by the Preaching of the Word, beene confuted and confounded: and not withstanding that the busie and restlesse. Iesuites,

Priests, Seminaries, studie and striue to recouer their losses, and heale the wounds of the euer-dying Beast, yet it is but a lightning before death, & periturum gaudium.
               
                  Ester 6.13.
                The Romish Haman hath begunne to fall before Mordecai of the seea of the Iewes, yea, to fall before the reformed Christians, and therefore hee shall neuer preuaile against them but certainely fall before them.
            Fiftly, sinne and iniquity euery where aboundeth, and is growne excessiue and impudent: all things are out of square, all flesh hath corrupted his way, and (whether wee respect Doctrine, Discipline, and (specially) corruption of manners) in most Coasts and Countries, there is almost no faith left on the earth.
            
            Sixtly, All the Elements, all the

creatures, the Sun, Moone, Starres, Plants, Birds, Fowles, Fishes, &c. groane grieuously vnder the burden of mans sinnes,
                  Rom. 8.20.21.22.23.
                and are wonderfully peruerted by man; yea, exceedingly decayed in their proprieties, vertues, efficacies, and therefore watchfully waite for their plenarie and finall deliuerance from this bondage of corruption.
            Lastly, (to passe ouer in silence many other Arguments, yea, and some few Signes shortly to be fulfilled, whereof I distinctly entreate in the ensuing Treatise) the iust Iudge of the world must needs giue perfect rest and glory to his troubled Saints and seruants;
                  2. Thess. 1.7.8.
                and of necessity render vengeance vnto his, and their, implacable enemies.
            Wherefore (my deerely beloued Brethren and Parishioners) let vs

be wise hearted and awaken our selues; and the rather, because God (in his wisedome) hath deseruedly concealed and kept from vs, the knowledge of the set houre, day, yea yeare, let vs (casting away all vnprofitable and vaine curiosities) take notice of the accomplishment of the Signes and Tokens of the last iudgement, as they are reuealed in the volume of the Bible, and seeing the last of them to beginne onely to come to passe, let vs reioycingly hold vp our heads,
               
                  Luk. 21.28.
                
               knowing that the day of our (full) redemption draweth nigh.
            
            And that you might bee more plainely and plentifully, directed and instructed in these Doctrines and Duties, I haue (in my loue and Pastorall care) beene moued, to Print, Publish, and Inscribe vnto

you, this small Treatise following, purposing (if neede require) hereafter to enlarge it. And seeing that, by Diuine Prouidence, the ample charge of Douercourt and Harwich is committed vnto mee, a poore Minister of the Gospell, I therefore, by the helpe of God, will carefully and conscionably discharge my Office and Ministery. And I doubt not, but that you generally, hauing with such contentment receiued my doctrine, and so kindly and respectiuely entertained mee, will continue, yea, happily proceed in the worke of your loue; which will greatly redound vnto Gods glory, and much tend to my encouragement. If my reuerend, graue, learned, and diligent Predecessour, your late Pastour of blessed memory, hath planted you, I will doe my best endeuour to

water you, and build you vp in the faith, referring the successe and encrease vnto the blessing of the Almighty.
            But being so well perswaded of you all, and expecting all good things from so well disposed and zealous people, I cease to vse further speech, and I withall, betake and commend you vnto the direction and protection of the Prince of Pastors, the Bishop of your soules, our Lord Iesus Christ, who alwaies blesse and preserue you. From Harewich in Essex Iune 12. 1615.
            
            
               Your louing and carefull Pastor: THOMAS DRAXE.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
            An Alarum to the last Iudgement.
            
               THE FIRST CHAPTER Containing the Preface.
               
                  BEFORE that wee treate and discourse of the generall Signes and Fore-runners of the Last Iudgement, it shall not be impertinent, in few words, to shew and demonstrate the Subiect it selfe: for where there is no Substance, there are no Accidents;

and where there is no Foundation, there is no House, or Building. Therefore that the truth of these Signes may more manifestly appeare, and that we may more orderly proceed; I thus, by warrant of Gods Word, and waight of inuincible arguments, euince, and proue, these three maine principles of Faith and Religion. First, that there shall bee an vniuersall Iudgement, wherein all reasonable creatures shall be called to an account. Secondly, that IESVS CHRIST the Son of God, is appointed of God, to bee the Iudge of the Iudge, both of the quick and the dead. Lastly, that this world (in respect of the fashion, forme, and corruptible qualities thereof) shall haue an and, and come to destruction.

That there is a set and prefixed day of Iudgement (though vnto vs profitably vnknowne) and that there shall bee a generall Iudgement, I thus declare.
               First, the sacred Scriptures are pregnant and plentifull in this point, Iob 19.25. Psalm. 9.8. Isa. 66.15. Dan. 12.2. Math. 25.31. Luke 18.17. Iohn 5.28.29. and chap. 12.44. Act. 17.31. Rom. 2.16 1. Thess. 4.16.17. and chap. 5.2. 1. Pet. 4.8. Tit. 2.13. Apoc. 20.11. 12.13. Heb. 9.27.28.
               Secondly, the doctrine of the last Iudgement,Heb. 6.2. is a very ancient, and principall Article of the Apostles Catechisme; and therefore no person, vnlesse hee bee a meere Athiest, or Infidell, can, or will deny it.
               Thirdly, the Generall Resurrection, the necessary and immediate

antecedent of the iudgement,
                     Sublatis destinatis ad finem, tollitur finis.
                   and those that shall arise and appeare in iudgement, who are the proper obiect of it, do enforce it; yea, and what arguments serue to proue the Resurrection, the same iustifie the last iudgement.
               Fourthly, the generall and particular iudgements, calamities, and punishments, both in the old and new Testament, and in all succeeding ages, are Types, Similitudes, and Foresignifications of it. Of this kind were Noahs Floud (or Deluge) wherein the world was drowned; the ouer-whelming of Pharoah and the Aegyptians in the red Sea; the burning of Sodom and Gomorrah; the destruction of Ierusalem; the ruin of the foure great Monarchies of the

world, that afflicted Gods chosen; and of late time, the sinking and dispearsing of the Spanish inuincible Armado, Anno Christi 1588, in the English Seas, and by the coasts of Ireland.
               Fiftly, vnlesse there should be a finall iudgement, wherein euery man is to receiue a reward according to his workes, God could not declare himselfe perfectly iust. For all sinnes in this world committed, come not to light: neither are all punished that are apparant. Tyrants, and Oppressours; yea Christs Arch-enemies, the Turke and Pope, &c. liue long, and prosper in their wickednesse. And if God should censure all sinnes that are done in the earth, then no other iudgement would bee expected:

wherefore the Lord beareth long with sinners, and suffereth the offences of the Reprobate to grow rotten ripe, that hee may fully and finally punish and plague them at the last day. Forbearance is no quittance: Christ commeth with woollen feete (i. faire and softly) but striketh with Iron hands, that is deadly.
               Sixtly, vnlesse there come a day of generall release and absolution for the godly, yea a day of full deliuerance, and glorious triumph, God cannot declare himselfe completely and infinitely mercifull. For it seemeth to goe well with the wicked, in this world, and ill with the good: The godly are oppressed and persecuted, troubled and tormented, molested, martyred, massacred, and both

inwardly and outwardly afflicted; therefore the iust Lord cannot but at length reward the patience and pietie of his seruants: Great shall their reward be in heauen:
                  Math. 5.5. 
                  Hee shall recompence the lightnesse of their momentany afflictions,
                  Rom 8.18. 2. Cor. 4 17 18. 
                  with an exceeding and super-excellent weight of glorie.
               
               Seuenthly, the feare, trembling, astonishment, horror of conscience and dreadfull despaire in many malefactors (specially persecutors and murderers) euen of those that escape the iudgement of the Magistrate, doth euidently argue that there will come a day of reckoning, and that there is an hell fire, whereof these are certaine flashings, and fore-runners.
               Lastly (to be briefe) the children

of God look and long for, groane and pant for this day and time; which is the day of their Marriage, of the bodies ascent into heauen, and of their entrance and inauguration into the Kingdome of Glory. These spirituall sighes and sobs,Rom. 8.22. are speciall effects of Gods spirit, infallible characters of Gods children, and the very earnest of our inheritance. Inward desires make a lowder sound in Gods eares, then bare words vttered with the tongue, and therefore cannot misse the marke, viz. eternitie of blessednesse.
               Now that Iesus Christ, not onely as he is God, whereby in the decree, efficacie, and authority of the iudgement, hee is equall with God the Father,

and the Holy Ghost; but also as he is man, in regard of the sentence to bee pronounced, and the visible execution of the iudgement; is and shall be the Iudge both of the quicke and dead, the Scriptures put it out of question, Dan. 7.9.10. Ioh. 5.27. Act. 10.42. 2. Cor. 5.10. 2. Tim. 4.1.
               Secondly, it is an Article and foundation of faith, firmely to be beleeued.
               Thirdly, it is one end, and that a principall one, of Christs Resurrection & Ascension: It is a part of his Kingly Office which hee shall then most openly and eminently execute.
               Fourthly it standeth with all equity, that Hee that, when hee liued on earth,Mat. 26.64 and was most vniustly iudged, accused, indicted,

condemned and executed, should at length, gloriously, and in the view of all the world, iudge, arraigne, condemne, and fee execution done vpon his enemies.
               Lastly, to stop the mouths of, and to put all Atheists to silence, the Heathenish Prophetesse Sibylla testifieth as much, saying

                     
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        , &c.
                     
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        .
                  
               
               That is:

                     Christ shall come in the cloudes
                     In glorie, with his sinlesse Angels.
                  
               
               And that this miserable and corruptible world, with all the contemned creatures shall (not in respect of matter and substance, but outward forme, and accidentall qualities) haue an

end and consumption, thus I compendiously make it manifest. First, by expresse Scripture: Secondly, by Argument. Heauen and earth shall passe away:
                  Mat 24.35 1. Cor. 7.31 2. Pet. 3.10 
                  The fashion of this world passeth away. The heauens shall passe away with a great noise, the elements shall melt with heate, the earth also and the workes that are therein, shall be burnt vp.
                  Apoc. 20.11 
                  I saw (saith Saint Iohn) a great white throne, and him that sate on it, from whose face the heauen and earth fled away, and there was found no place for them. Secondly, by argument, I thus make good my assertion. The world being but a creature had a beginning, and therefore it shall haue an end; Omnia orta intereunt. The world as in the seuerall parts, so in the whole, daily fadeth,

decayeth, weakneth, and is in an irrecouerable consumption, therefore it must needs, at length, come to an end. A ruinous house will in tract of time fall, and a sick body cannot hold out long. The world must bee renewed at the last day;2. Pet. 3. for there shall be a new heauen, and a new earth:
                  
                     Generatio vnius est corraptio alterius.
                   
                  Ergo the old heauen and earth must (of necessitie) be first abolished. Lastly, some of the Pagan Philosophers and Poets (whensoeuer, or wheresoeuer, they had so much light) acknowledge as much.
               The Platonists held, that the world should be destroyed: so did the Sibyls Prophecie: The Poet Ouid in the first booke of his Metamorphosis, and Lucan in the first booke belli Pharsalici, iustifie as much; and mans

sinne hath iustly deserued and procureth it.
            
            
               CHAP. II. Of the Signes and Fore-runners of the last iudgement in generall.
               ALBEIT the day and houre of the last iudgement is vnknowne to all men, to the very Angels of heauen,
                  Mat. 24.36 yea albeit the Sonne himselfe being on earth knew it not;Mar. 13.32 yea, although no man knoweth the yeare when the Son of man wil come to iudgement (For it is not for vs to know the times and seasons which the Father hath put in his owne power) yet the Lord Iesus,Acts 1.7. that hee might not so much leaue the wicked his irreconciliable

enemies, without all excuse and pretence of ignorance, and withall appall, affrighten and astonish them, specially when his second comming neerely approacheth, doth kindly and louingly forewarne his children, that they should neither be amated, nor found vnready (for a man forewarned is halfe armed.) And that hee might comfort and encourage them against the manifold scandales, troubles, and miseries of this present life; Hee hath (I say) in the Scriptures, left and giuen them many generall and notable Signes, Tokens and Fore-runners of his comming, which they daily doe, and alwaies ought, to take notice of, that when they see these things come to passe they might hold vp
                  Luk. 21.28.
                  
                  their heads, knowing that their Redemption draweth neere.
               
               These Signes and Prasagia are like to so many tender Greene,
                  Mat. 24.32 and leauy branches of the Fig-tree that shewerh the Summer of their happinesse to bee nigh. These are like the white and yellow eares of corne that declare the Haruest to bee at hand; and these are (as it were) so many sounding Trumpets, or Alarums,
                  A similitude. to awaken vs. And as the Sunne being about to arise, first sendeth forth his bright beames a farre off, and enlightneth the East; so our Lord Iesus the Sunne of righteousnesse, doth before his second comming, send certaine generall Signes, and (as I may say) Herbingers, that men might the more carefully waite for, and

more dilligently addresse and prepare themselues against that time. The Tempests threaten before that they arise: the Houses crack before they fall, and the Smoake goeth before the flame: So these Signes and Fore-warnings go before the consummation of the world.
               These Signes & Fore-runners are of three sorts: namely, those that are already accomplished and fulfilled: Secondly, those that are mixt signes and praedemonstrations in continuall action and motion; and those that yet remaine in their due time to be performed. Of these plainly, and in order: But (that I may cleere the coast, and proceede with more dexterity and profit) two principall questions by many moued, are to be seasonably

decided.Questions First, why God doth not, and will not, reueale vnto any the houre, day, yeare, and time of the last iudgement. Secondly, why the Lord seemeth so long to delay and put off that day and iudgement; especially seeing that hee promiseth to come quickly, and that his children so long waite and so earnestly pray for that time.
               I answer to the former question: The Lord wil haue the day, houre, yeare, &c. of the vniuersall iudgement concealed. First, because it is the Glory of God to conceale a thing,
                  Prou. 25.2. and not to reueale some things before the euent, which is the best & surest interpreter. Secondly, that hee might bridle and represse the impudent boldnesse, and rash curiositie of those, that vainely,

yea presumptuously, pry, and search into things forbidden, vnnecessary, and impossible to be known, & in the meane time neglect the searching out of, and the due practise of things in the word of God reuealed and commanded. Thirdly, and lastly, not onely to try and make knowne the modesty and humility of his deere seruants, whether that they will break into the closet of his secrets or no; but also to keep them from the slumber of security, and to stir them vp to watch for, and prepare themselues against that day. Vtiliter (saith an ancient Father) latet vltimus dies vt obseruentur omnes dies: That is, it is for our profite that the last day is vnknowne, that wee may obserue and watch all daies.
               
                  
                  The second question.
               
               Why doth the Lord so long deferre his comming to iudgement?
               
                  Ans. First that the Prophecy of the Reuelation,
                  Apoc. 6 11 & 11.10. and of other Scriptures should bee fulfilled: For heauen and earth shall passe away,
                  Mat. 24.35 
                  but no point or tittle of Gods word shall passe away vnaccomplished.
               
               Secondly, that the sinnes and abhominations of the wicked and profane, who abuse and despise the riches of Gods goodnesse,Rom. 2.4. forbearance and long-suffering, not knowing that the goodnesse of God leadeth them to repentance: and who mispend and lauish their time that God hath allotted for their repentance;Ioh. 14.22. might be left without plea or excuse, and that

their sinnes being heaped vp to heauen, might bee punished with eternity of torments.
               Thirdly, that none of the Predestinate should perish,1. Tim, 2, 4 but that in this world they should come to the acknowledgement of the truth,2, Pet, 3, 9. to repentance, and so consequently to saluation.
               Lastly, to try, declare, cherish, and exercise, the patience, faith, hope, and charity of his chosen, that liue amongst such an infinite number of lewd, Atheisticall, scandalous, superstitious and venemous people, and yet by the grace of God, directing and preseruing them, are blamelesse,
                  Phil. 2.15. 
                  harmelesse, without rebuke, and shine as light in the midst of a crooked and peruerse Nation.
               
            
            
               
               CHAP. III. The first generall Signe, the desolation and destruction of the Temple and Citie of Ierusalem, and the vtter ouerthrow of the Iewes Common-wealth.
               THE first generall Signe of the end of the world,Mat. 24.12 is the vtter ruin and laying waste of the Citie of God,Mat. 13.12 
                  Ierusalem, of the holy Temple, and the ruin of the Iewes pollicie and Commonwealth.
                  Dan. 9.26. The Temple and Citie was destroyed by Titus and Vespasian, Romane Emperours, the nine and thirtieth yeare after the Ascension of our Lord into heauen: And the Iewes euer since haue bene led away captiue into all nations,Luk. 21.24 and Ierusalem hath beene troden downe

of the Gentiles,1. Thess. 2.15. and the wrath of God is come vpon them to the full, now whether the beleeuing Iewes shall towards the end of the world, be temporally restored into their owne Country, rebuild Ierusalem, and haue a most reformed, and flourishing, Church and Commonwealth (as some by extraordinary expositions, seeme to gather out of the Scriptures) the issue and euent will discouer. But (to finish the point in hand) the desolation of the Temple and Citie of Ierusalem, by reason of the similitude and correspondencie, of things, persons, and euents, is a type and figure of the destruction of the world.
            
            
               
               CHAP. IIII. Of the Preaching of the Gospell vnto all Nations.
               THE second generall Signe is the publishing, Preaching, and proclaiming of the blessed Gospell in and through all (the habitable,Mat. 24 14 and then knowne, especially the Easterne) world, by the Ministerie of the twelue Apostles: These as Christs Embassadours, and like twelue Beames of the Sunne of Righteousnesse, being effectually called to this heauenly Function, furnished with most rare, extraordinarie, and miraculous gifts aboue all former Prophets, and hauing a Charge and Commission, with a promise annexed,Mat. 28.19. to Teach and Baptise all

Nations,
                  
                     Distributiue▪
                     
                   and to Preach the Gospell to euery (reasonable) creature; did accordingly performe it, and sealed and confirmed it with their bloud and martyrdome;Psal. 19.6. so that the line of the Apostles went out into all the earth,Col. 1.6. and their words vnto the end of the world, Rom. 10.18. and prospered and was fruitfull: And since that time he that sitteth on the White (Triumphant) Horse, and hath a Bow in his hand,Apoc. 6.2. and a Crowne on his Head, i. the Lord Iesus, and his Vicars, viz. Christian Kings and Emperours, haue gone forth Conquering and to Conquer.
               
               Lastly, the Lights, Lampes, Fathers and Pillars of the Primitiue Church, Saint Origen, Saint Ierom, Saint Ambrose, and

others, write, and auow, that all Nations were enlightned by the Apostles; so that the Apostolicall calling and gifts being ceased, and the Gospell once vniuersally hauing beene published, no such solemne Legacy is the second time of vs, or our Successours, to be expected.
               
                  I. Aetiologià.
                  The Lord would hereby enlighten all Nations, and by the Arme of his Gospell draw all the elect effectually vnto him:Rom. 1.16. For the Gospell is the power of saluation to euery one that beleeueth, to the Iew first, and also to the Greek. This is the Golden Scepter of Christs Kingdome which when it is holden forth,Psal. 110.2. and by the elect touched, it is

the instrument of their saluation.
               
               
                  II. Aetiologià.
                  Secondly, the Lord would, and will, haue the Preaching of the Gospell to all Nations, to bee a Testimoniall,
                     Mat. 24.14 (at least of conuincement) vnto them, that they should pretend no ignorance, nor haue any thing to say in their defence: For they that know, or (at least) haue sufficient meanes to know Gods will, and do not embrace and execute it, shall be beaten with many stripes:
                     Luk. 12.47 
                     i. their paines in hell shall bee greater then of those, who neuer enioyed the meanes of saluation: yet they sinning without Law, shall perish without Law.Rom. 2.12.
                  
               
               
                  
                  Question.
                  It seemeth that the Gospell hitherto, hath not bene known, much lesse Preached by the Apostles, to the Americans and West Indies, those huge and vaste Countries, for there is no monument or record of any such matter: and therefore the time is to come when they shall bee enlightned, and receiue the Gospell of our Lord Iesus.
                  
                     Ans. I must in this difficult point answere, as distinctly, so by distinction. First, I answere that the Apostles and Euangelists, hauing taught and Preached the Gospell, to the most famous, knowne and populous Kingdomes, Prouinces, Cities, and Townes, it is very probable

that they, or their Successours, did Preach the Gospell to the vnknowne, obscure, and most barbarous Nations, such as are the Americans, West Indies, and North Parts of the world: And what if now either driuen thitherby Tempests, or forced by enemies, they might in time grow barbarous, and loose all knowledge of Christ? Againe, I deny not but that the Gospell may, and shall be at length published and made knowne to the Americans, if they neuer formerly heard of it; for the mercy of God in Christ is of infinite extent. And if the very Iesuites (though arch-heretickes, and the fire-brands of sedition) perhaps sow some seeds of Christianity amongst them: How much more purely and plainely,

may the English, Hollanders, and other Professours, in time, performe it? Fourthly, it diuers parts of Europe, haue within these hundred yeares last expired, since the reuealing of Antichrist, and the dispersion of the mists of Poperie, beene so greatly illuminated: why may not (specially after the generall calling and conuersion of the Iewes, which wee continually expect, and pray for, and which shall be the Enliuing and Resurrection of the world) the Americans,Rom. 11.12 West Indians, and other Nations; yea euen in the Turkes Dominions, be enlightned?
                  Lastly, it is sufficient to conuince the world of vnbeleefe, and to leaue the Inhabitants without excuse, if onely the Fame, Rumor, and Report, yea the

                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
very Sound of the Gospell hath come vnto them: For they might haue enquired, trauelled, and proceeded further. But time and experience will cleere this doubt.
               
            
            
               CHAP. V. Of a generall Apostasie from the Gospell of Christ.
               THE third generall Signe, already past, is not onely the decay and ruine of the ancient and mighty Romane Empire,2. Thess. 2. whereof now a name and a shadow, and not the tenth part of the Demaines and Dominions remaineth, that by the ouerthrow of it Anti-christ might arise,Apoc. 13.14. preuaile, and tyrannize; and the Turke likewise dominere,2. Thess. 2.3.
                  
but a generall,Apoc. 9.1.2. and almost vniversall Apostasie, reuolt, and departure of all Nations,Apoc. 13.7 8. from the Gospell of Christ, partly to Mahomet, as we see is come to passe in the East parts of the world, and partly to the Romish Anti-christ as wee see verified in the Westerne parts.cap. 18.3. This Apostasie began Anno Christi 606 (or there-abouts) Fore-runners whereof were, and foundations whereof laid long sithence, those proud, ambitious, and erroneus Prelates, that taught Iustification before God to proceed of mans workes; that taught inuocation, and worshipping of Angels and Saints; that brought in Traditions; adored Reliques; immodestly, and immoderately extolled single life, against Gods

expresse Word, forbad meates, and marriages, defended the doctrine of Free-will in the work of our saluation, brought in an infinite number of old and idle ceremonies; yea, ouermuch magnified the Sea and Primacie of Rome. Nemo repentè fit turpissimus: The Mysterie of iniquity began in the Apostles times, and went on by degrees, and (at length) the venome and poyson of false and damnable doctrine did infuse and diffuse it selfe into all the veines and vitall parts of the Church: so that that of Isaiah is verified in the Romish Synagogue, From the sole of the foote euen to the head,
                  Esay 1.6. 
                  there is no soundnesse in it, but wounds and bruises and putrifying soares. Neither ought this to seeme

strange vnto vs, seeing that before the Incarnation of Christ, the like Apostasie befell to vs Gentiles, about the yeare of the world 2455, and continued about foureteen hundred yeares: and the like apostasie or reuolt happened to the tenne Tribes, Anno Mundi two thousand nine hundred sixty fiue, and lasted some thousand yeares. For it pleased God in his iustice by leauing men to their owne wils, and by sending them strong delusions, to vindicate and reuenge the contempt and refusall of his holy Gospell once offered vnto them, and sincerely Preached amongst them.
            
            
               
               CHAP. VI. Of the reuealing and discouerie of Antichrist.
               
                  2. Thess. 2.3.THe fourth generall Signe already (at least in great part) accomplished,Apoc. 11.4 5.6. chap. 14. à v. 6. ad 12. is the displaying and discouery of Anti-christ by the Ministery of Gods word, &c.
               This Anti-christ, Bishop, or Pope of Rome, is that Great Starre (or Bishop) that whē 
                  the third Angel sounded,
                  Apoc. 8.10 
                  fell from heauen (i. the Church) burning, viz. before his fall, as it were, a Lampe, and fell vpon the third part of the riuers, and vpon the fountaines of waters: i. Corrupted and poisoned the Church, and the Bishops, Pastors and Ministers of it. This is the Angell of the bottomelesse

Pit: i. came from thence, and thither will returne, with all his fauourites & followers. This is the King of the Locusts,
                  Apoc. 9.11 
                  i. the Head and Prince of the Monks, Friars, Iesuites. This is that Man of sinne;
                  2. Thess. 2 3. 
                  i. nothing but sinne; yea a Teacher and Commander of it.
                     Passiuè & actiuè.
                   
                  The Sonne of Perdition: i. that is damned himselfe, and draweth innumerable with him to the same destruction. Hee opposeth himselfe,
                  Ver. 4. 
                  and exalteth himselfe aboue all that is called God: i. Kings, Emperours, Princes, and Angels, that are in Scripture oftentimes styled Elohim,
                  Psal. 82.1. or Gods. Hee sitteth in the Temple of God, i. (as most Interpretors, old and new, expound it) the Church of God, because it was a true Church, and is so reputed; and a true Church lurketh

amongst them: Shewing himselfe that he is God: that is, not onely assumeth to himselfe the title of God, viz: Holinesse, and so to be called; but taking vpon him power to Change times, Place and displace Kings; Forgiue all sinnes; dispense with the degrees of Marriage forbidden in Moses Law; To command the Angels: to allow all villany, and (without controule) to do what he list. His will standeth for a Law: And forsooth the Holy Ghost dwelleth in his breast; and he cannot erre (viz. but damnably.) His Seate is the new Babylon, i. Rome, that is seated (or was so in Saint Iohns dayes) vpon seuen knowne Hils, and then raigned ouer the Kings of the earth; for some 250 Prouinces and Kingdomes, were subiect

to the Romane Emperour. In a word, all the Popes from Boniface the third, vnto the now Pope Paulus quartus, are that great Anti-christ, in a continued seate, succession, tyrannie, false doctrine, and Regiment, that Saint Paul, and Saint Iohn so much speake of.
               He hath bene reuealed some three hundred yeares agoe, by worthy Iohn Wickliefe, and others: But specially and notably from Anno Christi 1517, vntill this present date 1615, by Apostolicall Martin Luther; and by many most learned, holy, and famous Doctors & Pastors in Germany, France, England, Bohemia, and other Countries and Kingdomes. The light of the Gospell, and the exact knowledge of the fountaine Languages,

hath, and daily doth, discouer, dispell, and scatter, the darknesse, shades, mistes, and cloudes of Poperie. God (in mercy) continue and increase, amongst vs the number of such worthy instruments, and grant that these flying Angels, may, without interruption, passe through the middest of this (Europaean) Heauen,
                  Apoc. 14.6 and Preach the euerlasting Gospell to all Nations, Languages, and People, and that they may speedily and zealously embrace and retaine it, Amen.
               
            
            
               CHAP. VII. Of the great persecutions vnder the Romane Anti christ.
               THE fift generall Signe, already (at least for the most

part) accomplished, are the great persecutions, massacres, murders, warres, poisonings, rackings, excommunications, banishments, imprisonments, and all kind of cruelties against Protestant Princes, Prelates, Pastors, Professours, Churches, Kingdomes, Prouinces, vnder the Romish Foxe, Wolfe, Anti-christ, and his Butcher-like and bloud-sucking followers; especially (ouer all Europe) in these last hundred yeares immediately expired. Their Religion is rebellion, their faith is faction, their badge is bloud.Apoc. 18.24. Rome hath been, & (to their power) yet is, the Shambles and Slaughter-house of the Saints. How many hundred thousands of Christians in Europe hath not that viperous and bloudy generation

slaine and destroied? But we see and hope that the most part of these troubles are ouer-blowne;Apoc. 6.11 that the Church hath and shall haue a further rest and breathing time:Mark. 13.7 that the Papists shall be drunk in their owne bloud, and Babylon shortly bee burnt with fire. And admit that the Romanists (for our tryall, or, to punish our coldnesse and remissenesse in the profession of the pure worship of God) practise, or attempt ought, in Germany, France, the Low Countries, or, our secure, England; yet wee trust it is but a Lightning before death: and a principall meanes to put an edge to our prayers; to scowre off the drosse of our drowsinesse, and to enkindle the zeale of Protestant Kings, Dukes, Pastors and

Professours against them, to their fatall and vtter ruin; which the Almightie grant, for Iesus Christ his beloued Sonnes sake, Amen.
               
               
                  And thus much of the generall Signes of the last day, perfectly fulfilled, which is the first part of the Treatise.
               
            
         
         
            
            The second part of the Booke touching mixt Signes in continuall motion.
            
               CHAP. VIII. Of the vanity, corruption, and manifold abuse of the creatures.
               
                  THE first generall mixt Signe in continuall action and motion, is the vanity, decay, mortalitie, and maruellous abuse of the creatures, daily growing and preuailing vntill the consummation

and end of the world. The world waxeth old as a garment; it, and all the parts of it, fade, waste, consume, and draw toward their fatall period. All things (by sinfull, licentious, and rebellious man) are abused, peruerted, mis-applyed (against the Creators scope, and the creatures desire) to vnlawfull, or immoderate profite and pleasure; yea to reuenge, and open persecution. The Sunne and Moone,
                  The Sun & Moone. those two great Eyes of heauen, are often darkened, and fearefully eclypsed, and (as learned Astronomers haue obserued) many thousand miles neerer the earth then in times past. The Planets and the other Starres,
                  Starres. like so many Candles and Spangles in the heauens, are much decayed in their vertues and operations,

and by hurtfull effects and influences, often annoy corne, man, beasts and plants.
               
                  The Aire.The Aire that we breath in, is oft troubled, infected, and consumeth into the cloudes; and many frightfull and ominous fights appeare in it.
               
                  The Earth.The Earth, the common mother of vs all, is many waies cursed, it is sore weakned, shaken eft-soones by earth-quakes, the Sea oft encroacheth vpon it, and marreth the beauty of it, deadly dampes proceed out of it: it is in many places much more barren then in former times; or else aboundeth with weeds, thornes, and vnprofitable things.
               
                  The Sea.The Sea ebbeth and floweth, it corrodeth and eateth vpon the firme Continent, roareth, is tempestuous and vnquiet, and

drowneth both men and Ships.
               
                  Riuers are often dryed vp,Waters. and change their channels.
               In Plants,
                  Plants. 
                  Hearbs, Trees, there is not the same vigor, efficacy, feeding, and medicinable vertue, which was in times past.
               
                  Men are not so tall of stature,Men. not so long liued, not so strong as in the daies of old: They are more fraile, feeble, mortall; and though they are more illumined, more witty, and learned, by many degrees, then in old time; yet they generally are more crafty, wicked, mischeiuous: they haue science, but not so much conscience.
               Excesse in Building and Apparell,
                  Building. 
                  sunt aegrae Reipub. indicia, that is signes of a sick state: They serue rather for shew then substance, and are more glorious

then lasting. Many Chymnies and little Smoake, faire houses and small hospitality; gallant houses and great enclosures, often eate vp men, and dispeople the Land.
               
                  Apparell.
                  Apparell is vsed more for neatnesse then necessity, for garishnesse then seemelinesse; faire fethers make farie fooles, and now a dayes apparell maketh a man: For matter, men (and especially the woman-kind) that often carry all their riches on their backes, and that haue decked bodies but deformed soules, exceed their calling and ability, they cut not their coate according to their cloath; and this the poore Tenants finde and feele. Alas poore soules! And as for fashion and forme (now the Fashions kill an horse) the

French, Spanish, Italian, and euery new fangled forme, is in request. If they were as monstrous in their bodily shapes, as they are prodigious in their attire, all men might iustly wonder at them, and abhorre them. The Peacock is a goodly Bird but hath foule feete: and they that affect finenesse in apparell, neglect the sanctification of the soule; and (in a word) the leuity of Apparell, doth argue the lightnesse and changeablenesse of the mind.
               
                  Marriages are more desired for riches then Religion,Marriages for goods then goodnesse;
                     Genus & forma sine re vilior alga est.
                   and the face is more respected then grace; but like beginnings haue like endings, and like cause like effect, like parents, like posterity.
               
                  
                  Diet.In Diet many great and rich men obserue no time, order, measure; they looke that the meat be rather toothsome then wholesome; they pamper the body but pine the soule; they stuffe themselues but sterue the poore; hence ensue surfets, sicknesses and vntimely deaths.
               
                  Drinkes.And touching drinking, men were neuer so much giuen to immoderate drinking, and to be drowned in drunkennesse, as in this dropsie age; not the fiery Tragon (yet there are too many ominous fires) but the watry Trigon raigneth: Men make their bodies Tuns to receiue the Wine and the Ale, and when the Wine and Ale is in, the Wit, yea Grace is out: They drinke away all grace out of their hearts, money out

of their purses, honesty out of their liues, and oftentimes die, and are damned in their drunkennesse.
               And that Indian,
                  Tobacco. and costly, weed, now onely and commonly in request, whereof so many thousands liue (and yet they sell nothing but smoake, that though it came not out of the bottomelesse pit, it leades many into it) I meane that smoaking and deuill-choaking Tobacco: For if the smoke or vapour that came out of the liuer of a Fish could driue the deuill out of Tobias daughter: Of how greater force is the Nicotium or Tobacco?
                  Tob. 6.16.17. This Simple and Drugge serueth to dry vp the drunken dropsie, that men may gull in the more drinke. It is a nourisher of lust and drunkennesse; yea

of all idlenesse and prodigality, and a shortner of the life, rather then a lengthner of it.
               
                  Docet experientia rerum. O would some straite and strict Statute were made against this waste-time and waste-mony Tobacco; for now it is a raging and vnruly euill, better beseeming Pagans then Protestants.
            
            
               CHAP. IX. Of the daily weakening and wounding of Anti-christ.
               
                  THE second generall Signe in continuall and present motion is the daily weakning and wounding of Anti-christ and Popery in Christendome, by Writing, by Disputes, and by the Word and the Sword. The

breath of the Lords mouth,
                  2. Thess. 2.8. 
                  i. the mightie and powerfull Preaching of the word of God must consume him: viz. by degrees and times. And hence it is, that the Pope and Papists are such deadly enemies to the sincere and plentifull Preaching of the Word. The three orders of Angels,
                  Reu. 14. v. 6. ad 11. i. of Pastors and Preachers, must reueale, prophecy the ruin of Anti-christ, and vnder paine of damnation, labour to reuoke the fauourites of Anti-christ from their pernicious errours and heresies.
               The Christian Magistrates, Princes, Dukes, Iudges, Captaines, &c. must and shall leade the Babylonians into captiuity, slay diuers of them with the sword; render double vnto these seducing idolaters;chap. 18.6. chap. 17.6. hate the whore,

make her naked, eate her flesh and consume her with fire: And this is in continuall execution; and both Magistrate and Ministers, Captaines and Colonels, are in the Scriptures commanded and enioyned to prosecute this businesse. God stirre vp their zeale and resolution;Iudg. 5.23. For Cursed is he that helpeth not the Lord against the mighty,Ier. 48.10. or, that goeth negligently about the work of the Lord.
            
            
               CHAP. X. Of the falling of particular persons from the reuealed truth, and their returne to the errors of Anti-christ.
               THE third generall Signe, in continuall motion, is,

that in the latter daies, certaine shall depart from the faith;1. Tim. 4.1. some Princes, some Prelates, some Ministers, some Professours. They affect not, nor loue, the sweet and sugred Gospell of Christ, but rather delight and doate vpon sense-pleasing superstition;2. Thess. 2.11.12. and hence being iustly forsaken of God, these ignorant and vnstable soules returne with the dogs to their former vomite, and with the swine to their wallowing in the mire of Popish defilements.2. Pet. 2.
               
               These that thus fall away in this great light of the world, whether to Anti-christ or to Epicurisme, and Atheisme, are Comets soone consumed, and not fixed Starres that alwaies abide in the Firmament. These are like Chaffe blowne away with

euery blast of trouble,Psal. 1.4. but not good Graine that abideth. Finally, they are they that build their house vpon the sandy foundation of mans inuentions, or at least of Historicall and Temporary Faith;Mat. 7.26 27. and therefore as soone as the winds blow,Math. 13.10. & 21. and the waters flow, it falleth. For if they had builded it vpon the Rock Christ, and kept Faith and a good Conscience, they had stood firme and fast, like the Mount Syon,
                  Psal. 125.1 
                  which standeth fast for euer and can neuer be remoued.
               
               But, thankes be to God, this wind shaketh no corne: though the Church of Rome gaine in one place, it looseth in another: that which is gained in the shire is lost in the hundred.
            
            
               
               CHAP. XI. Of a generall corruption in life and manners, which is more to bee feared in these latter daies then corruption in doctrine.
               THE fourth generall Signe in daily motion and encrease, is the invndation of all manner of sinne and wickednesse, and a generall corruption of mens manners. This plague raigneth and rageth: vices and abuses creepe vpon men by stealth, by their contagion infect them, and passe from one to another. Our age is (as it were) the Sinke of all former ages, into which all filthinesse runneth. The more Light wee haue, the more Lewd wee are: the more wee are warned, the

more wicked wee shew our selues. Men indeed haue a Forme and profession of godlinesse,2. Tim. 3 1. but deny the power thereof in their hearts. Men generally so now liue, as though there were no Iudge to call thē to an account, no heauen for reward, and no hell for punishment: and, as though the Preachers threates and thundrings were but scare-bugs; yea, as though God had granted out a generall indulgence vnto all manner of sinne.
               
                  Mat. 24.11
                  Charitie is waxen cold, yet selfe-loue aboundeth. Vsury by the Scriptures, all ancient Fathers, and Councels, condemned to hell, and in former generations scarce heard of, is now become a common Trade. O Legall, nay ô Lawlesse theeues!

                  Might ouer-ruleth Right; the poore is the rich mans booty. Idlenesse, excessiue pride in apparell, blasphemie, Saboth-profanation, lying, yea, and drunkennesse, abound and are vnpunished. These are priuiledged sinnes, and seeme to haue some speciall charter and immunity, yea impunity. But the iudgement of God sleepeth not, and one day shall pay for all. What should I speak of fraud, deceit, filthy liuing, back-biting, malice, enuy, and going to the Law (to feed the greedy Griffins) for euery trifle? Men (in a manner) mind nothing but eating, drinking, buying, selling, building, marrying, and giuing in marriage;Luk. 17.26.27.28. planting, setting, &c. not dreading the last day (though neerely approaching)

much lesse preparing themselues by faith and repentance, against the second comming of our Lord Iesus. But when they shall say peace,
                  1. Thess. 5.3. 
                  peace, sudden destruction shall come vpon them as the trauaile vpon a woman with child, and they shall in no wise escape. Finally, there is no truth in mens promises; whereas in time past euery mans word was thought as good as an Obligation. There seemeth almost no faith left vpon the earth, whether we respect God or man: Good men decay and euill men abound; yea, one may with better like and applause liue loosely then Religiously: For euery religious man (though neuer so discreete) shall vsually bee mistermed a Puritane, a Precisian, a Schismatick, a factious and

seditious person. And alas! what ill haue these honest and harmelesse men done? or who are these that so exclaime and declaime against them, but Libertines, Atheists, Papists, Drunkards, Gamesters, Epicures, and the like, whose tongue is no slander? What shall wee conclude of all these, and the sinnes of all Callings and Trades, in Church, Family, and Commonwealth, which would bee too long now to recite, All these daily and wonderously encreasing, doe presage and euince that the end of all things is at hand; and therefore wee should bee sober, and watch and pray,
                  1. Pet. 4.7.8. 
                  but aboue all things haue feruent charity amongst our selues.
               
               For as vlcers and bodily diseasesA similitude.
                  
comming thick, and members out of ioint, are fore-runners of death neere at hand: so these common and prodigious offences and scandals euidently argue, that the day of the Lord is not farre off.
               It shall bee our wisedome, and good for vs in this common pestilence of Manners, to get and preserue the Antidotes and Counter-poisons of faith and a good conscience; that though wee liue in all euill world which will grow worse and worse, yet wee bee not infected by it: And it is the greatest tryall, yea and the highest commendations for any man to bee godly, good, and deuout, amongst those that are openly wicked: For it sheweth that

grace in him is more strong to preserue him, then wicked and profane men to poison, or peruert him.
            
         
         
            
            The third part of the Booke touching generall Signes yet for to come.
            
               CHAP. XII. Of the vtter ruin, sacking, and burning of Rome, the seate of Anti-christ.
               
                  THE first generall Signe of Christs comming, that is yet not begun, is the ruin and vtter desolation of the Citie Rome: For the Throne of the Beast must grow darke;Apoc. 16.10 
                  Babylon must fall, it

must fall, and come into remembrance before God:
                  Apoc. 18.8 at one instant must her plagues come, viz famine, mourning, death; it must be burnt with fire,
                  Ver. 12.13. and all her pretious things, all her Musicall instruments, and idoll furniture be wholy consumed, and euer after vnto the comming of our Lord, Baybilon must be an house of deuils,
                  Ver. 2. and a Cage of euery hatefull and vncleane Bird: Some of the ten Hornes: i. one of the last Emperours, or some valiant Duke, must be the chiefe instrument to execute Gods fore-determined vengeanee vpon her. The Romanists and Italians and others, that are willed to come out of Babell,
                  Ver. 6. and to render Double vnto the Whore for that she had done vnto them, shal assist the principall instrument.
               
                  That Rome shall (literally vnderstood) bee vtterly desolated before the end of the world; not onely all Protestant Interpreters of the Reuelation hold, but also the Sibyllae;
                     Lact. de diu. praemio. lib. 7. c. 11. yea diuers chiefe Papists, as namely, Vega, Ribera, Bellarmine, the Rhemists, and others confesse.
               Touching the yeare and point of time, when Rome shall bee destroyed, albeit wee dare not (as some doe) determine of some thirty yeares hence,The time of the burning of Rome. and some more probably of a shorter time, yet we are perswaded that it is neere at hand, and (perhaps) much neerer then most imagine. For the power of the Pope in forraigne Kingdomes is much lessened; his authoritie in ciuill causes euery where falleth to the ground; yea in his

owne Dominions, in Venice, Florence, Millain, &c. Many that haue beene by him seduced beginne to kenne and smell him out; To speak nothing of England and other Protestant Kingdomes that haue wholy forsaken him. Now let vs come vnto some forcible reasons and arguments, whereby wee may make strong our assertion.
               
                  I. Reason.
                  All Kingdomes and States haue their set Periods and Fatall yeares, which being expired, they must needs fall and come to naught, and lightly in the space of 500 yeares there is seene an alteration in all States, and why not in Rome?
               
               
                  
                  II. Reason.
                  All tainted, vnsound, and putrified bodies, hauing the beginning and matter of their destruction in themselues, do at length (though no man hurt them) vanish and die: But Rome and Popery, is such a tainted, vnsound, and rotten body; yea an old wind-shaken and ruinous house; which though the Iesuites, and others, seeme to prop vp for a reason, yet downe it must, and fall it will, and so let it in Gods name.
               
               
                  III. Reason.
                  Easterne Babell in Chaldaea, a figure of this Romish and new Babell, is long sithence fallen

(though in villany, cruelty, and idolatry nothing comparable to it) and therefore it must needes come to desolation. The Type and the Arch-type, must needs answere and agree. Babylon in Chaldaea was laid waste by the Medes and Persians, and so shall Rome bee by the Christian Princes.
               
               
                  IIII. Reason.
                  God, that is truth it selfe, and whose absolute threatnings are alwaies executed,Apoc. 18.21 hath fore-told a secular ruin of Rome; therfore it must needs come to passe.
               
               
                  V. Reason.
                  God is infinite in power,Apoc. 18.8 and able to bring it to passe, therefore

it is not impossible, though in our weakenesse, wee doe, and may, cast many doubts.
               
               
                  VI. Reason.
                  
                     Romish Babel is already fallen in many Countries, Kingdomes, Prouinces, and States, of Europe, viz. in Germany, Heluetia, Polonia, Bohemia, Hungaria, England, Scotland, Ireland, Denmarke, in diuers Prouinces of the Lower Germany, and in a good part of France, &c. And why shall it not by the like reason (in due time) fall in Italy, Spaine, Portugall, &c. Parium similis est ratio.
                  
               
               
                  VII. Reason.
                  The sinnes, treacherie, idolatry, cruelty, pride, blaspemy,

lust and abominations of Rome are so ripe and growne to such an head and impudency, that they ouercome the patience and long-suffering of our Lord, and prouoke and enforce him to descend vnto visible and horrible execution, and reuenge: For the iust Iudge of the world must needs doe Iustice,
                     Gen. 18. and bee auenged of his enemies: Let vs therefore say,Psal. 68.1. 
                     Exurgat Deus & dissipentur inimici. i. Let God arise and let his enemies bee dispersed.
                  
               
               
                  VIII. Reason.
                  The Anti-christ doth with all maine and might (whatsoeuer the Foxe pretendeth) set and oppose himselfe against our Lord Iesus Christ, against his Gospell, Discipline, Church

and Members; Therefore our Almighty IESVS cannot but confront and confound this his Arch-enemy.
               
               
                  IX. Reason.
                  The wailing and lamentation of the (Popish) Kings,
                        Ab euentu.
                      Marchants, Marriners, &c. beholding a farre off the burning of Rome;Apoc 18.9 11.17.18. and contrary-wise the reioycing of the Prophets and Apostles (per prosopopeiam) and of the Pastors and Church of God,Apoc. 18.20. for the desolation of Rome when it is come to passe; demonstrate the certainty of this future Iudgement.
                  Lastly, certaine of the neerest fore-runners of Romes ruine. First a suddaine departure of many Christians out of Rome,

by the instinct of Gods Spirit; like wherevnto was that of the godly Iewes departing from Ierusalem, a little before the Siege of it. Secondly, a diuision of the Citie (or Cittizens) into three parts; a figure whereof was the diuision of Tongues when the Tower of Babell was destroyed.Gen. 11. Lastly, a most terrible and ominous Earth-quake,
                     Apoc. 16.18. 
                     Such as there was neuer since men were vpon the earth, doe euidence it, and will giue the godly the watch-word.
               
            
            
               
               CHAP. XIII. How after the destruction of Rome the Papists, and louers of the Whore, shall practise, by violence, vtterly to roote out all Christians, but shall bee finally and vtterly ouerthrowne.
               A Second generall Signe of Christs comming, not yet begunne to bee fulfilled, is the vtmost indeuour and practise of the Romanists (that shall suruiue when Rome is burnt) to roote out and extinguish by the sword, all Christians: And this cleerely appeareth, out of the 19 chapter of Saint Iohns Reuelation, and by the consent of diuers learned and iudicious Interpreters.
               The Beast (i. the second beast

the Pope) and the (Popish) Kings of the earth,
                  Apoc. 19.19. 
                  and their Armies (viz. huge and many) gathered themselues together to make warre against him that sate on the Horse (i. Christ, and Christian Princes his Instruments) and against his Army, 1. All Protestant Souldiers. But behold, and wonder at the euent, and giue the Lord the glory of the victory: The Protestants shall Eate (i. destroy) the flesh of (Popish) Kings,
                  Vers. 18. 
                  Captaines, Mighty men, of horses, horse-men, bond, free,
                  Vers. 20. 
                  great small: Then the beast and the false Prophet shall bee taken.
                  Iudg. 5. vlt. 
                  So perish all thine enemies ô Lord; but let them that loue thee, bee as the Sunne when it goeth forth in his might.
               
               So you see that the Papists shall seek by a generall consent,

to recouer their ruines and regaine their losses, but with no successe; yea with their fatall ouerthrow: It is no striuing against the Lord.
            
            
               CHAP. XIIII. A third generall and memorable Signe of the approach of the last iudgement; namely, the conuersion of the Iewes.
               A Third general and eminent Signe, not yet fulfilled, is the general Calling,
                  2. Cor. 3.15 
                  and Gathering of the whole Nation of the Iewes vnto the faith, and into the Church of Christ: And this is pregnantly gathered of Scripture:Isay 59.20. 
                  Ioh. 10.16. There must be one Fold (of Iewes and Gentiles) and one Shepheard.
                  Rom. 11.25 
                  Euery

Tribe must mourne apart,
                  Zach. 13.2. for Christ (by them crucified) the parents (by the Sword of Gods Word,chap. 13.3. at least) must thrust through the false Prophet when hee Prophecieth: The Prophet shall bee ashamed of his vision (i. his false doctrine) lay aside his rough garment (taken vp by apish imitationVer. 4. of the true Prophets) and returne to his former husbandry.
                  Ver. 5. Then shall wee see (in earth) The holy Citie new Ierusalem,
                  Apoc. 21.2. 
                  comming downe from God out of heauen, prepared as a Bride adorned for her Husband: whereof so many glorious things are spoken in Scripture, and literally to be vnderstood in many points.
               These vpon the fame and brute of their first conuersion, and the report of their purpose

to returne into their owne Country; neere wherevnto, and in the Confines whereof many of them dwell, shall bee assaulted by the great Turke,
                  Dan. 11.44 45. the King of the North, who with all his forces shall endeuour to extinguish them, and kill euery mothers sonne: so that there shall bee such a time of trouble to them,
                  Chap. 12.1 
                  as neuer was since there was a Nation, euen to that same time; But then Michaell the great Prince, i. The Lord IESVS or his mighty instruments, shall Stand vp and (finally) deliuer them. None of all these Prophecies are yet performed, therefore they must, of necessity, be fulfilled in their appointed times.
               The Iewes being once conuerted, shall bee a most famous,

reformed, and Exemplary Church of all the world,Isay 2.2. and all Nations shall flow vnto it, and it shall bee, as it were, a visible heauen vpon earth; but it shall not (perhaps) many yeares continue. For the further proofe of their further conuersion (to omit sundry glorious promises of God in Esay, Ezechiel, the Psalmes, and which are thought hitherto but in (small) part to be performed) I alledge these reasons ensuing.
               
                  I. Reason.
                  The Apostle S. Paul inferreth that the Iewes are not vniuersally forsaken, because hee being an Israelite,Rom. 11.1. and of the Tribe of Beniamin is not forsaken.
               
               
                  
                  II. Reason.
                  The same Apostle saith, that there is a Remnant reserued,
                        A pari.
                      and as it were some seed of election in the multitude,Ver. 5. though yet not seene nor discerned.
               
               
                  III. Reason.
                  The calling and conuersion of some Iewes to the Christian Faith in all ages, doth conclude that the Iewes are not wholy forsaken, but are rather the first fruites of a greater Haruest, and the Fore-runners of a greater Conuersion.
                  
               
               
                  IIII. Reason.
                  The First Fruites, viz, the holy Patriarkes are holy, and therefore

the Lumpe,
                     Rom. 11.16 
                     i. the multitude of them for the time to come, is holy: The roote (Abraham) is holy, and therefore (some) Branches.
                  
               
               
                  V. Reason.
                  It was a speciall end of Pauls Ministerie to winne his Country-men the Iewes;Ver. 13.14 and it is (or ought to bee) the scope of our zeale and good example, to gaine them: But this end and scope, being of God, cannot be vaine and frustrate.
               
               
                  VI. Reason.
                  The Fulnesse of the Iewes conuerted shall bee the Riches (the occasion of knowledge & grace) of the world;Ver. 12. and their taking (into the Church) shall

bee life from death,
                     Ver. 15. the reuiuing and springing againe of the whole world consisting of Iewes and Gentiles.
               
               
                  VII. Reason.
                  
                     Ver. 23.God can convert them and graft them in againe, therefore it is not impossible.
               
               
                  VIII. Reason.
                  When the Fulnesse of vs Gentiles is come into the Church,
                     Ver. 25. 
                     id est, some remaining Nations, as perhaps Spaine, Italy, Portugall, or the like Countries: then shall all Israel (i. a great or greatest part of the Iewes) bee conuerted.
                  
                     Quest. 1. What shall bee the place of their calling?
                  
                     Answ. The Easterne and

Westerne parts of the world in respect of Iudaea and that are neere vnto it.
                  
                     Quest. 2. When shall they bee generally called?
                  
                     Ans. When Rome, whose Idolatry so hindreth their conuersion, shall bee burnt, and the full number of vs Gentiles, that shall prouoke them, is come in.
                  
                     Quest. 3. Shall the Iewes bee restored into their Countrey?
                  
                     Ans. It is very probable. First, all the Prophets seeme to speak of this returne. Secondly, they shall no longer bee in bondage. Thirdly, God hauing for so many ages forsaken his people shall the more notably shew them mercy.
               
            
            
               
               CHAP. XV. Of the extreme and finall desolation of the Turke and his Monarchy.
               THE great Turke, who in Daniel is called the King of the North,
                  Dan. 11.40 and all his innumerable Army, shall in a place called Armageddon i. the Mountaine of Delight,Apoc. 16.16. Beauty, or Holinesse, or Iudaea, lying betweene the (Syrian) Sea,Dan. 11.45 and the great Riuer Euphrates, bee vtterly confounded.
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     
                   For this Turkish Gog and Magog shall plant his Palace there; he shall gather the (conuerted) Iewes to battell,
                  Apoc. 20.9 
                  he shall goe vpon the bredth of the earth, and compasse the Campes of the Saints about, and the beloued Citie: i. Ierusalem,

or the Church of the Iewes: For he shall feare least the Iewes, so infinite in number, gathering themselues together should come, or conspire, to dispossesse him of his (vsurped) Kingdome: wherefore he shall do his vtmost, vtterly to extinguish and roote out these (poore) Iewes: then there shall bee such a time of trouble, as neuer was heard of (in that Nation) but Michael the great Prince (whether the Lord IESVS,Dan. 12.1. or some powerfull Instrument of his) shall stand vp for his chosen, and deliuer them: Fire shall come downe from God out of heauen,Apoc. 20.9 and deuoure their enemies;Ezech. 38.9. that is, (as Ezechiel more fully speaketh of the matter) though he come like a storme against the people of Israel,
                  Ver. 16.
                  
and as a Cloud to couer the land, yet God will make a great and generall shaking in the Land of Israel;19 Hee will call for a Sword against him,22 hee will plead against him with Pestilence and with bloud; hee will raine vpon him and his bands, and vpon the many people that are with him,Dan. 11.45 
                  an ouer-flowing raine, and great haile-stones, fire and Brimestone. Finally, there he shall come to his end, and none shall helpe him.
               
               He is an arch-enemy of the Lord IESVS and his Church; he beganne with the Romish Antichrist, and why then shall not he bee confounded with him, or not long after him?
            
            
               
               CHAP. XVI. Of the false Christs, and the false Prophets (their ministers) that shall arise in the last age of the world.
               EVEN as (Tipicé) betweene the death of Christ, and the destruction of Ierusalem, there arose false Messiasses in that generation: so correspondently, in the last generation of mankind, not long before the end of the world,Mat. 24 24 there shall arise false Christs (that shal take vpon them the very person of Christ, and vsurpe his name) and false Prophets (viz. their Ministers) that shall say they are sent of Christ, that shall win credit vnto them, and do great Signes and Wonders to deceiue (if it were possible) the

very Elect. And this God shall suffer to come to passe, to try, proue, and make manifest, whether his elect people will assent vnto, and bee carried away with such false Christs, and false Prophets, or no? And to vindicate and (spiritually) punish, in the Reprobate and Vnbeleeuers, the refusall and extreme contempt of his sweete and blessed Gospell,2. Thess. 2.11.12. Preached amongst them, and offered vnto them.
               
                  Quest. But how may these false Christs that shall bee raised vp by the deuill, in the last age (or how shall they) bee discerned and distinguishd, from the false Messia's before the destruction of Ierusalem that drew great multitudes after them?
               
                  Ans. These last shall bee false

Christs taking vpon them the very name of Christ, but the former were false Messiae, that imagined Christ to be a meere man, neither did they assume vnto themselues the Title of the Sonne of God. Secondly, our Lord Prophecyeth of false Christs that shall arise in the end of the world, and seduce, as well the Gentiles as the Iewes; but those before the ouerthrow of Ierusalem onely deceiued the Iewes. Lastly, those false Messiae did shew forth no Signes or Wonders, and therefore could not so effectually deceiue others; But these false Christs, by fained Miracles, satanicall illusions, and efficacy of errour, shall seeke to winne them credit and authority; and therefore of this time that saying of our Lords

shall bee, or may bee, (specially) verified:Luke 18.8. 
                  Shall the Sonne of man when hee commeth finde faith vpon the earth?
               
               
                  Quest. Shall the miracles of these false Christs and false Prophets bee true and Diuine, as those of our Lord IESV, and of the Apostles, were?
               
                  Ans. No: The Miracles done by CHRIST and his Apostles, were true miracles in matter and forme, hauing their beginning from God, setting forth the glory of God, and confirming the truth: But the Miracles of these false Christs and false Prophets, shall bee lying Miracles, illusions, or cunning conclusions, proceeding from the deuill; not profitable and wholsome, but rather pompous and permicious, and tending

onely to confirme and mainetaine lies and errours.
            
            
               CHAP. XVII. Of the strange Euents, Signes, Prodigies, and fearefull wonders of the last age.
               A Sixt generall Signe not yet fulfilled, but to come to passe, are prodigies, strange things, and ominous and most fearefull euents. These shall presignifie the change and end of all things to be euen at hand, in so much that the very brute creatures shall feele the power of Christ ready to come to iudgement. Of this sort are terrible Sights in the Aire,Luk. 21.11. dreadfull earth-quakes, frequent and fearefull fires;
                  Vers. 25 
                  vpon the earth distresse

of Nations with perplexities, the Sea & the waues extraordinarily roaring:
                  26 
                  mens hearts failing them for feare, and for looking after those things which are comming on the earth:
                  Mar. 13.8. 
                  Famines, troubles, Wonders in heauen aboue,
                  Act. 2.19. 
                  and Signes in the earth beneath bloud and fire, and vapors of Smoke. The Sunne shall bee turned into darkenesse,
                  20 
                  and the Moone into bloud, before that great and notable day of the Lord commeth; the Starres shall fall downe from heauen: i. either such in shew and appearance, or Meteors and blazing Starres. Of this sort also are thundring Winds, and troublesome Tempests, invndations of waters,
                  
                     Lact. de diu. praemio. lib. 7. c. 15. excessiue Raine, drying vp of Fountaines, failing of Beasts, Birds, Fishes: vnequall and vnnaturall Seasons
                  
of the yeares, Winterly Summers, and Summer-like Winters, extreme barrennesse of the earth, and horrible confusions.
               
                  
                     Vse 1.
                  Let all good Pastors and Preachers fore-warne their hearers hereof, and when they perceiue the accomplishment of them, labour to awaken them out of their deadly lethargie by zealous and due application heereof.
               
               
                  
                     Vse 2.
                  They much mistake the matter, and are fouly ouer-seene, that expect a golden world, and expect an heauen on earth, and an exquisite reformation of all things: whereas in so declining

a world, they shall see the Lord comming in the cloudes sooner then this their dreame come to passe.
               
            
            
               CHAP. XVIII. Of the generall and maruellous deadnesse of heart, and senselesse benummednesse of the last times.
               A Seuenth generall Signe, shall bee a dead slumber, spirituall Lethargie, and a brutish security in all sorts of people; which, though it hath bene in the time of Noah,
                  Luke 17.26.27. not long before the vniuersall Deluge; and in the time of iust Lot, at the destruction of Sodom and Gomorrah, and in other ages of the world; yet it shall most apparantly

raigne and preuaile in the last age; So that no Alarums, no thundering iudgements, no strange Sightes, Monsters, Wonders, Doctrine, Counsell, Admonitions, Warnings, shall bee able to arowse and waken them from this sluggish and deafe security: They shall drowne themselues in pleasure and in drunkennesse; mind nothing but the world, wealth, oppression, reuenge: But the Sonne of man shall come to such, in an houre they wot not of, and shall finde them sleeping:
                  Mar. 13.36 1. Thess. 5.2. 
                  The day of the Lord shall come as a Thiefe in the night: For when they shall say peace and safety,
                  Ver. 3. 
                  then sudden destruction shall come vpon them as trauaile vpon a woman with child, and they shall not escape. Securitas initium calamitatis: God

giue vs grace, to watch and waite for that day, and to attend to the sound of the Trumpet, that being found watching and wel-doing, wee may stand before the Sonne of man,Luk. 21.36 and enter into our Lords ioy. Amen.
               
            
            
               CHAP. XIX. Of the graduall, yet sudden darkning of the lights of heauen.
               THE last generall Signe is, not onely the wonderfull roaring of the Seas, but a graduall, yet sensible and strange darkening of the lights of heauen; this is the neerest generall Signe, and the more to bee heeded when it commeth: For presently after shall come our LORD IESVS, who by the

brightnesse of his comming, shall (vtterly) obscure and hide the light of the Sunne, Moone, and Starres. Neither must this seeme incredible or impossible, for the like hath beene seene in time past (though not vniuersally ouer the whole world, but in some kingdome and particular place of it) At mid-day,
                  Act. 26.13. as Saint Paul went to Damascus, he saw in the way a light from heauen aboue the brightnesse of the Sunne, shine round about him and thē that iourneyed with him: If it exceeded the brightnes of Sun, then it obscured the Sun, and (as it were) put out the light of it.
               Secondly, at the death of Christ, the Sunne was darkened and terribly eclypsed:Mat. 27.44. 
                  And darknesse was vpon all the land (of Iudaea) from the sixt houre to the

ninth: i. from noone to three of the clock in the afternoone.
               Thirdly, strange and wonderfull sightes and prodigies were fore-runners of the destruction of Ierusalem: and why not likewise of the end of the world?
               Lastly, the poore Marriners and Sea-faring men haue particular and lamentable experience of such darkenesse, when suddenly the storme ariseth, and all their lights are put out, and they oftentimes are ouer-whelmed. In Saint Pauls voyage to Rome, when hee and his company were exceedingly tossed vpon the Seas, neither Sunne nor Starres in many daies appeared.
                  Act. 27.28.
               
               
                  
                     Vse 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     
                  Let us therefore as the children of the Light, and the day, put on the Armour of light, that

this darkenesse when it commeth discomfort vs not, much lesse bee a fore-runner of euerlasting darknesse, Amen.
               
            
            
               CHAP. XX. Diuers difficult and curious questions, soberly handled, and religiously resolued.
               
                  I. Question.
                  How, and with what truth, could Saint Paul in his time teach,1. Cor. 10▪
                      that the ends of the world were come on them: and S. Peter write that the end of all things was then at hand;1. Pet. 4.7 seeing that from that time vnto ours, haue passed about one thousand sixe hundred yeares, and we certainely know not, how many

yeares remaine to bee accomplished?
                  
                     I Answere▪
                      First, from Christs Birth (or Death) vnto the end of the world is counted but an age, or the last, though (perhaps) the longest, age of the world: Seeing wee are not to haue, nor expect, any new Christ, new Gospell, new Sacraments, new Scriptures, new Apostles, new Euangelists, new Miracles; but content our selues with those that Christ hath vnchangeably left vnto vs.
                  Secondly, this last age of the world is not confined and limited to a certaine stint and set number of yeares, as the former ages are, and were: because wee should alwaies bee prepared, and in continuall expectation when it should end, otherwise

men would more delay and post of (from time to time) their conuersion vnto God: Therefore, as the last age of a man (to wit old age) cannot bee determined by a certaine number of yeares as the precedent ages of a man;
                        August.
                      namely, child-hood, striplings state, youth, and ripenesse of age can: Euen so the last age of the world, cannot be determined and defined by certaine and expresse yeares.
                  Lastly,
                        Chrys. hom. 33. in Iohannem.
                      as wee call the end of the yeare, not the last day but the last moneth, though containing 30 daies: So wee may, and doe, call the last quarter of the world, the end of it, though it be of longer extent then any age from the beginning of the world vnto Christ his Incarnation.
               
               
                  
                  A second Question.
                  Whether that this world shall last and continue (at least) seuen hundred yeares, seeing that in the 20 chapter of S. Iohns Reuelation, expresse mention is made of two distinct thousands of yeares;Apoc. 20. the former wherof, is thought to take his beginning at the raigne of the Emperour Constantine, and to end about Wickliefes time, Anno 1300, and in all this time the Church declined; and the second millenarie, or thousand, wherein the Church shall bee renewed and flourish, beganne onely (as it is collected) about the yeare of our Lord 1300, so that seuen hundred yeares yet remaine.
                  
                     Ans. True it is that mention

is made of two thousand yeares, and diuers of the ancient Fathers did acknowledge as much, but mis-vnderstood, and mis-applyed, the same, being carryed away with the errour of the Millenarij, that imagined that the people of God should after the Resurrection, liue a thousand yeares in this world in pleasures and ioyes.
                  But, I answere first, that it is not agreed amongst Interpreters, when the first thousand should beginne, whether when S. Iohn wrote his Apocalipse, or rather Anno 300 when Constantine beganne to raigne.
                  Secondly, for the Elects sake, least all flesh should perish, these daies shall bee shortned, as well as those of the Iewes miserie at the destruction of IerusalemMat. 24.22
                     
were abridged: For the shortning of the former is a type and figure of the shortning of the latter. Now how many yeares, or, whether certaine hundred of yeares, God best knoweth (if not onely knoweth) and the end and issue will make manifest.
                  Thirdly, if the end of the world should continue so long, and this should be notified, and publickly signified to the world, they would take occasion to liue much more licentiously, to deferre their repentance; yea, many would Atheistically inferre, that Christ would neuer come to iudgement: And therefore the Holy Ghost keepeth vs in suspense, and still in the Scripture telleth vs, that the Houre draweth neere, that the Day is at

hand, and that the Lord will come quickly, to the intent wee should alwaies be ready.
               
               
                  A third Question.
                  Whether that the world shall end in the yeare of Christ two thousand thirty nine, that is some foure hundred and fiue and twenty yeares hence, seeing that from the beginning of the world, to that date, are accomplished the 6000 yeares of the worlds full continuance; figured (as diuers old and new Writers thinke) by the sixe daies of the creation.
                  
                     Ans. First, from the six daies of creation to conclude of sixe thousand yeares of the worlds continuance, it is no certaine rule, or axiome, but onely a coniecture.

And whereas Saint Peter saith; That a thousand yeares with the Lord (viz. being compared with His Erernitie) is but as one day,
                     2. Pet. 3.8. 
                     and one day as a thousand yeares; hee neither alludeth to the sixe daies wherein the world was created, nor doth determine how long the world shall endure.
                  Secondly, our confident perswasion is, that the world shall be consummate before this long date, for the dayes must bee shortned, otherwise if the world hold on his hold, there should no faith be left, or found vpon the earth.
                  Thirdly the Wise Virgins, that is, the holy Professours of sincere Religion,Mat. 25.6. shall nictare, id est, nod and slumber (though their hearts shall wake) and therefore they

haue no certaine knowledge of any yeare when the Lord will come to iudgement,Luk. 12.39 otherwise they would the more rowse vp themselues.
                  Lastly, the sixt Angell hath already blowne, or sounded with the Trumpet, and when the seuenth shall but beginne to blow (which time is shortly expected) then the Mysterie of God shall bee finished,
                     Apoc. 10.7 (i. the world shall bee ended) as hee hath declared to his Seruants the Prophets, i. will reueale to the godly learned Pastors and Ministers, who (no doubt) some of them will take speciall notice of it, that they may more painefully performe their Office, and more preuailingly stirre vp their hearers.
               
               
                  
                  A fourth Question.
                  Whether that the world shall end in the yeare of Christ 1699 or 1700, especially seeing that from the time that the daily Sacrifice shall bee taken away, and the abomination of desolation set vp, shall bee 1335 daies, which some interprete so many yeares, beginning the account in the yeare of Christ 367, when the Iewes, by the grant of the Emperour Iulian, repairing the Temple of Ierusalem, were dispersed by fire sent from heauen?
                  I Answere, that most, and almost all Interpreters vnderstand those 1335 daies, not for so many yeares, but literally, for three yeares and an halfe, with the addition of 45 daies, in the

end wherof Antiochus the chiefe enemy of the Iewes should die; and being fulfilled in Antiochus, why, or by what reason, should any man extend them further?
                  Secondly, it is generally held that (the doctrine and mention of the last iudgement excepted) that Daniels Prophecie endeth either at the death of Christ, or (at the furthermost) with the destruction of Ierusalem.
                  Thirdly, Maister Napier, a learned Scot, counting the beginning of these 1335 daies (and interpreting them for yeares) anno Christi 360, will haue the world to end, about the yeare 1695; But Maister Brightman maketh this date the beginning of the generall conuersion and flourishing state of the Iewes, which hee holdeth shall

continue diuers hundred yeares afterwards.
                  Fourthly, it was a receiued opinion that the world should end 1588, and the euent descried the vanity of their collection: And why may not they erre (though they cannot so much erre comming neerer the end of the world) likewise, that define that the world shall certainely end betweene the yeares 1688, and 1695?
                  Lastly, it is not for vs (specially that liue not in the very last age of the world) to know the times and seasons,
                     Acts 1.7. 
                     which the Father hath reserued in his owne power; therefore let vs not bee ouer-curious, but wise to sobrietie.
               
               
                  
                  A fift Question.
                  Whether (as some Phantasticks are reported to hold and defend) the world shall end before the yeares of Christ 1630?
                  
                     Ans. First, to arguments vnknowne wee cannot giue particular answeres.
                  Secondly, this opinion is priuate and singular, and, perhaps, onely one man is the Author of it. An ille solus sapit? who hath told him?
                  Thirdly, all the remaining Signes, not yet begunne to bee accomplished, cannot, in any probability, bee fulfilled in so short a scantling of time; or, if they can, let him assigne the particular yeare of Romes ruin, of the Iewes conuersion, of the

comming of the false Christs; if he cannot resolue vs in the smaler point, how shall wee credit him in the greatest?
                  Lastly, when the Iewes are conuerted, it is most likely they shall (at least) continue glorious on the earth for one generation, that Gods mercy may more euidently appeare, and that all the world may take sufficient notice of their generall calling, and herevpon be either conuerted or (at least) conuicted.
               
               
                  A sixth, and more materiall Question.
                  Whether the very age (which some,Deu. 15.16 reckoning according to the Iubile account, restraine to 50 yeares) wherein our Lord

shall come to iudgement, either now is, or, hereafter may, or shal be▪ reuealed to any; especially seeing that our Lord, speaking of the Signes of the last daies saith; That this generation, (i. the age or time of a mans life) shall not passe vntill all these things shall be fulfilled?
                  
                  
                     Ans. I answere, First, that to restraine a generation, or, age of a man, to 50 yeares, may seeme too short an account; rather 70 or 80 yeares may make a generation.
                  Secondly, the age wherein Christ shall come may bee knowne, because our Lord onely excepteth the day and houre.
                  Thirdly, the Scripture expressely saith, that in that age in which the false Christs and Prophets shall arise, all shall bee fulfilled.
                  
                     Lastly, when the seuenth Angell shall begin to blow,
                     Apoc. 10.7 
                     the Mysterie of God shall be finished, &c.
                  
               
            
            
               CHAP. XXI. The wholesome Application, and profitable Vses of all these Signes and Fore-runners.
               
                  I. Vse.
                  HERE are condemned Aristotle and his followers, who imagining that the world had no beginning, held that it should neuer end.
                  Secondly, here are taxed all Atheists and Scorners, that either will not beleeue, or be perswaded, that there shall bee a second comming of Christ, and an end of this world; or else,

with those scoffers in Saint Peters time, say; Where is the promise of his comming? These bee like vnto one Manlius who said; Non alium vidêre patres, aliumùe minores aspicient.
                  
               
               
                  II. Vse.
                  The doctrine of these Signes serueth to check and reproue all Curiosists and rash Spirits, that by coniectures, Arithmeticall numbers, and misapplying and wresting of the holy Scriptures, seeke to search out, yea to determine the day, as Bellarmine (by consequence) doth: For he, mis-vnderstanding the Scriptures both of Daniel and the Apocalipse, touching the continuance of Antichrist, doth hold that the imaginary Antichrist

which hee and his followers yet expect to come, shall raigne iust three yeares and an halfe,Dan. 12.11 12. and that iust in the end of them Christ shall come to iudgement, or (at the vtmost) there shall bee a distance of 45 daies for warning and preparation; so that by this account a man may know the very day of the last iudgement, which Christ in his humility knew not, and which the heauenly Angels are ignorant of. Let vs content our selues with the knowledge and practise of things reuealed, and and in other matters be wise to sobriety; otherwise if wee come too neere to the Arke of Gods secrets, wee shall bee consumed; if wee come too neere to this Flame wee shall bee burned: Let vs not approach too neere this

                     bottomelesse pit, least wee bee drowned.
               
               
                  III. Vse.
                  The meditation of the comming of Christ, of the neere approach of it, and of the terrour of the last iudgement, must awaken vs from the slumber of security, and spurre and stirre vs vp to amendment of life, to prayer, sobriety, and watchfulnesse, that we be not taken tardy nor found vnready, but waking and wel-doing.Mar. 13.33 35. And the lesse that the point of Christs comming is knowne vnto vs, the more let vs watch, and prepare our selues. Let vs liue well and we shall die well, and as we die and make our last end, such shall our iudgement bee at the

last day. Finally, let Saint Hieromes holy and blessed meditation bee ours also, that euery one of vs may say with him; Quoties diem illum considero,
                     
                        Hier. in Math.
                      
                     &c. that is; As often as I consider that day I tremble in all my body, for whether I eate or drinke, or what else souer I doe, me thinkes I alwaies heare that terrible Trumpet alwaies to sound in my eares; Arise yee dead and come to iudgement.
                  
               
               
                  IIII. Vse.
                  Seeing that our Lord in his loue towards vs, hath left vs certaine Herbingers, and Fore-runners, of his second comming, for our full redemption, and for our inauguration into the Kingdome of heauen, let vs search the Scriptures, and take

due notice of these Signes, and the accomplishment of them; and the neerer that that day approacheth, so much the more let vs hold vp our heads: For the glory, happinesse, triumph, and immediate fellowship with the blessed Trinitie, the Father, Sonne, and Holy Ghost, wee shall then enioy, shall infinitely exceed (whether wee respect quantity, quality, or continuance) all the troubles and trials of this mortall and miserable life: And the serious meditation hereof will make vs hopefull and patient in all afflictions, and when death approacheth, make vs willing to goe to God, and to cry come Lord Iesus, come quickly, Amen, Amen.
                  
               
            
         
         
            
            An effectuall Prayer according to the argument, and containing the Summe of the whole Treatise.
            
               O LORD our God, and most mercifull Father, thou art indeed great and terrible, of pure Eyes, and canst not behold euill: Hardning, blinding, forsaking, punishing, and in thy Iustice taking vengeance on thy aduersaries,Nah. 1.2. and art in thy wrath a consuming fire,Heb. 12, 29 and art notwithstanding, in thy onely begotten

and most deerely beloued Son IESVS CHRIST, a most louing, gracious, and kind Father to all thy Church and children, not wishing, much lesse working, their misery, ruin, and destruction; but calling, iustifying, sanctifying, directing, protecting, and glorifying them; yea, thou dost most louingly fore-warne them of the euils to come,Psal. 46.1. and in the midst of their miseries and distresses, assist, comfort, sustaine, support, and deliuer them.Cant. 1.3. This sweete Ointment & perfume of thy mercies doth draw vs after thee, & these thy high, and altogether vndeserued, fauours, wee confesse and acknowledge with all thankfulnesse, and acclamation. And more particularly, seeing that thou in thy wisedome (to check

and correct, our vaine curiosity, & rash presumption) doth conceale & keep from vs the knowledge of the set houre,Mar. 13.32 day, yea yeare, when the Sonne of man shall come to iudgement; that wee should be ready and prepared at euery moment, and withall, that we (after the manner of the wicked thy enemies) should not bee suddenly surprised,Luk 21.25.26. nor distressed and perplexed with feare and astonishment, but bee encouraged in wel-doing.Mat. 24.32 And that wee should gather certaine signes of the Summer of solace, and Haruest of Happinesse at hand; and that we should be preserued from all atheisme, doubting, mis-beleefe, thou hast, in thine vnspeakeable mercy, left vs in the sacred Scriptures sundry generall and vndoubted

               Signes, tokens, and Fore-runners, of the last Iudgement: Wherof diuersare already past, as the destruction of the foure mighty Monarchies; the desolation of Iudaea and Ierusalem, the extinguishing of the large Romane Monarchie,2. Thess. 2.6. whose power & Maiesty hindred the comming of the Romish Antichrist; the vniuersall and solemne Preaching of the Gospell by the Apostles and their Assistants and Successours vnto all Nations;Mat. 24.14 Finally, the reuealing, yea, generall weakning & wounding of Antichrist:2. Thess. 2.8. And whereof some are yet in continuall motion and progresse, as the reiection, and dispersion of the Iewes;Rom. 9.27.31. the invndation and deluge of all impiety and iniquity;Rom. 8.22.23. the vanity, abuse, corruption, and decay of

the creature: And whereof certaine remaine yet to bee accomplished; namely, the ruin of Rome; the ouerthrow of Mahomet and his Alcaron; the generall calling and conuersion of the Iewes vnto the Christian faith;Rom. 11.25 26. & (that which is the plague and poyson of the declining, apostaticall, contemptuous and vnthankfull world) in the last age of the world,Mat. 24.21 the arising of False Christs and false Prophets, their instruments, that shall shew great (Diabolicall) Signes and Wonders; insomuch that (if it were possible) they shall deceiue the very elect: Lastly (neere the point of Christ his glorious appearance) the strange, sudden, and fearefull dimming and darkning of the Eyes,
               Ver. 29. 
               Lamps, & Lights of heauen; therefore bee thou

entreated (most mercifull Lord) to enlighten all our blind vnderstandings, to mollifie, purge, & prepare all our hearts, and effectually to stir vp and rectifie all our wils, desires, affections, that wee may make true, godly, and seasonable vse of all these soundings of the trumpets, and fore-running signes. Grant vs grace, that by the due obseruance of the signes expired, and in continuall act, wee may certainely expect and waite for the performance of those, that are promised, and yet for to come: Heauen and earth shall passe away,
               Mat. 24 35 
               but thy words shall not passe away. And because thy Church on earth,Eph. 6.10.11, 12, &c. is in such continuall trouble and warfare; thy Saints and seruants so much oppressed,Apoc. 6.9.10. wronged, yea, massacred and

Martyred; and the world of the Atheists, Idolaters, Hypocrites, profane and wicked ones, liue in so dreadlesse security,1. Thess. 5.3. and thriue in all manner of sin and vngodlinesse: wee therefore, thy poore and vnperfect children, doe so much more humbly and earnestly beseech thy good Maiestie to hasten the comming of thy Son, to shorten (for thy Elects sake) these daies of sin,Mat. 24.22 bondage, corruption; and, in demonstration hereof, to destroy & abolish the tyrannie of the Turke and Pope thy Arch-enemies. For this end stirre vp the zeale and courage, & prosper the heroicall designes and endeuours of Christian Princes and Worthies;Apoc. 17.16. conuert (according to thy generall promise)Rom. 11.25 the long seduced and miserably scattered nation of the

Iewes, and take away the vaile of Moses from their eyes, that their receiuing into the Church may be to them and vs, the encrease of the Church,Ver. 12. life from death, the reuiuing of our faith, and the multiplication of the common ioy, when there shall be one Fold and one Shepheard. Likewise all the subsequent and neerest signes, in due time fulfil; and giue vs such wisedome and due regard and attention, that when we see and obserue the last and most immediate generall signes to come to passe, we may be more vigilant and feruent, in piety, prayer, charity, & for ioy, lift vp our heads, knowing that our (full and finall) redemption,
               Luk. 21.28. from all sin and sorrow, draweth nigh.
            But because it may bee that

none, or not many of vs, that are now liuing, shall surviue vnto that day, but bee preuented by death; and seeing that the last day is but a manifestation of our estate in death, and as death shal leaue vs, in such condition shall the last iudgement find vs, therefore (good Lord) giue vs grace and conscience to redeeme the time: to prouide our selues of the Oile of Faith in the Lampes of our profession;Mat. 25.4. to procure the wedding garment of holinesse, and with all expedition to make our selues ready against that day, that we may bee accounted worthy to escape al those things that shall come on the world,Luk. 21.36 and to stand before the Sonne of Man▪ and heare that gladsome sentence of Absolution; Come yee blessed of my Father, inherite

yee the Kingdome prepared for you from the foundation of the world. As for all thy enemies, ô Lord, in whom thou hast no part, let them betimes heare and receiue that terrible sentence;Mat. 25.41 
               Go yee cursed into euerlasting fire prepared the deuil and his Angels: let them go to the place, in thy iustice, appointed for them, and let the smoake of their smoake ascend vp for euermore,Apoc. 14.11 that they for whom Christ neuer made any satisfaction,Iohn 17.9. and they that neuer rested in Christ his all-sufficient expiation, may by eternitie of torment satisfie for all their abomination.
            Giue a blessed assent (most gratious Father) to these our vnperfect prayers: Pardon all our transgressions, supply all our wants, make vs truely and euer

thankefull for all thy blessings in heauenly and earthly things, fulfill all the remaining signes, and in the time appointed, after that wee haue suffered a while, and made our selues ready, bring vs vnto, and translate vs into, thine euerlasting Kingdome of glory, for thy onely begotten and most deerely beloued Sonne Iesus Christ his sake, merites and intercession, to whom with thy eternall Maiestie, and God the holy Ghost, bee giuen, rendred, and ascribed, all Power, Wisedome, Honour, Glory, Praise and Thanks in the Church, from Generation to Generation, Amen.
            
            FINIS.
            
         
      
   