
      
         
            
               
                  
                  
                  TWO
SERMONS,
THE ONE COMMENDING
THE MINISTERIE
IN GENERALL:
THE OTHER DEFENDING
THE OFFICE OF BISHOPS
in particular:
                  Both Preached, and since enlarged by
GEORGE DOVVNAME
Doctor of Diuinitie.
                  1. TIM. 3. 1, 2.
                  It is a faithfull saying; If any man desire the office of a
Bishop, he coueteth a good worke. A Bishop therefore
must be vnreprooueable, &c.
                  AT LONDON
Imprinted by Felix Kyngston, and are to be sold in
Paules Churchyard by Matthew
Lownes. 1608.
               
               
                  
                  
                  REVERENDISSIMO
IN CHRISTO PATRI AC DOMINO
HONORATISSIMO,
DOMINO RICHARDO PROVIDENTIA
DIVINA ARCHIEPISCOPO
CANTVARIENSI,
TOTIVS ANGLIAE PRIMATI
AC METROPOLITANO, SERENISSIMAE
QVE REGIAE
MAIESTATI A SANCTIORIBVS
CONSILIIS, DOMINO
SVO AC PATRONO
COLENDISSIMO:
                  GEORGIVS DOVVNAME CONCIONEM
HANC, QVA TVM MINISTERII
DIGNITAS TVM MINISTRORVM

                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      TRACTATVR IN
PERPETVVM OBSERVANTIAE
SVMMAE TESTIMONIVM
L.M.D.D.
               
            
            
               
                  
                  
                  A SERMON OF
THE DIGNITIE AND
DVETIE OF THE
MINISTERIE.
                  
                     1. TIM. 3. 1. 2.
                     Faithfull is this saying: If a man desire the office of a
Bishop, he coueteth a good, or goodly, worke. A Bishop
therefore must be blamelesse, the husband of one wife,
vigilant, sober, of decent behauiour, giuen to hospitalitie,
apt to teach, &c.
                  
                  
                     THe blessed Apostle S. Paul,
hauing left1. Tim. 1. 3▪
                      
                     Timothie as
his substitute at Ephesus,
and inuested him with Episcopal
authoritie, (that
is to say, with so much of
the Apostolical power as was necessarily to
continue in the Church, which besides the
Ministerie of the word and Sacraments,

common to all Ministers, consisteth specially
in the power of Ordination, & Ecclesiasticall
iurisdiction:) hee addresseth this
and the other Epistle vnto him, thereby informing
him, andChrysost. hom. 10. in 1. Tim. Oecumen in 1. Tim. 5. The Epistles to Timothie and Titus, are precedents for Bishops▪ and are as Tertullian saith, de ecclesiastico statu compositae. aduers. Marcion. lib. 5. in fine. in him all Bishops, how
to
                     1. Tim. 3. 15. 
                     behaue himselfe in the house of God, which
is his Church. And to this end he prescribeth
Ecclesiasticall Canons, and Apostolicall
Constitutions, not onely concerning the
exercise of his Episcopall iurisdiction and
gouernment of the Church, but also touching
the ordination of Ministers. For as
in the fifth Chapter he chargeth him1. Tim. 5. 22. not
to lay his hands rashly vpon any: soChrysost. hom. 10. in 1. Tim. Non absque ratione Paulus huiusmodi monitis vtitur, quia Timoth
                           ••
                         ipsi cura incumbebal Episcopos ordinandi, sicut & Tito. Conferre with this place, Tit. 1. 56 here he
directeth him, what manner of persons he
is to ordaine Ministers. Prouing from the
weight and excellencie of the calling, that
not euery one that desireth this office, is to
be preferred thereunto: but such a one as
Elthu
                     Iob. 33. 23. scarcely acknowledgeth to be one of
a thousand, whō the Lord hath, with the excellent
indowments of learning and pietie,
adorned & made fit for so great and worthie
a function. For mens calling must not
goe before, but follow the calling of God.

For their calling is but declaratiue, as
the Schoolemen speake, whereas Gods calling
is effectiue. And therefore men ought
by their calling to declare none fit for the
Ministerie, but such as God by his calling
hath made fit. The office of a Bishop, saith
Paul, is an excellent function, a glorious
calling, a worthy worke: therefore he that
would be preferred to this office, must be
qualified accordingly: that is, for his life,
he must be both in generall 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , without
blame, and in particular, chaste, as being the
husband of one wife, vigilant, sober, of decent
behauiour, harborous, &c. and for his gifts

                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , that is, as the Apostle speaketh in another
2. Tim. 2. 2. See also Tit. 1. 9. place 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , apt or able to teach.
                  
                  So that this text is an enthymeme, as we
call it, the antecedent whereof setteth forth
amplitudinem Ministerij, the dignitie of the
Ministerie, or worthinesse of the calling:
the consequent, aptitudinem Ministrorum,
the worthinesse of the persons who are to
be Ministers, inferred thereupon.
                  The Antecedent Paul confirmeth by
his owne testimonie. For that asseueration

                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , it is a faithfull saying, hath (as
othes also haue) the force of a testimonie:
and in this place is vsed 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , that is, by
way of preuention. For as the othes, which
the holy Ghost interposeth any where in
the Scriptures, doe argue our infidelitie; so
these asseuerations doe presuppose in vs
some contrarie and erroneous conceite.
As if the Apostle had said: Although carnall
men, whoseRom. 8. wisdome is enmitie against
God, doe basely esteeme of Ministers
in regard of their calling: yet it is a
most certaine trueth, which by the spirit of
trueth I doe testifie vnto you, that the office
of Ministers is an excellent and worthy
calling, and that they are greatly honoured
of God, whom he calleth thereunto.
Indeede it is, and alwaies hath been, the
lot and condition of Gods Ministers in
this world, to be contemned, scorned and
abused. The Prophets, who were the Embassadours
of the great God, and Angels of
the Lord of hosts, were
                        
                           •
                         Chron. 36. 16 despised and derided.
The Apostles, who were the twelue
Patriarches as it were of the Israel of God,

and Embassadours sent from Christs side,
to reconcile men vnto God, were notwithstanding
esteemed as the1. Cor. 4. 13. 
                     Skumme of the
world and of scouring of all things. But what
speake I of seruants? was not Christ himselfe
our royall Priest and Prophet, theHebr. 3. 1. Apostle
and high Priest of our profession, of
his owne kindred esteemed as aMar. 3. 21. mad man,
of his ill willers slaundered as aIoh. 8. 48. 52. Daemoniacke,
of Herod and his gallants scorned
and euen set
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . Luc. 23. 11. at naught?
                  Against this carnall conceite of profane
men, the holy Ghost opposeth his verdict,
when hee saith, this is a faithfull saying.
Whereby we are taught, vnlesse we had rather
conforme our iudgements to the vaine
opinion of the wicked world, than to the
infallible censure of the holy Ghost, to conceiue
honourablie of the Ministers of
God.
                  And this was the prosyllogisme or
proofe of the Antecedent, taken from the
testimonie of Gods spirit speaking in the
Apostle, and prefixed as a preface, to win
both attention and credit to this text.
                  
                     
Now followeth the antecedent it selfe.
If a man desireth the office of a Bishop, he desireth
a good, or excellent worke. In which words,
besides the commendation of the Ministerie,
which is the maine intendment thereof,
two things are briefely to be discussed.
The one, whether it bee lawfull for a man
to desire the office of a Bishop: the other,
what is the office of a Bishop, which the Apostle
here doth so highly commend. Of
the former the Apostle maketh no question,
but taketh it for granted, that it is lawfull
for a man to desire this function. For
what (saithHomil. 10. in 1. Tim. 
                     Chrysostome) doth the Apostle
say? If a man desire the function of a Bishop, I
mislike it not, hee desires a goodly worke. For
first, when men consecrate themselues, as
Numb. 6. Amos 2. 11. Nazarits, to the studie of diuinitie, they
doe it in this desire: which, if it bee a desire,
as well to doe the worke of the Ministerie,
as to obtaine the honour thereto belonging,
is without doubt most acceptable vnto
God. And afterwards, when God hath
blessed their studies, and fitted them for
this function; this desire and willingnes to

exercise their gifts, and to employ their talents,
is a part of their calling from God.
For God calleth men, partly inwardlie by
himselfe, not onely furnishing them with
those gifts which appertaine to the sufficiency
of a Minister, but also giuing thē this
Rom 1. 15. 1. Pet. 5. 2. 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , or willing readines to imploy their
gifts: and partly outwardlie by his substitutes,
to whom in his Church he hath committed
the power of calling, ordaining and
admitting Ministers. The Prophet Esay,
                     Esay 6. 6. 
                           •
                        . when his tongue had been touched with
a coale from the Altar, and hee had heard
the voice of the Lord, saying, VVhom shall
I send, he offereth himselfe and saith, Ecce
me, Behold, here am I, send me. A desire therefore
to glorifie God in the seruice of the
Church, and a signification of this desire,
when a man is fitted for the calling, is
not onelie lawfull, but also commendable.
The greedie and ambitious desire of
them, who either are not willing, or not able
to glorifie God in the Ministerie, is that
which is to be condemned.
                  As touching the second, it will be obiected;

that the calling of a Bishop, being a
function of great authoritie and preeminence
in the Church of God, is indeede an
excellent and worthie worke; but what is
this to other Ministers, who are subiect to
the Bishops? I answere, by 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , wee are in
this place to vnderstand the office, and by

                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , the person, not onelie of such as euer
since the Apostles times haue properly
been called Bishops, (howsoeuer this
place is principally to bee vnderstood of
them, and so is expounded by diuersChrysost. hom. 11. in 1. Tim. Ambr. in. 1. Tim. 3. Hieronvm. Theophyl. &c. of
the Fathers:) but of all Pastors and Ministers
of the word and Sacraments in generall.
Which interpretation may be confirmed
by conference of this Scripture with
Tit. 1. 5, 6, 7. Tit. 1. where the same Canon being repeated,
the Apostle vseth sometimes the
word 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , and sometimes 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . From
whence we may gather, either that by Bishop
here the Apostle meaneth any presbyter,
the names being as yet confounded,
as Ierome and Theodoret suppose: or at the
least, that the same things which here are
spoken of the dutie and dignitie of Bishops,

doe also appertaine to Presbyters
in generall: which cause the other Fathers
alleag
                        •
                     , why Presbyters be not expressely
mentioned in this place. But howsoeuer
the Fathers seeme to be diuided in the interpretation
of the word Bishop, some
of them by Bishop vnderstanding euery
Presbyter; others, those who properly are
called Bishops: yet all agree in this, that
both of Presbyters and Bishops, that is to
say, of all Ministers in generall, this text is
vnderstoode. ForTheod
                           •
                        r. in. 1. Tim. 3. Etiamsi presbyteris has leges cōstituis diuinu
                           •
                         Apostolus, clarum est quòd eas op
                           •
                        rtet primos seruare Episcopos, vt qui maiorem sint dignitat
                           ••
                         assecuti. 
                     Theodoret, though hee
say, that by Bishop euery Presbyter is here
meant; yet he professeth that what is here
said of Presbyters, doth chiefely appertaine
to Bishops. And the other Fathers,
though they vnderstand this text as spoken
of them who properly are called Bishops;
yet they say, that in the name of Bishops,
Presbyters are also included. Here by
the way we are to note, that if the names of
Bishop and Presbyter in the writings of the
Apostles bee confounded, as Ierome and
Theodoret teach, and many in our times not
onely affirme, but also out ofAct. 20. 17. 2
                           •
                         Tit. 1. 5, 6, 7. Phil. 1. 1. 1. Pet. 5. 1, 2. Acts 20.

Tit. 1. Phil. 1. 1. Pet. 5. confirme, in so much
as euery Bishop is a Presbyter, so euery
Presbyter a Bishop, according to the Apostles
phrase: then it followes necessarily,
that in the Apostles writings, there are no
Presbyters mentioned, but such as are Pastors
and Ministers of the Word. And agreeable
to the phrase of the Apostles, hath
the perpetuall vse of this word been in the
Primitiue Church: there being, as I suppose,
not any one example to be alleaged
out of any Councell or Father, where the
word Presbyter doth signifie any other
than a Minister or Priest. And if the like
shall bee obiected against Bishops, that in
the Apostles times there was no difference
betwixt Presbyters and them: I answere,
though the names of Bishop and Presbyter
were for a short time confounded; yet
the functions were not, as I haueIn Apoc. 1. 20 elsewhere
shewed.
                  But to come to that, which, as I said, is
the maine intendment of these words: the
commendation, which the Apostle giueth
to the office of a Bishop, is, that it is 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , a

worthie worke. He calleth it a worke, that we
should not imagine it to be an idle dignitie,
which when wee haue once obtained,
we might giue ouer our selues to ease and
securitie; but a worke full of imployment
and difficultie, wherein it behoueth Ministers
(who are the LordsMatth. 9. 38. workemen) to
labour, and as the Apostle speaketh1. Tim. 5. 17. 1. Thess. 5. 12. 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     
that is, to labour vnto wearines. But neither
is it a seruile worke, or a base Ministerie;
but 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , a goodly and excellent
worke.
                  Two things therefore doe here offer
themselues to our consideration, Onus &
honos Ministerij: The burden and the honour
of the Ministerie, both appertaining
to the greatnesse of this calling, and both
requiring, (which is the Apostles scope,)
a correspondencie of gifts in the person
of the Ministerie. For, in regard of both,
we may iustly vse that exclamation,2. Cor. 2. 16. 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     ,
and who is sufficiēt for these things?
that is, who is able to beare this burden,
who is worthie to haue this honour? For
in that he calleth it a worke, that appertaineth

to the burden▪ in that hee termeth it
excellent, that belongeth to the honour.
And these two are vnseparable companions.
For, honos & onus: honour and charge
goe together. Whence it is, that the same
Hebrew
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        
                      word signifieth both honorare &
onerare. For whom God aduanceth vnto
honour, them hee doth burden with a
charge, and on whom hee imposeth a burden,
to them he vouchsafeth honour. And
as they bee vnseparable, so also proportionable.
For such as is the weight of the
burden, such is the height of the honour,
and contrariwise. These things therefore
which the holie Ghost hath vnseparablie
vnited, ought not to be separated, neither
by the Ministers themselues, nor yet by
the people. Desirest thou the honour of
the Ministerie, vt praesis, that thou maist be
preferred aboue others? thou must also
desire the worke of the Ministerie, vt prosis,
that thou maist profit others. For he, that
desireth the office of a Bishop, desireth an excellent
worke. Art thou discouraged with the
weight of the burden? so much let the

height of the honour which God hath in
this life awarded, and in the life to come
prouided for faithfull Ministers, encourage
thee. As for the people: many care
not how great a burden they lay vpon the
Ministers, and how little honour they afford
them: as though their charge among
all callings could be the greatest, and their
honour the least. In a word, let vs on all
hands so acknowledge the dutie and dignitie
of the Ministerie to bee conioyned,
that the Ministers be as readie to performe
the dutie of the Ministerie, as to challenge
the honour: And the people as willing to
yeeld the double honour of reuerence and
maintenance to their Minister, as from
him to expect the performance of his dutie.
For what things God hath conioyned, let
no man seuer.
                  
                  But how soeuer in vse these things may
not be disioyned; yet, that I may distinctlie
and orderly speake of them, I am for a
while to seuer them in my speech▪ And
first wee are to weigh the burden of the
Ministery. For that are we to vndergoe,

before we can iustlie claime the honour.
1. Tim. 5. 17. Double honour indeed belongeth to the
Ministerie: of which, as the people must
count their Ministers worthie, so must wee
labour to be worthie. For 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      should go
with 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . And who are worthie of the honour
of the Ministerie? Surely they, which
beare, the burden, or doe the worke of the
Ministerie. The worke of a Bishop, whereof
the Apostle speaketh, is, as may bee gathered
out of the words, 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , to bee
a good Superintendent, whereunto Peter
                     1. Pet. 5. 2. exhorteth: 1. Epist. 5. Now what that is,
the Apostle sheweth, Act. 20. where hee
exhorteth the Ministers of Ephesus,Act. 20. 28. that
they would attend vnto themselues and to the
whole flocke, ouer which the holy Ghost had
made them Superintendents, to feed the Church
of God which he hath purchased with his owne
blood. The same he repeateth, though in
other words, 1. Tim. 5.1. Tim. 5. 17. Ministers are to
be accounted worthie of double honour.
But who? 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , that are good presidents,
especially they that labour in the word
and doctrine. For to feed the flocke, is the

chiefe worke of the Pastor or Bishop, as
appeareth in all these three places. Feede
the flocke, saith Peter to the Ministers,

                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , performing the Office of Bishops
or Superintendents, not as of necessitie, but
as willingly, &c. But to speake more distinctly,
the worke of a Bishop or Pastor,
which, as I said, is 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , to be good
Presidents, or Superintendents, cōtaineth these
branches. The first is, that they attend to
themselues▪ the second, to their flocke. To
themselues, that they may be precedents,
and as the holie Ghost speaketh1. Pet. 5. 3. Tit. 2. 7. 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , paternes
and samplers of a godly life. For
this in the Apostles phrase isTit. 3. 8. 14. 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     ,
to be presidents of good workes. But
of this more, when I come to the worthinesse
of the person: vers. 2. To the flocke
also they must attend, feeding and ouerseeing
the same both1. Pet. 5. 2. willinglie andHeb. 13. 17. carefully,
as those who are to giue an account.
For whom in the new Testament, the holie
Ghost, calleth 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , Superintendents, in
the old he callethTsophim. 
                     speculatores, watchmen▪
                     
whose office is the custodie and gardianship,

not of mens bodies, but, that which
isArs est artium, regimen animarum. Gregor. pastoral. part. 1. c. 1. more, of their soules; for which they
are to watch, as they who are to giue an
account. In so much, that if any of their
flocke shall perish through their default;
they shall perish indeed in their sinnes, but
their blood will the Lord require at the
Ezec. 3. 17. 33. 8. watchmens hands. And this doth the Apostle
Paul insinuate in his farwel Sermon,
where in the conscience of his Ministerie
faithfully performed, he professethAct. 20. 26. that
he was free from the blood of them all. By which
word, saith Gregorie,
                     Homil. 11. in Ezech. 
                     we are conuicted who
are called Priests, who besides those euils which
we haue of our owne, doe ad the deaths of other
men. For so many doe we kill, as wee doe suffer
through our negligence and silence to perish.
Now wee are to attend the flocke, first, by
watching ouer the same as good shepheards,
accomodating our selues to their
seuerall estates and necessities. As namely,
2. Tim. 3. 16. Ezech. 34. 4. 1. Thess. 5. 14. to instruct the ignorant, to reduce the
erroneous, to heale the diseased, to seek the
lost, to admonish the disorderlie, to comfort
the distressed, to support the weake, to

be patient towards all. Secondlie, by1. Pet. 5. 2. feeding
them in the Ministerie of the word
and Sacraments, and lastly by1. Sam. 12. 23 praying for
them both publicklie and priuately.
                  This burden of the Ministery, was after
a sort prefigured by the burden of the
Arke, which was imposedDeut. 31. 9. on the Priests.
For in the ArkeHebr. 9. 4, 5. was the golden pot hauing
Manna, and Aarons fruitfull rod, and the
tables of the Couenant; and vpon it the propitiatorie
ouershadowed with the glorious Cherubins.
For by the pot of Manna, we may
vnderstand the Sacraments; by the rod,
Ecclesiasticall discipline; by the budding
and fruitfulnesseNumb. 17. 8. of it, their fruitfull conuersation;
by the tables, the preaching of
the law; and by bearing the propitiatorie
(figuring Christ,) the Ministerie of reconciliation
committed vnto the Ministers of
God, both in respect of prayer and also of
preaching.
                  But the principall burden and chiefe
worke of the Ministery, for which double
honour is1. Tim. 5. 17. especially due to Ministers, is
the preaching, that is, the expounding and

applying of the word, to the diuers vses of
2. Tim. 3. 16. doctrine, confutation, instruction and reproofe.
To the2. Tim. 4. 1, 2. diligent performance
whereof, in the1. Cor. 2. 4. 
                     demonstration of the spirit,
in2. Cor. 4. 2. and 2. 17. 
                     sinceritie as in the sight of God, inMatth. 24. 45 
                     discretion
and1. Cor. 4. 2. 
                     faithfulnesse, as it becommeth the
wise and faithfull steward of God, withTit. 2. 7. 
                     grauitie,
                     Mic. 3. 8. 
                     iudgement,
                     Ephes. 6. 19. 20 Ierem. 1. 8. 17. Ezec. 3. 8, 9. 
                     boldnes and power, and finally
with zeale of GodsIohn 7. 18. Mal. 2. 2. glory and2. Cor. 11. 2. Gal. 4. 19. saluation
of the hearer: the Minister is bound
with a double bond of necessitie, the one,
in regard of himselfe; the other, in respect
of the people. In regard of our selues, euerie
one of vs must say with the Apostle,
1. Cor. 9. 16. 
                     Necessitie is laid vpon me, and woe vnto me
if I preach not the Gospell. For if they bee
subiect to the curse; who withhold the
corne: what is to be expected of them, who
withdraw from the people of God, the diuine
food of their soules? Assuredly both
are accursed: they,Prou. 11. 26. of the people: these,
of God:Ezech. 34. 2. woe to those Pastors, qui non
pascunt, sed depascunt gregem, who feed not the
flocke, but feede vpon it. And againe,
                        
                           •
                        ac. 11. 17. 
                     Vae
Pastori nihili, VVoe to the idle shepheard that

forsaketh the flocke: the sword shall be vpon
his arme, and vpon his right eie, (whereby
is meant his power and iudgement.) His
arme shall be dried vp, and his eie shall be vtterly
darkned.
                  
                  In regard of the people, the Ministerie
of the word is so necessarie, that our Sauiour
saithLuk. 10. 42. there is necessitie of this one thing.
And Salomon,
                     Prou. 29. 18. that where this is wanting, the
people perish. But the necessitie of preaching
in respect of the people, appertaineth
to the dignitie of the Ministerie, whereof
I am now to speake.
                  And first of the office it selfe, and then
of those titles, wherewith Ministers are adorned
in the word of God. Of the office
I am to speake, first, absolutely; then, by
way of comparison. Absolutely it is affirmed
in this place, to bee an excellent, or
worthie worke. AndHeb. 5. 4. Heb. 5. an honour:
and elsewhere we are taught, that for this
workes sake, the Ministers are1. Thess. 5. 12. 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . 
                     exceedinglie
to be loued, and reuerenced, and for the dignitie
of their function to bePhil. 2. 29. had in honor.
Yea that the veryEsay 52. 7. Rom. 10. 15. 
                     feete of those which preach

the Gospell ought to seem beautiful vnto vs.
And the same may be confirmed, by consideration
of the institution of the Ministery;
the eminencie of the persons who haue exercised
this function; the excellencie of the
end for which it was ordained; and lastlie,
the dignitie of the parts, whereof it doth
consist.
                  First, therefore Ministers were ordained
to supplie the office, and sustaine the
person of the Sonne of God, who is the
Word and wisdome of his father. For from
the beginning of the world vntill the time
of Moses, the Lord for the most part in his
owne person, performed the office of
preaching to his people. In which respect
hee is often called in the bookes of Moses,
theGen. 22. 11. 12 Exod. 3. 2. 4. 6. Gen. 32. 28. 30 & Hos. 12. 3. Exod. 13. 20, 21 & 1 Cor. 10. 9. Malac. 3. 1. Angell of God, and elsewhere the
Angell of the couenant. But when the
Lord in terrible maner had published his
law from heauen, and the people, not being
able to endure his voice, had humbly
intreated him, that he would be pleased to
speake vnto them by a Prophet: vpon this
occasion, the Lord ordained the publicke

Ministerie, andDeut. 18. 18. promised a continuall
succession of Prophets, (into whose mouth
he would put his words,) which was to continue
vntill Christ, in whom especially that
prophecie was verified. And againe, when
Christ was to ascend into heauen, hee ordained
the Ministers of the Gospell, as the
Embassadours of God, in his stead: affirming,
Iohn 20. 21. that as his father had sent him, so he
did send them. For we (saith the Apostle)
2. Cor. 5. 20. 
                     are the Embassadours of God in Christs stead,
euen as though God did intreate you by vs, wee
beseech you in Christs stead, be reconciled vnto
God. The Ministers therefore were ordained
to supplie the roome of Christ. Which
the Lord did, not that hee would haue the
Ministerie of the word lesse esteemed, then
if he should speake from heauen himselfe;
but that hee might by this meanes teach
vs after a more familiar manner, and might
make the better triall of our obedience.
For as Iohn saith,1. Iohn 4. 6. 
                     Hee that knoweth God,
heareth vs; and who is not of God, heareth
vs not. Our dutie therefore is, when God
doth speake vnto vs by his Ministers,

to set our selues, with Cornelius
                     Act. 10. 33. and his
company, in the presence of God; and to
heare1. Thess. 2. 13. 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , The word preached, not as
the word of man, but as it is indeede the word of
God: and to receiue the Ministers of God,
as the GalathiansGal. 4. 14. entertained Paul, as the
Embassadours of Christ, as the Angels of
God, yea, as Christ himselfe. For so hath
he saidLuk. 10. 16. to his Ministers, Hee that heareth
you, heareth mee; and hee that despiseth you,
despiseth me.
                  
                  But let vs also consider the excellencie
of those persons, who haue in former times
exercised any part of this function. And
here I could commend vnto you Noah, the
prince of the world, and2. Pet. 2. 5. Preacher of
righteousnesse: Melchisedec, who was
bothHebr. 7. 1. Gen. 14. 18. a King and a Priest: Moses the Prophet
and Prince of Israel: Dauid a King
and a Prophet: Salomon that glorious King,
affecting the name of aEcclesiast. Preacher. I might
alleage that the Kings among the heathen,
were also Priests. For hence it was, that the
Athenians and the Romanes, after they
had expelled their tyrannizing Kings, did

ordaine to themselues, Reges sacrificos, sacrificing
Kings, because certaine sacrifices
among them, might not be offered but by
Kings. But what speake I of meere men?
The sonne of God, before his incarnation,
as you heard before, was the Angell and
messenger of God vnto his people: and
after he became flesh, he professed, thatLuk. 4. 18. 43. he
was sent to preach. And who knoweth not,
that he being truely and onely 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , as
hee is our King, so also our Prophet, and
our Priest? And that, which yet more setteth
forth the excellencie of the Ministery;
Christ, who, as he was God, thought it no
robbery to be equall with God: yet as hee
was also man, he would not take vpon him
thisHeb. 5. 4, 5. honour to be our Priest, vnlesse hee
had been called thereto of God, as Aaron
was. Whereas therefore I said, that certaine
Princes haue been Prophets: you may well
thinke, that this is no greater credit to the
Ministerie, that Kings haue prophecied;
than it was commendation to the Kings
themselues, that they were Prophets. And
howsoeuer sometimes they haue been graced

with that part of the Ministerie, (for
euen1 Sam. 10. 11. 19 24. 
                     Saul sometimes was among the Prophets:)
yet might they not intrude vpon
the other functions of the Priesthood. And
therefore Saul, the King of Israel, for thrusting
himselfe into the office of the Priest,
1. Sam. 13. 9. 13. 14. was himselfe thrust out of his kingdome.
Likewise, when Huzziah the King of Iuda,
2. Chron. 26. 16. 19. presuming (his heart being lift vp with
pride,) to offer incense vpon the altar,
which was a function peculiar to the Priests,
the sonnes of Aaron; the Lord, not onely
caused a fearefullAmos 1. 1. Zac. 14. 5. Ioseph. Antiq. Iud. lib. 9. c. 11. earthquake, to testifie
his displeasure: but also presently smote
him with a Leprosie, and sequestred him
from his regall function. ForHebr. 5. 4. 
                     no man, whatsoeuer
he be, may take vpon him this honour,
but he that is called thereunto of God, as Aaron
was.
                  
                  I come to the end of the Ministerie;
which is, to saue mens soules. Other professions
respect the good of this life; as the
Magistracie, the maintenance of peace and
good order among the subiects; the art of
the Physition, the health of his Patient; the

profession of the Lawyer, the wealth of his
Client. But the end of the Ministerie alone,
is the saluation of Soules. For although
Christ hath performed so much as is sufficient,
for the saluation of all: yet none are
actually saued, but they onely, to whom the
benefit of the Messias is communicated.
Now the merits of Christ are applied ordinarilie
by the Ministerie of the Word and
Sacraments: vnto which, for that cause, the
power of Saluation is ascribed. They
therefore who enioy the Ministerie of the
Word and Sacraments, let them acknowledge
themselues infinitely bound vnto the
Lord; who hath visited them with the fauour
of his people, and vouchsafed vnto
them the peculiar priuiledge of his visible
Church; in that he hath not onely sent his
Sonne to redeeme them, but also giuen
them those meanes, whereby the benefit of
Redemption may be applied vnto them.
                  There remaine the parts of the Ministerie;
which are two: the Leiturgie or publike
seruice of God in the Congregation,
and the regiment of the Church. The Leiturgie

hath three parts; the Preaching of
the Word, publike Prayer, and administration
of the Sacraments. In the Preaching
of the word, as the duetie of the Ministerie,
so also the dignitie doth principally
consist: this being the chiefe workeEphes. 4. 12. of the
Ministerie, for which1. Tim. 5. 17. double honour is
especially due vnto the Ministers: yea, the
1. Cor. 16. 10. 
                     worke of the Lord, in respect where of the
Ministers 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , as theRom. 15. 16. Apostle
speaketh, that is, performing the sacred function
of preaching the Gospell, are called,
1. Cor. 3. 9. 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , the co-workers of God. But the
worthinesse of this worke may easily appeare,
if we consider the excellencie, profit,
and necessitie thereof. For what greater
honour can be vouchsafed to a mortall and
sinfull man, then to be theIob 33. 23. 
                     Angell or2. Cor. 5. 18. 20 
                     Embassadour
of God in stead of Christ; appointed
and sent of God,2. Cor. 5. 18. 20 to reconcile
men vnto himselfe, to iustifie them, and to
saue them? And hereby also appeareth the
exceeding profit and necessitie of the Ministery
of the word. The profit, in that by
the preaching of the worde, men are

brought to saluation, and all the degrees
thereof. The necessitie, in that without it
ordinarily men cannot attaine to saluation,
no nor yet to any degree of saluation. For
whereas there are three degrees of saluation
in this life, our vocation, our iustification,
our sanctification: what one of these is not
effected by the Ministery of the word, and
what one of them is effected ordinarilie
without it? For whom GodRom. 8. 30. hath elected,
them doth he call; neither shall any be saued
(I speake of such as come to yeeres of
discretion,) but such as are, or shall be called.
Hence it is, that the Church, which is
the companie of the elect, is called 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , a
companie of men called. Now men are
called by the Ministerie of the2. Thess. 2. 14. Gospell,
seconded and made powerfull by the Spirit
of God. For first, by it, our minds are
enlightnedLuk. 1. 79. Act. 26. 18. to see our owne miserie in our
selues, and the infinit mercies of God in the
mysterie of saluation by Christ. Secondlie,
by it, as by theEsay 53. 1. Act. 26. 18. arme of God, men are
drawne vnto him, that they may turne vnto
God, and beleeue in Christ. Neither

is there any meanes in the world, so effectuall
to worke the conuersion of a sinner, or
to bring him vnto faith in Christ, as the Ministerie
of the word: by which if a man
will not be perswaded, neither will hee beleeue,
though an Angell should come from
heauen, or aLuk. 16. 31. man be raised from the dead.
For indeed the Ministerie of the Gospell,
is theRom. 1. 16. 
                     power of God to our saluation. And although
in the world it be contemned, as a
weake and foolish meanes: yet it is the
good
                     1. Cor. 1. 21. 
                     pleasure of God, by the foolishnes of preaching,
to saue those that beleeue.
                  
                  Againe,Rom. 8. 30. whom God calleth, them hee
iustifieth, acquitting them from their sins,
and accepting them in Christ, as righteous,
and as heires of eternall life. But men are
iustified by faith: and faith
                     Rom. 10. 17. 
                     commeth by hearing
the word of God. For as the Apostle reasoneth,
Rom. 10. 14. 
                     How shall they call on him, in whom
they haue not beleeued; and how shall they beleeue
in him, of whom they haue not heard; and how shall they heare without a preacher? For
this cause, Preachers are said to be1. Cor. 3. 5. 
                     Ministers,
by whom we beleeue, and being Ministers

of faith, whereby men are iustified, they are
also saidDan. 12. 3. 
                     to iustifie men.
                  Moreouer, whom the Lord doth iustifie
by faith, them also hee doth sanctifie by the
Spirit of regeneration. For2. Cor. 5. 17. 
                     whosoeuer is
in Christ, hee is a new creature. Neither can
any man truely hope to enter intoIohn 3. 3. 
                     the
kingdome of heauen, vnlesse he be borne againe.
But how should men be borne againe? by
1. Pet. 1. 23. 
                     the immortall seede, saith Peter, which is the
word of the liuing God: by which Preachers
doe beget men vnto God. And in that respect
are called spirituall fathers, fathers in
the faith; because, as Paul speaketh to the
1. Cor. 4. 15. Corinthians, they beget them by the Gospell
of Iesus Christ. And forasmuch as wee are
nourished, as the Philosopher saith, by that
from which we are ingendred: the word
therefore, as it is the seed of our spirituall
generation, so is it the food of our soules,
whereby wee are to bee nourished, and to
grow vp in grace: affording, both1. Pet. 2. 1. 
                     milke
for the new borne, andHeb. 5. 12, 13, 14. 
                     strong meate for those
who are better growne in Christ. And
therefore, as the Ministers be fathers to beget

men; so are they alsoEphes. 4. 11. Pastors, to feed
them. And whereas sanctification consisteth
of two parts, a dying vnto sinne, and a
liuing vnto righteousnesse: the Ministerie
of the word, is as salt to mortifie our corruptions.
In which respect the Ministers
are called theMatth. 5. 13. 
                     salt of the earth. And in
respect of righteousnesse habituall, it is the
Rom. 10. 8. word of faith, the2 Cor. 3. 8. Ministerie of the Spirit,
theAct. 20. 32. word of grace, byIohn 7. 17. which wee are
sanctified. And as for actuall righteousnes,
it is theColoss. 1. 6. fruit of the word preached, which
being sowne in the furrowes of good and
honest hearts,Luk. 8. 15. bringeth forth fruit with
patience.
                  If therefore our vocation, iustification
and sanctification, which are al the degrees
of saluation going betweene election and
glorification, bee all of them wrought by
the Ministerie of the word: we must acknowledge
it, worthily to bee called the
power of God to our saluation, and not
without good cause the power of sauing
mens soules to bee ascribed vnto it, and to
the preachers of it, as to the meanes and

instruments vnder God. Receiue with meeknes,
saith S. Iames,
                     Iam. 1. 21. 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , the word engrafted,
(to wit, by the Preachers who are
Gods1. Cor. 3. 6, 7, 8 planters: 1. Cor. 3.) VVhich (saith
he) is able to saue your soules. Attend to thy
selfe (saith Paul to1. Tim. 4. 16. 
                     Timothie) and to doctrine,
continue therein; for this doing, thou shalt saue
both thy selfe, and them that heare thee. But
to conclude this point with the oracle of
our Sauiour Christ, sounding in the eares
of S. Paul at his conuersion, from heauen:
at which time he appearing vnto Paul, to
make him as he there saith,Acts 26. 16. a Minister of
the Gospell, setteth downe the end of the
Ministerie in these words, which containe
the summe of all that hath been said concerning
the preaching of the word. To
open (saithAct. 26. 18. he) their eies, that they may bee
turned from darkenesse vnto light, and from
the power of Satan vnto God, (there is vocation)
that by faith in Christ, (for so I construe
the words, there being a comma in the
Greeke text after 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     ) they may receiue
forgiuenesse of sins, (that is iustification) and
inheritance among them that are sanctified:
                     
there is sanctification, and glorification;
and all to be procured by the Ministerie of
the word.
                  Here therefore by the way diuers sorts
of men are to bee admonished. First, the
Ministers: that as they desire the saluation
of their people, whom Christ hath redeemed
with his most pretious bloud, they
would not onlie bee diligent in preaching,
but also bee carefull so to preach, as that
their conscience may beare them witnesse,
that in their Ministerie they truely seeke
to glorifie God, in the saluation of the
people. Secondly, the people; that as they
tender the eternal saluation of their soules,
so they should be affected to the Ministerie
of the word. For theMatth. 13. 44, 45. 
                     kingdome of heauen
(so is the preaching of the Gospell called,
because it is the principall meanes to
bring vs to Gods Kingdome) is like a treasure,
or a pretious pearle, which a man hauing
found, he will sell all that he hath to procure it.
Thirdly, they that doe hinder the preaching
of the word: for seeing the word
preached is of such necessitie to saluation,

they which are an hinderance to the preaching
of the word, doe also hinder the saluation
of their brethren, which euery Christian
is bound by all good meanes to aduance.
Of this kind are they, who being
not of the Ministerie doe get into their
hands the liuings and possessions of the
Church. For where is want of liuing, there
will be want of Preachers: where Preachers
or Prophets are wanting, there prophesie,
or preaching faileth: and where
                     Prou 29. 18. 
                     prophesie
faileth, there the people perish. The people
indeede shall perish in their sinnes: but
their bloud shall be required at thy hands,
who hast been the cause of their spirituall famishment.
                  Such also are those greedie Patrons, or
rather latrons of Church liuings, who with
Gehezi, sell such things as none but Simons
will buy: who with the theefe, & traitor Iudas
betray for quid mihi dabitis, the bodie of
Christ, which is his Church, into the hand
of blind and Pharisaicall guides: who with
1. King. 12. 3
                           •
                        . 1. King. 13. 33. 
                     Ieroboam the son of Nebat, preferre to the
Ministerie, the skirts, or, as the Prophet

calleth such, theEsay 9. 15. 
                     taile of the people. But
these men as they imitate the practise of
Gehezi, Iudas and Ieroboam: so let them
feare their end.
                  And lastly, such are those Ministers,
who hauing either no will, or no skill to
feede the people of God with the food of
life; doe notwithstanding for the milke
and fleece of the flocke take vpon them the
charge of soules. But let these and the former
consider, that wheras they ought to be
resolued, not to hazard, or lose their owne
soules, though they mightMark. 8. 36. gaine the whole
world: they to gaine, not the whole world,
but the tithes of some one parish (which are
as nothing in comparision of the world)
doe hazard not their own soules alone, but
the soules of the people, whom they depriue
of the principall ordinarie meanes of
their saluation.
                  But to returne to my purpose: haue you
by your own experience found the Ministers
to haue been the meanes vnder God
of your vocation, iustification, sanctification,
which are the necessarie forerunners

of saluation? then, I dare say, you will confesse
that to be true, which Paul writing to
Philemon, forbeareth to speake: that you
owe euen your ownePhil. 17. selues vnto them:
and that you ought to be affected to them,
as the Galathians were to S. Paul, who
giueth this testimonie of them, that they
were readie (if it had been possible) toGal. 4. 15. pul
out their owne eies to doe him good. But
if you be more readie to pull out their eies,
then to doe them any good; it is a manifest
argument, that as yet you are not sanctified,
not iustified, not called; and therefore not
to be saued, vnlesse these graces shall hereafter
be wrought in you by the Ministerie
of the word. Which benefits if you doe
but looke for at the Ministers hands, you
cannot but honour and reuerence them in
the meane time. But if you neither haue
these graces, nor hope for any, wee must
count our selues blessed, when for our calling
and the discharge of our dutie, we are
of such persons hated and reuiled.
                  Thus much I thought good to speake
of preaching the word. Now are wee

brieflie to intreate of inuocation, and so of
the rest. For as in the preaching of the
word, the Minister is the Lords Embassadour
to his people: so in publicke prayer
he is an orator, and as it were an intercessour
for the people vnto God. In which respect,
Chrysostome
                     De Sacerdot. lib. 6. cap. 4. saith, that the Minister
performeth an embassage vnto God, not only
for his owne people, but also for the whole world,
as if he were an vniuersall father hauing care
of all. And Nazianzene
                     Apolog. acknowledgeth
it to be no small honour, to bee preferred
before others in neerenesse vnto God, and
to receiue 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     : a presidentship
of soules, and a mediation betweene
God and men: By which they stand, as Moses
                     Psal. 106. 23. once did, in the breach: and for which,
as the Prophets were wont, so may godlie
Ministers now, bee worthilie called the
2. King. 2. 12. & cap. 13. 14. horsemen and chariots of Israel.
                  I come to the Sacraments: whereof the
Ministers also are dispensers. For as in respect
of the word, which is as it were Gods
treasurie, the Ministers are his treasurers: so
in respect of the Sacraments, which are the

seales of God, theRom. 4. 1
                           •
                        . seales of that righteousnesse
which is by faith, they are the keepers
of the Lords seales, whereby the people
of God are assured, not of an earthlie
patrimonie, but of an eternall kingdome
in heauen. If therefore it be a great honour
(as it is indeede) to be the Lord keeper of
the Kings seale, which notwithstanding
hath vse but in temporall affaires: what
shall we thinke of their function, who are
the keepers of the heauenlie Kings seales:
which also serue for the confirmation of
spirituall blessings in heauenlie things?
                  Hauing spoken of the leiturgie, wee are
now to intreate of the regiment of the
Church. For to the Ministers the Church,
which is the spouse of Christ, is committed:
that hauing espoused her against the marriage
day, which is the day of iudgement,
they may present her2. Cor. 11. 2. vnto Christ the
bridegroome, as a pure virgin and vndefiled.
In which senseApolog. 
                     Nazianzene calleth
the Minister, 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , and
De Sacerdot. lib. 3. cap. 6. 
                     Chrysostome thus describeth him, 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     ,
He whose office it is to adorne

the spouse of Christ. And forasmuch as the
Church in the Scriptures is also called the
house of God: therefore the Ministers,
who are set ouer the Church, are called
Tit. 1. 7. Luk. 12. 42. 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , that is, stewards of God set ouer his
houshold. And whereas the authoritie of
a steward is signified by theEsay 22. 22. keyes committed
vnto him: our Sauiour Christ therfore,
to his stewards hath commited keies,
Matth. 16. 19 
                     The keies of the kingdome of heauen, that both
by preaching the Gospell, and by Ecclesiasticall
discipline, they might open to some
the gates of heauen, and shut them to others:
that to them which beleeue and repent,
they might pronounce the sentence
of absolution, and might denounce damnation
against the vnfaithfull and impenitent:
that they might loose the one, and
bind the other. Which their authoritie he
hath ratified with most gratious promises,
assuring them on his word, which is infallible,
thatIohn 20. 23. 
                     whose sinnes they remit, they shall
be remitted, and whose sinnes they retaine, they
shall be retained. And againe,Matth. 18. 18 
                     VVhat soeuer
they bind on earth, it shall be bound in heauen;

and whatsoeuer they loose on earth, it shall
be loosed in heauen. Wherefore, as by the
worke of their Ministerie, men being therby
conuerted, the will of God is done, as in
heauen, so also vpon earth, according to
our dailyMatth. 6. 10. prayer: so by the authoritie
committed vnto them, it is done, as in the
earth, so also in heauen. Then which, what
authoritie is more glorious vpon the
earth? the Magistrates indeede, hauing
the keyes of an earthly kingdome, haue also
power to loose and to bind the bodies
of their subiects, and to commit the same
to a Iaylour or executioner. But the Ministers,
hauing the keyes of the kingdome
of heauen, haue power to binde and loose
the soules of men, and to deliuer the obstinate
to Satan: and what they doe vpon
earth, is ratified in heauen. And this is that,
whichAd Heliodorum de vit
                           ••
                         
                        
                           •
                        
                        remitica. 
                     Ierome saith, the Ministers hauing
the keies of the kingdome of heauen, doe iudge
after a sort before the day of iudgement.
                  
                  Hitherto the dignitie of the Ministerie
hath been absolutely declared, and without
comparison. But if into the ballance

of comparison we shall put the Ministers
and other men, I had almost in some respects
added the Angels, we shall finde that
to be true, whichDe dignitate sacerd. cap. 2. Honor & sublimitas Episcopalis null
                           •
                        s potest comparationibus ad
                           •
                        
                        quari. 
                     Ambrose hath auerred:
that the dignitie of Bishops can scarsely be matched
with any comparisons. Wee will therefore
compare Ministers with other men:
first, as they are men; secondly, as they are
Christians: thirdly, as they are honorable.
                  Men by nature, are the children
                     Ephes. 2. 3. 
                     of
wrath, and enemies of God; the Ministers
are2. Cor. 5, 18. 20 
                     Embassadours sent from God to reconcile
them vnto him. Men naturallie sit in
darkenesse, and in the shadow of death,
knowing no more of God then serues to
leaue them without excuse: the Ministers
are theMatth. 5. 14. 
                     light of the world, who are sent of
God toLuk. 1. 79. 
                     enlighten them, to open
                     Act. 26. 18. 
                     their eies,
to bring them out of darkenesse into light, and
to guide their feete into the way of peace. Men
narurally are such, asEzech. 16. 14 
                     Ezechiel describeth,
wallowing in their owne pollutions, not
washed with water, nor seasoned with salt:
The Ministers are theMatth. 5. 13. 
                     salt of the earth, ordained
of God to season men, and toIohn▪ 17. 17. 
                     sanctifie

them with the word of truth, & to wash
them with the lauour of regeneration.
Men naturally areEphes. 2. 1. dead in sinne, neither
can they liue vnto God, vnlesse they bee
borne againe: Ministers are spirituall fathers,
who by preaching the Gospell
                     1. Cor. 4. 15. 
                     beget
men vnto God. Men naturally are without
faith, voide of the spirit, destitute of grace:
Preachers are1. Cor. 3. 5. 
                     Ministers by whom they beleeue:
Ministers of the2. Cor. 3. 6. 9. Spirit, Ministers
of grace. Men naturalli
                        •
                      being the bondslaues
of sinne, and captiues of Satan, are
by him as theLuk. 8. 33. 
                     Gergesins swine caried headlong
into mare mortuum, the dead sea of
perdition: the Ministers are by Obadiah
                     Obad. 21. called sauiors, and by Christ himselfe,Luk. 5. 10. the
fishers of men, 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , catching with theMatth. 13. 47 net
of the word2. Tim. 2. 26. 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , those, who were
caught of the diuell; bringing them out of
theAct. 16. 18. power of Satan into Gods kingdom;
out of the slauerie of sinne, into the glorious
libertie of Gods children; out of the
state of damnatiō, as it were the vniuersall
deluge, into the state of grace and saluation,
as it were into the Arke of Noah. You

see then how the comparison stands betweene
Ministers and other men.
                  Let vs therefore compare them with others,
as they bee Christians, and such as
shall be saued by Christ. Other Christians
are but the sheepe
                     Ioh. 10. of Christ: Ministers are
alsoEphes. 4. 11. 
                     Pastors or shepheards, to whom
Christ the chiefe Pastor hath committed
his sheepe to bee guided andIoh. 21. 15. 16 17. fed.1. Pet. 1. 2. Act. 20. 28. Other
Christians are but theCant. 4. 12. 
                     plants in the Lords
garden: Ministers are also the Lords gardiners,
appointed of God to1. Cor. 3. 6. 7 8. plant, and to
water them. Other Christians are but liuing
                     1 Pet. 2 5. 
                     stones in the Temple of God, which is his
Church: Ministers are also Gods1. Cor. 3 9. 
                     builders,
ordained of Christ,Ephes. 4. 12. 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , for
the edifying o
                           •
                         his body, which is his Church.
Others finally are but the familie, and as it
were the house hold seruants of Christ: the
Ministers are the stewards,
                     Titus 1. 7. Matth. 24. 45. Luk. 12. 42. whom the
Lord hath set ouer his familie, to giue to euery
one, which be of the houshold of faith,
their 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , portion of food in due season.
                  Out of these two comparisons it doth
euidently appeare, that no man, whatsoeuer

he be, whether a true Christian, or but
a naturall man, hath iust cause to despise
the ministers of God. For in that the true
Chistian hath attained to grace, hee hath
obtained it by the helpe of the Ministerie,
whereby he was reconciled vnto God, enlightned
with the truth, begotten vnto
God, &c. And the naturall man, who wanteth
grace, is also to receiue it ordinarilie
by the helpe of the Minister, if euer he haue
it. And therefore those, who vilifie and
contemne the Ministers of God in respect
of their calling, doe manifestlie bewraie
themselues to bee vile and contemptible
persons, who neither haue any grace, nor
yet desire any.
                  But now let vs compare the Ministers
with other men, as they are honourable;
and first, with all iointlie, and together▪ For
if we will make a comparison of all honors
in generall; we must also take a view both
of their burthen in this life, and reward in
the life to come. For the first, I haue shewed
before, not only that honos and onus do
alwaies goe together; but also that according

to the weight of the burthen, such is
the height of the honour. Now euery man
is readie to lay loade vpon the Ministers,
and amongst all callings to attribute the
greatest burden and charge vnto them: by
which reason, they must be faine to ascribe
vnto them the greatest honour. For they
are Pastors, not of mens bodies, as Magistrates
are, but of their soules; and they
beare all mens burthens, as Chrysostome
saith, & they watch for other mens soules;
insomuch that if any perish through their
negligence, the blood of those which doe
perish, shall beeEzech. 33. 8. required at their hands.
How weightie this burthen is, it will easilie
appeare if we shal consider how heauy euery
priuate mans owneGal. 6. 5. burden will bee to
beare in the day of the Lord. For the Ministers
own burthē may seeme to be heauier
then others. First, because the Lord requireth
greater matters in them, then in others.
Secondlie, because the same sinnes, which
in other men are lesse offences, in them are
esteemed greater faults. Simple fornication,
which in others was after a sort salued

by marriage, in theLeuit. 21. 
                           •
                        . Priests daughter, was
punished with death. Thirdlie, because
the PriestLeuit. 4. 3. 13. was to offer as great a sacrifice
for his own sins, as for the sins of the whole
people. But the Minister must not onely
beare his owne burthen, but as vpon Aaron
                     Exod. 28 29.
the names of the twelue Tribes were
imposed; so the Ministers are to beare the
charge of their flocke; and of that flocke,
which Christ hath redeemedAct. 20. 28. with his
blood, and therefore was more deere and
pretious to him, then his owne most pretious
blood. But what vse are wee to make
of this? shall wee therefore depresse the
Ministers by contempt, whom wee oppresse
with our burthens? nay rather as we
presse them downe with our burthen, so let
vs exalt them with honour. It is the exhortation
of the holy Ghost: Heb. 13.Heb. 13. 17. 
                     Obey
them that haue the ouersight of you, and submit
your selues vnto them, for they watch for
your soules, as they that must giue an account,
that they may doe it with ioy, and not with
griefe, for that is vnprofitable for you.
                  
                  But as the Ministers charge is greater

then others in this life; so hauing discharged
his dutie, hee shall haue a greater
weight of glorie in the life to come. For
that wise and faithfull steward mentioned,
Matth. 24,Ma
                           •
                        . 24 45. shall not only receiue blessednesse
for his reward, or that incorruptible
crowne of glorie, which the holie Ghost
hath promised vnto them: but also hauing
saued1. Tim. 4. 16. both himselfe, and those that heare
him, of whom hee may say in the day of
iudgement, Behold, here I am and the children
which the Lord hath giuen me (for whom
the Minister begetteth through his Gospel
vnto God, they shall be, as2. Cor. 1. 14. 
                     Paul saith, his
reioycing in the day of the Lord) hee shall
be preferred aboue others in happinesse.
For good Ministers, as they haue been
Apocal. 1. 20 
                     starres in the Church militant to enlighten
others with the truth: so in the Church
triumphant they shall shineDan. 
                           •
                        2. 3. as starres in
the firmament for euer and euer. And
this is that, which in the place before cited,
the Lord promiseth to the wise and faithfull
steward: that he will make himMat. 24. 47. ruler
ouer all his goods. Vpon which wordes,

an ancient and learnedAuthor imperfect. operis apud Chrysostin Matth. 24. expositour writeth
to this effect; The greatest amongst all is
the Priestly dignitie, if a man keepe it without
blemish. For if the Lord aboue all his workes,
esteeme the soules of men most precious, (for
them hee hath redeemed with his owne
bloud) it is not to be meruailed, if he set him ouer
all, who brings vnto him the gaine of soules.
                  
                  Now are wee to compare the Ministers
with those peculiar sorts of men, to whom
the Lord hath vouchsafed honour. And
these are either priuate in the familie, or
publicke out of the family in the Church,
and commonwealth. Those that are to be
honoured in the family, are our parents: to
whom great honour is due by Gods commandement,
but not so great as to the Ministers.
For, from thy parents as the instruments
of God, thou hast thy generation:
from the Ministers, as the instruments of
the holy Ghost, thy regeneration: by thy
parents thou art a man, by the Ministers a
Christian thy parents by mortal seed begat
thee vnto this world, the Minister, by immortall
seed begetteth thee vnto the world

to come: by thy parents is sin and corruption
deriued to thee from the first Adam;
by the Ministers, iustification and freedom
from sinne is communicated vnto thee
from the second Adam. Finally, thy naturall
parents are fathers in the flesh; but
the Ministers are fathers in the Spirit. Both
then, as you see, are parents: but the spirituall
fathers are, as Chrysostome saith,De sacerdot. lib. 3. cap. 5. 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     ,
more honourable then fathers. And
so great is the difference,
                     Cap. 6. 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . saith he, of them both,
as of the life present, and the life to come; for
these beget thee into this life, they into the other.
Wherefore, leauing our naturall parents,
we will compare them with another sort of
spirituall fathers, which is now ceased: I
meane the Leuiticall Priests; and chiefelie,
the high Priest, whose dignitie appeared,
both in his office, and in his attire.
For his office, hee was, as it were, a mediator
betwixt God and man; and therein,
because he represented the Messias, he was
superiour, not onely to other men, but to
the Angels themselues. And his attire,
which the LordExod. 18. & 39. appointed vnto him, was

answerable thereunto, signifying a 
                        ••
                     rson,
excelling the condition of other men. Insomuch
that as historiesIoseph. Antiquit. Iud. lib. 11. cap. 8. doe record, Alexander
the great, comming with his armie
against Ierusalem, when the high
Priest did meete him araied with his sacred
and magnificent attire; hee dismounted
himselfe, and in the high Priest worshipped
God: who, as he said, had in a dreame
appeared vnto him in that habit. But what
is this to our Ministerie? As an argument
of comparison frō the lesse to the greater.
For, if the ministerie of the law was so excellent:
what shall we thinke of the Ministerie
of the Gospell, which, as the Apostle
sheweth,2. Cor. 3. 7. 8. 9. 2. Cor. 3. is much more excellent
and glorious then it? The same doth
our Sauiour seeme to testifie, when hauing
extolled Iohn Baptist aboue all the Priests
and Prophets that went before him, as being
more then a Prophet, then whom a
greater had not risen amongst the sonnes
of women; notwithstanding hee preferreth
euery faithfull MinisterMat. 11. 11. in the
kingdome of God, that is to say, in the

                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
Church of Christ, before him.
                  Now we are to enter into comparison
with the ciuill Magistrate. Wherein the
fathersAmbros. Chrysost. Nazianz. indeed haue included also the soueraigne
Magistrate, affirming that the
Ministers excell Princes, as farre as gold
is better then lead, as heauen surpasseth
the earth, as the soule excelleth the bodie:
and such like speeches are frequent
among them, which the Papists abuse to
the maintenance of the Popes supremacie
ouer Princes: For, whereas the Fathers
speake of the dignitie and spirituall excellencie
of the Ministery aboue all other callings;
the Papists vnderstand their speeches
of power and externall authoritie.
And againe, whereas their commendations
are giuen of the calling in generall, either
of all Ministers, or at least of all Bishops,
whom the Fathers notwithstanding, acknowledged
to be subiect to their Princes:
the Papists applie them as peculiar to their
Lord GodExtra. Ioan. 22. tit. 14 De verborum sig. 
                           •
                        . cum inter. in glossa. the Pope, whom they stile the
King of Kings, and the Lord of Lords. But
howsoeuer the comparison of Bishops

with Princes, vsed by the fathers, may
seeme capable of good construction, in respect
of spirituall excellencie, and dignitie
celestiall: yet me thinks it should beseeme
the modestie of a loyall subiect, in reuerence
due to that supereminent function,
to exempt the royall Maiestie of Soueraigne
Princes from this comparison, not
onely in respect of externall power and authoritie, (in regard whereof, we doe freely
professe that Ministers are and ought to
be subiect to their Soueraigne, and that to
the King is committed of God a soueraigne
or supreame authoritie in all causes
and ouer all persons, as well Ecclesiasticall
as Ciuill:) but also in respect of externall
excellencie and glorie. For as the whole
Church, the spouse of Christ; so the Ministers,
especially, are glorious within:
Psalme 45.Psalm. 45. 13 And as Christ his kingdome
was not of this world: so is not their excellencie
worldly, nor their dignitie carnall.
For the Ministerie, as Chrysostome
saith,
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . De. sacerd. lib. 3. cap. 4. 
                     Is indeed executed vpon the earth,
but it is to be numbred in the order of heauenly

things, to other Magistrates, wee say with
Nazianzene,
                     Orat. ad Nazianz. ciues 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , we also are rulers: yea I will adde (saith he) that we haue a greater
& more perfect rule; vnlesse you will say, that
the spirit must giue place to the flesh, or heauenly
things to earthly. The iudgement seat of the
Magistrate is placed on the earth, & he onlie
determineth earthlie affaires: but the
throne of the Minister, who exerciseth
heauenly iudgements, is, asTom. 1. de verbis Esaiae. homil. 5. 
                     Chrysostome
saith, in heauen; and his sentence pronounced
on earth, is executed in heauen. The
Magistrate, as Peter
                     1. Pet. 2. 13. saith, is, 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , an
ordinance humane, or appertaining to men:
but the Ministerie is 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , an ordinance
diuine, or apperteining to God. Or as
Iehosaphat
                     2. Chron. 19. 11. distinguisheth them; the one
for the Kings affaires, the other for the
busines of the Lord. Both in deed are Gods
Ministers, but the Minister, asIn Nu
                           •
                        er. 
                     Procopius
saith, augustius est sortitus Ministerium, hath
obtained a more worthie Ministerie. For the
Magistrate is conuersant in externall matters,
that concerne the world: but the Minister
is employed in spirituall things appertaining

to God: the one is the Minister
of Gods externall iudgement: the other of
his word, and iudgements spirituall. Both
also may be called the Pastors of the people:
but the Magistrates are Pastors of
their bodies, the Ministers of their soules.
The one, may say with the Romane Magistrate,
Ilictor liga manus, deliga ad palum, or
as ours doe vse to write, capias corpus, take
his bodie, or habeas corpus, hauing authority
only to bind the bodie: the other may say
with Paul,
                     1. Cor. 5. 5. 
                     Tradatur Satanae, let him be deliuered
to Satan, or let him be1. Cor. 16. 22. 
                     Anathema maranatha,
that is, accursed vntill the comming
of the Lord, as hauing authoritie to bind the
soule: the one procureth the temporall
good of the bodie, the other the eternall
saluation of the soule. The armour, warfare
and munitions of the one, are corporal:
of the other,2. Cor. 10. 4. 
                     spirituall,
                     
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . 
                     mightie through
God, to the ouerthrowing of strong holds. The
one preserueth vs from externall foes, who
are but flesh and blood: the other warreth
not with flesh & blood, but with principalities
& powers, deliuering men from most

dangerous enemies, both within them, that
is, their owne sinnes and corruptions, and
without them, that is, the world, and the
Prince of this world, the diuell. And therefore
in this respect also, as the Prophets
were wont; so may the Ministers now, bee
called the horsemen and chariots of Israel.
Wherefore, if heauen and heauenly things
surpasse the earth, and earthly affaires; if
the soule, and the eternall saluation both of
bodie and soule, are to be preferred before
the bodie, and temporall good thereof;
if the enemies of the soule be more dangerous,
then the foes of the bodie: then can
we not deny, but that the Ministerie in dignitie
doth excell the Magistracie. It is the
conclusion of Chrysostome: The Ministerie,
                     De sacerd. lib. 3 cap. 1. 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . saith he, so farre surpasseth the Magistracie,
as the spirit excelleth the flesh. And not
to stand any longer in particular comparison
with the seuerall sorts of men, this may
be auouched in generall, that as the Ministerie
is of all good things among men the most
excellent, asAd Smyrn. 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . 
                     Ignatius saith: so the Minister
is vouchsafed the greatest fauour among

men; so that he may not vnworthily
be called by a speciall prerogatiue, as Moses
in his speech to God, calleth the Priest,Deut. 33. 8. 
                     
                        
                           •
                        sh
chasideca, virum quem benignitate prosequeris,
as if the Minister were among men the
chiefe obiect of Gods bountie and fauour,
and as you would say, the fauorit of God.
But I pray you what meaneth that speech
of God to Moses,
                     Exod. 30. 30. 32. Exod. 30. where hauing
commanded him vers. 30. to anoint the
Priests with the sacred oile: in the two and
thirtieth verse, hee forbiddeth to anoint
mans flesh with it? How shall wee vntie this
knot, saithProcop. in Exod. 30. 
                     Procopius, writing vpon that
place, Priests must bee anointed with the
holie oile, but men may not? Surely, saith
he, you must remember that the Priesthood or
Ministerie surpasseth the height of all humane
excellencie. For Ministers though they bee
men: yet are they not as others, men of
the world, but, as the Scripture vsually calleth
them, men of God. To conclude, if
the charge of the Ministerie be, as Chrysostome
speaketh, Onus angelorū humeris formidandum,
a burthen which the shoulders of Angels

                        
                           〈1 page duplicate〉
                        
                        
                        
                           〈1 page duplicate〉
                        
                        
may shrincke at; and yet God enableth
those men, whom he calleth, to beare this
burthen, whereunto none in themselues
are able; it cannot bee denied, but those
whom the Lord calleth to the Ministery, he
aduanceth aboue the condition of other
men; calling them, as to a charge, so also
to an honour, which might seeme to become
Angels, rather then men.
                  Wherfore ceasing to compare Ministers
with other men: let vs consider, whether
they may not be cōpared with the blessed
Angels. For as in some things they are like
vnto them; so in other things, they seeme
to haue some preeminence aboue them.
Like in this, that as the Angels, so also the
Ministers, areHebr. 1. 14. 
                     sent forth into the Ministerie
for their sake, which shall be heires of saluation.
In which regard the Ministers are often
called in the Scriptures Angels; and the
AngelsApoc. 19. 10. & 22. 9. 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , the fellow seruants of the Ministers.
Superiour they seeme to bee in respect
of their Embassage, and of their spirituall
authoritie. The Embassage of the
Ministers is not simplie 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      a message;

but 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      
                     the Euangell, into which the Angels
themselues doe desire, as Peter speaketh,
2. Pet. 1. 12. Iohn 20. 5. 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , that is, stooping downe, as it
were, to looke, and to behold. The law indeede
was published by the MinisterieAct. 7. 53. Gala
                           •
                        h 3. 19. of
Angels; but the Gospell, by Christ and his
Ministers. Now the Ministery of the Gospell
is far more2. Cor. 3. excellent, then that of
the law, and the contempt there of more
Hebr. 2. 2. 3. grieuous. Neither hath the Lord, as appeareth
by the storie ofAct. 10. 6. 
                     Cornelius, committed
the preaching of the Gospell to Angels;
but to his Ministers, whom wee are
bound to heare and to receiue, not only as
Gal. 4. 14. Angels of God, but euen as Christ Iesus.
                  And as touching their authoritie: to
the Ministers, saith Chrysostome,
                     De Sacerd. lib. 3. cap. 5. 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . being conuersant
on earth is committed the administration
of things in heauen; and they haue
receiued such an authoritie as God neuer
communicated to the angels. For to which
of the Angels hath God said at any time,
which he hath said to his Ministers:Mat. 18. 18. 
                     Verilie,
I say vnto you, whatsoeuer you shall bind
vpon earth, it shall be bound in heauen: and

whatsoeuer you shall loose on earth shal be loosed
in heauen. And againe.Iohn 20. 23. 
                     VVhose sinnes you
forgiue, they shall be forgiuen; and whose sinnes
you retaine, they shall be retained. On which
words, Theophylacts annotation is something
hyperbolicall; but in a qualified
sense, true:Theoph. in I
                           •
                        an. 20. 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . 
                     Marke me, saith he, the dignitie
of priests, that it is diuine; for it belongeth to
God to forgiue sinnes: wherefore you must honour
them as God. As if in plainer termes he
had said; the authoritie of forgiuing sinnes
is diuine; which being communicated after
a sort to Ministers, in that they pronouncing
the forgiuenesse of sinne according
to their commission the sinnes indeede
are forgiuen, their authoritie also may
bee saide to bee diuine. Wherefore they
bearing the image of Gods authoritie before
men in forgiuing or retaining sinnes,
you are to honor and obey them as God,
whose vicegerents they bee. The like
hathAd Trall. 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . 
                     Ignatius; Bee subiect, saith hee,
vnto your Bishop, as vnto the Lord. And againe,
reuerence your Bishop as Christ. Neither
is this any more, then is commended

vnto vs in the example of the Galathians,
Gal▪ 4. 14. who receiued the Apostle as an Angell of
God, yea as Iesus Christ.
                  Hitherto I haue commended the office
of the Ministerie, both absolutelie, and by
way of comparison. Now am I to propound
the honourable titles, which are giuen
to the Ministers of the word. Whereof
great store might bee produced out of
the Fathers, but I will content my selfe
with a few. Chrysostome therefore calleth
Ministers theIn Matth 7. 
                           •
                        omil. 17. oper. imperfect. 
                     Vicars, or vicegerents of Christ;
in which title, though common to all Ministers
in a right sense, the vicar of Rome,
(though lifting vp himselfe aboue all that
is called God) doth chieflie glorie. Origen
calleth them theIn Matth. tract. 5. 
                     eies of the Church: Ambrose,
the captaines and gouernours of Christs
flocke: Augustine,
                     De doctr. Christian. lib. 4. cap 4. 
                     the defenders of the true
faith, and subduers of errours: Nazianzene,
likewiseI
                           •
                         Ap
                           •
                        loget. 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , the presidents of
truth,
                     Init. carm. ad epise. 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , the glorious gardians
of mens soules, the foundations of the world, the
light of the life, and pillars of the Christian
faith. Bernard and others, praelatos, as being

preferred before other men.
                  But omitting the writings of the fathers,
let vs search the Scriptures; and inquire,
what titles, or attributes of honour are by
the holie Ghost assigned to Ministers. And
first wee will begin with this very title of
Gods Ministers, being a title common to
them not onelie withRom. 13. 4. Princes, but also
with Christ, who is called theRom. 15. 8. 
                     Minister of
circumcision, that is, of the Iewes.
                  2 They are called 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     ,Hebr. 13 17. 
                     rulers.
                  
                  3 By a speciall prerogatiue, they are termed
not onelie in the old Testament, but
also in the new,1. Tim. 6. 11. 2 Tim. 3. 17. 
                     men of God.
                  
                  4 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     ,1. Cor. 3. 9. 
                     coworkers of God, who hath
so honoured his Ministers, that hee communicateth
his owne worke vnto them.
Hence it is, that in the Scriptures they are
said to remit sinnes, to beget men vnto
God, and to saue them, &c.
                  5 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , the
                     Titus 1. 7. 
                     stewards of God, to whom
are committed the keies of the kingdome
of heauen.
                  6 The
                     Aggei. 1. 13. 
                     Embassadours of God; and that,
in the
                     2. Cor. 5. 20. 
                     stead of Christ.
                  
                  
                     
7 The
                     Apoc. 1. 2. 3. Iudg 2. 1. Malach. 2. 7. 
                     Angels of the Lord, and Angels
of the Churches, and therfore asIob 33. 23. Galath. 4. 14. Angels
to be receiued.
                  8 The
                     2. King 2. 12. &c. 13. v. 14. 
                     chariots of Israel, and the horsemen
therof, that is, the strength and stay of the
Church, which is the Israel of God.
                  9 Stars,
                     Apocal. 1. 20. because as in this life they shine
before others, with the light of doctrine
and good example; so in the life to come
they shallDan. 12. 3. shine as the starres in glorie.
                  These are honorable titles, but you shall
heare more glorious. For the holy Ghost
not content to haue honored the Ministers
with these, ascribeth also vnto them such
titles and effects, as most properly belong
vnto God. For albeit wee haue butMat. 23. 8 9. one
Father, and one Teacher, who is in the heauens:
notwithstanding the Ministers are
called in the Scriptures, not only Doctors,
but also Fathers; and such Fathers, as are

                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . De Sacerd. l. 3. cap. 5. more to bee feared then Princes, more to
bee honoured then fathers, as Chrysostome
speaketh▪ For whom they beget, they beget
them sons of God, heires of heauen, & coheires
with Christ. And although this very

worke of regenerating or begetting men
to God, be the proper worke of the holie
Ghost: yet the Ministers also are said by
the1. Cor. 4. 15. Gospel to beget men vnto God, likewise
toMalac 4. 5. Luk 1. 16. conuert men vnto God, toAct. 26. 18. open
their eyes, to turne them from darknes
vnto light, and from the power of Satan
vnto God, toDan. 12. 3. Iohn 20. 23. iustifie men, and to remit
their sins, toMatth 5. 13. season them as salt, that they
do not putrifie in their corruptions, are the
proper workes of the blessed Trinitie: and
yet notwithstanding all and euery of them
are ascribed to the Ministers of God. Moreouer,
it is proper vnto Christ to be the1. Pet. 2. 25. Pastor
of our soules, theIohn 1. 9. light of the world,
theMatth. 1. 21. Sauiour of his brethren: and yet the
Ministers also are calledEphis 4. 11. Heb. 13. 17. 
                     Pastors, not of
mens bodies, but of their soules, theMatth. 5 14. light
of the world,Obad. 21. sauiours of their brethren,
to whom, as the instruments of God, power
of1. Tim. 4. 16. Rom. 11. 14. sauing is ascribed. Wherefore to conclude;
if the Ministers were ordained to
supplie the roome of Christ, and to be the
Embassadors of God in his stead: if Kings
and Princes, yea if the King of Princes

haue executed this function: if the proper
end of their Ministerie be the saluation of
soules: if in regard of preaching, they bee
the mouth of God to his people, in regard
of prayer, the mouth of the people vnto
God: in respect of the Sacraments, the keepers
of Gods seales; as touching the gouernment
of the Church, the guardians of
Christs bodie, to whom are committed the
keies of the kingdome of heauen: if compared
to other men, they, be the children
of wrath, as all by nature are; these, reconcilers
to God: they, sitting in darkenesse;
these, the light of the world: they, putrifying
in their corruption; these, the salt of the
earth: they, dead in sinne; these, begetting
them anew, that they may liue to God: they
bondslaues of Satan; these, sent to bring thē
out of the power of Satan vnto God: if to
other Christians, they, be sheepe these, Pastors:
they, plants; these, plāters: they stones;
these, builders: they, houshold seruants;
these, stewards of Gods house: if to other
honourable personages in generall, the
Ministers doe so much excell others in honour,

as their charge is greater in this life,
and their reward more glorious in the
world to come; if in speciall, the Spirituall
fathers be in honor to be preferred before
the carnall, as far as the life to come before
this present life; if the Priests of the law, in
whom notwithstanding appeared a mirror
of Gods glorie, are farre surpassed by the
Ministers of the Gospel, who haue receiued
a more glorious Ministery: if the spiritual
pastors haue a more excellent function,
then the ciuill, by how much the heauen is
more excellent then the earth,
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . De Sacerd. l. 3. cap. 5. or the soules
more pretious then the bodie, as Chrysostome
saith: if the Lord hauing aduanced
them aboue the condition of other men,
hath made them in some things equall, in
some things superiour to the glorious Angels
of God: and lastlie, if the holie Ghost
hath assigned vnto them titles of honour,
not onelie common to them with the best
of the creatures, but also peculiar to the
Creator, all which hath with vnanswerable
euidence of truth been demonstrated vnto
vs: then can we not deny, but that the Ministerie,

is not onely a worthie worke, as the
Apostle here speaketh, but a most excellent
and glorious function.
                  The full demonstration whereof, I
thought to be very needful, as well for their
sakes, who bee not of the Ministerie, as for
those that be. For first, those of the Laitie,
by this doctrine may bee throughly perswaded,
to esteeme their Ministers worthy
of that double honour of reuerence and
maintenance, which by the word of God is
due vnto them: & to free themselues from
the two, no more vsual then capitall sinnes
of our time, Contempt of the word and Sacrilege.
                  
                  For as touching reuerence; there is no
true Christian, but he will readily acknowledge,
that hee ought highly to reuerence
those, whom God would haue in speciall
manner honored, as the Embassadours of
God in the stead of Christ, sent to reconcile
men vnto God, and to saue them. Neither
will he easily despise those, whom hee acknowledgeth
to be the blessed instruments
of God, for his singular and euerlasting

                      good. Whereas contrariwise, not to reuerence
the Ministers, is to dishonor God,
 whose Embassadours they be. Basely to esteeme
of them in respect of their meane estate
in the world, is an euident signe of a
worldly minded man: who, as he hath not
learned to distinguish the men of God
from the men of the world, or to acknowledge
the ordinance of God, who hath1. Cor. 47. 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . discerned
them: so he seemeth to know no
better good things then worldly goods,
and therefore thinketh himselfe so much
better then the Minister, as he is richer. But
those who are religious and wise, are otherwise
minded. Obadiah, though the gouernour
of the Kings house, disdained not
to doe reuerence1. King. 18. 7. 9. to the poore Prophet
Eliah. and Ioash the King, when Elisha was
sicke, was content to do him this honor, as
not onely to visite him, but also to weepe
vpon his face and say:2. King. 13. 14 
                     My father, my father,
the chariot of Israel and horsemen of the
same. Yea, the Emperour Iustinian
                     Maxima quidem in omnibus sunt dona Dei à superna collata clementia, sacerdotium & impcoium: & illud quidem diuinie ministyans, hee autem humanie praesidens, &c. Auth. Collat. 1. Tit. 6. Nouell. 6. in praefat. acknowledging,
that the Ministrie, & the Magistracie
were two principall gifts of God,

giueth the precedence to the Ministerie.
And the like preeminence doe our lawes
giue to those of the spiritualty, before them
of the temporaltie. Howbeit priuate men
stand otherwise affected towards the Ministerie:
euery meane man almost, not only
preferring himselfe before the Minister,
but also disdaining to bestow, either his son
on the Ministerie, or his daughter on a Minister.
Yet Esay the Prophet was a Noble
man, and as it is thought of the blood royall.
Neither did the Kings of Iuda disdaine
to ioyne in2. Chron. 22. 11. 2. King. 23. 31. affinitie with the Priests.
                  To despise and contemne the Minister
in respect of his calling, is to despise God 
and Christ our Sauiour. For he that despiseth
you, saithLuke 10. 16. Christ, despiseth mee, and hee
that despiseth me, despiseth him that sent mee.
It is to professe a mans selfe voide of all
soundnesse of religion. For it is certaine
that a true estimate may bee taken of mens
religion and pietie towards God, by their
behauiour to the Ministers of God. Neither
can it bee, that they, who haue been
brought by the Ministerie of the word to

the state of grace and saluation, should
contemne the Ministers thereof. Wherefore
hee that despiseth the Ministerie, vndoubtedlie,
saith Ignatius,
                     Ad Trall. 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . 
                     Hee is an Atheist,
and irreligious man, and a despiser of
Christ. It is to hinder their owne saluation,
by making the meanes thereof vneffectuall
vnto them, which Chrysostome esteemeth
a point of madnesse. For it is manifest madnesse,
                     De Sacerd. lib. 3. cap. 5. 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . saith he, to despise so great authoritie,
without which we can neither attaine to saluation,
nor to the promised good things. For hee
that despiseth the Ministers, despiseth also
their Ministerie, by which notwithstanding,
as by the ordinarieRom. 1. 16. power of God
to our saluation, hee is1. Cor. 1. 21. pleased to saue
those that beleeue. And whosoeuer despiseth
the Ministerie of the Gospell, it shal
be easier for them ofMat. 10. 15. Sodom and Gomorah
in the day of iudgement, then for
him.
                  
                      To abuse the Ministers by word or
deede, is a sinne highly displeasing vnto
God, and grieuouslie prouoking his anger.
For seeing they are the Embassadours of

God, it cannot bee denied, but that by the
iniuries and indignities that are offered to
them as Ministers, the Maiestie of God is
violated. Wherefore he hath said,Psal. 105. 15. 
                     Touch
not mine anointed, and doe my Prophets no
harme. Yea, who knoweth not that the persons
of Embassadours, are by theSiquis legatum hostium pulsasset, contraius gentium id commissum esse existimatur: quia sancti habentur legati. Digest. lib. 5. tit. 50. lege vltima. Cic. in Verr. lib. 1. Nomen legati eiusmo. di esse debet, quod non modo inter sociorum iura, sed etiam inter bostium tela in colume versetur. De harusp. respons. sic enim lentio, ius legatorum cùm hominum praesidio munitum sit, tum etiam diuino iure esse vallatum. law
of nations sacred and inuiolable? Because
their Embassadours were contumeliously
vsed, the ancient RomanesCic. pro lege Manilia. thought it a
sufficiēt cause to extinguish Corinth, though
the eie of Greece.
                  
                     Dauid likewise reuenged the indignitie
offered to his Embassadors, with the ouerthrow
of the Ammonites. 2. Sam. 10. Doe
earthlie Princes, who are but dust and
ashes, reuenge the wrongs offered to their
Embassadours; and shall wee thinke, that
the Lord of hosts, the GodPsal. 94. 1. of vengeance
wil suffer the indignities offered to his Embassadours,
to goe vnpunished? Neuer any
man, saith
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . ad Magnes. 
                     Ignatius, offending in this kind escaped
punishment. Let the withered hand of
Ieroboam,
                     1. King. 13. 4. which hee had stretched out against
the Prophet: let the two Captaines

with their fifties,2. King. 1. 10. 12. who were sent to apprehend
the Prophet Eltah, destroied by fire
from heauen: let the leaud children
                        
                           •
                        . King. 2. 24. which
reuiled Elisha, deuoured by the beares:
let the people of Israel, for2. Chron. 36. 16. contemning
and mocking the Prophets, reiected: let
Corah, Dathan and Abiram, who for insurrection
made against Aaron, wereNumb. 16. swallowed
vp of the earth, be witnesses of this
truth. Neither hath the Lord taught this
by example alone, but also by precept;
wherein he hath appointedDeut. 17. 12. death to him
that rebelleth against the Priest. For
though the contempt of the Ministers now
adaies seeme a very small or none offence:
yet Chrysostome
                     Homil. 2. in 2. Timoth. doubteth not to call it the
cause of all euill, and the Scripture noteth
it as a grieuous sinne. Wherefore the Prophet
Hosea,
                     Hos. 4. 4. when he would set out in liuelie
colours, the desperate wickednesse of
the people in his time, he saith, they were
like them which contend with the Priest. For
to impugne the Ministers which are sent
of God, is not to repugne men, but giantlike,
to
                     Act. 5. 39. 
                     fight with God: For it is not Aaron

that you striue against, saith Moses,
                     Numb. 16. 11. to Corah
and his complices, but euen against God himselfe.
                  
                  I come to the honour of maintenance;
which, though it be most due to the Minister
by the word of God, is notwithstanding
now adaies greatly called into question.
Some thinking the Ministerie vnworthie
of allowance, as being in their
conceit an idle and needelesse function;
and therefore whatsoeuer they can by anie
fraudulent deuice either detaine or purloine
from the Minister, they thinke it well
gotten. Others thinking, that the maintenance
of the Ministery is a thing arbitrary,
which they may either yeeld or withhold,
as 
                        ••
                     ey find themselues able, or as they like
their Minister. Others acknowledging that
Ministers ought to bee maintained, notwithstanding
would haue them to depend
either altogether, or for the most part, on
the vncertaine beneuolence of the people:
themselues not caring how little they pay
by way of dutie, so they may pay what they
list by way of beneuolence. The first is a

kind of brutish people, which haue no taste
of religion; but are either meere earthwormes,
or Epicures, seruing no God but
Mammon, or their owne bellie. The second,
a kind of professors forward in shew,
and but in shew; who thinking the maintenance
of Ministers to be as it were a matter
of ceremonie, make no conscience of it.
The third, a companie of glorious professors,
who being indeed vnwilling to pay so
much as they ought of dutie, would notwithstanding
make God as it were beholding,
and his Ministers obnoxious vnto
them for their gratuities. But I hope it doth
sufficiently appeare by that which hath bin
said in commendation of the Ministerie,
that the Ministers are well worthie of sufficient
maitenance, and that, to bee yeelded
vnto them, neither as a thing arbitrary, nor
as a meere gratuitie; but as an honor in equitie
and iustice due vnto them by the
word of God. Yea, I will adde, so due, as
that without sacrilege it cannot be detained
from them.
                  For the cleering of this point, we are to

shew two things; first, that a sufficient maintenance
is due to the Minister. Secondly,
what this sufficient maintenance is. As touching
the former: the Apostle1. Cor. 9. 14. saith: 1. Cor.
9. 14. God hath ordained that they which preach
the Gospell should liue of the Gospel. The maintenance,
therfore of Ministers is not an humane
policie, but the ordinance of God:
and wee are to acknowledge it to bee due
vnto them not onelie by mans law, but also,
iure diuino, by the law of God. Now
God hath ordained it as a dutie both of
pietie towards him, and also of iustice and
equitie towards his Ministers. Pietie requireth
that we shouldMat. 22. 21. 
                     giue vnto God that
which is Gods. For God hauing reserued
vnto himselfe a portion in all mens goods,
he is to be honoured with the same, as Salomon
                     Prou. 3. 9. saith: Prou. 3. Honour the Lord with
thy substance, and with the chiefe of thy increase.
This portion is the Ministers allowance:
in which respect the LordDeut. 18. 2. Ezech. 44. 28. professeth,
that hee is the portion of his Ministers.
And this portion is so due vnto God,
and from him to his Ministers, as that to

professe religion, and to denie this allowance,
is no better then toGala. 6. 6. 7. mocke God,
and no lesse then toMatth. 3. 8. robbe him.
                  Equitie requires, that the Ministers, hauing
not onely for the furnishing of themselues
to the seruice of the Church, spent
their time, industrie, and substance; but also
when they are furnished, employing
their gifts, and spending their strength in
the most profitable and necessarie seruice
of the Church, should bee liberallie maintained,
and as the Apostle speaketh, bee
1. Tim. 5. 17. 
                     counted worthie of double honour. And this
equitie the holy Ghost prooueth by diuers
reasons: 1. Cor. 9. First, à pari, vers. 7.1. Cor. 9. 7. 
                     VVho
goeth a warfare at his owne cost? who planteth
a vineyard, and eateth not of the fruite therof?
or who feedeth a flocke, and eateth not of the
milke of the flocke? Therefore by the same
reason, Ministers, who are the captaines of
the Lords bandes, planters of his vineyard,
Pastors of his flocke, are to haue maintenance
from the Church. Secondlie, à minori;
we are in equitie to afford food, and
1. Cor. 9. 9. 10. 1. Tim. 5. 18. 
                     not to mussle the mouth of the oxe that treadeth

out the corne: therefore much more are
we to yeeld maintenance to them, that
breake vnto vs the food of life: vers. 9. 10.
Thirdly, à maieri, the Minister communicateth
spiritual things to the people, which
are incomparablie of more value then all
temporall commodities. Is it then a great
matter, saith the1. Cor. 9. 11. Apostle, if we reape your
carnall things? vers. 11. Fourthly, à simili,
as the Leuiticall Priests for their seruice
had liberall maintenance; so ought the
Ministers of the Gospell.1 Cor. 9. 13. 14. 
                     Doe you not know,
saith he, vers. 13. 14. that they which minister
about the holy things, eate of the things of the
Temple, and they which waite at the Altar, are
partakers with the Altar? so also hath the
Lord ordained, that they which preach the Gospell,
should liue of the Gospell.
                  
                  Now, what and how great this sufficient
maintenance is, which as I said, is due to
the Ministers, we are not to estimate according
to the niggardly conceits of worldlie
men, but according vnto that proportion
of allowāce, which God assigned to the
Priests of the Law. For it cannot be denied,

but that as we are more bound vnto the
Lord in all duties of thankfulnes, since the
Messias exhibited, then they to whom hee
was only promised; & as in the same respect
the Ministerie of the Gospell far excelleth
the priesthood of the law: so the portion
which is due vnto God, and from him to
his Ministers, ought to be answerable.
                  Let vs then consider, what allowance
was due to the clergie by the lawe. First,
they hadNumb. 35. 4. 5. 7. Iosua 21. Philo de Sacerd. honorib. 48. cities, and the suburbane
fields round about, for the space of two
thousand cubits euerie way; which in so
small a coūtry was a very great proportiō.
Secondly; they had the
                     Numb. 18. 21. Leuit. 27. 30. 32. Matth. 23. 23. 
                     tithes of the corne,
wine, oile, and of all fruites and hearbs, the
tithes of the heards and the flockes. Thirdlie,
the first
                     Exod. 34. 19. 20. Ezech. 44. 30. Nehem. 10. 36. Num. 18. 15. 16. 
                     borne, of all sorts of cattell, as of
beeues, sheepe; and goates, and the prises
of the rest, according to the Priests estimation.
Likewise, the first borne of men,
redeemed at fiue shekels a man. Fourthlie,
theNum. 18. 13. Deut. 18. 4. Ezech. 44. 30. Nehem. 10. 35. 37. 
                     first fruits, as namely, the first ripe
of all that was in the land; the first fruits of
the wine, oile, and wooll, the first fruit of

their dough. Fiftlie, allNum. 18. 8. 14. 19. Ezech. 44. 29. 30. the oblations and
vowes, and whatsoeuer was dedicated vnto
God, and separated from common vse.
Sixtly, theNumb. 18. 9. 11. Ezech. 44. 29. Leuit. 24. 9. Matth. 12. 5. 
                     meate offerings, the sinne offerings,
and the trespasse offerings, the heaue offerings,
and the shake offerings, and the shew-bread.
Seuenthlie, ofNum. 18. 18. Leuit. 7. 31. 32. 34. Deut. 18. 3. Leuit. 7. 8. 
                     sacrifices eucharisticall, they
had the brest & the shoulder; of others, the
shoulder, the two cheekes, and the mawe;
of burnt sacrifices, the skinne. Eightly, all
theExod. 23. 15. cap. 34. 20. 
                     males were to appeare thrice a yeare before
the Lord, and none emptie handed. Lastly,
all these duties were to beNehem. 10. 35. 37. brought to the
Priests and Leuites; and if any for their
owne ease desired not to pay in kind, but
to redeeme any dutie, or cōsecrated thing;
they were to pay according to the Priestes
estimation, and to adde a fifth part. And if
anyLeuit. 5. 15. 16. detained any thing, either in whole,
or in part, which was holy, and by law due;
hee was to bring a ramme for an offering,
he was to make good that which hee withheld,
and also to adde a fifth part.
                  The maintenāce therfore of the Priests,
by the law of God, was in respect of the

quantitie, very liberal; and in respect of the
maner, very honorable. For as Philo
                     De honorib. Sacerd. saith,
it is a great honor to bee partaker of those
things which are consecrated to God; and
as heIbid. hath well obserued, lest the people
when they brought any of their duties,
should vpbraid the Priest, as if he were beholding
vnto them; they were commanded
to bring their offerings or gifts into the
Temple, that from thence the Priests might
receiue them, as from the hands of God.
Now, if such plentifull & honorable maintenance
by the law of God, was due to the
Priests and Leuites; no man of vnderstanding
will denie, but as great a proportion
at the least, doth in equitie belong to the
Ministers of the Gospell.
                  If it be said, that the Leuites were the 13.
part of Israel, and therefore a greater proportion
needfull for their maintenance: I
answere, though they were the 13. Tribe,
yet were they not the thirteenth part. For
when the other 12. Tribes wereNumb. 1. 46. numbred
from 20. yeeres and vpward, such onelie as
were fit to beare armes, the number of

them was six hundred and three thousand, fiue
hundred and fiftie. Whereunto if you shall
adde all which were either vnder twentie
yeeres, or vnfit for seruice, the number
would be at the least doubled. But the Leuites
being al reckoned from a moneth old
and aboue, their number wasNumb. 3. 39. 
                     but two and
twentie thousand: which was not much aboue
the sixtith part; and not so much
byNumb. 3. 33. 
                     two hundred seuentie three, as the onelie
first borne of the other tribes. And therefore
when the Lord tooke the Leuites for
the first borne of Israel, the odde two hundred
seuentie three, were redeemed according
to theNum. 18. 16. law, at fiue shekels a man;
and for them aNumb. 7. 47. 48. 50. 51. 
                     thousand three hundred sixty
fiue shekels giuen to Aaron and his sonnes.
Now, if a suruey bee taken of the Clergie
of England and their families; I suppose,
they will not come much short of this proportion.
Besides, the meanes of maintenance,
which the Clergie of Israel had,
descended to their posteritie; and therefore
a lesse annuitie might suffice them, because
they had a perpetuitie; whereas the

maintenance of our Clergie dieth with
them; and out of the annual receites, which
the parent hath for terme of life, his posteritie
must be prouided for; and in that respect
an inheritance to bee permitted vnto
them, which was denied to the Leuites. But
although our Ministery be more excellent,
and therefore greater honour both of reuerence
and maintenance due vnto it:
though our number and charge being not
lesse, our need of larger maintenance greater,
because it endeth with vs: though the
Church, being not tied to the succession of
the posteritie, which oft would prooue vnworthie,
but being (by law) alwaies to bee
prouided of sufficient incumbents, ought in
this regard also to make the better allowance;
yet what haue wee in comparison of
them? yea what are our annuities to their
perpetuities? Our Colledges, and collegiate
Churches (blessed bee God) haue
lands, and our benefices glebes, though
much impaired by sacriledge. But what
are these to the 48. cities of the Priests and
Leuites with their precincts; beside all the

land, which at any time was dedicated vnto
God, and (being not redeemed) remained
for a perpetuallLeuit. 27. 21. 28. possession to the
Priests? Beside the lands (which many
want) we haue scarce any thing but tithes;
and a great part of them, by popish either
appropriations, whollie alienated, or exemptions
defaulked, or by the sacrilegious
practises, both of corrupt Patrons, and also
of vnconscionable parishioners, mightilie
impaired. But the Priests, to whom our Ministers
are answerable, had so many allowances
(as you heard) that although they
had had no tithes, the proportion of their
maintenance had farre exceeded ours.
                  If it shall be said, that tithes are ceremoniall
or iudiciall, and therefore not to bee
exacted of vs: I answere, first, that many
learned men are of iudgement, that they
are morall, as being that part of mens
goods which is perpetually due vnto the
Lord. But I will not enter into that question
at this time, it shall suffice vs to acknowledge
these two things: first, that if not the
same maintenance which was assigned to

the Priests, then questionlesse a greater is
due vnto the Ministers of the Gospell, for
the reasons before deliuered: secondly, that
although tithes were prescribed by the iudiciall
law; yet the equitie of that law remaineth,
and it is lawfull for Christian Magistrates
in imitation thereof, to prescribe
the same things. Neither can it be denied,
but that the tithes being by the lawes, not
only of this land, but almost of all Christendome,
consecrated vnto God, for the maintenance
of the Ministers, they cannot without
sacrilege bee alienated, or detained
from them. It is destruction, saithProu. 20. 25. 
                     Salomon,
to deuoure that which is sanctified, & after the
Vowes to enquire. That which is once dedicated
vnto holy vses, and consecrated to
God, may not returne to common vses.
If the thing be abused▪ the vse is to be reformed:
but the propertie is the Lords, and no
man can take it from him. See Numb. 16. 38.
Leuit. 27. 21. 28. Sacrilegious therefore was
the alienation of Church liuings by appropriations,
which are the bane of the people,
and blemish of our Church: neither wil the

Popes authority, by which they were made,
excuse them as lawfull; but prooue the
originall of them, to haue been Antichristian.
Sacrilegious hath been the practise
of courtlie Harpies, who haue praied vpon
the liuings of the Church, which praied for
them. If it were sacriledge in Nebuchadnezzar
(though a conqueror) to take away the
goldenDan. 5. 2. 2
                           •
                        . vessels of the Temple; and in
Belshazzer, to abuse them to profane vses:
what shall we say of them, who haue taken,
not the mooueables, but the very patrimonie
of the Church? Sacrilegious is the practise
of Patrones, who detaine any part of
the glebe or tithes, or with Gehezi make
gaine of that which ought freelie to be giuen:
as well as it was sacriledge inIos. 6. 22. & 7. 
                           •
                        1. 
                     Achan,
to take part of that which was consecrated
vnto God. Sacrilegious are all the practises
and deuises of vnconscionable parishioners,
who either by fraude or pretence
of law, as by pretended customes, compositions,
or such like, defraude the Minister of
his due. Was it sacrilege inAct. 5. 
                     Ananias and
Sapphira, punishable with sudden death,

who detained part of that which themselues
had consecrated vnto God, and
might before the consecration thereof
haue kept it to themselues? and is it not
much more sacrilegious to detaine that,
which wee neuer had right to keepe, as being
by law consecrated vnto God? Christians
should remember that the tithes and
reuenues of the Church, are Gods part;
and that it is their dutie to honour God, not
with theMal. 1. 8. refuse, but with the
                     Prou. 3. 9. 
                     chiefe of their
increase:
that to detaine those things which
bee consecrated to God, for the maintenance
of his Ministers, is no other then to
robbe and spoile God himselfe. For will a
man, saithMala
                           •
                        . 3. 8. he, spoile his gods? yet haue you
spoiled me: but you say, wherein haue we spoiled
thee? In tithes and offerings. Let them consider
on the one side, the gracious promises
of God made to those who honour him
by giuing the due honour of maintenance
to his Ministers, as Prou. 3.Prou. 3. 9 10. 
                     Honour the
Lord with thy riches, and with the chiefe of all
thine increase. So shall thy barnes be filled with
abundance, and thy presses shall euen burst with

new wine. And Malach. 3.Malach. 3. 10 
                     Bring you all the
tithes into the store house, that there may bee
meate in mine house, and prooue me now herewith,
saith the Lord of hosts, if I will not open
the windo wes of heauen vnto you, and power
you out a blessing without measure. On the other
side, the fearefull curse, not onely denounced,
as Malac. 3.Malac. 3. 9. 
                     You are accursed with
a curse, for you haue spoiled me, saith the Lord,
viz. in tithes, and in offerings: but also executed
on those who haue been guiltie of
sacriledge. Let the great and greedie Harpyes
set before their eies, theDan. 5. 5. hand writing,
which appeared to Belshazzar when he
was quaffing in the cuppes of the Temple:
and let the rest, I meane sacrilegious proprietaries,
corrupt Patrons, couetous and
vnconscionable parishioners call to mind
what befell toIos. 7. 
                     Achan, to2. King. 5. 27. 
                     Gehezi, toAct. 5. 
                     Ananias
and Sapphira: and as they would auoid
their punishment, so let them abhorre their
sinne.
                  And to conclude this point, let those
which be in authoritie (as it becommeth
the nursing fathers of the Church) imitate

the zeale of godlie Nehemiah, who could
not cndure the alienation of oneNehem. 13. 8. chamber
of the Priests to the priuate vse of Tobiah.
And let our Parliaments, in the name
of God, be carefull to auoide that imputation
which Paul laieth vpon the Iewes, that
howsoeuer in respect of the particulars before
mentioned, it may be verified of too
many among vs, yet notwithstanding the
whole state may not bee charged with it.
Rom. 2. 22. 
                     Thou abhorrest idols, saith he, and doest thou
commit sacriledge? And let them know that
not onelie to the restitution of impropriations
(which at the dissolution of the Abbies
ought to haue been made) they still
remaine deepelie obliged: but also for the
not restoring thereof, the whole land standeth
in an high degree, obnoxious to the
iudgements of God. For though the Pope
and Papists had some shew of reason to
take from the secular Priests, that which
they gaue to the regular, who as they imagined,
liued in a state of perfection, whose
deuotions were in their conceit the treasures
of the Church for the releefe of labouring

soules, and whose maintenance in
their intent, was to serue for the great releefe
of the poore and harbourlesse: yet
what colour, or shew of reason haue we, by
alienating the Church liuings from the
Cleargie, to robbe God of his portion, the
Ministers of their maintenance, the people
of their spirituall, and the poore of their
corporall sustenance? And lastlie, let them
acknowledge it to bee a great shame for
our land prosessing the Gospel, and sincere
religion of Christ, that the idolatrous
Priests, not onely among the Papists, but
also among theGen. 47. 22. Heathen, are more regarded,
and better rewarded, then the true
Ministers of Christ among vs.
                  And thus much of the vse, which the
people are to make of this doctrine.
                  Before I come to the Ministers themselues,
some thing is to bee added concerning
scholers or students. That none of
them presume to refuse the Ministerie, as
thinking thēselues in respect either of their
parentage, or of their wealth, or of their
gifts, too good to be Ministers. For if they

will call to mind what hath been said concerning
the honour of the Ministerie: I
doubt not, but they will say with Paul,
                     2 Cor. 2. 16. 
                     And
who is sufficient for these things? and be more
readie to acknowledge themselues vnworthie
to bee Ministers, then the Ministerie
to be vnworthie of them. If they refuse it,
because it wanteth either wealth or honor,
or because they call into question the lawfulnes
of the chiefe places in the Ministerie
(which respects haue diuerted many indued
with excellent gifts, to the studie of Physicke,
or law either ciuill or common) I
would intreate, not onely them, that they
would with indifferencie reade that which
In Apoc. 1. 20. elsewhere I haue alledged to iustifie the
honorable calling of Bishops, as being the
ordinance of God, but also those which be
in authoritie, that they would acknowledge
it to be a godly, wise, and necessary
policie, that places of great reward and eminent
honor, should be prouided for those
who deserue best, in respect either of the
studie and profession of diuinitie, or exercise
of their Ministerie, For honos alit artes:
                     
neither may it be expected that men of best
gifts, and therfore most worthie to be consecrated
to the Lord, will ordinarily vndertake
this calling, which is exposed to such
contempt of the world, subiect to so great
a charge as the gardianship of mens soules,
and yet rewarded with small preferment
either of maintenance or honor; when other
studies, especially that of the law, doth
promise vnto them, so rich rewards, so
great honour, so high preferment in the
world. It is true, there should bee no comparison
in the estimation of a Christian, betweene
that profession which respecteth
onely outward wealth (especially if you
adde the vsuall and personall corruption
of them who professe it, who vndertaking
all causes that come to hand, seeme to set
not only their tongues, but also their soules
to sale) and that calling, by the studie and
practise whereof, thou mayest1. Tim. 4. 16. saue thine
owne soule, and those that do heare thee:
notwithstanding because yong men, when
they are to make choice of their profession,
are not (for the most part) so wel setled

in Christianitie, as simplie to preferre things
spirituall, to things temporall; there must
be some inducements to the studie of diuinitie,
which may euen in outward respects
allure them who are of best gifts, and of
greatest hope: for they also are flesh and
blood.
                  Now I come to the Prophets, and sons
of the Prophets; that is, to Ministers and
students of Diuinitie: who from the dignitie
of the Ministerie are to reape two
vses. The one, of comfort and incouragement,
the other of instruction. For although
the Ministerie aboue all callings
is most subiect to the contempt and disgrace
of profane and godlesse men: yet the
Ministers are to be assured, that their function,
is a worthie and excellent worke; and
that as God himselfe hath greatly honoured
thē, so can they not but be honored of
all those▪ who are the children of God. The
contempts and contumelies of the rest,
which they offer vnto vs for Christs, or for
our callings sake, ought to bee so far from
dismaying vs, as that we ought in respect

thereof to account our seluesMatth. 5. 11. 12. happie: For
being there by made conformable not onlie
to the Prophets and Apostles of Christ,
but also to our Sauiour himselfe, wee shall
also be conformed vnto them in happines
and glorie. And howsoeuer our Ministerie
be contemned or oppugned; yet wee
are to be assured with the Apostle,2. Cor. 2. 15. 16. that we
are a sweete sauour vnto God in Christ, not
onelie in them that are saued, but in them also
that perish; to the one, a sauour of death vnto
death, & to the other, a sauour of life vnto life.
And in some measure may euerie one of vs
say with the Prophet (though speaking in
the name of Christ)Esa. 49. 4. 5. howsoeuer I haue
laboured in vaine, and haue spent my strength in
vaine, and for nothing: yet my iudgement is
with the Lord, and my worke with my God.
And though Israel be not gathered, yet shall I
be glorious in the eies of the Lord, and my God
shall be my strength.
                  
                  The instruction which is to bee learned
is this, that seeing the function of the Ministerie
is so honourable, as hath been said,
Ministers first, would labour to be worthie

of that honour, which in respect of their
function appertaineth to them. And secondly,
that students in diuinity would not
offer themselues, or Bishops admit them,
namelie, to bee Pastors, vntill they bee in
some competent measure qualified according
to that sufficiencie or worthinesse,
which is required in the Minister of God.
For (as they say) Non ex quouis ligno fit
Mercurius. And this (that I may proceede
from the worthinesse of the Ministerie, to
the worthinesse of the Minister, described
vers. 2.) is the vse which the Apostle himselfe
maketh in this place. The office of a
Bishop, saith he, is a worthie worke: therefore
a Bishop ought to be blamelesse, &c.
But howsoeuer many things are here required
to the worthinesse or sufficiencie of
a Minister; yet all may be reduced to these
two heads. The one, respecting his life,
that he be 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , of blamelesse conuersation:
the other, his Ministerie, that hee be

                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , apt, that is, able and willing to teach:
the one, implying, 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      
                     personae, the
gifts of the person, wherewith the Minister

is to be adorned, 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     ,Gal. 2. 14. to walke vprightlie;
the other, 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      
                     Ministerij, the
gifts of the Ministerie, wherewith he is to
be furnished, 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , to
                     2. Tim. 2. 15. 
                     diuide the word
aright. And these two are vsually ioyned
together in the Scriptures, to wit, Thummim
and vrim, integritie of life, and light of doctrine;
precept, and practise. For the Lord
would haue his Ministers, whom they
teach by precept, to goe before them also
in example, and contrariwise. For this
cause, as God inserted in the brest-plate of
the PriestExod. 28. 30. 
                     vrim and thummim, to bee vpon
his hart: so Moses praying that God would
adorne his Priests with sufficiencie, hee
craueth these twoDeut. 33. 8.; Let thy Thummim & thy
vrim be vpon the man of they mercie. Likewise,
on the skirts of the Priests robe
the Lord appointedExod. 28. 33. 34. golden belles and
pomgranates to bee sowed round about;
signifying by the one, the sweet and heauenlie
sound of true doctrine; without
which sound, saithGreg. lib. 1. Epist. 24. in ea verba Exod. 28. Audiatur sonitus, &c. Sacerdos ingrediens sanctuarium moritur▪ si de eo sonitus non audiatur: quia iram contra se occul
                           •
                        i iudicis exigit, si sine sonitu praedicationis incedat. 
                     Gregorie, if a Minister
doe goe into the Sanctuarie, hee incurreth
the anger of God: by the other, the sweet

and holsome fruit of a godlie life. For as
the diuinePlato in Lachete. Philosopher saith, Hee maketh
the best harmonie, whose life agreeth with his
doctrine. But whose doctrine is altogether
dissonant from his life, he is, as the Apostle
saith,1. Cor. 13. 1. 
                     a iarring Cymball. The same hath the
Prophet Malachie ioyned together; shewing
that these things were, and so ought to
be in the Priests of God.Mal. 2. 6. 7. 
                     The law of truth
was in his mouth, and there was no iniquitie
found in his lippes: he walked with me in peace
and equitie, and did turne many away from iniquitie.
For the Priests lippes should preserue
knowledge, and they should seeke the lawe at his
mouth, for he is the Angell of the Lord of Hosts.
In the new testament these two oft concurre.
Mat. 5. 13. 14. cum 16. Matth. 5. Ministers are said to bee
the salt of the earth, and the light of the world;
because their office is, by sound doctrine to
season, and by good example to shine before
others:Act. 20. 28. Act. 20. The Ministers of
Ephesus are exhorted to attend both to
themselues and to the flocke: to themselues,
by liuing well; to the flocke, by feeding
them with holsome doctrine. For we

that are Ministers, saithTom. 9. de Pastor. cap. 1. 
                     Augustine, haue
two things; the one, that we are Christians; the
other, that we are Ministers. Illud quòd Christiani
sumus, propter nos est; quòd autem praepositi
sumus, propter vos est. In eo quòd Christiani
sumus, attenditur vtilitas nostra: in eo
quòd praepositi, non nisi vestra. VVee are Christians
for our selues, and Ministers for you. In
that wee are Christians, our owne profit is attended;
but as we are Ministers, your profite
it sought. Likewise, in his epistles, Paul exhorteth
Ministers1. Tim. 1. 19. to retatne faith, that is,
sound doctrine, and a good conscience: to1. Tim. 4. 16. 
                     attend
to themselues and to doctrine: as touching
their life, to shew themseluesTit. 2. 7. 8. 
                     examples
of good works: and as touching their Ministerie,
Tit. 2. 7. 8. to teach sound and vncorrupt dostrine.
These two, whosoeuer ioyneth together,
that is,Matth. 5. 19. whosoeuer shall keepe the
Commaundements of God and teach others so
to doe, the shall be great in the kingdome of God.
Such a Minister was Iohn Baptist, to whom
our Sauiour giueth this testimonie,Ioh. 5. 35. that
he was a burning and a shining light: burning,
in himselfe, and shining vnto others.

Such were all the men of God, who are
commended vnto vs in the Scriptures;
whose knowledge was inflamed with piety,
and their pietie enlightened with knowledge.
                  These things which the holy Ghost
ioyntly requireth in Ministers, by no means
ought to be seuered. For what is an honest
Minister, if he be vnlearned? A Lampe that
burneth, but giueth no light: a Bell of
good mettall, but wanting a Clapper: a
kinde Nurse, but without milke: an honest
Gregor. past. part. 2. c. 4. Praeconis officium suscipist, quîsquis ad sacerdotium accedit, vt ante aduentum iudicis qui terribiliter sequitur, ipse scilicet clamando gradiatur. Sacerdos ergo si praedicationis est nescius, quam clamoris vocem daturus est praeco mutus? Crier, but without a voice: a well
minded Watchman, but void of sight: a
willing Guide, but ingorant of the way.
And therefore they are like to remaine in
darkenesse, who should be enlightened by
him: to be hunger-starued, that should be
fedde by him: to remaine vncalled, who
should bee called by him: to be surprized
who should haue warning from him: to
goe out of the way, who should be guided
by him. Wherefore it is well said of Ierome,
                     Hieronym▪ ad Oceanum. Innocens a
                           •
                        sque sermone conuersatio, quantum exemplo prodest, tantum silentio nocet. 
                     Innocent conuersation without instruction,
doth as much hurt by silence, as it helpes by example.
                     
For the Ministers, they be the light
of the world, the salt of the earth, the eies in
the bodie of Christ, which is his Church,
the guides of the people: If therefore the
lightMatth. 6. 23. of the people be darkenes; alas, how
great shall their darkenesse be? If the salt
whereby the people should be seasoned be
vasauourie, how should not the people
putrifie in their sinnes? If the eies of the
cōgregation (asNum. 10. 31. guides be in stead of eies)
be blind, how should the people see? If the
guides know not the way, needes must the
people wander. If the
                     Matth. 15. 14. 
                     blind leade the blind,
both shall fall into the ditch.
                  
                  But some idle drone wil say: it is enough
for mee, that I serue God in holinesse and
righteousnesse; though I cannot, or do not
preach. To whom I answere, that a mans
religion and iustice, if hee haue any, must
appeare in the exercise of his calling. And
therefore a Minister can hardlie be a good
man, as I suppose, that is not, in some competencie,
a good Minister. Now a good
Minister, is not onely a sheepe in Christs
fold, but also a Pastor of his flocke: not onlie

a liuing stone in the Temple of God,
but also a builder: not onely a plant in
Gods garden, but also a planter: not only
a child of God, but a father also in the faith,
begetting others vnto God: not onelie

                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , a disciple of Christ, but a teacher,
Mat. 28. 19. 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , instructing others.
                  On the other side, what is a learned Minister,
if he be vngodlie? He is nothing, saith
Paul,
                     1. Cor. 13. 2. 
                     for if I had prophecie, saith he, and knew
all mysteries, and alknowledge, and had not charitie,
I were nothing. For an
                     1. Cor. 8. 4. 
                     Idoll is nothing,
as he saith in the same Epistle. And a Minister,
that saith, and doeth not, little differeth
from an idoll; being not vnfitlie to
bee compared to the Mercuriales statuae,
which shew the way to passengers, but
themselues stirre not. But with Paul (in
1. Cor. 13. 2. 3. that place) nihil esse, and nihil prodesse, to
be nothing, and to profit nothing, is all one.
But Ministers, who with the Pharisies,Matth. 23. say
and do not, they are like to profit the people
but a little; and themselues nothing at
all. This therefore ought to bee the first
care of euerie Diuine,Matth. 6. 33. 
                     First, to seeke the

kingdome of God and his righteousnesse. That
he may be a sound Christian, before he bee
a Minister; a Disciple of Christ, before hee
take vpon him to teach others; a liuing
stone in the Temple of God, before he presume
to bee a builder: a sheepe of Christ,
before he be a Pastor; a plant in Gods garden,
before he be a planter; that himselfe
be called, before he call others: himselfe
a follower of Christ, before he lead others:
himselfe one of the houshold of faith, before
he take vpon him to bee a steward or
ruler of the houshold.
                  And surely if all Christians, who tender
their owne saluation, had neede to labour
for holinesse,Hebr. 12. 14. 
                     without which no man shall see
God: then much more had Ministers need
to1. Tim. 4. 7. 
                     exercise themselues vnto godlinesse, to
whose care and fidelitie the saluation of
others is entrusted; that by preaching profitablie,
and liuing vprightlie, they may
1. Tim. 4. 16. saue, not onelie themselues, but those also
who are committed to their trust. Otherwise,
if we say and doe not; yea, if wee
say one thing, and doe the contrarie, wee

shall neither profit the people, nor yet
our selues. Not the people, whom by our
example we do more scandalize, then edifie
by our doctrine, pulling downe with
the left hand, what we set vp with the right,
misleading by our life, whom by our doctrine
wee would seeme to lead. Euen as
the Prophet saith,Esay 3. 13. 
                     My people, qui ducunt te,
seducunt: they which leade thee, mislead thee.
Wherfore, as Isidore saith, Qui negligit recta
facere desinat & recta docere: Let him cease to
teach well, that cares not to liue well. For to
what purpose doest thou commend to thy
people the straite and afflicted way to
heauen; when thy selfe takest the broad
and easie way, which leadeth vnto hell? for
wil not the people sooner learne Atheisme
by thy life, then religion by thy doctrine?
For what saith thy sillie sheepe in such a
case? Surelie if my Pastor were indeed perswaded,
that there is a God which wil iudge
the world, ren dering to euery man according
to his waies; if hee thought indeede,
that there is a heauen for the godlie, and a
hell for the wicked, as hee would perswade

vs; it could not bee, that he would liue as
he doth. But what heare I words, when I
see deedes? If my guide goe that way,
who am I, that I should not follow him?
This is that, which Gregory saith,Pastoral. part. 1. cap. 2. 
                     Cum Pastor
per abrupta graditur, ad praecipitium grex
sequitur; when the Pastor goeth in steep-downe
places, the flock followeth headlong vnto ruine.
Wherefore, whosoeuer by an vngodly life
ouerthroweth his doctrine, hee layeth
Leuit. 19. 14. 
                     a stumbling block before the blind, or causeth
Deut. 27. 18. 
                     the blind to erre out of his way, which whosoeuer
doth he is accursed: yea, as I said, he
openeth a schoole to Atheisme, whereby it
comes to passe, asDe dignit. Sacerd. cap. 6. 
                     Ambrose saith Vt non solums
ipsi dum malè agunt, dignè pereant, sed alios
insuper secum indignè perdant: That not onelie
themselues whiles they liue wickedly, doe worthilie
perish, but also vnworthily they destroy others.
But neither do they profit thēselues,
for as Paul saith,1. Cor. 13. 1. 2. 
                     If I speake with the tongue
of Angles, & could prophesie, and had all knowledge,
and haue not loue, it profiteth me nothing.
Such Ministers are like to cookes, which
prouide wholesome meate for others, but

eate not thereof themselues. Like to those
carpenters that built the Arke for Noah,
and themselues perished in the floud; for
whiles they1. Cor. 9. 27. preach to others, themselues
become reprobates. For if we haue nothing
to alleadge for our selues in the day of
iudgement,Matth. 7. 22. 2
                           •
                        . but, Lord haue not we prophesied
in thy name? we shall receiue this doome, I
know you not, depart from me you workers of
iniquitie. Yea, he that teacheth others, and
teacheth not himselfe; hee that condemneth
other sinners vnto hell, and committeth
greater crimes himselfe; hee teacheth
God with what sentence to condemne
himselfe, for vnto him that terrible, but yet
iust sentence doth belong;Luk. 19. 22. 
                     Out of thine
owne mouth I will condemne thee thou wicked
seruant. Whereas contrariwise, if we would
1. Tim. 4. 16. attend to our selues to liue well, and to
doctrine to teach well, and would continue
therein, wee should saue both our
selues and those that heare vs: if we would
bee carefull both toMatth. 5. 19. keepe Gods Commandements,
and teach others so to doe,
wee should bee great in the kingdome of

God; great (I say) in the kingdome of
grace, but incomparablie greater in the
kingdome of glorie. Vnto which he bring
vs, that hath so dearely bought it for vs,
euen Christ Iesus the righteous: to
whom with the Father and the
holy Ghost be all praise and
glorie for euer,
Amen.
                  
                  FINIS.
               
            
            
               
                  Corrections.
                  Pag. 11. lin. à fine 6. Minister. pag. 18. lin. vlt. idole. pag. 52. lin. 1.
things. To. pag. 58. marg. lin. à fine 5. 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . lin. vlt. 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     .
pag. 59. lin. penult. of life. pag. 62. lin. 4. God. Likewise pag. 88.
lin. vlt. Ministerie. For.
                  
               
            
         
         
            
               
                  
                  
                  
                     A
Sermon defending the
honourable function of
BISHOPS,
Preached, April. 17. Anno.
D. 1608. at the Consecration of
the right reuerend Father in GOD,
the L. Bishoppe of Bath
and Wells:
                  
                  By George Downame, Doctor
of Divinitie.
                  AT LONDON,
Printed by H. L. for Mathew
Lownes, and 
                        
                           ••
                        lix Kyngston.
Anno. D. 1608.
               
               
                  
                  
                  REVERENDO
IN CHRISTO
PATRI AC DOMINO,
DOMINO IACOBO MOVNTAGVE,
EPISCOPO BATHONIENSI
ET WELLENSI, PRAESVLI CLARISSIMO,
DOMINO SVO INPRIMIS
OBSERVANDO
                  Georgius Downame Concionem hanc,
quâ dignitas Episcopalis asseritur, ad perpetuam
amoris et observantiae memoriam,
Dicat Consecrat
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                     .
               
               
                  
                  
                  To the Christian Reader.
                  
                     ALthough I am not ignorant (good
Christian Reader) how vnpleasing
this Sermon will be to some, who
are forestalled with preiudicate opinions,
(whom I could wish, I were
as sure to perswade, as I hope by euidence
of truth to conuince:) notwithstanding, if I
may intreat thee, to reade it without preiudice, and to
iudge of it without partialitie; I doubt not, but thou
wilt acknowledge with mee, that the doctrine therein
contained, is not onely true, but also a profitable and
necessarie truth. And the rather doe I conceiue this
hope, because the time hath beene, when mine affection
enclined by the reuerent opinion, which I had worthily
conceiued not onely of Master Caluin, the author, but
also of Master Beza, and many other godly and learned
men, patrones and fautors of the pretended discipline,
made me suspend my iudgement in this cause; vntill I
had seriously entred into the studie thereof. The which
for a long time I did forbear: partly because I did rightly
suppose, that my paines might bee more profitably bestowed
in other partes of diuinitie, and I had heard a

zealous preacher reproue young Diuines in a Sermon at
Cambridge,
                     Master Greenham. who, before they had studied the grounds
of theologie, would ouer-busie themselues in matters
of discipline, and as hee said, before they had laide the
foundation of their studie, would bee setting vp as it
were the roofe: and partly because in my slender iudgement,
I could not then see, what good would come either
to my selfe or to the Church of God, by my paines taken
in that controuersie. For I conceiued the issue of my studie
would bee, either the disgrace of my ministerie among
the forwarder sort▪ if I resolued, as now I knowe
I should haue done; or the ouerthrowe of my ministerie,
if I should stand for that discipline. Thus was I cō
                     tent
to remaine in suspense, whiles I tooke it to bee the
best course, both for my selfe and for the Church, to bee
no medler on either side. But when of late yeares the
case was so altered with the time, that a necessitie was
imposed, not onely to resolue, but also to professe my
resolution on the one part; and it was now expected,
that I should informe not onely my self, but some others
also what way to take: I did then seriously enter into
the studie of these things; Perhaps with another minde
then some others haue done, and therefore with other
successe. I considered with my selfe, that this Church of
England, wherein I was called to be a minister, did hold
and professe all substantial points of diuinity, as soundly
as any Church in the world, none excepted neither in
this age, nor in the primitiue times of the Church. And
secondly, that it hath the testimonie of all other true
Churches. Thirdly, that in it the means of saluation are
ordinarily and plentifully to be had. And therefore to
make separation from it, I tooke to be schismaticall and

damanable presumption. And as touching my selfe, I considered
that being in the ministerie, necessitie is laide
vpon me, and woe bee vnto mee, if I preach not the
Gospell. Wherefore I must confesse, I studied the controuersies
wherein the policie of our Church is called into
question, as one who meant if hee were not conuicted
with euidence of truth, to bee as it were the respondent,
or defendant, resoluing not to leaue my standing
wherein God had placed mee, vnlesse by force of argument,
I were remooued: Whereas others, hauing (as it
seemeth) beene out of loue with our Church-discipline
before, and in affection wholly alienated from our
Church-gouernours, haue studied these things as opponents
and plaintiffes. And therefore hauing sought a
knot as it were in euerie bulrush, and strained at euerie
gnatte, they haue picked so many quarels against the
Church, and by consequent, against their owne ministerie,
as that by their oppos
                        ••
                     ion, the Church is depriued
of their ministerie, & themselues of the imployment of
their gifts; They suffering the Land to swarme (euen in
their owne opinion) with Papists and Atheistes, and
their places either to be destitute, or to be occupied with
such as they account vnprofitable ministers, rather thē
they wil embrace, nay rather then they wil without preiudice
and partiality read, what is truly said for the defence
of our Church. But to returne to my selfe: when
with this resolution (which I am perswaded ought to be
in the like case) I had studied som, which are supposed to
bee the chiefe treatises on both sides: I found on the one
side, certaine places of Scripture drawne as it were by
the necke to that side, a fewe stragling sentences quoted
out of the Fathers, and as it were with oares wherried
by these men (looking as one would thinke the other

waie) against the full streame of Antiquitie; some
pretie speeches and wittie proofes, which notwithstanding,
were (as before I had obserued in the question of
vsurie) meere colours, rather then sound arguments. On
the other side, I found full and plentiful proofes, as in other
writinges, so namely in the learned treatise of the
perpetuall gouernemant of the Church, from which I
receiued good satisfaction. Now, the arguments which
perswaded me, I haue here set downe, as the shortnesse
of a Sermon (though somewhat enlarged) would permitte;
hoping (because I knowe nothing to the contrarie,
setting not the iudgement of men, otherwise minded,
but their preiudice aside) that the same argumentes
which haue perswaded me, wil also preuaile with others
to embrace this, which at the first I called a profitable
and necessarie trueth. The which if it shall please God
according to my hearts desire to effect, I would hope
through Gods goodnesse qu
                        ••
                     kly to see an ende of this
pernicious diuision which is among vs. For though some
other particulars be cōtrouerted; yet this, of the church-gouernment,
is the chiefe & principal: and so chiefe, as
that somtimes I haue thought the rest to be but controuersies
in pretēce to auoyd the enuie of this. Neither doe
I doubt, but that if men sincerely affected were rightly
perswaded of the gouernmēt, that either they wold not
so stand vpon matters of ceremony, & such like of small
importance, as that for them they would maintain this
rent in the bodie of Christ or suffer either themselues to
be depriued of the imployments of their talents, or the
Church of their ministerie: or if anie out of tendernesse
of conscience should make scruple of these things,
that they would fauourably be respected. So that by the
acknowledgment of this one truth our differences would
be compounded, our breaches healed, our diuided minds

reunited, with one heart and voice to glorifie God in
the edification of his Church, propagation of the Gospell
confusion of Poperie and Atheisme. Whereas now
this opposition, whiles it is continued, greatly dishonoureth
God and his true religion which we professe, hindereth
the proceedings of the Gospel, aduantageth Poperie
& Atheisme scandalizeth the people whom we ought to
edifie, and not onely the backwarder sort; who hereby take occasion
to be of no religion, but also the forwarder sort, and that many
waies, as I wil particularly shew. For they (I speak not
of all) are hereby occasioned, 1. To despise the solemn worship
& seruice of God, and whatsoeuer good thing else is
set forth by Authoritie: and 2 Wheras they would seeme
aboue all things to esteeme the ministery of the word, as
that precious treasure for which they would (with him
in the Gospell) forgoe all things; they not onely vilifie
and disgrace the ministerie, which is to bee had (I mean
of those who are conformable, though no way inferiour,
but in many graces, by many degrees superiour to many
of those whom they admire:) but also encourage by all
meanes their admired ministers to stand out, as though
they had rather want the foode of their soules, and that
which they acknowledge to be the power of god to saluation,
thē not to enioy their fācies, for which they haue no
ground. 3. To place the height of religion in disconformitie,
turning zeal into faction, godly conferēces to bitter
inuectiues against Bishops, & odious censures of such as
they cal formalists; the study of the scriptures & the substance
of diuinity, to disputatiō of discipline & ceremonies,
& being ignorant in the Catechisme to professe skil
in those things: Combining themselues in a diuided brothe
hood, as though none were to be accounted Christiās or brethren
in Christ, but such as stand for the pretended discipline; to
whom also they cōfine their charitie. 4. To be dāgerously

vnthankfull vnto God for the continuance of the Gospell
together with outward peace and prosperitie vnder
the happie gouernment of our gratious and dread soueraigne.
For whereas before the end of the blessed raigne
of Queene Elizabeth, all good Christians would haue
acknowledged thēselues infinitely bound to Almightie
God in al duties of thankfulnes, if they might haue been
assured of the continuance of these things after her decease
(which was the time that we feared & our enemies
expected:) yet now when the Lord hath granted whatsoeuer
almost we could desire, we take on, as if we had nothing;
and like weyward children when we haue what is
fit for vs, if we cannot also haue what we fancy besides,
we are ready to cast away that, which, through Gods vnspeakable
goodnes, we may to our soules health enioy. Yea
so strangely doe some dote vpon their owne deuises, that
they protest to all the world,Christian & modest offer of disput. vnlesse their assertions (diuerse
euen the principall whereof were neuer heard of
in the Church of God within 1600. and some odde
yeares after Christ) bee graunted, they see not how our
separation from the Church of Rome can bee iustified.
Nay they protest, that if they be in an errour and the Bishops
haue the truth, the Pope and Church of Rome haue
had great wrong and indignitie offered vnto them, in
that they are reiected: and that all the protestant Churches
are schismaticall in forsaking vnity and communion
with them; And therfore in their wisdoms make this
offer to the Priests and Iesuites, that if from them they
can receiue satisfaction concerning their propositions,
they will be reconciled to the See of Rome. So that now
it must be thought that we separated from the church of
Rome, not for their abominable idolatries & heathenish
superstitiōs, nor for their capital heresies subuerting the

foundation of religiō, nor because the church of Rome is
the whore of Babylon, the See of Antichrist, the mother
of all fornications and abominations, being also embrued,
and as it were died red with the blood of the Saints,
& of the Martyrs of Iesu; frō which we are cōmanded to
separate in these respects: but because forsooth among
them, euery particular parish is not held to be an entire
body by it selfe, furnished with sufficient power & authority,
for the gouernment of it selfe in all causes ecclesiasticall;
because euery parish among thē hath not power
immediatly vnder Christ, to elect and ordaine, depriue
and depose their Ministers, and to execute all other ecclesiast▪
censures: because the Pastor of euery particular
cōgregation, is not among thē the highest ordinary ecclesiasticall
officer, but aboue him they haue diocesan and
provinciall church-officers, & such like; for it shall suffice
to haue mentioned those, which as they concerne the
cause in hand, so they are the principal. In respect wherof,
seeing they holde separation is to be made from the
church of Rome, they plainly bewray themselues what
manner of persons they be, who for the same causes may
separate not onely from our Church, but those of Scotland,
and Geneua, and all others, where these vndigested
deuises were neuer heard of. Fiftly, to growe wanton
in religion through a kinde of spirituall pride, not
caring for the heauenly food of their soules, vnlesse they
may haue their own sawee, & preferring the circūstances
of religiō & ceremonies, before the substance. We wil
not heare a sermon forsooth made at a funerall, bee it
neuer so profitable, and by our good wil we would heare
none that is conformable, be hee neuer so learned and
godly a preacher: of if we doe, (we hearing with preiuiudice,

& making the word vneffectual vnto vs) we say
his gifts be decayed, & his preaching to be without power:
we heare & not heare with admirable acceptation of
persons, as if we had neuer learned to acknowledge Gods
ordinance, or to look higher then to the speaker. Moreouer,
if lawe did not compell vs, wee had rather be at no
publique prayers, then at those which by authoritie are
appointed; or if we be present, we will behaue our selues
as absent, not vouchsafing to ioyne with the congregatiō.
We had rather not haue our child baptized (if we might
choose) then that the crosse in baptisme should be vsed.
We had rather not receiue the Communion, then receiue
kneeling &c. Which things, when I consider how fewe among
the people (in comparison) de care for religion, &
of those few, how many are (I am sory to speake it) schismatically
disposed, doe make my heart to sorow, and my
bowels to yearne in commiseration so thē. Neither can I
choose, but in an earnest desire of the peace of our church
(whereby these inconveniences might be remedied) to intreat,
& euen in the bowles of Christ, to beseech my brethren
of the Ministery, that as they tender the glorie of
God, in the propagation of the Gospel, or the salvation of
the people which Christ hath redeemed with his precious
blood: or if these considerations wil not preuaile, as they
hope to answer these thinges at the day of the Lord, they
would at length seeke the peace of Sion, & be as desirous
to find arguments to revntie themselues vnto vs, as they
haue bin ouer-busie in seeking reasons to disioyne themselues
frō vs. Or if they will not be at so much paines, yet
at the least, that they would weigh in the ballance of an
vpright & vnpartiall iudgement, those proofes which
heere are briefely set downe. And if they finde them to

ouer-weigh the reasons of the contrary part, they wold giue
glory to God, by acknowledging ingenuously so profitable, &
as these times are, so necessary a truth. Neither shall they
need to feare discredit, if vpon better information they shal
reforme their iudgements. Wherein all moderate men will
hold them excused: remembring first, the common condition
of humane frailty, which is subiect to ouer sight; frō which
the most zealous men are so far frō being exempted, as that
many times they are more subiect there-vnto then others of
milder temper; men of greatest zeale being not alwaies, nor
for the most part, of soundest iudgement. Secondly, the reuerent
opinion which worthily they haue conceiued of Calvin
& Beza, & other worthy Diuines, whom they hauing
found so admirably sound & orthodoxal in the substantiall
points of religion; it is no maruel, though without any great
search they relied vpon their credit for matters of lesse importance.
Thirdly, the good effects which (as they haue beene
enformed) the new discipline hath brought forth, and the
manifold corruptions which they haue taken notice of in the
gouernmēt of our church, being the personal defaults not so
much of the Bb. themselues, as of their officers. And yet what
are these to those horible cōfusions, which if the discipline of
the newest edition should be established, wold inevitably follow?
Namely, if euery parish Bishop should, as they teach, bee
the supreme or highest ecclesiasticall officer: that euery parish (where
plurality of voices must cary all things, & the greater part ouersway
the better) should within it selfe haue authority immediatly deriued
from Christ, to elect, ordaine, depose and depriue their Minister, and
to exercise all other ecclesiasticall censures; that euery parish should
be an entire body within it selfe, hauing neither subordinatiō, nor (for
ought that I see in the new plotforme) consociation with others.
                  And is it possible, that these things should not onelie bee
broached of godly learned Ministers, but also with such vehemency
be vrged, that separation is to be made frō all those

churches which admit not these new & vndigested fancies?
Or shal we not rather think, that Brownists, or some not far
from Brownisme, haue abused their names? which if it bee
so, why do not the rest disavow these new-found assertions,
& protest against such schismaticall nouelties? Why are the
people suffered to receiue thē as oracles? why is this advantage
giuen to Papists as though the ministers among vs, who
would be thought to seeke reformation, did acknowledge no
greater cause of separation from the church of Rome, then
these matters of the new-found parish-discipline, which no
reformed Church in the world doth obserue?
                  But if in the partial ballance of their forestalled iudgmēt
these argumēts shal seem light in cōparison of their own; my
desire is, that their answers may be distinctly applied to euery
argumēt in order, & that their proofs may be produced:
which (they must remember) had need to be very pregnant
& demonstratiue, which are to perswade, both the abolishing
of that gouernment which euen from th' apostles times
hath been perpetually obserued in the church, & setting vp
of another which was neuer heard of till now of late. And if
for ought that I haue heere said, or can say, the newest things
wil proue the truest, (which yet neuer hapned) I will then
acknowledge my error. Onely I desire christian and modest
dealing: not as in that which is called the christian and modest
offer, which notwithstanding that title, is ful of odious
censures, proud & scornful speeches, vnchristian & vnmodest
provocations, with great bitternes galling those whom
they haue made their opposites. In expectation whereof, I
commend thee to the Grace of God, vnfainedly protesting,
that what I haue heere either in this Praeface or in the Sermon
deliuered, is that which in my conscience I am verilie
perswaded to be the truth.
                  
                     Thine in the Lord, G. D.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Pag. 97. lin. 13. read, Presbyteries.
                  
               
            
            
               
                  
                  A SERMON PREAched
at Lambith.
                  
                     APOCAL. 1. 20.
                     The seauen Starres, are the Angels of the seauen
Churches.
                  
                  
                     OVr Lord & Sauiour Christ,
hauing appeared to Saint
Iohn, in a glorious forme,
v. 13. &c. (before described) in the
midst of seauen goldē Candlesticks,
hauing seauen
                     v. 16. 
                     Stars
in his right hand: In this verse, hee expoundeth
the mysterie both of the seauen Starres,
and also of the seauen golden Candlesticks;
shewing, that as by the golden Candlestickes
are meant the seauen famous Churches of
Asia, viz. Ephesus, Smyrna, and the rest before

specified, vers. 11: so the seauen Starres are
(that is, doe signifie) the Angelles of those seauen
Churches. In handling of which wordes, I
am to performe two things First, because this
expositiō is, asIn Apoc. 1. 
                     Albertus noteth, allegorical,
we are to examine, who, and what manner of
of persons are meant by the Angels of the
Churches. For although it bee a thing agreed
vpon among theThose fewe which by the Angels vnderstand, either the Angels of heauen, or the whole churches, are easily confuted: the former, because the faults reproued, and repentance enioyned in the Epistles, cannot agree to Angels; the latter, because they confound the seauen Stars, which Christ held in his hand, with the seauen golden Candlestickes, in the midst whereof hee walked. interpreters both
new and old, that by the Angels we are to vnderstand
the Pastors or Bishops of the Churches:
yet is it become a great controuersie in
our time (which I wish were as likely to bee
determined and ended, as it is easie by euidence
of truth to be decided) what manner
of Bishoppes they were: whether (for the
substance of their calling) such as the reuerende
Fathers of our Church are (which,
by the grace of GOD, I will plainely
prooue), or such, as some of our time haue
fancied.
                  Secondly, wee are to consider the quality
of their function, and out of the wordes to
shewe, that the office and function of Bishops
heere meant by Angells, is in this text both
approued as lawfull, and commended as excellēt:

they hauing this relation to the Churches
whereof they are Bishoppes, that where
the Churches are compared to Candlesticks,
they are presupposed to bee the lightes sette
there on, toMat. 5 15. Iohn 5. 35. giue light to all in the house
of God: where the Church in this booke is
tearmed heauen (as it is the heauen vppon
earth) the Pastors and Bishoppes are the
Starres of heauen: where it is called the kingdome
of heauen, as though it were the heauē
of heauens, they are the Angels in this heauen.
                  For the deciding of the former question,
two things are in the wordes offered to our
consideration. For whereas they are said to
be Angels of the Churches, wee are first to
consider what manner of Churches they
were, whereof they were Angells; and secondly,
what manner of preheminence they
had in those Churches, in regard wherof they
are tearmed the Angels of the Churches. As
touching the first: we are to try, whether these
Churches whereof they were Angels or Bishops,
were parishes, or dioceses: and consequently,
whether they were parishionall, or
diocesā Bishops. For som of late haue taught,

that properly there is no visible Church, but
a parish, nor lawfull Bishoppes but parishionall;
and that for the space of two hundred
yeares after Christ, there were no other but
parish-bishops. And that we should not think,
they vse the word parish, in so ample a sense
as the auncient Fathers and Councilles
were wont to vse the worde 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , (as after
you shall heare): they define a Parish to bee
a particular, ordinarie, or set Congregation
or Christians assembling in one place (as it
were in one synagogue) to the solemne worshippe
and seruice of God; such as bee our
parishes here in England. To make good
this newe-found opinion (the noueltie wherof
bewrayeth the falsitie) they haue coyned
others, as newe, and therefore as false assertions.
As first, that euerie parishIure diuino▪
                      by
right hath sufficient authoritie within it selfe
immediately deriued from Christ, for the gouernement
of it selfe in all causes ecclesiasticall.
And secondly, least they might
seeme to set vppe an absolute Popeling in
euerie parish, who should haue not onelyFor they say, that the Pastor of a particular congregation is the highest ordinarie ecclesiasticall office in any true cō
                        stituted visible Church of Christ.
supreame, but also sole authoritie in causes
ecclesiasticall: they adioyne vnto him, his

consistorie of lay or gouerning Elders. And
to this parishionall presbyterie consisting of
the parish Bishoppe (forsooth) and his parish
elders, they doe ascribe that sufficient,
immediate, and independent authoritie for
ecclesiasticall gouernement of euerie proper
visible Church, otherwise called a parish.
Thirdly, as for diocesan or prouinciall Bishops,
they hold them vnlawfull, & Antichristian:
neither may they (good men) bee acknowledged
to bee so much as members of
the true visible Church; because forsooth they
bee not members of some one onely parish;
which in these mens conceipt must needes be
the kings owne case.
                  Concerning the second; viz. what was
the preheminence of these Bishoppes in the
Churches, in respect whereof they are called
the Angels of the Churches; Others more
wise and learned then the former, graunting
they were Bishops of whole Cities, and the
Countreyes adioyning (that is to say of Dioceses)
notwithstanding the sway of the gouerment
they ascribe to the Presbyteries of
those Churches, consisting partly of ministers
and partly of annuall or Lay-presbyters; making

these Angels or Bishoppes nothing else
but 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , or presidents of those presbyteries:
and such presidents, as were not superiour
to the other presbyters in degree, but
onely in order; hauing an authoritie committed
to them by the free consent of the rest, to
assemble the Presbyters, to moderate the action,
to propound matters, to aske voyces,
euer pronouncing what the greater part decreeth,
and lastly to execute the presbyterial
decrees: and further, such president, as had
not this superioritie for terme of life, but for
a shor time, as a weeke or a moneth, and that
by course; this presidentshippe being, according
to their conceipt, common to all in their
turnes.
                  Now for the clearing of this matter, which
wee haue in hand: forasmuch as both sortes
obtrude lay-elders to extrude Bishops; I will
 first proue against both, that there were no
lay-gouerning-elders in the primitiue church
& that the presbyteries then consisted wholly
 of ministers. And then more particularly
against the former sort, that in the first two
hundred yeares, the visible Churches (such as
they speak of) indued with power of ecclesiasticall

gouernement, were dioceses properly, and
not parishes: & that the presbyteries which
were in those times, were assigned not to parishes,
but to dioceses. And consequently,
that the Angels of the Churches and presidents 
of the presbyteries, were not parishionall,
but diocesan Bishops.
                  Against the latter, that the Bishop being aduanced 
to a higher degree of the ministerie,
was set aboue the other presbyters, not onely
in prioritie of order, but also in maioritie of
rule: and that, neither for a short time, nor yet
by course: but, as for his worth hee was either
at the first appointed by the Apostles, or afterwards
elected by others; so was he to continue
for tearm of life, vnlesse for his vnworthinesse
he were displaced.
                  And so in the last place I will come to the
other thing, which is to bee obserued in this 
text, which is, cōcerning the qualitie of their
function: wherein I am to shew, and by euidence
of truth to demonstrate, that the calling
of such Bishops, is of apostolicall and
diuine institution. Vnto which last, that I may
in due time come, I will be the shorter in the
former.
                  
                     
ANd first,First, no presbyters, but Ministers. I am to shew, that there were no
other Presbyters in the primitiue Church
but Ministers. A sufficient proofe whereof
may bee this: that, as in the writings of the
Apostles, in the auncient Fathers and councils,
the word 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      or Presbyter (noting
an Ecclesiasticall person) doth euermore signifie
a Minister of Priest (which word, though
abused by the Papistes to signifie sacrificing
Priests, is the proper english of Presbyter, and
from thence deriued:) and therefore question
might as wel be made whether there were
anie annuall ministers or lay-priests, as presbyters,
(that being also a name, as themselues
say, confounded in the Scriptures with Episcopus,
and noting a person, who must by the
Apostles rule beAble to teach. 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     ): so can ther not any
one pregnant testimonie be alledged out
of the scriptures, Councils or Fathers, mentioning
or meaning any lay, annual, onely-gouerning
presbyters: which no doubt will seem
strange to those; who remember with what
vehemencie this kinde of presbyters hath
beene vrged and obtruded vpon vs. For although
manie places are vsually alleadged
out of the Scriptures and Fathers: yet I doe

vnfainedly professe, that (to my knowledge)
there are onely two allegations, which I esteeme
worth the answering: the one, out of
1. Tim. 5. 17. 1. Tim. 5. the other, out of Ambrose
on the same Chapter. The Presbyters, sayth
Paule, that rule well, let them bee counted worthie
of double honour, especially they who labour
in the worde and doctrine. From
whence they gather a distinction of Presbyters
or elders; that some are gouerning
elders onely: others, also Ministers. Whereunto
I answere, that not anie of the Fathers,
or any other before our age, did euer vnderstand
this text of any other, but of the ministers
of the word, they cōceiuing of it, as if the
Apostle had said: Let those Ministers or Priests
which rule wel &c. Neither doth the Apostle
indeed note 2 sorts of Elders, as they imagin,
but two dueties of the Ministers, in respect
wherof double honour is due vnto them: the
one generall, 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , to bee good presidents;
the other speciall, 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     ,
to labour in the word and doctrine.
Putting onely this difference, that whereas
double honour is due to all ministers for
the performāce of their duty in general, (for

soHiero. nym. in 1. Ti. 5. 
                     Ierome expoundeth these wordes, qui
bene praesunt (i.That is, who fulfill their office. 
                     qui implent officium suum:)
yet especially they are to bee honoured for
their paines in preaching the word; that being,
in Pauls estimation, the chiefe worke of
the Ministerie. For 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      is all one with
that phrase of going out and in before others,
wherby the conuersation of publike persons
in the scriptures is signified. And they are
said 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , who goe out and in before
the people of God as it becommeth them.
And thus also the ancient Syriack Paraphrase
expoundeth those wordes, 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      
                     qui
bene segerunt, who demeane themselues well
in their place. And this is to be vnderstood
both of their priuate conuersation (in which
sense the word 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      is vsedTit. 3. 8. 14. 
                     Tit. 3. 8. 14.
where those which beleeue, are exhorted

                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , to bee presidents of good
workes) and also of their publike administration.
Both which the Apostle expresseth in
his farewell-sermon to the same Presbyters of
Ephesus, of whome hee speaketh to Timothe,
                     Act. 20. 28.
                     Act. 20. 28. which may serue as a cōmentarie
to this place. As if the Apostle had sayd,
those Presbyters or Ministers among you,

who fulfill their ministerie according to that
directiō which at my departure I gaue them,
viz. that they should attend to themselues and
to the whole flocke, ouer which the holy Ghost had
made them ouerseers, (that is 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     ) and
more specially, to feede the Church of God
which hee hath redeemed with his owne bloud,
(that is, to labour in the word and doctrine)
let them bee counted worthie of double honour.
It is plaine therefore, that the Apostle
in that place speaketh onely of Ministers.
And that hee speaketh not there of lay or
onely-gouerning elders, it may further bee
proued by plaine euidence out of the text.
For, seeing by honour in that place the Apostle
vnderstandeth honourable maintenance,
which by their owne confession is not due to
lay-elders; it is therefore certaine, that this
place acknowledgeth none such. Thus therfore
I argue;
                  To all those elders, who are mentioned or
meant in this place, the honour of
maintenance is due for their worke
sake.
                  To the Lay-elders the honour of maintetenance
is not due for their work sake.
                  
                     
Therefore lay-elders are not mentioned
nor meant in this place.
                  The proposition the Apostle prooueth in
the next words by 2.1. Tim. 5. 18 Deut. 25. 4. testimonies. For the
Scripture sayth, thou shalt not moosell the mouth
of the Oxe that treadeth out the corne. Which
testimony hee also alleageth1. Cor. 9. 9. 1. Corin.
9, to proue that mainetenance is due to the
Ministers of the Gospell. And againe,
Luk. 10, 7. 
                     The workeman is worthie of his stipend.
                  
                  The Assumption thēselues confesse, both
by their doctrine and their practise. For,
whereas some obiect, that their lay-elders, if
they stand in neede, are to bee maintained:
I aunswere, that theySee the Suruey of the pretended discipline cap. 10. choose such as
haue not neede; and if they haue, that the
maintenance which is allowed, is for their
neede, and not for their worke sake. But
the Apostle sayth, the Presbyters are worthie
of double honour, and the workeman is
worthie of his stipend; to signifie, that the
honour or mayntenaunce, whereof hee
speaketh, is not a beggerly almes giuen
onely in charitie for neede; but an honourable
stipende, in iustice due to the Minister

for his worke sake.
                  Seeing therefore this Scripture failes
them, wee may conclude, that lay-elders
haue no footing in the Scriptures; and
therefore by their owne principles ought
not to bee obtruded vpon the Church of
God.
                  I come to Ambrose, writing on the first
verse of the same ChapterAmbrose. in 1. Tim. 5. 1. Where the Apostle
exhorting Timothie, not to rebuke an
elder or aged man, Ambrose giueth this reasō:
For among all nations old age is honourable: and
then addeth, vnde & synagoga, & postea ecclesia
seniores habuit, quorum sine consilio nihil agebatur
in Ecclesia. Quod quâ negligentiâ obsole
verit nescio, nisi fortè doctorum desidiâ aut magis
superbiâ, dum soli volunt alquid videri.
Whence it is, that both the Synagogue, and afterwards
the Church had Seniors, without whose
counsell nothing was done in the Church. Which
by what negligence it is growen out of vse, I
knowe not, vnlesse perhappes by the slouthfulnesse
of the learned or teachers, or rather pride,
whiles they alone will seeme to bee some thing.
Which wordes, whosoeuer vnderstande
as giuing testimonie to lay-elders, they

wrong Ambrose, in making him against his meaning
to testifie that, which hath no warrant
either in Scriptures, or in the elder writings
of Antiquitie. For, Ambrose himselfe was
a Diocesan Bishoppe, and one who laboured
as much as anie, not to iustifie (for that needeth
not in those times) but to magnifie the
calling of Bishoppes; and was as farre as
any, from subiecting either Bishoppes or Ministers
(as these men doe) to the Presbyteries
of lay men.
                  But let vs examine the force of their argument.
Ambrose saith, there were elders in
the Church as well as in the Synagogue,
therefore (say they) there were lay elders.
It followeth not. For euen the Synagogue
hadIerom. 19. 1. 
                     Seniores sacerdotum, Seniors of the
Priests, as well as Seniores populi, Seniors of
the people. And, of such, Ambrose speaketh,
when hee sayth, in the Church or Church
causes nothing was done without their aduise.
If it be said, that Ambrose speaketh of
such Seniors, whose aduise was neglected
through the default of the learned or teachers,
and therefore of such as were not teachers;
I answere againe, neither doth this follow:

for, doctorum, the learned or teachers, being
a common title both to Bishoppes and
Presbyters, and so to bee vnderstood in this
place; wee may easilie conceiue, how the assistance
of the Seniors, through not lay-men
but Ministers, was grown out of vse, through
the default of such as had beene teachers in
the Church, either as Presbyters, or as Bishoppes.
For, whereas in the Primitiue
Church, the Bishoppe had vsed the aduise of
certaine graue Ministers, who remained with
him, after the greatest number of Presbyters
(being now allotted to their seueral titles or
charges) were seuered from him: (a liuely
resemblaunce whereof remaineth in the
Deanes and Chapters of Cathedrall Churches)
and nothing almost was done in
Church causes without their aduise: Ambrose
complaineth, that their counsell in his
time was neglected, & their assistance growen
out of vse, by what negligence hee could
not tell: but as hee ghesseth, it was to bee
attributed either to the idlenesse doctorum of
the learned or teachers, that is to say, of the
Presbyters, who for their owne ease gaue ouer
medling in matters appertaining to gouernment;

or else to the pride doctorum of
the learned or teachers, that is to say, of
the Bishoppes, who tooke all vppon themselues,
that they alone might seeme to bee
somewhat. For if you expound Doctorum, for
pastors of parishes alone, as the Presbyterians
doe, or for Bishoppes alone, as others
doe: I cannot see, how the excluding of Seniors,
and taking the whole burden and imployment
vpon themselues, could by Ambrose
bee imputed as a matter of sloath or idlenesse,
either to the Pastors, excluding
the lay Elders; or to the Bishoppes, excluding
the learned Presbyters. But howsoeuer
Ambrose knewe not what to saye
of this matter, otherwise then by coniecture;
yet I doubt not but the true causes,
wherefore the assistaunce of the Seniors
grewe out of vse, were these: First,
because it beeing a matter of greate trouble,
whereby they had no profitte, they
prouided for their owne ease, giuinge ouer
to intermeddle in those combersome
imploymentes, (which was Ambrose his
first reason). Secondly, because it grewe
needelesse; for that the frequent Synodes

of Bishops, which in euery Province were assembled,
not onely determined many causes,
which before were wont by Presbyteries
to bee decided: but also decreed many canons
and constitutions, whereby the Bishop,
without his former assistance, might seeme
sufficiently directed. I conclude therfore the
first poynt, viz. that in the Primitiue church
there were no lay Elders, and consequentlie,
no parishionall Presbyteries. Wherevpon, it
will necessarily follow, either that euery parish
Bishop (as they call him) must rule as a
Pope, or be subjected to the authoritie of the
diocesan Bishop.
                  I come to the second;2. The Churches, dioceses. which is, to shew, that
in the Apostles times, & in the age following,
the Churches, whereof the Bishops are
called Angels (or, to vse their words, the visible
Churches, endued with power of Ecclesiastical
gouernment) were dioceses properly,
and not parishes. This is prooved out of this
place. For, whereas our Sauiour Christ, writing
to the Churches of Asia, numbreth but
7. and naming the principall, and (some of

them) mother-cities of Asia, saith, the seauen
starres, were the Angels of those 7. churches; it
cannot bee denied, but that the churches
whereof they were Bishops, were great and
ample cities: and not the cities alone, but also
the countries adjoyning. For, it is euident,
that the Apostles, when they intended to cō
                     vert
any Nation, they first preached to the
chiefe cities thereof. Wherein, whē through
Gods blessing they had converted some, their
manner was to ordaine Presbyters; hoping
by their Ministerie, to convert not onely the
rest of the citie, but also in the countries adjoyning,
so many as did belong vnto GOD;
the kingdome of heauen beeing like a little
Mat. 13. 33 leaven, which beeing put into any part of
the meale, seasoneth all. Neither were the
parishes distinguished in the Apostles times,
nor the presbyters assigned to their seuerall
titles or cures; but in common, the presbyters
were to attend theAct. 20. 28 whole flock converted,
feeding them with the Word and Sacraments,
and to labour the conversion of
the residue, so farre as they should be able,
both in the citie, and in the countries adioyning.
The presbyteries therefore in the Apostles

times, were appointed, not to seueral
parishes, but to whole cities, and the countreyes
annexed, that is to say, to Dioceses;
that both they might convert them, and attend
and feede them beeing converted.
                  Against this which hath been said, they do
object; that in the first 200. yeres, all the christians
in any one great city, did make but one
particular ordinarie congregation assembled
in one place; & consequently, that both the
presbytery, and the President thereof, were
assigned but to one congregation.
                  I answere, first, that the presbytery and the
President thereof, were prouided, not onely
for the cities thēselues, but also for the countries
adjoyning, which were converted, or to
be converted, by the Bishop & presbyters of
the citie; and being converted, were counted
part of that church. And therfore though the
antecedent of this objectiō were true, yet the
consequence were to be denied. But the antecedent,
is not onely false, but also vnreasonable,
& vncredible. For, if you consider the
number of the christians in the greatest cities
within the first two hundred yeeres, or the
times vvherein they liued, or the places

where they vsed to assemble; you will acknowledge,
that all the Christians in the great
Cities, neither did, nor could ordinarilie assemble
in the same place, as one set particular
ordinary congregation.
                  What the number of Christians were before
the first 200. yeers were ended, in Rome,
Ephesus, Alexandria; and such like Cities, we
may imagine by that great multitude of
Christians which were atActs. 4. 4. 5000. 
                     Ierusalem; within
a few weeks after the death of Christ: 3000.
hauing beene converted inActs. 2. 41. one day. At
Rome▪
                      about the yeere 100. the company of
Christians beeing much increased, (& til then
both the Presbyters attending them promiscuoslie,
and the people meeting in diuerse
places vncertainly) Euaristus the Bishop of
Rome, was faine, for avoyding of confusion,
to distinguish thē into diuersPlatina, ex Dama
                           •
                        o. Onuphr. de episcopat. et titulis. &c. parishes, or
titles, assigning vnto them, not presbyteries,
but seuerall Presbyters; the number whereof
byPlatina, ex Dama
                           •
                        o. Onuphr. de episcopat. et titulis. &c. 
                     Hyginus was augmented, about the
yeere 138. In the time of Cornelius, Bishops &
Martyr, about the yere 250. there were in the
Church of Rome (as himselfe sheweth in an
Epistle yet extant in Eusebius) one,Eusebius. lib. 
                           •
                         cap. 43. and but

one Bishop, 46 Presbyters, 7 Deacons, and
of other Clergie-men 101, of widdowes and
other distressed people, aboue 1500: all maintained
by the charitable contribution of the
Christian people in Rome, which afterwardes
he calleth 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , a very great
and innumerable people. And well might he so
call it: for, Tertullian within the first 200. yeres
saith no lesse. See his Apologet. cap. 37. Adde
to the multitude of the people, the consideration
of the times, raging for the most part
with persecution, & not permitting the Christians
ordinarily to meet in great multitudes;
also the consideration of the places wherein
they vsed to assemble, as it were by stealth (as
priuate houses, and 
                        •
                     aults called Cryptae, and
other priuate and priuie places, not capable
of such multitudes) and you will easily acknowledge,
that the Churches which were in
the Cities alone, contained many particular
congregations, vnto all which, there was but
one presbyterie, or Colledge of Presbyters
assigned.
                  
                     NOw,3, The Angels, not parishionall, but diocesan Bishops? these Presbyteries in the Apostles
times, as the presbyterians cōfesse, had
& by divine ordinance ought to haue
a President, whom the holy Ghost heere calleth
an Angell, and the Fathers, a Bishoppe;
which, by that which hath been said, may be
proued to have been, not a parishionall, but
a diocesan Bishop. And that is the 3. point,
which I was to prooue. For, if the churches
whereof they were Bishops, were dioceses, &
not parishes; if the parishes were not yet distinguished,
nor Ministers assigned to their
peculiar titles, or seuerall cures; if the presbyteries
were allotted to whole dioceses, and
not to seuerall parishes: then the Bishoppe,
who was set ouer a whole diocese, and not a
particular parish, who was president of the
presbyterie allotted not to a seuerall parish,
but to a whole diocese, was vndoubtedly not
a parishionall, but a diocesan Bishoppe. And
this was the state of the Church in the Apostles
times. Howbeit, in the end of the Apostles
time, parishes began to be distinguished
in cities, and afterwards in the country. For,
about the yeere 100. and therfore before the

death of S. Iohn, Euaristus Bishop of Rome,
distinguished the parishes or titles in Rome,
                     Damasus, &c. vt supra.
and assigned not a presbyterie, but seuerall
Ministers to euery of thē: which was also practiced
in other cities. We may gather out of
Eusebius, that before the time of Iulianus, that
is, before the yeere 180, diuers particular
congregations or churches, were subiect to
the Bishoppe of Alexandria. For, in the first
yeere (saith heeEuseb. lib. 5. cap. 9.) of Commodus, the Bishoprick

                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        , of the Churches in
or about Alexandria, was committed to Iulianus,
after that Agrippinus had fulfilled his ministerie
for the space of twelue yeeres. Neither
may we omit that, which Eusebius saith of
Titus, and Theodoret both of Titus and also
of Timothe, because it also plainely confuteth
their newe assertion, who deny, that
more particular congregations then one,
were subiect to any Bishoppe, within the first
two hundred yeeres.
                  
                     Titus (saith Eusebius) the Bishop 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     
                     Euseb. lib. 3. cap. 4.
of the churches in Creet.Theodoret. in 1. Tim. 3. 
                     Theodoret
saith, Titus was the Bishop Cretensium, of
the Cretians, and Timothe Asianorum, of
them in Asia.
                  
                     
                     Epiphanius saith Singuli ecclesia
                           •
                        ū episcopi habeut
beut sub se ecclesias:
                     Epist. ad Ioan. Hiei 
                           •
                         sol. apud Hieron. tom 2. 
                     all Bishops of the Churches,
haue Churches vnder thē. As touching countrey
Townes, they were indeede converted
aftor the Cities: and because they remained
heathenish for a time after the conversion
of the Citie, therefore heathenish people
are still called Pagans: Notwithstanding the
Bishop and Presbytery of the Citie acknowledging
them to belong to their charge, laboured
their conversion as soone as they
could; and when they were converted, the
Bishoppe out of his Presbyterie assigned not
a Presbyterie, but a Presbyter or Minister to
euery of them; a Presbiter, I say, & not a Bishoppe:
sauing that where the Diocese was
large, the Bishop being not able to performe
all episcopall duties in all places (things beeing
as yet not so well setled) was faine to appoint
a Presbyter heere and there, to be 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     ,
a country Bishop, who, together with
his charge, remained subiect to the Bishop of
the Citie, in whose diocese hee was; neither
might hee meddle any further in Episcopall
affaires, thē by the Bishop was permitted vnto
him. The Councell of Sardica determined,

that one Presbyter is sufficient for a village;
or a little Cittie or Towne,
                     Council. sard. capit. 6. 
                     and therefore
licence not to be granted to ordaine a Bishop in
such places. VVhich euidently sheweth, that
Bishoppes were set ouer cities and dioceses,
and that euery parish and Countrey-towne
had not a Bishoppe, or a presbytery, but
one onely Minister, as sufficing for such a
charge.
                  Thus thē parishes were distinguished, both
in the cities and countries, & seuerall presbyters
peculiarly assigned vnto them. Vpon
which division of parishes, & assignement of
presbyters vnto them, there happened no
alteration to the state of the Bishop: the difference
was in the imployment of the presbyters.
For whereas, before, they attended
the whole flocke in common, by the direction
of the Bishoppe: now, by his assignement,
they were deputed to their seuerall charges.
The Bishops iurisdiction was not altered, hee
hauing, as before, the same episcopall
charge of the citie and country adjoyning. In
respect wherof, a diocese cōtained 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      &

                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , in this division, signifying, not as
the vulgar vse of our English word Parish importeth

a particular ordinary congregation,
answerable to a Iewish Synagogue, but the
whole citie & suburbs, though containing as
many particular parishes, asIn Ierusalē were 400. Synagogues. Ioseph. 
                     Ierusalem did
Synagogues; & in that sense (euen after the
division of Parishes) is ordinarily vsed in the
bestEuseb. hist. passim. Epiph. Epist. ad Ioan. Hieros. apud Hieronym. tom. 2. writers. One of the anciētCanon. Apost. 33. Canons,
called the Apostles, appointeth euery Bishop to deale in those matters 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , whatsoeuer appertaine
to his own See, & the countries subiect vnto
it. Which Canon the council of Antioch reciting,
& calling it the anciēt canon of their fathers,
explaneth in these wordes;Concil. Antioch. c. 9. 
                     For euery
Bishop ought to haue authority ouer his owne
paroecia, & to haue care 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        ,
of the whole region which is subiect to
his citie, vsing 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      and 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      promiscuously.
                  These three points wherof hetherto I haue
intreated, are of such euident and vndeniable
truth, that Calvin, the first founder of the
Presbyterian discipline, doth acknowledge
the same. For, speaking of the discipline of
the primitiue Church, whichInstit. lib. 4. ca. 4. §. 1. hee confesseth
was framed according to the worde of
God, & scarcely had any thing differing therfrom;

he saith:Calv. Instit. lib. 4. cap. 4. §. 2. 
                     Quibus ergo docendi &c. to
whom the office of teaching was inioyned, all thē
they named Presbyters. They, out of their number
chose one in euery citie, to whom they specially
gaue the title of Bishop: ne ex aequalitate, vt
fieri solet, dissidia nascerentur; least out of aequality,
as vsually it happeneth, dissensions
should arise. And some-what after, Habebant
ergo, &c. Euery citie had their Colledge of Presbyters,
who were Pastors and Teachers. And againe,
To euery citie there was attributed a certaine
region or country, which frō thence should
receiue their Presbyters, & be reckned as part of
that church. And yet againe: But if the coūtrey
which was vnder his Bishopricke, were more
large then that hee could sufficiently discharge
all the offices of a Bishop in euery place: through
the countrey, in certaine places, some Presbyters
were appointed, who in matters of lesse importance
should bee the vicegerents of the Bishop.
Such they called Chorepiscopi, because in
the province they represented the Bishop.
                  
                  Thus farre, that worthy seruaunt of Christ,
Calvin: who though in these three thinges
hee agreeth with vs, namely, that the Presbyteries
consisted of Ministers, that the Churches

indued with power of Ecclesiasticall
gouernment, were dioceses, and that Bishops
vnder their charge, had both their cities and
countries adioyning: yet I confesse, in the
fourth point he differeth from vs, and as I am
vndoubtedly perswaded, from the truth.
                  IN the 4.4. Bishops, superior to other Ministers, in degree. place therfore, wee are to intreat of
the superioritie of Bishops ouer other Ministers.
For, although the presbyterians &
we agree in this, that by divine institution,
there was in the primitiue Church, and still
ought to be one, set ouer the Presbyters: yet
in diuers things they dissent from vs, and as I
said, from the truth. First, in that they make
the Bishop superior in order onely, & not degree.
Secondly, in that they assigne a superioritie
or presidentshippe vnto him for a short
time, and that by course. Thirdly, in that they
ascribe vnto him a prioritie onely of order, &
not a majority of rule or power. And to this
pupose, it pleaseth thē to distinguish Bishops
into 3. sorts, divine, humane, divelish; acknowledging
such onely, as they fancy, for divine.
Howbeit, I must needs cōfesse, that reverend
Beza, though an earnest patron of the presbyterian

discipline, & one who came far short of
Caluins moderation in this behalfe, notwithstanding
he speaketh farre otherwise of our
Bishoppes, then our men vse to doe.Beza de ministr. euang. cap. 18. see▪ also cap 21. in fine. 
                     Quòd si
nunc Anglicanae Ecclesiae, saith hee, &c. But if
now the reformed English Churches do persist being
vpheld by the authoritie of their Bishoppes
and Archbishops (as this hath happened vnto
them in our memorie, that they haue had men of
that order not onely famous martyrs of God, but

                           ••
                        o most worthie Pastors and Doctors:) let
England surely enioy that singular blessing of
God, which I pray God may be perpetuall vnto
it. And that wee may all say Amen to Beza
his wish, I will shew you first in generall, that
the Bishoppes or Angells of the primitiue
Church, were superior, as wel as ours, in degree
to other Ministers: and then more particularly
I will declare, wherein their superioritie
did consist.
                  That Bishoppes were superiour to other
Ministers in degree, all antiquitie with one
consent (if you except Aërius, who for dissenting
in this point was accounted an hereticke
by Epiphanius and Augustine) doth acknowledge;Concil. fard. c. 
                           •
                        3.
distinguishing three 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      
                     degrees of

Ministers, Bishoppes, Presbyters, Deacons, aunswerable
to the high Priest, Priestes and Leuits;
making the Bishoppes to be the first degree,
Presbyters the second,Aduers. Parmenian. libro 1. Quid commemorem Laicos, qui tunc in ecclesia nulla fuerunt dignitate suffulti? quid ministros plurimos? quid diaconosintertio? quid presbyteros in secundo sacerdotio cō
                        stitutos? ipsi apices & principes omnium aliqui episcopi illis temporibus, vt damno aeternae vitae istius incertae lucis mora
                           •
                         breuissi mas compararent, instrumenta diuinae legis impiè tradiderunt. & Deacons the
third. So sayth Optatus, What should I mention
the Deacons placed in the third, or the Presbyters
in the second Priesthood or Ministerie? the
verie chiefe, & principes omnium Episcopi &c.
and princes of all, the Bishoppes &c. Neither
is any thing more vsuall in Councils and Fathers,
then the distinction of ministers in
                        ••
                     
these three degrees.
                  
                     Ignatius, who liued in the Apostles times,
often mentioneth this distinction: as, ad smyrn.
                     Ignat. ad smyrnenses. 
                     Let the Lay men be subiect to the Deacons,
the Deacons to the Presbyters, the Presbyters to
the Bishoppe, the Bishoppe to Christ: and ad
Tarsens.
                     Ad Tarsēs 
                     Presbyters submitte your selues to
to the Bishoppe: Deacons to the Presbyters:
the people to the Presbyters and Deacons.

                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        ,
my soule for theirs, who obserue this good order,
and the Lord be alwayes with them. And again,
Ad Philadelph. 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     .
Let the
Presbyters, and the Deacons, and the rest of the

Clergie together with all the people, be obedient
to the Bishoppe, as their ruler; for so much is
implied in the word.
                  And such was the difference betweene the
degree of a Presbyter and of a Bishoppe, that
when Eustathius the Bishoppe of Tyrus
sought vpon secrete displeasure to disgrade
certaine Bishoppes whom Photius had ordained;
the censure of the great Councill ofEx actis Concil. Chalced. de Photio & Eustathio.
                     Chalcedon was this, 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     :
to reduce a Bishop to the degree
of a Presbyter, it is sacriledge. To omitte others,
let vs heare Ieromes confession, because
he vsually is alledged as fauouring the heresie
of Aërius.
                     Hyero
                           •
                        i
                           ••
                        . ad Euagrium. 
                     At Alexandria (sayth hee)
From Marke the Euangelist vnto Heraclas &
Dionysius Bishoppes, euermore the Presbyters
hauing chosen one from among themselues, and
placed him in excelsiori gradu in a higher degree,
called him Bishop, euē as an army maketh an Emperour;
& in the end of the same Epistle, That
we may know, saith he, that the apostolicall traditions
are taken out of the old testament, looke
what Aaron & his sonnes, and the Leuites were
in the Temple, the same let the Bishops, Priests &
Deacons challenge in the Church.
                     
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                  
                  
                     
But let vs consider more particularly
wherein the superioritie of Bishoppes did,
and doth consist. Paule writingTit. 1. 5. to Titus,
the Bishoppe of Creet, sayth, I left thee, that
thou shouldest continue to redresse those thinges
that are amisse, and that thou shouldest ordaine
Presbyters in euerie Citie, as I appointed thee.
From whence wee may gather a threefolde
superioritie of Bishoppes; the first, Singularitie
of preeminence, during life: I left thee,
that thou sholdest &c. The second, the power
of ordination; that thou shouldest ordaine
Presbyters: The third, the power of iurisdiction;
that thou shouldest redresse &c. and this twofold
power not confined to a parish, but extended
to the whole Island of Creet, and to
all the Cities thereof. From the first of these
dependeth the vnitie, from the second the
perpetuitie, from the third the eutaxy or good
order of euerie Church.
                  As touching the first,Bishops, superior to other Ministers in singularitie of preeminence, during life. whereas there were
many Presbyters in one Citie, (as in the time
of Cornelius
                     Epist. Cornel. apud Euseb. lib 6. c. 43. there were 46. in Rome;) yet
there neither was nor might be, as hee there
sayth, any more Bishops but one in a whole
Diocesse, or as the holy Ghost here teacheth

vs, but one Angell in a Church; one Timothe
at Ephesus, one Titus in Creet, one Epaphroditus
in Philippi, one Archippus at Colossa &c.
which is a truth that Councilles and Fathers
with one consent doe testifie.Concil. Nicen. apud Ruffin. eccl. hist. lib. 10. c. 6. 
                     Ruffinus reporteth
this Canon out of the Coūcil of Nice,
which indeed agreeth with the 8. Canō, Ne in

                           〈◊〉
                         ciuitate duo sint Episcopi, that in one Citie
there be not two Bishops.
                     Hieronym. Chrysost. Ambros. Theodoret. Oecumen. In: Philipp. 1. 
                     Ierom writing on
the first to the Philippiās saith, Here, by Bishops
we vnderstand Presbyters, for in one Citie there
could not be more Bishops then one: the like hath
Hieronym. Chrysost. Ambros. Theodoret. Oecumen. In: Philipp. 1. 
                     Chrysostome, Ambrose, Theodoret, Oecumenius,
writing on the same place.
                  This, as it was ordained for the preseruation
of the Church in vnitie, and for the auoiding
of schisme; so is it for the same cause to
bee retained. For whence, saith CyprianCypr. lib. 4. Epist. 9.
                     haue schismes and heresies risen and doe rise, but
whiles the Bishop, who is one and gouerneth the
Church, by the proud presumption of some is cō
                        temned;
and the man, honoured by Gods acceptation
of him as worthie, is iudged of vnworthie
men?
                  
                  The like hathHier. aduers. Luciferian. 
                     Ierome, who sayeth,
that vnlesse this singularitie of preeminence

bee yeelded to the bishoppe, tot in ecclesi
                           ••
                        
efficientur schismata, quot sacerdotes, there
will bee so many schismes in the Churches
as there bee Priestes. And in the place before
Ad Euag
                           •
                        ium. cited, hee sayeth, that the Presbyters
hauing elected One from among themselues,
and placed him in a higher degree, called
him a Bishoppe. And that wee should
not thinke this to haue beene peculiar to
Alexandria; elsewere, hee sayeth, after
that euerie one sought to drawe disciples
after him,In Tit. 1: 
                     toto orbe decretum est, vt
vnus de Presbyteris electus superponeretur
caeteris, ad quem omnis ecclesiae cura pertineret:
It was decreede in the whole worlde,
that one beeing chosen from among the Presbyters,
should bee set ouer the rest in euery
Church, vnto whom the whole care of that
Church, or care of that whole Church, should appertaine.
                  
                  The Presbyterians also confesse, that by
Gods ordinance there ought to be one set ouer
the rest: but that one, they say, was for a
short time, as for a weeke or a Moneth, and
that by course; this superiority being commō
to all in their turns. And to this purpose they

alleage the courses of the Priests, and the testimony
ofIn Ephes. 
                     Ambrose. But, the courses of
the Priests make nothing to this purpose. For
though the seuerall orders of Priestes serued
in their course; yet hee, who was chiefe of
his order, kept his preeminence when their
course was ended. And to their testimonie I
aunswere: first, that the author of those commentaries
is suspected. Secondly, that his
testimony is false: for nothing is more euidēt,
thē that bishoppes were elected to their places.
Ierome, in the two last testimonies which
I alledged, witnesseth the same. And lastly it
is falsified by them who alleage it: for that author
speaketh not of a running regency to be
changed euerie week or moneth; but of the
succession of one bishop after the deceasse of
another, according to their senioritie. Neither
can any thing be more euidently proued
out of the monumēts of Antiquitie then this,
that bishoppes continued their regency for
term of life. Was notEuseb. lib. 3. 13. & 21. &c. 
                     Anianus bishop of Alexandria 22.
years, and Abilius after him 13.
yeares, euen in the Apostles times? Likewise
Iames at Ierusalem 30. yeares, and after
him Simeon the sonne of Cleophas 3
                           •
                        ? Euodius
                     
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
at Antioch aboue 20. yeares, and Ignatius 40?
Linus at Rome 12. yeares after the death of
Peter and Paul, 22. in all? Anacletus 10. and
odde monethes: Clemens, 9. Euaristus 8? and
so throughout the succession of Bishoppes
from the Apostles to the Councill of Nice,
and so downeward? Notwithstanding if you
will beleeue them, such Bishops as were for a
weeke by course (for they suppose it was
Hebdoma
                           •
                        ica 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     ) must bee esteemed diuine;
though there cannot bee alleaged out
of all antiquitie, either in the Apostles times
or since, any one example of such. As for
those who be for terme of life, they (forsooth)
are but humane, though superiour onely in
priority of order: but if superiour also in power
or maioritie of rule; then are they, in their
iudgement, worse then humane.
                  Let vs therefore see,B B. Superiour in power or maioritie of rule. if Bishops were not also
superiour in power. Hearken to Ierom.
                     Aduers. Luciferia
                           •
                        os.
                     The safetie of the Church (saith he) dependeth on
the dignitie of the chiefe Priest or Bishoppe: to
whom if there be not giuen exors & ab omnibus

                           •
                        minens potestas, a peerelesse power, and eminent
aboue all, there will be so many schismes in
the Churches, as there be Priests.
                  
                  
                     
This power is two-fold: the power of ordination,
and of iurisdiction. As touching the
former: it hath been the receiued opinion in
in the Church of God, euen frō the Apostles
time vntill our age, that the right of ordination
of Presbyters, is such a peculiar prerogatiue
of Bishops, as that ordinarily, and regularly,
there could bee no lawfull ordination,
but by a Bishop.
                  At Ephesus, there were diuers Presbyters,
Acts 20. and so no doubt in Creet▪
                      yet the Apostle
for this cause substituteth Timothe at
Ephesus, & Titus in Creet, that they might ordaine
Elders by imposition of hands. Which
authoritie, as it was not in the Presbyters before
their comming, but in the Apostles; so
was it not at their deceasse deriued to thē, but
to such as were successors of Timothe at Ephesus,
and of Titus in Creet.
                  
                  They object, 1. Tim. 4. 14. Neglect not the
gift that is in thee, which was giuen thee by prophecie,
with imposition of hands of the Presbyterie.
Vpon which place especially, they build
the authoritie of their presbyteries. But without
cause; this place admitting two expositions,
neither whereof doth fauour their presbyterie.

For first, Presbyterium heere may
signifie, not the fenate, or company of Presbyters,
but the office of a Presbyter or
priesthoode; in which sense the word is often
vsed.
                  And so, not onely diuers in former times, as
Ierome, Brimasius, Anselmus, Haymo, Lyra,
but Culvin also expound it. Paul, saith Calvin
                     Instit. lib. 4. cap. 3. in fine. 
                     in another place, saith, that he, and not
any more, imposed hands on Timothe. 2. Tim. 1.
6. I admonish thee that thou stirre vp the grace
which is in thee by imposition of my handes.
For that, which in the other Epistle is said concerning
the imposition of handes of the Presbyterie;
I doe not so vnderstand, as if Paul did
speake of the Colledge of Seniors: but vnder
this name I vnderstand the ordination it selfe;
as if hee should say, endevoure that the grace
which by imposition of handes thou diddest receiue
vvhen I made thee Presbyter, be not in
vaine.
                  
                  Againe, though it should signifie a companie
of Seniors; notwithstanding, this place
is so farre from prooving either parishionall
Presbyteries (which neuer were, or if they
had beene, should not haue had authoritie to

ordaine him, who was not to serue a parish)
or lay presbyteries whatsoeuer, (whichCalv. lib. 4. c. 3 §. 16. hoc postrem
                           •
                         habendū est, solos pastores manus imposuisse ministris. And Beza speaking of the worde 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                         in his annot. quo nemine coetus omnis ille significaatur qui in verbo laborabant.
                     Calvin and Beza acknowledge to haue no
right to impose handes) as that thoseChrysost. Theodor. Theophy. Oecumen. in. 1. Tim. 4. Fathers,
who expound this place of a company
of Elders, vnderstand, heere, the ordination
of Timothe to be a bishoppe by the imposition
of their handes, who were either bishops,
or more then bishoppes; the worde
beeing heere, and elswhere, generally taken;
as Beza also confesseth. Insomuch, that as
the Apostles sometimes1. Pet. 5. 1. 2. Iohn. 1. and 3. Epist. 1. are called Presbyteri,
so Presbyterium heere may signifie a
company of Apostles or apostolicke men;
in which number2. Tim. 1. 6 
                     Paule was one. For Presbyters,
as these Fathers say, might not ordaine
a bishoppe.
                  
                     Ne
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         enim sas erat, saithAmbr. in 1. Tim. 3. 
                     Ambrose, ne
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                        
decebat, for neither was it lawful, nor decēt, that
the inferiour should ordaine the superior: For
no man giueth what hee hath not receiued. And
without all cōtradiction, saith theHeb. 7. 7. Apostle,
the greater blesseth the lesse, and not contrariwise,
namely, ex aut horitate.
                  
                  
                     Yea, but the Coūc. of Carth. say they, cōmitteth
authority of imposing handes to Presbyters.
                  
                  
                     
The words of the Canon are these:Concil. Carth. 4. c. 3. 
                     Whē
a Presbyter or Priest is ordained, the Bishoppe
blessing him, or holding his hand vpon his heade,
let all the Presbyters also which be present, holde
their hands vpon his head, by the Bishops hand.
Where, we plainly see the power of ordination
to be ascribed to the Bishop, & the Presbyters
hands to be adjoyned (as with vs) not
for necessitie, but for the greater solemnity of
the action, and the better encouragment of
the partie ordained, hauing the consent and
approbation of more then one. Otherwise,
the perpetuall consent of the church of God,
appropriateth the ordinarie right of ordination
to the Bishop alone; the Councils & Fathers
speaking of the Ordainer, as of one: As,
Concil. Antioch. c. 9. 
                     Euery Bishop, within his own diocese, may ordaine
Presbyters and Deacons.
                     Canon Apost. 2. 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     ,
let a Presbyter be ordained
of one Bishop.
                     Concil. Carth. 3. c. 45. et Africā. c. 22 
                     By one Bishop, many
Presbyters may be ordained.
                     Concil. Hispal. 2. c 6. A Bishop alone
may giue to Priests and Deacons their honour:
but he alone cannot take it from them.
                  
                  As for Presbyters, they are by Councils
forbidden to ordaine: and if at any time they
presumed so to do, (there being thē no want

of orthodoxall Bishops) their ordination was
repealed and iudged of none effect. Because
Colluthus
                     Athanasi. apol. 2. contra Arian. in epist. presbyt. et diac. Mareotic. ad Curios. et Philagr. praefect. Agypti. was not a true, but an imaginarie
Bishop, not onely himself was commanded in a
general coūcil to cary himself as a Presbyter:
but Ischyras also and others, who by him had
been ordained Presbyters, were returned to
their former order. Likewise the coūcil ofCōcil. Cō
                        stan. 1. c. 6.
                     Constantinople, iudging Maximus to haue bin
no lawful Bishop, iudged also the ministers by
him ordained, vnlawfull. Yea the Chorepiscopi
themselues, sometimes wereConcil. Antioch c. 10. restrained, &
somtimes forbiddenConcil. Ancyr. c. 12. Damas. epist. 4. Leo, epist. 88. altogether, to ordain
Presbyters or Deacons. Nay further we read,
that whē a certaine Bishop in the ordination
of a Presbyter and two Deacons imposed
his hands on them, and vsed the helpe of a
Presbyter, onely to read the words of consecration
and to blesse them, himselfe oculorum
dolore derentus, beeing not able to reade for the
paine of his eyes: the councill ofConcil Hispal. 2. ca. 5. 
                     Hispalis reversed
the ordination as vnlawfull.
                  And this is one principall reason whereby
Epiph. haeres. 75. 
                     Epiphanius prooueth against Aërius the
heretick, that the office of a Bishop is a higher
degree then that of Presbyters, 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     ,

                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                     for the functiō of Bishops, is an
order generatiue of fathers; for it begets fathers
to the church: vvheras the order of presbyters,
being not able to beget fathers; by the laver of regeneration,
begetteth children to the church, not
fathers, or teachers. And this is so clear a case,
that bishops only, in the iudgement of the fathers,
haue right of ordaining Ministers regularly;
as that Ierome himselfe, euen where and
when hee seeketh to advance the presbyters
as high as he can aboue the deacons, doth cō
                     fesse
ordination to be peculiar to bishops.Ad Evagr.
                     Quid facit excepta ordinatione Episcopus, quod
presbyter nō faciat? what doth a bishop excepting
ordinatiō, which a presbyter may not do? Where,
you are not to vnderstand him, or other or
the Fathers, speaking somtime to the likeChrysost. hom. 11. in 1. Tim. episcopi sola ordinatione superiores sunt, at
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         hoc tantū plusquam presbyteri 
                           •
                        abere videntur.
purpose, as though the bishop were not superior
in any thing els: but that potestate ordinis,
as touching power of order, he is superior onely
in ordination. For, that he is superior potestate
jurisdictionis, in power of iurisdiction, they
euery where acknowledge.
                  Thus haue I reported the iudgement of the
anciēt church, ascribing the ordinary right of
ordination to bishops: But yet, not so appropriating
it vnto them, as that extraordinarily,

and in case of necessity, it might not be lawful
for presbyters to ordaine; & much lesse teaching
(as the Papists imagin) absolutely a nullity
in the ordination which is not performed
by a bishop. For suppose a churchThe state of some reformed churches. either altogether
destitute of a bishoppe, or pestered
with such as the popish prelats are, heretical &
idolatrous, by whō no orthodoxall Ministers
might hope to be ordained; wee neede not
doubt, but that the ancient Fathers would, in
such a case of necessity, haue allowed ordination
without a bishop, though not as regular,
according to the rules of ordinary church gouernment;
yet, as effectual, & as iustifiable, in
the want of a bishop. For, seeing the Coūc. of
Conc. Antioch. c. 10. 
                     Antioch, permitted the licēsed Chorepiscopi,
who were but presbyters, to ordain presbyters
& deacons in the country, in the local absence
of the bishop, to whom with a litle more
paines they might haue repaired: how much
more would they haue allowed the same to a
company of graue & learned Ministers in the
totall want of a bishoppe? Yea, doth not the
church of Rome, in her practice allow Chorepiscopos
or Suffragans to ordaine? & haue not
some learnedSee D. Field. de ecclesia. lib. 3. ca. 39. men among them (in their
iudgement) approued the ordination, not of

priests alone, but of Bishops performed by
Presbyters, where no Bishops are to be had?
Yea, suppose that the right of ordinatiō doth
belong to the power of th' episcopall order:
yet I am sure the begetting of fathers to the
church by ordination, doth no more belong
to the power of order in Bishoppes, then the
begetting of children to the church by Baptisme,
to the power of order in all Ministers.
Yet, in the case of supposed necessity, in the
absence of their priests, not onely other men,
but women also, among them are permitted
to baptise. The truth is, where Ministers may
be had, none but Ministers ought to baptise:
and where bishops may be had, none but bishops
ought to ordaine. But though neither
ought to be done; yet beeing done, the former,
by other christians in the want of a Minister,
the latter, by other Ministers, in the
defect of a bishoppe, as the one in the iudgement
of the fathers is of force, the church receiuing
the partie baptized into the communion
of the faithfull; so also the other, the
church admitting the party ordained as a
lawfull Minister. Thus much by the way, to
prevent popish cavills.
                  
                     
Now am I to shewe, that the Bishop is superiour
also in the power of jurisdiction. The
Presbyters indeede doe gouerne, but the
people onely of their particular flocke; and
that not
                        
                           •
                        ot in an outward court, but in the Court of the conscience. 
                     in foro externo, but in foro conscientiae,
                     
                        •
                     eeding and guiding them by the ministerie
of the word and sacraments, and by
watching ouer them. And that pastoral authoritie
which they haue, is delegated and committed
vnto them by the Bishop; vnto whom
the care of the whole Church, asIn Tit. 1. 
                     Ierome
saith, doth belong. But the Bishoppe doth
gouerne also in foro externo, not one particular
flocke, but the whole diocese; and not the
people onely, but the Presbyters also, hauing
authoritie both to direct, & also to correct
them. And that authoritie is deriued vnto
them from the Apostles, as to their successours
in the gouernement of the Church. For
which cause, as wee shall heare anon, Bishops
at the first were called Apostles. For, as Ierome
                     Hieronym ad Marcella 
                           〈◊〉
                        . aduers. Montan. saith, Apud nos, that is, in the true Church,
Bishoppes doe hold the place of the Apostles. And
Irenaeus
                     Irenaeus. lib. 3. c. 3. testifieth that the Apostles left
the Bishops their successours, deliuering vnto thē
their owne place of gouernement.
                  
                  
                     
I shal not neede to proue their authoritie
ouer the people of their diocese, if I demonstrate
their rule ouer the presbyters
thereof.
                  Consider therefore the Presbyters, either
as they were parts of the Presbyterie assisting
the Bishoppe; or as Pastors, seuered from the
Bishop, and allotted to their seuerall charges.
As touching the former; it is euident, that the
Bishops had not onely a prioritie of order,
ouer the seuerall Presbyters; but a majoritie
of rule, ouer them all. ForAduers. Luciferianos. 
                     Ierome (as you
heard) yeeldeth to the Bishop a peerless power
and eminent ouer all, or as the word exors
may signifie, admitting no partener. Likewise
Ignatius that holy martyr, who for many
years was Bishop of Antioch in Saint Iohns
time, 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      saith he,Ignat. ad Trallian. 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     ;
What is a Bishoppe
else, but such an one as holdeth or menageth the
whole power and authoritie aboue all? And writing,
a little before his Martyrdome, to the
Presbyters of Antioch, where himselfe was
Bishoppe, 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      sayth hee,Idem ad Antioch. 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . You Presbyters feed the flocke which is among

you, vntill God shall declare who shall
be your gouernour; for I am euen now to bee
sacrificed, that I may gaine Christ. And in diuerse
of hisAd Smyrnens. ad Tarsens. ad Philadelph. Epistles (as you heard before)
hee exhorteth the Presbyters to bee subiect
and obedient to their Bishop.
                  Now, the Presbyters were subiect to their
Bishop, both as to their Ruler, to be guided
and directed by him; and also as their iudge,
to bee censured and corrected of him. For
by auncient Canons, and Councils, the presbyters
might not doe any thing of importance,
without the direction of their Bishop.
Let Presbyters and Deacons doe nothing sayth
the auncient Canon,Canon apost. 40. 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     
                     without the sentence or appointment of the Bishop.
The first CouncillConcil. Arelatens. 1. c. 19. of Ar
                           •
                        es likewise
decreede, vt presbyteri sine conscientia episcoporum
nihil faciant: and to the like purpose
the Councill ofConcil. Ancyr. c. 12. 
                     Ancyra. As touching Baptisme,
Tertull. de Baptismo. 
                     Tertullian sayth, The chiefe Priest,
which is the Bishop, hath the right of giuing baptisme:
then, the Presbyters & the Deacons, but
yet not without the authority of the bishop for the
honor of the church; which being safe, peace is safe:
& for the cōmunion;Cypr. lib. 3. Epist. 14. 
                     Cypryā
                      findeth fault

with the Presbyters of Carthage, where hee
was Bishoppe, that they not regarding propositum
sibi episcopum, the Bishoppe set ouer
them, had receiued some to the communion
who had fallen in time of persecution, without
warrant from him, though absent. In a
word, Let no man, sayth Ignatius
                     Ignat. ad smyrn. 
                     doe any
thing appertaining to the Church, without the
Bishoppe: and more particularly hee sayth,Ibid.
                     that the administration of the Eucharist is then
to bee esteemed firme and good, when it is done either
by the Bishop, or by him whome the Bishoppe
hath authorized.
                  
                  But as the Bishoppes had authoritie to
guide and direct, so also to censure and correct
the Presbyters. For proofe wherof, what
should I tell you ofCypr. lib 3. Epist. 9. 
                     Cyprian, partly assuring
Rogatianus a Bishop (who in modesty,
hauing been reproched of his Deacon, complained
to his fellow Bishoppes) that pro episcopatus
vigore & cathedrae authoritate, for the
vigour of his Bishopricke, and authoritie of his
chaire, hee had power to reuenge his owne
cause: and partly aduising him, if the Deacon
did persist, hee should either depose or suspend
him? OfAduers. Vigilantium ad Riparium. 
                     Ierome, maruelling that

the Bishoppe of the Church, where Vigilantius
was Presbyter, did not virga apostolica,
with the Apostolicke, and with an iron rodde,
breake that vnprofitable vessell, and deliuer
him vnto the destructiō of his flesh, that his spirit
might be safe? Doth not the scripture testifie
the same, when the Angel of the Church
ofApoc. 2. 2. 
                     Ephesus is commended for examining &
not suffering those which said they were Apostles
and were not? and contrariwise the Angel of
Ap. 2. 20. 
                     Thyatira reproued for suffering the teachers
of the Nicolaitan heresie, who are compared
sometimes to Balaam, and sometimes
to Iezabell, because they perswaded to fornication
& Idolatry? But most plainly doth Paul
attribute to Timothe and Titus (who, as afterwards
we shal proue, were Bishops) this episcopall
power, whereof we speake: to them alone
& their successors, doth he direct his injunctions
for the execution of that power; &
on thē he laies the whole charge. For this cause
I left thee in Creet,
                     Tit. 1. 5. sayth hee to Titus, that
thou shouldest 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                         reforme and correct
what is defectiue or amisse, and shouldest ordain
Presbyters in euerie Citie, as I appointed thee.
And to Timothe, I requested thee
                     1. Tim. 1. 3. 
                     sayth he,

                        to abide still in Ephesus, that thou mayst commaūd some that they do not 
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                            teach
strange doctrine:
                        1. Tim. 5. 22. 
                        lay not thou hands hastilie
on no man, neither be thou partaker of other mēs
sinnes, keepe thy selfe pure.
                        1. Tim. 5. 19. 20. 
                        Against a Presbyter
receiue not thou an accusation, but vnder
two or three witnesses; them that sinne rebuke openly,
&c. On which words,Haeres. 75. 
                        Epiphanius inferreth
against Aërius, therefore Presbyters are
subiect to the Bishop, as to their iudge; and therfore
as to their superiour. Now followeth the
charge:1. Tim. 5. 21. &c. 6. 14. 
                        I charge thee before God, and the lord
Iesus Christ, and the elect Angels, that thou obserue
these things without preiudice, and without
partialitie.
                  
                  But consider also the Presbyters, as seuered
in place from the Bishop, and affixed to
their seueral cures: First, in the Citie, and then
in the Country. For as in the City, the Bishop,
to whom, asIn Tit. 1 
                     Ierome saith, the whole care of
the Church did appertaine, distinguished the
parishes, and assigned a Presbyter to euery of
them: so in the Countrey, when the townes
& villages were conuerted (which was effected
by the Bishop of the Citie & his presbytery.)
they had their presbytersHere note by the way▪ that presbyters first were ordained (as diuines be in our vniuersities) to the nationall or diocesan Church (where they liued) in common, before they were assigned to their peculiar titles or cures. by the Bishop

appointed vnto them: & when any place
was void, the Bishop out of his presbytery, or
if he could not, the Metropolitan supplied it.
These presbyters, as I said before, might doe
nothing but by authority frō the bishop, or as
the ancient council ofConcil. Ancyr. c. 12. 
                     Ancyra speaketh, sine
authoritate literarū eius, without the authoritie
of his Letters. Nay, they might not so much
as trauel frō place to place, and much lesse remoue
from one cure to another, without the
Bishopslicence. To his iurisdictiō & censures
they were subiect: for to him they were accused;
being accused, by him they were conuented,
and examined; being faulty, by him they
wereConcil. Nicen. c. 5. Carthag. 2. c. 8. & alijs. censured, according to the qualitie of
their offence; by reproofe, putting to silence,
suspension, depriuation, excommunication.
                  To conclude, the pastors of seuerall parishes
either had assistants to restrain them, or they
were subiect to the bishop, or they ruled alone
without cōtrolement, neither subiect to
Bishop, nor restrained by assistants. But this
last is absurde: for that had been to set vp a
Pope in euery parish, and to make as manie
schismes as there were parishes. Associates

of lay Presbyters in euerie parish they neuer
had, nor yet haue in those Countreyes where
Presbyters be erected. For there is but one
Presbyterie in the Church of Geneua, for all
the parishes in the Citie, and territory thereto
belonging: and in all Scotland, where be some
thousands of parishes, there bee scarce halfe
a hundred presbyteries. To haue a Presbyterie
of ministers to assist the pastor in euerie
parish, it neither was, nor is possible. It remaineth
therefore, that the Ministers of seuerall
parishes euer were, and still ought to be,
subiect to the bishoppe; whose pastoral care
extended it selfe to all euen the remotest parishes
in his Diocese, to see them furnished
with sufficient Ministers, to prouide that they
were soundly taught, and discreetly guided,
to reforme abuses notified vnto him, to suppresse
schismes, to decide controuersies,
to exercise Church-censures against offenders,
&c.
                  Thus then you haue heard, that the Angels
or Bishoppes of the Primitiue Church
were, for the substance of their calling, such as
our bishops are; that is to say, Diocesan and
prouinciall bishoppes, being superiour in degree

to other Ministers, and hauing a singularitie
of preeminence for terme of life, and a
peerelesse power both of ordination and iurisdiction.
For, as for titles of honour, which
in our church are giuen to bishops; sure it is,
they are inferiour to those which the holie
Ghost assigneth vnto thē in this place. Neither
should we thinke much, that they, in respect
of their honourable calling, are termed
Lords (a title in Scriptures giuen not onely
Gen. 31. 35 Let not my Lord be angry, saith Rabel to her father. to naturall, but also, and that more woorthily,
to spirituall1. King. 18. 7. 13. Art not thou my Lord Eliah? and, was it not told my Lord, saith religious Obadiah. fathers) when the holy
Ghost termeth them Angels of the churches.
Not that Bishops may behaue themselues as
1. Pet. 5. LL. of the churches; but that they being
angels, & spiritual fathers, to whō, a paternal
and pastoral authority is committed ouer the
churches, may worthily be honored with the
title of Lords. Neither is there such great difference
between Master & Lord, that inferior
Ministers, which assume to themselues the title
of Master, should deny the title of Lord to
Bishops. Neither doth it follow, that Bishops
are Lords of the churches, or they masters of
the churches, because the titles of Lords are
attributed to Bishops, and Masters to them.
                  
                     
IT remaineth,5. The quality of the episcopall function. that I should demonstrate
not onely the lawfulnes of the Bishops calling,
but also the excellencie, and dignitie
thereof, in that they are heere called starres
and angels. But to intreat of the excellencie,
it shall not be needfull, if we be perswaded of
the lawfulnes. For if the function of all Ministers
in generall, be (as I haue else-whereIn 1. Tim. 3. 1.
manifestly prooued) honourable, and they, in
regard of their calling, are to be1. Tim. 5. 17. esteemed
worthy of double honour; then much more
the office of Bishops, who are the chiefe and
principall Ministers, is a worthy or excellent
worke. If euery Minister in a diocese is to be
honored in regard of his calling; much more
that one, who in a place of singular preeminence
is set ouer the rest. And if a worthy minister
be among men as one of a thousand, as
Elih
                           •
                        
                     
                     Iob. 33. 23. speaketh; vndoubtedly a worthy bishop
is as one of a million. If it be an honor to
beget children to the church, as all ministers
do, by the ministery of the Gospell, & by the
laver of regeneratiō; much more to beget fathers
to the church, as bishops do, by ordination.
If it be a great honour to be set ouer the
people of one particular flock; what is it to be

set ouer not onely the people, but the Pastors
also of many flocks, as a chiefe steward ouer
Gods family, as a principall spirituall Gouernour
of his body, which is his church, as a singular
successour (as touching ordination and
jurisdiction) in euery church, of the glorious
Apostles of Christ.
                  All the question now adaies is of the lawfulnes.
For those, who vnderstanding the words
of the Apostle, 1. Tim. 3. 1. (that the office of a
bishop is 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     ) of the ministery in general,
acknowledge it to be both good & excellent;
they are so far from granting 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , the
office of a bishop, properly vnderstood of those,
whom the church of God, euer since th' Apostles
times, hath peculiarly termed Bishops, to
be excellent, that they do not acknowledge it
to be good. Yea, they are so far from acknowledging
it to be good, that they thinke it neither
lawful, nor indifferent, nor tolerable.
                  I will therefore shew that the function of Bishops
is lawful and good, in that they haue divine
both institution, being Angels (and therfore
sent of God) & approbation, being stars,
which Christ holdeth in his right hand. And
this I will prooue, first, by consequence; and

then directly.The function episcopall, an apostolicall and divine ordinance. 
                     For, what function or gouernment
is of apostolicall institution, that is to bee
acknowledged a divine ordinance, in respect of
the first institution; as hauing GOD the author
thereof: the episcopall function, or gouernmēt
by bishops, is of apostolicall institution: therfore
the episcopal function is a divine ordinance.
                  
                  The proposition is of vndoubted truth,
and is so acknowledged by Beza. Surely, saith
he,De grad. Ministr. c. 23. 
                     if it proceeded from the Apostles, I would
be bold to ascribe it wholly, as al other apostolical
ordinances, to the institution of God.
                  
                  The assumption I will proue by three arguments:
in which I will proceede as it were by
degrees. 1. That gouernment which was generally
and perpetually vsed in all Christian churches
in the first three hundred yeres after Christ,
and his Apostles, and not ordayned by generall
councils, was vndoubtedly of apostolicall institution.
This proposition, besides that it is
Augustines rule, is also of manifest truth. That
which the whole church obserueth, saithDe baptis. contra Donatist. l. 4. c. 24. quod vniuersa tenet ecclesia, nec cōcilijs institutū, sed semper retentū est, non nisi authoritate apostolica traditū rectissimè creditur. 
                     Augustine,
and was not instituted by Councills, but
alwaies retayned, it is very rightly belieued to
haue beene ordained no otherwise but by the authority
of the Apostles. And againe, to dispute

whether
                     Aug. ep. 118 
                     that which the whole primitiue
church throughout the world obserueth, is to be
done or not, insolentissimae insan
                           •
                        ae est, it is most
insolent madnesse. For, can it enter into the
heart of a modest and charitable Christian, to
imagine, that all the godly learned Fathers,
whereof many had liued and conversed with
the Apostles, all the famous Confessors, and
glorious Martyrs of the primitiue Church, all
those pure & orthodoxall churches, planted
by the Apostles, did all with one consent, immediatly
after the deceasse of the Apostles,
cōspire to abolish that forme of gouernmēt,
which the Apostles had established, and (as
these men vse to aggravate the matter) to
turne Christ out of his kingdome? Or if wee
could find in our harts to thinke they were so
vngodly (which be it far from vs once to imagine:)
yet how is it possible, that al christians,
in all places, so far distant one from another,
should suddainly, & at once, jumpe, not onely
in abolishing the Apostolical gouernment,
but also in setting vp in all places throughout
the Christian world, one vniforme gouernment,
which they had not receiued from the
Apostles? Therefore this proposition also, is

of infallible truth.
                  I will therefore adde th' assumption. But the
gouernment of the churches, by such Bishops as I
haue spoken of, was generally and perpetually vsed
in all Christian churches, in the first three
hundred yeeres after Christ and his Apostles, &
not ordained by any generall Councill.
                  
                  That it was so vsed, appeareth first by that
which hath been said: when I shewed that the
Angels or Bb. in the primitiue Church, were
diocesan Bb. superior in degree to other Ministers,
hauing singularity of preeminence
during life, and majority of power, in respect
both of ordination, and also iurisdiction.
                  Secondly, by the confession of Ierome, who
saithHier. in Tit. 1. when factions began in the church,
toto orbe decretum, it was decreed in the whole
world, that one elected from the rest of the Presbyters,
should bee set ouer the rest, viz. in euery
church, vnto whom the whole care of that church
should appertaine, and that the seeds of schismes
might be taken away. And in another place, he
saithIn Psal. 44. that the church when th' apostles deceassed,
in stead of them who had bin fathers,
had her children, that is, bishops, who should
become Princes or Gouernors in all Lands.

                     In omnibus finibus mundi (saith hee) principes
ecclesiae. i. episcopi constituti sunt: In all the
ends of the world, the princes of the church, that
is, Bishops, were ordained or established.
                  
                  Thirdly, by the testimonies of Councils,
histories, and Fathers, who with one consent
giue testimony to this gouernment. Neither
can any one pregnant testimony of any sound
writer, or example of any one orthodoxal or
apostolicall church, be produced to the contrary.
Fourthly, the successions of Bb. in all
the most famous churches, deduced from the
Apostles times to the council of Nice, do yet
remaine vpon record in theEus
                           •
                        . passim Epiph. haer. 66. Iraeneus and Tertullian doe proue the deriuation of the orthodoxall doctrine from the Apostles, by a continuall succession of Bishops in the churches, teaching the same truth. Irae. lib. 
                           •
                        . c. 3. Tertul. de praescrip. histories & other
monumēts of best credit. Neither is any
thing objected against this succession, which I
hold worth the mentioning. Verily, to a moderate
christian, this might seeme a sufficient
cōmendation of the episcopal functiō, thogh
no more could be said to iustifie it; that in the
best times of the primitiue church, it was
borne of so many thousand godly & learned
Bb. receiued in al true churches, approued of
al the orthodoxall & learned Fathers, allowed
& cōmended of all the famous councils. Allowed
I say, & cōmended, but not first ordayned

by Councils. For, the most ancient provinciall
Councils, consisted chiefely of such
Bishops, assembled & guided by the Metropolitanes.
And the councill of Nice, which
was the first generall councill (for vntill the
time of Constantine, there was no meanes for
assembling a Councill generall) is so far from
first ordayning Bishoppes, as not onely that
Councill consisted of such bishops, but also
it speaketh of Metropolitanes, as being long
before in vse; yea, and ratifieth the ancient
custome (for so it saithConcil. Nic. ca. 6. 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     )
of subjecting diuerse prouinces to the Patriarches
or Archbishops of Rome, Alexandria,
and Antioch, and confirmethCap. 7. the next
place of honour (according to the ancient
custome) to the bishop of Ierusalem.
                  
                  Therefore the gouernment of the Churches by
such Bishops, as I haue spoken of, was vndoubtedlie
of apostolicall institution.
                  Againe, that gouernment which no where
was in vse in the first three hundred yeeres, is
not of Apostolicall institution:
                  The gouernement of the Churches, by a
paritie of Ministers, and assistance of Lay-Elders
in euery parish, was no where in vse

in the first three hundred yeares. Therefore
it is not Apostolicall institution.
                  Now I proceede to the second degree, ascending
to the Apostles times, from whence
in the second place I argue thus:
                  That gouernement which euen in the Apostles 
times was vsed in the Apostolicall
Churches, and was not contradicted by
them, was vndoubtedly of apostolicall
institution. This I take for graunted.
                  
                  
                     The gouernement by Bishoppes was vsed euen
in the Apostles times, and not contradicted by
them. This I proue, both by Scripture, and
by other euidence. The seauen Angels were
the Bishoppes of the seauen Churches as all
confesse, and for the substance of their calling
like to ours, as I haue prooued. Besides,
it is wel knowen, that the Angel of the church
of Smyrna, to whome the second Epistle is
directed, was Polycarpus
                     Bulling. in Apoc. conc. 9. noteth that Polycarpe was made Bishop of Smyrna, 13. yeares before the reuelation was giuen, and so hee continued for many yeares after. that renowned
Martyr, of whom the Church of Smyrna
that then was, writethEuseb. lib. 4 c. 15. thus in an Epistle
yet extant in Eusebius: Of which elect
(say they) this Polycarpe was one in our
times, an Apostolicall and propheticall Doctor

                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        
hauing beene the Bishoppe of the Catholike
Church in Smyrna. And it may well bee supposed,
that the Angell of the Church at Ephesus,
to whom the first Epistle is directed,
was Onesimus. For when Ignatius wrote his
Epistles, hee testifieth,Ignat. ad Ephes. & ad Antioch. that at that time,
Onesimus was Bishoppe of Ephesus. Nowe
hee wrote, while Clemens was Bishoppe of
Rome; as appeareth by his firstIgnat. ad Mariam Cassob. Epistle:
That is to say; betweene the 90. yeare of
our Lord and 99. in the middest of which
time the Reuelation was giuen. And that
wee should not thinke that Testimonie
counterfeit and falsely fathered on Ignatius,
who was Bishoppe of Antioch at the same
time: Eusebius also alledgeth it out of the
same Epistle. Ignatius, sayth hee,Euseb. lib. 3. c. 35. 
                     being
at Smyrna where Polycarpus was, hee writeth
one Epistle to the Church of Ephesus, mentioning
their pastor Onesimus.
                  
                  Moreouer it is euident, that from these
seauen Angels, a succession of Bishoppes was
continued in all those seauen Churches, vntil
the Councill of Nice, and long after: for both
to that council, and to diuerse others following,

the Bishops of those seauen ChurchesVide subscriptiones Concil. Niceni; Ephesini interact. Chalced; Chalcedonensis, & Constantinop. 6.
subscribed their names: As, to to the Councill
of Nice, Menophantes bishop of Ephesus, Artemidorus
of Sardis, Eutychius of Smyrna, &c. to
the council of Chalcedon, Stephanus B. of Ephesus,
Florentius of Sardis &c. Again, it is with
great consent testified byIrenaeus. Eusebius. Epiphanius. Augustine, &c. Authors of best
credite in the Church of God, that in the Apostles
time (reckoning vntill the death of S.
Iohn: that is to the yeare of our Lord, 101, or
102), there were not onely Bishops, but also
a succession of Bishops in diuerse Churches.
As, at Rome these were bishops successiuely in
the Apostles time;Irenaeus. lib. 3. c. 3. Euseb. lib. 3. c. 2. & 4. & capp. 13. 14. 34. 
                     Linus, Anacletus, Clemens,
and about the yeare 99. Euaristus.
                  
                  At Ierusalem
                     Euseb. lib. 2. c. 23. & l. 3. c. 11. 
                     Iames the iust, and Simeon
the sonne of Cleophas.
                  
                  At Antioch,
                     Ignat. ad Antioch. Euseb. 3. 22. 
                     Euodius and Ignatius.
                  
                  At Alexandria,
                     Euseb. l. 2. c. 24 & l. 3. c. 13. 
                     Saint Marke, Anianus,
Ab
                           ••
                        ius, Cerdo.
                  
                  Neither were they contradicted by the Apostles,
but approued by them: As, these Angelles
of the seauen Churches, in respect of
their function approoued by Saint Iohn,
or rather by our Sauiour Christ. Epaphroditus,
the Apostle or Bishoppe of the Philippians,
                     
(who therefore is not mentioned in the
inscription, because that Epistle was sent
by him) commended by Paule as hisPhil. 2. 25.
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      copartner both in his function
and in affliction, and the Philippians
                     Phil. 2. 29. 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        .
commanded to haue in honour such. Iames
the iust, Bishoppe of Ierusalem, generally approued,
Act. 15. See the Geneua note on Act 21. 18. Act. 15. and 21. Gal. 1. 19. Archippus
the Bishoppe of Colossa, in respect of
his function,Colos. 4. 17 approued of Paul Coloss. 4.
17. Antipas,
                     Apoc. 2. 13. who had beene Bishoppe of
Pergamus (as Arethas reporteth) highly
commended by the holy Ghost. Apoc. 2.
13.
                  Hereunto adde the confession of Ierome,
                     In Tit. 1. that when factions began to arise in the
Church, some saying I am of Paul, I am of Apollos,
I am of
                     1. Cor. 1. 
                     Cephas, (which was in the
Apostles times, 1. Cor. 1.) it was decreed in
the whole world (and therefore by the Apostles;
for Ierome himselfe calleth the episcopall
function,Ad Euagr. 
                     a tradition Apostolicall)
that one being chosen from among the Presbyters,
should bee set ouer the rest, &c. Hee also
confesseth,Catalog. script. that Iames the iust, shortly after
the passion of Christ, was made Bishoppe

of Ierusalem. And that at Alexandria, euen
fromAd Euagr. Saint Marke (who died fiue or sixe
years before Peter and Paul, and after whom
there was a succession of three more in the
Bishoprick, during the Apostles time) there
had been Bishops chosen successiuely. And
least we should thinke, as some doe, that the
words, A Marco, are vnderstood exclusiuely,
as though Marke himselfe had not beene Bishippe
of Alexandria; Ierome telleth vs elsewhere,
Prooem. in Matth. Marcus interpres Apos. Petri, & Alexandrinae Ecclesiae primus Episcopus. that Mark was the first Bishop of the
Church at Alexandria.
                  
                  Seeing therfore godly and worthie Bishops
were ordained in the Apostolicall Churches
in the Apostles times, & they not oppugned,
but approued of the Apostles; it followeth
therefore, that the gouernement of the churches
by Bishops, is of Apostolicall institutiō.
                  But yet I proceed to a further degree. Which 
is, to proue that the Apostles thēselues ordained
bishops, & cōmitted the Churches vnto
thē; & therfore that the episcopal function, is
without questiō of Apostical institution. The
Antecedent is to be explained & proued, by
shewing the time when, the places where, the
persōs whom, the Apostles ordained bishops.
                  
                     
As concerning the time, there is some difference
betweene the Church of Ierusalem,
and the rest. For there, because shortly after
Christes passion, a great number were
conuerted to the faith (for weeActs. 2. 41. & 4. 4. reade of
3000. conuerted in one day:) and because
that was the mother Church, vnto which
Christians from all partes were afterwards to
haue recourse; the Apostles before their dispersion,
Statim post passionem domini, straightwayes
after the passion of our Lord, ordained
Iames the iust, Bishoppe of Ierusalem, as lerome
                     Catelog. scriptorum. testifieth.Euseb. lib. 2. cap. 23. 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . 
                     Eusebius reporteth out
of Hegesippus, who was neere the Apostles
times (as Ierome saith) that to Iames our Lords
brother, the throne of the Bishopricke at Ierusalem
was committed by the Apostles. Likewise
Euseb. lib. 2. cap. 1. out of Clemens Alexandrinus, hypotopos. 6.
that Peter, Iames and Iohn, after the ascension
of our Sauiour, did choose Iames the iust, Bishoppe
of Ierusalem. The same is testified by
Epiphanius
                     Epiphan. haeres. 66. 
                     haeres. 66. where also hee setteth
downe the succession of the Bishoppes
of Ierusalem from Iames, to his time. Byhomil. 3. & 33. in initio.
                     Chrysostome on the Acts. ByAmbros. in Galat. 1. 19. 
                     Ambrose
on the Epistle to the Galathians, Paule

sawe Iames at Ierusalem, because there hee had
beene ordained Bishoppe by the Apostles. By
Eusebius
                     Euseb. lib. 3. c. 5. & Chronic. Anno 33. himselfe, byDoroth. in synops. 
                     Dorotheus, by
Aug. contra 
                           •
                        resconium. l. 2. c. 37. in order, not in degree.
                      
                     Augustine, &c.
                  If any obiect (as somede gradib. ministr. c. 23. haue done)
that Iames was ordine, but not gradu, superiour
to the Presbyters of the Church at Ierusalem,
or that hee was (according to their
conceipt) president of the presbyterie for a
short time, and that onely in his course: they
must remember, that he was an Apostle, and
his honour and degree by his Bishoprick not
impaired. Yea, Eusebius reporteth out of Clemens
Alexandr.
                     Euse. l. 2. c. 1 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . 
                     that Peter, Iames and Iohn
after the ascension of Christ our Sauiour, though
the Lorde had vouchsafed them some prerogatiue
of honour, yet they would not arrogate
to themselues that glorie, but chose Iames the
iust to bee Bishoppe of Ierusalem. And good
AuthorsEuseb. lib. 3. c. 11. & 4. c. 22. ex Hegesippo. testifie, that both hee, and his successour
Simon, the sonne of Cleophas, were by
the Apostles preferred to that place, because
they were our Sauiour Christs kinsmen according
to the flesh.
                  
                     What then? was he superiour to the rest of

the Apostles? In degree he was not; but in order
he was, when and whilest they were at Ierusalem,
after his election, as appeareth Act.
15. howbeit their purpose in making him Bishop,
was not to set him ouer themselues, but
ouer the presbyters & people of Ierusalem.
For indeed the Apostles first ioyntly ruled the
Church at Ierusalē; but being to goe into all
the world, & no longer to be accounted mē
                     bers
of that particular church, ordained Iames
to be bishop: & that charge which before they
had in common, they now committed to him
in particular. And this is that which Ierome citeth
out of Hegesippus. Hegesippus (saith hee)
Catalog. scriptor. in Iacob. 
                     who was neere the Apostles times, in the fift
book of his cōmentaries speaking of Iames, sayth,
Suscepit Ecclesiā Hiero solymae post apostolos frater
Domini Iacobus, cognomento Iustus. Iames
the brother of our Lord, sirnamed Iustus, receiued
or vndertooke the Church of Ierusalem after
the Apostles.
                  
                  For the other point: (to omitte his continuance
at Ierusalem, as the superintēdent of
that Church testified by theAct. 15. Act. 21. Gal. 1. scriptures) the
same authors which say hee was Bishoppe,
doe also testifie that hee continued so vntill

his death.Catalog. script. in Iacob. 
                     Thirty yeeres, saith Ierome, rexit
he ruled the Church at Ierusalem, that is to say,
euen vnto the seauenth yeere of Nero; & in like
manner his successour, 38. yeeres.
                  As touching other churches; we are to obserue,
that the Apostles did not, at the very
first planting of them, appoint bishops vnto
them; because as yet, there was neither that
choice, nor yet that vse of thē, among a people,
which was to be converted, before it needed
to be gouerned: but first they ordayned
Act. 14. 23. 19. 6. et 20. 17. 28. Presbyters, to labour the conversion of
the people, and to seede them which were
converted by the Word and Sacraments, and
attending them in cōmon, to gouerne them
after a priuate manner, and as it were, in foro
conscientiae. But the Episcopall power, which
consisteth specially in the right of ordination,
and in the sway of ecclesiastical iurisdiction
committed to one, the Apostles each of
them retained in their owne hands, as it is manifest
2. Thes. 3. 14. 1. Corin. 5. whiles either they continued neere
them, or meant not to be long frō them. All
which while, bishops were not so needful; the
Apostles providing for the necessity of those
churches, either by their presence, or by their

Letters or Messengers. And this is the cause,
why in the writings of th'apostles, bishops
are so seldom (though not so seldom as some
imagine) mentioned, & the name with Presbyter
confounded. But when as they were to
leaue the churches altogether, either by departure,
or by death, (that the churches
should not be left fatherlesse, they fulfilled
that in Psal. 45. according to Augustine & Ieromes
exposition, In stead of fathers, that is,
th'apostles, there shall bee children borne vnto
thee, whom thou shalt make Princes ouer all the
earth;
                     Hieronym. et Augustin. in Psalm. 44. that is, bishops succeeding th' apostles
in the regiment of the church:) at their
departure they left substitutes, and at their
death appointed successors, to whom they
committed the gouernment of the churches;
furnishing them by a singularity of preeminence,
both with the right of ordination, and
with the power of iurisdiction, as well ouer
the Presbyters, as the people of each Citie,
with the country adioyning. And these, at
the first were called, sometimes Angels of the
churches, as Apoc. 1. 2. 3. some-times 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     ,
praepositi, Rulers. Hebr. 13. 17. (which text in
theCanon. 44. canons of th' apostles, & in the second

Epistle ofIgnatius ad Trallian. 
                     Ignatius, as also the name praepositi,
in Latine Fathers, from thence is appropriated
to Bishops.) some-times, th' apostles
                     Philip. 2. 25 
                     of the churches, as succeeding th' apostles
in the gouernement of the particular
churches: as, Philip. 2. 25. Epaphroditus, who
was the Bishop or Pastor of Philippi, is therefore
called their Apostle; as not onelyAmbrose. Hieronym. Theodoret. Calvin. Tho. Aqui. &c. in Philip. 2. 
                     Ambrose;
Ierome, Theodoret, but also Calvin teacheth
vpon that place, and obserueth the mutual
affectiō, both of Epaphroditus as their Pastor,
and of the Philippians, as his stock. For,
whiles th' episcopall power was for the most
part in th' apostles & apostolicke men, those,
who also had that power, were called apostles:
& therfore Ambr.
                     Ambr. in Ephe. 4. et in 1. Cor. 12. 28. vnderstāds by apostles, in
some places of the scripture, bishops, as Eph. 4,
11. & 1. Cor. 12. 28. Apostoli, episcopi sunt. And
to the like purpose, Cyprian,
                     Cypri. lib. 3 epist. 9. 
                     Apostolos. i. episcopos
et praepositos dominus elegit. For, as
Theodoret
                     Theodoret in 1. Tim. 3. hath wel obserued, on 1. Tim. 3.
Intimes past, saith he, they called the same men
Presbyters & Bb. and those who now are called
Bishops, they named Apostles. But in processe of
time, they left the name of Apostle, to those who
are properlie called Apostles, and the name of

Bishop they imposed on them who had been called
Apostles. Thus Epaphroditus was the Apostle of
the Philippians, Titus of the Cretians, and Timothe
of the Asians. Neither was it long, that
the name Episcopus was cōfounded with Presbyter.
For, Ignatius, who was a bishop aboue
30.For S. Iohn died anno. 101 and 5. of Trajane. And Ignatius, after he had beene 40. yeeres Bishop, died in the yere 107. and 11. of Trajane. yeeres in th' apostles times, appropriateth
the name 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , to a Bishop, & distinguisheth
the three degrees of the Clergy (as
the church, euer since the time of th' apostles,
hath distinguished thē) by these three names,
Bishop, Presbyter, Deacon. So do theCan. 2. 6. 7. &c. canons
which are called the Apostles, & some
other monuments of Antiquity, which were
written neere the Apostles times; of which
sort are diuers testimonies in Eusebius, cited
out of the most ancient writers of the church.
                  But, we are also to shew the places where, &
the persons whom, th' apostles ordained Bishops:
and first out of the Scriptures. For, by
the Epistles of Saint Paule to Timothe and
Titus, it is apparant, that hee had ordained
Timothe Bishop of Ephesus, & Titus of Creet;
The Epistles themselues, beeing the verie
patternes and precedents of th' episcopall
function. For, as the Apostle had committed

(vnto them episcopall authoritie, both in respect
of ordination and jurisdiction, which in
th' epistles is presupposed: so doth he by those
Epistles1. Tim. 3. 15. Ambros. praefat. in 1. Tim. Timotheū iam creatum episcopum instruit per epistolam, quomodo deberet ecclesiam ordinate. informe them, and in them all Bishops,
how to exercise their function; First, in
respect of ordination (as Tit. 1. 5, I left thee
in Creet, that thou shouldst ordaine presbyters in
euery citie, as I appointed thee. 1. Tim. 5. 22, Impose
hands hastily on no man, neither be partaker
of other mens sinnes: And to this purpose
describeth how Presbyters & Deacons, whō
they were to ordaine, should be qualified. 1.
Tim. 3. 2. and 8. Tit. 1. 6. 7. 8. 9.) Secondly, in
regard of iurisdictionTit. 1. 5. not onely ouer the
people, but also ouer the presbyters; appointing
them to be both guides & censurers
of their doctrine, (as 1. Tim. 1, 3,) I required
thee to continue in Ephesus, that thou shouldest
commaund some that they teach no strange doctrine▪
neither that they attend 
                           〈…〉
                        , &c. 
                        •
                     .
Tim. 2, 10, stay prophane
                           •
                         & vaine bablings. T
                        ••
                     .
1, 10, 11, There are many deceiuers, 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        ,
whose mouthes thou must stoppe, which subvert
whole houses, reaching things which they ought
not for filty by lucres sake: wherefore rebuke theme sharply▪ that they may bee sounde in the faith.
                     
Tit, 3, 9, Stay foolish questiōs & genealogies, &c.)
and also iudges of their persons & conversation:
as, 1. Tim, 5, 19, 20, 21, Against a Presbyter
receiue not an accusation, but vnder two or three
witnesses. Thē that sin rebuke openly, that the rest
also may feare. I charge thee before God, and the
Lord Iesus Christ, & the elect angels, that thou
obserue these things without preiudice, & without
partiality. Tit. 3, 10, Reicet him that is an
hereticke, after once or twice admonition.
                  
                  And that wee should not thinke (as some
do) that these things were spoken to them, as
to extraordinary persons (whose authoritie
should did with them) but to them and their
successors to the end of the world: he straightly
chargeth Timothe, that the cōmandements
and directions which he gaue him, should be
kept inviolable1. Tim. 6. 13. 14. 
                     vntill the appearing of our
Lord Iesus Christ; and therefore by such as
should haue the like authority vnto the end.
Ambrose, writing on those words, faith,Ambrose in 1. Tim. 6.
                     Paul is so circumspect, not because hee is fearefull
of Timothe his care; but for his successours, that
they, after the example of Timothe, might conti
                        
                           •
                        inue
the will ordering of the church. For the authority
which was committed to them is perpetually

necessary: without which, the church
neither can bee gouerned (as without jurisdiction)
neither yet cōtinued, as without ordination;
& therefore not peculiar to extraordinary
persons, but by an ordinary deriuation
to be cōtinued in those, who are the successors
of Timothe and Titus. Now I appeale
to al, who haue any iudgement, whether their
supposed Presbyteries (which cōsist of Laymen
for the greatest part) or the Bb. which
succeeded them in the gouernement of the
church, were to be accoūted their successors.
Why but, did bishops indeede succeed Timothe in
the gouernment of Ephesus? yes, without question▪
For (to omit not onely this angel of Ephesus,
Apoc. 2. which was one of the next successors
vnto Tim. whether it were Onesimus
or any other, but also Polycrates theEuseb. lib. 5. cap. 25. B. of
Ephesus in the time of Victor, who professeth
that he was the 8. bishop of his kinred) in the
councill of Chalcedon,
                     Cōc. Chalc. Act. 11. 
                     Leontius the B. of
Magnesia saith, that frō
                      S. Timothe to that time,
ther had bine 7. Bb. of Ephesus al ordain'd there.
                  
                  Against this, two things are obiected; first;
that Timothe and Titus may seeme not to haue
beene appointed Bishops of Ephesus and Creet,

because they did not continue there, but were remoued
to other places. Where-vnto I answere,
that although vpon speciall & extraordinarie
occasions, they were by th' apostles called to
other places, as his, or the churches necessity
required; yet these were the places of their
ordinary resiance, where they both liued and
died. Paule willeth Timothe
                     1. Tim. 1. 3. 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , permanere,
(the word isSee the vse of the worde, Math. 15. 32. Acts. 11. 23. & 18. 18. 1. Tim. 5. 5. significant) to abide
still, or continue at Ephesus: and he left Titus
not to redresse things in Creet for a brunt, &
so to come away; but that he shuldTit. 1. 5. 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     ,
continue in redressing what should be amisse,
and still keep that church, as it were, in
reparation, For wheras someDe Ministr. grad. c. 22. et in 1. Tim. 1. 3. thinke that
Timothe was commanded Acts, 20, to stay at
Ephesus for a short time, only to confirme the
church there, being troubled with the sedition
raised by Demetrius; they are vtterly deceiued.
For, Paul appointed, Timothe to continue
in Ephesus,
                     1. Tim. 1. 3. 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , when himselfe
was going into Macedony. But this cannot be
vnderstoode of either of those voyages into
Macedonia, which are mentioned Acts, 20:
the first, from Ephesus▪
                      after the tumult vvas
appeased, Acts, 20, 1. at which time he could

not leaue Timothe at Ephesus to settle the
christiās after the vp-rore raised by Demetrius;
for immediatly before the historie of that
tumult, it is said, that hee had sentAct. 19. 22. 
                     Timothe
before into Macedonia, and himself followed
Act. 20. 1. and when he had gone through
those partes, (namely of Macedonia) hee
came into Greece, purposing from thence to
goe towardes Ierusalem. But vnderstanding
that the Iewes laid waite for himAct 20. 3. hee resolued
(that hee might auoyde their ambushments)
to returne into Macedonie, and from
thence to 
                        •
                     ayl towards Ierusalem, trauelling along
by the coasts of Asia: in which iourney
it is expressely saide,Act. 20. 4. 5. 14. that Timothe
                     Their conceipt therefore is strange who say that the first Epistle was write to Timothe out of Macedonie. accompanied
him, and from Philippi with others
went before him to Troas, and to Assos, from
whence hee accompanied him to Miletum;
                     Act. 20▪ 17. whether the Apostle sent for the Presbyters
of Ephesus. Seeing therefore Paul appointed
Timothe to stay at Ephesus, when himselfe
was going into Macedonia; & in all those
iourneyes into Macedonia mentioned in the
Acts, viz. cap. 16. 19. 20, Timothe was with him
in Macedonia; and forasmuch as hee went no
more thither vntill hee had beene at Rome:
                     
it is apparant therfore that this iourney happened
in Paules peregrinations, after his departure
frō 
                     Rome; when he hauing staid there
aboue two years, was at length dismissed and
set at libertie by Nero, in the 4. of his reigne,
which was the 57. yeare of grace. From which
time vntill the 13. of Nero, hee renewed his
former paines in trauelling from place to
place. Now, the historie of the Actes of the
Apostles ending with Paules first being at
Act. 28. 30. 
                     Rome, the rest of his acts in the 9. yeares
following, cannot otherwise bee knowen but
by those his Epistles which were written in
that time, & other monuments of Antiquity,
which testifie that Paul ordained Timothe Bishoppe
of Ephesus, and Titus of Creet. Wherunto
wee may adde the credible testimonie
ofHieronym. siue Sophronius in Catalog. in Tito. Dorotheus in synopsi. Isidorus de vita & morte sanct orum. 87. & 88. Vincentius lib. 38. c. 10. & Antonius ex Polycrate, part. 1. tit. 6. cap. 28. §. 6. Niceph. lib. 10. c. 11. diuerse authors, who report, that Timothe
and Titus, as they liued, so also died,
the one at Ephesus, the other in Creete.
                  
                  The other thing which they obiect, is,
that they were Euangelists. But that doth not
hinder, but that when they were assigned to
certaine Churches and furnished with episcopall
power, they became Bishoppes. For as
Zuinglius
                     In Ecclesiaste. hath well obserued, Philippe the

Euangelist, who had beene one of the Deacons,
was afterwardes Bishoppe of Caesarea.
Iames the Apostle was Bishoppe of Ierusalem,
and diuerse of the Apostles (which also may
bee verefied of theSo was Marke of Alexandria. Euangelists) when they
ceased from their peregrination, became Bishops
of certaine Churches, as by the ancient histories
is manifest. Hereof we may conclude thus:
The supposed Euangelisticall function of Timothe
and Titus, was to ende with their persons,
and admitted no succession, being (as thēselues

                        •
                     each) both extrordinarie and temporarie.
but the function and Authoritie which they
had, as being assigned to certaine Churches,
viz. of Ephesus and Creete, (consisting specially
in the power of ordination and jurisdiction)
was not to ende with their persons,
but to bee continued in their successours;
as being ordinarie, and perpetually necessarie,
not onelie for the well beeing,
but also for the verie beeing of the visible
Churches: (For, if whiles the Apostles
themselues liued, it was necessarie,
that they should substitute in the Churches
alreadie planted, such as Timothe,
and Titus, furnished with episcopall power:

then much more, after their decease, haue the
Churches need of such gouernours.) Therefore
the function and authoritie, which Timothe
and Titus had, as being assigned to Ephesus
and Creet, was not extraordinarie and Euangelisticall;
but, as I will further proue, Episcopall.
For, that Timothe was Bishoppe of
Ephesus, and Titus of Creet, it appeareth
not onely by the subscriptions, annexed to
the ende of the Epistle to Titus, and second
to Timothe: but also by the generall consent
of the auncient fathers, and histories of the
Church. Eusebius reporteth out of the ecclesiasticall
histories which were before his
time,Euseb. lib. 3. c. 
                           •
                        . that Timothe first had the Bishopricke
of the Church at Ephesus, and Titus of the
Churches in Creet. The Author of the book,
which goeth vnder the name of Dionysius
Areopagita, dedicating his treati
                        •
                     e de diuinis
nominib. to Timothe the Bishoppe of Ephesus,
doth at the least signifie, that in his time it
was a thing confessed, that Timothe was Bishoppe
of Ephesus. The Catalogue of Ecclesiasticall
writers, which is in Ierome, reporteth,
that Timothe was ordained of blessed
Paul Bishoppe of the Ephesians, and that
                     
Titus was Bishoppe of Creete. The same is
testified by Ambrose, praefat. in. 1. Tim. & praefat.
in Tit. by Dorotheus in Synopsi. by Theodoret
in 1. Tim. 3. by Chrysostome in argum. 1.
Tim. & in Epist. ad Philipp. homil. 1. by Epiphanius,
haeres. 75. by Gregorie the great,
Pastoral. part. 2. cap. 11. by Polycrates apud
Antoninum part. 1. tit. 6. cap. 28. §. 6. by
Oecumenius in Ephes. 4. & in 1. Tim. 1. &

                        •
                     . & in Titum. 1. by Primasius praefat. in 1.
Tim. & in 2. Tim. 1. by Nicephorus, lib. 2.
c. 34. by Isidorus, de vita & morte sanctorum
87. 88.
                  To these two mentioned in the Scriptures,
wee may adde others out of other the
most auncient recordes of the Church, wherof
some were made by Peter and Paul, some
by Iohn the Euangelist, some by diuerse of
the Apostles.
                  
                     Anticch, (where the professours of the
Christian faith were first called Christians)
had the first Bishoppe, after Ierusalem, ordained
by the Apostles, Peter and Paul, about
the yeare of our Lord 45. (asChronie. Euseb. anno 45. 
                     Eusebius
sayth) viz. Euodius, whomEuseb. l. 3. c. 22. 
                     Ignatius succeeded.
Hee, in his Epistle to them of Antioch,
                     
hath these words;Ignat, ad Antioch. 
                     You were the disciples of
Paul and Peter, lose not that which was committed
to your trust. 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        .
Remember Euodius
your most blessed pastor, to whom the gouernment
of you was first committed by the Apostles.
                  
                  As touching the first Bishoppe of Rome,
though I finde great varietie of opinions, yet
this I take to bee the truth; that Peter and
Paule being bothPeter came to Rome to op pugne Simon Magus in the second of Nero. Paule shortly after, vpon the occasion of his appeale; frō whence, after two years they departed; Paule being dismissed and set at libertie, Peter driuen thence by Nero. Prudēt. peristeph. passio. Petti & Pauli. viuis vtrunque dies, ple
                           •
                        o tamen innou
                           •
                        tus anno vid
                           •
                        e superba morte laureatum. Peter crucified Iun. 29. anno Neronis. 12. Paule beheaded sun. 29. anno Neronis. 13. not. 14. for Nero himselfe died on the 10. of Iune in the 14. yeare of his Empire. at Rome (where they staid
either of them somewhat aboue two yeares,
but neither of them professing themselues
Bishop of Rome) about the year of our Lord
56, ordayned Linus the bishoppe of Rome;
who continued Bishoppe there ten years before
the death of Paul, and twelue yeares after.
And this is that which Irenaeus one of the
most auncient writers doth testifie: namely,
that the
                     Irenaeus, lib. 3. cap. 3. 
                     blessed Apostles Peter and Paul, the
founders and instructors of the Church of Rome,
Lino episcopatum administrandae ecclesiae tradiderunt,
committed the Bishopricke and administration
of that Church to Linus: after whom
followed, successiuely, Anacletus, and
then Clemens; as not onelyIren. 3. 3. 
                     Irenaeus, and

                     Euseb. l. 3. c. 22. 
                     Eusebius (who saith, that he was the third after
Paule and Peter: for Linus, saith he, was the
first, and after him
                     
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . 
                     Anacletus) butIgnat. ep. ad Martam Cassobolit. 
                     Ignatius
also (who liued at the same time) doe witnesse.
                  I come to Alexandria, where Marke the
Euangelist was the first bishoppe, by the appointment
of Peter. For although this be not
certainely knowen, whither Peter leauing
Rome, did take Marke with him into Egypt,
and ordayned him there, (asNiceph. lib. 14. c. 39. 
                     Nicephorus
writeth, and as wee may well thinke, if by Babylon
where Marke was with him, 1. Pet. 5. 13.
we vnderstand Babylon in Egypt,) or whether
he did send him thither from other parts, as
Gregor. lib. 6. Epist. 37. others testifie; yet this is confessed, that he
was by Peter apointed bishop there. And surely
if he were bishop there, we need not doubt,
but it was by Peters assignemēt. For being his
disciple, & perpetual follower, it may not bee
thought, that he separated himself frō 
                     Peter, &
bestowed himself, whiles Peter liued, without
his direction. But that hee was bishoppe there,
whiles Peter liued, we haue certain euidēce. In
the eight year of Nero his reigne, saithEuseb. l. 2. c. 24. 
                     Eusebius
(that is 4. or 5. years before Pet. death) Anianus
succeeded Marke the Euangelist in the Church

of Alexandria, being a religious man and euery
way admirable. Hierome saith,Prooem. in Matth. that the second
Euangelist is Mark, interpres Apostoli Petri,
& Alexandrinae Ecclesiae primus episcopus,
the interpreter of Peter the Apostle, and the first
Bishoppe of the Church at Alexandria. And
againe,In Catalog. script. that Marke hauing established the
Church at Alexandria, died in the eight yeare
of Nero, and was buried at Alexandria, Anianus
succeeding him: & in another place, that
Ad Euagr. 
                     at Alexandria, euen from Marke the Euangelist,
there had alwayes Bishops beene elected
&c. Dorotheus also sayeth, that MarkeDoroth. synops.
                     was the first Bishoppe of Alexandria, and that
hee was martyred and buryed there.
                  
                     From Alexandria I returne againe to Ierusalē
                     for after Iames the iust was put to death,
the
                     Euseb. lib. 3. c. 11. apostles and disciples, and kinsmen of our
Sauiour Christ, which yet were remaining, assē
                     bled
themselues from al parts, and hauing consulted
among themselues, whom they should think
worthy to succeed Iames; with one consent made
choyse of Symeon the son of Cleophas, of whome
there is mention in the Gospell, because hee also
was our Sauiours cousin: For Cleophas, as Hegesippus
reporteth, was Iosephs brother.
                  
                     
Thus haue you heard, that the Bishops of
the foure principall churches, Rome, Alexandria,
Antioch, and Ierusalem, were all ordayned
of th' apostles. To these I will adde Smyrna,
because thereof there is most euident
proofe: namely, that S. Iohn th' apostle, ordayned
Polycarpe the bishop of that church.
That he was bishop there, the church of Smyrna,
as you heard before, which liued vnder
him, did by their Letters professe: and Ignatius,
who was well acquainted with him, doth
Igna. epi. 7 ad Smyrn. et 8. ad Poly
                           •
                        . episc. S
                           •
                        yrnens. witnesse. That he was made bishop by the
Apostles, Irenaeus, who was his scholler, doth
plainly testifie. Polycarpus, saith he,Ire. l. 3. c. 3. 
                     was not
onely taught of the Apostles, and had conversed
with many of them, who had seene our Lord; but
also he was, by the Apostles, ordained Bishop in
Asia, in that church which is at Smyrna. The
like hath Eusebius,
                     Euseb. lib. 3. cap. 35. 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . And
more particularly, that he was ordayned by
Saint Iohn, not only Tertullian
                     De praescr
                           •
                        p. doth acknowledge:
(for, hauing saide that the churches
were able to shew, that their first bishop
was ordained by some of the Apostles; hee

addeth, Sicut Smyrnaeorum ecclesia Polycarpum
ab Ioanne conlocatum refert, as the church of
Smyrna recounteth Polycarpe placed by Iohn:)
But Ierome also doth confesse. Polycarpus Ioannis
Apostoli discipulus, et ab eo Smyrnae episcopus
ordinatus:
                     Catalog. scriptor. 
                     Polycarpe, Iohn th' apostles
scholler, and by him ordained Bishoppe of
Smyrna.
                  
                  And not to mention any more particulars,
the most ancient Writers, who liued next the
Apostles times, doe witnesse, that Iohn, after
his returne from exile, ordained Bishops in
diuers places, according to the direction of
the holy Ghost. So saithEuseb. ex Clem. lib. 3. cap. 23. 
                     Clemens. Irenaeus
saith,Iren. lib. 4. cap. 63. 
                     th' apostles cōmitted the church, which is
in euery place to bishops; AndLib. 3. c. 3. that th' apostles
left them their successors, sunm ipsorū locum
magisterij tradentes. And againe,Ibid. 
                     habemus
annumerare, &c. We are able to reckē those
who were by th' apostles ordained Bb. and their
successors vnto our time. Likewise Tertulliā
                     
                     Tertul. de praescrip. advers, haeretic.
professeth, that th' apostolick churches could
shew the order of their bishops, so running along
by successions from the beginning, that their first
Bishop had for their founder and ancecessor, one
of the Apostles, or apostolicke men, who had continued

with the Apostles.
                  
                  Against all this, which hath beene saide to
proue that th' episcopal function is of apostolicall
institution, the authoritie of Ierome is
obiected. First, where he saith,In Tit. 1. vntill factions
did arise in the church, some saying, I am
of Paule, I am of Apollo, &c. the churches were
gouerned by the common counsell of the Presbyters:
But when they began to draw disciples after
them, namely, such as themselues had baptized,
it was agreed in the whole world, &c.
                  
                  I answere, first, that this speech of Ierome, in
respect of the church at Ierus. is vntrue: which
was first gouerned by th' apostles in common,
and after, committed to Iames in particular,
before we read of any presbyters there ordained.
Catalog. 
                     Ierome himselfe hath tolde vs, that
Iames straight-waies after the passion of our
Lord, was by the Apostles ordained Bishoppe of
Ierusalē. Secondly, in respect of other churches;
that which he saith, neither proueth that
the office of Bb. & presbyters were cōfoūded
(which notwithstanding seemeth to haue bin
his scope by that which followeth in the same
place) neither doth it hinder, but that the distinct
office of Bb. is of apostolicall institutiō.
                  
                     
It is true, that for a time the Presbyters by
common counsell gouerned the churches,
but as vnder the Apostles, who kept in their
owne hands the Episcopall authoritie; they,
I meane the Presbyters, hauing neither the
right of ordination, nor the power of outward
iurisdiction. This therefore doth not
prooue, that the offices of Bishops and Presbyters
were confounded. The name of Bishop
was confounded with Presbyter: but the
office and authoritie of the Bishop, was as yet
in the Apostles; The Presbyters beeing such
then vnder the Apostles, as they were afterwards,
vnder the Bishop.
                  But when th' apostles were to discontinue
from those churches, which they had planted,
then were Bishops substituted: wher-vnto the
factious behauiour of the Presbyters (wherof
Ierome speaketh) might be some inducement.
For, parity indeede breedeth faction & confusion.
For the avoyding whereof in the absence
of the Apostles, Bishops were instituted;
but when, and where, and by whom, and
to what end, let Ierome himselfe testifie. Whē?
when factions began to spring in the church, saith
In Tit. 1. 
                     Ierome, some saying I am of Paule, I am of

Apollo, I am of Cephas, which was in the Apostles
time, 1. Corin. 1. and it were fonde to
imagine, that factions did not begin till after
their time.
                  Where? in toto orbe, saith Ierome, it was decreed
in the whole world. Which could not
be in the Apostles times, without their consent;
nor neere the Apostles times, without a
generall Councill, which was not.
                  By whom? Ierome
                     Vide. supra. hath told vs, when,
and by whom, Iames was made bishop of Ierusalem,
Marke of Alexandria, Timothe of Ephesus,
Polycarpe of Smyrna, &c. To what
end? to avoyde schisme, saith Ierome: And therfore,Aduers. Luciferian.
for the same end to be retained, as hee
doth also acknowledge. For, the safety of the
church, dependeth on the dignity of the Bishop; to
whō if a peerelesse power & eminent aboue all be
not giuen, there will be as many schismes in the
churches as there be Priests.
                  
                  Secondly, they vrge Ieromes inference in that
place: Presbyters, at the first, ruled the church by
common counsell; therefore the bishops, and they,
ought to rule the church in common still. I answer,
it followes not in respect of the Presbyters
themselues. Before titles were distinguished,

and presbyters assigned to their seuerall
cures, they attended the whole flock in common;
which after the parishes were distinguished,
and they seuered to their seuerall cures,
they did not: Onely the Bishop, and the presbyters
which remained still about him, had
the like care, which th' apostles and presbyters
had, at the first; The Bishop vsing the advise
of the Presbyters (though not to bee over-ruled
by them) vntill their advise and assistance,
to themselues seeming troublesome,
and to the Bishop (by reason of the frequent
Synodes, and synodall constitutions) needlesse,
grew out of vse.
                  Thirdly, they alledge out of Ierome,
                     Epist. ad Oceanū, item ad Evagrium. in Tit. 1. that
Bishop & Presbyter is all one: & therfore Bb. are
to know, that they be greater thē Presbyters, rather
by the custome of the church, thē by the truth
of divine disposition. I answere: where Ierome
saith Episcopus and Presbyter is all one,
he is to be vnderstood in respect of the names,
which he proueth, byPhil. 1. 1. Act. 20. 17. 28. Tit. 1. 5. 7. 1. Pet. 5. many testimonies,
to be confounded in the writings of th' apostles.
And in this sense it is true, that whereas
now Episcopus is more then Presbyter, it is to
be ascribed to the custome of the Church; as

before I haue noted out of Theod. And in the
same sense, Augustine
                     Epist. 19. ad Hieronym. is to be vnderstood,
when he saith, according to the names of honour,
in which the vse of the church hath prevailed,
Episcopatus est maior Presbyterio; that
is, Episcopatus, Bishop-ship, is a name of greater
honour then Presbyterium, Priesthood. But
if you think that Ierome, in affection towards
his owne degree, (which hee sought to set as
high aboue the deacons as he could, whoAd Evagr.
at that time beganne to compare with the
Presbyters) did meane, that the functions, as
well as the names, were confounded, or that
it is not an Apostolicall ordinance, that Bishoppes
should be set ouer the Presbyters:
you shall make him, not onely to striue against
the streame of all Antiquitie, but also
to be contrary to himselfe: as appeareth by
all those allegations, which I haue alreadie
cited out of his writings.
                  If his meaning should be, that the superioritie
of Bishops ouer Presbyters, though it be
an apostolicall tradition (asAd Evagr. him-selfe calleth
it) yet notwithstanding, is not directlie
of diuine institution; although there be

smalThough in respect of the first institution, there is small difference between an apostolical & divine ordinance, because what was ordained by the Apostles, proceeded frō God, (in which sense & no other, I doe hold the episcopall function to bee a diuine ordinance:) yet in respect of perpetuity, difference by some is made betwixt those things which be divini, and those which be apostolici iuris: the former in their vnderstanding beeing generally, perpetually, and immutably necessary; the latter, not so. difference between these
two (as I vnderstand divine institution)
because what th' apostles
did in the executiō of their
apostolical function, they did by
direction of the holy Ghost, so
that they might truly say, both
of their ordinances,Act. 15. 
                     it seemed
good to the holy Ghost and vs; and
of the parties by them ordained,Act. 20. 28 
                     attend
the flocke ouer which the holy Ghost hath made
you bishoppes: notwithstanding, for more euidence,
I wil in the last place directly, yet briefly
proue, that the episcopall functiō, is of divine
institution, or, that bishops were ordained
of God. For, by whō was Timothe ordained
Bishop? By Paul, I confesse, as the instrument;
but yet by the holy Ghost, as the author
& director of his ordinatiō. For he was made
bishop by prophecy,1. Tim. 4. 14. 1. Tim. 4. How is that?

                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , thou wast made bishop
saithChrisost. homil. 5. in 1. Tim. 
                     Chrysostome, not by humane suffrage,
but by prophecy, that is, by divine reuelation,
saithTheodoret. Theophylact. Oecumen. In 1. Tim. 4. See Calvin also in 1. Tim. 4. 14. 
                     Theodoret. That is, spiritu sancto iubente,
by the cōmandemēt of the holy Ghost, saith
Theophyl. 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , saith Oecumenius,

                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        , for by the appointment
of the holy Ghost, Bb. were made, & not at
rādon. By whom was Archippus made Bishop
of Colossa?
                     Col. 4. 17. see Col. 4. 17. Where Paule vsing
the same exhortation to him, which hee gaue
to Timothe the Bishop of Ephesus
                     2. Tim 4. 5. 2. Tim.
4. namely that hee should fulfill his ministery,
hee addeth, which thou hast receiued in the
Lord; and therefore by Gods ordinance, and
as it were at the Lords hands. And to conclude,
the same may euidently be proued out
of this text, which I haue in hand. First, in
that the Bishoppes of the seauen Churches
are called Angels: which not onely sheweth
the excellencie of their calling, but also proueth,
that they were authorized and sent of
God. Secondly, that they are commended
vnder the name of Starres; to signifie both
the preeminence of dignitie which they haue
in this life (for the Starres are theApoc. 12. 1 crowne
of the Church, Apoc. 12.) and also the prerogatiue
of glorie which they shall haue in the
world to come, when they hauing faithfully
perfourmed their duetie shall shine asDan. 12. 3
Starres in the Firmament for euer. Daniell,
12.
                  
                     
Thirdly, that these bee the seauen Stars
which our Sauiour Christ didApoc. 1. 16. 
                           •
                         20. 
                     hold in his
right hand. Which plainely argueth, his, both
approbation of their function, and gratious
protection of their persons.
                  Thus hauing proued this doctrine arising
out of the text, that the episcopall function
is of apostolicall and diuine institution: it remaineth,
that we should from thence gather
som vses to our selues, both for the informing
of our iudgments & reforming of our liues.
For the rectifying of our iudgements, the
same doctrine which by way of explication
of my text I proued; I doe now by way of
application commend vnto you: that as the
episcopall function hath beene manifestly
prooued to bee lawfull and good, as being
the ordinance of God; so you would bee
perswaded to acknowledge it. But you will
say; Some further matter, by your doctrine,
may seeme to bee intended. For whereas it
hath bin proued, that the gouernment of the
Churches by Bishoppes, is an apostolicall
and diuine ordinance: may not wee also inferre,
that all Churches are so necessarilie
and perpetually tied vnto it, as that no other

forme of gouernement is warrantable
in the Church of GOD? and that not
onely this gouernment is lawfull, but that
it onely is lawfull? This inference I referre
to their consideration who hauing fancied
that the Presbyteriall plot-forme is commended
vnto vs in the scriptures; doe therfore
vrge the same vpon vs, as perpetually
and vnchaungeably necessarie in all Churches.
As for others, who being of better
temper, doe so commend their forme of discipline,
as that they doe not condemne all
others, neither seeke to force other Churches
to their imitation; they are to expect
the like moderation from vs. For
although wee bee well assured that the forme
of gouernement by Bishoppes, is the best,
as hauing not onely the warrant of Scripture
for the first institution, but also the
perpetuall practice of the Church from the
Apostles time to our age, for the continuance
of it: notwithstandinge, wee
doubt not, but where this may not bee had,
others may bee admitted; neither doe we
denie, but that siluer is good, though gould
be better.
                  
                     
But some will say, the protestants, which
were the blessed instrumentes of GOD
for the reformation of religion in this last
age, are thought to haue preferred the other
discipline by presbyteries, before this by Bishops:
and therefore in thus magnifying the
Bishoppes, you seeme to ioyne with the
Papists against them. Whereunto I aunswere,
that those godly and learned menSee the Suruey of the pretended discipline. cap. 8. pag. 110. 111. &c. allowed
the episcopal function, and simply desired
the continuance thereof. Notwithstanding,
when together with it they could not
enioy the profession of the Gospell, (such
was the obstinacie and tyranny of the Popish
Prelates:) they were forced with the losse of
the episcopall gouernement, to redeeme the
most pretious iewell of the Gospell; which is
to beeMat. 13. 45. 46. redeemed (if neede bee) with the
losse of all outward things. Which losse, notwithstanding,
they endeuoured to repaire in
some places, by renewing the function of Bishoppes
and Arch-bishoppes, vnder the
names of superintendents, and generall superintendents,
as in Germanie. In others,
where that could not bee done, either because
the Popish Bishoppes were still countenanced

by the ciuil magistrate, as in France;
or because the form of ciuil gouernment being
after the expulsion of the B. changed into
a popular state, could no more endure the
gouernment of a Bishop, then Rome after the
expulsion of Tarquinius the regiment of a
King, as at Geneua: they were forced to bring
in that forme of gouernment, which is next
the best, and by a Senate or Aristocratie of
graue men, to supply the absence of a Bishoppe.
But, as in those places, where orthodoxall
Bishoppes could not bee had, presbyters
were wisely brought in, (for any gouernment
whatsoeuer, is better then none at all:)
so are they verie inconsideratly obtruded on
those Churches, where Bishops, most soundly
professing the Gospell of Christ, are established;
especially, considering that the gouernment
by Bishoppes, is not onely simplie
good and lawfull; but also in comparison, to
bee preferred before theirs, as hauing better
warrant.
                  Now let vs consider, what practicall vses
this doctrine doth afforde: first, to thē, whom
God hath subiected to the authoritie of Bishops.
For if their authority be the ordinance

of God, and they in respect of their function
are termed Angels, as sent frō God; & Stars,
which Christ holdeth in his hand, as approuing
their office, and protecting their persōs;
then are we bound in cōscience, first, to reuerence
their persons, & as the Apostle exhorteth
thePhil. 2. 29. 
                     Philippians, to haue them in honour,
as spirituall fathers; & as they are heer called,
so to receiue them, as the Angels of God.
                  Secondly, to obey their authoritie, as being
the holy ordināce of God: It is the exhortatiō
of the Apostle,Heb. 13. 17. Heb. 13. 17. as the Canons
Canon. 40. Ignat. ad Trall. of the Apostles, and Ignatius doe expound
and apply it. And the rather we shuld
make conscience of these three vses alreadie
mentioned, because the schisme, which is in
our Church, and all the euilles which arise
from thence, (which are worthie to bee lamented
with aboundance of tears,) are to be
ascribed to the neglect thereof; that is, to
the not acknowledging of their lawfull function,
the contemning of their persons, & oppugning
their authoritie.
                  As for the reuerend Bishops themselues,
they may reape comfort and encouragemēt
from this text. For, seeing they bee Starres in

Christs right hand, they may be assured whiles
they receiuing their light frō him, who is the
Sunne of righteousnes, do shine vnto his people
in the light of doctrine, & of a godly life,
they shall be protected frō euill (for who shal
be able to pluckeIohn. 10. 28 them out of his right
hand?) and also be preserued, both from falling
with the fallingApo. 12. 4. starres, & from erring
with theIud. ver. 13. wandring starres. And seeing they
be the Angels & Embassadors of God; whiles
they perform their office & embassage faithfully,
they may expect, that he will blesse, defend,
reuenge, and reward them.
                  And lastly, from these words they are to be
put in minde of their dutie, that as they be
heere honored with the titles of Angels and
starres; so they would endeuour to be answerable
to their names; that they would fulfill
Colo. 4. 17 2. Tim. 4. 5. their ministerie, that they woulde keepe
their1. Tim. 6. 20. 
                     depositum, or that which is committed
to their trust; that, as starres, they would
shine before others in the light of pure doctrine,
1. Tim. 3. 2. and of a godly conversation; that
they acknowledging themselues as Angels,
entrusted with thePsal. 91. custody and gardianship
of Gods people, may faithfully, cheerefully,

vprightly, discharge the trust reposed
in them; and as Angels sent frō God for the
Heb. 1. 14. good of those who shal inherit saluation,
they may faithfully and zealously seeke the
glory of God, from whom they are sent, in the
saluation of his chosen, for whom they are
sent: that so hauing shined as starres vpon the
earth, and demeaned themselues as Angels
in the church militant; they may also shine as
the starres in heauen, as Daniell
                     Dan. 12. 3. hath promised,
and be like the electMath. 22. angels in the
Church triumphant. Which the Lord grant
for his Christs sake; to whom with the Father
and the holy Ghost, one eternall, all-sufficient,
infinite, most gracious, and most glorious
GOD, be all glory, honour and praise,
both now and euer-more. Amen.
                  Glory be to God on high, and
in earth peace.
               
            
            
               
                  Corrections, and additions.
                  
                     Pag. 4. in marg. lin. a fin. 5. officer. p. 14. l. 6. 7. needed. in
marg. Ierē. p. 31. in marg. ad 4. lin. adde et editionis graecae.
ca. 29. p. 34. l. 10. else-where he. p. 40. ad lin. 9. Calv. Instit.
lib. 4. 
                        •
                     . 3. §. 16, Incertū est an plures imposuerint manus,
nécne. p. 48. l. 2. praepositum. p. 65. l. a fine 4. apostolical.
p. 73. l. 15. ad 8.
                  
               
            
         
      
   