
      
         
            
            
            POEMS:
            BY WILLIAM DRVMMOND, of Hawthrone-denne.
            
            The second Impression.
            EDINBVRGH,
            Printed by ANDRO HART. 1616.
         
         
            
            
            To the Author.
            WHile thou dost praise the Roses, Lillies, Gold,
            Which in a dangling Tresse and Face appeare,
            Still stands the Sunne in Skies thy Songs to heare,
            A Silence sweet each Whispering Wind doth hold;
            
               Sleepe in Pasitheas Lap his Eyes doth fold,
            The Sword falls from the God of the fift Spheare,
            
            The Heards to feede, the Birds to sing, forbeare,
            Each Plant breathes Loue, each Flood and Fountaine cold:
            And hence it is, that that once Nymphe, now Tree,
            Who did th'Amphrisian Shepheards Sighes disdaine,
            And scorn'd his Layes, mo
                  •…
               'd by a sweeter Veine,
            Is become pittifull, and followes Thee:
            Thee loues, and vanteth that shee hath the Grace,
            A Garland for thy Lockes to enterlace.
            
               PARTHENIVS.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
            POEMS:
            BY W. D.
            
            
               THE FIRST PART.
               
                  SONNET.
                  
                     IN my first Yeeres, and Prime yet not at Hight,
                  When sweet Conceits my Wits did entertaine,
                  Ere Beauties Force I knew or false Delight,
                  Or to what Oare shee did her Captiues chaine;
                  Led by a sacred Troupe of Phoebus Traine,
                  I first beganne to reade, then Loue to write,
                  And so to praise a perfect Red and White,
                  But (God wot) wist not what was in my Braine:
                  
                     Loue smylde to see in what an awfull Guise
                  I turn'd those Antiques of the Age of Gold,
                  And that I might moe Mysteries behold,
                  Hee set so faire a Volumne to mine Eyes,
                  That I [quires clos'd which (dead) dead Sighs but breath]
                  Ioye on this liuing Booke to reade my Death.
               
               
                  
                  SON.
                  I Know that all beneath the Moone decayes,
                  And what by Mortalles in this World is brought,
                  In Times great Periods shall returne to nought,
                  That fairest States haue fatall Nights and Dayes:
                  I know how all the Muses heauenly Layes,
                  With Toyle of Spright which are so dearely bought,
                  As idle Sounds of few, or none are sought,
                  And that nought lighter is than airie Praise.
                  I know fraile Beautie like the purple Flowre,
                  To which one Morne of Birth and Death affords,
                  That Loue a Iarring is of Mindes Accords,
                  Where Sense and Will inuassall Reasons Power:
                  Know what I list, this all can not mee moue,
                  But that (ô mee!) I both must write, and loue.
               
               
                  SON.
                  YEe who so curiously doe paint your Thoughts,
                  Enlightning eu'rie Line in such a Guise,
                  That they seeme rather to haue fallen from Skies,
                  Than of a humane Hand bee mortall Draughts;
                  In one Part Sorrow so tormented lies,
                  As if his Life at eu'ry Sigh would parte,
                  
                     Loue here blindfolded stands with Bow and Dart,
                  There Hope lookes pale, Despaire with rainie Eyes:
                  Of my rude Pincell looke not for such Arte,
                  
                  My Wit I finde now lessened to deuise
                  So high Conceptions to expresse my Smart,
                  And some thinke Loue but fain'd, if too too wise:
                  These troubled Words and Lines confus'd you finde,
                  Are like vnto their Modell my sicke Minde.
                  
               
               
                  
                  SON.
                  FAire is my Yoke, though grieuous bee my Paines,
                  Sweet are my Wounds, although they deeply smart,
                  My Bit is Gold, though shortned bee the Raines,
                  My Bondage braue, though I may not depart:
                  Although I burne, the Fire which doth impart
                  Those Flames, so sweet reuiuing Force containes,
                  That (like Arabias Bird) my wasted Heart
                  Made quicke by Death, more liuely still remaines.
                  I joye, though oft my waking Eyes spend Teares,
                  I neuer want Delight, euen when I grone,
                  Best companied when most I am alone,
                  A Heauen of Hopes I haue midst Hells of Feares:
                  Thus euery Way Contentment strange I finde,
                  But most in Her rare Beautie, my rare Minde.
               
               
                  SON.
                  HOw that vaste Heauen intitled First is rold,
                  If any other Worlds beyond it lie,
                  And People liuing in Eternitie,
                  Or Essence pure that doth this All vphold:
                  What Motion haue those fixed Sparkes of Gold,
                  The wandring Carbuncles which shine from hie,
                  B
                        •…
                      Sprights, or Bodies, contrare-Wayes in Skie
                  If they bee turn'd, and mortall Things behold:
                  How Sunne postes Heauen about, how Nights pale Queene
                  
                  With borrowed Beames lookes on this hanging Round,
                  
                  What Cause faire Iris hath, and Monsters seene
                  In Aires la
                        •…
                     ge Fields of Light, and Seas profound,
                  Did hold my wand
                        •…
                     ing Thoughts; when thy sweet Eye
                  Bade mee leaue all, and only thinke on Thee.
               
               
                  
                  SON.
                  VAunt not, faire Heauens, of your two glorious Lights,
                  Which though most bright, yet see not when they shine,
                  And shining, cannot shew their Beames diuine
                  Both in one Place, but parte by Dayes and Nights,
                  
                     Earth, vaunt not of those Treasures yee enshrine,
                  Held only deare because hidde from our Sights,
                  Your pure and burnish'd Gold, your Diamonds fine,
                  Snow-passing Iuorie that the Eye delights:
                  Nor Seas of those deare Wares are in you found,
                  Vaunt not, rich Pearle, red Corrall, which doe stirre
                  A fond Desire in Fooles to plunge your Ground
                  Those all (more faire) are to bee had in Her:
                  Pearle, Iuorie, Corrall, Diamond, Sunnes, Gold,
                  Teeth, Necke, Lips, Heart, Eyes, Haire, are to behold.
               
               
                  SON.
                  THat learned Graecian (who did so excell
                  In Knowledge passing Sense, that hee is nam'd
                  Of all the after-Worlds Diuine) doth tell,
                  That at the Time when first our Soules are fram'd,
                  Ere in these Mansions blinde they come to dwell,
                  They liue bright Rayes of that Eternall Light,
                  
                  And others see, know, loue, in Heauens great Hight,
                  Not toylde with ought to Reason doth rebell;
                  Most true it is, for straight at the first Sight
                  My Minde mee told, that in some other Place
                  It elsewhere saw the Idea of that Face,
                  And lou'd a Loue of heauenly pure Delight?
                  No Wonder now I feele so faire a Flame,
                  Sith I Her lou'd ere on this Earth shee came.
               
               
                  
                  SON.
                  NOw while the Night her sable Vaile hath spred,
                  And silently her restie Coach doth rolle,
                  Rowsing with Her from TETHIS azure Bed
                  Those starrie Nymphes which dance about the Pole,
                  While CYNTHIA in purest Cipres cled,
                  The Latmian Shepheard in a Trance descries,
                  And whiles lookes pale from hight of all the Skies,
                  Whiles dyes her Beauties in a bashfull Red,
                  While Sleepe (in Triumph) closed hath all Eyes,
                  And Birds and Beastes a Silence sweet doe keepe,
                  And PROTE vs monstrous People in the Deepe,
                  The Winds and Waues (husht vp) to rest entise,
                  I wake, muse, weepe, and who my Heart hath slaine
                  See still before me to augment my Paine.
               
               
                  SON.
                  
                     SLeepe, Silence Child, sweet Father of soft Rest,
                  Prince whose Approach Peace to all Mortalls brings,
                  Indifferent Host to Shepheards and to Kings,
                  Sole Comforter of Minds with Griefe opprest.
                  Loe, by thy charming Rod all breathing things
                  Lie slumbring, with forgetfulnesse possest,
                  And yet o're me to spred thy drowsie Wings
                  Thou spares (alas) who cannot be thy Guest.
                  Since I am thine, O come, but with that Face
                  To inward Light which thou art wont to show,
                  With fained Solace ease a true felt Woe,
                  Or if deafe God thou doe denie that Grace,
                  Come as thou wilt, and what thou wilt bequeath,
                  I long to kisse the Image of my Death.
                  
               
               
                  
                  SON.
                  FAire Moone who with thy Cold and Siluer Shine
                  Makes sweet the Horrour of the dreadfull Night,
                  
                  Delighting the weake Eye with Smiles diuine,
                  Which PHEBVS dazells with his too much Light.
                  Bright Queene of the first Heauen, if in thy Shrine
                  By turning oft, and Heauenseternall Might,
                  Thou hast not yet that once sweet Fire of thine
                  ENDEMION, forgot, and Louers Plight?
                  If Cause like thine may Pitie breede in thee,
                  And Pitie somewhat els to it obtaine,
                  Since thou hast Power of Dreames as well as Hee
                  Who paints strange Figures in the slumbring Braine:
                  Now while She sleepes in dolefull Guise her Show
                  These Teares, and the blacke Mappe of all my Woe.
               
               
                  SON.
                  LAmpe of Heauens Christall Hall that brings the Hours,
                  Eye-dazaler who makes the vglie Night
                  
                  At thine Approach flie to her slumbrie Bowrs,
                  And fills the World with Wonder and Delight:
                  Life of all Lifes, Death▪giuer by thy Flight
                  To Southerne Pole from these sixe Signes of ours,
                  Gold-smith of all the Starres, with Siluer bright
                  Who Moone enamells, Apelles of the Flowrs.
                  
                     Ah, from those watrie Plaines thy golden Head
                  Raise vp, and bring the so long lingring Morne,
                  
                  A Graue, nay Hell, I finde become this Bed,
                  This Bed so grieuously where I am torne:
                  But (woe is me) though thou now brought the Day,
                  Day shall but serue more Sorrowe to display.
               
               
                  
                  SONG.
                  
                     IT was the time when to our Northerne Pole
                     The brightest Lampe of Heauen beginnes to rolle,
                     When Earth more wanton in new Robes appeareth,
                     And scorning Skies her Flowrs in Raine-bowes beareth,
                     On which the Aire moist Saphires doth bequeath,
                     Which quake to feele the kissing Zephires breath:
                     When Birds from shadie Groues their Loue foorth warble,
                     And Sea like Heauen, Heauen lookes like smoothest Marble,
                     When I, in simple Course, free from all Cares,
                     Farre from the muddie Worlds captiuing Snares,
                     By Oras flowrie Bancks alone did wander,
                     
                        Ora that sports her like to old Meander,
                     
                     A Floud more worthie Fame and lasting Praise
                     Than that which Phaetons Fall so high did raise:
                     Into whose moouing Glasse the Milke-white Lillies
                     Doe dresse their Tresses and the Daffadillies.
                     Where Ora with a Wood is crown'd about
                     And seemes forget the Way how to come out,
                     A Place there is, where a d
                           •…
                        licious Fountaine
                     Springs from the swelling Paps of a proud Mountaine,
                     Whose falling Streames the quiet Caues doe wound,
                     And make the Ecchoes shrill resound that Sound.
                     The Lawrell there the shining Channell graces,
                     The Palme her Loue with long-stretch'd Armes embraces,
                     The Poplar spreds her Branches to the Skie,
                     And hides from sight that azure Cannopie.
                     The Streames the Trees, the Trees their leaues still nourish,
                     That Place graue Winter finds not without Flourish.
                     If liuing Eyes Elysian fields could see
                     This litle Arden might Elysium bee.
                     Here Diane often vsed to repose Her,
                     And Acidalias Queene with Mars reioyce her:
                     
                        The Nymphes oft here doe bring their Maunds with Flowres,
                     And Anadeames weaue for their Paramours,
                     The Satyres in those Shades are heard to languish,
                     And make the Shepheards Partners of their Anguish,
                     The Shepheards who in Barkes of tender Trees
                     Doe graue their Loues, Disdaines, and Ielousies,
                     Which Phillis when there by Her Flockes she feedeth
                     With Pitie whyles, sometime with laughter reedeth.
                  
                  
                     Neare to this place when Sunne in midst of Day,
                     In highest top of Heauen his Coach did stay,
                     And (as aduising) on his Carier glanced
                     The way did rest, the space he had aduanced
                     His panting Steeds along those Fields of light,
                     Most princely looking from that gastly hight:
                     When most the Grashoppers are heard in Meadowes,
                     And loftie Pines haue small, or els no Shadowes,
                     It was my hap, O wofull hap! to bide
                     Where thick
                           •…
                        st Shades me from all Rayes did hide
                     Into a shut-vp-place, some Syluans Chamber,
                     Whose Seeling spred was with the Lockes of Amber
                     Of new-bloom'd Sicamors, Floore wrought with Flowres,
                     More swe
                           •…
                        te and rich than those in Princes Bowres▪
                     
                     Here Adon blush't, and Clitia all amazed
                     Lookt pale, with Him who in the Fountaine gazed,
                     The Aramanthus smyl'd, and that sweet Boy
                     Which sometime was the God of Delos joy:
                     The braue Carnation, speckled Pinke here shined,
                     The Violet her fainting Head declined
                     Beneath a drowsie Chasbow, all of Gold
                     The Marigo
                           •…
                        d her leaues did here vnfold.
                  
                  
                     Now 
                           •…
                        hile that rauish'd with delight and wonder,
                     Halfe in a trance I lay those Archers vnder,
                     
                        The season, silence, place, did all entise
                     Eyes heauie lids to bring Night on their Skies,
                     Which softly hauing stollen themselues together
                     (Like Euening Clouds) me plac'd I wote not whether.
                     As Cowards leaue the Fort which they should keepe
                     My senses one by one gaue place to Sleepe,
                     
                     Who followed with a Troupe of golden Slombers
                     Thrust from my quiet Braine all base Encombers,
                     And thrise me touching with his Rod of Gold,
                     A Heauen of Visions in my Temples roll'd,
                     To countervaile those Pleasures were bereft me,
                     Thus in his silent Prison clos'd he left me.
                  
                  
                     Me thought through all the Neighbour Woods a noyce
                     Of Quiristers, more sweet than Lute or voyce,
                     (For those harmonious sounds to IOVE are giuen
                     By the swift touches of the nyne-string'd Heauen,
                     Such are, and nothing else) did wound mine Eare,
                     No Soule, that then became all Eare to heare:
                     And whilst I listning lay O gastly wonder!
                     I saw a pleasant Mirtle cleaue asunder,
                     A Mirtle great with birth, from whose rent wombe
                     Three naked Nymphes more white than snow foorth come.
                     For Nymphes they seem'd, about their heauenly Faces
                     In Waues of Gold did flow their curling Tresses,
                     About each Arme, their Armes more white than milke,
                     Each weare a blushing Armelet of silke,
                     The Goddesses such were that by Scamander,
                     
                     Appeared to the Phrygian Alexander,
                     
                     
                        Aglaia, and her Sisters such perchance
                     Be, when about some sacred Spring they dance▪
                     
                     But scarce the Groue their naked Beauties graced,
                     And on the amorous Verdure had not traced,
                     
                        When to the Floud they ran, the Floud in Robes
                     Of curling Christall to brests Yuorie Globes
                     Who wrapt them all about, yet seem'd take pleasure
                     To showe warme Snowes throughout her liquid Azure.
                  
                  
                     Looke how Prometheus Man when heauenly Fire
                     First gaue him Breath Dayes Brandon did admire,
                     And wondred of this Worlds Amphitheater,
                     So gaz'd I on those new guests of the Water.
                     All three were faire, yet one excell'd as farre
                     The rest, as Phebus doth the Cyprian Starre,
                     Or Diamonds small Gemmes, or Gemmes doe other,
                     Or Pearles that shining shell is call'd their Mother.
                  
                  
                     Her haire more bright than are the Mornings Beames
                     Hang in a golden shower aboue the Streames,
                     And (sweetly tous'd) her forehead sought to couer,
                     VVhich seene did straight a Skie of Milke discouer,
                     VVith two faire Browes, Loues Bowes, which neuer bend
                     But that a Golden Arrow foorth they send.
                     Beneath the which two burning Planets glancing
                     Flasht Flames of Loue, for Loue there still is dancing.
                     Her either Cheeke resembl'd a blushing Morne,
                     
                     Or Roses Gueules in field of Lillies borne:
                     Betwixt the which a Wall so faire is raised,
                     That it is but abased euen when praised.
                     Her Lips like Rowes of Corrall soft did swell,
                     And th'one like th'other only doth excell:
                     The Tyrian Fish lookes pale, pale looke the Roses,
                     The Rubies pale, when Mouths sweet Cherrie closes.
                     Her Chinne like siluer Phebe did appeare
                     Darke in the midst to make the rest more cleare:
                     Her Necke seem'd fram'd by curious Phidias Master,
                     Most smooth, most white, a piece of Alabaster.
                     
                        Two foaming Billowes flow'd vpon her Brest,
                     VVhich did their tops with Corrall red encrest:
                     There all about as Brookes them sport at leasure,
                     VVith Circling Branches veines did swell in Azure:
                     VVithin those Crookes are only found those Isles
                     
                     VVhich Fortunate the dreaming old World Stiles.
                     The rest the Streames did hide, but as a Lillie
                     Suncke in a Christalls faire transparent Bellie.
                  
                  
                     I, who yet humane weaknesse did not know
                     (For yet I had not felt that Archers Bow,
                     Ne could I thinke that from the coldest Water
                     The winged Youngling burning Flames could scatter)
                     On euery part my vagabounding Sight
                     Did cast, and drowne mine Eyes in sweet Delight.
                     What wondrous Thing is this that Beautie's named
                     (Said I) I finde I heretofore haue dreamed?
                     And neuer knowne in all my flying Dayes
                     Good vnto this, that only merites Praise.
                     My Pleasures haue beene Paines, my Comforts Crosses,
                     My Treasure Pouertie, my Gaines but Losses.
                     O precious Sight! which none doth els descrie
                     Except the burning Sunne, and quiuering I.
                     And yet O deare bought Sight! O would for euer
                     I might enioy you, or had ioy'd you neuer!
                     O happie Floud! if so yee might abide,
                     Yet euer glorie of this Moments Pride,
                     Adjure your Rillets all now to beholde Her,
                     And in their Christall Armes to come and fold Her:
                     And sith yee may not ay your Blisse embrace,
                     Draw thousand Pourtraits of Her on your Face,
                     Pourtraits which in my Heart be more apparent,
                     If like to yours my Brest but were transparent.
                     
                        O that I were while she doth in you play,
                     A Daulphine to transport Her to the Sea,
                     To none of all those Gods I would Her rander
                     From Thule to Inde though I should with Her wander.
                     Oh! what is this? the more I fixe mine Eye,
                     Mine Eye the more new Wonders doth espie,
                     The more I spie, the more in vncouth fashion
                     My Soule is rauish'd in a pleasant Passion.
                  
                  
                     But looke not Eyes, as more I would haue said
                     A Sound of whirling Wheeles me all dismayde,
                     And with the Sound foorth from the timorous Bushes
                     With storme-like Course a sumptuous Chariot rushes,
                     A Chariot all of Gold, the Wheeles were Gold,
                     The Nailes, and Axetree Gold on which it roll'd:
                     The vpmost Part a Scarlet Vaile did couer,
                     More rich than Danaes Lap spred with her Louer:
                     In midst of it in a triumphing Chaire,
                     A Ladie sate miraculously faire,
                     Whose pensiue Countenance, and Lookes of Honor,
                     Doe more allure the Mind that thinketh on Her,
                     Than the most wanton Face and amorous Eyes,
                     That Amathus or flowrie Paphos sees.
                     A Crue of Virgins made a Ring about Her,
                     The Diamond shee, they seeme the Gold without Her.
                     Such Thetis is when to the Billowes rore
                     With Mcrmaids nyce shee danceth on the Shore:
                     So in a sable Night the Sunnes bright Sister
                     Among the lesser twinckling Lights doth glister.
                     Faire Yoakes of Ermelines, whose Colour passe
                     The whitest S
                           •…
                        owes on aged Grampius Face,
                     More swift than Venus B
                           •…
                        rds this Chariot guided
                     To the astonish'd Bancke where as it bided.
                     
                        But long it did not bide, when poore those Streames
                     
                        Aye me! it made, transporting those rich Gemmes,
                     And by that Burthen lighter, swiftly driued
                     Till (as me thought) it at a Towre arriued.
                  
                  
                     Vpon a Rocke of Christall shining cleare
                     Of Diamonds this Castle did appeare,
                     Whose rising Spires of Gold so high them reared
                     That Atlas▪
                         like it seem'd the Heauen they beared.
                     Amidst which Hights on Arches did arise
                     (Arches which guilt Flames brandish to the Skies)
                     Of sparking Topaces, Prowde, Gorgeous, Ample,
                     (Like to a litle Heauen) a sacred Temple:
                     VVhose Walls no Windowes haue, nay all the Wall
                     Is but one Window, Night there doth not fall
                     More when the Sunne to Westerne World▪ declineth,
                     Than in our Zenith when at Noone He shineth.
                     Two flaming Hills the Passage strait defend
                     Which to this radiant Building doth ascend,
                     Vpon whose Arching tops on a Pilastre
                     A Port stands open, rais'd in Loues Disastre,
                     For none that narrow Bridge and Gate can passe,
                     VVho haue their Faces seene in Venus Glasse.
                     If those within, but to come foorth doe venter,
                     That stately Place againe they neuer enter.
                     The Precinct strengthened with a Ditch appeares,
                     In which doth swell a Lake of Inkie Teares
                     Of madding Louers, who abide there moning,
                     And thicken euen the Aire with piteous Groning.
                     This Hold (to braue the Skies) the Destines fram'd,
                     The World the Fort of Chastitie it nam'd.
                     The Queene of the third Heauen once to appall it,
                     The God of Thrace here brought who could not thrall it,
                     
                        For which he vow'd ne're Armes more to put on,
                     And on Riphean Hills was heard to grone.
                     Here Psyches Louer hurles his Darts at randon,
                     Which all for nought him serue as doth his Brandon.
                  
                  
                     VVhat bitter Anguish did inuade my Minde,
                     VVhen in that Place my Hope I saw confinde,
                     VVhere with high-towring Thoughts Ionely reacht Her,
                     VVhich did burne vp their Wings when they approacht Her?
                     Mee thought I set me by a Cypresse Shade,
                     And Night and Day the Hyacinthe there reade:
                     And that bewa
                           •…
                        ling Nightingalles did borrow
                     Plaints of my Plaint, and Sorrowes of my Sorrow.
                     My Food was W
                           •…
                        rmewood, mine owne Teares my Drinke,
                     My Rest on Death, and sad Mishaps to thinke.
                     And for such Thoughts to haue my Heart enlarged,
                     And ease mine Eyes 
                           •…
                        ith brinie Tribute charged,
                     Ouer a Brooke (me thought) my pining Face
                     I laid, which then (as grieu'd at my Disgrace)
                     A Face Me shew'd againe so ouer-clouded,
                     That at the Sight mine Eyes afray'd them shrowded.
                     This is the guerdon Loue, this is the Gaine
                     In end which to thy Seruants doth remaine,
                     I would haue said, when Feare made Sleepe to leaue me,
                     And of those fatall Shadowes did bereaue me.
                     But ah alas! in stead to dreame of Loue,
                     And Woes, mee made them in effect to proue,
                     For what into my troubled Braine was painted,
                     I waking found that Time, and Place presented.
                  
               
               
                  
                  SON.
                  
                     AH burning Thoughts now let me take some Rest,
                  And your tumultuous Broyles a while appease,
                  Is't not enough, Starres, Fortune, Loue molest
                  Me all at once, but yee must to displease?
                  Let Hope (though false) yet lodge within my Brest,
                  My high Attempt (though dangerous) yet praise,
                  What though I trace not right Heauens steppie Wayes?
                  It doth suffice, my Fall shall make me blest.
                  I doe not doate on Dayes, nor feare not Death,
                  
                  So that my Life be braue, what though not long?
                  Let me Renown'd liue from the vulgare Throng,
                  And when yee list (Heauens) take this borrowed Breath.
                  Men but like Visions are, Time all doth claime,
                  He liues, who dies to winne a lasting Name.
               
               
                  MADRIGALL.
                  
                     ADEDALE of my Death,
                  Now I resemble that subtile Worme on Earth
                  VVhich prone to its owne euill can take no rest.
                  For with strange Thoughts possest,
                  I feede on fading Leaues
                  Of Hope, which me deceaues,
                  And thousand Webs doth warpe within my Brest▪
                  
                  And thus in end vnto my selfe I weaue
                  A fast-shut Prison, no, but euen a Graue.
               
               
                  
                  SEXTAIN.
                  
                     THe Heauen doth not containe so many Starres,
                     
                     So many Leaues not prostrate lie in Woods,
                     
                     VVhen Autumne's old, and Boreas sounds his Warres,
                     
                     So many Waues haue not the Ocean Floods,
                     
                     As my rent Mind hath Torments all the Night,
                     
                     And Heart spends Sighes, when PHE
                              •…
                           VS brings the Light.
                     
                  
                  
                     VVhy should I beene a Partner of the Light?
                     
                     Who crost in Birth by bad Aspects of Starres,
                     
                     Haue neuer since had happie Day nor Night,
                     
                     VVhy was not I a Liuer in the Woods,
                     
                     Or Citizen of THETIS Christall Floods,
                     
                     Than made a Man, for Loue and Fortunes Warres?
                     
                  
                  
                     I looke each Day when Death should ende the Warres,
                     
                     Vnciuill Warres, twixt Sense and Reasons Light,
                     
                     My Paines I count to Mountaines, Meads, and Floods,
                     
                     And of my Sorrow Partners makes the Starres,
                     
                     All desolate I haunt the fearfull Woods
                     
                     VVhen I should giue my selfe to Rest at Night.
                     
                  
                  
                     VVith watchfull Eyes I ne're beholde the Night,
                     
                     Mother of Peace, but ah to me of Warres,
                     
                     And CYNTHIA Queene like shining through the Woods,
                     
                     VVhen straight those Lamp
                           •…
                         come in my Thought, whose Light
                     
                     My Iudgement dazel'd, passing brightest Starres,
                     
                     And then mine Eyes en-isle themselues with Floods.
                     
                  
                  
                     Turne to their Springs againe first shall the Floods,
                     
                     Cleare shall the Sunne the sad and gloomie Night,
                     
                     To dance about the Pole cease shall the Starres,
                     
                     
                        The Elements renew their ancient Warres
                     
                     Shall first, and bee depriu'd of Place and Light,
                     
                     Ere I finde Rest in Citie, F
                           •…
                        elds, or Woods.
                     
                  
                  
                     Ende these my Dayes Endwellers of the Woods,
                     
                     Take this my Life yee deepe and raging Floods,
                     
                     Sunne neuer rise to cleare mee with thy Light,
                     
                     
                        Horror and Darknesse keepe a lasting Night,
                     
                     Consume me Care with thy intestine Warres,
                     
                     And stay your Influence o're me bright Starres.
                     
                  
                  
                     In vaine the Starres, Endwellers of the Woods,
                     
                     Care, Horror, Warres I call and raging Floods,
                     
                     For all haue sworne no Night shall dimme my Sight.
                     
                  
               
               
                  SON.
                  O Sacred Blush impurpling Cheekes pure Skies,
                  With crimson Wings which spred thee like the Morne,
                  
                  O bashfull Looke sent from those shining Eyes,
                  Which (though cast down on Earth) couldst Heauen adorne!
                  O Tongue in which most lushious Nectar lies,
                  That can at once both blesse and make forlorne,
                  Deare Corrall Lip which Beautie beautifies,
                  That trembling stood ere that her words were borne.
                  And you her Words, Words no, but Golden Chaines
                  Which did captiue mine Eares, ensnare my Soule,
                  Wise Image of her Minde, Minde that containes
                  A Power all Power of Senses to controule:
                  Yee all from Loue disswade so sweetly mee,
                  That I loue more, if more my Loue could bee.
               
               
                  
                  SON.
                  NOr Arne, nor Mincius, nor stately Tyber,
                  
                  
                     Sebethus, nor the Floud into whose Streames
                  He fell who burnt the World with borrow'd Beames,
                  Gold-rolling Tagus, Munda, famous Iber;
                  
                  
                     Sorgue, Rosne, Loire, Garron, nor prowd-banked Seine,
                  
                  
                     Peneus, Phasis, Xant
                           •…
                        us, humble Ladon,
                  
                  Nor Shee whose Nymphes excell her who lou'd Adon
                  
                  Faire Tamesis, nor Ister large, nor R
                           •…
                        eine,
                  
                  
                     Euphrates, Tigris, I
                           •…
                        dus, Hermus, Gange,
                  
                  Pearlie Hydaspes, Serpent-like Meander,
                  
                  The Golfe bereft sweet Hero her Leander,
                  
                  
                     Nile that farre farre his hidden Head doth range,
                  Haue euer had so rare a Cause of Praise,
                  As Ora, where this Northerne Phenix stayes.
               
               
                  SON.
                  TO heare my Plaints faire Riuer Christalline
                  Thou in a silent Slumber seemes to stay,
                  Delicious Flowrs, Lillie and Columbine,
                  Yee bowe your Heades when I my Woes display.
                  Forrests, in you the Mirtle, Palme, and Bay,
                  
                  Haue had compassion listning to my Grones,
                  The Winds with Sighes haue solemniz'd my Mones
                  Mong Leaues, which whisper'd what they could not say.
                  The Caues, the Rockes, the Hills the Syluans Thrones
                  (As if euen Pitie did in them appeare)
                  Haue at my Sorrowes rent their ruethlesse Stones,
                  Each thing I finde hath sense except my Deare
                  Who doth not thinke I loue, or will not know
                  My Griefe, perchance delighting in my Woe.
               
               
                  
                  SON.
                  SWeet Brooke, in whose cleare Christall I mine Eyes
                  Haue oft seene great in Labour of their Teares,
                  Enamell'd Banke, whose shining Grauell beares
                  These sad Characters of my Miseries.
                  High Woods, whose mounting Tops menace the Spheares,
                  Wild Citizens, Amphions of the Trees,
                  You gloomie Groues at hottest Noones which freeze,
                  
                     Elysian Shades which Phebus neuer cleares,
                  Vaste solitarie Mountaines, pleasant Plaines,
                  Embrodred Meads that Ocean-wayes you reach,
                  Hills, Dales, Springs, all that my sad Cry constraines
                  To take part of my Plaints, and learne Woes Speach,
                  Will that remorselesse Faire e're Pitie show,
                  Of Grace now answere if yee ought know? No.
                  
               
               
                  SON.
                  WIth flaming Hornes the Bull now brings the Yeare,
                  Melt doe the horride Mountaines Helmes of Snow,
                  The siluer Flouds in pearlie Channels flow,
                  The late-bare Woods greene Anadeams doe weare.
                  The Nightingall forgetting Winters Woe,
                  Calls vp the lazie Morne her Notes to heare,
                  Those Flowrs are spred which Names of Princes beare,
                  
                  Some red, some azure, white, and golden grow.
                  Here lowes a Heifer, there bea-wailing st
                        •…
                     ayes
                  A harmelesse Lambe, not farre a Stag rebounds,
                  The Sheepe-heards sing to grazing Flockes sweet Layes,
                  And all about the Ecchoing Aire resounds.
                  Hills, Dales, Woods, Flouds, & euery thing doth change,
                  But Shee in Rigour, I in Loue am strange.
               
               
                  
                  SON.
                  WHen Nature now had wonderfully wrought
                  All AVRISTELLAS Parts, except her Eyes,
                  To make those Twinnes two Lamps in Beauties Skies,
                  Shee Counsell of her starrie Senate sought.
                  
                     Mars and Apollo first did Her aduise
                  In Colour Blacke to wrappe those Comets bright,
                  That Loue him so might soberly disguise,
                  And vnperceiued Wound at euery Sight.
                  Chaste PHEBE spake for purest azure Dyes,
                  But IOVE and VENVS greene about the Light
                  To frame thought best, as bringing most Delight,
                  That to pin'd Hearts Hope might 
                        •…
                     or ay arise:
                  
                     Nature (all said) a Paradise of Greene
                  There plac'd, to make all loue which haue them seene.
               
               
                  MAD.
                  To the delightfull Greene
                  Of you faire radiant Eine,
                  Let each Blacke yeeld beneath the starrie Arche.
                  Eyes, burnisht Heauens of Loue,
                  
                  Sinople Lampes of Ioue,
                  
                  Saue that those Hearts which with your Flames yee parche
                  Two burning Sunnes you proue,
                  All other Eyes compar'd with you (deare Lights)
                  Bee Hells, or if not Hells yet dumpish Nights.
                  The Heauens (if we their Glasse
                  The Sea▪beleeue) bee greene, not perfect blew.
                  They all make faire what euer faire yet was,
                  And they bee faire because they looke like you.
               
               
                  
                  SON.
                  IN vaine I haunt the colde and siluer Springs,
                  To quench the Feuer burning in my Vaines,
                  In vaine (Loues Pilgrime) Mountaines, Dales, and Plaines,
                  I ouer-runne, vaine Helpe long Absence brings▪
                  
                  In vaine (my Friends) your Counsell me constraines
                  To flie, and place my Thoughts on other Things,
                  
                     Ah! like the Bird that fired hath her Wings,
                  The more I moue, the greater are my Paines.
                  
                     Desire (alas) Desire a Zeuxis new,
                  From Indies borrowing Gold from Westerne Skies
                  Most bright Cynoper, sets before mine Eyes
                  In euery Place, her Haire, sweet Looke and Hew:
                  That flie, runne, rest I, all doth proue but vaine,
                  My Life lies in those Lookes which haue me slaine.
               
               
                  SON.
                  ALl other Beauties how so e're they shine
                  In Haires more bright than is the golden Ore,
                  Or Cheekes more faire than fairest Eglantine,
                  
                  Or Hands like Hers who comes the Sunne before:
                  Match'd with that Heauenly Hue, and Shape diuine,
                  With those deare Starres which my weake Thoughts adore,
                  Looke but like Shaddowes, or if they bee more,
                  It is in that that they are like to thine.
                  Who sees those Eyes, their Force and doth not proue,
                  Who gazeth on the Dimple of that Chinne,
                  And findes not Venus Sonne entrench'd therein,
                  Or hath not Sense, or knowes not what is Loue.
                  To see thee had Narcissus had the Grace,
                  Hee sure had died with wondring on thy Face.
               
               
                  
                  SON.
                  MY Teares may well Numidian Lions tame,
                  And Pitie breede into the hardest Hart
                  That euer Pirrha did to Maide impart,
                  When Shee them first of blushing Rockes did frame.
                  
                     Ah Eyes which only serue to waile my Smart,
                  How long will you mine inward Woes proclaime?
                  Let it suffice you beare a weeping Part
                  All Night, at Day though yee doe not the same:
                  Cease idle Sighes to spend your Stormes in vaine,
                  And these calme secret Shades more to molest,
                  Containe you in the Prison of my Brest,
                  You not doe ease but aggrauate my Paine,
                  Or (if burst foorth you must?) that Tempest moue
                  In Sight of Her whome I so dearely loue.
               
               
                  SON.
                  
                     NYmphes, Sister Nymphes which haunt this christall Brooke,
                  And (happie) in these Floting Bowrs abide,
                  Where trembling Roofes of Trees from Sunne you hide,
                  Which make Ideall Woods in euery Crooke,
                  Whether yee Garlands for your Lockes prouide,
                  Or pearlie Letters seeke in sandie Booke,
                  Or count your Loues when Thetis was a Bride?
                  Lift vp your golden Heads and on mee looke.
                  Read in mine Eyes mine agonizing Cares,
                  And what yee read recount to Her againe:
                  
                     Faire Nymph
                           •…
                        s, say all th
                        •…
                     se Streames are but my Teares,
                  And if Shee aske you how they sweet remaine,
                  Tell that the bittrest Teares which Eyes can powre,
                  When shed for Her doe cease more to be sowre.
               
               
                  
                  MAD.
                  LIke the Idalian Queene
                  Her Haire about her Eyne,
                  With Necke and Brests ripe Apples to be seene,
                  At first Glance of the Mo
                           •…
                        ne
                  
                  In Cyprus Gardens gathering those faire Flowrs
                  VVhich of her Bloud were borne,
                  I saw, but fainting saw, my Paramours.
                  The Graces naked danc'd about the Place,
                  The Winds and Trees amaz'd
                  VVith Silence on Her gaz'd,
                  The Flowrs did smile, like those vpon her Face,
                  And as their Aspine Stalkes those Fingers band,
                  (That Shee might read my Case)
                  A Hyacinth I wisht mee in her Hand.
               
               
                  SON.
                  THen is Shee gone? O Foole and Coward I!
                  O good Occasion lost, ne're to bee found!
                  What fatall Chaines haue my dull Senses bound
                  When best they may that they not Fortune trie?
                  Here is the flowrie Bed where Shee did lie,
                  With Roses here Shee stellified the Ground,
                  
                     Shee fix'd her Eyes on this (yet smyling) Pond,
                  Nor Time, nor courteous Place seem'd ought denie.
                  Too long, too long (Respect) I doe embrace
                  Your Counsell, full of Threats and sharpe Disdaine,
                  Disdaine in her sweet Heart can haue no Place,
                  And though come there, must straight retire againe:
                  Hencefoorth Respect farewell, I oft heare tolde
                  Who liues in Loue can neuer bee too bolde.
               
               
                  
                  SON.
                  IN Minds pure Glasse when I my selfe behold,
                  And viuely see how my best Dayes are spent,
                  What Clouds of Care aboue my Head are roll'd,
                  What comming Harmes, which I can not preuent:
                  My begunne Course I (wearied) doe repent,
                  And would embrace what Reason oft hath told,
                  But scarce thus thinke I, when Loue hath controld
                  All the best Reasons Reason could inuent.
                  Though sure I know my Labours End is Griefe,
                  The more I striue that I the more shall pine,
                  That only Death can be my last Reliefe:
                  Yet when I thi
                        •…
                     ke vpon that Face diuine,
                  Like one with Arrow shot in Laughters Place,
                  Malgre my Heart I ioye in my Disgrace.
               
               
                  SON.
                  DEare Quirister, who from those Shaddowes sends
                  (Ere that the blushing Dawne dare show her Light)
                  Such sad lamenting Straines, that Night attends
                  Become all Eare, Starres stay to heare thy Plight.
                  If one whose Griefe euen Reach of Thought transcends,
                  Who ne're (not in a Dreame) did taste Delight,
                  May thee importune who like Case pretends,
                  And seemes to ioy in Woe, in Woes Despight?
                  Tell me (so may thou Fortune milder trie,
                  And long long sing) for what thou thus complaines?
                  Sith (Winter gone) the Sunne in dapled Skie
                  Now smiles on Meadowes, Mountaines, Woods and Plaines:
                  The Bird, as if my questions did her moue,
                  With trembling Wings sobb'd foorth I loue, I loue.
                  
               
               
                  
                  SON.
                  TRust not sweet Soule those curled Wa
                        •…
                     s of Gold
                  With gentle Tides which on your Temples flow,
                  Nor Temples spread with Flackes of Virgine Snow,
                  Nor Snow of Cheekes with Tyrian Graine enroll'd.
                  Trust not those shining Lights which wrought my Woe,
                  When first I did their burning Rayes beholde,
                  Nor Voyce, whose Sounds more strange Effects doe show
                  Than of the Thracian Harper haue beene tolde:
                  Looke to this dying Lill
                           •…
                        e, fading Rose,
                  
                  Darke Hyacinthe, of late whose blushing Beames
                  Made all the neighbouring Herbes and Grasse reioyce,
                  And thinke how litle is twixt Lifes Extreames:
                  The cruell Tyrant that did kill those Flowrs,
                  Shall once (aye mee) not spare that Spring of yours.
               
               
                  SON.
                  THat I so slenderly set foorth my Minde,
                  Writing I wote not what in ragged Rimes,
                  And charg'd with Brasse into these golden Times
                  When others towre so high am left behinde:
                  I craue not PHEBVS leaue his sacred Cell
                  To binde my Browes with fresh Aonian Bayes,
                  Let them haue that who tuning sweetest Layes
                  By Tempe sit, or Aganippe Well,
                  Nor yet to Venus Tree doe I aspire,
                  Sith Shee for whome I might affect that Praise,
                  My best Attempts with cruell Words gainsayes,
                  And I seeke not that Others me admire.
                  Of weeping Myrrhe the Crowne is which I craue,
                  With a sad Cypresse to adorne my Graue.
               
               
                  
                  SON.
                  SOund hoarse sad Lute, true Witnesse of my Woe,
                  And striue no more to ease selfe▪ chosen Paine
                  With Soule-enchanting Sounds, your Accents straine
                  Vnto these Teares vncessantly which flow.
                  Shrill Treeble weepe, and you dull Basses show
                  Your Masters Sorrow in a deadly Vaine,
                  
                  Let neuer ioyfull Hand vpon you goe,
                  Nor Consort keepe but when you doe complaine.
                  Flie Phoebus Rayes, nay, hate the irkesome Light,
                  Woods solitarie Shades for thee are best,
                  Or the blacke Horrours of the blackest Night,
                  When all the World (saue Thou and I) doth rest:
                  Then sound sad Lute, and beare a mourning Part,
                  Thou Hell may'st mooue, though not a Womans Heart.
                  
               
               
                  SON.
                  YOu restlesse Seas, appease your roaring Waues,
                  And you who raise hudge Mountaines in that Plaine
                  Aires Trumpeters, your blustring Stormes restraine,
                  And listen to the Plaints my Griefe doth cause.
                  Eternall Lights, though adamantine Lawes
                  Of Destin
                        •…
                     es to mooue still you ordaine,
                  Turne hitherward your Eyes, your Axetree pause,
                  And wonder at the Torments I sustaine.
                  
                     Earth (if thou bee not dull'd by my Disgrace,
                  And senselesse made?) now aske those Powers aboue
                  Why they so crost a Wretch brought on thy Face?
                  Fram'd for Mis-hap, th'Anachorite of Loue,
                  And bid them if they would moe AETNAS burne,
                  In Rhodopee or Erimanthe mee turne.
               
               
                  
                  SON.
                  WHat cruell Starre into this World mee brought?
                  What gloomie Day did dawne to giue mee Light?
                  What vnkinde Hand to nourse mee (Orphane) sought,
                  And would not leaue mee in eternall Night?
                  What thing so deare as I hath Essence bought?
                  The Elements, drie, humid, heauie, light,
                  The smallest liuing things by Nature wrought,
                  Bee freed of Woe if they haue small Delight.
                  
                     Ah only I, abandon'd to Despaire,
                  
                  Nail'd to my Torments, in pale Horrours Shade,
                  Like wandring Clouds see all my Comforts fled,
                  And Euill on Euill with Hours my Life impaire:
                  The Heauen and Fortune which were wont to turne,
                  Fixt in one Mansion staye to cause mee mourne.
               
               
                  SON.
                  DEare Eye which daign'st on this sad Monument
                  
                  The sable Scroule of my Mis-haps to view,
                  Though with the mourning Muses Teares besprent,
                  And darkly drawne, which is not fain'd, but true,
                  If thou not dazell'd with a Heauenly Hue,
                  And comely Feature, didst not yet lament?
                  But happie liu'st vnto thy selfe content,
                  O let not Loue thee to his Lawes subdue.
                  Looke on the wofull Shipwracke of my Youth,
                  And let my Ruines for a Phare thee serue
                  To shunne this Rocke Capharean of Vntrueth,
                  And serue no God who doth his Church-men sterue:
                  His Kingdome is but Plaints, his Guerdon Teares,
                  What hee giues more are Iealousies and Feares.
               
               
                  
                  SON.
                  IF crost with all Mil haps bee my poore Life,
                  If one short Day I neuer spent in Mirth,
                  If my Spright with it selfe holds lasting Strife,
                  If Sorrowes Death is but new Sorrowes Birth?
                  If this vaine World bee but a sable Stage
                  Where slaue-borne Man playes to the scoffing Starres,
                  If Youth bee toss'd with Loue, with Weaknesse Age,
                  If Knowledge serueto holde our Thoughts in Warres?
                  If Time can close the hundreth Mouths of Fame,
                  
                  And make what long since past, like that to bee,
                  If Vertue only bee an idle Name,
                  
                  If I when I was bome was borne to die?
                  Why seeke I to prolong these loathsome Dayes,
                  The fairest Rose in shortest time decayes?
               
               
                  SON.
                  LEt Fortune triumph now, and Iö sing,
                  Sith I must fall beneath this Load of Care,
                  Let Her what most I prize of eu'rie Thing
                  Now wicked Trophees in her Temple reare.
                  Shee who high Palmie Empires doth not spare,
                  And tramples in the Dust the prowdest King,
                  Let Her vaunt how my Blisse Shee did impaire,
                  To what low Ebbe Shee now my Flow doth bring.
                  Let Her count how (a new Ixion) Mee
                  Shee in her Wheele did turne, how high nor low
                  I neuer stood, but more to tortur'd bee:
                  Weepe Soule, weepe plaintfull Soule, thy Sorrowes know,
                  Weepe, of thy Teares till a blacke Riuer swell,
                  Which may C
                           •…
                        cytus be to this thy Hell.
               
               
                  
                  SON.
                  O Cruell Beautie, Meekenesse inhumaine,
                  That Night and day contend with my Desire,
                  And seeke my Hope to kill, not quench my Fire,
                  By Death, not Baulme to ease my pleasant Paine.
                  Though yee my Thoughts tread downe which would aspire,
                  And bound my Blisse, doe not (alas) disdaine
                  That I your matchlesse Worth and Grace admire,
                  And for their Cause these Torments sharpe sustaine.
                  Let great Empedocles vaunt of his Death
                  Found in the midst of those Sicylian Flames,
                  And Phaëton that Heauen him r
                        •…
                     ft of Bre
                        •…
                     th,
                  And Daedals Sonne He nam'd the Samian Streames:
                  Their Haps I enuie not, my Praise shall bee,
                  The fairest Shee that liu'd gaue Death to mee.
               
               
                  SON.
                  THe Hyperborean Hills, Ceraunus Snow,
                  Or 
                        
                           〈◊〉
                        
                      (cruell) fi
                        •…
                     st thee bred,
                  The Caspian Tigers with their Milke thee fed,
                  And Faunes did humane Bloud on thee bestow.
                  Fierce Orithyas Lo
                        •…
                     er in thy Bed
                  Thee lull'd asleepe, where he enrag'd doth blow,
                  Thou didst not drinke the Flouds which here doe flow,
                  But T
                        •…
                     ares, or those by ycie Tanais Hed.
                  Sith thou disdaines my Loue, neglects my Griefe,
                  Laughs at my Grones, and still affects my Death,
                  Of thee, nor Heauen I'll seeke no more Reliefe,
                  Nor longer entertaine this loathsome Breath,
                  But yeeld vnto my Starre, that thou mayst proue,
                  What Losse thou hadst in losing such a Loue,
               
               
                  
                  SONG.
                  
                     PHoebus arise,
                  And paint the sable Skies
                  VVith azure, white, and Red:
                  Rowse Memmons Mother from her Tythons Bed,
                  That Shee thy Cariere may with Roses spred,
                  The Nightingalles thy Comming each where sing,
                  Make an eternall Spring,
                  Giue L
                        •…
                     fe to this darke World which lieth dead.
                  Spreade foorth thy golden Haire
                  In larger Lockes than thou wast wont before,
                  And Emperour-like decore
                  VVith Diademe of Pearle thy Temples faire:
                  Chase hence the vglie Night
                  
                  VVhich serues but to make deare thy glorious Light.
                  This is that happie Morne,
                  That Day long wished Day,
                  Of all my Life so darke,
                  (If cruell Starres haue not my Ruine sworne,
                  And Fates not Hope betray?)
                  VVhich (only white) deserues
                  A Diamond for euer should it marke:
                  This is the Morne should bring vnto this Groue
                  My Loue, to heare, and recompense my loue.
                  Faire King who all preserues,
                  But show thy blushing Beames,
                  And thou two sweeter Eyes
                  
                  Shalt s
                        •…
                     e than those which by Peneus Streames
                  Did once thy Heart surprise:
                  Nay, Sunnes, which shine as cleare
                  As thou when two thou did to Rome appeare.
                  Now Flora decke thy selfe in fairest Guise,
                  
                     If that yee, Winds, would heare
                  A Voyce surpassing farre Amphions Lyre,
                  Your stormie chiding stay,
                  Let Zephyre only breath,
                  And with her Tresses play,
                  Kissing sometimes these purple Ports of Death.
                  The Windes all silent are,
                  And Phoebus in his Chaire
                  Ens
                        •…
                     ffroning Sea and Aire,
                  Makes van
                        •…
                     sh euery Starre:
                  
                     Night like a Drunkard r
                        •…
                     eles
                  Beyond the Hills to sh
                        •…
                     nne his flaming Wheeles.
                  The Fields with Flowrs are deckt in euery Hue,
                  The Clouds bespangle with bright Gold their Blew:
                  Here is the pleasant Place
                  And eu'ry thing, saue Her, who all should grace.
               
               
                  SON.
                  WHo hath not seene into her saffron Bed
                  The Mornings Goddesse mildly Her repose,
                  Or Her of whose pure Bloud first sprang the Rose,
                  Lull'd in a Slumber by a Mi
                        •…
                     tle Shade.
                  Who hath not seene that sleeping White and Red
                  Makes Phoebe looke so pale. which Shee did close
                  In that Iönian Hill, to ease her Woes,
                  Which only liues by Nectare Kisses fed:
                  Come but and see my Ladie sweetly sleepe,
                  The sighing Rubies of those heauenly Lips,
                  The Cupids which Brests golden Apples keepe,
                  Those Eyes which shine in midst of their Ecclipse,
                  And Hee them all shall see (perhaps) and proue
                  
                     Shee waking but perswades, now forceth Loue.
               
               
                  
                  SON.
                  OF Cithereas Birds that milke-white paire
                  On yonder leauie Mirtle Tree which grone,
                  And waken with their kisses in the Aire
                  Enamour'd Zephyres murmuring one by one,
                  If thou but Sense hadst like Pigmalions Stone?
                  Or hadst not seene Medusas snakie haire,
                  
                     Loues Lessons thou mightst learne? and learne sweete Faire,
                  To Summers Heat ere that thy Spring bee growne.
                  And if those kissing Louers seeme but Cold,
                  Looke how that Elme this Iuie doth embrace,
                  And bindes, and claspes with many a wanton Fold,
                  And courting Sleepe o'reshadowes all the Place:
                  Nay seemes to say, deare Tree we shall not parte,
                  In Signe whereof loe in each Leafe a Heart.
                  
               
               
                  SON.
                  THe Sunne is faire when hee with crimson Crowne,
                  And flaming Rubies leaues his Easterne Bed,
                  Faire is Thaumantias in her christall Gowne
                  When Clouds engemm'd hang azure, greene, and Red.
                  To Westerne Worlds when wearied Day goes downe,
                  And from Heauens Windowes each Starre showes her Hed,
                  
                     Earths silent Daughter Night is faire, though browne,
                  Faire is the Moone though in Loues Liuerie cled.
                  Faire Chloris is when Shee doth paint Aprile,
                  Faire are the Meads, the Woods, the Flouds are faire,
                  Faire looketh Ceres with her yellow Haire,
                  And Apples Queene when Rose-cheekt Shee doth smile.
                  That Heauen, and Earth, and Seas are faire is true,
                  Yet true that all not please so much as you.
               
               
                  
                  MAD.
                  WHen as shee smiles I finde
                  More light before mine Eyes,
                  Nor when the Sunne from Inde
                  
                  Brings to our World a flowrie Paradise:
                  But when shee gently weepes,
                  And powres foorth pearlie Showres,
                  On Checkes faire blushing Flowres,
                  A sweet Melancholie my Senses keepes.
                  Both feede so my Disease,
                  So much both doe me please,
                  That oft I doubt, which more my Heart doth burne,
                  Like Loue to see her smile, or Pitie mourne.
               
               
                  SON.
                  SLide soft faire FORTH, and make a christall Plaine,
                  Cut your white Lockes, and on your foamie Face
                  Let not a Wrinckle bee, when you embrace
                  The Boat that Earths Perfections doth containe.
                  
                     Windes wonder, and through wondring holde your Peace,
                  Or if that yee your Hearts cannot restraine
                  From sending Sighes, mou'd by a Louers Case,
                  
                  Sigh, and in her faire Haire your selues enchaine:
                  Or take these Sighes which Absence makes arise
                  From mine oppressed Brest and waue the Sailes,
                  Or some sweet Breath new brought from Paradise:
                  
                  
                     Flouds seeme to smile, Loue o're the Winds preuailes,
                  And yet hudge Waues arise, the Cause is this,
                  The Ocean striues with FORTH the Boate to kisse.
               
               
                  
                  SON.
                  
                     AH! who can see those Fruites of Paradise,
                  
                  Celestiall Cherries which so sweetly swell
                  That Sweetnesse selfe confinde there seemes to dwell,
                  And all those sweetest Parts about despise?
                  
                     Ah! who can see and feele no Flame surprise
                  His hardened Heart? for mee (alas) too well
                  I know their Force, and how they doe excell,
                  Now burne I through Desire, now doe I freeze:
                  I die (deare Life) vnlesse to mee bee giuen
                  As many Kisses as the Spring hath Flowrs,
                  Or as the siluer Drops of Iris Showrs,
                  Or as the Starres in all▪ embracing Heauen,
                  And if displeas'd yee of the Match complaine,
                  Yee shall haue leaue to take them backe againe.
               
               
                  SON.
                  IS't not enough (aye mee) mee thus to see
                  Like some Heauen-banish'd Ghost still wailing goe?
                  A Shadow which your Rayes doe only show,
                  To vexe mee more, vnlesse yee bid mee die?
                  What could yee worse allotte vnto your Foe?
                  But die will I, so yee will not denie
                  That Grace to mee which mortall Foes euen trie,
                  
                     To chuse what sort of Death should ende my Woe.
                  
                  One Time I found when as yee did mee kisse,
                  Yee gaue my panting Soule so sweet a Touch,
                  That halfe I sown'd in midst of all my Blisse,
                  I doe but craue my Deaths Wound may bee such▪
                  
                  For though by Griefe I die not and Annoy,
                  Is't not enough to die through too much Ioy?
               
               
                  
                  MAD.
                  SWeete Rose whence is this Hue
                  VVhich doth all Hues excell?
                  VVhence this most fragrant Smell?
                  And whence this Forme and gracing Grace in you?
                  In flowrie Paestums Field (perhaps) yee grew,
                  Or Hyblas Hills you bred,
                  Or odoriferous Ennas Plaines you fed,
                  Or Tmolus, or where Bore yong Adon slew,
                  Or hath the Queene of Loue you dy'd of new
                  In that deare Bloud, which makes you looke so red?
                  No, none of those, but Cause more high you blist,
                  My Ladies Brest you bare, and Lips you kist.
               
               
                  SON.
                  SHee whose faire flowrs no Autumne makes decay,
                  Whose Hue celestiall, earthly Hues doth staine,
                  Into a pleasant odoriferous Plaine
                  Did walke alone, to braue the P
                        •…
                     ide of Maye:
                  
                  And whilst through chekred Lists shee made her Way,
                  Which smil'd about her Sight to entertaine,
                  
                     Loe (vnawares) where Loue did hid remaine
                  Shee spide, and sought to make of him her Prey:
                  For which of golden Lockes a fairest Haire
                  (To binde the Boy) shee tooke, But hee afraid
                  At her Approach sprang swiftly in the Aire,
                  And mounting 
                        •…
                     arre from Reach look'd backe and said,
                  Why shouldst thou (Sweet) me seeke in Chaines to binde,
                  Sith in thine Eyes I dayly am confinde.
               
               
                  
                  MAD.
                  ON this colde World of Ours,
                  Flowre of the Seasons, Season of the Flowrs,
                  Sonne of the Sunne sweet Spring,
                  
                  Such hote and burning Dayes why doest th
                        •…
                     u bring?
                  Is this for that those high Eternall Pow'rs
                  Flash downe that Fire this All enuironing?
                  Or that now Phoebus keepes his Sisters Spheare?
                  Or doth some Phaēton
                  
                  Enflame the Sea and Aire?
                  Or rather is it (Vsher of the Yeare)
                  For that last Day amongst thy Flowrs alone
                  Vnmask'd thou saw'st my Faire?
                  And whilst thou on her gaz'd shee did thee burne,
                  And in thy Brother Summer doth thee turne.
               
               
                  SON.
                  DEare Wood, and you sweet solitarie Place,
                  Where from the vulgare I estranged liue,
                  Contented more with what your Shades mee giue,
                  Than if I had what Thetis doth embrace:
                  What snakie Eye growne iealous of my Peace,
                  Now from your silent Horrours would mee driue?
                  When Sunne progressing in his glorious Race
                  Beyond the Twinnes, doth neare our Pole arriue.
                  What sweet Delight a quiet Life affords,
                  And what it is to bee of Bondage free,
                  Farre from the madding Worldlings hoarse Discords,
                  Sweet flowrie Place I first did learne of thee:
                  Ah! if I were mine owne, your deare Resorts
                  I would not change with Princes stately Courts.
                  
               
               
                  
                  SEXTAIN.
                  
                     SIth gone is my Delight and only Pleasure,
                     
                     The last of all my Hopes, the chearfull Sunne
                     
                     That clear'd my Lifes darke Day, Natures sweet Treasure,
                     
                     More deare to mee than all beneath the Moone,
                     
                     VVhat resteth now, but that vpon this Mountaine
                     
                     I weepe, till Heauen transforme mee in a Fountaine?
                     
                  
                  
                     Fresh, faire, delicious, christall, pearlie Fountaine,
                     
                     On whose smoothe Face to looke shee oft tooke Pleasure,
                     
                     Tell mee (so may thy Streames long cheare this Mountaine,
                     
                     So Serpent ne're thee staine, nor scorch the Sunne,
                     
                     So may with gentle Beames thee kisse the Moone)
                     
                     Doest thou not mourne to want so faire a Treasure?
                     
                  
                  
                     VVhile shee her glass'd in thee, rich TAGVS Treasure
                     
                     Thou enuie needed not, nor yet the Fountaine
                     
                     In which that Hunter saw the naked Moone,
                     
                     Absence hath robb'd thee of thy Wealth and Pleasure,
                     
                     And I remaine like Marigold of Sunne
                     
                     Depriu'd, that dies by Shadow of some Mountaine.
                     
                  
                  
                     Nymphes of the Forrests, Nymphes who on this Mountaine
                     
                     Are wont to dance, shewing your Beauties Treasure
                     
                     To Goate-feete Syluans, and the wondring Sunne,
                     
                     VVhen as you gather Flowres about this Fountaine,
                     
                     Bid Her Farewell who placed here her Pleasure,
                     
                     And sing her Praises to the Starres and Moone.
                     
                  
                  
                     Among the lesser Lights as is the Moone,
                     
                     Blushing through Scarfe of Clouds on LATMOS Mountaine,
                     
                     
                        Or when her siluer Lockes shee lookes for Pleasure
                     
                     In Thetis Streames, prowde of so gay a Treasure,
                     
                     Such was my Faire when Shee sate by this Fountaine
                     
                     With other Nymphes, to shunne the amorous Sunne.
                     
                  
                  
                     As is our Earth in Absence of the Sunne,
                     
                     Or when of Sunne depriued is the Moone,
                     
                     As is without a verdant Shade a Fountaine,
                     
                     Or wanting Grasse, a Mead, a Vale, a Mountaine,
                     
                     Such is my State, bereft of my deare Treasure,
                     
                     To know whose only Worth was all my Pleasure.
                     
                  
                  
                     Ne're thinke of Pleasure Heart, Eyes shunne the Sunne,
                     
                     Teares be your Treasure, which the wandring Moone
                     
                     Shall see you shed by Mountaine, Vale, and Fountaine.
                     
                  
               
               
                  SON.
                  THou Window, once which serued for a Spheare
                  To that deare Planet of my Heart, whose Light
                  Made often blush the glorious Queene of Night,
                  While Shee in thee more beautious did appeare,
                  What mourning Weedes (alas) now do'st thou weare?
                  How loathsome to mine Eyes is thy sad Sight?
                  How poorely look'st thou, with what heauie cheare,
                  Since that Sunne set, which made thee shine so bright?
                  Vnhappie now thee close, for as of late
                  To wondring Eyes thou wast a Paradise,
                  Bereft of Her who made thee fortunate,
                  A Gulfe thou art, whence Cloudes of Sighes arise:
                  But vnto none so noysome as to mee,
                  Who hourly see my murth'red Ioyes in thee.
               
               
                  
                  SON.
                  ARe these the flowrie Bankes? is this the Mead
                  
                  Where Shee was wont to passe the pleasant hours?
                  Did here her Eyes exhale mine Eyes salt Showrs,
                  When on her Lap I laide my wearie Head?
                  Is this the goodly Elme did vs o'respread,
                  Whose tender Rine cut out in curious Flowrs
                  By that white Hand, contain
                        •…
                     s those Flames of Ours?
                  Is this the rusling Spring vs Musicke made?
                  Deflourish'd Mead where is your heauenly Hue?
                  Banke, where that Arras did you late adorne,
                  How looke yee Elme all withered and forlorne?
                  Onely sweet Spring nought altered seemes in you:
                  But while here chang'd each other thing appeares,
                  To sowre your Streames take of mine Eyes these Teares.
               
               
                  SON.
                  
                     ALexis, here shee stay'd among these Pines
                  
                     (Sweet Hermitresse) shee did alone repaire,
                  Here did shee spreade the Treasure of her Haire,
                  More rich than that brought from the Colchian Mines.
                  
                     Shee set Her by these musket Eglantines,
                  The happie Place the Print seemes yet to beare,
                  Her Voyce did sweeten here thy sugred Lines,
                  To which Winds, Trees, Beasts, Birds did lend their Eare.
                  Mee here shee first perceiu'd, and here a Morne
                  Of bright Carnations did o'respreade her Face,
                  Here did shee sigh, here first my Hopes were borne,
                  And I first got a Pledge of promis'd Grace:
                  But (ah) what seru'd it to bee happie so?
                  Sith passed Pleasures double but new Woe.
               
               
                  
                  SON.
                  O Night, cleare Night, O darke and gloomie Day!
                  O wofull Waking! O Soule-pleasing Sleepe!
                  O sweet Conceits which in my Braines did creepe!
                  Yet sowre Conceits which went so soone away.
                  A Sleepe I had more than poore Words can say,
                  For clos'd in Armes (mee thought) I did thee keepe,
                  A sorie Wretch plung'd in Mis-fortunes deepe
                  Am I not wak'd? when Light doth Lies bewray.
                  O that that Night had euer still bene blacke!
                  O that that Day had neuer yet begunne!
                  And you mine Eyes would yee no time saw Sunne!
                  To haue your Sunne in such a Zodiacke:
                  
                  Loe, what is good of Life is but a Dreame,
                  When Sorrow is a neuer-ebbing Streame.
               
               
                  SON.
                  HAire, precious Haire which Midas Hand did straine,
                  Part of the Wreathe of▪Gold that crownes those Browes
                  Which Winters whitest White in Whitenesse staine,
                  And Lillie, by Eridians Banke that growes.
                  Haire (fatall Present) which first caus'd my Woes,
                  When loose yee hang like Danaës golden Raine,
                  Sweet Nettes, which sweetly doe all Hearts enchaine,
                  Strings, deadly Strings, with which Loue bends his Bowes.
                  How are yee hither come? tell me, O Haire,
                  Deare Armelet, for what thus were yee giuen▪
                  
                  I know a Badge of Bondage I you weare,
                  Yet Haire for you, ô that I were a Heauen!
                  
                  Like Berenices Locke that yee might shine
                  (But brighter farre) about this Arme of mine.
               
               
                  
                  MAD.
                  VNhappie Light,
                  Doe not approach to bring the wofull Day,
                  When I must bid for ay
                  Farewell to Her, and liue in endlesse Plight.
                  Faire Moone, with gentle Beames
                  The Sight who neuer marres,
                  Long cleare Heauens sable Vault, and you bright Starres
                  Your golden Lockes long glasse in Earths pure Streames,
                  Let Phoebus neuer rise
                  To dimme your watchfull Eyes:
                  Prolong (alas) prolong my short Delight,
                  And if yee can, make an eternall Night.
               
               
                  SON.
                  WIth Griefe in Heart, and Teares in sowning Eyes,
                  When I to Her had giu'n a sad Fare-well,
                  Close sealed with a Kisse, and Dew which fell
                  On my else-moystned Face from Beauties Skies.
                  So strange Amazement did my Minde surprise,
                  That at each Pace I fainting turn'd againe,
                  Like One whome a Torpedo stupifies,
                  Not feeling Honours Bit, nor Reasons Raine.
                  But when fierce Starres to parte mee did constraine,
                  With backe-cast Lookes I 
                        •…
                     nui'd both and bless'd
                  The happie Walles and Place did Her containe,
                  Till that Sights Shafts their flying Obiect miss'd,
                  So wailing parted Ganamede the faire,
                  When Eagles Talents bare him through the Aire.
               
               
                  
                  MAD.
                  I Feare not hencefoorth Death,
                  Sith after this Departure yet I breath,
                  Let Rocks, and Seas, and Wind,
                  Their highest Treasons show,
                  Let Skie and Earth combinde
                  Striue (if they can) to ende my Life and Woe:
                  Sith Griefe can not, mee nothing can o'rethrow,
                  Or if that ought can cause my fatall Lot,
                  It will bee when I heare I am forgot.
               
               
                  SON.
                  HOw many times Nights silent Queene her Face
                  Hath hid, how oft with Starres in siluer Maske
                  In Heauens great Hall shee hath begunne her Taske,
                  And chear'd the waking Eye in lower Place▪
                  
                  How oft the Sunne hath made by Heauens swift Race
                  The happie Louer to forsake the Brest
                  Of his deare Ladie, wishing in the West
                  His golden Coach to runne had larger Space:
                  I euer count, and number, 
                        •…
                     ince alas
                  I bade Farewell to my Hea
                        •…
                     ts dearest Guest,
                  The Miles I compasse, and in Minde I chase
                  The Flouds and Mountaines holde mee from my Rest:
                  But (woe is mee) long count and count may I,
                  Ere I see Her whose Absence makes mee die.
               
               
                  
                  SON.
                  SO grieuous is my Paine, so painefull Life,
                  
                  That oft I finde mee in the Armes of Death,
                  
                  But (Breath halfe gone) that Tyrant called Death
                  
                  Who others killes, restoreth mee to Life:
                  
                  For while I thinke how Woe shall ende with Life,
                  
                  And that I quiet Peace shall ioye by Death,
                  
                  That Thought euen doth o'repowre the Paines of Death,
                  
                  And call mee home againe to lothed Life:
                  
                  Thus doth mine euill transcend both Life and Death,
                  
                  While no Death is so bad as is my Life,
                  
                  Nor no Life such which doth not ende by Death,
                  
                  And Protean Changes turne my Death and Life:
                  
                  O happie those who in their Birth finde Death,
                  
                  Sith but to languish Heauen affordeth Life.
                  
               
               
                  SON.
                  
                     FAme, who with golden Pennes abroad dost range
                  Where Phoebus leaues the Night, and brings the Day,
                  
                     Fame, in one Place who (restlesse) dost not stay
                  Till thou hast flowne from Atlas vnto Gange:
                  
                  
                     Fame, Enemie to Time that still doth change,
                  And in his changing Course would make decay
                  What here below he findeth in his Way,
                  Euen making Vertue to her selfe looke strange.
                  Daughter of Heauen; Now all thy Trumpets sound,
                  Raise vp thy Head vnto the highest Skie,
                  With Wonder blaze the Gifts in Her are found,
                  And when shee from this mortall Globe shall flie,
                  In thy wide Mouth, keepe long long keepe her Name,
                  So thou by Her, shee by thee liue shall Fame.
                  
               
               
                  
                  MAD.
                  THe Iuorie, Corrall, Gold,
                  Of Brest, of Lips, of Haire,
                  So liuely Sleepe doth show to inward Sight,
                  That wake I thinke I hold
                  No Shadow, but my Faire:
                  My selfe so to deceaue
                  With long-shut Eyes I shunne the irkesome Light.
                  Such Pleasure thus I haue
                  Delighting in false Gleames,
                  If Death Sleepes Brother bee?
                  And Soules relieu'd of Sense haue so sweete Dreames?
                  That I would wish mee thus to dreame and die.
               
               
                  SON.
                  I Curse the Night, yet doth from Day mee hide,
                  The Pandionian Birds I tyre with Mones,
                  The Ecchoes euen are weari'd with my Grones,
                  Since Absence did mee from my Blisse diuide.
                  Each Dreame, each Toy, my Reason doth affright,
                  And when Remembrance reades the curious Scroule
                  Of pass▪d Contentments caused by her Sight,
                  Then bitter Anguish doth inuade my Soule.
                  While thus I liue ecclipsed of her Light
                  (O mee!) what better am I than the Mole?
                  Or those whose Zenith is the only Pole,
                  Whose Hemispheare is hid with so long Night?
                  Saue that in Earth he rests, they hope for Sunne,
                  I pine, and finde mine endlesse Night begunne.
               
               
                  
                  SON.
                  OF Death some tell, some of the cruell Paine
                  Which that bad Crafts-man in his Worke did trie,
                  When (a new Monster) Flames once did constraine
                  A humane Corps to yeeld a brutish Crie.
                  Some tell of those in burning Beds who lie,
                  For that they durst in the Phlegraean Plaine
                  The mightie Rulers of the Skie defie,
                  And siege those christall To
                        •…
                     res which all containe.
                  An other countes of Phlegethons hote Floods
                  The Soules which drinke, Ixions endlesse Smart,
                  And his to whom a Vulture eates the Heart,
                  One telles of Specters in enchanted Woods:
                  Of all those Paines he who the wo
                        •…
                     st would proue,
                  Let him bee absent, and but pine in Loue.
               
               
                  MAD.
                  
                     TRitons, which bounding diue
                  Through Neptunes liquide Plaine,
                  When as yee shall arriue
                  With tilting Tides where siluer Ora playes,
                  And to your King his watrie Tribute payes,
                  Tell how I dying liue,
                  And burne in midst of all the coldest Maine.
               
               
                  
                  SON.
                  PLace mee where angry Titan burnes the More,
                  
                  And thirstie Africke fir
                        •…
                     e Monsters brings,
                  Or where the new-borne Phoenix spreades her Wings,
                  And Troupes of wondring Birds her Flight adore.
                  Place mee by Gange, or Indes empampred Shore,
                  Where smyling Heauens on Earth cause double Springs,
                  Place mee where Neptunes Quire of Syrens sings,
                  Or where (made hoarse through Cold) hee leaues to roare.
                  Mee place where Fortune doth her Darlings crowne,
                  A Wonder, or a Sparke in Enuies Eye,
                  Or late outragious Fates vpon mee frowne,
                  And Pittie wailing see disastred Mee,
                  
                  Affections Print my Minde so deepe doth proue,
                  I may forget my Selfe▪ but not my Loue.
               
            
            
               
               POEMS:
BY W. D.
               
               THE SECOND PART.
               
                  SONNET.
                  OF mortall Glorie ô soone darkned Raye!
                  O posting Ioyes of Man! more swift than Winde,
                  O fond Desires! which wing'd with Fancies straye,
                  O traitrous Hopes! which doe our Iudgements blinde:
                  Loe, in a Flash that Light is gone away,
                  Which dazell did each Eye, Delight each Minde,
                  And with that Sunne (from whence it came) combinde,
                  Now makes more radiant Heauens eternall Day.
                  Let Beautie now be blubbred Cheekes with Teares,
                  Let widow'd Musicke only roare, and plaine,
                  Poore Vertue get thee Wings, and mount the Spheares,
                  And let thine only Name on Earth remaine.
                  
                     Death hath thy Temple raz'd, Loues Empire foylde,
                  The World of Honour, Worth, and Sweetnesse spoylde.
               
               
                  
                  SON.
                  THose Eyes, those sparkling Saphires of Delight,
                  Which thousand thousand Hearts did set on fire,
                  Which made that Eye of Heauen that brings the Light
                  (Oft jealous) staye amaz'd them to admire.
                  That liuing Snow, those crimson Roses bright,
                  Those Pearles, those Rubies, which did breede Desire,
                  Those Lockes of Gold, that Purple faire of Tyre,
                  
                  Are wrapt (aye mee!) vp in eternall Night.
                  What hast thou more to vaunt of, wretched World?
                  Sith shee (who cursed thee made blest) is gone?
                  Thine euer burning Lamps, Rounds euer whorld,
                  Can vnto thee not modell such a one:
                  For if they would such Beautie bring on Earth,
                  They should be forc'd againe to make Her breath.
               
               
                  SON.
                  O Fate! conspir'd to powre your Worst on mee,
                  O rigorous Rigour, which doth all confound!
                  With cruell Hands yee haue cut downe the Tree,
                  And Fruit and Flowre dispersed on the Ground.
                  A litle Space of Earth my Loue doth bound,
                  That Beautie which did raise it to the Skie,
                  Turn'd in n
                        •…
                     glected Dust, now low doth lie,
                  Deafe to my Plaints, and senslesse of my Wound.
                  
                     Ah! did I liue for this, ah! did I loue?
                  For this and was it sh
                        •…
                     e did so excell?
                  That 
                        •…
                     re shee well Lif
                        •…
                     s sweet-sowre Ioyes did proue,
                  Shee should (too deare a Guest) with Horrour dwell?
                  Weake Influence of H
                        •…
                     auen! what faire yee frame,
                  Falles in the Prime, and passeth like a Dreame.
               
               
                  
                  SON.
                  O Woefull Life! Life, no, but liuing Death,
                  Fraile Boat of Christall in a rockie Sea,
                  A Sport expos'd to Fortunes stormie Breath,
                  Which kept with Paine, with Terrour doth decay:
                  The false Delights, true Woes thou dost bequeath,
                  Mine all-appalled Minde doe so affraye,
                  That I those enuie who are laid in Earth,
                  And pittie them that runne thy dreadfull Waye.
                  When did mine Eyes behold one chearefull Morne?
                  When had my tossed Soule one Night of rest?
                  When did not hatefull Starres my Projects scorne?
                  O! now I finde for Mortalls what is best:
                  Euen, sith our voyage shamefull is, and short,
                  Soone to strike Saile, and perish in the Port.
               
               
                  SON.
                  MIne Eyes, dissolue your Globes in brinie Streames,
                  And with a Cloud of Sorrow dimme your Sight,
                  The Sunn
                        •…
                     s bright Sunne is set, of late whose Beames
                  Gaue Luster to your Day, Day to your Night.
                  My Voyce now deafen Earth with Anatheames,
                  Roare foo
                        •…
                     th a Challenge in the Worlds Despight,
                  Tell that disguised Grie
                        •…
                     e is her Delight,
                  That Life a Slumber is of fearfull Dreames.
                  And woefull Minde abhorre to thinke of Ioy,
                  My Senses all now comfortlesse you hide,
                  Accept no Object but of blacke Annoy,
                  Teares, Plaints, Sighs, mourning Weeds, Graues gaping wide,
                  I haue nought left to wish, my Hopes are dead,
                  And all with Her beneath a Marble laide.
               
               
                  
                  SON.
                  SWeet Soule, which in the Aprill of thy Yeares
                  So to enrich the Heauen mad'st poore this Round,
                  And now with golden Rayes of Glorie crown'd
                  Most blest abid'st aboue the Spheare of Spheares▪
                  
                  If heauenly Lawes (alas) haue not thee bound
                  From looking to this Globe that all vpbeares?
                  If Rueth and Pittie there aboue bee found?
                  O daigne to l
                        •…
                     nd a Looke vnto those Teares.
                  Doe not disdaine (deare Ghost) this sacrifice,
                  And though I raise not Pillars to thy Praise
                  Mine Offerings take, let this for mee suffice,
                  My Heart a liuing Piramide I raise:
                  And whilst Kings Tombes with Lawrels flourish greene,
                  Thine shall with Mirtles, and these Flowrs bee seene.
               
               
                  MADRIGALL.
                  THis Life which seemes so faire,
                  Is like a Bubble blowen vp in the Aire,
                  By sporting Childrens Breath,
                  VVho chase it euery where,
                  And stri
                        •…
                     e who can most Motion it bequeath:
                  And though it sometime seeme of its owne Might
                  (Like to an Eye of gold) to be fix'd there,
                  And firme to houer in that emptie Hight,
                  That only is because it is so light,
                  
                  But in that Pompe it doth not long app
                        •…
                     are;
                  For euen when most admir'd, it in a Thought
                  As swell'd from nothing, doth dissolue in nought.
               
               
                  
                  SON.
                  O! It is not to mee bright Lampe of Day,
                  That in the East thou shew'st thy rosie Face,
                  O! it is not to mee thou leau'st that Sea,
                  And in these azure Lists beginst thy Race.
                  Thou shin'st not to the Dead in any Place,
                  And I (dead) from this World am gone away,
                  Or if I seeme (a Shadow) yet to stay,
                  It is a while but to bemone my Case.
                  My Mirth is lost, my Comforts are dismay'd,
                  And vnto sad Mis-haps their Place doe yeeld;
                  My Knowledge doth resemble a bloudie field,
                  Where I my Hopes, and Helps see prostrate layd:
                  So painefull is Lifes Course which I haue runne,
                  That I doe wish it neuer had begunne.
               
               
                  SONG.
                  
                     SAd Damon beeing come
                     To that for euer lamentable Tombe,
                     Which those eternall Powers that all controule,
                     Vnto his liuing Soule
                     A melancholie Prison had prescriu'd:
                     Of Hue, of Heate, of Motion quite depriu'd,
                     In Armes wake, trembling, cold,
                     A Marble, hee the Marble did infold:
                     And hauing made it warme with many a Showre,
                     VVhich dimmed Eyes did powre,
                     VVhen Griefe had giuen him leau
                           •…
                        , and Sighes them stay'd,
                     Thus with a sad alas at last he said.
                  
                  
                     VVho would haue thought to mee
                     The Place where thou didst lie could grieuous bee?
                     
                        And that (deare Body) long thee hauing sought
                     (O mee!) who would haue thought?
                     Thee once to finde it should my Soule confound,
                     And giue my Heart than Death a deeper Wound?
                     Thou didst disdaine my Teares,
                     But grieue not that this ruethfull Stone them beares,
                     Mine Eyes serue only now for thee to weepe,
                     And let their Course them keepe,
                     Although thou neuer wouldst them Comfort show,
                     Doe not repine, they haue Part of thy Woe.
                  
                  
                     
                        Ah Wretch! too late I finde,
                     How Vertues g
                           •…
                        ious Titles proue but Winde;
                     For if shee any could release from Death,
                     Thou yet eni
                           •…
                        y'd hadst Breath;
                     For if shee ere appear'd to mortall Eine,
                     It was in thy faire Shape that shee was seene.
                     But ô! if I was made
                     For thee, with thee why too am I not dead?
                     VVhy doe outragious Fates which dimm'd thy Sight,
                     Let mee see hatefull Light?
                     They without mee made Death thee to surprise
                     Tyrants (perhaps) that they might kill mee twise.
                  
                  
                     O Griefe! and could one Day
                     Haue Force such Excellence to take away?
                     Could a swift flying Moment (ah) deface
                     Those matchlesse Gifts, that Grace
                     Which Art and Nature had in thee combinde,
                     To make thy Body paragone thy Minde?
                     Haue all past like a Cloud,
                     And doth eternall Silence now them shroud?
                     Is what so much admir'd was nought but Dust,
                     Of which a Stone hath trust?
                     
                        O Change! ô cruell Change! thou to our Sight
                     Shewes Destines Rigour equall doth their Might.
                  
                  
                     VVhen thou from Earth didst passe
                     (Sweet Nymph) Perfections Mirrour broken was,
                     And this of late so glorious World of ours,
                     Like Meadow without Flowrs,
                     Or Ring of a rich Gemme made blind, appear'd,
                     Or Night, by Starre nor Cynthia neither clear'd.
                     
                        Loue when hee saw thee die,
                     Entomb'd him in the Lidde of either Eye,
                     And left his Torch within thy sacred Vrne,
                     There for a Lampe to burne:
                     VVorth, Honour, Pleasure, with thy Life expir'd,
                     Death since (growne sweet) beginnes to bee desir'd.
                  
                  
                     Whilst thou to vs wast giuen,
                     The Earth her Venus had as well as Heauen:
                     Nay and her Sunne, which burnt as many Hearts,
                     As hee doth Easterne Parts;
                     Bright Sunne, which forc'd to leaue these Hemispheares,
                     Benighted set into a Sea of Teares.
                     
                        Ah Death! who shall thee flie?
                     Sith the most worthie bee o'rethrowne by thee?
                     Thou spar'st the Rauens, and Nightingalles dost kill,
                     And triumphes at thy will:
                     But giue thou canst not such an other Blow,
                     Because like Her Earth can none other show.
                  
                  
                     O bitter-Sweets of Loue!
                     How better is't at all you not to proue?
                     Than when wee doe your Pleasure most possesse,
                     To find them then made lesse?
                     O! that the Cause which doth consume our Ioy,
                     Remembrance of it too, would too destroy!
                     
                        What doth this Life bestow
                     But Flowrs on Th
                           •…
                        rnes which grow?
                     VVhich though they sometime blandishing delighte,
                     Yet afterwards vs smite?
                     And if the rising Sunne them faire doth see,
                     That Planet setting, too beholdes them die.
                  
                  
                     This World is made a Hell,
                     Depriu'd of all that in it did excell.
                     O Pan, Pan, Winter is fallen in our May,
                     Turn'd is in Night our Day:
                     Forsake thy Pipe, a Scepter take to thee,
                     Thy Lockes disgarland, thou blacke Ioue shalt bee.
                     The Flockes doe leaue the Meads,
                     And loathing three-leaf'd Grasse, hold vp their Heads.
                     The Streames not glide now with a gentle Rore,
                     Nor Birds sing as before,
                     Hilles stand with Clouds like Mourners, vail'd in Blacke,
                     And Owles on Caban Roofes fore-tell o
                           •…
                        r Wracke.
                  
                  
                     That Zephyre euerie Yeere
                     So soone was heard to sigh in Forrests heere,
                     It was for Her: that wrapt in Gownes of Greene,
                     Meads were so earelie seene,
                     That in the saddest Months oft s
                           •…
                        ng the Mearles,
                     It was for Her: for h
                           •…
                        r Trees dropt foorth Pearles.
                     That prowde, and statelie Courts,
                     Did enuie those our Shades, and calme Resorts,
                     It was for Her: and shee is gone, ô Woe!
                     Woods cut, againe doe grow,
                     Budde doth the Rose, and Dazie, Winter done,
                     But wee once dead no more doe see the Sunne.
                  
                  
                     VVhose Name shall now make ring
                     The Ecchoes? of whom shall the Nymphettes sing?
                     
                        VVhose heauenlie Voyce, whose Soule-inuading Straines,
                     Shall fill with Ioy the Plaines?
                     VVhat Haire, what Eyes, can make the Morne in East
                     VVeepe, that a fairer riseth in the West?
                     Faire Sunne, poste still away,
                     No Musicke heere is found thy Course to stay.
                     Sweet Hybla Swarmes with Wormewood fill your Bowrs,
                     Gone is the Flowre of Flowrs,
                     Blush no more Rose, nor Lillie pale remaine,
                     Dead is that Beautie which yours late did staine▪
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Aye mee! to waile my Plight
                     VVhy haue not I as many Eyes as Night?
                     Or as that Shepheard which Ioues Loue did keepe?
                     That I still still may weepe:
                     But though I had, my Teares vnto my Crosse
                     VVere not yet equall, nor Griefe to my Losse,
                     Yet of you brinie Showrs,
                     VVhich I heere powre, may spring as many Flowrs,
                     As came of those which fell from Helens Eyes,
                     And when yee doe arise,
                     May euerie Leafe in sable Letters beare
                     The dolefull Cause for which yee spring vp heere.
                  
               
               
                  
                  MAD.
                  DEare Night, the Ease of Care,
                  Vntroubled Seate of Peace,
                  
                     Times eldest Childe, which oft the Blinde doe see,
                  On this our Hemispheare,
                  What makes thee now so sadly darke to bee?
                  Comm'st thou in funerall Pompe her Graue to grace?
                  Or doe those Starres which should thy Horrour cleare,
                  In Ioues high Hall aduise,
                  In what Part of the Skies,
                  VVith them, or Cynthia shee shall appeare?
                  Or (ah alas!) because those matchlesse Eyes
                  VVhich shone so faire, below thou dost not finde,
                  Striu'st thou to make all other Eyes looke blinde?
               
               
                  SON.
                  MY Lute, bee as thou wast when thou didst grow
                  With thy greene Mother in some shadie Groue,
                  When immelodious Windes but made thee moue,
                  And Birds on thee their Ramage did bestow.
                  Sith that deare Voyce which did thy Sounds approue,
                  Which vs'd in such harmonious Straines to flow,
                  Is reft from Earth to tune those Spheares aboue,
                  
                  What art thou but a Harbenger of Woe?
                  Thy pleasing Notes, be pleasing Notes no more,
                  But orphane Wailings to the fainting Eare,
                  E
                        •…
                     ch Stoppe a Sigh, each Sound drawes foorth a Teare,
                  Bee therefore silent as in Woods before,
                  Or if that any Hand to touch thee daigne,
                  Like widow'd Turtle, still her Losse complaine.
               
               
                  
                  SON.
                  SWeet Spring, thou turn'st with all thy goodlie Traine,
                  Thy Head with Flames, thy Mantle bright with Flowrs,
                  The Zephyres curle the greene Lockes of the Plaine,
                  The Cloudes for Ioy in Pearles weepe downe their Showrs.
                  Thou turn'st (sweet Youth) but ah my pleasant Howres,
                  And happie Dayes, with thee come not againe,
                  The sad Memorialls only of my Paine
                  Doe with thee turne, which turne my Sweets in Sowres.
                  Thou art the same which still thou wast before,
                  Delicious, wanton, amiable, faire,
                  But shee, whose Breath embaulm'd thy wholesome Aire,
                  Is gone: nor Gold, nor Gemmes Her can restore.
                  Neglected Vertue, Seasons goe and come,
                  While thine forgot lie closed in a Tombe.
               
               
                  SON.
                  WHat doth it serue to see Sunnes burning Face?
                  And Skies enamell'd with both the Indies Gold?
                  Or Moone at Night in jettie Charriot roll'd?
                  And all the Glorie of that starrie Place?
                  What doth it serue Earths Beautie to behold?
                  The Mountaines Pride, the Meadowes flowrie Grace,
                  The statelie Comelinesse of Forrests old,
                  The Sport of Flouds which would themselues embrace?
                  What doth it serue to heare the Syluans Songs,
                  The wanton Mearle▪ the Nightingalles sad Straines,
                  Which in da
                        •…
                     ke Shades seeme to d
                        •…
                     plore my W
                        •…
                     ongs?
                  For what doth seru
                        •…
                      all that this World containes,
                  Sith shee for whome those once to mee were deare,
                  No Part of them can haue now with mee heere?
               
               
                  
                  MAD.
                  THe Beautie, and the Life,
                  Of Lifes, and Beauties fairest Paragon,
                  (O Teares! ô Griefe!) hang at a feeble Thread,
                  To which pale Atropos had set her Knife,
                  The Soule with many a Grone
                  Had left each outward Part,
                  And now did take his last Leaue of the Heart,
                  Nought else did want▪ sa
                        •…
                     e Death, 
                     
                        •…
                     uen to be dead:
                  VVhen the afflicted Band about her Bed
                  (Seeing so faire him come in Lips, Cheekes, Eyes)
                  Cried, ah! and can Death enter Paradise?
                  
               
               
                  SON.
                  
                     AH Napkin, ominous Present of my Deare,
                  Gift miserable, which doth now remaine
                  The only Guerdon of my helpelesse Paine,
                  When I thee got thou shew'd my State too cleare:
                  I 
                        •…
                     euer since haue ceased to complaine,
                  Since, I the Badge of Griefe did euer weare,
                  
                     Ioy on my Face durst neuer since appeare,
                  
                     Care was the Food which did mee entertaine:
                  Now (since made mine) deare Napkin doe not grieue
                  That I this Tribute pay thee from mine Eine,
                  And that (these posting Houres I am to liue)
                  I laundre thy faire Figures in this Brine:
                  No, I must yet euen begge of thee the Grace,
                  That thou wouldst daigne in Graue to shrowdemy Face.
               
               
                  
                  MAD.
                  POore Turtle, thou bemones
                  The Losse of thy deare Loue,
                  And I for mine send foorth these smoaking Grones,
                  Vnhappie widow'd Doue,
                  VVhile all about doe sing,
                  I at the Roote, Thou on the Branche aboue,
                  Euen wearie with our Mones the gaudie Spring.
                  Yet these our Plaints wee doe not spend in vaine,
                  Sith sighing Zephyres answere vs againe.
               
               
                  SON.
                  AS in a duskie and tempestuous Night,
                  A Starre is wont to spreade her Lockes of Gold,
                  And while her pleasant Rayes abroad are roll'd,
                  Some spitefull Cloude doth robbe vs of her Sight:
                  (Faire Soule) in this blacke Age so shin'd thou bright,
                  And made all Eyes with Wonder thee beholde,
                  Till vglie Death depriuing vs of Light,
                  In his grimme mistie Armes thee did enfolde.
                  Who more shall vaunt true Beautie heere to see?
                  What Hope doth more in any Heart remaine,
                  That such Perfections shall his Reason raine?
                  If Beautie with thee borne too died with thee?
                  
                     World, plaine no more of Loue, nor count his Harmes,
                  With his pale Trophees Death hath hung his Armes.
               
               
                  
                  SON.
                  SIth it hath pleas'd that First and onlie Faire
                  
                  To take that Beautie to himselfe againe,
                  Which in this World of Sense not to remaine,
                  But to amaze, was sent, and home repaire,
                  The Loue which to that Beautie I did beare
                  (Made pure of mortall Spots which did it staine,
                  And endlesse, which euen Death cannot impaire)
                  I place on him who will it not disdaine.
                  No shining Eyes, no Lockes of curling Gold,
                  No blushing Ro
                        •…
                     es on a virgine Face,
                  No outward Show, no, nor no inward Grace,
                  Shall Force hereafter haue my Thoughts to hold:
                  Loue heere on Earth hudge Stormes of Care doe tosse,
                  But plac'd aboue, exempted is from Losse.
               
               
                  MAD.
                  MY Thoughts hold mortall Strife,
                  I doe detest my Life,
                  And with lamenting Cries
                  (Peace to my Soule to bring)
                  Oft calles that Prince which here doth Monarchise,
                  But Hee grimme grinning King,
                  VVh
                        •…
                      Catiues scornes, and doth the Blest surprise,
                  Late hauing deckt with Beauties Rose his Tombe,
                  D
                        •…
                     sdaines to croppe a VVeede, and will not come.
               
               
                  
                  SONG.
                  
                     IT Autumne was, and on our Hemispheare
                     Faire Ericyne began bright to appeare,
                     
                        Night West-ward did her gemmie World decline,
                     And hide her Lights, that greater Light might shine:
                     The crested Bird had giuen Alarum twise
                     To lazie Mortalls, to vnlocke their Eyes,
                     The Owle had left to plaine, and from each Thorne
                     The wing'd Musicians did salute the Morne,
                     
                     VVho (while shee glass'd her Lockes in Ganges Streames)
                     Set open wide the christall Port of Dreames:
                     When I, whose Eyes no drowsie Night could close,
                     In Sleepes soft Armes did quietly repose,
                     And, for that Heauens to die mee did denie,
                     
                        Deaths Image kissed, and as dead did lie.
                     I lay as dead, but scarce charm'd were my Cares,
                     And slaked scarce my Sighes, scarce dried my Teares,
                     
                        Sleepe scarce the vglie Figures of the Day
                     Had with his sable Pincell put away,
                     And left mee in a still and calmie Mood,
                     VVhen by my Bed (me thought) a Virgine stood,
                     A Virgine in the blooming of her Prime,
                     If such rare Beautie measur'd bee by Time?
                     Her Head a Garland ware of Opalls bright,
                     About Her flow'd a Gowne as pure as Light,
                     Deare amber Lockes gaue Vmbrage to her Face,
                     VVhere Modestie high Majestie did grace,
                     Her Eyes such Beames sent foo
                           •…
                        th, that but with Paine
                     Here, weaker Sights their sparckling could sustaine:
                     
                        No Deitie faign'd which haunts the silent Woods
                     Is like to Her, nor Syrene of the Floods:
                     Such is the golden Planet of the Yeare,
                     VVhen blushing in the East hee doth appeare.
                     Her Grace did Beautie, Voyce yet Grace did passe,
                     VVhich thus through P
                           •…
                        arles and Rubies broken was.
                  
                  
                     How long wilt thou (said shee) estrang'd from Ioy,
                     Paint Shadowes to thy selfe of false Annoy?
                     How long thy Minde with horride Shapes affrighte,
                     And in imaginarie Euills delighte?
                     Esteeme that Losse which (well when view'd) is Gaine,
                     Or if a Losse, yet not a Losse to plaine?
                     O leaue thy tyred Soule more to molest,
                     And thinke that Woe when shortest then is best.
                     If shee for whom thou deafnest thus the Skie
                     Bee dead? what then? was shee not borne to die?
                     VVas shee not mortall borne? if thou dost grieue
                     That Times should bee, in which shee should not liue,
                     Ere e're shee was, weepe that Dayes Wheele was roll'd,
                     VVeepe that shee liu'd not in the Age of Gold:
                     For that shee was not then, thou may'st deplore
                     As duely as that now shee is no more.
                     If onely shee had died, thou sure hadst Cause
                     To blame the Destines and Heauens yrone Lawes:
                     But looke how many Millions Her aduance,
                     VVhat numbers with Her enter 
                           •…
                        n this Dance,
                     VVith those which are to come: shall Heauens them staye,
                     And Alls faire Order breake, thee to obaye?
                     Euen as thy Birth, Death which thee doth appall,
                     A Piece is of the Life of this great All.
                     
                     Strong Cities die, die doe high palmie Raignes,
                     And (weakling) thou thus to bee handled plaines.
                  
                  
                     
                     If shee bee dead? then shee of lothsome Dayes
                     Hath past the Line, whose Length but Losse bewrayes;
                     Then shee hath lef
                           •…
                         this filthie Stage of Care,
                     VVhere Pleasure seldome, Woe doth still repaire:
                     For all the Pleasures which it doth containe,
                     Not conteruaile the smallest Minutes Paine.
                     And tell mee, Thou who dost s
                           •…
                         much admire
                     This litle Vapour, Smoake, this Sparke, or Fire,
                     VVhich Life is call'd, what doth it thee bequeath,
                     But some few Yeeres which Birth drawes out to Death?
                     VVhich if thou paragone, with Lusters runne,
                     And them whose Carriere is but now begunne,
                     In Dayes great Vaste they shall farre lesse appeare,
                     Than with the Sea when matched is a Teare.
                     But why wouldst thou Her longer wish to bee?
                     One Yeere doth serue all Natures Pompe to see,
                     Nay, euen one Day, and Night: This Moone, that Sunne,
                     Those lesser Fires about this Round which runne,
                     Bee but the same which vnder Saturnes Raigne
                     Did the serpenting Seasons enterchaine.
                     How oft doth Life grow lesse by liuing long?
                     And what excelleth but what di
                           •…
                        th yong?
                     For Age which all abhorre (yet would embrace)
                     Whiles makes the Minde as wrinckled as the Face:
                     And when that Destinies conspire with Worth,
                     That Yeeres not glorie Wrong, Life soone goes forth.
                     Leaue then L
                           •…
                        nts, and thinke thou didst not liue,
                     Lawes to that fi
                           •…
                        st eternall C
                           •…
                        use to giue,
                     But to obey those L
                           •…
                        wes which hee hath giuen,
                     And bow vnto the just Decrees of Heauen,
                     Which can not erre, w
                           •…
                        at euer foggie Mists
                     Doe blinde Men in these sublunarie Lists.
                  
                  
                     
                     But what if shee for whom thou spend'st those Grones,
                     And wastest Lifes deare Torch in ruethfull Mones,
                     Shee for whose sake thou hat'st the joyfull Light,
                     Court'st solitarie Shades, and irkesome Night,
                     Doth liue? ô! (if thou canst) through Teares a Space
                     Lift thy dimm'd Lights, and looke vpon this Face,
                     Looke if those Eyes which (foole) thou didst adore,
                     Shine not more bright than they were wont before?
                     Looke if those Roses Death could ought impaire,
                     Those Roses to thee once which seem'd so faire?
                     And if these Lockes haue lost ought of that Gold,
                     VVhich earst they had when thou them didst behold?
                     I liue, and happie liue, but thou art dead,
                     And still shalt bee, till thou be like mee made.
                     
                        Alas! whilst wee are wrapt in Gownes of Earth,
                     And blinde, heere sucke the Aire of Woe beneath,
                     Each thing in Senses Ballances wee wie,
                     And but with Toyle, and Paine the Trueth descrie.
                  
                  
                     Aboue this waste and admirable Frame,
                     This Temple visible, which World wee name,
                     VVithin whose Walles so many Lamps doe burne,
                     So many Arches opposite doe turne,
                     VVhere Elementall Brethren nurse their Strife,
                     And by intestine Warres maintaine their Life,
                     There is a World, a World of perfect Blisse,
                     Pure, immateriall, bright, more farre from this,
                     Than that high Circle which the rest enspheares
                     Is from this dull ignoble Vale of Teares,
                     A World, where all is found, that heere is found,
                     But further discrepant than Heauen and Ground:
                     It hath an Earth, as hath this World of yours,
                     VVith Creatures peopled, stor'd with Trees, and Flowrs,
                     
                        It hath a Sea, like Saphire Girdle cast,
                     VVhich decketh of harmonious Shores the Waste,
                     It hath pure Fire, it hath delicious Aire,
                     Moone, Sunne, and Starres, Heauens wonderfully faire:
                     But there Flowrs doe not fade, Trees grow not olde,
                     The Creatures doe not die through Heat nor Colde,
                     Sea there not tossed is, nor Aire made blacke,
                     Fire doth not nurse it selfe on others Wracke;
                     There Heauens bee not constrain'd about to range,
                     For this World hath no neede of any Change:
                     The Minutes grow not Houres, Houres rise not Dayes,
                     Dayes make no Months, but euer-blooming Mayes.
                  
                  
                     Heere I remaine, and hitherward doe tend
                     All who their Spanne of Dayes in Vertue spend:
                     VVhat euer Pleasure this low Place containes,
                     It is a Glance but of what high remaines.
                     Those who (perchance) thinke there can nothing bee
                     VVithout this wide Expansion which they see,
                     And that nought else mounts Starres Circumference,
                     For that nought else is subject to their Sense,
                     Feel
                           •…
                         such a Case, as one whom some Abisme
                     Of the Deepe Ocean kept had all his Time:
                     VVho borne and nourish'd there, can scarcely dreame
                     That ought can liue without that brinie Streame,
                     Cannot beleeue that there be Temples, Towres,
                     VVhich goe beyond his Caues and dampish Bowres,
                     Or there bee other People, Manners, Lawes,
                     Than them hee fi
                           •…
                        ds within the roaring Waues,
                     That sweet
                           •…
                        r Flowrs doe spring than grow on Rockes,
                     Or Beasts bee which excell the skalie Flockes,
                     That other Elements bee to bee found,
                     Than is the Water, and this Ball of Ground.
                     
                        But thinke that Man from those Abismes were brought,
                     And saw what curious Nature here hath wrought,
                     Did see the Meads, the tall and shadie Woods,
                     The Hilles did see, the cleare and ambling Floods,
                     The diuerse Shapes of Beasts which Kinds foorth bring,
                     The feathred Troupes, that flie and sweetly sing:
                     Did see the Palaces, the Cities faire,
                     The Forme of humane Life, the Fire, the Aire,
                     The brightnesse of the Sunne that dimmes his Sight,
                     The Moone, the gastly Splendors of the Night:
                     VVhat vncouth Rapture would his Minde surprise?
                     How would hee his (late-deare) Resort despise?
                     How would hee muse how foolish hee had beene
                     To thinke nought bee, but what hee there had seene?
                     VVhy did wee get this high and vaste Desire,
                     Vnto immortall things still to aspire?
                     VVhy doth our Minde extend it beyond Time,
                     
                     And to that highest Happinesse euen clime?
                     If wee be nought but what to Sense wee seeme,
                     And Dust, as most of Worldlings vs esteeme?
                     Wee bee not made for Earth, though here wee come,
                     More than the Embryon for the Mothers Wombe:
                     It weepes to bee made free, and wee complaine
                     To leaue this loathsome Iayle of Care and Paine.
                  
                  
                     But thou who vulgare Foot-steps dost not trace,
                     Learne to raise vp thy Minde vnto this Place,
                     And what Earth-creeping Mortalles most affect,
                     If not at all to scorne, yet to neglect:
                     O chase not Shadowes vaine, which when obtain'd,
                     VVere better lost, than with such Trauell gain'd.
                     Thinke that, on Earth which Humanes Greatnesse call,
                     Is but a glorious Title to liue thrall:
                     
                        That Scepters, Diadems, and Chaires of State,
                     Not in themselues, but to small Mindes are great:
                     How those who loftiest mount, doe hardest light,
                     And deepest Falls bee from the highest Hight;
                     How Farne an Eccho is, how all Renowne
                     Like to a blasted Rose, ere Night falles downe:
                     And though it something were, thinke how this Round
                     Is but a litle Point, which doth it bound.
                     O leaue that Loue which reacheth but to Dust,
                     And in that Loue eternall only trust,
                     And Beautie, which when once it is possest,
                     Can only fill the Soule, and make it blest.
                     Pale Enuie, jealous Emulations, Feares,
                     Sighs, Plaints, Remorse, here haue no Place, nor Teares,
                     False Ioyes, vaine Hopes, here bee not, Hate nor Wrath,
                     VVhat ends all Loue, here most augments it, Death.
                     
                     If such Force had the dimme Glance of an Eye,
                     VVhich some few Dayes thereafter was to die,
                     That it could make thee leaue all other things,
                     And like the Taper-slie there burne thy Wings?
                     And if a Voyce, of late which could but waile,
                     Such Power had▪ as through Eares thy Soule to steale?
                     If once thou on that only Faire couldst gaze,
                     What Flames of Loue would hee within thee raise?
                     In what a mazing Maze would it thee bring,
                     To heare but once that Quire cel
                           •…
                        sliall sing?
                     The fairest Shapes on which thy Loue did sease,
                     VVhich carst did breede Del
                           •…
                        ght, then would displease,
                     Then 
                           〈◊〉
                         hoarse were Earths entising Sounds,
                     All Musicke but a Noyse which Sense confounds.
                     This great and burning Glasse that cleares all Eyes,
                     And musters with such Glorie in the Skies,
                     
                        That siluer Starre which with its sober Light,
                     Makes Day o
                           •…
                        t enuie the eye-pleasing Night,
                     Those golden Letters which so brightly shine
                     In Heauens great Volume gorgeously diuine,
                     The VVonders all in Sea, in Earth, in Aire,
                     Bee but darke Pictures of that Soueraigne Faire,
                     
                     Bee Tongues, which still thus crie into your Eare,
                     (Could yee amidst VVorlds Cataracts them heare)
                     From fading things (fond VVights) lift your Desire,
                     And in our Beautie, his vs made admire,
                     If wee seeme faire? ô thinke how faire is Hee,
                     Of whose faire Fairnesse, Shadowes, Steps, we bee.
                     No Shadow can compare it with the Face,
                     No Step with that deare Foot which did it trace;
                     Your Soules immortall are, then place them hence,
                     And doe not drowne them in the Must of Sense:
                     Doe not, ô doe not by false Pleasures Might
                     Depriue them of that true, and sole Delight.
                     That Happinesse yee seeke is not below,
                     Earths sweetest Ioy is but disguised VVoe.
                  
                  
                     Heere did shee pause, and with a milde Aspect
                     Did towards mee those lamping Twinnes direct:
                     The wonted Rayes I knew, and thrice essay'd
                     To answere make, thrice faultring Tongue it stay'd.
                     And while vpon that Face I fed my Sight,
                     Mee thought shee vanish'd vp in Titans Light,
                     Who guilding with his Rayes each Hill and Plaine,
                     Seem'd to haue brought the Gold-smiths World againe.
                  
               
               
                  
                  TEARES, ON THE DEATH of Moeliades.
                  
               
               
                  
                  To the Author.
                  
                     IN Waues of Woe thy Sighes my Soule doe tosse,
                  And doe burst vp the Conduits of my Teares,
                  Whose ranckling Wound no smoothing Baulme long beares,
                  But freshly bleedes when Ought vpbraides my Losse.
                  Then thou so sweetly Sorrow makes to sing,
                  And troubled Passions dost so well accord,
                  That more Delight thine Anguish doth afford,
                  Than others Ioyes can Satisfaction bring.
                  What sacred Wits (when rauish'd) doe affect,
                  To force Affections, metamorphose Mindes,
                  Whilst numbrous Power the Soule in secret bindes,
                  Thou hast perform'd, transforming in Effect:
                  For neuer Plaints did greater Pittie moue,
                  The best Applause that can such Notes approue.
                  
                     Sr. W. Alexander.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  TEARES, ON THE DEATH of Moeliades.
                  THE N
                        •…
                      which in thes
                        •…
                      Verses is giuen Prince HENRI
                        •…
                     , is that which he himselfe in ye Challenges of his Martial Sports, & Mascarads, was wont to vse, Moeliades Princ
                        •…
                      of the Isle
                        •…
                      which in 
                        〈◊〉
                      maketh Miles A DEO.
                  
                     
                        
                           O Heauens! then is it true that Thou art gone,
                     And left this woefull Ile her Losse to mone,
                     
                        Moeliades? bright Day-Starre of the West,
                     
                     A Comet, blazing Terrour to the East:
                     
                     And neither that thy Spright so heauenly wise,
                     Nor Bodie (though of Earth) more pure than Skies,
                     
                     Nor royall Stemme, nor thy sweet tender Age,
                     
                     Of adamantine Fates could quench the Rage?
                     
                     O fading Hopes! O short-while-lasting Ioy!
                     
                     Of Earth-borne Man, which one Houre can destroy!
                     Then euen of Vertues Spoyles Death Trophees reares,
                     As if hee gloried most in many Teares.
                     Forc'd by grimme Desti
                              •…
                           es, Heauens neglect our Cryes,
                     
                        Starres seeme set only to acte Tragoedies:
                     
                     And let them doe their Worst, since thou art gone,
                     Raise whom they list to Thrones, enthron'd dethrone,
                     Staine Princely Bowres with Blood, and euen to Gange,
                     
                     In Cypresse sad, glad Hymens Torches change.
                     
                        Ah! thou hast left to liue, and in the Time,
                     VVhen scarce thou blossom'd in thy pleasant Prime,
                     So falles by Northerne Blast a virgine Rose,
                     
                     At halfe that doth her bashfull Bosome close:
                     So a sweet Flourish languishing decayes,
                     That late did blush when kist by Phoebus Rayes:
                     
                        So Phoebus mounting the Meridians Hight,
                     Choack'd by pale Phoebe, faints vnto our Sight,
                     Astonish'd Nature sullen stands to see
                     The Life of all this All, so chang'd to bee,
                     In gloomie Gownes the Starres about deplore,
                     The Sea with murmuring Mountaines beates the Shore,
                     Blacke Darknesse reeles o're all, in thousand Showres
                     The weeping Aire, on Earth her Sorrow powres,
                     That (in a Palsey) quakes to finde so soone
                     Her Louer set, and Night burst foorth ere Noone.
                     
                  
                  
                     If Heauen (alas) ordain'd thee young to die,
                     Why was it not where thou thy Might did'st trie?
                     And to the hopefull World at least set forth
                     Some litle Sparke of thine expected Worth?
                     
                     
                        Moeliades, ô that by Isters Streames,
                     Amongst shrill-sounding Trumpets, flaming Gleames
                     Of warme encrimson'd Swords, and Cannons Roare,
                     Balls thicke as Raine pour'd by the Caspian Shore,
                     Amongst crush'd Lances, ringing Helmes, and Shields,
                     Dismembred Bodies rauishing the Fields,
                     In Turkish Blood made red like Marses Starre,
                     
                     Thou end
                           •…
                        d hadst thy Life, and Christian Warre!
                     Or as braue Burbon thou hadst made old Rome,
                     
                     
                        Queene of the World, thy Triumphs Place, and Tombe!
                     So Heauens faire Face to the vnborne which reades
                     A Booke had beene of thine illustrous Deedes:
                     So to their Nephewes aged Syres had told
                     The high Exploits perform'd by thee of old,
                     Townes raz'd, and rais'd, victorious, vanquish'd Bands,
                     Fierce Tyrants flying, foyl'd, kill'd, by thy Hands.
                     And in deare Arras, Virgines faire had wrought
                     The Bayes and Trophees to thy Countrey brought:
                     
                        While some new Homer imping Pennes to Fame,
                     
                     Deafe Nilus Dwellers had made heare thy Name.
                     That thou didst not attaine those Honours Spheares,
                     
                     It was not want of Worth, ô no, but Yeares.
                     
                     A Youth more braue, pale Troy with trembling Walles
                     Did neuer see, nor shee whose Name apalles
                     Both Titans golden Bowres, for bloody Fights
                     Mustring on Marses Field such Marse▪
                         like Knights.
                     The Heauens had brought thee to the highest Hight,
                     Of Wit, and Courage, shewing all their Might
                     VVhen they thee fram'd: Ay mee! that what is braue
                     On Earth, they as their owne so soone should craue.
                     
                        Moeliades sweet courtly Nymphes deplore,
                     From Thuly to Hydaspes pearlie Shore.
                  
                  
                     VVhen Forth thy Nurse, Forth where thou first didst passe
                     Thy tender Dayes (who smyl'd oft on her Glasse
                     To see thee gaze) Meandring with her Streames,
                     Heard thou hadst left this Round, from Phoebus Beames
                     Shee sought to flie, but forced to returne
                     By neighbour Brookes, Shee gaue her selfe to mourne:
                     And as shee rush'd her Cyclades among,
                     Shee seem'd to plaine, that Heauen had done her wrong.
                     VVith a ho
                           •…
                        rse Plaint, Cleyd downe her steepie Rockes,
                     And Tweed through her greene Mountaines cled with Flockes,
                     Did wound the Ocean, murmuring thy Death,
                     The Ocean that roar'd about the Earth,
                     
                     And it to Mauritanian Atlas told,
                     Who shrunke through Griefe, and downe his white Haires roll'd
                     Hudge Streames of Teares, that changed were in Floods,
                     VVith which hee drown'd the neighbour Plaines and Woods.
                     The lesser Brookes as they did bubbling goe,
                     Did keepe a Consort vnto publike Woe▪
                        
                     
                     
                        The Shepheards left their Flockes with downe-cast Eyes,
                     Disdaining to looke vp to angrie Skies:
                     Some broke their Pipes, and some in sweet-sad Layes,
                     Made senslesse things amazed at thy Praise.
                     His Reed Alexis hung vpon a Tree,
                     
                     And with his Teares made Doven great to bee.
                     
                        Moeliades sweet courtly Nymphes deplore,
                     From Thuly to Hydaspes pearlie Shore.
                  
                  
                     Chaste Maides which haunt faire Aganippe Well,
                     
                     And you in Tempes sacred Shade who dwell,
                     Let fall your Harpes, cease Tunes of loy to sing,
                     Discheueled make all Parnassus ring
                     VVith Antheames sad, thy Musicke Phoebus turne
                     In dolefull Plaints, whilst Ioy it selfe doth mourne:
                     Dead is thy Darling, who decor'd thy Bayes,
                     VVho oft was wont to cherish thy sweet Layes,
                     And to a Trumpet raise thine amorous Stile,
                     
                     That floting Delos enuie might this Ile.
                     
                     You Acidalian Archers breake your Bowes,
                     Your Brandons quench, with Teares blot Beauties Snowes,
                     And bid your weeping Mother yet againe
                     A second Adons Death, nay, Marses plaine:
                     His Eyes once were your Darts, nay, euen his Name
                     
                     VVhere euer heard, did euery Heart inflame:
                     
                        Tagus did court his Loue, with golden Streames,
                     
                     
                        Rhein with his Townes, faire Seine, with all shee claimes.
                     
                     But ah (poore Louers) Death did them betrey,
                     And (not suspected) made their Hopes his Prey!
                     
                     
                        Tagus bewailes his Losse, with golden Streames,
                     
                     
                        Rhein with his Townes, faire Seine with all shee claimes.
                     
                     
                        Moeliades sweet courtly Nymphes deplore,
                     From Thuly to Hydaspes pearlie Shore.
                  
                  
                     
                     Delicious Meads, whose checkred Plaine foorth brings,
                     VVhite, golden, azure Flowres, which once were Kings,
                     In mourning Blacke, their shining Colours dye,
                     Bow downe their Heads, whilst sighing Zephyres flye.
                     Queene of the Fields, whose Blush makes blushe the Morne,
                     
                     Sweet Rose, a Princes Death in Purple mourne.
                     O Hyacinthes, for ay your AI keepe still,
                     Nay, with moe Markes of Woe your Leaues now fill:
                     And you, O Flowre of Helens Teares first borne,
                     Into those liquide Pearles againe you turne.
                     Your greene Lockes, Forrests, cut, in weeping Myrrhes,
                     
                     The deadly Cypresse, and Inke-dropping Firres,
                     
                     Your Palmes and Mirtles change; from Shadowes darke
                     VVing'd Syrens waile, and you sad Ecchoes marke
                     The lamentable Accents of their Mone,
                     And plaine that braue Moeliades is gone.
                     Stay Skie thy turning Course, and now become
                     A stately Arche, vnto the Earth his Tombe:
                     Ouer which ay the watrie Iris keepe,
                     And sad Electras Sisters which still weepe.
                     
                        Moeliades sweet courtly Nymphes deplore,
                     From Thuly to Hydaspes pearlie Shore.
                  
                  
                     Deare Ghost, forgiue these our vntimely Teares,
                     By which our louing Minde, though weake, appeares,
                     Our Losse not Thine (when wee complaine) wee weepe,
                     For thee the glistring Walles of Heauen doe keepe,
                     Beyond the Planets Wheeles, aboue that Source
                     Of Spheares, that turnes the lower in its Course,
                     VVhere Sunne doth neuer set, nor vgly Night
                     
                     Euer appeares in mourning Garments dight:
                     VVhere Boreas stormie Trumpet doth not sound,
                     Nor Cloudes in Lightnings bursting, Minds astound.
                     
                        From Cares cold Climates farre, and hote Desire,
                     
                     VVhere Time is banish'd, Ages ne're exspire:
                     Amongst pure Sprights enuironed with Beames,
                     Thou think'st all things below to bee but Dreames,
                     And joy'st to looke downe to the azur'd Barres
                     Of Heauen, indented all with streaming Starres;
                     
                     And in their turning Temples to behold,
                     In siluer Robe the Moone, the Sunne in Gold,
                     Like young Eye-speaking Louers in a Dance,
                     VVith Majestie by Turnes retire, aduance,
                     Thou wondrest Earth to see hang like a Ball,
                     Clos'd in the gastly Cloyster of this All:
                     
                     And that poore Men should proue so madly fond,
                     To tosse themselues for a small Foot of Ground.
                     Nay, that they euen dare braue the Powers aboue,
                     From this base Stage of Change, that cannot moue.
                     All worldly Pompe and Pride thou seest arise
                     Like Smoake, that scattreth in the emptie Skies.
                     Other Hilles and Forrests, other sumptuous Towres,
                     
                     Amaz'd thou find'st, excelling our poore Bowres,
                     
                        Courts voyde of Flatterie, of Malice Mindes,
                     
                     
                        Pleasure which lasts, not such as Reason blindes:
                     Farre sweeter Songs thou hear'st and Carrolings,
                     VVhilst Heauens doe dance, and Quire of Angells sings,
                     Than moldie Mindes could faine, euen our Annoy
                     
                     (If it approach that Place) is chang'd in Ioy.
                  
                  
                     Rest blessed Spright, rest saciate with the Sight
                     Of him, whose Beames both dazell and delight,
                     
                        Life of all Liues, Cause of each other Cause,
                     The Spheare, and Center, where the Minde doth pause:
                     
                        Narcissus of himselfe, himselfe the Well,
                     
                     
                        Louer, and Beautie, that doth all excell.
                     
                        Rest happie Ghost, and wonder in that Glasse,
                     
                     VVhere seene is all that shall be, is, or was,
                     
                     VVhile shall be, is, o
                           •…
                         
                        was doe passe away,
                     And nought remaine but an Eternall Day.
                     
                     For euer rest, thy Praise Fame may enroule
                     In golden Annalles, whilst about the Pole
                     
                     The slow Bootes turnes, or Sunne doth rise
                     VVith skarlet Scarfe, to cheare the mourning Skies:
                     
                     The Virgines to thy Tombe may Garlands beare
                     Of Flowres, and on each Flowre let fall a Teare.
                     
                        Moeliades sweet courtly Nymphes deplore,
                     From Thuly to Hydaspes pearlie Shore.
                  
               
               
                  SONNET.
                  A Passing Glance, a Lightning long the Skies
                  That vsh'ring Thunder dies straight to our Sight,
                  A Sparke, of Contraries which doth arise,
                  Then drownes in the huge Depthes of Day and Night:
                  
                  Is this small-Small call'd Life, held in such Price
                  Of blinded Wights, who nothing judge aright,
                  Of Parthian Shaft so swift is not the Flight
                  
                  As Life, that wastes it selfe, and liuing dies.
                  O! what is humane Greatnesse, Valour, Wit?
                  
                  What fading Beautie, Riches, Honour, Praise?
                  
                  To what doth serue in golden Thrones to sit,
                  Thrall Earths vaste Round, triumphall Arches raise?
                  All is a Dreame, learne in this Princes Fall,
                  In whome (saue Death) nought mortall was at all.
               
               
                  
                  Of IET,
                  
                  Or Porphyrie,
                  
                  Or that white Stone
                  
                     PAROS affordes alone,
                  Or those in Azure Dye,
                  Which seeme to scorne the Skie;
                  
                  Here MEMPHIS Wonders doe not set,
                  Nor ARTEMISIAS hudge Frame,
                  That keepes so long her LOVERS Name.
                  Make no great Marble Atlas tremble with Gold,
                  To please a vulgare EYE that doth behold:
                  The Muses, Phoebus, LOVE, haue raised of their Teares
                  A chrystall Tombe to Him, through which his Worth appeares.
               
               
                  
                  VRANIA, OR Spirituall Poems.
               
               
                  
                  VRANIA▪ 
                     OR Spirituall Poems.
                  
                  TRiumphing Chariots, Statues, Crownes of Bayes,
                  Skie threatning Arches, the Rewards of Worth,
                  
                  Workes heauenly wise in sweet 
                        •…
                     armonious Layes,
                  Which Sprights diuine vnto the World set forth:
                  States, which ambitious Mindes with Blood doe raise
                  From frozen Tanais to Sunne-gilded Gange,
                  
                  Giganticke Frames held Wonders rarely strange,
                  Like Spiders Webbes, are made the Sport of Dayes.
                  All on
                        •…
                     y constant is in constant Change,
                  What done is, is vndone, and when vndone,
                  Into some other Fashion doth it range▪
                  
                  Thus goes the floting World beneath the Moone,
                  
                  Where for (my Minde) aboue Time, Motion, Place,
                  Thee raise, and Steps vnknowne to Nature Trace.
               
               
                  TOo long I follow'd haue my fond Desire,
                  And too long painted on the Ocean Streames:
                  Too long Refreshment sought amidst the Fire,
                  And hunted Ioyes, which to my Soule were Blames.
                  
                     Ah! when I had what most I did admire,
                  And seene of Lifes Delights the last Extreames,
                  I found all but a Rose hedg'd with a Bryer,
                  A Nought, a Thought, a Show of mocking Dreames.
                  Hencefoorth on thee mine only Good I'll thinke,
                  For only thou canst grant what I doe craue,
                  Thy Naile my Penne shall bee, thy Blood mine Inke,
                  Thy Winding-sheet my Paper, Studie Graue,
                  And till that Soule forth of this Bodie flie,
                  No Hope I'll haue but only onelie Thee.
               
               
                  
                  TO spreade the azure Canopie of Heauen,
                  And make it twinckle all with Spanges of Gold,
                  To place this pondrous Globe of Earth so euen,
                  That it should all, and nought should it vphold:
                  To giue strange Motions to the Planets seuen,
                  And Ioue to make so meeke, and Mars so bold,
                  To temper what is moist, drie, hote, and cold,
                  Of all their Iarres that sweet Accords are giuen.
                  LORD, to thy Wit is nought, nought to thy Might,
                  But that thou shouldst (thy Glorie laid aside)
                  Come basely in Mortalitie to bide,
                  And die for them deseru'd eternall Plight,
                  A Wonder is, so farre aboue our Wit,
                  That Angells stand amaz'd to thinke on it.
               
               
                  COme forth, come forth, yee blest triumphing Bands,
                  Faire Citizens of that immortall Towne:
                  Come see that King, who all this All commands,
                  Now (ouercharg'd with Loue) die for his owne.
                  Looke on those Nailes which pierce his Feete and Hands,
                  What a strange Diademe his Browes doth crowne?
                  Beholde his pallide Face, his Eyes which sowne,
                  And what a Throng of Thieues him mocking stands:
                  Come forth yee Empyrean Troupes, come forth,
                  Preserue this sacred Blood, which Earth adornes,
                  Gather those liquide Roses from his Thornes,
                  O! to bee lost they bee of too much Worth:
                  For Streames,1 Iuice,2 Baulme,3 they are, which quench,1 killes,2 charmes,3
                  
                  Of God,1 Death,2 Hell,3 the Wrath,1 the Life,2 the Harmes.3
                  
               
               
                  
                  SOule, which to Hell wast thrall,
                  Hee, hee for thine Offence
                  Did suffer Death, who could not die at all:
                  O soueraigne Excellence,
                  O Life of all that liues,
                  Eternall Bountie, which all Goodnesse giues,
                  How could Death mount so hie?
                  No Wit this Point can reach,
                  Faith onely doth vs teach,
                  For vs hee died, at all who could not die.
               
               
                  IF with such passing Beautie, choise Delights,
                  The Architect of this great Round did frame
                  This Pallace visible, which World we name?
                  (Yet sillie Mansion but of mortall Wights)
                  How many Wonders? what amazing Lights,
                  Must that triumphing Seate of Glorie claime?
                  Which doth transcend all this great Alls high Hights,
                  Of whose bright Sunne ours heere is but a Beame?
                  O blest Abode! ô happie dwelling Place!
                  Where visiblie th'Inuisible doth raigne,
                  Blest People, who doe see true Beauties Face,
                  With whose darke Shadowes Hee but Earth doth daigne,
                  All Ioy is but Annoy, all Concord Strife,
                  Match'd with your endlesse Blisse, and happie Life.
               
               
                  
                  LOue which is heere, a Care
                  That Wit and Will doth marre,
                  Vncertaine Truce, and a most certaine Warre,
                  A shrill tempestuous Winde,
                  VVhich doth disturbe the Minde,
                  And like wilde Waues our Dessignes all commoue:
                  Among those Sprights aboue
                  VVhich see their Makers Face,
                  It a Contentment is, a quiet Peace,
                  A Pleasure voide of Griefe, a constant Rest,
                  Eternall Ioy, which nothing can molest.
               
               
                  WHat haplesse Hap had I now to bee borne,
                  In these vnhappie Times, and dying Dayes,
                  Of this else-doating World? when Good decayes,
                  
                     Loue is quench'd forth, and Vertue held a Scorne.
                  When such are onely priz'd, by wretched Wayes
                  Who with a golden Fleece them can adorne,
                  When Auarice, and Lust, are counted Praise,
                  And noble Mindes liue Orphane▪
                      like forlorne.
                  Why was not I into that golden Age,
                  When Gold yet was not knowne? and those blacke Artes,
                  By which base Mortalles vildely play their Parts,
                  And staine with horride Actes Earths stately Stage?
                  Then to haue beene, Heauen, it had beene my Bliss
                        •…
                     ,
                  But blesse mee now, and take mee soone from this.
               
               
                  
                  THrise happie hee, who by some shadie Groue
                  Farre from the clamarous World doth liue his owne,
                  Though solitare, yet who is not alone,
                  But doth conuerse with that Eternall Loue.
                  
                  O how more sweet is Birds harmonious Mone,
                  Or the soft Sobbings of the widow'd Doue?
                  Than those smoothe Whisp'rings neare a Princes Throne,
                  Which Good make doubtfull, doe the Euill approue.
                  O how more sweet is Zephyres wholesome Breath,
                  And Sighs perfum'd, which doe the Flowres vnfold,
                  Than that Applause vaine Honour doth bequeath?
                  How sweete are Streames to Poyson drunke in Gold?
                  The World is full of Horrours, Falshoods, Slights,
                  Woods silent Shades haue only true Delights.
               
               
                  WHy (Worldlings) doe ye trust fraile Honours Dreames?
                  And leane to guilded Glories which decay?
                  Why doe yee toyle to registrate your Names
                  In ycie Columnes, which soone melt away?
                  True Honour is not here, that Place it claimes,
                  Where blacke-brow'd Night doth not exile the Day,
                  Nor no farre-shining Lampe diues in the Sea,
                  But an eternall Sunne spreades lasting Beames.
                  There it attendeth you, where spotlesse Bands
                  Of Sprights, stand gazing on their soueraigne Blisse,
                  
                  Where Yeeres not hold it in their cankring Hands,
                  But who once noble euer noble is:
                  Looke home, lest he your weakned Wit make thrall,
                  Who Edens foolish Gard'ner earst made fall.
               
               
                  
                  
                     AStrea in this Time
                  Now doth not liue, but is fled vp to Heauen;
                  Or if shee liue, it is not without Crime
                  That shee doth vse her Power,
                  And shee is no more Virgine, but a Whoure,
                  Whoure prostitute for Gold:
                  For shee doth neuer holde her Ballance euen,
                  And when her Sword is roll'd,
                  The Bad, Injurious, False, shee not o'rethrowes,
                  But on the Innocent lets fall her Blowes.
               
               
                  WHat serues it to bee good? Goodnesse by thee
                  The Holy-wise is thought a Foole to bee,
                  For thee the Man to Temperance inclin'de,
                  Is held but of a base and abject Minde,
                  The Continent is thought for thee but cold,
                  Who yet was good, that euer died old?
                  The pittifull who others feares to kill,
                  Is kill'd himselfe, and Goodnesse doth him ill:
                  The meeke and humble Man who cannot braue,
                  By thee is to some Giants Brood made Slaue.
                  Poore Goodnesse, thine thou to such Wrongs sett'st forth,
                  That ô! I feare mee, thou art nothing worth:
                  And when I looke to Earth, and not to Heauen,
                  
                  Ere I were turned Doue, I would bee Rauen.
               
               
                  
                  
                     GReat GOD, whom wee with humble Thoughts adore,
                     Eternall, infinite, almightie King,
                     Whose Pallace Heauen transcends, whose Throne before
                     
                        Archangells serue, and Seraphins doe sing:
                     Of Nought who wrought all that with wondring Eyes
                     VVee doe behold within this spacious Round,
                     VVho mak'st the Rockes to rocke, and stand the Skies,
                     At whose Command the horride Thunders sound:
                     
                        Ah! spare vs Wormes, weigh not how wee (alas)
                     Euill to our Selues, against thy Lawes rebell,
                     VVash off those Spots, which still in Conscience Glasse
                     (Though wee bee loth to looke) wee see too well.
                     Deseru'd Reuenge, ô doe not, doe not take,
                     If thou reuenge▪ what shall abide thy Blow?
                     Passe shall this World, this World which thou didst make,
                     VVhich should not perish till thy Trumpet blow.
                     For who is hee whom Parents Sinne not staines?
                     Or with his owne Offence is not defil'd?
                     Though Iustice Ruine threaten, Iustice Raines
                     Let Mercie hold, and bee both just and milde.
                  
                  
                     Lesse are our Faults farre farre tha
                           •…
                         is thy Loue,
                     O! what can better seeme thy Pow'r diuine?
                     Than those who Euill deserue thy Goodnesse proue?
                     And where thou thunder shouldst there faire to shine?
                     Then looke, and pittie, pittying forgiue
                     Vs guiltie Slaues, or Seruants, at thy Will,
                     Slaues, if (alas) thou look'st how wee doe liue,
                     
                        
                           •…
                        r doing nought at all, or doing ill:
                     
                        Of an vngratefull Minde a foule Effect,
                     But if thy Gifts, which largely heretofore
                     Thou hast vpon vs powr'd, thou doest respect?
                     VVee bee thy Seruants, nay, than Seruants more,
                     Thy Children, yes, and Children dearly bought,
                     But what strange Chance vs of this Lot bereaues?
                     Vile Rebells, ô! how basely are wee brought?
                     VVhom Grace made Children, Sinne hath now made Slaues:
                     Sinne Slaues hath made, but let thy Grace Sinne thrall,
                     That in our Wrongs thy mercie may appeare▪
                     
                     Thy Wisdome not so weake is, Pow'r so small,
                     But thousand Wayes they can make Men thee feare.
                  
                  
                     O Wisdome bound-lesse! admirable Grace!
                     Grace, Wisdome, which doe dazell Reasons Eye,
                     And could Heauens King bring from his placelesse Place,
                     On this infamous Stage of Woe, to die:
                     To die our Death and with the sacred Streame
                     Of Bloud, and Water, gushing from his Side,
                     To expiate that Sinne, and deadly Blame,
                     Contriued first by our First Parents Pride.
                     Thus thy great Loue, and Pittie, heauenly King,
                     Loue, Pittie, which so well our Losse preuents,
                     Could euen of Euill it s
                           •…
                        lfe all Goodnesse bring,
                     And sad Beginnings cheare with glad Euents.
                     O Loue, and Pittie! ill knowne of these Times,
                     O Loue and Pittie! carefull of our Blisse,
                     O Goodnesse! with the hainous Actes and Crimes
                     Of this blacke Age, that almost vanquish'd is:
                     Make this excessiue ardour of thy Loue,
                     So warme our Coldnesse, so our Liues renew,
                     That wee from Sinne, Sinne may from vs remoue,
                     Wit may our Will, Faith may our Wit subdue▪
                     
                     
                        Let thy p
                           •…
                        re Loue burne vp all mortall Lust,
                     That Band of Ills which thralles our better Part,
                     And fondly makes vs worship fleshly Dust,
                     In stead of Thee in Temple of our Heart.
                  
                  
                     Grant, when at last the Spright shall leaue this Tombe,
                     This loathsome Shop of Sinne, and Mansion blinde,
                     And (call▪d) before thy Royall Seat doth come,
                     It may a Sauiour, not a Iudge, thee finde.
                  
               
               
                  
                  To the Author.
                  THe sister Nymphes who haunt the Thespian Springs,
                  Ne're did their Gifts more liberally bequeath
                  To them who on their Hills suck'd sacred Breath,
                  Than vnto thee, by which thou sweetly sings.
                  Ne're did Apollo raise on Pegase Wings
                  A Muse more neare himselfe, more farre from Earth,
                  Than thine; if Shee doe weepe thy Ladies Death,
                  Or sing those sweet-sowre Panges which Passion brings.
                  To write our Thoughts in Verse doth merite Praise,
                  But those our Verse to gild in Fictions Ore,
                  Bright, rich, delightfull, doth deserue much more,
                  As thou hast done these thy delicious Layes:
                  Thy Muses Morning (doubtlesse) doth bewray
                  The neare Approach of a more glistring Day.
                  
                  
                     D. Murray.
                  
               
            
            
               
                  
                  
                  MADRIGALLS, AND Epigrammes.
                  
                     BY W. D.
                  
               
               
                  
                  
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  MADRIGALS, AND EPIGRAMMES.
                  The Statue of MEDVSA.
                  OF that MEDVSA strange,
                  Who those that did her see in Rockes did change,
                  None Image caru'd is this;
                  
                     MEDVSAS selfe it is,
                  For whilst at Heat of Day,
                  To quench her Thirst Shee by this Spring did stay,
                  Her curling Snakes beholding in this Glasse,
                  Life did Her leaue, and thus transform'd Shee was.
               
               
                  The Trojane Horse.
                  AHorse I am, whom Bit,
                  Raine, Rod, 
                        •…
                     or Spurre, not feare;
                  VVhen I my Riders beare,
                  VVithin my Wombe, not on my Backe they sit:
                  No Streames I drinke, nor care for Grasse, nor Corne,
                  
                     Arte mee a Monster wrought,
                  All Natures Workes to scorne:
                  A Mother, I was without Mother borne,
                  In End all arm'd my Father I forth brought:
                  VVhat thousand Ships, and Champions of Renowne,
                  Could not doe free, I captiue raz'd a Towne.
               
               
                  
                  A Louers Heauen.
                  THose Starres, nay Sunnes, which turne
                  So stately in their Spheares,
                  And daz'ling doe not burne,
                  The beautie of the Morne
                  
                  VVhich on those Cheekes appeares,
                  The Harmonie which to that Voyce is giuen,
                  Make mee thinke yee are Heauen:
                  If Heauen yee bee? ô that by pow'rfull Charmes
                  I Atlas were, to holde you in mine Armes!
               
               
                  Deepe Impression of Loue.
                  WHom raging Dog doth bite,
                  Hee doth in Water still
                  That Cerberus Image see;
                  
                     Loue Mad (perhaps) when he my Heart did smite,
                  (More to dissemble Ill)
                  Transform'd himselfe in thee,
                  For euer since thou present art to mee:
                  No Spring there is, no Floud, nor other Place,
                  Where I (alas) not see thy heauenly Face.
               
               
                  The Pourtrait of MARS and VENVS.
                  FAire PAPHOS wanton Queene,
                  Not drawne in White and Red,
                  Is truely heere, as when in VVLCANS Bed
                  She was of all Heauens laughing Senate seene:
                  Gaze on her Haire, and Eine,
                  Her Browes, the Bowes of Loue,
                  
                  Her backe with Lillies spred:
                  And yee should see her turne, and sweetly moue,
                  But that Shee neither so will doe, nor darre,
                  For feare to wake the angrie God of Warre.
               
               
                  
                  IÖLAS Epitaph.
                  HEre deare Iölas lies,
                  Who whilst hee liu'd in Beautie did surpasse
                  That Boy, whose heauenly Eyes
                  Brought Cypris from aboue,
                  Or him till Death who look'd in watrie Glasse,
                  Euen Iudge the God of Loue:
                  And if the Nymphe once held of him so deare,
                  
                     Dorine the faire, would heere but shed one Teare,
                  Thou shouldst (in Natures Scorne)
                  A purple Flowre see of this Marble borne.
               
               
                  Vpon the Death of a LINNET.
                  IF cruell Death had Eares,
                  Or could bee pleas'd by Songs?
                  This wing'd Musician liu'd had many yeares,
                  And Chloris mine had neuer wept these Wrongs:
                  For when it first tooke Breath,
                  The Heauens their Notes did vnto it bequeath:
                  And (if that Samians sentence bee found true)
                  
                     Amphion in this Body liu'd of new:
                  But Death, for that hee nothing spares, nought heares,
                  As hee doth Kings, it kill'd, ô Griefe! ô Teares!
               
               
                  ALCONS Kisse.
                  WHat others at their Eare
                  Two Pearles Camilla at her Nose did weare,
                  Which Alcon who nought saw
                  (For Loue is blinde) robb'd with a prettie Kisse,
                  But hauing knowne his Misse,
                  And felt what Ore hee from that Mine did draw,
                  When shee to charge againe him did desire,
                  Hee fled, and said, foule Water quenched Fire.
                  
               
               
                  
                  ICARVS.
                  WHilst with audacious Wings
                  I sprang those airie Wayes,
                  And fill'd (a Monster new) with Dread and Feares,
                  The feathred People, and their Eagle Kings:
                  Dazel'd with Phoebus Rayes,
                  And charmed with the Musicke of the Spheares,
                  VVhen Pennes could moue no more, and Force did faile,
                  I measur'd by a Fall these loftie Bounds;
                  Yet doth Renowne my Losses counteruaile,
                  For still the Shore my braue Attempt resounds:
                  A Sea, an Element doth beare my Name,
                  VVho hath so vaste a Tombe in Place, or Fame?
               
               
                  Cherries.
                  MY Wanton, weepe no more
                  The 
                        •…
                     osing of your Cherries,
                  Those, and farre sweeter Berries,
                  Your Sister in good store
                  Hath, spred on Lips, and Face:
                  Be glad, kisse but with me, and hold your peace.
               
               
                  Of THAVMANTIA, beholding her selfe in a Marble.
                  WOrld, wonder not that I
                  Engraue thus in my Brest
                  This Angell Face, which mee bereaues of Rest:
                  Since things euen wanting Sense, cannot denie
                  To lodge so deare a Guest,
                  And this hard Marble Stone
                  Receiues the same, and Ioues, but cannot grone.
               
               
                  
                  Loue suffereth no Parasol.
                  THose Eyes, deare Eyes, bee Spheares,
                  VVhere two bright Sunnes are roll'd,
                  That faire Hand to behold,
                  Of whitest Snowe appeares:
                  Then while yee coylie stand,
                  To hide from mee those Eyes,
                  Sweet, I would you aduise
                  To choose some other Fanne than that white Hand:
                  For if yee doe, for Trueth most true this know,
                  That Sunnes ere long must needes consume warme Snow.
               
               
                  Sleeping Beautie.
                  O Sight! too dearely bought,
                  Shee sleepes, and though those Eyes,
                  VVhich lighten Cupids Skies,
                  Bee clos'd, yet such a Grace
                  Enuironeth that Place,
                  That I through Wonder to grow faint am brought:
                  
                     Sunnes, if ecclips'd yee haue such Power diuine?
                  O! how can I endure you when yee shine?
               
               
                  The qualitie of a Kisse.
                  THe Kisse with so much Strife,
                  VVhich I late got (sweet Heart)
                  VVas it a Signe of Death, or was it Life?
                  Of Life it could not bee,
                  For I by it did sigh my Soule in thee,
                  Nor was it Death, Death doth no Ioy impart:
                  Thou silent stand'st, ah! what thou didst bequeath,
                  To mee a dying Life was, liuing Death.
               
               
                  
                  Of PHILLIS.
                  IN Peticote of Greene,
                  Her Haire about her Eine,
                  
                     Phillis beneath an Oake
                  Sate milking her faire Flocke:
                  Among that strained Moysture (rare Delight!)
                  Her Hand seem'd Milke in Milke, it was so white.
               
               
                  Kisses desired.
                  THough I with strange Desire
                  To kisse those rosie Lips am set on Fire,
                  Yet will I cease to craue
                  Sweet Touches in such store,
                  As hee who long before
                  From Lesbia them in thousands did receaue;
                  Heart mine, but once mee kisse,
                  And I by that sweet Blisse
                  Euen sweare to cease you to importune more,
                  Poore one no Number is:
                  Another Word of mee yee shall not heare,
                  After one Kisse, but still one Kisse, my Deare.
               
               
                  Of DAMETAS.
                  
                     DAMETAS dream'd he saw his Wife at Sport,
                  And found that sight was through the hornie Port.
                  
               
               
                  The Canon.
                  WHen first the Canon from her gaping Throte,
                  Against the Heauen her roaring Sulphure shote,
                  
                     Ioue wak'ned with the Noyce, and ask'd with Wonder,
                  VVhat mortall Wight had stollen from him his Thunder,
                  His christall Towres hee fear'd, but Fire, and Aire,
                  So deepe, did stay the Ball from mounting there.
               
               
                  
                  APELLES enamour'd of CAMPASPE, ALEXANDERS Mistresse.
                  POore Painter, whilst I sought
                  To counterfaite by Arte
                  
                  The fairest Frame that Nature euer wrought,
                  And hauing limm'd each Part
                  Except her matchlesse Eyes:
                  Scarce on those Twinnes I gaz'd,
                  As Lightning falles from Skies,
                  When straight my Hand benumm'd was, Mind amaz'd:
                  And ere that Pincell halfe them had exprest,
                  
                     Loue all had drawne, no, grauen within my Brest.
               
               
                  CAMPASPE.
                  ON Starres shall I exclame,
                  VVhich thus my Fortune change?
                  Or shall I else reuenge
                  Vpon my selfe this shame?
                  Vnconstant Monarch, or shall I thee blame?
                  Who let'st APELLES proue
                  The sweet Delights of Alexanders Loue;
                  No, Starres, my selfe, and thee, I all forgiue,
                  And joye that thus I liue:
                  Kings know not Beautie, hence mine was despis'd,
                  The Painter did, and mee hee dearly priz'd.
               
               
                  Vnpleasant Musicke.
                  IN Fields Ribaldo stray'd,
                  
                     Mayes Tapestrie to see,
                  And hearing on a Tree
                  A Cuckooe sing, hee sigh'd, and softly said,
                  Loe, how (alas) euen Birds sit mo
                        •…
                     king m
                        •…
                     e.
               
               
                  
                  A Iest.
                  IN a most holy Church▪ a holy Man,
                  Vnto a holy Saint, with Visage wan,
                  And Eyes like Fountaines, mumbled forth a Prayer,
                  And with strange Words, and Sig
                        •…
                     es, made blacke the Aire:
                  And hauing long so stay'd, and long long pray'd,
                  A thousand Crosses on himselfe hee lay'd,
                  Then with some sacred Beads hung on his Arme,
                  His Eyes, his Mouth, Brest, Temples did hee charme.
                  Thus not content (strange Worship hath none End)
                  To kisse the Earth at last hee did pretend,
                  And bowing downe, besought with humble Grace
                  An aged Woman neare to giue some Place:
                  Shee turn'd, and turning vp her Pole beneath,
                  Said, Sir, kisse heere, for it is all but Earth.
               
               
                  NARCISSVS.
                  FLouds cannot quench my Flames, ah! in this Well
                  I burne, not drowne, for what I cannot tell.
               
               
                  TO THAVMANTIA singing.
                  IS it not too too much
                  Thou late didst to mee proue,
                  A Basiliske of Loue?
                  And didst my Wits bewitch:
                  Vnlesse (to cause more Harme)
                  Made Syrene too thou with thy Voyce mee charme?
                  
                     Ah! though thou so my Reason didst controule,
                  That to thy Lookes I could not proue a Mole:
                  
                  Yet doe mee not that Wrong,
                  As not to let mee turne Aspe to thy Song.
               
               
                  
                  Of her Dog.
                  WHen her deare Bosome clips
                  That litle Curre, which faunes to touch her Lips▪
                  
                  Or when it is his Hap
                  To lie lapp'd in her Lap,
                  O! it growes Noone with mee,
                  With hotter-pointed Beames
                  My burning Planet streames,
                  VVhat Rayes were earst, in Lightnings changed bee:
                  VVhen oft I muse, how I to those Extreames
                  Am brought, I finde no Cause, except that shee
                  In Loues bright Zodiacke hauing trac'd each Roome,
                  To fatall Syrius now at last is come.
               
               
                  A Kisse.
                  HArke happie Louers, harke,
                  This first and last of Ioyes,
                  This Sweetner of Annoyes,
                  This Nectare of the Gods,
                  Yee call a Kisse, is with it selfe at ods:
                  And halfe so sweet is not
                  In equall Measure got,
                  At Light of Sunne, as it is in the Darke,
                  Harke, happie Louers, harke.
               
               
                  Cornucopia.
                  IF for one only Horne
                  Which Nature to him gaue,
                  So famous is the noble Vnicorne?
                  
                  What Praise should that Man haue,
                  Whose Head a Ladie braue
                  Doth with a goodlie Paire at once adorne?
               
               
                  
                  Of AMINTAS.
                  OVer a christall Source
                  
                     Amintas layde his Face,
                  Of popling Streames to see the restlesse Course:
                  But scarce hee had o'reshadowed the Place,
                  When (spying in the Ground a Childe arise,
                  Like to himselfe in Stature, Face, and Eyes)
                  Hee rose o'rejoy'd, and cried,
                  Deare Mates approch, see whom I haue descried,
                  The Boy of whom strange Stories Shepheards tell
                  (Oft-called Hylas) dwelleth in this Well.
               
               
                  PAMPHILVS.
                  SOme, Ladies wed, some loue, and some adore them,
                  I like their wanton Sport, then care not for them.
               
               
                  Vpon a Glasse.
                  IF thou wouldst see Threedes purer than the Gold,
                  VVhere Loue his Wealth doth show?
                  But take this Glasse, and thy faire Haire behold:
                  If Whitenesse thou wouldst see more white than Snow,
                  And reade on Wonders Booke?
                  Take but this Glasse, and on thy For
                        •…
                     head looke:
                  VVouldst thou in Winter see a crimsin Rose,
                  VVhose Thornes doe hurt each Heart?
                  Looke but in Glasse how thy sweet Lips doe close:
                  Wouldst thou see Planets which all Good impart,
                  Or Meteores diuine?
                  But take this Glasse, and gaze vpon thine Eine:
                  No, Planets, Rose, Snow, Gold, cannot compare
                  With you, deare Eyes, Lips, Browes, and amber Haire.
               
               
                  
                  Of a Bee.
                  AS an audacious Knight
                  Come with some Foe to fight,
                  His Sword doth brandish, makes his Armour ring:
                  So this prowde Bee (at home (perhaps) a King)
                  Did buzzing flie about,
                  And (Tyrant) after thy faire Lip did sting:
                  O Champion strange as stout!
                  Who hast by Nature found,
                  Sharpe Armes, and Trumpet shrill, to sound, and wound.
               
               
                  Of that same.
                  O Doe not kill that Bee
                  That thus hath wounded thee,
                  (Sweet) it was no Despight,
                  But Hue did him deceaue:
                  For when thy Lips did close,
                  Hee deemed them a Rose,
                  What wouldst thou further craue?
                  Hee wanting Wit, and blinded with Delight,
                  Would faine haue kiss'd▪ but Mad with Ioy did bite.
               
               
                  Of a Kisse.
                  
                     AH! of that cruell Bee
                  Thy Lips haue suckt too much:
                  For when they mine did touch,
                  I found tha
                        •…
                      both they hurt, and sweetned, mee:
                  This by the Sting they haue,
                  And that they of the Honey doe recea
                        •…
                     e:
                  Deare Kisse, else by what Arte
                  
                  Couldst thou at once both please and wound my Heart?
               
               
                  
                  IDMON to VENVS.
                  IF (Acidalias Queene)
                  Thou quench in mee thy Torch,
                  And with the same Thaumantias Heart shalt scorch;
                  Each Yeere a Mirtle Tree
                  Heere I doe vow to consecr
                        •…
                     te to thee:
                  And when the Meads grow greene,
                  I will of sweetest Flowrs
                  Weaue thousand Garlands, to adorne thy Bowrs.
               
               
                  A Louers Plaint.
                  IN midst of silent Night,
                  VVhen Men, Birds, Beasts, doe rest,
                  VVith Loue, and Feare possest
                  To Heauen, and Flore, I count my heauie Plight.
                  Againe with roseate Wings
                  When Morne peepes forth, and Philomela sings,
                  Then Voyde of all Reliefe,
                  Doe I renew my Griefe:
                  
                     Day followes Night, Night Day, whilst still I proue,
                  That Heauen is deafe, Flore carelesse of my Loue.
               
               
                  His Firebrand.
                  LEaue Page that slender Torch,
                  And in this gloomie Night
                  Let only shine the Light
                  Of Loues hote Brandon, which my Heart doth scorch:
                  A Sigh, or Blast of Wind,
                  My Teares, or Droppes of Raine,
                  May that at once make blinde;
                  VVhilst this like Aetna burning shall remaine.
               
               
                  
                  DAPHNIS VOW.
                  WHen Sunne doth bring the Day
                  From the Hesperian Sea,
                  Or Moone her Coach doth rolle
                  Aboue the Northerne Pole,
                  VVhen Serpents can not hisse,
                  And Louers shall not kisse:
                  Then may it be, but in no time till then,
                  That Daphnis can forget his Orienne.
                  
               
               
                  Of NISA.
                  
                     NIsa Palemons Wife him weeping told,
                  Hee kept not Grammer Rules, now beeing old:
                  For why (quoth shee) Position false make yee,
                  Putting a short thing where a long should bee.
               
               
                  Beauties Idea.
                  WHo would Perfections faire Idea see,
                  Let him come looke on Chloris sweet with mee;
                  White is her Haire, her Teeth white, white her Skinne,
                  Blacke bee her Eyes, her Eye-browes, Cupids Inne:
                  Her Lockes, her Body, Hands, doe long appeare,
                  But Teeth short, Bellie short, short either Eare;
                  The Space twixt Shoulders, Eyes, is wide, Browes wide,
                  Straite Waste, the Mouth straite, and her virgine Pride:
                  Thicke are her Lips, Thighs, with Banckes swelling there,
                  Her Nose is small, small Fingers, and her Haire,
                  Her sugred Mouth, her Cheekes, her Nailes, bee red,
                  Litle her Foot, Pap litle, and her Hed.
                  Such Venus was, such was the Flame of Troy,
                  
                  Such Chloris is, my Hope, and only Ioy.
               
               
                  
                  CRATONS Death.
                  AMidst the Waues profound,
                  Farre farre from all Reliefe,
                  The honest Fisher Craton, ah! is drownd
                  Into his litle Skife:
                  The Boords of which did serue him for a Beare,
                  So that to the blacke World when hee came neare,
                  Of him no Waftage greedie Charon got,
                  For hee in his owne Boat
                  Did passe that Floud, by which the Gods dow sweare.
               
               
                  ARMELINS Epitaph.
                  NEare to this Eglantine
                  Enclosed lies the milke-white Armeline:
                  
                  Once Chloris onlie Ioye,
                  Now onlie her annoy;
                  Who enuied was of the most happie Swaines,
                  That keepe their Flocks in Mountaines, Dales, or Plaines:
                  For oft shee bare the wanton in her Arme,
                  And oft her Bed, and Bosome did he warme:
                  Now when vnkindlie Fates did him destroy,
                  Blest Dog he had the Grace,
                  With Teares for him that Chloris wet her Face.
               
               
                  The Statue of VENVS sleeping.
                  BReake not my sweet Repose
                  Thou, whom free Will, or Chance, brings to this Place,
                  Let Lids these Comets close,
                  O doe not seeke to see their shining Grace:
                  For when mine Eyes thou seest, they thine will blinde,
                  And thou shalt parte, but leaue thy Heart behinde.
               
               
                  
                  LILLAS Prayer.
                  
                     LOue, if thou wilt once more
                  That I to thee returne,
                  (Sweete God) make me not burne
                  For quiuering Age, that doth spent Dayes deplore:
                  Nor doe not wound my Hart
                  For some vnconstant Boy,
                  Who ioyes to loue, yet makes of Loue a Toy:
                  But (ah) if I must prooue thy golden Dart?
                  Of grace O let mee finde
                  A sweet young Louer with an aged Mind.
                  Thus Lilla pray'd, and Idas did replie
                  (Who heard) Deare haue thy wish, for such am I.
               
               
                  The vnkindnesse of RORA.
                  WHilst sighing forth his Wrongs,
                  In sweet, though dolefull Songs,
                  
                     Alexis seekes to charme his Roras Eares,
                  The Hills are heard to mone,
                  To sigh each Spring appeares,
                  Trees, euen heard Trees, through Rine distill their Teares,
                  And soft growes euery Stone:
                  But Teares, Sighes, Songs, can not faire Rora moue,
                  Prowde of his Plaints shee glories in his Loue.
               
               
                  ANTHEA Gift.
                  THis virgine Locke of Haire
                  To Idmon Anthea giues,
                  
                     Idmon for whom shee liues,
                  Though oft shee mixe his Hopes with cold Despaire:
                  This now, but absent if hee constant proue,
                  VVith Gift more deare shee vowes to meet his Loue.
               
               
                  
                  TO THAVMANTIA.
                  Come, let vs liue, and loue,
                  And kisse, Thaumantia mine,
                  I shall the Elme bee, bee to mee the Vine,
                  Come let vs teach new Billing to the Doue:
                  Nay, to augment our Blisse,
                  Let Soules euen other kisse,
                  Let Loue a Worke-man bee,
                  Vndoe, distemper, and his Cunning proue,
                  Of Kisses three make one, of one make three:
                  Though Moone, Sunne, Starres, bee Bodies farre more bright,
                  Let them not vaunt they match vs in Delight.
               
               
                  Epitaph.
                  THis deare (though not respected) Earth doth hold
                  One for his Worth, whose Tombe should bee of Gold.
               
               
                  Of LIDA.
                  SVch Lida is that who Her sees
                  Through Enuie, or through Loue straight dies.
               
               
                  A Wish.
                  To forge to mightie Ioue
                  
                  The Thunder-bolts aboue,
                  Nor on this Round below
                  Rich Midas Skill to know,
                  And make all Gold I touch,
                  I doe not craue, nor other Cunning such:
                  For all those Artes bee vnderneath the Skie,
                  I wish but Phillis Lapidare to bee.
               
               
                  
                  A Louers Day and Night.
                  BRight Meteore of Day,
                  For mee in Thetis Bowres for euer staye:
                  
                     Night, to this flowrie Globe
                  Ne're show for mee thy starre-embrodred Robe;
                  My Night, my Day, doe not proceede from you,
                  But hang on Miras Browe:
                  For when shee Iowres, and hides from mee her Eyes,
                  Midst clearest Day I finde blacke Night arise,
                  When smyling shee againe those Twinnes doth turne,
                  In midst of Night I finde Noones Torch to burne.
               
               
                  The Statue of ADONIS.
                  WHen Venus longst that Plaine
                  This Parian Adon saw,
                  Shee sigh'd, and said, What Power breakes Destines Law,
                  World mourned Boy, and makes thee liue againe?
                  Then with stretcht Armes shee ran him to enfold:
                  But when shee did behold
                  The Bore, whose snowie Tuskes did threaten Death,
                  Feare closed vp her Breath:
                  Who can but grant then that these Stones doe liue,
                  Sith this bred Loue, and that a Wound did giue?
               
               
                  CLORVS to a Groue.
                  OLd Oake, and you thicke Groue,
                  I euer shall you loue,
                  With these sweet-smelling Briers,
                  For Briers, Oake, Groue, ye
                        •…
                      crowned my Desires,
                  When vnderneath your Shade
                  I left my Woe, and Flore her Maidenhead.
               
               
                  
                  A Couplet encomiasticke.
                  
                     LOue1, Cypris2, Phoebus3, will feede1, decke2, and crowne3,
                  Thy Heart1, Browes2, Verse3, with Flames1, with Flowrs2, Renowne3.
               
               
                  An other.
                  THy Muse not-able, full, il-lustred Rimes,
                  Make thee the Poet
                        •…
                      Aster of our Times.
               
               
                  The Rose.
                  FLowre, which of ADONS Blood
                  Sprang, when of that cleare Flood
                  Which Venus wept, an other white was borne,
                  The sweet Cynarean Youth thou right dost show:
                  But this sharpe-pointed Thorne,
                  Which doth (so prowde) about thy Crimsin grow,
                  What doth it represent?
                  Boares Tuskes (perhaps) his snowie Flancke which rent:
                  O Show of Showes! of vnesteemed Worth,
                  Which both what kill'd, and what was kill'd sett'st forth.
               
               
                  To a Riuer.
                  SIth shee will not that I
                  Show to the World my Ioy,
                  Thou who oft mine Annoy
                  Hast heard (deare Flood) tell Thetis Nymphettes bright,
                  That not a happier Wight
                  Doth breath beneath the Skie:
                  More sweet, more white, more faire,
                  Lips, Hands, and amber Haire,
                  Tell none did euer touch;
                  A smaller, daintier Waste
                  Tell neuer was embract:
                  But Peace, sith shee forbids thou tell'st too much.
               
               
                  
                  
                     Thaïs Metamorphose.
                  IN Briareus hudge
                  
                     Thaïs wish'd shee might change
                  Her Man, and pray'd him herefore not to grudge,
                  Nor fondly thinke it strange:
                  For if (said shee) I might the Parts dispose,
                  I wish you not an hundreth Armes, nor Hands,
                  But hundreth Things, like those,
                  VVith which Priapus in our Garden stands.
               
               
                  Vpon a Baye Tree, not long since growing in the Ruines of VIRGILS Tombe.
                  THose Stones which once had Trust
                  Of Maros sacred Dust,
                  Which now of their 
                        •…
                     irst Beautie spoylde are seene,
                  That they due Praise not want,
                  Inglorious and remaine,
                  A Delian Tree (faire Natures only Plant)
                  Now courtes, and shadowes with her Tresses green
                        •…
                     
                  
                  Sing Iö Paean, yee of Phoebus Traine,
                  Though Enuie, Auarice, Time, your Tombes throw downe,
                  With Maiden Lawrells Nature will them crowne.
               
               
                  Epitaph.
                  THen Death thee hath beguild
                  
                     Alectos first borne Child?
                  Thou who didst thrall all Lawes
                  Then against Wormes canst not maintaine thy Cause?
                  Yet Wormes (more iust than thou) now doe no Wrong,
                  Sith all doe wonder they thee spar'd so long,
                  For though from Life but lately thou didst passe,
                  Ten Springs are gone since thou corrupted was.
               
               
                  
                  FLORAS Flowre.
                  
                     VEnus doth loue the Rose,
                  
                     Apollo those deare Flowrs
                  Which were his Paramours,
                  The Queene of sable Skies,
                  The subtile Lunaries,
                  
                  But Flore likes none of those,
                  For faire to Her no Flowre seemes saue the Lillie:
                  
                  And why? because one Letter turnes it P.
                  
               
               
                  MELAMPVS Epitaph.
                  ALl that a Dog could haue
                  The good Melampus had:
                  Nay, hee had more than what in Beasts wee cra
                        •…
                     e,
                  For hee could playe the Braue,
                  And often like a Thraso sterne goe Mad:
                  And if yee had not seene, but heard him barke,
                  Yee would haue sworne hee was your Parish Clarke.
               
               
                  KALAS Complaint.
                  
                     KAla old Mopsus Wife,
                  
                     Kala with fairest Face,
                  (For whom the Neighbour Swaines oft were at Strife)
                  As shee to milke her milke-white Flocke did tend,
                  Sigh'd with a heauie Grace,
                  And said, What Wretch like mee doth leade her Life?
                  I see not how my Taske can haue an End:
                  All Day I draw these streaming Dugs in Fold,
                  All Night mine emptie Husbands soft and cold.
               
               
                  
                  The Happinesse of a Flea.
                  HOw Happier is that Flea
                  Which in thy Brest doth playe,
                  Than that pied Butterflie
                  Which courtes the Flame, and in the same doth die?
                  That hath a light Delight
                  (Poore Foole) contented only with a Sight,
                  When this doth sporte, and swell with dearest Food,
                  And if hee die, hee Knight-like dies in Blood.
               
               
                  Of that same.
                  POore Flea, then thou didst die,
                  Yet by so faire a Hand,
                  That thus to die was Destine to command:
                  Thou die didst, yet didst trie
                  A Louers last Delight,
                  To vault on virgine Plaines, Her kisse, and bite:
                  Thou diedst, yet hast thy Tombe
                  Betweene those Pappes, ô deare and stately Roome!
                  Flea, happier farre, more blest,
                  Than Phoenix burning in his spicie Nest.
               
               
                  LINAS Virginitie.
                  WHo Lina weddeth, shall most happie bee,
                  For hee a Maide shall finde,
                  Though Maiden none bee shee,
                  A Girle, or Boy, beneath her Waste confinde:
                  And thought bright Ceres Lockes bee neuer shorne,
                  Hee shall be sure this Yeere to lacke no Corne.
                  
               
               
                  
                  LOVE naked.
                  ANd would yee (Louers) know
                  VVhy Loue doth naked goe?
                  Fond, waggish, changeling Lad,
                  Late whilst Thaumantias Voyce
                  Hee wondring heard, it made him so rejoyce,
                  That hee o'rejoy'd ran Mad:
                  And in a franticke Fit threw Cloathes away,
                  And since from Lip, and Lap hers can not straye.
               
               
                  NIOBE.
                  WRetched Niobè I am,
                  Let Wretches reade my Case,
                  Not such who with a Teare ne're wet their Face;
                  Seuen Daughters of mee came,
                  And Sonnes as many, which one fatall Day
                  (Orb'd Mother!) tooke away:
                  Thus reft by Heauens vnjust,
                  Griefe turn'd mee Stone, Stone too mee doth entombe,
                  VVhich if thou dost mistrust,
                  Of this hard Rocke but ope the flintie Wombe,
                  And heere thou shalt finde Marble, and no Dust.
               
               
                  Change of Loue.
                  ONce did I weepe, and grone,
                  Drinke Teares, draw loathed Breath,
                  And all for Loue of one
                  VVho did affect my Death:
                  But now (Thankes to Disdaine)
                  
                  I liue relieu'd of Paine,
                  For Sighs, I singing goe,
                  I burne not as before, no, no, no, no.
               
               
                  
                  Wilde Beautie.
                  IF all but Yce thou bee,
                  How dost thou thus mee burne?
                  Or how at Fire which thou dost raise in mee
                  (Sith Yce) thy selfe in Streames dost thou not turne▪
                  
                  But rather (plaintfull Case!)
                  Of Yce art Marble made to my Disgrace:
                  O Miracle of Loue! not heard till now,
                  Cold Yce doth burne, and hard by Fire doth grow.
               
               
                  Constant Loue.
                  
                     TIme makes great States decay,
                  
                     Time doth Mayes Pompe disgrace,
                  
                     Time drawes d
                        •…
                     epe Furrowes in the fairest Face,
                  
                     Time Wisdome, Force, Renowne, doth take away,
                  
                     Time doth consume the Yeeres,
                  
                     Time Changes workes in Heauens eternall Spheares:
                  Yet this fierce Tyrant which doth all deuoure,
                  To lessen Loue in mee shall haue no Power.
               
               
                  TO CHLORIS.
                  SEe Chloris, how the Cloudes
                  Tilte in the azure Lists,
                  And how with Stygian Mists
                  Each horned Hill his giant Forehead shroudes,
                  
                     Ioue thundreth in the Aire,
                  The Aire growne great with Raine,
                  Now seemes to bring Deucalions Dayes againe:
                  I see thee quake, come, let vs home repaire,
                  Come hide thee in mine Armes,
                  If not for Loue, yet to shunne greater Harmes.
               
               
                  
                  VPON A POVRTRAIT.
                  THe Goddesse that in Amathus doth raigne,
                  With siluer Tramells, and Saphire-colour'd Eyes,
                  When naked fr
                        •…
                     m her Mothers christall Plaine
                  Shee first appear'd vnto the wondring Skies;
                  Or when (the golden Apple to obtaine)
                  Her blushing Snowes amazed Idas Trees,
                  Did neuer looke in halfe so faire a Guise
                  As shee heere drawne, all other Ages Staine.
                  
                  O God what Beauties! to inflame the Soule,
                  And hold the wildest Hearts in Chaines of Gold,
                  Faire Lockes, sweet Face, Loues stately Capitole,
                  
                  Deare Necke, which dost that heauenly Frame vp-hold:
                  If Vertue would to mortall Eyes appeare,
                  To rauish Sense, shee would your Beautie weare.
               
               
                  Vpon that same.
                  IF Heauen, the Starres, and Nature, did her grace
                  With all Perfections found the Moone aboue,
                  And what excelleth in this lower Place,
                  Did place in her, to breede a World of Loue?
                  If Angells Gleames shine on her fairest Face?
                  Which make Heauens Ioy on Earth the Gazer proue?
                  And her bright Eyes (the Orbs which Beautie moue)
                  Doe glance like Phoebus in his glorious Race?
                  What Pincell paint? what Colour to the Sight
                  So sweet a Shape can show? the blushing Morne
                  
                  The Red must lend, the milkie- Way the White,
                  And Night the Starres, which her rich Crowne adorne,
                  To draw her right: But then that all agree,
                  The Heauen, the Table, Zeuxis Ioue must bee.
               
               
                  
                  Vpon that same, drawne with a Pansie.
                  
                  WHen with braue Arte the curious Painter drew
                  This heauenly Shape, the Hand why made hee beare
                  With golden Veines that Flowre of purple Hue,
                  Which followes on the Planet of the Yeare?
                  
                  Was it to show how in our Hemispheare
                  Like him shee shines? Nay, that Effects more true
                  Of Power, and Wonder doe in her appeare,
                  Whilst hee but Flowres, shee doth braue Minds subdue?
                  Or would hee else to Vertues glorious Light
                  Her constant Course make knowne? or is it hee
                  
                  Doth paralell her Blisse with Clytias Plight?
                  Right so, and thus, hee reading in her Eye
                  Some woefull Louers End, to grace his Graue,
                  For Cypresse Tree this mourning Flowre her gaue.
               
               
                  Vpon that same.
                  IF Sight bee not beguilde?
                  And Eyes right playe their Part?
                  This Flowre is not of Arte,
                  
                  But is faire Natures Child:
                  And though when Phoebus from vs is exilde,
                  Shee doth not locke her Leaues, his Losse to mone,
                  No Wonder, Earth hath now moe Sunnes than one.
               
               
                  
                  THIRSIS in Dispraise of Beautie.
                  
                     THat which so much the doating World doth prise,
                     Fond Ladies only Care, and sole Delight,
                     Soone-fading Beautie, which of Hues doth rise,
                     Is but an abject Let of Natures Might;
                     Most woefull Wretch, whom shining Haire and Eyes,
                     Leade to Loues Dungeon, traitor'd by a Sight,
                     Most woefull: for hee might with greater Ease
                     Hells Portalls enter, and pale Death appease.
                  
                  
                     As in delicious Meads beneath the Flowres,
                     And the most wholsome Herbes that May can show,
                     In christall Curles the speckled Serpent lowres,
                     As in the Apple (which most faire doth grow)
                     The rotten Worme is clos'd, which it deuoures,
                     As in gilt Cups with Gnossian Wine which flow,
                     Oft Poyson pompously doth hide its Sowres:
                     So Lewdnesse, Falshood, Mischiefe, them aduance,
                     Clad with the pleasant Rayes of Beauties Glance.
                  
                  
                     Good thence is chas'd, where Beautie doth appeare,
                     Milde Lowlinesse with Pittie from it flie,
                     Where Beautie raignes as in their proper Spheare,
                     Ingratitude, Disdaine, Pride, all des
                           •…
                        rie,
                     The Flowre, and Fruit which Vertues Tree should beare,
                     With her bad Shadowe Beautie maketh die:
                     
                        Beautie a Monster is, a Monster hurld
                     From angrie Hea
                           •…
                        en, to scourge this lower World.
                  
                  
                     As Fruits which are vnripe, and sowre of Taste,
                     To bee confect'd more fit than sweet wee proue,
                     
                        
                           〈◊〉
                         Sweet in Spight of Care themselues will waste,
                     When they long kept, the Appetite doe moue:
                     
                        So in the Sweetnesse of his Nectare, Loue
                     
                     The foule confects, and seasons for his Feaste:
                     Sowre is farre better which wee sweet may make,
                     Than sweet which sweeter Sweetnesse will not 
                           •…
                        ake.
                  
                  
                     Foule may my Ladie bee, and may her Nose
                     (A Tanarife) giue Vmbrage to her Chinne;
                     May her gay Mouth (which shee no Time may close)
                     So wide be, that the Moone may turne therein,
                     May Eyes, and Teeth, bee made conforme to those,
                     Eyes set by Chance, and white, Teeth blacke and thinne:
                     May all what seene is, and is hidde from Sight,
                     Like vnto these rare Parts bee framed right.
                  
                  
                     I shall not feare thus though shee straye alone,
                     That others Her pursue, entice, admire,
                     And though shee sometime counterfaite a Grone,
                     I shall not thinke her Heart feeles vncouth Fire,
                     I shall not stile Her ruethlesse to my Mone,
                     Nor prowde, disdainfull, wayward to Desire:
                     
                     Her Thoughts with mine will hold an equall Line,
                     I shall bee hers, and shee shall all bee mine.
                  
               
               
                  EVRYMEDONS Praise of MIRA.
                  
                     GEmme of the Mountaines, Glorie of our Plaines,
                     Rare Miracle of Nature, and of Loue,
                     
                     Sweet Atlas, who all Beauties Heauens sustaines,
                     No, Beauties Heauen, where all her Wonders moue,
                     The Sunne from East to West who all doth see,
                     On this low Globe sees nothing like to thee.
                  
                  
                     One Phoenix only liu'd ere thou wast borne,
                     And Earth but did o
                           •…
                        e Queene of Loue admire,
                     
                        Three Graces only did the World adorne,
                     But thrise three Muses sung to Phoebus Lyre,
                     Two Phoenixes bee now, Loues Queenes are two,
                     Foure Graces, Muses ten, all made by you.
                  
                  
                     For those Perfections which the bounteous Heauen
                     To diuerse Worlds in diuerse Times assign'd,
                     With thousands more, to thee at once were giuen,
                     Thy Body faire, more faire they made thy Mind:
                     And that thy like no Age should more behold,
                     When thou wast fram'd they after brake the Mold.
                  
                  
                     Sweet are the Blushes, on thy Face which shine,
                     Sweet are the Flames, which sparkle from thine Eyes,
                     Sweet are his Torments, who for thee doth pine,
                     Most sweet his Death, for thee who sweetly dies,
                     For if hee die, hee dies not by Annoy,
                     But too much Sweetnesse and aboundant Ioy.
                  
                  
                     What are my slender Layes to show thy Worth?
                     How can base Words a thing so high make knowne?
                     So wooden Globes bright Starres to vs set forth;
                     So in a Christall is Sunnes Beautie showne:
                     More of thy Praises if my Muse should write,
                     More Loue and Pittie, must the same indite?
                  
               
               
                  THAVMANTIA at the departure of IDMON.
                  
                     FAire Diane, from the Hight
                     Of Heauens first Orbe who chear'st this lower Place,
                     Hide now from mee thy Light,
                     And pittying my Case,
                     Spread with a Skarfe of Clouds thy blushing Face.
                  
                  
                     
                     Come with your dolefull Songs,
                     Nights sable Birds, which plaine when others sleepe,
                     Come, solemnize my Wrongs,
                     And Consort to mee keepe,
                     Sith Heauen, Earth, Hell, are set to cause mee weepe.
                  
                  
                     This Griefe yet I could beare,
                     If now by Absence I were only pinde,
                     But ah! worse Euill I feare,
                     Men absent proue vnkinde,
                     And change (vnconstant like the Moone) their Minde.
                  
                  
                     If Thought had so much Power
                     Of thy Departure, that it could mee slaye?
                     How will that vgly Houre
                     My feeble Sense dismaye?
                     
                        Farewell sweet Heart, when I shall heare thee say.
                  
                  
                     Deare Life, sith thou must goe,
                     Take all my Ioy and Comfort hence with thee,
                     And leaue with mee thy Woe,
                     Which vntill I thee see,
                     Nor Time, nor Place, nor Change shall take from mee.
                  
               
               
                  ERYCINE at the departure of ALEXIS.
                  ANd wilt thou then, Alexis mine, depart?
                  And leaue these slowrie Meads, and christall Streames?
                  These Hills as greene as great with Gold and Gemmes,
                  Which courte thee with rich Treasure in each Part?
                  Shall nothing hold thee? not my loyall Heart,
                  That burstes to lose the Comfort of thy Beames?
                  Nor yet this Pipe which wildest Satyres tames?
                  
                     Nor Lambkins Wayling? nor old Dorus Smart?
                  O ruethlesse Shepheard, Forrests strange among
                  VVhat canst thou else but fearfull Dangers finde?
                  But ah! not thou, but Honour doth mee Wrong;
                  O cruell Honour! Tyrant of the Mind,
                  This said sad Erycine, and all the Flowres
                  Empearled as shee went, with Eyes salt Showres.
               
               
                  ALEXIS to DAMON.
                  THe Loue Alexis did to Damon beare,
                  Shall witness'd bee to all the Woods, and Plaines,
                  As singulare, renown'd by neighbouring Swaines,
                  That to our Relicts Time may Trophees reare:
                  Those Madrigals wee sung amidst our Flockes,
                  With Garlands guarded from Apollos Beames,
                  On Ochells whiles, whiles neare Bodotrias Streames,
                  Are registrate by Ecchoes in the Rockes.
                  Of forraine Shepheards bent to trie the States,
                  Though I (Worlds Guest) a Vagabond doe straye,
                  Thou mayst that Store, which I esteeme Suruaye,
                  As best acquainted with my Soules Conceits▪
                  
                  What euer Fate Heauens haue for mee design'd,
                  I trust thee with the Treasure of my Mind.
               
            
            FINIS.
            
         
      
   