
      
         
            
            
            A new Counſell againſt the Peſtilence, declaring what kinde of diſeaſe it is, of what cauſe it procedeth, the ſignes and tokens thereof: With the order of curing the ſame.
            
            
               depiction of furnace
            
            Imprinted at London by Iohn Charlewood for Andrew Maunſell, in Paules Church yard, at the ſigne of the Parrot.
         
         
            
            
            To the Right honorable, Syr Iames Hawes Knight, Lorde Mayor of the Citie of London.
            
               
                  IT is the duetie of euery good Magiſtrate, Right honourable, not onely to eſtabliſhe good Lawes for the preſeruation of a common wealth: but alſo to prouide for the health of the commons. And ſince during the time, next vnder God, and our moſt vertuous Prince, the gouernment of this Citie of London is committed to your charge: I could not deuiſe a fitter▪ Patrone for this booke intituled, A new counſell againſt the Peſtilence, latelye by me Engliſhed, both for the good wyll I am aſſured you beare towarde the Citie, and the welfare thereof: As alſo for that vnder the auctoritye of your Honours name, that it might be the more thankfully receyued, and better lyked of within the ſame. In whiche Citie this greeuous plague of Peſtilence, hath more fiercely raged at other times, then now it doth: God bee thanked therefore, whome I beſeeche it

may do leſſe: and ſhould do leſſe at this preſent, I ſuppoſe, if at your Lordſhips commaundement, the officers looked more nighlye vnto the preciſe execution of ſuch holſome ordinaunces as are made in that behalfe, as alſo for the cleane & ſwéete kéeping of the ſtreetes and other places: by omitting whereof, the ayre becommeth corrupt & contagious, bringing the Citie into obloquie, the Citizens into contempt, impoueriſhing the commons, and depriuing many of Gods people of their lyues. Some priuate cauſes there bee alſo, not nowe to bée recited, pricking mee thus boldlye forwarde to trouble your Honour with thys ſmall trauaill, both in reſpect of your vertues many wayes, and for the worthines of the writer, in whoſe commendation for want of time and place, I wyll ſay nothing, the worke ſufficientlye prayſing it ſelfe, which notwithſtanding, I commit vnto your Honours moſt fauourable tuition, with my ſelfe, as a ſimple, yet hartye welwyller, and your Honours moſt humble at commaundement:
            
               T. T.
            
         
         
            
            
               ❧ To the Right honourable the Lorde Vidam Chartres, Prince of Chabanoys. Peter Droet Phiſition ſendeth gréeting.
            
            
               SO many are your benefits beſtowed vpon mee, (Right honourable Patrone, where by you would haue me bounden vnto you all the dayes of my life, both in beſtowing parte of your goods vpō mee, and in imparting the rare gyftes of your minde: that if I would indeuour to declare the ſame in wordes, truely I were not able▪ And firſt to let paſſe the giftes of fortune wherewith you haue ſufficiently increaced my wealth, I would willingly reherſe the countreyes which I haue traueyled with you: and what ſecrets of nature I haue learned by your means & induſtrie: what queſtions you haue propoſed vnto me and other profeſſours of Phiſick, drawne out of the deepeſt ſecrets and bowels of nature, whereat both they & I being aſtonied: haue wondered at your ſingular learning, and merueled at your sharpnes of wit, yea, I myſelfe remember how ofte I haue reade ouer the workes of Hippocrates and Galen only to be

able to ſatiſſie your demaundes, who woulde diſpute with more sharpneſſe of witte then is accuſtomablye vſed in our publique ſchooles, whereby you haue ſo pricked mee forward that whatſoeuer excellencie is in me in the knowledg of Phiſick, which I would haue to be taken as ſpoken without brag, I acknowledg that I haue receiued it by your meanes only. For by the helpe of you, and your wiſdome, I haue had conference with the beſt learned Phiſitions both in England, Germanie, and many other places: and for your ſake I haue learned many thinges of them concerning the ſecrets of our facultie, and found them to bee true by practice and experience, whereby I am able to cure many kindes of diſeaſes. Amonge all which ſecrets▪ I haue gathered together manye rare and verie effectuall remedies againſt the Feuer quartaine, againſt the infectious Peſtilence, to breake the ſtone, and againſt certen other ſtubburne diſeaſes, neuer ſet forth in the writinges of any Phiſitions as far as I doe knowe. VVhich when I had imparted vnto certen well learned Phiſitions, my friendes and acquaintance, I regarded them ſomuch that by oftē requeſting of me, they obtayned, that I should ſetfoorth into

light ſuch ſpeciall remedies as I had gathered againſt the plague, to the commoditie of the miſerable eſtate of mankind. VVherfore (Right honourable Mecoenas and Patrone) though I bee mindfull of your good turnes on me beſtowed, wherwith you haue bounde me and all mine to be at your commaundemente for euer: notwithſtanding ſince it is the parte of an honeſt and liberall heart to deſire to be more beholden to him to whom he is much beholden, I would thus much requeſt of you, that this bookegoing forth vnder the ſalfconduct of your honourable name, and being alreadie approued by your ſingular learning, and preſuming on your aucthoritie, may come abrode into mens handes, whereby the poſteritie maye wonder at you, and worthely praiſe you for being not onely a prince of warre, but a ſtudent alſo of liberall ſciences. Fare you well From my ſtudie, the iiij. of the Ides of Iune. 1572.
         
      
      
         
            
            
            ¶ A new counſel againſt the Peſtilence.
            
            
               The 1. Chap.
               
                  SIckneſſes breede, ſayth Hippocrates, partlye ofHippoc. in his boke of the nature of mankind. our diet: and partlye of our breath, by drawing in whereof we liue.
               They which come of our dyet, areGal. in the preface of the. 1. booke of Epidem. called Sporadici: and by our breathing are engendred Endemij, and Epidemii. Wee terme thoſe Sporadici, which according to the diuerſe & ſundrie trades of life do happen to this or that man, as doth Bronchocele, or rupture of the throate, vnto weemen which dwell by the lake Lemanus, and the inhabitants neere to Geneua by drinking ſnowie water: Lykewyſe great and ſwelling myltes, by drynking of colde, yſie, and troubled waters: as alſo they which vſed to eate of a kinde of pulſe, like vetches, called Eruum, were troubled with paine in the knees: and ſuch as fead on other kinde of pulſe, became weake in the thies. Of theſe diſeaſes

hath Hippocrates intreated in his bok
                     •
                   of the diet in ſharpe ſickneſſes, as Galen is auctour in his commentary vpon the ninth ſentence of the ſecond booke of ſharpe ſickneſſes. And they were called Sporadici diſeaſes, of the Ilands named Sporadas which lye ſtragling, as it were, here & there diſperſed, and as Galen lykewiſe in the third booke of the adminiſtration of Anatomie, and in his booke of ye diſſection of the veines, calleth certaine veines which lye here & there one not far from another vpon the ſkin, by name of Sporadas. The ſickneſſes called Endemij, be they which by reaſon of the contagion of the heauen, or particulare ayre, do alwayes moleſt ſome one place: according as Ariſtotle reciteth in his booke intituled: Of the world, and dedicated vnto Alexander, howe poyſned ayres roſe out of corrupt Dennes & Caues, which infected thoſe that came neere them, partlye with an outragious kind of madnes, and partly conſumed thē with a peſtilent quality.
               There are ſome alſo that kyll a man preſently, as in Phrygia: and there be

many Welles, and ſmall Lakes, and bituminous ſpringes, or ſtanding waters, and places where Metals haue beene digged, and the ſtinking pudles of Auernus and Lucrinus, whoſe lothſome vapour kylleth the Dogges that do but once licke of it, bee it neuer ſo litle, and ſtifleth the Fowles that flye ouer it. Of theſe diſeaſes hath Hippocrates
                  Galen in the ſame place. intreated in his booke of the ayre, places, and waters.
               The Epidemij ſickneſſes, are taken by Hippocrates, in two ſignifications. After one ſort the Epidemius ſickneſſe is taken for ſome diſeaſe which taketh a great many of people away, whether it bee flixe, or tercian ague, or ſome like diſeaſe which raigneth among the people in ſome one place: howbeit for ye more part, the Greeke words Limos,
                  Galen in the ſame place. and Diatheſis Limodes, are taken for the Peſtilence, which inuading men, wéemen & children, of all ages, diſpatcheth many out of their liues: whether it procéede firſt of the ayre, or by infection, of which diſeaſes Hippocrates hath intreated in his booke intituled Epidemiorum.
                  
Wherefore, what kinde of diſeaſe the Peſtilence is, what the ſubſtaunce thereof is, and of what cauſes it proceedeth, we muſt now declare.
            
            
               The. 2. Chap.
               THE Peſtilence is a contagious ayre, not being the diſeaſe it ſelf, but the neereſt and moſt principall cauſe thereof, either raiſed with in the bodies, or caught abroade, ſuddeinly weakning the ſpirites, & the powers which gouerne the body.
               The cauſe of this Peſtilence, theGalen in the ſecond boke of Feuers. more parte of learned writers aſcribe vnto the ayre, but not all one waye: for ſome are of opinion that the poyſoning infection is ſent down from the ſtarres and planets, and ſo diſperſed through the ayre: other ſay that the ayre it ſelfe is putrified, the cauſe of which putrifaction they aſcribe vnto the coniunctions and oppoſitions of the planets, the Eclips of the Sunne, and Moone, and the coniunction of Saturnus, with other euell planets, by meanes whereof inſue

ſundry tempeſtes, & great chaunge of the ayre, and conſequently thereof commeth diuers rottennes, and putrifactions. For the ayre hath manifeſt cauſes of alteracion, as namelye the mingling of other ſtraunge ayre with it, or of ſome kinde of ſubſtaunce elſe, which is moſt contrary vnto vs, as are rotten vapors: and thereof it putrifieth and waxeth peſtilent, and is chaunged into the nature of poiſon. Whereby it cōmeth to paſſe, that according to proportion, this plague rageth ſumtime among men, ſumtime amōg beaſts, and ſumtime among graſſe, fruite, & corne. And there be many thinges very common that are good for cattel, & wyl hurt men: and contrariwiſe wyll ſlay cattel, that wyll doo men good. Like as many doo perceiue, that the feeding on naughtie meates engendreth the plague, as if a man ſhould fall into the plague, by vſing ſuch euill diet, as is commonlye ſéene in the dearth of corne and other victuals: then immediatly ſhall he infect others, and when that diſeaſe by going from one to other hath gathered

ſtrength, and hath inuaded many of all ages and ſexes: it is called the Peſtilence. Againe, they ſuppoſe that ſumtime the ayre is infected by lower cauſes, of thinges rotten and putrified, as of carcaſies vnburied, wythred and putrified hearbes and weedes, priuies, dunghils and ſuch lyke: which afterwarde being drawne into our bodyes breedeth the plague, as ſome doo write of the Putauian pyt. Surely that this is the verye iuſt iudgement & reuenge of God, our barbarous nation being the verie vttermoſt land of this part of the worlde, doth acknowledge and profeſſe, a moſt manifeſt teſtimonye whereof we haue in Ezechiel, and in the ſecondIoſeplius, the 7. boke and. 13. cha. of the Kinges, the fowre and twentye Chapter.
            
            
               The. 3▪ Chap.
               THat ſecrete force of infection which our ſenſes cānot diſcerne, conſiſteth in an humour, or ſome other kinde of ſubſtaunce: for a force & power of a bodily ſubſtaunce, cannot ſo

much anoy our bodies. Wherefore, I thinke it verye requiſite for to knowe perfitlye vppon what part of our body this ſecrete poiſon exerciſeth his tyrā
                  nie, ſéeing according to the diuerſity of the place where it ſetleth, there ariſeth not only diuerſe kyndes of peſtilences: but alſo a diuerſe order of cure is requyred for them. For if it be receyuedGalen in the. 3. of his cōmet. vpon the. 3. of Epid. into the ſubſtaunce of the heart, it reſembleth the likeneſſe of an Hecticke or conſuming feuer: and many times it ſurpriſeth the ſpyrites, and kylleth the man preſently: As not yet full ſixe yéeres ſince I my ſelfe ſawe in the Peſtilence which raged in Lyons: where men fell downe dead to the grounde, euē as they were going in the ſtreets. Sometime it reſteth in the Liuer, and according to the nature of the humour which it infecteth: it cauſeth a feuer, as namely the feuer called Synochus, if it haue infected the blood, and a burning feuer if it be choler, and the like iudgement is alſo to bee geuen of the other humours. A like plague vnto this whereof I ſpeake, not fullye fiftéene

yéeres ago raigned in Eueris, & at Vernoyle: whereas a Surgeon through the grace of God, and mine inſtructions, ſaued a great many: at which time Iohn Renart the Apothecarye, a man verye well learned, vſed ſingular diligence towarde our cuntreymen, and Citizens. It hapneth alſo ſometime, that the poyſned ayre being drawen through the noſtrels into the braine, firſt hurteth the ſame, for ſufficient proofe whereof ſhall ſerue the diſcourſe which followeth.
            
            
               The. 4. Chap.
               IT is well knowen by the doctrine ofIn his boke of kernels. 
                  Hippocrates, and the colledge of Arabians, that the principall partes haue theyr voiding places, iſſues, or, as they terme them Emunctories, into which they clenſe and rid away whatſoeuer is noyſom vnto them, ſpeciallye if thoſe partes be ſtrong, and thereby, as they ſaye, is coniecture made of the part affected: as for example, if the botch appeare in the grine, it is a ſigne

that the diſeaſe is in the Liuer, or in the partes beneath the midriffe: but if the ſore breake foorth in the arme pits, they ſay that the heart and the partes aboue the midriffe are infected: as they lykewiſe gather that the infection is in the braine, if the poyſoned ſwelling gather behinde the eares, or in places thereabout: although many times there chaunceth inflamation of the kernels about the eares, called Parotides, whē a more vehement heat hath lifted the matter vp higher, as ſayth Galen in the fourth booke of commentaries vppon the Aphoriſmes, the. 75. Aphoriſme.
               Moreouer, the vrine confirmeth this opinion of ours, béeing ſometime thick and troubled, yealowe, and white, as we ſée the ſame to be altered according to the humours offending, and diuerſitye of the partes affected: as many times the ſkull being eaten with rottennes, and the rime of the braine periſhed with a ſtripe or putrified, and whē ſtoare of mater is gathered within the ſkull, a man ſhall perceiue the vrine to be litle or nothing at all chaunged.

For when the venim féedeth vpon the ſound ſubſtaunce of the partes, the vrine is lyke the vrine of one that is whole, which ſhalbe proued to be true, by this that hereafter followeth.
            
            
               The. 5. Chap.
               BUT for aſmuch as we concluded before, that this infection is in the ay
                     ••
                   which wée drawe in by breathing, 
                     〈…〉
                  s receiued into the inner partes of th
                     •
                   body through the pores of the ſkin, by the motion of the arteyres: how chaūceth it then that the heart is not alwayes infected, for aſmuch as in our large breathing, the ayre which is drawen in by the Lungues, imparteth the contagiō ſooner vnto the heart becauſe of theyr néerenes, thenGalen in the. 3. of his cōmet. vpon the. 3. of Epid. vnto partes be farther of, as the Liuer and the Braine? Note this common reaſon, ſayth Galen, that a corrupt humour which is engendred in all by one conſtitucion, doth not affect the ſame places, for that in reſpect of al theyr natures, the body was not in the ſame cō
                  ſtitution at that preſent, but one part was weaker then another. For thoſe

partes which be ſtronger in qualitie or quantitie, vſe to expulſe and driue awaye the offending bumour into another that is of leſſe reſiſtaunce. Wherfore, if the heart, eyther of it ſelfe, or by helpe of Phiſick, be ſtrong: then wyll it driue the venimous ayre, eyther to the Liuer, or to the Brain. Moreouer, the proportion of the putrifaction maye be in cauſe thereof, for whatſoeuer hath the force to do any thing, doth not immediatly execute the ſame vpon what euer it méeteth withall, but neceſſarye it is that there be ſome naturall likeneſſeGalen. 1. boke and 4. chapter of the differē
                     ces of feuer
                        •
                     . betwéene the thing Agent, and the Pacient: and after this maner we affirme that Purgations drawe this or that humour by reaſon of the lykeneſſe vnto them of nature or ſubſtaūce. And therefore the olde writers ſayde verye well, that euery thing cannot worke vppon euerye thing, but onely whatſoeuer hath ſome agréement with the Agent in matter, or in maner of applying them together: lyke as the Ephemerum Colchicum, a venimous herbe ſo called, & the Uiper, beare enmitie

againſt the Liuer, as may eaſilye be perceiued by the bloody flixe, dropſie, and other accidents which both of them do cauſe, and as the byting of certaine Beaſts breedeth the iaundice, corrupting & conuerting the blood into choler.Galen. 5. boke and. 7 chap of places affected.
               
               Beſides this, Henbaine, & the Aſpe, moleſt that part of the Braine, wherein the Animall facultie reſteth, the laſt bringing vnwakeable ſléepe, the firſt diſtracting ye mind, which it doth not byGalen in his boke of Triacle vnto Piſo. reaſon of cold, as late writers affyrme.
               For Brionie, which is hot, worketh alſo the ſame effect, howbeit ye extreeme colde that is in Houſelike, in Lettice, or Poppie, troubleth not the wittes. The Baſiliſke, ſlayeth a mā ſodainly, conſuming the ſpirites which he doth, they ſay, by ſight and hyſſing. The Taxus,
                  Galen in the ſame place Dioſcorides in the. 4. boke. which ſeme ſuppoſe to be the Ewtrée, kylleth with his ſhaddowe, ſpecially in hot cuntreys, thoſe that ſleepe vnder it▪ ſtrangling them preſently, lyke as the Hemlock, with his paſſing cold qualitie, extinguiſheth naturall heat.
               Theſe cauſeth of ſo ſudde in death procéedeth frō no other thing, then ye peculiar

kind of poiſon, which at the firſt aſſault inuadeth ye caſtle of life. For euery thing hath his peculiar mixtion, frō whence ſpring forth thoſe properties of ſubſtaunce. And theſe thinges are no leſſe proper vnto the ayre alſo, then they are common vnto plants, & brute beaſtes, ſo that the diuerſe kinde of putrifaction which is in the ayre, infecteth or affecteth the diuers partes of our bodies, after a diuerſe kinde of maner.Hippocr. in his boke of the ayre. &c For loke what the ayre is, ſuch muſt needes our humours and ſpirites bee, wherein the ſoundneſſe or infirmitie of the partes conſiſteth. And this was the cauſe that Hippocrates wrote, how that the ſundry mutaciō of tymes, procureth many diſeaſes: as namely, if the Summer be drie, and the wind North, the Harueſt verie rainy, and the wind South, the winter following are lyke to enſue payne in the head, coughes, horſenes, rewmes, and ſtuffing in the head, and many ſhal fall into conſumptions: lykewiſe ſome other diſpoſition of the Summer and Harueſt, ingendreth other kindes of diſeaſes: ſo that

ſometime they procéede frō the braine, & ſometime depend vpon other partes, according to the diuerſe temperature of the ayre, and Hippocrates very learnedly hath ſet downe in the thyrd boke of his Aphoriſmes, in his booke of Epidemies, and of the ayre, places, and waters.
               But the auctoritye of D. Ambroſius Pareus, whome poſterity acknowledgeth for the thyrd ſun of Aeſculapius, doeth much lighten and confyrme this opinion: who opening the bed wherein one laye ſicke of the Plague, felt a moſt filthye and peſtilent ſauour, ryſing from the plaguie botch and carbuncle, which ſo ſtrooke his Braine, that preſentlie he fell in a ſowne to the ground, without feeling any paine at the heart, or other accident that might declare that the heart, or ſtomacke, or any other part of the body were affected: at length, recouering ſtrength he aroſe, and his braine began to expulſe that contagious ayre, with ſo forcible ſneeſing, that the blood therewith guſſhed out of his noſe: and vnleſſe, ſayde

hée, the expulſiue facultie of my braine had bene ſtrong, doubtleſſe I had died, for the Animall or lyuing facultie had bene therewith vtterlye oppreſſed.
               Thus you ſée, louing Reader, by the example and iudgement of ſo notable a man, that this poyſon may firſt infect the braine, no other part being hurt.
               For there is a perpetuall drawing ofGal. in his cōment. vpō Hippocr. of humours. ayre into the braine, in euerye breathing creature, in at ye noſtrels through the bones called Iſtmoidea into ye foremoſte ventricle or ſell of the braine, where the ſmelling vertue remaineth, whereby it commeth that it imparteth moſt readelye vnto the braine that infection which it receyueth, before that it conuey it vnto the heart. For it cannot come vnto the heart vntyl ſuch tyme as it bee well laboured in the Lungues, wheras by the tareing there it looſeth ſome parte of the venimous qualitie▪ or elſe infecteth the hollowneſſe of the Lungues, or the thin ſkins and rimes within the breaſt, or the Midriffe, whereby many times in the Peſtilence, commeth ſpetting of blood,

as Guido de Cauliaco hath noted in the ſame plague which beginning firſt at Auenion. was diſperſed ouer all Europe. Lykewiſe the painfull Cathar with ſhortneſſe of breath, which the Frenchmē termed Coqueluche, which awhile agoe raged ouer all Europe, was cauſed by the ayre, declaring it ſelfe to bée peſtilent euen by the verye force thereof, and going from man to man which was the kinde of that infection do to: and notwithſtanding, allGale. in his comment. the accidents and tokens declared that by ſimilitude of paſſion, the braine was likewiſe affected, as were heauines and paine in the head with deſyre to ſléepe, the mur, ſtuffing in the head, and diſtillacion into the Lungues & ſtomacke. The lyke vnto this, is to bée founde in Hippocrates in the thyrd booke of Epedemies, where he deſcribeth a peſtilent ſtate: For many were diſeaſed in the Iawes, had impedimentes in theyr ſpeache, theyr bellyes were troubled with laſkes, many wared rotten, and fell into conſumptions, ſo that the next wynter following, wee were much

troubled with contagious ſquincies in theſe quarters, which came to paſſe with chaunging of the winde from the South to the North, as it is to be learned out of the twentye fowrth Aphoriſme of the firſt booke of Hippocrates Aphoriſines. And afterward Hippocrates addeth, and the diſeaſes, ſayth he, which the peſtilent ayre doth bring, if it once offend the Lyuer, are burning feuers, dropſies, putrifaction of the lower part of the bellye, and priuities, and when, ſayth hee, the rottennes had taken déeper rootes, many loſt theyr armes, and from ſome the whole cubite from the elbowe foreward fell awaye.
               The lyke kinde of Peſtilence was1. Booke of feuers. and. 5. of ſimple medicines. that which Galen citeth out of Thucidides, to haue raigned in Athens. But if all theſe proofes can not ſufficientlye perſwade thee, rememember that the Leproſie is a contagious diſeaſe, the contagion whereof proceedeth of the ayre, corrupt and infected by leprous perſons, which beeing drawne in by breathing: infecteth others, the contagion

taking hold on ye Liuer, which is the ſeat of the Leproſie: éeuen ſo, one that is ſicke of the plague, diſperſeth the infection abrode in the ayre, which infecteth thoſe that are about him with the ſame ſickneſſe: wherby it hapneth that the ſame diſeaſe, and hauing the verye ſame accidentes many times continueth a yéere or twoo togeather, as I remember it chaunced once in England.
               Meaſelles, by conſent of all auncient wryters, take theyr originall of an infection ſent downe from the celeſtiall bodyes into the ayre, and are of the kinde of Epedimious diſeaſes, and the forerunners of ſome gréeuous & mortall peſtilence, the cauſe whereof is the heat and boyling of blood, and are to bée numbred among diſeaſes of the lyuer. And that there is in theſe a moſt manifeſt infection to be taken one of another, euery ſimple woman can tell, and Raſes maketh them one kinde of the Peſtilence.
               Thus all that we haue hetherto ſayd do prooue▪ that the Peſtilent ayre ſumtyme infecteth the Braine, ſumtyme

the Lyuer, and ſumtime the heart, according to the diuerſitye of the putryfaction▪ and the diuerſe diſpoſition of the body.
               For as fire is ſooner kyndled in dryeAphrodiſeus the. 88. queſtion of the. 2. boke. ſtrawe, then in gréene wood: ſo lykewiſe the infected ayre béeing diſperſed abroade and breathed in, ſooner ouerthroweth ſuche bodyes as are ſtuffed with euyll humours, then thoſe that are cleane and pure from any ſuch, and for this cauſe you ſhall ſee among a great many that were about one which was ſicke of the plague, one onely many times to eſcape the ſickneſſe: and euen ſo all that looke vpon ſore eyes, become not ſore eyed: but ſuch onelye in whome the infection had lyke matter to worke vpon. And this is theThe. 104. queſtion of the. 2. boke of problemes. The. 5. queſtion of the 6. booke of problemes. cauſe, why for the moſt part, ſoreneſſe & bleareneſſe of the eyes vſeth to come before a plague, as Aphrodiſeus wryteth. Becauſe, ſayth hée, the plague is a diſeaſe of the ſpirites, and when this troubled and corrupted ſpirite is caryed vp to the head, it moleſteth the eyes, and hurteth them before any other

thing, for being ſubtile and moueable, it goeth firſt vnto the eyes. Not vnlike vnto this, is that which Ariſtotle verie fitlye demaundeth, howe it chaunceth that when euell tydinges or ſorowfull newes are told vs, wee ſuddeinly ſhake & quiuer: and ye beholding of affections in other before our eyes, bréede the like affections in vs alſo: for when we ſée another eate ſome ſower thing, our téeth waxe in an edge, and if wee heare a ſawe filed, or a PumiceThe. 
                        •
                     . queſtion of the 7. of the problemes. ſtone cut, we tremble & quake for cold? The cauſe of al theſe, as ſaith Ariſtotle is the ſpirite, which entring within our ſenſes, moueth vs, altering, and many times extinguiſhing the ſpyrites which are within our bodyes, howbeit then by lykelyhood & proportion they ſhould more eaſily chaunge the ſpirites which remaine in ſhe heart, Braine, and Lyuer, then in the vttermoſt part of the teeth. But a man ſhall not eaſily perſwade the common people▪ or the newe wryters in this point, as that the filthy & ſtynking Kennels and durty places of the Citye, doo onely hurt the Braine.
               
                  The Colicke (whereof next afterThe. 3. boke chap. of the paine of the colick, and chap. of the palſie, and Hipp. alſo. 
                  Hippocrates, Paulus Aegineta maketh mencion) in the yéere. 1572▪ reygned generallye, and dyd very much harme, kylling many: For all that were ſicke of it, fell into the Paulſie, or falling ſickneſſe, and many dyed thereof, either in the fyt, or not long after, as I obſerued it in the houſe of my good Lord and exhibitour, and in the Monaſterye of Caſa dei, or Gods houſe, néere vnto our dwelling called Rugla: for the Nūnes which dwelt there, could not prouide for theyr health by any other meanes then by flight, and chaunge of place.
               And more then fiftéene yéere ſince, this gréeuous diſeaſe much afflicted our cuntreymen and Citizens alſo, and euen this laſt winter it wandred here amōg our next neighbours, as it reygned at Abbeuille, in the yeere of our Lorde.Emerius in his boke of the peſtil. 1554. of the cure whereof I meane Godwylling to intreate in my booke of diſeaſes which came by inheritaunce.
               And this much thou haſt alreadye, Louing Reader, cōcerning the cauſe, and place of the Peſtilence: and now harken

farther to the ſignes and tokens thereof.
            
            
               The. 6. Chap.
               IF the putrifaction of the corruptedSignes of 
                        •
                      the infectiō bee in the ſpirites. ayre do take holde on the ſpirites, the heat is not ſharpe nor pricking, the patiēts féele a greater heat in their breaſt, then in any other part of the bodye, the pulſe is nothing weake, but ſumtime more quicke then it is woont, but yet not to ſwift as when the imperfection is in the humours: the vrine is lyke vnto the naturall, there iſſueth no ſweat, but ſome moiſture appeareth on the forehead and in the necke, the tongue is drye and rough, they thyrſt not much, nor toſſe them ſelues hether & thether, becauſe the naturall ſtrength is whollye ouerthrowen: they ſowne often, there appeareth vpon them neyther botche, nor blaine, nor Gods markes, neyther haue they the laſke, but dye ſuddeinlie, vnleſſe they be well looked vnto at the fyrſt aſſault of the ſickneſſe.
               
                  But when the putrifaction hath inuadedIf in the ſubſtance of the heart. the ſound ſubſtaunce of the heart then it bringeth a feuer, as I haue ſayd, like to an Hecticke or a conſuming feuer: in which there is no great heate, but that which is lurketh within, conſuming and putrefiing the ſubſtaunce of the heart, burning it and all that is therein: the pacients féele not themſelues to be in an ague, or to be ſicke at all, & ſo ſone as they haue eaten meate▪ they fall into a colde ſweat, their pulſe is indifferent, almoſt naturall, but ſumdeale quicker and weaker: theyr vrine is lyke ones in good health, they raue not, they are not troubled with the laſke, nor gréeued with any other accident. The lyke plague vnto this, raigned at Lions and Vienna, in the yeere of our Lord. 1525. as Montuus reporteth.
               If the peſtilent ayre being drawneIf in the braine. in at the noſe or otherwyſe, haue poſſeſſed the braine: the ſignes thereof are tremblinges and ſadneſſe, the partye féeleth great paine in ye head, be raueth at the fyrſt aſſault of the ſicknes, hée

is troubled with a cholericke diſtillation out of the head into the ſtomacke, Lungues, and nether partes, he is eyther verye ſléepie, or aboundeth in ouer watching, he hath ſwelling in his neck, and about the eares, the dayſling of the head, hyſſing in the eares, with readneſſe of the face, and beating of the temples. This plague raygned in Auernia, in the yéere of our Lorde. 1546.
               Many are of opinion that the PeſtilenceIf in the Lyuer. is a thyrde kinde of the burning Feuer, and iudge that it procéedeth of Melancholicke blood, eyther putryfying, or boyling by reaſon of the putryfying: which they gather to bée ſo, by the reſemblaunce which it hath to a continual quartaine, and the ſmellings which vſe to appeare in ſuch Feuers. Howbeit vnleſſe all the auncient wryters, and this our learned age alſo, haue bene verye much ouerſeene, the Feuer is not of the verye ſubſtaunce of the ſickneſſe. For albe it for the more part ſhee ioyne her ſelfe vnto it as a moſt painfull companion, and a whelpe of

the ſame hayre, notwithſtanding the whole order of the cure ſheweth that they differ euen by whole kinde. And becauſe the place of making blood and other humours, is by nature appointed vnto the Lyuer, I wyl ſhew the ſignesIf in blood. of euery one: beginning firſt with the ſignes that declare the infection to bee in the blood, which are theſe, heat not byting, but gentle and milde, a ſtiffe and ſtrouting weerineſſe of the whole body, ſtinking ſieges, large and liquide: lying of the pacient vpon his back, heauines of the head, beating of the tēples, rauing and idle ſpeech after the fourth or ſeauenth day, ſmal thyrſt or none at all, a filthie tongue, vrine at the beginning almoſt white, afterward growing redder and confuſed: all the bodye ouer, ſpeciallye vpon the backe, breaſt, and armes, litle red whelkes ryſing, not vnlike to fleabites.
               If the infection be in Choler, the diſeaſedIf in chole
                        •
                     . are vexed with that vnquietnes which the Grecians terme Liſmos, féeling ſuch an extreame burning within them, that thèy alwaye crye to bée remoued

to ſome colder place, although theyr outwarde partes are not hote at all: theyr face is ſometime pale, and ſometime red, they thyrſt much, theyr tongue is verye drie, they neuer ſléepe, their breath ſtinketh, they breath hardlye, for which cauſe and by reaſon of theyr immoderate heat, they deſire to drawe in freſhe ayre continually: theyr ſieges are cholericke, thinne, ſtinking, and fattie: and ſometime they make water verye yealowe, watriſhe, and thinne.
               When the infection hath taken holdIf in Fleagme. on the rawer part of the blood, then the pacient ſléepeth continuallye, the body is ſlouthfull, and the partes thereof weerie, the belching ſower, ſoft and flegmaticke, ſwellinges do aryſe with other ſignes moe, declaring the dominion of fleame. And therefore tender and moiſt natures are ſooner infected then olde men, and ſuch as are geuen to labour, or that are of a colde and moiſt temperament, and brought vp with cold meates.
               But when this peſtilent corruptionIf in Mclancholie.
                  
of the ayre hath inuaded the dregges of the blood called Melancholie, the pacient wyll bee very carefull and heauy, and much more ſorrowful then he was woont, he becummeth diſtract, the pulſe is ſmall and déepe, the vrine lyke the wine of Pomegranates, blackiſhe, and whatſoeuer ſores or botches breake out in the body, they repreſent the coulour and complexion of their humour.
            
            
               The. 7. Chap.
               HEtherto we haue intreated of ye ſignes, it followeth now that we come to the cure, which cōſiſteth in two pointes, in preuenting and dryuing away the ſicknes. The peſtilent ayre is auoided many wayes. Firſt, if wee kéepe awaye all occaſions of the bringing of it to the place where wee dwell, as we reade that Marcus Varro did at Corcira: for when he perceyued howe that there were ſome ſicke in euerye houſe round about him, he ſhut his windowes whiche opened to the South, and he opened them that were

to the North, and ſo preſerued all his familie in good health: howbeit that which Varro did toward the South, I thinke ought to be done alſo when the winde is Eaſt, Northeaſt, and Weſt alſo: for if the wiſe and dilligent Phiſition do well marke it, he ſhall perceiue that the plague incr
                     •
                  a
                     •
                  eth when thoſe windes do blowe. So lykewiſe it is neceſſarie to chaunge place, as from lowe places to goe vnto higher, when the plague is ingendred by corruption of the ayre: but if the winde bring the plague out of one cuntreye into another, then were it keſt to deſcend from a high dwelling to a lower, where the ground is watriſhe, and the ayre thick, which wyll hardlye receyue the impreſſion of the ſupernall bodies. And when we haue choſen an houſe, then the peſtilent ayre is to be corrected, by burning of ſuch thinges as eyther by ſecrete or manifeſt qualitie are contrarye to the infection, as are the Trochiſces which followe. Take Styrax calamite, Benioin, of eche one dram: red Roſes, Lauender, Cypres, of eche halfe

a dram: with Roſewater & Tragagāt, make Trochiſces, burne thē in a chafingdiſhe of coales, or elſe burne with them of the compoſition called Gallia, or Alipta moſcata, and ſuch lyke.
               It were verye good alſo for this purpoſe to burne ſuch woods and hearbes as yéeld a ſweet ſauour, as Roſemary, Sage, Lauender, Baies, Ciprus wood, Juniper, the wood & the barries, ye wood Aloes, Cinnamon & Cloues. Likewiſe the ſprincling of ſweete waters about the chamber, amendeth the euill diſpoſition of the ayre, as the water of Lauender and Maierom, but theſe are moſt to be vſed when the ayre is moiſt, cloudye, and colde: For the warme ayre more ſpéedely and redelye perceth into our bodies, and is ſooneſt infected with the qualitye of ſome other thing, as Auicen hath noted in his firſt booke, in the Chapter of varietye of ſeaſons: Wherefore prouiſion muſt bee made that it waxe not verye hote, by ſprincling of fayre water and vineger, roſevineger: by ſetting vp Wyllowe boughes, and by ſtrawing the Chamber

with water lyllies, flagges, and ſuch like.
            
            
               The. 8. Chap.
               BUt nowe it is not inough in this maner to haue amended the ayre, but alſo the principal parts muſt bee ſtrengthened, both with thinges receyued inward, and applied outwarde, to thintent they maye the more valiauntlye withſtande the peſtilent ayre. And among thoſe thinges to which the Grecians giue name for that they be hanged about vs: I lyke eſpeciallye of twaine: the one is, if a hole be made in a haſyll nut, and the kernel b
                     •
                  e pulled forth with a pin, and the place fylled vp againe with common quickſiluer, and hanged about the neck, it preſerueth a man wonderfully from the peſtilence. This Medicine I learned aboue twelue yéeres agoe, of the Phiſition to the Right honourable the Lord Vidam that nowe dead is. For at what time Henrie the ſecōd, King of Fraūce, lead his armie into Germanie,
                  
and at the ſiedge of the Citie of Ment
                        •
                     
                   hee preſerued not onelye him ſelfe, but alſo his Surgeon which went to them that had the plague, and dreſſed them: Of this Medicine Marſilius Ficinus ſpeaketh.
               There is alſo another ſuch medicine,The. 7. cha. of his boke of the Peſtilence. and it is Chriſtialline, and red Arſnick, the effect whereof I learned at Argentine and Baſil, in the yeere of our Lord. 1564. at what tyme the plague raigned almoſt ouer all Germanie. But for as much as Georgius Agricola in his thyrd booke, of the nature of things digged out of the ground, and after him Theodoſius Montuus haue ſufficiently diſputed of this matter, I wyll onelye ſet downe the receite of the Medicine, which is after this maner: Take Arſnick chriſtalline and red, of eche a lyke quantitie, beate them into powder, whereof with the white of an egge, or the Mucciladge of Tragagant, you ſhall make a lozenge a finger thicke, then folde it in a double péece of ſilke, & applye it vnto the region of the hart: but beware that the moyſt Arſnicke,

exulcerate not the ſkin, and therefore in the morning you muſt diligentlye wipe the place, or at what tyme ſo euer elſe the pacient ſweateth, for which cauſe it were good to put a fayre linnen cloath betwéene: The Arſnicke beingThe. 8 boke chap of the hardnes of the Splene. applyed, ſtrengthneth as wel the heart as the Mylt, as Trallianus writeth, but it worketh not that effect of cuſtome, as Theodoſius ſayth. Surely in this one point God wonderfullye declareth his prouidence, when he teacheth vs to applye ſtrong and deadlye poyſons vnto our commoditie: as Galen ſheweth in the eleuenth booke of ſimple Medicines of the wine made of Uipers: and our men of late tyme haue applyed the oyle of Scorpions in the cure of the plague with ſo good ſucceſſe, that onelye with the annointing of this oyle they dryue awaye the euyll qualitye of the peſtilent ayre, by example of them which haue gréeuous vlcers in theyr feete. D. Ambroſius Pareus geueth this counſell, that they which wyll goe viſite the ſicke of the plague, ſhoulde fyrſt make iſſues in theyr armes and

legges, bicauſe nature vſeth to purge out by thoſe places whatſoeuer venimous humour is in the whole bodye, & dryuing that thether whatſoeuer gathereth vnto any principall part.
               Moreouer, an oyntment made of Laſerpitium, the fat of venimous Serpentes, and Uitrioll is much commended: or if of theſe be made a broade cake and folded in ſylke, and layd vpon the heart and arteries. I haue alſo vſed the Linament which foloweth not only in the Peſtilence, but alſo in the quiuering of the heart, which is thus made: Take of the iuce of Cardiaca one ounce, of Camfire halfe a dram, of Saffron one ſcruple, with as muche waxe as ſufficeth, make thereof an oyntment, and therewith anoynt the region of the heart: or make an oyntment of the iuce of Bugloſſe, Borage, and Saffron. There maye alſo be one made to the ſame effect of roſes, violets, red Saunders, Cinnamom, Cloues, Lauender Flowers, Orenge pilles, & the wood Agallochum, which is prepared in maner following. Take

of the three kindes of Saūders, Roſes, Wormwood, Agrimonie, of eche halfe an ounce, beate them into powder, and boyle them ouer a ſofte fyre an houre & an halfe, then ſtraine the liquour, and wring it harde through a linnen cloth, then ſeeth it againe ouer the fyre, vntyll it come to the thickneſſe of Honie, then put thereto the iuce of Lettice, ſmalledge, wylde ſuccorie, of eche thrée drams, Camfyre a dram, and with a lytle waxe make thereof an oyntment, and anoint therewith the region of the Liuer. After this order the oyntments which are prepared, I better lyke of, not onely in the Peſtilence, but alſo in other continuall Feuers, then if the pouders were put in whole, for elſe howe could thoſe thicke and groſſe pouders mingled with the iuces and oiles, doo any good vnto the place? Lyke wiſe there maye be made ſemblable oyntmentes for the heart, of the roote of Lormentill, Zedoarie, Roſes, & ſuch lyke. It is good alſo to drop into the eare, a twoo or thrée drops of the oyle of Sage, or Cloues, with a lytle Muſke.

I prepare oyles for that purpoſe after this maner: Take of Nutmegges one ounce, Cloues, and Cinamom, of eche halfe an ounce, drye Sage an ounce, ſwéete Almondes twoo ounces, make them all into pouder, and ſprincle them with Aqua vitae, and preſſe it hard as you would do oyle of Almondes: and vſe it as is afore declared: and with the ſame oyle you may anoynt your tēples and noſtrels. It is good alſo to kéepe a péece of the rinde of a Citron in the mouth, or Cinamom, Zedoarie, Angelica, or ſuch lyke. Our huſbandmen in the Cuntreye ſmell vnto hearbe grace, it were not a miſſe neyther to beare in a ſpunge to ſmell vnto, Cinamom water, roſe vineger, roſe water, or this ſweet ball, the diſcription wherof inſueth: Take roſes, Styrax calamite, Cloues, of eche twoo ounces, Arrace rootes of Florence, thrée ounces, Muſke twoo ſcruples, of theſe make a ſwéete ball. Some ſtiepe Cloues in vineger al night, & eate them in the morning, and waſhe their face, arme holes, and priuie partes with vineger. The

Phiſitions of Germanie, ſhaue the roote of the great cloat leafe, and ſtiepe it in vineger a night or more, thē they roule it in Suger, and geue it in the morning to preuent the plague. But I vſe to laye the ſame roote to ſooke in whyte wine, or wine of wormewood, and in the morning geue it to drincke with Sugar.
            
            
               The. 9. Chap.
               THoſe things which are receyued in at the mouth to preuent the ſickneſſe, are partlye Medicines againſt poyſon and infection, and partlye purgatiue remedies, for wée hope that ſuch purgatiues are onely néedefull for this purpoſe, as do clenſe the firſt region of the bodye, without moouing the humours. For we muſt take héede leaſt by ſharpe and ſtrong purgations we cauſe a laſke, which were verye daungerous in this diſeaſe. For in a peſtilent conſtitucion, the humors be mooued by the ſmalleſt occaſion that maye bée, and forciblye doo run downe into the bellie: ſuch purgatiues whereof we now ſpeake, are Rhabard & Agarike
                  
made in infuſion in the decoction of ſuch hearbes as are naturall, good againſt this infection, adding thereto the Syrupe made by infuſion of Damaſke roſes, of Uiolets, of Succorye compound, and ſuch other lyke, as in reſpect of the age, cuſtome, and temperament, maye bée preſcribed by the ſkilfull Phiſition. Howbeit, for children I vſe Rhabarb thus prepared. Cut Rhabarb into ſmall ſlices, & moyſten them with the vapour of whyte wine, then ſtiepe it with Cinamom a daye and a nyght in roſe water, in Sū
                  mer: but in Wynter in white Wine and roſe water mingled togeather, and when the Rhabarb hath loſt his colour in the water, then dreane that water awaye and put freſhe too, and thus ſhall you doo vntyll the Rhabarb coulour the water no more: then take thoſe couloured waters, and boyle them to the one halfe ouer a good fire for temperate heate: then put vnto this liquour, Sugar or Honye, and boyle it againe vnto ye conſiſtence of a Syrupe perfectly boiled, and then put the ſlices of Rhabarb
                  
into the ſirupe: Of this ſirupe you may miniſter twoo or thrée ſponefuls vnto children of twoo or thrée yéere olde, and to them that are elder, you maye geue one ſlice of ye 
                  Rhabarb with the ſirupe. With this Medicine you ſhall not onelye preſerue them from the plague, but alſo ſlaie and driue foorth the Wormes that bée in the guts. Or elſe, when you haue thus ſliced your Rhabarb, mingle it with the ſirupe of Uiolets, Succorie, or roſes, and while the ſubſtance of the Rhabarb is ſomwhat ſoft, ſéeth the ſirupe againe, & when it is cold put thereto Rhabarb againe with Cinamom & cloues, and miniſter foure or fiue ſlices with two ſponfuls of ſirupe. And vnto thoſe that are elder, but delicate, wée vſe to preſcribe in Winter pilles of Rhabarb, Aloës, Agarike, Sene, and Mirobalanes, according to the cuſtome of theyr lyfe, & diuerſity of natures: and in Summer we geue Potious made of the ſame, or the lyke. The maner of making whereof is this: Také Rhabarb an ounce and a halfe, Agarike one ounce, Sene clenſed foure

ounces, Cinamom one dram, Ginger halfe a ſcruple, Aniſe and Fenell ſeedes of eche twoo drams, beate them into a groſſe pouder, and ſprincle it with Aqua vitae, afterwarde ſtéepe it in Borage water, or fayre common water: and when it is ſufficientlye couloured, then ſtraine it, then powre the like water vpon the dregges, and let it ſtéepe as before, then ſtraine it and wring it, and boyle the ſtrayned lycour ouer a ſoft fyre, vntyll it come to the conſiſtēce of Honie, then put Sugar thereto, and kéepe it to your vſe: geue of this three pilles for halfe a dram, more or leſſe according to the age, ſtrength, and temperament. I knewe one in England, Baptiſta Agnelli, who had ſpent all his life in the art of Diſtilling, hee vſed this Opiate in the time of Peſtilence with verye good ſucceſſe, whoſe deſcription followeth: Take Agrimonie, Wormwood romane, of eche twoo handfuls, Aniſe halfe an ounce, Sene twoo ounces, boyle them in common water, the ſpace of foure houres, then ſtraine thē all ſtronglye, and vnto the ſtrayned licour

put an ounce of Sugar, of clenſed Caſſia twoo ounces, make it after the maner of an Opiate, whereof you may geue half an ounce at a time, for it purgeth gentlye, without troubling the humours. Some put Manna to the ſirupe of Roſes, and ſo make an Opiate. But all wryters commende the pilles called Ruffi, or Common, or of Aloes, Saffron, and Mirrhe, not onely becauſe they purge euyll humours, but becauſe they reſiſt putrifaction, ſtrengthning the heart, Lyuer, and other partes, and conſume ſuperfluous moiſtures, which br
                     ••
                  de great occaſion of this diſeaſe, asBooke 4. 
                        •
                     en 1. cha. 4. 
                  Auicen wryteth. But they which can not take purgations, they muſt often haue theyr bellies mooued with a Glyſter: or they in whome blood alone, or ioyned with other humours, is found much abounding, would haue ſome taken from them after theſe aboue rehearſed euacuations, ſpeciallye if they haue bene accuſtomed to lettyng of blood, and haue large veynes, and bée much geuen to drynking of Wine, and eating of fleſhe.
            
            
               
               The▪ 10. Chap.
               THus when at ſundrye times the body hath bene gentlie purged, let the Pacient take betimes in the morning faſting a dram of this Opiate following: Lake olde Triacle one dram, conſerue of the flowers of Tunica, and roſemary
                     •
                  , of eche thrée drams, with the iuce of a Citron, make them vp in the forme of an Opiate. Or thus: Take the rootes of Angelica, Zedoarie. Tormentill, of eche one ounce, Cinamom twoo drams, the rinde of a Citron a dram, bring theſe into pouder, and boyle them in roſe water, an hower and a halfe, then ſtraine it hard, and boyle the ſtrayned licour with Sugar ſufficient vnto the conſiſtence of Hony, and make it an Opiate, or make it an Clectuarye in lozenges. After the ſame order you maye make a very good Opiate of the iuce of gréene Juniper berries, with Sugar, to coale the ſtomacke, to expell the grauell out of the reynes, and to fortifye the principal partes. Or thus: Bruſe the berryes and boyle them in common water to

the thyrd part, then boyle the ſtrayned licour againe as I haue ſhewed before. Of Bole, Zedoarie, Gentian, and Angelica maye bée made trochiſkes, with the iuce of Borage, Scabious, & Pimpernell. But thoſe that inſue I vſe more commonlye, and they are more pleaſaunt to bée taken: Take ten Citrons and cut them into many péeces, the tops of Borage an handfull, good white wine thrée pintes, ſtyll them in an earthen veſſell, and there wyll drop forth very cleare water, ſoote, & pleaſaūt to taſte, take of this water twoo ounces euerye morning faſting. Another: Take Aqua vitae thrée ounces, roſewater an ounce and an halfe
                     •
                  , wherein laye a ſtiepe of Cinamom thrée drams, yealowe Saunders one dram, ſtraine it through an hairen ſtrainer, & ſwéeten it with conſerue of roſes, take one ounce thereof euery morning eyther in a ſpone, or vpon a toſt of bread. Another: Take Tormentill, Biſtort, Zedoary, Enelacāpane, of eche one ounce, Diuels bit, Scordium, Saucealone, wilde Sorrell, Pimpernell, of eche

halfe an handfull, Borage and violet flowers, Taxus Barbatus, the tops of Rue one gripefull, Citron ſéedes, and Carduus benedictus, ofech twoo drams, Juniper berries thrée drams, Cloues, Nutmegs of eche a dram and an halfe, plde Triacle, an ounce and an halfe, good white wine, a pint and an halfe, diſtyll them all in Balneo, and miniſter twoo ounces of this diſtylled water.
               The moſt wicked and deſperate varlets, whome the Magiſtrates of Lions put to death for carreing about and increaſing the plague, when they were led to execution, confeſſed, that they preſerued themſelues from the Peſtilence with none other thing then a walnut, which they toſted or ſcorched a lytle againſt the fyre before they eate it.
               
                  Leonhardus Fuchſius tolde me once in his owne houſe, that there was nothing more holſome againſt ye plague, then an Electuarie of Egges, and that it was a cōmon thing among the Germanes, both to preuent and to cure the plague, and hee ſayde as much alſo of Angelica.
               
            
            
               
               The. 11. Chap.
               FOr as much as at the beginning of this diſeaſe, there is great plentye of euyll humours gathered into ye ſtomack, and other common paſſedges of the bodye, which may eaſilye bee diſcerned by the burning, and byting of the ſtomacke, vnquencheable thyrſt, lothing, vomyting of fleame, choler, or ſome other humour: then muſt the cure bee begun by clenſing the bellye with a ſuppoſitour, or common Olyſter. Afterward the pacient maye take a dram of mine Electuarye, whoſe diſcription is to bee founde in the 
                     •
                  yght Chapter, and twoo or three howers after that, you muſt prouoke vomite with Antimonie, whoſe preparation you ſhall finde diſcribed in the ende of this treatiſe.
               But to the intent that the pacient maye vomite with more eaſe and leſſe trouble vnto him, it were good for him to ſup the broath of a Chick, an hower or twaine after hee haue receyued the vomite, and to doo ſo as often as hée

perceiueth him ſelfe mooued to vomite. For the corrupt humours which the Antimonie hath drawne into the capacitie of the ſtomack, wyl be without any trouble caſt foorth with the breath. For vomiting vpon an empty ſtomack is painful. But they that haue not Antimonie in aredines, let them take one or two of the inner kernels of ye ſtraūge Indian Nut, which is as pleaſaunt vnto the mouth, as the Filbeard or Walnut, but it prouoketh vomit very ſtrōgly, a medicine truely not to be deſpiſed, for it néedeth no preparation, and may alwayes be at hand in areadines. The effecte of this Medicine I learned at And warpe, of an Italian Surgeō, whē I trauailed that waye out of England into Germanie. At the laſt Nauigation out of Hiſpania noua, the Admirall of the fléete brought great ſtoare of theſe into Normandy: the Trée whereon they grow, as he told, is al the ſtemme ouer full of ſharpe prickles lyke the hip trée, and as big as our plum trées, full of boughes growing ſtreight foorth at the top, whereof ye fruite groweth like a

Cheſtnut, wherin are cōtayned fower or fiue nuts, blackiſhe, ſomewhat long, round, and lyke filbeards. Theſe, whē the prickly huſke gapeth with ripenes, many times fall downe alone. But becauſe no man ſhal thinke that I father ſome glorious lye in ſight of the world, vpon theſe rare Merchaundize, which are brought out of India, the ſtéede and vertues of this Nut maye bee ſupplied by fine kernels or ſéedes of the hearbe called Palma Chriſti, or commonly Ricinum, for they purge the bellye, and there withal prouoke vomite, peraduē
                  ture as well as Matthiolus his Antimonie doth. But good héede muſt be takē, leaſt being delighted with ye ſwéetneſſe of the meate, there be too many eaten of them, for then they wyll cauſe a ſuperpurgation: the profe whereof I found of late in a certaine noble man, who, I being not priuie thereof, deuoured fiftéene kernels, and with ſieging & vomitting had almoſt purged out his life. I my ſelfe a fewe yéeres ſince béeing in England, miniſtred twoo ounces of the hearb Eriſinum, with the waters

of Bugloſſe, Scabious, & Carduus benedictus to prouoke vomit, with ſo good ſucceſſe, that at one time the pacientes vomited, and draue out their ſores. Some geue the diſtylled water of wild Sorrell, mingled with vineger, and a lytle Uitrioll, to prouoke vomit. Take Bolearmoniack prepared, Cinamom, of eche a dram & an halfe, the roote of Dittamnie, Tormentill, Pimpernell, Gentian, of eche twoo drams, the ſéeds of the Citron, and of Sorrell, of eche a dram & an halfe, of al kindes of Saunders, Zedoarie, Angelica, Scordium, ſhauinges of Iuorie, of eche one dram, & of the horne of a young heart, ſhaued neare vnto ye head, halfe a dram, make thereof a pouder with thriſe ſo muche Sugar. The quantitye to be miniſtred is one dram, or fower ſcruples in ye water of Bugloſſe, Scabious, or in the ſirupe of Limons. Aboue fiftéene yéere agoe, I knewe a Surgeon at the Citie of Roan, an old man, who was found & maintayned by the common charge of the Citie, to the intēt he ſhould goe vnto all the Citizens y• were ſicke in time

of Peſtilēce: He vſed at the firſt aſſault of the ſickneſſe to let them blood, as I wyl afterward declare, and afterward he gaue them prepared Calcanthum, as he termed it, to prouoke them to vomite, with good ſucceſſe. The ſame alſo vſed Antimonic, before that Matthiolus had ſet forth his commentaries vpō 
                  Dioſcorides, and this is the maner of preparing the Calcanthum: Take vitriol romane aud drie it very diligently, then diſſolue it in water, & clenſe the water cléerely from the reſidence, then Euaporate this cleered water awaye, & you ſhall haue your vitrioll in the bottome like ſalt, which you may vſe with conſerue of roſes, of the flowers of roſemarye, or Borage water, twoo ſcruples or one dram of y• ſalt at a time: touching this matter, ſéeke more in Guainerius Fumanellus, and Amatus Luſitanus. In ſmaller diſeaſes, I haue cōmonly vſed to geue a vomit of the ſéede of Arrage, Radiſh, Walwort, Broome, & the roote of Aſſarabacca, & the diligent Readers maye ſeeke for the lyke receites in the bookes of practicioners, alwayes remembring

this, that in this diſeaſey, as ſtrongeſt muſt bée vſed, that the humorie may not be ſtirred only, but expelled alſo. And when the pacient hath made an ende of vomiting, he muſt be comforted with ſuch things as nouriſh much & ſpedely, as is the water of fleſhe, whoſe diſcription foloweth: Cut a Pertridge, capon, or any other kind of fleſh into thin & broad ſlices, & ſeeth thē ouer the fire with the pouder of Diamargariton frigidum, conſerue of Marygold flowers, bugloſſe, & of roſemary flowers, vntyll they be reſolued into lycour, this water ſhall you dreane from the groundes, & geue it the pacient to drinke. To the ſame purpoſe maye be made ſtrengthning broathes, & ſuppinges of fleſhe, pouned and wrong in a preſſe, called collyces, and ſuch lyke: then afterwarde to amende the harme whiche the ſtomacke hath taken by the recourſe of euyll humours vnto it, it were verye wholſome to miniſter ſome of the ſubſtaunce of a Quince, with a little of a Citron condite, that by diligence wee maye reſtore as much as the vomite hath weakened.
            
            
               
               The. 12. Chap.
               THey which haue no lyking to vomit at ye beginning of ye ſicknes, or whē they haue done vomiting, let them, if it be poſſible, ſweat abundantly. For thoſe medicines which prouoke ſweate do not only helpe to the driuing forth of botches, but alſo expell the verye ſéede & ground of the peſtilent putrifaction with the thinneſt part of the blood through the ſmal paſſages of the ſkin. The profe herof is cléere, if we take a preſident from ye cure of the French pocks: for as no man wyl graūt that they be perfectly healed, vnles the ſores be cured by bringing thē vnto ſuppuratiō by ſundry & often times ſweating, or by any other means wherby the poiſoned humour which poſſeſſed the principall part be drawen forth: ſo likewiſe neyther can the peſtilēt diſeaſe or plague be remedied, vnleſſe ye néereſt & chéefeſt cauſe, together with the bumor whereon it feedeth, are by nature voided into ye proper iſſue, or ſome other conuenient place. Now therefore muſt we doo our beſt in deſcribing the moſt fit & ſoueraine medicines to prouoke ſweat. And among the reſidue that are deuiſed by the

expert in the ſecretes of Philoſophy, as principall are commended the ſalt made of wormwood, & of Scabious, being ſuch as being miniſtred in very litle quātity, do not onely prouoke ſweat verye abundantlye: but alſo withſtand this ſicknes mightely. And no maruaile, ſince Hippocrates ſaid, that ſalt cureth the iaūdice: For ſalt by cutting & making thin, diſchargeth the ſtopping of ye intrailes, & by ye vertue which it hath to drie, it reſiſteth putrifactiō, which many times is ioyned with the iaundice and the peſtilence. If theſe properties be common to the ſalt which we eate with our meate, much more is it peculiar vnto this kinde of ſalt whereof I now ſpeake, which hath in it a firy quality of y• thing, out of which it is drawne. The making of ye ſalt is afterRaymun. Lul in Clauicula. this maner. Take wormwood romane, & ſcabious, & burne them to aſhes, & poure cōmon fayre water vnto thē, & boyle thē halfe an hower & more, then ſtraine the water, & put freſhe vnto the aſhes, and boile it as before, which you ſhall doo ſo oftē vntil in boiling ye water chaūge neither taſt, nor colour Thē clēſe theſe waters which you haue kept, either through

a cloth, or by dreaning, and cauſe it to bée euaporated away by a ſoft fire, and you ſhal haue the ſalt in the bottom & ſides of ye veſſell, whereof you ſhal geue x. grains in white wine, delaied with the water of Bugloſſe, conſerue of roſes, or the water of Citrons before diſcribed. With this Medicine onely many were ſaued of the plague, in the yéere of our Lord. 1567. at what time it raigned ouer all England & Germani. You may alſo after the ſame maner, and to the ſame purpoſe, draw a ſalt out of Angelica, Zedoarie, Guaicū, & ſuch like: But thys much I aduertiſe the Readers, ye vnto ſweating medicines they put ſome thing that may helpe the part affected by natural inclination, as if the gréefe be in the Liuer, geue the ſalt in the decoction of ſuch hearbs as experiēce hath taught do comfort the Liuer, & the lyke diſcrecion is to be vſed in the other partes. Ierome of Flaūders a Surgeon, when he was once heartned by ye plague that was at London, began boldly to goe viſite firſt his friendes, & afterward the common people of the Engliſhmen that were ſick, to the imitacion of them who hauing once eſcaped the daunger of the

Sea & warre, goe vnto the ſame againe with better courage, hoping ye hey may eſcape harder perils, as ſaufe they did before. And this was a cauſe to make them leſſe diſpaire of recouerie. He gaue them ten or twelue graines of ſalt made of the Aſhe trée, which he had of a friend, which he miniſtred vnto them in the cō
                  ſerue of Borage, Roſemary flowers, Roſes, or in ye water of Carduus benedictus, or Scabious, & immediatly their bodies ran all on a ſweat, & the ſick were recured, eyther the mallice of the diſeaſe being ouercome or dryuen forth into ſome voiding place, as he faithfully reported ye ſame vnto mée, and other his friendes.
               Theſe thinges haue I not gathered out of the moſt vaine trifles of Paracelſus, as Andernacus a man verye well learned, & Adamus a Bodeſtein can wel remember, but rather out of Geber, & Raymundus Lullius. For Geber ſayth, that of eueryIn Clauſ
                        ••
                      la. thing may be made Lime, of Lime ſalt, of ſalt, water, or oyle. And indeede if you diſſolue this ſalt in Aqua vitae, & let it putrifye fiue or ſixe dayes in Balneo, or Dungue: & afterward diſtyll it, you ſhal haue an oyle, whereof thrée drops being

mi
                     〈…〉
                   ſome conuenient lycour, prouo
                     〈…〉
                  eat plentifully, as I haue oftentim
                     〈…〉
                  perimented in curing of the Qua
                     〈…〉
                   Ague, by the oyles drawen foorth 
                     〈…〉
                   ſalts of Germāder, Ceterac, Polipo
                     〈…〉
                  , or of the Aſhe trée. But they that haue no leiſure to prepare their ſalt, let them vſe the medicines following: Take Triacle thrée ounces, conſerue of Bugloſſe, & of the flowers of Roſemary, of eche one ounce, Scabious, Diuels bit, Pimpernell, of eche halfe an hādful, Gē
                  tian, Angelica, Zedoarie, Cinamom, of ech twoo drams, flowers of Chamomil, & Peneriall, of eche twoo gripes, the ſéedes of Caduus benedictus, a dram & an halfe, beate the rootes & leaues into pouder, & with equal quātity of the water of Carduus benedictus & white wine, diſtyl thē in Balneo or aſhes, and giue thrée ounces thereof at a time, Or boyle Milium in common fayre water, vntyll it yeeld no more ſkum, then take of this decoction thre ounces, of good white wine an ounce & an halfe, mingle them togeather, & let the pacient drinke it warme, & it prouoketh ſweat abundantlye. This kinde of remedie alſo we vſe in Feuers, diſtillacions,

and other infirmities w
                     〈…〉
                  ein we think it conuenient to prouoke 
                     •
                  weat: otherſom prouoke ſweat with 
                     〈…〉
                  or ſeauē drops of the oyle of vitrioll, & 
                     〈…〉
                   with the oyle of Aniſe ſéede. But the moſt ſureſt remedy is prepared of the decoctiō of Guaicū, the rootes called Chynae, & Zarſa parilla, adding thereto the ſirupe called Acetoſitatis citri, & the Theriacal water, with ſuch like. I know a ſurgeō at Andwarp, who to prouok ſweat, vſed to wrap his paciēts in a ſhéete moiſtned with the decoctiō of Guaicum, the roote of Tormē
                  till, Walwort, and the herbe Bardana, wherein al he diſſolued Sublimatum. Others vſe to make a Suffumigation or ſmoake of Cinabar, Frankēſenſe & ſuch like, which we vſe ordinarely in curing the Frenche pockes: but the vſe of our Mercurie water is more effectual, wherwith we vſe to bathe al the ioynts of the body, to prouoke ſweat in the Plague, & in the French pocks, of which medicines we wyl diſpute more at large in another place. And ſome againe make a Suffumigaciō of Frankenſence, Cinabar, Antimonie, Cloues, and ſuch lyke, which through tynnen funnels and pipes, they

                  
                     〈…〉
                  he ſicke mans bed, to cauſe him 
                     〈…〉
                  ut prouided alwaies, that the 
                     〈…〉
                  ot the head.
            
            
               
                  
                     〈…〉
                  e. 13. Chap.
               N
                     〈…〉
                  me vnto y• which I propoſed 
                     〈…〉
                  he third & laſt place, wherin it is conuenient to ſet downe the particular cure of the Peſtilēce. Wherefore, aſſoone as thou cūmeſt to one whom yu ſuſpecteſt to be ſick of the plague, geue him a dram of the Electuarie following: Take Angelica, Zedoary, Tormentill, Gentian, of eche an ounce, the ſéedes of Carduus benedictus, of Citrons, of eche two drams, beate thē into pouder, & boile them ouer a ſoft fire the ſpace of twoo or thrée howers, then ſtraine them & wring them hard, and boyle the ſtrained lycour with Sugar, vnto the conſiſtence of an Opiate, or make it into an Electuarie. In the ſtede of this compoſitiō, take twoo drams of the Opiate before deſcribed, with the dyſtilled water of Citrons: and in the meane while, ſearch diligently in what part of the bodye the infection lurketh, which you may eaſily perceyue by the agréemēt & concurſe of ſignes, wherof we haue intreated before. Wherfore,

if the infection be in the Liuer 
                     〈…〉
                  paine, and pricking, and ſti
                     〈…〉
                   be grine: immediatly let the pa
                     〈…〉
                   in the ancle veines, but if the b
                     〈…〉
                   not foorth in ſufficient quantitye or 
                     〈…〉
                  e for ſome other conſideration it be not good to open thoſe veines, thē were it good to ſet cupping glaſſes vnto ye place with ſcarification, and before, or immediatly after opening y• veine, to mooue the belly with a ſuppoſitour made of Honie, or ye common Glyſter, & afterward ſet cupping glaſſes to the grine where it beginneth to ſwel, & foure fingers breadth beneath the place affected, applye the leaues of Elleborus niger, which Plinie calleth Cō
                     ſiligo, layd too playſterwiſe. And to draw the corruption foorth vnto the voyding place, the roote and leaues of Yarrowe, ſtāped with common ſalt, & layd too after ye ſame maner, is very good to breake the botch, as the ſame varlets of whom we made mencion before, declared at theyr death, as Maiſter Laigle, the flower of our Citie, a very wel learned Phiſition, & a mā of good credite, affirmed vnto mée. For being demaunded by the gouernour how they ſaued thē whome they had infected

                  
                     〈…〉
                  heyr wyll? they aunſwe
                  
                     〈…〉
                  s medicine only they vſed 
                     〈…〉
                  e poiſō which poſſeſſed ye 
                  
                     〈…〉
                  es, & ſo they ſaued them 
                     〈…〉
                  ould not haue to periſhe. The 
                     〈…〉
                  hale of ye walnut with ſalt, hath the ſame effect, as alſo Brionie, the black vine, & the inner rinde of Viburnū. While the Surgeon is buſie about theſe maters, let him vſe alſo the ointments afore deſcribed for the Liuer & the heart, or let him anoint the region of the heart with oyle made of ye kernels or ye flouers of Peaches, or of roſemary, or S. Johns wort. Or beat dried roſes into very fine pouder, & boyle it in roſewater an houre & an half, or ſumwhat more, thē ſtrain it hard, ye the fineſt part of ye pouder which is diſſolued by boyli, may paſſe through the lynnen ſtrayner. Then when it is ſtrained, boyle it againe ouer a ſoft fire, vntyl it come to the conſiſtence of hony, or an oyntment, & therewith anoynt the region of the heart. This is the maner to draw the earth (as they terme it) out of ſimples, as I my ſelfe at other tymes haue drawne the like out of wormwood, Gaules, Pomegranate floures, & ſuch

lyke, againſt harde milte
                     〈…〉
                   bleeding of the Hemerodes, 
                     〈…〉
                   long & ſtubborne diſeaſes 
                     〈…〉
                   & vnto the roſes may be a
                     〈…〉
                   of Citrons, of Orenges, a
                     〈…〉
                  rs of Gentian, eſpeciallye in Burgondie, which is a place yt nouriſheth moſt rare and precious ſimples. I vſe to put vnto this oyntment while it is boyling a fewe drops of the iuce of Limons, yt by reaſon of the more liuely heat, and pleaſantnes of the taſt, it may be the more acceptable vnto the ſicke perſon. If there appeare any ſwelling in the necke, or about the eares, or any other ſignes declare the infection to bée in the Braine, the forehead veine muſt be opened, or elſe the ſmall veines in the Noſe, with Milfoile thruſt into the noſtrels, or with ſome other pricking thing. The learned and expert Surgeons do open the outward veine of the throate, with no feare or daunger of to much confluxe of blood, as I my ſelfe haue alſo experimēted in the continuing headach. The later practicioners let blood in a ſmall quantitie out of Cephalica, otherſome open the veines yt are vnder the tongue, bicauſe, as the diuine Hippocrates
                  
                  
                     〈…〉
                  ten, it is moſt requiſit to 
                     〈…〉
                  lace vnto the pain. And 
                     〈…〉
                   very good reaſon, that it 
                     〈…〉
                   to apply cupping glaſ
                  
                     〈…〉
                  ation vpō the neck, back, 
                     〈…〉
                   and armes, and beneath the place affected muſt the things be applied which I deſcribed erewhile. When the ſwelling riſeth vnder the arme, open the veine Baſilica on the ſame ſide, where ye ſwelling appeareth. And if it ryſe vnder both armes, opē the Baſilica in the right arme, then make a little cut in the inner ſide of the hand on the ſame ſide, right againſt the little finger, and then lay vnto the cut Scordium, or Sauce alone in the ſteede thereof, to drawe forth the Uenim at the peculiar voyding place: this medicen I learned of D. Pelleterius Biſhop of Monpelier when he was at Paris, fiftene or twēty yéere a goe. D. Hollerius a Phiſition of Paris, who ſumtime was my mayſter, vſed to apply liue Oyſters to the ſame purpoſe. Now when the botch i
                     •
                   ſwolne ſomwhat bigge, then lay therto an Oynion roſted in the embers with garlick, and barrowes greace, or butter: Or make an Oynion hollow, and fill vp

the hole with olde Triacle
                     〈…〉
                   vp, and roſt it in the embe
                     〈…〉
                   Malowes, violets, cammo
                     〈…〉
                   and the freſh flowers of 
                     〈…〉
                   they be well boyled, pow
                     〈…〉
                   and ſtraine thē through an hairen ſtrainer, then put therto the oyle of S. Johns woort, or of Camomill, and make therof a plaiſter. The laſt yéere all the Surgeons in England applied plaſters whiche they made of Crabbes before they were ripe: otherſome cut a Pomegranate into ſmale pieces, and boyle it in vineger, and powne it, and ſpread it vpon a linen cloath, & laye it too, not to repell the large recourſe of the noiſome humour, as ſome doo write, but to drawe rather: for it is ſtraunge to ſée howe by the laying too of this, the ſore wyll ſodainly ſwell, & waxe byg, but the playſter muſt touch ye whole places about the ſore alſo, y• from thence it may draw moyſture into the ſwelling kernell. Whatſoeuer elſe belongeth to the cure of ye peſtilēt 
                     •
                  ote
                     •
                  , the Readers maye gather it out of Hollerius booke of the Peſtilent feuer, out of Ambroſius Par
                        •
                     us, and others that haue written more copiouſlye of this argument.
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  depiction of furnace
               
               THis is the forme aud repreſentacionThe forme 
                        •
                     f the Forace. of the Fornace, with his veſſell, which notwithſtanding, I thought good to place apart, whereby their ſeueral figures might be the better perceiued. The veſſell with the thrée

neckes muſt ſo be plac
                     〈…〉
                  nace, that ye twoo necke
                     〈…〉
                   one direaly againſt an
                     〈…〉
                   maye paſſe through th
                     〈…〉
                   fornace made on eythe
                     〈…〉
                   the twoo endes maye come 
                     〈…〉
                   the fornace, and the thyrd ſticke 
                     ••
                  rectly vpryght. Nowe when after this maner the veſſell is placed within the fornace, and couered with Bricks or Tyles, layd one vpon another, ſo cloſe that the heate of the fyre paſſe foorth at no chinke, the doore which you ſee in the ſide may ſerue partlye to put in the fire, and partly alſo to kindle it, that it goe not out for want of ayre. The nethermoſt doore is made to auoide the aſhes, and at the beginning of the worke you ſhall make a great fire ſo long cōtinuing, vntyl the earthen veſſell be all red hote, which for the moſt part wyil bée in halfe an howre, or an howre at the moſt.
               Then take one dram of crude Antimonie and caſt it into the veſſell at the neck which ſticketh vpright, and then couer it immediatlye with a ſtople of earth, or glaſſe, and forthwith the Antimonie wyl ryſe vp too the twoo neckes which are at

                  
                     〈…〉
                  e fornace, which in the top 
                     〈…〉
                  hite, & beneath ſomwhat 
                     〈…〉
                  ſtay betwéene caſting in 
                     〈…〉
                  me may be the more per
                  
                     〈…〉
                  d. Anon caſt in againe as much more crude Antimonie, & do ſo ſtyl as I haue before declared vntyll you, ſée the twoo ſide necks halfe full of prepared Antimonie. Then withdrawe the fire, and when the veſſell is colde, breake it, and gather the Antimonie awaye from the refuſe which lyeth in the bottome, whereof there is no vſe in Phiſicke. And kéepe the red Antimonie vnto your vſe, whereof I haue intreated in the. 
                     〈…〉
                  . Cha. And reſerue the whyte vnto other purpoſes, eſpeciallye againſt the impedimentes of the eyes, and other moſt gréeuous diſeaſes of the bodye, of which thing (God wylling) I meane hereafter in ſome other place to diſcourſe more at large.
            
            FINIS.
            
         
      
   