
      
         
            
            
            TEARES ON THE DEATH of Meliades.
            
            EDINBVRGH, Printed by Andro Hart, and are to be sold at his shop on the North-side of the high streete, a litle beneath the Crosse, 1613.
         
         
            
            To the Author.
            IN waues of Woe thy sighes my Soule doe tosse,
            And doe burst vp the Conduits of my teares,
            Whose ranckling wound no smoothing Baume long beares,
            But freshly bleedes when ought vpbraides my losse.
            Then thou so sweetly Sorrow makes to sing,
            And troubled Passions dost so well accord,
            That more delight thy Anguish doth afford,
            Then others Ioyes can satisfaction bring.
            What sacred Wits (when rauish'd) doe affect
            To force Affections, Metamorphose minds,
            Whilst numbrous powre the Soule in secret binds,
            Thou hast perform'd transforming in effect.
            For neuer plaints did greater pittie moue,
            The best applause that can such notes approue.
            
               S. W. ALEXANDER
            
         
      
      
         
            
            TEARES ON THE DEATH of Meliades.
            
            O Heauens, then is it trew that thou art gone,
            And left this wofull Ile her losse to mone,
            
               Meliades, bright day-Starre of the West,
            A Comet blazing terrour to the East:
            And neither that thy Spirit so heauenly wise,
            Nor Bodie [though of earth] more pure then Skies,
            Nor royall Stemme, nor thy sweete tender Age,
            Of cruell Destinies could quench the rage?
            O fading hopes! O short-while-lasting joy
            Of earth-borne man, that one houre can destroy!
            Then euen of Vertues spoyles Death Trophees reares,
            As if he gloried most in many teares.
            Forc'd be hard Fates, doe Heauens neglect our cryes?
            Are Starres set onely to act Tragedies?
            And let them doe their worst, since thou art gone;
            Raise whome they lift to Thrones, enthron'd dethrone,
            Staine Princely Bowres with blood, and euen to Gange,
            
            In Cypresse sad, glad Hymens torches change.
            
               Ah thou hath left to liue, and in the time,
            When scarse thou blossom'd in thy pleasant Prime.
            So falls by Northen blast a virgin Rose,
            At halfe that doth her bashfull bosome close:
            So a sweete Flourish languishing decayes,
            That late did blush when kist by Phoebus rayes.
            So Phoebus mounting the Meridians hight,
            Choak't by pale Phoebe, faints vnto our sight:
            Astonish'd Nature sullen stands to see
            The Life of all this All, so chang'd to be,
            
               In gloomie gownes the Starres about deplore,
            The Sea with murmuring mountaines beates the shore,
            Blacke Darkenesse reeles o're all, in thousand shoures
            The weeping Aire on Earth her sorrow poures,
            That in a palsey, quakes to see so soone
            Her Louer set, and Night burst forth ere Noone.
            If Heauen alas ordaind thee yong to die,
            Why was't not where thou mightst thy valour trie?
            And to the wondring world at least set forth
            Some litle sparke of thy exspected worth?
            
               Meliades, O that by Isters streames
            Mong sounding trumpets, fierie twinckling gleames
            Of warme vermilion swords, and cannons roare,
            Balls thicke as raine powr'd by the Caspian shore;
            Mong broken speares, mong ringing helmes & shieldes,
            Huge heapes of slaughtred bodies long the fieldes,
            In Turkish blood made red like Marses starre,
            Thou ended had thy life and Christian warre!
            Or as braue Burbon, thou had made olde Rome
            
            Queene of the world, thy triumph and thy tombe.
            So Heauens faire face to comming worlds which reedes,
            A booke had beene of thy illustrous deedes.
            So to their nephewes aged Syres had told
            The high exploits perform'd by thee of olde;
            Townes raz'd, and rais'd, victorious, vanquish'd bands,
            Fierce Tyrants flying, foyl'd, kild by thy hands.
            And in deare Arras, Virgins faire had wrought
            The Bayes and Trophees to thy countrie brought:
            While some great Homer imping wings to fame,
            Deafe Nilus dwellers had made heare thy name.
            
               That thou did not attaine these honours spheares,
            Through lacke of power it was not, but of yeares.
            A brauer youth, pale Troy with trembling walls
            Did never see, nor she whose name appalls
            Both Titans golden bowres, in bloodie fights
            Mustring on Marses field, such Mars-like knights.
            The Heauens had brought thee to the highest hight
            Of wit and courage, showing all their might
            When they thee fram'd. Ayme that what is braue
            On earth, they as their owne so soone should craue!
            
               Meliades sweete courtly Nymphes deplore,
            From ruddy Hesp'rus rising to Aurore.
            
            When Forth thy nurse, Forth where thou first did passe
            Thy tender dayes, [who smylde oft on her glasse,
            To see thee gaze] Meandring with her streames,
            Heard thou had left this round, from Phoebus beames
            She sought to flie, but forced to returne
            By neighbour brookes, she gaue her selfe to mourne:
            And as she rush't her Cyclades among,
            She seem'd to plaine, that Heauen had done her wrong.
            With a hoarse plaint, Cleyd downe her steppie rockes,
            And Tweid through her greene mountaines cled with flocks,
            Did wound the Ocean, murmuring thy death;
            The Ocean that roar'd about the earth,
            And to the Mauritanian Atlas told;
            Who shrunke through griefe, & down his white haires rold
            Huge streames of teares, which changed were in floods,
            Wherewith he drown'd the neighbour plaines & woods.
            The lesser brookes as they did bubling goe,
            Did keepe a consort vnto publicke woe.
            
               The Shepheards left their flockes, with downe cast eyes
            Sdaining to looke vp to the angrie Skyes:
            Some brake their pipes, and some in sweete-sad layes
            Made senslesse things amazed at thy praise.
            His reed Alexis hang vpon a tree,
            And with his teares made Doven great to be.
            
               Meliades sweete courtly Nymphes deplore
            From ruddy Hesp'rus rising to Aurore.
            
            Chast Maids which haunt faire Aganippe Well,
            And you in Tempes sacred shade who dwell,
            Let fall your harpes, cease tunes of joy to sing,
            Discheueled make all Parnassus ring
            With Antheames sad, thy Musicke Phoebus turne
            In dolefull plaints, whilst Ioy it selfe doth mourne.
            Dead is thy Darling who decor'd thy Bayes,
            Who oft was wont to cherish thy sweete layes,
            And to a trumpet raise thy amorous stile,
            That flotting Delos enuied might this Ile.
            You Acidalian Archers breake your Bowes,
            Your brādons quench, with teares blot Beauties snowes,
            And bid your weeping Mother yet againe
            A second Adons death, nay Marses plaine.
            His Eyes once were your darts, nay euen his Name,
            Where euer heard, did euery heart inflame.
            
               Tagus did court his loue with Golden streames,
            
               Rheine with his Townes, faire Seine with all she claimes.
            But ah (poore Louers) Death them did betray,
            And not suspected made their Hopes, his Pray!
            
               Tagus bewailes his losse with Golden streames,
            
               Rheine with his Townes, faire Seine with all she claimes.
            
               
               Meliades sweete courtly Nymphes deplore
            From ruddy Hesp'rus rising to Aurore.
            
            Faire Meades amidst whose grassie velvet springs
            White, golden, azure flowres which once were kings,
            In mourning blacke, their shining colours dye,
            Bowe downe their heades, whiles sighing Zephyrs flye.
            Queene of the fieldes, whose blushes staines the Morne
            Sweete Rose, a Princes death in purple mourne.
            O Hyacinthes for ay your Al keepe still,
            Nay, with moe markes of woe your leaues now fill.
            Your greene lockes Forrests cut, in weeping Mirres,
            The deadly Cypresse, and inke-dropping Firres,
            Your Palmes and Mirtles turne; from shadowes darke
            Wing'd Syreins waile, and you sad Echoes marke
            The lamentable accents of their mone,
            And plaine that braue Meliades is gone.
            Stay Skye thy turning course, and now become
            A stately Arche, vnto the Earth his tombe;
            Ouer which ay the watrie Iris keepe,
            And soft-eyed Pleiades which still doe weepe,
            
               Meliades sweete courtly Nymphes deplore
            From ruddy Hesp'rus rising to Aurore.
            
            Deare Ghost forgiue these our vntimely teares,
            By which our louing mind, though w
                  〈…〉
               ares.
            Our losse, not thine [when we complaine] we weepe,
            The glistring walls of Heauen for thee doe keepe,
            Beyond the Planets wheeles, boue highest source
            Of Spheares, that turnes the lower in his course.
            Where Sunne doth neuer set, nor vgly Night
            
               Euer appeares in mourning garments dight:
            Where Boreas stormie trumpet doth not sound,
            Nor clowdes in lightnings bursting, minds astound.
            From cares cold climates farre, and hote Desire,
            Where Time's exild, and Ages ne're expire:
            Mong purest spirits enuironed with beames,
            Thou thinks all things below, t'haue bene but dreames;
            And joyes to looke downe to the azur'd barres
            Of Heauen, poudred with troupes of streaming starres:
            And in their turning Temples, to behold
            In siluer robe the Moone, the Sunne in gold,
            Like yong eye-speaking louers in a dance,
            With majestie, by turnes retire, aduance.
            Thou wonders th'Earth to see hang like a ball
            Closd in the gha
                  •••
               ly Cloister of this All:
            And that poore m
                  ••
                should proue so madly fond,
            To tosse themselues for a small foote of ground.
            Nay, that they euen dare braue the pow'rs aboue,
            From this base stage of change, that cannot moue.
            All worldly pompe, and pride thou seest arise
            Like smoake thats scattred in the emptie skies.
            Other Hills and Forrests, other sumptuous Towres
            Amaz'd thou finds excelling our poore Bowres;
            Courts voyd of flatterie, of malice Minds,
            Pleasures which last, not such as reason blinds.
            More sweeter songs thou heares and carrollings,
            Whilst Heauens do dance, and quire of Angells sings,
            Then moldie minds could faine, euen our annoy
            [If it approach that place] is chang'd in joy.
            Rest blessed spirit, rest, satiat with the sight
            
               Of him whose beames (though dazeling) doe delight,
            Life of all liues, Cause of each other cause,
            The Spheare and Center where the mind doth pause:
            
               Narcyssus of himselfe, himselfe the Well,
            Louer, and Beautie that doth all excell.
            Rest happie Ghost, and wonder in that Glasse,
            Where seene is all that shall be, is, or was,
            While shall be, is, or was, doe passe away,
            And nothing be, but an Eternall day.
            For euer rest, thy praise Fame may enroule,
            In golden Annales, while about the Pole
            The slow Boötes turnes, or Sunne doth rise
            With scarlet scarfe to cheare the mourning Skies.
            The Virgins to thy tombe may garlands beare
            Of flowres, and with each flowre let fall a teare.
            
               Meliades sweete courtly Nymphes deplore
            From ruddy Hesp'rus rising to Aurore.
            
            
               W. Dr.
            
            FINIS.
         
         
            
            OF IET, 
            Or PORPHERIE,
            
            Or that white stone
             
               PAROS affoordes alone,
             Or these in AZVRE dye,
             which seeme to scorne the SKYE:
             Here Memphis Wonders doe not set,
             Nor ARTEMISIAS huge frame,
             that keepes so long her Louers Name:
             mak no great marble Atlas tremble with gold
             To please a vulgar eye that doth beholde.
             
               Phoebus, the Muses, Loue, hath raised of their teares
             A Chrystal tombe to him where through his worth appears.
         
         
            
            STay Passenger, see where enclosed lyes,
            Wits Paragone, and Natures daintiest frame,
            
               Vertues faire Temple, Wonder vnto Fame,
            In whome was found the best Heauen could deuise:
            At least that part the Earth of him could claime,
            Of Elements combind that did arise,
            For as to his braue Spirit, and glorious Name,
            The one the World, the other fills the Skyes.
            
               Arabian odours, Mirtles youthfull Bayes▪
            
            Roses, and that sweet floure 
                  〈…〉
               ares,
            Spred on this stone, while I these dolefull layes
            Sigh forth, and wash it ouer with my teares.
            Then goe and tell from Gades vnto Inde,
            
            Thou saw where Earths perfections were cōfinde.
            
            
         
      
   