
      
         
            
            
            THE HARMONIE of the Church.
            Containing, The Spirituall Songes and holy Hymnes, of godly men, Patriarkes and Prophetes: all, ſweetly ſounding, to the praiſe and glory of the higheſt.
            Now (newlie) reduced into ſundrie kinds of Engliſh Meeter: meete to be read or ſung, for the ſolace and comfort of the godly.
            By M. D.
            LONDON. Printed by Richard Ihones, at the Roſe and Crowne, neere Holborne Bridge. 1591.
            
         
         
            
            
            To the Godly and vertuous Lady, the Lady Iane Deuoreux, of Meriuale.
            
               GOod Madame, oft imagining with my ſelfe howe to manifeſt my well meaning vnto your Ladiſhippe, and in my loue towardes you, moſt vnwilling to bee founde ingratefull, either in the behalfe of my Countrie or the place of my byrth: To the one, your godlie life beeing a preſident of perfect vertue: to the other, your bountifull hoſpitalitie an exceeding releefe.
            Then (good Ladie) my ſelfe, as an admyrer of your manie vertues, and a well-wiſher vnto your happie and deſired eſtate, doo here preſent the fruites of my labours vnto your modeſt and diſcreet conſideration, hoping that you will meaſure them, not by my abilitie, but by their authoritie: not as Poems of Poets, but praiers of Prophets: and vouchſafe to be their gracious Patroneſſe againſt any graceleſſe Paraſite: And endeuour your ſelfe with this good Debora, Heſter and Iudith, (whoſe ſonges of praiſe I here preſent to your Ladiſhip) to the aduancing of Gods glorie, and the beautifieng of his Church. Thus committing your Ladiſhip and all your actions to the protection of the Almighty, and my ſhort tranſlation to your curteous cenſure, I humbly take my leaue. London, this 10. of Feb. 1590·
            
               
                  Your Ladiſhips to commaund, in all dutifull ſeruices. Michaell Drayton.
            
         
         
            
            
            To the curteous Reader.
            
               GEntle Reader, my meaning is not with the varietie of verſe to feede any vaine humour, neither to trouble thee with deuiſes of mine owne inuention, as carieng an ouerweening of mine owne wit: but here I preſent thee with theſe Pſalmes or Songes of praiſe, ſo exactly tranſlated as the proſe would permit, or ſence would any way ſuffer me: which (if thou ſhalt be the ſame in hart thou art in name, I mean a Chriſtian) I doubt not, but thou wilt take as great delight in theſe, as in any Poetical fiction. I ſpeak not of Mars, the god of Wars, nor of Venus, the goddeſſe of loue, but of the Lord of Hoſtes, that made heauen and earth: Not of Toyes in Mount Ida, but of triumphes in Mount Sion: Not of Vanitie, but of Veritie: not of Tales, but of Truethes.
            Thus ſubmitting my ſelfe vnto thy clemencie, and my labours vnto thy indifferencie, I wiſh thee as my ſelfe.
            
               Thine, as his owne. M. D.
            
         
         
            
            The Spirituall Songes and holy Hymnes, contained in this Book.
            
               1 THe moſt notable Song of Moſes, which he made a litle before his death.
               2 The Song of the Iſraelites, for their deliuerance out of Egypt.
               3 The moſt excellent Song of Salomon. Containing eight Chapters.
               4 The Song of Annah,
               
               5 The Praier of Ieremiah.
               
               6 The Song of Deborah and Barach.
               
               7 A Song of the Faithfull, for the mercies of God.
               8 Another Song of the Faithfull.
               9 A Song of thankes to God.
               10 An other Song of the Faithfull.
            
            
               Other Songes and Praiers out of the bookes of Apocripha.
               
                  11 The Praier of Iudith.
                  
                  12 The Song of Iudith.
                  
                  13 A Praier in Eccleſiaſticus of the Author.
                  14 The Praier of Salomon.
                  
                  15 A Song of Iheſus the ſonne of Sirach.
                  
                  16 The Praier of Heſter.
                  
                  17 The Praier of Mardocheus.
                  
                  18 A Praier in the perſon of the Faithfull.
                  19 A Praier of Tobias.
                  
               
            
            FINIS.
         
      
      
         
            
            The moſt notable Song of Moſes, containing Gods benefites to his people, which he taught the Children of Iſraell, a litle before his death: and commanded them to learne it, and teach it vnto their children, as a witneſſe betweene God and them.
            Deutronom. Chap. xxxii.
            
               
                  YEe Heauens aboue, vnto my ſpeach attend,
               And Earth below, giue eare vnto my will:
               My doctrine ſhall like pleaſant drops diſcend,
               My words like heauenly dew ſhal down diſtil,
               like as ſweet ſhowers refreſh the hearbs again
               Or as the graſſe is nouriſh'd by the raine.
            
            
               I will deſcribe Iehouahs name aright,
               And to that God giue euerlaſting praiſe:
               Perfect is he, a God of woondrous might,
               With iudgment he directeth all his waies.
               He onely true, and without ſinne to truſt,
               Righteous is he, and he is onely iuſt.
            
            
               With loathſome ſinne now are you all defilde,
               Not of his ſeed, but Baſtards, baſely borne:
               And from his mercie therefore quite exilde,
               Miſchieuous men, through follie all forlorne.
               Is it not he which hath you dearly bought:
               Proportion'd you, and made you iuſt of nought?
            
            
               
               Conſider well the times and ages paſt.
               Aſke thy forefathers, and they ſhall thee tell.
               That when Iehouah did deuide at laſt,
               Th'inheritance that to the Nations fel:
               And ſeperating Adams heires, he gaue
               the portion, his Iſraell ſhould haue.
            
            
               His people be the portion of the Lord,
               
                  Iacob the lot of his inheritance:
               In wilderneſſe he hath thee not abhorr'd,
               But in wild Deſerts did thee ſtill aduance.
               He taught thee ſtill and had a care of thee.
               And kept thee as the apple of his eie.
            
            
               Like as the Eagle tricketh vp her neaſt,
               Therein to lay her litle birdes full ſoft,
               And on her backe doth ſuffer them to reſt,
               And with her wings both carie them aloft.
               Euen ſo the Lord with care hath nouriſht thee.
               And thou haſt had no other God but he.
            
            
               And great Iehouah giueth vnto thee,
               The fertilſt ſoyle the earth did euer yeeld:
               That thou all pleaſure mightſt beholde and ſee,
               And taſt the fruit of the moſt pleaſant field:
               Honey for thee out of the flint he brought,
               And oile out of the craggie rocke he wrought.
            
            
               With fineſt butter ſtill he hath thee fed,
               With milke of Sheep he hath thee cheriſhed:
               With fat of Lambes, and Rammes in Bazan bred,
               With fleſh of Goates he hath thee nouriſhed.
               With fineſt wheat he hath refreſht thee ſtill,
               And gaue thee wine, thereof to drink thy fill.
            
            
               But hee that ſhould be thankfull then for this,
               Once waxing fat, began to ſpurne and kicke:
               Thou art ſo crancke, and ſuch thy groſeneſſe is,
               
                  That now to luſt thy prouender doth pricke.
               That he that made thee, thou remembreſt not,
               And he that ſau'd thee thou haſt clean forgot.
            
            
               With Idols they offend his gracious eies,
               And by their ſinne prouoke him vnto yre:
               To deuils they doo offer ſacrifice,
               Forſake their God, and other goddes deſire.
               Gods whoſe beginnings were but ſtrange & new,
               Whom yet their fathers neuer fear'd nor knew.
            
            
               He which begat thee is cleane out of mind,
               The God which form'd thee thou dooſt not regard:
               The Lord to angre was therewith inclinde,
               His ſonnes and daughters ſhould him ſo reward.
               And there he vow'd his chearfull face to hide,
               To ſee their end, and what would them betide.
            
            
               For faithleſſe they and froward are become,
               And with no God moue me to ielouſie:
               To angre they prouoke me all and ſome,
               And ſtill offend me with their vanitie:
               And with no people I will mooue them then,
               And angre them with vaine and fooliſh men.
            
            
               For why? my wrath is kindled like the fire,
               And ſhall deſcend to the infernall lake:
               The earth ſhall be conſumed in mine ire,
               My flames ſhal make the mighty mountains quake
               With many plagues I wil them ſtil annoy,
               And with mine arrowes I will them deſtroy.
            
            
               With hunger, heat and with deſtruction,
               I wil them burne, conſume and ouerthrow:
               They ſhal be meat for beaſts to feed vppon,
               The ground invenom'd whereupon they goe.
               In field, in chamber ſtil my ſword ſhall ſlay
               Man, maid & child, with him whoſe head is gray.
            
            
               
               And I will ſcatter them both far and neare,
               And hence foorth make their memorie to ceaſe,
               Saue that the furious enemie I feare,
               And that his pride ſhauld thereby more increaſe.
               And they ſhould ſay, and foorth this rumor ring,
               that they and not the Lord haue done this thing.
            
            
               They are a nation void of counſell quite,
               To vnderſtand, there doth not one intend:
               But were they wiſe, in it they woule delite,
               And would conſider of their latter end.
               Can one or two put thouſands to the flight,
               Except the Lord do help them with his might?
            
            
               For with our God their Gods may not compare,
               Our foes themſelues will ſtill the ſame confeſſe:
               Their Vines of Sodome and Gomorra are,
               Their grapes of gaule, cluſters of bitteneſſe.
               Their wine is like to Dragons poiſon ſure,
               or gaule of Aſpes, that no man may endure.
            
            
               And haue not I laid vp in ſtore this thing,
               Amongſt my treaſures doe I not it hide?
               The recompence with vengeance wil I bring,
               And aſt in time their foot awry ſhall ſlide.
               For their deſtruction (loe) is nowe at hand,
               And miſchief here euen at their heels doth ſtand.
            
            
               For why? the Lord doth iudge the earth alone,
               And to his ſeruants ſhew himſelfe moſt kinde:
               When he ſhall ſee their power is paſt and gone,
               And none kept vp in hold nor left behind.
               when men ſhal ſay, let vs your goddes behold,
               Where be they now, whom ye ſo much extold?
            
            
               Which oft did eat the fatted ſacrifice,
               And dranke the wine of the drinke offering:
               Vnto your helpe now let vs ſee them riſe:
               
                  Loe, I am God, and there is no ſuch thing:
               I kil, giue life, I wound, make whole againe,
               Out of my handes no man can ought retaine.
            
            
               I lift my hands on high to heauen aboue,
               Immortall I, and onely liue for euer:
               My glittering ſword I ſharpe for my behooue,
               In righteous iudgment ſtill I doo perſeuer.
               I wil ſend vengeance on mine enemies,
               And many plagues on them which me diſpiſe.
            
            
               Mine arrowes then of blood ſhal haue their fill,
               My ſword ſhal eate the verie fleſh of men:
               For ſuch my Saintes as they doo ſlay and kill,
               And for the Captiues they impriſon then.
               And when I once begin reuenge to take,
               From plague & vengeance then I will not ſlake.
            
            
               Ye nations all, honour his people then,
               He will reuenge his ſeruantes guiltleſſe blood,
               And ſurely plague the vile and wicked men,
               Which ſtoutlie haue againſt him euer ſtood,
               He will ſhew mercie ſtil vnto his land,
               And on his people, brought foorth by his hand.
            
         
         
            A Song of Moſes and the Iſraelites, for their deliuerance out of Egypt.
            The xv. Chap. of Exodus.
            
               I Will ſing praiſe vnto the Lord for aīe,
               Who hath triumphed gloriouſly alone,
               The horſe and rider he hath ouerthrowen,
               And ſwallowed vp euen in the raging ſea.
            
            
               He is my ſtrength, he is my ſong of praiſe,
               He is the God of my ſaluation.
               
                  A Temple will I build to him alone,
               I will exalt my fathers God alwaies,
            
            
               The Lord Iehouah is a man of warre,
               
                  Pharao, his chariots, and his mightie hoſte
               Were by his hand in the wilde waters loſt,
               His Captaines drowned in red Sea ſo farre,
            
            
               Into the bottom there they ſanke like ſtones,
               The mightie depthes our enemies deuour,
               Thy owne right hand is gloorious in thy power,
               Thy owne right hand hath bruiſed al their bones.
            
            
               And in thy glorie thou ſubuerted haſt
               The rebels riſing to reſiſt thy power,
               Thou ſentſt thy wrath which ſhall them all deuour,
               Euen as the fire doth the ſtubble w
                     •
                  ſt,
            
            
               And with a blaſt out of thy noſtrilles
               The flowing flood ſtood ſtill as any ſtone,
               The waters were congealed all in one,
               And firme and ſure as any rockes or hilles.
            
            
               The furious foe ſo 
                     〈…〉
                   ſtil,
               And voweth to purſue with endleſſe toile,
               And not returne til he haue got the ſpoile,
               With fire and ſword they wil deſtroy and kill.
            
            
               Thou ſentſt the wind which ouerwhelm'd them all,
               The ſurging ſeas came ſouſing in againe,
               As in the water, ſo with might and maine,
               Like lead, vnto the bottome downe they fall.
            
            
               Oh mightie Lord, who may with thee comp
                     •••
                  
                  ▪
               
               Amongſt the Gods I find none like to thee:
               whoſe glorie's in holines, whoſe feares in praiſes be
               whoſe chiefe delights in working woonders are.
            
            
               
               Thou ſtretcheſt out thy right and holy arme,
               And preſently the earth did them deuour:
               And thou wilt bring vs by thy mightie power,
               As thou haſt promiſt without further harme.
            
            
               And for thy people (Lord) thou ſhalt prouide,
               A place and ſeat of quietneſſe and reſt:
               The nations all with feare ſhall be oppreſt,
               And Paleſtina quake for all her pride.
            
            
               The Dukes of Edom ſhal hang downe the head,
               The Moabites ſhall tremble then for feare,
               The Cananites in preſence ſhall appeare,
               Like vnto men whoſe fainting heartes were dead,
            
            
               And feare and dread ſhall fall on them alas,
               Becauſe thou helpeſt with thy mighty hand:
               So ſtil as ſtones amazed they ſhal ſtand,
               Oh mightie Lord, while thine elect doo paſſe.
            
            
               And thou ſhalt bring thy choſen and elect,
               Vnto the mount of thine inheritance:
               A place prepared thy people to aduance,
               A Sanctuary there thou ſhalt erect,
            
            
               Which thou (oh Lord) eſtabliſh'd haſt therefore,
               And there thy name ſhal raigne for euermore.
            
         
         
            The moſt excellent Song which was Salomons, wherein is declared the true and vnfained loue betweene Chriſt and his Church, containing, viii. Chapters.
            
               Chap. 1.
               LEt him imbrace his Deare, with many a friendly kiſſe,
               For why? thy loue than any wine to me more pleaſant is:
               In ſmel thou art moſt like, ſweet odors vnto me,
               thy name like precious ointmēt is, ſo ſweet as ſweet may be
               
                  Therefore the Virgins al, of thee enamored are,
               Entice me on to follow thee, loe, we our ſelues prepare:
               The King hath brought me in, to chamber richly dight,
               He is my ioy, his loue is ſweet, the good in him delight.
               Ye daughters of Ieruſalem, although that browne I bee,
               Than Arras rich or Cedars fruits, I ſeemlier am to ſee,
               Diſdaine me not although I be not paſſing faire,
               For why? the glowing ſunny raies diſcolloured haue my laire:
               My mothers darlings deare, with enuie ſwelling ſo,
               Haue me cōſtrain'd to keep their Vine, thus I mine own forgoe.
               Tell me my ſweet and deare, where thou thy flocke dooſt feed,
               Or where thy litle Lamblings reſt, about midday indeed?
               Els ſhall I walke about, all wandring like a ſtray,
               And ſeeke thee after other flocks, through many an vnknowne way:
               If that my pathes (oh Paragon) be ſo vnknowen to thee,
               Go feed thy flock amongſt the tents, wher none but ſhepherds be,
               My true and loyal Loue, I may thee well compare
               To famous Pharaos horſes great, which in his chariots are,
               Thy cheeks bedect with precious ſtone, moſt louely to behold,
               About thy neck likewiſe do hang great maſſy chaines of gold.
               Fine coſtlie borders for my Loue, of gold we wil prepare,
               With ſiluer ſtuds accordinglie of worke ſurpaſſing rare.
               Whiles he at table ſat, perſumes then did I make
               Of Spicknard ſweet and delicate, al for my true Loues ſake:
               My loue more ſweet than Myrrhe, between my breaſts doth ly,
               Or Camphere, that doth ſpring and grow in vine of Engady.
               How faire art thou my Loue, my Doue, my Darling deare,
               Thine eies moſt like vnto the Doues, in ſight to me appeare.
               Oh how exceeding faire, and ſeemly to be ſeene,
               The bed where we together lie, is hung with pleaſant greene:
               The beames our houſe vphold, they all of Cedar be,
               The reaching Rafters of the ſame, of Fyrre, that ſtately tree.
            
            
               The ſecond Chapter.
               
                  I Am the fragrant Flower, of braue vermilion hue,
               And Lilie in the valey low, yſprong vp freſh and new:
               As Lillie flower excels the thorne, or litle chyer of graſſe,
               
                  So far my Loue the Virgins all in beautie doth ſurpaſſe.
               Or as the barren crooked ſtocke vnto the ſtraighteſt tree,
               No more the ſonnes vnto my Loue may ought compared be:
               To reſt by his ſweet ſide, to mee a heauenly bliſſe,
               The fruit that ſpringeth from my Loue, exceeding pleaſant is,
               To Celler he me brings, of wine aboundant ſtore,
               His loue diſplaied ouer me, how can I wiſh for more?
               Fil foorth your Flagons then, whereof the fume may flie,
               Bring forth your cates to comfort me, ah me, for loue I die.
               His left hand clipping cloſe, about my necke doth hold,
               His right doth ſweetly me imbrace, and eke my corps enfold.
               I charge you by the Roes and Hinds, ye Iewiſh daughters all,
               Not once to ſtir nor wake my Loue, vntil ſhe pleaſe to call.
               But ſtay, me thinks this is, mine owne Loues voice I heare,
               Loe, how he ſkips from hill to hill, loe, yon he doth appeare.
               My Loue is like a Roe, that friſketh in the wood,
               Or like the ſtrong and ſtately Hart, in prime and luſty blood.
               He cloſely ſhroudes himſelfe behind our wall I ſee,
               And through the gate he dooth diſcloſe and ſhew himſelfe to me.
               And calling then, he ſaith, come to thine owne my Deare,
               For lo, the clouds are paſt and gone, the ſkies are chriſtal cleare:
               The flowers in the field, ſo faire and freſhly ſpring,
               The birds do chant with merie glee, the Turtle now doth ſing:
               The fig-trees bear ſuch ſtore, that boughs with waight are bent,
               The Vines with bloſſoms do abound, which yeeld a ſweet accēt.
               Come to thine owne my deare, my Darling and my Doue,
               Leaue thou the place of thine abode, come to thine own true loue
               Let me behold thy face, moſt pleaſant to the ſight,
               And heare my beſt beloueds voice, that moſt doth me delight.
               Deſtroy the ſubtil Fox, that doth the grapes deuoure,
               For loe, behold, the time is come, the vines do bud and floure.
               My Loue to me is true, and I likewiſe his owne,
               Which in the Lilles takes repaſt, himſelfe euen all alone:
               Vntil the day doth ſpring, or ſhadowes fade away,
               Be as a Roe or like the Harts, which on the mountaines play.
            
            
               
               The third Chapter.
               By night within my hed, I romed here and there,
               But al in vain, I could not find my Loue & friendly Fere.
               Then ſtraight waies vp I roſe, and ſearching euery ſtreet
               throughout the city far & neer, but him I could not meete.
               The watchmen found me tho, to whom I then can ſay,
               Haue ye not ſeen mine owne true Loue, of late come this a way:
               Then paſſing them, I found my Loue I long had ſought,
               And to my mothers chamber then, my darling haue I brought.
               I charge you by the Roes and Hinds, this vow to me you make,
               Ye Iewiſh daughters, not to call my Loue till ſhe doe wake.
               Who's that which doth frō wildernes, in mighty ſmoke appeare,
               Like the perfumes of odors ſweet, which Merchāts hold ſo dear.
               About the bed of Salomon, behold, there is a band
               Of threeſcore valiant Iſraelites, which al in armour ſtand,
               All expert men of war, with ſword ſtil ready preſt,
               Leaſt foes in night time ſhould approch, when men ſuſpect them leaſt:
               King Salomon hath made of Liban tree ſo ſure,
               A Pallace braue, whoſe pillers ſtrong are al of ſiluer pure:
               The pauement beaten gold, the hangings purple graine,
               The daughters of Ieruſalem with ioy to entertaine.
               Ye Sion daughters, ſee, where Salomon is ſet
               In Royall throan, and on his head, the princely Coronet,
               Wherewith his mother firſt, adorn'd him (as they ſay)
               When he in mariage linked was, euen on his wedding day.
            
            
               The fourth Chapter.
               BEhold, thou art al faire my Loue, my hearts delight,
               Thine eies ſo louely like the Doues, appear to me in ſight,
               Thy haire ſurpaſſing faire and ſeemely to the eie,
               Like to a goodly heard of Goates, on Gilead mountaine hie.
               Thy teeth like new waſht ſheep, returning from the flood,
               Wheras not one is barren found, but beareth twinnes ſo good.
               Thy lips like ſcarlet thred, thy talke dooth breed delight,
               Thy temples like pomgranet faire doth ſhew to me in ſight.
               Thy necke like Dauids Tower, which for defence doth ſtand,
               
                  Wherein the ſhieldes and targets be, of men of mightie hand.
               Thy breſts like twinned Roes, in prime and youthfull age,
               Which feed among the Lillies ſweet, their hunger to diſwage.
               Vntil the day doe ſpring, and night be baniſht hence:
               I will aſcend into the mount of Myrrhe and Frankenſence.
               Thou art all faire my Loue, moſt ſeemly eke to ſee,
               From head to foot, from top to toe, there is no ſpot in thee.
               Come downe from Libanon, from Libanon aboue,
               And from Amanahs mountain hie, come to thine own true loue.
               From Sheuers ſtately top, from Hermon hil ſo hie,
               From Lions dens & frō the cliffes, where lurking Leopards lie.
               My Spouſe and ſiſter deare, thy loue hath wounded me,
               Thy louely eie and ſeemly neck, hath made me yeeld to thee.
               Thy loue far better is, than any wine to me,
               Thy odors ſweet doth far ſurpaſſe, the ſmell where ſpices be.
               Thy lips like hony combe, vnder thy tongue doth lie
               The honey ſweet: thy garments ſmel, like Libanon on hie.
               My Spouſe a garden is, faſt vnder locke and kay,
               Or like a Fountaine cloſely kept, where ſealed is the way.
               Like to a pleaſant plot I may thee well compare,
               Where Cāphere, Spicknard, dainty fruits, with ſweet Pomgranets are.
               Euen Spicknard, Saffron, Calamus, & Synamom do growe,
               With Incenſe, Myrrhe and Alloes, with many ſpices moe.
               Oh Fountaine paſſing pure, oh Well of life moſt deare.
               Oh Spring of loftie Libanon, of water chriſtal cleare.
               Ye North and Southern winds vpon my garden blow,
               That the ſweet ſpice that is therein, on euery ſide may flow.
               Vnto his garden place, my Loue for his repaſt
               Shall walke, and of the fruites therein, ſhal take a pleaſant taſt.
            
            
               The fift Chapter.
               WIthin my garden plot, loe, I am preſent now,
               I gathered haue the Myrrhe and ſpice, that in aboundance growe:
               With honey, milke & wine, I haue refreſht me here.
               Eat, drink my friends, be mery there, with harty friēdly cheare.
               Although in ſlumbering ſleepe, it ſeemes to you I lay,
               
                  Yet h
                     ••
                  r
                     •
                   I my beloued knock, me thinks I heare him ſay,
               Open to me the gate my Loue, my hearts delight,
               For 
                     〈◊〉
                   my locks are all bedewed with drizling drops of night.
               My garments are put off, then may I not doo ſo,
               Shal I defile my feet I waſht, ſo white as any ſnow.
               Then faſt euen by the dore to me he ſhew'd his hand,
               My heart was then enamoured, when as I ſaw him ſtand.
               Then ſtraight waies vp I roſe, to ope the dore with ſpeed,
               My handes and fingers dropped Myrrhe, vpon the bar indeed.
               Then opened I the dore, vnto my Loue at laſt,
               But all in vaine, for why? before, my Loue was gone and paſt.
               There ſought I for my loue, then could I crie and call,
               But him I could not find, nor he, 
                     •
                  ould anſwer me at at all.
               The watchmen found me then, as thus I walk'd aſtray,
               They wounded me, and from my head, my vaile they took away
               Ye daughters of Ieruſalem, if ye my Loue doo ſee,
               Tell him that I am ſicke for loue, yea, tel him this from me.
               Thou peereleſſe Gene of price, I pray thee to vs tell,
               What is thy Loue, what may he be, that doth ſo far excell?
               In my beloueds face, the Roſe and Lilly ſtriue,
               Among ten thouſand men not one, is found ſo faire aliue.
               His, head like fineſt gold, with ſecret ſweet perfume,
               His curled locks hang all as black, as any Rauens plume.
               His eies be like to Doues, on Riuers banks below,
               Ywaſht with milk, whoſe collours are, moſt gallant to the ſhow.
               His cheeks like to a plot, where ſpice and flowers growe,
               his lips like to the Lilly white, frō whēce pure Myrth doth flow,
               His hands like rings of gold, with coſtly Chriſales,
               His belly like the Yuory white, with ſeemly Saphyrs ſet.
               His legs like Pillers ſtrong, of Marble ſet in gold,
               His countenance like Libanon, or Cedars to behold.
               His mouth it is as ſweet, yea, ſweet as ſweet may be,
               This is my Loue, ye Virgins loe, euen ſuch a one is he.
               Thou faireſt of vs al, whether is thy Louer gone,
               Tel vs, and we will goe with thee, thou ſhalt not goe alone.
            
            
               
               The ſixt Chapter.
               DOwne to his garden place, mine own true Loue is gone,
               Among the Spice and Lillies ſweet, to walke himſelfe alone.
               True am I to my Loue, and he my louing make,
               Which in the Lillies makes abode, and doth his pleaſure take,
               With Tirzah or Ieruſalem, thy beautie may be waide,
               In ſhew like to an Armie great, whoſe Enſignes are diſplaid.
               Oh turne away thine eies, for they haue wounded me,
               Thy haires are like a heard of Goats, on Gilead mount that be
               Thy teeth like new waſht ſheep, returning from the flood,
               Whereas not one is barren found, but beareth twins a good,
               The temples of thy head, within thy locks to ſhowe,
               Are like to the Pomgranet fruit, that in the Orchards grow.
               Of Concubines four ſcore there are, of Queens twice treble ten
               Of Virgins for the multitude, not to be numbred then.
               But yet my Doue alone, and vndefiled Fere,
               Her mothers only daughter is, to her exceeding deare.
               The Virgins ſaw my Loue, and they haue lik'd her well,
               The Queens & eke the Concubines, they ſay ſhe doth excell.
               Who's ſhe I doo behold, ſo like the morning cleare,
               Or like the Moon, when towards the ful, in pride ſhe doth appear
               Bright as the radiant raies, that from the Sun deſcend,
               Or like an Army terrible, when Enſignes they extend.
               Vnto the nuts downe will I goe, and fruitfull valeyes lowe,
               To ſee if that the Vine doo bud, and the Pomgranets growe.
               My ſelfe I know not I, ne nothing knew I then,
               Let me be like a chariot, euen of thy noble men.
               Return againe, oh make returne, thou Shulamite ſo deare,
               Let vs enioy thy company, I pray thee ſoiorne here.
               What ſee you in the Shulamite, in her what may you ſee,
               But like a troupe of warlike men that in the armies be.
            
            
               
               The ſeuenth Chapter.
               HOw ſtately are thy ſ
                     •
                  eps with braue and loftypace,
               Thou daintie princeſſe, darling deare, with comely gallant grace.
               the wiues of thy fait thighs, the which ſo ſtraight do ſtand
               Are like to cutions iewels wrought, by cunning workmās hand
               Thy nauell like a gobler is, which ſtil with wine doth flowe,
               Thy belly like an heape of wheat, about which, Lillies growe.
               Thy breaſts I may compare like to two litle Roes,
               which follow on their mothers ſteps, when forth to feed ſhe goes.
               Thy necke like to a Tower, of coſtly Iuory fram'd,
               thine eies like Heſhbō
                   waters clear, by that Bathrabbin nam'd
               Thy noſe like Libanon Tower, moſt ſeemly to the eie,
               Which towards Damaſcus citie faire, that ſtately town dothly.
               Thy head like Starlet red, thy hatre of purple hue,
               The King in thee doth take delight, as in his Lady true.
               How faire art thou my Loue, and ſeemly to the ſight,
               The pleaſures that abound in thee, they are my chiefe delight:
               Thy ſtatute like the Paſiue, the call and ſtraighteſt tree,
               Thy breaſts, the which do thee worne, moſt like to cluſters be.
               Vpon the pleaſant palme, I ſaid I wil take holde,
               And reſt vpon her pleaſant boughes, I ſaid I wil be bolde.
               Thy breaſts are like a bunch of grapes, on the moſt fruitful vine,
               Thy noſe in ſmel like to the fruit, of al moſt pure and fine.
               The roofe of thy ſweet mouth, like pureſt wine doth caſt,
               Which makes the very aged lagh, forgetting ſorrowes paſt.
               I am vnto my Loue, a faithfull friendly Fere,
               And he is likewiſe vnto me, moſt render and moſt deare.
               Goe we into the field, to ſport vs in the plaine,
               And in the pleaſant villages (my Loue) let vs remaine.
               Then early will we riſe and ſee, if that the vine do flouriſh,
               And if the earth accordingly do the Pomgranets nouriſh.
               I feele the Mandrakes ſmell, within our gates that be:
               The ſweeteſt things both new & olde (my Loue) I kept for thee.
            
            
               
               The eight Chapter.
               OH that thou weart my brother borne, that ſuckt my mothers breaſt:
               Then ſweetly would I kiſſe thy lippes, and by thee take my reſt.
               Vnto my mothers cloſet ſure, mine own Loue will I bring,
               And be obedient vnto him in euery kind of thing.
               There wil I giue to thee (my Loue) the daintie ſpiced wine,
               And pleaſant liquor that diſtils from the Pomgrauet fine.
               With his left hand he ſhal ſupport, and eke my head vpreare,
               And with the right moſt louingly he ſhal imbrace his deare.
               Ye daughters of Ieruſalem, doo not my Loue diſeaſe,
               But ſuffer her to take her reſt, ſo long as ſhe ſhall pleaſe.
               Who's that which from the wildernes, you commeth frō aboue,
               And in this ſort familiarly dooth leane vpon her Loue:
               Vnder a pleaſant aple tree, from whence like fruit doth ſpring,
               Thy mother firſt conceiued thee, euen forth which did thee bring
               Let it be like a priuie ſeale, within thy ſecret heart,
               Or like a Signet on thy hand, thy ſecrets to impart:
               For iealouſie is like the graue, and loue more ſtrong than death
               From whoſe hot brands ther doth proceed a flaming fiery breath
               The flouds cannot alay his heat, nor water quench his flame,
               Neither the greateſt treaſure, can counteruaile the ſame.
               Our litle ſiſter hath no breaſts, what ſhal we doo or ſay,
               when we ſhal giue her to her Spouſe, vpon her wedding day?
               If that ſhe be a wall, on that foundation ſure,
               A princely pallace wil we build, of ſiluer paſſing pure.
               And if ſhe be a doore, ſhe ſhall incloſed be
               With braue and goodly ſquared boords, of the fine Cedar tree.
               I am a mightie wall, my breaſts like Towers hie,
               Then am I paſſing beautifull in my beloueds eie.
               King Salomon a vinyard had, in faire Baalhamon field,
               Each one in ſiluer yeerely dooth, a thouſand peeces yeeld,
               But yet my vineyard (Salomon) thy vine doth far excell,
               For fruit and goodnes of the ſame, thou know'ſt it very wel.
               A thouſand ſiluer peeces are, euen yearely due to me,
               
                  Two twouſand likewiſe vnto them, the which her keepers be.
               Oh thou that in the garden dwell it, learne me thy voice to know
               That I may liſten to the ſame, as thy companions doo.
               Flie my beloued hence away, and be thou like the Roe,
               Or as the Hart on mountaine toys, wheron ſweet ſpices growe.
            
         
         
            The Song of Annah, for the bringing foorth of Samuel her ſonne.
            The ſecond Chap. of the firſt booke of Samuel,
            MY heart doth in the Lord reioice, that liuing Lord of might,
            which doth his ſeruāts horn exalt, in al his peoples light.
            I wil reioice in their deſpight, which erſt haue me abhord,
            Becauſe that my ſaluation dependeth on the Lord.
            None is ſo holie as the Lord, beſides thee none there are:
            With our God there is no God, that may himſelfe compare.
            See that no more preſumptuouſly, ye neither boaſt nor vaunt,
            Nor yet vnſeemly ſpeak ſuch things, ſo proud and arrogant.
            For why? the counſell of the Lord, in depth cannot be ſought
            Our enterpriſes and our actes, by him to paſſe are brought.
            The bowe is broke, the mightie ones ſubuerted are at length,
            And they which weake and feeble were, increaſed are in ſtrength
            They that were ful & had great ſtore, with labor buy their bread
            And they which hungrie were & poore, with plenty now are fed.
            So that the womb which barren was, hath many children born,
            And ſhe which ſtore of children had, is left now all forlorne.
            The Lord doth kill and make aliue, his iudgments all are iuſt,
            He throweth downe into the graue, and raiſeth from the duſt.
            The Lord doth make both rich & poore, he al our thoughts doth trie.
            He bringeth low & eke againe, exalteth vp on hie.
            He raiſeth vp the ſimple ſoule, whom men puſude with hate,
            To ſit amongſt the mightie ones, in chaire of princely ſtate.
            For why? the pillers of the earth, he placed with his hand,
            whoſe mighty ſtrēgth doth ſtil ſupport, the waight of al the land.
            He wil preſerue his Saints likewiſe, the wicked men at length
            He wil confound: let no man ſeem, to glory in his ſtrength.
            
               The enemies of God the Lord, ſhal be deſtroied all,
            From heauen he ſhal thunder ſend, that on their heads ſhal fall.
            The mightie Lord ſhall iudge the world, & giue his power alone
            Vnto the King, and ſhal exalt his owne annointed one.
         
         
            The Song of Ionah in the Whales bellie.
            In the ſecond Chap. of Ionah.
            IN griefe and anguiſh of my heart, my voice I did extend,
            Vnto the Lord, and he therto, a willing eare did lend:
            Euen from the deep and darkeſt pit, & the infernall lake,
            To me he hath bow'd down his eare, for his great mercies ſake.
            For thou into the middeſt, of ſurging ſeas ſo deepe
            Haſt caſt me foorth: whoſe bottom is, ſo low & woondrous ſteep.
            Whoſe mighty wallowing waues, which from the floods do flow
            haue with their power vp ſwallowed me, & ouerwhelm'd me tho.
            Then ſaid I, loe, I am exilde, from preſence of thy face,
            Yet wil I once againe behold, thy houſe and dwelling place.
            The waters haue encompaſt me, the floods incloſde me round,
            The weeds haue ſore encōbred me, which in the ſeas abound.
            Vnto the valeyes down I went, beneath the hils which ſtand.
            The earth hath there enuiron'd me, with force of al the land.
            Yet haſt thou ſtil preſerued me, from al theſe dangers here,
            And brought my life out of the pit, oh Lord my God ſo deare.
            My ſoule conſuming thus with care, I praied vnto the Lord,
            And he from out his holie place, heard me with one accord.
            Who to vain lieng vanities doth whollie him betake,
            Doth erre alſo, Gods mercie he, doth vtterly forſake.
            But I wil offer vnto him the ſacrifice of praiſe,
            And pay my vowes, aſcribing thanks vnto the Lord alwaies.
         
         
            
            The Praier of Ieremiah, bewailing the captiuitie of the people.
            In the fift Chap. of his Lamentations.
            CAl vnto mind oh mightie Lord, the wrongs we daily take
            Conſider and he hold the ſame, for thy great mercies ſake.
            Our lands & our inheritance, meere ſtrangers do poſſeſſe,
            The alients in our houſes dwel, and we without redreſſe.
            We now (alas) are fatherleſſe, & ſtil purſude with hate,
            Our mourning mothers nowe remaine in wofull widdowes ſtate.
            We buy the water which we drink, ſuch is our grieuous want,
            Likewiſe the wood euen for our vſe, that we our ſelues did plant.
            Our neckes are ſubiect to the yoke, of perſecutions thrall,
            We wearied out with cruell toile, and find no reſt at all:
            Afore time we in Egypt land, and in Aſſyria ſerued,
            For food our hunger to ſuſtaine, leaſt that we ſhould haue ſterued
            Our fathers which are dead & gone, haue ſinned wondrous ſore,
            And we now ſcourg'd for their offence, ah, woe are we therefore.
            Thoſe ſeruile ſlaues which bondmen be, of them in fear we ſtand
            Yet no man doth deliuer vs, from cruel Cattiues hand.
            Our liuings we are forr'd to get, in perils of our liues,
            The drie and barren wilderneſſe therto by danger driues.
            Our ſkins be ſcortcht as though they had, bin in an ouen dride,
            With famine, and the penury; which here we doo abide.
            Our wiues and maides defloured are, by violence and force,
            On Sion, and in Iuda land, ſans pity or remorce.
            Our kings by cruel enimies, with cordes are hanged vp,
            Our graueſt, ſage and ancient men, haue taſted of that cup.
            Our yoong men they haue put to ſword, not one at al they ſpare,
            Our litle boyes vpon the tree, ſans pitie hanged are.
            Our elders ſitting in the gates, can now no more be found,
            Our youth leaue off to take delight, in muſicks ſacred ſound.
            The ioy and comfort of our heart, away is fled and gone,
            Our ſolace is with ſorrow mixt, our mirth is turn'd to mone.
            Our glory now is laid full low, and buried in the ground,
            Our ſins ful ſore do burthen vs, whoſe greatnes doth abound.
            
               Oh holy bleſſed Sion hill, my heart is woe for thee,
            Mine eies poure foorth a flood of teares, this diſmal day to ſee.
            Which art deſtroied and now lieth waſt, from ſacred vſe & trade,
            Thy holie place is now a den, of filthy Foxes made.
            But thou the euerliuing Lord, which dooſt remaine for aye,
            Whoſe ſeat aboue the firmament, full ſure and ſtill doth ſtay.
            Wherefore doſt thou forſake thine owne? ſhal we forgotten be?
            Turne vs good Lord, and ſo we ſhall be turned vnto thee.
            Lord cal vs home from our erile, to place of our abode,
            Thou long inough haſt puniſht vs, oh Lord, now ſpare thy rod.
         
         
            The Song of Deborah and Baracke.
            
            The fift Chap. of Iudges.
            PRaiſe ye the Lord, the which reuenge on Iſraels wrongs doth take:
            Likewiſe for thoſe which offered vp themſelues for Iſraels ſake.
            Heare this, ye kings, ye princes al, giue eare with one accord,
            I wil giue thanks, yea ſing the praiſe, of Iſraels liuing Lord.
            When thou departedſt (Lord) from Seir, and out of Edom field,
            The earth gan quake, the heauens rain, the cloudes their water yeeld
            the moūtains hie before the Lord, haue melted euery del,
            As Synay did in preſence of, the Lord of Iſraell.
            In time of Sangar, Anaths ſonne, and in old Iaels daies,
            the paths were al vnoccupied, men ſought forth vnknown waies.
            The townes & cities there lay waſt, and to decay they fel,
            Til Deborah, a matrone graue, became in Iſraell.
            They choſe thē gods, then garboils did, within their gates aboūd
            A ſpear or ſhield in Iſrael, there was not to be found.
            In thoſe which gouern Iſrael, my heart doth take delight,
            And in the valiant people there, oh, praiſe the Lord of might.
            Speak ye that on white Aſſes ride, & that by Midden dwell.
            And ye that daily trade the waies, ſee forth your minds you tell.
            The clattering noiſe of archers ſhot, when as the arrowes flew,
            Appeaſed was amongſt the ſort, which water daily drew.
            The righteouſneſſe of God the Lord, ſhal be declared there,
            
               And likewiſe Iſrael righteouſnes, which worſhip him in feare.
            The people with reioicing hearts, then all with one conſent:
            I mean the Lords inheritante, vnto the gates they went:
            
               Deborah vp, ariſe and ſing, a ſweet and worthy ſong,
            
               Baracke, lead them as Captiues forth, which vnto thee belong.
            For they which at this day remaine, do rule like Lords alone,
            The Lord ouer the mightie ones, giues me dominion.
            The roots of Ephraim aroſe, gainſt Amalecke do fight.
            And ſo likewiſe did Beniamin, with all their power and might.
            From Macher came a company, which chiefeſt ſway did beare,
            From Zebulon, which cunning clarks, & famous writers were.
            The kings which came of Iſacher were with Deborah tho,
            Yea Iſacher and Barack both attend on her alſo.
            He was diſmounted in the vale, for the deuiſions ſake,
            Of Ruben the people there, great lamentation make.
            
               Gilead by Iorden made abode, and Dan on ſhip boord lay,
            And Aſher in the Deſart he, vpon the ſhore doth ſtay.
            They of Zebulon and Nepthaly, like worthy valiant wightes.
            Before their foes euen in the field, aduanc'd themſelues in fight.
            The kings themſelues in perſon fought: the kings of Canaan,
            
            In Tanach plaine, wheras the ſtreame, of ſwift Megido ran.
            No pay, no hyer, ne coine at all, not one did ſeem to take,
            They ſerued not for greedy gain, nor filthy lucre ſake.
            The heauens hy and heauenly powers, theſe things to paſſe haue brought
            The ſtars againſt proud Siſera, euen in their courſe haue fought
            The ſtream of kiſhons anciēt brook, hath ouerwhelm'd thē there
            My ſoule, ſith thou haſt done thy part, be now of harty cheare.
            The hardened hooues of barbed horſe, were al in peeces broke,
            By force of mightie men which met, with many a ſturdy ſtroke.
            The Angel hath pronounc'd a curſe, which ſhal on Meroz fall,
            And thoſe that doo inhabite there, a curſe light on them all.
            Becauſe they put not forth their hands to help the liuing Lord,
            Againſt the proud and mighty ones, which haue his truth abhord
            
               Iaell the Kenit Hebers wife, moſt happy ſhal be bleſt,
            Aboue al other women there, which in the tents do reſt.
            He aſked water for to drink, ſhe gaue ſweet milk to him,
            Yea butter in a lordly diſh, which was full tricke and trim.
            her left hand to the naile ſhe put, her right the hammer wrought.
            
               Wherewith preſumptuous Siſera vnto his death ſhe brought.
            And from his corps his head ſhe cut, with mortal deadly wound,
            When through the tēples of his head, ſhe naild him to the groūd.
            He bowed then vnto the earth, and at her feet can fall,
            And where he fell there ſtill he lay, bereau'd of ſences all.
            The mother then of Siſera, in window where ſhe lay,
            Doth marueil much that this her ſonne doth make ſo long a ſtay.
            Her Ladies then, they hearing that, make anſwer by and by.
            Yea, to her ſpeaches paſt before, her ſelfe doth this replie:
            Hath he not gotten mightie ſpoiles, and now diuiſion makes,
            Each one a Damoſell hath or twaine, which he as captiue takes.
            
               Siſera of coſtly coloured robes, ful rich, with needle wrought,
            Hath got a pray, which vnto him, as chiefeſt ſpoiles are brought.
            So let thine enemies (O Lord) ſuſtaine and ſuffer blame,
            And let thy choſen bleſſed ones, that loue and feare thy name,
            Be like the Son, when in the morne, his glorie doth increaſe:
            Or like the land, which many a yeare, hath bin in reſt and peace.
         
         
            Another Song of the faithfull, for the mercies of God.
            In the xii. Chap. of the propheſie of Iſaiah.
            
               OH liuing Lord, I ſtill will laude thy name,
               for though thou wert offended once with me:
               Thy heauy wrath is turn'd from me againe,
               and graciouſly thou now dooſt comfort mee.
            
            
               Behold, the Lord is my ſaluation,
               I truſt in him, and feare not any power:
               He is my ſong, the ſtrength I leane vpon,
               the Lord God is my louing Sauiour.
            
            
               Therefore with ioy out of the well of life,
               draw foorth ſweet water, which it dooth afford:
               And in the day of trouble and of ſtrife,
               cal on the name of God the liuing Lord.
            
            
               
               Extol his works and woonders to the ſunne,
               vnto al people let his praiſe be ſhowne:
               Record in ſong the meruails he hath done,
               and let his glorie through the world be blowne.
            
            
               Crie out aloud and ſhout on Sion hill,
               I giue thee charge that this proclaimed be:
               The great and mightie king of Iſraell,
               now onely dwelleth in the midſt of thee.
            
         
         
            A Song of the faithfull.
            In the third Chap. of the propheſie of Habacucke.
            
               LOrd, at thy voice, my heart for feare hath trembled,
               Vnto the world (Lord) let thy workes be ſhowen:
               In theſe our daies now let thy power be knowen,
               And yet in wrath let mercie be remembred.
            
            
               From Teman loe, our God you may behold,
               The holie one from Paran mount ſo hie:
               His glorie hath cleane couered the Skie,
               And in the earth his praiſes be inrolde.
            
            
               His ſhining was more clearer than the light,
               And from his hands a fulneſſe did proceed,
               Which did contain his wrath and power indeed.
               Conſuming plagues and fire were in his ſight.
            
            
               He ſtood aloft and compaſſed the land,
               And of the Nations doth defuſion make
               The mountains rent, the hilles for feare did quake,
               His vnknown pathes no man may vnderſtand.
            
            
               The Morians tentes euen for their wickednes,
               I might behold the land of Midian:
               
                  Amaz'd and trembling like vnto a man,
               Forſaken quite, and left in great diſtreſſe:
            
            
               What, did the riuers moue the Lord to ire?
               Or did the floods his Maieſty diſpleaſe:
               Or was the Lord offended with the ſeas,
               That thou cameſt forth in chariot hot as fire.
            
            
               Thy force and power thou freely didſt relate,
               Vnto the tribes thy oath doth ſurely ſtand,
               And by thy ſtrength thou didſt deuide the land,
               And from the earth the riuers ſeperate.
            
            
               The mountaines ſaw, and trembled for feare,
               The ſturdy ſtreame, with ſpeed foorth paſſed by,
               The mighty depthes ſhout out a hideous crie,
               And then aloft their waues they did vpreare.
            
            
               The Sun and Moon amid their courſe ſtood ſtill,
               Thy ſpeares and arrowes forth with ſhining went,
               Thou ſpoileſt the land, being to anger bent,
               And in diſpleaſure thou didſt ſlay and kill.
            
            
               Thou wenteſt foorth for thine owne choſens ſake,
               For the ſauegard of thine annointed one:
               The houſe of wicked men is ouerthrowne,
               And their foundations now goe all to wracke.
            
            
               Their townes thou ſtrikeſt by thy mightie power,
               With their own weapons, made for their defence:
               Who like a whyrl-wind came with the pretence,
               The poore and ſimple man quite to deuoure.
            
            
               
                  
                     ••
                  ou madeſt thy horſe on ſeas to gallop faſt.
               Vpo
                     •
                   
                  
                     ••
                  e waues thou rideſt here and there:
               My 
                     •••
                  als trembled then for verie feare,
               
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   at thy voice, my lips ſhooke at the laſt.
            
            
               
               Griefe pierc'd my bones, and feare did me annoy,
               In time of trouble, where I might find reſt:
               For to reuenge, when once the Lord is preſt,
               With plagues he wil the people quite deſtroy.
            
            
               The fig-tree now no more ſhall ſprout nor flouriſh,
               The pleaſant vine no more with grapes abound:
               No pleaſure in the citie ſhall be found:
               The field no more her fruit ſhal feed nor nouriſh.
            
            
               The ſheep ſhall now be taken from the fold,
               In ſtall of Bullocks there ſhall be no choice.
               Yet in the Lord my Sauiour I reioice,
               My hope in God yet wil I ſurely hold.
            
            
               God is my ſtrength, the Lord my only ſtay,
               My feet for ſwiftneſſe, it is he will make
               Like to the Hinds, who none in courſe can take:
               Vpon high places he will make me way.
            
         
         
            A Song of thankes to God, in that hee ſheweth himſelfe Iudge of the world, in puniſhing the wicked, and maintaining the godlie.
            In the xv. Chap. of the propheſie of Iſaiah.
            
               OH Lord my God, with praiſe I wil perſeuer
               Thy bleſſed name in ſong I wil record:
               for the great wonders thou haſt done O lord,
               Thy trueth and counſels haue bene certain euer.
            
            
               A mightie citie thou makeſt ruinat.
               The ſtrongeſt townes thou bringeſt to decay:
               A place where ſtrangers vſually do ſtay,
               And ſhall not be reduc'd to former ſtate.
            
            
               
               The proudeſt people therefore ſtoupe to thee,
               The ſtrongeſt cities haue thee ſtill in feare:
               Thou ſtrengthneſt the poore man in diſpaire:
               And helpeſt the needie in neceſſitie.
            
            
               Thou art a ſure refuge againſt a ſhower,
               A ſhadow which doth from the heat defend:
               The raging blaſts the mighty forth doth ſend,
               Is like a ſtorme which ſhakes the ſtatelieſt tower.
            
            
               Thou ſhalt abate the forraine ſtrangers pride,
               Like as the heat doth drie the moiſteſt place,
               The glorie of the proud thou ſhalt deface.
               Like as the cloudes the ſunny beames doo hide.
            
            
               The Lord of hoſtes ſhal in this mount prouide,
               And to his people here ſhal make a feaſt,
               Offatted things and dainties of the beſt,
               Of Marrow and wines finely purified.
            
            
               And in this Mountaine by his mightie hand,
               That ſame dark cloud the Lord wil cleane deſtroy,
               Euen with the vaile which doth his folke annoy.
               And death no more before his face ſhall ſtand.
            
            
               The Lord will wipe out of his choſens eies,
               The teares which doo their faces ſo diſtaine:
               And their rebuke ſhal now no more remaine,
               Thus ſaith the Lord, theſe be his promiſes.
            
            
               And men ſhal ſay (then) loe, this ſame is he,
               This is our God, on whom we did attend,
               This is the Lord that will vs ſtil defend,
               We will be glad and ioyfull (Lord) in thee.
            
            
               Thy hand (oh Lord) here in this mount ſhall reſt,
               And curſed Moab ſhall by thee be beaten,
               
                  As in thy iudgment thou of long dooſt threaten.
               As in Mamena ſtraw of men is threſht.
            
            
               And ouer them the Lord his hand ſhal holde.
               As he that ſwimmeth, ſtretcheth him at length,
               And by his power and by his mighty ſtrength.
               The proud and ſtout by him ſhal be controlde.
            
            
               Thy higheſt walles and towers of all thy truſt,
               He ſhall bring downe and lay them all full lowe,
               Vnto the ground his hand ſhall make them bow,
               And lay thy pride and glorie in the duſt.
            
         
         
            An other Song of the faithfull, wherein is declared in what conſiſteth the ſaluation of the Church.
            In the xvi. Chap. of the propheſie of Iſaiah.
            
               ANd in that day, this ſame ſhal be our ſong,
               In Iuda land this ſhall be ſung and ſaid,
               We haue a citie which is woondrous ſtrong,
               And for the walles, the Lord himſelf our aid.
            
            
               Open the gates, yea ſet them open wide,
               And let the godly and the righteous paſſe:
               Yea let them enter, and therein abide,
               Which keepe his lawes, and do his trueth imbrace:
            
            
               And in thy iudgment thou wilt ſure preſerue,
               In perfect peace thoſe which doo truſt in thee:
               Truſt in the Lord, which dooth all truſt deſerue,
               He is thy ſtrength, and none but onelie he.
            
            
               He will bring downe the proud that looke ſo hie,
               The ſtatelieſt buildings he wil ſoone abaſe:
               And make them euen with the ground to lie,
               And unto duſt he will their pride deface.
            
            
               
               It ſhall be troden to the verie ground,
               The poore and needy downe the ſame ſhal tread:
               The iuſt mans way in righteouſnes is found,
               Into a path moſt plaine thou wilt him lead.
            
            
               But we haue waited long for thee, oh Lord
               And in thy way of iudgment we do reſt:
               Our ſoules doth ioy thy name ſtill to record,
               And thy remembrance doth content vs beſt.
            
            
               My ſoule hath long'd for thee (oh Lord) by night,
               And in the morn my ſpirit for thee hath ſought:
               Thy iudgments to the earth giue ſuch a light,
               As al the world by them thy trueth is taught.
            
            
               But ſhew thy mercie to the wicked man,
               He wil not learne thy righteouſnes, to know,
               His chiefe delight is ſtill to curſe and ban,
               And vnto thee, himſelfe he will not bow.
            
            
               They doo not once at all regard thy power,
               Thy peoples zeale ſhall let them ſee their ſhame,
               But with a fire thou ſhalt thy foes deuoure,
               And cleane conſume them with a burning flame.
            
            
               With peace thou wilt preſerue vs (Lord) alone,
               For thou haſt wrought great woonders for our ſake
               And other Gods beſide thee haue we none:
               Only in thee we all our comfort take.
            
            
               The dead and ſuch as ſleep within the graue,
               Shal giue no glorie, nor yeeld praiſe to thee:
               Which here on earth no place nor being haue,
               And thou haſt rooted out of memorie.
            
            
               Oh Lord thou dooſt this nation multiply,
               Thou Lord haſt bleſt this nation with increaſe:
               
                  Thou art moſt glorious in thy maieſty,
               Thou haſt inlarg'd the earth with perfect peace.
            
            
               We cride to thee, and oft our hands did wring,
               When we haue ſeen thee bent to puniſhment.
               Like to a woman in childbyrth traueiling,
               Euen ſo in paine we mourne and doo lament.
            
            
               We haue conceiu'd and laboured with paine,
               But only wind at laſt we forth haue brought:
               Vpon the earth no hope there doth remaine,
               The wicked world likewiſe auailes vs nought.
            
            
               The dead ſhal liue, and ſuch as ſleep in graue
               With their own bodies once ſhal riſe againe:
               Sing ye, that in the duſt your dwelling haue,
               The earth no more her bodies ſhall retaine.
            
            
               Come, come my people to my chamber here,
               And ſhut the doores vp ſurely after thee:
               Hide thou thy ſelfe, and doo not once appeare,
               Nor let thine eies mine indignation ſee.
            
            
               For from aboue the Lord is now diſpoſ'd
               To ſcourge the ſinnes that in the world remaine:
               His ſeruants blood in earth ſhal be diſcloſde,
               And ſhe ſhal now yeeld vp her people ſlaine.
            
            Finis. Hereafter follovve certain other Songs and Praiers of godly men and women, out of the Bookes of Apocripha.
         
         
            
            The Praier of Iudith, for the deliuerance of the people.
            In the ix. Chap. of the book of Iudith.
            OH Lord, the God of Simeon, my ſoueraigne Father deare:
            To whom thou gaueſt ſtrength and might, the ſword in hand to beare.
            To take reuenge on thoſe which firſt, the maidens wombe did tame,
            And ſpoiled her virginitie, with great reproch and ſhame.
            For which offence, thou gaueſt vp, their princes to be ſlaine.
            ſo that their wounds with gory blood, their beds did all diſtain.
            Their ſeruāts with their lords ech one, haue felt thy wrath alike
            who ſitting in their roial ſeat, thou ſpareſt not to ſtrike.
            Their wiues, their daughters, & their goods, thou gau'ſt for thy behoue
            As prais, as captiues, & as ſpoiles, to thoſe whō thou didſt loue.
            who modu'd with zeale, could not abide, their blood defil'd to ſee,
            Then heare me Lord, a widow poore, which here do cal to thee.
            things paſt, & things not yet diſcern'd, thy prouidence hath wrought,
            Things preſent & the things to come, by thee to paſſe are brought.
            Each thing is preſent at thy call, thy wiſdome doth deuiſe,
            Thy ſecret iudgments long before, thy knowledge doth compriſe.
            Th' Aſſirians now in multitude, a mighty number are,
            Whoſe horſmen on their barbed horſe, themſelues to war prepare.
            Their hope in footmen doth conſiſt, in ſling, in ſpeare and ſhield,
            They know not thee to be the Lord, whoſe force doth win the field.
            Let all their force, their ſtrength & power, he by thy might abated,
            Who vow thy Temple to defile, which thou haſt conſecrated.
            Yea, to pollute thy Tabernacle, thy houſe and holy place,
            And with their inſtruments of war, thine Altars to deface.
            Behold their pride, and poure on them, thy wrath and heauy yre,
            And ſtrength my hand to execute, the thing I now deſire.
            Smite thou the ſeruant and the Lord, as they together ſtand,
            Abate their glory and their pride, euen by a womans hand.
            For in the greateſt multitude, thou takeſt not delight,
            Nor in the ſtrong and valiant men conſiſteth not thy might.
            
               But to the humble, lowly, meeke, the ſuccourleſſe and poors,
            Thou art a help, defence, refuge, and louing ſauiour,
            My father in thy name did truſt, O Iſraels Lord moſt deare,
            Of heauen, of earth, of ſea and land, doo thou my praier heare.
            Grant thou me wit, ſleight, power, ſtrēgth, to woūd thē which aduance
            Thēſelues ouer thy Sion hil, & thine inheritance.
            Declare to nations far and neare, and let them know ful well,
            Thou art the Lord, wohſe power & ſtrength, defendeth Iſraell.
         
         
            The Song of Iudith, hauing ſlaine Holophernes.
            
            In the xvi. Chap. of the book of Iudith.
            TVne vp the Timbrels then with laud vnto the Lord,
            Sound foorth his praiſe on Simbals loud, with ſongs of one accord,
            Declare & ſhew his praiſe, alſo his name rehearſe,
            In ſong of thankes exactly pend, of ſweet and noble verſe.
            The Lord he ceaſeth warres, euen he the verie ſame,
            Tis he that doth appeaſe all ſtrife, Iehouah is his name.
            The which hath pitcht his tent, our ſureſt ſtrength and aide,
            Amongſt vs here, leaſt that our foes, ſhuld make vs once diſmaid
            From northren mountain tops, proud Aſſur came a downe,
            With warlike men a multitude, of famous high renowme.
            Whoſe footmen ſtopt the ſtreams, where riuers woont to flowe,
            And horſmen couered all the vales, that lay the hilles belowe.
            His purpoſe was for to deſtroy my land, with ſword and fire,
            To put my yongmen to the ſword, did thirſt with hot deſire.
            My children to captiuitie, he would haue borne away,
            My virgins ſo by rape and force, as ſpoiles and chiefeſt pray,
            But yet the high and mighty Lord, his people doth defend,
            And by a ſilly womans hand, hath brought him to his end.
            For why? their mightie men, with Armes were not ſubdude,
            Nor with their blood our yoong mens hands, were not at al imbrude.
            No, none of Titans line, this proud Aſſirian ſlue,
            Nor any Gyants aid we crau'd, this ſouldier to ſubdue.
            But Iudith ſhe alone, Meraris daughter deere,
            Whoſe heauenly hue hath bred his vaine, and brought him to his beere.
            
               She left her mourning weed, and deckt her ſelfe with gold,
            In royall robes of ſeemly ſhowe, all Iſraell to behold.
            With odors ſhe perfum'd her ſelfe, after the queinteſt guiſe,
            Her haire with fillet finely bound, as Art could wel deuiſe.
            Her ſlippers neat and trim, his eies and fancie fed,
            Her beautie hath bewitcht his mind, her ſword cut off his head.
            The Perſeans were amaz'd, her modeſtie was ſuch,
            The Medes at her bold enterpriſe, they marueiled as much.
            Amongſt th' Aſſyrians then, great clamors can ariſe,
            When as the fact ſo lately done, apear'd before their eies.
            the ſons which erſt my daughters haue, euen on their bodies born
            Haue ſlaine them as they fled in chace, as men ſo quite forlorne.
            Euen at the preſence of the Lord, the ſtouteſt turn'd his backe,
            His power did ſo aſtoniſh them, that al things went to wracke.
            A ſong now let vs ſing, of thankes vnto the Lord,
            Yea, in a ſong of pleaſant tune, let vs his praiſe record.
            Oh God, thou mightie Lord, who is there like to thee,
            In ſtrength and power, to thee oh Lord, none may compared be.
            Thy creatures all obey, and ſerue thee in their trade,
            For thou no ſooner ſpakſt the word, but euery thing was made.
            Thou ſenteſt foorth the ſpirit, which did thy worke fulfill,
            And nothing can withſtand thy voice, but liſten to thy will.
            The mountains ſhal remoue, wher their foundation lay,
            Likewiſe the floods, the craggy rocks, like wax ſhal melt away.
            But they that feare the Lord, and in him put their truſt,
            Thoſe will he loue and ſtil impute, amongſt the good and iuſt:
            But woe be thoſe that ſeeke, his choſen flocks decay,
            The Lord God wil reuenge their wrongs, at the laſt iudgement day
            For he ſuch quenchleſſe fire, and gnawing wormes ſhal ſend,
            Into their fleſh, as ſhal conſume, them world without an end,
         
         
            A Praier of the Authour.
            In the xxiii. Chap. of Eccleſiaſticus.
            
               LOrd of my life, my guide and gouernour,
               Father, of thee this one thing I require,
               
                  Thou wilt not leaue me to the wicked power.
               Which ſeeke my fall, and ſtil my death deſire.
            
            
               Oh, who is he that ſhall inſtruct my thought,
               And ſo with wiſdom ſhall inſpire my heart:
               In ignorance that nothing may be wrought
               By me with them whoſe ſinne ſhall not depart.
            
            
               Leaſt that mine errors growe and multiplie,
               And to deſtruction through my ſinnes I fall:
               My foes reioice at my aduerſitie,
               Who in thy mercie haue no hope at all.
            
            
               My Lord and God, from whom my life I tooke,
               Vnto the wicked leaue me not a pray:
               A haughty mind, a proud diſdainfull looke,
               From me thy Seruant take thou cleane away.
            
            
               Vaine hope likewiſe, with vile concupiſcence,
               Lord of thy mercie take thou cleane from me:
               Retaine thou him in true obedience,
               Who with deſire daily ſerueth thee.
            
            
               Let not deſire to pleaſe the greedy mawe,
               Or appetite of any fleſhly luſt:
               Thy ſeruant from his louing Lord withdraw,
               But giue thou me a mind both good and iuſt.
            
         
         
            The Praier of Salomon.
            
            In the ix. Chap. of the book of Wiſdome.
            OH God of our forefathers all, of mercie thou the Lord:
            Which heauen and earth, and al thinges els, createdſt with thy word.
            And by thy wiſdome madeſt man, like to thy ſelfe alone,
            And gaueſt him ouer thy workes, the chiefe dominion.
            
               That he ſhoud rule vpon the earth, with equity and right,
            And that his iudgments ſhould be pure, and vpright in thy ſight.
            Giue me that wiſdome, which about, thy ſacred throne doth ſtay,
            And from amongſt thine own elect (Lord) put me not away.
            For I thy ſeruant am, and of thy handmaid borne,
            A ſillie ſoule, whoſe life alas, is ſhort and all forlorne.
            And do not vnderſtand at all, what ought to be my guide,
            I mean thy ſtatutes and thy lawes, leaſt that I ſlip aſide.
            For though a man in worldly things, for wiſdome be eſteem'd,
            Yet if thy wiſdom want in him, his, is but folly deem'd.
            Thou choſeſt me to be a King, to ſit on royall throne,
            To iudge the folk which thou of right, doſt chalenge for thy own.
            Thou haſt commanded me to build, a Temple on thy hill,
            And Altar in the ſelf ſame place, where thou thy ſelfe dooſt dwel.
            Euen like vnto thy Tabernacle, in each kind of reſpect,
            A thing moſt holy, which at firſt, thy ſelfe thou didſt erect.
            Thy wiſdome being ſtil with thee, which vnderſtands thy trade,
            When as thou framedſt firſt the world, and her foundation laid.
            Which knew the thing that moſt of all, was pleaſant in thy ſight
            Thy wil and thy commandements, wherein thou takſt delight.
            Send her down from that heauenly ſeat, wheras ſhe doth abide,
            That ſhe may ſhew to me thy will, and be my onely guide.
            For ſhe dooth know and vnderſtand, yea, al things doth foreſee.
            And by her works and mighty power, I ſhall preſerued bee.
            Then ſhal my works accepted be, and liked in thy ſight,
            When I vpon my fathers throne, ſhall iudge thy folke aright.
            Who knoweth the counſell of the Lord, his deep and ſecret ſkil.
            Or who may ſearch into his works, or know his holy will?
            For why? the thoughts of mortal men, are nothing els but care,
            Their forecaſts and deuiſes all, things moſt vncertaine are.
            The bodie is vnto the ſoule, a waight and burthen great,
            The earthly houſe depreſſeth down, the mind with cares repleat
            The things which here on earth remain, we hardly can diſcern,
            To find their ſecret vſe and trade, with labor great we learne.
            For who doth ſearch or ſeek to know, with traueill & with care,
            The ſecrets of the mightie Lord, which hie in heauen are.
            Who can thy counſels vnderſtand, except thou doo impart
            Thy wiſdome, and thy holy ſpirit dooſt ſend into his heart?
            
               For ſo the waies of mortal men, reformed are and taught,
            The things that moſt delighteth thee, which wiſdom forth haue brought.
         
         
            A Song of Iheſus the ſonne of Sirach.
            
            In the laſt Chap. of Eccleſiaſticus.
            
               
                  I Will confeſſe thy name O Lord,
               And giue thee praiſe with one accord:
               My God, my King, and Sauiour,
               Vnto thy name be thankes and power.
            
            
               I haue bene ſuccoured by thee,
               And thou haſt ſtill preſerued me:
               And from deſtruction kept me long,
               And from report of ſlaunderous tongue.
            
            
               From lips ſtil exrciſde with lies,
               And from my cruell enemies,
               Thou me in mercie dooſt deliuer,
               Thy bleſſed name be praiſde for euer.
            
            
               From monſters, that would me deuoure,
               From cruell tyrants, and their power:
               In all affliction paine and griefe,
               Thou ſuccoureſt me with ſome reliefe.
            
            
               From the cruell burning flame.
               Poore I incloſde within the ſame:
               From the deepe infernall pit,
               From venom'd tongues that poiſon ſpit.
            
            
               From ſpeeches that of malice ſpring,
               From accuſation to the king,
               From all reproch and infamy,
               From ſlander, and like villanie.
            
            
               
               My ſoule, to death praiſe thou the Lord,
               And laud his name with one accord:
               For death was readie thee to take,
               And thou neare the infernall lake.
            
            
               They compaſſed me round about,
               But there was none to helpe me out:
               I look'd when ſuccour would appeare,
               But there was none that would come neare.
            
            
               Vpon thy mercies then I thought,
               And on the wonders thou haſt wrought:
               How from deſtruction thou dooſt ſaue,
               Such as in thee affiance haue.
            
            
               In praier then I did perſeuer,
               That thou from death wouldſt me deliuer:
               Vnto the Lord I crie and call,
               That he would rid me out of thrall:
            
            
               Therefore I ſtill will praiſe thy name,
               And euer thanke thee for the ſame:
               My praiers ſhall of thee be heard,
               And neuer from thy eares debard.
            
            
               Thou ſau'ſt me from deſtruction,
               And other miſchiefs more than one:
               Therefore wil I praiſe thee O Lord,
               And in my ſongs thy name record.
            
         
         
            The Praier of Heſter, for the deliuerance of her and her people.
            In the xiiii. Chap. of Heſter.
            
               O Mighty Lord, thou art our God, to thee for aid I crie,
            To help a woman deſolate, ſith danger now is nie:
            Euen frō my youth I oft haue hard my predeceſſors tel,
            
               That from amongſt the nations all thou choſeſt Iſraell▪
            
            And choſeſt thoſe our fathers were from theirs that went before
            To be thine owne and haſt perform'd, thy promiſe euermore.
            Now Lord we haue committed ſin, moſt grieuous in thine eies,
            Wherfore thou haſt deliuered vs, vnto our enemies.
            Becauſe that to their heathen gods, with worſhip we haue gone,
            Knowing that thou art God the Lord, the righteous Lord alone.
            Yet not content, nor ſatiſfied, with theſe our captiues bands.
            But with their Idols they thēſelues, haue ioin'd & ſhaken hands
            Quite to aboliſh and ſubuert, what thou appointed haſt,
            And this thine owne inheritance euen vtterly to waſte.
            To ſhut and ſtop the mouthes of thoſe, that yeeld thee thanks and praiſe,
            Thy glorious temples to defile, thine Altars vp to raiſe:
            And to induce the heathen folke, to laud their Idols might,
            To magnifie a fleſhly King, a man, a mortall wight.
            Then let not ſuch the Scepter ſway, whoſe glorie is of nought,
            Leaſt they deride vs when that we, to miſerie are brought.
            And thoſe deuiſes they haue wrought, t'intangle vs withall,
            May turne vnto their owne decay, and on their heads may fall.
            Remember Lord, and ſhew thy ſelfe, to vs in time of need,
            And ſtrengthen me thou King of kings, & Lord of power indeed.
            Inſtruct my tongue with eloquence, my ſpeaches to impart.
            Before the Lions face, and by, thy wiſdome turne his heart
            To hate our deadly enemie, ſo wholly bent to ill,
            Deſtroy him, and al ſuch as doo conſent vnto his will.
            But let thy hand deliuer vs, and help and ſuccour me,
            Sith I am now left comfortleſſe, and haue no help but thee.
            Thou know'ſt right well all things O Lord, & this thou knoweſt then
            I hate the glory and the pompe, of wicked ſinful men,
            And vtterly deteſt the bed, of any heathen wight,
            Vncircumciſed, moſt vnpure, and odious in thy ſight:
            Thou knoweſt my neceſſitie, and that with hate I beare
            This token of preheminence, which on my head I weare.
            And as a filthy menſtruous cloath, I take thereof ſuch ſhame,
            As being by my ſelfe alone, I neuer weare the ſame.
            And that at Hamans table yet, thy handmaid hath not fed,
            Nor tooke delight in princes feaſt, nor drank wine offered,
            And neuer wi'd in any thing, ſince firſt I hether came,
            
               Vntil this day but in the Lord thou God of Abraham.
            
            Oh thou the high and mightie God, heare thou the voice & crie
            Of them, whoſe hope, whoſe truſt and ſtay, only on thee doth lie.
            And now in need deliuer vs, out of their cruell hand,
            And from the dread and feare O Lord, wherin we dayly ſtand.
         
         
            The Praier of Mardocheus.
            
            In the xiii. Chap. of Heſter.
            
               Oh Lord, my Lord, that art the King of might,
               Within whoſe power all thinges their being haue:
               Who may withſtand that liueth in thy ſight,
               If thou thy choſen Iſraell wilt ſaue.
               For thou haſt made the earth and heauen aboue,
               And al things els that in the ſame do mooue.
            
            
               Thou madeſt all things, and they are all thine own,
               And there is none that may reſiſt thy will:
               Thou know'ſt all things, and this of thee is knowne,
               I did not erſt for malice nor for ill,
               Preſumption nor vaine glorie els at all,
               Come nor bow downe vnto proud Hamans call.
            
            
               I could haue bin content for Iſraels ſake,
               To kiſſe the ſoles euen of his verie feet:
               But that I would not mans vaine honor take.
               Before Gods glorie, being ſo vnmeet.
               And would not worſhip none (O Lord) but thee:
               And not of pride, as thou thy ſelfe dooſt ſee.
            
            
               Therefore (oh Lord) my God, and heauenly king
               Haue mercie on the people thou haſt bought:
               For they imagine and deuiſe the thing,
               How to deſtroy and bring vs vnto nought.
               Thine heritance, which thou ſo long haſt fed,
               And out ſo far from Egypt land haſt led.
            
            
               
               Oh heare my praier, and mercie doe extend,
               Vpon thy portion of inheritance,
               For ſorrowe now ſome ioy and ſolace ſend,
               That we may liue thy glorie to aduance.
               And ſuffer not their mouthes ſhut vp oh Lord,
               Which ſtil thy name with praiſes doo record.
            
         
         
            A Praier in the perſon of the Faithfull.
            The xxxvi. Chap. of Eccleſiaſticus.
            
               HAue mercie on vs bleſſed Lord,
               Which madeſt all thinges with thy word:
               Behold vs Sauiour from aboue,
               Illuminate vs with thy loue.
            
            
               And let the wicked dread thy name,
               Which neuer ſought vnto the ſame:
               And knowe that thou art God alone,
               And like (in woonders) to be none.
            
            
               Oh Lord lift vp thy mightie hand,
               The world thy power ſhall vnderſtand:
               As by vs thou art ſanctified,
               By them ſo be thou magnified.
            
            
               That they may learne thy power to knowe,
               As we that be thy ſeruantes doo,
               Thou art the liuing Lord alone,
               And other Goddes beſides thee none.
            
            
               Renew the ſignes (Lord) thou haſt ſhowne,
               And let thy woonderous woorks he knowne:
               Declare the ſtrength of thy right hand,
               Let them thy power vnderſtand.
            
            
               Ariſe to iudgment in thine yre,
               Poure out thy wrath as hot as fire:
               
                  Deſtroy the cruell aduerſarie,
               To ſpoile our foes (Lord) doo not tarie.
            
            
               Shorten thou theſe wicked daies,
               Thinke on thine oath at all aſſaies:
               Let thy woonders (Lord) appeare.
               And be thou praiſed farre and neare.
            
            
               In burning fire (Lord) let them die,
               Which doe eſcape, and ſeek to flie:
               And let them periſh with annoy,
               Which ſeeke thy people to deſtroy.
            
            
               Cleaue thou the heads of mighty kings,
               Our enemies in godly things:
               And let the world behold and ſee,
               That we are choſen vnto thee.
            
            
               Lord, gather Iacob vnto thee,
               That they thy might & power may ſee:
               that they thy wondrous works may ſhow
               And to be thine themſelues may know.
            
            
               Vnto thy folke impute no blame,
               Which euer cald vpon thy name:
               To Iſrael Lord be thou milde,
               Thy only heir thy firſt borne child.
            
            
               Vnto Ieruſalem ſhew pitie,
               Thy ſanctuarie and thy citie:
               Bleſſe Sion where thy prophets liue,
               Thy glorie to thy people giue.
            
            
               And be thou witneſſe vnto thoſe,
               Which haue bene thine ſtill to diſpoſe:
               And raiſe them vp oh Lord, on hie,
               Which in thy name doo propheſie.
            
            
               
               Reward them (Lord) that waite for thee,
               That they thy Prophets trueth may ſee:
               Heare thou thy ſeruants praier oh Lord,
               As thou to Aaron gaueſt thy word.
            
            
               Guide vs in way of righteouſneſſe,
               The earth thy glorie ſhall expreſſe:
               And to the world it ſhall be knowne:
               Thou art eternall and alone.
            
         
         
            A Praier of Tobias, exhorting all men to praiſe the Lord.
            Tobias. Chap. xiii.
            
               BLeſſ'd be that king which euermore ſhal raign,
               So euer may his kingdome bleſſed be:
               Which puniſheth and pittieth againe,
               Which ſends to hell, and likewiſe ſetteth free.
               Before whoſe preſence may no creature ſtand,
               Nor any thing auoid his heauie hand.
            
            
               Ye children of his choſen Iſraell,
               Before the Gentles ſtil confeſſe his name:
               With whom he hath appointed you to dwell,
               Euen there (I ſay) extol and laude his fame:
               He is a Lord and God moſt gracious,
               And ſtill hath bene a father vnto vs.
            
            
               He wil ſcourge vs for our iniquitie,
               Yet mercie will he take on vs againe,
               And from thoſe nations gathered ſhall we be,
               With whom as ſtrangers now we do remaine.
               Yf in your harts he ſhal repentance find,
               And turne to him with zeale and willing mind.
            
            
               When as your dealings ſhall be found vpright,
               Then wil he turn his face from you no more:
               Nor thenceforth hide his preſence from your ſight,
               
                  But lend his mercie, then laid vp in ſtore,
               Therefore confeſſe his name, & praiſes ſing,
               To that moſt great and higheſt heauenly King.
            
            
               I will confeſſe him in captiuitie,
               And to a wicked people ſhewe his might,
               Oh turne to him, vile ſinners that you be,
               And doo the thing is vpright in his ſight.
               Who's there can tell if he will mercie ſhowe,
               Or take compaſſion on you, yea or noe?
            
            
               I will extoll and laude thy name alwaies,
               My ſoule, the praiſe of heauens King expreſſe:
               All tongues on earth ſhall ſpread abroad his praiſe,
               All nations ſhew foorth his righteouſneſſe.
               
                  Ieruſalem thou ſhalt be ſcourged then,
               But he wil ſpare the ſonnes of righteous men.
            
            
               Faile not to giue the Lord his praiſes due,
               And ſtill extoll that euerlaſting King:
               And help to build his Tabernacle newe,
               In which his Saints ſhall euer ſit and ſing.
               In which the captiues ſhall haue end of griefe,
               In which the poore ſhall euer find reliefe.
            
            
               Many ſhall come from countries far and neare,
               And ſhall great giftes vnto his preſence bring,
               Many before his preſence ſhall appeare,
               And ſhal reioice in this great heauenly King,
               Curſed be thoſe which hate thy bleſſed name,
               But bleſſ'd be thoſe which loue & like the ſame.
            
            
               Triumph with ioy, ye that be good and iuſt,
               Though ſcattered now, yet ſhall you gathered be:
               Then in the Lord fix all your hope and truſt,
               And reſt in peace till you theſe bleſſings ſee.
               bleſſed be thoſe which haue bin touch'd with griefe
               when they haue ſeen thee ſcourg'd, & want reliefe.
            
            
               
               Thoſe only ſhall reioice with thee againe,
               And thoſe ſhall be partakers of thy glorie:
               And ſhall in bliſſe for ay with thee remaine,
               Now paſſed once theſe troubles tranſitorie.
               Then (oh my ſoule) ſee thou reioice and ſing,
               And laud the great and higheſt heuenly King
            
            
               And he will build Ieruſalem full faire,
               With Emeralds and Saphyrs of great price,
               With precious ſtones he will her walles repaire,
               Her towers of golde with worke of rare deuice.
               And all her ſtreetes with Berall will he paue.
               With Carbunckles and Ophirs paſſing braue.
            
            
               And all her people there, ſhall ſit and ſay,
               Praiſed be God with Aleluiah.
            
            FINIS.
            
         
      
   