
      
         
            
            A Heauenly Harmonie of Spirituall Songes, and holy Himnes, of godly Men, Patriarkes, and Prophets.
            Imprinted at London. 1610.
         
         
            
            
            To the curteous Reader.
            
               GEntle Reader, my meaning is not with the varietie of verse to feede any vaine humour, neither to trouble thee with deuises of mine owne inuention, as carieng an ouerweening of mine owne wit: but here I present thee with these Psalmes or Songes of praise, so exactly translated as the prose would permit, or sence would any way suffer me: which (if thou shalt be the same in hart thou art in name, I mean a Christian) I doubt not, but thou wilt take as great delight in these, as in any Poetical fiction. I speak not of Mars, the god of Wars, nor of Venus, the goddesse of loue, but of the Lord of Hostes, that made heauen and earth: Not of Toyes in Mount Ida, but of triumphes in Mount Sion: Not of Uanitie, but of Ueritie: not of Tales, but of Truethes.
            Thus submitting my selfe vnto thy clemencie, and my labours vnto thy indifferencie, I wish thee as my selfe.
            
               Thine, as his owne. M. D.
            
         
         
            
            The Spirituall Songes and holy Hymnes, contained in this Book.
            
               1 THe most notable Song of Moses, which he made a litle before his death.
               2 The Song of the Israelites, for their deliuerance out of Egypt.
               3 The most excellent Song of Salomon. Containing eight Chapters.
               4 The Song of Annah,
               
               5 The Praier of Ieremiah.
               
               6 The Song of Deborah and Barach.
               
               7 A Song of the Faithfull, for the mercies of God.
               8 Another Song of the Faithfull.
               9 A Song of thankes to God.
               10. An other Song of the Faithfull.
            
            
               Other Songes and Praiers out of the bookes of Apocripha.
               11 The Praier of Iudith.
               
               12 The Song of Iudith.
               
               13 A Praier in Ecclesiasticus of the Author.
               14 The Praier of Salomon.
               
               15 A Song of Ihesus the sonne of Sirach.
               
               16 The Praier of Hester.
               
               17 The Praier of Mardocheus.
               
               18 A Praier in the person of the Faithfull.
               19 A Praier of Tobias.
               
            
            FINIS.
         
      
      
         
            
               
               The most notable Song of Moses, containing Gods benefites to his people, which he taught the Children of Israell, a litle before his death: and commanded them to learne it, and teach it vnto their children, as a witnesse betweene God and them. Deutronom. Chap. xxxii.
               
                  
                     YEe Heauens aboue, vnto my speach attend,
                  And Earth below, giue eare vnto my will:
                  My doctrine shall like pleasant drops discend,
                  My words like heauenly dew shal down distil,
                  like as sweet showers refresh the hearbs again
                  Or as the grasse is nourish'd by the raine,
               
               
                  I will describe Iehouahs name aright,
                  And to that God giue euerlasting praise:
                  Perfect is he, a God of woondrous might,
                  With iudgment he directeth all his waies.
                  He onely true, and without sinne to trust,
                  Righteous is he, and he is onely iust.
               
               
                  With loathsome sinne now are you all defilde,
                  Not of his seed, but Bastards, basely borne:
                  And from his mercie therefore quite exilde,
                  Mischieuous men, through follie all forlorne.
                  Is it not he which hath you dearly bought:
                  Proportion'd you, and made you iust of nought?
               
               
                  
                  Consider well the times and ages past.
                  Aske thy forefathers, and they shall thee tell,
                  That when Iehouah did deuide at last,
                  Th'inheritance that to the Nations fel:
                  And seperating Adams heires, he gaue
                  the portion, his Israell should haue.
               
               
                  His people be the portion of the Lord,
                  
                     Iacob the lot of his inheritance:
                  In wildernesse he hath thee not abhorr'd,
                  But in wild Deserts did thee still aduance.
                  He taught thee still and had a care of thee,
                  And kept thee as the apple of his eie.
               
               
                  Like as the Eagle tricketh vp her neast,
                  Therein to lay her litle birdes full soft,
                  And on her backe doth suffer them to rest,
                  And with her wings doth carie them aloft.
                  Euen so the Lord with care hath nourisht thee,
                  And thou hast had no other God but he.
               
               
                  And great Iehouah giueth vnto thee,
                  The fertilst soyle the earth did euer yeeld:
                  That thou all pleasure mightst beholde and see,
                  And tast the fruit of the most pleasant field:
                  Honey for thee out of the flint he brought,
                  And oile out of the craggie rocke he wrought.
               
               
                  With finest butter still he hath thee fed,
                  With milke of Sheep he hath thee cherished:
                  With fat of Lambes, and Rammes in Bazan bred,
                  With flesh of Goates he hath thee nourished.
                  With finest wheat he hath refresht thee still,
                  And gaue thee wine, thereof to drink thy fill.
               
               
                  But hee that should be thankfull then for this,
                  Once waring fat, began to spurne and kicke:
                  Thou art so crancke, and such thy grosenesse is,
                  
                     That now to lust thy prouender doth pricke,
                  That he that made thee, thou remembrest not,
                  And he that sau'd thee thou hast clean forgot.
               
               
                  With Idols they offend his gracious eies,
                  And by their sinne prouoke him vnto yre:
                  To deuils they doo offer sacrifice,
                  Forsake their God, and other goddes desire.
                  Gods whose beginnings were but strange & new,
                  Whom yet their fathers neuer fear'd nor knew.
               
               
                  He which begat thee is cleane out of mind,
                  The God which form'd thee thou doost not regard:
                  The Lord to angre was therewith inclinde,
                  His sonnes and daughters should him so reward.
                  And there he vow'd his chearfull face to hide,
                  To see their end, and what would them betide.
               
               
                  For faithlesse they and froward are become,
                  And with no God moue me to ielousie:
                  To angre they prouoke me all and some,
                  And still offend me with their vanitie:
                  And with no people I will mooue them then,
                  And angre them with vaine and foolish men.
               
               
                  For why? my wrath is kindled like the fire,
                  And shall descend to the infernall lake:
                  The earth shall be consumed in mine ire,
                  My flames shal make the mighty mountains quake
                  With many plagues I wil them stil annoy,
                  And with mine arrowes I will them destroy.
               
               
                  With hunger, heat and with destruction,
                  I wil them burne, consume and ouerthrow:
                  They shal be meat for beasts to feed vppon,
                  The ground invenom'd whereupon they goe.
                  In field, in chamber stil my sword shall slay
                  Man, maid & child, with him whose head is gray.
               
               
                  
                  And I will scatter them both far and neare,
                  And hence foorth make their memorie to cease,
                  Saue that the furious enemie I feare,
                  And that his pride should thereby more increase.
                  And they should say, and foorth this rumor ring,
                  that they and not the Lord haue done this thing.
               
               
                  They are a nation void of counsell quite,
                  To vnderstand, there doth not one intend:
                  But were they wise, in it they woule delite,
                  And would consider of their latter end.
                  Can one or two put thousands to the flight,
                  Except the Lord do help them with his might?
               
               
                  For with our God their Gods may not compare,
                  Our foes themselues will still the same confesse:
                  Their Uines of Sodome and Gomorra are,
                  Their grapes of gaule, clusters of bittenesse.
                  Their wine is like to Dragons poison sure,
                  or gaule of Aspes, that no man may endure.
               
               
                  And haue not I laid vp in store this thing,
                  Amongst my treasures doo I not it hide?
                  The recompence with vengeance wil I bring,
                  And all in time their foot away shall slide.
                  For their destruction (loe) is nowe at hand,
                  And mischief here euen at their heels doth stand.
               
               
                  For why? the Lord doth iudge the earth alone,
                  And to his seruants shew himselfe most kinde:
                  When he shall see their power is past and gone,
                  And none kept vp in hold nor left behind.
                  when men shal say, let vs your goddes behold,
                  Where be they now, whom ye so much extold?
               
               
                  Which oft did eat the fatted sacrifice,
                  And dranke the wine of the drinke offering:
                  Unto your helpe now let vs see them rise:
                  
                     Loe, I am God, and there is no such thing:
                  I kil, giue life, I wound, make whole againe,
                  Out of my handes no man can ought retaine.
               
               
                  I lift my hands on high to heauen aboue,
                  Immortall I, and onely liue for euer:
                  My glittering sword I sharpe for my behooue,
                  In righteous iudgment still I doo perseuer.
                  I wil send vengeance on mine enemies,
                  And many plagues on them which me dispise.
               
               
                  Mine arrowes then of blood shal haue their fill,
                  My sword shal eate the verie flesh of men:
                  For such my Saintes as they doo slay and kill,
                  And for the Captiues they imprison then.
                  And when I once begin reuenge to take,
                  From plague & vengeance then I will not slake.
               
               
                  Ye nations all, honour his people then,
                  He will reuenge his seruantes guiltlesse blood,
                  And surely plague the vile and wicked men,
                  Which stoutlie haue against him euer stood.
                  He will shew mercie stil vnto his land,
                  And on his people, brought foorth by his hand.
               
            
            
               A Song of Moses and the Israelites, for their deliuerance out of Egypt. The xv. Chap. of Exodus.
               
                  I Will sing praise vnto the Lord for aie,
                  Who hath triumphed gloriously alone,
                  The horse and rider he hath ouerthrowen,
                  And swallowed vp euen in the raging sea.
               
               
                  He is my strength, he is my song of praise,
                  He is the God of my saluation.
                  
                     A Temple will I build to him alone,
                  I will exalt my fathers God alwaies.
               
               
                  The Lord Iehouah is a man of warre,
                  
                     Pharao, his chariots, and his mightie hoste
                  Were by his hand in the wilde waters lost,
                  His Captaines drowned in red Sea so farre,
               
               
                  Into the bottom there they sanke like stones,
                  The mightie depthes our enemies deuour,
                  Thy owne right hand is gloorious in thy power,
                  Thy owne right hand hath bruised al their bones.
               
               
                  And in thy glorie thou subuerted hast
                  The rebels rising to resist thy power,
                  Thou sentst thy wrath which shall them all deuour,
                  Euen as the fire doth the stubble wast.
               
               
                  And with a blast out of thy nostrilles
                  The flowing flood stood still as any stone,
                  The waters were congealed all in one,
                  And firme and sure as any rockes or hilles.
               
               
                  The furious foe so vainly v
                        •••
                     teth stil,
                  And voweth to pursue with endlesse toile,
                  And not returne til he haue got the spoile,
                  With fire and sword they wil destroy and kill.
               
               
                  Thou sentst the wind which ouerwhelm'd them all,
                  The surging seas came sousing in againe,
                  As in the water, so with might and maine,
                  Like lead, vnto the bottome downe they fall.
               
               
                  Oh mightie Lord, who may with thee compare?
                  Amongst the Gods I find none like to thee:
                  whose glorie's in holines, whose feares in praises be
                  whose chiefe delights in working woonders are.
               
               
                  
                  Thou stretchest out thy right and holy arme,
                  And presently the earth did them deuour:
                  And thou wilt bring vs by thy mightie power,
                  As thou hast promist without further harme.
               
               
                  And for thy people (Lord) thou shalt prouide,
                  A place and seat of quietnesse and rest:
                  The nations all with feare shall be opprest,
                  And Palestina quake for all her pride.
               
               
                  The Dukes of Edom shal hang downe the head,
                  The Moabites shall tremble then for feare,
                  The Cananites in presence shall appeare,
                  Like vnto men whose fainting heartes were dead,
               
               
                  And feare and dread shall fall on them alas,
                  Because thou helpest with thy mighty hand:
                  So stil as stoues amazed they shal stand,
                  Oh mightie Lord, while thine elect doo passe.
               
               
                  And thou shalt bring thy chosen and elect,
                  Unto the mount of thine inheritance:
                  A place prepared thy people to aduance,
                  A Sanctuary there thou shalt erect,
               
               
                  Which thou (oh Lord) establish'd hast therefore,
                  And there thy name shal raigne for euermore.
               
            
            
               The most excellent Song which was Salomons, wherein is declared the true and vnfained loue betweene Christ and his Church, containing, viii. Chapters.
               
                  Chap. 1.
                  LEt him imbrace his Deare, with many a friendly kisse,
                  For why? thy loue than any wine to me more pleasant is:
                  In smel thou art most like, sweet odors vnto me,
                  thy name like precious ointmēt is, so sweet as sweet may be
                  
                     Therefore the Uirgins al, of thee enamored are,
                  Entice me on to follow thee, loe, we our selues prepare:
                  The King hath brought me in, to chamber richly dight,
                  He is my ioy, his loue is sweet, the good in him delight.
                  Ye daughters of Ierusalem, although that browne I bee,
                  Than Arras rich or Cedars fruits, I seemlier am to see,
                  Disdaine me not although I be not passing faire,
                  For why? the glowing sunny raies discolloured haue my laire:
                  My mothers darlings deare, with enuie swelling so,
                  Haue me cōstrain'd to keep their Uine, thus I mine own forgoe.
                  Tell me my sweet and deare, where thou thy slocke doost feed,
                  Or where thy litle Lamblings rest, about midday indeed?
                  Els shall I walke about, all wandring like a stray,
                  And seeke thee after other flocks, through many an vnknowne way:
                  If that my pathes (oh Paragon) be so vnknowen to thee,
                  Go feed thy flock amongst the tents, wher none but shepherds be,
                  My true and loyal Loue, I may thee well compare
                  To famous Pharaos horses great, which in his chariots are,
                  Thy cheeks bedded with precious stone, most louely to behold,
                  About thy neck likewise do hang great massy chaines of gold.
                  Fine costlie borders for my Loue, of gold we wil prepare,
                  With siluer studs accordinglie of worke surpassing rare.
                  Whiles he at table sat, perfumes then did I make
                  Of Spicknard sweet and delicate, al for my true Loues sake:
                  My loue more sweet than Myrrhe, between my breasts doth ly,
                  Or Camphere, that doth spring and grow in vine of Engady.
                  How faire art thou my Loue, my Doue, my Darling deare,
                  Thine eies most like vnto the Doues, in sight to me appeare.
                  Oh how exceeding faire, and seemly to be seene,
                  The bed where we together lie, is hung with pleasant greene:
                  The beames our house vphold, they all of Cedar be,
                  The reaching Rafters of the same, of Fyrre, that stately tree.
               
               
                  The second Chapter.
                  I Am the fragrant Flower, of braue vermilion hue,
                  And Lilie in the valey low, ysprong vp fresh and new:
                  As Lillie flower excels the thorne, or litle chyer of grasse,
                  
                     So far my Loue the Uirgins all in beautie doth surpasse.
                  Or as the barren crooked stocke vnto the straightest tree,
                  No more the sonnes vnto my Loue may ought compared be:
                  To rest by his sweet side, to mee a heauenly blisse,
                  The fruit that springeth from my Loue, exceeding pleasant is.
                  To Celler he me brings, of wine aboundant store,
                  His loue displaied ouer me, how can I wish for more?
                  Fil foorth your Flagons then, whereof the fume may flie,
                  Bring forth your cates to comfort me, ah me, for loue I die.
                  His left hand clipping close, about my necke doth hold,
                  His right doth sweetly me imbrace, and eke my corps enfold.
                  I charge you by the Roes and Hinds, ye Iewish daughters all,
                  Not once to stir nor wake my Loue, vntil she please to call.
                  But stay, me thinks this is, mine owne Loues voice I heare,
                  Loe, how he skips from hill to hill, loe, you he doth appeare.
                  My Loue is like a Roe, that frisketh in the wood,
                  Or like the strong and stately Hart, in prime and lusty blood.
                  He closely shroudes himselfe behind our wall I see,
                  And through the gate he dooth disclose and shew himselfe to me.
                  And calling then, he saith, come to thine owne my Deare,
                  For lo, the clouds are past and gone, the skies are christal cleare:
                  The flowers in the field, so faire and freshly spring,
                  The birds do chant with merie glee, the Turtle now doth sing:
                  The fig-trees bear such store, that boughs with waight are bent,
                  The Uines with blossoms do abound, which yeeld a sweet accēt.
                  Come to thine owne my deare, my Darling and my Doue,
                  Leaue thou the place of thine abode, come to thine own true loue
                  Let me behold thy face, most pleasant to the sight,
                  And heare my best beloueds voice, that most doth me delight.
                  Destroy the subtil Fox, that doth the grapes deuoure,
                  For loe, behold, the time is come, the vines do bud and floure.
                  My Loue to me is true, and I likewise his owne,
                  Which in the Lilles takes repast, himselfe euen all alone:
                  Until the day doth spring, or shadowes fade away,
                  Be as a Roe or like the Harts, which on the mountaines play.
               
               
                  
                  The third Chapter.
                  BY night within my bed, I romed here and there,
                  But al in vain, I could not find my Loue & friendly Fere.
                  Then straight waies vp I rose, and searching euery street
                  throughout the city far & neer, but him I could not meete.
                  The watchmen found me tho, to whom I then can say,
                  Haue ye not seen mine owne true Loue, of late come this a way:
                  Then passing them, I found my Loue I long had sought,
                  And to my mothers chamber then, my darling haue I brought.
                  I charge you by the Roes and Hinds, this vow to me you make,
                  Ye Iewish daughters, not to call my Loue till she doe wake.
                  Who's that which doth frō wildernes, in mighty smoke appeare,
                  Like the perfumes of odors sweet, which Merchāts hold so dear.
                  About the bed of Salomon, behold, there is a band
                  Of threescore valiant Israelites, which al in armour stand,
                  All expert men of war, with sword stil ready prest,
                  Least foes in night time should approch, when men suspect them least:
                  King Salomon hath made of Liban tree so sure,
                  A Pallace braue, whose pillers strong are al of siluer pure:
                  The pauement beaten gold, the hangings purple graine,
                  The daughters of Ierusalem with ioy to entertaine.
                  Ye Sion daughters, see, where Salomon is set
                  In Royall throan, and on his head, the princely Coronet,
                  Wherewith his mother first, adorn'd him (as they say)
                  When he in mariage linked was, euen on his wedding day.
               
               
                  The fourth Chapter.
                  BEhold, thou art al faire my Loue, my hearts delight,
                  Thine eies so louely like the Doues, appear to me in sight,
                  Thy haire surpassing faire and seemely to the eie,
                  Like to a goodly heard of Goates, on Gilead mountaine hie.
                  Thy teeth like new washt sheep, returning from the flood,
                  Wheras not one is barren found, but beareth twinnes so good.
                  Thy lips like scarlet thred, thy talke dooth breed delight,
                  Thy temples like pomgranet faire doth shew to me in sight.
                  Thy necke like Dauids Tower, which for defence doth stand,
                  
                     Wherein the shieldes and targets be, if men of mightie hand.
                  Thy brests like twinned Roes, in prime and youthfull age,
                  Which feed among the Lillies sweet, their hunger to asswage.
                  Until the day doe spring, and night be banisht hence:
                  I will ascend into the mount of Myrrhe and Frankensence.
                  Thou art all faire my Loue, most seemly 
                        〈◊〉
                      to see,
                  From head to foot, from top to toe, there is no shot in thee.
                  Come downe from Libanon, from Libanon aboue,
                  And from Amanahs mountain hie, come to thine own true loue.
                  From Sheuers stately top, from Hermon hil so hie,
                  From Lions dens & frō the cliffes, where lurking Leopards lie.
                  My Spouse and sister deare, thy loue hath wounded me,
                  Thy louely eie and seemly neck, hath made me yeeld to thee.
                  Thy loue far better is, than any wine to me,
                  Thy odors sweet doth far surpasse, the smell where spices be.
                  Thy lips like hony combe, vnder thy tongue doth lie
                  The honey sweet: thy garments smel, like Libanon on hie.
                  My Spouse a garden is, fast vnder locke and kay,
                  Or like a Fountaine closed 
                        〈◊〉
                     , where sealed is the way.
                  Like to a pleasant plot I 
                        〈◊〉
                      thee well compare,
                  Where Cāphere, Spicknard, dainty fruits, with sweet Pomgranets are.
                  Euen Spicknard, Saffron, Calamus, & Synamon
                        •
                      do growe,
                  With Incense, Myrrhe and Alloes, with many spices moe.
                  Oh Fountaine passing pure, oh Well of life most deare.
                  Oh Spring of loftie Libanon, of water christal cleare.
                  Ye North and Southern winds vpon my garden blow,
                  That the sweet spice that is therein, on euery side may flow.
                  Unto his garden place, my Loue for his repast
                  Shall walke, and of the fruites therein, shal take a pleasant tast.
               
               
                  The fift Chapter.
                  WIthin my garden plot, loe, I am present now,
                  I gathered haue the Myrrhe and spice,
                  that in aboundance growe:
                  With honey, milke & wine, I haue refresht me here.
                  Eat, drink my friends, be mery there, with harty friēdly cheare.
                  Although in slumbering sleepe, it seemes to you I lay,
                  
                     Yet heare I my beloued knock, me thinks I heare him say,
                  Open to me the gate my Loue, my hearts delight,
                  For lot, my locks are all bedewed with drizling drops of night.
                  My garments are put off, then may I not doo so,
                  Shal I defile my feet I washt, so white as any snow.
                  Then fast euen by the dore to me he shew'd his hand,
                  My heart was then enamoured, when as I saw him stand.
                  Then straight waies vp I rose, to ope the dore with speed,
                  My handes and fingers dropped Myrrhe, vpon the bar indeed.
                  Then opened I the dore, vnto my Loue at last,
                  But all in vaine, for why? before, my Loue was gone and past.
                  There sought I for my loue, then could I crie and call,
                  But him I could not find, nor he, nould answer me at at all.
                  The watchmen found me then, as thus I walk'd astray,
                  They wounded me, and from my head, my vaile they took away
                  Ye daughters of Ierusalem, if ye my Loue doo see,
                  Tell him that I am sicke for loue, yea, tel him this from me.
                  Thou peerelesse Gem of price, I pray thee to vs tell,
                  What is thy Loue, what may he be, that doth so far excell?
                  In my beloueds face, the Rose and Lilly striue,
                  Among ten thousand men not one, is found so faire aliue.
                  His head like finest gold, with secret sweet perfume,
                  His curled locks hang all as black, as any Rauens plinne.
                  His eies be like to Doues, on Riuers banks below,
                  Ywasht with milk, whose collours are, most gallant to the show.
                  His cheeks like to a plot, where spice and flowers growe,
                  his lips like to the Lilly white, frō whēce pure Myrrh doth flow,
                  His hands like rings of gold, with costly Chrisalet,
                  His belly like the Yuory white, with seemly Saphyrs set.
                  His legs like Pillers strong, of Marble set in gold,
                  His countenance like Libanon, or Cedars to behold.
                  His mouth it is as sweet, yea, sweet as sweet may be,
                  This is my Loue, ye Uirgins loe, euen such a one is he▪
                  
                  Thou fairest of vs al, whether is thy Louer gone,
                  Tel vs, and we will goe with thee, thou shalt not goe alone▪
                  
               
               
                  
                  The sixt Chapter.
                  DOwne to his garden place, mine own true Loue is gone,
                  Among the Spice and Lillies sweet,
                  to walke himselfe alone.
                  True am I to my Loue, and he my louing make,
                  Which in the Lillies makes abode, and doth his pleasure take,
                  With Tirzah or Ierusalem, thy beautie may be waide,
                  In shew like to an Armie great, whose Ensignes are displaid.
                  Oh turne away thine eies, for they haue wounded me,
                  Thy haires are like a heard of Goats, on Gilead mount that be
                  Thy teeth like new washt sheep, returning from the flood,
                  Whereas not one is barren found, but beareth twins a good,
                  The temples of thy head, within thy locks to showe,
                  Are like to the Pomgranet fruit, that in the Orchards grow.
                  Of Concubines four score there are, of Queens twice treble ten
                  Of Uirgins for the multitude, not to be numbred then.
                  But yet my Doue alone, and vndefiled Fere,
                  Her mothers only daughter is, to her exceeding deare.
                  The Uirgins saw my Loue, and they haue lik'd her well,
                  The Queens & eke the Concubines, they say she doth excell.
                  Who's she I doo behold, so like the morning cleare,
                  Or like the Moon, when towards the ful, in pride she doth appear
                  Bright as the radiant raies, that from the Sun descend,
                  Or like an Army terrible, when Ensignes they extend.
                  Unto the nuts downe will I goe, and fruitfull valeyes lowe,
                  To see if that the Uine doo bud, and the Pomgranets growe.
                  My selfe I know not I, ne nothing knew I then,
                  Let me be like a chariot, euen of thy noble men.
                  Return againe, oh make returne, thou Shulamite so deare,
                  Let vs enioy thy company, I pray thee soiorne here.
                  What see you in the Shulamite, in her what may you see,
                  But like a troupe of warlike men that in the armies be.
               
               
                  
                  The seuenth Chapter.
                  HOw stately are thy steps with braue and lofty pace,
                  Thou daintie princesse, darling deare,
                  with comely gallant grace.
                  the ioines of thy fair thighs, the which so straight do stand
                  Are like to curious iewels wrought, by cunning workmās hand
                  Thy nauell like a goblet is, which stil with wine doth flowe,
                  Thy belly like an heape of wheat, about which, Lillies growe.
                  Thy breasts I may compare like to two litle Roes,
                  which follow on their mothers steps, when forth to feed she goes.
                  Thy necke like to a Tower, of costly Iuory fram'd,
                  thine eies like Heshbō
                      waters clear, by that Bathrabbin nam'd
                  Thy nose like Libanon Tower, most seemly to the eie,
                  Which towards Damascus citie faire, that stately town doth ly.
                  Thy head like Scarlet red, thy haire of purple huē,
                  The King in thee doth take delight, as in his Lady true.
                  How faire art thou my Loue, and seemly to the sight,
                  The pleasures that abound in thee, they are my chiefe delight:
                  Thy stature like the Palme, the tall and straightest tree,
                  Thy brests, the which do thee adorne, most like to clusters be.
                  Upon the pleasant palme, I said I wil take holde,
                  And rest vpon her pleasant boughes, I said I wil be bolde.
                  Thy breasts are like a bunch of grapes, on the most fruitful vine,
                  Thy nose in smel like to the fruit, of al most pure and fine,
                  The roofe of thy sweet mouth, like purest wine doth tast,
                  Which makes the very aged lagh, forgetting sorrowes past.
                  I am vnto my Loue, a faithfull friendly Fere,
                  And he is likewise vnto me, most tender and most deare.
                  Goe we into the field, to sport vs in the plaine,
                  And in the pleasant villages (my Loue) let vs remaine.
                  Then early will we rise and see, if that the vine do flourish,
                  And if the earth accordingly do the Pomgranets nourish.
                  I feele the Mandrakes smell, within our gates that be:
                  The sweetest things both new & olde (my Loue) I kept for thee.
               
               
                  
                  The eight Chapter.
                  OH that thou weart my brother borne,
                  that suckt my mothers breast:
                  Then sweetly would I kisse thy lippes,
                  and by thee take my rest.
                  Unto my mothers closet sure, mine own Loue will I bring,
                  And be obedient vnto him in euery kind of thing.
                  There wil I giue to thee (my Loue) the daintie spiced wine,
                  And pleasant liquor that distils from the Pomgranet fine.
                  With his left hand he shal support, and eke my head vpreare,
                  And with the right most louingly he shal imbrace his deare.
                  Ye daughters of Ierusalem, doo not my Loue disease,
                  But suffer her to take her rest, so long as she shall please.
                  Who's that which from the wildernes, you commeth frō aboue,
                  And in this sort familiarly dooth leane vpon her Loue:
                  Under a pleasant aple tree, from whence like fruit doth spring,
                  Thy mother first conceiued thee, euen forth which did thee bring
                  Let it be like a priuie seale, within thy secret heart,
                  Or like a Signet on thy hand, thy secrets to impart:
                  For iealousie is like the graue, and loue more strong than death
                  From whose hot brands ther doth proceed a flaming fiery breath
                  The flouds cannot alay his heat, nor water quench his flame,
                  Neither the greatest treasure, can counteruaile the same.
                  Our litle sister hath no breasts, what shal we doo or say,
                  when we shal giue her to her Spouse, vpon her wedding day?
                  If that she be a wall, on that foundation sure,
                  A princely pallace wil we build, of siluer passing pure.
                  And if she be a doore, she shall inclosed be
                  With braue and goodly squared boords, of the fine Cedar tree.
                  I am a mightie wall, my breasts like Towers hie,
                  Then am I passing beautifull in my beloueds eie.
                  King Salomon a vinyard had, in faire Baalhamon field,
                  Each one in siluer yeerely dooth, a thousand peeces yeeld,
                  But yet my vineyard (Salomon) thy vine doth far excell,
                  For fruit and goodnes of the same, thou know'st it very wel.
                  A thousand siluer peeces are, euen yearely due to me,
                  
                     Two twousand likewise vnto them, the which her keepers be.
                  Oh thou that in the garden dwell'st, learne me thy voice to know
                  That I may listen to the same, as thy companions doo.
                  Flie my beloued hence away, and be thou like the Roe,
                  Or as the Hart on mountaine tops, wheron sweet spices growe.
               
            
            
               The Song of Annah, for the bringing foorth of Samuel her sonne. The second Chap. of the first booke of Samuel,
               MY heart doth in the Lord reioice, that liuing Lord of might,
               which doth his seruāts horn exalt, in al his peoples sight.
               I wil reioice in their despight,
               which erst haue me abhord,
               Because that my saluation dependeth on the Lord.
               None is so holie as the Lord, besides thee none there are:
               With our God there is no God, that may himselfe compare.
               See that no more presumptuously, ye neither boast nor vaunt,
               Nor yet vnseemly speak such things, so proud and arrogant.
               For why? the counsell of the Lord, in depth cannot be sought
               Our enterprises and our actes, by him to passe are brought.
               The bowe is broke, the mightie ones subuerted are at length,
               And they which weake and feeble were, increased are in strength
               They that were ful & had great store, with labor buy their bread
               And they which hungrie were & poore, with plenty now are fed.
               So that the womb which barren was, hath many children born,
               And she which store of children had, is left now all forlorne.
               The Lord doth kill and make aliue, his iudgments all are iust,
               He throweth downe into the graue, and raiseth from the dust.
               The Lord doth make both rich & poore, he al our thoughts doth trie.
               He bringeth low & eke againe, exalteth vp on hie.
               He raiseth vp the simple soule, whom men pusude with hate,
               To sit amongst the mightie ones, in chaire of princely state,
               For why? the pillers of the earth, he placed with his hand,
               whose mighty strēgth doth stil support, the waight of al the land.
               He wil preserue his Saints likewise, the wicked men at length
               He wil confound: let no man seem, to glory in his strength.
               
                  The enemies of God the Lord, shal be destroied all,
               From heauen he shal thunder send, that on their heads shal fall.
               The mightie Lord shall iudge the world, & giue his power alone
               Unto the King, and shal exalt his owne annointed one.
            
            
               The Song of Ionah in the Whales bellie. In the second Chap. of Ionah.
               IN griefe and anguish of my heart, my voice I did extend,
               Unto the Lord, and he therto, a willing eare did lend:
               Euen from the deep and darkest pit, & the infernall lake,
               To me he hath bow'd down his eare, for his great mercies sake.
               For thou into the middest, of surging seas so deepe
               Hast cast me foorth: whose bottom is, so low & woondrous steep.
               Whose mighty wallowing waues, which from the floods do flow
               haue with their power vp swallowed me, & ouerwhelm'd me tho.
               Then said I, loe, I am exilde, from presence of thy face,
               Yet wil I once againe behold, thy house and dwelling place.
               The waters haue encompast me, the floods inclosde me round,
               The weeds haue sore encōbred me, which in the seas abound.
               Unto the valeyes down I went, beneath the hils which stand.
               The earth hath there enuiron'd me, with force of al the land.
               Yet hast thou stil preserued me, from al these dangers here,
               And brought my life out of the pit, oh Lord my God so deare.
               My soule consuming thus with care, I praied vnto the Lord,
               And he from out his holie place, heard me with one accord,
               Who to vain lieng vanities doth whollie him betake,
               Doth erre also, Gods mercie he, doth vtterly forsake.
               But I wil offer vnto him the sacrifice of praise,
               And pay my vowes, ascribing thanks vnto the Lord alwaies.
            
            
               
               The Praier of Ieremiah, bewasling the captiuitie of the people. In the fift Chap. of his Lamentations.
               CAl vnto mind oh mightie Lord, the wrongs we daily take
               Consider and he hold the same, for thy great mercies sake.
               Our lands & our inheritance, meere strangers do possesse,
               The alients in our houses dwel, and we without redresse.
               We now (alas) are fatherlesse, & stil pursude with hate,
               Our mourning mothers nowe remaine in wofull widdowes state.
               We buy the water which we drink, such is our grieuous want,
               Likewise the wood euen for our vse, that we our selues did plant.
               Our neckes are subiect to the yoke, of persecutions thrall,
               We wearied out with cruell toile, and find no rest at all:
               Afore time we in Egypt land, and in Assyria serued,
               For food our hunger to sustaine, least that we should haue sterued
               Our fathers which are dead & gone, haue sinned wondrous sore,
               And we now scourg'd for their offence, ah, woe are we therefore.
               Those seruile slaues which bondmen be, of them in fear we stand
               Yet no man doth deliuer vs, from cruel Cauiues hand.
               Our liuings we are forc'd to get, in perils of our liues,
               The drie and barren wildernesse therto by danger driues.
               Our skins be scortcht as though they had, bin in an ouen dride,
               With famine, and the penury, which here we doo abide.
               Our wiues and maides defloured are, by violence and force,
               On Sion, and in Iuda land, sans pity or remorce.
               Our kings by cruel enimies, with cordes are hanged vp,
               Our grauest, sage and ancient men, haue tasted of that cup.
               Our yoong men they haue put to sword, not one at al they spare,
               Our litle boyes vpon the tree, sans pitie hanged are.
               Our elders sitting in the gates, can now no more be found,
               Our youth leaue off to take delight, in musicks sacred sound.
               The ioy and comfort of our heart, away is fled and gone,
               Our solace is with sorrow mixt, our mirth is turn'd to moue.
               Our glory now is laid full low, and buried in the ground,
               Our sins ful sore do burthen vs, whose greatnes doth abound.
               
                  Oh holy blessed Sion hill, my heart is woe for thee,
               Mine eies poure foorth a flood of teares, this dismal day to see.
               Which art destroied and now lieth wast, from sacred vse & trade.
               Thy holie place is now a den, of filthy Foxes made.
               But thou the euerliuing Lord, which doost remaine for aye,
               Whose seat aboue the firmament, full sure and still doth stay.
               Wherefore dost thou forsake thine owne? shal we forgotten be?
               Turne vs good Lord, and so we shall be turned vnto thee.
               Lord cal vs home from our erile, to place of our abode,
               Thou long inough hast punisht vs, oh Lord, now spare thy rod.
            
            
               The Song of Deborah and Baracke. The fift Chap. of Iudges.
               PRaise ye the Lord, the which reuenge
               on Israels wrongs doth take:
               Likewise for those which offered vp
               themselues for Israels sake.
               Heare this, ye kings, ye princes al, giue eare with one accord,
               I wil giue thanks, yea sing the praise, of Israels liuing Lord.
               When thou departedst (Lord) from Seir, and out of Edom field,
               The earth gan quake, the heauens rain, the cloudes their water yeeld
               the moūtains hie before the Lord, haue melted euery del,
               As Synay did in presence of, the Lord of Israell.
               In time of Sangar, Anaths sonne, and in old Iaels daies,
               the paths were al vnoccupied, men sought forth vnknown waies,
               The townes & cities there lay wast, and to decay they fel,
               Til Deborah, a matrone graue, became in Israell.
               They chose thē gods, then garboils did, within their gates abcūd
               A spear or shield in Israel, there was not to be found.
               In those which gouern Israel, my heart doth take delight,
               And in the valiant people there, oh, praise the Lord of might.
               Speak ye that on white Asses ride, & that by Midden dwell.
               And ye that daily trade the waies, see forth your minds you tell.
               The clattering noise of archers shot, when as the arrowes flew,
               Appeased was amongst the sort, which water daily drew.
               The righteousnesse of God the Lord, shal be declared there,
               
                  And likewise Israels righteousnes, which worship him in feare.
               The people with reioicing hearts, then all with one consent:
               I mean the Lords inheritance, vnto the gates they went:
               
                  Deborah vp, arise and sing, a sweet and worthy song,
               
                  Baracke, lead them as Captiues forth, which vnto thee belong.
               For they which at this day remaine, do rule like Lords alone,
               The Lord ouer the mightie ones, giues me dominion.
               The roots of Ephraim arose, gainst Amalecke to fight.
               And so likewise did Beniamin, with all their power and might.
               From Macher came a company, which chiefest sway did beare,
               From Zebulon, which cunning clarks, & famous writers were,
               The kings which came of Isacher were with Deborah tho,
               Yea Isacher and Barack both attend on her also.
               He was dismounted in the vale, for the deuisions sake,
               Of Ruben the people there, great lamentation make.
               
                  Gilead by Iorden made abode, and Dan on ship boord lay,
               And Asher in the Desart he, vpon the shore doth stay.
               They of Zebulon and Nepthaly, like worthy valiant wightes,
               Before their foes euen in the field, aduanc'd themselues in fight.
               The kings themselues in person fought: the kings of Canaan,
               
               In Tanach plaine, wheras the streame, of swift Megido ran.
               No pay, no hyer, ne coine at all, not one did seem to take,
               They serued not for greedy gain, nor filthy lucre sake.
               The heauens hy and heauenly powers, these things to passe haue brought
               The stars against proud Sifera, euen in their course haue fought
               The stream of kishons anciēt brook, hath ouerwhelm'd thē there
               My soule, sith thou hast done thy part, be now of harty cheare.
               The hardened hooues of barbed horse, were al in peeces broke,
               By force of mightie men which met, with many a sturdy stroke.
               The Angel hath pronounc'd a curse, which shal on Meroz fall,
               And those that doo inhabite there, a curse light on them all.
               Because they put not forth their hands to help the liuing Lord,
               Against the proud and mighty ones, which haue his truth abhord
               
                  Iaell the Renit Hebers wife, most happy shal be blest,
               Aboue al other women there, which in the tents do rest.
               He asked water for to drink, she gaue sweet milk to him,
               Yea butter in a lordly dish, which was full tricke and trim.
               her left hand to the naile she put, her right the hammer wrought.
               
                  Wherewith presumptuous Sisera vnto his death she brought,
               And from his corps his head she cut, with mortal deadly wound,
               When through the tēples of his head, she naild him to the groūd.
               He bowed then vnto the earth, and at her feet can fall,
               And where he fell there still he lay, bereau'd of sences all.
               The mother then of Sisera, in window where she lay,
               Doth marueil much that this her sonne doth make so long a stay.
               Her Ladies then, they hearing that, make answer by and by,
               Yea, to her speaches past before, her selfe doth this replie:
               Hath he not gotten mightie spoiles, and now diuision makes,
               Each one a Damosell hath or twaine, which he as captiue takes.
               
                  Sisera of costly coloured robes, ful rich, with needle wrought,
               Hath got a pray, which vnto him, as chiefest spoiles are brought.
               So let thine enemies (O Lord) sustaine and suffer blame,
               And let thy chosen blessed ones, that loue and feare thy name,
               Be like the Son, when in the morne, his glorie doth increase:
               Or like the land, which many a yeare, hath bin in rest and peace.
            
            
               An other Song of the faithfull, for the mercies of God. In the xii. Chap. of the prophesie of Isaiah.
               
                  OH liuing Lord, I still will laude thy name,
                  for though thou wert offended once with me:
                  Thy heauy wrath is turn'd from me againe,
                  and graciously thou now doost comfort mee.
               
               
                  Behold, the Lord is my saluation,
                  I trust in him, and feare not any power:
                  He is my song, the strength I leaue vpon,
                  the Lord God is my louing Sauiour.
               
               
                  Therefore with ioy out of the well of life,
                  draw foorth sweet water, which it dooth affoord:
                  And in the day of trouble and of strife,
                  cal on the name of God the liuing Lord.
               
               
                  
                  Extol his works and woonders to the sunne,
                  vnto al people let his praise be showne:
                  Record in song the meruails he hath done,
                  and let his glorie through the world be blowne.
               
               
                  Crie out aloud and shout on Sion hill,
                  I giue thee charge that this proclaimed be:
                  The great and mightie king of Israell,
                  now onely dwelleth in the midst of thee.
               
            
            
               A Song of the faithfull. In the third Chap. of the prophesie of Habacucke.
               
                  LOrd, at thy voice, my heart for feare hath trembled,
                  Unto the world (Lord) let thy workes be showen:
                  In these our daies now let thy power be knowen,
                  And yet in wrath let mercie be remembred.
               
               
                  From Teman loe, our God you may behold,
                  The holie one from Paran mount so hie:
                  His glorie hath cleane couered the Skie,
                  And in the earth his praises be inrolde.
               
               
                  His shining was more clearer than the light,
                  And from his hands a fulnesse did proceed,
                  Which did contain his wrath and power indeed,
                  Consuming plagues and fire were in his sight.
               
               
                  He stood aloft and compassed the land,
                  And of the Nations doth defusion make
                  The mountains rent, the hilles for feare did quake,
                  His vnknown pathes no man may vnderstand.
               
               
                  The Morians tentes euen for their wickednes,
                  I might behold the land of Midian:
                  
                     Amaz'd and trembling like vnto a man,
                  Forsaken quite, and left in great distresse:
               
               
                  What, did the riuers moue the Lord to ire?
                  Or did the floods his Maiesty displease:
                  Or was the Lord offended with the seas,
                  That thou camest forth in chariot hot as fire.
               
               
                  Thy force and power thou freely didst relate,
                  Unto the tribes thy oath doth surely stand,
                  And by thy strength thou didst deuide the land,
                  And from the earth the riuers seperate.
               
               
                  The mountaines saw, and trembled for feare,
                  The sturdy streame, with speed foorth passed by,
                  The mighty depthes shout out a hideous crie,
                  And then aloft their waues they did vpreare.
               
               
                  The Sun and Moon amid their course stood still,
                  Thy speares and arrowes forth with shining went,
                  Thou spoilest the land, being to anger bent,
                  And in displeasure thou didst slay and kill.
               
               
                  Thou wentest foorth for thine owne chosens sake,
                  For the sauegard of thine annointed one:
                  The house of wicked men is ouerthrowne,
                  And their foundations now goe all to wracke.
               
               
                  Their townes thou strikest by thy mightie power,
                  With their own weapons, made for their defence:
                  Who like a whyrl-wind came with the pretence,
                  The poore and simple man quite to deuoure.
               
               
                  Thou madest thy horse on seas to gallop fast.
                  Upon the waues thou ridest here and there:
                  My intrals trembled then for verie feare,
                  And at thy voice, my lips shooke at the last.
               
               
                  
                  Griefe pierc'd my bones, and feare did me annoy,
                  In time of trouble, where I might find rest:
                  For to reuenge, when once the Lord is prest,
                  With plagues he wil the people quite destroy.
               
               
                  The fig-tree now no more shall sprout nor flourish,
                  The pleasant vine no more with grapes abound:
                  No pleasure in the citie shall be found:
                  The field no more her fruit shal feed nor nourish.
               
               
                  The sheep shall now be taken from the fold,
                  In stall of Bullocks there shall be no choice.
                  Yet in the Lord my Sauiour I reioice,
                  My hope in God yet wil I surely hold.
               
               
                  God is my strength, the Lord my only stay,
                  My feet for swiftnesse, it is he will make
                  Like to the Hinds, who none in course can take:
                  Upon high places he will make me way.
               
            
            
               A Song of thankes to God, in that hee sheweth himselfe Iudge of the world, in punishing the wicked, and maintaining the godlie. In the xv. Chap. of the prophesie of Isaiah.
               
                  OH Lord my God, with praise I wil perseuer
                  Thy blessed name in song I wil record:
                  for the great wonders thou hast done O lord,
                  Thy trueth and counsels haue bene certain euer.
               
               
                  A mightie citie thou makest ruinat.
                  The strongest townes thou bringest to decay:
                  A place where strangers vsually do stay,
                  And shall not be reduc'd to former state.
               
               
                  
                  The proudest people therefore stoupe to thee,
                  The strongest cities haue thee still in feare:
                  Thou strengthnest the poore man in dispaire:
                  And helpest the needie in necessitie.
               
               
                  Thou art a sure refuge against a shower,
                  A shadow which doth from the heat defend:
                  The raging blasts the mighty forth doth send,
                  Is like a storme which shakes the stateliest tower.
               
               
                  Thou shalt abate the forraine strangers pride,
                  Like as the heat doth drie the moistest place,
                  The glorie of the proud thou shalt deface.
                  Like as the cloudes the sunny beames doo hide.
               
               
                  The Lord of hostes shal in this mount prouide,
                  And to his people here shal make a feast,
                  Of fatted things and dainties of the best,
                  Of Marrow and wines finely purified.
               
               
                  And in this Mountaine by his mightie hand,
                  That same dark cloud the Lord wil cleane destroy,
                  Euen with the vaile which doth his folke annoy,
                  And death no more before his face shall stand.
               
               
                  The Lord will wipe out of his chosens eies,
                  The teares which doo their faces so distaine:
                  And their rebuke shal now no more remaine,
                  Thus saith the Lord, these be his promises.
               
               
                  And men shal say (then) loe, this same is he,
                  This is our God, on whom we did attend,
                  This is the Lord that will vs stil defend,
                  We will be glad and ioyfull (Lord) in thee.
               
               
                  Thy hand (oh Lord) here in this mount shall rest,
                  And cursed Moab shall by thee be beaten,
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                     As in thy iudgment thou of long doost threaten.
                  As in Mamena straw of men is thresht.
               
               
                  And ouer them the Lord his hand shal holde.
                  As he that swimmeth, stretcheth him at length,
                  And by his power and by his mighty strength,
                  The proud and stout by him shal be controlde.
               
               
                  Thy highest walles and towers of all thy trust,
                  He shall bring downe and lay them all full lowe,
                  Unto the ground his hand shall make them bow,
                  And lay thy pride and glorie in the dust.
               
            
            
               An other Song of the faithfull, wherein is declared in what consisteth the saluation of the Church. In the xvi. Chap. of the prophesie of Isaiah.
               
                  ANd in that day, this same shal be our song,
                  In Iuda land this shall be sung and said,
                  We haue a citie which is woondrous strong,
                  And for the walles, the Lord himself our aid.
               
               
                  Open the gates, yea set them open wide,
                  And let the godly and the righteous passe:
                  Yea let them enter, and therein abide,
                  Which keepe his lawes, and do his trueth imbrace:
               
               
                  And in thy iudgment thou wilt sure preserue,
                  In perfect peace those which doo trust in thee:
                  Trust in the Lord, which dooth all trust deserue,
                  He is thy strength, and none but onelie he.
               
               
                  He will bring downe the proud that looke so hie,
                  The stateliest buildings he wil soone abase:
                  And make them euen with the ground to lie,
                  And vnto dust he will their pride deface.
               
               
                  
                  It shall be troden to the verie ground,
                  The poore and needy downe the same shal tread:
                  The iust mans way in righteousnes is found,
                  Into a path most plaine thou wilt him lead.
               
               
                  But we haue waited long for thee, oh Lord
                  And in thy way of iudgment we do rest:
                  Our soules doth ioy thy name still to record,
                  And thy remembrance doth content vs best.
               
               
                  My soule hath long'd for thee (oh Lord) by night,
                  And in the morn my spirit for thee hath sought:
                  Thy iudgments to the earth giue such a light,
                  As al the world by them thy trueth is taught.
               
               
                  But shew thy mercie to the wicked man,
                  He wil not learne thy righteousnes, to know,
                  His chiefe delight is still to curse and ban,
                  And vnto thee, himselfe he will not bow.
               
               
                  They doo not once at all regard thy power,
                  Thy peoples zeale shall let them see their shame,
                  But with a fire thou shalt thy foes deuoure,
                  And cleane consume them with a burning flame.
               
               
                  With peace thou wilt preserue vs (Lord) alone,
                  For thou hast wrought great woonders for our sake
                  And other Gods beside thee haue we none:
                  Only in thee we all our comfort take.
               
               
                  The dead and such as sleep within the graue,
                  Shal giue no glorie, nor yeeld praise to thee:
                  Which here on earth no place nor being haue,
                  And thou hast rooted out of memorie.
               
               
                  Oh Lord thou doost this nation multiply,
                  Thou Lord hast blest this nation with increase:
                  
                     Thou art most glorious in thy maiesty,
                  Thou hast inlarg'd the earth with perfect peace.
               
               
                  We cride to thee, and oft our hands did wring,
                  When we haue seen thee bent to punishment.
                  Like to a woman in childbyrth traueiling,
                  Euen so in paine we mourne and doo lament.
               
               
                  We haue conceiu'd and laboured with paine,
                  But only wind at last we forth haue brought:
                  Upon the earth no hope there doth remaine,
                  The wicked world likewise auailes vs nought.
               
               
                  The dead shal liue, and such as sleep in graue
                  With their own bodies once shal rise againe:
                  Sing ye, that in the dust your dwelling haue,
                  The earth no more her bodies shall retaine.
               
               
                  Come, come my people to my chamber here,
                  And shut the doores vp surely after thee:
                  Hide thou thy selfe, and doo not once appeare,
                  Nor let thine eies mine indignation see.
               
               
                  For from aboue the Lord is now dispos'd
                  To scourge the sinnes that in the world remaine:
                  His seruants blood in earth shal be disclosde,
                  And she shal now yeeld vp her people slaine.
               
            
            Finis.
         
         
            Hereafter follovve certain other Songs and Praiers of godly men and women, out of the Bookes of Apocripha.
            
               
               The Praier of Iudith, for the deliuerance of the people. In the ix. Chap. of the book of Iudith.
               OH Lord, the God of Simeon,
               
               my soueraigne Father deare:
               To whom thou gauest strength and might,
               the sword in hand to beare.
               To take reuenge on those which first, the maidens wombe did came,
               And spoiled her virginitie, with great reproch and shame.
               For which offence, thou gauest vp, their princes to be slaine.
               so that their wounds with gory blood, their heds did all distain.
               Their seruāts with their lords ech one, haue felt thy wrath alike
               who sitting in their roial seat, thou sparest not to strike.
               Their wiues, their daughters, & their goods, thou gau'st for thy behoue
               As prais, as captiues, & as spoiles, to those whō thou didst loue.
               who modu'd with zeale, could not abide, their blood defil'd to see,
               Then heare me Lord, a widow poore, which here do cal to thee.
               things past, & things not yet discern'd, thy prouidence hath wrought,
               Things present & the things to come, by thee to passe are brought.
               Each thing is present at thy call, thy wisdome doth deuise,
               Thy secret iudgments long before, thy knowledge doth comprise.
               Th'Assirians now in multitude, a mighty number are,
               Whose horsmen on their barbed horse, themselues to war prepare.
               Their hope in footmen doth consist, in sling, in speare and shield,
               They know not thee to be the Lord, whose force doth win the field.
               Let all their force, their strength & power, be by thy might abated,
               Who vow thy Temple to defile, which thou hast consecrated.
               Yea, to pollute thy Tabernacle, thy house and holy place,
               And with their instruments of war, thine Altars to deface.
               Behold their pride, and poure on them, thy wrath and heauy yre,
               And strength my hand to execute, the thing I now desire.
               Smite thou the seruant and the Lord, as they together stand,
               Abate their glory and their pride, euen by a womans hand.
               For in the greatest multitude, thou takest not delight,
               Nor in the strong and valiant men consisteth not thy might.
               
                  But to the humble, lowly, meeke, the succourlesse and poore,
               Thou art a help, defence, refuge, and louing sauiour,
               My father in thy name did trust, O Israels Lord most deare,
               Of heauen, of earth, of sea and land, doo thou my praier heare.
               Grant thou me wit, sleight, power, strēgth, to woūd thē which aduance
               Thēselues ouer thy Sion hil, & thine inheritance.
               Declare to nations far and neare, and let them know ful well,
               Thou art the Lord, wohse power & strength, defendeth Israell.
            
            
               The Song of Iudith, hauing slaine Holophernes. In the xvi. Chap. of the book of Iudith.
               TUne vp the Timbrels then with laud vnto the Lord,
               Sound foorth his praise on Simbals loud,
with songs of one accord,
               Declare & shew his praise, also his name rehearse,
               In song of thankes exactly pend, of sweet and noble verse.
               The Lord he ceaseth warres, euen he the verie same,
               Tis he that doth appease all strife, Iehouah is his name.
               The which hath pitcht his tent, our surest strength and aide,
               Amongst vs here, least that our foes, shuld make vs once dismaid
               From northren mountain tops, proud Assur came a downe,
               With warlike men a multitude, of famous high renowme.
               Whose footmen stopt the streams, where riuers woont to flowe,
               And horsmen couered all the vales, that lay the hilles belowe.
               His purpose was for to destroy my land, with sword and fire,
               To put my yongmen to the sword, did thirst with hot desire.
               My children to captiuitie, he would haue borne away,
               My virgins so by rape and force, as spoiles and chiefest pray,
               But yet the high and mighty Lord, his people doth defend,
               And by a silly womans hand, hath brought him to his end.
               For why? their mightie men, with Armes were not subdude,
               Nor with their blood our yoong mens hands, were not at al imbrude.
               No, none of Titans line, this proud Assirian slue,
               Nor any Gyants aid we crau'd, this souldier to subdue.
               But Iudith she alone, Meraris daughter deere,
               Whose heauenly hue hath bred his baine, and brought him to his beere.
               
                  She left her mourning weed, and deckt her selfe with gold,
               In royall robes of seemly shewe, all Israell to behold.
               With odors she perfum'd her selfe, after the queintest guise,
               Her haire with fillet finely bound, as Art could wel deuise.
               Her slippers neat and trim, his eies and fancie fed,
               Her beautie hath bewitcht his mind, her sword cut off his head.
               The Perseans were amaz'd, her modestie was such,
               The Medes at her bold enterprise, they marueiled as much.
               Amongst th'Assyrians then, great clamors can arise,
               When as the fact so lately done, apear'd before their eies.
               the sons which erst my daughters haue, euen on their bodies born
               Haue slaine them as they fled in chace, as men so quite forlorne.
               Euen at the presence of the Lord, the stoutest turn'd his backe,
               His power did so astonish them, that al things went to wracke,
               A song now let vs sing, of thankes vnto the Lord,
               Yea, in a song of pleasant tune, let vs his praise record.
               Oh God, thou mightie Lord, who is there like to thee,
               In strength and power, to thee oh Lord, none may compared be.
               Thy creatures all obey, and serue thee in their trade,
               For thou no sooner spakst the word, but euery thing was made.
               Thou sentest foorth the spirit, which did thy worke fulfill,
               And nothing can withstand thy voice, but listen to thy will.
               The mountains shal remoue, wher their foundation lay,
               Likewise the floods, the craggy rocks, like wax shal melt away.
               But they that feare the Lord, and in him put their trust,
               Those will he loue and stil impute, amongst the good and iust:
               But woe be those that seeke, his chosen flocks decay,
               The Lord God wil reuenge their wrongs, at the last iudgement day
               For he such quenchlesse fire, and gnawing wormes shal send,
               Into their flesh, as shal consume, them world without an end.
            
            
               A Praier of the Authour. In the xxiii. Chap. of Ecclesiasticus.
               
                  LOrd of my life, my guide and gouernour,
                  Father, of thee this one thing I require,
                  
                     Thou wilt not leaue me to the wicked power,
                  Which seeke my fall, and stil my death desire.
               
               
                  Oh, who is he that shall instruct my thought,
                  And so with wisdom shall inspire my heart:
                  In ignorance that nothing may be wrought
                  By me with them whose sinne shall not depart.
               
               
                  Least that mine errors growe and multiplie,
                  And to destruction through my sinnes I fall:
                  My foes reioice at my aduersitie,
                  Who in thy mercie haue no hope at all.
               
               
                  My Lord and God, from whom my life I tooke,
                  Unto the wicked leaue me not a pray:
                  A haughty mind, a proud disdainfull looke,
                  From me thy Seruant take thou cleane away.
               
               
                  Uaine hope likewise, with vile concupiscence,
                  Lord of thy mercie take thou cleane from me:
                  Retaine thou him in true obedience,
                  Who with desire daily serueth thee.
               
               
                  Let not desire to please the greedy mawe,
                  Or appetite of any fleshly lust:
                  Thy seruant from his louing Lord withdraw,
                  But giue thou me a mind both good and iust.
               
            
            
               The Praier of Salomon. In the ix. Chap. of the book of Wisdome.
               OH God of our forefathers all,
of mercie thou the Lord:
               Which heauen and earth, and al thinges els,
createdst with thy word.
               And by thy wisdome madest man, like to thy selfe alone,
               And gauest him ouer thy workes, the chiefe dominion.
               
                  That he shoud rule vpon the earth, with equity and right,
               And that his iudgments should be pure, and vpright in thy sight.
               Giue me that wisdome, which about, thy sacred throne doth stay,
               And from amongst thine own elect (Lord) put me not away.
               For I thy seruant am, and of thy handmaid borne,
               A sillie soule, whose life alas, is short and all forlorne.
               And do not vnderstand at all, what ought to be my guide,
               I mean thy statutes and thy lawes, least that I slip aside.
               For though a man in worldly things, for wisdome be esteem'd,
               Yet if thy wisdom want in him, his, is but folly deem'd.
               Thou chosest me to be a King, to sit on royall throne,
               To iudge the folk which thou of right, dost chalenge for thy own.
               Thou hast commanded me to build, a Temple on thy hill,
               And Altar in the self same place, where thou thy selfe doost dwel.
               Euen like vnto thy Tabernacle, in each kind of respect,
               A thing most holy, which at first, thy selfe thou didst erect.
               Thy wisdome being stil with thee, which vnderstands thy trade,
               When as thou framedst first the world, and her foundation laid.
               Which knew the thing that most of all, was pleasant in thy sight
               Thy wil and thy commandements, wherein thou takst delight.
               Send her down from that heauenly seat, wheras she doth abide,
               That she may shew to me thy will, and be my onely guide.
               For she dooth know and vnderstand, yea, al things doth foresee.
               And by her works and mighty power, I shall preserued bee.
               Then shal my works accepted be, and liked in thy sight,
               When I vpon my fathers throne, shall iudge thy folke aright.
               Who knoweth the counsell of the Lord, his deep and secret skil.
               Or who may search into his works, or know his holy will?
               For why? the thoughts of mortal men, are nothing els but care,
               Their forecasts and deuises all, things most vncertaine are.
               The bodie is vnto the soule, a waight and burthen great,
               The earthly house depresseth down, the mind with cares repleat
               The things which here on earth remain, we hardly can discern,
               To find their secret vse and trade, with labor great we learne.
               For who doth search or seek to know, with traueill & with care,
               The secrets of the mightie Lord, which hie in heauen are.
               Who can thy counsels vnderstand, except thou doo impart
               Thy wisdome, and thy holy spirit doost send into his heart?
               
                  For so the waies of mortal men, reformed are and taught,
               The things that most delighteth thee, which wisdom forth haue brought.
            
            
               A Song of Ihesus the sonne of Sirach. In the last Chap. of Ecclesiasticus.
               
                  
                     I Will confesse thy name O Lord,
                  And giue thee praise with one accord:
                  My God, my King, and Sauiour,
                  Unto thy name be thankes and power.
               
               
                  I haue bene succoured by thee,
                  And thou hast still preserued me:
                  And from destruction kept me long,
                  And from report of slaunderous tongue.
               
               
                  From lips stil exrcisde with lies,
                  And from my cruell enemies,
                  Thou me in mercie doost deliuer,
                  Thy blessed name be praisde for euer.
               
               
                  From monsters, that would me deuoure,
                  From cruell tyrants, and their power:
                  In all affliction paine and griefe,
                  Thou succourest me with some reliefe.
               
               
                  From the cruell burning flame.
                  Poore I inclosde within the same:
                  From the deepe infernall pit,
                  From venom'd tongues that poison spit.
               
               
                  From speeches that of malice spring,
                  From accusation to the king,
                  From all reproch and infamy,
                  From slander, and like villanie.
               
               
                  
                  My soule, to death praise thou the Lord,
                  And laud his name with one accord:
                  For death was readie thee to take,
                  And thou neare the infernall lake.
               
               
                  They compassed me round about,
                  But there was none to helpe me out:
                  I look'd when succour would appeare,
                  But there was none that would come neare.
               
               
                  Upon thy mercies then I thought,
                  And on the wonders thou hast wrought:
                  How from destruction thou doost saue,
                  Such as in thee affiance haue.
               
               
                  In praier then I did perseuer,
                  That thou from death wouldst me deliuer:
                  Unto the Lord I crie and call,
                  That he would rid me out of thrall:
               
               
                  Therefore I still will praise thy name,
                  And euer thanke thee for the same:
                  My praiers shall of thee be heard,
                  And neuer from thy cares debard.
               
               
                  Thou sau'st me from destruction,
                  And other mischiefs more than one:
                  Therefore wil I praise thee O Lord,
                  And in my songs thy name record.
               
            
            
               The Praier of Hester, for the deliuerance of her and her people. In the xiiii. Chap. of Hester.
               
                  O Mighty Lord, thou art our God, to thee for aid I crie,
               To help a woman desolate, sith danger now is nie:
               Euen frō my youth I oft haue hard my predecessors tel,
               
                  That from amongst the nations all thou chosest Israell.
               And chosest those our fathers were, from theirs that went before
               To be thine owne and hast perform'd, thy promise euermore.
               Now Lord we haue committed sin, most grieuous in thine eies,
               Wherfore thou hast deliuered vs, vnto our enemies.
               Because that to their heathen gods, with worship we haue gone,
               Knowing that thou art God the Lord, the righteous Lord alone.
               Yet not content, nor satisfied, with these our captiues bands.
               But with their Idols they thēselues, haue ioin'd & shaken hands
               Quite to abolish and subuert, what thou appointed hast,
               And this thine owne inheritance euen vtterly to waste.
               To shut and stop the mouthes of those, that yeeld thee thanks and praise,
               Thy glorious temples to defile, thine Altars vp to raise:
               And to induce the heathen folke, to laud their Idols might,
               To magnifie a fleshly King, a man, a mortall wight.
               Then let not such the Scepter sway, whose glorie is of nought,
               Least they deride vs when that we, to miserie are brought.
               And those deuises they haue wrought, t'intangle vs withall,
               May turne vnto their owne decay, and on their heads may fall.
               Remember Lord, and shew thy selfe, to vs in time of need,
               And strengthen me thou King of kings, & Lord of power indeed,
               Instruct my tongue with eloquence, my speaches to impart.
               Before the Lions face, and by, thy wisdome turne his heart.
               To hate our deadly enemie, so wholly bent to ill,
               Destroy him, and al such as doo consent vnto his will.
               But let thy hand deliuer vs, and help and succour me,
               Sith I am now left comfortlesse, and haue no help but thee.
               Thou know'st right well all things O Lord, & this thou knowest then
               I hate the glory and the pompe, of wicked sinful men,
               And vtterly detest the bed, of any heathen wight,
               Uncircumcised, most vnpure, and odious in thy sight:
               Thou knowest my necessitie, and that with hate I beare
               This token of preheminence, which on my head I weare.
               And as a filthy menstruous cloath, I take thereof such shame,
               As being by my selfe alone, I neuer weare the same.
               And that at Hamans table yet, thy handmaid hath not fed,
               Nor tooke delight in princes feast, nor drank wine offered,
               And neuer ioi'd in any thing, since first I hether came,
               
                  Until this day but in the Lord thou God of Abraham.
               
               Oh thou the high and mightie God, heare thou the voice & crie
               Of them, whose hope, whose trust and stay, only on thee doth lie.
               And now in need deliuer vs, out of their cruell hand,
               And from the dread and feare O Lord, wherin we dayly stand.
            
            
               The Praier of Mardocheus. In the xiii. Chap. of Hester.
               
                  OH Lord, my Lord, that art the King of might,
                  Within whose power all thinges their being haue:
                  Who may withstand that liueth in thy sight,
                  If thou thy chosen Israell wilt saue.
                  For thou hast made the earth and heauen aboue,
                  And al things els that in the same do mooue.
               
               
                  Thou madest all things, and they are all thine own,
                  And there is none that may resist thy will:
                  Thou know'st all things, and this of thee is knowne,
                  I did not erst for malice nor for ill,
                  Presumption nor vaine glorie els at all,
                  Come nor bow downe vnto proud Hamans call.
               
               
                  I could haue bin content for Israels sake,
                  To kisse the soles euen of his verie feet:
                  But that I would not mans vaine honor take,
                  Before Gods glorie, being so vnmeet.
                  And would not worship none (O Lord) but thee:
                  And not of pride, as thou thy selfe doost see.
               
               
                  Therefore (oh Lord) my God, and heauenly king
                  Haue mercie on the people thou hast bought:
                  For they imagine and deuise the thing,
                  How to destroy and bring vs vnto nought.
                  Thine heritance, which thou so long hast fed,
                  And out so far from Egypt land hast led.
               
               
                  
                  Oh heare my praier, and mercie doe extend,
                  Upon thy portion of inheritance,
                  For sorrowe now some ioy and solace send,
                  That we may liue thy glorie to aduance.
                  And suffer not their mouthes shut vp oh Lord,
                  Which stil thy name with praises doo record.
               
            
            
               A Praier in the person of the Faithfull. The xxxvi. Chap. of Ecclesiasticus.
               
                  HAue mercie on vs blessed Lord,
                  Which madest all thinges with thy word:
                  Behold vs Sauiour from aboue,
                  Illuminate vs with thy loue.
               
               
                  And let the wicked dread thy name,
                  Which neuer sought vnto the same:
                  And knowe that thou art God alone,
                  And like (in woonders) to be none.
               
               
                  Oh Lord lift vp thy mightie hand,
                  The world thy power shall vnderstand:
                  As by vs thou art sanctified,
                  By them so be thou magnified.
               
               
                  That they may learne thy power to knowe,
                  As we that be thy seruantes doo,
                  Thou art the liuing Lord alone,
                  And other Goddes besides thee none.
               
               
                  Renew the signes (Lord) thou hast showne,
                  And let thy woonderous woorks be knowne:
                  Declare the strength of thy right hand,
                  Let them thy power vnderstand.
               
               
                  Arise to iudgment in thine yre,
                  Poure out thy wrath as hot as fire:
                  
                     Destroy the cruell aduersarie,
                  To spoile our foes (Lord) doo not tarie.
               
               
                  Shorten thou these wicked daies,
                  Thinke on thine oath at all assaies:
                  Let thy woonders (Lord) appeare.
                  And be thou praised farre and neare.
               
               
                  In burning fire (Lord) let them die,
                  Which doe escape, and seek to flie:
                  And let them perish with annoy,
                  Which seeke thy people to destroy.
               
               
                  Cleaue thou the heads of mighty kings,
                  Our enemies in godly things:
                  And let the world behold and see,
                  That we are chosen vnto thee.
               
               
                  Lord, gather Iacob vnto thee,
                  That they thy might & power may see:
                  that they thy wondrous works may show
                  And to be thine themselues may know.
               
               
                  Unto thy folke impute no blame,
                  Which euer cald vpon thy name:
                  To Israel Lord be thou milde,
                  Thy only heir thy first borne child.
               
               
                  Unto Ierusalem shew pitie,
                  Thy sanctuarie and thy citie:
                  Blesse Sion where thy prophets liue,
                  Thy glorie to thy people giue.
               
               
                  And be thou witnesse vnto those,
                  Which haue bene thine still to dispose:
                  And raise them vp oh Lord, on hie,
                  Which in thy name doo prophesie.
               
               
                  
                  Reward them (Lord) that waite for thee,
                  That they thy Prophets trueth may see:
                  Heare thou thy seruants praier oh Lord,
                  As thou to Aaron gauest thy word.
               
               
                  Guide vs in way of righteousnesse,
                  The earth thy glorie shall expresse:
                  And to the world it shall be knowne:
                  Thou art eternall and alone.
               
            
            
               A Praier of Tobias, exhorting all men to praise the Lord. Tobias. Chap. xiii.
               
                  BLess'd be that king which euermore shal raign.
                  So euer may his kingdome blessed be:
                  Which punisheth and pittieth againe,
                  Which sends to hell, and likewise setteth free.
                  Before whose presence may no creature stand,
                  Nor any thing auoid his heauie hand.
               
               
                  Ye children of his chosen Israell,
                  Before the Gentles stil confesse his name:
                  With whom he hath appointed you to dwell,
                  Euen there (I say) extol and laude his fame:
                  He is a Lord and God most gracious,
                  And still hath bene a father vnto vs.
               
               
                  He wil scourge vs for our iniquitie,
                  Yet mercie will he take on vs againe,
                  And from those nations gathered shall we be,
                  With whom as strangers now we do remaine.
                  Yf in your harts he shal repentance find,
                  And turne to him with zeale and willing mind.
               
               
                  When as your dealings shall be found vpright,
                  Then wil he turn his face from you no more:
                  Nor thenceforth hide his presence from your sight,
                  
                     But lend his mercie, then laid vp in store,
                  Therefore confesse his name, & praises sing,
                  To that most great and highest heauenly King.
               
               
                  I will confesse him in captiuitie,
                  And to a wicked people shewe his might,
                  Oh turne to him, vile sinners that you be,
                  And doo the thing is vpright in his sight.
                  Who's there can tell if he will mercie showe,
                  Or take compassion on you, yea or noe?
               
               
                  I will extoll and laude thy name alwaies,
                  My soule, the praise of heauens King expresse:
                  All tongues on earth shall spread abroad his praise,
                  All nations shew foorth his righteousnesse.
                  
                     Ierusalem thou shalt be scourged then,
                  But he wil spare the sonnes of righteous men.
               
               
                  Faile not to giue the Lord his praises due,
                  And still extoll that euerlasting King:
                  And help to build his Tabernacle newe,
                  In which his Saints shall euer sit and sing.
                  In which the captiues shall haue end of griefe,
                  In which the poore shall euer find reliefe.
               
               
                  Many shall come from countries far and neare,
                  And shall great giftes vnto his presence bring,
                  Many before his presence shall appeare,
                  And shal reioice in this great heauenly King,
                  Cursed be those which hate thy blessed name,
                  But bless'd be those which loue & like the same.
               
               
                  Triumph with ioy, ye that be good and iust,
                  Though scattered now, yet shall you gathered be:
                  Then in the Lord fix all your hope and trust,
                  And rest in peace till you these blessings see.
                  blessed be those which haue bin touch'd with griefe
                  when they haue seen thee scourg'd, & want reliefe.
               
               
                  
                  Those only shall reioice with thee againe,
                  And those shall be partakers of thy glorie:
                  And shall in blisse for ay with thee remaine,
                  Now passed once these troubles transitorie.
                  Then (oh my soule) see thou reioice and sing,
                  And laud the great and highest heuenly King
               
               
                  And he will build Ierusalem full faire,
                  With Emeralds and Saphyrs of great price,
                  With precious stones he will her walles repaire,
                  Her towers of golde with worke of rare deuice.
                  And all her streetes with Berall will he paue.
                  With Carbunckles and Ophirs passing braue.
               
               
                  And all her people there, shall sit and say,
                  Praised be God with Aleluiah.
               
               
            
         
         FINIS.
      
   