
      
         
            
            
            THE MOST excellent, profitable, and pleaſant booke of the famous doctour and expert Aſtrologien Arcandam or Aleandrin, to fynd the fatal deſteny, conſtellation, complexion, and naturall inclination of euery man and childe by his byrth: with an addition of Phiſiognomie very delectable to reade. Now newly tourned out of French into our vulgare tonge, by William Warde.
            
            
               I R
            
            Printed at London by Iames Rowbothum and are to be ſolde at his ſhop in Chepeſyde, vnder Bowe churche.
         
         
            
            
            
               To the ryght honorable and vertuous lord the Earle of Shroweſbury, knyght of the moſte noble order of the Garter. &c. Iames Rowbothum wyſheth longe lyfe, with the encreaſe of godly honour.
            
               I Doubt not (right honorable) but the mynde of man is free, and hath the rule and power of him ſelfe throughe the vertue of hys libertye, and that the wiſe man by his reaſon, and reaſonable ſapience, hath dominion ouer the ſtarres and their impreſſions, namely ouer all naturall inclinations, and celeſtiall deſtnies, withoute any forced neceſſitie to do this or that, which commeth by the grace and gyfte of God, the gouernour of the vniuerſal worlde. Euen ſo Stilpo (by reaſon rulyng him) auoyded whoredome, although he were naturallye enclyned therevnto. Yet not withſtanding it is

moſt certayne, that men haue ſome inclinations and complexions by nature which ſome men know either by Aſtrologie, or by coniecture of their nature, called Phiſyognomie, and thei that coniecture are called in Greeke Phyſiognomones which tell by coniectures, notes, ſignes and tokens, the inclinations of mens affections. The Philoſophers indeed haue inuented and found out phiſiognomy to the great commoditie of men, for to knowe to what vertue or what vice yong children were enclined to the end thei might amend their vicious and faultie nature with good education, & not to geue the brydle to their affections, but to moue them to ſcienences, ſtudyes, and other qualities, whereunto nature moſte calleth them and maketh them moſte enclined. So Apelles and Zeuſis folowed and learned naturally the arte of painting. So Polyeletus and Praxiteles folowed the art of making pictures & images. So Demoſthenes & Cicero choſe the

art of Oratorie and eloquence, in pleadyng matters in the law: So Homere and Virgil folowed poetrie: So Socrates, Plato, and Ariſtotle handled Philoſophie. And nowe all is altered and chaunged and almoſt cleane ouerturned, and goeth (as I might ſaye) ouerthwartly lyke the Crabbe. For he that ſhould be naturally a plowman, is forced to the ſtudy of pleading, and to bee an Oratour or Philoſopher, or elles of ſome higher learning, ſnoring on his bookes, turning and returning himſelf this way and that way, as though he ſat vpon coales or hoate embers. Contrariwiſe, they that are well borne, and called by the benefite of nature to all honeſty often times are conſtrained to ſeruyle doyngs. The knowledge then of Phiſiognomy is requiſite & profitable to men, ſo that men abuſe it not, as ſome fond people do (commonly called Egiptians) which are as it were rauening Harpies, hunting after the gaine of money, which haue brought to paſſe

by their lyes, that this parte of philoſophie is now in no eſtimation, which is to be lamented, ſeyng that euen Hunters know by cōiectures, notes, ſignes, draughtes, lineamentes, & ſight of the body, the nature and propertie of dogs: And by the lyke meanes Horſecorſers do knowe the nature of Horſes, as the Poete Vergill deſcribeth in the thirde booke of his Georgykes ſaying.
            The good Colt by and by marcheth high vpon the grounde, & orderly extolleth himſelf, or elles ſetteth down often tymes his ſoft thighes the one after the other: And firſt he dare goe in durtye wayes, or into great riuers, and venter vpon a bridge whiche he knoweth not: neither feareth he any vaine noyſe or cry. The good horſe hath a high neck, a lytle head, a ſhort belly, fat behinde, & faire before, hauinge a full mane. The red is faire, faire alſo is the ſpeckled, faire is the browne baye: and euyll is a whyte colour in a horſe. And worſe is the colour betwene whyte and red.
            
               A good horſe can not ſtande ſtill at the ſounde of a trumpet that he heareth a far of. The eare we ſee waggeth vp & down, euery member moueth, foming at the mouth, he breatheth out and gathereth in vnder his noſtrels fier & hote breath. A thicke mane hangyng on the ſyde alonge downe all his necke: and a double chyne ending broade vpon hys back. He treadeth deepe in the ground, and in treadinge he aſtonieth it. His hard hoofe of horne ſowneth, with other qualities belōgyng to a good horſe.
            But nowe a dayes no man careth to coniecture, or to know by coniectures, or to referre mans naturall inclinations to ſuch a profit. And though there were no other profite riſynge by it but onely to make a troubled mynde merry (whereunto we oftentimes ſee muſick applied which is one of the ſciences commonly called liberall:) this art of phiſiognomy ought not be contemned. And therefore wayinge wt my ſelfe the pleaſauntnes of this part of philoſophy

and hauing occaſion to publiſhe in our vulgare tongue this litle booke of Arcandam or Aleandrin doctour & moſte expert Aſtrologian, treating of the predictions of the byrth & fatall diſpoſition of yong childrē. I was ſo bold as to dedicate ye fruite of this labour vnto your lordſhip, and to honour it with the honourable tytle of your honours name, moſt humbly beſechinge your lordſhyp fauorably to accept it as offered of one who wiſheth vnto you and yours all health, wealth, long life, and much encreaſe of vertue & honour, nothing doutinge but that after your lordſhippes weyghty and ſerious affaires, you ſhal not be greued to recreat your ſelf with the reading of ſome pleaſaunt parte hereof, whiche maye eaſe ſuch tedious exerciſes as your lorſhip may vpon occoſions take in hande.
            
               Your honours moſt humble, Iames Rowbothum.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
               A briefe declaration moſte certaine and profitable, for to fynde out (as much as the art of Aſtronomie can certifie) mans fate and conſtellation indicatiue, touching the naturall inclination of man: Made by Arcandam the learned and expert Aſtrologian.
            
               THe maner to fynde oute the deſtnie and conſtellation is this. Fyrſt, if you wyll knowe the conſtellation of any man, take his natural name which is cōmonlye called his proper name and the proper name of his mother, in ſuche ſort as neither of ye ſaid two names in any wiſe be chaunged or depraued from the vulgare or proper callynge (as often tymes it chaunceth by the common apellation of mens names) but that thei be perfect and not diminiſhed. And for two cauſes the name of the mother is

taken and not of the father. Fyrſt, becauſe the mothers ſyde is more apparent then the fathers. Secondlye, although the father be the originall of the conception and generation of the childe yet the chylde touchyng the bodye hath more of the mothers matter and ſubſtaunce then of the fathers. Yea and as oftentymes it happeneth, ſome parte of the fathers ſeede doeth not entre nor ſerue touchynge the materiall compoſion. For man is verely a thyng actiue, and by no meanes paſſiue, and touching him ſelfe can haue no action. Whereby it conſequently appeareth that the child concernyng the bodye hath more of the mothers ſubſtaunce then of the fathers. Wherevnto a thyrde cauſe maye be added, that for as muche as the chylde is nouriſhed of the mothers ſubſtance and not of the fathers, that then the conſtellation enforſyng hys effect & ſigne in the chyldes body, doeth rather conuert the ſame with the mother & the bodye of the mother, then with the father and the

body of the father. And therefore truely and determinatlye to know and learne the chyldes fate and conſtellation, hys proper name muſte be taken togethers with the natural and proper name of the mother. Then diligently conſider euery letter of the ſaid two names, and amonges the ſame gather ye numeral letters, ſuche as ſignifie a number, which accordyng to the auncient accompt are ſeuen as .I. ſignifieth one .V. fyue .X. tenne .L. fiftie .C. a hundreth .D. fiue hundreth, M. ſignifieth a thouſand.
            Taking all and ſingular letters of the ſayde two names, as well the number as ſuch as ſignifie a number. Then gather the whole ſumme, which ſumme ſo collected, diuide if it be poſſible by .xxix. becauſe of the .xxix. conſtellations of the ſtarres, or becauſe of the particuler ſignes celeſtiall whiche after the auncient maner is the firſte diuiſion of the ſignes. And hereby it appeareth that the principall partes of the particular ſtarres and ſignes celeſtial in number

are .xxix. as here after ſhall appeare. So that the number ſignified by the numerall letters of the two proper names aforeſayd ought to be deuided by reaſon of the ſayde ſignes. And ſometymes the ſayde number doth amount iuſte to the ſumme of .xxix. and ſometyme it excedeth the ſame, wherein is to be noted that either the number doth excede or elles is equall.
            If it excede, then the number ought to be applied and diuided by theyr vnities to the ſayde ſignes addynge to euery of the ſignes their vnities begynnynge at the firſt ſigne which is the head of Aries and ſo of the reſte ſucceſſiuelye. And where ſo euer the laſt vnitie ſhall faile or ſhall be placed, there and in that ſygne and in the parte of that ſigne, the Infant (whoſe conſtellation you ſeeke to knowe) vndoutedlye is borne, and thereby you ſhal geue iudgement and truely pronounce that in that ſigne the fate and conſtellation of the Infant conſiſteth. Not withſtandyng

that peraduenture, accordyng to the maner and courſe of the ſtarres, tymes and monethes, ſome other ſigne ſhoulde ſeeme to haue dominion ouer that natiuitie. And becauſe that the ſigne wherein certaynely the Infant is borne doeth not alone beare rule in the tyme of the byrthe, but all and ſinguler effectuallye doe concurre accordynge to the more or leſſe in euery nauitie. So that eftſones it chanceth that ſome ſigne diſtinct from that ſigne appropriat to the moneth doth more effectuallye rule and more excellentlye expreſſe his effectes. Therefore to the intent you maye perfectly beholde the fate and conſtellation of the partie that is borne, you muſt not onely looke vpon the ſigne allotted and appropriate to that moneth wherein determinatlye any is borne: but chiefely you muſt haue reſpecte to that ſigne whiche ſpeciallye hath dominion aboue others in the tyme of the byrthe, not withſtandynge that ſigne appropriate to the moneth hath the principall effect.
            
               And whether one ſigne is more excellent or effectuall then another you may moſte certainlye and truely knowe by thys arte.
            Let vs retourne then vnto our former propoſition, and ſaye that either the ſumme of the number ſignified by the numeral letters of the names aforeſayd doth not amounte to .xxix. or elles that it doth principally atteyne to that ſumme, or is equall, or elles excedeth the ſame. But nowe after the agrement and concorde of the number, take alſo the conuocation and aſſemble of the ſignes celeſtiall, whiche are touchyng theyr particuler partes .xxix. as is aforeſayde, or xxx. as ſhalbe ſayde hereafter, begynnyng at the firſt particuler ſigne, which is the head of the ſigne Aries. And wher ſo euer the laſte vnitie of this number ſhall reſte or remaine, that is the ſpeciall ſigne and is of moſt force in the tyme of the nauitie. But if this number dothe not ſurpaſſe the number of .xxix. but therevnto is equall, then the laſte ſigne

whiche is the tayle of Piſces is the chiefeſt ſigne at the natiuitie. Semblablye yf this number doeth excede the number of .xxix. then this number is to be diuided ſo manye tymes by .xxix. tyll the number of .xxix. be founde out. And then for euerye vnitie one ſigne muſt be accompted yeldyng to euery ſigne his vnitie: and then the laſte vnitie, whiche is xxix. is attributed to .xxix. and to the laſt ſigne whiche is the tayle of Piſces, as was ſayde a lytle before, and that ſigne chiefely hath dominion in the natiuitie of the infants. But if that number laſtly remainynge be within the number of xxix. then euerye vnitie of this number ought to be diſtributed to euerye particuler ſigne beginninge firſt at the head of Aries, and whereſoeuer the laſte vnitie of this nūbre doth remaine the ſame is the principall ſigne, and chiefely hath gouernement at the byrth of the infant.
            Here alſo oughte diligently to be noted that the celeſtiall ſignes maye be taken two wayes, that is to ſaye totally or

touchyng the whole effectes of the ſame and are in number but twelue. That is to wete: Aries (and is the firſt ſigne, at whiche you muſt begynne, and then folowe ſucceſſiuely tyll you come to the ſigne of Piſces whiche is the twelfeth) Taurus, Gemini, Cancer, Leo, Virgo, Libra, Scorpio, Sagitarius, Capricornus, Aquarius, Piſces. Nowe eche of theſe ſignes in his whole effecte doeth eſpeciallye beare rule in that moneth whiche is appropriate to the ſame. And euery ſigne intierly hath dominion ouer euery moneth ſuche as therevnto is appoynted. As for example: Aries hath dominion in Marche which is the firſt moneth accordynge to the computation of Aſtronomers. Lykewyſe Taurus in Aprill, and ſo the reſt conſequently ſuccedyng. And although the foreſayde ſignes ſingulerlye and appropriatlye haue their monethes ſpeciallye aſſigned as is aforeſayde. Yet all theſe twelue ſignes in euery moneth at all tymes, euerye day and houre, euery moment & minute

of an houre, do concurre in the nauitie of euery byrthe, although not equallye yet accordyng to the moore or leſſe. And that ſigne whiche chiefely hath dominion in the natiuitie, the ſame is the conſtellation of the Infant. Moreouer the ſigne wherein the Infant is borne, although it be not that ſigne which is appropriat to the moneth but ſome other, yet it is eaſie to be knowen frō the ſigne perticularly appoynted to the ſayde moneth. Likewyſe the ſayde ſignes maye be taken two wayes not intierly but ſpecially touchynge their partes and by acceptyng the ſame in ſuche perticular wiſe (chiefely after the reconing of auncient Aſtronomers) they be nyne and twentye, for fyue of them that is to ſaye: Taurus, Gemini, Leo, Scorpio, and Aquarius are euerye of theym diuyded into three pryncipall partes. As into the Head, the Beallye, and Tayle, and is as muche to ſaye, into the begynnynge, the myddle, and the ende.
            
               Whereby it foloweth that theſe fyue figures ſo deuided doe include fyftene particuler ſygnes whiche are there .xv. principall partes for thre tymes v. make fyftene. And the other ſeuen ſygnes. That is to ſaye Aries, Cancer, Virgo, Libra, Sagittarius, Capricornus and Piſies, emongs whom three partes are contayned in Virgo for his taile is diuyded into twayne as ſhall bee ſaide hereafter, althoughe here it hath but .ii. partes. All which ſeuen are deuided but into two principall partes, to weete into the heade and taile and ſo include .xiiii. particular ſygnes for twiſe ſeuē is xiiii. Whereby it manifeſtlye appeareth by the premyſſes that the ſygnes particulerlye accepted are in number .xxix. becauſe .xv. and .xiiii. make .xxix. Further it is to be noted that in all and euery the aforeſaid ſignes being wholy accompted according to the maner before remembred al theſe .xii. are concurrents eyther more or leſſe in the natiuitie of euery infante. For eche man hath in the foreſayd

ſignes a parte & proprietie as for example. The infante that is borne in Aries,Aries. diſpoſeth his lyfe in that ſygne and in that parte of Aries which is moſt pliant to his natiuitie. And ſpecially the parte whiche according to the quantitie hathe cheifeſt dominiō in that ſigne, and is the fyrſte houſe of his natiuitie whiche is a ſignifier of lyfe. &c. And alſo placeth in the ſayde ſygne his ſpeche, wyſedome, augmentation of al his workes, his begynnynge, his name, and the originall of his lyfe and yeres.
            In Taurus is conteyned the ſubſtaunce of the infante,Taurus. his gaine or loſſe his liuing, Debtes, Gyftes, Seruauntes, Helpers, ſuch as be obedient to his commaundementes, his witneſſes and treaſure. And this ſigne becauſe it is the ſeconde houſe ſignifieth the ende of hys youthe.
            Gemini are bretheren.Gemini. This ſygne becauſe it is the thyrde houſe is a token of brethren, ſyſters, frendes neyghbors brethren of huſbandes and ſuche as procede

of the mothers ſyde, and ſignifieth the mother her ſelfe. Lykewyſe it is a token of fayth, religion, commaundementes, embaſſadours, newes, mutations, ſmall iorneys, and a ſpace of lyfe before death approche.
            In Cancer the Infante diſpoſeth hys father,Cancer. graundfather, and all his parentes on hys fathers ſyde, to wete, all his auncetours aſcendynge from the ryght lyne males, and his ſiſters and other inheritours, except ſuch as are inheritours by the ſucceſſion of the dead.
            Alſo it ſignifieth houſes landes, rightes, treaſures, and what ſo euer is hid vnder grounde, priſons, and priſoners, and all ſuche as happeneth to the dead beynge buryed, after the buryall, or wythout burial, as eft ſoones it chaunceth to ſuch as be hanged, beheaded, or otherwiſe ſlaine. And becauſe it is the fourth houſe it ſignifieth death before he growe to mans ſtate and the ende of thynges.
            
               Leo.Leo betokeneth Infantes, loue, meſſangers, nouelties, giftes, rewardes,

fayre promyſes, or myrthe, goods by the father & ſuch as ſhall happen after death whether it be praiſe or infamie.
            In the .vi. ſygne whiche is Virgo are conteyned infirmities,Virgo. and thyngs contrary to health, ſeruauntes, maides, lyinge, accuſation, vnrighteouſnes, places priſons, mutation from place to place, Catayll of ſmall ſtature. And becauſe this ſygne is the ſyxth houſe it doth inſinuate ende of life and all ſuche thynges as ſhall happen before olde age.
            In Libra whiche is the ſeuenth ſygne marriages are conteyned,Libra. miſchiefe and peryll in marriage, contencions, open enimies, warres, emmities, theues, partakynge, and oppoſition and euerye thyng oppoſite, participation of marchaundiſe, expedite and ſmall voyages, and becauſe it is the ſeuenth houſe it noteth the moitie and ende of lyfe towarde olde age.
            In Scorpio is conteyned death, feare,Scorpio. ſadnes, labour, diſpeyre, ſeperatiō, aide of aduerſaries, pollicies, witte, letall,

poyſon, ſubſtaunce or hereditamentes aſwell of ſtraungers as of affinite ſuche as the heyers oughte to poſſeſſe after death and ſignifieth becauſe it is ye eight houſe ende of lyfe after the approchement of olde age.
            
               Sagitarius.In Sagittarius beinge the .ix. houſe are expreſſed longe Iorneys, or farre peregrinations and all thinges therevnto incident. Alſo it ſignifieth faith, religion, wiſedome, Philoſophie, writtinges, Bookes, Epiſtles, Newes, interpretations of dreames and thynges to come great wonders, muche honour and ioye. And for as muche as this ſygne is lorde of the nynth houſe it ſygnifyeth a beginnynge and enteraunce into halfe of the lyfe.
            
               Capricornus.The .x. houſe is Capricornus whiche prefygurateth kingdome, gouernment, auctoryty dignities offices and all artes that maye be exerciſed and whereby a man maye be a Maſter, it ſygnifyeth alſo eccleſiaſtical iuriſdiccion, things ſtolne or carrieth awaye, prayſe and fame it

pronoſticateth alſo mothers, graundemothers, & anceſtors of feminine kinde, mothers in lawe, and halfe the tearme of lyfe.
            In the eleuenth ſygne which is Aquarius the birth appointeth his proper and proſperous conſtellation,Aquarius. and it betokeneth praiſe honour, greate fortune, faythefull frendes ayde of kynges and princes, treaſour, and ſocietie and ſygnifieth half the yeares of mannes life.
            Piſces being the twelfeth houſe doth demonſtrate ſignifications of werines,Piſces. ſadnes, pouertie, priuye hatred, deceipt feare, ſorowe, lamentacion, blaſphemye ambuſhmentes, houſes, priſons, captiue handes, rebuke, and beaſtes meete to ryde vppon.
            In maner aboue expreſſed is intreated onelye of the infante borne in Aries althoughe the ſame muſt be diuided and ſpoken of euerye ſygne aſcending in the natiuitie of euery byrth and of all other ſygnes folowing the ſygne of the natiuitie til by recours the number of .12. be attayned

whether anye be borne in Taurus or in Gemini whiche is in order, is written the thyrde ſigne or in any of the twelue ſignes. And therefore you ſhall diligently note that euerye of the aforeſayde houſes is in him ſelfe the firſt, and hath his ſeconde, thyrde, fourth, fifth, ſixth, ſeuenth, eyght, nynth, tenth, eleuenth, and twelfeth houſe. And this I remember becauſe the lyke whereof we haue ſayde of the ſignes, the ſame I woulde ſhoulde be vnderſtanded of the houſes. And euerye houſe accordynge to their qualities hath eleuen other houſes beſide him ſelfe of whome their ſignifications be deriued.
            All which (well beloued reader) maye through the dexteritie of thy witte be eaſely vnderſtanded, whether the infant be borne in Taurus, in Gemini or in Libra, as before. And ſo euerye man maye learne to knowe by this art determinatly his owne fate, his proper and paſſiue conſtellation, not forced of neceſſitie, but by the naturall inclination.

becauſe as Ptolemeus ſayeth, a wyſe man ſhal rule the ſtarres. As muche to ſaye. A wyſe man maye let and prohibite the very future effectes,The heauenly inclinatie no be no inforcementes to the wyſe. which procede of the ſtarres and the influences thereof. And ſo yf he wyll he maye rule the ſayde ſtarres and heauenly mocions. And therefore for a monition vnto thee, the ſayde ſtarres doe not enforſe and conſtraine thee to any thynge, except it he ſuche as are proclyue and readye to be drawen by them, and ſuche as wyll folowe nature rather then reaſon after the maner of brute beaſtes. Wherefore for a more euident doctrine and inſtruction of the premeſſes, the Scheme or figure enſuwyng is placed.
            
               
               
                  The fyrſt celeſtiall principall and entier ſygne called Aries.
               
                  ♂ ♈
                  ram
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  The Figure.
                  
                     
                        (The Eaſt.)
                        The houſe cadent.
                        The houſe ſuccedyng.
                        (Noonetyde.)
                        The houſe cadent.
                        The houſe ſuccedyng.
                        (The Weſt.)
                        The houſe cadent.
                        The houſe ſuccedyng.
                        (Mydnyght.)
                        The houſe cadent.
                        The houſe ſuccedyng.
                     
                     
                        Aries, the firſt houſe.
                        Taurus, the ii. houſe.
                        Gemini, the iii. houſe.
                        Cancer, the iiii. houſe.
                        Leo, the v. houſe.
                        Virgo, the vi. houſe.
                        Libra, the vii. houſe.
                        Scorpio, the viii. houſe.
                        Sagitarius, the ix. houſe.
                        Capricornus, the x. houſe.
                        Aquarius, the xi. houſe.
                        Piſces, the xii. houſe.
                     
                  
                  The figure of the Infante in whoſe natiuitie Aries hath dominion. But yf Taurus beare rule, then Taurus muſt be figured in the firſt houſe, in the ſeconde houſe Gemini, and in the thyrde Cancer. And yf Gemini beare rule, then Gemini muſte be placed in the fyrſt houſe, and Cancer in the ſeconde. And ſo of the other Sygnes.
                  ¶Place this figure next before the ſigne of Aries.
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
                  IN the fyrſte treatiſe the ſayde ſigne of Aries is diſcribed with the efficacie and power thereof. Which Aries is diuided into two principal partes.Aries diuided into two principall panes containing fyue chapters. That is to ſaye, into the head and tayle. And this treatiſe conteyneth .v. Chapters.
               In the fyrſt the head of Aries is deſcribed with the efficatie and fortune thereof. In the ſeconde the tayle and force thereof. In the thyrde the ſpecial iudgement of Aries accordynge to the male. In the fourth, the iudgement eſpeciall after the female. In the fyfte and laſte the generall and totall fortune of Aries.
               The fyrſt Chapter which is the head of Aries,the fyrſt particular ſygne. being the fyrſt particuler ſigne celeſtiall is called Aluathay, & after ſome mens opinions Salhay, hauynge foure ſtarres diſpoſed in this maner. Where is to be not vnderſtanded

that who ſo euer is borne in this ſigne touchynge the diſpoſition of the bodye,colour and makyng of the body. accordyng to the effect of ye ſigne ſhalbe ſomwhat ruddy or



                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
yellowe colour, and ſhall haue a ſmale bealy, nymble and ſtraite, thynne and leane of body, and ſhall alſo haue vpon his left foote a ſygne or marke,Marke or ſygne. and the lyke vpon the left elbowe. And if fortune fauour he ſhal haue a mutable enheritaunce.inheritance That is to ſaye beyng once obteyned ſhall ſodenly be loſte, and yet in ſhort tyme ſhal recouer it again. And this parte of fortune is by a certaine nature indifferent. Likewiſe touchyng the good fortune,Good fortune. the ſame ſhall haue many frendes, and ſhall hate the euyll and folowe the good, imploying good tournes vpon ingrate and vnthankefull men.Significations of the mynde. Touching the diſpoſition of the mynde he ſhall be ſubtile, politike, and craftye. And concernynge infirmities, and ſicknes,Infirmities the ſame ſhall be more prone to paynes in the head then to anye other diſeaſe, wherewith he ſhalbe vehementlye vexed, beſydes whyche diſeaſe the healthe ſhall bee good and proſperous. And for a more apte aduertiſement of the fortune of this ſigne, I referre to

the vniuerſal chapter of this ſigne Aries where is entreated the entier effecte and generall fortune thereof, and is the fifte Chapter of thys treatiſe.
               The ſeconde Chapter mencioneth the taile of Aries,the .ii. perticuler ſigne or the latter part therof, accordyng to the ſigne particuler is called Allothayn and of ſome Alhuthou.
               
               This ſigne hath foure ſtarres, one in the tayle and three in the loynes or bellye figured in thys

maner. Where is to be noted that who ſoeuer is borne in the tayle of Aries or in the ſeconde particuler ſygne celeſtiall.
               Fyrſt touching the diſpoſition of the bodye ſhall be very hearye,the body. and ſhall haue a greate bearde, coloured eyes, whyte teethe, a fayre Noſe, greate eye Browes, and ſhall bee of coloure Redde mixte wyth the Croceall or Safferon coloure.
               
                  And touchynge the diſpoſition of the mynde,the mynde and qualities therof. ſhalbe eloquent, ſolitarie in life, prodigall in neceſſitie, deceiptfull, and many tymes ſhall folow after ambuſhments, and prone to hurte others. If the ſame be borne in the ſeconde houre of the nyght, there ſhalbe a white or pearle in the eye, and in the ende ſhalbe ſtarke blynde, and touchynge the myndes inclination ſhalbe a ſearcher of wordes, factes, and other ſecretes. Lykewyſe ſhalbe irefull, enuious, and yet ſhalbe rather enuied of others, then greatly geuen to that vice. Whereof it wyll come to paſſe that he ſhall haue manye enemies which wyll ſeeke after his deſtruction.the terme of lyfe. And touching the lyfe and maner thereof, he ſhall lyue fourtie yeres and then ſhall waxe ſicke, but if he ſhall chaunce to recouer that ſicknes he ſhall lyue foure ſcore yeres, and then dye in his bedde.Ill fortune Moreouer touchynge ill fortune, he ſhall haue a ſtrype in the face either with a ſworde or ſtone, and ſhalbe afflicted with manye miſeries. So that

he ſhall receyue no commoditie wythoute loſſe and ſome hynderaunce.Good fortune.
               
               And concernynge proſperous fortune, he ſhall be happye in tillage.
               The thyrd Chapter wherein the iudgement of Aries is remēbred touchyng the male, and bothe partes of this ſigne becauſe both do concurre in all the effectes determinatly, eſpecially concerning the ſayde male. What ſo euer male therefore, that is borne in this ſigne and in euery part thereof,the body. after the diſpoſition of his body ſhal haue a certain marke in his ſhulders, and in his lefte foote as is ſayde before. Secondarely touchyng his mynde, he ſhalbe of good ſtomacke,the mynde ſtudious, proude, inconſtant and lyuely. And in his fyrſt degree of youth he ſhalbe very contencious, irefull, and ſhamefaſt. He ſhalbe very couetous, and ſhall attayne to great authoritie in bying and ſellyng, by reaſon he ſhall deny that he hath any ſubſtaunce, affirmyng hymſelfe to be very poore & worthe nothing. He ſhalbe glotonous, and in all meates

ſhall fynde lacke, that is to ſaye, not ſatiſfied, whereby hys rauenous & greedy ſtomacke ſhall continuallye murmour and grudge. Inwardelye he ſhall freate wyth angre, and can not keepe it ſecreate, but vtter and diſcloſe the ſame. Lykewyſe he ſhall bee a lyer and falſe in wordes, faynyng fayre ſpeache, amiable countenaunce and obedient geſture, and thereby hyde his diſſimulation and falſehode, he ſhall ſpeake one thynge and doe another, promyſynge golden hylles, but performe nothynge. Thyrdly, touchynge his lyfe and maner thereof,Chaunces in the lyfe tyme. he ſhall paſſe parte of hys lyfe in great authoritie. And ſhall ſuffer payne in the ſtomacke, and for a womans ſake ſhall ſuſteyne muche ſorowe. Alſo he ſhall receyue woundes of foure footed beaſtes as of horſes, and ſuche lyke, whereby he ſhall bee in daunger of death. Alſo aboute the three and twentye, and fyue and thyrty yeres of hys age he ſhalbe in peryll of poyſon. Moreouer, yf he eſcape certayne diſeaſes,

he ſhall lyue tyll the age of foure ſkore and ſeuen yeres,Diſeaſes. and three monethes. And the Mondaye ſhall be hys contrarye daye.Contrarye d
                        •••
                     
                   And therefore lette him not waſhe hys head nor putte on anye newe apparell, or begynne anye notable thynge vppon that daye, becauſe all ſuche thynges hauynge reſpecte to miſfortune and maner of lyuynge are infortunate.
               Fourthlye, touchynge the good fortune,Good fortune. he ſhall haue good lucke to other mens goods. He ſhall be made ryche by his wyfe, and ſhall atteyne to great ſubſtaunce. He ſhall enioye great ſtore of cattaile, and ſhall daylye encreaſe to further wealth. He ſhall wander into far countreys, for ſaking both his owne countrey & parents. When he cōmeth to xxiii. yeres of age he ſhal attein to better things & ſhall haue to do with a maſſe of monie. And being .xl. yeres old he ſhalbe of great wealth & amoūt to great dignitie: ſuch things as he goth about to take in hād ſhalbe brought to great perfectiō.

His promocions or offices he ſhall exerciſe with much fauour. He ſhall not marrye his fyrſte wyfe whiche ſhall be allotted vnto hym,Mariage. but another of whome he ſhall haue noble and worthye Chyldren. He ſhall loue and be dayly conuerſant wyth the Catholicke Churche. And to ſpeake vniuerſally ſuche as are borne in the tyme of the daye, ſhall be fortunate and in great fauour with Prynces and noble men, but if in the nyght they be vnfortunat.
               The fourth Chapter diſcourſeth the iudgement of Aries,deſcription of the bodye. concernynge bothe partes and the efficatie of the ſame, eſpecially touchyng the female. Therefore the mayde that is borne in thys ſygne ſhall haue in the myddeſt of her bodye before or behynde, or vppon her feete, certayne naturall markes, and a heare dependynge downe to her feete.
               Lykewyſe touchynge the diſpoſition of her mynde, ſhe ſhall be diligent and paynefull.the minde. She ſhall be fayre, curſte and curious of thynges newe. She ſhall

haue a certayne honourable ſhamefaſtneſſe, that is to ſaye, endued wyth chaſtitie and baſhefulnes, and therefore called honourable. She ſhall be merye, and her myrthe ſhall daylye encreaſe. Lykewyſe that thynge whiche is done by her aduiſe ſhall haue good perfection. And after the vmacitie and lyuelyneſſe of her ſpryte, ſhe ſhall be curſte and tauntynge in wordes. And touchynge her lyfe and maner of her lyfe,Sicknes, ſhe ſhall be full of ſyckenneſſe from the age of foure yeres to ſeuentene yeres, and then let her beware of marriage.Marriage.
               
               Lykewyſe ſhe ſhall ſuffer a certayne infirmitie called the lunatyke paſſion, whiche is a great diſeaſe, and yf ſhe eſcape the ſame, ſhe ſhall lyue tyll ſhe be thre ſcore and nyne yeres of age.Length of lyfe.
               
               Touchyng her good fortune, ſhe ſhall enioye the goodes of her parentes and ſhall trauayle in places vnknowen,Good fortune. and after .xxxiii. yeres of age, ſhe ſhall ariue in places of better aduenture. She ſhall haue manye Chyldren by her huſbande

and ſhall bee called a mother of other mennes chyldren, but her firſt begotten ſhall dye. And touchynge her euyll fortune,Ill fortune ſhe ſhall be hurte of a foure footed beaſt and ſubiect to many perylles.
               The ſyxte Chapter of this treatiſe, mencioneth the generall fortune of Ariries. Where it is to be knowen that the ſigne of Aries touchynge bothe partes, ſignifieth fortune in warre fare, and the ſeruice of others.Forreyn euentes. Lykewyſe fortune in all kyndes of marchaundiſe eſpecially in redde thynges, bloudye thynges, and in fyer and bloode, in the ſhambles, and in euery facte done by fier, it ſignifieth fortune in hoſpitalitie. Infantes borne in this ſigne,Infirmities males or females, ſhalbe voyde of head ache, but greatlye troubled with the ſtrangullion, grauell and ſtone.Dayes. The fortunate daies be Mondaye and Tweſdaye, wherein they may attempt anye newe enterpryſe.What parte of the worlde is beſt. Lykewiſe the Infante borne in this ſigne aboute the Eaſt parte is more fortunate then aboute anye other parte. Therefore

yf the ſame wyll proſper in anye affayres he oughte to directe his doynges thereunto, yea if it be aboute marriage. Let him alſo haue the doore of his houſe open towardes the Eaſt and his bedde ſtandynge towardes the ſame parte alſo.Garments. Let hys garmentes be blacke and redde. His nature is bothe whote and drye,Nature. and therefore Choler is moſte abundaunt in hym.
            
            
               
               
                  Taurus the ſeconde and principall ſygne celeſtiall.
               
                  ♀ ♉
                  depiction of bull
               
               
                  THe ſeconde principall traictiſe of this booke entreateth of the principall ſigne called Taurus, whyche ſigne is diuided into three chiefe partes that is to ſaye into the Head,Taurus diuided into thre partes containing vi. chapters Bealy and Tayle. This treatiſe is diuided into .vi. Chapters. The fyrſte conteyneth the head of the ſayde ſygne. The ſeconde the bealy. The thyrde the tayle. The fourth the iudgemente of the ſame touchyng the male. The fyfte touchynge the female. The ſyxte and laſte entreateth of the generall fortune of the ſayde Taurus.
               Concernyng the fyrſt Chapter of this treatiſe, wherein the head of Taurus is ſpoken of which is the thyrde particular ſigne called Adoldaya,
                  the thyrde particuler. hath .vii. ſtarres diſpoſed in this ſort. And is

to be noted yt whoſoeuer is borne in this ſigne fyrſt touching the diſpoſition of the bodye and vinacitie of this ſigne ſhalbe of colour pure, of bodye fatte,the bodie. fayre and without

ſpotte, his lippes thicke and hangynge downe his ſtature ſhorte. He ſhall haue a beautifull face, his heare longe, but verye faire, and ſhall haue manye markes in his bodie. But the ſpeciall marke ſhall be in his necke becauſe he ſhall be very hearye. He ſhall haue great eyes of colour lyke a Catte or blacke. Touchynge the diſpoſition of the mynde,of the bodye. he ſhall be much ayded and ſuccoured, and of his aiders ſhall receyue no hurte, he ſhalbe aduenturous and of good corrage. And touching his life and the maner thereof,Infirmities he ſhalbe greatlye troubled with paine of his heart. The firſt terme of his lyfe ſhabe at .xxiiii. The ſecond at lxx. in either of theſe termes he ſhall be wonderfull ſicke,terme of Sicknes. but in the ſeconde terme he ſhall ſuffer an infirmitie of the Apoſtume Cynanches commonlye called the Squinſie, whiche breadeth in the throte, whiche if he eſcape, he ſhal lyue to foure ſkore, but in the ende he ſhall die of the ſayde apoſtume. Touchynge the influence of this ſigne,Hurtes. he ſhall be

bitten with a Dogge, and ſhall haue a notablye ſtrype wyth a Stone, or Yron. Lykewyſe you ſhall vnderſtande, that yf it chaunce the Infant bee borne earlye in the mornynge, he ſhall bee thycke and groſſe. And touchynge the diſpoſition of hys mynde,Qualities. he ſhall be pleaſaunte, apte, and bolde, and chiefelye in hys youthe, but he ſhall bee of an vpryghte conſcience, and a good Companion. Yf he be borne in the fyrſte parte of the nyghte, he ſhall haue a greate Noaſe, and a ſmale head. He ſhall haue manye frendes and ſhal haue a dilectation in ſundry kindes of pleaſures.
               In the ſeconde Chapter of this treatiſe the Beallye is deſcrybed, whyche is the ſeconde parte of Taurus, and the fourthe particular ſygne.the .4. perticuler ſigne Therefore it is to wette, that thys ſygne hath ſeuentene ſtarres, of thys forme and faſhion folowynge, and is called Co
                  
                     •
                  ebram. And who ſo euer is borne in

this ſigne. Fyrſt touching

the diſpoſition and quantitie of the bodye,the body. he ſhall bee narowe betwene the ſhulders, and in the Arme hooles verye hearye, hys face indifferent rounde, and his eyes verye fayre. he ſhal haue a marke in hys bodye, eyther vpon his yarde, loynes, or the priuy partes, or elles betwene his Armehooles. One of his armes ſhalbe hurte, and ſhall receyue a wounde vppon his head.The qualitie of the mynde. And touchinge the diſpoſition of his mynde, he ſhalbe ſmilynge, merye, artificiall, and ſhall take good aduiſement in his doynges. He ſhall be liberal and willyng and ſhall geue hys enheritaunce to one of his owne familie. Hys mynde ſhall be fired vppon the goodes of Fortune, and vppon theyr happye or vnhappye aduentures.
               
                  He ſhall loue contencion and embrace women, and eſpeciallye he ſhall loue two aboue others in hys lyfe tyme, to the whiche he ſhall vſe carnallye, he ſhall be verye ritous, but not ſo muche as he that is borne in the fyrſte parte of the ſigne. Touchynge hys lyfe and maner thereof he ſhall haue two ſpeciall diſeaſes whiche is the cough and payne of the galle.Diſeaſes. In the fourth yere of his age, he ſhall be affected wyth a greate diſeaſe, but yf he ſhall recouer the ſame, then ſhall he be free tyll twentye, at whyche tyme he ſhall be ſycke agayne. But yf he eſcape that ſickneſſe, he ſhall continewe to foure ſkore yeres or foureſkore and tenne. He ſhall dye in a ſtraunge countrey alone,Death. naked and wythoute abſequies at hys buriall. He ſhall not bee buryed.Buriall. No man ſhall mourne for hym. And there ſhall be no man that wyll ſaye, he was my neyghbour. Concerninge his good fortune,Good fortune. he ſhal amonge ſtraungers atteyne either vnto good or euill ſucceſſe.

He ſhalbe entangled and ſubiecte to diuers troubles, and as is aforeſayd ſhall dye in a ſtraunge countrey, and at the tyme of hys death ſhall depart wythout companye. If he be borne in the firſte parte of the nyghte he ſhalbe inconſtant and mouable, hauynge ſmale regarde to hys owne familie. If he be borne in the daye time, he ſhalbe wounded vpon ſome parte of his bodie. And touchynge his minde, he ſhalbe a good man and of a good diſpoſition doyng his affaires after a ſimple and plaine ſort without any regarde of diuinations or knowledge of thinges to come.
               And the thirde Chapter entreateth of the taile of Taurus whiche is the fifte ſigne celeſtiall and hath two ſtarres ſhaped in this forme,
                  The 5 perticular ſigne and is

called Aliuiſeri. Whereby you maye knowe that who ſoeuer is borne in this ſigne fyrſt touching the diſpoſition of his body and quantitie thereof,of the bodye. he ſhalbe of an indifferent forme and ſtature,

he ſhal neyther be whyte nor black but of a colour like honny or nutbroune but his head, face and heare, ſhall bee beutifull. In his face he ſhall haue a naturall ſigne or marke, or in his left eye, or elles in his bealy, or righte thigh, and ſhalbe balde.the minde. Touching his mynde he ſhalbe ſolitarie in his buſynes doynge the ſame without cōpany of others, in ſo much as if it be poſſible he will haue no man to knowe of it, becauſe he truſteth no man. He ſhalbe ware in his doinges for that he miſtruſteth all men.
               He ſhall be couetous daylye muſynge howe he maye get other mens goodes. He ſhalbe ſtronge and prone to angre, but it ſhall not continue, he ſhall alſo be verye inconſtant. All whiche notwithſtandinge in the ende he ſhall indeuour him ſelfe to walke vprightly. And touchinge his life and maner of his lyfe, he ſhall lyue in trouble,Sicknes, and contiue to fiue and twentie yeres before he be ſicke and if he eſcape that ſicknes then, he ſhall atteyne to fourtie. He ſhalbe luckie in

tillage, and happye to the female kynde as well foules as beaſtes, and amonges others fortunate to women. But notwithſtandyng that felicitie, he ſhall not kepe anye number of ſeruauntes.
               
                  Marriage.He ſhall marrye a wyfe, and for a certeyne ſpace ſhalbe withoute Chyldren. He ſhall ſuſteyne enuye and malyce, he ſhalbe bitten of a Dogge, and ſtroken vppon one of hys ſydes, and hurte wyth a ſtone. One of his bones ſhall be broken. And yf it chaūce that be he borne in the nighte, then he ſhall haue a naturall ſigne vpon hys arme. He ſhall be ſwifte to iorney or trauell. He ſhalbe wyſe ryotous, and notablye beloued of women, although in other thynges he is of colde nature, whyche chaunceth by reaſon of the totall effecte of thys ſygne.
               The fourth Chapter deſcribeth the iudgement of Taurus,The iudgemēt of the male. touchynge all & euery the parts thereof concernyng the male. And what ſo euer male chylde is borne in thys ſygne Taurus in what

parte ſo euer he bee borne after the diſpoſition of the bodye, he ſhall bee wounded or marked in the ſtones or yarde. He ſhall bee riotous and ſtronge, dealynge wyth thynges of great force.
               And after hys mynde he ſhall be wyſe, and ſigulerlye preſume in hys owne wytte and force, whereby he ſhall greatlye prolonge the terme of hys lyfe. He ſhall gyue no heede to the counſell of hys neyghbours. Nor be carefull and vigilant aboute hys owne affayres. He ſhall bee beautifull, liberall, and wylfull, a liberall geuer, and for that cauſe beloued of all men. Concernynge hys lyfe and maner thereof:Infirmtiie. He ſhall haue ſeuen diſeaſes, or ſeuen principall termes. In the three and twentie yere of hys age, he ſhalbe affected wyth a notable maladie, & if he eſcape al hys infirmities, and atteyne to olde yeres, then he ſhall acquire greate ſubſtaunce and much money,Wandering in forteen countries, and by his diligence ſhall haue great fortune to goodes.
               
                  He ſhall be a great trauailer, and ſhall paſſe to vnknowen places, he ſhall not abide in his owne countrey, but wander from place to place, and from cytye to cytye. And by reaſon of ſuch alteration obteyne great riches. When he is three and thyrtie yeres of age, he ſhall ſee his money and ſubſtaunce encreaſe. At thre and twentie he ought to marry,Marriage. but if he marrie a maide, ſhe ſhall die.
               And ſhe being dead he ought to marrye another maide by whome he ſhalbe made more riche and welthie. He ſhall be verye fortunate and happie in vanquiſhing his enemies.Ill fortune Touchinge his euill fortune, in the fifte yere of his age he ſhall haue a wounde on his head, arme, or bealy, and bitten with a Dogge he ſhall haue a marke with a ſworde or elles with fier, and ſometimes in daunger of drowning.Contrarye daye. Monday is his contrarie daye, and therefore vpon that daye let him attempt no new enterpriſe.
               The fifte Chapter mencioneth the iudgement of Taurus touchinge the

woman.The iudgemēt of the female. Whatſoeuer female or woman that is borne in this ſigne after her bodies diſpoſition ſhalbe marked in the face legge or thigh. She ſhalbe of a good vnderſtanding, doubtfull, carefull, murmuring. She ſhalbe be painefull and obſequious,Huſbandes and maried to many huſbandes by whome ſhe ſhall haue many Chyldren. She ſhall haue a naturall paine in her eyes & feete. And ouercommyng al her diſeaſes which are thertene in number,Diſeaſes. ſhe ſhall atteyne to foure ſkore yeres: and accordynge to her good fortune ſhe ſhal obteyn a certein promocion.Subſtance. She ſhall encreaſe in ryches by occaſion of huſbande men and ſtraungers.Infamie. She ſhall ſuſteyne a notable infamie or ſlaunder, becauſe in her youth ſhe ſhall abuſe her bodie. Other mens goodes ſhe ſhall make her owne, whereby ſhe ſhall vſe thefte. She ſhall continuallye be reproued of lyke offence, and in the ende delyuered from the ſame, and then chaunge her dwellyng place.
               The ſixte Chapter maketh mencion

of the generall fortune of Taurus.The general fortune of Taurus.
               
               Wherefore it is to be knowen that this ſigne hathe a ſinguler and notable fortune in all inequitable beaſtes that can not be ridden, be they fayre or not fayre, eſpeciallye ſuche as are of colour whyte. Moreouer thys ſigne hath fortune in all thynges that maye be geuen.Good fortune. It hath alſo fortune in thynges that belonge to womens apparell or fortune and other delectations. It hath alſo fortune in all feminine kynde. It hathe fortune in whyte garmentes. The borne in this ſigne hath a ſpeciall lucke towardes the Southe, and therefore let him direct his chamber doore and bedde towards that parte. Lykewyſe let hym diſpoſe all hys buſynes that wayes. Concernyng the euyll fortune,Ill fortune the borne in this ſigne from the middes of September tyll the middes of Marche is moſte fortunate aboue other tymes of the yere.Frendes. He is alſo vnhappie amonges frendes, becauſe he is naturally colde and drie, and thereby melancolyke, & ſo conſequently ſadde

and of ſadde conuerſation, whereby lyke as he procureth frendes in haſt, euen ſo he loſeth and forgoeth them againe. He ſhall be fortunate in harde enterpriſes,Sicknes. and ſhall vanquiſhe his enemies, yf he paſſe foure and thirtie yeres, he ſhall be very longe lyued. He ought to beware of poyſons, Collickes, Squinſies,Diſeaſes. Apoſtumes, Vlcerations whiche growe in the Throte, wherewith amonges others he ſhall be vexed.
            
            
               
               
                  Gemini the thirde celeſtiall and principall ſygne.
               
                  ☿ ♊
                  depiction of twins
               
               
                  THE thyrde treatiſe of this booke, hath a diſcourſe of the thyrde principall and entier ſigne celeſtial called Gemini,Gemini is diuided in to 3 partes conteining 6 chapters. and is diuided into ſyre Chapters lyke vnto the other whiche immediatly before precedeth. Whereof the firſt entreateth of the head of Gemini, the ſeconde of the bealye, and the thyrde of the tayle. The fourth of the iudgement of Gemini touchynge the male: The fifte concernyng the female, and the ſixte treateth of the generall fortune of Gemini.
               The firſt Chapter entreateth of the head of Gemini,the 6 perticular ſigne beyng the ſixe ſigne particuler, and includeth fiue ſtarres diſpoſed in this forme. Whoſoeuer

is borne in thys ſigne touchyng the inclination of hys bodye,the body. and firſt accordyng to the quallitie and quantitie thereof, he ſhalbe fayre, meane of ſtature, beautifull in the face, and hath his eye browes comely and all his members well proporcioned and his

ſight clere and ſharpe. But touchynge the qualitie his heare is blacke his voyce thryll and pleaſannt. He hath a ſygne or ſtrype in his body. That is to ſaye vpon his head, in his eyes, handes or knees and his mouthe hurte. He is of great ſtrength and force, hearye, and naturallye ſlowe. And after the diſpoſition of his mynde:the minde. He is geuen muche to prayer, fearefull and not prone to anger. He is naturally riotous,Infirmities although with women he ſhall not be very fortunate:
               
                  Length of lyfe.Concernynge his lyuynge and maner thereof he ſhall be troubled with the payne of the backe and ſhall be vexed with an euyll ſpirite. He ſhall loſe certayne of his teeth, and ſhall lyue tyll he be .vii. or twelue yeres old .xl. or .lxxxiiii. and ſhall dye in his bedde. And after hys good fortune he ſhall haue much goods, and ſhalbe greatly praiſed of men. His honour ſhall with better ſucceſſe happen in age then in youth. And touchyng his euil fortune he ſhall haue .ij. wiues, but that directly hath not reſpect to the

euil fortune but indifferent. He ſhal apply with diligence his owne affaires, yf he be borne in ye latter part of the night, he ſhalbe a ſeller of fleſh & a marchaunt of Catail which are apt to be eaten and ſaleable in the ſhambles. And ſo conſequently ſhalbe a ſheder of blood.
               The ij. Chapter entreateth of the belly of Gemini,The 7 perticular ſigne whiche is the vij. perticuler ſigne, and hath foure ſtarres diſpoſed in this forme, and is called Alcaya.of the bodye. Where is to be noted

that whoſoeuer is borne in this ſigne, firſt touchinge the diſpoſition of the bodye, he is naturallye blacke, hearye, of ſhorte ſtature and ſtraunge. He hath fayre eyebrowes, and a blacke ſpotte vppon hys Elbowe or pryuye members. And after the diſpoſition of hys mynde,the mynde he ſhall be moſte happely gyuen to prayer. He ſhall be timerous and fearefull.
               His wordes ſwete and pleaſaunt, notwithſtandynge he ſhall be riotous and vnthryftye.
               
                  
                  Length of lyfe.He ſhall lyue tyll he be tenne yere olde, and yf he eſcape hys ſicknes then, he ſhall lyue tyll he be thyrtye, and yf hys lyfe be prolonged any further, then he ſhall liue til he be .xliiii. & if he reuiue his ſticknes,Diſeaſes. then he ſhall liue .lxxii.
               He ſhall be troubled with the payne of the backe and vered with an euill ſprite. He ſhal haue much ſubſtaunce and rule ouer his owne affayres. If he be borne in the ſeconde houre of the naturall day, then after his bodies diſpoſition, he ſhal be hearie and haue a ſpotte in his eyes, and ſhall leaſe many of hys teeth. Likewyſe yf he be borne in the thyrde houre of the daye, he ſhalbe happy and of nature whote and moyſte. But if he bee borne in the nyght, then he ſhalbe a ſeller of fleſhe, or a ſheder of bloode, and ſhall lyue of ſuche ſubſtaunce as happeneth to him by marriage.
               The thyrde Chapter of this treatiſe, deſcribeth the latter parte of Gemini,The 8 perticuler ſigne & is the .viij. perticular ſigne

celeſtial, hauing .ij. ſtarres

diſpoſed in this fourme, & is called Aldaman, wher is to be noted that who ſo euer is borne in the ſayd ſigne touching the diſpoſition of the body,the body. is naturallye collick and drye, his Galle aſcending into the head by his fumoſitie. His eyes ſemynge to threaten or diſdayne, and hys face chaunging colours, ſomtime white and pale and ſometime reuerteth to his own naturall colour, that is to ſay, lyke to honny, & yet not withſtanding handſome and well made in his members & body ſauyng that his eyes are ſomwhat lytle. His voice great, and vpon his forebead or face, hath a marke or ſtrype, or elles the 
                     〈◊〉
                   vpon one of his hands, his breſt, priuy partes, or yarde.the mynde And after the mindes inclination hath a good and honeſt hart, a beneuolant wyll, a fine & pregnant wirte, by reaſon whereof he ſhall learne many thinges in ſo muche that throughe the viuacitie of the ſame, he ſhall perceyue and throughly vnderſtand the thynges that be heareth, applying the ſame as though before they

touched hym ſelfe. He is mer
                     •
                  e and plea ſaunt not wythſtandynge of cholericke nature. And as he is ſoone angrye euen ſo he is ſoone reconciled. He is bolde of ſpech & words, before the preſence of his prince by reaſon wherof he wil not ſpare to touche anye man. Lykewyſe he is verye prone and apte to ſwearynge, doinge or ſpeakynge nothynge wythoute an othe. He is lyght of ſuſpicion, and thereby wyll vtter wordes vnſemelye. He is a great diſſemulatour, and ſpreade: abroade of fanſies and tryfles or tones. He is a great drunkarde, and verye riotous, and by reaſon of muche bibbyng and ſwillinge of wyne greatly geuen to leacherye. His firſt ſicknes ſhall be at .vij. yeres of age,Sicknes, which if he eſcape then the ſecond ſhall be at .xxiiii.lxxx. or lxxx, and ſhall dye of a diſeaſe in the throte. Accordynge to hys good fortune he ſhal finde money and treaſure hidden in the earth.Good fortune. He ſhall haue two Chyldren at one hyrthe. And after hys euyll fortune,Ill fortune he ſhal lyue vnquietly with his

wyfe, who ſhall lyue but a ſhorte ſpace. Hys parentes ſhall not be ryche, whom he ſhall burye, and ſhall haue no brother lyke vnto hym ſelf but one.
               The fourth Chapter determineth the iudgement of Gemini touchynge the male.The iudgemēt of the male. And whoſoeuer is borne in Gemini, in whether parte of the ſame ſoeuer he be borne, firſt touchynge the diſpoſition of hys bodye, he ſhall haue an indifferente and comelye ſtature,the body. beautifull, and fayre of face, ſtronge and of greate force. He ſhall haue great authoritie and thynges of muche value to be ſolde. Hys bodye ſhall be naturally marked. And after the diſpoſition of the mynde, he ſhall be an ingenious and cunnynge Artificer,the mynde and muche geuen vnto excellent Artes.
               He ſhall bee naturallye wyſe, and ſhall truſte muche therein, and by reaſon of the ſame, what ſo euer he entendeth to goe aboute and accomplyſhe, he ſhall brynge it the ſooner vnto good effecte.
               
                  Lykewiſe he is pleaſaunt and merciful, eaſie to be ſpoken vnto, and by vertue of this conſtellation ſhalbe acceptable in al men. He ſhall not be, muche curious ouer his owne affaires, he ſhall, be ſobre and moderate in meate and drinke, and yet not withſtanding luxurious and geuen to women. He ſhall be contencious and vnquiet with his neighbours by reaſon of his prone diſpoſition to angre and cholor. And for his ſaid promptitude to choler he ſhall ſuſteyne muche peryll and blame, and yet not withſtandyng a profitable man and beloued of all men. Touchynge his lyfe and maner of hys lyfe, he ſhalbe entangled with manye troubles by reaſon of his wyfe. And concernyng his euyll fortune,Ill fortune he ſhal ſuffer much pain in hys backe or guttes within, and about the ſtomack. But if it happen that he eſkape his firſt diſeaſes,Diſeaſes. he ſhal lyue tyll he be an hundreth and ten and thre monethes. Lykewiſe touchyng his good fortune,Good fortune. he ſhalbe wt catel greatly enriched. He ſhall finde money that

hath bene hyd in the grounde, and ſhall triumph ouer his enemies. His chiefeſt fortune ſhalbe towardes the Eaſt, and therefore towards the ſame let him diſpoſe all his affaires. In the fiftie yere of his age towards the ſayde Eaſt part he ſhal finde money. And touching his euil fortune, he ſhall trauell muche vpon the ſea, and when he is .xxxii. yeres olde, he ſhalbe in danger of the fier & ſword, but yet delyuered from that peryll and ſhall receyue hurt of ſome fourefooted beaſt. The Tweſdaye is his vnfortune daye,Euil dayes. and therefore vpon that daye let hym attempt no enterpriſe, nor waſhe his head or feete, or put on any newe apparell, or ſuche lyke.
               The fifte Chapter entreateth of the iudgement of Gemini touching the female.The iudgemēt of the female. Whereit is to be noted that what ſoeuer mayde chylde that is borne in this ſigne, firſt touchynge her body, ſhe ſhalbe very fayre, and haue a wound vp on her body. And touchyng her mynde ſhe ſhall of nature be very wyſe and ingenious.

She ſhall be mery and courtelyke, diligent and readye to obey. She ſhalbe very wylfull and whote of minde and by reaſon of the ſayde heate of will, complexion, or nature, ſomwhat angrie, which wil not lōg cōtinue. And becauſe ſhe is free of ſpeche, ſhe ſhall be muche boaſtynge of her ſelfe, and a great lyer ſpeakynge one thynge and daynge the contrarye.Length of lyfe. If thys mayde or woman doe eſcape the force of her diſeaſes, ſhe ſhal lyue tyll .lxxxiij. yeres of age. She ſhall ſuſteyne many notable infirmities and diſeaſes of her bodye within the tyme of her age of .xxxiij. and chiefelye aboute fiftene yeres the Phrenſie or Lunatike paſſion by the ſpace of fourtye dayes,Lunatik of Moneage. whiche diſeaſe is commonlye called the Moneage, or infirmitie of the Moone, whereby the Pacient is called Lunaticus. Semblably, tyll ſhe be .xxxviij. ſhe ſhall paſſe ouer many ſorowes,Good fortune. but by reaſon of Phiſicke whiche ſhalbe miniſtred vnto her ſhe ſhall recouer. Likewyſe touchynge her good fortune, becauſe

of many troubles whiche ſhe ſhall ſuffer, at length ſhe ſhall obteyne to greate honoure and muche ſeruyce, and obedience ſhall be done vnto her, and through her huſbandes fortune ſhe ſhal verye muche reioyce, and through him atteyne to great promicion. And at three & fourtye ſhe ſhall begyn to waxe ryche. She ſhal ſee reuengement ouer her enemies, and after .xlv. ſhall be called a mother of Chyldren. And her firſt begotten ſhall be no male but a female,Chyldren. accordyng to the force of her naturall conſtellation. And touchyng her euyll fortune,Ill fortune. ſhe ſhalbe labourious and painfull, and tyl .xxxv. yeres of age, ſhe ſhalbe enrapped with muche paine and ſorowe. She ſhall be hurte with whore water, and ſhal haue a fall from an hic place. She ſhalbe bitten with a Dogge. Tweſdaye is her contrary & infortunate day,Euil dayes. therefore let her not waſh her head vpon that day, or do any new fact or enterpriſe.
               The .vj. chap. mencioneth the cōmon fortune of gemini,The general fortune of Gemini wher is to be noted ye
               
               
                  〈2 pages missing〉
               
            
            
               
               THe fourth ſigne called Cancer being the fourth treatiſe,Cancer is diuided in to 5 partes conteining 5 chapters. is deuided into .v. partes or .v. Chapters. The firſt entreateth of the head of Cancer.
               The .ij. of the taile hauyng no mo parts but thoſe twayne. The .iij. of the iudgement of Cancer touching the male.
               The .iiij. touchinge the female. And the v. of the vniuerſall fortune thereof.
               The firſte entreateth of the head of Cancer,the .x. perticuler ſigne and is the .ix. particuler ſigne called Albacra, & hath .x. ſtarres ſhaped in this forme: where is to be

noted, that who ſo euer is borne in this ſigne, in ye day time,of the bodye. touchinge the bodies diſpoſition ſhalbe leane of body only, & of heare comely. His eyebrowes narow. His noſtrylls ample, wyde, brode, or large. He ſhall haue naturall ſignes in hys breſt or ſide, in hys arme or ryghte Elbowe, in hys Legge, and ſometymes vppon the face. Touchyng the diſpoſition of the mynde this partie ſhall bee verye irefull,the mynde and

thereby a great lyer, a Chyder, and fighter euen againſt his owne frendes. He ſhalbe blacke of colour, muche reſemblyng the colour of Honnye. He ſhall be eloquent, expert and wittie, a Carier of tailes, and reporter of wordes. He ſhall be glorious, reuengynge and a great drynker. But yet in all the premiſes wyll hee glad to receyue aduertiſment of his frendes, for the admendement of thoſe vices.Good fortune. Touchyng the good fortune, he ſhall bee of a good inclination, Thereby recoueryng a number of frendes. He ſhall lyue thyrty yeres, and then ſhall ſuſteyne a great ſickeneſſe,Sicknes. whiche yf he eſkape, he ſhall lyue to the age of fourtie and eyght yeres, and then ſhall be ſicke, whiche yf he recouer, he ſhall lyue .lxxxx. He ſhall bee payned in the raines of the back, in his knees and eies, he ſhall be bitteen with a Dogge. And touching his indifferent fortune he ſhal marry .iij. wiues, but the thirde wife of theſe .iij. ſhal bury him, & before he die he ſhalbe bitten with a dog, as is aforeſaid.

If he be borne in the night, then after his myndes diſpoſition he ſhall be verye angrie, wicked and madde, ready to ſtryke. And concernyng his diſeaſes, he ſhalbe payned with the headache, in the harte, or backe, or els in all. Touchynge his good fortune, his ende ſhalbe better then his beginninge. And touching hys euyl fortune, he ſhalbe in ye thraldom of a great man. Likewiſe he ſhall poſſeſſe the goodes of his kynred.
               The ſeconde Chapter of this preſent treatiſe deſcribeth the the tayle of Cancer, whiche is the tenth particular ſigne caled Alearf, and hath

twoo Starres in thys forme. Where is to be knowen, that who ſo euer is borne in this ſigne (except there be any ſpeciall or vrgent cauſe ye contrary.) Touching the bodies diſpoſitiō, he hath a ſmale body & ſhort, but not ſo extreme ſmale, but yt it ſhalbe of an indifferēt bignes: the ſame ſhal haue two markes, that is to wette, vpon his legge and priuy parts nere the

guttes, and ſhall haue a ſtrype vpon his lyppes. His eyebrowes ſhalbe very heary, and his face ſwolne and puft vp. He ſhal haue a marke vpon his ryght hand, in his forehead, breſte, bealye or guttes. He ſhall receyue ſucke of two nourſes.
               His colour is very blacke, but his bodye ſhalbe ſomewhat white (chiefly his face) and hearie, and yet after the courſe of this parte of the ſigne, he ſhalbe redde.
               After the diſpoſition of the minde, he ſhalbe wiſe and diſcrete. He ſhall not be a ſercher of many matters, but rather dulle & ſtack. He ſhalbe ireful, wrathfull moleſtious or greuous, and wicked or vngracious in ſtrykyng. And although he be wrathful, yet his angre ſhalbe priuye and hidden from anye man, in ſo muche that when he is angrie, no man ſhall knowe any cauſe why but himſelfe onely, and therfore deſperat in ſtriking. He ſhalbe prone to adultrie, by reaſon of the heate whiche hath dominion in him in whome the fyer beareth the chiefe rule. He ſhalbe a great offender,

and ſhall commit muche miſchiefe, and ſhall be ſoone angrie. Lykewyſe touching his lyfe and maner thereof, he ſhall lyue fourty yeres, and ſhall dye in a ſtraunge lande. He ſhall ſuffer great paine in his backe and head. And touchyng his good fortune, for his diligent and pleaſaunt conuerſation, he ſhall be beloued of all men with whome he is familier, and ſhall haue many Chyldren. He ſhall gayne much by his lands and Vinyardes, and his end ſhal vaine, He ſhal not tary long in his way and iorney, but hauyng accomplyſhed his purpoſe ſhal ſoone retourne. Concernynge his euyll fortune, that although he haue manye Chyldren, and in the ſame ſhall be fortunate, yet his owne brethren ſhal not lyue longe, but ſhall remayne brotherleſſe. He ſhalbe hurte by fyer, and depryued of ſome bone, and ſhall haue a ſtrype vpon his head.
               The third chapter of this treatiſe diſcourſeth the iudgement of Cancer touching the male. Where note that whoſoeuer

male childe is borne in this ſigne firſt touchyng the diſpoſition of the bodye, he ſhall be naturallye mightye and ſtronge, whoſe body ſhall be groſſe, and touchynge the diſpoſition of the mynde, he ſhall be wyſe, wittie, ſomewhat gentle, a great and manifeſt Scorner and Mocker, and ſhall ſpeake playnelye. He ſhall be naturallye Cholericke, and a great Threatner, but his anger wyll be ſoone appeaſed, and ſhall be well beloued of all men. And touchynge hys lyfe and maner of his lyfe. This man within the ſpace of two and twenty yere eſpecially aboute the ende of that tyme, he ſhall ſuſteyne ſicknes. Lykewyſe in thre yeres folowynge, that is to ſaye, about .xxvj. yeres old, he ſhalbe in great daunger of life. Semblably he ſhal haue vij. diſeſes or notable infirmities, which if he eſcape, he ſhall liue according to the efficacie of this ſigne .lxxx.viij. yeres & iij. monethes, & ſhall die of the diſeaſe of the belly. Cōcerninge his good fortune, imediatlye after he be .xxiiij. yeres olde:

He ſhall ſee his riches beginne to encreaſe, & ſuch thinges as he is borne vnto he ſhall poſſeſſe aboute the middle of his age, that is to ſaye, when he is .xliiij. yere old. He ſhal haue the gouernmēt of ſome Caſtel or Hold, & ſhal haue authoritie in the common wealth. His fortune is to haue .iij. maiſters, & by fortune of one man he ſhall atteyne vnto great promocion. He ſhal trauell farre & ſhal haue to do wt many affayres, & receiue much ſorow by meanes of a ſtraū
                  ger. He ſhal purchaſe maners & farmes & ſhal finde money that is hidde, he ſhall be enriched by his wyfe. And touchyng his euyll fortune he ſhall vndoubtedlye ſuſteyne diuers and ſundrye troubles and daungers. He ſhalbe hurte with a ſworde, in daunger of drownynge, he ſhall fall from an high place, and ſhalbe in peryll of fier. He ſhall receyue hynderaunce by his owne children, and ſhalbe poore tyll he be twentye yeres olde, hys ſeruice and good iournes ſhall bee counted ingrate, diſpleaſaunt, & a
                     •••
                  xed

to vnthankfulnes. He ſhal haue victorie ouer his enemies. A great mā ſhal rule ouer hym and of him, accordinge to the force of this ſigne, he ſhalbe externated and baniſhed for ſome notable facte.
               Wedneſday is his contrary, and moſte vnfortunate, and therfore vpon that day let him not waſhe his head, nor put on anye newe apparell or doe anye notable thynge.
               The .iiij. Chapter diſcloſeth the iudgement of Cancer touching the female and is to be noted that the maide borne in the ſaide ſigne after the diſpoſition of her bodye, ſhalbe luſty and of ſtronge complexion. She ſhalbe well proporcioned, neate, ſomwhat fatte, nimble, and wel made. She ſhalbe very wittie, wiſe prouident and ſubtile, irefull, diligent, ſhamefaſt, double minded, painfull, bold whote of mynde, and ſpitefull, but her angre wyl be ſoone appeaſed, & through the vehemencie of her angre wyll ſpare for no talke, but vtter her ſtomack. And ſhe is vnmerciful and wil haue no compaſſion

vpon one that wepeth. She ſhall haue al great fluxe before ſhe be .xxxij. yere old, and at .xxxij. ſhe ſhalbe in danger of death. Lykewyſe at .lxxx. yeres ſhe ſhalbe in lyke daunger of death, becauſe through the force of her conſtellation ſhe ſhalbe ſubiect to great peryll.
               And at .lxxx.vj. yere ſhe ſhall dye.
               Touchyng her good fortune when ſhe is .xxx. yeres olde ſhe ſhall haue a ſonne, and after .xxxviij. ſhe ſhall atteyne vnto great promocion. She ſhall haue Chyldren by .iij. huſbandes, and by all thrée ſhalbe in great honour. She ſhall continually be enryched, and ſhall poſſeſſe much Cattail. And touchinge her euill fortune ſhe ſhall be greatly enuied and ſhalbe hurt with a ſworde. She ſhalbe troubled with water, & ſuffer diſpleaſur in her body by fier, & ſhalbe very muche vexed with the collick. In the 38 yere of her age ſhe ſhal ſuffer much peril through her nieghbors, ſhe ſhall leſe her firſt huſbād, & her huſband ſhal loue another mans wife. In the .viij. moneth of her xxx. yere, ſhe ſhall by her parents negligence

ſuffer ſome danger by a whot burning iron, whereby ſhe ſhalbe in daunger of death.
               The .v. chap. entreateth of the indifferent fortune of Cācer, wher is to be noted yt the borne in this ſigne is fortunate in his affaires, & chiefly marchandiſe, & in cattel not apt to be ridden, eſpeciallye ſuch as be of colour of white, his fortune ſhalbe better vpon land then water & in ſuch things as may be caried or trāſported by water chiefly ye colour beīg whit. He is likewiſe verye fortunat in tillage & in ambaſſage, when ye Mone is growing, or before the ful, for when it decreaſeth then he is infortunat. The borne in this ſigne ſhall ſuffer muche coughing, conſumption in the lungs, pluriſie, breaking out, the ſkapes, & ſuch like, if it be a maid ye is borne in this ſigne beſide theſe inward diſeaſes ſhe ſhalbe in danger of drowning. His weke dayes whiche are good be Mōday, Thurſday & friday. His euil day is Tweſday. As for Wedneſdaye and Saterdaye be indifferent.
               
                  His better fortune is towardes the Southe, and therefore let him direct all hys affayres that waye, and that waye alſo place his chamber doore, and bedde. He that is borne in this ſigne, is naturallye ſanguine, muche diſpoſed to Cholor mixte wyth Phleame. And therefore let him weare his apparell of coloure Redde and Whyte. Redde becauſe of Fyer and blood, and White by reaſon of Phleame.
            
            
               
               
                  Leo the fyfte celeſtiall and principall ſygne.
               
                  ☉ ♌
                  lion
               
               
                  THe .d. treatiſe diſcloſeth the effect of Leo beyng the fifte total ſigne and is deuided into three partes. That is to ſaye, into the head, belly, and taile, and hath ſixe Chapters. The firſt entreateth of the head of Leo. The ſeconde of the belly. The third of the tayle. The fourth of the iudgement of Leo touchyng the male. The fifte of the female. And the ſixte of ye equal fortune of both.
               The firſte entreateth of the head of Leo, whiche is the eleuenth perticuler ſigne, & is called Algebachac hauing iiij. ſtarres diſpoſed in this

forme. And note that who ſoeuer is borne in this ſigne, firſt touchinge the diſpoſition of the bodye hath a comely face, plain and corpulent, a fierce loke & terrible. A litle noſe & brode, but yet comely, and a body proper. His mouth ſhalbe hurt, hauing therevpon a ſtrype, but yet notwithſtanding his teeth faire & great eares. His ſhulders great & brode, but his back wel made. He ſhal haue certein

naturall markes, & the firſte in his face, the reſt vpon his thigh, breſt, legge, and priuy parts. Touching his colour, his body ſhalbe white, his face neither black nor white but indifferent. Touching the diſpoſition of the minde, he is naturally geuē to be notably proude & of ſuch ſtomacke that in hys heart, he woulde wiſhe himſelfe comparable to Kinges, yea and them to excell, yf it were poſſible. And he is of ſuche and ſo greate pryde, that by reaſon of his haultie cocourage, as well in value as dignitie, or other ſufficiencie, he wyll ſuppoſe no man in the world (be he neuer ſo great) to bée hys equall or matche, or at leaſt wyſe greater then he, and alſo in hys heart iudgeth hym ſelfe to ſurpaſſe or is able to excell in humaine felicities all and ſingular other perſons. He is alſo couetous and very ireful, and yet that notwithſtanding, of much myrth & paſtime in ſo much ye continually he wold be mery & plai: he wil be a wiſe man & proper, & the Magik ſciēce wil do him great ſtede.

Lykewiſe touchyng his lyfe and maner thereof, he ſhalbe muche vexed with the headache, in ſuche forte as he ſhall be ſtraughte of his wittes by reaſon of the fumes, whiche aſcende from the Galle. He ſhalbe pained in his thighes chiefely in the vpper parts thereof. He ſhal haue thre principall diſeaſes, the firſte when he is .xiij. yeres olde. The ſeconde when he is .xl. yeres olde, yf he eſkape the firſt. If he alſo eſkape the ſecond, then the .iij. he ſhall fele aboute .xlviij. which alſo yf he recouer, then ſhall he atteyne to the ſumme of a hundreth yeres. And either he ſhall die vpō ye ſwordes point, or elles by ſome greuous infirmitie of the body. And accordinge to his proſperous fortune, he ſhall paſſe from one promocion to another, in ſo much as amonge kings and princes he ſhalbe familier and well beloued. He ſhall get muche treaſure, and bring it heaped together. He ſhall loſe them againe, and at length ſhall fal in daunger and diſpleaſure of ſome pier or noble man.
               
                  The .ij. chapter entreateth of the bellye of Leo, & is the .xij. perticuler ſigne,the 12. perticuler ſigne being called. Alcomencon, and hath .iiij. ſtarres formed in this

maner. Where note that who ſo euer is borne in this Sygne, hathe a marueylous euil and infortunate conſtellation. Firſt touchynge his body and maner thereof, whether he borne in the nighte or daye, hath a broade breſte, a longe face, ſmale ſtones, and ſlender legges, and hath a natural marke in the raines of his back. Touchinge his mynde, he is of hearte proude or irefull. For eftſoones he is angrie, and is of ſpeche very ruſticall. He is verye doubtfull and ſuſpicious in his doynges. Touchynge his good fortune, he ſhall haue no good fate, but by vertue of this ſigne ſhall be moſte infortunate as is aforeſaid. For he that is borne in this ſigne is ſubiect to manye troubles, yf he be borne in the daye he ſhalbe verye fearefull and timerous when

he trauaileth, yf he be borne in the night what houre ſo euer it be, ſauing the ſeconde, then he ſhalbe of a mery countenaunce, and ſhall haue a rounde noſe, a ſtripe vpon his head, and a naturall marke vpon his féete. He ſhalbe wittie, fearfull and careleſſe. He ſhal haue thrée diſeaſes. The firſte ſhall chaunce when he is .xj. yere olde. The ſeconde when he is .xxiiij. And the thyrd when he is .lviij. And ſhall dye vpon the ſworde, or elles of ſome other great infirmitie of the body. He ſhall haue two wyues whyche ſhall faythfully loue hym, but them he ſhall not loue, but rather ſhall hate to the vttermoſte. He ſhall haue a ſtrype in hys Head, or Hyppe, whyche ſhall happen by fyer, or ſhall haue ſome other ſygne. He ſhall be depriued of hys ſpeche after the diſpoſition of the Sygne, and influence thereof, vnleſſe the ſame by ſome perticular cauſe bée wythſtanded or elles interrupted by the diuine clemencie, or elles by the libertie and wyll of the Lady of thys Science whoſe

libertie this Sygne, not withſtandynge maye bée applied to good, and to vertue, and to workes godlye, who alſo maye appeaſe and mitigate the influence and malyce of the ſayde Sygne. Semblably yf he be borne in the ſeconde houre of the nyght, ouer and beſydes the premiſſes. Touchynge his euyll fortune, he ſhall leſe hys Infantes and Children, and fewe ſhall remayne on lyue. Lykewiſe he ſhalbe curious in ſearchynge of Parables and Myſteries. Hys firſte Chylde ſhall be a female, and the ſeconde a male. Durynge hys lyfe he ſhall ſuſteine much trouble and perylles.
               The thyrde Chapter mencioneth the tayle of Leo, or the latter parte thereof, whyche is the tenth perticuler Sygne. And hath one onelye Starre in thys forme. And

who ſo euer is borne in thys Sygne, touchynge the bodyes diſpoſition, is ſufficiently bygge of ſtature, whoſe voyce is vehement and bygge.
               
                  He ſhall haue thre naturall markes in his breſt, & ſhalbe marked in the throte, legge, or middle of the hande. And ſhall haue a ſtrype vpon his bellye, his colour ſhall be whyte, mixte with a roſeall colour. His heares ſhalbe of colour ſomewhat redde, but his eyebrowes ſomewhat blacke, and ſhal haue much heare. Alſo concernyng the mynde, he ſhall be lowly, gentle, not ambicious, but pacient. He ſhall ſuffer infirmitie, but the ſame he ſhall tolerate with muche pacience. In eating he ſhalbe very moderat after the qualitie of this ſigne. Likewiſe angrie he ſhall be and lecherous, in ſo much that although he marry a wyfe of his owne afinitie, yet he ſhalbe diſpoſed to lecherye. He ſhall haue two maner of ſickenneſſes. The firſte at .xxiij. yeres olde, at what tyme he ſhalbe ſicke of the ſmale Poxe or of an ague. The ſeconde, ſhalbe at .xliiij. yeres olde. Both whiche yf he eſkape, he ſhall lyue .lxxxx. yeres and ſhal die in exile and out of his owne Countrey. Lykewyſe, concernyng hys

good fortune, he ſhall raigne and beare rule ouer his owne Countrey, and ſhall haue authoritie to iudge either ſuche as is a thefe or malefactour, or of another man, or els ſuch as was his owne fugitiue or Verlet. Moreouer he ſhalbe of power to do many thyngs with Lords & Piers of Realmes. He ſhalbe very happye in matters of huſbandrye. He ſhall haue a verye fayre and beautifull wyfe, whoſe colour ſhalbe ſalowe lyke to one that hath the greene ſicknes, and ſhe ſhalbe one of hys owne kynred, whome when he hath marryed, GOD wyll gyue vnto him muche ſubſtaunce according to the efficatie and influence of this ſigne. He ſhall auoyde many perylles and ſhall enioye goodes abundaunt. He ſhall haue paines in one his of feete and ſhalbe bereft of both. He ſhalbe depriued of one of his bones. And vpon hys belly ſhall be hurte, either with iron or fier. In his affayres he ſhal not accompliſhe his wyl, except it be in Wynter tyme or in the Spryng. Sixe monethes

he ſhalbe fortunat in hys buſynes, euen accordynge to hys Hearts deſire: That is to ſaye, in September, October, Nouember, December, Ianuary, and Februarye. In Sommer & Autumne he ſhall not be ſo fortunate. He ſhall leſe much goods, and his labour ſhall litle auaile, by reaſon of the three markes in his breſte. Let him not paſſe from one Countrey to another, becauſe chaunge is not profitable to him. If therefore he wil be fortunat, let him continue in one place certeyne.
               The .iiij. Chapter mencioneth the iudgement of Leo touchynge the male. Where note, that what ſoeuer man Childe is borne in this ſigne. Firſt touching the vniuerſal diſpoſition of the body. ſerch the .iij. perticuler ſignes of Leo aforeſayde, and there ſee the condicions equall of the ſame. And touchyng the diſpoſition of the mynde, he ſhalbe naturally wittie, ſubtile, eloquent, coragious, irefull, and ſollen. For he wyll be ſoone angrie, and ſoone pleaſed againe.

His ſtomack and ſubden angre is ſuch, that by reaſon of his natural animoſitie he ſhall ſuſteyne muche contumelie and diſpleaſure. He ſhalbe very couetous, arrogant bold & wilful to al thyngs, which he ſéeth or heareth, in ſo muche as what ſoeuer he eyther heareth or ſéeth, al that doth greatly pleaſe hym, and that he embraſeth and deſyreth to enioye and do the ſame, accordyng to the exigence and maner of the thynge he heareth or ſéeth, and ſpecially, yf the thyng heard or ſéene be ſtable and able to be ſuffered, but within a whyle after he wyll be werye thereof, and care nothynge for it. Lykewyſe he is bountifull and liberall, becauſe he can not kéepe ſecrete the thynge he poſſeſſeth, and althoughe he woulde kéepe it ſecrete, he can not but with great difficultie. He is naturally gentle and quiet, but yet a derider and mocker. And touching his life and maner therof, he ſhall haue .vij. termes or ſpecial ſickneſſes, whereof the firſte thrée ſhall be verye vehement.
               
                  The firſt ſhalbe when he is .x. yeres old. The ſecond when he is .xx. And the .iij. when he is .xl. And yf he paſſe and ſkape the ſayd .iij. diſeaſes, then naturally and with happines inough, he ſhal attayne to .lxxx. and .viij. yeres. In lyke maner touchyng his good fortune, he ſhal with good ſucceſſe abyde the brunttes of malyce, and the ſtate of hys lyfe. He ſhall haue dominion ouer his Countrey, and ſhal vanquiſh his enemies, although he ſhal obiect him ſelf to many afflictions & daungers, from the whiche he ſhall by Godds helpe right well eſkape. From xxx. yeres vpwarde he ſhall aſpyre to his better fortune, and then ſhal ſée his ſubſtaunce augment. Of honourable perſonages he ſhal purchaſe muche welth, and thereby hys houſe ſhalbe plentifull of money and abundaunt of ryches.
               Concernyng hys euyll fortune, he ſhall haue a fall from an hygh place, and ſhal haue payne in one of his feete, and by water ſhal ſuſteyne trouble. He ſhall not kepe his firſt wyfe. Tweſday ſhalbe

his contrary daye, wherein if he be wiſe, let him doe no newe matter or beginne anye enterpriſe. In the .v. Chap. is entreated the iudgement of Leo, touching the female.
               Who accordinge to the maner and ſtate of her body, ſhall haue a broad breſt and ſmall thighes which are tokens of boldnes and ſtoutnes of ſtomack. She ſhalbe verye menſtruous and fertile inough, not withſtandinge ſhe ſhall haue but few Children, with certein other conditions of her bodye before declared in the iij. perticuler ſignes. After the diſpoſition of her mynde ſhe ſhalbe naturallye ſubtile wittie, & deſirous of learnyng. She ſhalbe chaſte, ſhamefaſt, courtilike diligent and of good ſtomack, by reaſon whereof ſhe ſhalbe, very prone & ſubden to angre & yet ſhalbe ſoone again appeaſed. And not withſtanding her angre, yet in her owne houſholde very liberall, by whoſe meanes the houſe ſhalbe plentiful of meate & drink. And becauſe of her natural ſubtiltie, ſhe ſhalbe very bolde,

for as muche as what ſoeuer ſhe heareth or ſéeth if it ſeeme to compriſe anye ſubtiltie or difficulty of matter, imidiatly ſhe wil deſire to know it. She is liberal becauſe ſhe can not keepe cloſe ſuche things as ſhe hath. She is very lowly & humble, & if ſhe chaunce to be ſpotted wt any ſinne, imediatly ſhe will fall downe proſtrat vpon the ground, & humbly aſke mercy & forgeuenes of her Creator. Concerning her lyfe and maner thereof, ſhe ſhall ſuffer the lunatike paſſion & a notable payne of her hart & ſtomack, which if ſhe eſkape, ſhe ſhal liue till ſhe be .lxxxv. yeres of age. She ſhall alſo be pained in her toes. She ſhall haue ſufficient reuengement vpon her enemies. And after her euyll fortune ſhe ſhall haue many fortunes. For firſt ſhe ſhal haue a fal from an high place, and her body hurt wt iron or fier. When ſhe is .xxiij. yeres old ſhe ſhalbe married, and by her huſband atteyn to promotion. Her huſband ſhall not lyue long, but ſhall die by meane of poyſon or witchecrafte. And at length

ſhall marry another who ſhall loue her derely. Of her neighbour ſhe ſhall receyue damage in her treaſure. When ſhe is .xij. yeres old vnleſſe ſhe take good hede ſhall be deceyued by oppreſſion vpon her bodye, and ſhall leſe her maiden-head. She ſhalbe troubled in the water and in daunger of lyfe. Thurſday is her contrary day, and therefore let her do no notable thyng vpon that day, waſhe her head or put on any apparell. And here is alſo to be noted, that the beſt remedy to auoyde all her miſfortunes, is firſt to addreſſe her ſelfe, by prayer to our Lorde GOD onelye, with all her heart. And to carye aboute her precious Stones ſuche as be orient and gliſterynge. And then eaſly ſhe ſhal ouercome al her miſaduentures by gods helpe.
               The .vj. Chapter determineth the general iudgement of Leo, & is to be noted that this ſigne hath a ſinguler fortune in warfare & dominion: beſides which they yt be borne in Leo, haue pains in the ſtomack, apoſtumes, & peſtiferous agues

Such as be borne in the ſeruice of great men, the ſame this ſigne preſenteth to their ſeruice. He ſhalbe fortunat to gold braſſe, horſes, and to ſuche marchandiſe as be of colour red. Frō the mid of October to the mid of Aprill, & from the mid of Iuly to the mid of Auguſt, he ſhall proſper otherwiſe not. And touching the weke, he ſhall haue .iij. happie dayes, to wete, Sonday, Tweſdaye, & Wedneſday. Saterday is his infortunate daye. But Munday, Thurſday, & Friday, be indifferēt. Likewiſe his fate is towards the Eaſt, and therefore let him place his chamber dore, bed, windowe, and all his affaires into that parte, eſpeciallye yf they be notable.
            
            
               
               
                  Virgo the ſyxte celeſtiall and principall ſygne.
               
                  ☿ ♍
                  virgin
               
               
                  THe .v. treatiſe of this booke entreateth of the .vj. entier and celeſtiall ſigne called Virgo, with the three principall partes thereof. The firſt being the head of Virgo. The ſeconde the firſt parte of the tayle, and the thirde the ſeconde part of the ſame. And is diuided into .vj. Chapters. The firſte Chapter mencioneth the head. The .ij. the firſte part of the taile. And the .iij. the .ij. part. The .iiij. the iudgement of Virgo, touching the male. The .v. the female. And the .vj. the common and indifferent fortune of Virgo.
               The firſte Chapter determineth the head of Virgo, being the .xiiij. perticuler ſigne called Lacxa,

and hathe .v. ſtarres in this forme diſpoſed. And he that is borne in thys ſigne, ſhall be fayre and beautifull, and of comely ſtature, whyte vpon his breſte, but his heares ſhalbe redde. And by the

force of this conſtellation. He is naturally enclined to haue curled heare and redde, and by nature loueth the ſame, in ſo much that if he haue not ſuch heare of that colour, yet he will ſéeke to haue the ſame coloured by art. He ſhall alſo be naturally marked in the face, bellye, thigh and legge, and vpon his right Elbowe, and the ſaid mark can not by any meanes be put away. Concernyng the diſpoſition of his mynde, he ſhall be honeſt, ſkilfull, apte, ſhamefaſt, a louer of iuſtice. His minde ſhalbe good and hys voyce vehemente and loude.
               He ſhall bée as ſymple as a Lambe, hauynge no regarde or care vppon the goodes of the worlde, or the goodes of fortune. He ſhall knowe nothynge that is good, nor ſhall take héede of anye man, but ſhall truſt all men. He ſhall take no regard of harmes wherwyth he myghte bée infected, and that by reaſon of the foure naturall markes vpon hys Face, Bellye, Thyghe, and Legges, aforeſayde.
               
                  And by force of the ſame, he ſhalbe very negligent, imploying more care vpon his owne affaires as is aforeſayde. But yf he woulde take héede, no doubte he might bryng them to good effect. He ſhal be deſirous and couetous. He ſhalbe irefull and ſubden, and by reaſon of hys ſoubden foreſyght of offence, he ſhal preuent the angre of his brethren. Touchyng his life and maner thereof, if this man be borne in the .iiij. houre of the naturall day, he ſhall dye without any ſicknes, but if he be borne in the fifte houre, then before his death he ſhall be verye ſick. He ſhall haue .iiij. termes or principall ſickenneſſes. The firſt, when he is xv. yeres of age. The .ij. at .xxij. The .iij. at .xxxvj. And the .iiij. and laſte at fiftye, which if he eſcape, he ſhall atteyne to .lx. Lykewyſe touchyng hys good fortune, the man ſo borne ſhall haue a good fate, and by reaſon thereof ſhall be exalted, and haue great preferment. He ſhall haue many Chyldren, and yf he woulde vſe diligence vpon his owne buſynes,

he ſhoulde profite very much, eſpecially in tillage. When he is .xxxvj. yeres olde he ſhalbe preferred to honour and dignitie. But if he be borne in the firſt houre of the naturall daye, then he ſhall be a great kyng or lorde. But if in the thyrde houre then kyng of all kynges, a mighty Soueraigne. He ſhall haue great proſperitie, and ſhall exagarat to hym ſelfe infinite treaſure. Lykewiſe touchynge his euil fortune, when he is married his wyfe ſhall lyue but a ſhort ſpace, and he him ſelfe ſhall dye with her, or wythin a whyle after. And although he ſhalbe abundaunt in Children, yet few of them ſhall lyue. He ſhall fall into many miſeries, becauſe he ſhalbe payned in the belly or ſome other place. He ſhal moreouer be marked in his priuye partes.
               If he be borne in the .iiij. houre of the naturall day, then ſhall he dye ſoddenly wythout any diſeaſe. He ſhalbe diuorſed from his wyfe, whereof he ſhall haue great heauines and ſorow.
               The .ij. chapter entreateth of the firſt

part of the taile of Virgo, called Alecaneth, and hath .v. ſtars ſhaped

in this forme, & is the .xv. perticuler ſigne. Whoſoeuer is borne in this ſigne,the 15. perticuler ſigne after his bodies diſpoſition, & firſt accordyng to the quantitie. He ſhalbe high in ſtature. He ſhall haue a brode and large face and a beautiful, a long and great beard, a fair noſe. After the qualitie of the ſame he ſhal haue faire hear, narow eyes, and al his body ſhalbe white. He ſhalbe naturally marked in the forehead, in the vpper hip, vpon his ſhulders, the paulme of his hand, in his belly & guttes. After the diſpoſition of the minde, he ſhalbe wiſe, his counſell ſhalbe heard & apte to euery thing. He ſhalbe lowly, good, deuoute, & ſhal loue to be praiſed. He ſhal by nature atteyn to liue to .lxij. yeres, and ſhall dye before he be olde. And touching his good fortune, he ſhal haue two wiues, which ſhalbe very ſubſtanciall and riche, in ſo much as by them he ſhall poſſeſſe great

riches. Lykewiſe he ſhalbe very apt to euery thing whiche hath a good ende.
               Concerning his euill fortune, he ſhalbe bitten of a Dogge in the face and on his body. He ſhall haue fewe Children, and they ſhal not be long lyued, but ſhall die in ſhort ſpace. Further, all ſuch thynges as are ſpoken of in this Chapter are generall, and generally belong to all ſuche as are borne in this ſigne. If the partie borne in this ſigne happen to be borne vpon the Fridaye, then he ſhall haue great miſfortune. If he be borne in the nighte, then he ſhall haue a naturall marke vppon the Crowne of the Head, the Bellye, the Face, or foote, and ſhall haue greate Feete.
               And touchynge the diſpoſition of the mynde, he ſhall bee an vpryght man walkynge iuſtelye, ſeldome exceadynge the pathe of equitie. Lykewyſe he ſhall haue two dyſeaſes eſpeciall, wherof the fyrſte ſhall bee when he is fouretene yeres of age.
               
                  The other at .lv. or .lxxx.viij. and ſhall dye in hys owne houſe, but the cauſe of hys death ſhall be a ſtroke wyth Iron or a ſworde. After hys good fortune he ſhal marry two wyues, and one of them ſhall haue a very ſmall necke. Lykewiſe he ſhall haue muche by meanes of hys Children. Alſo touchyng his euill fortune in olde age he ſhall fall into the thraldome of a man of honour or power, and ſhalbe ſtroken with Iron, and in his owne houſe ſhall dye of the ſayde ſtroke. In gettinge of riches ſhall take muche paynes and labour, and ſtraungers ſhal enioye the fruites of his trauell.
               
                  the 16. perticuler ſigneThe .iij. Chapter entreateth of the ij. and laſt part of the tayle of Virgo called Aliena, beynge the .xvj. ſigne particuler. Where is to be noted, that whoſoeuer is borne in this ſigne, touchyng the diſpoſition of hys bodye and the qualitie thereof. He ſhal haue a fayre ſtature and a ſimple countenaunce. He ſhall haue a naturall ſigne not able to be put awaye vpon hys ryght Elbowe. Accordynge

to the diſpoſition of the mynde, he ſhalbe honeſt, apt to learnynge, wyſe, good and ſhamefaſt. He ſhalbe very couetous in tillage, but in other affayres he ſhalbe remiſſe and negligent, whereas if he would take héede he ſhould greatly profite. Lykewyſe touchyng hys lyfe, he that is borne in this ſigne, and ſpecially yf he be borne in the .v. houre of the day, he ſhall naturally haue .iij. ſickenneſſes whereof the firſte ſhalbe when he is .xij. yeres old. The ij. when he is .xxxij yeres olde. And the .iij. and laſt, when he is xl yeres olde. If he chaunce to eſkape the firſt, which wylbe very daungerous then he ſhalbe afflected with the .ij. whiche yf he alſo eſkape, then he ſhall attein to the .iij. And touchinge his fortune before he be .xxxvj. he ſhal obteyne to a certeyne of honour and office. He ſhal haue many Chyldren and ſhall profit greatly in tillage as is aforeſayd. And if he wold be careful and diligent, he ſhould greatly profit in all matters. Hys euyll fortune is, yt he ſhal fal into many troubles

by reaſon he ſhalbe muche payned in the bellye, or by ſome other meanes ſhall be extremely vexed. He ſhall haue a ſtrype vppon hys Head, or hys Face, or vppon bothe, but notably in his priuye partes, where he ſhalbe greatly pained. And although he ſhall haue many chyldren, yet fewe ſhal remaine on lyue, and in that poynt ſhalbe very infortunate. He ſhalbe a great Horder, and a greate gatherer together of money, but by myſchaunce ſhall loſe hys money ſo gathered. If he be borne in the .iij. houre, then he ſhall be moſte puyſaunt a Kynge of Kyngs, & conſequently moſt fortunat, yf he borne in ye .iiij. houre he ſhalbe infortunat, becauſe he ſhal die ſoddenly. If he be borne in ye 5 houre then in his body he ſhalbe very foule & deformed, but in riches he ſhalbe very abundant plentiful.
               The fourth Chapter diſcourſeth the iudgemente of Virgo touchynge the male, and firſt touchyng the diſpoſition of the body, he ſhalbe beautifull, of good behauiour, and ſhall haue a naturall

marke in his ſhulders and loynes, and in none other place. He ſhalbe longe liued. He ſhall haue .iij. fortunate and ſpeciall dayes in the weeke. That is to ſaye: Sonday, Tweſday, and Wedneſday. His infortunat day is Friday. And that day euer is ſomewhat infortunate. His good fortune is toward the South. And therefore let hym diſpoſe his affaires that waye, together with the doore and bedde. The ſame is naturally of the Melancolyke complexion, and is of nature cold and drye. Therefore his apparell ought to be of ſome darke or blacke colour.
               The fifte Chapter toucheth the iudgement of Virgo, concerninge the female. Wherefore note that the mayde or woman borne in this ſigne, ſhall be marked in the ſaid places as is deſcribed in this Chapter precedent. Touchynge the diſpoſition of her mynde, ſhe ſhall be wittie, ſhamefaſte, chaſte, gentle, beneuolent and glad to pleaſe al men, wherby ſhe ſhalbe beloued of all men.
               
                  But ſhe ſhalbe ſomewhat curſte, and that only belongeth to her euyl fortune. Aboute .xvij. yeres of her age, ſhe ſhall marry, and her firſt huſband ſhe ſhall not loue, who ſhall dye, and afterwards marry the .ij. Her firſt Chyld ſhalbe of excellent beautye. She ſhalbe enrapped with many ſorowes. She ſhal ſuffer diuers maladies, which yf ſhe eſkape ſhe ſhall lyue .lxx. yeres .vj. monethes, & v. dayes. Her fortunat dayes bée Wedneſday and Sunday. Her infortunat day is Saterday. Therfore vpon that day let her begynne no new worke, but abſtayne from all notable buſynes.
               They that be borne in this ſigne as wel men as women ſhall ſuffer much payn in their thighes, féete, and head. Her fortune is towards the South, &c. as in the former Chap. And both kynds ſhalbe liberall.
               The .vj. Chapter compriſeth the common fortune of Virgo. Where is to bée noted that the borne in this ſigne haue their fortune in tillage, and in al things

generally thervnto apperteining, eſpecially in all things that be ſowen. They be ſubiecte to paines of the thighes and feete as fiſtulas or ſuch like, ache in the head, dropſie, the flixe or collick, beſides others before mencioned. And emonges other countreis thei ſhal viſit the citie of Ieruſalem, the riuer of Euphrates, Spaine, & other countreys adioyning. And their good fortune or chief dominiō is towards the South. Their fortunate dayes are Sundaye, Tweſday & Wedneſdaye. Their infortunate is Fridaye and Saterday: but Friday to them that be borne in this ſigne is euer infortunate. He that is borne in this ſigne, as is aforeſaide is melancholike, colde, and drie. And therefore let him weare black apparell, or ſuch as be of darke colour, and of no lyght colour, becauſe this ſigne is altogether melancolick that is to ſaye: earthie.
            
            
               
               
                  Libra the ſeuenth celeſtiall and principall ſygne.
               
                  ♀ ♎
                  depiction of scale
               
               
                  THe .vij. treatiſe doeth demonſtrate the effect of the .vij. Celeſtial ſigne called Libra, and is diuided into .v. Chapters. The firſte determineth the head of Libra. The .ij. the tayle of Libra. This ſigne hath but onely the ſayde two principall partes. The .iij. Chapter mentioneth the iudgement of Libra touchyng the male. The .iiij. touchynge the female. The .v. and laſt the generall and common fortune of Libra.
               The firſt Chapter of this treatiſe entreat
                     ••
                  h of the head of Libra,the 17. p
                        •••••
                     
                     culer ſig
                        •
                     
                   whiche is the .xvij. celeſtiall and perticuler Signe and hath .iiij. ſtarres

diſpoſed in this forme. Be it knowen therefore that whoſo euer is borne in this ſigne firſt touchynge the proporcion and diſpoſition of his body, he ſhalbe fair in face, well fauoured, painefull, and learned. Concernynge hys lyfe and maner thereof, he ſhall ſuffer payne of hys head, heart, and galle. He ſhall haue a

paine in his neck, and in his ioyntes. He ſhal haue thre ſpeciall diſeaſes. The firſt when he is .xv. yeres olde, which if he recouer, he ſhall haue the .ij. at .xxxviij. Which if he lykewiſe eſkape, he ſhall atteyn to .lxxxx. yeres, and then ſhall ſuffer his laſt and finall infirmitie. Touchyng his good fortune, beyng borne in the ſecond houre of the naturall day, he ſhalbe the chiefeſt of all hys kynne, & although he be of power and authoritie yet the execution thereof ſhall not be profitable or proſperous. He afteer his euyll fortune ſhal loſe his firſt wyfe. He ſhalbe in danger of a ſworde, therefore let him take good heede thereof.
               The ſecond Chapter of this .vij. treatiſe argueth of the taile, and latter parte of Libra,the 18. perticuler ſigne whiche is the .xviij. perticuler ſigne called Alcabenech, hauynge two ſtarres, diſpoſed in thys

ſorte. Where note that who ſoeuer is borne in this ſigne, touchynge the diſpoſition of the body, ſhalbe beautifull,

and ſhalbe naturallye marked in the head and mouth, or nere the mouth. He ſhalbe hurte vppon the mouth, and his face ſhalbe redde, his heare ſmothe and redde. After the diſpoſition of the mynde, he ſhalbe meary, thriſtie, ſpecially for hym ſelfe, he ſhalbe of good ſtomack, knowen and honoured emonges hys kynred, and ſhalbe of wyll feruent. Thirdly he ſhalbe greatly payned in the heart, and ſhall haue three ſpeciall diſeaſes. The firſt ſhalbe when he is .xvj. yeres of age. The ſeconde when he is xxxvj. The thyrde and laſte when he is xlviij. Touchynge his good fortune, he ſhall enioye greate patrimonies and riches by his parentes. And by reaſon of a naturall marke whiche he hath in hys head after many euill fortunes, he ſhall poſſeſſe muche good, and ſhall be full of children. In his youth he ſhall lye with a woman of excellent beautie. He ſhalbe a Chauncelour or head of the people: touching his euil fortune, he ſhalbe ſtroken wt a ſword. He ſhal leſe one of his bones.

He ſhal die either by the ſtripe of a ſword or elles of the payne of the belly. He ſhal fall into a ryuer, but ſhall ryſe agayne, and ſhalbe in daunger of fier. And in the ende of his life ſhall ſuſteyn pouertie.
               The .iij. Chapter entreateth of the iudgement of Libra, touchyng the male Where note, that who ſo euer ſhalbe borne in this ſigne, firſt touching the diſpoſition of the body, he ſhalbe wel made & proporcioned. He ſhall haue a naturall marke vppon one of his armes. Touchinge the diſpoſition of the mynde. He ſhalbe a great fornicator, merye, holde, fortunate eſpecially vpon the water. He ſhall excogitate and ſerche out many ſecretes, & ſhalbe verye perylous. He ſhall be very deſirous to wander in the world to viewe the faſhions therein, and the ſundrie vanities and condicions thereof, and for that cauſe ſhall traiuell into many countreys. He ſhalbe freatynge inwardly by fittes, and by fittes alſo ſhalbe quiet. Towarde ſtraungers he wyll vſe flatteryng wordes and ſweete communication,

but towardes hys owne ſeruauntes, if thei be euill, he will vſe ſharpe and croked wordes. He ſhalbe ſuſpected of a great crime, but it ſhalbe ſo cloſe as it can not be proued. He ſhall ſuffer great paine in hys necke, ioyntes, and bellye, and ſhall haue .iij. eſpeciall ſickenneſſes. The firſte ſhalbe when he is .xv. yeres of age. The .ij. when he is xxxviij. And the .iij. when he is .lxxxx. at what tyme he ſhall dye. Concernynge his good fortune, in his youth he ſhall be neyther poore nor ryche, but afterwardes he ſhall accumulate vnto hymſelfe great ſubſtaunce. He ſhall occupye and haue to do with other mens money. He ſhall triumph ouer his enemies.
               Touchyng his euyll fortune he ſhall be wounded with yron, a clubbe, or wyth a ſtone, emonges the reſt of his miſfortunes. He ſhalbe in daunger of a ſword, and therfore let hym beware thererf. He ſhall continue in the place where he was borne, not withſtandyng for a time he ſhall trauell into farre countreys,

whiche fortune maye be to him indifferent, he ſhal forgoe his firſt wife, whiche alſo is a fortune indifferent. Thurſday is his contrarye day, and therefore vpon that daye, let him not waſhe his head, and put on no new apparel nor beginne any notable enterpriſe.
               The .iiij. Chapter declareth the iudgement of this ſigne touchinge the female, where note that the maide borne therein, firſt touchinge the diſpoſition of the bodye, ſhe ſhalbe faire, and of excellent beautie. Touchinge the diſpoſition of her mynde ſhe ſhalbe frendlye, amiable, wittie, and a louer of her owne familie. Concernynge her lyfe and maner thereof, ſhe ſhall ſuffer a naturall payne in her ſtomacke. She ſhall haue two diſeaſes. The firſte ſhalbe daungerous, and when ſhe is two yeres olde. And the ſeconde when ſhe is .lxxviij. yeres of age. After her good fortune ſhe ſhall haue in occupyinge a great maſſe of money. In her ſeconde huſbande ſhe ſhall greatly reioyce, and ſhall triumph

ouer her enemyes. Accordynge to her euyll fortune, ſhe ſhall haue a ſtrype or wounde in ſome place of her bodye. Shee ſhall haue twoo huſbandes, and by the deathe of her firſt huſbande ſhe ſhall bee vnfortunate.
               Thurſdaye is her vnluckye daye. And therefore let her not waſhe her head vpon that daye, or begynne anye thynge notable.
               The fifte Chapter deſcribeth the common and vniuerſall fortune of Libra.
               Where note that Libra hath hys fortune in beaſtes equitable or apte to be ridden, eſpeciallye if thei be of colour white. Likewiſe Libra his fortune is in al faire things, & in the bargains thereof eſpecially if thei be white, & generally in al beautiful things, belonging to worldly delectatiō, chiefly in womens aparel, & in al things proceding frō the water, & in al things yt be tranſported frō a far, and that be of ſmaleſt weight. The borne in this ſigne are aboue others giuen to embrace lerning, & the ſtudy of the ſciences.

The good and fortunat dayes, are Monday and Fryday. The infortunate daye is Wedneſday. The borne in this ſigne ſhall be troubled with infirmities & diſeaſes of the belly, as with ye diſſenterie, lienterie, grypynges, and other paynes procedyng of wynde, and chiefely about the backe bone. They be naturally of ſanguine complexion, and thereby whote and moyſte. And becauſe he is fortunate in things that be whyte, therfore let hym vſe whyte apparell. The good fortune of thys Signe is towardes the Weſt. And therefore hys houſe, bedde, and all hys affayres, ſuche as bee notable are to bee directed that way.
            
            
               
               
                  Scorpio the eyght celeſtiall and principall ſygne.
               
                  ♂ ♏
                  scorpion
               
               
                  THe .viij. treatiſe entreateth of Scorpio, the .viij. ſigne celeſtial, and conteyneth .vj. Chapters. The firſte ſpeaketh of the head of Scorpio. The .ij. of the bellye of Scorpio. The .iij. of the taile. The .iiii. of the iudgement of Scorpio touchynge the male. The fifte touchyng the female. The .vi. and laſt of the common and generall fortune therof.
               
                  the 19 perticuler ſigneThe firſte Chapter entreateth of the head of Scorpio, which is the .xix. celeſtiall and particuler ſigne called Alchayt, and hath .vij. ſtarres in

this maner. Where note that what ſoeuer as well male as female, beynge borne in thys ſigne, firſte touchyng the diſpoſition of the body, is well coloured and hath muche heare. Hys bodye fayre and whyte, ſauynge that hys Noſe is foule and deformed. Hys eyebrowes narrowe, and hys Chekes ſmale. He hathe a marke naturall not farre from hys Noſe, vpon his lefte foote

and ſhulders. Alſo the lyke vppon the paulme of hys hande, and vppon the legge. He ſhall be curteous of ſpeache diſcrete and profitable in manye artes. He ſhall be beloued with his Parentes, Neyghbours, and Frendes, and eſpeciallye wyth hys Parentes, and ſuche as he loueth, he ſhall liberallye enryche wyth muche goods and honoure.
               Towardes women he ſhabe of a lyght and inconſtaunte mynde, and yet ſhall vſe no deceypte or malyce towardes them. But yf he were of ſmale conſcience, he myghte dooe wyth them and vſe them as he lyſted, becauſe he ſhall be greatlye beloued wyth them.
               Lykewyſe touchynge Glottonye, whyche is the verye Handemayde of Lecherye, the partye borne in thys ſigne aboue all meates ſhall loue bread, eſpeciallye cruſtye bread, whereof he ſhall be a greate eater. He ſhall bee verye irefull, and therevnto ſoddenlye dyſpoſed.
               
                  He ſhall be a greater talker. He ſhall be faynte harted and fearefull. And although his angre be vehement, and yet the chiefeſt effect thereof ſhall conſiſt in words. One of his familie he ſhal greatly hate. His firſt wyfe ſhalbe faire and a cleare of cōplexion. Concernyng his lyfe and maner thereof. He ſhal lyue honeſtly and quietly with his wyfe. He ſhall naturallye be full of diſeaſes, but yet thereof verye pacient. He ſhall haue .iij. ſpeciall maladies. The firſte when he is xiiij. yeres of age. The .ij. when he is xliij. The .iij. and laſt when he is .lxv. Concernynge his good fortune. He ſhal be a man that ſhall vſe correction, and ſhalbe very diſcrite. He ſhalbe honorable and from one degree of eſtate ſhall aſcende to another. And accordynge to his euyl fortune, he ſhalbe ſtryken vpon the head, and ſhalbe bitten with a Dog, or ſome other beaſt. He ſhall dye vpon a ſwordes poynct. He ſhalbe greatly affected with ſelfwel, and with vehemencie of wordes and tauntes. He ſhalbe nanaturally

enclined to haue paine in hys bellye, wherewith he ſhalbe much troubled. He ſhall fal into the hands of great men. He ſhall haue carnall companye with .iiij. women, whereof the .iiij. ſhalbe marked vpon the checke.
               The .ii. Chapter maketh declaration of the bellye of Scorpio

whiche is the .xx. particuler Signe hauynge thrée ſtarres ſhaped in this forme, for whoſoeuer is borne in this ſigne, ſhalbe fayre, and yet not pure whyte, but mixt, ſomewhat diſpoſed to redde, and ſhalbe redde headed. His mouth and head ſhalbe great, and ſhalbe of a meane and comely ſtature. He ſhalbe a great pratler, and notable lecherous, angrye, and therein very vehement. His angre ſhalbe diſpoſed to miſchiefe, and ready to reuengement, muche lyke an Adder. And although he be one day merye, yet another daye he ſhalbe ſadde. He ſhall doe muche miſchiefe. Lykewyſe touchynge his lyfe and maner thereof. Fyrſt in his

backe he ſhall ſuffer muche payne. He ſhall naturallye be aflected with an infirmitie in his heart and ſtomack. Thre peciall ſickenneſſes he ſhall haue durynge hys lyfe. The firſt when he is .xv. yeres of age. The ſeconde when he is xxxvj. The thirde and laſte when he is xlix. Concernynge hys euyll fortune. He ſhall incurre into manye troubles and miſaduentures. He ſhalbe marked or hurte wyth ſome toole or inſtrument of yron vpon hys head, face, breſte, right ſide and priuye partes. And here note that all ye thynges aforeſayde, are general & ſpoken generalli, & touch al & ſinguler ſuch as are borne in ye belly of Scorpio, whether it be in the day or nyght, or what houre ſoeuer it bee. But yet here further is to be cōſidered, that the borne in this ſigne, whether it be in the daye or night, ouer & beſydes the premiſſes touchyng hys bodye, ſhalbe effeminate, and touchynge hys lyfe and maner thereof, he ſhalbe flatteryng, ſkappye, and ſhall haue a payne in one of hys feete, yf he

be borne in the thyrde houre of the daye it ſignifieth good fortune, for he ſhall bée luckye in tillage of grounde, but in marchaundiſe lytle fortunate. But yet not wythſtandynge in thoſe trafiques, whyche he ſhall attempte he ſhall receyue muche profite. Semblablye touchynge hys euyll fortune, he ſhall dye of a ſtrype wyth a ſworde or elles in hys iorney trauelynge and ſhall haue a marke vpon his knee and backe.
               The thyrde Chapter deſcribeth the tayle of Scorpio called Elebrah, whyche is the one and

twentie particuler Sygne, and hathe ſyxe ſtarres in thys maner, where note that who ſoeuer is borne in thys Sygne. Wheather it bée by Daye or Nyght, or what houre ſo euer it bée.
               
                  Furſt touchyng the diſpoſition of the bodye ſhalbe beautifull, neate, hauynge faire, eyebrowes, cleare eyes and ſmale leane checkes and thinne and vnder his Iawe ſhall haue a marke. If anye be borne in this ſigne in the tyme of Winter, then his complexion ſhalbe effeminate. If he be borne in the Sommer then touchinge the diſpoſition of his body he ſhalbe beautifull, but yet groſſe and fatte vnder his apparell. Alſo if any woman be borne in this ſigne, ſhe ſhall be of an indifferent ſtature and beautie, her face faier, of ſmothe here and by reaſon of her colde complexion ſhe ſhall deſyre to weare much clothyng. She ſhall haue a blemiſhe in her eyes, and ſhalbe marked vppon her arme, fingers, and knee. If he be a man, he ſhalbe of ſanguine complexion, and miſchiefuous in geuynge a blowe. He ſhalbe naturally enclined (not, withſtandynge it ſeeme merueylous) to contradictories, that is to ſaye, to iuſtice and vnrighteouſnes, to loſſe and gaine, to truth and falſhold,

and all by reaſon of the concurrence of the oppoſites and contrarye ſignes, and yet not withſtanding the ſigne that is of greateſt force, ſhall beare the chiefe rule touchyng the premiſſes. Touchinge iuſtice, he ſhall be naturally geuen to honeſtye, he ſhall be iuſte and of muche equitie, and in all his affayres greatly inclined to iuſtice. And touchinge the contrarye he ſhall be a greate Inuenter of newes, a Talebearer, a Lyer, deceyptfull, enuious, and falſe, prone to deceyte as well by his looke as by hys laughter. He ſhalbe full of diſcorde and a ſower of debate, chieflye emonges brethren and frendes, whereby it appeareth that he is naturallye inclined to iniquitie and vnrighteouſnes, crafte and deceipte not withſtanding his nature alſo to the contrarie. But yet the ſigne of moſte force as is aforeſayde doeth principallye beare rule in this natiuitie. And to ſaye anye thynge touchynge his lyfe, and maner thereof, touchynge his future inclination, we can not. For as muche as the

concourſe of the ſtarres in this natiuitie are dyuers. Lykewyſe concernyng his good fortune or indifferent fortune, thys man at one tyme ſhall want, and at another tyme ſhall haue ſufficient.
               He ſhall haue thrée wyues, whereof the firſte ſhall bée a wydowe. The ſeconde and thyrde ſhall bée virgins, but the thyrde ſhall bury hym. And here is méete to bée knowen that by reaſon of the generalitie of this ſigne, and of the concourſe of the ſignes, thys natiue ſhoulde bee coupled to foure wyues, but yet the chiefeſt ſhall preuayle. He ſhall bée of power and libertie to doe and accompliſhe hys owne deſiers. Happye ſhal he be to the femine kynde, that is to ſaye, to thinges of that kynde, as cattaill and ſuch lyke. He ſhall bée twiſe bitten with a dogge or other beaſt vppon the ſhulder and on his noſe ornoſtrels ſhall haue a marke. He ſhalbe in daunger or thrall of men of power or authoritie. Hys laſte Wyfe ſhall burye hym by reaſon of the marke vppon his arme,

or the bytte of the Dogge as hys conſtellation doeth therevnto chyefelye enclyne.
               The fourth Chapter deſcribeth the iudgement of Scorpio, touchynge the male. Where note that the Chylde borne in thys Sygne (touchynge hys bodye) vppon hys feete and handes ſhall haue a naturall marke. And touchynge hys mynde, he ſhall bee bountifull and liberall, ſo that he ſhall not keepe ſecreate hys ſubſtaunce.
               In the ſeruyce of others, he wyll bee mearrye, truſtye, bolde and pleaſaunt. In his conditions ſtronge, ſtable, and not wauerynge, not deſiſtynge or leauyng of from hys affayres beynge once begonne. Touchynge his lyfe, he ſhall haue three principall diſeaſes the tymes whereof bee not here noted, whyche yf he chaunce to eſkape he ſhal lyue .C.x. yeres and .x. monethes. And accordynge to the vertue of this ſigne ther ſhalbe no impediment in the conſtellation, except it happen by ſome perticuler cauſe.
               
                  His fortune ſhalbe good for that in hearyng and ſeyng his lucke ſhalbe proſperous. He ſhall atteyne to greate wyſedome and learninge, and to the magike ſcience he ſhal greatlye applie himſelfe, and the myſteries thereof diligentlye ſerche out. And yet his diligence ſo taken doeth include a certeyne doubte or duplicitie, by reaſon of the force and efficatie of the worde. For it maye ſignifie greate inueſtigation and diligence and that perteyneth to his good fortune, or elles it maye ſignifie a cauſable infirmitie procedynge of the ſayde Magike ſcience, whiche belongeth to euyll fortune. He ſhall haue greate abundaunce of money, and the ſame daylye ſhall encreaſe and multiplye. By meanes of a woman he ſhall be greatlye enriched, and ouer hys enemyes he ſhall haue the victorie. In forreyne places he ſhall exerciſe tillage, and at length ſhall retourne home into hys owne countrey wyth gayne. Of his betters by waye of rewarde, he ſhall receyue

Horſſes, Shepe, Oxen and other beaſtes. Thys natiue ſhall bee in greate daunger, and excepte he take héede, he ſhall be hurte wyth a ſworde. Saterdaye ſhall be his contrarye daye, and therefore vppon that daye, let hym not waſh his Head, or put on any new garment, or elles attempte any ſtraunge enterpriſe. And ſome affirme that he that is borne aboute the ende of thys Sygne, ſhall be of neyther kynde, or of bothe, that is to ſaye, as well male as female.
               The fifte ſigne declareth the effecte of Scorpio concernyng the woman.
               Who hath her recourſe to the partes of thys ſigne before mencioned in eche Chapter. Notwithſtandyng ouer and beſids the premiſes, thus much is to bée ſpoken. For fyrſte, you ſhall note that ſhe ſhall bée of a frendlye condicion, obedient ſeruiceable, fearefull, and ſhamefaſte. She ſhall bée wrathfull and haue him in deadly hatred that doth her anye diſpleaſure. She ſhall haue Chyldren

by three huſbandes, and wyth them ſhall lyue in greate felicitie. She ſhall vanquyſhe her enemies, but yet tylle ſhe bee thyrtye yeares of age ſhe ſhall ſuſteyne muche ſickenneſſe. Neuertheleſſe, of Cattayle ſhe ſhall haue haboundaunce, and manye people ſhall bee vnder her gouernement. But yet in her youth ſhe ſhall abuſe her bodye in playinge the Harlot, yf the force of the iminent conſtellation do take his effecten, bitte ſhe ſhall bee with a Dogge, and in the ende ſhalbe blinde. Of her brethren and parentes ſhe ſhall receyue much trouble. Saterday ſhalbe to her infortunat day, therfore vpon that daye let her not waſhe her head, put on any newe garmentes, or doe any other ſtraunge facte.
               The ſyxte Chapter entreateth of the generall fortune of Scorpio. Therefore the borne in thys Sygne is naturallye moyſte, Phlegmatycke or

Sanguine. And ſuche ſhall bee ſingulerlye fortunate of all thynges that bée of coloure redde, and in byinge and ſellynge of all ſuche. The lyke fortunate in all thynges factible, or to bee forged wyth or in the fyer, extrahible or belongynge to the ſame, and in marchaundyſe of vnknowynge thynges. And therefore as muche as he can, lette hym weare ſuche garmentes as bee Redde. The lyke fortunate in Warrefare and Tillage, and in all Beaſtes belongynge to the ſame. Fortunate in Hoſpitalytye, whether it bee doone for money ſake, lucre, or for Goddes ſake.
               The vnfortunate Dayes bee Thurſdaye and Saterdaye. The reſte bee good, eſpeciallye Tweſdaye. He ſhall bee affected wythe the Chyragre or Goute in the Handes. Wyth the Sciatica and payne in the Head.
               
                  And yf Saturne bée founde to bée aſſcendent, than he ſhall haue great payns in his toes. Hys fortune is towards the South, and therefore let hym diſpoſe hys affayres that waye, and conuert to that part hys chamber Doore, Bedde Wyndowe, and the lyke.
            
            
               
               
                  Sagitarius the .ix. celeſtiall and principall ſygne.
               
                  ♃ ♐
                  depiction of archer
               
               
                  THe .ix. treatiſe maketh relation of the .ix. celeſtiall and principall ſigne called Sagitarius, whiche is diuided into two partes, that is to ſaye, the head and the tayle, conteynynge fiue Chapters. The firſte entreateth of of the head of Sagitarius. The .ij. of the taile. The .iij. of the iudgement of Sagitarius concernynge the male. The iiij. of the female. And the .v. and laſte of the generall fortune therof.
               And ouer and beſydes the ſayde fyue Chapters, there is a generall rule nexte after the ſecond Chapter, not wythſtandyng the generalitie mencioned in the ende of this treatiſe.
               The firſte Chapter entreateth of the head of Sagitarius called Albaham, being the .xxij. particuler ſigne,the 22. perticuler ſigne & hath viij. ſtarsfaſhioned in this

maner. Where note that who ſo euer is borne in this Signe, firſte touchynge the diſpoſition of his bodye,

hath a beautifull bodye, comely to beholde, longe and talle, and throughout beautifull, a lytle head, a thycke face, a fayre noſe, whyte téeth and ſhort. Vppon the lefte parte of hys Head he ſhall haue a ſtrype, and the lyke vppon the Crowne of hys Head, hys left Hand hys Fyngers, Armes, Teates, and agaynſt hys Heart. He is nymble, ſwifte on hys féete, and verye expedite in runnyng. He ſhall haue a naturall marke vppon hys pryuye members. He is of colour blacke, whoſe face ſhalbe lyke to them that haue the gréene ſickennes.
               Touchyng the diſpoſition of the mynde he ſhall by nature haue a good wytte, and a ſharpe, and therewithall conſtant and firme. He ſhall loue wyſe men, and ſhall embrace all ſuche as bee of diſcretion.
               Therefore touchynge thys parte of nature, and the naturall conſtellation bearyng rule in this natiuitie, he ſhall acquire vnto hym ſelfe poſſeſſion wyth wyſe men.
               
                  And althoughe that he haue a couetous mynde naturally diſpoſed to auarice, by reaſon of the concourſe of certain ſtarrs, yet by meanes of the dominion of thys Signe, he ſhalbe ſtudious of good thinges, and ſhalbe inclined to vertue, and eſpecially to the vertue of liberalitie.
               And therefore he ſhall not be muche inclined to the oppoſite or contrarye, nor yet to extorte other mennes goods. And becauſe principally he is bent to vertue, it will folow that he ſhalbe of great authoritie, & exalted in hygh degree of honour. Moreouer although he be naturallye inclined to liberalitie, and not to rapine or extorcion, yet he ſhalbe procliue and giuen to many vices, that is to ſay, to pryde, couetouſnes, lecherie and glotonye, and chiefly to pryde lytle eſteemyng other mennes doyngs or ſayings, very haultye, in ſo muche that what ſoeuer queſtion any do aſke of him, be ſhal get no anſwere at hys handes. And by reaſon of hys pryde aforeſayde, he ſhalbe a great Cauillour, Lyer, Chyder, and

full of contention. He ſhall haue a verye peſtiferous and venemous tongue. And although he be naturally inclined to a certeyne ſpice of liberalitie, for that he wyll couet to poſſeſſe nothyng vniuſtly, yet he ſhall bée deſirous to gette ſubſtaunce, and couetouſly to enioye it.
               Whereby conſequently it appeareth, that wholly he is not gyuen to couetouſnes, but to a certayn ſpyce therof to a deſire to haue. Lykewyſe he is inclined to Lechery. For with thrée women ſpecially he ſhall haue to do, but ſome tymes (by natures impedimēt) he ſhal not proiect his ſéed, although he be very deſirous therevnto. He is much diſpoſed alſo to glottony chiefly to catyng of herbes and in his meate doth greatly loue them.
               Furthermore note here that the premiſſes do not only belong to the man, but to the woman alſo ſubiect to that conſtellation. Concernyg hys lyfe and maner therof. He ſhall bée long ſick, and ſhall haue a payne in hys heart. He ſhal haue thrée ſpeciall ſickenneſſes. The

firſt when he .xx. yeres of age. The .ij. when he is .xlvij. The .iij. and laſt, when he is .lxxx. Touchyng his good fortune, he ſhall bée in great eſtimation and honour. He ſhall haue manye children, & amongs al he ſhal haue a twinne or two borne at one byrthe, and of them he ſhall ſee the thyrd generation. He ſhal atteyn to his fathers enheritaunce. In all hys affayres he ſhall proſper and dayly he ſhall ſée his goods encreaſe. He ſhal come into the worlde wyth his owne ſtarre, that is to ſay, he ſhall enioy all thyngs accordyng to the influence of his ſigne. He ſhall haue much trouble in the water. He ſhall fall into a riuer but he ſhall eſkape drownyng. He ſhall loſe the moſt part of all hys goods and ſhall fall into the hands of his enemie and ſometymes into handes of a woman a ſhe enemie. He ſhall bee bitten with a beaſt in the middeſt of one of his fingers of hys right hand, and ſhall dye an exile out of hys countrey. His moſt dereſt frend beloued aboue others he ſhal leſe,

and he ſhall bée wonderfully troubled with deuilles and euill ſpirites.
               The ſeconde Chapter deſcribeth the condicion of the tayle of Sagitarius, whiche is .xxiij. particuler ſigne called Albeyda,the 23 perticuler ſigne and hath

vij. ſtarres fixed in thys maner. He that is borne in thys ſigne, firſte touchynge the diſpoſition of his bodye. He ſhall haue a body comelye, a ruddye face, redde heare, narowe eye-browes, eyes lyke a Catte, he ſhall bee balde, and beautifull to beholde, naturally marked vppon the head, his left ſide, and vpon hys ryght noſtrill.
               After the diſpoſition of the mynde he ſhalbe very ready to anger, and therein alſo ſhalbe very ſonbden, and the payne beyng paſt, he wyll ſoone be appeaſed.
               He ſhalbe of an excellent witte, and naturally geuen to the exerciſe of rydynge

and ſhotynge. He ſhall not he circumſpect in hys doynges, nor yet foreſeyng in thynges that maye happen. He ſhall haue muche payne in his guttes, and in hys head, eſpecially he ſhall ſuffer thrée ſeuerall ſickenneſſes. The firſt when he is .xxj. yeres olde. The ſeconde when he is .lxij. yeres of age. And the thyrd when he is .lxxx. And touchyng his good fortune, yf he doe not take away or remoue the naturall marke which ſhalbée vppon his ryght buttocke, or right noſtrell, then his Conſtellation ſhall bée proſperous. But yf the ſayde marke bée violently remoued from the place, then his fate ſhall bee hindered and empeched. He ſhall bée valient in armes, and therein alſo victorious. But if the houre of Saturne doe concurre with Saturne in hys natiuitie, he ſhall be impotent by reaſon of the influence of that planet, and therefore ſhal with great labour atteyne to anye commoditie, and with muche difficultie acquire his former good lucke. But yet not withſtandyng

the impediment of Saturne, yf the marks aforeſayd be not taken away yet he ſhall obteyne the victorious feates aforeſayde. But yf his mother parhappes do take awaye that marke from the places aforeſayde, ſome euyll happe may chaunce vnto hym. For he ſhall haue much a doe to repell the influence of Saturne. The ſayde markes doe vehementlye reſiſt the malyce of the planet by reaſon of theyr notable vertue.
               So that Saturne ſhal do no great hurte although he doe ſome hynder. And touchynge the euyll fortune of the borne in thys Sygne of Sagitarius. He ſhall bee in manye troubles. He ſhall bee hurte wyth whotte burnynge yron.
               He ſhall bee in daunger of Theues not onelye by traueylynge by the waye, but alſo in Cytyes. He ſhall alſo loſe and forgoe manye poſſeſſions purchaſed by hym ſelfe, whyche ſhall bee confiſcate and taken from hym through the malyce of certeyne naturall markes, whereof one ſhall bee in hys ſtones.
               
                  And another vppon hys lefte ſide, by force wherof, he ſhal not long after loſe hys ſyght.
               Lykewyſe thou ſhalt haue in remembraunce this rule folowyng, touchyng the taile of Sagitarius, generally apperteyninge to all men borne in this ſigne. And firſt thou ſhalt know that if it happen he be borne in the ſeconde houre of the daye, not withſtandynge the premiſſes he ſhall be foule and euill fauoured. He ſhalbe balde, and his Children alſo ſhalbe balde, by reaſon of the markes aforeſayde, whereof the one ſhalbe vppon his ribbes, and the other vppon his left ſyde. Alſo by force of this conſtellation, he ſhalbe very lecherous, and ſhalbe diſeaſed with a great infirmitie. but he ſhal recouer. In lyke maner touchynge hys good fortune, he ſhall haue two Chyldren borne at one byrthe. Hys poſſeſſion and lyuynge ſhall bee indifferent, for ſometymes it ſhall bee diminiſhed, and ſometymes encreaſed. All theſe thinges thou ſhalte diligentlye note, ouer and

beſides the things conteyned in the two Chapters aforeſaid.
               In the thyrd Chapter entreatyng of Sagitarius iudgemente touchynge the male. There is to be noted that he that is borne in thys Sygne, ſhall haue a merye and pleaſaunt countenaunce.
               Lykewyſe, touchynge the diſpoſition of the mynde, he ſhall bee gentle, faithfull, meeke, liberall mixte wyth ſtubburneſſe, by reaſon whereof, he ſhall bee of greate authoritie, gentle, kynde, courtelyke, and a great bankettour, by reaſon of whyche hys curteſye manye well repayre vnto him, and be geſtes at hys table. And by meanes of his liberalitie he wyll bee a bountifull geuer of Horſſes and other fourefooted beaſtes. He ſhall bee verye ingenious, wyttye, artificiall, ſobre, graue, paynefull, and carefull of his affayres. He ſhall bée ſubtile and very ware aboute his doyings. So that he wyll not diſcloſe hys ſecreates to no man, but ſecreatelye wyll keepe them to hym ſelf, & the ſame wyll

very finely keepe hidde in his breſte, for that almoſt he is miſtruſtfull all men.
               He ſhall be with manye vices encombred, becauſe he is naturallye gyuen to be a great fornicatour, and one that will be ſoone angrye, and yet ſoone appeaſed againe, and when his anger is once done, then he wyll vtter muche fayre and gentle talke ſomewhat ioyned with couetouuſnes. He ſhall be ſkabbye and very full of ytche. He ſhall bee aflected wyth two notable & ſtrong ſickenneſſes. The one when he is .xxxiij. yeares of age, whiche ſhall bee ſo vehement that he ſhall ſtande in greate hazarde of lyfe, whiche yf he eſkape, then ſhall he haue the ſeconde, whyche ſhall happen when he is foure ſkore and eyghte yeares of age, whereof he ſhall dye. Semblablye, touchynge hys good fortune. The firſt Chylde that he ſhall haue, ſhall bee a ſonne. He ſhall haue to his frend a Pier of a realme, with whome he ſhall dwell in houſholde and ſhall poſſeſſe other mennes gooddes. In lyke maner

chynge hys euyll fortune, he ſhall bee in daunger of three ſeuerall frayes, and her that ſhoulde bee hys firſte wyfe he ſhall not enioye. And by the malyce of others he ſhall bee in diſpleaſure wyth hys frende aforeſayde, and yet in the ende he ſhall ouercome theyr malyce, and bee reconſiled to hys frendſhyppe agayne. He ſhall be hurte wyth Iron vnleſſe warely he take heede thereof.
               Sondaye is hys contrarye daye, therefore vppon that daye let hym attempte no newe enterpriſe, nor waſhe his head, or put on any newe apparell.
               The fourthe Chapter of thys preſente Treatyſe deſcribeth the Iudgemente of Sagitarius touchynge the female. And here to learne for to knowe the diſpoſition of her bodye, you muſte repayre to the Chapters of the head and tayle of Sagitarius (whiche is before recited) where you ſhall finde manye thynges ſpoken of the female borne in thys Sygne.
               
                  And touchynge the diſpoſition of the mynde, ſhe ſhall bee verye muche gyuen to the Artes of Magicke, and to Witchecrafte, and by reaſon of the ſubteltie of her wytte, ſhe ſhall putte the ſame Artes in practyſe. She ſhall bee verye curſte, carefull, mercyfull, chyldebearynge and a great Lyer. She ſhall incurre great peryll, eſpeciallye for one offence that ſhe ſhall commytte, for whyche offence ſhe ſhall bée brought to Iudgemente: Whyche peryll yf ſhe eſkape, then ſhe ſhall lyue tyll ſhe bée three ſcore and .viij. yeres olde. She ſhall fullye accomplyſhe her fate.
               And althoughe ſhe bee ſubecte vnto muche malyce and daunger, yet ſhe ſhall obteyne the vyctorye ouer them all. She ſhall haue twoo huſbandes, whereof the ſeconde ſhall bée the better. Sondaye ſhall bee her vnfortunate daye, and for that cauſe, lette her attempte no new enterpriſe or other notable or newe thynge.
               
                  The fifte and laſte Chapter maketh rehearſall of the generall Fortune of Sagitarius. And firſte the borne in thys Sygne ſhall bée Fortunate, bothe in the lawe of GOD, and alſo in the lawe of the Worlde.
               He ſhall bee happye in all kyndes of Marchaundyſe, eſpecyallye in that Arte that chyefelye vſeth the Preſſe, and in Taylours crafte. Alſo in the Drapers ſcyence. Chyefelye in clothes of fayreſte Coloure, yf they bee retayled percelle meale by the Yarde, or Elle.
               Alſo in the Bouchers occupatyon, and Beaſtes whyche are accuſtomed to bee ſolde in the Shambles. Thys Sygne is alſo Cholerycke by nature, and therefore the borne in thys Sygne is naturallye Cholerycke, by reaſon wherof he is whotte and drye. And he ſhall haue a great payne and gryefe by meanes of a ſoore Impoſtume in the Lunges. And alſo of a conſumyng and vehement Ague, whyche is called Hectica.
               
                  And alſo of an inflamation that ſhall procede from the Lounges, accordynge to the qualitye of thys Sygne.
               The apparelles and the coloures whiche oughte to bee moſte vſed of the borne in thys Sygne, is Graye, Browne, Yelowe or Redde, whyche Coloures by reaſon of the heate and Fyer, are moſte apte, moſte neceſſarye, and conueniente.
               The one halfe of the lyfe ſhall bee fortunate, and the other halfe vnfortunate, not onelye in dayes, and houres, and in Monethes, or Weekes, but alſo in whole yeares by the number of ſyxe. That is to ſaye: by ſyxe and ſyxe. Syxe good yeares, and ſyxe badde, yeares.
               The Male or Female that is borne in thys Monethe, hathe hys ſpecial Fortune placed in the Weſte. And therefore towardes that parte of the Worlde lette hym dyſpoſe all hys doynges, concernynge hys Houſe, hys Doore,

and hys Bedde, and all hys ſpeciall affayres, and notable actes. &c
            
            
               
               
                  Capricornus the .x. celeſtiall and principall ſygne.
               
                  ♄  ♑
                  sea-goat
               
               
                  THe .x. treatiſe entreateth of the .x. principall and celeſtiall ſigne called Capricornus. This ſigne is diuided into .ij. principall partes, that is to ſaye, the head and the tayle, for that cauſe it is diuided but into .v. Chapters whereof the firſte entreateth of the head, The .ij. of the taile. The .iij. of the male. The .iiij. of the female. And the v. and laſte of the common and generall fortune of Capricornus.
               The firſte Chapter entreateth of the head of Capricornus beynge the,the 24. perticuler ſigne xxiiij. particuler ſigne

and is called A
                     ••
                  adab whiche hath thrée ſtarres dyſpoſed in thys maner.
               
               Where is to bée noted that the borne in thys Sygne touchynge the diſpoſition of the bodye, hathe a fayre bodye and comelye well faſhioned, eſpeciallye in youth

it ſhall not bee properlye Blacke nor Whyte, but ſome what gyuen to bee Redde. Lykewyſe, he ſhall haue certayne naturall Sygnes in the Head, the Breſte and the Knée. The eyes ſoore, and full of payne. He ſhall bée naturallye ſymple, learned, and wyſe, and yet not wythſtandynge, verye incredulous and harde of belyefe. In ſo muche, as he wyll beleue no man, although he ſweare. He ſhall bée angrye and Chollerycke, and in hys angre verye noyous and hurtefull. A man of bloode, and greatlye thryſtynge after the bloode of hys enemyes. So that yf he chaunce to haue the ſuperioritie ouer hys enemyes, he wyll deſtroye them all, or the moſt parte of them, if not wyth hys owne handes, yet be meanes of others. He ſhall bée verye craftye and ſubtyle, and that vnfaynedly. And yet in hys doynges trewe dealyng and verye iuſt, and a great louer of trueth, doyng the thyng that he goeth about wyth much thought, although therewyth

ſome crafte bée included. Hys gate and goyng very crafty althoughe outwardly it ſhall not appeare. Who in his age ſhall bee very profitable and good to many. This man doeth naturally loue the trymmyng of hys bodye, and hath ſo great delyght in hys owne beautye, that he ſhall thynke none to bee lyke vnto hym ſelfe. And hys ſpeciall reſpecte ſhall bee towardes hys Head, hys Bearde, and Heare.
               Lykewyſe, by reaſon of the vehemencye of hys naturall Complextion he is by nature muche enclyned to ſleepe after meate, and at the Table, whyche commonlye he putteth in practyſe.
               Lykewyſe, touchynge hys lyfe, and maner thereof. Touchynge diſeaſes and ſyckenneſſes, there is nothynge to bee founde certeyne in this Chapter. And yet in the fourth Chapter where the Iudgemente of Capricornus is entreated concernynge

the woman, it is reade that the borne in this ſigne, ſhall haue one ſpeciall and principall diſeaſe when he is .xxxix. yeres of age, whiche yf he eſkape, he ſhall lyue tyll he be .Cviij. yeres of age. And touchyng ſicknes. He ſhalbe naturallye diſeaſed and ſingulerlye affected wyth the payne of the heart and ſtomacke, whereof he ſhall dye. Alſo touchynge the euyll fortune of this ſigne, ye ſhall vnderſtand that the borne in this ſigne, that is to ſaye, in the head of Capricornus accordyng to the force of the conſtellation he ſhall be depriued of one of his members, and ſome of hys téeth.
               In the .ij. Chapter of this .x. treatiſe is expreſſed the taile of Capricornus, whiche is the fyue and twentye particuler Sygne called Aſtaldabor hauynge two ſtarres placed in this

ſorte. Where is to be noted that whoſoeuer is borne in this ſigne after the diſpoſiciō of his body, he ſhalbe beautiful white

and ſmothe heared, fayre eyes, hys eyebrowes, well made, hys colour Yelow, and ſhalbe naturally marked in the face and alſo in hys body, with manye ſundry markes. That is to ſaye: aboute hys necke, and neare vnto hys eye. He ſhall haue ſhort lippes, in ſo much that for the ſhortnes thereof, when he ſpeaketh, he ſhall ſhewe all the teeth in his head. He ſhall bee well learned, and ſomewhat bent to bee proude, whiche ſhall happen euen by nature. He ſhalbe a ſower of Corne vppon other mens labours, that is to ſaye: he vſeth other mens doinges to the commendation of hym ſelfe. He ſhall diſpiſe all men, and bee a great prayſer of hym ſelfe, diſpyſinge others, and greatly ſtandinge in his owne conceyte. He ſhall bee irefull, and verye fierce in angre, in ſo much that he ſhall bée greatly offended with hys owne parentes. He ſhall bee verye lecherous and a louer of all ſortes of women, and ſpeciallye he ſhall committe adultery wyth nyne ſundrye woman, beſydes

all other ſyngle and common women, and not withſtandyng this his great deſier and affection to women, ſometimes by wichecrafte and ſorcerye, he ſhalbe letted from committynge fornication with diuers women. Lykewyſe he ſhalbe a notable great drynker. But not wythſtandynge the vices aforeſayde, wherevnto he ſhalbe much apte and inclined, yet he ſhalbe a iuſte man and much inclined to iuſtice, a deſpyſer of euyll and a great louer of hys companions. And where he ſhalbe naturally geuen to be a drynker, yet in hys meate and dyet, he ſhalbe very ſpare and temperat. He ſhall feele great payne in hys head. But yet the ſeconde payne, that is to ſaye, the payne of hys belly, ſhalbe greatlyer in hym. He ſhall alſo in his going bee troubled wyth a payne in hys Legge. Alſo he ſhall haue eyght ſpecial ſicknneſſes.
               The firſte, when he is fourtene yeares olde. The ſeconde, when he is twenty. The thyrd, when he is one and twenty.

The fourth, when he is thyrtye.
               The fifte, when he is ſixe and thyrtye. The ſixte, when he is foure and fourtye. The .vij. when he is ſixe and fourtye. The .vij. when he is .lx. And then by force of his conſtellation. He ſhall dye through the weakeneſſe of hys members.
               Moreouer, touchynge hys good fortune he ſhall haue two ſonnes, and ſhall receyue inheritaunce from his Progenitours. And hys ende ſhall bee better then his begynnynge. He ſhall bée naturallye gyuen to the marchaundyze of Goates, and therein ſhall bée both fortunate and luckye, yf he wyll diligently folowe the ſame trafficke.
               Lykewyſe, touchynge hys euyll fortune, he ſhall bée ſubiecte to the hande of hys enemies. He ſhall bée depriued of one of hys members, and thereby ſhall bée maimed. And before the tyme of hys death, he ſhalll ſuffer manye and ſundrye great troubles at the handes of a noble man.
               
                  The thyrd Chapter determineth the iudgement of Capricornus touchynge the male. And for the man chylde borne in this ſigne, there is nothynge founde certayne, touchynge the diſpoſition of his body in this Chapter, and therefore recourſe muſte be made, to the Sygne wherein the male Chylde is borne.
               That is to ſaye, to the head of Capricornus, or elles to the tayle, and there the truth concernyng hys corporall diſpoſition maye bee founde.
               And yet not wythſtandynge (ouer and beſyde the premiſſes) ſuche one hath a lytle head, hollowe eyes, and a ſofte ſpeache. And touchynge hys mynde he ſhall be very incredulous & harde of beliefe, in ſo much as them that ſweare, and confirme theyr ſayinges wyth othe, he ſhall not credite. And therefore lyke as he ſhall not beleue others, euen ſo it is as meete that other ſhall bee as harde of beliefe to hym, and ſhall not credite hys wordes thoughe he bynde them wyth othes. He ſhall naturally

bée verye ſubtell and ſecrete in all hys affayres, and therein ſhall bee a ſubteil and crafty deceyuour, and a bolde ſufferer and bearer of aduerſitie. Lykewyſe he is naturally couetous, irefull, and therein verye ſoubden and miſcheuous, vſynge a miſcheuous and vngracious ſtomacke, and therefore with greate difficultie he ſhall retourne to hys former quiet. And not withſtandynge the aforeſayde vices he ſhall bée naturallye geuen to be ciuile, honeſt, amiable, and pleaſaunt. Moreouer, touchyng hys life and maner thereof, he ſhall bée full of ſickennes. But yf he eſkape one verye vehement ſickennes (whyche ſhall happen when he is twentye yeares of age) he ſhall lyue by force of thys Conſtellation, eyght and fiftie yeres vnleſſe ſome naturall impediment of anye perticuler or vniuerſall cauſe oppoſite doe occurre and happen. His lyfe ſhall bée ſhortened by reaſon of the truncation and cuttyng of ſome of hys members.
               He ſhallbe marryed to two wyues, and

the ſeconde he ſhall marrye, when he is one & thyrty yeres of age, whyche ſhal bée hys better Wyfe, by whome he ſhall bée greatlye enryched. He ſhall enter into other mennes laboures, and enioye gooddes gotten by others.
               He ſhall treade the grounde of manye Countreyes, and at length ſhall retourne to hys owne Countrey, and to the place of hys nauitie wyth greate gayne and ſubſtaunce. He ſhall haue to doe wyth muche treaſure, and ſhall enioye parte of the ſame.
               Touchynge hys euyll fortune, he ſhall ſuffer muche aduerſitie in the place where he was borne. And for that he is naturallye ſubtyle, and of myſchieuous mynde. He ſhall ſuffer muche trouble and yet ſhall ouercome it well ynoughe. Hys fyrſte Wyfe ſhall dye before he bée one and thyrtye yeares olde. Sondaye is hys contrarye and vnfortunate daye. Therefore vppon that daye lette hym attempte no newe facte, or anye notable enterpryſe.
               
                  He ſéemeth to bée of a melancolycke or earthye Complexion. And therefore he hathe hys Fortune chyefelye dyſpoſed towardes the Northe parte.
               And here thou ſhalte diligentlye note, that he whyche is borne in the ende of thys Sygne, ſhall bée borne in Adulterye. And thys Sygne hath no power in the natiuitie of women, but onely of the males.
               The fourth Chapter of thys tenth Treatyſe deſcrybeth the Iudgemente of Capricornus, touchynge the female. And thou ſhalte note that the woman-borne in thys Sygne, hathe nothynge in thys preſente Chapter that is certayne touchynge the dyſpoſition of her bodye. And therefore looke in what parte of this ſigne ſoeuer ſhe bée borne, there thou ſhalte fynde her naturall and corporall diſpoſition. And therewyth alſo thou ſhalte haue recourſe vnto the nexte Chapter enſuynge, and the difference ſhall be founde to bée greate betwene both the kyndes.
               
                  For as muche as the bodily diſpoſition, as well the ſtature as the other compoſition of either kynde is indifferent and equal. Moreouer touching the diſpoſition of the mynde. The woman Chylde borne in this ſigne ſhall bee very wyſe, and a geuer of good counſell, in ſo much as by reaſon of her great wiſedome and conſideration ſhe ſhall bee acceptable to all ſortes of men. She ſhall atteyne to a good fate and conſtellation ioyned with muche ioye, and meane of her witte. She ſhall brynge her deuiſes to good effect. She ſhall be naturally geuen to bee of curſte heart, verye whotte and wylfull ſpeciallye in thoſe thynges touchynge the diſpoſition of her wytte and pollicie and thereby verye deſirous to knowe ſuche thynges as bee moſte pleaſaunt vnto her wyth her neyghbours, and ſpecially ſuche as be moſte acquainted with her. She ſhall bee curteous and frendly. She ſhall be ſoone abaſhed and deſirous to ſee the world, & therfore ſhal trauell in vnknowē places.

She ſhal receyue hurte of a foure footed beaſte, whereof yf ſhe eſkape ſhe ſhall lyue foure ſkore yeares. Lykewyſe touchynge her good fortune, ſhe ſhalbe called a mother of Chyldren for that by force of her conſtellation, ſhe ſhalbe chyldebearynge and apte to Chyldren eſpecially to ſonnes. She ſhall alſo be abundaunte in foure footed beaſtes, and after ſhe is paſſed the age of fourtye yeres, her tyme folowyng ſhalbe more proſperous. And concernynge her euyll fortune. She ſhall bée hurte of foure footed beaſtes, and ſhalbe very fearefull vppon the water. Her lucke ouer her Cattell ſhall not be very proſperous. Sonday is her vnfortunate daye, and therfore vppon that day let her attempt no ſpeciall matter, eſpeciallye of anye great effect.
               The .v. Chapter of this .x. treatyſe hauynge his title of the generall and vniuerſall fortune of Cappricornus, is chiefly proſperous in huſbandrye, and in all kyndes of Beaſtes and Cattell,

concernyng the ſame, and in all weighty and ponderous matters touching earth, and that whiche is poſſible to bee done wyth earth, with ſtones with wodd, and wyth the hydes of the beaſtes before remembred. Likewiſe, in bying and ſellyng of grayne, and other heauye matters abundant vpon the earth, and eſpecially growing in the ſame. This ſigne is proſperous in dull and heauy beaſtes as Aſſes, Swine, Oxen, and ſuch lyke, and in all kynds of workes poſſible to be done with great and painefull labour. The borne in this ſigne ſhall bee more healthfull in trauell then in doynge nothyng. Likewiſe this ſigne ouer and beſides the particuler euentes, is muche diſpoſed to Impoſtumes of the ſtomacke, to the Coughe, and to inflamations of the Lyuer. Alſo hys tyme touchyng his indifferent Fortune, is diuided into two principall partes, not onely in dayes, weekes and monethes, but alſo in yeres, for the tyme is diuided by the number of fyue, becauſe continually

there ſhalbée fyue good yeares and fyue badde. This ſigne alſo extendeth hys Fortune towardes the Southe. And therefore let hym dyſpoſe all hys wholle affayres (yf he mynde to proſper) that waye. And from tyme to tyme let hym vſe to weare Blacke garmentes.
            
            
               
               
                  Aquarius the .xi. celeſtiall and principall ſygne.
               
                  ♄ ♒
                  water-bearer
               
               
                  THis .xj. Treatiſe makinge mencion of the .xj. Sygne called Aquarius, is diuided into thrée principall partes, comprehendynge .vj. ſeuerall Chapters. The .j. conteyneth the head of Aquarius. The .ij. part the belly. And the .iij. the tayle. The .iiij. the male. The v. the female. The .vj. and laſt, the common and generall fortune therof.
               The .j. Chapter makinge declaration of the head of Aquarius, being the .xxvj. particuler Sygne,

hathe two ſtarres framed in this ſort,
and is called Aſtrad. Where is to be noted, yt who ſo euer is borne in this ſigne, ſhalbe beautifull in the face and bodye, hauynge a naturall marke in the head, the breſt, and left foote. The colour not altogether whyte, but ſomwhat diſpoſed to black, & to the colour of Honny. Touchyng the diſpoſition of the mynde very well learned, but naturally vniuſt & a doer of much wrong, very deſirous

to walke after meales. And not withſtandyng the naturall inclination to the doyng of wronges, yet he is of nature godly, pitifull, pacient, and a louer of companions, and yet ſomwhat inclined to the contrary, as to impietie and godlynes, iniquitie and right, vnrighteouſnes, iuſtice and mercye. He ſhalbe ſo pitifull that he ſhall accuſe no man, but rather be an excuſer. He ſhall naturallye ſuffer an ache in the Head, and a payne of the Heart. He ſhall haue two naturall ſickenneſſes. The firſt, when he is twenty yeres of age. The ſeconde, when he is fiftye. He ſhall bée greatlye honoured, and from manye troubles, which he ſhall ſuffer, almightye GOD ſhall mercifullly delyuer hym. And hys Fortune ſhall bee indifferente. That is to ſay, ſome tyme hauynge ſufficient, and at other tymes alſo he ſhall lacke.
               Alſo, a Dogge ſhall greuouſly byte hym vppon hys Thyghe or Legge.
               He ſhall wander into a ſtraunge lande, and in the myddeſt of hys wealthe and

ſubſtaunce muche adueruerſitie ſhall happen.
               The ſeconde Chapter of thys preſent Treatiſe deſcribeth the Bellye of Aquarius, whiche is the .xxvij. particuler Signe called Alſcadabra, and hathe xij. ſtarres formed

in thys ſort. Who ſo euer is borne in thys ſigne ſhall haue a good body well complexioned and made. And thys bodye ſhall bée Whyte naturallye, and ſhall haue ſome naturall marke in hys Face, Backe, and Elbowe. Hys Bodye ſhall bee naturallye full of holes, & ſhal haue vpon his head a blowe or ſtrype with a ſword or dagger. Thys man ſhall bee verye wyſe, meeke chaſte, and ſhamefaſte. And ſhall loue no vanities, but rather ſhall embrace trueth and vertue.
               
                  He ſhall feare GOD, and deſire to do rather good then euill, to which good qualities he is naturally gyuen. And by reaſon he is tender, he ſhall haue no naturall force to do anye actuall or corporall labour, and conſequently not geuen to walke much. He ſhalbe much payned in the raines of his backe. He ſhall haue iij. principall diſeaſes. The .j. when he ſhalbe .xxix. yeres of age. The .ij. when he is .xxxvij. The .iij. and laſt when he is lxxxx. Concernyng hys good fortune, that although he ſhal enioy in his owne countrey no kynde of office or promocion, yet in a ſtraunge countrey he ſhall attaine to much honour. Concernyng his euill fortune, he ſhall ſuffer much trouble, and ſundry diſcommodities ouer and beſides the bityng of a Dogge or ſome other beaſt, either vppon hys arme or legge. He ſhall haue much euill fortune by meanes of hys Parents, for they ſhalbe taken from him by death, and from them ſhall receyue no kynde of inheritaunce or ſubſtaunce. And by

force of thys Conſtellation, he ſhall end hys lyfe in a ſtraunge Countrey, and in the water.
               The thyrde Chapter of this treatiſe deſcrybeth the Tayle of Aquarius, being the .xvij. particuler Sygne of Heauen called Algaſſarall, whych hath two Starres placed

in thys maner. Where is to be noted that who ſo euer is borne in thys Sygne. Fyrſt touchynge hys bodyes diſpoſition, ſhall bee fayre of bodye, and of a ruddye face, ſhorte in ſtature and ſomewhat balde.
               Touchynge the qualitie of the mynde he ſhall bee naturallye verye lecherous, and greatelye gyuen to the loue of women, vehemently deſirynge theyr companye. A greate Surfetour, greatlye occupyinge hym ſelfe in bankettynge and Bellye cheare, frequentynge the ſame wythoute meaſure.
               
                  He ſhalbe verye couetous and deſirous to haue, for what he ſeeth he wyll couet to haue. Which vices not withſtanding yet geuen to quietnes, greatly embraſinge peace and concorde, and muche abhorrynge diſcorde, auoydynge the meanes thereof, as muche as lyeth in hys power. Lykewyſe, he ſhall bee endewed wyth a certayne frenſie, and ſhall by a naturall ſicknes in a ſtraunge Countrey yelde furth hys breath.
               Thrée principall termes or diſeaſes he ſhall ſuffer. The firſt, when he is twentye yeares of age. The ſeconde, when he is fiue and fourtye. And then he ſhall bee in great daunger of death. But yf he eſkape the ſame, he ſhall lyue one hundred and twentye yeares, and three dayes. Lykewyſe, touchynge hys good fortune, he ſhall lyue a longe ſpace with hys Wyfe and ſhall gette muche ſubſtaunce and ryches. And althoughe he ſhall haue great loſſe, yet he ſhall haue plentye. Touchynge hys euyll fortune, he ſhalbée without a head, and depriued

of hys Parentes, and Brother. In a ſtraunge Countrey he ſhall ende hys lyfe, as before is remembred.
               The .iiij. Chapter entreateth of Aquarius iudgement touchyng the male. And to learne the diſpoſition of the bodye, recourſe muſt bee made to thoſe thynges that bee reported in the three Chapters before mencioned, where very largely is intreted the particuler fortune of Aquarius. Ouer and beſides he ſhall haue a great audacitie of ſpeache. Semblablye touchynge the diſpoſition of the mynde, and eſpeciallye concernynge hys lyfe, he ſhalbe couetous, lecherous, prone to angre, contencious, a lyer, becauſe he ſhal ſpeake one thyng and do another, and that ſhalbe by force of hys principall conſtellation.
               Not withſtandynge the ſayde vyces, he ſhalbe very ware and circumſpect, wyſe, pollityke, truſtynge in hys owne wyſedome, and ſhall haue a certeyne excellencie of arte and knowledge. Carefull ouer his affayres euen from his youth.
               
                  Singulerlye beloued, courtelyke honeſt and good. Honeſt he ſhall bee for that he ſhall bée conuerſant with the honeſt. Good he ſhall bee by vertue of the Conſtellation, and therfore naturallye inclined to goodnes, ſingulerly embraſing all thyngs good and honeſt. Mercifull, for that he ſhall extend the ſame to ſuch as haue néede of mercy, ſpecially Orphanes and wydowes, to whome he ſhall not onely bee pitifull, but a benefactour and defender. He ſhall wander into manye places, and thereby by lytle and lytle ſhall bee enriched.
               Lykewyſe, touchynge hys lyfe and maner thereof. He ſhall haue two ſpeciall ſickenneſſes. The firſt when he ſhall bée ſixe and thyrtye yeares of age, whyche ſhall bée verye vehement and daungerous, whereof yf he bée acquieted, then he ſhall feele the other, when he is foure ſkore & ten yeres of age, & of that laſte dyſeaſe wythout fayle he ſhall dye. In lyke maner touchyng hys good Fortune, he ſhall bée happye, for that he

ſhall bée ſkylful in Arte and knowledge by reaſon whereof, he ſhall atteyne to preferment. He ſhall haue the charge and gouernement of manye and diuers ſommes of money, and by a ſtraunge man ſhall vnlooked for enioye muche treaſure. And concernynge hys euyll Fortune, hys abode ſhall not continue in the place of hys owne natiuitie, but wanderynge abrode ſhall perambulate ſtraunge places, and in them ſhall continue. And not withſtandynge thys hys peregrination and dewellynge in ſuche places is indifferente either to good or euyll Fortune. Therefore as ſéemeth to me, it tendeth indifferentlye bothe to good and euyll fortune. He that is thus borne, hys firſte wyfe ſhall not long tarye with hym, and after ſhe is dead, all thynges ſhall haue moore proſperous ſucceſſe wyth hym.
               And the loſſe alſo of thys Wyfe, as ſpeciallye I doe note, ſeemeth not to me to belonge to euyll Fortune, but to indifferente.
               
                  Lykewyſe, vppon the water he ſhall bee very vnfortune, which by nature he ſhal abhorre. He ſhall bee enwrapped wyth many and ſundry daungers and amonges others ſpeciallye with his wyfe and woman. Saterday is his contrarye and vnhappy day. Therefore vpon that daye he muſt attempte no notable enterpriſe or facte, nor yet vpon that day waſhe his Head, put on newe garmentes, or doe other nouelties remembred and ſpoken of in the treatiſe before.
               The .v. Chapter of this .xj. treatiſe deſcrybeth the iudgement of Aquarius touchynge the woman. And here is to be noted, that the woman borne in thys ſigne touchyng the diſpoſition of her body, ſhalbe delicate and tender, and by force of this conſtellation ſhall haue a marke in her ryght hande. She ſhall bee trewe, faythfull, conſtant, wyttye, and of a good complexion, and diſpoſed to all goodnes, ſpeciallye to mercye and pitie. Lykewyſe, touching her lyfe and maner thereof, ſhe ſhall haue a great diſeaſe in

her eyes, and ſhall haue two ſpeciall ſickenneſſes, whereof the chiefeſt and moſte daungerous ſhall bee when ſhe is of eyghtene yeares of age. And the ſeconde ſhe ſhall haue (yf ſhe chaunce to eſkape the firſt) when ſhe is foure ſkore yeres olde, and then ſhall dye accordyng to the effect of this conſtellation.
               Alſo touchynge her good fortune, ſhe ſhall abounde in Chyldren. She ſhalbe enryched with other mens goodes, and ſhall atteyne to an indifferent wealthe. When ſhe is .xv. yeares of age, Fortune ſhal fauour her better, and ſhe ſhal enioye a better ſtate. Muche euyll Fortune ſhall happen vnto her in her tyme, and amonges others, her good name ſhall be blotted with infamye, and ſhall be defamed with the corruption of her virginitie, and ſhall haue experience of ſtraunge places, and be verye odious to her enemyes. Her firſt Huſbande ſhall put her from hym. She ſhall be hurte wyth foure footed beaſtes, or ſhall bee very neare the ſame. But it ſeemeth to

me ſhe ſhall paſſiuelye receyue a hurte or daunger.
               The .vj. Chapter entreateth of the common and generall fortune of Aquarius, whiche conſiſteth ſpeciall in tillage and in beaſts méete for tillage together, and in all beaſts of great quantie and fatnes, as Aſſes, Moyles, Swyne, Oxen, Kyne, and ſuch lyke. Lykewyſe, fortunate in buyldings, in earth, in ſtone, in wod, in hydes of beaſts, ſpecially the beaſts afore remembred. Furthermore, it is cōmonly and for the moſt part fortunate in thoſe things which be done with great labour and exerciſe. This ſigne is fortunat toward the weſt, therfore they muſte diſpoſe their affayres that waye. The Sunday is vnfortunate for them, therefore that daye let them not doe any newe notable worke, as is ſaide in the other treatiſes. They ſhalbe vexed with long feuers quotidians and cold. According to the vertue of the conſtellation, their tyme is diuided into .xv. ſo that the firſt .xv. yeres going before, are good and

lucky, the .xv. yeres folowing are vnlucky and vnfortunat: and neuertheles in the good fortune of the firſt .xv. yeres the Sunday is alwayes vnfortunat. As touching the good fortune of the firſt .xv. yeres, amonge the vnfortunate dayes, the Tweſday and Saterday haue the principall poynt in the good Fortune. They be naturally fanguine, whote, and moyſt, and therefore they muſt weare redde and blacke garmentes.
            
            
               
               
                  Piſces the .xii. celeſtiall and principall ſygne.
               
                  ♃ ♓
                  depiction of fish
               
               
                  THe .xij. treatiſe of this Booke ſpeaketh of the .xij. and laſte principall ſigne of Heauen, called Piſces, and is diuided into two principall partes, the Head and the Tayle. Thys treatiſe conteyneth fyue Chapters. The firſte, maketh mencion of the Head of Piſces. The ſecond of the Tayle. The .iij. of the iudgement of Piſces for the male. The iiij. of the iudgement for the female.
               The .v. and laſt, of the common fortune of Piſces, bothe of the male and female together.
               The firſt Chapter maketh mencion of the Head of Piſces, which is the .xxix. particuler ſigne of Heauen, called Algafayſer, and conteyneth

two ſtarres thus ſet. He that is borne in thys ſigne, ſhall bee Whyte, and ſoft of body, and namely of a whyte face. He ſhall haue a large breſt, a comely beard, a fayre forehead, fayre eyes, more blacke then whyte. He ſhall

haue many naturall markes on his body, by the which according to the vertue of the Conſtellation rulynge, he ſhalbe naturally inclined to fidelitie and wiſedome, but rather he ſhalbe faythful and wyſe in deede. Moreouer, he ſhall haue a naturall marke vppon hys Elbowe or in hys Foote, and ſhall peraduenture loſe one of hys members, or elles it ſhal fayle hym. He ſhalbe of a ſmylyng countenaunce, merrye, and louyng pleaſure and playe, naturally enclined to equitie: but yet couetous accordynge to the coniecture taken of his Conſtellation. And thoughe he be naturallye ſubiecte to the payne of the Head, he ſhal bée healthful, of a ſounde wytte, and of a wholeſome complexion. By the vertue and lyuelyneſſe of hys complexion, he ſhall lyue naturally thre ſkore and ten yeres without any notable ſickenneſſe, ſauinge the head ache, whiche he ſhall often tymes haue. As concernyng hys good fortune, he ſhall gette muche money, and poſſeſſe manye poſſeſſions. He ſhall haue

thrée Wyues, and ſhall bée troubled wyth the thyrde. When he ſhall bée in publycke offyce, manye woulde hurte hym, and yet they ſhall doe hym no hurte, becauſe of theyr weakeneſſe, and finallye he ſhall ſurmounte them: for theyr enuye and malyce ſhall haue no power agaynſt hym. As concernynge hys euyll Fortune, he ſhall fall into manye aduerſities and troubles by hys Conſtellation: Yet not ſo but that all theſe fore ſayde thynges in this Chapters be generall as touchynge the influence and efficatie of the Signe, and that they doe appertayne generallye to all that be borne in thys Signe. For yf it chaunce that anye be borne in the thyrd houre of the daye, as touchynge the diſpoſition of the bodye, he ſhall haue a naturall marke in his Noſtrelles, and ſhall haue longe eyes. As concernynge the diſpoſition of hys mynde and wytte, he ſhall bée a verye ſuſpecte man harde of beliefe, and therefore not beleued.
               
                  As concernyng the maner of his liuing, he ſhall haue a great ſickennes and feruent in his Noſtrels, ſo that by the feruentnes of it he ſhall dye where he was borne. He ſhal haue .iij. greuous ſickenneſſes. The firſt at .xxvij. yeres. The .ij. at .liiij. The .iij. at .lxx. yeares. And then he ſhall dye of this ſicknes, yf he eſkape the other twayne, or elles bee in great daunger. As concerning his good fortune, although by the effect of the Conſtellation, he ſhoulde fall into a ryuer, yet he ſhalbe ſaued from it, and ſhall riſe oute of it againe yf he fall in, whyche thynge belongeth to hys good fortune.
               He ſhall haue many Chyldren. He ſhall bée myghty, and rule in Ilandes.
               By the mercy of GOD, and the goodnes of the Conſtellation, he ſhall eſkape from all his trouble.
               As concernynge hys euyll fortune, he ſhall fall into a ryuer as is aforeſayde. And alſo into the handes of a myghtye man, and into muche trouble. Yet not wythſtandynge that theſe thynges doe

appertayne to his euyll Fortune, they ſhall haue a good yſſue and ende. For he ſhall bée delyuered from theſe verations as afore is ſayde. Whereof it foloweth, that this fortune is euil by accidēt. Furthermore, becauſe of the marke that he ſhall haue in hys Noſtrelles, he ſhall burye hys Parentes, whyche he ſhall loſe accordynge to hys Conſtellation. Whiche thynge belongeth ſomewhat to hys euyll Fortune.
               He ſhall loſe ſome of hys temporall gooddes, whyche he ſhall haue gotten wyth great labour, and ſhall wholly bée ſpoyled of them, or of the moſte parte of them.
               The ſeconde Chapter maketh mencion of the Tayle of Piſces, whiche is the .xxx. and laſte particuler Sygne of Heauen called Luaten, hauynge twentye Starres, ſette and diſpoſed in dewe order, in ſuche maner and forme as here foloweth.
               
                  
                  He that is borne

in this ſigne in the firſt houre of the naturall day ſhall be fayre of looke, hauynge fayre eyes, fayre face, and fayre of all his bodye. He ſhall naturally haue manye markes. As concernynge the mynde & wytte, he ſhalbe witty, and prudent, and amiable, hys voyce well ſownyng, and liberall more towarde ſtraungers then to hys neighbours. Staungers ſhall haue much ryches of hym that is thus borne. He ſhall haue thrée vehement ſickenneſſes. The firſt at .xxviij. yeres. The ſecond at .lvj. The thyrde and laſt at .lxxx. yeres .v. monethes, at the ſecond houre of the fifte moneth. He ſhalbe a good whyle without Children in wedlocke, yet he ſhall haue many. He ſhall haue a

charge in a ſtraunge countrey: But he ſhall dwell in hys owne natiue countrey. And if it chaunce he be borne at the ſeconde houre, than as touchyng the diſpoſition of his body, he ſhall bee marked in the breaſt, and in hys Fynger.
               As concernynge the diſpoſition of hys mynde, he ſhall haue naturally all the ſignes and markes that he ſhall haue whyche is borne in the firſt houre, or in another, ſauynge the ſeconde houre, for he that is borne in the ſeconde, is naturallye lyberall, and yet couetous.
               As concernynge the maner of hys lyfe, you muſte ſaye of hym that is borne in the ſeconde houre, as of the other that is borne in another houre of thys ſigne. He ſhall bee aboundaunte in vittayle and ryches. He ſhall oute lyue two Wyues that he ſhall marrye, by whom he ſhall haue hys gooddes and poſſeſſions. He ſhall bee myghtye and ſtronge by Sea and by lande, and ſhall haue a ſonne of power and myghte, of whome he ſhall ſee great thynges, and ſhall

haue generation of him. Some of hys members ſhalbe diminiſhed: and yf he eſkape ſuch a paſſion, he ſhal fal no more into it, whiche thinges appertaineth to hys good fortune. And finally, he ſhalbe delyuered from all aduerſitie.
               Touchinge his euyll fortune, he ſhall loſe ſome of hys goods by violence. He ſhall fal into a ryuer, whereoute he ſhal ryſe agayne, and ſhall take no hurte at all, as is aforeſayde. He ſhall come into the handes of a puyſante man, from whome he ſhalbe delyuered. He ſhall loſe by violence muche ryches whiche he had gotten, without recouery or hope of recouerye.
               The thyrde Chapter determineth of the iudgement of Piſces for the male. The man chylde borne in this Sygne ſhall haue a naturall marke in his head ſhulder, or foote, and a ſcarre in the middeſt of his bodye, or ſome where elles.
               He ſhall bee a player, merrye, a diſpyſer of Fortune, verye harde of beliefe, lecherous beyonde meaſure, and haue

great fanſye to women, whereby he ſhall ſuffer greate contumelye and hynderaunce. He ſhall bee furious and haſtye to anger: but as he is ſoone angrye, ſo ſhall he bee ſoone pacified agayne.
               He is naturally couetous, hardye, ſtandynge in hys owne conceyte, frendelye, vnkynde, a lyer. Yet not withſtandynge theſe vices he is wittie, accordynge to hys nature, auaricious, couetous and greedye of learnynge, eloquente, obſtinate in hys learnyng, defendynge hys concluſions obſtinatly and wittilye.
               And though he haue a ſmale witte, yet it is readye, ſharpe, and prompte. Suche a one borne thus is gyuen to the companye and loue of good men, earneſtlye louynge hys frendes, and wyllynglye wyll venter hym ſelfe for them, whereby he ſhall ſuffer hurte and detriment. He ſhall haue ſeuen greate ſyckenneſſes, whereof three ſhall bee verye extreame, and ſpeciallye the ſyxte, whyche he ſhall haue at foure and thyrtye yeares of age. And yf he eſkape it,

he ſhall lyue .lxxxv. yeares, and .iij. monethes, and .xiij. dayes, he ſhal dye of the vij. ſicknes. Vntyll .xxxiiij. yeares of hys age, he ſhall not be ryche nor poore, nor ſhall come to any honour. He ſhall bee ryche by the death of hys kynſfolke.
               He ſhall gette muche gooddes by hys labour, trauell, and notable induſtrye.
               He ſhall haue the reuenge of hys enemyes, and ſee the puniſhement of them. He ſhall marrye at .xxxiij. yeares, and yf he marrye before, he ſhall not kéepe hys Wyfe longe, but ſhall marrye another. He ſhall bee called the father of Chyldren, and ſhall haue manye, yet he ſhall not haue a ſonne at the begynnyng.
               If he wyll remedye hys euyll fortunes, and be delyuered from them, he muſte cal earneſtly vpon GOD, deſiring mercy for Ieſus Chriſtes ſake, and by that meanes he ſhal be delyuered. In marriyng a Wyfe he ſhall bee ſomewhat infortunate, becauſe it ſhall not bee expedient for him then, but in the age of xxxiij. yeares as is ſayde. He ſhall bee

hurte by his neyghbour in hys gooddes. He ſhall haue manye ſuytes in the law, becauſe of hys gettyng: and ſhall ſuffer muche and diuers tribulation, and ſpecially in hys youth, wherein certayne thynges ſhall come luckely to paſſe with hym. The Saterdaye ſhall bee vnfortunate for hym: Therefore that daye he maye not attempte nor take in hande any newe thyng.
               The .iiij. Chapter deſcribeth the iudgement of Piſces for the female.
               The mayde that is borne in this ſigne, ſhal haue a marke by nature in her head or face. She ſhall be feruent and earneſt verye honeſt, louynge the deckynge of her body: deſyryng to haue braue apparell: hardy, eloquent, hauynge a readye tounge to ſpeake, wyttye, wyſe, pitifull, mercifull, faythfull, amiable, liberall, of a merrye heart. She ſhall bee tormented wyth the grypynge and frettynge of the Bellye, payne of the ſtomacke, wyth the Lunatike paſſion or Franſie, whereby ſhe ſhall haue greate trouble

the ſpace of eyghte monethes: and after that ſhe is eſkaped from it, ſhe ſhall lyue two and ſeuentye yeares. She ſhal comme to greate honour, and haue manye Chyldren, and ſhall bee called the mother of Chyldren: yet hereof ſhe ſhall haue ſome miſfortune: becauſe her fyrſt Chylde ſhall bee a doughter and not a ſonne accordyng to the conſtellation. As for the mans parte beynge enclined to the contrarye, and ſurmountinge the naturall complexion of thys mayde, ſometyme for the meetynge of certayne perticuler cauſes, whyche maye alter the complexion of the man and of the woman, and maye ſomme thynge chaunge it. She ſhall bee burned and hurte with fyer. And yf it chaunce that her fyrſte Chylde bee a ſonne, he ſhall not bee a trewe male, becauſe of the oppoſition and inclination of the mother, whereof I haue already ſpoken. At .xxv. yeares of her age, ſhe ſhall haue ſuyte with her father or mother, or agaynſte them both, yf thei lyue. The Saterdays

ſhalbe contrary to her & vnlucky, therefore that day ſhe maye not beginne anye notable worke.
               The .v. Chapter reciteth the common fortune of Piſces. They that be borne in this ſigne, haue their fortune, in art of a handy crafts man, and in marchandiſe of cloth, if thei be faire, alſo in metalls, and in marchaundiſe of fleſhe, and namely in marchandiſe of corne & wheate and barley: and moreouer in horſe, in diuinitie & the ciuill law, thei ſhalbe ſubiect to whot ſickneſſes & burninge, as to feuers, fretting of the belly, poiſon, ſpecially at ye yeres of 44 & 68, thei ſhal haue 3 lucky daies in ye weke, Monday, thurſday & fryday, the tweſday & ſaterday vnlucky, ye wedneſday & ſonday indifferēt. Furthermore thei haue 6 good yeres & 6 bad, thei haue their good fortune toward the ſouth therfore thei muſt diſpoſe their doore, bed, & ſuch like affaires that waye, thei be cholerick, wherby thei be balde, & thei muſt weare grey apparell or black, and not red, grene, white, or blewe.
               
                  ¶Beſides that whiche is written in the Prologue ſet before the treatiſes here expreſſed by Chapters, you muſte number & reken this letter N. amonge ye numerall letters that ſignifie ye number, and it is as much as two beyng compoundes and made twiſe of the letter. I.
               Nowe, for to finde the totall or principall ſigne, you muſt diuide the number by .12. Of a thouſande there remaineth the number of 4.
               
                  
                     
                        Of 900
                        nothing.
                     
                     
                        Of 800
                        8.
                     
                     
                        Of 700
                        4.
                     
                     
                        Of 600
                        nothing.
                     
                     
                        Of 500
                        8.
                     
                     
                        Of 400
                        4.
                     
                     
                        Of 300
                        nothing.
                     
                     
                        Of 200
                        8.
                     
                     
                        Of 180
                        nothing.
                     
                     
                        Of 160
                        4.
                     
                     
                        Of 140
                        8.
                     
                     
                        Of 120
                        nothing.
                     
                     
                        Of 100
                        4.
                     
                     
                        Of 80
                        8.
                     
                     
                        Of 60
                        nothing.
                     
                     
                        Of 50
                        2.
                     
                     
                        Of 40
                        4.
                     
                     
                        Of 30
                        6.
                     
                     
                        Of 20
                        8
                     
                  
               
               The number that commeth of the letters of number, muſte bee diuided by 30, for to finde the particuler ſigne of the chylde that is borne, becauſe there be 30

particuler ſignes, and becauſe of the tayle of Virgo, whiche is diuided into two partes, whereof foloweth the diuiſion of the numbers by 30.
               
                  
                     
                        Of 1000
                        10.
                     
                     
                        Of 900
                        2.
                     
                     
                        Of 800
                        20.
                     
                     
                        Of 700
                        10.
                     
                     
                        Of 600
                        nothing.
                     
                     
                        Of 500
                        20.
                     
                     
                        Of 400
                        10.
                     
                     
                        Of 300
                        nothing.
                     
                     
                        Of 200
                        20.
                     
                     
                        Of 180
                        nothing.
                     
                     
                        Of 160
                        10.
                     
                     
                        Of 140
                        20.
                     
                     
                        Of 120
                        nothing.
                     
                     
                        Of 100
                        10.
                     
                     
                        Of 80
                        20.
                     
                     
                        Of 60
                        nothing.
                     
                     
                        Of 50
                        20.
                     
                     
                        Of 40
                        10.
                     
                  
               
               Furthermore, you muſt note that the number whiche commeth of the numerall letters of the name of the Chylde and of hys mother muſte bee diuided by 29 whereof the diuiſion foloweth.
               
                  
                     
                        Of 1000
                        remaineth 14.
                     
                     
                        Of 900
                        1.
                     
                     
                        Of 800
                        17.
                     
                     
                        Of 700
                        4.
                     
                     
                        Of 600
                        20.
                     
                     
                        Of 500
                        6.
                     
                     
                        Of 400
                        23.
                     
                     
                        
                           Of 80
                        22.
                     
                     
                        Of 60
                        2.
                     
                     
                        Of 50
                        21.
                     
                     
                        Of 300
                        10.
                     
                     
                        Of 200
                        26.
                     
                     
                        Of 180
                        6.
                     
                     
                        Of 160
                        15.
                     
                     
                        Of 140
                        24.
                     
                     
                        Of 120
                        4.
                     
                     
                        Of 100
                        13.
                     
                     
                        Of 40
                        11.
                     
                     
                        Of 30
                        1.
                     
                  
               
               The numerall letters ſignifiyng the number.
               
                  
                     
                        I.
                        one.
                     
                     
                        II.
                        two.
                     
                     
                        V.
                        fyue.
                     
                     
                        X.
                        tenne.
                     
                     
                        L.
                        fyftye.
                     
                     
                        C.
                        a hundred.
                     
                     
                        D.
                        fyue hundred.
                     
                     
                        M.
                        thouſand.
                     
                  
               
               Some men wyll not admitte N. for a ſignifiynge letter of two amonge the other ſeuen: yet there bee certayne names wherein this letter may ſerue in the ſteede of other letters.
            
            FINIS.
         
         
            
            
               OF PHISIOnomie. Nowe, for as muche as the maners of the mynde do folow the temperature of the bodye, I haue thought it meete and conuenient to adde here ſome ſignes of the Phiſionomie, accordyng to the quantitie or qualitie of ſome partes of the bodye,
            
               
               
               
                  
                      
                     ¶Sygnes.
                     ¶Nature.
                  
                  
                     The head
                     Great.
                     Of a dulle wytte.
                     Aſſes.
                  
                  
                     Verye ſmale.
                     Fooles.
                      
                  
                  
                     Meane.
                     Of a good wytte.
                     Naturall.
                  
                  
                     Sharpe poynted lyke a Sugar lofe.
                     Vnſhamefaſt.
                     Vaunters.
                  
                  
                     Wyth Heare ryght vpwarde.
                     Fearefull.
                     Paſſion.
                  
                  
                     Wyth Heare ryghte downewarde.
                     Symple.
                      
                  
                  
                     Wyth Heare much curled.
                     Fearefull.
                     Ethiopians.
                  
                  
                     Wyth thycke Heare.
                     Euyll.
                      
                  
                  
                     Wyth Heare curled at the ende.
                     Of good courage.
                     Lyons.
                  
                  
                     The forhead.
                     Verye ſmale.
                     Hard to be taught.
                     Hogges.
                  
                  
                     Rounde.
                     Of a dull wytte.
                     Aſſes.
                  
                  
                     Longe.
                     Flatterers.
                     Dogges.
                  
                  
                     Square.
                     Couragious.
                     Lyons.
                  
                  
                     Without wrynckles.
                     Flatterers.
                     Paſſion.
                  
                  
                     Rough and wrynckled.
                     Hardye.
                     Lyons.
                  
                  
                     Hangyng ouer the eyes.
                     Sadde.
                     Paſſion.
                  
                  
                     Hygh and loftye.
                     Liberall.
                     Lyons.
                  
                  
                     
                        
                        the eares.
                     Smale.
                     Geſters.
                     Appes.
                  
                  
                     Great.
                     Dulle.
                     Aſſes.
                  
                  
                     Blacke and hangyng.
                     Folyſhe.
                     Aſſes.
                  
                  
                     Meane.
                     Of good wytte.
                     Natural
                  
                  
                     The eyebrowes.
                     Ioyned together.
                     Sadde.
                      
                  
                  
                     Seperated muche.
                     Fooles.
                     Hogges.
                  
                  
                     Fyne and ſofte.
                     Couragious.
                     Lyons.
                  
                  
                     Thyn and hard.
                     Vncleanelye.
                     Hogges.
                  
                  
                     Thycke hangynge downewarde.
                     Fooles.
                      
                  
                  
                     the eyes.
                     Somewhat redde.
                     Shamefaſte.
                     Paſſion.
                  
                  
                     Moyſte and ſhynnynge.
                     Merye.
                     Of good maners.
                  
                  
                     Watrye weepyng.
                     Drunkardes.
                     Paſſion.
                  
                  
                     Runnyng.
                     Sleepye.
                     Paſſion.
                  
                  
                     Verye lytle.
                     Faynte hearted.
                     Apes.
                  
                  
                     Verye great.
                     Slowe.
                     Oxen.
                  
                  
                     Meane.
                     Of good diſpoſition.
                     Naturall.
                  
                  
                     Farre into the head.
                     Malicious.
                     Apes.
                  
                  
                     But a lytle into the head.
                     Couragious.
                     Lyons.
                  
                  
                     Bolt out of the head.
                     Fooles.
                     Aſſes.
                  
                  
                     Somewhat great, and not farre inwarde.
                     Meeke and gentle.
                     Oxen,
                  
                  
                     Oft wynkynge.
                     Fearefull.
                     Paſſion.
                  
                  
                     Redde.
                     Angrye.
                     Paſſion.
                  
                  
                     Verye blacke.
                     Fearefull.
                      
                  
                  
                     
                        
                        Blewe.
                     Fearefull.
                      
                  
                  
                     Blacke yellowyſhe.
                     Of a good ſtomacke.
                      
                  
                  
                     Chollerycke.
                     Furious.
                     Goates.
                  
                  
                     Sparkelynge.
                     Merye ſhameleſſe.
                     Dogges.
                  
                  
                     Of many colours.
                     Fearefull.
                     Paſſion.
                  
                  
                     Bryght and cleare.
                     Lecherous.
                     Cockes.
                  
                  
                     The noſe
                     Rounde blunt and great.
                     Couragious.
                     Lyons.
                  
                  
                     Lyke a Haukes byll.
                     Couragious.
                     Egles.
                  
                  
                     With great endes.
                     Couetous.
                     Oxen.
                  
                  
                     Sharpe at the ende.
                     Angrye.
                     Dogges.
                  
                  
                     Flatte in the middes.
                     Lecherous.
                     Buckes.
                  
                  
                     Wyde and open.
                     Angrye.
                     Paſſion.
                  
                  
                     Verye blacke.
                     Fearefull.
                     Ethiopians.
                  
                  
                     Verye white.
                     Fearefull.
                     Women.
                  
                  
                     Somewhat browne.
                     Stronge.
                     Meaneſſe.
                  
                  
                     Aberne.
                     Of a good heart.
                     Lyons.
                  
                  
                     Freckled.
                     Subtell.
                     Foxes.
                  
                  
                     Redde.
                     Wyttye.
                      
                  
                  
                     Enflamed.
                     Angrye.
                     Paſſion.
                  
                  
                     The face
                     Sharpe poynted.
                     Faythfull.
                     Dogges.
                  
                  
                     the Chyn
                     Wyth a rough nodde.
                     Liberall.
                     Lyons.
                  
                  
                     Great.
                     Stronge.
                      
                  
                  
                     Longe.
                     Fearefull and eaters.
                      
                  
                  
                     
                        
                        the necke
                     Sklender and ſmale.
                     Weake.
                     Women.
                  
                  
                     Fleſhye.
                     Angrye.
                     Bulles.
                  
                  
                     Shorte.
                     Deceytfull.
                     Wolues.
                  
                  
                     Meane.
                     Couragious.
                     Lyons.
                  
                  
                     The backbone hearye.
                     Vnſhamefaſt.
                     Brute beaſtes.
                  
                  
                     the hands
                     The fingers coupled.
                     Vncleanelye.
                     Hogges.
                  
                  
                     Short and great.
                     Raſhe and cruell.
                      
                  
                  
                     Nayles large and whyte.
                     Manlye.
                      
                  
                  
                     Narrowe and longe.
                     Cruell.
                      
                  
                  
                     Oblyque or awrye.
                     Impudent.
                      
                  
                  
                     Smale.
                     Craftye and ſubtyll.
                      
                  
                  
                     Breaſt.
                     With heare.
                     Inconſtant.
                     Byrdes.
                  
                  
                     Wythout heare.
                     Shameleſſe.
                     Women.
                  
                  
                     Ample and large.
                     Stronge.
                     Lyons.
                  
                  
                     Nauell.
                     Farre from the breſt.
                     Gluttons.
                      
                  
                  
                     Equally diſtant.
                     Prayſe worthye.
                      
                  
                  
                     the place about the priuye mēbers.
                     Ful of bones or ſharpe.
                     Stronge.
                     Male.
                  
                  
                     Fleſhye and fatte.
                     Weake and delicate.
                     Female.
                  
                  
                     Hanches.
                     Full of ſinowes.
                     Stronge.
                     Male.
                  
                  
                     Fleſhye.
                     Weake and delicate.
                     Female.
                  
                  
                     Thighes
                     Full of ſinows & thicke.
                     Stronge.
                      
                  
                  
                     Full of ſinows and ſmale.
                     Lecherous.
                      
                  
                  
                     Great and euyll faſhioned.
                     Vnſhamefaſte.
                      
                  
                  
                     
                        
                        Legges.
                     Ful of ſinows & euil faſhioned
                     Stronge.
                     Male.
                  
                  
                     Fleſhy and well formed.
                     Weake and tender.
                     Female.
                  
                  
                     Feete.
                     Full of ſinows and equally proporcioned.
                     Stronge.
                     Male.
                  
                  
                     Narrowe and ſmale.
                     Weake and tender.
                      
                  
                  
                     Wyth croked and nayles.
                     Vnſhamefaſte, rauenous, greedye.
                      
                  
                  
                     Wyth ryght nayles.
                     Commendable.
                     Naturall.
                  
                  
                     Bodye.
                     Verye ſmale.
                     Wyttye, ſharpe.
                      
                  
                  
                     Verye great.
                     Slowe.
                      
                  
                  
                     Meane.
                     Wyſe.
                      
                  
                  
                     Euyll proporcioned.
                     Craftye.
                      
                  
                  
                     Well compaſſed.
                     Stronge.
                      
                  
                  
                     Of a lyght fleſhe.
                     Wyſe.
                      
                  
                  
                     Of a ſoft fleſhe.
                     Forgetfull.
                      
                  
                  
                     Of a harde fleſhe.
                     Dull and heauye of ſpirite.
                      
                  
                  
                     Mouyng.
                     Lyghte.
                     Inconſtant.
                      
                  
                  
                     Slowe.
                     Of a groſſe wytte.
                      
                  
                  
                     Heauye.
                     Graue, couragious.
                      
                  
                  
                     Voyce.
                     Stronge.
                     Graue iniurious.
                     Aſſes
                  
                  
                     Graue endynge ſharpelye.
                     Fearefull, egre or fierce.
                     Oxen,
                  
                  
                     Softe and lowe.
                     Gentle.
                     Shepe.
                  
                  
                     Graue and moderate.
                     Stronge.
                     Dogges.
                  
                  
                     Sharpe and ſtronge.
                     Angrye.
                     Goates.
                  
               
            
            
               HEre by the nature you muſte vnderſtand the inclination and naturall complexion, whiche ſpeciallye we maye coniecture by the coloure of the bodye. For naturallye blacke men are fearefull as the Ethiopians be.
            Whyte men alſo bee timerous and fearefull: and they that bee of a meane coloure Blacke and Whyte, bée ſtrong and bolde. They that bee yellowe of the coloure of Golde bee couragious as Lyons. And yf they bee to yellowe, they bee malicious as Foxes.
            They that bee ſome what pale and darcke coloured bee fearefull: and this is referred to the perturbation that commeth of feare. They that bee verye pale, and almoſte greene for paleneſſe bee colde: and therefore they are vnapte to moouynge, ſlowe, and negligent to worke. They that be of ſanguin colour and ſomewhat redde, are nimble and ready to work. They that be of a firy and enflamed colour become oute of their wits, and be like mad men, when

thei be to muche chafed. So you muſte cōiecture of other colours that take part of the aforeſayd. They that deſire to ſee many other ſignes & tokens of the naturall inclination, muſte haue recourſe to Ariſtotles litle booke intituled of the phiſiognomy: & to the works of Galene, ſpecially to his litle booke, where he ſayeth that the maners of the minde do folowe the temperature of the body. Furthermore, you muſte note yt we haue foure humours, which Galene calleth the elements of liuing thinges yt haue blood, to wéete: blood, fleme, collor, & the melancoly humour. The blood is whote, moiſt & ſwéete. The ſpettle called fleme, is cold moiſt, & without qualitie, as the water is, if it bee not depraued. The collor or flaua bilis is whote, dry & bitter. The melancoly humour is cold, dry, bitter & earthy. The blood noriſheth. The fleme helpeth the moouing of the ioynts. The coller clenſeth & maketh cleane the flematike excrements of the bowels: & prouoketh the power or ſtrength excretiue.
            
               The melancolicke humour helpeth the bellye in hys actions: For, becauſe it is egre and bitter, it conſtreyneth and preſſeth the mouthe of the Ventricle or bellye called the ſtomacke, and maketh it embrace and reteyne the meate, vntyll the digeſtion bee made. The bloode maketh men moderate, merye, pleaſaunte, fayre, and of a ruddye colour, which bee called ſanguine men.
            The fleame maketh men, ſlouthfull, ſluggyſhe, neglygente, drowſye, fatte, and ſoone to haue graye Heares.
            The Choller maketh them angrye prompte of wytte, nymble, inconſtante, leane and of a quycke digeſtion. The melancolike humour, whiche is as it were the ſubſtaunce, the bottome, and leeſe of the bloode, maketh men rude, churlyſhe, carefull, ſadde, auaricious, deceyuours, traitours, enuious, fearefull, weake hearted, and dreaming and imaginynge euyll thynges, vexed with the trouble of the mynde as though thei were haunted wyth a malignaunte

ſpirite. Theſe humours than maye bee referred to the Phiſonomye: for by them a man maye knowe the naturall inclination of men. You maye alſo referre therevnto the temperature of ages. For the puerilitie or Chyldehode, whiche is from the byrthe vnto fiftene yeares or there aboute, is whote and moyſt. The adoleſcēcie or youth, which endureth vntyll fiue and twentye yeres, is of a good and meane temperature. The youthe or floryſhynge age of mans ſtate, whiche endureth tyll fiue and thyrtye yeres, is of a whote and drye temperature. The fourth age is the firſt parte of olde age, whiche endureth tyll fourtye and nyne yeres: and then men begynne to ware colde and drye, and lyke vnto a plante that dryeth vp and wythereth, and they bee called in Latyne Senes The ſeconde parte of olde age endureth vntyll end of the life: and the men be called in Latyn Seniores. And this age is alſo diuided into two or three degrees. They that be in the firſt

degree, haue yet theyr greene olde age, whiche yet maye handle and execute ciuill matters. They bee of the ſeconde degree, whiche drawe them ſelues by lytle and lytle from the ſayde affaires becauſe of theyr weakeneſſe. They of the thyrde degree are in extreme feebleneſſe. If you deſyre to knowe anye moore of the ſignes of Phiſognomie, you ſhall finde them by diligent readynge of authours.
            
               
               
                  The prediction of the maners and natures of men, by conſiderynge of theyr face and other partes of theyr body.
               
                  ¶Of the iudgement of the head.
                  SEynge that the head is the part that is moſt ſéene of al the parts of mans bodye, Hypocrates in his .vj. booke of common ſickneſſes, not without cauſe ſheweth how to iudge of the whole bodye by the conſideration of the head. For that which is either greater or leſſer then it oughte to bee is alwayes faultie and not good, and they that haue this faulte or lacke, haue alſo thoſe thinges that do euidently appartain to the faulty & hurted myndes. And now euen as the head whiche is litle, is neuer without faulte, ſo that whiche is great, is not altogether parfite and good: but ſometyme good and ſomtime yll. It is a ſigne of goodnes or of wickednes.
                  
                     But the beſt faſhion is the round head, and ſomwhat low on both ſydes, as yf you ſhoulde imagine a verye rounde Sphere made of Ware to bee ſomewhat lowe of eche ſyde. The beſt forme then and ſhape of a head, is that whiche is meanely greate, and hath a comelye conuenient roundneſſe: whiche appeareth before and behynde ſomewhat lowe. The principall cauſe why the head is lytle, is the lacke of matter or ſubſtaunce. And the cauſe of the greatnes of it, is the abundaunce and ſuperfluitie of the ſubſtaunce and ſeede man. But yf there bee lytle matter wyth the force of the firſte formatiue vertue, it ſhalbe of a good forme and ſhape, and leſſe euil, for as much as in the creature the noughtines of the faſhion is ioyned with ſmalenes of the head. The braine foloweth the forme and faſhion of the ſkull. For yf the ſkull bee corrupte, the brayne ſhalbe alſo corrupte. The head of man hath more brayne proporcionallye then all other beaſtes. The male

hath more braine then the female. The head of man hath moe ioynynges then all other thynges: and the male moe then the female. A well faſhioned head is lyke a mallet, whereof the fore parte and the hynder parte, be lofty and high. The forme or faſhion of the meane ventricle, muſte bee a lytle preſſed together, and ſo the cogitatiue is the more noble. If the forme before be lowe, the man hath no iudgement. And the hynder parte bee lowe, he hath no memorye, and hath a weakeneſſe of mouyng hys ſynowes, and conſequentlye of all his bodye: for by the force of the braine is declared the force of the necke and ſynowes: and alſo the brodeneſſe of the ſhulders and of the breaſt, and the partes of the ſydes called Hypocondria, whiche be ioynynges to the lyuer and lunges. The head that is of a reaſonable faſhion augmenteth the witte and vertue, and declareth a magnificence in the man: but when it is euyll is faſhioned it ſheweth the contrary.
               
               
                  
                  The iudgement of the head.
                  THey that haue a great head, and yet not out of meaſure, are commonly faire and well condicioned. They that haue a greate head oute of meaſure be fooles, idiotes, dull heades. When the head is great proporcioned to the body, and ſpecially to the necke, ſo yt the neeke be ſtronge, and meanelye great with the ſinowes great & ſtrong, it is a very good ſigne. The head faſhioned lyke a Sugar lofe, declareth the man to be paſte ſhame, a deuourer, bold and raſhe, which thing commeth of the heat and dryneſſe of the brayne. It is a another thyng when the head is great and the other members are not great accordynglye. The head is of a good faſhion, when the ventricle before is alſo of a good faſhion, and moyſte ynoughe. For the takynge of the kindes commeth of the moyſture, and the reteynyng commeth of drynes in the part behinde. The head with a meane ventricle

ſomewhat preſſed together about the ſides, declareth the ventricle cogitatiue to be ready to comprehende and deuiſe, that whiche is comprehended, and that becauſe of the vnitie of the ſpirites that are in that place.
                  The head rounde ſignifieth, mobilitie, vnſtablenes, forgetfulneſſe, ſmale diſcretion and lytle wyſedome in the man, for ſometymes the mouing of the ſpirites ſtayeth. The lytle head neceſſarily ſheweth an euill ſigne, for aſmuch as it ſoone falleth into a ſickennes, becauſe that in it there is litle brayne, and the ventricles narowe, wherein the ſpirites to ſtraightly kepte doe not theyr office: for they are oppreſſed, enflamed, and choked vp, wherefore they imagine not well, they diſpoſe nothing wel, they haue no memory. Suche men are commonly ſoone angry, & are fearfull, & kepe their anger long, by reaſon of the great drought, and whote temperature of the braine. Thei take in hand falſe matters thei ſpeake yll, & haue a double tongue.

The longe head withoute meaſure, hauynge the Organes a wrye, and not ryghte, noteth vnſhamefaſtnes and follye. The head lowe and flatte betokeneth inſolencie and diſſolutneſſe.
                  The head high before betokeneth pride. The head that hath as it were a holow hoole behynde and is lowe and holow, declareth man to bee ſubiecte to angre and deceyte. The greate head wyth a large forehead and a face lyke a Gyaunt, is a ſigne of a ſlowe man, gentle, ſtronge, and not eaſye to be taught. When the head is ryghte and almoſte flatte in the myddeſt, and of a meane greatnes, it ſheweth the man to haue greate wytte, and to bee couragious. If the head bee in all poyntes of a good meaſure, it is a ſigne of a great wytte and that the man is ſharpe and liberall. We meane the head not to great nor to ſmale, but accordynge to the quantitie and meaſure of the bodye.
               
               
                  
                  ¶The Iudgement of the body by the colour.
                  BLacknes in a man like a gliſtering horne is a token of aduſtion as wel in the members as in the heare. A blacke colour ſheweth the man to be of a ſmall courage in feates of warre fearefull and craftye and is to be compared to them that dwell in the ſouthe. A greene colour, darke, or blacke, declareth the man ready and prompte to anger. Men that haue a verye redde or redde headed in colour are ſubtile and craftie. As the common ſayeng among the Frenche men is l'ay veu bein peu de petites gens humbles, & rouſſeaux fideles, that is to ſay I haue ſene fewe litle mē humble or lowlye, & fewe redde headded men faithfull and true. They that haue a pale and a dead face, and yet a redde forehead and lowe eyes, are altogether ſhamefaſte. And to them you may attribute paſſion. The white colour & ſamewhat ruddye, ſignifieth the

man verye ſtronge and courageous. Suche are the northen men. The colour that is verye whyte ſheweth the man to be contrarye to vertue. A pale coloure ſygnifyeth the man to be withoute courage in deedes of warre, fearefull, and a turner of his backe, yf ſyckenes be not the cauſe of thys palenes. When a browne colour is myxed with a pale, it declareth the man to be a blabbe of his tonge and a prater, ſone angrye, and a ſpeaker without any temperature. This colour then tendeth to an extreeme folly. They that be but a lytle red and freckled and haue quauering and moouinge lyppes and wyde noſtetrells be commonly couragious and readye to wrathe and anger: and to theym alſo is paſſion attributed. A meane redde colour noteth a readye and pregnaunt wytte and vnderſtandynge. They that be of a fyrye colour or verye neere, keepe theyr anger longe and are harde to pacyfye or to be ruled when they are angrye. When

the vaines of the braine and of the temples be ſeene and the eyes ſanguyne, it is a ſygne that the man is ſubiecte to vehement wrath, and that ſometime he is folyſhe & out of his wyts. When the face is redde, it is a ſygne of ſhame or dronkenneſſe you ſhall then knowe this colour by the ſygnes of the eyes.
               
               
                  ¶ The iudgement of the heare by the ſubſtaunce.
                  THe heare ſmooth and thicke betokeneth meekenes, colde and moiſture. The further that the brayne is from heate, the more hearye is the head. The heate of a man that goeth to the vpper partes percinge throughe from all partes goeth thorowe the ſkinne of the heade and maketh an humour to comme oute of the holes that it maketh, and the fyneſt parte of this humour vanyſheth away but the groſſer remayneth wythin and is turned in to heare. Whyche is harder than the

ſkinne and that by the meanes of the outward colde, & the heare is as bigge as the pore or hole, and as longe as the violence and force of thruſting it out is great. When the heare commeth oute ſlowlye, it is a ſigne of a moyſte complexion and not ſanguyn. If they come a paſe the body ſhall enclyne rather to dryneſſe than to moyſture. And whan heate and drougth doe ioyne together the heare commeth out the ſooner, and therewithall groſſer. The multitude of heares declareth a hote man and the groſſneſſe of theym ſheweth him to be full of fumoſite. And therefore that happeneth more in yonge men than in yonge children. For in children the ſubſtaunce is more vaporous than moyſt. But in yong men it is contrary wherfore contraries folow their contraries. Abundaunce of heare in yong children ſheweth their complexion that encreaſeth and augmenteth, to tende to melancolines. The curlinge of the heare ſignifieth heate and drines, & cōmeth of

the crokednes of the pores. The heares that be right vp in the head & the heare alſo that ſtandeth vprighte in the reſt of the body betoken fearfulnes in ye man. The heares right or thicke declare the man to be cruell and whan they be rare then they ſhewe him to be a deceiuour and if they be curled and turninge vpward it is a ſigne of a hoate complexiō. And they be faſt together appearing vp on the forehead they declare a myghty courage and a brutall as the courage of beares. The heares that be preſſed downe and couched together vpon the myddle of the forehead ryſing together vpon the toppe of the heade ſhewe the man to be hoate, and without knowledge of honeſtye. The heares that be thine ſlender and fewe in number beſide the temples declare the man to be colde and without force. The reaſon is for in that place, are the great arteres & that place ought naturally to be hoote, and conſequently to haue aboundance of heares for aſmuch as the generation

and growynge of heares commeth of heate. Therfore whan the heare is thin and ſlender in that place, there is lacke of heate, and this ought to be aſcribed vnto women for thei neuer haue a bondance of heare in that place. The heare thinne and hard beſyde the temples declare the man to be colde and feareful. And when they be thycke in the ſame place and beſyde the eares it is a ſygne of heate & whordome. And thei be there ſtable, blacke or yellowe they ſignify a violēt mind or courage. If thei be groſſe and ſomewhat whiter, it is a ſigne that the man ſhall be indocible whom men ſhall not rule nor tame. The abundāce of groſſe heares & preſſed downe, with the abundance of heare in all the reſt of the body, doe ſhewe in an infante a melancolines to come, that is to ſaye, that he ſhall fall into a furye or folly. When heares growe in a man that is already aged it is a token of great aduſtiō by nature, yt which engendreth folly & priuation of wytte and ſenſe. Women are neuer

bald, for their nature is like the nature of infantes or children. The gelded men lykewyſe neuer waxe bald for they be almoſt of the nature of womē. The heares yt are made curled by touching like vnto the wrinkling of pepper doe ſygnifye weakeneſſe in the vertue digeſtiue and age comminge haſtelye on.
               
               
                  ¶The Iudgement of the colour of the heare.
                  THE ſignification of the colour of the heare is not veryfyed for the moſt part but in temperate climates. Yet a man maye Iudge thereof ſome thinge in euerye climate in making compariſon of men of ye climate vnto other as to ye Flemynges & Ethiopians. For the Ethiopians be blacke & their heare is curled and extreme crooked. Yet therefore their complexion ſhall not be hoate but thys heate and curlynge of heare commeth of an outwarde heate.
                  
                     For they be rather colde, for as much as the heate goethe oute by vapours. But Fleminges whiche dwell in cold regions, are whit and haue their heare ſome what of a yellowe colour flatte and playne. And yet for all that we may not ſay that generally they be cold but rather that their complexion is verye hote: for the heate is within them as it commeth to paſſe in winter &c. A white colour ſignifieth either a vehement colde, as it appeareth in olde men that haue white heares or elles a great dryeneſſe, as it happeneth in things vegetatiue when they drye vp, the which for their blacknes or greeneſſe turne in to whiteneſſe. And that neuer happeneth vnto men but at the end of ſickneſſes dryinge vppe. Heares haue fower principall colours to weete blacke redde, aberne and whyte or graye. The regions and ayer doe ſome thinge in the aperation of the heares. The whyteneſſe of heares commeth by wante of naturall heate or by rotten

fleame. And is a ſygne ſome tyme of wanton maners and conditions. The blacke heare cometh of ſuperabundant coler aduſte or of bloode aduſte, redde heare ſygnifyethe heate whyche is not aduſte for they be of a diminiſhed heate The heares that be very redde declare the man to be a craftye deceiuour, depriued of wytte colerycke, ful of wrath and furious withoute reaſon. The heares that be of a cheſte nutte colour declareth the man to be vpryght, iuſte and well beloued of men. Golden heares, that is to ſaye yellowe heare or of the colour of golde, come of colde diminiſhed. The abern coloured or yellowe heare hold ſomething of cold, and the heate is dead in the moyſt, and this is referred vnto infantes. The people of the northe notwythſtandinge haue thys heate bycauſe of the region. And therefore this muſte be noted for ſuche thynges doe manye tymes deceyue the Iudgers of Phiſyognomye. The blackeneſſe of heares whyche is lyke

to a bryghte horne with ſome roughnes and crookednes declareth the heate of the complexion: but the heare that is onelye blacke ſygnifyeth fearfullneſſe and couetouſnes. The colour that is as it were a bright gliſtering horne, is like to the nature of Mars. Neuertheles the heares be not groſſe, but ſomwhat fyne of the fineſſe of the humours, and are made blacke wyth a greate heate, which thing appeareth in breade toſted vpon the coales bycauſe the moyſture in gone. But when the reſt of the body is to heary then Mars & Saturne doe employ their forces. And ſuche men are commonly theues and robbers and when they haue their breaſt onely hearie, it is a ſigne of heate & of a great courage. When all the body is couered wt heare, it is rather a ſigne of ye courage a fowerfooted beaſt then of a mā: when the nod of ye necke is couered wt heare euen from the heade it is a ſygne of ſtrength and of courage and in that the man is like to the lion.
               
               
                  
                  ¶ The Iudgement of the forehead.
                  THe face is the onelye partie where the man onely becommeth. They that haue a great forehead are cō
                     monly ſlouthfull and are compared to oxen. They that haue a broad forehead commonly chang their minde and yf it be very great, they be fooles of lytle diſcretion and rude of witte. Vnderſtand take this brodnes wt the iuſt quantitye of the length and largenes. They that haue a rounde forehead are ſubiecte to wrath and anger ſpecially if their forehead be open & plaine. And they be alſo inſenſible like vnto Aſſes. They yt haue a litle forehead and narrow be fooles, & doltes, not eaſely to be taught, ſlouens, deuourers lyke ſwine. They ye haue a metly long forehead haue good wits & ar eaſely to be taught but yet they are ſom what vehemēt as dogs be. They yt haue ſquare forehed of a meane greatnes for mall to the heade are vertuous, wyſe,

and couragious like Lions. They that haue a plaine and flatte forehead and wt out wrinkle will not bowe, & be wtout wytte contumelious, and much ſubiect vnto anger, obſtinate, and full of contention. They that haue a longe and ſtretched oute foreheade be flatterers and ſuch haue their parte of paſſions. They that haue a darcke and couered foreheade be audatious and terrible. A lowe forehead and obſcure, maketh the man readye to weepe, and in that he folowethe the pecockes. The forehead that is great hath euer muche groſſe fleſhe, and contrarye the lytle forehead hath fine & thinne fleſhe. The lytle forehead and fineſſe of the ſkynne betoken a fyne wytte and wauerynge. Nowe than the ſpirite or wytte, is a fyne body engendred of the vapours of the bloode. And this ſpirite or wytte beareth the vertues of the ſoule to the ſpirituall mēbers. And therfore where there be groſſe humours there a good wytte cannot be. When a foreheade is

to much wrinkled, it is a ſigne of a man wythout ſhame, and this wrinkling cōmeth of to much moyſture, although that ſometime it proceedeth of drieth, & if the ſame be not in all ye forehead, it declareth the man to be full of anger, and very ſubiect to anger and kepeth longe hys anger and hatred wythoute cauſe. They that haue a ſhorte foreheade, the temples and the checkes flatte preſte downe, & large chawbones he ſubiecte to the diſeaſe called the kinges euyll. They that haue as it were a litle cloud on ye toppe of their noſe or in ye middes, as narrowe are coumpted angry men as bulles and Lions. A hygh forehead large and longe ſignifieth encreaſe of goods. A low foreheade is no ſigne of a manly mā. The forehead that is ſome what ſwelling vp aboute the temples wyth a groſſenes of fleeſhe wyth the Iawes alſo full of fleeſhe, declareth a greate courage anger, pryde and a groſſe vnderſtanding.
               
               
                  
                  ¶ The Iudgement of the eyebrowes.
                  THE eyebrowes are places in the ioynture of the bones, and therefore they growe in manye men when they be olde. The eyebrowes that be very heary declare folyſhnes of maners and miſcheife. The eyebrowes thicke with abundance of heare ioyned to the beginning of the noſe do ſygnifye a great aduſtion, & ſuch men are of an euyl nature. If the eyebrows yt be hygh vpward do deſcend to the begynning of the noſe and aboue are ryſyng to the tēples, it is a ſigne that heat & drougth do rule, and ſuch men be crafty & malefactours If ye eyebrows deſcend downwardon ye ſide of the noſe, & ryſyng vpward on the ſyde of the temples, they declare men to be without ſhame and dulle and that bycauſe of a furyous heate. The eyebrows thinne and of a competent greatnes, declare the, temperature and goodnes of the humours

and they that haue them ſo are of a greate wytte. The eyebrowes longe ſhewe the man to be arrogant and wythout ſhame, but when they be longe wyth much heare they ſygnifye the man to thinke and to haue hys mynde vppon great thynges. The eyebrowes whyche deſcende downewarde on the ſyde of the noſe, and rayſed vpward on the ſyde of the temples, and hangyng downeward on bothe ſydes declare the man to be wythout ſhame enuious, folyſhe inſatiable, and lyke vnto hogges. The eyebrowes which deſcend crooked on the ſide of the noſe declare the man to be witty in naughty thinges, and whan they be crooked on the out ſide of the eye, they ſignifie the man to be recreatife & merry. If ye eyebrowes be right as though they were drawen with a lyne and lōg it is a ſigne of an euyll minde weake and femnine and as womens mindes bee. When the eyebrowes comme togyther, they ſhewe the man

to be verye penſyfe and not very wyſe. Hanging eyebrows and falling downe vpon the eyes, declare enuye: but yf they be crooked they ſygnifye a ſmalle memorye. The eye browes that be rounde compaſſed lyke a bowe, ſo that they ioyne almoſte to the noſe, declare the man to be ſubtyll wytty and ſtudious. The eyebrowes thynne meete or meaſured by the diamenter, and greate betoken a good wytte.
               
               
                  ¶The Iudgemente of the eyelyddes.
                  THE eyelyddes are ſette aboue the great coueringes of ye ſmal vaines by a groſſe vapour. The fyneneſſe of the ſkynne declarethe the ſubſtaunce of the matter that is to ſaye of the humours and that coler hathe the domynion. And they that haue ſuch heare, be malycyous and vitious vnto whome you maye alſo aſcribe the other paſſyons of colere.
                  
                     And when that place is verye fleſhye (as the eyes of the Dules) it is a ſigne of fraude and guyle. The eye lidde appearyng hygh aboue, and ſeemeth fuller then it is, declynynge a lytle aboue the eye, declareth the ſight to be other then the common ſight of men, and to muche fixed and ſet vppon one thyng. But yf the ſayde eye lydde tend downwarde, it is a ſigne that the man is full and fatte, and namely when it is redde rounde aboute, it is a ſigne that the man is a dronkarde and riotous, &c, whyche thynge I haue tryed in manye men which dyd haunt tauernes. The reaſon is, becauſe ſuche a diſpoſition of the eye lydde ſignifieth weakeneſſe of the eyes, and conſequentlye of the brayne. Wherefore they that haue them ſo, feare often tymes the Wyne. If thei be thinne and fine downward, ſo that the whyte of the eye bee couered, it is a ſigne of dryneſſe of humors. And if that happen in any ſharpe paſſion, it is a ſigne of death. When the

heare of the Eyelyddes is croked downewarde, or naturally tourned or wreathed at one ſyde, it is a ſigne of lyinge and ſubteltie. They that haue verye great or groſſe Eyelyds, ſée fartheſt of, for they conſerue theyr ſyght wyth heate and outwarde colde. Whan the corners of the Eyes bée broade, it is a ſygne of diſeaſes of the Eyes. And yf they haue anye fleſhye apparence, they ſignifye Dronkennes, and ſpecially when ye Eyes bée apparent and cleare, and haue theyr couerynges dryed vp.
                  The Eyelyds aboue the Eyes, whiche couer them beneath ſignifie longe lyfe. They that wagge and remoue often theyr Eyelyddes, bée fearefull, and wythoute good ſence or wytte.
                  The Eyelyddes thynne, ſygnifye healthe, and declare the thoughte of the man to bée nygh vnto good.
               
               
                  The iudgement of the eyes.
                  
                     THe complexion of the Eyes is moyſt, & they bée made of .vij. lids, whiche are called in Latyne Tunicae oculorum, with thrée humours. The paſſions of the mynde bée declared ſpecially by the Eyes, as tribulation, myrth, loue, hatred, & ſuche other.
                  The Eyes haue foure principall colours, to wytte, blacke, ſomewhat whyte, chaungeable, darcke, and taunye. The forme of the Eyes that bée rounde, are the moſte wauerynge and rollyng that bée, the moſt parfyte, and vncorrupt, becauſe there is no ſquarenes in them. The Eyes that haue corners are moſt fylled wt ſuperfluities in ye ſame corners: the eyes yt be great betoken fearfulnes & weakenes, for their groſſenes cōmeth to a great abūdance of moiſture in ye brain, wherin ther is a certeyn coldnes, which is ſpred amōg ye mēbres, & quencheth ye blood: wherfore euen as the ſprite of the blood maketh the man bold, ſo the cōplexion that is cold and moiſte maketh him fearefull.

The eyes that bee bolt forewarde, declare follye in the man. But when thei bee hollowe inward they ſhewe a malicious ſubteltie in the man. Broade eyes tendynge to the largenes of the bodye, and lyke vnto Hogges eyes, declare a moyſture of the bodye. They that haue theyr appearynge outwarde and loftye ſee not verye well: for their eyes bee farre of from their fountaine whiche is the brayne. And ſuche men are commonlye greate babblers and praters. The hollowe eyes farre in the head haue a ſharper ſighte than the other. The rollynge or waggynge of the eyes commeth of heate and betokeneth wrath, lecherye, and boldenes. When the eyes moue deformely, ſo ye nowe thei runne, and now they ſtande ſtyll, it is a ſigne of great malyce, and that ſuche men are full of wicked cogitations. They that remoue theyr eyes ſwiftly with a ſharpe ſight, be theues, vnfaythfull, and full of deceyte. Suche men haue a ſubtell witte, but it is

readyer to euyll than to good. A ſtedfaſt looke, commeth of two great and ſtedfaſt cogitation, and oftentymes of a deſyre they haue to deceyue. They that haue a looke lyke women, are whoremaiſters and withoute ſhame: for that diſpoſition commeth to them by ſuch a complexion as women haue. When a man looketh as thoughe he were a chylde, ſo that hys face and eyes, be alwayes ſmylyng, it is a ſigne that he ſhall be of a longe and merrye lyfe. Merrye and laughyng eyes with the reſt of the face, betokeneth flattery, lecherye, and backebytinge. The eyes that bee as it were yellowe, ſignifie crueltye and deceyte, as it appeareth well ynoughe in baudes and murtherers, this colour commeth of a Choller raignyng and aduſt. Lytle eyes ſignifie malyce, folly, and weakeneſſe in a man. The hollownes of the eyes commeth of a dryeth, whiche dryeth vp the muſcles and ligamentes. Whereof enſueth a contradiction in the inward

partes, & that the man becometh brainles. The eyes are ſet & ſituat naturally in man accordyng to the largenes of the body. The Eyes that are of diuers colours & dimme in the balle of them betoken folyſhnes. The boltyng oute of the Eyes doth repreſent diuers obiectes, whereby it commeth to paſſe that the man is confuſe with this diuerſitie of obiectes, goynge aboute to beholde them all together. The Eyes that tend vpward, ſignifie goodnes, but if they be red & great tending vpward, thei ſignifie wickednes, folly, & dronknes, And that cōmeth of the weakenes of the brayne, whyche is verye moyſte and not temperate. The eleuation of the Eyes commeth by accident, for the cauſe of it is to muche heate, the Sygne whereof is the redde colour: whereof alſo commeth the perturbation of the reaſonable ſoule.
                  As we ſée in the great anger of men.
                  The extention of the Eyes and of the face, ſhewe the malyce of the man: becauſe that heate and drynes bée the

cauſe thereof. And the whote ſoule, bryngeth commonly ſome euyll ſigne. The Eyes that bée as it were hidden in the head, ſée further of then other and ſignifie ſuſpicion, malyce, daungerous anger and naughtye conditions: they declare the man to haue a great memorye, and ſpeciallye of Iniuries: audacious, cruell, full of crafte, a lyer, vicious, and a Whoremonger. &c. Whan the Eyes are nowe ſhutte nowe open, and by and by ſtande ſtyll, ſuche men haue not yet committed any crimes, but they haue them in theyr heart. The Eyes haue diuerſities of colours becauſe they bée Diaphanes and of a rare ſubſtaunce and fyne. And therefore the ſpirites of the ſyght ſhew their qualities in the Eye. As a womā that hath her flowers ſpotteth the looking glaſſe, & marreth children in the cradell, & ſomtime hurteth whole & ſound eyes: when there be many apparent ſpots in the ball of the Eye it is a ſigne of noughtynes.
                  
                     And yet ſhall the ſpotted eye be worſe, yf it bee of diuers colours. The chaungeablenes of the eyes commeth of nothyng but of heate rayſynge vp the vapours vnto the eyes. And the greater the varietie is, the greater is the heate. For as much as the ſpottes be diuers, the aduſtion of the ſpirite rayſed vp, is the greater, whereof commeth the diuerſitie of maners, and the multitude of vices. And of this great varietie, the honeſte and commendable iudgement is corrupted. The eyes that bee redde as coales, ſignifie wickedneſſe and obſtinatie. For by the colour of fier, is ſignified greate Choller. They that haue meane eyes, enclinynge towarde the colour of the ſkye, or ſomewhat blacke, haue a ſharpe and pearſyng vnderſtandynge, and be faithfull and curteſye. Almanſor ſaieth that the beſt and moſte commendable colour of the eyes is betwene blacke and chaungeable, yf they bee not full of beames, or yf there bee not any rednes

or yellownes in thē, thoſe eyes declare diſcretion & vnderſtanding. His reaſon is, becauſe they bee withoute Choller or Melancoly aduſt. The colour of the eyes graye and blacke, ſpecially where bee no ſpottes, is cauſe of moyſte humours and temperate without aduſtion, whereof foloweth the ſpirite lyke vnto the nature. And of this ſpirite commeth the vnderſtandynge and ſpeculation: the diuers coloured is made of a moore cleare viſible ſpirite, therefore ſuche men are well borne, and ſéekers of knowledge and ſcience. The worſer eyes haue whyte ſpottes or blacke or redde, or of ſome other colour. And they that haue ſuche eyes are worſe then all other, and more to be reproued. The chaungeable great and of aberne colour, yf they haue lytle redde ſparkes very duſtye ſignifieth the man to bee troubled in hys mynde and vicious: but yet bolde and wyttye. When there be lytle redde ſpottes in the eyes, and tourne moore to blacke

than to red ſo that they ſéeme blacke, it is a ſygne of a noble heart, iuſte, good & witty. The Eyes that ſhyne wythin as ſpottes of Whyte betoken cleane men, ſtable, and verye courtiſe.
                  The Eyes that haue lytle ſpottes all together red, & yet not roūd but ſquare, and ſhynynge lyke fyer wythin & vnderneath, & that there bée other beſyde them that bée pale, & other blood colour, & that the circles whiche cloſe in the ball of the Eye bée ſanguine, & that the Eye bée of a good greatneſſe, & that the Eyelyds & the ball do remoue & wagge much, it is a Sygne of a cruell heart, moore than a man would thinke: the redder thoſe lytle ſpottes bée & the ſmaler, ſo much the moore do they ſhew the great anger & wickednes in the man: the ſpottes that bée greater & darker, diminiſhe thoſe great vices: but they take them not away all together: the blacke ſpottes or ſanguine in the blacke ball of the Eye or browne do ſignifie malice

or poyſonyng. The pale ſpottes ſignifye ſecreate wyckedneſſe. And you muſte note that as muche as the colours are moore vehement, the moore efficatie they haue.
                  Yet there bée ſome Eyes coloured lyke the Rainebowe, the whyche yf they bée drye, declare great lacke of wytte: But yf they bée moyſt, they ſignifie magnificence & wyſedome: yet wyth wrathe & infamous whoredome. If the ball of the Eye be blacke, & cloſed in with the foreſayde yellowe colour, or if it ſeme lyke gylt (as the Phiſitions ſay) it betokeneth the bloody Flixe in the neather partes.
                  The great Eyes & long Eyebrowes, betoken ſhort lyfe. They that haue in theyr Eyes a blackyſhe Whyte, are commonly great Perſonages, & lyue in great honour.
                  The waueryng or moouyng Eyes & ſharpe, ſygnifie theft, whych is attributed vnto Haukes.
                  
                     The drye eyes and full of veynes, betoken priuation of wytte to come or preſent. The eyes compaſſed aboute with dimme darkeneſſe, declare that the man is ſeaſoned with euyll dotrine, and that he is vnfaythfull and temperat. But when they ſhyne much and be without ſpotte, it is a token of goodnes. When the eyes ſhyne verye muche, and are browne, and ſanguine it is a ſigne of raſhenes and of priuation of witte: But yf they be well proporcioned, they betoken good ſtate of the wytte. The colour of the eyes meane betwene blacke and chaungeable is commendable aboue all other ſortes aforeſayde, yf they bee not full of beames and ſtreakes, eyther yellow or red. If the eyes bee great, and verye cleare and cleane, they ſignifie iuſtice, docilitie, prouidence, and good aduertiſment. If they bee eminent, red, and ſmale, it ſhalbee a ſigne of the thought and the tongue vnrulye, and of an vnconſtant mynde. Tremblyng eyes and

browne, betoken a man withoute ſhame, vnfaythfull and vniuſte.
                  When the eyes haue a competente greatneſſe, and be verye bryght, it is a ſigne of magnanimitie, & that the man enterpryſeth greate thynges & bryngeth to paſſe great matters. Somtime it is a ſigne of anger, and that the man is gyuen to Wyne, that he is a thefe, and couetous beyonde meaſure.
                  When the eyes bée great and ſmiling it is a ſigne of a dull man, lecherous, and that foreſéeth not what ſhall come after. Hollow eyes and ſmylyng as it were lying in wayte, or to ſpye, ſpecially, yf the chéekes, the eyebrowes, and the lyppes do moue all together, it is a ſigne of wycked cogitations, deceytes, and namely, yf ſomtyme the eyelids bée ioyned together, & touche one another, it is a ſigne of moſt wycked thoughtes. Sad eyes are not much to bée feared: for they bée to the cogitations of moyſt eyes, & betoken ſtudy of good ſciences. But yf the eye browes

and the Forehead be of a good bredeth & ſtyll, & that the Eyelyds be good, it is ſygne of a faythfull mynde, graue & gentle: the ſad Eyes & dry wyth ſharpenes of the Forehead & ſtedfaſt looke, & caſtyng down of the Eyelyds ſignifie hurt & cruelty, & that the man hath a raſh boldnes: they that haue watry Eyes are louers of Wyne, and become bald, and ſuch men haue always a moyſt Brayn & weary: they that haue theyr Eyes very watry & running, are ſlepy & loue to ſleepe. Blerines or watrynes of the Eyes commeth of groſſe blood, & of a melancoly humour whych falleth into the Eye lyds: the watrynes of the Eye by the looke of the diſpoſition, betokeneth drunkenes: yf it bee wyth depreſſion of the Eyes, it declareth ſlepe.
                  The flat Eyes ſygnifye ſlownes: wherein the man is compared to Oxen. The meanes of the Eyes ſygnifieth goodnes and puritie. The Eyes that be ſomwhat hollow, betoken

magnanimitie. But yf they be moore hollow, it is a ſygne of mekenes. If the ball be black, it is a ſygne of a ſlouthfull and dull man. The ball of the Eye that hath round about certain Pearles, ſignifieth the man to be enuious, a babbler, fearfull, and very daungerous. The Eyes that ſtand awry wyth a vehement ague, ſygnifye death. If the Eyes tarry longe open, it is a ſygne of folyſhnes, and that the man hath no ſhame.
                  The Eyes that bee very blacke, betoken fearefulneſſe, and deſyre to ſcrape together gooddes. And yf they bee not verye blacke, but ſomewhat yellow, it is a ſygne of a good and vertuous mynde: the Eyes that bee Browne, or Whyte, ſignifie fearefulnes, and ſpecially the Whyte: the eyes that be not altogether Browne, betoken a good courage and mynde: the Eyes that be full of vaines, ſignifie foliſhe men and deſtitute of their wittes, and that is referred vnto Goates.
                  
                     Now the eyes are called full of vaines which haue many lytle lynes or ſtreakes, as the minutes of vaynes bee, by the which the colour of the eyes is made diuers. The eyes that bée enflamed ſignifieth the man to bée paſte ſhame. The eyes are enflamed when they ſhyne and are brighte, & glyſter lyke fier: for they bée kyndled wyth yre and wrath. And yf they ſée one thynge, they thynke they ſée twayne. The eyes and the chéekes red betoken dronkenes And when they bée red & drye, it is a ſygne of wrathe & angre. When the eyes bée browne or troubled, it is a ſygne of feare. The meane eyes and lowe, betoken ſhamefaſtneſſe & honeſtye. The ſteddye eyes snd ſomewhat red betoken whoredome & deuouring The chaungeable eyes & ſhorte declare a couetous man & deſyrous of goods. But yf he haue the forehead and eye browes halfe retyerd he is the moore couetous.
               
               
                  
                  ¶ The Iudgement of the face.
                  THE face is taken ſymplye for a naturall looke: but the vyſage is vnderſtand of the qualitie of the mynde. The face of them that be very cleane is meane in the cheekes and temples and ſomewhat fatte. And that face is a trewe face, louing and not diſdaynefull. The merrye face commeth of a merry harte, and ſo the contrarye. The meane forme that is to ſaye neyther to greate nor to lyttle, is very handſome. He that hath a full and fatte face is importune, a lyar, a deuourer, and not very wiſe. A fatte face maketh the man circumſpecte in his affayres, and ſygnifyeth a ſharpe wytte. The thynnes of the face betokeneth the man to be penſiue. A rounde face ſygnifyeth folly: and a greate face ſygnifyeth ſlouth. The face that is very litle ſygnifieth naughtinea, craft, flattery, no liberalite: & fearfulnes. They yt haue a croked face, are

of a naughty and wicked dyſpoſytion. A longe face teſtifyeth the man to be without ſhame and iniurious and that cometh of heate. The temples ſwollē with great veynes and arteries, ſignifye wrath and anger. If the fleſhye face be ſomewhat thicke, and not very neat it is a ſigne of fearfullnes and of great follye. A groſſe and ruſticall face wyth broade Iawes, ſygnifyeth a rude and blount nature.
               
               
                  ¶The Iudgemente of the viſage or of the face.
                  THe aſperite or ſharpnes of ye face, of ye ſtate of the lipps, of ye chekes, of the forehead, and of the countynaunce, ſygnifieth a folyſhe man and without ſence or wytte. The face that ſweteth often, yea with a lytle mouing betokeneth heate, leacherie, glottonye, and that the man is a great eater, and therefore falleth into indigeſtion: and at the laſt into great ſyckneſſes. When the face is hollow lyke a valley, more

leane than fatte, it ſygnifyeth the man to be iniurious, enuious, a lyer, a rioter cruell, and ſpecially yf he be of an aduſt colour and ſomewhat blacke or elles yellow. The face well proportioned of fleſhe, of colour, & other things appartaining, declare a commendable lyfe, and aboundaunce of vertues. Euerye fatte face & full ſignifyeth an ignorant man, and gyuen to pleaſures. Take héede you be not deceiued in the iudgement of Lazer men for their eyes become round and their vaines appeare. The lyttle viſage heareth witneſſe of a lyttle vnderſtanding, of wyckednes, of folly and of ignorance.
               
               
                  ¶ The iudgement of the noſe.
                  THe noſe that reacheth downe euen to the mouthe of a competent bignes declareth the griſtle and the brayne thereof to be of a hoate complexion and ſygnifieth goodnes and audacitye. Whan the noſtrells be greate and wyde it is a ſygne the mans codds

and ſtories be greate, and that he is a whoremonger, a traytour, falſe, audatious, a lyar, enuious, couetous, a nyggard, and but a little fearfull and of a groſſe vnderſtandinge. The Noſe ſheweth the diſpoſytion, of the hart: yf it be great, it is a ſygne that the man is ſubiect to wrath. A lyttle noſe and a greate alſo declare the ſecrete partes of the man, and of the woman. The pryuye member of a man great, commeth of a groſſe and hote matter. Yet the foote of the woman declareth her matryce. A narrowe foote, longe leane ſheweth the lyke of the matryce of the woman, and ſo the contrarye. The meaſure of halfe the foote beyng bare, is the meaſure of the length of the matrice, yea in all women. Greate lippes declare the ſkynne or the lyppe of the gate to be great, and ſo contrary And ſpecially in a maide. The noſtrells of the Noſe ſhewe the ſtones of the man. If they be greate and wyde it is a ſygne that hys coddes be greate

and large: but if they be ſmalle it is a ſygne that the coddes be narrow and ſmalle. Wherefore the rule cannot fayle (vnleſſe it be by accident) that is to ſaye by ſyckenes and yll rule, as dauncyng, or ſuche lyke. For trauayle and labour encreaſeth the member. And ſo manye haue theyr righte hande greatter then the lefte bycauſe it laboureth more. A hawke Noſe ſygnifyeth magnanimytye and courage, cruellty, rapacitye, and boldnes whych thynge commeth of heate. And therefore they that haue thys hawke Noſe are commonlye angrye and full reuenge and gyue themſelues to vnlawefull thynges. A flatte Noſe ſygnifyeth violence whoredome and yet neuertheles weakenes. For that commeth of fleame & of moiſture If the noſe be ſhort the mouth litle and the teeth ſhort & great, that commeth of moyſtenes and colde. A ſharpe noſe, a longe necke, and the voyce fayer & ſhrill come of coleryke temperature.

When the noſe is broade in the middes toward the typpe, it is a token of ſuperfluitie of wordes, of lyeing of anger. I haue knowen ſuch men excéedinge in vices and chieflye in lyes. They that haue their noſe ſharpe at the ende are commonly lyars hurtfull, and contentious. For that procedeth of coler. The noſe that is great at the end, declareth deſyrours of thynges as oxen are. And ſuch men couet all that they ſee, and ſpecially in carnal voluptuouſnes. And moreouer are commonly very angrye. Large & wide noſtrells betoken whoredome. The noſe that is great at the end ſignifieth inſenble men paſt ſhame and vnapt to be taught. The noſe turned vpward and round at the ende is a ſygne of magnanimitie and greate courage which is in lyons. The noſe thynne and ſmall at the ende like a birds byll ſignifieth lightnes and folly.
               
               
                  ¶The Iudgement of the noſe and noſtrells.
                  
                     THE noſe that is crooked and hard from the forehead to the mouth, is a ſygne that the man is without ſhame. A hollow noſe and the forehead rounde and emynent aboue, declareth leacherous men. If the noſe be croked nygh vnto the forehead it is a ſygne of a man paſt ſhame and without honeſty. The noſtrelles crooked are aſcribed to men of a good hart. The Noſe tending to the laterall partes of the man, yf it declyne onely to one parte of the poſytion, goyng from the gyrdle on the ſide of the laſt part betokeneth ſome hurt: But deuyded into both the partes of the poſytion, it ſheweth ſyckenes or hurt, and that commeth eyther of the primatyue cauſe, or of the cauſe goeyng before. The Noſe that is in hys begynnynge almoſte flatte. Betokeneth lyberalitye ſuche are the Lyons. A redde noſe whyche hath a hole at the verye foundation, and the bredth of it ſomwhat ſwellynge, after

the faſhion of ſtrawberies, betokeneth dronkenes: and ſuche men are commonly moyſte and lecherous, ſpecially yf that ſygne be on the body of a ſmall meaſure. And thys hath bene tryed. Open and wyde noſtrelles ſygnifye readynes to anger. The thinne and very open noſtrelles, betoken crueltie and diſdainfull thought. The noſtrelles thynne and longe ſygnifye vnſtablenes and lyghtnes. And yf they be thynne and ſharpe they ſignifye quarelyng men. Whan one part of the noſtrelles is myxed wyth the forehead and taken honeſtly from the forehead and ſeperated by a good compoſition ſo that it be not to hyghe nor to lowe with ſome lyne deſcendyng it is a ſigne of conſtancie, manlines and prudence. The noſtrelles ryght vp betoken diſtemperance of tonge. The noſtrelles that be in all things greater, are better than the leſſer. The lyttle noſtrelles are naturallye aſcrybed vnto ſeruile and bound wyttes and to

vnfaithefull men. The wyde Noſtrells ſhewe a token of myrthe and ſtrength. And when they be verye narrowe, rounde, and almoſt ſtopped they betoken follye. The largenes of the noſtrells, the Iawes fatte, and the ſmall quantitie of heare on the chéekes, ſygnifye a moyſt complexion. If the heare that groweth in the noſtrells of a man be great thycke, and muche, it is a ſygne of a hard wytte and ſpirite and vnmoouable. But yf there be lyttle heare and ſofte, it betokeneth a gentyll and eaſye wytte, and good to be taught.
               
               
                  ¶The iudgement of the eares.
                  THE greate Eares are engendred of aboundaunce of matter and ſuche men haue commonlye a lyttle necke, and fayer.
                  They be ſanguine ſomewhat colericke wyth groſſe bloode and ſome thynge

aduſte. And thoſe men are very vnpacient and prone to anger. When the eares be great and ryght beyond meaſure it is a ſygne of follye, and abundaunce of manye ſuperfluous wordes and longe lyfe. If they be ſo greate that they maye be compared to Aſſes eares, it is a ſygne of follye and ſlownes. And when they be greate and hange downeward, they ſygnifye ryches. If they be thynne and drye, it is a ſygne of greate vnſtablenes, and that the man ſhall not haue much goodes. Very ſmall eares betoken folyſhe men théeues and whoremongers. The ſmall eares ſygnifye the ſame thynge that the other before doe and therwith all they ſygnify deceyte and malignite. When the eares be narrowe and very long it is a ſygne of enuye. And yf they be verye longe they ſhewe and declare an enuious man. Lyttle eares, ſygnifye ſhorte lyfe. The eares that be to rounde declare an indocible man. If the muſcle of the

eares be ioyned faſt wyth the fleſhe of the throte. it is a ſygne of follye, and vanitye. Plyable eares declare the proportion of the heate and moyſture. The right eares ſtiffe and full of griſtles, declare that drynes hath dominion. The eares that be lyke halfe a cyrcle meane, and hollow, and Ioyned to the line and middle ſomwhat preſſed together toward the centre, ſtyckinge neare to the head declare goodnes of nature. The eares that be couched cloſe to the head ſygnifie dull men ſlow and ſlowthfull. The eares that be hydden and fyxed ryghte to the head betoken ſlowth. The eares that be hearye betoken long life and a good hearing.
                  The meane eares amonge all the ſortes aforeſayde are good, and tokens of goodes, If there be anye greate quantitye of longe heare and thycke in the eares it betokeneth a hoate courega and a deſyre of carnall pleaſure.
               
               
                  
                  ¶The Iudgement of the Iawes and chekes.
                  
                     MAlae be the emynent partes vnder the eyes and Maxillae is the diminutiue. The chaffes be the parts of the Iawes oute of the whych the beard groweth. The Iawes are taken offten times for the chaffes. The Iawes ſpecially declare the complexion of ye man. The Iawes that is to ſay the eminent cheke of the vpper part of the mouth with the length of ye Iawes of the parte of the compoſition ſygnyfye malicious men. The ſhort Iawes and farre out from the vpper part of the mouth ſygnifye malyce backbiting violence enuie, ſpecially whan in thoſe partes there is no fleſhe. The leane Iawes & of a thinne ſubſtance browne or ſomewhat yellowe declare a hote & a dry complexion. The Iawes that be as it were black, wyth a purged ſubſtance of fleſhe ſignifye exces of dryenes and colds as it appeareth in a melancolye

man. The groſſe fleſhe of the Iawes is a ſigne of a groſſe nature of cowardnes and ſometyme violence. The Iawes that be to thynne betoken malignitye. And they that be ſofte and long ſygnifye importunate babblynge and prating. The chéekes that be ful, with full and blowen temples, betoken great wrath. Whan the chekes are ſmall and ſo ſytuate, that they appeare cutte and ſeperated from the eyes, it is a ſygne of aboundaunce of euyll humours.
                  The roundenes of the chéekes declare enuye. Whan the chéekes be lyghte and euyll ſette, they ſygnifye length of tounge, importunitye and much talke. Redde chéeks (as is aboue ſayd) ſignifie dronknes.
               
               
                  ¶The nature of the mouth.
                  THE mouth great & wyde betokeneth wrath, boldnes & warre. And ſuch men are comonly glottons.

A wyde mouth withoute meaſure. as thought it were cutte and ſtretched out ſygnifieth rauening inhumanite, wickednes, a warlyke hart and cruell, like vnto beaſtes of the ſea. Such men are greate talkers, boaſters, babblers, enuions, lyars, and full of follye. The mouthe that hathe but a lyttle cloſynge and a lyttle openynge, ſygnyfyeth a fearful mā, quyet & yet vnfaithfull. The mouthe that is verye apparent and rounde wyth thyckenes of lyppes, ſygnifyeth vnclenlynes, follye, and cruelltye. The mouthe whyche hath a quantitie in his ſytuation with a lyttle ſhutting, and ſmylynge eyes wyth the reſte of the face, ſygnifyeth a carnall man a louer of daunſes, and a greate lyar. Whan the mouthe turneth in ſpeakinge it is a ſygne that it is infected wt ſome catarre or murre as it is manyfeſt ynough. The long chynne declareth the man to be verye lyttle ſubiecte to anger, and of a good complexion: and yet he is ſomewhat

a babbler and a boaſter of hymſelfe.
                  They that haue a litle chinne, are much to be auoyded and taken heede of, for beſydes all vices wyth the whych they are fylled they are full of impietye and wyckednes and are ſpyes, lyke vnto ſerpentes. If the ende of the chynne be round it is a ſigne of feminine maners and alſo it is a ſygne of a woman. But the chynne of a man muſte be almoſte ſquare.
               
               
                  The iudgement of the lippes.
                  THE lyppes be of ſofte fleſhe with a good moouinge bycauſe of the ſpeech. The greate lyppes are meete for fooles and dullardes. The redde coloure of the lyppes, on the ſyde of the openynge of the mouthe, commeth of the vaynes that be in that place. The naturall coloure of the lyppes is redde in the vtter partes bycauſe of the fyneſſe of the ſkynnes, and ſygnyfyeth cleanes

of complexion and wythoute myxtition of troubled bloode in great vertue. The blacknes of the Lyppes ſygnifieth the contrarye, for the vertue of the bloode and naturall heate is gonne and thoſe that haue ſuche Lyppes are ſyckely. The neather lippe loſe and verye redde ſygnifyeth greate fleſhelynes, and vnſhamefaſtnes in a woman. The lippes groſſe declare great ſubſtance of matter drawen of heate. And the groſſenes declareth the humours and the groſſe ſpyrites, of the whyche proceedeth dulnes of vnderſtandynge. If they be ryghte and thycke, that is to ſaye fyrme and faſt, and Ioyned togyther Mars is theyr planette. And lykewyſe whan the mouthe is greate.
                  Softe lyppes and ſomewhat ſmylynge whyche be in a merrye face betoken fleeſhelyenes. Yet ſometime they be alſo deceyuours, theeues and full of fraude and gyle.
                  
                     They that haue not red lyppes wythin are ſycke, or very neare to ſickenes. The lyppes of the mouth very great, and ſlacke, or to muche tourned outward ſignifie ſimplicitie, and readines to wrath and groſſe witte: and fleame ruleth in them. Thynne lyppes and loſe in the vppermoſt partes, ſo that the vpper lyppe be bowynge downe to the ioynyng of the lyppes, ſignifieth magnanimitie: thynne lyppes and hard appearyng aboute the téeth ſignifie a beaſtly vnderſtandyng and wytte vnapt to be taught. The lyppes that bée great beneath in the neather part, betoken folyſh men, and lyke to Aſſes. The vpper lyppe very apparent in the Gummes, ſignifie men that loue contumelies and euyll ſlaunderynge, and are alwayes in brawlynge and contrauerſies: the lytle lyppes with a lytle mouth, ſignifieth weakeneſſe of the ſpirite and naughty crafte. The beſt maner or ſorte of lyppes and mouth is when they are not to moyſte, for the

moyſtnes of the mouth and lyppes, ſygnifye fearefulneſſe and malignitye. The greate blabbe lyppes, betoken greate follye, babblynge and audacitie. The lyppes that bée neyther to thycke nor to thynne, and ſomewhat tourned outwarde, ſygnifye, ſecreteneſſe, pollicie, wrathe, and a great wytte. The lyppes that bee well coloured, moore thynne then thycke, ſignifie a fayre condicioned man, and chaungeable to two wayes: But rather vnto vertue. And of ſuche men Iupiter is the Plannette. The lyppes that bée not equall, ſo that one is greater then the other, declare the man to bee wyſe and of a chaungeable fortune. The vpper lyppes ſmale and ſomewhat loftye, ſignifie the man to bee a blabbe and a longe tongue, verye enuious, and an accuſour.
                  Thynne vpper lyppes, hangynge and tourned inſyde out, betoken a theefe, and a deceyuour. You maye not iudge of the Ethiopians lyppes vnleſſe you

haue bene conuerſaunt amonge them and diligentlye noted and obſerued theyr qualities. But of our regions and countreys, we maye geue iudgemente.
               
               
                  ¶Of the teeth.
                  WHen the teeth that bée lyke Dogges teeth, bée long and faſt, and that they ſtycke oute of the mouth, it is a ſygne of a glotton, ſubiecte to angre, wicked and a foole.
                  Weake teeth thynne and ſmale, declare all the bodye to bée weake, and the lyfe of the manne to bee ſhorte and weake. The ſownde made wyth the teeth betokeneth follye or lacke of wytte, whyche thynge happeneth ſometyme to Chyldren ſleepynge, whyche is a token of Wormes.
                  Greate and broade teeth, apparente eyther wythin, or wythoute, ſygnifye vanitie in a man, ſlouthe, ſimplicitie, but yet a good wytte.
                  
                     Some ſaye that is is ſigne of a groſſe wytte, procedynge from groſſe humours: the téeth that bée extreme drye altogether without moyſture, ſignifie in a ſicke man death, and in a healthfull man they ſhewe a ſicknes verye nigh at hande, for the moyſt roote ſéemeth to be cōſumed. And the bodies of ſuche men are as a lampe withoute Oyle: ye téeth that be full of reume ſignifie a fault of the head, or elles of the ſtomacke, through the communicatyng of the head and the lunges, which becauſes of a deſcendyng or runnyng at the noſe (which goeth by the throte) of coughing or quinſeys, and of ſwellyng in the throte. Beaſtes that haue theyr teeth gagged lyke a ſawe drinke lyckynge: but thoſe that haue them vniforme and euen drynke ſuppyng.
               
               
                  ¶Of the tongue.
                  
                     THe tongue is made to taſt and to pronounce woordes and to vtter the voyce. The tongue that is tourned right downe, or that ſtutteth or ſtumbleth, ſignifieth the flixe of the belly: they that be ſubiect to laſkes and flixes become ſtutters, becauſe of the matter whiche deſcendeth from the head, whiche entreth into the poores of the tongue and muſcles, whereof it commeth to paſſe, that the tongue is the greater, and thereby made broder, and ſo ſhorter: and therfore ſome ſtammer and ſtutte. The tongue that is tied before, can not well pronounce wordes or letters, but pronounceth C, inſteade of S: and that maketh the man to ſtutte. And yf it be tyed behynde it can not well pronounce the letter R, but in ſteade of R, it pronounceth L, they that ſtutte feare wyne, for they wyll bee dronke commonly, and therefore drunkards doe ſtammer, and can not well pronounce this word (Trentatry). The heauines of the tongue in

youth, ſignifieth ſoddayne death after it waxeth once lyghte. The greate and broad tongue declareth a rude wytte and vnderſtandynge and flematycke humours. He that ſtutteth and repeteth often the fyrſte ſyllable of a worde is readye to melancolynes. The tonge that is touched wyth a lyght mouynge and is cauſe of repetynge the wordes by corruption of ſpeeche, betokeneth follye violence and wrathe: becauſe of the moouyng of the ſpirites, and of the heate whiche haſteth the prouocation vnaduiſedlye. When the tongue is longe and redde withall, it is a ſygne of wyſedome: for it declareth good and commendable humours. A whyte tongue betokeneth pouertie and miſerye. The tongue that is hurte or marred wyth heate vnnaturall ſygnifieth diſtemperaunce and euyll diſpoſition ſpeciallye of the belly and breaſt. A longe tongue, groſſe and ſo rounde that a man maye wype hys owne noſe with it, declareth a nature lyke an

Oxe. The tongue that is ſhortened wyth ſome humours loſeth hys taſte. All men that ſtutte be rude of bodye and proude.
               
               
                  ¶Of the voyce.
                  THey that haue a ſlowe voyce and graue, are quiet men and eaſye to bee ſpoken to, merry and well manered. The voyce that is graue and drawen long, betokeneth ſtrength I meane the groſſe voyce, and that ſoundeth lyke a trumpet. The force of the voyce, foloweth the wydeneſſe of the Veynes, and the multitude of ſpirites: all the whyche thynges come of heate. The men that haue a groſſe voyce are verye iniurious and are compared to Aſſes. They that haue a groſſe voyce by nature, wythout forcynge it are ſtronge, and that is referred to Dogges. They that haue a groſſe voyce, and ſowndynge well, are warrelyke and eloquent.
                  
                     A ſharpe or ſhryll voyce ſignifieth fearfulnes. By this voyce I meane a ſmal voyce and not a great: the voyce ſhryll and ſoft, and broken betokeneth a womanlyke feare, and is attributed vnto them yt be effeminate: the voyce ſharpe and ſtronge, declareth men to be full of anger, it is the propertie of Goates.
                  A weake voyce betokeneth narrow arteries, and want of ſpirite, which thinges come of cold. A ſofte voyce and not drawen or ſtretched oute, betokeneth meekenes, which is in ſhéepe. For you muſte referre and compare the voyce as well as all other thyngs to the likenes of beaſtes. The antiuocates, that is to ſaye, they that ſpeake great at the fyrſt and ſmale at the laſte, and haue a ſharpe voyce are full of wrath, and yet they be ſoone appeaſed agayne, & are of a gentle affection. A meane voyce in ſounde and in greatnes, declareth the man to bee wyſe, circumſpecte, iuſte, and trew. They that haue an vnpleaſaunt ſound of theyr voyce, and diſcordyng

are numbred amonge the fooles: they that be haſty in theyr ſpeache (ſpecially yf they haue a ſhryll voyce) are commonlye wycked and greate fooles, importune, and lyers. But yf the voyce be great, the man will commonly be angry, and of a noughty nature. They that haue a ſoft and ſweete voice are enuious, and full of ſuſpicion.
                  They that moue muche and often and ſpeake with mouinge of theyr handes, are vncleanely, eloquent, and deceyuours: But they that moue not ſo theyr handes, haue a perfite witte and vnderſtandynge, and haue alſo a good diſpoſition and good counſel: they that ſpeake in the Noſe are lyers, euill wyllers, and enuious.
               
               
                  ¶The maners and condicions of men & prouinces.
                  THe Spaniards are meanly ſtrong but for to doe all other thynges, which are poſſible to be done, they ſurmount & paſſe many other nacions.

And there be many among them very excellent, and that in diuers maners in caſtyng the ſtone, in nymblenes and in manye other thynges.
                  In Portugale the men are melancolye and ſanguyne for the moſt parte: manye of them are ſufficient ſtronge, althoughe they haue no lyuelyneſſe of witte or ſpirite.
                  The Sicilians are collericke, and melacolicke, and ſtronge of bodye: they exerciſe them ſelues in wraſtelynge, or at the caſtynge of the barre, and are nymble and quycke.
                  The Italians for the moſte parte are weake men, and ſome amonge (althoughe the number bee ſmale) haue greate ſtrength, and are wont to bee moore excellent than other, but yet rather of imitation then by inuention. They bee ſlender, and of a ſtature betwene greate and meane.
                  In Germanye the men are flematicke, whiche ſhewe manifeſtlye the nature of that complexion, that is to

ſaye, that they bee flematycke and verye Chollerycke. Furthermoore, they hee of a greate bodye, but yet fewe there are amonge them that haue great bodylye ſtrength, or anye greate actiuitie and nymbleneſſe, to doe anye harde thynges, though they bee verye induſtrious to doe materiall thynges, whiche concerneth anye worke of the handes.
                  The Frenchmen be made and proporcioned of fleame and of Chollere, and are for the moſte parte ſlowe and weake. Yet there are ſome of them ſingulare, and ſurmounte others in manye thynges, but the number is ſmale. They bee robute and ſtronge, but thei haue not the meane and waye howe to vſe theyr ſtrength.
               
               
                  ¶The iudgement of other partes of the body.
                  THey that haue a lytle Necke and a long, haue a good voyce & great & are fooles, feareful & malignāt.

But they that haue a ſhort necke, are very whote and great deceyuours.
                  They that haue a greate necke, are great fooles, and great eaters: the nod of the necke long and broad, ſignifieth good courage and pryde: the eleuation of humour, ſignifieth a rude & vnfaithfull nature. When the armes of the body that is right vp, are ſo longe that the hands reache to the knees, it is a ſygne of actiuitie and nymbleneſſe at worke, of audacitie, and of goodnes, with liberalitie: But when they bee ſhorter it is a ſygne of a louer of diſcorde, and of an ignoraunt perſon.
                  The paulme of the handes long, with longe fyngers, ſignifie an apte man to manye artes, namelye to mecanycall & handye craftes, & prudent and ware in all hys affayres. For there is in hym a ſygne of good regiment and gouernaunce: the greatnes of the fingers ſygnifie folly and imprudencie.
                  You muſt alſo meaſure the place from the nauell vnto the ende of the breaſt

and to the beginning of the necke. If the parte of the breaſt be bygger, it is a ſygne of prudencie and wyſdome, but yf that whiche is in the breaſt vnto the nauell, bee greater it is a ſygne of a deuourer. If the bellye bee to ſlacke, as though it were emptye, it is a ſygne of fearefulnes, of wyckednes and of deuouryng: the bellye that is ſomewhat ſofter and deeper, is a ſygne of the force and vertue of the wytte, and of magnificence. The ſydes thynne and narowe and deepe, betoken fearefulneſſe: But when they bee moore fleſhy and harde, they ſhewe the man to bee dnapt to be taughte. And they that bee round, as though they were ſwollen, ſygnifie much vnprofitable talke.
                  The backe broad and ſound, is a ſygne of manlynes, & the womans is contrarye. If the body of thē that haue croked bodyes bee ſofte, it is not ſo euyll as yf it were in a thick & hard body. If the lower part of ye chyne of the back be hidden in the breadeth and to abundaunt,

and enuironed with fleſhe, it agreeth with women. That whyche is longe and ſharpe at the ende, it declareth diſtemperaunce of the carnall deſyre, and fearefulnes. Then the chyne of the backe of a man is that whiche is manifeſt in the bones moderate and ſound. The haunches harde and ſolyde, and ſeperate from the bones, betoken a ſtronge and warrelyke man. But yf they bee broade, ample, and full of fleſhe, they ſignifie a feminine vnderſtandyng and witte: But yf they bée to leane and full of wrynckles and compaſſed about with a thyn ſkynne, they ſignifie the wickednes of Apes.
                  When the knees touche one the other in goynge, they bee referred to the woman kynde. When the lower partes of the ſhynnes nexte to the heeles, and the heeles, and the vnder parte of the feete bee broade, and full of fleſhe, it is a ſygne of a foolyſhe man, or wythout wytte. The vnder part of the féete ſeperated from the ſynowes and arteries,

ſheweth a cleare vnderſtandynge, noble, and manly. If the feete bee ſoft, and enuyroned with fleſhe, it is a ſygne of a ſofte and womanlyke wytte. The feete verye longe ſhewe the man to bee vigilant and geuen to deceyte, ſeekynge the hurte of manye men. The féete very thynne and ſhort, betoken malignitie. The ſhorte feete hauynge the ſole hollowe is an euyll ſygne.
               
               
                  ¶Of the goyng of the feete.
                  THey that marche or goe a greate paſe are ſtoute men and attayne to the ende of theyr enterpryſes. But they that goe alytle paſe, and ſhorte, haue but a lytle courage. The croked goyng, is cauſe of griefe, and of obſcuritie of wytte. When the man goeth lyghtlye hauynge all hys bodye vpryghte, it is a ſygne that he wyl take in hande ſome enterpriſe, and by and by doe ſome great thynge.
                  
                     But if a man go ſwiftly with his eyes lookyng downewarde, and go altogether croked, it is a ſygne of a nyggard, fearefull and ſubtyle. They that haue the nod of the necke ſhort, are audacious and bolde, and yet fearefull. They that haue a harde brayne, it is a ſygne that they bee indocible. The nod of the necke tourned vpwarde, ſignifieth inſolence, rygour, follye and vanitie.
                  When the nod of the necke hangeth on the pectorall partes, they declare the mynde to bee occupied in thoughtes and imaginations. And it is alſo a ſygne of ſparynge and of wyckednes. The throte ſharpe ſygnifieth lightnes. The ſhulders thynne, right, and poynted, ſygnifie the man to bee a lyer in wayte to deceyue. The Elbowes thynne, ſygnifie imbecillitie & weakenes. And when they bee verye full of fleſhe they betoken weakenes. But when they bee meanely ſolyde & harde great of artires and muſcles, they betoken a noble bodye, & of good courage.

Whan the fingars are ſoft it is a ſigne that the mā is eaſye to be inſtructed and taught. Whan they be hard he is ſtrōg and vnapte to be taughte. Whan the handes be ſhort and the fyngars ſtrong it is a good ſigne. If the fatte and lyttle hands haue very ſhort fyngars they be. token a deceyuour, a ſpye, and a thefe. The hands thinne and crooked, ſhewe the man to be a greate talker & babler. The nayles white brode & ſome what redde ſygnifie a very good Iudgement. But whan they be narrow & very long it is a ſigne of folly, & cruelty. The nailes yt be bowed & croked ſignifie impudency, and violent rapacite. The nailes that be depe within the fleſhe & ſticke to faſt vnto it ſignifie exceſſyue crueltye & great folly. The nailes that be to ſhort pale black, and ſharpe, declare a naughtye malignant man. Theſe ſignes that be attributed to the nailes of them ſelues haue no vertue nor force. But whā they be ioyned vnto other greater they haue ſome efficacie or forte. Whan the

fingars be ioyned and ſticking the one to the other, they ſignifie vnclenlynes. And that be cafte & faſt together round ſhewe malignitie, couetouſnes and the man to be a whoremonger. Whā they be ſmall and thinne it is a ſigne of folly. The ſhort fingars and great ſignifie enuie, audacity, & cruelty. And whan they be two long and to ſlender, it a ſigne of a wyttles man & farre from wiſedome. And if there be to greate diſtaunce betwen them, it is a ſigne of lightnes and of to muche talke. But whan they be meanely great & of an honeſt forme and faſhion it is a ſygne of verye good maners. Now theſe thinges are ment aſwell of the nailes & of the tooes as of the fyngars and handes. A ſlender & thinne breaſt & without vertue or ſtrength, ſignifieth weaknes of heate. They yt haue their pappes hanging & their breaſt enuironed with ſofte fleſhe, are giuen to wine, and to leachery yea exceſſiuelye. They that wagge their ſhulders & lyfte vp their necke ſhalbe coūpted arrogant

& proud. But they that wagge all their body ſhewe euidently that they be effeminate. And among al theſe the moſte tollerable kind are they ye bowe down their bodye on the right ſyde when they ſturre, and the folyſheſt are they that turne body toward the left ſyde.
               
               
                  Of the breath.
                  WHan the breath ſometime reſteth and than a long time after breaketh out in great aboundance, declareth the man to be in great trouble of mind. Alſo when the head ſhaketh & ſigheth, it is a ſigne that their is in it ſome naughty and euill framed thing. The ſpirite that maketh a noyſe, and is greatly mooued and thruſt oute, it is a ſigne of cruelty & that the man is giuen to wine. They alſo yt haue their breath troubled and groſſe as they that haue runne longe are voyde of counſell and ſubiect to anger, and haue alſo a facilite readines to do and to ſpeake. This rule ought to be obſerued in all ſignes and

tokens ſo that you muſt take the ſuperfluitie in euill part and the meane and temperature to be good. Whā ye thighs be to croked and to heary it is ſigne of whoredome. This is referred vnto the goates. Ariſtotle ſaith more yt the buttocks that be very dry ſignifie virility & mālines & they yt be very fleſhy & moiſt ſignifie effemination, & they that be as it were cut, declare the wickednes of ye man. And this is referred vnto beares and apes. The ſignes of an impudent man be ſuche as folowe. Firſt he hath bright ſhining eyes & open, the eyelides far a ſonder: great féete, & great handes he reiſeth himſelf againſt thē ye beholde him. He is red of colour & hath a ſharpe voice. And beſide all theſe ſignes of impudency he is iniurious. The heary mā which hath blacke heare right & ſmoth, the mouth, the chinne, and the temples heary, great eyes and gliſteryng, is furious, enclined to whoredome: a louer of fraies and fightinge, euill tounged, Ieronimus Gardanus a Phiſition of Milan

a man truly of great learning & knowledge ſaith thus in his .xii. booke de ſubtilitate. Euē as all lame mē are wicked ſo all they which are in health haue not good maners. For it is more requiſite, & there is more a doe to forme a mind without faulte, than a body. Wherfore the moſt wicked of al other, are ye croke backed men ſeing the faulte of them is neare vnto the hart whych is the prince of all ye body. Next are the blind and the ſquint eyed men, foraſmuch as nature hath failed about ye braine. After them come the dome & the deffe. And then the halting men & after thē are they yt haue their fingars faſt ioyned together, or to farre a ſounder the one from the other for nature hath failed in them, in members leſſe neceſſarye. They that be ful of wartes haue the nexte and laſt place and the ſcarred bodies folow them.
               
               
                  ¶The Iudgement of other partes of the body.
                  
                     THE largnes of the breaſt and the greatnes of the ſhulders and back ſygnifye bouty, and audatitye, with capacitye of wytte and wiſedome But ye ſmallnes of the backe declareth the man to be of a diſcordaunt nature. The meanes of the breaſt and equalnes of the backe is a very good ſygne. The ſhulders loſe declare weakenes of the mynde and fearfullnes. They that haue a great belly are vndiſcreete, fooles, proud and whoremongers.
                  The meane belly and narrow ſtomack ſygnifie hyghnes of vnderſtanding and good counſell. The ſmallnes of the legges declare ignorance and the greanes of thē, ſygnifie audacitie & ſtrength of body. Aboundance of fleſhe at the knes ſygnifyeth debilitie and weaknes or effemination. They that haue a wyde paſe in goyng and ſlowe, proſpere commonly in their doynges & affayres. But they that haue a lyttle paſe are violent, and of ſmall ſtrength and in their workes of an euyll will. Finallye

he hath a good memorye and well compoſed in nature that hath a ſofte fleſhe moyſte and meane betwene rough and ſofte, and whan he is neyther to great nor to litle when he is whyte, declining to reddenes: or whan he is neyther to much but meanely blacke. Gentyll of continuance hauing the heare full and meane. Great eyes ſomewhat round A meane head, and of a good faſhyon, wyth a great necke well and equally ſette. The ſhulders faſte and ferme wythoute wauerynge to or fro not hauing muche fleſhe in the ſmall of the legges, and knées. A cleare voyce ſmal temperate: ſome what ſmilyng & not mockig: hauing a lyke loke of mirth &c. Yet you maye not be to haſtye in gyuing Iudgement or aduyſe in one of theſe ſignes: But take the teſtimonye of them all. And you haue the dyuerſyte of ſignes tending to dyuers things turne alwayes to the better parte and the moſte approued. Then may you pronoſticate and gyue Iudgement

more aſſuredlye of greate and ſmalle thynges to comme, yea of euerye man what ſoeuer he bée, for as muche as you ſhall knowe moore certaynely hys déedes and hys maners, in kéepynge thys rule and waye.
               
               FINIS.
               
                  R. H.
               
            
         
      
   