
      
         
            
            THE
CHVRCHES
Securitie,
Togither with the Antidote
or preservative of ever
waking Faith. A treatise conteyning many fruitefull instructions,
moralities and consolations fit for the time
and age wherein wee live. Hereunto is annexed a sound and profitable treatise
of the generall signes and forerunners
of the last judgement. By THOMAS DRAX.
            Happy are those servants, whom the Lord when hee commeth
shall finde waking. Luk. 12. vers. 37.
            
            AT LONDON
Imprinted by George Eld, and are to be sold by
John Wright at his shoppe at Christchurch
Gate. 1608.
         
      
      
         
            
               
                  
                  
                     SALOMONS SONG. Chap. 5. verse. 2.
                     I sleepe, but mine heart waketh.
                  
                  
                     
                        FOr as much as Christ Iesus the sonne
of God, our blessed Sauiour, our holy
harmlesse vndefiled hight 
                              •
                           riest, separate
from sinners, and made higher then the
heauens, was subi
                           •
                        ct to the like infirmities,
and temptations in all things (as
wee are,) but without sinne, and that
which amongst other temptations, his three-fold combate
and conflict with the diuell, doth demonstrate, wee must
not thinke it strange, or take it offensiuely, that wee that
are but his members, his seruants, yea and most miserable
and sinfull creatures should be liable, and subiect to the
temptations, and assaults of the world, fl
                           •
                        sh, and the diuell.
For first we must bee conformable vnto Christ our head.
Secondly Satans m
                           •
                        lice, and rage against vs, especially in
these last dayes wherein hee perceiueth his time to bee so
sh
                              •
                           rt,
                        Apoc. 12. ver▪ 12. is restl
                           •
                        sse and vnpea
                           ••
                        able. Lastly euery Christian
man, yea the most perfect beleeuer that liueth vpon the
earth, by reason of his manifold ignorances, slips, errors,
drowsinesse, defects, imperfections, doth (if God and grace
preuent not) minister and affoord continuall matter, and
occasion for the tempter to assault him, yea and to worke
vpon him. Therefore, as Christ Iesus was assaulted with
three speciall temptations,
                        Math. 4. ver. 3. whereof the first was directed to
remoue him from his sonne-like confidence in God. The
second, to puffe vp his m
                           •
                        nde with rash presumption in the
protection of God.vers. 
                              •
                           . And the third to blast, and infect his
minde with the venemous vapour of ambition, and couetousnesse,
all which he resisted, and ouer-came by the scripture,
and word of God: euen so here in the Cantickles the
church was encountered with three sorts of temptations,

though in forme and kinde differing from Christ his temptations.
The first which is the best, and most holy temptation,Canti 2. 4.
was her Loue-sicknesse, or falling into a swound, by reason
of the sight of the great prouision, and spirituall dainties
that Christ had prepared for the Church. Answerably
herevnto Peter in the trans
                              •
                           iguration of Christ was so rauished,
and surprised with the sweetnesse of that momentanie
glory, that hee imagined Christ his kingdome and
glory to be earthly, and did plaee the blisfull happinesse of
the Saints in this trans
                           •
                        tory and troublesome world, which
alone is to be sought in heauen. And proportionably herevnto
Paul (whether in the body,2 Co
                              •
                           . 
                              •
                           2. 4. or out of it, he knew not,
and therefore it is not in our knowledge to determine)
was rapt v
                              •
                           into the third heauen, or Paradise, and h
                              •
                           ard words
which canot be spoken, & which it is impossible for mā to vtter.
                     
                     The second temptation wherein (as also in the next following)
the Church more bewraieth her corruption,Cap. 3. vers. 1. 2. 3. is the
feare (which commeth from infidelitie) in the Church,
least she had lost Christ; yet so qualified, as thereby the
spirit kindleth in her more paines, and studie, both to seeke
to attaine vnto Christ more neerely, and to apprehend him
more firmely, and in a while after that all the meanes had
beene vsed, shee findeth Christ, and renueth and reuiueth
her faith in him.
                     The third, and last temptation, which is worldly drowsinesse,Cap. 5. 2. 3. 4.
and some kinde of securitie, incident to the Church,
and children of God; the bitternesse, and extremity whereof
was, that shee fell into a swound, that is, she for the time,
was almost in despaire of her saluation, as one depriued of
feeling and comfort of grace: But at length by communication
with her friends concerning Christ his excellencie,
and the place where he was gone, her faith beginneth to reuiue,
& she assureth her selfe that Christ is hers, & she is his.
And this is the third,Vers. 17. 18. and last temptation, wherin we meane
to insist. The originall, briefe & substance of it is conteined
in these words; I sleepe, that is, I am some-what secure, and
carelesse, and keepe not that watch against the pleasures of
this life, and the baites & hookes of the world as I should,
and am bound to doe.
                     
                        
Then followeth a limitation, or exception in these
words. But mine heart waketh, that is, my 
                           •
                        aith apprehendeth,
and holdeth Christ, and I doe not suffer my delight,
and ioy in him to cease, and determine.
                     In the temptation comprized in these words, I sleepe,
two things are to be considered. First the Churches winking,
or slumbering. Secondly the confession, and acknowledgment
of her faulte, and offence.
                     In that the Church is here sayd to sleepe, or slumber, yet
so as that shee discerneth off,1. Obser. notwithstanding that her
heart, that is, her faith, and better part waked, laied hold on,
and found sweere repose, and contentment in Christ. We
learne hence this doctrine, and iustruction viz. that the
true Church of God, and the particuler members of it,
are not only subiect to sinne, and error in generall, for euery
man is borne,
                        Psal. 51. 
                              •
                           . 5. 
                        and conceiued in sinne, euery man is a liar, we
haue all sinned,
                        Rom. 3. 23. and stand in need of the golrie of God, who
knoweth the errors of this life: all our righteousnesse is but as
a menstrous cloth.Psal. 19. v. 11. and when wee haue done all that we can,
wee are but defectiue and vnprofitable seruants; but also,
and that more particularly, that many times the Church
of Christ, euen in the best, and most flourishing outward
Estate of it, is ouertaken with a kinde of spirituall slumber,
and securitie, and is lesse carefull, and watchfull to
beware of the snares of the worldes prosperitie, and the
baites, and allurements of honours, and pleasures; so that
here it must needs follow that her faith must oftentimes be
weakened, eclipsed, and darkned, yea and she now and
then fall into simptoms, and fits of desperation.
                     The truth hereof appeareth first in Dauid, who when he
was established in his kingdome, and flourished in prosperitie,
was puffed vp with carnall securitie, and confidence in
his own strength,Psal. 30. v. 6. 7. and ful little thought of his own infirmity,
dangers or iminent euills, as though his present felicitie
should neuer change:vers. 8. but presently God hid his face from
him, that is withdrew the sense of his fauor, and good will,
and cast him into trouble, and calamities, and so awakened
him from his slumber, and drowsines.
                     
                        
Secondly in Ezechias (otherwise a right good King)
whose heart was lift vp with pride, by reason of his late and
glorious victory, and aboundance of treasures, in so much.
that he in oftentation shewed vnto the ambassadors of the
King of Babell all his treasures,
                        2 King. 20. 13. 15. 
                        that bee had in his house and
realme, so that wrath came vpon him, and vpon Iudah and
Ierusalem.
                     
                     Thirdly in Ephraim,
                        Iere 31. 18. who in his prosperitie was as an vntamed
Calfe.
                     Fourthly,Math. 25. 6. in the very wise Virgins, who (though they
had their Lampes furnished with oyle) yet they slumbered
at Christ his second comming.
                     Fi
                           •
                        tly, in Christ his disciples, who because Christ whiles
he liued vpon the earth, kept them from all dangers, dreamed
of continuall prosperitie, and could not conceiue of
nor endure to heare of Christ his death and resurrection;
in-so-much that at the time of his suffering they slept and
slumbered,
                        Make 14. vers. 37. and 40. when they should haue watched, and prayed, and
when Christ was once apprehended, they all, for feare, forsooke
him, 
                              •
                           nd fled away, yea and Peter denied him three seuerall
times,Math. 26. with cursing and swearing, Mark. 14. 71. This
was the state of the Angell, and people of Sardis, who had a
name that they liued,Reuel. 3. 1. yet were dead. The luke-warme
Church of Laodicaea was tact with security, and slumber.
She indeed said that she was rich, and encreased in worldly
goods,
                        Ibid. ver 17. 
                        and had need of nothing, whereas the holy Ghost testifieth
of her that she was wretched, miserable, poore, blinde,
and naked. And lastly the Church of Ephesus, (albeit in all
other things a most excellent Church) yet she is noted for
this, that she left her first loue, that is, she had abated, and remitted
much of her former loue, both to God, and her
neighbour. Now he is happy that can Rerum cognoscere
causas, that is, know the causes of things, and by feeling of
the pulse, iudge, and discerne of the disease.
                     The causes then from whence the churches slumber proceeded,
were (especially) worldly prosperity, and cares, as
likewise earthly delights, and pleasures; which how greatly
they hinder, yea and many times choake all zeale, and

sanctification, appeareth manifestly by the third sort of
hearers, which are resembled to seede sowne amongst
thornes, they indeed heare the word, and after their departure
to their domesticall occasions, they are choakea with
cares,
                        Luke 8. Ver. 14. 
                        and with riches, and voluptuous liuing, and bring forth
no fruite. The sence hereof is, that euen as thornes, & other
hurtfull incombrances do choake the corne (that is otherwise
prosperous) whiles it is growing to a stem or stalke: so
corrupt motions of the flesh doe preuaile in the hearts of
men, and ouercome faith: so that it doth suppresse, and oppresse
the power and working of heauenly doctrine before
it be come to his full ripenesse. And therefore it standeth
euery man vpon, to pull these manifold thornes out of his
heart, vnlesse hee would haue Gods word vtterly choaked
in him. Prosperitie, and excessiue pleasures and delights,
corrupted, & effeminated most wise Salomon, that at length
he was drawne to commit idolatry himselfe (as some interpret)
or at least) to grant a toleration and permission of
it to his out-landish wiues,1. Reg. 11. & concubines, if not to others.
And because the spirituall sleepe, and slumber, which hath
allusion to that which is naturall, doth and will, by way of
comparison with it, more fully and effectually appeare, let
vs a little consider the similitude, and proportion that is
betwixt them both.
                     Naturall sleepe is the rest or binding of the senses, and
the suspension, or interruption of the spirits, caused by certaine
sumes and vapours, which by reason of plenty of
meate and drinke, ascend from the stomack into the head
and braine, and thereby stopping the rootes of the sinews,
or nerues, are by the animall spirits caried vnto the seates
of the outward senses: so a spirituall sleepe or slumber, is a
ceasing, or stopping of the spirituall senses, so that the spirituall
eye, for the time, cannot see, nor the eare attend, nor
the palate taste, the mouth speake, nor the stomack desire,
or digest, nor the hand worke, nor the feete goe, (as in a
deepe sleepe): or but very faintly, and weakly (as in a
winking, or nodding slumber) such as that of the church
is in this place, and it is caused from the fumes, and vapours

of earthly prosperitie, cares, and pleasures, honours and glorie,
which ascend from the distempered affections into the
minde, and iudgement, and so stay, and suspend the spirituall
senses, and cause sleeping, slumbring, nodding,
winking, &c.
                     But because these te
                              •
                           ptations are not so frequent as
fearefull, nor so delightsome as dangerous and deceitfull, in
so much that the most vertuous, wise, learned, religious,
and prudent men in the world haue hereby beene entised,
and entangled, I will for the better laying open of them insist,
and in order handle euery particuler branch.
                     First touching wordly ioylitie and prosperitie, it pusfeth
vp the heart with pride, and contempt of others; and
it stealeth away the heart from God,2 Sam. 15. 6. as Absolon did the peoples
from his father Dauid; and here-vpon Paul aduiseth
Timothy to charge his rich hearers that they bee not high
minded,
                        1 Tim 6. 17. 
                        and that they trust not in vncertaineriches but in the
liuing God: And to this effect, the Lord warneth the Isralites
that when they haue eaten, & filled themselues, when
they haue built goodly houses, and dwelt in them, when
their beasts and sheepe are encreased,Deut. 8. 14. and their gold multiplied,
that then their heart bee not lifted vp, no they forget
the Lord their God. In prosperitie, Dauid committed adulterie,
and murder, and numbred the people in the pride of his
heart.Luke. 15. In his prosperitie the prodigall childe departed from
his fathers house, and wasted all his substance by riotous,
and intemperate liuing. From hence also sprang the sinnes
of Sodom; vnnaturall lust, pr
                              •
                           de, fulnesse of bread, aboundance
of idlenesse, and contempt of the poore.
                        Ezechi. 16.
                     
                     The Princes of Israell being at ease in Sion, 
                           
                              •
                           ut farre from
them the euill day,
                        Amos. 6. 3. 4. 5 as though Gods plagues should neuer
ceaze vpon them: They lay vpon their beds of Iuory,
fed, and fared deliciously; had all varitie of Musicke,
wines, and ointments; Put none of them was sorie forie for the
affliction of Ioseph,
                        Vers 6. that is of their bretheren in captiuitie.
                     The riche man in the Gospell, whose ground brought
forth plentifull fruites, and whose thoughts were altogether

                        set vpon the enlarging of his barnes and buildings,
                        Luke. 12. 16. 17. 18. 19. 20. applauded,
and soothed vp himselfe in his security, as
though hee had obtained a long lease, or patent of it,
but that night was his sou'e fetche
                              •
                            (by the Diuell) from
him.
                     The warmth of Ca
                              •
                           phas his fire, and the occasion of ill
company there,Marke. 4. Ver. 54. induced Peter to deny his Lord and maister.
The world bewitched Demas, and made Iudas a
traytor. By reason of worldly prosperitie, and eager and
earnest pursuite after it, it is, that many Anassims, Nimrods
and Termagonts of the earth, oppresse and insult ouer
the poore afflicted and innocent; and as the great 
                           •
                        ishes
deuoure the smaller, so doe the riche the meane and poorer
sort. Hence it is, that many of them, ioyne house to
house,Isay 5. 8. and laye field to field, vntill there bee no place
(and elbow roome for the poore), that they may be placed
(alone) by them-selues in the middest of the earth.
This auarice and vnquenchable thirst of the Ahabs of
this world, that will neuer bee content vntill they haue
by hooke or crooke gotte Naboth his Vineyard, is
the common sinne of the land, not decreasing or going
backe ten degrees, as the Sunne in the time of Ezech as,
but preuailing like Noah his deluge, vntill all be drowned.
The poore crye, and no man (almost) for the time
regardeth or righteth them, but the Lord in heauen beholdeth
all, and his eye liddes trye the children of men. And
as for these encrochers and enclosers, GOD at length
frustrateth them of their hope and expectation,Isai. 5. vers. 9. pulleth
downe their houses, leaueth them voyde of inhabitants
and tenants,Vers. 10. and curseth their grounds and fields, that
they answer not the labour and cost bestowed vpon
them.
                     From the abuse of ease and prosperitie, likewise, ariseth
ryot, pride, excesse, and phantasticknesse of apparell amongst
all sorts and rankes of men, and especially in
women; who like to them, yea and exceeding them
much in Isaias his time,Isai. 3. vers 16. 17 &c. beyond their degree, and all comely
grauitie; affect and follow after brauerie, sumptuousnes,

garishnesse, strange, forraine, monstrous and ridiculus fashions,
much vnbeseeming Christian profession & the daughters
of GOD, who should rather labour to bee inwardly
garnished then outwardly trimmed; and whose attire
should bee holy, decent, comely, and rather within then aboue
their calling. But this malum (I feare) is i
                              •
                            mebicabile
& nolime tangere, the fault of Court, Citie & Country. But
for all this, God wil and doth punish this pride, many times
with shame and captiuitie, and many times with pouertie
and beggerie, and hee will call them to account for spending
so much time trifling and tricking themselues, and for
improouing, racking and inhauncing their rents, to the ruine
of their poore tennants, and all to maintaine their
pompe, and curious brauery.
                     From the worlds prosperity and the desire and lusting
after it, proceede so many vngodly, vnequall and vnprosperous
marriages. Here it is, that sometimes men of sort
and place yea and those that doe or, at least seeme to prosesse
Religion very sincerely, will for landes and liuings,
match their sonnes and daughters with Atheists and halfe
Papists, as though religion should stoupe to riches, and
as though Godlines would sooner be gotten then wordly
goods. But is this marrying in the Lord? will iron and clay
cleaue togither? and can any good come of so bad beginning?
To conclude the great red dragon with h
                              •
                           s taile, that
is not so much with his ceremonies, inuentions, and traditions,
(albeit v
                           •
                        le, and antechristian) as with his pompe, promises,
preferments, dignities, drew the third part of the
stars from heauen,
                        Gen. 15. 
                        and cast them to the earth. By the starres
according to the phrase of scripture are ment principall
and eminent persons both in church,Gen. 37. and common-wealth,
that were drawne by this baite from the heauenly truth,Apoc. 1.
and diuine studies, to intend wholy earthly, and transitorie
things, and to become vassals, and slaues vnto Antechrist.
                     Seeing that worldly prosperity, and welfare,Vse. 1. (though
not properly in his owne nature, but accidentally through
mans corruption) breedeth, and bringeth the before named,
and many other euills with it, as wee also of this

blessed Iland can for many yeares by wo
                           •
                        ull experiments
testifie; for from hence hath proceeded so much Atheisme,
so greate neglect of Gods worshippe, such contempt of the
word, such prophanation in many places of Gods Sabboth,
such abuse of the Sacraments, such blasphemy, such oppression,
and so infinite inclosures, such a night vppon many
Prophets, &c. We must therefore beware of the inffection,
and poison hereof,Apoc: 17. 4. & decline it, as wee would, in a nother
case,Apoc. 17. 
                        the whore of Babilons golden cup in her handful of abhominations,
& filthinesse of her for
                              •
                           ication. Let our treasure
be in heauen, not vpon the earth let vs not build vpon outward
prosperitie, for this is but a sandie foundation; neither
lette vs trust vnto it, for it is as a reed, or rotten post, & will
soone faile vs, let vs not set our heart vppon it, but vppon
God, our hope, and our confidence for euer, who will
neuer faile, nor forsake vs. Let it be our seruant, and subiect,
and tributary to vs as the Cananites were to Solomon; but
let it not bee our maister, and commander: for that were a
base, and preposterous course, then might wee say (as Sollomon
in another case saith) I haue seene seruants on h
                              •
                           rses,
                        Eccles. 10. 7. 
                        and
Princes walking as seruants on the ground.Vs
                              •
                           . 2. Seeing that
wordly prosperitie is not the true contenting, and 
                           •
                        uerlasting
treasure, peculier and proper onely to the Saints, and
seruants of God; but it is earthly, vaine, deceitfull transitory,
and common to the wicked with the good, yea the
wicked inioy it (though as vsurpers onely before God,)
commonly in greater measure then the godly; we must not
rest and settle our affections vppon it, but if wee bee risen
with Christ, seeke the thinges aboue. God who is all
sufficient, must be our portion, and if our riches any manner
of way alienate, or withdraw vs from him, or his seruice,
we must cast them away as the Mariners in a tempest
cast their wares into the Sea: Better to loose all with the
Apostles, and poore afflicted Hebrewes, and to gaine
Christ our heauenly treasure, who is the fountaine of all
happinesse: Then to winne the world, and loose heauen,
and make shipwracke of our owne soules. This is
not to change 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        , that is golden armour for

brazen as Diomedes in Homer did with Gla
                              •
                           cus: but it is
to exchange ease for eternitie, the world for heauen, and
the Diuell for Iesus Christ.
                     For as much as riches, and prosperitie in them-selues,
and especially to the godly who know how to vse them,Vse. 3.
are not euill, but good blessings of God, and they are
giuen and lent vs of GGD to dispose of them as good
Steward
                              •
                           , to good endes, and vppon right vses; we must
therefore at the commandement of GOD, and following
the worthy presidents of Abraham, Lot, I
                              •
                           b, the
Noble Sunamite, 
                              ••
                           ad
                              •
                           ah, Nehem
                              •
                           as, Leuie, Zachaus,
the Centurion, Cornelius, Dorcas, Gaius, and many
more in Scripture, and in all ages sithence, with our temporals,
and outward riches, releeue the distressed, feed
the hungry, intertaine strangers, nourish and maintaine
the Prophets, & ministers of GOD, feast the poore prouide
for the fatherlesse, and widdowes, aduance religion,
further learning, & doe good to the common wealth,
and place where God hath seated vs. Then shal our riches,
and prosperitie bee sanctified vnto vs, and bee meanes to
procure comfort to our soules, and strength to our faith
heere: and afterwards adde to our glory in the kingdome
of heauen. For according to the measure of our faith, and
well-doing, shall God in fauor, and mercy reward vs with
further glory, and happines in the world to come. To end
this point, shall an Heathen writer, yet Prince of Philosophers
say.Arist. 1. 
                        Thou shalt loue God,
                        Metaphy. 
                        if thou shalt imitate him in
this, that thou maiest doe good to all, and hurt to none: and
shall not wee hauing the light of grace, the warrant of
Gods word, the examples and practise of all his Saintes,
and worthies, and so singuler, and pretious promises laid
before our eyes, much more carefully, and conscionably
put it in execution? Otherwise vndoubtedly, our riches,
our gold, our siluer, our landes, liuings, possessions, reuenues
will bee but matter, and fewell of our iust, & greater
condemnation at the last day.
                           
                              〈◊〉
                            5. 4.
                     
                     And thus much of prosperitie, and the vses of it.
                  
                  
                     
                        
The second cause,2 cause worldly cares or occasion, of the Churches slumber,
and security, is worldly thoughts, cares, and desires,
and this hath some affinitie with the former, and many
times doth follow it. The effects hereof are, as diuers
so dangerous, as manifold, so most miserable. They distract
the minde, and like wilde horses draw it and driue
it this way, and that way, and therefore are called 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        ,
that is distracting cares.
                     They choake the word of God, and make it vnprofitable.
For a man that is full of worldly cares, and thoughts, hath
his wittes a wooll-gathering (as the common prouerb is)
when hee should attend to better matters, his mind is on
his halfe-penny, and all his zeale is for Diana the great
Goddesse of the Ephesians, when it serueth for the maintaining
of his trade, and not vppon GODS worde, which
is the food of the soule that indureth to eternall life. When
hee is gone from hearing the word,Iohn. 6. ye. 27. hee either forgets
all, or (at least) neglecteth all, and practiseth nothing,
for it is impossible for a man to gather grapes of thornes,
or figges of thistles, or to expect any good from such.
                     Secondly, worldly sorrow, that is for losse of commodities,
and goodes, or for sense, and ferae of euill, breedeth
death,
                        2 Cor. 7. 10. that is causeth desperation, & by consequence death:
It is the Heathens sinne to be distrustfully carefull; and to
say what shal we eate, or what shall we drinke, or where-with
sha
                              •
                           l no be cloathed? But wee must committe our waies to
GOD,Math. 6. 
                              〈◊〉
                           . 2. 
                              •
                           
                         cast all our care vppon him, who careth, and
prouideth for vs, and bee content with our estate; for
GOD hath made a promise, that hee will neuer faile, nor
forsake vs. Will the LORD feed the Rauens that cry
vnto him, and will hee not feed his children? will he nourish
the wicked his enemies,Heb. 13. 5. and will hee not much more
feed his friendes, and beeloued? shall hee so gloriously
cloth the Lillies of the field, and will hee not much more
apparrell those that serue him, and depend vppon him
continually?
                     Lastly they that desire to bee rich (saith Saint P
                              •
                           ule)
fall into many temptations,
                        1 Tim. 6. 9. 
                        and snares, and fall into marynoisome,

and foolish lusts, which drowne men in perdition, and
destruction. And in the end of the next verse hee addeth
they erre from the faith, and peirce themselues thorough
with many sorrowes. Now the Apostles meaning in this
place is not, that riches are (properly) the cause of the euills
here mentioned, but onelie the inordinate appetite,
and desire of man. The temptations into which hereby
priuate men fall into are many: strayning, and stretching
their consciences (as some doe their broad cloathes, and
carsies) but especially in the ministers of whome the Apostle
speciallie speaketh, they are so blinded many times
with couetousnesse, that they refuse to doe, and defend
nothing bee it neuer so absurd, so soone as the hope of money,
and profit hath bleered, and blinded their eies. And
as touching faith, they that are ouer troubled with worldlie
cares soone fall, and reuolt from it, as wee haue Demas
for an example. Lastly they are sundry times horribly tormented
in conscience, as it befalleth vnto desperate men:
To these sorrowes may be added suites in law, losses, hostilities,
dangerous bargaines, and the like.
                     But some men will (perphaps) obiect, and say I haue a
great family,Obie. and many children to sustaine, and the world
is hard, and I do no man open wronge, therefor it is lawfull
for me thus to carke, and care, to toile, and moile, or els I
know not how to liue, but I must be enforced to borrowe,
begge, or steale.
                     First albeit it be lawful,Ans. and necessary for a man carefully
to keepe the goods, which hee hath gotten, and to imploy
them to necessary, & profitable vses: & albeit the thoughts,
and hand of the diligent bring aboundance,
                        Pro. 5. ver. 16. 17. 
                        and pouerty commeth
vpon the idle person, as one that trauelleth by the way,
& necessitie like an armed man;
                        Prou. 21. 17. and he that doth not prouide
for his owne, and namely for them of his houshould denieth
the faith, and is worse then an Infidel; & albeit euery man
must follow his calling; yet notwithstanding, thoughttaking,
distrustfull care, and toiling, and moyling continually
with labour and griefe is not hereby warranted, but
rather reprooued, and in many other places of scripture

totally condemned. For first no man can hereby adde one
cubite to his stature, much lesse to his life.
                     Secondly men hereby shew themselues more like Paynims,
                        Math. 
                              •
                           . 32.
and Gentiles who onely seeke after these earthly
things, then like Christians, who waiting for the glorious
resurrection of the bodie, and eternall life, should not
take such carking care for this mortall, and miserable life.
                     Thirdly worldly cares, and the sincere seruing of God,
are so opposite, and contrarie that a man cannot intend
both togither, he cannot serue GOD, and mammon; and
therefore so much as a man addeth to his thoughtfull care,
so much he detract
                           •
                        th from his hope, & cōfidence in God.
Fourthly we are seruants in our heauenly Fathers house, &
therefore he will kindly,Hebr. 13. and louingly prouide that which
shalbe good for vs. And as for borrowing, so it be within
our ability,P
                              ••
                           l. 37. ve 21 and with a minde, and conscience to repay it, is
vpon iust occasion lawful. And as for begging, if wee serue
God we shall neuer begge, or if it sometimes should so fall
out through ino
                           •
                        itable losses,Psal. 37 ve. 25 & through the disorder
of common-wealthes, yet we shall neuer be for saken of God.
Lastly they that trust in God, and carefully, and thirstily
walke in their calling shalbe so far from stealeing, that they
shall either bee more enabled to giue then to rece
                              •
                           ue, or (at
least) beeing contented with that they haue, and making
the Lord their portion, they shalbe farre from any such vnlawfull
practise.
                     Let vs therefore beware that wee do not with the Gentiles,Vse. 1.
or with those that want faith in Gods prouidence
with so egar appetites, and thoughtfull cares seeke after
these outward, and earthly things, as though they were
the chiefe good; but before all things, and with all study,
and endeuour seeke after heauenly, and spiritual things,
as the most principal blessings, and the true riches of man,
& then, as for al other things God wil cast thē vpon vs as an
aduantage, or ouerplus, we not careing, or looking for thē.
                     Secondly let vs not headily,Vse. 2. and ouer hastily vex, and torment
our selues with the expectation, and thinking vpon
things to come, like vnto those that vainely imagine, and

dreame of diuers afterclaps,Math. 6. 34. calamities, and crosses to ensue.
For present distresses, and difficulties bring vnto vs
troubles enough, and therefore wee haue no reason to
multiply care and miserie by taking thought for that
which is to come. And to finish, and absolue this point,
verie Heathens condemne this carking care for future euents.
Quids
                              •
                            futurum, cras fugequerere, that is forbeare
to enquire what shalbe done to morrowe. And (as
Cicero saith) meditationem fut
                              •
                           ri mali &c. the thinking
vpon an euill to come, and that, perhaps will not
come at all, is foolish: that euery euill is greeuious, and
painefull when it is once come.
                     Lastly wee must commit,Vse. 3. or (according to the originall)
roll our waie vpon the Lord, that is, wee must in hope,
and patience commit the issue, and euent of all our actions,
and affaires to his diuine prouidence, and disposition,
and vnload all our cares, and labours into Gods bosome.
Wee must also trust in him;
                        Psal. 37. 5. that is perswade our
selues that wee are gouerned of God, and pray also to bee
gouerned by him, and then hee will bring it to p
                              •
                           sse, that is
grant an happie, and prosperous successe; and not suffer
our hope to bee frustrate, as hee iustly punisheth the infidelitie
of the children of this world. For otherwise
our life, and calling cannot bee ordered, and directed by
mans diligence,Ier. 10. and industry, for except the Lord build and
oraer the house they labour in vaine that build it, therefore
in so great waight of businesse, and daungers wee
stand in continuall neede of the presence,
                        Psal. 137. 1. and helpe of
GOD.
                     And thus much touching worldlie cares.
                  
                  
                     Now we are come to the third cause,3. Part. and occasion of the
Churches slumber, and securitie, and that is, that shee to
much addicted her selfe,Earthly pleasures. and slacked the raines to earthlie
delightes, and pleasures: which are of maruelous force
to rocke, and lull men a sleepe in the cradle of securitie.
For euen as wee see that naturall sleeping, and slumbering

is many times procured by singing, musicke, rubbing,
sweete broathes, and such delightsome thinges: Euen so
the sleepe, and slumber of the soule is often caused, not
onely by the vse of pleasures, and delights that are in
them-selues vnlawfull, which rather worke the death,
then the slumber of the soule, but also (as here is intended)
by the vnseasonable and immoderate vse, and following
of sportes, delights, and recreations that are in
themselues things meerely indifferent, and therefore lawfull
to bee vsed, or foreborne. Examples, and proofes hereof
wee haue many in holie scripture.Amos. 6. The Princes of
Israell in Amos time gaue themselues wholy to delicacie,
wines, feasting, musicke &c. and herevpon thought
not vpon their captiuitie at hand, much lesse pitied the
distressed Estate of their afficted bretheren; but hereof
I haue spoken before, Wise Solomon that felt, and found by
wofull experience the poysonfull infection of pleasures,
pronounceth laughter to bee madnesse,Ecle. 2. 2. and all pleasure to
be but vanitie.
                     The Iewes in Isaias his time, bathing, and soaking themselues
in their pleasures did not consi
                              •
                           er the w
                              •
                           rke of God,
that is they did not heed,Isay. 5. ver. 12. nor take notice of his iudgments
at hand. The baites of pleasure, and a prodigal minde withdrew
the lost childe from his fathers house, and protection,
and at length brought him to shame,Luke. 15. and extreame
pouertie.
                     It was one of the sinnes of the old world before the generall
deluge, and of Sodome, and the Citties adioyning
before their destruction from heauen, and it is one of the
maine sinnes that now doth, and shall raigne in the world,
Christ his comming to iudgement, namely pleasures,

                           •
                        nities, delights. The particulars, whereof were, eating,
drinking, marrying wi
                              •
                           es,
                        Luk. 17. 26. 27. 28. 
                        and gi
                              •
                           ing in marriag
                              •
                           . Herevnto
is added sur
                              •
                           etting,
                        Luk. 21. 34. 
                        and drunkenesse, of which sinnes
our S
                           •
                        uiour in Luke doth so warne vs. By the former example
our Sauiours meaning is, that men shalbe so taken
vp, and possessed with the pleasures, and profits of this present
life, as if not change, & alteratiō were to be looked for.

whereas otherwise eating, drinking, marrying, &c. are
not in them-selues vnlawfull, (for they serue for mans necessitie,
and comfort) vnlesse men excessiuely, or altogither
herevnto addicted, should grow insensible of Gods
iudgements, or shutting their eyes should runne into all
licentiousnesse, as though there were no God in Heauen
that would take vengeance on them: And as for those vile
& damnable sinnes of surfetting, and drunkennes, what hurt
they bring to the body, what lauishment to the goodes,
what abuse of the creatures, what discredit to a mans good
name, what decay to the witte, and vnderstanding, what
ill example to the world, what scandall to the godly, what
offence to God, and what disstruction to the soule, daily,
and lamentable experience sheweth? Paule saith that the
widdow liuing in pleasure is dead being aliue,
                        2 Tim. 6. 5. is shee
is dead being idle, and seruing for no vse.
                     Lastly it is one of the sinnes of the whore of Babilon, and
cause of her ruine, yea a fore-runner of it, to liue in pleasure,
to sitte as a Quee
                              •
                           e,
                        Apoc. 18. Vers. 7. to perswade her selfe that she is no widdow,
and that she shall see no mourning. These pleasures if
we do not beware of them, & wisely and soberly vse them,
are as baites to intise vs, snares to intangle vs, a delectable
phrensie to beguile vs, thornes to pricke, and goare vs,
Vlisses his Syrenes to turne vs into swine, and beastes, the
fewell of concupiscence; finally they bring a spirituall lethargie,
                        
it is both forgetfullnes, and a slumber vppon the
soule, and the infection of the witte like the biting of an
Aspe which casteth the person that is bitten in a sweete
sleepe,Vse. 1. out of which he neuer recouereth. The vse of this
point serueth to checke, & condemne the practise of those
especially that hauing lands, liuings, and possession
                           •
                        
spend their time in pleasures and sports, but not in readi
                           ••
                        
the scriptures, in perusing good bookes, in singing of
psalmes, nor in being instruments of doing good. Herevpon
they like waxe are apt to receiue any forme of religion
sauing the truth, and no marueile, for he that maketh
no conscience of his pleasures, & of directing his life, will
make no conscience of true religion; for hee loueth his

pleasures more then God. And answerably here-vnto
Nimrod,
                        1 Tim. and Esa
                              •
                           
                         are taxed and noted for their hunting,
Nimrod a great hunter before the Lord, but an oppressor,
Esau an hunter, but a hairy, and a wilde man, and a persecutor
of his brother.
                     
                        Ob, But is not hunting lawfull?
                     
                        An. Yes if it be not vpon the Sabboth dayes, and be in
moderation. Secondly if the same persons bee as carefull,
and dilligent according to their calling, and occasions to
hunt the Romish Gray Foxe, and all his cubs, Iesuits, Seminaries,
Priestes, Papists, Recusants, that deuoure the
vines, that is, corrupt and destroy the Churches: Heere
is good game, sport, pastime, here is pleasure and profit:
Otherwise to hunt, and kill the silly Hare, and the Deere
that do none or little harme, and to lette these stinking,
subtile, and cruell Foxes alone, is both dishonour to God,
and shame to them-selues, dangerous both to Church &
common wealth.
                     
                        Ob. Is not beare-baiting, and cock-fighting lawfull and
allowable?
                     
                        An. No, for it maintaineth, yea, and increaseth the
enmitie, and opposition betweene the creatures, which
mans sinnes brought first into the world:Isai. 11. And therefore
they should rather labour to reconcile, then to sette the
creatures at iarre, and rather lament then to sport themselues
when they see them one to rend and deuour another:
Yet notwithstanding if they will haue some proportionable
sport wherein to recreate them-selues, let them
first like prudent Paule who for the preseruing of himselfe
set the Scribes,Act. 19. and Pharasies at difference; so let them for
the defence of them-selues, and the weakening of the Papists,
ours, and their aduersaries, shew their best wit, skill,
and indeuor to sette these Midianites at enmitie against
them-selues, by shewing the opposition of the late Papists
with the ancient, the Iesuits with the seculer Priestes, and
one Papist with an other, yea one, and the same Papist many
times with him-selfe; as two excellent, & worthy Diuines
Maister Doctor Willet, and Maister Doctor Morton
                        
the one in his terrastilon, and the other in his prima et secunda
Ap
                              •
                           logiae Catholicae parte, haue most notably attempted
and begunne.
                     Secondly let them rather, and vpon farre better ground,
and vndoubted recreation and comfort, labour and endeuour
in their owne selues, and soules, to worke, and breed
enmitie and warre betweene the flesh and the spirit, and by
all holy meanes to continue, and further it, for as long as
this battaile, and conflict lasteth, there is grace in the heart:
and when this ceaseth, faith, and grace determineth. Let
them strengthen, arme, and encourage the spirit, and disarme
and weaken the flesh, and sinne, that the spirit may
triumph, and the flesh bee subdued; Here is sport that will
end in greater pleasure, here is matter of exercise that will
not vndo, or hurt vs, but enrich, and make vs all blessed. But
it is much to be feared that most of those that are so caried
away with humane vanities, and these cruell sportes; little
know, and discerne what this battaile betweene the flesh,
and the spirit meaneth, much lesse are they trained vp, and
beaten in it.
                     
                        Vse. 2. Secondly wee must keepe such a moderation, and
temper in the vse of lawfull pleasures, wee that haue wi
                              •
                           es
must bee as though wee had none,
                        1. Cor. 6. 28. so was it with good Vrias
who for the time that his seruice in Dauids warres lasted,
made a conscience to go into his wife, least the pleasure of
her might perhaps make him more Remisse,2. Sam. 11. ve. 11. and 13. and vnwilling
to performe that warlike charge imposed vpon him: wee
that reioyee must be as 
                              •
                           hough wee reto
                              •
                           sed not, wee must vse
them, as Ionathan tasted of the hunny, onely for his necessarie
refreshment,1. Sam. 14. 27. and as Canis e Nito bibit, a taste & away.
Finally wee must qualifie, and temper them with the feare
of God, that wee be not seduced by them, or (at least) made
more vnwilling, vnfit, and vnapt for better exercises, and
actions.
                     And thus much of pleasures, and their vses.
                  
                  
                     
                        
A fourth, and last reason of the Churches s
                           •
                        curitie, and
slumbering in generall, and of the speciall members in
particuler,4. cause: affectation of hon
                              •
                           ur, titles, glory. may be, and is oftentimes the desire, affectation
of honours, titles, and of the glory, and applause of
the world; which many seeking, and withall obtayning,
iudge of them-selues rather by the opinion, and esteeme
of others, then by the sound knowledge, and experimentall
Iudgement.Apoc. 3. Vers 1. 2. Hence it was that the Church of Sardis
had a name that she liued, and yet was dead. Of this sort
are those that haue a forme of godlinesse,
                        2. Tim. 3. 4. 
                        but deny the
power of it.
                     
                     The Diuell (albeit twise before repulsed) at length
tempted our Sauiour Christ by shewing him (in a vision
perhaps) all the kingdomes of the world,Math. 4. 8. and the glory of
them, hoping thereby to blinde his eyes, and to preuaile
against him, as he doth against many. Moreouer Christ reproouing
the Scribes, and Pharasies for their vanitie, and
ambition, in that they hunted after humaine glory, and
neglected the glory that was due vnto God,Iohn. 5. 44. saith hee how
can yee beleeue that receiue honour one of an other, and seeke
not the honour that commeth from God onely? And this affecting,
and desire to gaine, and retaine humaine titles, and
glory is one great cause that detaineth many of the Papists
from admitting of the puritie of the Gospell, and it is some
occasion of hardening them in their Idolatry. It is said of
many of the cheife rulers in the time of our Sauiour. Neuerthelesse
euen among the chiefe Rulers many beleeued in him
but because of the Phara
                              •
                           ies they did not confesse him, least they
should be cast out of the Synagogue,
                        Iohn. 12. 42. 
                              •
                           3. 
                        for they loued the praise of
men more the thē glory of God.
                        Toss, harm. It is to be thought 
                           •
                         not withstanding
these chiefe Rulers (amongst whome was doubtlesse
Ioseph of Arimathea, and Nicodemus were indued with
true faith; but it was for the time very weak & yong, which
God beareth withal, & in processe of time cureth and perfiteth.
Ambitious vanitie possessing Absolon, moued him to
seeke to depriue his aged father Dauid of his Crowne &
Kingdome. The assenting vnto the flattering and blasphemous
acclamation, and applause of the multitude

caused Herod to be smitten of the Angell of the Lord imm
                              •
                           
                           diately,
                        Acts 12, 23.
                        because hee gaue not the glorie to God, so that hee was
eaten of wormes and gaue vp the Ghost, & it made the scribes,
and Pharasies to delight, and content themselues with an
externall, and onely seeming righteousnesse; who in their
fasting▪ pra
                           •
                        ers, almes, titles, robes, salutations, aimed at,
onely the praise, and commendation of men, and therefore
are by our Sa
                              •
                           iour iustly,
                        Math. 6. 16. and often taxed, and checked
for it. They had the reward that they sought for, viz. the
praise of men, but they had no rewarde, or approbation
from GOD. In so much that Christ saith. I say vnto you
except your righteousnesse exceed the righteousnesse of the
scribes,
                        Math. 5. 20. 
                        and Pharasies yee shall not enter into the kingdome
of heauen.
                     
                     The pompe, and applause of the world is nothing els
but a vapour, or fume soone consumed, it is like a fether tost
in the aire from month to mouth, then which nothing is
more light, vaine, and inconstant; and the brauery, and
flaunting glory of the world is nothing else thē an Idol, &
a vaine thing,Psal. 73. 20. yea like vnto a dreame wherewith for a time
a man doth delight himselfe, whilest that hee conceiueth
great hopes of riches, honours, preferments, and renowne:
but when he waketh all his hopes perish, and come to nothing.
                     
                        Obi. But is it not lawful for a man to seeke to seeke to get
a good name, credit, report, and estimation amongst men,
and when he hath once gotten it to maintaine, & keepe it.
                     
                        Ans. Yes without question for whatsoeuer things bee of
good report if there bee any vertue,
                        It is lawfull to get and preserue a good name. 
                        if there bee any praise, wee
must thinke on these things. Secondly that which GOD
promiseth, and bestoweth vpon his children as a speciall
blessing that they may moderately seeke,Phil. 4. and desire, but
he promiseth to honour, yea, and honoureth them that honour
him.
                        1. Sam. 2. 30.
                     
                     The principall reason that must induce, and drawe vs
herevnto, is, and must bee not our owne glory, but that by
our meanes the Gospel, and the name of Christ may be wel
spoken of; for the good name of Christians is an ornament

and credit to the Gospell. And vpon this ground Paul exhorteth
seruants to subiection,Tit. 2 v. faithfulnesse, and obedience
that they may adorne the doctrine of GOD their
Sauiour in all things.
                     Lastly our Sauiour willeth, and exhoreth vs saying. Let
your light so shine befor
                              •
                            men that they may see your good
workes,
                        Math. 5. 16. 
                        and glorisie your father which is in heauen. Therefore
it is lawfull to haue a diligent consideration, loue, and
care for a good name, for so much the Greeke worde

                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . vsed before Phil. 4. ver. 8. importeth. But here
certaine rules are to bee obserued.Ce
                              •
                           ten cautions. First wee must beware
that in no wise wee detract, and derogate ought
from the honour, and glorie of GOD (as the Papists doe
who attribute, and ascribe merite, satisfaction, and iustification
to their owne workes and inuentions, and not
to the grace of GOD onely.) for then they that despise
GOD shalbe despised,
                        1. Sam. 2. 30. and hee is so iealous, and zealous
of his owne honour that hee cannot abide it to bee giuen
to any other: therefore wee must in all things earnestly
seeke for the glorie of GOD onely, and not our
owne.Math. 6. 5.
                     
                     Secondly wee must refraine from all manner of sinne,
and wickednesse, for otherwise as one Flie doth corrupt,
                        Ecclesi 10. 1. 
                        and
cause to stinke the oyntment of the Apothecary: so doth one
sinne, or vice obscure, and eclipt his name that is in estimation,
for wisdome and for glorie.
                     
                     Thirdly we must repent vs of al our sinnes,P
                              〈◊〉
                           . 10. 7. and we must
practise iustice,Mark▪ 14. 9. and excell in good works. For then our memorall
shalbe blessed, and then that which wee haue done,
shalbe spoken of, and remembred with honour.
                     Lastly we must not delight in the oblique, or disgrace of
any,Math 7. 2. but haue a speciall regard to thinke, and speake well
of others. For with what, iudgemēt we iudge, we shalbe iudged.
                     
                     And this much touching the resolutiō of this doubt.
                     
                        Vse. 1. Seeing that the inordinate desire, and affectation
of humaine glorie, popular praise, and hunting after titles,
and honour, doe euen in the best, sometimes so dimme and
darken faith, and make them secure, and carelesse in Gods

matters, wee must not please our selues in, much lesse dote
vpon these outward, and vaine things, least afterwards
beeing dispoyled of them wee bee like the beasts that perish,
                        Psal. 49. 20.
who feede only vpon these outward things, and fore-see
no further.
                     
                        Vse. 2. We must first, and principally approue our hearts,
waies and consciences vnto GOD, and seeke to bee inwardly
holy & not outwardly only that our praise may not
bee of men but of God:
                        Rom 2. 29. 
                        for not hee that praiseth himselfe, (no
nor whome men alwaies praise who may bee deceiued)
is not allowed,
                        2. Cor. 10. 18. 
                        but hee whome the Lord praiseth. And Secondly
when wee labour and endeuour to approoue our
selues vnto men, and especiallie to the true seruants of
GOD, if they doe praise, and testifie well of vs, wee must
not dispise, and neglect their commendation and approbation,
but take it as a fruite and effect of our wel-doing;
and albeit they giue no such great report and commendation
of vs, wee must bee content, and hold it sufficient,
that GOD and our sanctified conscience,2. Cor, 1. 12. testifieth, and
beareth witnesse of our Godly purenesse, and weldoing.
1. Cor. 1. 3.
                     And thus much of the foure causes, and occasions of the Churches sleepinesse and securitie.
                  
                  
                     
                        Thus wee see by the example of this Church in the Canticles;
                           The Church subiect to 
                                 •
                              in and error.
as of diuers others, it is subiect, as to other sinnes,
defects and errours, so to a kinde of winking or slumbering
euen in the good and prosperous estate of it. But in
this place the Church was in no dead sleepe, much lesse
had her faith extinct, for shee discerned and tooke notice
of her infirmitie, which shee could not otherwise haue
done if she had either soundlie slept, or had wandered in
darkenesse.Ioh. 12. 35. Which beeing so, wee are to make a two-fold
vse of it.
                        
                           Vse. 1. First wee must not for certaine defects, infirmities,
wants, and some small spottes and blemishes, either in doctrine
or discipline, much lesse forsake, and denie the Church

that holdeth firmely and purely the foundation. Neither
must wee for certaine spottes, balcknesse, defects and deformities,
doubt of much lesse despaire of our owne estate
and saluation so long as our heart is right with God
and wee are sound in the faith of our Lord I
                              •
                           sus Christ.
For Christ hath made a satisfaction to Gods iustice for
all our sinnes, and there is no condemnation to those that
are in Christ, in whome sinne albeit it alwaies dwell, yet it
neuer swaieth and raigneth. And as for sinnes of ignorance;
weakenesse and infirmity the Lord pardoneth,Psal. 103. v. 12 and 13. and passeth
by them in his sonnes and seruants.
                        
                        And as a louing husband will not take away his loue
from his wife,A simil
                                 •
                              ude. nor cast her off for euerie fault and want,
so long as shee keepeth her loue entirely, and sincerely to
him. So GOD will not cast off his loue, nor forsake his
Church or any particular member of it, for speciall wants
and frailties in particular commandementes, so long as
they by faith cleaue vnto him, and generallie labour to
please him.
                        
                           Vse. 2. Secondly seeing that sleepinesse, drowsinesse, negligence
and securitic in the Church doth not please God,
but offend him and cause his Maiestie both by inward
snibbes, yea and sense of his indignation: and also oftentimes
by sundry and fearefull iudgements and thunderclaps
(especially when it is growne to any deadnesse of
heart and is hardly sensible of her decay and decline) doth
labour to rowse and awaken them as hee hath of latter
yeares this Island by clamor and still triumpeting of his
ministers; by daungerous, and neere effecting of the
Papists gunshot; shogging and shaking of the earth
vnder vs, noyse of the windes, and roaring and inundation
of the waters, eclipting of zeale in manie, and threatenings
pronounced against vs for our abuse, neglect
and contempt of his holie Gospell, that hee will send
and bring vpon vs not a famine of bread,Am
                                 •
                              s. 1
                                 •
                              . 12. but of Gods
worde: wee all of vs must take knowledge thereof, repent
of our sinnes betime,zep 2. V 1
                                 •
                              2.
                                 •
                              
                            
                           fanne our selues beefore the decree
come forth, meete the LORD in the waie, yea and

                           kisse the Sonne Christ Iesus,Psal. 2. 12. by true subiection, faith and
obedience,Psal. 2. 12. least hee be angry 
                                 •
                              nd so perish in the way, when
his wrath shall sodainly burne.
                           Gouernors of the Church. Let the Gouernors, Rulers
and those that haue the greatest eminencie and authority
in the Church looke dilligently to their charge for the remouall
and redresse of ignorance, error, Atheisme and
Popish superstition, and for the aduancement and countenancing
true Religion and vertuous liuing.Passor
                                 •
                              s and Preachers. Let the Reuerend
Prelates and Pastors of the Church, Ministers, and
Preachers of the word beware they do not Performe Gods
worke negligently; let them wisely and couragiously speake
and admonish the wicked of his way, lest God require his
blood at their hands.
                           Ez
                                 •
                              chi. 33. 8. Let them keepe backe nothing but
shew vnto their people all the councell of God,
                           Acts. 20. 26. 27. 
                           that they may bee
pure from the blood of all men. And let them preach the word,
be instant in season, and out of season, improue, rebuke, exhort
with all long suffering, and Doctrine. For the time
will come when they will not suffer wholesome Doctrine:
but hauing their eares itching, shall after their owne lusts get
them a heape of teachers:
                           2 Tim. 3. 2. 3. 4. 
                           And shall turne their eares from the
truth, and shall be giuen vnto fabl
                                 •
                              s.
                        
                        Thirdly let the ciuill Magistrates,Magistrates, and ciu
                                 •
                              ll Rulers. whether Superiors or
Inferiors defend and assist the Pastors, and Ministers, lette
them draw out the sword of Iustice and cutte downe sinne,
lette them promote true religion, roote out errour, and
Idolatry. Let them execute Iustice and iudgement without
respect of persons, let them spare, and defend the innocent,
let them prouide for the wants of the poore, let
them shine as lights before the people by all godly & vertuous
example, and finally let them, (as farre as their
power and authoritie will extend) take order and do their
indeauour that the people vnder them may lead a quiet,
and a peaceable life in all godlines and honestie.
                           1 Tim. 2. 2. Finally
let the people and subiects feare and serue God,Peoples duty. repent of
their sinnes, honour their King, obey and be subiect to authoritie,
loue and reuerence their Ministers, submitte themselues
to the word of GOD, and liue in brotherly loue, &
vnitie, one with another, which GOD almightie graunt

for 
                              
                                 •
                              esus Christes sake Amen.
                        
                        And thus much of the Churches fault and infirmitie.
                     
                     
                        2. SECTION.
                        NOw it followeth to speake of her confession and acknowledgement
of her slumbring and carelesnes,
contained and couched in these wordes I sleepe. From
whose example and practise we are taught without all denying,Confession of sinne.
suppressing, or lessening our sinnes, to make a
willing, and ingenuous confession of them all unto allmighty
God; to the intent that God may forgiue, and forget
them, and remoue or mittigate the 
                              •
                           uills and punishments
that they haue brought vppon vs. For further confirmation
and illustration hereof; we haue both commandement
in S
                              •
                           ripture, and also publike and priuate excercise of it.
The Lord by the Prophet Hosea
                           Hosea, 13. exhorting the Isralites to
repentance prescribeth them a set forme of repentance saying.
Take vnto you words and turne to the Lord and say:Vers. 3.
Take away all iniquitie, and receiue vs gratiously &c.Vers. 4.
                           As
                                 •
                              ur shall not saue vs &c. neither will wee say any
more to the workes of our handes (yee are) our Gods.
                        
                        Secondly when wee are exhorted to repent, and amend,
wee are withall exhorted to confesse our sinnes, for confession
is as the First,
                            so a most necessary part of repentance.
Heere-vppon Iob
                           Iob. 33. 27. saith, if one say, I haue sinned, and
peruerted righteousnes and it did not profit me. Then God
will deliuer his soule from going into the pitte, and his
life shall see the light. If wee confesse and for sake our sinnes,
                           Pro. 28. 13.
                           wee shall finde fauor. Againe, if wee acknowledge our sinnes,
God is faithfull and 
                                 •
                              ust, (Viz. in his promise) to forgiue vs
our sinnes,
                           publike conteslion. 
                           and to clense vs from all vnrighteousnes. Publike
examples wee haue in Nehemias making a large and
mournefull confession of his and the peoples sinnes.Nehe. 9. 5. 6. 7.
                        
                        Secondly in Daniel, who in the name, and behalfe of
the people maketh a confession of his and the peoples,Dan. 9. 5. 6. 7. and

confesseth that Iustice belongeth vnto God, but shame and
confusion to them, &c. Thirdly of the Isralites in Isaias
his time, who all acknowledge themselues to haue beene
as vncleane thing
                                 •
                              ,
                           Isai. 64. vers. 4 
                           and their righteousnes as a filthy rotten
clout: and of the people in Samuell the Prophets daies;
saying,I Sam. 12. 19 we haue sinned in assuming vs a King besides all other
sinnes. Herevnto may bee annexed and referred the example
of the Niniuites confessing their sinnes vnto God,Ionah. 3. vers. 8. & 9. and
of the people that came to Iohn the Baptist to bee baptized
of him,Math. 3. v. 6. 
                           confessing their sinnes Viz: voluntarily and in a generall
manner onely.Priuate consession. Priuate practise, and presidents hereof
wee haue in Dauid confessing and bewayling his folly in
numbering the people,
                           I Exod. 21. 8. his adultery in polluting Vrias his
wife,Psal. 51. 3. 4. 5. and his murder in causing her innocent husband, &
his good subiect, to be slaine in warre. Dauid before hee
had confessed his sinnes (as appeareth) could find no ease
day nor night, but his bones consumed, & he roared al the day:
but as soone as he in heart purposed to confesse against himselfe
his sinnes vnto the Lord,
                           Psal. 32. 3. 4. 5. 
                           God forgaue the punishment of
his sin.
                           Iob. 9. Likewise in Iob who acknowledgeth himselfe to be
vilde before God, and that he cannot answer one word for
a thousand. Thirdly in the Prodigall childe, who confessed
that he had sinned against heauen and against God,
                           Luke. 15. and
that he was no more worthy to be called his son.Vers. 21. Fourthly
of the contrite Publican, who would not lift vp his eyes to
heauen,
                           Luke. 1
                                 •
                              . 13. 
                           but smote his breast saying God be mercyfull vnto me a
sinner.
                           Luke. 5. 8. Fi
                              •
                           tly in Peter that accknowledgeth him-selfe a sinfull
man, and of Paule that in regard he had bene a blasphemer,
a persecutor,1 Tim. 1. Vers. 15. an oppressor, (albeit ignorantly) confesseth
himselfe to be the greatest amongst sinners.
                        
                        The person to whome confession is to bee made is first
properly and principally GOD;Psal. 51. 54. for against him onely
haue wee sinned, and done euill in his sight, hee alone
knoweth all our sinnes, and he alone pardoneth and forgiueth
all our sinnes and that for his owne names sake,
                           Psal. 51. 4. and for
his Christ his 
                              •
                           ake, merites, suffering, and mediation. And
therefore it is folly, vanitie, superstition, yea bondage and
impossibilitie, to make confession of al our mortal sins to a

Priest (as the Papists make shew of, and require in their
care confession) no commandement, no practise, no example,
hereof is extant in the sacred Scriptures, and it began
not to be vrged vntil 800. yeares after Christ. Secondly
Dauid and others repented, and receiued remission of
sinnes without confessing their sinnes in particuler to any
man Psal. 32. 2. Sam. 12. 12.
                        
                           Ob. But is it lawfull, & conuenient some times, and in
some case to confesse our sinnes to our Pastor, Minister, or
Christian brother?
                        
                           An. Yes, for Iames willeth men to confesse their sinnes one
to another,I am 5. and this priuate confession is to be made not of
all knowne sinnes, but onely of that sinne which troubleth
and vexeth the conscience; or of that whereby our neighbour
is annoyed, and wronged. And that in two cases;
first when 
                              •
                           ase and comfort is sought for in trouble of
conscience,Priuate confessiō to men when lawfull. and here before confession be made, no helpe
can bee obtained: For as the Phisition must know the disease
before hee can apply the remedie, euen so the Minister,
or brother cannot comfort, or councell the distressed,
before that he hath discouered his griefe. And herein
the persons to whome confession is to be made are especially
the faithfull Ministers and Pastors, who for their
callings,Isai. 50. 4. guifts, and experience, are of all men most apt
and able to direct, informe, and comfort the troubled conscience.
And thus Dauid confessed his sinne to Nathan,
                           2. Sam. 12. 13.
and the people to Samuell (as hath bene before touched.)1 Sam. 12. 19.
Secondly wee are to confesse our sinnes to our neighbour
whome wee haue wronged, or offended by word
or deed; that wee may giue some satisfaction to him,
and pacifie his anger and displeasure, and so bee reconciled
to him. In this case CHRIST preferreth
reconciliation to sacrifize,Math. 5. 23. 24. and would haue vs first be reconciled
to our brother, and then offer that wee left at

                                 〈◊〉
                               Altar.
                        
                        Reasons further to moue, induce, and perswade vs (in
the godly sorrow & contrition of our hearts) to make confession
of al our knowne sins vnto God, are specially these.

First hereby we giue glory vnto God and 
                                 •
                              ustifie him in his
word and corrections,1. Reason. 10. 12. 27. who the more we debase our selues
before him (in respect of our sinnes) the more we glorifie
God,Iohn. 9. 24. from whome nothing is hid,Psal. 51. 4. and the more vile, and
base that we are in our owne eyes the more pretious and
glorious in Gods; and when wee thinke and confesse that
we are lost in our selues wee are found of him. The second
reason is,Psal. 32. 5. because vnlesse wee confesse our sinnes before
God, wee can finde no ease of them, but they will more
paine and torment vs. The stomacke that is ouercharged
with some vndisgested meates that doth annoy it,A similitude. or with
Rheume or Flegme is 
                              •
                           ased by a vomit: euen so the soule
that is burdened with sinne is eased and relieued by confession,
and accusation of it selfe.
                        Thirdly without confession, there is not, nor cannot
bee any true repentance, for it is a part of it, yea the
gate, dore, and foundation of it, and if the heart bee
holy, contrite, godly sorrowfull, it cannot but manifest,
and discouer it selfe by the confession of the mouth
which speaketh out of the aboundance of the heart.
                        
                        The last reason is because without confession of all our
knowne sinnes vnto GOD, there is no remission of
sinnes.Prou 28. ve
                                 •
                              . For hee that hideth his sinnes shall neuer prosper,
and the more wee hide them, the sooner, and more sodainely
will they issue forth to our shame and confusion,A similitude.
like as the waters the more they are dam'ed vppe,
the more violently will they breake forth. Dauid before
hee confessed his sinnes,2 Sam. 12. 12. hee found not pardon.
And vppon his confession hee was immediately pardoned.
                        Seeing that confession of sinne, is so necessary,Vse. 1. & that it
is not so easie a matter to finde out all our sinnes, we must
not onely try & examine our deedes, words, and thoughts
by the strickt and straight line and rule of Gods lawe,
which is the discouerer, and reuealer of sinne; but because
our knowledge is vnperfect, and wee blinde, and partiall in
our owne cases, we must be content to haue our sinnes ript
vp and laid open by publike doctrine,1 Cor. 14. 25. and preaching; and

indure it albeit, it neuer so much gall, wound, and shame
vs: and also admitte and allow of priuate, and brotherly
admonition. For all these are holy, & the ordinary meanes
ordained and sanctified of God for our humiliation, repentance
and recouery, which whosoeuer neglecteth contemneth,
or refuseth, hee can neuer truly come to the knowledge
and conscience of sinne, much lesse repent of it, and
so be saued.
                        Secondly wee must not onely confesse those our sinnes
vnto God, that are more enormous, and haynous & these Vse. 2. that are many times odious before men; but also our secret,
and particular corruptions, faultes, blottes, weakenesses,
infirmities, yea and also sinnes of omission, and neglect especially
of prayer, praise, thankesgiuing vnto God. And we
must haue a true touch and godly sorrow for them: for the
least sinne in it owne nature beeing committed against the
good and infinite maiestie of God,Rom 6. and his vndefiled law
deserueth death.
                           Psal 25. Thus Dauid desireth pardon of the sinnes
of his youth,
                           Psal. 19. 11. 
                           yea of his vnknowne sins.
                           Iob. 1. 5. Thus Iob offered burnt
offerings for his children euery day fearing least his sonnes
had sinned, and had blasphemed God in their hearts. Thus
Paule was afflicted and troubled in him-selfe for his originall
sinne,Rom. 7. vers. 24. crying out, and saying. O miserable man that I
am, who shall deliuer me from this body of death? Dauid hauing
onely vpon extraordinary aduantage,1 Sam. 24. 6. and occasion
cutte of the lappe of Sauls garment,
                           Psal. 119. 18. 
                           was troubled in his heart.
He also confesseth his blindness & ignorance in Gods matters.
The Church of God in Isaias his time doth acknowledge
that whereas they erred from Gods waies,
                           Isai 63. 17. 
                           & that their
hearts were hardened from his feare, it came for their vnthankefullnes,
& that God in iustice was the author of it.
Lastly when they omit good duties to God or men, or faile
in the manner, and measure of them, they make confession
of it, we haue failed & we haue rebelled, &c. And in another
place:Lam. 3. 42. all this plague is come vpon vs, as it is written in the
law of Moses,
                           Dan. 9. 13. 
                           
                              yet made we not our praiers before the Lord our
God, &c. And of this we must haue a care to repent, because
by leauing our duty vnaccomplished wee oftner offend,

then by sinnes committed: and if GOD should require
it at our handes, the smallest sinne of omission it
is enough to condemne vs.Psol. 130. 3. And therefore Dauid saith
if thou O Lord straitly markest iniquitie, who shall stand? And
againe,Gal. 3. 10. 
                           cursed is euery man that continueth not in all things
which are written in the booke of the law to doe them. And
here is a notable touchstone whereby the children of
God are discerned, and distinguished from all reprobates
whatsoeuer. The reprobates (and that but now and then)
are touched with, and make confession of some great, and
notorious sinne, as wee haue examples in P
                                 •
                              arao, in Caine,
in Iudas. But for their smaller sinnes, particular infirmities
and sinnes of omission, they haue no touch, sense and
feeling at all.Rom 8. ver. Contrariwise the elect, and regenerate of
God, doe euen grone and sigh vnder the burden of these
lesser sinnes, they make confession of them, and desire to be
eased, and lightned of them, for they know that hereby
they offend GOD,Rom. 7. 19. which they would in no wise doe, and
therefore Paul saith, the goo
                                 •
                               thing which I woul
                                 •
                               I doe not,
but the euill thing which I would not doe that doe I: so that
here hee is grieued for his particular sinnes both of commission
and omission, or leauing of good vnperfourmed.
                        And thus much of confession and the vses thereof.
                     
                     
                        THE THIRD SECTION.
                        But mine heart waketh.
                        HAuing spoken of the Churches flumber and securitie,
wherein her infirmitie, and weakenesse appeared: it
followeth that now I propound, and apply the Antidote or
remedy contained in these words. But mine heart waketh.
The heart here, which is naturally the seate, and fountaine
of life and motion, principally and properly signifieth, faith,
whereby the Church in this her drowsinesse, and slumbering
securitie, waked, that is laid true hold of Christ, and

seffered not her delight in him to vanish. Some shadowe
and resemblance hereof wee may see, and obserue in naturall
sleepe, wherein the outward senses rest, and cease
working, but yet the phantasia or imagining part is
commonly in action and motion. Euen so a true iustifying
faith: albeit it bee for a time obscured, and the externall
actions of it appeare not, nor are felt and discerned;
yet the seede, roote, and foundation of it alwaies, remaineth
and abideth. This beeing so, I from the authoritie
of this place, gather this doctrine, and conclusion
viz: that, doctrine. That the faith, and other sauing graces
that proceede from it and accompany it; neither faile,
nor are wholy, and finally lost in the children of GOD,
no not in the greatest temptations, falls and decaies that can
possibly happen vnto them, but it shall reuiue, and bee in
time recouered, and confirmed.
                        The seede of eternall life may for a time bee hidden
in them, and not shewe forth it selfe, yet it abideth in them.
                           1. I
                                 •
                              oh. 3. 9.
The fire of the spirit of GOD may bee cooled yea and
couered in them, but it is neuer extinct. 
                           The shining
Sunne of righteousnesse by reason of the interposition of
the earth betweene them and it, may bee eclipted, but
yet it neuer departeth out of the firmament of their heart.
They may seeme for the time to bee dead trees without
leaues or fruite, but they retaine sappe of grace in their
heart.
                        They outwardly may seeme to themselues, and to others,
to bee but drosse, yet they are before GOD vessels
of siluer and gold. They may esteeme themselues in the
time of distresse, bare, yea bankerupt; and yet notwithstanding
haue, and retaine in their hearts, the precious
marga
                                 •
                              te, and pearle of the grace of GOD, yea and Christ
himselfe the treasure of eternall life. They like the two
disciples that went to Emaus, may talke togither of
the scriptures,Luk. 24. 14l. 15, 16. yea, and communicate, and conferre with
Christ himselfe, and yet their spirituall eyes for a time
may bee so holden that they cannot knowe him. They
may conceiue Christ in their heartes, and yet now, and

then, not perceiue the motion of this heauenly Embrio.
Lastly they may bee cast into a swound, or traunce, in so
much that no spirituall breath can be discerned in them, &
yet haue life and heate at the heart.
                        That the truth, & soundnes of this conclusion, Viz. that
Gods spirit, the gift of faith, and sauing grace in the true
members of the Church, can neuer perish or bee vtterly
lost, but in time bee reuiued, may more manifestly and
euidently appeare, these Scriptures following must be he
                              •
                           
                           ded
and attended.
                        
                           Hee that drinketh of the water that I shall giue him shall
be ne
                                 •
                              er more a thirst,
                           Ioh. 4. ver. 14. 
                           nay I shal be in him a wel of water springing
vp to eternall life, therefore it cannot be dried vp, for it
springeth continually, & ceaseth not, vntil it hath brought
him to euerlasting life.1 Iohn. 3. 9. 
                           Whosoeuer is born of God sinneth not,
id est doth not commit that sinne against the holy Ghost,
no nor other sinne with delight, and continuance; for his
seed abideth in him. Simon, Simon,
                           Luke. 22 31. 3 2. Sathan hath desired you
to winnow you as wheat, Viz. that passeth through the riddle,
the chaffe remaining. But I haue praied for thee that
thy faith faile not,Heb. 7. 2 5. yea hee liueth alwaies to make intercession
to God for the Church. But Christ his prayer is alwaies
heard.
                        Their loue to God, to his word,Ioh. 11. 42. to his Children is neuer
lost, for much water cannot quenche loue, neither can the
floods drowne it,
                           Cant. 8. 7. 
                           loue doth neuer fall away, & no maruaile seeing
it is a roote and foundation.
                           1 Cor. 13. The calling and gifts of
God are without repentance,Eph
                                 •
                              s. 2. 17. that is the inward calling of
God,Rom. 11. 29. and his graces that concerne saluation are constant,
& neuer (wholy) taken away; for as God is vnchangeable,
so are his gifts and decrees.
                           Mal. 3. 6. God hath vnto the Gentiles
granted repentance vnto life,
                           Act. 11. 18. if eternal life be the effect, and
consequence of it, it can neuer be lost: I saith the Lord will
forgiue their iniquitie,
                           
                              
                                 •
                              er. 3. 1. 34. 
                           & will remember their sinnes no more.
Therefore they can neuer dye out of Gods fauour, not bee
depriued of the grace of iustification, whose sinnes shall
neuer bee charged vppon them. They are alwaies greene
oliues before God,Psal. 1. 3. their leaues, that is to say, their sanctification

neuer 
                              •
                           adeth,2. Tim. 1. 19. 
                           the continue in the Apostles doctrine,
and in the fellow ship of the Church; their election is a sure
foundation and certaine,Col. 2. 5. 6. they are rooted, and grounded
in the faith: And lastly as their persons can neuer perish,
but shall be saued, so answereably cannot their gifts and
graces that are the meanes to bringEph. 4. ver. 30. them to eternall life.
Touching their persons and so their faith, they are sealed to
the day of redemption, their names are writtē in the booke
of life, the gates of hell cannot preuaile again
                              •
                           t them,
                              
                                 •
                              oh. 13. 3. Christ
loueth them to the end and nothing can separate them
from the loue of God,Rom. 8. 38. they are giuen of God to Christ to
be saued,
                           Ioh. 10. ve. 2
                                 •
                              
                            
                           and none can take them out of his hands, and
                           1. Pet. 1. 5. (to conclude)
they are kept by the power of GOD through faith vnto
saluation.
                        
                        And if humaine testimonies, and those of most excelent
and ancient diuines be to be respected, when the scriptures
be so plaine and plentifull, then amongst many others the
iudgement of that most iudicious father Saint Augustine is
most notable, who saith horum 
                                 •
                              ides quae per dilectionem operatur,
profecto aut omnino non deficit, aut siqui sunt quorum

                                 •
                              ides d
                                 •
                              icit, reparatur antequam vita ista 
                                 •
                              initur. de correptione
et gratia cap. 7. Their faith which worketh by loue either
neuer faileth at all, or if it do faile in any, it is repaired
againe before the life be ended.
                        
                           Obi. Saul, Simon Magus, Iudas, Himeneus, and Alexander,
fell away from faith, made shipwrack of it, and a good
cōscience, and lost the spirit and grace of GOD, therefore
the elect may wholy loose their faith, and the spirit of
regeneration.
                        
                           Answer. The argument or consequence followeth
not; these were neuer elected nor euer t
                              •
                           uly iust, or righteous
before GOD. Saul was an hipocrite, persecuted
Dauid, and died fearefully: Iudas was the childe
of perdition, and in his best estate hee was but a theese,
and an hipocrite Simon Magus his hart was not right in
the sight of God howsoeuer he was other wise deemed, and
esteemed before men.Act. 8. 21
                                 •
                              . And as for P
                                 •
                              ymeneus, and Philetus
they neuer had true iustiying faith which neuer faileth

but only an historicall, or temporary faith which hipocrites
may haue, and which in time of temptation fadeth, and falleth
away.
                        
                           Ques. But how far forth may, and sometimes do the elect
and regenerate loose faith, grace, and the spirit of God?
                        
                           An. First they, notwithstanding that their adoption and
interest to eternal life remaineth firme, & sure; yet by their
sins do & may loose y• inward feeling of Gods fauour,Hosea. 5. v. 15. & be
left to themsel
                              •
                           es for a time, in their troubles & afflictions,
Secondly vntill they repent of their sinnes they feele not,
nor finde in themselues the outward act and effects of imputed
grace. Thirdly touching inward and inherent grace,
albeit the seede, and habite of it cannot bee lost by reason
of confirming & succeeding grace, yet the outward worke
and apprehension of it may for a time cease and be suspended
as wee haue examples in Dauid, Iob, Anna, Ezechias,
and others.
                        
                           Ques. In the most greeuous, and extreame assaults and
temptations of the children of God, what grace of God remaineth
in them so, as that they, and others of sincere orthodoxe
iudgement may bee kept from dispaire, and conceiue
good hope that they remaine in Gods fauour?
                        
                           An. These following; the loue of God, of his Son Christ,
of his word, and of all his children in generall. For they
neuer hate God, hate Christ, hate his word, hate his children,
but loue and like them. Secondly they thinke, and
speake oft of God, and his waies, desire to bee reconciled
vnto him. Thirdly they pray vnto God, which though
they cannot doe alwaies in feeling, yet they do it in faith;
and this faith without feeling is more precious, and more
highly esteemed with God then faith with feeling, for it
wholie and simply relieth vpon God and his word. And
herein as they bee blessed that beleeue, and see not, so (vndoubtedly)
they are most happy that trust in, and depend
vpon God 
                              〈◊〉
                            (for the present) haue no feeling. Lastly they
reioyce, & finde maruelous contentment when they know
or heare of the good estate and prosperity of the church
in generall, or any member, or part of it in particular: and

when it goeth ill either with the Church or any member
thereof, they vpon the notice thereof mourne, greiue, lament;
And this argueth that they euen in the night, cloude,
& tempest of their present affliction are liuely, and feeling
members of the Church of God, because they haue a sympathy,
and such a mutuall compassion; and this point, that
saying of Paul confirmeth, and striketh it (as wee vse to
phrase it) dead; if one member suffer all suffer with it, if one
member be had in honour all the members reioyce with it.
                           1. Cor. 12. 26.
                        
                        
                           Que. But God is an holie God, an hater, and a punisher of
sinne, one that requireth truth in the inward partes, & that
we walke before him, and be perfect, how then will hee or
can hee, beare with such want of feeling, so many complaints,
so many defects, corruptions and wants in his children?
                        
                           An. The Godly are better within then without &1. Sam. 16. 7 GOD
requireth the heart more then the worke, man looketh on
the outward appearance,
                           Mat. 12, v. 20 
                           but the Lord beholdeth the heart.
A broken heart is an acceptable sacrifice vnto him. If our
faith be but as the graine of m
                                 •
                              stard seede, yea as smoaking
flaxe which for the present can neither yeeld light nor
heate, yea and weake, like a bruised reed, if it can but touch
the hemne of Christ his garment, yet if it be sound, hauing
onely God, Christ and the promises of the Gospell for
the obiect, and it doe growe and encrease, it is accepted
with GOD for a perfect faith and is sufficient for saluation.
                        Secondly God is a most indulgent,Heb. 12, v. 6, and 7. and louing Father
to his children looking onely vnto, and accepting the better
part in them which is his owne worke, and passing by
and pardoning their defects,Psal. 32, 1, 2. sinnes and imperfections as
though they were not at all;Rom. 8, 33, 34 and therefore they are blessed
be
                                 •
                              ause their sinnes are not imputed and GOD iustifieth
them, who shall then condemne them?
                        And as wee respect an heape of corne,Similitude. (albeit the greater
part bee chaste) for the corne and not for the chaffe,
and giue it the denomination of corne, and as wee
esteeme a mountaine, or mine of Gold, or Siluer

(though vnwrought, and vnrefined) for the gold, or siluer
and not for the drosse, and for the more precious parte
cal it gold or siluer: Euen so our heauenly Father accepteth
& regardeth his children for their better partes; of faith, and
sanctification, and taketh no notice of their faultes, and defects
(albeit they bee farre more in number then their
virtues.)
                        
                           Vse. 1. First this doctrine of the perpetuity, and continuance
of grace in Gods children serueth to checke and condemne
that false, and comfortlesse doctrine of the Romish
Synagogue, who holdeth and maintaineth and that by the
cannons of the 
                              
                                 •
                              ridentine councel, non modo infidelitate per
quam et ipsa 
                                 •
                              ides amittitur sed etiam quocun
                                 •
                              q alio mortali
peceato acceptam iustificationis
                           Tr
                                 •
                              dent Concil ses. 6. ca. 15 
                           grasiam amitte et omnes qui
laethalta committant peccata a Christs gratia seper
                                 •
                              entur. That
the grace of Iustification receiued is lost not onely by
vnbeleefe by which faith it selfe is lost, but also by any other
mortall sinne, and they that commit deadly sinnes are
seperated from the grace of Christ, which vile doctrine (as
before hath beene prooued) is the breake-necke of faith
directly against the word of God.
                        
                           Vse. 2. Secondly it serueth for the consolation and reuiuing
of the afflicted conscience of Gods children, for being
in the estate of grace they can neuer bee depriued of
it, but, God that hath begunne the good worke will finish
it,Hose, 6, v. 1. 2. 
                           hee that hath wounded the Church will heale it, though shee
fall she shall rise, and when shee shall si
                                 •
                               in dark nesse the Lord
will bee a light vnto them,Mic
                                 •
                               7. v. 8. and therefore let no man for his
owne, or any of Gods seruants temptations, fals, and frailties,
despaire either of his owne, or any other mans restitution,
and saluation;Rom. 11, v. 23 
                           for God is able to restore them, yea and
will restore and perfect them.
                        
                           Vse. 3. Seeing that in euery greiuous temptation, wee suffer
much losse, either by abating and remitting of our
faith, our zeale, our hope, our loue, our strength, our ioye,
feeling; or els by falling into some grosse and greiuous actuall
sinne, as did Noab, Lot, 'Dauid, Sol
                                 •
                              mon, Ez
                                 •
                              chias, Peter
&c. Wee must labour by all good, and holy meanes to

repaire our decaies, and recouer our losses. We must nourish
the spirit of God, by prophesie, praier &c. cherish our
lampes with the oile of faith.  If our nets bee broken wee
must with Iames and Iohn mend them, if our wedding garment
bee rent or torne wee must repaire it. And as in
Pauls nauigation when through the feare of death, and
through an exceeding tempest,Acts 27 and for that the sunne and
starres in many daies appeared not, the mariners, and souldiers
for foureteene daies had no appetite to their meat, or
did any thing at all; yet at last, beeing comforted and reuiued
by Paul, they did at his exhortation, for the safegard
of their liues take foode: euen so, if through the tempests
of temptations, wee haue, longer then it was meete either
abstained from, nor had any appetite to spirituall foode, it
is time (before we famish) to receiue it and to recouer our
appetite.
                        If with the Church of Ephesus we haue lost our first loue,
we must repent,Apo. 2, 4, 5. and consider from whence wee are fallen,
and doe the first workes; if with the Church of Sardis wee
haue a name that weeApo. 3, 2. 
                           liue and yet are dead wee must awaken
and strengthen the things that remaine that are readie to die.
If with the Church of Laodicaea
                           Apoc. 3, 16. 19. wee by reason of ease and
prosperitie grow luke-warme, and are neither cold nor hote, we
must bee zealous and amend.
                        
                        Lastly, if our sinnes haue wounded vs, and left vs halfe
dead as the theeues and robbers did the man that fell into
their hands betweene Iericho a
                              •
                           d Ierusalem;
                           Luk 10, 11, 
                                 •
                              . 30, ad 37. wee must in
the Inne of the Church entreate, and procure the good
Samaritane Christ Iesus to powre wine and oile into our
wounds, and to take charge of vs and heale vs, so shall wee
bee in staetu quo prius, yea and our latter end wilbe more
glorious and comfortable then our beginning.
                        And thus much of this point viz. that sauing grace in the elect neuer faileth.
                     
                     
                        
                        THE FOVRTH SECTION.
                        BVt mine &c. Here the Church findeth and feeleth
grace in her heart, & by faith layeth hold on Christ, so
that notwithstanding, that her temptation had in part preuailed,
yet shee before the extremitie, and bitternesse of it
came; professeth and assureth herselfe and others that her
faith was vntainted, and her heart sound with GOD. Her
walls and outward buildings were somewhat crazed, and
battered, but the strong Castle of her faith in Christ vntouched.
From this her confession wee learne to our
comfort that the elect, and Saints of GOD (of whome
alone his Catholike Church doth consist)The elect assured of Gods fauour and their election. are (except
onelie in the greene blade, and insancie of the Church or
in the night and tempest of some great temptation) perswaded
and assured in their owne consciences by Gods
spirit that they are in the state of grace, and saluation, and
shall neuer fall away from it.
                        Now that we may be assured that wee haue faith in our
hearts, and so are in fauour with GOD, wee haue most
plaine,Rom. 8, 15. and pregnant places of holy scriptures to prooue
it. God hath sent forth the spirit of his Sonne into your
hearts whereby wee cry Abba father, wee haue receiued
the spirit of Adoption, whereby wee cry abba father, the same
spirit beareth witnesse with our spirit, that wee are the children
of GOD. But this witnesse is not coniecturall but
most certaine; for the spirit can neuer bee deceiued,
therefore vndoubtedlie they knewe that they were
Sonnes.Ephes. 3, 12.
                        
                        Thirdly by the spirit wee haue boldness and enterance
with confidence by faith in him, for the spirit expelleth
all feare,
                           2. Cor. 13. 5. that is all doubtfulnesse and mistrust. Prooue
your selues whether that you are in the faith, examine
your selues, know yee not your owne selues howe that

IESVS CHRIST is in you except you be reprobates.
Now CHRIST was in them by grace and iustifying
faith,Gal. 2. 20. 
                           and not by his power and miracles only, as Bellarmine
would haue it,1 Ioh. 4. 17. for by this faith men liue in Christ, yea liue
for euer.1. Ioh. 2. ve. 20
                        
                        But you knowe the spirit for hee dwelleth with you,
and shall bee in you: therefore if wee know the spirit
to bee in vs, wee must needs know our faith and iustification
that proceedeth thence.Dan. 7. 24. 
                           Yee haue an ointment
from him that is holy and knowes all things.
Here the Apostle alludeth vnto the old figures of the law,
and the ointments where-with the Priests were annointed
and specially the high Priest a figure of Christ, who is stiled
by the name of messias, or anointed. Now the anointing
of Priests and Kings in the old testament was a representation
of the gifts of the holy Ghost, and this is the cause
why the holy Ghost is here,1. Ioh. 3. 14. and else where named 
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                           
or ointment, and the sense is that the true beleeuers hauing
the holy Ghost,1. Ioh. 4. 14. know all things (necessary to saluation) and
by his power preseuer in faith,1. Ioh. 5. 18. 20. 
                           ergo they also know that
they are in Gods grace and fauour. And againe we know
that wee are translated from death to life because wee lou
                                 •
                              e the
brethren. Hereby we know that we dwell in him and hee in vs
because he hath giuen vs of his spirit. He that beleeueth in the
sonne of God hath the witnes of God in himselfe.
                           Iob. 19. 26. 27 Now this is
not a doubting, or coniecturall knowledge but an holy
perswasion wrought in Pauls,
                           Rom. 8. 38. 39. and so in all our hearts by
the holy Ghost.
                        
                           I know my redeemer liueth (saith Iob,) and that I shall see God
in my flesh, and mine ies shall be hold him, and none other for me
Lastly (to be breife) I wil conclude with that of Paul; I am
perswaded that neither death, nor life, nor Angels, nor principaliites,
nor powers, nor things present or things to come, nor
beegth, nor depth, nor any other creature shal be able to separate
vs from the loue of God, which is in Christ I
                                 •
                              sus our Lord.
But least any man should obiect that this perswasion
was proper onely to Saint; Paule and that hee had it
by some speciall reuelation for the answere hereof.
                        
                           
                           A
                                 •
                              s.
                           Rom. 
                                 •
                              . 5. Wee must note that the ground of his 
                              〈◊〉
                           
                           ▪
viz: the loue of God in Christ I
                                 •
                              sus is common to all the
faithfull, for it is shed in all their hearts. And Paul, in another
place, maketh the assurance of saluation common to
him with all the faithfull, saying, there is laid vp for mee a
Crowne of righteousnesse,
                           2. Tim. 48 
                           and not to mee onely, but vnto all
them also which loue his appearing, albeit some haue it in
greater measure then others.
                        And that this doctrine may bee the more easily conceiued
of vs; I will explaine and make it lightsome by some
familier comparisons and similitudes. Can a man carry
fire in his hand,Similitudes & comparisons. and not feele it, and can a man containe the
holy flame of Gods grace in his heart, and not discerne it?
Can a woman be wedded to an husband and not know it?
And can wee be conioyned to Christ, yea and ingrafted into
him, and not perceiue it? Can a man buy, and possesse
a precious pearle, and a rich treasure, and yet bee ignorant
of it, and can the Church by faith buy, and apprehend
Christ, and not be aware of it? Can a man doubt of the garments
where with he is cloathed, and can the Church cloathed
with the sonne of righteousnesse neuer see nor obserue
it?1. Ioh. 2. 20. Can the elect (the friends of God) know all things
needfull for their saluation by reuelation from him, and
shall they erre and be ignorant in the knowledge, and certaintie
of their owne iustification, and saluation? Can the
sense bee deceiued about his proper obiect? And can all
spirituall senses faile, and beguile vs? Can hee dwell in vs,
and we not see him? Can hee dwell in vs, and wee neuer
feele him?Luk. 24. v. 32. Can he speake peace to our soules and cause our
hearts to burne within vs, and we not heare him? Can hee
feede vs with the hony, wine, spices, fatlings, and delicates, and
wee haue no tast, and relish of them? Can Christ perfume
his spouse with mirrbe, and incense and with all the powder
of the merchant,Cant. 3. 6. and shee not smell it? Can Christ lodge
and lie with vs,Apoc. 3. 20. and we with him, & neuer spiritually touch
him? Finally shall the Church and must shee reioyce that
her name is written in heauen, and yet haue no certaintie
of it? Wherefore this doctrine of the assurance of faith, and

of the grace of God is certaine, infallible, and neuer
faileth. But before wee 
                              〈◊〉
                            attaine vnto this certainety
of faith, and sauing grace,Meanes to come to assurance. wee must dilligently
and reuerently heare Gods word, know it, and our sinnes
by it, be truly humbled by it, dispaire of our owne abilitie;
ascent, and subscribe vnto the Gospell; hope and desire
pardon, hunger and thirst after grace, craue pardon of our
sinnes, and particularly apply vnto our selues the promises
of mercy, and saluation made vnto vs in the Gospell, and
continue herein,1. Sam. 17▪ 36. and then in processe of time after long
sence, obseruation, and long experience of Go
                                 •
                              's fauor an
                                 •
                              
loue Psal. 23. 6. Yea after that we haue bene long excercised
in temptations,2. Timi 4. 7. 8. and bene old beaten soldiers in Christs battaile
wee shall attaine vnto this fulnesse, and firmnesse
of faith.
                        By this doctrine is confuted and ouerthrowne that erroneous
and desperate doctrine of the Romish Synagogue,
Vse. 1. who albeit they teach that men may by their workes merite
saluation, and satisfie Gods iustice, yet they contradict
themselues (which is proper to Babel
                                 •
                              
                            the mother of confusion)
and considently hold and teach, that no man can
be certaine of his saluation in this life by an ordinary and
speciall faith, but onely by extraordinary reuelation and
hope, which hope ministreth (as they say) but a coniecturall
certaintie. If this their position were true, how could
euer Iob in his extremities haue comforted himselfe in the
vndoubted hope of his resurrection to eternall glory.
Would euer Moses haue forsaken Pharaohs court, and the
glory, pleasure, and preferments of it,H
                                 •
                              b. 11. 25. if he had not had an
eye vnto, yea an assurance of the recompence of the reward in
the life to come? would Manahen that had beene brought
vp with Herod the Tetrarch so debased and subiected himselfe
to so much enuie,Acts. 13. 1. 2, and so many pcrils, and dangers by
entring into the holy ministery, had not the expectation,
and assurance of eternall happinesse induced him herevnto?
And (to absolue this point) how could, or would so many
thousands of Martyrs (since the Apostles times especially)
haue suffered so much rebuke, so great losses,Heb. 10. and 11. chapters. so many

tortures for Christ, and his Gospell, yea, and most cruell
deaths and persecutions, had they not been secured in their
soules of the fauour of God, and beene verily perswaded
that they stood in the estate of grace, and should in time
be glorified?
                        Seeing that the knowledge of our e
                              •
                           tate before God,Vse. 2.
and the certaintie of Gods fauour and loue is so admirable
and vnualuable a benefit communicated to none but Gods
children, and to them that seeke his face in Christ, let vs neuer
rest, nor be quiet vntill we haue sued out our qu
                                 •
                              etus est,
and haue procured this certaintie. 
                              Let not marrying of
wiues,
                              Luk. 9. v. 
                                    •
                                 5. 
                              buying of Farmes, trying of Oxen, oues, & boues, &
pecori campi, hinder, and stay vs from getting this assurance.
                        
                        What shall we so toile and moile, and so sue and seeke
with so much paine and cost, to ascertaine vnto our selues
and ours, lands, liuings, leases, patents, reuersions, (which
notwithstanding by reason of our mortalitie, and the
might, malice, and cunning of men, we (oftentimes) can
neither long, nor peaceably enioy) and shall we not much
more seeke the kingdome of God, and the righteousnesse
of Christ? shall not we labour to secure vs of Gods vnchangeable
fauour; and to get the grant, yea, and begining
of eternall and vnspeakeable happinesse, which wee
may assuredly obtaine, and the obtaining and purchase
whereof is worth ten thousand workes: And therefore
Curare externa neglectis internis (imoaeternis, (as one saith
well) caec
                                 •
                              tas est, that is, to haue a care of these outward
things, and neglect and passe inward, and eternall things
is blindnesse, nay madnesse. For what will it profit a man to
gaine the whole world, and loose his owne soule, or what ransome
or recompence shall hee giue to r
                                 •
                              de
                                 •
                              me it? surely none.
GOD therefore make vs wise to saluation, and grant
that we may alwayes looke to the maine chance, and make
choise of the better part, Amen.
                        
                     
                     And thus much shall suffice to haue spoken of the churches, faith, confidence, and feeling.
                  
                  
                     
                     NOw because this doctrine is of so great moment, and
importance, and of so excellent, and necessary vse; I
for the edification, and comfort of all good Christians will
annexe and set downe six special, and principal, or characteristicall
notes, markes and demonstrations, whereby a man
may in conscience bee perswaded that he standeth in the
estate of grace, and is reconciled vnto God, whether for
the present temptation hee haue feeling or not. And by
these notes and demonstrations it shall euidently appeare
who is in the state of grace and s
                           •
                        luation; for as the life is
knowne by the motion, the fire by the light and heate,
the tree by the fruite, and the sheepe by the markes and
brands, so may the godly heareby iudge and determine of
their faith.
                     The notes are these six following, which I will (God assisting)
handle breifly and in order.Six speciall notes or marks of faith and grace. The first is sound
iudgement in matters of faith and religion. The second sincere
affection towards, and constant delight in Christ, and
his Gospell. The third a constant course in all the excersises
of godlines. The fourth an inward and godly sorrow
for our sinnes, and for the offence of GOD.
                     The fift is thanfulnes in acknowledgement and high
esteeme of C H R I S T, and all his graces and benefits.
Lastly to suffer no sinne to raigne, and haue command
and dominion in vs, but to dislike, resist and
breake it off. Hee that hath these, and the like 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        
congnisances, markes and properties wee may say iustly of
him, hee that hath or that doth these t
                              •
                           inges, shall neuer fall,
that is, hee is perpetually blessed, and can neuer by any
violence, tyranny, or iniuries of Satan, and the world,
bee ouerthrowne or remoued from his state, but is secure
and safe against all euills.
                     Touching soundnes of faith and iudgement,1 note soundn
                              •
                           s of iudgement. it is when
no heresie is maintained, or errour held against the
principles and groundes of Orthodoxe religion; but
in iudgement and conscience is directed, and rectified in
all thinges by the holy Scriptures, this is a light
to our wayes, and a Lanth
                              •
                           rne to our steppes, the eye of our

soule a lampe, and torch to guide and lead vs, in the darkenesse
of this world, it is a gate and doore to let vs vnto
Christ his chamber of presence, and to intromit vs into
heauen; it is a key to vnlocke the treasures of the scriptures;
it is the foundation of our spirituall house, and the
directer, & touchstone of al good workes, and obedience.
That, this soundnesse of faith and iudgement is of absolute
necessity, to prooue vnto vs the truth of grace and Gods
fauour, it shall thus by scripture most manifestly bee declared.
                     The Church in the Acts of the Apostles is said to continue
in the Apostles doctrine,
                        Ephes. 2. 20. the Church is builded vpon the foundation,
the doctrine, and scriptures of the Prophets and Apostles.
Tit. 2. 2. Elder men must be sound in the faith, nay the church
must bee rooted & grounded in it.Col. 2. 6. If they had beene of vs
(saith Saint Iohn)1. Ioh. 2, 19. 
                        they had continued with vs, viz▪
                         in soundnesse
of doctrine, and in frequenting the holy assemblies.
No other foundation can any man laie then that which is laid
which is Iesus Christ.
                        1. Cor. 3, 11. That is the doctrine of the Gospel,
touching Christ his person, and office, is (as it were) the
foundation of Christian Religion, therefore both pastors
and people must by all meanes endeuour to keepe this
doctrine pure, and vncorrupted: And all doctrines and opinions,
quirkes, and curriosities that are not agreeable
herevnto, are but woode, hay, stubble which the fire of heauenly
truth will in time to their reproach and shame reueale,
and consume. The ministerie of the word is
giuen, and ordained of GOD that wee might grow vp
to perfect on of faith, and that wee should bee no more c
                              •
                           ildren,
                        Eph. 4. 13. 14. 
                        wauering and carried about with euery winde of doctrine.
Iesus Christ yesterday,Heb. 13. 8. and to daie and the same for euer.
Bee not caried about with diuers and st
                              •
                           ange doctrine▪ for
it is a good thing that the heart bee established with grace and
not with meates &c. Faith is the eye of the bodie, if the eye
be single the whole 
                              •
                           ody shalbe light.
                     
                     The necessity, and most absolute vse of this doctrine
will appeare by the Caueates and warnings that are giuen
vs in scripture to beware of seducers, & false teachers, and

by the opposition and zeale that we are to shew against al
Atheisme, Idolatry, Libertinisme &c. Hence it is that in
matters of conscience, and in troubles of minde wee are
put ouer to the lawe and to 
                              •
                           he testimonies, and they that
speake not according to this word haue no light in them.
                        Isa. 8. 20▪
                         
                        They
that will not beleeue Moses and the Prophets will not beleeue
though one arose from the dead.
                        Luk. 1
                              •
                           . Hence it is that Dauid by
reason of his vnderstanding in,Psal▪ 119. 104 and loue to Gods word,
hateth all false waies. Hence it is that the Church is exhorted
to beware of false Prophets, to beware of the leuine
that is, the infections and false doctrine of the Scribes
and Pharasies, to saue themselues from that forward generation, 
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        
                        Iud. 1. 3. to play the Champions and to contend for
the common faith,Apoc. 18. v. 4. 
                        to come out of 
                              •
                           abylon least they bee partakers
of her si
                              •
                           nes, and so of her plagues; not to goe after
false Christs and false Prophets,Ioh. 10. v. 5. for they must not so much
as heare a stranger, that is, one that bringeth strange, and
false doctrine, much lesse bid him God speede,2. Ioh. 10. that is any
way shew any countenance, and allowance to his corrupt
doctrine. And no maruaile for Heresie and false
doctrine is the poyson and pestilence to the soule,Apo. 9 v 5. it stingeth,
and vexeth the conscience like a scorpion.
                        2. Tim. 2. 17. It doth
eat and consume the soule like a Gangraene, it maketh men
spiritually mad,2. Pet. 2. 2. yea and bringeth with it (if men die in it)
certaine and iust damnation.
                     
                        Vse. 1. Wherefore we learne hence, first not to measure the
truth of Religion by multitudes, vniuersalities, antiquities
(as the Papists and ignorants, of the world doe;) for h
                           •
                        rein
we may soone bee deceiued,
                           
                              •
                           uk. 13. v. 24. 
                        the broad way leadeth to destruction,
Christs flocke is but a little one: and the number
of the elect is (in comparison of them that perish) exceeding
few, therefore we must try and examine all by the
standard, and certaine rule of Gods holy word▪ and if it
be consonant therevnto, wee must admit it, otherwise reiect it.
                     
                        Vse. 2. It meeteth with and checketh the errour, and
sottishnesse of the simple ignorant multitude, of whome
for the most part we may truely say they know not the law of

God and accursed,Ioh. 7. v. 49. who terme and call an Atheist a Papist
a Libertine, (if 
                           •
                        e be onely outwarly and ciuilly righteous,)
iust, liberall curteous, sociable, a right honest man;
as though there could possibly be any true honesty without
fath and true religion, the cause and foundation of it;
For Paul doth make Godlinesse a cause of honesty that is,1. Tim. 2. 2. of Christian life, and behauiour.
                     
                        Vse. 3. We must beware of and shunne all doctrine that
tendeth to Atheisme and Libertinisme, and all popish opinions,
and especially such as haue beene by some of late
yeares vented, furbished and refined, and therefore the
more dangerous,Resined Errors. and deceitfull. And indeed no better
then the whore of Babilons golden cup, glorious without,
but within full of abhominations and deadly poyson. Of
this kinde of opinions, and errours (to omit others) are
these following. First that the now Romish church (albeit
idolatrous, and apostatical) is a true visible church.
                     2. Error. That the holy religion of Christ now professed,
and by publicke authority maintained in England, and
the doctrine and worship of Papists differ onely in accidents
and circumstances and not in substance, and that a
reconciliation betwixt both parties might well be admitted.
Whereas first the Romish religion is (for the most
part) Idolatrous and hereticall, but so is not ours at all. Secondly
the Papists will in no wise yeeld to any reconciliation
to vs, though in truth, and why should
wee yeeld and bee reconciled to them in error, and Idolatrie?
                     3. Error. That we must not enquire how Christ is present
in the Eucharist (viz: whether spiritually or bodilie)
intending heereby to keepe men in suspence, and to make
away for that absurd and blasphemous doctrine of Transubstantiation.
Whereas otherwise it is most plaine by
scripture that Christs presence is altogither spirituall.
                     4. Error. That the sabboth is but a ceremony, and that it
is in the churches power and libertie to alter it, determine
the time, and the continuance of it, and to remit and abate
of the strictnesse of it as it shall thinke good. Whereas it

is one of the tenne commandements, and therefore must
needes for substance bee morall and perpetuall, and it is in
the power of no person to dispense withall, and the maintayning
of this error openeth a dore to al prophanesse and
licentiousnesse.
                     5. Error. The false opinion of vniuersall grace, and the
denying of the doctrine of 
                           •
                        ternall reprobation in Gods
secret decree.Math. 1
                              •
                           . 27. Whereas sauing grace is proper onely to
the elect,Rom. v. 
                              •
                           . and that God hath eternally decreed, and doth
in time actually passe by many and most, it is by scripture
most apparent.
                     6. Error. That the sufferings of Christ were only bodily
and not in soule (properly and immediately) but by Sympathy
onely. Whereas his soules heauines, bloudy sweate,
praier against it, and the consent of most worthy, and Orthodoxe
Diuines, euince the contrary.
                     Lastly it is malum omen, and prognosticateth much decay
of sincere zeale and pure affection, when of late times
amongst too too many students in Diuinitie, the sound,
iudicious, pithy and fruitfull writings, comments, disputes,
and Euangelicall authors, such as are Caluin, Beza,
Martyr, Bucer, Zanchius, Pola
                              •
                           us. Iunins, Iuell, Whittakers,
Fulke, and Perkins, &c. are neglected, contemned, and out
of request, and the false rubbish, and muddy bookes and
writings of Popish schoolemen, and interpreters are iniudiciously
& rashly receiued. Herevnto may be referred, (as a
great rebater to faith, and a mighty infection, and corruption
to good life, and manners,) the publishing, toleration,
reading, and affecting of scurrile play bookes, vnsauery,
and amorous ballads, foolish ieasts, and fained and vnprofitable
histories and fables. These are to to much in request;
these effiminate mens manners, and make them apt
to entertaine any religion but the truth: and if perhaps
they retaine the truth, it is to bee feared that it is more in
shew then in substance, for custome rather then▪ for conscience.
                     And thus much of the foundation of faith and iudgement.
                  
                  
                     
                     Now it followeth that wee speake of sincere affection,2. Note, si
                              •
                           
                           cere affection.
and sound delight in Christ, and in his Gospell: Vbi am
                              •
                           r
ibi oculus, where our loue is, there will bee our eye, and
where our treasure is, there will bee our heart. Our loue to
Christ must be hartie like Peters, it must be great like Mary
Magdalins,
                        Iohn. 21. 7. it must be setled and vnmoueable that no water
can quench it,
                        Luk. 7. 38▪
                         
                        no
                              •
                            the stoods drowne it, yea wee must for no substance
part with it.
                        Cant. 8. 7 Christ is the tree of life, and vnder his
shadow we must sit down
                              •
                            and rest.
                        Cant, 2. v. 3. We must count all things,
whatsoeuer may otherwise bee auantageable vnto vs, but
losse and dung to winne him.
                        Philip. 3. 8
                              •
                           
                         And as for the world, because it
is the spring and fountaine of all knowledge,Psal. 87. v. 7. the immortall
seede, and the instrument of faith and saluation; wee must
receiue it, and loue it, if we would profit by it, yea, and preferre
it aboue spoiles, treasures, gold, siluer, and pretious
stones. If we leese it, we leese all things, yea the very broad
scale and patent of eternall life, and if we haue and reteine
it (in sound iudgement, sincere delight, and hearty affection)
wee shall liue for euer. Wee must also cleaue vnto the
Lord with full purpose of heart,
                        Acts 11. 23. and entreate him to knit our▪
hearts vnto him, least our hearts distracted with diuers desires,
Psal. 86 11. should remaine in doubt, and take such courses as are
not pleasing vnto God; but that they being consecrated
vnto him may obey him,Rom. 8. 23. onely rest in him, and depend vpon
him.2. Cor. 5. 2. Lastly wee must waite for our full redemption, and
entertaine an earnest desire to enioy e
                              •
                           ernall life.
                     
                     This doctrine meeteth with the Stoikes,Vse. and those that
are Stoikally minded who deny affections, and would haue
men herein to be no better then stockes and stones; wheras
in truth without these affections set vpon their right obiect,
and that in due proportion, there can be no true seruing
of God, no zeale for his glory, no feare of his name,
no hatred, and detestation of 
                              ••
                           nne, no spirituall ioy and delight,
no true loue of God, his saints, and word, and no true
faith and hope in God, &c. These are wings whereby wee
flye, and are carryed vnto God, chariots to bring vs vnto
Christ, and they are the very heart and life of all our spirituall
actions.
                     
                     The churches securitie. And thus much in briefe touching the sinceritie of our affections.
                  
                  
                     THe third note and marke of faith and grace, is a setled
and a continued course in all the duties of godlinesse.The 3. note. Constant and vniuersall obedience. And herein is Christian wisedome, fortitude, and resolution
seene. For the proofe and demonstration of this point,
the Scriptures are plaine and plentifull, Dauid saith; I haue
respect vnto all thy commandements. I haue chosen the way of
truth,
                        Psal. 119. v. 6. 
                        and thy iudgements haue I layd before me; teach me O
Lord the way of thy statutes, and I will keepe it unto the end:
And seuen times a day doe I praise thee,
                        v. 30. & 33. 
                        because of thy righteous
iudgements.
                        Prou. 4. 18. 
                        The way of the righteous shineth as the light
that shineth more and more vnto the perfect day; that is the
noone-tide, when the day is most cleere and bright. And
the meaning is, that the godly do daily profit in wisdome,
and the feare of the Lord, and goe from strength to strength,
vntill they ascend to that perfection which may be attained
vnto in this life.
                        Luke. 1. v. 7. 
                              •
                           . This is one maine end of our redemption,
viz. to serue the Lord in holinesse and righteousnesse
all the dayes of our life. Againe we are perpetuall
subiects and seruants vnto God (albeit otherwise his
freemen and children) and we expect an eternall reward,
namely eternall life purchased for us, and promised vs,
therefore our obedience must be perpetuall also. But that
wee may the better keepe this continued and resolued
course in goldlinesse; we must alwayes remember, and doe
our vtmost endeuour, to repaire, and renue our faith and
repentance: for as we sinne daily, so wee must repent dailie,
and as wee slip daily and loose some-thing (especially
in the euill day and the time of any speciall temptation)
so it is most requisite that wee bee carefulll to confirme
and strengthen our 
                           •
                        aith, and to renue our repentance.
For recouery of bodily health and strength decayed, we
vse Physicke, good dyet, exercise, and all other good
meanes, and shall not wee bee much more studious and
prouident by all meanes, for the recouerie and repaire of
our spirituall strength and health that is any wayes impaired,

and diminished. This was the practise of Dau
                              •
                           d who
saith I haue considered m
                              •
                            waies and turned my feete vnto thy
testimonies.
                        Psal. 119▪ 59. Hence it is that our Sauiour teacheth and commandeth
vs daily to confesse our sinnes, and craue pardon
of them at Gods hands saying, forgiue vs our trespasses
as wee forgiue them that trespasse against vs. Hence it is
that before wee receiue the word wee are to prepare our
selues,Ecles. 4▪ 17. and to take he
                              •
                           de to our feete, that is, to our affections,
when wee enter into Gods house, and bee more neere to

                              •
                           eare them to giue the sacrifice of Fooles, that is wee must vseall
diligent endeuour that wee heare the voice of GOD,
and frame our life thereafter, and not to offer such sacrifice
as fooles doe, who hauing sinned, imagine that they
can satisfie the Lord with their ceremonious Worshippe,
when their life notwithstanding is not amended.Psal 2▪ 66. Dauid
s
                              •
                           ith th
                              •
                           t hee will washe his hands in innocencie and (so)
compasse Gods alter. Likewise before the receyuing of
the Sacrament of the bodie, a
                              •
                           d bloud of CHRIST; a man
must trie,
                        1. Cor. 11. 28 
                        and examine himselfe,
and by consequence renue
his faith, and repentance, and so eat of the bread and
drinke of that cuppe. And (to knit vp all in a word) the
Church of Corinth must expell that leauen the incestuous
person:1. Cor. 5. 7. the Church of Ephesus must recouer her first loue:
the Church of Pergamus must repent of that sinne for
tollerating them amongst them that mainta
                              •
                           ned the doctrine
of the Nicolaitans.Apo. 2. 25 The Church of Sardis must awaken,
and strengthen the thing that remaine, that are read
                              •
                           e
to die.
                        Apo. 3. 2. The luke-warme Church of Laodicae
                              •
                           
                         which
was neither hote nor cold (which is now the common sinne
of our time and the maladie of most Churches) must bee
zealous, and amend.vers. 19.
                     
                     Vse. 1. The vse of this doctrine, is to cond
                           •
                        mne them
that either vse no holie and Religious exercise at all, and
hereby discrie and bewray themselues to bee meere Atheists,
and Nullifidians, or els if they doe performe any
dutie of pietie, religion and loue, they doe it vpon fits,
brunts, passions; for a time, and that in some things onelie
like Iehu, and their goodnesse (like that of Ephraim
                        
and luda
                              •
                           
                        ) is as a morning cloude, and as a morning dew it goeth
away,
                        Hosea. 6. 4. they are soone hote and soone cold, and they
are farre from any stedfast resolution, and continued
practise, which onelie is proper to a true iustifying faith:
whereas hipocrites, temporizers, and wordlings may (for a
time and vpon suddaine motions) formally performe all
the forenamed duties.
                     Vse. 2. The second vse is for consolation. Dost thou
notwithstanding thou now and then deuiate, and digresse
a little out of the way for a time with Noah, Lot
Dauid, Peter, Ezechias &c, trauaile daily foreward to heauen?
dost thou purposely, and ordinarily walke in the
narrow way that leadeth to eternall life? Dost thou not
long continue in thy by-pathes, nor please they selfe in
them; but vpon notice of thy errour, reduce thy selfe
into the waie againe, and then by more speede and hast
make amendes for thy former straying and slouthfulnesse?
comfort thine heart, thine infirmities shall neuer
bee laid to thy charge, and thou shalt at length attaine
to the ende of thy iorney and hope, namely the port and
hauen of euerlasting happinesse, For GOD, chiefely respecteth
the heart, and resolution: And that which Paul
saith of almes, and contribution;1. Cor. 8, 12. we may truely affirme of
all other holy duties: if there be first a willing minde, they are
accepted according to that a mā hath, & not according to that
a mā hath not, and (to conclude) for this constant practise,
continuance, and perseuerance in holy duties and Godlinesse:

                           
                              •
                           osua, Dauid, Iehoshaphat, Aza, Ezcch: as, Iosias,
&c. are commended and eternized in scripture, for that
they serued GOD with a perfect and vpright heart,
and did (in generall) that which was acceptable in
Gods sight.
                     And thus much of a continued course in Godlinesse.
                  
                  
                     THe fourth signe or marke is a griefe,2. Cor. 7. 11 4▪ note a Godly sorro
                              •
                           . and Godly sorrow
for the offense of God ioyned with an earnest

desire of reconciliation and forgiuenesse. It is a Renting
of the heart and not of the garments. Examples of this
sorrow,Ioel. 2. 13 
                        we haue in Daniell confessing his, and the peoples sins,
wee haue sinned, and committed iniquity and done wickedly,Dan. 9. vers. 6.
                        O Lord righteousnesse belongeth unto thee, and to vs open
pen shame. In the prodigall child, Father I haue sinned against
heauen,
                        Luke 18. 13. 
                        and against thee, and I am no more worthy to
bee called thy childe. In the Iewes repenting of their vnthankfulnesse
against Christ, of whome its said that they
shall lament for Christ as one mourneth for his onely sonne,
and bee sory for him as one is one is sorie for his first borne.
                        Zacha. 12, 10.
They
are blessed that mourne, viz:
                        Math 5. for their owne sinnes, and others,
and a broken heart is a sacrifice to God. Let euery
man then descend into himselfe, examine his conscience
and bewaile his sinnes, whereby hee hath crucified the
sonne of God. Let him then sigh and grone and bee afflicted
for his offences, which no Man, Angell, or creature
els could satisfie for, but onely Christ Iesus the Kings
sonne, who both suffered manifold and exquisite paines
in bodie, and most inward and vnspeakeable torments
in his soule for his sinne and that beeing his vtter enemie,
and therefore if hee could shed buckets of teares
for his sinnes, yea and teares of bloud all the daies of his
life hee must not thinke it sufficient. Now the griefe and
sorrow must not bee onely, or cheifely in respect of losses,
crosses, extremities, afflictions, punishments, or because
hee afraid of hell tormentes and the terrour of
the last iudgement;Psal. 130, 4. for reprobates, as Cain, Esau,
Iudas, Magus, may and haue gone thus farre: but it must
bee chiefely because the good maiestie of GOD hath
beene offended, his patience and long suffering abused,
and his mercie and fauour contemned, and this sorrow
would appeare in iust and Godly men, albeit there were
no conscience to accuse, no iudge to condemne, no temporall
plagues to terrifie, and no eternall torments to
daunt and dampe him. And if that saying be good oderunt
peccare boni virtutis amore: so much more the Godly and
regenerate are loath and grieued to displease God for the

loue and reuerence they beare to God and their Sauiour
Christ. And as for deprecation,De
                              ••
                           re of pardon. and desire of pardon, it
is of absolute necessitie, and wee haue aboundant scriptures
for the illustration and iustification of it. In the
Iewes in Hosea his time,Hos. 14, 4.
saying. Take away all iniquitie,
and receiue vs gratiously: I say, Daniell. and the Iewes of
his time saying. O Lord heare, O Lord, forgiue, O Lord,
consider and doe it,
                        Psal. 51. 
                        deferre not for thine owne names sake O
my GOD. In Dauid, haue mercie vpon mee, O GOD according
to thy louing kindenesse; according to the mul
                              •
                           itude
of thy compassions put away mine iniquities.
                     
                     And here wee may obserue a notable and a manifest
difference betweene Gods children, and the hipocrites
and wicked. Gods children desire nothing so much as to
bee reconciled vnto him, and therefore vpon the sense,
and perceiuing of his displeasure, they forthwith fall to
prayer and humble suite, for the pardon of their sinnes, and
neuer giue ouer vntell God from heauen send into their
hearts some comfortable assurance thereof. But the
wicked in their extremities (if they desire ought of God)
either by themselues or others, it is onelie with
Pharao, and Simon Magus, for the remoouall, or preuention
of Gods iudgement, but as for their particuler
sinnes, the cause of all their miseries they haue no true
touch of, much lesse, then, desire pardon of them; as the
examples of the two forenamed persons, as likewise of
Cain, Esau, Iudas &c. doe sufficiently testifie. And the
reason hereof is for that the wicked, and reprobate are
neuer liuely smitten with the sense of their particular
offences, nor discerne what an excellent and vnutterable
benefit it is for a man to bee eased of them,Psal. 32, 1. 2 but the
case is farre otherwise with euery Godly, and truelie regenerate
man.
                     And thus much of Godly sorrow and desire of pardon.
                  
                  
                     THe first signe and marke of sauing grace is when no
one sinne,A fi
                              •
                           t note freedome from all raigning sinnes. nor any sin is suffered to sway, domineere,

and raigne in the bodie, or soule. Now that is a raigning
sinne that is committed with a full and resolued consent
of will,Psal 53.
and wherein a man continueth without griefe
for it,
                           
                              •
                            Thes: 5, 7 without feare of God, or his iudgement, without
resistance against it, and without amendment of life.
It is when men make a trade, and occupation of sinne,
and like Ahab sell themselues to commit sinne, and it
is like to a wilde horseman,Math. 7, 23 and vnruly Rider that spurreth
his horse so egarly vntell they both be ouerthrowne,
and bee (as he said) caried man and horse and all to the
diuell. Euery sinne of this kinde is a deadly wound to
the soule, an earnest penny to sathan, yea and his foode
and diet; an vnresistable and violent tempest to the conscience,Rom. 6, 16.
a strange God, an Idoll, and a certaine herbinger,
and forerunner of eternall distruction; and it is in euery
man by nature vntill hee bee renued and regenerate.
From this, and the like sinnes the regenerate are freede
not by nature, but grace, not by their owne desertes,
but by Gods meere mercie and goodnesse; and it is apeculier
prerogatiue of a sanctified and iustified man to
haue no sinne raigning, and tirannizing in him.
                     The Godly haue the seede of the spirit remayning in
them, and therefore they can commit no such sinne. They
keepe themselues (as instruments of grace) that the wicked
one toucheth him not viz:
                        1. Ioh. 5, 18. to commit any raigning sinne.
Sinne shall not (no nor can) haue dominion ouer them, for
they are not vnder the law but vnder grace. Against these
there is no law (to condemne them;) for in them the spirit
alwaies fighteth against the flesh;Gal. 5, v. 24. and they haue crucified
the flesh with the affections and lusts thereof, and therefore
albeit they sinne of ignorance, and infirmitie onely, yea &
sometimes of presumption, yet they shall neuer bee condemned
for them: for it is not they that do it, but that dwelleth
in them;Rom. 7. v. 20. and they are not slaues, and seruants vnto sin
as the wicked, are, who li
                              •
                           e and die in them, but seruants of
obedience vnto righteousnesse whom the Sonne hath made
free.Ioh. 8, 34. 36.
                     
                     Let herevnto be added, that the regenerate with Dauid
                        
pray vnto God,Psal. 19, 13. 
                        that he would keepe them from presumptuous
sins that they raigne not ouer them, and they desire the
Lord to direct their footesteps by his word, that so no iniquity
haue dominion ouer them, and this their praier beeing
framed according to Gods will,Ioh. 15, v. 16. and onelie for spirituall
and necessary graces God alwaies heareth.
                     
                        Vse. 1. Seeing that raigning sinnes are so dangerous
and pestilent, yea and as contrary to true regeneration,
as fire to water, darkenesse to light, and death to life: wee
must beware of it, and giue no consent and allowance
vnto it, least sinne like the seruants, and messenger of 
                           
                              •
                           enadab
King of Syria take diligent heede if they can catch
any thing of vs,
                        1 King 20,
33. and so worke vpon vs to our perpetuall ruine
as they did vpon Ahab.
                     
                     Therefore it is wisdome, and good for vs not to presume
to come to neere the bankes of sinne, least wee sinke,
and bee drowned, if wee would not haue the fire of sinne
to consume vs: Wee must take heede of, and labour betimes
to quench the very sparkes of it; wee must dash
our sinnes like the Babilonish young children against the
stones:Psal. 137. v. 9. kill the young Lions; and wee must make a conscience
euen of small and lesser sinnes, if wee would bee
free from greate and raigning sinnes. These many times
are more dangerous then greater and more grosse sinnes;
for great and grosse sinnes men will often leaue, for feare
of discredit, shame, and penaltie, but smaller sinnes are
not acknowledged, and are counted no sinnes, and so
at length preuaile, and get head that they that make no
conscience of them wilbe drawne in time to commit
more horrible sinnes: euen as hee that maketh no conscience
of filching, and purloyning, may easily (vpon occasion,
and entisement) bee drawne to robbe by the high
way-side, and to offer violence to innocent men.
                     Let vs therfore giue no assent to sin, least assent bring delight,
delight custome, custome necessity, necessity, senslesnes,
& senslesnes death & damnation. Shall we so carefully
shun, & decline al things y• bring hurt, sicknes, infection, &

danger to the body? and shall not wee much more heedfully
beware, and take heede of the tyranny and dominion
of sinne that in time bringeth both body and soule to
eternall destruction. Lastly let vs betimes procure the
Amulete or preseruatiue of grace to keepe the poyson of
it farre from the heart (our hold, or castle) or (to speake
more plainly) let vs hide,Isal. 119. 11. and lay vp Gods word in our
heart, that we sinne not against God.
                     
                     It serueth also to condemne, and reprooue those,Vse. 2. that
(because they are in their owne opinion onely righteous,
and in the conceit, and estimation of men, whom they
may easily by their sophistry and hypocriticall holinesse
deceiue: but not so inwardly of conscience before God,)
thinke themselues free, though they with the Scribes and
Pharasies be fast bound with the chaine of some peculiar
and beloued sinne. If they with Iudas preach, do miracles,
haue an office, and dissemble their impieties (albeit couetousnesse
raigne in their heart) all is well with them: they
thinke it sufficient with Herod, to heare Iohn Baptist for a
time gladly, yea to reuerence him, and to reforme many
smaller sinnes, and yet few goe so farre, albeit they liue
with him, and remaine in perpetuall adultery, or the like
sinnes:Iohn. 5. v. 35. they content themselues to delight in Ioh
                              •
                           
                         his
doctrine, and Ministery for a time, but they soone fall away
from it and him: And lastly they thinke themselues
happy, and perfect men, if with the Scribes and Pharasies
they pray, they fast, they doe almes, they pay their tithes,
they weare long robes, and enlarge the fringes of their
garments for vanitie, vaine glory, yea and merits sake: and
yet inwardly they be hypocrites, rotten bones, and full of
extortion, crueltie, persecution, couetousnesse, excesse, deceit,
and errour. But of these we may say iustly (as Christ
did of his time) except your righteousnesse exce
                              •
                           d the righteousnesse
of the Scribes and Pharasies yee shall not enter into
the kingdome of heauen:
                        Math. 5. 20: and as Christ said another time.
O Serpents,
                        Math. 23. 33. 
                        O gene
                              •
                           ation of vipers, how should yee escape the
damnation of hell? Wherefore let vs labour rather to be
inwardly holy then outwardly, and to approone our

waies and consciences to God rather then to men, and by
no one sinne to suffer satha
                           •
                         to haue enterance and accesse
vnto our hearts, for if hee once get hold, and possession,2. Pet. 2. v. 20.
(and specially re-entry) after hee hath beene by grace and
the knowledge of the Lord Iesus repelled: hee will either
very hardly, or els neuer bee remooued, but taketh, seauen
other spirits worse then himselfe, and they enter in, and dwell
there,
                        Math. 12. ve.
45. 
                        and the end of that man is worse then the begin
                              •
                           ing.
                     
                     And thus much of raigning sinne with the vses thereof.
                  
                  
                     THe sixt,The sixt marke praise and thankes giuing vnto God. and last marke amongst many other and
that most eminently, is praise and thankes-giuing vnto
God for all his benefits past, present, and to come, whether
outward, and temporary, or spirituall, and eternall. Of
this sort, in things outward, is our creation, preseruation,
health, life, libertie, prosperity, priuate and publicke deliuerances,
yea and all the meanes of our temporall life, and
hapinesse; and specially in heauenly things our predestination
to eternall glory, our adoption to be Gods sonnes,
our redemption by Christs sufferings and obedience, our
iustification by faith in Christ his death and merits, our illumination,
and sanctification by his word and spirit: the
blessed ministery of the word, the vse and comfort of the
Sacraments, the reueiling, and weaking of Antichrist and
his promised destruction, the fitting of vs for a better
kingdome; and preparing the kingdome of glorie for vs,
his long patience, and forbearance of vs, and all fatherly,
gentle, and mercifull corrections, and warnings. For all
these in general,Col. 3. 17. yea and for euery one of them in particuler
we are bound, and must endeuour (both generally and
distinctly)Iob. 1, 21. to returne vnto the Lord praise and thanksgiuing,
and to serue him in holinesse,
                        Luke 1, 75. 
                        and righteousnes all the
daies of our life. Here vpon Paul vpon the distinct consideration
of them brasteth forth into thankesgiuing, and
saith:Ephe. 1. 4: 
                        Blessed bee God the father of our Lord Iesus Christ
which 
                              •
                           ath blessed vs with all spirituall blessing in heauenly
things in Christ. And afterwards hee descendeth into particulars.

                        Dauid also wondering at the greatnesse of
Gods goodnesse bra
                           •
                        teth out into an exclamation,Ps
                              •
                           l. 116, 17. and acknowledgeth
Gods benefits to be greater then he is able
to requite. What shall I (saith hee) render vnto the
Lord for all his benefits? and in another place hee saith,
my soule prais
                              •
                            thou the Lord,
                        Psal. 103, 1, 2 
                        and all that is within mee
praise his holie name; my soule praise thou the Lord and
forget not all his benefits. Hereby hee stirreth vp himselfe
to thankesgiuing, and laboureth to shake of all drowsinesse:
For forgetfulnesse, and vnthankefulnesse, as it is the
common disease of the world, so it argueth a vaine, and a
wicked minde. For speciall, and particular deliuerances
from captiuitie, from hunger, from imprisonment, from
sicknesse,Psal. 107. from feare of drowning, and shipwracke &c. require
particular thankes, and there is good reason it
should bee so, for euery particuler benefit requireth a new
song, and a peculier forme of thankesgiuing, and this is
plaine by sundry psalmes of Dauid endited, and framed
vpon sundry benefits receiued, and deliuerances obtained.
This thankefulnesse is the peculiar dutie of the
Iust, and it is a Sacrifice whereby wee glorifie GOD, and
glorifying him, he will glorifie vs. It is also a speciall note
of the true, ye the triumphant Church as may appeare by
the practise, and examples of the Angells, Elders, and
beasts in the Apocalips,Apo. 7, 12 
                        Amen. Glorie, honour, wisedome
thankes and power, and might be vnto our God for euermore.
It is peculier to them to singe the new song of their redemption
which none can learne but the redeemed alone:
                        Apoc. 14, 4. Wee
must also with the Church in the Apocalips render and
ascribe vnto the Lord,Apo. 19, 1. 
                        praise, glorie, wisedome, honour,
thankes, power, might, saluation for his righteous iudgement
(alreadie in part) vpon the Antichrist of Rome, for
that he hath condemned the great whore which corrupted the
earth with her fornication, and hath auenged the bloud of hi
                              •
                           
seruants shed by her hands.
                     
                     Lastly the Church is exhorted, to reioyce, be glad and
giue glorie to him for the full redemption of his Church
at hand, and because the mariage of the lambe is come,

and the bride hath made her ready. But that we may the
more soundly, and sincerely practise and performe this dutie:
we must do three things.
                     First wee must magnifie, and high esteeme of all Gods 
blessings (specially of those that concerne and accompany
saluation) wee must acknowledge them wonderfull,High estimation of Gods blessings.
speake of them honorably: thinke, and meditate of them
often, yea and to value and price them aboue riches,
                        Psalm. 119.
                        spoiles, corne, wine, gold, siluer, Iewells, precious stones, yea, and
account all things els (in comparison of them, and so farre
forth as they are any let or hinderance to our saluation) as
losse and dung.
                        Philipians 3.
                     
                     Secondly wee must debase our selues before God,Debasing of our selues before God. and 
acknowledge our vnworthinesse to receiue so great blessings,Genes. 32, 10▪
                        
and graces at his hands. Thus Iacob acknowledged
himselfe not to bee worthy of the least of all Gods mercies,
and of his promises p
                           •
                        rformed vnto him. Thus Dauid
(vpon the consideration of Gods vnspeakeable mercies
towardes mankinde, and also of mans vilenesse and vanitie,)
brasteth forth into an exclamation, saying. What
is man that thou art so mindfull of him,
                        Psal 144. 3. 4. 
                        or the Sonne of
man that thou thinkest vpon him? Man is like to vanitie,
his daies are like a shadowe that vanisheth.
                     Thirdly in Paul and that most singulerly) who confesseth
ingenuously that the grace of the Lord was exceeding
aboundant towardes him;1 Tim. 1, v. 15 beeing (before
his conuersion) a blasphemer, a persecutor, and an oppressor;
and that IESVS CHRIST, came into the
world to saue sinners of whome saith hee I am chiefe.
Lastlie in the lost childe saying,Luke 15. 19. 
                        Father I am no more worthy
to bee called thy sonne, make mee as one of thy hired
seruants.
                     
                     Thirdly if wee would shewe our selues truely thankefull,
wee must liue in obedience of Gods commaundements,To liue in obedience to God, and his cōmandmēts.
sinne no more least a worse thing befall vs, order
our conuersation aright, keepe our selues pure from
idolatry; and consecrate and deuote our selues, soules
and bodies to God his seruice. For this is a most liuely,

effectuall▪ yea,Psal. 50. v. 
                              •
                           3. and reall sacrifice, yea the best sacrifice that
we can offer vnto God. Rom. 12. ver. 1. Reasons further to
enforce this dutie, and to perswade vs herevnto, are firs
                           •
                        
so many commandements and exhortations in holy scriptures,
and (by name) in the psalmes of Dauid.
                     
                     Secondly the often and excellent examples of so many
rare and renowned men in holy scripture, of Patriarkes,
Kings▪ Prophets, and right Isralites in the old Testament:
and of Christ his Apostles, disciples, and all rankes of sound
confessors, and Christians in the new Testament. These
are so many notable lightes, lampes, examples, and directors
vnto vs; whose footesteps if w
                           •
                        e insist not in, wee declare
our selues to bee bastard slips and not true branches,
and to bee (notwithstanding al labour, care, and husbanding)
that cursed ground that bringeth forth nothing,
                        Heb. 6. 8. but briars,
and thornes, whose end is to be burned.
                     
                     Thirdly of all other sacrifices, this is most sweete and
sauory in Gods nostrilles,Gen. 8. v. 21. being not a constrained, and enforced
worship (as praier is sometimes,) 
                           
                              •
                           ut a free-will offering,
                        Psa. 50. 14, 15
                        it is the ca
                              •
                           ues and fru
                              •
                           te of the lips which confesse his
name, and it is a speciall glorification of God.
                     Fourthly hereby wee imitate and follow the practise of
the Church triumphant in heauen, whose continuall vsage
and exercise it is, in quiers, and companies by Himmes,
Psalmes, and thanksgiuing, to sound and set forth the glorie,
and mercies of God.
                     Fiftly because vnthankefulnesse for, and forgetfulnesse
of Gods blessings, and benefits, is a thing most distastfull,
and hatefull to the diuine maiestie▪ and a brand of profaine
and dissembling hearted men. Therefore it is said of
y• Isralites that though they in their affliction remēbred that
God was the strength and the most high God their redeemer,
                        Psal. 78. 35.
                        yet they did but flatter him with their mouth, and dissembled
with him with their tongue, for their heart was not vpright
with him, neither were they faithfull in his co
                              •
                           enant: ouer
& besides the Iewes were no sooner gloriously deliuered
out of Egipt, and had passed through (the red sea making
way for them;)Psal. 106. 2. 
                        but they forgat God their Sauiour, who had

done so great things for them. Lastly nine of the tenne
leprous persons whome Christ cleansed and cured, are noted
for vnthankefulnesse;Luke 17. 8.
&c. for it is said that onely one of
them returned to giue God thankes, and that was a Samaritane,
and one that was most odious to the Iewes and of
all other the most vnlikely, but he serued not Christ in
vaine, for hee alone was inwardly cured, and had his sins
forgiuen him. Finally (to end this reason) the very Heathen

                           •
                        nd Pagans, who knew not God in Christ, and were
altogither ignorant of, and neuer had any holy Scripture
to direct them; did and could by the very darke light
of nature see, and acknowledge thus much: 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        ,
saith 
                           
                              •
                           indarus that sententious
and wise Poet. That is, an old good turne is soone
forgotten, and men are vnmindfull of it, and that it i
                              •
                            lost
which a man doth to an vnthankefull person; yea and that
which is most remarkeable. Cum ingratum dixeris omnia
dixeris. That is when a man hath named an vnthankefull
man; hee hath (therein) named all faultes, or disgracefull
imputations, and it maketh a man vnworthy of al fauour:
and to this purpose, Gregorie in his Morrals saith wel, non
est dignus dandis, & that is, he is not worthy to receiue benefits
to be giuen, who is not thankefull for good thinges
already receiued.Math. 1
                              •
                           . 23. Thus the vnthankefull seruant in the
Gospell whome his Lord and maister after (vpon his submission,
and supplication) had forgiuen tenne thousand
talents, was for his vnthankefullnes to his Lord, and his
cruell and extreame handling of his fellow seruant, that
onely ought him but one hundred pence, deliuered
vnto the Iayler vntill hee should pay all he debt,
                     
                     Lastly because in the duty of praise, and thanksgiuing,
we are most defectiue, negligent, and remisse; we need vse
all good meanes to stir vp and reuiue vs, and to testifie our
zeale, and thankefulnes vnto God. For as without meanes
we cannot attaine vnto the end: so without speciall, and
spirituall helpes wee can neuer be truly, and constantly
thankefull. Of this sort, are the often meditating of our
sollemne promise and vow made in Baptisme, to renounce

all false Gods, false worship, and sinne, and to beleeue in
God, and to serue him in holinesse, and righteousnesse all
the daies of our liues. Of this sort are morall and gospellike
vowes,Psalme 119.
and couenants of repentance,Psal. 66. v. 13.
and 14. praier, and
thankesgiuing, obedience, yea publicke and priuate othes
to cleaue vnto God, and serue him onely.
                     Herevnto may bee added religious fasts, both publike
and priuate, so often practised of the saints of God both in
the old and new Testament, yea and of the reformed
church since, and that with most happy successe.
                     Lastly,The Lords supper a Sacrament of thankes giuing. seeing that the Lord knowing our aptnesse and
pronesse vnto this vice, hath ordained a sacrament of
thankesgiuing which the ancient fathers call the E
                              •
                           charist
to nourish and preserue true thankefulnesse in the
church towards Christ, and for all his merits, graces, and
blessings, wee must often, and religiously, as, vse all other
helpes, so specially this. And finally as all riuers runne into
the sea from whence they came; so let all the benefits
and blessings of God bestowed on vs,Similitude. flow backe and redownd
vnto God the author and fountaine of them:
which God almightie grant for Christ Iesus his beloued
Sonnes sake, to whome with the Father and the holy
Ghost be giuen and rendered in the Church,
all honour praise and glorie foreuer
and euer. Amen.
                     
                  
               
            
         
         
            
               
                  
                  THE
GENERALL
signes and forerunners of Christs
comming to iudgement, soundly and sincerely collected
out of holy Scripture, and seruing as well to
awaken the drowsie and slumbering Protestant▪
                     
as to comfort and reuiue the Godly
and afflicted Christian.
                  
                  Take heed watch and pray: for yee know not when the
time is. Mark. 13. vers. 33.
                  When these things beginne to come to passe, then looke
vp, and lift vp your heads: for your redemption draweth
neere. Luk. 21. vers. 28.
               
               
                  
                  
                  To the Right worshipfull learned,
and Godly wise Gentleman Mr
William Combes of Warwicke Esquire, high
Sheriffe of the shire and one of his Maiesties high
Commissioners in causes Ecclesiasticall, all
increase of grace, comfort and
happinesse.
                  
                     EVEN as (right worshipfull) it was the
commendable and diligent practise of
the Prophets and holy men of God (for
the encrease of their comfort and confirmation
of their faith) to calculate,1 Pet. 1. v. 10
and 11. by
the direction of the word of God, and to
search and enquire out the very time of
Christ his incarnation, his death, his glorification. So in semb
                        •
                     able
sort, it as much concerneth vs, vpon the ends of the
world are come, and who haue both promises and signes of
Christ his second appearance at hand for our perfit redemption
and full saluation, to take due notice of them, to serch into
them and obserue the accomplishment of them in their proper
times. Our rule of direction, must not be humaine collections,
fained prophecies and reuelations, Astrologicall coni
                        •
                     ctures,
Arithmetical computations, for these are vaine, vncertain, deceitfull,
as the euent in all ages doth demonstrate: but it must
bee onely the written word of God, which albeit it hath not reueiled
the daie, nor the yeare, nor the definite time of Christ his
second comming, yet it hath left vnto vs many generall yet
vndoubted signes and forerunners of it, which are some of
them, wholy expired, some of them in present motion and progresse
and others yet wholy to come. These signes and predictions
if wee serch them out, weye and make vse of them, (as they
are described in holy scriptures) wee shall not onely bee contained
and preserued from Atheisme and vnbeleefe, the common
sinne of the world, and bee kept from all ras
                        •
                     , foolish and vngrounded

                     
                        •
                     uri
                        •
                     sities, but also bee effectually and continually
stired vp to prepare our selues in Faith, Hope and Repentance
against Christ his comming, and we shal in all trialls and temptations
whatsoeuer might comfort our hearts in that our Redemption
is so nigh at hand.
                  This doctrine, being of so notable vse and profit, (especially
for the Godly and sober minded,) I thought good to publish it
and vpon good considerations to recommend it to your worships
patronage. First you for learning, iudgement and experienc
                        •
                     
are very sufficient to iudge of it. Secondly your vertuous affection
and most religious disposition will (no doubt) finde comfort
and contentment in it. Thirdly, your fauonr, grace and authoritie
beeing tempered with so much humanitie and humilitie,

                        〈◊〉
                      not (I hope) be wanting. Lastly (not to be tedious) I
can by no other meanes so well testifie my thankefull dutie for
your late and extraordinary kindenesse both in word and deed,
testified towards m
                        •
                     e.
                  Wherefore, most humbl
                        •
                      entreating your acceptance, and
requesting you to make vse of my short obseruations, I here,
most humbly take my leaue. The Lord, blesse, preserue and
prosper your worship, as likewise the Noble, and vertuous Ladie,
the Ladie Puckering your wise: and infulness
                        •
                     
of daies and Faith, glorifie you both
in the Heauens.
                  
                     
                        Couentry: 
                        Iuly 1608.
                      
                     Your worships in all duty to
be commanded.
THOMAS D
                           •
                        AXE▪
                     
                  
               
            
            
               
                  
                  The signes and fore runners of
Christs comming to iudgement.
                  
                     THe Lord Iesus in his mercy, because hee would not
haue 
                           •
                        is children ensnared and ouertaken vnawares
at the sodainnes of his second comming, and because hee
would warne, conuince and leaue the very wicked his
enemies without excuse and defence of them-selues: hath
reuealed and sette forth in Scripture certaine generall
and vndoubted signes of the approaching of the last
iudgement, whereof some are already perfectly fulfilled,
some in part accomplished, & others yet remaine to come
to passe in their time. Of al these and the general vses that

                           •
                        re to be made of them, I wil speake breifely, and in order▪
                     
                     The first generall signe (long sithence past) is the
destruction and desolation of Ierusalem, togither with
the Iewes state and pollicy, and that irrecouerably vnto
the end and consumation of the world, Math. 24. 12.
Marke. 13. ver. 12. Daniel. 9. 26.
                     And this is a type and patter
                           •
                        e of the worlds destruction
                     The second signe is the divulging and preaching of
the Gospel throughout the whole▪ known and inhabited
world. Therefore for this purpose the Apostles as they
had an extraordinary calling and extraordinary guifts,
so they had a generall commission and commandement to
go into al the world and to teach and Baptize al nations,
                        Math. 28. 19. 
                        and
to preach th
                              •
                            Gospel to euery creature,
                        Act. 1. 8. Marke. 16. 15. and to
bee his witnesses vnto the ends of the world.
                     
                     The reason there of is, first because God would hereby in
lighten, conuert & draw vnto himselfe al that are to be saued.
Secondly, that it might be a witnes to all nations, &
that al men might bee conuinced sufficiently through
all parts of the worlde that they could pretend and alleadge
no excuse of their ignorance to hide their
impiety. Mathew 24. 14. Secondly the Apostles preached
the Gospell accordingly to all the worlde that

was then habitable or knowne, or (at least) in the most
famous, populous and knowne countries, kingdomes and
citties of it, so that from hence either by the Apostles
Disciples, or the Euangelists, or by others, it might bee
brought from thence vnto the most obscure, vnknowne
and barbarous nations (such as are America and the
North parts of the world) Col. 1. v 6. & 23. Rom. 10. 18.
Lastly the ancient and holy Fathers of the primitiue
Church,Mr. Doctor
Willet, synop.

                              •
                           ol. pag. 1063.
1064. 1065. as Origene, Ierome, Ambrose, &c. make expresse
mention in their writings of the vniuersall calling & enlightning
of all nations, and therfore no such solemne &
vniuersall legacie is now the second time to be expected,
seeing that the Apostolicall calling and giftes are ceased,
and seeing that the Gospell is passed from 
                           
                              •
                           udaa, and from
the East, to the South to the Greekes: from the South it
hath made his progresse to the West, that is to the Latines,
and from the West to the North, that is▪ to the Germaines
and other confining countries, yet we denie not,
but it may, though not vniuersally yet bee reuealed in
other countries where it either originally hath not beene
preached, because perhaps in the Apostles times those
countries were not inhabited, or (at least) very slenderly
and sparingly, or where the mysterie of iniquitie and
Antichristianisme had obscured and preuailed ouer all,
Apoc. 14. v. 6. Apoc. 18. v. 1.
                     The third signe is the comming and reuealing of Ant
                           •
                        christ,
for the day of the Lord (saith the Apostle) shall not
come except first that man of sinne be disclosed,
                        2. Thes. 2. 3.
whom Saint
Iohn calleth Antichrist:
                        1. Iohn. 
                              •
                           . 18. concerning which Antichrist and
his members and Locusts, Saint Paul saith, that they are
men of corrupt mindes,
                        2, Tim. 3. v. 8.
& 9. 
                        reprobate concerning the faith, and
that they shall preuaile no longer: for their madnesse shall
be euident to all men.
                     But Antichrist is come long agoe, when the third Angell
in the Apocalyps blew the Trumpet, then this great
starre (the Pope and his successors as the heads of the
Apostacie) fell from heauen burning like a torche;Apoc. 8. v. 10. &▪ 11. and
it fell into the third part of the riuers, and fell into the

fountaines of waters and made them bitter, he hath been
reuealed sithence by the preaching of the two (few yet
sufficient) witnesses in the Apocalyps,Apoc. 1
                              •
                           . v. 
                              •
                           
                           ▪ 5. 6. and by the first,
second and third Angell in the 14. of the same Apocalyps
1. by all the excellent teachers, Preachers, and writers sithence
Martin Luther his time, namely from the yeare of
Christ about 1520. vntill this present time. To conclude,
the description of Antichrist, and whatsoeuer the Prophets
and Apostles haue foretold of Antichrist they in all
things agree to euery Pope of Rome, and him onely, since
the death of Gregory the great, and since the death of
the Emperour Maurice, as hath beene demonstrated
by many heretofore both English and forraine writers:
and touching this argument yea & the whole mistery of
the Romish Antichrist a learned countri-man of our own
hath purposely, learnedly, and succintly written in his
Theologicall disputations, de Antichristo & eius eccle
                              •
                           ia.
                     
                     The fourth and last signe,Rom. 8. yet in motion, and not perfectly
fulfilled, but to continue vnto the worlds end, is
the vanitie, corruption and abuse of the creatures, which
hath continued from Adams fall, and doth and shall encrease
by degrees vnto the consummation of all things.
The Elements (as we may obserue) of fire, ayer, water and
earth, are corrupted, distempered, and often-times very
hurtfull and contagious to mankind and other creatures.
In plants, trees, herbes, there is not the same vigor, efficacie
and vertue that was wont to be, the earth is become
more barren and vnfruitefull; the sea more distempered
and tempestuous▪ often breaking his bounds, and encroaching
vpon the firme continent, the Sunne and Moone,
the worlds two eyes, more often-times and fearefully eclipted
then in former times, yea the sunne, as also the
starres (as the most excellent Astronomers haue noted)
moue much more vnequally, and are remooued greatly
from their former standings. And as for men, we full well
know, and are taught, by reading scripture, & experience
that they are not so long liued, nor of that goodly tall and
strong constitution of body, as in former ages.
                     
                        
But some may obiect and say, this shortnesse of mans
life and decay of his strength is notably supplied by agilitie
of minde and pregnancy of wit, capacitie, inuention: I
answere; This is most true and Gods name is to be glorified
for it, but yet men neuer more abused and peruerted
their wits & capacities then in these daies; for commonly
the more witty men are, the more wicked, the more politike,
the more pestilent; and the more vnderstanding that
they haue, the more Hereticall, Papisticall and Atheisticall
they prooue. To leaue man and to come to buildings,
houses, apparrell, what vanitie, what surperfluiti
                           •
                         and excell,
what follie and pride doth not herein appeare? For
buildings, that in time past serued onely for defense and
necessitie, and therefore were made very strong and durable;
are now for the most part in many places, builded (albeit
with excessiue cost as the poore tenants can testifie)
yet slightly, and more for shew then for substance and for
pompe then profit. And garments and apparell which naturally
serueth to hide mans nakednesse, and to defend
him from cold, and (to make the best of it) to serue for
comelinesse and distinction of degrees; is vsed now ordinarily,
as an ensigne of pride, serueth for brauery and ostentation,
more then for profit, durablenesse or common
wealthes aduantage. And thus we see, that as the world
doth decay and decline in the partes, so it doth and shall in
the whole.
                     The fourth signe is the shaking, weakning wounding &
consuming of Antichrist and his kingdome in many kingdoms
countries & citties by the breath of Gods mouth. 1. by
the powerful and continual preaching of the Gospel,2. Thes. 2. v. 8 as also
by the materiall sword of Christian Kings, Princes and
Magistrates in their seuerall dominions, though not all at
one time yet successiuely Apoc. 16. 6, Apoc. 17. 16. Apoc.
18. 6 and so it shall be more and more ruinated & decaied
vntell the burning and desolation of Romish Babilon.
                     
                     The fift signe is grieuous calamities & persecutions of
Gods Prophets,The fi
                              •
                           t signe. Saints and Seruants vnder Antichrist, especially
these 100. years last past of which (perhaps) Daniel
                        
chap. 2. 15. chap. 8. ve. 34. Apoc. 11. 35. Apoc. 13. ve. 15. 16.
17. Lastly in Rome hath bin found the bloud of the Prophets,
and of the Saints and of al that were slaine vpon the
earth,Apoc. 18, 24
of these it is verified y• the Psalmist saith for thy sake
are we slaine continually,
                        
                           
                              •
                           s
                              •
                           l 44. ve 22 and are counted as sheepe for the

                           •
                        laughter, & that which our Sauiour fore-sheweth, saying,
they shall excommunicate you: yea the time shall 
                              •
                           ome,
                        Ioh. 16, 1. 2 
                        that
wh
                              •
                           soeuer killeth you will thinke that 
                              •
                           e doth God good ser
                           
                              •
                           ice:
the reason hereof in respect of Antichrist and his adherents
is because they cannot indure the ransacking and
refuting of there idolatry, false doctrine, the Popes supremacy
and their idle superstitions and Antichristian rites,
ceremonies and traditions. But we hope that these trobles
are for the most part past, and that towardes the end of the
world shalbe wel abated, so that the church as of late years
shall haue a further breathing time, and thus much Mark
                              •
                           
                        
seemeth to signifie, Mark. 13. 7.
                     And thus much of the signes perfectly, and many of them long sithence accomplished.
                  
                  
                     THe second sort of signes and forerunners are those yt
are in continuall act, namely partly fulfilled and partly
to be further performed in their times. Of this sort are
first an Apostacy and departure of many pastors & people
from faith & soūd doctrine to Antichristianisme Turcisme
yea and plaine Atheisme. 2. Thes. 2. 3. 1. Tim. 1. 4. 2. Pet. 2.
ve. 1. 2. 3. Apoc. 13. ve. 16. et 17. But vnder the tiranny of
the Romish Antichrist & Mahomet this general Apostasie
and falling away from truth and wholesome doctrine hath
long a goe beene verified, yet not so but that daily wee see
it by lamentable experience continued and so it shall
more and more bee encreased vnto the end of the world:
for many that haue renounced Antichrist, fall to flat Atheisme
and Libertinisme, and some againe reuert and reuolt
to their former superstition out of which they were
for the time and in sort recouered, of these speaketh the
scripture in many places Hebre
                              •
                           es 6. vers. 4. 5. 6. 2. Tim.
4. ver. 3. 4. 2. Peter 2. vers. 20. 21. and it shall so abound
and ouerflow at Christ his second comming. That hee shall

hardly finde faith on the earth,
                        Luke 18, 
                              •
                           . and no maruaile for as there
haue done, yet doe, and alwaies shall arise false Prophets,
Seducers, Deceiuers (successiuely) in many countries▪ kingdomes
and places,2. Pet. 2. 2 so many shall follow their damnable
waies and be blinded by them.
                     The second signe partly past and partly present and to
come, is a generall impietie, corruption of manners and
impudency in all manner of sinne, still (like Noah, his generall
deluge) preuayling in most places▪ the particular effects
where we as in a cataloge may reade and obserue in
Paul his first Epistle to Timo
                              ••
                           y, chapter the third v. 1. 2. 3.
4. 5. And hereof in our owne kingdome we haue had fearfull
experience, especially in these six and seauen last
yeares, as though God had graunted a general indulgence
to all manner of licentiousnesse, and as though hell were
broake loose, and this profainesse and corruption of manners
in all places of the world, yet continueth and shalbe
much more vniuersall and contagious neare the time of
Christ his second comming Luk. 17. 26. Math. 24. 38. and
hereof there is and shalbe more feare then of corruption in
doctrine;1. Tim. 3, 5 for many shal retaine a forme and outward profession
of Godlines but denie the powre and efficacy of it.
                     The third signe, is signes in the Sunne and in the Moone,
& in the Stars,
                        Luke. 21, 25 
                        and vpon the earth trouble vpon nations, with
perplexitie.
                        Acts 2, 20 
                        The sunne shall be turned into darkenesse and the
Moone into bloud before the great & notable day of the Lord
come. This signe by frequéncie and multitude of Eclipses
hath of later yeares and daily is fulfilled; likewise by terrible
windes, tempests, meteors and strange alterations in
the aire it is performed, and this our late experience
can iustifie: but it shalbe perfectly accomplished in
the instant of Christ his second comming and glorious appearing;
for then hee by the brightnesse of his glorious
Maiesty shall darken and suppresse the light of Sunne
Moone and Starres; and a little before this time the whole
frame of the world shalbe shaken and mooued and the very
brute and senselesse creatures shal before hand perceiue
and feele the powre of Christ his commingLuke 2
                              •
                           , v. 26 when all the

reprobate shall remaine blockish and without feeling.
                     And thus much of mixt or continued signes.
                  
                  
                     Signes and fore-runners that are yet to come to passe are
specially these fiue following.
                     First the burning and vtter desolation of Rome the
mother of fornication and idolatrie and the proper seate
of Antichrist, this that it shall be so, is most manifest and
apparent by Scripture, reasons and authorities: First the
Scripture testifieth that,Apoc. 16. 16▪
                         
                        the great (ittie shall be diuided into
three partes, and great Babilon shall come in remembrance
before God: and th
                              •
                           t the tenne horned or Ki
                              •
                           ges shall hate
the whore,
                        Cap. 17. 16. 
                        shall make her desolate and naked, and shall eate hir
flesh, and burne hir w
                              •
                           th fire,
                        Verse 8. and most plainely in the 18.
Chapter, hir plagues shall come in one day, death, and sorrow,
and hunger, and she
shall be vtterly burnt with fire, for strong
is the Lord that iudgeth hir. Here-vpon the (Iodolatrous)
Kinges of the earth, the Marchants, and euery shippe gouernour,
                        Chap. 18▪ V. 9. 11. 17. 18.
                        and all they that occupy shippes, and ship-men, and as
many as worke in the Sea, shall bewayle hir, lament hir, weepe

                              •
                           nd cry at the sight and notice of hir burning, but this is not
yet come to passe, like-wise all the Church of God shall

                           •
                        eioyce and praise God for his iust iudgements executed
vppon the Whore; Apocalips. 11. Verse 20. and Chapter
19. Verse 1. and 2.
                     Further reasons are these, God hath begun in part to
punish and destroy Rome and Antichrist, and therefore
seeing that it is builded and standeth vpon a sandy foundation,
hauing begune to fall, it must needes shortly fall
when the raine of Gods seuere iudgement commeth, and the
flouds flow, and the windes blow and beate vpon it, and great
must be the fall of it.
                     
                     Secondly, The-Easterne Babilon, a type of this Westerne
Babilon (abeit she had nothing so much conuiction,
nor neuer committed so haynous and manifold abhom
                           •
                        
                        nations
as Rome hath done) was vtterly and many ages
sithence destroyed, much more shall Rome it selfe, the
mouth of Hell and Satans his chamber and Metropolis.

Thirdly all the Protestant and sound interpreters of the
Apocalips by one ioynt consent hold that Rome shalbe
ransacked and ruinated and wholely consumed and neuer
more inhabited vnlesse it be wi
                           •
                        h deuills.
                     Lastly (to omit the prophecy of Sibylla who saith that
Rome in the tenth generation of men shall perish with
fire hard at the end of the world) the Papists themselues
acknowledge thus much and render reasons of it.
                           
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                            & 
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                           . Our
Rhemists in their Annotations in Apoc. 17. say that Rome
before the end of the world shalbe come the seate of antichrist,
Ribera vpon the 14. chap. saith, it shalbe the shoppe of
all Idolatry. Vega the Iesuite in his commentary vpon the
18. chapter, saith that it shalbe the habitation of deuills and
reuolt from the faith of Christ: 
                        and herevpon Vega and Ribera
(both Iesuits) confesse that Rome in the end of the
world shalbe Babilon and burned, as they collect out of the
18. chapter: and the Kings and Marchants shall lament for
her torments, which saith Vega wee must needes referre
to the last times before the end of the world; wherefore
howsoeuer many, because of present improbabilities cast
needelesse doubts yet shal the threatnings and iudgments
of God not fall to the ground but bee executed in their
times.Math. 24. 35
                     
                     The second signe yet to bee fulfilled is the generall calling
and conuersion of the nation of the Iewes (in the places
and countries where they shalbe and are residing,)
when the fulnesse of vs Gentiles is come into the church,
and this shalbe the reuiuing and reioysing of the world
both in respect of Iewes and Gentiles, and this is most
plaine as by Lu. 21. ver. 24. 2. Cor. 3. 16. & perhaps Zophonia
3. ver. 8. so especially Rom. 11. ver. 12. 15. 2. 6. This generall
conuersion of them wee daily expect to come to
passe albeit we are ignorant of the maner and circumstances
of it, but hereof I haue treated at large in my exposition
of the 11. chapter to the Romaines.
                     The third signe next succeeding and following in order
is the arising of false Christes,Math. 24. ver. 24. and false Prophets, that shall
shew great signes and wonders: in so much that (if it

were possible) they should deceiue the very elect. Herevpon
Gods people are admonished and instructed, that
when they shall say,Ver. 26. behold hee is, in the secret places that
they must not beleeue it. But it will bee obiected that there
were such that tooke vpon them the name of the Messias
and the King of Israel before the destruction of Ierusalem,
and seduced and drew many after them (as we haue examples
in Theudas Acts 5. and in the Aegiption Acts 21.) I
answere here in this place Christ speaketh of false Christes
that shall long after that time arise, and that shall seduce
as well the Gentiles as the Iewes.
                     Secondly those Christs did shew no signes and wonders
as these shall doe, who shall labour by false miracles
and satanicall illusions and conclusions to gaine and procure
credit and authoritie to their false doctrine, and also
in respect of efficacie of error in the last generation or age
of the world, it may very well stand that the Sonne of
man shall scarcely finde faith vpon the earth when hee commeth
to iudgement.
                        Luk. 18. 8.
                     
                     The fourth signe, that is the last generall signe is a certaine
brutish securitie and an vnspeakable deadnesse of
heart and spirit, so that man shalbe without all feare of
God, senselesse of all euill, caring for no instructions and
admonitions; but liuing in pleasure and impenitency and
not heeding nor taking notice of the signes of Christ his
comming. Math. 24. 35. Luke 17. 26. 1. Thess. 5. 3. so that
the last day shall come as a snare on al such;
                        L
                              •
                           k 21. 35 
                        sudden destruction
shall come vpon them and they shall in no wise escape,
                        1. Thes. 
                              •
                           , 
                              •
                           . et. 4. 
                        they
shall not be able to endure the day of his wrath; much lesse be
able to stand and iustifie their cause in iudgement.
                     This brutish securitie hath beene in former ages, and
much increaseth in these our daies, but then it shalbe much
more vniue
                           •
                        fall and incurable.
                     The last signe is the darkning of the lights of heauen,
and the roaring of the seas Math. 24. v
                           •
                        . 24. Luk. 21. v. 25,
this is the neerest signe and therefore, wee are the more
carefully to obserue it when it commeth.
                     
                        
                        Quest. Why will not God reueale vnto any the time and day
of the last iudgement?
                     
                        An. Partly to bridle mans rash curiositie that doth serch
and mine into secrets that are both vnpossible and vnlawfull
to be knowne. Secondly that wee should watch and
waite for his comming and make vs ready euery houre. Mark. 13. ver. 33.
                     
                        Quest. Why doth God def
                           •
                        rre and put of the last iudgement
so long?
                     
                        An. First that the number of his elect might be all borne,
called and fulfilled, and so gathered into the Chruch triumphant
in heauen. Secondly to containe and keepe his
people from astonishment of feare and from abuse of his
long patience, and also to trie & exercise their faith, hope,
charitie and patience. Lastly to leaue the wicked and
those that contemne his grace offered vnto them,Rom 2 v 4. et 5. 2. 
                              〈◊〉
                           . 3. 
                              •
                           . and abuse
his long suffering, without all excuse and defense of
themselues in the last day.
                     
                        Vse. 1. The generall vses of all these signes past, present
and are to come, are principally foure. First here are reprooued
and condemned all such who beeing led by their
owne lusts and carnall reason and not by holie scripture
beeleue not the last iudgement but contemne and deride
it. 2. Pet. 3. ver. 3.
                     Whereas first this doctrine is plainely and abundantly
set forth in the scriptues. Psal. 50. 1. Act. 10. 42. Math. 25.
31. Luk. 18. 17. Rom. 2. 16. Hebrew. 9. 27. Iob. 19. 25. Act.
3. 19. Act. 17. 31. 2. Cor. 5. 10. 1. Pet. 4. Iude. ver. 14. et 15.
2. Tim. 4. 8. Apoc. 1. Apoc. 20. ver. 12. 13. 14. 15.
                     Secondly except there should bee a generall iudgement
there neede no resurrection. Lastly God could not
shewe himselfe either perfectly iust in punishing and
condemning the reprobates, nor perfectly mercifull in absoluing
sauing, and rewarding his seruants.
                     
                        Vse. 2. Secondly, seeing that wee know not the day
nor the yeare of iudgement but onely the generall signes
of it, it serueth to refute and refell the pride and rash cu
                        
                           •
                        iositie
of those, that either by fained reuelation, humaine

Prophecies▪ Arithmeticall supputation, position of starres
and hum
                           •
                        ine coniectures and authorities, will calculate
and cast yea and define the very time and yeare of Christ
comming (as some did in the antient fathers times, and
many defined that the world shall end in 88.) but time
and experience hath shewed the folly and vanitie of there coniectures.
                     Secondly it is a thing both vtterly vnlawfull and simplie
vnpossible for any man to know or define the certaine
and set time of Christ his appearance,Acts 
                              •
                           . 
                              •
                           . for it is not reuealed
to the very elect Angells, and Christ when hee was vpon
the earth knew not the day. Math. 24. ver. 36. Math. 13.
32. much lesse can we know it.Math 24, 42,
et 
                              •
                           4
                     
                     
                        Vse. 3. The third vse is for instruction and admonition
that the Godly themselues because many times
they are in a kinde of slumber, and doe not alike cheerefully
looke for CHRIST his comming, might watch,
pray,Luk. 12. 43 repent, make themselues ready and waite for
the day and appearance of Christ, that when Christ commeth
to them either by death or at the last iudgement,
they may be found waking and walking in their Christian
calling, and so ready with good conscience to render
vnto the Lord an account of their Stewardship.
                     
                        Vse. 4. The fourth vse is for the consolation of the sound
and sincere hearted Christian whosoeuer,Acts 3, ver. 19 for hee knoweth
that the neerer the signes are to their accomplishment;
the sooner shall hee bee eased of the burden of his
sinnes, deliuered from all miseries and bee possessed with
all ioy and hapinesse.Luk. 21, 28 Herevpon the Godly are vpon notice
taken of the accomplishment of these signes, exhorted
to lift vp their heads, because their full redemption
draweth nigh and they in the certaine hope and expectatation
of this blessed day, are notably sheilded and defended
against all temptations and afflictions. Iob. 25. 19.
2. Cor. 4.Apoc. 1. 7.
                     
                     
                        Vse. 5. The last vse is for the terrour and conuincement
of all im
                           •
                        enitent, vnbeleeuing, profaine rebellious persons;
who in this life would not submit and subiect themselues

to 
                           •
                        ee taught, ruled and ordered by Christ, his Gospell, his
discipline, they by reason of their vnbeleefe and con
                        
                           •
                        empt
shall finde and feele Christ to be as a iust, so an angrie
and seuere iudge to condemne them to eternall and
vnspeakable torments. Apoc. 6. vers. 15. 16. Luk. 21. 26.
Ma
                           •
                        h. 25. 41. Apoc. 6.
                     The Lord God for Christ his sake grant, that wee may
take due notice of these signes, and be hereby effectually
stirred vp to prepare our selues against
Christ his comming that our
soules may be saued.
Amen.
                     
                     
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        .
                  
               
            
         
      
   