
      
         
            
            
            A PAEAN TR
                  •
               VMPHALL. COMPOSED FOR THE SOCIETIE O
                  •
                the Goldsmiths of London: congratulating his Highnes magnificent entring the Citie.
            To the Maiestie of the King.
            By MICHAEL DRAYTON.
            Dicite io paean, io bis dicite paean.
            LONDON
            Printed for IOHN FLASKET, and are to be sold at his shop
            Pauls Churchyard at the signe of the black Beare. 1604.
         
      
      
         
            
            
            A Paean Triumphall.
            TO the vaste skies whilst shoutes and cries rebound,
            And buildings eccho with reuerberate sound,
            Strugling to thrust out of the peopled throng,
            Panting for breath flies our elaborate song.
            That time the day brake from her wonted guise,
            The Sunne in haste before his houre did rise,
            And draue the fleet-foote posting houres so fast,
            Which were afeard young Phaeton that was cast
            From his Siers Chariot, reobtain'd the Carre,
            To set the neighboring Elements at warre.
            But whilst sweete Zephyre gently spreads his wings,
            Curles the sleeke bosomes of th'enamoured springs.
            With Baulmie spices so perfumes each place,
            Breathing such odors in the mornings face,
            That the day seem'd all former daies to scorne,
            And (to compare it) euer should be borne.
            
               
               Saturne whose grim face clad in Icie haire,
            Thrust his bleake visage through the Northerne aire,
            That long had low'rd vpon the drouping spring,
            With Frosts, Hailes, Snowes and Tempests minacing,
            Suddenly calm'd, and his harsh rage resignes
            To smooth Fauonius and milde Libick windes,The south and southwest wind.
            
            Whil'st Temples stand euen trembling as afeard,
            To see proud Pageants on their Arches reard
            Aboue their Turrets, whilest the concourse meete,
            Like boysterous tides in euery publike streete.
            Windowes of eyes, the houses scorn'd their glasse,
            On euery side their Maiesties should passe:
            Roomes with rich beauties furnished about,
            Arras but serues to hang the walles without.
            Who lou'd in works of ancient times to prie,
            Hangings compleate with curious Imagrie,
            Glutting his eyes here liuely might behold,
            Faces whose numbers figures neuer told,
            Walling the houses, in whose seuerall eyes
            Ioye shewes it selfe in more varieties,
            
               Then be their mindes, the obiects that they see,
            Which are as various as their features bee.
            The hie-reard spires shake with the peoples crie,
            Bending their tops seeme wondring to espie
            Streets pau'd with heads, for such the numbers bee,
            The loftiest Tower no ground at all can see.
            Banners, Flags, Streamers, in such numbers borne,
            And stood so thick that one might soone haue sworne,
            Nature of late some noueltie had brought,
            Groaues leau'd with silke in curious manner wrought,
            Bearing such fruite th' Atlantides did keepe,The daughters of Atlas.
            
            By that fierce Dragon that did neuer sleepe.
            When now approched glorious Maiestie,
            Vnder a gold-wrought sumptuous Canopie.
            Before him went his goodly glittering traine,
            Which though as late wash'd in a golden raine.
            All so embraudered that to those behold,
            Horses as men, seem'd to be made of Gold:
            With the faire Prince, in whom appear'd in glory,
            As in th'abridgement of some famous story,
            
               Eu'ry rare vertue of each famous King
            Since Norman VVilliams happie conquering:
            Where might be seene in his fresh blooming hopes,
            
               Henry the fifth leading his warlike troupes,
            When the proud French fell on that conquered land,
            As the full Corne before the labourers hand.
            Vshering so bright and Angellike a Queene,
            Whose gallant carridge had but Cynthia seene,
            She might haue learnd her siluer brow to beare,
            And to haue shin'd and sparckl'd in her spheare,
            Leading her Ladies on their milkie Steedes,
            With such aspect that each beholder feedes,
            As though the lights and beauties of the skies,
            Transcending dwelt and twinckled in their eies.
            Here might you see what passion wonder wrought,
            As it inuades the temper of the thought:
            One weepes for ioy, he laughs and claps his hands,
            Another still and looking sadly stands:
            Others that seemed to be moued lesse,
            Shew'd more then these in action could expresse.
            
               None ther's could iudge a witnesse of this sight,
            Whether of two did take the more delight,
            They that in triumph rode or they that stand,
            To view the pompe and glorie of the land,
            Each vnto other such reflection sent,
            Either so sumptuous, so magnificent:
            Nor are the duties that thy subiects owe,
            Only compriz'd in this externall show.
            For harts are heap'd with those innumered hoords,
            That tongues by vttrance cannot vent in words:
            Nor is it all Inuention here deuises,
            That thy hie worth and Maiestie comprizes,
            And we not last of those glad harts that proue,
            To shew our Soueraigne our vnspotted loue.
            The first a Maiors name worthely did grace,Iohn Stow Suruay.
            
            Marrying that title and Pretorian place,
            Was of our freedome, purchasing thereby
            That primate honor to our Liuery.
            Natiue our loue as needfull is our trade,
            By which no kingdome euer was decaide,
            
               To bring sleight gauds and womanish deuices,
            Of little vse and of excessiue prices,
            Good home-made things with trifles to suppresse,
            To feede luxurious riot, and excesse,
            Sound-Bullion is our subiect, whose sure rate
            Scal'd by his selfeworth, such the Goldsmiths state,
            Which peace and happie gouernment doth nourish,
            And with a kingdome doth both fade and florish.
            Natures perfection, that great wonder Gold,
            Of which the first note of our name we hold,
            
               Phoebus his God that triply doth implie,
            To medicen, Musicke, and sweete Poesie,
            To vs his hie diuinitie imparts,
            As he is knowne and glorified in Arts:
            For that inuention studie doth befit,
            That is the crowne and puritie of wit,
            What doth belong and's proper to the muse,
            We of all other mysteries doe vse,
            Moulds and insculpturs framing by the head,
            Formes and proportions strangely varied.
            
               The lumpe as likes the workman best to frame,
            To wedge, to ingot, or what other name,
            That by the sight and knowledge of our trade,
            Into rich Plate, and Vtensils is made
            Within thy land, for ornament doth stay,
            Angels haue wings and fleeting still away,
            And by eschanging virtuously doth flie
            That cankerd, base, and idle Vsurie:
            For when the banck once subtilie is plac'd,
            Th'exacted vse comes hourely in so fast,
            That whil'st the lender on the borrower praies,
            Good and industrious facultie decaies.
            Foule Auarice that triple Dog of Hell,
            That when Ioues sonne emperiously did quell,
            And from his hand receiu'd that fatall wound,
            His poysoned foame he driu'ld on the ground,
            From which they say as in the earths despite,
            Did spring that black and poysoned Aconite:
            For they by fire that mettals vse to trie,
            And finde wise Natures secresies thereby,
            
               When they prepare industriously to shed
            Siluer, dispos'd adulteratly with lead,
            Proue this base Courser from the other fine,
            Being so cleere and aptly femenine,
            Steales from her purenes in his boystrous fixure,
            By the corruption of his earthly mixure,
            Which if Gold helping her infeebled might,
            As a kind brother in his sisters right,
            By him her spirit is perfect and compacted,
            Which that grosse body enuiously detracted.
            Conscience like Gold which Hell cannot intice,
            Nor winne from weake man by his auarice:
            Which if infus'd such vertue doth impart,
            As doth conforme and rectifie the hart.
            For as the Indians by experience know,
            That like a Tree it in the ground doth grow,
            And as it still approcheth to the day,
            His curled branches brauely doth display,
            Then in the bulke and body of the mine,
            More neat, contracted, rarifi'd, and fine:
            
               So truth from darknes spreading doth appeare,
            And shewes it selfe more luculent and cleere.
            
               Dunstan our Patron that religious man,In Cate
                     ••
                   Episcop
                     ••
                  
               
            
            (That great and famous Metropolitan,
            That in his time ascended by degrees,
            To VVorster, London, Canturburies Sees,
            That was in ancient Glastenbury bred,
            Foure Saxons raignes that liuing flourished,
            Whose deeds the world vnto this time containeth,
            And sainted in our Kalenders remaineth
            Gaue) what not time our Brotherhood denies,
            Ancient endowments and immunities:
            And for our station and our generall heape,
            Recides in Lombard or in goodly Cheape.
            VVe haue an Adage which though very old,
            Tis not the worse that it hath oft been told,
            (Though the despising ancient things and holie,
            Too much betraies our ignorance and follie)
            That England yeelds to goodly London this,
            That she her chiefe and soueraine Citie is:
            
               
               
                  
                     •
                  ondon will graunt her goodly Cheape the grace,
            
               
                  •
               o be her first and and absolutest place:
            
               
                  •
               are I proclaime then with a constant hand,
            
               
                  •
               heape is the Starre and Iewell of thy land.
            The Trophie that we reare vnto thy praise,
            This gold-drop'd Lawrell, this life-giuing bayes,
            No power lends immortalitie to men,
            
               
                  •
               ike the hie spirit of an industrious pen,
            Which stems times tumults with a full-spread saile,
            When proud reard piles and monuments doe faile,
            And in their cinders when great Courts doe lie,
            That shall confront and iustle with the skie:
            Liue euer mightie, happely, and long,
            Liuing admir'd, and dead be highly song.
            FINIS.
            
         
      
   