
      
         
            
            
            THE HISTORIE OF THE GREAT EMPEROVR TAMERLAN.
            VVherein are expressed, encounters, skirmishes, battels, sieges, assaults, skalings, taking of cities and strong places, defended, and assaulted, with diuerse Stratagems of warre, the which this great and Renowned warriour hath conducted and accomplished, during his raigne of fortie or fiftie yeares: with other instructions for the warre, which should not be vnknowen of them that would attaine vnto the knowledge of armes.
            Drawen from the auncient Monuments of the Arabians, by Messire Iean du Bec, Abbot of Mortimer.
            
               Newly translated out of French into English, for their benefite which are ignorant in that language.
            
            by H. M.
            
               ANCHORA SPEI
               printer's or publisher's device
            
            
               LONDON Printed for William Ponsonby. 1597.
         
         
            
            
            TO THE FRIENDLY READER.
            
               BEcause this Historie (friendly Reader) was translated at the first, and now at this present imprinted and set foorth for thy only benefit: I thought best to recommend it rather to the Readers correction, then vnto any mans particular protection. For as I cannot otherwise thinke, but diuerse and sundrie errors are in the translating by me committed, necessary by thee to be corrected: so do I assure my selfe the Historie is so excellent, as it needeth not to be protected. For whether is to be considered the man in his honorable vertues, or the matter with her rare and diuerse properties, you shall find both the one and the other able to protect themselues, and euery way satisfie thine expectation. For both the which I will say no more then I find written by the French author, that the Historie is most true, and not deuised, according to the vanities of former ages, but

being as it were buried in a straunge and vnknowen language is reuiued from that obscuritie by his trauailes, and presented vnto the Reader in his own tongue through my paines. VVhereof seeing thou art to reape the fruit, I doubt not but ye will accept and yeelde mee thankes for the same. I will not trouble thee with a vaine commendation of the famous Tamerlan, who being amongest the worthy conquerors, as the sunne with the other starres, shall in the reading of this Historie shine vnto thee his owne vertues. Farewell. From my house the xv. day of October. 1597.
         
      
      
         
            
            THE HISTORIE OF TAMERLAN.
            
               HAuing read sundrie Histories, the which doe attribute as a great want vnto the happie fortune of Tamerlan, not to haue a writer in his dayes, which might haue left in writing his Historie vnto posteritie: who surely had reason so to say, if this had bin true. But without any cause did they mone him, insomuch as his Historie is very famous amōgst the Turks and Arabians,
               The History of Tamerlan famous amongst the Turkes and Arabians. his conquests very largely discoursed, and many of his worthy and notable sayings collected, with an infinite number of noble deedes left vnto the memoriall of posteritie, hauing bene no lesse accompanied with such good hap, than was Achilles. Very true it is, that he had not an Homer, but a great and worthy person, learned as well in naturall Philosophy, as in Astrology, who was in the time of this Prince, a companion and familiar of his conquests, named Alhacen, an ArabianAlhacen. by birth, making profession of Mahomets religion, not according to the fond and vaine follies of the Turkes; but for want of Christian instruction, he worshipped one onely God, the author of nature, & maker both ofMahomet. Heauen and Earth (the which Mahomet taught as he had learned in the Schoole of the Christians) meaning to be contrary vnto the Heathen, who did allow of sundry Goddes. This Author then being fallen into my hands, in my voyage into the East Countrey, I caused

the same to be interpreted vnto me by an Arabian, whoThe Franke tongue amōgst the Turkes. did speake Frank (as they terme it) that is to say, Italian, & some time I spent, in associating my selfe so with this man, who commended greatly vnto me the eloquence & grauity of this author, wōdering at his digressions, & entring againe into his matter so well to the purpose. It grieued me much that I had not the perfection of this language, to be a helpe vnto the riches of this History, for to deliuer it vnto my Nation with some grace: but I tooke therof as much as I could in his language, which was corrupted, as is the Frank tongue (so they terme it) which is a kind of Italian, mingled with Slauon, Greek, & Spanish, tongs very cōmō at Cōstantinople, with the Arabian & Turkish tongs: so as I could not gather but only the truth thereof, & not the drifts & grauity of the declaration, wherein the author had collected it for posterity, (& as he said) by the cōmandemēt of the Prince,Tamerlan his learning. who was a louer of learning, & excellent in the knowledge of Astrology & diuinity, as the custome of those Nations is to ioine thē ordinarily together, studying vpon the vertue of names, & of the turning of letters, euē
               The Tartarians strange kind of Astrologie. in their placing, writing thē vnderneth starres, whereof they make sentences, by meanes whereof they wrought miraculously in the things of nature. This is that Zoroastrien & Bactrien science, that of Balaā, & some others in my opiniō, which hath succeeded vnto so many Arabian Astrologians. Now then this Prince was endued with such knowledg, as made him admired of the people where he cōmāded, who are for the most part great wōderers, insomuch as this caūsed him to be accoūted a Prince accōpanied with the diuine vertue, cōsideringItalian fables written of Tamerlan. the iustice he vsed in all his actiōs. This hath proceeded euē so far that some Italians haue writtē foolish things

thereof, as of certain kinds of Tents which he caused to be pitched, whē he besieged any city; one white, signifiing peace, it yelding vnto his mercy; another red, signifying cruelty to follow; and the third blacke, signifying mourning to ensue. But I find not this in our Author, & I beleeue thē to be fables, as that of Romans, for the affaires of the war are not hādled in this maner, & we find that he was very courteous: onely he desired to abbaseTamerlan very friendly vnto the good, and furious to the bad. the pride of that Turkish Emperor, called Baiazet, the thunder of heauen, & would tread vpon his head, imitating therin the Diuinity, which pulleth down the proud & raiseth vp the humble. Therfore in a word, I say, that which our Historiographers report of him, is very litle after this Author. This is the occasiō therfore that I desiring to write, in this solitarines which I haue chosen, seing the cōtinuāce of the miseries wherinto I haue often thrust my selfe with the hazard of my life, as I am bound for my king & countrey; where hauing receiued many wounds, by the fauor of my king, I haue sought againe the priuate life, which I had left▪ that I might not be seene in idlenesse at such time as men of worth were busied in sacrificing their liues for preseruatiō of their countrey. Now thē that I may keepe my self frō writing any thing of these times, for to say true, it engendreth hatred in many minds, & especially the desire to be flattered, & they which cannot do it, are they not cōmāded to keepe silence? I must forbeare to collect that which some men of worth hauing both seene & endured, doe leaue, as a monumēt of our follies vnto posterity, which should rather in my opinion be buried, then brought to light, for they be instructions to kindle mens minds forThe discemodities arising from the Histories of ciuill warres. the trouble of their countries, finding therin colours for destruction of the same. Do you not thinke that the Historie of the Romaine ciuill warres, hath beene the

occasion of the ouerthrow of many common-wealths? and do not you beleeue, that of the Grecians being read by Cesar, did harme, by lyfting vp his courage, and making him hope for high matters (as those of Marius and Silla) to set Rome on fire, and their owne Countrie in bloud, saying most truely, (and they of this age shall pardon me) that man is without loue, vnworthy of fire and water, who causeth and loueth ciuill warres. We must needs blame them in recyting those, and take from them the hope of obtayning thereby glorie of the posteritie, but much rather blame & dishonor. What was the cause that parricide was not forbidden by a law written? because this were to instruct that it might be done. Our countrie is another mother, shall we recite vnto posterity the praise of the parricide, which they cō
               mit against her the true mother? For this occasion therfore I hold my peace, & bury in my self as much as I may, the cōspiracies which they had made against their king, City, fellow-citizen, the hallowed altars, & against all both diuine and humane right. I will now declare vnto you with my Arabian, who this great Prince Tamerlan
               The ofspring and stocke of Tamerlan. was. He was then of the bloud of the Tartarian Emperors, and his father Og had for his portion the countrey of Sachetay, wherof he was Lord. This countrey lying betweene the North & the East, is the ancient country of Parthia, vpon the coast of the Zogdians, & the chiefest citie of his estate was Samercand situated vpon the riuer of Issarle. Some of our Historiographers would needs haue him to be the sonne of a shepheard; but this haue they said, not knowing at all the custome of their countrie, where the principall reuenue of the kings andThe customes and reuenues of the Tartarian kings. nobles consisteth in cattell, despising gold and siluer, but making great reckoning of such riches, wherin they

aboūd in all sorts: this is the occasiō wherfore some call thē shepheards, & say also that this Prince descēded frō thē. So his father Og was Prince of Sachetay, aboūding in such kind of wealth. And being come vnto the age of fifteen yeares, his father being already old, deliuered vp vnto him the gouernmēt of his kingdome, with the cō
               mandemētThe solitarie life of Og, for to serue God. ouer al his men of war. His father Og being giuen vnto peace, withdrue himself vnto a solitarie life, for to serue God, and end the rest of his dayes in quiet.Tamerlans name. He gaue vnto his son Tamerlan (which signifieth heauenlie grace in their tongue) two sufficient personages for to guide and assist him in the gouernment of his estate: the one was called Odmar, and the other Aly, personsOdmar & Aly appointed to assist Tamerlā in the gouernme
                     •
                  t of his kingdom by his father Og. Note. in great dignitie and credit with his father, whom this Prince did greatlie honour as long as they liued, & euen after their death hee did often make mention of them before his seruants, commending their seruices performed; a matter of no smal force for the mightie to make them wel serued, not to forget their seruants euē after their death. This acknowledging doth greatlie allure men, as the forgetfulnesse thereof doth grieue thē for the present time, and cooleth the desire they haue to serue. This Prince was wont to weare on his hand the rings of his two seruants, and was wont to say, that when he beheld these, he did call to his remembrance two precepts, which he had receiued of them; and this did he the better to retain them in memorie against he should minister iustice. Now this Prince was wel instructed in the Arabian learning, and exercised himselfeTamerlan his studies and learning. The delicacies of Tartaria. Tamerlans contemplation. much therein, and at such time as they thought him to be either in the Bathes, wherein they are very curious in that countrie, being their chiefest delicacies, he was in the contemplacion and studie of heauēly things, without

omitting anie thing notwithstanding that belonged to the gouernment of his estate, wherin he said his professed Demon did oftentimes especiallie direct him, accounting onely his estate prosperous when he had the heauēs fauorable. This Prince had within his eyesMaiestie in his eyes. such deuine beautie, being full of such maiesty, that one could hardly endure the sight of them without closing of their eies, & they which talked with him, and did oftē behold him, became dumb, insomuch as he abstained with a certain modesty & comelinesse to look vpon him that discoursed vnto him. All the rest of his visage was courteous and well proportioned: he had but little haire on his chin: he did weare his haire long & curled,The custom of the Tartariās. contrary to the custome of his country, who are shaued on their heads, hauing the same alwaies couered, but he contrariwise was alwaies in a maner bare-headed, and greatly esteemed of his haire: therfore one of his familiars demanding of him wherfore he did not shaue his haire like other men, he said vnto him, My friēd, I neuerTamerlan 
                     ••
                  re long 
                     •
                  air and why. told it vnto any body, but (said he) the affection I know thou bearest vnto my seruice, cannot deny it thee. My mother came of the race of Sāson, for a mark wherof she aduised me to honor long haire. This was the cause that made him respected of his men of armes, and the most part of thē did beleeue there was some vertue in those haires, or rather some fatal destiny, the which many did beleeue to be so; & verily they were of a duskie colour drawing towards a violet, the most beautifull that anie eye could behold. His stature was of the middle sort,The discription of Tamerlan. somwhat narrow in his shoulders, he had a faire leg & strong, the strēgth of his body was such as no body did surpasse, & often on the festiual daies he made triall of his strēgth with the most strong▪ & this he did with such grace & humanity, that he whō he ouercame held himself

therin most happy, although it be a disgrace amōgst the Tartariās to be thrown to the ground in wrastling. Now as he was martial & desirous of glory: the first war that he attēpted was against the Moscouit, who came &Tamerlan his first war aagainst the Moscouite. spoiled a citie which had put it self into his protectiō, & had entred also into his countrie, & being retired, proclaimed open war against him, gaue him battaile neer to the riuer Mascha, although the Moscouit had a great army, which he had gathered together long before. On the other side, the Prince determining to resist him, assembled all his forces, & those of his allies Tamerlans; & first, he made appeare vnto his soldiers the stoutnesse of his courage; for this day he perfourmed the office both of a souldier & Emperour iointly together. Now the place of fight being discōmodious for vs by reason of a litle hil which the Moscouits had takē, wheron they had placed some 6000. mē on foot, who with an infinit nū
               ber of arrowes hoped to ouercome thē that went to the battaile, who were constrained to passe by that place. Now he being aduertised that the Moscouit would not come to the battail, but only meant to shew himself, & after that to retire 20▪ leagues, as they are accustomed to do: he being desirous to end this war by a battail, did adiudge,▪ beyond the aduise of his Counsell, that the eenemy wold not fight, vnlesse by assaulting this mountaine, he were vrged therunto against his wil, or els lose those 6000. men which were there placed. Then he cō
               mādedA Stratagem. 20000. men of his army, led by Aly (Colonel of the footmen) to set vpon them. Now by this aduise he brought to passe two effects: the one whereof was, that he kept his horsmen from being iniured by the arrowes of the Moscouites; the other was to compel them vnto the fight, in case they would not otherwise come

thereunto, the which tooke place. For as the Moscouite thought to retire and succour them, Tamerlan at that very time caused his army to passe ouer the riuer Rosna, which gaue the occasion of battaile. The Moscouite could not retire but in disorder, our Armie hauing passed ouer: nowe the Muscouite had verie great forces, and men well trained vp in the warres, hauing had alwaies warres with his neighbors, the king of Polonia, with whom he had then friendship, and the ayd of tenne thousand verie good horse. There were also with him many Hungarian Gentlemen, led by Vdecelaus a HungarianThe armie of the Moscouite. Gentleman, who had brought with him more then eight thousand horse; the opinion was that he had in his armie fourscore thousand horse, and a hundred thousand footmen. Our Prince Tamerlan had in his armieThe armie of Tamerlan. about six-score thousand horse, and a hundred and fiftie thousand men on foot, but not so skilful in points of warre as those of the Moscouite: for our estate had long enioyed peace, and our souldiours were indeed trained vp in the disciplin of warres, but not in the practise thereof. For Prince Og loued peace and rest from his childhood, and kept himselfe with great mildnesse with all his neighbours, hauing nothing at all increased his borders, cōmended only for preseruing of them wisely. So these two Armies were the one before the other, and in the meane time the mountaine was forced by the Parthians, and defended by the Moscouites, euerie one assisting theirs. To conclude, the fight continued two houres, the armies nothing at al medling therein, but yet euery one did encourage their souldiours, &The order of Tamerlanes battaile. exhort them vnto the battaile. The order of Tamerlanes was this; that is, he caused all his armie to be deuided into squadrons, each consisting of sixe thousand

horse, except his own, which was of ten thousand, so as he made eighteen squadrons, his owne being reckened which made nineteene. The Auantguard was conducted by Odmar who led nine squadrons, flanked with 40. thousand men on foot, deuided both on the right and left sides, who should shoot an infinite number of arrowes. The battaile was conducted by Tamerlan, who led ten squadrons, his owne being therein closed, and 50. thousand footmen, the best and choisest souldiers of his whole armie. Prince Thanais, a kinsman vnto the Prince, led the Arere-ward, with fortie thousand footmen, and sixe squadrons: hee had some three thousand horse aduenturers, whome they call Oliagues in their tongue, the same which we tearme the forlorne hope.
            The Moscouite did not obserue that order, but did fight by double ranks with Launces, and there was a space to help themselues therein, and to breake them, notwithstanding those nations doe not breake them at all, and they seemed to be a greater number then wee, making a great noise. The Auantguard of the MoscouitesThe order of the Moscouits battaile. was fullie twentie fiue thousand horse. The Polonians and Hungarians were in the Auauntguard, the which was led by the Moscouits sonne, whom they call the Prince of Russia: the battaile consisted of 40. thousand horse, wherein was the king of Moscouie with manie of his Lords, and all the forces of his Allies, the Arere-ward was a great squadron squared with ten thousand horse; the footmen of the Moscouit were between the Battaile & the Arere-ward. Then our Prince seeingTamerlan his speech vnto his souldiers, being ranged in battaile array. our armie passed ouer, turned himself towards his souldiers, & began in this sort to speake vnto them: It is not for riches (my companiōs) nor for the enlarging of the

limits of my empire, that I doe fight this day with your assistance, but it is for a thing more excellēt, seeing the same is to purchase glory & honor vnto the Parthiā nation. The same whih was in old time the boūds of the glory of the Romā name, who could neuer conquer it, nor plant their Trophees therein. Let vs not then giue place vnto the glory of our auncesters, and make manifest this day vnto me, the faithfulnesse that is in you, & let the same be accompanied with your courage, for your king is not accustomed to retire without victory, I haue caused you to passe ouer this riuer, for the trust I haue in the force of your arms: let vs rather dy thē repas it without carying a laurel garlād on our head. Whilest this passed thus, the Parthiā soldiers led by Aly had won the moūtain, which was not without great fight: but the victory fel on our side, which gaue great hope vnto our army of more happy successe. This made the Moscouits to acknowledge the fault they had made, the which was wel taken hold of by vs: so the Prince gaue the signe of battaile, marching forward all along the mountaine which his souldiers had wonne, enflamed with their victory to begin the fight. And he placed 6000. fresh soldiers vpon this mountain to fauor his armie. At this instant the Moscouite gaue the signe of battaile, and aduancedBattaile between the Moscouite and Tamerlan. forward. Then the Prince Tamerlan willed his men likewise to come forward: and sent his commandement therof vnto Odmar, who returned answer, that seing the Moscouit did with such heat seek to come vnto the fight, he would suffer him to come vnto him, and would attend his comming resolutely in the place of battail. Now Odmar alone could by his authority bridle the boldnes of this yong Prince, who desired to go forward, & maintain in the meane time, like an old soldier, his aduantage, which was of no smal waight for the victory,

the place being of greater aduantage for the enemies, for in assaulting thē we lost the force of the fight, & we had also the wind & Sun in our eyes, which raised a great dust made by our horses, which kept the Moscouits frō beholding the efect of their soldiers in the fight that either as they won or lost they might be succored▪ So the fight was begun by the Moscouites, who strongly with al the fury that was possible charged Odmar, who stifly resisted all this forcible violence, but not without the losse of many of his men, and himself thrown to the ground, al his horse also broken, was fain to retire himselfe vnto the left wing of his footmen, where he was again mounted on horseback, whereupon reuniting his men together, whilest the Moscouite did fight with the maine battaile, conducted by the Emperour Tamerlan, he ren
                  •
               ed with those whom he had so vnited together a new charge, setting vpon the flank of the Moscouits, which did greatly impaire their strength. The fight endured 4. or 5. houres; insomuch as the heaps of men and horse were so many defences against the blowes of the arrowes shot by the Parthiā footmen & by those of the Moscouites. Now the Moscouite horsmen had pierced the maine battaile, the Hungariās fighting so resolutely as the Prince remained seuered with 3000. horse only, & after the Parthian maner began to fight in retiring▪ wherupon the Moscouite thought he had won the battaile; then, whē he being reunited vnto his Arier-ward, led by the Prince of Tanais, who had gathered together 14000. horse, and almost all the footmen, it behoued the Moscouite to retire backe, notwithstanding before that he made a strong resistāce; but at the length multitude & skil ouercam the force & valor of the Moscouites, the victorie bending to the Parthians side, the which they did pursue hotly. Tamerlan was hurt on

the forehead vpon the side of the left eye▪ and had two horses slaine vnder him in the fight; the Moscouite falling
                  
                     〈1 line〉
                  . into the hands of a priuate souldiour, as a prisoner, being not known, sa
                  •
               ed himself (his armie being whollie ouerthrowne▪ and diuers Muscouite Lords taken prisoners) and retired himselfe with nine or ten thousand horse in order: manie of their footmen saued thēselues by the benefit of the night. The place of their retiring was about ten leagues from our armie, and he passed ouer a riuer, where he reunited together his men during the night. The least losse he had was of his footmē, who tooke not the course of his horsmen, but rather as soon as they perceiued the victorie encline to the enemie, they retired themselues all along the moūtains for their better aduantage: a thing which greatlie fauoured the Moscouits. Tamerlan employed himself in giuing GodThe thākefulnesse of Tamerlan vnto God for his victorie thanks for this victorie, after he had pursued the enemy three leagues; the next day he reuiewed his armie, and found that he had lost of his side for his part betweene seuen an eight thousand horsmen, and betweene three and foure thousand footmen. The Moscouite lost some seuen and twentie thousand footmen, and between fifteene and sixteene thousand horsmen. This same day was Odmar the safegard of his Prince; for it is not to be doubted, had not the hindrance bene he gaue, when the Moscouits assaulted Tamerlan, setting vpon him with all their forces together, but that they had bene able to ouerthrow the Prince of Thanais, and the Emperour who was reunited vnto him. By the euent of this Battaile we may learne how much aduantage he hath,A good aduertisment for Generals. who attendeth the comming of his enemie with a resolute mind, in the field which he hath chosen for the battaile, hauing first caused the same to be well viewed by

his men, and especially by his Captaines. Secondly, the hurt that commeth in not obseruing the dust which the wind raiseth. Thirdly, that the Arier-ward well led, is the occasion of the victorie, and oftentimes the preseruation of the Prince. Fourthly, how necessarie it is to haue the chiefest strength of the battaile in going to assault the enemie. Now our Tamerlan after he had giuen thanks vnto God, caused a view to be made of his Armie, buried the dead, both his owne, and of his enemie, acknowledged the deserts of his soldiours, yeelding vnto them such houour as they had deserued. In this battaile he lost Hally, who was slaine by the blow of an arrow, after he had forced the moūtaine, in going to the battaile, being generall of all his footmē. This Prince was greatly grieuedtherwith, causing his bodie alwaies to be laide in his tent vntil his returne vnto Samarcand, where he caused him to be buriedGreat honour done to Hally after his death for good seruice performed by him in his life. verie honourably: hee was the beginning of the greatnesse to Samercand, and of the fame of his name, by making of a stately tombe for Hally. The Prince did slacke no time after so great a victorie: for hauing giuen such order as was necessarie to a great armie. (I wil not forget to declare, that when as this Prince did behold so many thousands of men lie dead on the ground where the battaile was fought, he turned himselfe vnto one of his familiars, lamenting the condicion of them who command ouer Armies, & commending the profession of the Emperour his father, he counted him happie, for that hee had sought rest, acknowledgingA notable saying of Tamerlan for making of warres. humaine miserie, the which in destroying his owne kind, procured his glorie. That for his part such tokens of victory were sorrowful euē vnto his hart.) He set forward, and came into the borders of the Moscouite, all

the coūtry being astonished, & euery one flying before his army, the Moscouite had retired himselfe vpon the losse of the battaile, & had likewise caused al his footmē to retire, making a shewe as though he had not lost his courage, & because he had reunited 30000. of his horsmen together, he bragged to trie very shortly his fortune againe. But for all this seeing his victorious enemy come and enter into his country, he thought he should haue to do with a mighty enemy: and hauing called together his principal Captaines, he passed ouer the riuer called Nifort, & taking their counsell, he did resolue for the preseruation of his subiectes to send vnto the Conquerour, and once to make trial of his mercie, as he had already of his forces, being informed by the prisoners of the noble mind and mildnesse the which this Prince vouchsafed vnto them, he determined to send EmbassadorsEmbassadors from the Moscouit to treat of peace with Tamerlan to treat with him, and to assay for to amend that which had bene ill done. The Embassadors being arriued, he receiued curteouslie, bewailing in a maner the fortune of their maister, rather then vaunting and exalting himself for the victorie: and as it were more modest then the conquered, he asked them how the Moscouit did, & for what cause they came vnto him. They gaue him to vnderstand, that they had in charge from their Prince to treat with him, desiring the abstinence of armes, and that they were ready to performe vnto him all things reasonable: they beseeched him moreouer to vse victorie as a thing which was the gift of Fortune, and might at another time change, calling vnto mind the estate of humane things, which are vnstable. Prince Tamerlan made them answer, that he had taken armes for the preseruation of his confederates and subiects, from the iniurie done vno them by the Moscouite;

and this was the cause of the victorie, for that hee had iustlie enterprised the same. That hee referred the victorie vnto the God of Battailes, & not vnto his own strength, or forces of his souldiers, and for these reasons he was not therby more insolent: for it was the custome of the Parthians, retaining the same from theA notable saying of Tamerlan. glorie of their ancesters, that in aduersitie their courages doe nothing at all faile them, and that prosperitie likewise doth in no sort blind thē so far, that they shuld not be mindful of iustice as wel in good as bad fortune. That it was iust they should satisfy the victor, & shouldArticles of agreement concluded vpon, betweene the Moscouite & Tamerlan. promise not to enterprise any more the troubling of his allies, then should they haue peace with his armes. He also required that they should become tributaries of a hundred thousand Duckats, and should pay all the charges of the warre, amounting vnto the sum of three hundred thousand Duckats, he then would send back again all the prisoners, & withdraw his armie; that for security hereof they shuld giue him pledges, which should be changed euery yeare; vnto all which they agreed. So was this warre ended to his contentment, returning with glorie vnto the Prince his father, in whose countenance no bodie could perceiue any ioy for his sonnes prosperitie, as hee whom the care of heauen had so rauished, that hee no longer set his minde on earthly things. Now Tamerlan was receiued into all his countries with much honour and triumph, the great Cham of Tartaria, brother vnto his father, sent presentes to gratifie him, making offer vnto him of his daughter in marriage, and that in marrying of her, he would cause him to bee acknowledged as Emperour throughout all his kingdomes, as his next heire, himselfe being nowe old, and out of all hope to haue anie

more children. Hereupon he presently tooke his iorney towards him, being in the citie of Quauicay, where he was receiued with all kind of triumph and magnificēce; there did he shew himselfe braue in all maner of gallant shewes and combats, as well in iest as in earnest. And as these nations are full of vanitie, and desirous to make shew of their strength & agility, Tamerlan caried away the prize therein, whether it were in shooting neereThe Tartarians exercises. with his bowe, or in changing horses in the middest of the courses, or in breaking an yron in running at the Quintaine; he made euery one wonder at his dexterity, and was crowned the sixt day after his comming thither with the ioyfull consent of all the subiects of theTamerlan his mariage with the great Chās daughter. Emperour his vnkle, and of all the Court. After that he maried the Emperours daughter, desiring first to bee crowned before the marriage, to the intent that none should think that the Crown came vnto him by means of her, but by succession, the daughters not at all succeeding into Empires. It was also to assure his estate, & hauing remained in that place by the space of two moneths, he returned from thence with his wife to Samercand, in which citie he delighted greatly to remaine, because the situation thereof was verie faire; and forThe situation of the city of Samercand. that the citie is accompanied with a faire riuer, which causeth great trafique, and maketh it richer then any citie within that countrey. As he abode there the MoscouitePresents from the Moscouit vnto Tamerlā
                sent to visit him with many presents of faire horses, & many excellēt furres, the which did greatly content him, for he had receiued newes that the Moscouite did arme himselfe, the which was true, but it was against the Polonians, and other of his neighbors. Who made their repaire vnto him for his assistance, earnestly desiring his aid; which he would not do; making answer

vnto them, that he had giuen vnto the Moscouite theTamerlan his worthie answere vnto the Polonians, who desired aide of him against the Moscouite. A Maxime. dearest thing he had in the world, which was his faith. Manie notwithstanding of the Court corrupted by the Embassadors of the king of Polonia, vsed perswasions to mooue him to fauour the Polonians, declaring vnto him, that it was a Maxime, that it behooued him not to suffer his neighbour to waxe too strong, especiallie of so mighty a kingdome as was Polonia; and that this was the means to make the Tartarians and Parthians terrible vnto the Moscouites. That it was necessary at the beginning to oppose himselfe against such greatnes, the which being suffered to increase, would in the end prooue hurtfull vnto vs, and then would it be verie hard to ouerthrow the same. The Prince answered, that at what time soeuer the Moscouit would not performe that which he had promised vnto him, he had sufficient means to punish him, seeing he had alreadie ouercome him with the Parthians, which was but a small prouince within Tartaria, and that at this day being increased to so great an estate as the whole Empire of the Tartarians, he had occasion to feare him the lesse; he hoped that his of-spring would also adde more Empires if it did maintaine equity; that in the meane time the Moscouite should breake his forces in one enterprise, hee would likewise bring to passe his, wherein he should iustlie get honour, and augment the limits of his reputacion. That the peace betweene him and the Moscouite was notoriouslie knowne vnto all his neighbours, the breach whereof should not proceed of his part, and that it was beneficiall both for him and his subiectes:Tamerlan a louer of iustice that God doth punish those who vniustlie enterprise warre against their neighbours; that this hath bene the occasion of the greatnes of our house, that his ancesters

haue alwayes had this iustice before their eyes, in as much as they haue neuer enterprised warre but in their owne defence, notwithstanding it is 300. yeares since they knew what it was to haue fortune cōtrary vnto thē, and that he beleeued certainly that proceeded frō thatA notable saying of Tamerlan. Iustice which the God of hostes obserued towards his; that if he were desirous of warre, and therby to get honour and reputation, he had many things to demaund of his neighbours, who during the raigne of his father, which sought onely heauen and neglected the earth, desirous of peace, hath permitted: the which he might iustly redemaund, and vpon refusal, by armes make way vnto the liberty of his subiects, tyrannised vnder vnlawfull Lords. Odmar seemed greatly to allow of the Princes reasons, although hee had bene one of the first which entred into this cōsideration to feare the greatnesse of the Moscouite; and he wondered at the maner he vsed in counterpeysing so vprightly in equal ballances iustice with his magnanimitie; the which notwithstanding was not transported beyond the course of equitie, what reasons soeuer diuerse wise men of his Councel declared, concerning the ancient enmitie betweene the Moscouits and Parthians, especially for the controuersie in religion: but all this was disanulled, Odmar allowing the purpose of the Prince, the which he alone knew, & the others speaking only as old Coū
               sellers, relying vpon the anciēt maximes by the which are maintained and assured the greatnesse of Monarchies. For Odmar alone was called by him at such time as the great Cham his vnkle did impart vnto him his affaires: and amongst other matters, he propounded vnto him the enterprise of China, promising him assistance and aid, and giuing him to vnderstand how necessarie it was to vndertake this war for the better assuring of his

estate, seeing the king of China had much gone beyōd his ancient bounds. So as our Prince had this iourney in his mind, and prepared himselfe therunto, he had not otherwise refused their counsell, and the wise opinions they propounded vnto him, being alwayes obedient vnto reason and not to any other passion, and then especially when the question was of warre, & for the good of his affaires; a thing for which he was as much to be cō
               mēded, as for any other vertue whatsoeuer; for by othersThe commendation of Tamerlan obeying reason. he was esteemed strōg, couragious & stout, but by this here mētioned, he was accoūted wise & vertuous, which maketh kings to be honored & admired: wherof he that is the owner, is Lord of one of the greatest Empires that men can obtaine; for the wise man onely hath the dominion thereof. And what auaileth it (I pray you) to conquer abroad, when as home-matters are miserablie subiected vnder the f
                  •
               ry of our foolish passions: is it not very hard to cōmand another, when thou commandest not thy selfe, thou being the slaue of thy follies, which do break thee with all their force against the moderate rock of wisdom, which houereth about thee, mocking at all that thou doest without her? Salomon also the king of Israel praied for it, so did our Prince often: this was the praier he most commonly made vnto God, and forTamerlan prayed for wisdom vnto God. this reason he honored greatly the counsel of the wise, and respected not their pouerty, & some wondered that he hauing knowledge of a wise man, would send for him vnto his Court, and conferring familiarly withA worthy custome of Tamerlan. him, would say vnto him: My friend, I pray thee let me bestow part of my goods vpon thee, and doe thou impart some of thy wisedome with mee. Hee wasA notable saying of Tamerlan. wont to say, they presented him with golde and siluer, with precious stones, with faire and rich moueables,

where he abounded: but that he found fewe which did beautifie his mind with good precepts & instructions, wherwith to gouerne so manie sundry people whome God had subiected vnder the obedience of his scepter. He had in his Court a Christian whom he loued much, and euerie one greatlie respected, named Axalla, a Geneuois by birth, brought vp from his youth about his person. This man principally did stir him vp vnto great enterprises, and notwithstanding his religion, hee trusted him. Now he had all religion in reuerence, so asThe Author saith that this may be praised in a Pagan & infidel, but not in a Christian Prince. it did worship one onelie God, creator of all things. He often said, that the greatnes of Diuinitie cōsisted in the sundry kindes of people which are vnder the coape of heauē, who serued the same diuerslie, nourishing it self with diuersitie, as the nature was diuers where it had printed his image, God remaining notwithstanding one in his essence, not receiuing therin any diuersitie. This was the reason that mooued him to permit and graunt the vse of all religions within the Countries of his obedience, alwayes prouided (as I said before) that they worshipped one onely God, detesting the idolatrous and strange goddes, in so much as he regarded not the diuersitie in religion, if they were able to serue him; so as this Christian attained vnto great honors and dignities neere vnto him, as hereafter you shall heare.
            Now to returne from my digression: Our Prince was desirous of warres, knowing that he could verie hardly maintaine his owne estate and so manie seruantes, whose fingers would tickle if they were not employed in making of warres. So he determined to make warre with the king of China (who is called the Lord of the world, & child of the sun) which was no smal enterprise.

But before he would begin the same, he sent vnto theEmbassadors vnto the king of China from Tamerlan. said king of China, for to demand right for some countries (which they cal Hordas) abiding places, & townes, or rather countries fit for the feeding of cattell, the which this Prince of China had vsurped long before, and euen the passages of a riuer called Tachij, which is beyond his limits, which are walles (the which are betweenA wall builded by the king of China to defend his countrey from the roades of the Tartarians. the kingdomes of the great Cham and of our Tamerlan) builded of purpose by this king of China to defend him from the roades of the Tartarians and forces of our Prince, so as this was begunne with the aduise of the great Cham, and for his benefite as well as for the Princes. Therefore to accomplish his enterprise, in the meane time that he attended for the returne of his Embassadors, he caused his forces to come forwards from all parts, appointing vnto them for the place of meeting his owne at the Horda of Baschir, where all his armie assembled: and other ayding troopes of the great Cham in the deserts of Ergimul at a certaine day, in which place he should ioyne with all his armie. The armie of the great Cham consisted of two hundred thousand fighting men, wherein were all the braue men of his Court, who were accustomed vnto the warres, the Emperor which then raigned, & was old, hauing greatly increased his limits, and conquered a great countrey, so as these men were well trained vp in the warres, and accustomed vnto trauaile and paines. Now then the Embassadors which were sent, returne and informe the Prince of the will of this proud king of the world, thisA proud answere of the king of China returned v
                     •
                  to Tamerlan by his Embassadors. king of China (who was named so) who puffed vp with vaine glorie, was astonished how any durst denounce warre against him, making this proud answer, that Tamerlan should content himselfe that he had left him

that which he might haue taken from him, and that his armes and forces were of another sort then those of whom he published the victory, to bring thereby terror vpon his neighbours. This answere being heard, our Prince marched directly vnto the armie, and gaue order for the conueyance of victuals from all partes, sent to hasten forwarde his consederates, emparted the answere vnto the Emperour by Embassadours dispatched from him, caused the boldnesse of the king of China to be published, to make manifest vnto all the world the iustnesse of his cause. Before his departure he went to take leaue of his father, who endued with a singularA kind parting betwene the father and the sonne. & fatherly affection, said he should neuer see him again, and that he hastened vnto his last rest, and hauing made solemne praiers ouer the Prince his sonne for his prosperitie, kissing him a thousand times, drew off his Imperiall ring, and gaue it vnto him, not asking whither his iourney tended: and calling Odmar, he bad him farewell, recōmēding his faithfulnes vnto his son. This was done with a grauity, wherof the grace was more diuine then humaine: then he departed and drew towards Samarcand,The custome of the Parthian kings to carrie t
                     •
                  eir 
                     •
                   
                  
                     •••
                  s with them vnto the warre. where the Empresse his wife remained; whom he carried with him as is the custome of that Nation, & after he had (being religious) visited the Tombe of his seruant H
                     •
                  lly, he caused his soule three dayes to be praied for, according to the rites of his law: whereuponSamay made gouernour of Sachetay in Tamerlans absence. he presently departed, hauing taken order for the well gouerning of his kingdome in his absence, committing the charge thereof vnto Samay, a man well practised in affaires, & he who had the charge of our PrinceThe courteous nature of Tamerlan towards his bringers vp. in his youth: for I must needes say this by the way, that our Prince had alwayes a naturall inclination towards those which had brought him vp in vertue, shewing vnto

them in a manner the same honor, as if he were yet vnder their gouernment: and this he did thorough a gentlenesse of nature which was in him, that made him beloued more then I am able to expresse vnto you. SoTamerlan his Armie marching against the king of China. then he marched forward in the middest of his armie, which consisted but of fiftie thousand horse, and one hundred thousand men on foote, relying principally on the forces of the great Cham his vncle; who aboue all desired this warre: he did not forget to giue in charge that the rest of his forces should be readie vpon the first commandement as soone as he should be ioyned with the forces of the great Cham, and marching forwardes he had stayed by the way, by reason of some distemperature which had surprised him thorough changing of the ayre as the Phisitions affirmed. But yet notwithstanding the forces which Catiles Captaine of the armie of the great Cham conducted, went daily forwards. Now the newes was spredde into an infinite number of places of his distemperature, yet did he not neglect to send vnto the great Cham, and often aduertise him of the estate of his health, to the end the same should not cause any alteration, the which he did fore-see by reason of his preferment vnto this Empire by the great Cham his vncle: and he was in doubt of a certaine Lord named Cal
                     •
                  x, who was discontented therewith, and had not as yet neither gratified nor acknowledged him as all the other subiectes had done, and they reported thereof diuersely vnto him; but this Prince vnto whom gentlenesse being naturall, was alwayes of opinion, that it would not bee conuenient for him to disturbe the quiet of the kingdome which was giuen him, during the life of his vncle, who desired it as old age doth naturally:

notwithstanding some report that vpon pollicie hee suffered this warre to be moued, wheras he might haue remedied the same, making it as a meanes to win the hearts of his new subiects, who liked well of him alreadie, and also to make himselfe to be feared of those that heaped vp conspiracies against his promoting vnto the new Empire. For kingdomes are for the most part obtained, and likwise preserued by the good-will gottenTamerlan his policie to cut off the brāches of sedition. in well commaunding men of warre: it produced also another effect, which was, that they who were sedicious, wasted of thēselues, or else became his affectioned seruants by the ordinary seruice in the warres, and by this meanes drew them out of their countrey. Now cō
               cerning his delay it was by sundry diuersly interpreted; some said that he had bene aduertised of some vproare to be attempted, when he should be farre seuered from thence, and had passed ouer the mountains of Pasanfu, and that Calix staied vpon nothing else, in so much as the companies of the great Cham were gone forwards, euen beyond the mountaines, hauing passed the riuer of Meau, and were encamped at Bouprou, the which Calix vnderstanding, thought he shold haue the means to worke his enterprise. Thereupon hauing assembledThe conspiracy of Calix against Tamerlan in his absence. great store of his most faithful followers, he tooke counsell with them, that this was the meanes to ouerthrow the purposes of Zachetay, who would raigne ouer, and bring them vnder his Empire: and that seeing their Prince had bene so badly minded as to doe the same of his owne minde without calling of them which had interest in that election, that now was the time to assure their libertie, which was in doubt to be lost, and caused also a rumor to be spread of the sicknesse of this Prince, that the great Cham was old, the greatest part of his

forces farre separated from him, that they should soone attaine vnto that they desired: that his enterprise herein was so assured; that so soone as his armie wes assembled, he would shew himselfe before Catay, he was certaine that presently there wold be a change in his fauor; that his father had commaunded there; that it is long since he knew the affection of this people, which inclined vnto him; that they had not as yet seene their newe Prince; that they would easily beleeue whatsoeuer he declared vnto them; that the Zachetay was farre seuered from them; that they had to do with a great enemie, to whom also he had sent Embassadors to aduertise him of his practise; that he was assured his enterprise would haue happie successe; that they would foorthwith dispatch a messenger vnto the great Cham their Prince, toAn old pretence of all rebels. assure him that they bent not their forces against him, but were his faithfull and obedient subiects: but they armed themselues, because they would not be gouerned by the Parthians their auncient enemies (for these Nations hate one another how neere neighbours so euer they be, as doth the Spaniard and the Portugall, the English men and the Scot) that they knew this Prince, in respect of his great age, hauing no posteritie was desirous of quiet rest, and desired nothing more then to end his dayes in peace, they would permit him so to do without altering any thing in the same; that they hope the Parthians are so badly entertained by the king of China, that in stead of setting vpon them they shall thinke themselues happie if they may be suffered to enioy peace; that they will march forward towards them at the straites of Tenduict, to hinder their returne. The propositions of Calix were great and well practised: for it was a yeare since he had won the peoples good will,

and he heaped together whatsoeuer was necessarie for his insurrection: but this was done secretly, notwithstanding diuerse had giuen aduertisement thereof vnto the Prince Tamerlan: but he despised that practise, or at the least made a shewe so to doe. Yet notwithstanding doe I knowe, that he was not so sicke at Cachobache where he remayned verie neare a moneth, that he had not in his vnderstanding (the which he wisely dissembled) the reuolt which Calix practised in his new estate; that he delayed but onely to vnderstand the certainty of the euents. And I haue often heard him say, that if it had not beene for feare of offending the great Cham his vncle, he had helped the same at the very beginning, without suffering the same to be set on foote: this was the cause that this Prince made so long abode. The Tartarians which were brought vnto him by Calibes, were vexed for hauing receiued newes of the preparations made by the king of China; they complayned that oportunitie and season passed away, so desirous were they to manifest vnto their new Prince their courages, and this was their dayly talke: but some matter of importance happened, and a great alteration was found in the Princes disposition, who was forward and diligent for executing of that speedily which he had with ripe deliberation resolued of. The which maketh mee beleeue that he had very good aduertisement, and that he waited the oportunitie. Now he gaue order for matters behind him, to the end that no newes might be spread of his armie: but rather that they should thinke that hee had passed the mountaine, and had vppon his necke the armie of the king of China, which was betweene the mountaines & him: thus Calix thought greatly to trouble him, when

he rose in armes against him, and did thinke that he had already assaulted the wall which the king of China had made against the Tartarians. But Calix was thrust forward rather with a desire of ruling, then beginning the same with any wisedome, making too great hast: & as his enterprise was craftily cōducted, so was it cunningly discouered, and all fit remedies prepared therefore whensoeuer the same should happen. As soone then as the Prince was aduertised of the pretences of Calix thus discouered, he marched one dayes iourney forward, to the end he might approch vnto Calibes, and impart the same vnto him, & assembling all his followers & counsell together, he discoursed vnto them in this manner:Tamerlan his Oration vnto his souldiers vpon the conspiracie of Calix. I nothing doubt but that all of you wil aduise me to desist from this enterprise, considering the armies which be raised vp within the hart of that coūtrey, where you all desire I should raigne, & where with the full consent of all the chiefest seruants of the Emperour my Lord & vncle I haue bene receiued: and ought not I then helpe him to punish the rashnes of Calix, who alone hath disdained to obey me, & allow of my promotion vnto the Empire of the Tartarians? But it behooueth vs also to make prouision against this enemy which we haue before vs, who seemeth to be rather a defender then an assaulter, according to the aduertisements we haue receiued of his preparations. We must also thinke that Calix hath not attēpted this without hope of being supported by the king of China, against whom he did see that wee did arme our selues, for to require iustly that which belōgeth vnto vs. There is good cause therfore we foresee how to hinder him from entring into our kingdome, whilst I shalbe busied in reducing this bold fellow vnto his dutie. We must therefore strengthen our borders,

and leaue all my munition and prouision of victuall in this place, the armie which wee shall leaue here will spend them, we will carrie backe with vs all our artilleries and engins vnto a safe place, we will leaue vpon the borders fiue and twentie thousand Parthian horse, fortie thousand of those sent by the Emperour my Lord and Vncle, and a hundred thousand footmen vnder the charge of Calibes, of whose faithfulnesse I am most assured. I will likewise aduertise Samay to set forwards towards me with fiftie thousand horse as soone as he can, and my self with all diligence, will march forwards with the rest of my armie towards this bold fellow, & when I shall be aduanced, I will attend the counsell and commaundemen of the Emperour. His discourse was allowed of, although Calibes was desirous to accompany him, notwithstanding he thought obedience was better thē sacrifice. They which had not vnderstood of the doings of Calix, thinking this a matter of great importance, there was in the Counsell contrarie opinions; the one saying it was necessarie to assure matters at home, the other party, that it was a great enterprise to seeke to make head with an armie against the king of China, & in the meane while to haue so daungerous a Cancer within his realme, as was the reuolting of the people: but these men entred not into the most secret counsell of the Prince, who had long since foreseene the practises of Calix, hauing a great armie most readie to ioyne with him vpon the first commaundement sent vnto the same: neither did they any thing at all perceiue, that the Prince Tamerlan, how much disquieted soeuer he made shew to be, was very glad to haue occasion ministred to enter with armes into the state by him newly obtayned, so as the same might seeme iust in the eyes of the

Emperour his vncle. For by this meanes he should take possession of his gift, obtaine the good will of his souldiers, and be well assured to punish this fellow so thoroughly,The wise foresight of Tamerlan. as others which might peraduenture be tickled with the same humor would take therby example, & therefore wisely had he separated the forces of the Tartarians. For what face soeuer Calibes set on the matter, he harkened what wold become of Calix, that he might likewise make some cōmotion: there was left with him to command ouer the Parthians the Prince of Thanais, without whom he could not doe any thing, for that he led the auantgard. Thus was the army deuided in two parts; the king of China remaining long before he was aduertised of all this, and thought he had all the forces both of the Tartarians & Parthians vpon his armes, so as this was of no small importance to fauor our affaires:Good directions from Tamerlan. for Tamerlan had especially giuen commandemēt, that the passages which are easily gotten, might as diligently be kept, to the end that the king of China should not be aduertised of the tumult. Then Tamerlan set forward his auauntgard vnder the leading of Odmar: he promised vnto himselfe shortly a happie successe in his affaires, and aduertised the Emperour of all: but it came vnto him when he was sicke. And surely it was high time for Tamerlan to march forward, or else all had beene reuolted, so leauing his footemen he made great iourneyes. Now during the time that hee had bene aduertised, and made his abode to consult, which was the space of two monethes: Calix hauing presented himselfe with a hundred thousand fighting men before Cambalu, a very great citie, and chiefe of the Prouince of Catayo, the inhabitants thereof came out to meete him, and did also receiue him with all the ioy

that might be. They had sent likewise to Euinsay, whereCambalu r
                     •
                  
                  uol
                     •
                  eth vnto Calix. the Emperour was at that time, to intertaine and assure him of their obedience, and that they did rise vp onely because they would not bee subiected vnto the Parthians. They had with one cōsent also sworne not to acknowledge Tamerlan for their Emperour: but they did beseech the Emperour that they might rather receiue Calix, to the end (said they) the greatnesse of the Tartarians should not bee buried within the straite bounds of the Parthians. But as soone as they heard that Tamerlan approached, it did bring much hinderance vnto the affaires of Calix: for these confederates so lincked together, made full reckoning that his absence would be for the space of eight or tenne moneths at the least, what prosperity soeuer he were like to haue in his enterprise: but he had plotted out the businesse for them in another sort. Euen as it is often seene, that when a Schoole-master entreth on a sudden into the schoole, with a rod in his hand, when as the schollers are in disorder, busied in beating one another, or neglecting the charge giuen them by the Schoolmaster: in such and the same manner did Tamerlan come vnto the Tartarians whom Calix raised vp, being thē at Cambalu whither all the Prouinces came to gratifie him. This was bad newes for him, to heare that Tamerlan approched, one of the greatest Captaines of the world, and who was the best followed, being most worthie that not onely they and the Tartarians should acknowledge him, but also all the Nations of the world, being worthie to commaund them, because he was so vertuous. He did as much as he could to cōceale these newes, but report cannot be kept secret, it runneth vpon the house toppes, and slideth euen into the houses, & looke how

the Moone diminisheth and encreaseth, being neuerAn apt comparison of report vnto the moon
                     •
                  
                stedfast in one estate: so many people which had vnaduisedly followed him, began to assemble themselues together for to make new matches, lightly changing their opinions. You might then haue seene the peopleConfused fear
                     •
                   within the city of Cambalu. gather together in troopes within this great Citie, here a thousand, and there two thousand, not knowing whereuppon to resolue, euery one of them being afeard of the iust indignation of Tamerlan, vnto whom so lately they had sworne their obedience, & had acknowledged him for their Prince and Emperour, according to the cōmandement of his 
                  ••
               cle. They knew him to be of the bloud of so many Emperors, and that he had ruled ouer them with such great iustice, they had therefore their consciences which did accuse them as guiltie, and did see the hand alreadie lifted vp to punish their offences. This caused euery one of the people throughly to bethinke them of the follies by them cō
               mitted in opening their gates vnto this rebell, that conspired against his Prince. Now whilest our army marched towards Caindu, and from thence vnto Calatia, whither our army went easily, looking for the forces of his natiue countrey of Zachetay to come & ioyne with him: he did not yet forget to send forward dayly of our souldiers towards Cambalu, so as they supposed all our forces to be on the necke of them alreadie, which gaue great terror vnto the people: for the nature of them isThe nature of the common people. such, that often times they ground their affaires vppon prosperitie, which they hold most assured, not so much as dreaming that the euents of matters of the world be often contrarie vnto that they haue in themselues imagined. Calix perceiuing that the people did

repent, he thought best to withdrawe himselfe out of Cambalu, determining to oppose himselfe against Tamerlan, and sent for his power from all places, putting all vppon the euent and hazard of a battell. Hee had also receiued aduertisement of the small contentment the Emperour conceiued of his proceedings, and how he had sent for all his forces to march thither, that from thence they might goe and ioyne with his Nephew Tamerlan, and how he falling againe into theThe great Chā sent his imperiall ring vnto Tamerlan. extremitie of his sicknesse, had sent his imperiall ring vnto Tamerlan, had giuen commaundement that he should be obeyed euen as his owne person, both during his life, and after his death; and therefore knew well, that he must of necessitie aduenture all, seeing Tamerlan came towardes him. So hee drewe out of Cambalu full fiftie thousand men, as well Burgesses, as souldiers which were there in Garrison, hauing wonne all the Captaines which the olde Emperour had placed there in Garrison, amounting to the number of thirtie thousand men, and him that commaunded ouer them, who had consented vnto the reuolt of this great Citie. To make it short, hauing assembled all his forces, he had fourescore thousand horse, and a hundred thousand footemen, the which he had gathered together from all partes. I knowe that the sedition of Calix was such, and in such manner plotted, that he did euen prouoke the Moscouites, that at the verie same time they might inuade Zachetay. Whereunto the Moscouite as a faithfull Prince, would not in any case hearken, a thing which I haue often heard Odmar report, commending the Moscouite, and maintaining him in peace with his master, by often

remembring him many times of this good turne performed: for it is very credible, that if the Moscouite had at the very same time entred Zachetay, he had hindered the forces of this Prouince, in such sort as it should not haue beene able at all to giue aide vnto the affairesA good aduertisement for men in authoritie. of Cambalu. Behold how they which guide the sterne of the common-wealthes-barke should in time giue remedie vnto the discontentments of the mightie. For when they haue attained vnto authoritie, they doe readily trouble all things, hauing therein alwaies very seditious minds, so as they are very willing to shuffle the cardes with them: and therefore such vproares are not to be neglected, but remedied speedily. Our army then marched with all diligēce, in such sort as certain scouts which were two thousand horse, had newes of the army of Calix, the which came forwardes directly towardes vs, whereof they caused the Emperour to be certified speedily, who sent thither two thousand horses more, to the end they should keepe the passage of a riuer called Brore, by the which our victuals were conueyed vnto the armie, and also for to win alwaies time, the Prince knowing right well that the motions of ciuill wars be furious at the beginning, and that it is the best to resist them slowly, drawing them alwaies out at length if it be possible. For the people in the end acknowledging their faults, their meanes and money failing them, and oftentimes victuals also: on the contrarie side in a royall army none of all this doth happen, where all things are fauourable, and the souldiers well disciplined, obedience & order being wisely obserued. Then had the Emperour the guiding of his owne purposes, for he had receiued commaundement from the Emperour his vncle, to hazard therin all for all, deliuering

vp into his hands the safegard of his life and estate, that he might thereby end his dayes in peace, willing him likewise, to punish this arrogant fellowe and his partakers. By this meanes came forces from all parts vnto Tamerlan; but on the contrarie part, the enemies armie was then in his chiefest force, and beganne to feele the want of victuals, by reason of a desert and certaine mountains which it had passed, where there was a Lorde subiect vnto the great Cham, who after he had promised him helpe for the conducting of victuals from Cambalu vnto his armie, as soone as he perceiued him to be farre off, changed his minde, and beganne to withdraw himselfe from his side, and to make warre vppon him: setting vpon his men, hauing gathered souldiers together, which was a great discommoditie vnto him for his armie, inThe proceedings of the two armies. such sort as he must of necessity come vnto a day of battell. But Tamerlan hauing aduertisement of all his discōmodities, found the means to passe ouer foure thousand horse to ioyne with Cangi (for so was this Lord named) to giue order thereby for cutting off the cōmodities which came from Cambalu: & (as I haue said) the Emperor hauing caused the foords of Brior to be carefully searched, and occupying all the passages with his armie, he possessed twelue or fourteene leagues of rich ground and good, hauing behind him the salt lake, and before him the riuer of Ostan. And there did he watch aduantage, staying the comming of his enemies, with whom they thought to fight, at the very instant they should arriue; but they were therein deceiued, for they were kept occupied with roades and skirmishes, and the maine battell came not to the fight: so as it was two moones (or rather two monethes) before we

aduaunced towards them, in so much as necessitie constrained them to retire towardes Cambalu. The Prince thereof aduertised, passed ouer the riuer with his armie, which was found to be a hundred and fiftie thousand horse, and two hundred thousand footmen, resolued to ioyne battell, fearing least Calix would returne and winter at Cambalu, and should be driuen to fight within the same, where not doubting of the victorie, he feared yet least so great and rich a citie as that, being sacked, would bring vnto him two great discommodities. The first would be, the losse of the citie; the other, hee feared that taking such a citie by force, his armie should be consumed in the spoyle thereof, & vtterly destroyed: or that his old souldiers made too rich, would no longer follow him. After he had called his principall Captains together, who were much vexed because they fought not, in the end resolued therupon, very sory that there was no remedy but that the possession of his Empire must be bloudie. Now he had warned Calix to forbeare, and lay downe his armes, and he would pardon him, but this rash fellow (whose courage was not yet to be despised) made no accoūt of al that: for purposing to commaund, hee could not resolue to obey, which did inuite him vnto a short life with happinesse, rather then vnto a long life honorlesse, euen as they which vndertake such follies must needes resolue. For it is very hard that the Prince his Lord shold assure himself therin, as lōg as he doth liue, so ticklish is this desire of raigning without a cōpanion. So our army went vnto Chincy, and made seuen leagues; the enemie hauing knowledge of our passage, turned his face, and they say thatThe speech of Calix vnto his companions. 
               Calix turned himselfe vnto three or foure of his companions, lifting his hands vnto heauen and said vnto

them that neuer in his life had he receiued more acceptable newes. The Parthians (said he) haue at this very instant passed ouer the riuer, and come towards vs, and if Tamerlan, who bargained so much, will fight at this present, I cannot receiue a greater good turne. For (said he) whatsoeuer shall become of me, it cannot but bring vnto me an immortall glorie; for if I conquer him, who is he in Asia that may be cōpared vnto me? the Empires of the Tartarians & of Sachetay shalbe mine: for I fight against the forces of these two great estates, the which I haue separated thorough my practises: my power consisteth of these two peoples: if I be ouercome, my glorie shall be very great, in that I durst, and vnto this present time we haue gotten this glorie, that the valour & courage of Sachetay was two moneths shut vp betwene the riuers of Brior and Ostan for the terror of our armes: therefore the victory which he shall gaine of vs, shalbe vnto vs alwaies glorious. Thus discoursing I haue heard (sayd he) did shew a great stoutnesse of courage. He aduaunced his armie forward, so as the auantcourers of the two armies encountred ech other, and our men were driuen euen into our Camp, a thing which greatly displeased Odmar, who was in the auauntguard, for the Emperor was very sory that he had not made them stronger when they came neere vnto the enemie, but the excuse was, that they did not imagin the rashnesse of Calix to be so great as to set forwards three leagues. The next day was spent in discoursing of battailes, euery one for his part, and to exhort the Captaines & souldiers, to deuide the gouernementes vnto Captaines, with the rankes and ordinances. Calix was of the age of forty, he was a Captain renowned with the great Cham, he was one of the chiefest in dignitie and place, and

they had alwayes respected him within Tartarie as a person most worthy of the Empire, if the glorie of Tamerlan and his reputation had not so far excelled. The Armies began to be viewed the one of the other about eight of the clocke in the morning, where there were very many skirmishes before they came vnto the main battaile (according to the fights of these nations) it was a great plaine wherein they met at that time, with like aduantage on either part; Odmar led the AuauntguardThe order of Tamerlans army ranged against Calix. (as I haue already said) wherin there was forty thousand horse, & three-score thousand footmen; he made three squadrons, wherof he set forward one before him that began the battaile. Tamerlan marched in the same order, but his squadrons were much stronger, the footmen both of the Auauntgard and of the Battaile were on the right and left wings. Tamerlan had drawne out sixe thousand Parthian horse and two thousand Tartarian for the Arier-ward, & had committed the charge therof vnto a faithful seruant of his called Axalla (a Geneuois borne) who had great credit with him, because he had bene brought vp with him in his youth, and had good triall of his faithfulnesse, valour, and industrie; hauing giuen him in charge not to fight at all but vpon the extremitie; and also to gather together all that should be scattered from the Armie. Axalla was a man of great iudgment, his vnderstanding being good and quicke, and a Captaine in great estimation amongst the soldiers, although he worshipped God in another maner then we did, and was also a Christian. And he had many of them with him, whom he caused to come frō the Georgians and from Pont Euxin, who fought with great agilitie; this day did he shewe his great fidelitie and courage vnto his Prince. Calix on the other side,

who was a well spoken man, was encouraging his soldiers to fauour his fortune, and the libertie of his nation:The order of Calix battaile against T
                     •
                  
                  m
                     •
                  rlan. hee had deuided his troupes into three maine battailes onely, his footmen vpon the right hand, his owne person was in the middest of the maine battaile, with manie footmen which compassed him round about (according as we vse to fight.) Now Odmar that was a politicke warrier, stayed their comming without remouing: his first squadron rushed furiously vpon this great multitude, that on the right side, wherin was his owne person, & the other on the left side gaue a great push, broke all the order of Calix armie, in such sort, as it was constrained to ioine all together, which was a great multitude: at this verie time the Prince charged, which ouerthrew all. You might haue seen in an instāt amōgst these great companies thus opened, some follow, some flie, some kill, taking of horses, and men tumblingThe battaile between Tamerlan and Calix within the countrie of Cataio. ouer and ouer; they held the victorie sure on our side, when as, behold, a maine force did come vpon vs, conducted by Calix, who had gathered them together, and they were between fifteene and sixteene thousand horse, which came & set vpon the Princes maine battaile on the flank, and pierced the same, and ouerthrew them in a maner all. Now you must vnderstand, that those on Calix part retired at the verie first charge euē vnto their carriages, and our men had followed the victorie too hotlie, making great slaughter, in somuch as they charging againe, and finding our forces broken, he did easily shake our Armie, and gaue vs a great checke, so throughly, that wee were vpon the point to lose the battaile. The Prince Tamerlan was throwne to the ground; in the meane while his maine BattaileTamerlan throwne to the ground. retired, continually fighting according to our maner.

The Prince was not long in mounting againe on horsbacke, looking continually on his Arier-guard, which had not the meanes to ioine with him; and earnestly viewing the countenance of the same. Nowe our footmen at such time as hee went to giue the charge, was open, and after shut againe, and had not bene as yet set vpon by anie, they had bene onely breathed vpon at the charges which had bene giuen; Axalla ioyning with it his troupes reserued for the Arier-ward. During this space Calix did hotlie pursue the troupe ofCalix enioyed the victory one houre. 
               Tamerlan, who retired, skirmishing continually with his souldiers, being almost all Parthians. The enemies maine battaile did greatly diminish, for his souldiers went a spoyling here and there within the campe of the Battaile, and they could not discerne by reason of the great dust, the Arier-ward which followed in good order after, killing and ouerthrowing all that vvere opposed against them. When as (behold) at the same instant there came a crie euen vnto Calix, with Turne, turne: there being a thousand or twelue hundred horse which Axalla had seuered from the rest, who hauing already aduanced themselues brauely, were come to handigripes with Calix, hauing receiued commandement to mingle amongst them, for to redeeme the Princes maine Battaile, which was pursued by them. Then did Calix in returning perceiue, that both his Empire and glorie, together with the good fortune which he one houre had fully inioyed, were for euer vtterly lost, & then began he to repent himselfe of his follie: & after he had commanded a charge to be giuen for the repelling of the auant-currers, hee staid, vniting his men, for he had as yet 11000. horse: but he could not descrie whether those which were with Axalla shold be

footmen or horse: for they all appeared vnto him horsmen, a thing which did greatly amaze him. On the other side he did perceiue that at the same instant he left pursuing the Emperours maine battaile, in that very time it had gotten a loofe off, ioyning together such of the men as had bene scattred from the same; attending the successe of this charge, that hee might beginne his fight againe, notwithstanding he being bold and braue had his recourse vnto extremitie by his armes, and hauing nothing in his face but boldnesse, he exhorted his men to fight valiantly with him, and pursue the goodCalix exhortation vnto his men. fortune which the great God had put into his handes this day: that these were scattered men which sought to ioyne with their fellowes, and it was necessary to hinder them from that. In this meane time his Army did stronglie ioyne itselfe together, the which Axalla well considering, thought that the good fortune of two great Emperours was this day in his power, and vnder his conduct, and that his life or death could not but prooue most glorious, being for the safetie of his good master, who had put in him so great confidence; he encouraged his souldiers valiantlie, commanding the first charge to be giuen, and brauely assisting his men, hee charged so strongly, that he passed cleane through the squadron of Calix, who was hurt in his mouth with the blow of a Lance, after had performed the dutie both of a souldier and Captaine. In the end, valiantly fighting,Calix t
                     ••
                  en prisoner by Axalla. he fell into Axallas owne handes, the which with one voice he proclaimed through all his campe, the which ouerthrew the courage of all his souldiers. Prince Tamerlan
               Tamerlan his great victory against Calix. also set vpon the flanke of one of those troupes broken already by Axalla; and so was the victorie entire. There were slaine of the one side and of the other,

more then fiftie thousand men. It cost our EmperourFifty thousand men slaine in the battail bebetweene Tamerlan & Calix. deare, who said that he neuer fought with greater danger of being ouercome. He honoured greatly Axalla for his good endeuour and wise conduct, who brought vnto him Calix sore hurt in the mouth with the blow of a Lance, and another blow of an arrow in the body. He spake vnto him, but the other being fierce and bold, answered him nothing at all, making a signe that his mouth did hinder him; he was kept vntill the next day,Calix beheaded. and was iudged by all the Counsell worthie of punishmen: whereupon he caused his head to be smitten off, the which he sent to be presented vnto the inhabitants of Cambalu: he caused the like to be done vnto all the chiefe leaders, not for crueltie, but for necessitie, knowing very wel, that the means to cut off the foot of ciuil warres, is to punish the heades of the same, for they be Hydras which grow vp but too fast. After this the ArmieA description of Cataio. marched into the kingdome of Cataio, a countrie rich in grasse, and in all kinds of pastures, abounding with great quantitie of beasts, and people which knew not what warre meant. The Prince gaue commandement that these people should not be accounted as enemies, but his good subiects, that he would vse all the cities well, as Cangi, Sochgi, Gonzae, Tagni, Togara, Congu, which had reuolted, and were come to sue for pardon at his handes, in humbling themselues before him; the which he granted vnto them, enioyning them only to prouide sufficient victuals for his armie: and neuer to be so ill aduised as to harken vnto those, who for their particular ambition would withdraw them from the obedience due vnto their true and naturall Prince and Emperour. Now this mercifulnesse was presentlie spread abroad, which was of no small importance for

the appeasing of others who had put all their hope in extremitie, which is in losing their owne liues to make others doe the like: & especially the inhabitāts of Cambalu had taken this resolution: but being informed of the Emperours clemency, changed their opinions; notwithstanding some of them which were the most sedicious, who thought they should run the same fortune with their leaders, were in despaire, doing as much as in them lay, to draw with them the destruction of their citie, the which this mildnesse had appeased, and changed into hope of the Princes clemency. In the meane while our army daily aproched, and at such time as we came neerest, the more did the feare of all the citie increase, in somuch as the Prince was aduertised daylie from those which fauoured his side, of all things within the citie, and he was assured that euerie one determined to obey the Conquerour, and to do whatsoeuer he commanded. The which being knowne vnto the Prince, he left all his armie at Gonsa, and himself went directly vnto the citie of Cambalu, where all thingesThe ordinary garrison at Cambalu of 30000. souldiers. were made quiet, by the means of thirtie thousand soldiers, being the ordinarie garrison, whom he caused to enter therinto before him, and two houres after entred into the same himself, being receiued with great magnificence, not yeelding as yet to pronounce the word of pardon, referring all vnto the Emperour, and to the ordinarie course of iustice. Willingly saying that hee pardoned the common people; shewing himself sundrie times openly gentle and curteous, honoring them greatly amongst others of the citie, which had taken his part. Now he stayed for the returne of one of his fauorites, whom he had sent vnto the Emperour, to carrie him newes of the victorie, and of the death of

               Calix, and that the chiefe of this faction remained prisoners with him; also to know what iustice the Emperour would appoint to be inflicted on those Citizens which were the first beginners of the reuolt of this citie: for the Prince being desirous to be esteemed mercifull, and to win loue within this great citie, would not execute iustice of himselfe, nor in his owne name, but by the Emperor his vnkle, whom he did gratifie herein, leauing the authority wholly vnto himselfe, and by this meanes he was not not esteemed cruell. Thus the Prince after he had remayned here eight dayes, departed. He was not many dayes iourney from the citie before he receiued tydings how the great Cham his vnkle willed that iustice should be executed on them which were the first moouers of this reuolt; the which was executed accordinglie in the name of the Emperour, and by his speciall ministers; in such sort, that as the people accused the cruelty of the Emperor, they commended the mercie of Tamerlan. Nowe the Emperour was better in health then he had bene, and greatlie desired to see the Prince, who referred the resolution of this, whether he should goe vnto him, vntill hee came vnto his Armie, desirous to heare newes thereof, remaining vpon the frontiers of China. In this sort went hee away, separating himselfe as much as hee could from the execution which was in doing at Cambalu, where some two hundred BurgessesA terrible execution. were put to death, for an example vnto the rest, their heades being set vp in the middest of the market place, in signe of a terror vnto thē which should hereafter rebell against their Prince. Thus was this vvarre brought vnto an end, to the great honour and reputation of Tamerlan. And it is also reported for most

certain, that if he had not stopped the way of this mischiefe, he had vtterly lost this estate, the conspiracie being in a maner generall: but the diligence he vsed in opposing himself against it, caused many to lose their courages. Therefore in such reuoltes it is a speciall point, for a Prince to shewe himselfe, to enter into the field, and passe through his Prouinces, to encourage his owne, and giue terrour vnto others. For the sedicious doe often declare lies vnto the people, the which the presence of the Prince doth dispearse, euen as theA go
                     •
                  d aduertisment for Princes. cleare Sunne doth a darke cloud, and aboue all to shew that they feare not those which conspire, making but small reckening of the same. For it is said, that he which first beateth the fields, hath best company with him; he must not thinke that without weapons in his hand, and not being on horsebacke, the matter may be remedied with words and admonitions. A thing plotted by a sedicious person, is continually attempted, or but deferred, but in the end it breaketh out; and therfore a wiseA good aduertisment vnto P
                     •
                  inces. and aduised Prince should disperse it speedily by the means of iustice: for such spirits are neuer pacified, but by the terrour of death, and of those which are guilty, the which must be prosecuted as soone as it is discouered, and looked vnto at the first rumour therof, hauing good espials in euery place, and prouiding so well on euerie side, that as soone as the same shall happen, hee may be on the necke of the sedicious. You see howe wisely our Prince made vse hereof, for it is not to bee doubted, but he had discouered the conspiracie long afore the execution of the same. This was the occasion that he kept his forces in readinesse within the country of Sachetay, and marched himself forward to minister occasion vnto others, to discouer vnto him their euil

affections, by this means to make the goodnesse of his cause appeare manifestlie vnto all the world. A matter of no small importanc
                  •
                to preserue himselfe, and the peoples affections, when they are once seasoned therwith: so as it is the best to make them assailers, if it be possible, and bring to passe that their assailing may be their vtter vndoing. Therefore is it necessarie, if possible to be (though halfe) on horsebacke, as soone as anie shall be discouered to haue a stirring humour and to trouble good order. This must be done, for wordes doe nothing at all satisfie them: you must of necessitie come vnto blowes, for they be ordinarilie rash fellowes, whose eyes ambition blindeth, or else if they be wise (who see great likelihood at such time as they enterprise it) their attempts haue often good successe, when they haue to doe with negligent and carelesse Princes, or effeminate, or of small courage, who giue themselues too much vnto delicacies, and spend their time in pleasure, whereas they ought to haue a watchfull eie to looke to the preseruation of all within their kingdome, & their hand ready to repulse iniuries comming from without. You see how well our Prince vseth his mildnesse, care, and watchfulnesse: before this hee was but halfe Emperour of the Tartarians, but hereby assured himself therof with good dexteritie, & die the Emperour neuer so soone, there is no shew that there can happen anie moment of trouble: for he is there reuerencedTamerlan his mildnesse won the loue and reuerence of all for his great mildnesse and clemencie, for rewarding of the good, & bearing somtimes with a fault (if there be any) and for hauing moreouer a stiffe hand to punish the wicked and sedicious. Nowe to come againe vnto our discourse: as soone as our Prince was returned vnto his Army where he found Odmar, who

there attended his comming, the which caused all the Armie to march forward and meet him, where hee was receiued of his souldiers, and with a loud voice called by all his Captaines and souldiers; Most greatTamerlan welcommed vnto his army, with new and strange acclamations. Emperour and most victorious, as they are accustostomed to doe amongst the Tartarians. The Prince after he had long discoursed with his Captaines both of the beauty and greatnesse of the citie of Cambalu, hee arriued at his tent, where after hee had declared vnto Odmar in what sort all things had passed at Cambalu: he asked his aduise whether hee should goe and visite the Emperour his vnkle. Odmar who well perceiued that the Prince desired it, and called vnto his remembrance the honor which he had receiued when he was at Quinzai, and that he would haue bene very willing to spend the winter with the Empresse, staying for the spring for to returne vnto the enterprise of China. But Odmar which was no flatterer, and who was a great Counseller of estate, and faithfull vnto our Emperour Tamerlan, spake vnto him in this manner: InuincibleOdmar his wise speech as answer vnto Tamerlan his question touching the visiting of his vn
                  
                     •
                  le. Emperour, so do I beseech you, as may be found in you both valor to conquer, and wisdome to vse the victory: you haue left your Army, the which for the space of six moneths hath bene busied in opposing it selfe against the forces of your enemies; he whom you haue left is a Tartarian, one of the chiefest of this nation; do you not know that the Tartarian and also the Parthian, doe in a manner acknowledge none for Prince worthie to command them, but those that go with them vnto the warres? On the other side, doe you nothing consider, that you haue enterprised this warre to augment the glorie of him who hath chosen and called you? Know

you not, that the king of China holdeth a great countrie which hee hath giuen you? It behooueth that you manifest vnto him the affection of your seruice. Consider also that your glorie and greatnesse will bee more acceptable vnto him farre off then neere at hand. For being farre off, it shineth vnto him for the fauoring of his affaires, but neere, it maketh his owne obscure. Do you not consider the suspitions hee may conceiue of your greatnesse? the repentings which often come to them which haue made men great, whom they desire afterwards to ouerthrowe: for Princes be variable? What glorie can you obtaine by this iourneying? Necessitie constraineth you not thereunto, but your reputation will be whollie diminished thereby, and the way of your glorie is altogether contrarie vnto the same. It is better for you to winter gloriously vnder your tentes in the middest of your men of armes then within the statelie pallaces of Quinzai, in the middest of the sweetnesse of an effeminate Court. They which would finde fault with you will demaund the cause wherefore you left your Armie; they will say that you threaten the king of China a farre off: it is to be feared also least hee should oppresse your men, from whence will you returne to resist the same, while you bring together againe your men of Armes? The Parthians would as your selfe returne vnto Sachetay, and the Tartarians vnto their Horda, but if you march forward, you shall prepare vnto your selfe an assured victorie of the king of China, and if you doe deferre it, it shall prooue dangerous vnto you, whereas it is now most assured, in as much as he thinketh your Armie busied within your owne country,

your forces empaired, the faith of your peopled changed, and all your Empire reuolted. He seeth your Armie led by Calibes to temporize, and being but as it were to defend it selfe, and not to assault any other, he supposeth that all your determinatiōs are ouerthrown. Some may thus say vnto him (as some haue suspected, and it is not without reason, but I will not affirme it, being vnwilling to enter any further into your wise enterprises, the which God onely knoweth, who guideth you) that you haue rather left Calibes there the chiefe of the Tartarians, to deliuer your selfe from the suspition you had of him, then for any further desire you had to accomplish your enterprise. Lose not this occasiō, the great God deliuereth her into your hands, you hold her by the haires, suffer her not to slip frō you. If I haue offended your Maiesty with my bold speech, do with me what it shal please you, I am your slaue, lo here my head. The Prince Tamerlan was very sad, and changed his countenance continuallie, when as Odmar
               The great humilitie of the Tartarians vnto their Emperour. spake once againe vnto him, kissing the hem of his garment in all humilitie, as wee are accustomed vnto our Emperours in signe of subiection and bondage. Then the Emperour answered him, that he had euerThe notable answer of the Emperor vnto Odmar. knowne his fidelitie and loue, and that the cause of his sadnesse was, for that he did not find in himselfe abilitie to recompence the same: and that hee aknowledged now in earnest the wisdome of the Emperour his father, in making choise of so worthy a Counseller to assist him, and that hee certainly learned to know, that the greatest seruitude which Princes haue vvith God, was that there was no end of their glorie, seeing their continual doing was their rest, as in the Diuinity; and that when he thought to giue himselfe some ease,

then was the time he must in steed of the delicacies and pleasures of Quinzay, make the desertes of Cipribit the resting place from the trauailes of his newe victorie: that it was ended, and his purposes determined: I haue also heard the Prince say, that Odmar did not speake vnto him like an earthly but diuine man, & that he verilie beleeued that God by his meanes did call him backe from some mishap which would haue light vpon him, to make his glorie increase the more. Now the rumour was already spread ouer all, that the Princes determination was to go and visite the Emperour his vnkle, the which tickled euery man with desire to returne into his countrie, hoping to inioy the sweetnesse of his natiue soyle. When as commandement was giuen for a generall reuiew of the whole armie: where the Emperor spake vnto his soldiers in this maner: We haue begun (my faithfull souldiers) an enterpriseTamerlan his oration vnto his soldiers vpō his going forward against the king of China. to go and assault the king of China, who hath of late repulsed euen beyond the mountaines the Tartarian name; but we were hindered to our great griefe by the foolish rashnesse of Calix, and were driuen to turne the bridle for to punish him, wherein you haue all assisted me. It grieueth me that I cannot as well brag of the fresh spoyles of a stranger, as I may vaunt (by the meanes of your weapons) of those our vnfaithfull Citizens; and in times past with your owne selues making triall of my first Armes against the boldnesse of the fierce Moscouite, although for this last ciuill victorie I am further indebted vnto you, for your greater endeuour, and the hazarding of your persons being much greater, so were they our owne people, who would not acknowledge vs, whereof I cannot speake without shedding of teares, desiring

rather to burie such a victorie, what glorie and honour soeuer we haue gotton thereby. Neither do I recount these thinges vnto you, but for to manifest that I forget not your faithfulnesse, and the great trauaile you haue endured with me. We must not therfore be wearie, but must turne our weapons against those which thinke that we ate greatly troubled, whereas wee are victorious. We haue left our companions, who haue temporized to heare the euent and successe of our affaires, all our munitions be there; wee must in that place (my souldiers and friendly followers) passe ouer the rest of winter; our cōpanions look for vs. The enemie is secure and looketh not for vs at this season of the yeare: for he perceiueth that our Armie which is there is not sufficient for offence, but only for defence. You shall receiue double pay, the better to furnish you against the iniurie of cold: and as we shall be cloathed with double garmēts, I hope we shal be also apparelled with double glorie. Let vs march on merrily, I my self will go with you, and be companion of your glorie. After he had thus spoken vnto his souldiers, they all cried; One God in heauen, and one Emperour on theThe crie of the souldiers vpon the Emperours oration. earth: and bowing downe al their heads in token of humilitie, they shewed how agreeable they were to obey that which he commanded. Thus euerie one returned into his tent, where they abode yet eight dayes more. The Prince sent back again Zamai vnto Sachetay with some fiue and twenty thousand horse and fiftie thousand footmen, for the saftie of his estate in those parts. Thus after prayers were sayd, all the Armie being assembled together in the presence of the Prince (according to the custome of our Emperours) our Armie began to march forward. He forgat not likewise

to dispatch one vnto the Emperour his vnkle, to giue him vnderstanding of all this resolution, the which he verie well liked of. The Prince by the same messenger did beseech him to send vnto him in the spring of the yeare some fiftie thousand men to repaire his Armie, and certaine money also for the payment of his men of warre: which he graunted him. Moreouer the conducting of good store of warlike munition, & plentie of victuals for to renew ours: for this war was principally enterprised for the profit and greatnesse of the Tartarians, & for the importance which the losse of the Lordships of Paguin & Quifu was vnto them, wherby the king of China had greatly strēgthened and assured his estate, in so much as he might at his pleasure enter vpon the Tartarians, and the Tartarians could not enterprise against him without great forces, for that hee had caused a wall to be made between the spaces of theA wall builded by the king of China forty leagues long. mountains, which was fortie leagues long, so as they were defended hereby frō the ordinary incursions, the which continually did greatly enrich thē, because they brought much cattel through the same, wherin the cū
               try of China doth greatly abound, by reason it is situated in a temperate aire, being neither too hot nor cold.The temperature of China. This was the cause that made the Emperour his vnkle to desire this warre; whom our Prince according to his duty would to the vttermost of his power gratifie, as also his new subiects. So we began to march, and in eight & thirty dayes we arriued at Cipribit, the Army hauing found great discōmodities: there had we newes of Clibes, who was very glad to vnderstand how the affayrs had passed: he came to visite the Prince, who shewed vnto him a very good countenance, and gaue him particular vnderstanding of his determination, and

vnderstood at large of Calibes, al that had passed within the kingdom of China. The next day the Prince mounted on horsebacke, and came vnto Pazanfou, where the forces commaunded by Calibes were at that present, the which had often fought with and tried the forces of the Chinois: but found thē much inferiour vnto their owne. The Emperour caused a generall reuiewe to bee made of all the forces which were vnder Calibes, and after hee beheld the countenances of these soldiers throughout all their ranks, he caused thē to muster, & to receiue money, euery one crying, God saue the victorious & inuincible Emperour, according to their custome. I had forgotten to declare vnto you how the Prince of Thanais, who was left to command ouer the Parthian nation by the Prince, at such time as Calibes went to meet him, was left in the army to commād it, where being desirous to shew his courage, had made warre, and meeting with foure thousand horse of China, led by the king of China his brother, he so allured thē to him, that hauing entrapped thē, he fought with and ouerthew them, bringing a great number ofThe Prince of Thanais ouerthrew a troupe of horsmen, led by the king of Chinas brother horse and spoiles away and there remained dead vpon the ground fiue or sixe hundred, the enemies being retired in disorder, if the night had not bene hee had obtained a most notable victorie. He had for this good fortune much honour at the arriuall of his Prince, and he had also daylie greatlie wearied the Chinois with ordinarie incursions: hee was sonne vnto one of the Princes sisters, & they greatlie honored him, as wel for his vertues, as the place frō whēce he was descēded. He was as yet but young, his father being dead old, who had worthily serued the Prince (as you haue heard) against the Moscouites, commaunding ouer the arereward,

who was notwithstanding a most sufficient & politick Captaine. Now he was desirous of glorie during the abode which he had made, being the formost on the enemies fide, and with great diligence had marked the wall and the places by the which he might enter by force, and sent many spies into the countrey of China, by certain litle wayes that were within the mountains, who aduertised him of all. He had also gained through his courtesie a Lord of the same mountaines (called theThe Prince of Thanais gaineth a Lord of the m
                     •
                  untains to doe the Emperour seruice. Vauchefu. Lord of Vauchefu) who ruled a great Countrey, with whom he had so well profited, that he made him desirous of a new master, and to submit himselfe vnto the Emperour, receiuing daily great discommodity by the warres which the Tartarians and Chinois made: so as he comming to visite the Prince of Thanais▪ he assured him of his desire to doe the Prince seruice, and to helpe him in the warre against the Chinois, the which the Prince of Thanais had wisely cōcealed frō 
               Calibes. But as soone as the Prince was arriued, hee imparted the same vnto him, the which made Tamerlan desirous to haue some speech with him, so that as soone as the Prince had receiued commandement from the Emperour, hee sent vnto Vauchefu to aduertise him of the Princes arriuall, and of the commaundement which he had receiued: whereof the other was very glad, and hauing appointed a day, the Prince tooke his iourney (without stirring of the army) into the campe of the Prince of Thanais, which was neere vnto the riuer of Languenne, whither he had caused this foresaid Lord to come, who met him there. The Prince hauing spokenConference between the Emperour and the Lord of V
                     •
                  
                  ch
                     •
                  fu. with him by his interpreters, hee assured him of much friendship, and the said Lord him of great fidelitie and seruice, and after many promises made by the

Prince vnto him for his greatnesse and quiet, he discouered vnto him a passage, by the which hee assured him of entrance into the kingdom of China, & with facility to set vpō the forces of the king of China, which were appointed for safegard of the wall, the which as I haue said, contained fortie leagues; a matter which gaue cause of good aduisement vnto the Prince: for Calibes who was an old Captaine, found it a matter of great difficultie to go through this passage by force, according to the view he had taken thereof, and had caused the same to be reuiewed by others. For it was carefully kept by the kings forces, who was not wearie to be mounted on horsebacke, assuring himselfe that fiftie thousand men the which he had placed for the guarde of the wall, were sufficient to stoppe all that would enterprise to force the same. So this Lord (much made of and gayned thorough the good countenance of the Prince) was a great furtherance vnto the good successe of this enterprise. Then the Prince after he had heaped vpon him gifts of faire horses, rich furres, and other rare things, he willed him to vtter that which he had to say vnto him. This Lord spake then in this manner: Know my Lord, that it is but losse of time to thinkeThe speech of the mountaine Lord vnto Tamerlan. that with your armes you shold be able to force the wall which the Chinois haue built against the incursions of your subiects, the defendants haue too much aduantage therein. I doubt not of your souldiers stoutnesse & of their courage, I know you haue cōquered many Nations with them, and that whatsoeuer you commaund thē, they will die or do the same. I know you haue great and wise Captaines with you, that your person is only of all the world worthie to commaund them: but all this will be but in vaine against the wall of the Chinois,

where I assure you there are fifty thousand men to keep it, and you cannot stay there so short a time, but there will come thither fiftie thousand more, led by the Xianxi who hath such a commaundement. The king of China will himselfe march forward also, who will giue you battell with two hundred thousand horse and as many footemen. After you haue fought, I beleeue that the fortune and valour of your men may obtaine the victorie, the which will cost you deare: but for to shew vnto you how much the reputation and mildnesse of your men hath bound me vnto them, I will shew you a meanes by the which you may cause fiftie thousand men to enter into the kingdome of China, whom I my selfe will conduct; and they shall be on them which keepe the wall, in a manner as soone as they shall perceiue it. In the meane time you shall cause your men to go vnto a place that I will tell you, which will be very discommodious vnto the Chinois, by reason of a mountaine ouer against them, which you must cause them to win: for I assure my selfe, that when they shall perceiue your souldiers to be passed, they will loose their courage, and you may easily win the passage for to fauour those men of yours which shall be passed ouer with me. And for to shew vnto you the affection & fidelitie of that I speake, I will deliuer into your handsHostages offered by the mountaine Lord vnto the Emperour. an only sonne I haue, and two little daughters with my wife: I haue also one brother, who I am assured will follow me to do you seruice. The Prince hauing heard this Lord speake, receiued great ioy thereof, hoping that his affaires should happily succeede, and this he kept very secret, for euen the Prince of Thanais knew not the meanes that this Lord had; seeing there was onely present the Prince & an interpreter, and the Prince after he

had thus spoken vnto him, gratifying him with all hee could possibly, this Lord retyred himselfe, accompanied with the Prince of Thanais, who conducted him backe againe with all the honour that might be. So the Emperour returned from thence into his quarter, and the next day after he had imparted the whole vnto Odmar, and heard Calibes concerning that which he had learned of the departing of the king of China, and of his preparation, which was great. This enterprise seeming hard vnto him, after due reuerence yeelded vnto the Prince, he spake vnto him in this manner: Know myCalibes oration vnto Prince Tamerlan. Lord, that I am your slaue for to obey you: but seeing you require me to giue you an accoūt of all that I know of the estate of the kingdome of China, for that I haue remained these sixe moneths vpon the borders by your cōmandement, to hinder them from passing the same, wherby they might hurt your enterprises, I can affirme vnto you that the king of China, who raigneth at this present is of great reputation, and hath increased the limits of his kingdome more then any of his predecessors, he is proud and bold, he causeth himselfe to be named of his people, Lord of the world. All his strength consisteth in this wall opposed against vs, the which he hath caused to bee made by reason of the ordinarie roades of our Nation. I am of opinion that there be between fiftie and threescore thousand men at the guard of that wall, men for the most part trained vp in the garrisons of the king of China, and his best souldiers, & I know no good means to force this wall without great hazard and much losse of your men. I haue vnderstood that towards the lake Hogeen you may find more easie entrance into the kingdome: but this will be 7. or eight daies iourney for your army, and there are many straite

places, where your army (which is great) will be long time a passing: on the other side, this will be a space of time wherein the king of China may giue order for his affaires, who supposeth that hee hath not to deale but with me, whom you haue left with cōmandement only of defence. Yet I thinke this to be most for your aduantage, for that victuals will be more easily conducted vnto your armie: you know that this is the principall sinew to bring forth a strong and furious combat. Therfore vnder correction of your graue and more wise aduise, this is as much as I know hereof, leauing vnto your selfe for to discourse of the inner parts of the countrey, whē we shall haue set foot thereinto, we will talke with you of the same. The Prince hard him very attentiuely, but he knew not at all that which the Prince had further learned, insomuch as the Prince, who would that his reputation and glorie should be attributed vnto his valour, and vnto those of his army, what practise soeuer he had in hand, and after euerie one had declared his opinion, he saied; that he hoped the great God the vnitie of whom he would maintaine against such idolaters, and his iust right should answere the reasons which do cōtradict his purpose, and the valiant arme of his souldiers shall quite ouerthrow whatsoeuer opposeth it self against the same. Behold how Princes make themselues wondered at for their forces, whereas oftentimes they vse more the Foxes craft, then the Lions strength. Our Prince would wisely attribute vnto himselfe the reputation of ouercomming by open warre, and concealed from his souldiers that which he held as assured to execute it, to the end the honour of a happie conducting might be ascribed vnto him onely. Now our Prince hauing satisfied euery one of the Kings and Lords that did

accompanie him, he appointed the meeting place for his armie to be at a certaine place, where he meant to chuse fiftie thousand fighting men, and deliuer them vnto the commandement of the Prince of Thanais, vnto whom he ioyned the Lord Axalla a Geneuois (for that he knew him to be discreete) for to accompanie him, commaunding him to giue credite vnto him, for his experience and fidelitie. The day appointed being come, the Lord with his brother came to the Emperor, hauing viewed the place againe, & found it to be forceable & fit to passe, assuring the Prince once again of the happy successe of their enterprise, & the Prince being assembled with them to conferre together, resolued in the end, that his person with al the army shold approch vnto the walles directly ouer against Quaguifou, inFiftie thousand men sent into China by a secret passage, vnder the leading of the Prince of Thnais and Axalla. which meane space the 50000. men should march forwards vnto the place appointed, and where they were assured to passe, conducted by the Chinois Lord, vnder the charge of the Prince of Thanais & Axalla Geneuois. The Emperor hauing not failed to deliuer vnto thē the best souldiers of his armie, & hauing set downe the order by them to be obserued, hee willed that the Lord Axalla should leade twentie thousand of them, & shold march the first, the rest led by the Prince of Thanais, and that euery one should haue one of those Lords to guide them, that by their meanes the enterprise might be more safely directed. So hauing marched x. leagues, they arriued at the passage, the which was won not finding any man there to resist them: and hauing taken aA secret way found into China, by the conduct of the mountaine Lord. light repast, they beganne to march forward other ten leagues which yet remained, where the Chinois were, who suspected no such thing, hauing only an eye vnto them which marched for to force their walles, assuring

thēselues to haue the maistry, considering their aduantage. But it fell out much otherwise, for euen at the very same time the Chinois did perceiue the Princes armie to approch vnto their wall, as soone did they dis
                  •
               ry Axalla with twenty thousand men, who aduanced forward being followed by the Prince of Thanais with thirtie thousand souldiers chosen out of the whole army, who without any cōmunicacion set vpon the Chinois, who came presently vnto thē, hauing left a certaine number of their campe for the guard of the wall: but they were presently won by the footemen led this day by Odmar, who passed ouer so as the Chinois were cut off betweenAxalla ouerthrew the Chinois that kept the wall of partition. our armies. When Axalla beganne the battell he ouerthrew them in a manner all, the Prince of Thanais not hazarding himselfe therin: there was great riches gotten this day, the king of China his cosin (whom he called king) was taken prisoner: there was a great quantity of gold amongst thē, as well on their armes as on their horse and furniture: they shewed no great stoutnesse. The newes hereof being come vnto the king of China, who at that present time was at Quantiou, brought vnto him great astonishment, for that he iudged it a thing that could not possibly come to passe, you might haue seene euery one filled with fright, teares & cries, bewailing the losse of their friends. The king although he had not beene vsed but to see Fortune alwaies friendly with a mild countenance, & now to see her turned backward with her haire brisseling, he made thereof notwithstanding no great shew, but gathering together souldiers from all partes (as the custome is of these people)The custome of the Chinois. he caused all the Priestes and such as had the charge of holie thinges to come vnto him, and after exhortations vsed, he (as their head) commaunded them to

offer sacrifice vnto their Gods, of whom the Sunne is the principall commaunding in heauen, whom they hold opinion to be the chiefest cause of their being, accounting it immortall and impassible, mouing it selfe onely for the benefit of liuing creatures, this did he cō
               maund to be obserued thorough out all his Cities; and the second thing was, that euery one able to beare armes should mount on horsebacke, and come vnto the king at Paguinfou, whither he doubted that we would go, because it was one of the neerest townes vpon the borders. I haue forgotten to declare that this Lord who had the charge to conduct fiftie thousand men vnto the frōtiers at such time as they which were there had need thereof, was soone in a readinesse, and came to oppose himselfe against the Princes armie which entred, and beeing skilfull in the wayes of the countrey, troubledThe Emperour wonne the wals of China. much the armie: for a great number of his men were on horsebacke. The Prince determined to beate downe all the wals the better to assure his returne, as also all the fortresses which were there vpon all the passages, all of them hauing yeelded thēselues after his victorie, shewing himselfe very courteous vnto the people of these mountaines, he gaue vnto this Lord a small portion ofThe mountain Lord rewarded with great gouernement. land, wherein there be seuen or eight good townes, Archij, Ymulij, Faliquien, Fulij, Cohensen, Quialij, Pulij, Quianlu, who came and deliuered vp their keyes vnto him, being neighbours vnto this Lord, and gaue him the gouernment of the frontier prouince of Xianxij, shewing himselfe to be a Prince of his word, and acknowledging the notable seruices the which this Lord had done him. He referred the honouring of his brother vntill he had meanes to doe the same: all which mildenesse was of no small importance to fauour the

conquest of this countrie: for the people thereof are great wonderers, especially when as they see the curtesie of the men of warre, a thing which is altogether against their custome: for they are very cruell vnto theirThe Chinois cruell vnto their enemies. enemies ouer whom they haue the victorie, holding that of the Indians, who ha
                  •
               e often entercourse with them. Now in our Prince there was not any thing noted but curtesie vnto the conquered, insomuch as this made him admired and honoured. Now the question being after all the fortes of the borders were beaten downe, to knowe what course the armie should take, the Prince had receiued newes, how that the king of China assembled his forces and marched forwardes, and that he was there in his owne person, and that he strengthened also his Cities which are sufficiently fortified, and more then in any countrey adioyning vnto him, so as this caused the Prince to determine not to assault any strong citie, and to leaue any of them behinde him, this were a great discommoditie vnto him for the victualing of his armie: for to leaue the enemie behind him, being assured to haue him on his front, this seemed to him nigh. Therfore vpō these doubts he thoght good to haue the aduise of his Captaines, & hauing assēbled thē together, he propounded all these difficulties vnto them: in the end after sundry opinions, his resolution was, to leaue nothing behind him, and to assault some famous citie, & take it, by meanes wherof he may nourish his armie, and secondarily call the enemie vnto battell. The which the conqueror should alwayes seeke,A good aduertisement for Generals. and the defender the latest he can hazard the same. For that it is a very doubtfull thing to commit themselues vnto a battell, his dutie being rather to delay, vndermining the conquerour by length, and by wearinesse, and

light skirmishes, then to sight in open field. For when a Generall hath wisely set his men in order, and hath exhorted them to performe their duties, what can hee do more then commit all vnto Fortune, and to the will of the Lord of Hosts? And it seemeth vnto me, that in no feates of armes doth fortune shew her trickes more often, then in the successe of battels, fauouring often the weakest, and deceiuing them sooner which trust in their skill of ouercomming. The examples thereof are verie common in the historie of the affaires of the world, where small armies haue ouercome innumerable numbers. I speake here by way of a preamble of things which you shall hereafter heare: and of the euill councell which the king of China receiued. Now for to returne againe vnto my historie, it was concluded,Warres in China made by Tamerlan with his wise proceedings therein. and the aduise of euerie one was, to conquer the countrie by litle and litle, so as their enterprise was to draw directly vnto Paguinfou, which as it was a great Citie and one of the chiefest, so is it also strongly fortified and well replenished with people: but the Prince made account that the king of China would hazard a battell. Now the Prince before hee would cause the same to be summoned, had informed himselfe well of the situation thereof, and causing all the countrie which is champion to be represented vnto his view, which are for the most part plaines, this increased the more his hope of bringing to good end his enterprise: the riches on the other side gaue courage vnto the souldiers, and principally vnto the Tartarians desirous of spoyle, who carried with them cartes to conuey away their spoyles, Paguinfou being accounted an exceeding rich and wealthie Citie. Then he dispatched Odmar with fourteene thousand

horse, to aduance forward and summon the same, as for to hinder victuals from being conueyed thereinto out of the champion countrey: to the end that the cattell remayning in the fieldes, shoulde bee a meanes to maintaine and nourish his armie. I had forgotten to tell you, that for the acknowledging of the Lord Axalla his seruices, the Prince had made him Captaine generall of all his footemen, whichAxalla made Captaine generall of all the footmen. was one of the principall honours of the armie. He caused the sayd Lord Axalla to march after Odmar, with all the footmen, which was verie neere a hundred and fiftie thousand men, well trayned vp in the warres, and good expert fighters. Hee marched himselfe immediatly after with all his horsemen, artilleries, engines, and other munitions belonging vnto warre, directly vnto Paguinfou. Odmar did ride twentie leagues this day, so as he arriued there contrarie to their expectation, looking rather for the king then for the enemie, and hauing taken much cattell, wherewith the countrie greatly aboundeth, he pitched his tents, leauing the citie betweene him and vs, and stayed for his footmen, who marched forwards in the meane space, sending continually vnto the warre, for to wearie the enemie. This endured three or foure dayes, vntill our footemen ledde by this braue Christian Geneuois, shewed themselues in the plaine of Paguinfou. Then the Citie was summoned to yeeld obedience vnto the Emperour, or else they should receiue the law of the conquerour. They made answere, that they were determined to liue and die in the seruice of their Prince. Now you must vnderstand that it was fortie yeares or thereabouts, since the Father of the king which raigneth at this present ouer the Chinois,

had conquered it from the Empire of the Tartarians, and hauing driuen out all the inhabitants, they had planted therein newe Colonies, so thoroughly, that there were but few of the first remembrance, but onely they of the flat country and small walled townes, who came from all partes and brought their keyes, most willingly submitting themselues vnto the obedience of the Prince: so as there was great aboundance of victuals within our armie: and if we had beene within our owne countrie, there could not haue come greater store; a thing which made our Prince hope for a happie successe, there beeing no other difficultie which for the most part can ouerthrow a great armie as ours was, and withdraw them from their enterprise. And thus the Citie of Paguinfou is besieged, and our footemen camped round about within an arrowes shot of all the walles. They within the citie did vse great endeuor forThe siege of the citie of Paguinfou. their defence, and our Prince omitted nothing for their offence. Axalla hauing viewed a great and strong suburbe, which was in length almost halfe a league, supposed that those of the Citie kept no watch there: that this must needes be, for that they would not make him obstinate; hee had a determination to winne it in the night, and hauing imparted it vnto the Prince, vpon the first watch all his men were readie, all of them hauing made prouision of ladders, and of such things as are necessary for winning thereof with handblowes, and hauing assaulted it on sundrie partes, after the fight had continued two houres, Axalla remainedA great suburbe wonne by Axalla in the night. the conquerour, and cut in peeces eight thousand men at the least which were within the same: the spoile was great, there were many of Axalla his mē slain of one side, which was that by the which they doubted

to be assaulted. But on the other side, by the which it was taken, there was scarce any one slaine. The taking of this suburbe did greatly astonish those of the Citie, who had marked the lustinesse of our men, and beganne to enter into doubt of their safetie, which vnto this day they accounted as most assured. On the other side they did see that the Princes promises to be there within fifteene daies fayled, they did see this great army which daily wanne footing, the engines and artillerie readie to offer violence on one side by them commaunded, the which did greatly annoy them, so as diuerse principall men of the Citie, desired rather to make triall of the conquerors clemencie, then of his rigor. But heeThe Gouernors speech vnto those of the city to stay them from yeelding. which commaunded within, who was one of the greatest Lords of the countrey, and one of the best beloued with the king, assured them of the kings approch, so as they should not want succour in time of necessitie: that there was no neede therof at this present, and although they had lost a suburbe, it should be great folly not to be willing to defend a citie, and their fortresses being as yet entire, that for his part, hee would make proofe of his fidelitie vnto his Prince, with the hazard of his life and goods. These words were of no small importance, and being vttered in the assembly of the people, it caused their courages for to change, in such sort as euery one retired into his quarter, beeing resolued with the losse of their citie, to lose also their liues. Now you must vnderstand that the situation of the citie was of hardThe situation of the citie of Paguinfou. accesse, being seated vpon a plaine, the which was enuironed round about with mountaines, one of them only approching the citie, which ouerlooked it on front vpon the North side, where was a valley by the which they passed, and there did runne a riuer: on this side was the

suburbe situated which had beene taken, so as the meanes to succour the Citie was stopped, our souldiers keeping the passages of these Mountaines, the which were in the old time the borders of the kingdome: for Paguinfou was once gouerned by the Tartarians, which kept it for a defence against the Chinois, but had lost the same, and these mountaines were the limits of China against the foresaid Tartarians, who gouerned Paguinfou at that time, so as these mountaines were of hard accesse, and there remained no other way but on the side of the suburbe, the which a riuer compasseth about, running all along the side of a bordering mountaine, vpon the which we caused many bridges to be built, for to haue thereby a way for to succour our souldiers, which kept the passages of the mountaines on the enemies side: so as it could not be but hardly succoured, or else by a battell the which the Prince did earnestly desire, as all conquerors should do. I will declare also that during this time Odmar, Calibes and the Prince of Thanais were cōmanded often by the Prince to make warre, as well for to heare certaine newes of the enemie, as also for to maintaine his horsemen, and to keepe the place the which he had chosen as the field for the battell, to the end that he might liue there with his horsemen. He gaue also commandement vnto his men to gather together great store of victuals, so as they sacked many small townes, out of the which they brought a great quantitie. In this meane time the king of Chinaes armie approched (euen like faire weather) the which was very great, as they brought vs word dayly, the Prince determining to go in person & meete with the enemy, accōpanied with his principall horsemen, and to leaue the greatest part of his footmen at the

siege, wherunto he had a great desire, omitting nothing that might wearie the besieged, who defended themselues couragiously. So the Prince began to batter, causingThe siege of Paguinfou. his engines to approch, as rammes and other munitions, the which he had made for to come neere vnto the walles, to the end they might come to hand-blowes with the enemies: insomuch as the Citie was assaulted on two sides very coragiously. They within began to be more affeard then before, there beeing set vp for the safegard of the munitions, and of a wall which was fallen down, a Caualier raised vp very high within an arrowshot, which did greatly annoy them, so as they were constrained to forsake the wall in the day, and this caused them to begin a trench for to couer themselues, the which was 22. foote in height, and as much in depth, and fiftie foot in bredth; the which being declared vnto our men, they determined to trie their fortunes, and to giue thē an assault before they had ended the same, or at the least to win the wall, & lodge there at the instant. So the Prince sent for Axalla, who was in his own quarter, this affaire depending vpon his charge, and hauing by his industrie ordered in a manner all the siege, and hauing acquainted him with his pleasure, commanded him to execute it. The next day putting his mē in order they assalted the wall, the which was valiantly defended: but in the end through the valor of Axalla who gaue an assalt with 20000. of his best souldiers, he won the wall, & lodged there, the Prince hauing so cōmanded him to do, to stop the heat of the soldiers frō going any further. Now the Princes purpose was to cōpound for the citie, & not to force it, for two reasons. The first was, for that he feared, the citie being great and rich, that when the souldiers should sacke it, the enemie who was but

thirtie leagues from thence, should come vpon them, and by this meanes his army should be found in disorder, also rich souldiers neuer serue well: The other was, for that he would draw out of that citie which was rich and wealthie, those commodities which were necessary for the sure accomplishing of his enterprise, seeing it was necessarie to haue such a citie for to make a storehouse of necessarie things for the army. Thus although the wall was won, the enemies wanted not courage yet to defend themselues valiantly, looking for aide according to the newes they had receiued, that the kings army marched forward. Whilest these things were in doing, one of our engines shooting a bullet, and hauing ouerthrowen a peece of Anuber, the same did hurt the Gouernour, who at the end of three or foure houres yeelded vp the ghost, the which caused the souldiers to change their resolution, there being none which made them obstinate but he, so as they determined before the Prince should be aduertised of the losse of their head, & especially of the great slaughter of men which they had lost in the fight of the wall, all of them with one cōsentThe citie of Paguinfou yeelded vnto Tamerlan vpon the death of their Gouernor did resolue for to yeelde themselues vnto the Princes mercie, sauing their liues, and the souldiers enioying their horse and weapons. Now I haue forgotten to declare how this assault had alreadie endured the space of eight dayes; such delay did greatly vexe the Prince, and on the other side, the king of China made no great hast, but at such time as he vnderstood of the Gouernour his death, doubting of that which happened. The Prince then who was aduertised that the enimies army marched vnto a batel, was very glad of these news, the which Axalla, who was aduanced vpon the walles, had declared vnto him, and brought the Embassadors

vnto the Prince, who receiued them verie curteouslie, assuring them on the one side of his gentlenesse, and on the other of the power he had to punish their disobedience. The conditions were agreed vpon, and there came out of the citie eighteen thousand souldiers, the inhabitants remaining in a maner all: there were therin thirtie thousand soldiers at the beginning: the siege cōtinued two moneths. Now the king of China in his marching receiued newes of the yeelding vp thereof: he caused the Lieutenant of the late Gouernor to be punished, and many of the Captaines, but pardoned the souldiers: he stayed in that place attēding for our marching forward, which could not bee before eight daies after he had taken order about this new cōquest, the which was necessarie for him to settle before hee proceeded any further. Our Prince caused a muster to be made of his soldiers hauing encreased their payes, and contented euery one according to his desertes.Reward for deserts. The honour of taking the citie and the happie successe therein was attributed vnto Axalla, to whom was giuen the gouernment of the citie with the country already conquered. But he beseeched the Prince that it would please him to bestow it vpon some other, and for himself he reserued the hope of his maister, wherein he should haue part. This answere did greatly content the Prince, for he greatly desired the seruice of Axalla, for that he was a Captaine, who besides his valour, had great practise in the knowledge of Armes, and full of inuention, but principallie at such time asAxalla skilfull in besieging of Cities. the question was for the besieging of any place. The Prince offering it vnto him rather to acknowledge his seruice done vnto him, then for any desire hee had to employ him in any other place then about his person.

Vpon his refusall this charge was bestowed vpon the Prince of Thanais, with the title of Viceroy. Now as I haue already told you, our Prince after he had giuen such order as was necessarie, and aduertised his friendes in all partes, and aboue all the Emperour, he marched forward, hauing contented his souldiers, and made a generall muster of his Armie, as well of the horse as footmen, the which hee found to be diminished of tenne thousand men onely. Nowe our Prince after he had solemnlie called vpon the immortall,Tamerlan his godlines. inuincible, and incomprehensible God, and spent one whole day in prayer, we enterprised to goe on forward, and to go directlie vnto the enemie, who was at Sintehu, with all his owne forces, and of all his Allies. As soone as he receiued newes that our Armie was passed ouer the riuer of Chulifu, it is reported that barbarouslie he caused to be published throughout all his Campe, that euerie one should prepare himselfe vnto the Battaile, for that he was determined to stay no longer for the enemie within his owne countrie, because hee could not endure to see his subiectes spoyled any longer. But certainlie he made it manifestlie appeare, how his mischiefe and euill fortune followed him too neare, euen at the verie heeles: for if that hee had drawne out the warre in length, he had gotten a great aduantage of vs, hauing manie strong Cities, the which we must needes haue assaulted, and had bene sufficient to ouerthrow vs vtterlie, and after he might haue had a good bargaine of vs. For the wisedome of our Prince would not endure to leaue any thing behind him which might hinder vs from victuals: for great Armies cannot otherwise be maintained. Our Prince was wont to say vnto his

famiars (for he neuer boasted himself, and at such time as fortune was most fauourable vnto him, then had he most doubt) that if the king of China were so euill aduised as to offer him battaile, hee should commit a follie whereof he would repent him, being well assured that he had braue Captaines, and souldiers well experienced in the warres, who knewe well what belonged vnto battailes. Now the king of China marched directlie vnto vs with great magnificence: thereThe king of China his magnificence. was nothing to be seene but gold and precious stones in his Armie: he himselfe was commonlie in a chariot, wherein there was such a quantitie of golde and rich stones, that euerie part was full of Diamonds, Rubies, and Pearles. The king of China was of the age of three and thirtie yeares, vvho for the most part had bene brought vp in pleasures, and not in militarie exercises, nor vnder the bloudy ensigne of Mars, loaden with yron, boisterous and furious, not with gold, precions stones, and with such kinde ofriches: so as he was very insolēt in thretnings, brauadoes, and in defying vnto the battaile. He often said that we had surprised him, and had not warned him to prepare himself, and that we had stroken him without speakingThe customi of the Chin
                     •
                  i
                     •
                  
                  ▪
                any word: for this is the custome of the people in those parts, to do in this maner. He had two or three kings also with him, his neighbours and Allies, who marched with the same preparation. The rumour of these riches gaue great courage to the soldiers, for they were couetous of iust gain, as is that gotten by a battaile. So both our armies went forward each to approch the other, & there was a city yeelded vnto the Prince called Tunicheuoy, the which helped our Armie greatly, so as the Prince hauing well marked the situation of the

Camp, found it to be much for his aduantage, and the waters and pastures in great aboundance, in so much as we determined abiding in that place to behold the enemies countenance, who if he were so rash as to set vpon him at all aduenture, this place seemed vnto him verie conuenient to teach him a newe lesson in. The next day to the end we might giue occasion vnto the enemie for to approch nearer, we sent to summon, and at the same time to take possession of the citie of Pannihu, the which in aduancing forward we left a litle behind vs. The king of China had put manie men thereinto, and it was a citie sufficiently well fortified: from Tiaucheuoy to Paguinuhu there were ten leagues. It vexed the Prince greatlie, that in returning directlie vnto Pannihu he should turne his backe vnto the enemie. This was the occasion he went to content himself with this inuesting onely, for two reasons; the one to cause the enemie the sooner to approch: the other forThe proceeding of Tamerlans army towards the enemie. to hinder the incursions which the might make: but it fell out much otherwise, for this matter was no sooner put in deliberation, but that Odmar who had bene at the warre brought certaine newes that the enemies Armie was within a dayes iourney of vs, and that the battaile in his opinion would bee the next day. The Prince foorthwith dispatched one vnto Calibes, who was gone thither with 10000. horse, that hee should come vnto him, and in the meane time made prouision of all thinges necessarie wherewith he might preuaile for obtaining of the victorie. So he aduaunced his Army within a league of the citie Tiaucheuoy, about noone the next day they had more certaine aduertisement of the enemies comming. The Prince who had as merrie a countenance as might bee, after he had

commanded his Armie to take the place for the Battaile, which he had chosen in his iudgement with most aduantage, and hauing set downe vnto Odmar the order he would haue to be obserued, hee desired to see the comming of this Armie: so sending before him fiue or sixe thousand horse as scouts, he aduanced forward, and Calibes with him. Now there were two causes wherefore hee marched the foremost; the one was, for that he wold iudge of his enemies countenāce; the other, he hoped to draw him to fight in his place of battaile the which he had chosen, and to deale in such sort as the enemie might be the assailant. So after he had seene this great confused Armie which continually came forward, he commanded Calibes to retire himselfe as soone as they drew neere vnto him, and bring vnto him this great cloud, the which he hoped soon to disperse. So the Prince returned backe vnto his men for to assure them of the battaile: he caused all his footmen to be placed all along by a great mountaine, so as they had but one head for to doubt. And hee planted great store of Artillerie for the guard of his footmen. I am of opinion, that the Prince had about sixe scoreThe order of the Princes battaile against the king of China. thousand footmen, whereof many w
                  •••
                armed after the Christian maner, and all they were commanded by sundry Captaines; but all obeyed Axalla, who commā
               ded them as Generall. Our horsmen were in battaile array in a great leuell plaine, hauing the footmen on the left hand, and on the right was the comming of the enemie, so as vpon the least disfauour that might happen, he would retire to be assisted by his footmen. We had foure-score thousand horse: Calibes with the Scythians were in the Auantguard, and had the commandement of thirtie thousand horse, who should receiue

him at such time as he did drawe on the enemie, as he was cōmanded. It was deuided into three troups, each one consisting of 10000. Odmar had also 30000. horse who should assist him. The Prince remained in the Arier-ward at the one of the wings of his footmen, which held one of his principall forces, his purpose was to suffer the three-score and sixe thousand horse to maintain the fight against the Barbariās, being led by two good Captaines, and if any of them remained the Emperor hoped after of them to haue a good market, by causing his footmen to march forward, and himselfe with whō there abode twenty thousand of the best horse, which were sufficiēt without hazarding his person for to giue a new battaile, if so be that any disfauor should happen vnto them: for he had vnderstood that this was the custome of the kings of China, to enclose thēselues within the middest of their chariots with their footmen, and not to hazard themselues but vpon the extremity: so the enemie failed nothing at all to march directlie vnto Calibes, and all the Army marched after following of him and setting vpon him, and he euen as the Scithians are alwayes accustomed to do, with his 6000. horse in retiring gaue manie charges, killing some of them, and they likewise killing some of his men. It was a beautifull sight to see this great Armie march, for it seemed to be twise as great as ours, therein being an infinite number of armed chariots, wherein he put hisThe beautie & richnesse of the king of Cl
                     ••••
                   Army. principall trust against the furie of our souldiers; so manie gildings of gold and siluer as well in the trappings of their horses, as on their armor, that it glittered, and was of vs all much admired. The Prince who with a troupe of horse did see the Armie march after Calibes, commended greatly the maner of casting their

men out of the rankes, for to compell this troupe vnto fight, & did see this Armie come in good order, & he tried with his eye to note the place wher the kings person was, hauing near him the Chinois Lord to instruct him, who knew well their maner of fighting. Nowe they had neither auant-guard nor battaile, but only an Arier-ward commanded by the king, and inclosed (as I haue said) with his chariots: the which being shewed vnto him by this Lord, the Prince turned himselfe vntoTamerlan his speach of the king of China. vs, and in our language said: Yet must wee this day disperse this cloud here so gilded, & the king of China and my selfe must make a partition thereof. Now hauing seene the enemie sufficiently aduanced, & iudging that he had had seene them march a good league, he thought it not conuenient to suffer them for to take breath, nor for to put themselues againe into their order; he sent vnto Calibes for to wil him to set forward the fight, and that if those whom he had led with him should be weary, they should come vnto him; but it was not in Calibes power to haue this commandement ouer them. For as soone as they heard this word of fighting vttered, they required the first charge, with a young Lord, who commanded ouer them called Zioctabanes, who made appeare vnto the Chinois to what end their flight was, charging verie stiffely vpon the foremost of the enemies, the which was an occasion to to begin the first fight. And I assure you there could not be seene a more furious thing, nor any for to fight with more desire to manifest the valor of his nation, & for to procure honor vnto his Prince. Now this endured a long houre before the Chinois had ouerthrowne Calibes. The Prince did see all pacientlie, saying alwaies, that the great multitude how confused so euer it were,

would carrie it away from the order and valour of hisThe battail
                     •
                   between the king of China and Tamerlan souldiers: you could not yet perceiue any alteration in the Princes countenance, aduersitie and prosperitie were so indifferent vnto him. Now his thirtie thousand horse were all Scithians, who obserue not the same order the Parthians doe. Now before the Prince retired with his men, he did see the first charge giuen. Calibes being wounded, retired himself neere vnto the Prince, hauing with him two thousand horse ioyned together againe, and many more ioyning themselues together neere vnto the Prince, who commaunded that they should cure Calibes, viewing the place of his wound, he caused him to be conducted behind his footmen, and the other which were hurt with him also. Now Calibes was not able to pierce through this Armie, being beaten back; but Odmar with almost all the Parthian horsmen did handle them more roughly, for he ran cleane through them, and returned by one of the right wings of the Armie, where he fought most valiantlie, and hauing beaten them back euē within the kings chariots, hee thought that hee should not doe wisely to go about to breake such forces. The King of China comming forward, and the horsmen which had bene broken by Odmar ioyning themselues together for his aid, Odmar onely remayning in the Battaile sent vnto the Prince for the footmē, and for to set forward the artillerie, and that he should assure himselfe of the victory. The Prince who had already set forward, kept aloofe off, and sent vnto him fiftie thousand footmen, with a part of the artillerie, giuing charge therof vnto Axalla, who forthwith set forward, hauing commandement to set vpon the chariots, and to make an entrance: hee set forward the artillerie before him, the which did

greatlie astonish the enemies: for the gouernors of the horses belonging to the kinges chariots could not hold them; it made also a great spoile. As soone as hee perceiued this disorder, he set forward, and came to handblowes; there were a hūdred & fifty thousand mē as yet about the kings person. Axalla full of courage fought so valiātly, that they neuer beheld any do more brauely. Odmar during this fight charged again the horsmen who were retired vnto the kings aide, whom he put to flight. Then the Prince aduanced forward with the rest of his footmen, gaue aide vnto Axalla, and came euen vnto the person of the king of China, who was as yet enclosed within a second ranke of Chariots with thirtie or fortie thousand men: and after hee had fought two or three houres, the horsmen assisting the footmen, and they principally whom the Prince had reserued, the king remained wounded within the power ofThe king of China wounded and taken prisoner. the Prince, the battaile being won, and all the enemies Campe forced; the fight indured eight houres, and it was euen night which saued the liues of many of the enemies. There were slaine two kings the Allies of theTamerlans victory ouer the king of China. king of China, and one taken prisoner: there was inestimable riches gotten, as wel in golden vessel as precious stones, and the most rich and faire chariots that could be seene. The Prince would not see the captiued king vntill the next day, being mounted on horsebacke, and passing through the Campe of the battaile for to stay the slaughter, and to ioyne together againe his men, to the end the accustomed watch might bee kept, whereof he gaue the charge vnto Axalla; toThe custody of the king of China deliuered vnto Axalla. whom he gaue likewise commandement to keepe the king of China within the middest of his souldiers, hauing bene already dressed of a wound he had receiued

in his right arme. It was a strange thing to behold the enemies weapons, and the diuersity of streamers wherwith they were decked, the which seemed vnto vs a far off as beautifull, as the diuersitie of colours plentifull. But to say the truth, the multitude was great which this king had, notwithstanding there was much difference betweene their valour and ours: and it is reported, that he had ranged in battaile this verie day three hundred and fiftie thousand men, whereof there were an hundred and fiftie thousand horsmen, the rest on foote: the greatest part of them were rude and barbarous people, which suffered themselues to bee slaine one vpon another, not marking their aduantage, nor hauing anie warlike knowledge, as our men haue:A great slaugh▪ ter of the Chinois. Tamerlan thankeful vnto God for his victorie. there were slain of the enemies some threescore thousand. Now the next day after the buriall of the dead, the Prince hauing giuen thankes vnto God for his victorie, caused the wounded to be cured, and amongst the others Calibes, who by reason of the vntemperatenesse of the aire, rather then by the blow of the woundCalibes wounded. he had receiued, found himselfe verie ill, yet would he not omit his dutie, to commaund alwaies his Auant-guard, the which was a great pleasure vnto the Prince, for he alone had commandement ouer the Emperours forces, being a Scithian, and greatly beloued of his nation. The Prince dispatched away thirtie thousand horse in the pursuit of one of the king of Chinas brothers, who was fled away, hauing ioyned together againe some twelue or fifteene thousand horse. The Prince sent to summon Pannihu, the which did yeeld it selfe vnto him: whereupon our Armie approched neare vnto it, for to aduance our selues the further into the countrie. Nowe I forget to declare

howe the Prince hauing the next day caused his tentes to bee pitched most stately, and his guardes ordered according to his greatnesse, the principall of his Armie being also neare his person, for all the night he had remained continually on horsebacke, vntill about two of the clocke, when as they brought him a tart and his water, for he neuer dranke wine, and lay downe vpon a carpet, where he passed the rest of the the night, I was neere vnto him and neuer left him: but I neuer heard anie vaunting or boasting to proceed out of his mouth, but much bewailed the follie of this king, which would not deliuer vp that belonged vnto him, and said vnto Odmar, who was neareTamerlan his speech vnto Odmar of the goodnesse of God. vnto him, that his God had led him by the hand, and had giuen vnto him a great victorie, without the losse of anie of his seruants, at the least of them which were of marke: that hee could not but lament for all those whom hee had lost, accounting them notwithstanding most happie and blessed, dying in the seruice of their king, against such cruell and barbarous people. So then hee sent a commaundement vnto Axalla, for to bring vnto him the imprisoned king: who being come,The comming of the king of China prisoner vnto the Emperor Tamerlā
                the Emperour issued out of his tents, and went to receiue him. This king of China came with a verie proud and haughtie countenance, and like a couragious man, approching neare vnto the Emperour, hee demaunded of Axalla by an interpreter, which was the Emperour, and being shewed him, hee spake fiercely vnto him after this manner: The goddes whom I worship, being prouoked against my nation & people, and conspired against my good fortune, haue made mee at this day thy prisoner: but for as much as it is reported ouer all the worlde, that Tamerlan
               
maketh warre for the honor of his nation: thou shouldest be contented that thou hast wonne it this glorie, that the Lord of the world, the child of the Sunne, is in thy power, to receiue such law as it shall please thee to prescribe him. This he said in a braue manner, and without any other humbling of himselfe. The Emperour on the other side hauing saluted him verie curteouslie, led him into his tent, & willed his interpreter to say vnto him; that euerie diuiniyt fained or true, whichTamerlan his prin
                     •
                  ely entertainment and godly speech vttered vnto the prisoner King of China. anie do worship and reuerence, that certainly an euill matter is alwayes disagreeable vnto them, and that he yeelded willinglie vnto the immortall, inuincible, and incomprehensible God (whom hee worshipped) this honor, to attribute vnto him this victorie obtained, euen as he did the cause of his euil fortune vnto his false gods whom he worshipped; that he might assure himselfe to finde all gentlenesse and good entertainment at his hands. So hauing made a signe that hee allowed of that the Prince said, with thāks vnto him, the Prince remained a certaine space after without speaking, hauing placed him neare vnto himselfe, not contenting himselfe in beholding this Princes behauiour. He caused his interpreter to demād of him, what he did think of the fashion obserued by his people in fighting. He answered, that he accounted the victorie most assured, when as he did see so few men come against him, in cō
               parison of the great Army that hee had; but that the gods had otherwise disposed thereof. When he asked whether his brother were a prisoner or slaine: hee was demanded whether he fought neare vnto him. He answered, that he commanded ouer his horsmen, and that hee wor
                  •
                the same royall garmentes that hee himselfe did. They tolde him, that he was taken. Whereupon

he fetched a great sigh, and being demanded wherfore he was sorie that his brother should bee with him and run the same fortune: he answered that all his hope of comforting himselfe in this mishap was placed in his brother, and all the good happe also of the Chinois name, therefore he greatlie lamented him, commending much the courage of his brother. Now the Prince knew of certaine that he was escaped away, and therfore (as I haue said) was Odmar gone to hinder his reuniting together. I ha
                  •
               e forgotten to declare how the riches which were gotten were innumerable: for the meanest amongst them had much gold about him, & vpon the trappings of their horse. The Lords had such store of precious stones, as of nothing more. They did bring all the prisoners before the Prince, and when the two Allies of the king of China did come, the king rose vp and did them great reuerence. Then the Prince demanded of him by an interpreter, who they were. He answered him, that they were his Allies, and that he lamented more their fortune thē his owne, and that he would die with them. Now this barbarous kingThe cruell custome of the Chinois. thought the matter should be handled after their maner, when as they put to death their prisoners, and feed of meat made of them, as some of those countries are accustomed to doe. Nowe the Prince hauing receiued them curteouslie, did assure them of good entertaiment: for the which the king of China did shewe himselfe greatly contented. The one of them was the king of Chiampa, the other of 
                  •
               anchuichina, vndervassals and tributories to the king of China. NoweA description of the king of China. he was of the age of thirtie yeares; hee had a long visage, his eyes blacke and great, his beard long, the which he stroaked often, his nose was of a reasonable

bignesse, hauing a graue behauiour, and well beseeming a great king. These prisoner-kings did as it were worship in saluting of him, and hee keeping his grauitie, only commāded them to rise frō the ground. He is surely a great Prince, and which hath had two hundred famous Cities within his kingdome. There be manie mynes of gold and siluer, much muske, andA d
                     •
                  scription of China. also of an hearbe which the Christians call Rubarbe. There bee in like maner within the kingdome of China fifteene verie large Prouinces, the which haue Gouerners. It is reported that he hath threesore and ten kings wearing crownes, tributaries vnto him. We call this region China, the which they in their language name Tamé, and the people Tangis, the which we call Chinois. This kingdome doth abound in fish, and in great numbers of wilde-foule, by reason of the great aboundance of running waters which doe ouerflowe the countrie, the which is reasonable temperate: they abound greatly in silkes, and the meanest are apparelled therewith, hauing small quantitie of woll, and not vsing the same: they haue much cotten and linnen in steed thereof. The men do weare their haire long, the women combe them: they haue as many wiues as they are able to maintaine. Next vnto the king, there is a Gouernor generall whom they call Tutan, the which was the brother vnto the imprisoned king. This is the cause wherefore he must not forsake the countrie: but he requested his brother to accompanie him vnto this Battaile, where they thought assuredlie to ouercome, and was so wilfull, that he did appoint a Lord in his place, vpon whom the king of China did not relie so much as vpon his brother: in so much as this made him sad, considering the follie which he had committed,

in suffering him to come with him, and to be both of them at one battaile. Now for to returne vnto the king of China: the Prince hauing assembled his counsell, to the end he might be aduised how he should vse his prisoners and the rest of the victorie: hee receiued newes by Odmar, how that the kings brother was arriued at Quantou, the which hee had fortified, and that great store of forces did ioyne themselues vnto him. This was the cause that the Prince hauing somewhat rested his forces, commaunded two thousand Parthian horse to conuey the prisoners vnto Paguinfou, and from thence after they had made abode there, to passe ouer the mountaines, and to remaine at 
                  
                     •
                  urda (a Citie of olde time faithfull vnto the Emperors of Scithia) and there to keepe them faithfully. This charge was giuen vnto Malaxen Lieutenant generall in the charge of Axalla. Then the Prince made dispatches vnto the Emperour, and to his Lieutenant ouer the Parthians, and made them partakers of this great and happie victorie, wherein had bene slaine so manie thousandes of the enemies, and hee had lost so fewe of his owne. I returne vnto the deliberation which the Prince tooke (after that hee had discharged himselfe of much carriages, the which hee had sent with the king of China,) before hee would goe anie further forward. Nowe hee had also sent to hasten the fortie thousand footmen which should come from Sachetay, and thirtie thousand Scithian horse, making his account that they should haue come vnto him, before the forces of the king of China could oppose themselues against him. So the purpose and resolution of the Prince was, that it behooued to assault Quantou, and to shut vp, if it were

possible, the kinges brother within the same, beingThe proceedings of the Emperors Armie after the victory, & his resolution in the same. one of the principall seates belonging vnto the king of China, and a citie greatly peopled and strong: it was fortie leagues from the place where the battaile was fought. But Odmar being aduanced thither, would not retire before hee had expresse commandement from the Prince, who hauing sent thither, pitched his tentes round about the said Citie: hauing summoned many small cities, the which yeelded themselues wholly vnto the Princes mercie, making great lamentation for their king taken, and for the estate of their affaires, the abasement being verie great throughout all the kingdome, for all the diligence the king of Chinas brother could vse for the quieting of their astonished mindes, and to exhort euerie one to take new courage. Notwithstanding the gentlenesse vsed by the Conquerour made them to take all their losses with patience: and because it was also reported, that hee had vsed the king most friendlie, and all the prisoners: for the Prince cause his clemencie to bee published vnto all that would vouchsafe to cast themselues into his armes, as he would also shewe his sharpnesse vnto all those which disobeyed him, and would withstand his commandementes. For it was the Princes custome to pardon the humble, and to punish the proud throughlie, knowing that reward and punishment are the thinges which doe greatlie increase estates.
                  
                     •
                   Maxime. And Princes must learne this as a generall rule, that whensoeuer they vse those which are rebels vnto them, as those that are obedient, they shall receiue hurt thereby, because euerie one will take libertie of ill doing, seeing that the one and the other are equallie weighed and regarded by the Prince, who ought

to be a iust iudge and moderatour of euerie ones deserts. Now our Prince had besides another maxime,Tamerlan straitely obserued his promise, and kept his word truly. that is, he straightly kept that which hee promised, although his estate depended therupon, if his word were once passed. And you must beleeue, that none of his seruants durst be so bold, as to make request and speake to the contrarie, so as this same being spread amongst the barbarous people, they were assured when they had once his word: now you must know that this is of no small importance vnto a victorious Prince, to make his victorie perfect. But to returne vnto my purpose, our Prince hauing caused praiers to be celebrated, and yeelded thanks vnto God for his victory, as his custom was, he caused money to be distributed vnto the Captaines for the cure of them which were wounded. He went directly vnto Quantou, hauing giuen commandement vnto Odmar to go euen beyond Quantou, to the end that the kings brother should not put any greater forces thereinto; and if it fell out so, he should not faile to fight with them and hinder them from the same, for his purpose was to besiege it. I will not forget to declareEmbassadours sent from the kings brother of China, vnto Tamerlan to visite the king. how the kings brother had sent Embassadors to obtain leaue for to know of the kings health, and for to see him, the which the Prince did willingly suffer, to the end this other should not declare himselfe king, who would haue brought him more trouble then the other. He attended for the euent of Quantou, and had his eye vpon the successe of this siege. Now the kings brother hauing receiued newes of the affaires of the besieged, he determined (hauing receiued aide from some of his confederates, and also as soone as he had ioyned together his forces) either to succour it, or to fight a battell, and came straight vnto Porchio, hoping he might make

a bridge of boates whereof there be great store in these same countries. The Prince vnderstanding this, caused a trench to be made at the ende of the bridge, for to keepe it against the enemies: there did he place three or foure thousand men, to the end the bridge might alwaies be at his commaundement, and as he did perceiue the enemie approch, hee shewed himselfe in battell ray all along the riuer. This passe-time continued tenne or twelue dayes, vntill such time as the kings brother hauing caused a great number of boates to be gathered together, had made a bridge in a verie narrowe place of the riuer: whereof the Prince being aduertised, he made no shew he knewe it, keeping himselfe within his Campe, from whence the said place was some tenne leagues from vs, called Cambin. Then our scoutes brought vs word that the bridge was made, presently thereupon the Prince commaunded Odmar to mount on horsebacke with fifteene thousand horsemen, and that he should suddenly set vpon all those that were passed ouer, and sent all his footemen after him; we set forward all our horsemen after, the which the Emperour himselfe did cōduct, hauing left a sufficient strength within Rochio. The Prince hauing considered the time of the diligence the which the kings brother might vse in passing ouer his armie, together with the aduertisement which he had receiued, made him accordingly aduāce his army, so as we departing at midnight came thither by noone, and Odmar halfe an houre before vs, in so much as he hauing marked that there were no more of them passed ouer then he was appointed to charge, he staied in hope that halfe of them would passe ouer, and also he looked for the Prince, who did set forward, being

behind the mountaines, which were within a league of that place, causing some to descrie from houre to houre what the enemie did. Now beeing enformed that the halfe part were passed, the which was fiftie thousand men good, he aduertised the Prince thereof, and went himselfe vnto the fight, and finding them in very ill order, and nothing at all aduertisedOdmar set vppon the kings brother at the passing of ariuer, and slue fiftie thousand of his men. of the enemies nearenesse, he gaue the charge, and vtterly ouerthrew them; there remained dead vpon the ground some fiftie thousand men, but it was not without great fight, strengthened with the fauour of the water, and a great Marrish wherein they were encamped. Notwithstanding our footemen hauing wonne the banke of the riuer, beganne also to winne the boates and to seuer them by the meanes of a great boate the which wee with diligence caused to runne downe being full of artificiall fire, so as at the sameA stratagem. very time that they which were within the boate did drawe neare, they retired out of the same, hauing first kindled the fire within the boate, the which with a great force rushed against the bridge of boates and ouerthrew it, and where it was resisted did burne. This did greatly astonish them that were passed, to see their returne cut off. The kings brother was not yet passed vnto the other side of the water, and he which first had gone ouer was the king of Cauchina, who was slaine atThe king of Cauchina slair
                     •
                  
                the first charge fighting very valiantly, in the forefront. The kings brother did see his men slain and drowned, & could not remedie the same. This second ouerthrow was of no small importance, although it was but the third part of the kings brothers armie, and that there remained vnto him as yet a hundred thousand fighting men: but there was no great hope that hee durst

present himselfe before our armie. The newes hereof being reported at Quantioufou, the Prince was of opinion that one should carrie thither the king of Cauchinas head, for he was one of the kings greatest vassals, thereby to assure them of the victorie, and that they should not hope for any succor. On the other side, they did see Axalla who pressed them verie neere, and what endeuour soeuer they made, yet did they marke that daily they lost their honour, and that by little and little they approched neerer vnto thē, in such sort that these 15. dayes they had beene continually at hand-blowes with our men. In the end they gaue knowledge vnto Axalla, that they desired to make triall of the Emperours clemencie. Answere was made vnto them, that they had better occasiō to trust vnto the Princes mercie at this present, then vnto their owne forces: and hauing by interpreters long time discoursed with Axalla, they demanded eight daies respit, wherin they might aduertise the kings brother of the estate of their affaires: and that if they were not succoured within fifteene dayes, they promised to yeeld thēselues, so as it would please the Prince, to keepe them in the same fidelitie that the kings of China had kept and maintained them. Axalla made answere, that he had charge from the Prince to receiue them vpon cōposition, and to make them proue all gentlenesse as soone as they had yeelded vnto his mercie: but for preuenting of so long delay, for that the Prince was in person within the countrie, he would 
                  •
               end and impart this vnto him, and beseech him for the same: and attending therfore, they should in the mean time deliuer hostages for this purpose, and that from this time forward he did graunt them truce, vntill the Prince had signified therein his pleasure. Thereupon

               Axalla dispatched one of his faithfull friends of his countrie vnto the Prince, to carrie vnto him these good newes: the which was more welcome vnto the Prince, then the ouerthrow he had giuen vnto the enemie, and agreed vnto all that Axalla demaunded, referring all vnto his sufficiencie and fidelitie, and relying thereuppon he would marke what the kings brother meant to do. After this last disgrace he was determined, if the enemie did not retire, to passe ouer the riuer, and to pursue him euen vnto the sea coastes. Three or foure dayes being spent the Prince tooke aduise for to passe ouer the riuer with his horsemen, but not to aduance any further then 3. or 4. leagues beyond the water: only he meant to hinder the kings brother from attayning vnto the riuers foord, hauing receiued aduertisement that he would passe ouer for to succour Quantoufou. As soone as the enemie vnderstood newes of the passing ouer of our army, it did greatly astonish him, & therevpon retired ten great leagues frō vs, bending towards the sea side into a hillie countrie, and vneasie for our horsemen, where he thought to find place of securitie for his armie, and where the same might be intrenched within the mountaines. And there at leasure he tooke aduise of the greatest about him, to determine what offers they might make vnto the Emperour, as well for the kings ransome, as also for to assure that which yet remained, & for to make a peace, the which must needs be had, were it by gold or siluer, seeing that bloud could doe no good therein, which had not beene spared: that there was no more to be done, and that the goddes were offended. Therefore it behooued with them to acknowledge Tamerlan, they for to fauour him, and we to serue him: and hauing sent to demaund safetie for to

               
                  〈◊〉
               , the Prince graunted so much vnto them, for suchThe citie of Quantoufou yeelded into the ha
                     ••
                  s of Axalla, who besi
                     •
                  ged the same. as would come vnto him. In this meane time Quantoufou yeelded it selfe into the hands of Axalla, who caused the garrison to come out of the same, receiued the inhabitants into the Princes protection, and they which would might remaine therein vnarmed: and he entredAxalla his entrance into Quantoufou with great magnificence. thereinto with the ioy of all the inhabitants, who did determine to receiue the Emperor into the same with all the magnificence that might be. He caused 30000. men of war to enter thereinto vnto whō was money deliuered for to maintain thē there, vntill such time as all the footmen shold receiue pay for 3. moneths due vnto them, whereof the inhabitants of Quantoufou did furnish the Prince, to the summe of eight hundred thousand Tentins, the which do amount vnto foure hundred and fifty thousand crownes or therabout. The Prince at this present sent me vnto Axalla, whom I found feasting of his Captaines and souldiers, staying for the cōmandement that I brought vnto him, the which was to remaine within Quantoufou, and to cause all his footmen to set forward directly vnto him, the which was done by the Prince, to the end it should strike a greater terror into the minds of the enemies, who seeing all his footmen arriued, he supposed they would nothing doubt (Quantoufou being taken) but that he would march forward, insomuch as he hoped this would greatly aduance his affaires, considering the estate they were in▪ I returned from Quantoufou vnto the Emperour, hauing seene a beautifull and great Citie, well fortified, and wonderfully peopled, and round about it there was a fruitfull countrey. Our armie had beene two monethes and a halfe before it, and I thinke we should haue continued there one monethes longer: for therein

was no want of any thing but of men, because many of them had beene slaine since the siege beganne. This was the cause wherefore the Princes brother would haue conducted some thither, & was the occasion that made him aduance forward. Many of our men were also dead by reason of the intemperatenesse of the aire, and the heat of sommer the which we had passed, wherwith our men had not bin accustomed: so as those souldiers which we looked for were necessarie for vs to aduance forward, if wee purposed to attempt any other thing. Axalla who remained therein, emploied all the paines he possibly could, to repaire the walles, and to winne the inhabitants good will vnto the Prince: for not one of them was departed with the Gouernour for to serue the king of China, he leading with him out of the citie, but thirteene thousand, of thirtie thousand souldiers, some beeing dead, the other remaining with the inh
                  •
               bitants vnarmed, for to receiue the law of the conquerour. It was a thing very worthie the noting of their new Lord, who was to commaund them, to marke so great lightnesse and inconstancie in forgetting so soone him which had maintayned them, he and his auncestors by the space of two hundred yeares with great pacience and quiet, and preserued their wealth in great prosperitie. This is the cause that they which gouerne common-wealthes ought to thinke, that the peoples good will is certainely to be esteemed: but withall, they must not too much trust therunto. This was the cause that Axalla marked that, saying that hee was troubled to deuise how this great multitude might be contained in their fidelitie, if wee should receiue any disfauour, and commanded me to speake vnto the Prince, for to treat before his Armie

were any more decayed, and after that it was very necessarie his wisdome should consider how to assure this citie in his absence, the which was so peopled, and the people thereof being so light and inconstant. Now as I haue said, there was almost a yeare spent since we began this enterprise, and our men were greatly diminished: the fall of the leafe also drawing neere, the which for the most part doth yeeld euill fruit vnto armies after their trauels, by the changing of humors, the which engender sicknesse. And this appeared alreadie within our armie, which caused the Prince to consider of many things; and not without cause, he doubted also some change within his owne countrie, the which long absences do often cause, the honour being no lesse in preseruing of that alreadie gotten, then in conquering of the same. Our Prince also did neuer refuse honourable conditions, the which he did more esteeme being obtained by peace then warre. He thought that his conquest consisting of almost halfe the kingdome, and in making the king tributarie for the rest, he should haue sufficient wherewith to bridle him, if at any time hee should deale badly, and would thereof be well aduised: and especially he hoped to assure the same so well, as their lightnesse should be throughly punished, at what time soeuer they would vse it. He did thinke it conuenient if they came vnto profitable conditions for his aduantage, euen as the conquered doe yeeld vnto the conquerors, for to resolue himselfe to border his conquests on this side. Thus the Embassadors being arriued, who were of the kings chiefest vassals, Tamerlan receiued them with all human
                  •
               tie, causing his greatnesse to appeare vnto them, and therewithall the agilitie of his horsemen, to make thē see with their eyes, that it would

be the destruction of the Chinois name if he proceededAn Embassage from the king of Chinas brother vnto Tamerlan, to treat for peace & the kings deliuerance. any further. So hauing saluted the Emperor with all reuerence, they vttered their Embassage vnto him, which was that the kings brother had sent them vnto him to treat for two causes: the one, was for the liberty of their king, the other, for preseruation of their country; that he had vnderstood of his accustomed humanity; that themselues would make triall thereof, rather then to accuse the Gods of their ingratitude towards the Chinois, repenting themselues that they did not satisfie our iust demands at the first comming of our army; that they wold pay for it, the which was reasonable, and therfore, they came to receiue the law of him, seeing he was the conquerour, and that nothing they should opposse against him, could cut off his good happe, they must needs be one of his limits vnto posterity. The Prince hauing heard them, the same being declared vnto him by Interpreters, hee answered them, that they had reason to trust vnto his mildnesse, because that was alwaiesThe answer of Tamerlan vnto the Embassadors. more for the benefit of them that would trie it, then were his armes, and that the same was before any force offered vnto them, the vse of the one being more agreeable vnto him, then the other; but the endes of the warres, were for the most part enterprises for to come vnto peace, and to make those vnderstand reason, that refused the same: but seeing at this present, they desired it, he would yeeld thereunto. And this was the first word of curtesie he wold pronounce at their first comming: it belonged now vnto them to offer the conditiōs wherewith he would acquaint his counsell. Thereupon the Prince rose vp, & caused to be sayd vnto them, that they shold deliuer their offers in writing, & that present answer should be made thereunto. Thus went they out

of the Princes presence with great ioy, and as it were assured of peace, and to recouer their former prosperities. The cōditions which they offered were, to leaue Paguinfou & all the country beyond it, with all the fortresses of the moūtains; that they wold pay al the charges of his army, since the day of answer made vnto his Embassadors; that they wold giue two millions of gold, for their king. This being presēted vnto the Lord, he made answer therunto,Conditions agreed vpon betweene Tamerlan & the Chinois. which was; that he wold keep that which he had cō
               quered within the coūtry, the which was his owne iustly, seeing his arms had giuē it vnto him; that he wold haue the riuer where he was now encamped to be his frontier, stretched vnto Hochioy, Tahaucezug, Cauchio, Lulun, euen vnto Poschio bordering vpon the sea; that the king of China should pay vnto him yearly three hundred thousand crowns, the which shold be deliuered at Paguinfou, for acknowledgment of submission vnto the Empire, as well for his successors as himselfe; that they should pay fiue hundred thousand crownes in ready mony for the charge of the army; that the king of China should be deliuered, and all the Chinois prisoners shold pay ransome vnto particular men that took them, except those which caried the name of kings, who should pay one hundred thousand crowns for peace with his armes; that no Chinois should be kept as slaue, nor sold for such hereafter, being vnder the Princes obedience, that trafique and entercourse of Marchantes should be free betweene both the nations; that the king of China should deliuer his brother as prisoner, and two kings named, with twelue principall men of the countrie for assurance, who should come yearely with money for assurance of the peace. Behold the Emperors answer & his resolutiō; but alas the armes of the Chinois, and their forces, were

so weakened, that they were yet glad to heare that they should be suffered to inioy that which yet remained, they accounted al things so certaine by lost, considering the ill haps which on euery side did ouerwhelme them: their best men were dead, and they which remained astonished. The flower of their best mē of war, with their king taken, two battels lost, and the two principall Citis of the kingdome taken, and the hardest passages wonne: so as they did see nothing but a certaine destruction of the conntry, if they came againe vnto the triall of armes. The king whose captiuity did greatly concerne them, could not be recouered but by peace, they were also aduertised, that great store of new forces marched forward to refresh our army, so as they did exspect nothing but their certaine destruction. Therefore they accepted of such conditiōs of peace as pleased the conqueror, hoping that time would bring againe vnto them their auncient liberty, and that for a time it behoued them to beare with patience the yoke of their bondage. Now the Prince had sent two thousand horse, to fetch the king of China, to the end that being at liberty, he might sweare to the peace solemnly, the which hee hauing performed at Quantoufou, whither the Prince caused him for to come, he brought with him vnto Paguin all the pledges, and amongst the rest, the kings eldest sonne, and his brother. The king being departed for to performe his promise, according to the treatie by him confirmed, hee was receiued, and as it were worshipped within his countrie, with all the ioy that might bee. In the meane time the Emperour, after he had prouided for the assurance of his newe conquest, hee left Odmar there to gouerne them, and gaue vnto him an estate of thirtie thousand

horse and fifty thousand footemen, to furnish all the fortresses and strong places, the Prince hauing led with him, many of the new conquered people, desiring to haue them for to dwell within his country, and to send other Colonies in their places, to assure himselfe the better of the lightnesse of this people, hauing noted them to be inclined vnto nouelties. He gaue in charge vnto Odmar to make his principall abode at Quantoufou, and to fortifie well the passage: and also commanded a fortresse to be made at Dermio, the better to strengthen his borders: and after he had left him all thinges necessary, he recommended vnto him theOdmar left Gouerner of China for Tamerlan. seruices of that Lord, who had manifested vnto him his great affection. The Emperour hauing well tried his faithfulnesse in his affaires as they fell out, he caried with him a brother of his, vnto whom he gaue great gifts within Sachetay. Then we turned our faces straight vnto Cambalu, hauing aduertized the great Cham of the happie successe of our affaires, wherof many sayd, he had lost the oportunity of vtterly rooting out the Chinois: but they do nothing consider, the difficulties therein as yet remaining, and that we must sometimes content our selues with the meane,A good aduertisment vnto Conque
                     •
                  ours. and know how to preserue them, without desiring at some time extreames, whereby doth often happen such accidents as bringeth the losse of all, and maketh that we retaine nothing of that which we accounted most assured, for that we sought more then we should haue desired. The Prince remained in deed king of China, holding in his possession, two of the fairest and greatest Cities of all the whole Countrie, hauing an hundred good leagues thereof vnto himselfe, and many

lesser Cities, hauing extended his borders vnto a riuer, by which he might go vnto the enemy, but they could not come vnto him without passing ouer the same: hauing good meanes to keep it and with aduantage. The king ofThe tribute paid by the king of China vnto Tamerlā fiue hundred thousand crownes yearly. 
               China moreouer was his tributary of fiue hundred thousand crownes yearely, and hauing the meanes at such time as he would not performe it, to be within the space of foure and twenty houres within his country, and he could not come into his: so as it was much more commendable to make this honourable treatie, then tyrannously to seeke for to subdue all, & to put vnto fire and sword a whole natiō, who willingly cast themselues into his armes as tributaries. Now the Prince desired aboue all that the idols which were within his conquest, shouldTamerlan caused all the idols within his conquest to be beatē downe, establishing the worship of one God. be beaten downe, and commanded the worship of one God, establishing the same after the forme of his owne country, for he made account that in short time all wold be reduced vnto our customes. But the Chinois were not of that mind, & their patience was founded vpon hope of recouering by that meanes their former liberty: but they did not weigh, that the Princes foresight had bene such, that he had left there the most wise and sufficient Captaine that was in his kingdome, who wold not lose any occasion by his watchfulnesse to assure his affaires. When Odmar left the Prince, as the custome is, he humbled himselfe too much. The Prince in lifting of him vp, sayd vnto him; I see well now that thou art a Chinois, seeing thou wilt worship me euen as they do their king: the worship I require of thee, is the remembrance thou shalt continually haue to do my commaundements, desiring thee to establish in my newe conquest, the honour of God, and after that, my authoritie through your faithfulnesse: you knowe this estate

better then I, call to thy rememberance that the sword hath conquered them, and not loue or good will: therefore hope not to haue them assured, whom feare retaineth, and not any loue, I recommend my seruice vnto thee. I did neuer see the Prince in greater griefe then now at his departure: but he was driuen of necessity to employ the faithfulnesse and wisedome of Odmar. So our army wherein was much sicknesse, began to march, and on the third daie hauing newes of forces which came towards vs, the Prince sent them a commandemēt not to come any further forward, and that they should march straight vnto Cambalu, where the Prince did suppose to find the Emperor his vnkle, who had set forward towards that place to haue the good hap for to see him, being determined to receiue him at Cambula with magnificence & triumphs, as he wel deserued. Now I wil declare by the way, how Odmar being seuered from vs, allTamerlan turned his fauour vnto Axalla. the Princes fauour was turned vnto Axalla, vnto whom he committed the whole charge of his army, in so much as Axalla although he was alwaies in great reputation, notwithstanding the same was much increased by the Prince at Quantoufou, where the Prince did trust him with the army, in so waightie an enterprise as that was, and the which he so gloriously atchieued: likewise the maner of entring into the kingdome of China, the intelligences he had: so as the report of his valour did flye throughout all the Empire. Calibes led the vantgard, and Axalla was in the battell neare vnto the Emperour, who gaue him the chiefest place, bestowing vpon himTwo hundred thousand crownes of yearely rent giuen vnto Axalla by Tamerlan. two hundred thousand crownes yearely, for to maintaine his ordinarie expēces. Now he for his part had no desire to leaue his maister at quiet, being desirous to draw him backe againe into his countrie, to the ende

he might afterwards moue him to enterprise some great matter, the which might redound as well vnto the glorie of his maister, as the quiet of the Christians, of whom hee was verie carefull, whatsoeuer was the cause thereof. Thus after certaine dayes iourney, we receiued newes, of the Emperours ariuall at Cambula, the Prince hauing left his army in a faire countrie for to winter, where he dismissing many of our souldiers, we arriued within foure leagues of Cambala, whither all the Princes of the Emperours Court, came for to receiue him, together with al the principal inhabitants, for to gratifie our Prince for his happie voyage. The Prince hauing receiued euery one, according to his wōted curtesie, retaining notwithstanding conuenient Maiesty, he was beheld to the great contentment of all his subiects. He had with him the Empresse his wife, who had not left him in his voyage. The next day the Emperour did himThe meeting betweene the great Cam & Tamerlan at the City of Cambala in Ca
                     •
                  aio. so much honour, as to come and meete him, with all the magnificence that might be. He gaue a present vnto the Emperour his vnkle, of all the richest chariots and fayrest horses he had wonne. And I can assure you, that at such time as the Prince set foote on ground, for to do reucrence vnto his vnkle, the Emperour wept for ioy, and this old Prince being on horsebacke, would haue descended; but our Prince beseeched him not to do him that wrong, and with all the humilitie which he did owe vnto his Prince and Lord, he hindred him from alighting. The Emperour was verie desirous to see his daughter: he caused her chariot to be vncouered, and caused her to enter into his: but the Prince remained on horsebacke, whom the eyes of all the people could not be satisfied with admiring. The Prince presented Calibes vnto the Emperour, and

making a recitall of his faithfulnesse, and the endeuor of euery one, he caused the Emperour to giue vnto him an hundred thousand crownes of increase vnto his pension. Axalla was also presented vnto the Emperour, who being informed of his valor, he was receiued withall the best fouours that might be, and he gaue vntoAxalla rewarded by the great Cam for his good seruice and faithfulnesse. him, of the reuenues belonging vnto the Empire, an hundred thousand Tartarins of gold in a Principality, that he might the better declare vnto him how much he esteemed of his fedelity. This ioy and pleasure continued with vs all the winter, where the Prince hauing receiued aduertisment how Baiazet Emperour of the Turkes, had enterprised to ioyne the Empire of Greece vnto his owne, & fully determined to besiege Constantinople: the which he vnderstanding & succour being required of him by the Greeke Emperour, he dispatched one towards Baiazet, for to declare vnto him his pleasureA message sent by Tamerlan vnto Baiaz
                     •
                  t. herein, and warned him on his behalfe, not to trouble the Emperour Paleologue who was his confederate. Now this motion came from Prince Axalla, who had wrought this league, being of kinne vnto Paleologue, and also thrust forward with desire to maintaine his religion in Greece, where hee was borne of the Geneuois race. Whereunto being answered verie proudly, by Baiazet vnto our Emperour,The proud answere of Baiazet. asking what he had to do therewith, and that he should content himselfe, with enioyning lawes vnto his subiects, and not vnto others, seeing he was not borne his subiect. This answere being made, Axalla procured to be verie ill accepted of the Emperour, and in such 
                  •
               or
                  •
               , that he determined to hinder this enterprise of the 
                  
                     •
                  ttomans, not being conuenient for the greatnesse of the Tartarian Empire, to suffer such a

neighbour, who would euen trouble his allies: so as the Ambassador returned from thence assured of the Princes succour against Baiazet: who in the meane time was not idle, but continued dayly his enterprise, seeking all meanes to accomplish the same: thinking that what messages soeuer were sent vnto him, were no other then threatnings. But on the other side also, the Prince vnto whom rest and ease was already become tedious, egged forward also by Axalla, with the increase of his glorie & name, being desirous of this enterprise, did not cease vntill the Prince did send him vnto Sachetay, for to giue beginning vnto the assembling of forces frō all parts, to the end that about the spring time he might march forward. The Emperour also had receiued newes of the battell lost by the Greekes, and that their affaires were like to go ill, if they were not succoured: the which made the Prince more forward, also to hinder these Ottoman dogges (for so he called them) mad for troubling the world. Axalla sent word also vnto the Prince how all things proceeded, and earnestly moued him to depart. Now the Prince had obtained of the Emperour his vnkle an hundred thousand footmen and fourescore thousand horse, hoping to haue as many from Sachetay, besides the Lords who would accompany him for to win glory, frō whō he made accoūt also of 50000. mē more that they would bring vnto him, besides the other forces. He supposed that he had abilitie to deliuer the Empire of Greece from the bōdage of the Ottomans. Thus the Prince departed, leauing the Empresse with the Emperour her father, for to serue him as a comfort of his age: it was not without a hard farewell of the EmperoursHea
                     •
                  i
                     •
                   parting. part towardes his nephew; but more grieuous on the Princes part towardes his wife, who had neuer left

him since the time they were maried: but nothing withheld our Prince, where there was either glory, or meanes to increase his reputation, & profite the cōmon wealth: saying often, that he was borne to this end, and that heA notable saying of Tamerlan. must take in these exercises his principall delights: for euery other thing wherein he did exercise himself was but borrowed, being appointed and called of God to punish the pride of tyrants. Neither will I here omit a dreame, which our Prince had the night before heTamerlan his dreame. departed from Cambalu, which was, that he did see as he thought, a great multitude of reuerent men, who put forth their hands vnto him, requiring his succour against the violence of certaine tyrants, who did afflict them with sundry kindes of tormentes: he sayd, that he did neuer see more reuerent countenances, and that some of them were apparelled in white, and others in cloth of gold, some hauing as it were crownes of gold vpon their heads, and it seemed vnto the Prince, that he gaue thē his hand, & lift them very high. This dreame he recited vnto vs the next morning, but no body was able to giue him the interpretation thereof, and him selfe thought no more of the same. Now to returne againe, we departed from Cambalu accompanied with all the Citie, with all the loue and griefe of a good people towards their Prince. In like maner, the Prince during the time he abode there, vsed all kindes of liberalities and magnificences that might be, after he had receiued all maner of presents that can be named of euery one, asTamerlan his iourney against the Turke. a witnesse of their affection. The Prince was accompanied also with Calibes, and he cōmaunded the Prince of Tanais to take vpō him the state of Colonell of the footmen, the which Axalla had left: vnto whom he gaue the charge of Lieutenant generall within his armie, with

commaundement to leade his auantguard, and Calibes the ariere-ward, being accompanied with farre greater forces then euer he had in any of his armies: for they came vnto him from all parts. The Chinois Lord was licenced by Odmar to go with 20000. men of the subiects newly conquered, being desirous to shew him self vnto the Emperour, as also for to learne our maners & fashions. The absence & separation of our maister was grieuous vnto none but Odmar, not for the feare of the Chinois his neighbours, but verily for the chāge of fortune. The Prince hauing sent him word of his purpose, he cō
               firmed the same, & amongst other things, he sent word vnto the Emperour, that he should hope for all good successe therin, seeing he was created by God for to cast down the proude & raise vp the humble: the Prince also did mislike of nothing more thē cruelty. I remēber wel, that whē we were at China, whē he perceiued this fierce nation, he sayd, I am sent to pull downe the glory of this proud man, I hope to haue a good end thereof. So we arriued leauing our forces, the which came straight vnto Ocera, where they had appointed the generall meeting of all the army, and the Prince tooke his voyage directly vnto Samarcand the place of his birth, three yearsTamerlan returneth from the conquest of China vnto Samarcand. being past since he had bin there. Zamay came to meete him, and I verily beleeue a million of men, blessing and praysing him in all manner of songs. All the Princes of the countrey also ran to visite him, he abode there a moneth. Axalla in this meane time was already at the meeting place at Ocera, who prepared all things, looking for the Princes commaundement for to go vnto him, aduertising him often of the doings of Baiazet. I haue forgotten also to declare, how the Prince sent vnto the Moscouite to b
                  •
                fauoured by him in this enterprise,

who presently sent Ambassadours with offers of what soeuer should please him. The Prince made demaundThe Moscouite 
                     ••
                  leth Tamerlan against the Turke. of fifteene thousand horse, and the payment of certaine money the which he owed, the which was graunted vnto him, and also passage through all his dominions, being very glad that he did set vpon others then on him selfe, and that so great a preparation should fall vpon them, whose greatnesse was as preiudiciall and fearefull vnto him, as it was vnto our Prince, the Ottomans at that time bringing not onely suspition vnto their neighbours, but which was much more, all the earth was astonished at their sudden greatnesse, and of the happie successe they had in all their enterprises, being of so small a beginning attained vnto so large an Empire. Now this was the verie reason that moued the Emperour to oppose him selfe against the same, thinking it much better to go and set vpon them within their new conquestes, then for to stay vntill they were come nearer vnto him, and should come to debate their quarrell within his Empire vnto his domage:A sound deliberation. a sound deliberation; for the same tendeth vnto two effects, the one is that it destroyeth the enemies countrey, and the other, that any disfauour comming vnto him, his countrey receiueth not thereby any astonishment, so as this enterprise was greatly for his aduantage. Now our Prince did all this through the coūsell of Prince Axalla, by whom at that time all the estate was gouerned, & the great authority which this man had, was not without the enuy of diuerse Courtiers: notwithstanding the readieAxalla gouerned all the 
                     •
                  
                  state, his commendation. fashion of Axalla to content euery one, accompanied with his singular vertues, together with so many seruices that hee had done, did vphold him against the enuious; as also for that he was no lesse acceptable

vnto the old Emperour then vnto his maister, who did often remēber the daungers & the braue enterprises he had executed in the affaires his maister had, as well against the Moscouites, as at the rebellion of Cambalu & Catayo, & in the last conquest of the kingdome of China: so as his authoritie was great, with this, that he was curteous and humaine, and friendly towards euery one, and who spake dayly vnto his maister of great matters, and alwayes propounded vnto him honorable enterprises, whereunto he would be the first to set his hands, without sparing the hazard of his life at all. And although our Emperour was accompanied with great renowmed Princes, yet were they no bodie in comparison of the vertues and the greatnesse the which Axalla had gotten with his maister, whether it were in pompe, in liberalitie, and in furniture of slaues and horses: for hauing a a great mind & sharpe wit, he made vse thereof politikely to maintaine him self. Moreouer he neuer gaue counsell the which he did not offer to execute, and he was happy for that they had successe according to his desire, which procured him great authority; but he had a graceThe commēdation of Prince Axalla. beyond all this: for he was humble vnto euery body, the which made him well beloued, in humbling him selfe (in such greatnesse) euen vnto the smallest. I was one day in a place when the Prince did reprehend him for this so great mildenesse. He answered him, that it belonged vnto his maister to be stately, but for me it is my trade to play the slaue and seruaunt, and as greatnesse doth well beseeme you, so doth humilitie me, for I am not about you but for to honour you: for if you be honored I shalbe also. Also how humbly soeuer I carrie my selfe, what neede you to care so as I serue you well? if I should be stately, I should be odious vnto the great

men of your Court, and I should seuer them from you. I will haue them honor me, for seruing well of you, & not for my countenāce. This answere did greatly please the Emperour, & it was a cunning to cause him to be beloued, the which fel out happily for him: for they honored him more then he would. Now for to come againe vnto the Princes purpose, we will for this time leaue Axalla, whose nature I was willing to expresse vnto you, the which shall serue to giue you vnderstanding of manie things, that shalbe declared of him within this historie. So the Emperour sent vnto Axalla to come vnto him at Samarcand, for to receiue directions from him for the setting forward of his armie. Now hauing left by the Emperors commaundement the Prince of Thanais to commaund, he came vnto him, & cōsulted with him of the order for his army: and hauing resolued that it was best to passe by the borders of the Moscouite, to go directly vnto Constantinople the seate of the Greeke Emrours, whither they sayd the armie of Baiazet Emperour of the Turkes did march, being alreadie come downe into Asia Minor, there was a kinsman of Axallas dispatched, for to assure the Emperour of Greece of our armies comming forward, and that great prouision of victuals was made from all parts for maintenance of the same. We departed from Samarcand, for to go vnto Ozara, where was the meeting place for all the Princes troupes: and hauing in that place takenConsultation about the way the armie should take to the Turkes Empire. aduise for his iourney, that is to say, for to know whether should be more expedient and fauorable, either to go by the coastes of Moscouie directly vnto Capha, or rather on the other side of the sea Bachu to passe by the skirtes of Persia. It was resolued in the ende, after sundry opinions, although the way were the longer, to

passe vnto Capha for to come vnto Trebisonda and to the Georgians, and from thence to enter into the limits of the Ottomans. Then our armie after the accustomed ceremonies and prayers made vnto God, whereinTamerlan his chiefest trust. our Emperour hoped to finde his principall succours, we drew straight vnto Maranis where the armie abode three dayes, looking for the forces which Odmar did send, whereof they receiued newes. There did the Emperour cause all his armie to be payed, and a generall muster was made. He had newes also there of the forces that the Moscouite did send vnto him: he likewise caused an infinite quantitie of victuals and the most part of his furniture to be conueyed by the sea of Bachu, there being some twentie leagues where wasBachu. want of water and victuals, through the which our armie must needes passe, causing all things necessarie to be caried by water, the which was a great commoditie vnto vs: and there was a commaundement giuen at all the shoares of the sea, that they should bring all the vessels for to carrie the munition of the armie: so as this foresight did greatly ease our army. The Prince wēt cō
               tinuallyTamerlan hū
                  ted by the way towardes the Turke. coasting the sea shoare, passing away his time in hūting, & his armie came not neare vnto him by 10. leagues, except such as came to seeke necessaries for the army, the which did extēd it self some 20. leagues, it was so great. The Prince abode at Sarasich during the time his army passed the riuer of Edel at Mechet, and at two or three other bridges, the which they had caused to be made; there had he certain newes how Baiazet marchedBaiazet marched vnto the siege of Constantinople. vnto the siege of Cōstātinople, hauing reduced vnto his obediēce all Bithinia, & Bursia a very noble city, the which he caused to be fortified, & diuers other Cities, vsing all the cruelties that might be, in so much as all the adioyning

prouinces yelded thēselues his tributaries: amōgst the rest the noble Citie of Capha, wherewith the Emperor was greatly moued, because it had first put it self vnder his protectiō before the Turke; & this had bin compassed by the meanes of Axalla, where he was borne,Axalla a principall worker against the Turke for the relieuing of the Greeke Empire, and against Capha the place of his natiuitie. who was also the more offended because it was his coū
               trey, so farre forth as he sent to summō them to come & yeeld a reason vnto the Emperor of their fidelitie: wherupon the Citie receiued a great astonishment, and the principall men of the same Citie came vnto the Prince, who sent to be informed of all; and being ready to receiue the punishment for their infidelitie, after diuerse presents by them made of very excellent Marterns & other furres, pardon was graunted vnto them, & the citie was by the Prince giuē vnto Axalla for to dispose of the same: the which he did, going thither to see his kinsfolk,The gouernment Axalla did chase. and to take such order there, as he thought was for the preseruatiō of the Citie, as one not vngratefull vnto his countrey: and it was not without seasing vpon Tana, the which was belonging vnto the Seigniorie of Genua, of Achea and Lopeso, who submitted them selues vnto the Prince, and commaundement was giuen vnto Axalla to take order therein. This Lord which had refused the commaundement of the kingdome of China and of so many good Cities, did plainly shew, that there is nothing more deare, nor that a man doth more esteeme, then his countrey, whereof after a sort he now receiued possession. Behold Axalla, who in the end made there the choice of his resting place, notwithstanding the greatnesse he might promise vnto him selfe, being the second person in the Court of the greatest Monarke of the world: making no reckening thereof, he rather placed his hope in this litle shoare of Mar Maiore, then

in the limits of Scithi
                     •
                  
                and China, and for to succeed after his master vnto all his great conquests, for that hee had all the souldiers at his commandement, and great credite amongst all the people ouer whom his Prince commaunded. Now the army had spent some time in refreshing it selfe, to the end it might be gathered together, when any neede should require; the Prince determining from hence forward to march within hisTamerlan marched within his armie. armie, the which he had not done vntill this present, hauing spent his time in pleasures, leauing the burthen of conducting his whole armie vppon Axalla. Now as soone as we came neare vnto the holy mountaines, the Circassians a
                  •
               d Georgians sent vnto the Emperour for to offer vnto him all the helpe and assistance they could for his iourney. Nowe they be Christians and a very great Nation, who haue beene alwayes tributaries vnto the Grecian Emperour, acknowledging this Empire euer since they were conquered by Pompey. For these Nations, being part of those ouer whom the great Mithridates raigned, at such time as Pompey subdued them, they were very desirous of the comming of this great power, the which seemed to be sent from heauen for to deliuer the Grecian Empire from the cruell bondage of the Ottomans▪ Axalla drew many of this people vnto the Princes seruice, who are greatly esteemed for their braue courage and strength, being
                  
                     •
                   description of the Georgians with the
                     ••
                   countrey. all of them tall men, verie beautifull, wearing long haire: they are verie expert in warres, and haue often resisted the power of the Ottomans, by reason of the aduantage they haue within their countrie, the which is hard to come vnto, they (for the most part) vpon the first rumor of warre, burning all their houses, and making verie great wastes to hinder the enemies, and by

these meanes they are able to resist any power whatsoeuer that shall come to assalt them. The Prince tooke great pleasure to beholde these faire people, and was very glad to heare of their valour, and carefull to prouide that they should not be iniured in anie thing; at this present time they were vnder the Empire of Trebiso
                     •
                  da, the which the Grecian Emperours possessed. The Prince was euery where receiued verie friendly, and they brought vnto vs all the helpe of victuals that might be, to supply the want of our armie. Here had he certaine newes of the siege that was before Constantinople, where the Emperour was shut vp, and all his estate brought vnto great necessitie, Baiaze
                     •
                  
                hauing a very great and mightie armie, who neither beleeued, nor once thought that we would come vppon him, so exceeding barbarous was hee, that he would not endure anie man so much as to speake onely vnto him of our armie, as despising it, he was so proud: and there he caused all the bordering people publickely to bee forbidden, to make any vowes and prayers for our prosperitie. For I will declare a truth, that wee marched with such order▪ and the souldiers hauing such commaundement, that none of the people where wee passed, were ini
                  •
               redNotable iustice amongest the Tartarians in the passage of our armie, iustice raigned so amongst vs. Insomuch as if a souldier had taken but an apple, he was put to death, and this was seuerely obserued ouer all, a thing vsuall and especially in this iourney, the which was the onely cause of ouerthrowing the tyrannie of the Ottomans, and of this proud Baiazet. So we arriued at Bachichiche, where the armie refreshed it selfe for the space of eight dayes. Vnto this place came the Embassadors of Guines, vnto the Emperour,

whom the Prince did greatly reuerence for his holinesse. The saide Embassadors offered on the behalfe of their maister, all assistance and ayde vnto this enterprise, and brought faire horses vnto the Emperour the which their maister had sent vnto him, with assurance of good successe in his enterprise: forGuines a great Astrologian. this foresaid Guines did prophesie, and was a great Astrologian. The Emperour seemed greatly to honour this Embassage, and sent vnto the saide Guines great store of rich furres, and vessell of gold, & whilest we soiourned in that place, the armie made a generall muster, and were payed, as well the horsemen as the footmen, the Prince hauing made an oration vnto them) as his custome was, at such time as his souldiers made their generall muster) and informed them the manner he would haue obserued in the fight, to the end they might obserue the military discipline, whereof he was verie curious with his Captaines. And also vpon this same day it was permitted vnto euerie souldierThe custome of the Tartarrians towards their Emperor. for to behold him with more boldnesse then on other dayes, for as much as he doth for that time lay aside his Imperiall Maiestie, to humble himselfe, and become familiar, so farre foorth as to exhort his souldiers vnto vertue. So the Emperour after he had caused generall prayers to be published, wee departed from Bachichich, and they reckened that there was in our army three hundred thousand horsemen, & fiue hundred thousand footmē, of all kinds of Nations. The Emperor was aduertised that the Ottomans were become masters of all Greece, in so much as the Emperor was of opinion, that Baiazet would passe ouer into Europe, whē he shold perceiue that he approched: at the least wise the reason of war made him iudge that he wold do so: but it fel out

farre otherwise: for as soone as we had gone beyond the Georgians, and were come vnto Buisabuiche, Axalla whom the Prince had not seene in eight dayes, because he ledde the head of the armie, came vnto the Emperour, knowing verie well, that he could not bring vnto him more acceptable newes then hee did bring, the which was that Baiazet had raised his siege for to come and defend his new conquest, and that it was a most certaine thing, that he was resolued to come vnto a day of battell: that he had caused all his forces to come out of Greece, as many of them as he could drawe from all partes, trusting not vppon the multitude, but rather in the boldnesse and experience of his souldiers, who were well trayned vp in the warres. This did greatlie reioyce the Emperour, but yet it was not with insolencie of vaunting, but rather with the countenance of a personage, who iudged the euentes of battels to be ordinarily doubtfull. And hee sayd, thatTamerlan his saying of battels. a small number well conducted, is oftentimes victorious. We soiourned three dayes at this Buisabuiche, and we caused our souldiers continually to aduance forward, and to passe ouer Euphrates, for to find better meanes to maintaine our armie vppon the spoyle of the enemie in attending their comming, rather then vppon our owne selues, or on our Allies. From that place the Emperour did dispatch vnto the Emperour his vnkle one of the greatest fauourites he had about him, for to certifie vnto him of the deliuerie of this noble Citie of Constantinople, and how the Ottomans came fully resolued to giue battell; and for to preuent dangers, he gaue cōmandement that they should keepe the borders strong, & all his forces on horseback vpon the enemies side: for often times as in prosperitie

all your neighbours do smile vpon you, and encline towards you: so whensoeuer an ouerthrow happeneth, euery one setteth vpon you, & do help to spoile you. ForA good aduertisement for Princes. this cause shold wise Princes assure well that which they do alreadie possesse, least the victorious enemie pursuing his good fortune, take from you the meanes to raise your selfe vp againe. Our Emperour had alwayes this wisedome, when such blowes happened, for to aduertise his countries to stand vppon their guard, rather then to publish vnto them his victorie. So wee departed from thence after the Prince had assembled all the principall men of his armie, to impart vnto them his purpose, and for to receiue counsell of them, the which his courtesie did vse of custome, that made him to be beloued. For the farther you were from him then did hee most honour you: there were so manie seuerall Nations within our armie, so many Captaines sent vnto him for his succour, and then was the time when he principally was humble, and layd aside his grauitie, feasting them for the aide and succour they gaue vnto our armie. Amongest the straungers this Chinois Lord did ordinarily receiue great honour of the Prince, who was alwayes wont to say, that the vertue of Axalla, and the loue of this Lord towards him, had made him Lord of the fairest kingdome of Asia. The Emperour was verie desirous to acquaint and instruct this Lord with the manners and fashions of those people by whom we passed, for he was alwayes neere vnto the Emperours person; and all the forces he had cōducted vnto our armie, wherein the Prince made shew to put great confidence; they had marched with vs these two monethes, and carried themselues very well, as all our other forces did, victuals being there in

great plentie, that which gaue vs so much thereof, was the great iustice therein obserued. So our armie came vnto Garga, where it passed the riuer Euphrates, the auantgard at Chinserig; and the generall meeting of the armie was appointed to be at Gianich, the which did yeeld it selfe: and there had wee newes that Baiazet his armie was neare vnto vs, within some thirty leagues, which caused vs to march more close. All the cities yeelded, the Emperor receiuing them graciously, and those which refused obedience, were cruelly punished, especially such inhabitants as were Turkes, but the Christians set in full libertie, vnder the name of the Greeke Emperour Emanuell, whom the Emperour would wholly gratifie, Axalla hauing receiued this commaundement from the Prince: so he caused themThe causes of Tamerlans warre against the Turkes. to sweare fidelitie vnto Emanuell, his purpose beeing to set him againe into his Empire, and to punish this Baiazet for being so rash, as to enterprise to destroy so flourishing an Empire, as that of the Greekes his Allies. Now the Emperours quarrell was iust against this proud lightning from heauen, especially in respect of his execrable cruelties hee vsed against all sexes and ages, vsurping an Empire the which had sought all possible meanes to make peace with his Armes: but he soone broke it, and falsified his faith vnto this poore Emperour, according as he found the meanes by litle and litle, to vsurpe almost all from him, there remaining no more vnto him, but some small townes belonging vnto his Metropolitan Citie, the which he had also besieged. It was then an honourable thing, for the Emperour to deliuer this noble Empire from such great tyrannie, an Empire so famous in the world, and a citie so auncient, out of the hands

of so wicked and accursed an off-spring. This was the cause that made the Emperor to hope for to haue God, his great God for an helper in this enterprise. But before I beginne, I am desirous to speake a word of the vprightnesse of the Princes cause, and also for to note the worthinesse of his courage, in giuing helpe vnto the weake, and punishing of the proud, representing by such deedes, the image of the diuinitie, the which should be marked in Princes, in vpholding the weake ones, and those that require succour against such oppressions. So God being with vs, the armie fully replenished with ioy and hope, we departed from Gianich. Axalla who was in the auantguard, hauing commaunded foure thousand Parthian horse for to getFoure thousand Parthiā horse sent to descrie. knowledge of the armie, vnder the charge of Chianson Prince of Ciarcian, commaunding him to put all vnto fire and sword, and also to bring word vnto him of the place where Baiazet was, and what countrie that was beyonde Sennas; and if hee could learne anie thing thereof, he should make relation thereof vnto him. This Captaine was of great reputation, and next vnto Axalla, he had the commanding of the auantgard in his absence: this man sent before him a Parthian light-horseman with fiue hundred horse. So hee had not ridden tenne leagues, but they heard newes of the armie, and hauing surprised Sennas, they vnderstood there the estate of the Turkes armie, the which was at Tataya, and marched forward. The which being certified vnto the Emperour, commandement was giuen vnto them, not to retire from that place, vntill they did see the arriuall of the enemie, and thereof to giue aduertisement euerie houre: the Prince determining to passe on no further, hauing seene a faire

plaine, and a countrie of aduantage for the order of his battell: for he knew that he had to deale with people expert in warres, and which were accustomed to fight against the Christians, who are verie actiue and war-like people, who wanted not the knowledge of war-like stratagemes. They knewe also, that his armie was greater then Baiazets: but it was yet of diuerse parts, so as it behooued to be well aduised, for it was not against the Chinois soft and effeminate people, but against souldiers, well acquainted with all manner of fights that are to be fought. Then the Emperour did not omit any vigilancie for to keepe his aduantage, Axalla was sent for by the Emperour to come and accompanie him for to view the said place, and to consider whether it would be for his aduantage, and to haue his aduise. This place is between the sea & Gianche on the side of Sēnas boūded of one side with a litle riuer which runneth into Euphrates. And he was aduised to keepe Sennas as long as he could possibly, and sent word vnto those which were within the same, to set it on fire when as they shold withdraw themselues from thence, to the end that the enemie shold not haue a desire to encamp therein: but should come forward nearer vnto our armie into these plaines, the place which we desired to fight in, because wee were stronger in horsemen then the Ottomans. Thus behold this great armie of Baiazet encouraged vnto the battell, who thought to haue surprised our men within Sennas, but as soone as they drewe neare, our men set it on fire, and the greatest part retiring, there remained some hundred horse to performe the same, who retyred themselues in verieA stratageme. great disorder. Now the Prince of Ciarcan had deuided his men into two troupes, & giuen cōmandement vnto

the first troupe, that as soone as they perceiued the enemies to pursue the hundred horse, they should receiue them, and retire iointly together. Now hee had the rest of his power in a valley neere vnto a wood, and hauing suffered some two thousand of the enemies horse, Turks auant-currers to passe by him, he charged them behind, and fought with them, they not fighting but flying as soone as they did see themselues pressed: many were slaine, and manie were taken prisoners. This was the first time we fought, and carried away the victorie: all the prisoners were sent vnto the Prince, amongst the rest the Bassa of Natolia, who led this troupe, of whom the Emperour earnestlie demanded, what caused Baiazet so litle to esteeme him, as to shew so great contempt of his Armie, and that hee should find that he was well able to punish his pride. The other answered, that his Lord was the Son of the earth, thatA proud answer of a Bassa made vnto Tamerlan. he could not indure a companion, that hee surely was astonished, how he from so far had enterprised so dangerous a iourney, to hinder the fortune of his Lord, in whose fauour the heauens did bend thēselues, because they were not able to withstand him, that all the rouud world did subiect themselues vnto him, and that hee cōmitted great folly in going about to resist the same.Tamerlans reply vnto the Bassa. The Emperour answered, I am sent from heauen for to punish his rashnesse, and to teach him that the proud are punished of God, whose principall action is to cast downe high things, & to raise vp the lowly: at the least yet I haue already constrained thy maister to raise his siege from before Constantinople. And moreouer, thou hast already felt (although I lament thy mishap) what the valour of my Parthian horse is against thy Turkish. Doest thou think (changing of his speech) that thy master

doth come to bid me battaile? The Passa answered, yea, assuring you that there is nothing hee more desireth: and I beseech you that I may acknowledge your greatnesse in giuing me leaue to assist my Lord at this Battaile. The Emperor said vnto him; I giue thee leaue, go and tell thy Lord that thou hast seene me, and that I will fight on horseback in the place where he shal see a greene ensigne. The Bassa did sweare, that next vnto his Lord he vowed his seruice vnto him. Then hee returned, and declared vnto Baiazet how hee had seene Tamerlan, reciting vnto him all that he was willed to declare. Of this (said hee) I will make triall, and I beleeue he will acknowledge his follie before the match be ended. The Bassa did not forget to publish ouer all, the mildnesse of Tamerlan, his greatnesse, and curtesie, declaring that he did so farre extend his curtesie, as to giue vnto him a verie faire horse, although he might well thinke that it was to fight against himselfe. So the next day Baiazet his Armie drew neare vnto the sight of ours, the which marched two leagues: and wee encamped within a league the one of the other. All the night long you might haue heard such noise of horses,How Tamerlans army passed the night before the battaile fought against the Turke. as it seemed the heauens were ful of voices, the aire did so resound, and euery one was desirous to haue the night passed, for to come each one vnto the triall of his valor. Vnto the Scithian nation, the which is desirous of goods, they propoūded the great riches they should get by the victory ouer the Ottomans. Vnto the Parthiā nation ambitious of rule, the honor and glory of their nation, being conquerets of them, who only were able to take from them the Empire of Asia. The Christians who made the fourth part there of, assured thēselues to conquer their greatest enemie. Behold how euery one

spake during the night time, according to his humour. The Prince this night went through his Camp hearing all this, & was very glad to see the hope that euery one of his soldiers did conceiue already of the victorie; & I being neere him, and he did me the honor to tell mee, that at the time he fought the battaile against the Moscouit, he did heare all the night long all kinds of songs, the which resounded in his Campe, seeing in a maner no bodie sleepe: I hoped then (said he) to haue some good hap, and I trust to receiue the like nowe. Now after the second watch the Prince returned vnto his lodging, and casting himselfe vpon a carpet, he meant to sleepe: but the desire of day would not suffer him for to sleepe; hee then commaunded me to giue him a booke, wherin he did reade: therin was contained the the liues of his fathers and grandfathers, and of other valiant knights, the which he did ordinarilie reade: he called me, hauing light vpon (in reading) the discourse of a battaile that his grandfather had lost against the Persians, the which he had thought to haue gottē (very vndiscreetly) hauing assaulted his enemie, many aduantages being propounded vnto him, whereof he might haue made good vse, all which he neglected, trusting vnto his owne valor and that of his souldiers. And hauing ended his speech, he commanded me to reade the same before him, and said vnto me, I alwaies reade thisTamerlan his custome before a battaile. before I begin a battaile, to the end I shold not so much trust vnto the Lyons skin, wherin I wrap my arme, that I shold not serue my self with the Foxes, to wrap therwith my head: for thus (said he) my grādfather was in a place of aduātage, & he wēt out of it to seek his enemy, who was lodged strōgly, & what soeuer his men said to him, he went on headlong, shutting his eares against

all the counsell and aduise of his seruants, and demanding of me whether it were day, hee caused the great Chamberlaine to be called, and commanded him to to cause his trumpet to be sounded, and that his horse should be ready: and hauing a litle slumbred, he gaue commandement that Axalla should be sent for, who came vnto him with other Lords and Captaines, the chiefest of the Armie, with whom after he had consulted of the order of his battaile. Hee mounted on horsebacke, and sent euerie one for to make themselues readie to do the like: at the same instant he receiued newes that the enemies Armie marched forward, and came to take his ground for the battaile. The Emperour desired to see him march, that according to his order hee might marshall his owne: and hauing caused three thousand horse to aduance forward, vnto whom he had giuen in charge to beginne the skirmish, himselfe aduanced forward to lodge euerie man in such places as he had fore seene to be most for his aduantage. Now he seeing the Turkish footmen march, whom they do callThe maner of the march of the Turkish footmen. Ianizaries, the which were placed in the middest, and vpon the two fronts, two great squadrons of horsmen, the which seemed to be thirtie thousand horse, & another which aduanced and couered the batallion of the the Ianizaries. He thought this order to be verie good, and hard to breake, and turning himselfe vnto Axalla, who was neare vnto him, hee said, I had thought to haue fought on foote, but it behooueth me this day to fight on horsebacke, for to giue courage vnto my soldiers to open the great Batallion: and my will is, thatThe order of Tamerlan his battaile. they come forward vnto me as soone as they may: for I will aduance forward an hundred thousand footmen, fifty thousand vpon each of my two wings, and in the middest

of them forty thousand of my best horse. My pleasure is, that after they haue tried the force of those mē, that they come vnto my auantguard, of whom I will dispose (& fiftie thousand horse more) in three bodies, whom thou shalt command, the which I will assist with foure-score thousand horse, wherein shal be mine own person, hauing an hundred thousand footmen behind me, who shall march in two troupes; and for my Arierward fortie thousand horse, and fiftie thousand footmen, who shall not march but vnto my aide. I will make choise of ten thousand of the best horse, whom I will send into euerie part where I shall thinke needfull within my Armie, for to impart my commandements. Ouer the first fortie thousand the Prince Ciarcian commanded: ouer the formost footmen was the Lord Synopes, a Geneuois, kinsman vnto Axalla, and he which was his Lieutenant ouer the footmen, a Captaine of great estimation. That ouer which the Prince Axalla commanded, consisted of fiue squadrons of horsmen. Baiazet his Armie seemed faire and great, which was aduanced continuallie forward towards vs, who stirred not one whit from the place of the battaile. There were indeed many light horsmen, as wel Scithians, Parthians, as Moscouites, who left their ranks, and shot arrowes, and brake lances betweene the two Armies. There was a spie who brought word that Baiazet was on foot in the middest of his Ianizaries, where he meant to fight, that hee did not forget to mount on horsebacke, giuing order ouer all for the wants of his Armie: but purposed to fight in the middest of those Ianizaries, who are a number of trustie men, broughtWhat the Turks I anizaries be. vp in exercises from their youth to all maner of warfare, and chosen out of all nations, the fairest and strongest

men, so as they are inuincible. By this bringing vp the which they haue had together, they do fight with a great force and courage for their Prince and Lord, who being in the middest of them, they are as in a halfe circle within the Armie. Now they were thirtie thousand men in this order, wherein Baiazet put his principall hope: he had many other footmen, but gathered together of all sorts. His battaile of horse was verie faire, amounting vnto the number of an hundred and fortie thousand horse, well exercised in all maner of fightes. The Soldan of Egypt hauing aided him with thirtie thousand Mammelues, very good horsmen, and with thirtie thousand footmen. Their Armie in that order seemed almost as great as ours: for they were not so knit together as we were, our forces being directlie one after the other, and theirs all in a front. So the enemies Armie aduanced forward continually with an infinite number of cries, and ours was in great silence. After that common prayer was ended, the Emperour himselfe aduanced continually forward, beholding the first charge giuen, and caused Axalla to set forward after he returned into his order, continually exhorting his men before he left them. There could not be seene a more furious charge giuen, then was performed by the Ottomans vpon the Prince of Ciarcian, who had commandement not to fight before they came vnto him: there could not haue bene chosen a fairer plain, and where the skilfull choise of the place was of lesse aduantage for the one then for the other, but that we had the riuer on our left hand, the which was some aduantage for the Emperour, hauing giuen commandement, that in any case they should not lose the same, & that the enemies, whatsoeuer came thereof, should

not win it: this he did for to haue the aduantage of the hand in fight. The Emperor, who aboue all MaximesTamerlan his principall Maxime of warre. of warre, did vse to deale in such maner, that the enemie might be the first assaulter; he had straightly commanded thē which were appointed for the first charge, to suffer the enemie for to giue the onset. Nowe (as I haue already declared) this young Prince of Ciarcian with his fortie thousand horse was almost wholly ouerthrown, hauing fought as much as he could, but he entredThe battaile betweene Tamerlā and Baiazet. euen into the middest of the Ianizaries, where the person of Baiazet was, putting them in disorder, where he was slaine. About this time Axalla set vpon thē with the Auātgard, where as he was not in any such danger; for hauing surprised one of the enemies wings, he cut it all in peeces, & his footmen comming to ioine with him, as they had bene commanded, he faced the Batallion of the Ianizaries. The Prince seeing the charge Axalla had vpon his arme, sent ten thousand horse frō his battaile for to succour him, and knit together the maine battaile of Axalla, and to giue once againe a charge vpon another Batallion of footmen, the which did shew it selfe, and came toioine with and strengthen that of the Ianizaries, who behaued themselues valiantlie for the safetie of their Prince. This fight continued one houre, and yet you could not haue seene anie scattered, fighting resolutely the one against the other. You might haue seene the mountaines of horses rush one against another, the men die, crie, lament, and threaten at one yerie time. The Prince had patiēce to see this fight ended, & when he did perceiue that his men did giue place, he sent ten thousand of his horse to ioyne againe with the ten thousand appointed for the Arierward, and commaunded them to assist him,

at such time as hee should haue need thereof. At this verie time the Emperour chargeth, and made them giue him roome, causing the footmen to assault, ouer whom the Prince of Thanais commanded; who gaue a furious onset vpon the batallion of the Ianizaries, wherein was yet the person of Baiazet, who had sustained a great burthen. But the multitude, and not valor, did preuaile; for as much as might bee done in fight, was by the Ianizaries performed, for to preserue the person of their Prince. But in the end the horsemen, wherein was the Emperors person, gaue a new charge, and his Auantguard was whollie knit againe vnto him, he renewed another forcing, and was fullie victorious.Tamerlan his notable victory obtained against Baiazet wherin he was taken prisoner. 
               Baiazet hauing retired on horsebacke out of the troupe of Ianizaries wounded, fell aliue into the hands of Axalla, vnto whom he yeelded himselfe, supposing it had bene Tamerlan: then Axalla seeing him so followed, (being for a time not knowne but for some great Lord of the Ottomans) twentie thousand horse did not fight at all, but only in pursuing the victorie, and they made a great slaughter. The Prince had his horse slaine vnder him with the blow of a lance, but he was soone remounted againe on horsebacke. This day the wisedom of the Emperor gaue the victorie vnto his souldiers:Tamerlan his wisdom the cause of the victory, & wherin performed. for the iudgement which he had in tyring of the strong forces of the Ottomans, was the safegard of his. For if all had gone vnto the battaile in one front, surely the mutitude had put it selfe into a confusion: but this maner of aiding his men made euerie one profitable. The Emperor iudging (like a great Captaine) of the need that euerie one of his souldiers had, so that this manner of proceeding was the getting of the victory. They accounted threescore thousand men slain of the Ottomans,
               
and twentie thousand of ours. The Prince of Tirzis was slaine as I haue said: the head of the Georgians slaine, Calibes was verie sorrie hee had so easie a reckening in his Arier-ward, being very couragious, and a gentle knight: the Despote of Seruia was taken prisonerer, who did accompanie Baiazet, and was a Christian: they gaue him this day of battaile much reputation. The Emperour gaue vnto him verie good entertainment, reproouing him, for that he did accompanie Baiazet against him, who did come in fauour of his Emperour. He answered him, that it was not according to his dutie, but the prosperitie of Baiazet, vnto whome it seemed, that all the world did bend for to subiect it selfe vnto him, and that his safetie had caused him to set forward. The Emperor presentlie therupon gaue him leaue to depart at his pleasure. He tooke care to get into his hands Baiazet his childrē: he gaue commandement that Baiazet should bee cured, and after brought before him: who at such time as he was there,Baiazet brought before Tamerlan, with his pride. neuer made any shewe of humility. The Emperour saying vnto him, that it lay in him to cause him to lose his life; he answered: Do it, that losse shall bee my happinesse. And demanding of him what made him so rash, for to enterprise to bring into subiection so noble a Prince as was the Emperour of the Greekes. He answered him, the desire of glorie and rule. Wherfore doest thou (said the Emperour vnto him) vse so great crueltie towards men, so farre foorth that neither thou nor thine do pardō either sex or age? This do I (answered he) to giue the greater terrour to my enemies. Then said the Emperour, so shalt thou receiue the like reward: and causing him to bee conueyed againe out of his presence, he turned vnto his followers, and said,

behold a proud and fierce countenance, hee deseruethTamerlan his saying of Baiazet. to be punished with crueltie, and it is necessarie that hee bee made an exemplarie punishment to all the cruell of the world, of the iust wrath of God against them. I acknowledge that God hath this day deliuered into my hands a great enemy, we must giue thanks vnto God for the same: the which was performed, being yet day: for the battaile was wonne at foure of the clocke, and there was as yet fiue houres of daylight. The children of Baiazet were brought before him: he caused them to be vsed curteouslie, and as the children of an Emperour. The next day he commaunded the dead to bee buried: they found the Prince of Tirzis dead in the middest of the Ianizaries, where he remained enclosed. The Emperour did greatly lamēt this young Prince, who was his kinseman, and would haue bene one day worthie for to do him great seruice. In that battaile there-died manie Captaines, & almost all the chiefe of the Ottomans. This was a great Battaile, the which was fought from seuen vnto foure of the clocke, in such sort that they knew not vnto whom the victorie did incline. Our Armie stayed vntill the next day, euery one causing his friends to be buried. The Prince of Tirzis was embalmed, and conueyed with two thousand horse vnto Samarcand vntil the Emperour returned. All the other dead bodies were buried at Sanas with all the honour that might be. Axalla was much grieued for his kinsman, because hee was verie well beloued of the Prince: his charge was giuen vnto one of his brethren who was verie famous; in fighting this same day, wee might iudge the euents of the matters of the world. Behold this Emperour Baiazet, who was, as he thought, superior to fortune,

which in an instant found himselfe and his estate by one battaile onlie ouerthrowne euen vnto the lowest place, and at such time as he thought least thereof. He vsed to say, that he was iustly punished, for despising the multitude we had, for the assurance that hee had in the valour of his horsmen, and especially of his Ianizaries. Hee was three dayes (as they report)The despaire of Baiazet after he was taken prisoner. before he could be pacified, as a desperate man, seeking after death, and calling for it. The Emperour did not vse him at all curteouslie, but caused small account to bee made of him: and for to manifest that he knew how to punish the proud; vpon festiuall dayes, when as he mounted on horseback, they brought this proud man vnto him, and hee seruedBaiazet Tamerlans footstoole to mount on horsebacke. him in steed of a foot-stoole: this did hee for to manifest the follie and arrogancie of men, and how iustlie God had humbled him. The next day the Prince marched directlie towardes Bursia, whither all the remainder of Baiazet his Armie was retired, with the Bassa Mustapha. All the countrie yeelded vnto vs, and the Prince caused all the holdes and fortresses to be ouerthrowne and destroyed, and punished all those which were so euill aduised as to stay vntill they were besieged. I had forgotten to declare, how hee caused the Prince of Tirzis bodie to be accompanied with diuers prisoners chained & tied together, whom he did send vnto Samarcand, the which the Prince had determined to make great, for a perpetuall memorie of his greatnesse. Euen so had hee greatlie peopled itTamerlan his pollicie for to encrease his citie Samercand▪
                with people of China, which had bene taken in the Battailes, and of those likewise which were taken out of the two great Cities, Paguinfou, and Quantoufou. Nowe this battaile did bring great astonishment

vnto all the countries possessed by Baiazet, and no bodie resisted vs, euen vnto Bursia, whither this armie was fled, and therein were also two sonnes of Baiazet verie young. Axalla being alwaies aduanced forward before our Armie, with fortie thousand horse, and an hundred thousand footmen without anie carriages, who hindred the enemies from ioyning themselues againe together: and he made a cruell warre vpon the Ottomans, deliuering the Grecians from the tyrannie ofAxalla cruell against the Ottomans for the deliuery of Greece. 
               Baiazet. He approched neare vnto Bursia, where the Ottomans did not stay the comming of Axallas Armie, but only they which could not run remayned behind. Baiazet his two sonnes were sent vnto the Greekish Emperor for to bring them vp, & to haue mercie vpon them; the rest went vnto Gallipoli, for to go vnto Andrinopoli, the which they held, hauing conquered it from the Grecians. Now the Prince (for to returne vnto my purpose) dispatched towards the Emperour his vnkle, and vnto the Empresse his wife one of his familiars, called Lieban, Captaine of his chamber, for to carriePresents sent by Tamerlan vnto the great Cham his vnkle him newes of this victorie, and to ioyne it also vnto all the rest. Hee sent vnto him Baiazet his sword and bowe, and the caparisons of his horse, the which was esteemed to be worth aboue two hundred thousand duckats. You may easilie thinke that Prince Lieban was well entertained of the olde Emperour, and of the young Princesse, bringing word vnto them, that all the world did bend it selfe to make our Prince victorious, who surely receiued these victories from God without insolencie, & at such time as he sent him most glory, then did his men note him to bee least puffed vp. Hee was neuer bolde, but in the day of battaile, and on the eeue for to commaund seuerelie, and

with greater maiestie. To tell you what hee was in aduersitie, I did neuer see him in that estate: but it is to be thought, that they which be not insolent in prosperity, are not faint-hearted in aduersitie. So our victorious Prince marched directlie vnto Bursia, loaden with spoiles and Trophees which he daylie got, departing from the Cities which did come and yeeld themselues vnto him; therein obseruing the same manner of proceeding the which we did in the cōquest of China; they which did yeeld vnto him without fighting, were well vsed, and the obstinate well punished, the Prince knowing that reward and punishment are the moderators of common-wealthes, the one to be vsed towards the good, and the other towards the euill. In the end we receiued newes by Axalla, that hee had receiued Bursia in the Emperors name, and how the inhabitants therof had punished the garrisons of Baiazet, hauing driuen them away, and slaine manie. He sent word also vnto the Prince, that the Embassadors of the Greekish Emperour Emanuel were come vnto him, the most honorable persons of his Court, and that he had staied them from passing any further. The Prince sent word, that they should stay for him in that Citie: so we arriued in short time, and all the inhabitants of the Citie came to meete the Emperour bare-headed, in token of bondage: and the Prince entered into Bursia with great magnificence. Axalla with the Embassadors came to meete him, whom the Emperor receiued with all the honor that might be, and shewed vnto thē all his magnificence, and the order of his Armie, whereat they wondered: for our Armie resembled a Citie, for the order that was therin, the which did bring vnto vs plenty of all kind of victuals & marchandize. The Embassage

of the Greeke Emperour was, that he submitted all hisThe effect of the Greek Emperors Emb
                     •
                  ssage vnto Tamerlan. Empire and his person vnto our Emperour, and that he wold be vnto him a most faithful subiect and vassall, himselfe and his subiects, and that hee would be thinke him how to dispose of his goods, the which he offered thereby as his owne, and that he was bound for to doe this, for that he was deliuered by him from the yoke & bondage of the most cruell Tigre that might be; that the farre countries he had passed, and the discommodities he had endured, and the losse of his men, could not be recompenced, but by the offer of his owne life and his subiects, the which he did dedicate for euer to his seruice; that he should alwaies find therefore such faithfulnesse as so great a bond towards him doth deserue. Besides, the so many vertues & rare gifts, which made his name famous throughout all the world inhabited, did bind him vnto the same; that he would attend him in his chief citie, for to deliuer it into his hands as his owne, and all the Empire of Greece, ouer which he commanded, to cause the same for to obey him. Nowe the Greek Embassadors looked for no lesse then to fall into bondage, thinking that to be so great which they did offer, & a morsell so delicate, that it would not bee refused, especially of a conquering Prince, as was Tamerlan; & that accepting therof in mildnesse & friendship, was the best bargaine they could make therin: but they receiued answer far otherwise: for the Prince withTh
                     •
                   worthy answer of Tamerlan vnto the Greek Embassadors. a mild countenance answered them; that hee was not come frō so far a cuntrie, nor had taken so much paines to conquer countries; that it was too base a thing for him to put himselfe into so great trauaile and dangers, but rather to win honor, and thereby for to make his name famous and glorious vnto all the world: therefore

would hee make it well appeare, that hee was come to aide him, being requested as a friend and allie, the which had happie successe. That his vpright meaning therein was the greatest cause that God had beheld from aboue his power, by the which he bruised the head of the most fierce enemie vnto mankind that was vnder heauen: & for to get him now an immortall glorie and eternall name, he would make free so great and flourishing a citie, gouerned by so noble and ancient a house; that with his courage he had alwaies faith ioined, the which wold neuer make so great a breach in his reputatiō, that it shold be reported of him, he cameThe worthy mind of Tamerlan. to help as a friend vnder the pretence to inuade the dominions of his Allie; that he would haue the seruice he had done ot the Greek Emperors engrauen in the memorie of the posterity, to the end they might wish well vnto him and his successors, by remembring that he had done good vnto them; that he contented himselfe to carrie away the honor and glorie thereof; that long might he liue to gouerne his estate; and that before his departure he should consider so well to establish him, as that hee should not fall againe into so great ieopardie, that hee deliuered into his handes the two sonnes of Baiazet, to do with them as he should thinke good; that he should be wise and prouident in well aduising himselfe hereafter; that his good will should be alwayes most fauourable towards him. You may easily iudge what ioy these Greekish Princes receiued, hearing the Emperor pronounce these words, full of so great clemencie, who for that he would not be seene to breake his faith, refused an Empire offered vnto him, and the most stately and magnificent Citie of the world. I do thinke there bee few Princes

that would performe such a part, so bee there likewise but few Tamerlans in the world. Axalla had commandement from the Prince to feast these Embassadors, and to do them all the honor that might be: one of thē was sent vnto the Emperour to carrie him these newes, who looked for some cleane contrarie: but hauing receiued word thereof, then was the time to make bonfiresBonfires made in Constantinople for the worthy answer receiued from Tamerlan. within Constantinople, and the oportunitie to reioyce with all kind of pleasures. The Greekish Emperour hauing assembled his Counsell, to know whether hee should not go vnto him and giue him thankes, it was so resolued on by all the Princes of the Court. So the Emperour was aduertised of his iourney, who was verie glad thereof, and euen vpon the first dayes iourney Axalla was sent by the Emperour for to certifie him of the ioy that he conceiued to haue the good hap for to see him, as also for to conduct him euen vnto Bursia, whither the Emperor vnderstanding the GreekThe meeting of Tamerlan and the Greek Emperor at Bursia. came, went to meet him, and with all kinds of magnificences, they were one whole day together. The next day the Greekish Emperour tooke his leaue of the Prince, who did accompanie him out of the Citie. Nowe the Emperour had as great a desire as might be, to see this so famous a Citie, as was Constantinople, but he would not goe thither but as a priuate person; the which Axalla handled without making anie shew thereof, desiring to be receiued thereinto priuately by the Greekish Emperour. The whichTamerlan his secret going to Constantinople was accomplished with all the familiarity possible, and therein was no rare and excellent thing which was not shewed vnto the Emperour. The Greekish Prince hauing aduised himselfe of all the meanes to doe him pleasure, & vnto all them which did accompanie him,

who were in a manner all apparelled after the Greeke fashion, insomuch as they were greatly astonished to vnderstand that we had bene there. The Greeke Emperour was curious to shew vnto our Emperour all the faire gardens, the which be all along the sea coast, a league or two from Constantinople, and hee conducted him in priuate companie, so as fiue or sixe dayes were spent with all the mirth that might be possible. The Prince would often say, he had neuer seene a fairer citie; that this was indeede the citie (considering his faire and rich situation) which ought to commaund all the world. He wondered at the costly buildings of the Temples,The rare things in Constantinople. the faire engrauen pillers, the faire Pirimades of wonderfull height, the which the Emperour Constantine had caused to be brought thither out of Egypt, and the making of the faire gardens: and he was wont to say, that he did nothing repent him of his voiage, for that he had preserued from fire and bloud, so noble a Citie as that was: he greatly commended the mildnesse and courtesie of the Greeke Emperour. Now the Greeke Emperour knowing the Prince very curious for faireThe Greeke Emperor gaue vnto Tamerlan faire horses. horses, he gaue vnto him thirtie of the fairest, strongest, and readiest that might be gotten, with the most rich cloth of gold, and excellent silke that could be seene. The Greeke sent likewise to gratifie all the Princes and Lords of the armie with presents, and caused all things to be deliuered vnto them, the which he thought to be necessarie for the armie. So as hauing rested almost fifteene dayes, we beganne to thinke vppon the accomplishing of our purposes: and after a straight friendship was sworne betweene the two Princes, our Emperour determined before he returned, to make the Soldan of Egypt know his power, who had giuen ayde vnto Baiazet
               
against him, to the end that all the world should know, that he was milde and courteous vnto his friends, and vnto his enemies terrible and fearefull. So we departed from Bursia, hauing deliuered the same into the handes of the Greeke Emperour, and hauing driuen out all the Ottomans out of all the fortresses, and hauing left the Greeke Emperour in the same libertie, hee was before our armie came, there being nothing now in Asia that tooke the Ottomans part, vnlesse he had gotten vnto the mountaines or passed ouer into Europe, so fearefull was our armie become by the victorie obtained against Baiazet. Andronicus Paleologus, nephew vnto the Greeke Emperour, followed our Emperor with ten thousand horse, the which the Greeke Emperor deliuered vnto him, for the warre which he enterprised against the Soldan of Egypt, with whom he had often fought. Now for to accōplish the Emperors good hap, he receiued newes frō his court, that the EmpresseThe Empresse deliuered of a goodly boy. was deliuered of a goodly boy: for the which were made bonfires, and great reioycing in the Army. He had also newes how all was quiet in his estate, and the old Emperor his vnkle in good health, the which was one of the things did most comfort him: for he feared especially least the old Prince should die in his absence, & by this meanes some trouble might arise within his estate, by some great men, and certaine fauourites which were neare vnto the old Emperour. Notwithstanding they which had played the fooles in his absence, were so well punished, that (as I thinke) others should take thereby example, & it is a generall rule, that after a Prince hath once his weapons in his hands, there will be no great reuolting in his absence, nor nouelties within his countrie, how farre soeuer he be seuered. For first and formost

all the seditious and ambitious fellowes, do ordinarily follow him vnto the warre, and moreouer he that is on horsebacke is feared. On the contrarie part, whensoeuer a Prince is softly and effemenate, his souldiers which are not employed, do go vnto him that hath any discontentment, or rather who is desirous of raigning: so as the Prince being found vnarmed, before he hath made an Armie, and gathered together his garrisons, the seditious haue alreadie plaied well their parts, and the mischiefe hath entred very farre. There were sixe moneths passed since we departed frō 
               Samarcand, and it grieued many that the Emperour would not returne into his countrie: insomuch as this being declared vnto the Prince by Axalla, it was thoght conuenient the Prince should againe reuiew the order of his armie, and should speake vnto his souldiers, causing a generall reuiew to be made of his armie, and that this same might giue them the greater courage for to endure all discommodities for the seruice of the Prince. So being come vnto Calestria, a generall reuiew was commaunded, the Prince being himselfe there in person, where hee spake first vnto the Parthians in this manner: I can not beleeue myTamerlan his oration vnto his souldiers at Calestria perswa
                     •
                  iue, to follow him vnto new enterprises countriemen and souldiers, that you haue any desire to see your countrie, and that you are fainting to winne glory vnto your Nation, seeing all people do hazard all & euery kind of happinesse for to win vnto them selues the same: you with me, and I with you, haue within certaine yeares gotten many victories, whereby we haue made our Nation superiour vnto others, and our name made famous ouer all the world. If you be wearie in following my glorious ensignes, remember your selues, how it may be reported, that Tamerlan your

Emperour hath finished his victories through the valor of another Nation, & not by his own: & consider what reproch you shall bring vnto ours, renowmed by so great successe obtained against so many and sundrie warlike people. You my souldiers, whose reputation flieth through all the world, shall I beleeue this of you? I will not, neither ought I to beleeue it: therefore follow me, and let vs go and assault the Mamelues, who you know of long time haue opposed themselues (how farre soeuer from vs) against our happinesse, hauing ioyned themselues vnto the Ottomans for our destruction. Would you that I should punish their rashnesse without you? Would you that the Scithians and my allies, should haue part in my victories, and in the meane time, you should go rest your selues, and lose the glorie alreadie gotten? The Prince had no sooner made an end, but they all cryed with a loud voice, that they wold liue and die with him, and as they followed him into China, so would they also follow him throughout all the world: but they besought him to haue regard vnto their woundes, to comfort their old age, and that he would giue thē hope of rest: the which the Prince promised vnto them. Vnto the others the Emperour spake nothing at all, for they were very glad to haue this glorie ouer the Parthians, in perceiuing them willing to returne, insomuch as when the Prince came to passe before the Scithian horsemen, they all cryed in their language: Victorious Emperour what doest thou? march forward, for we will follow thee. The which did greatly content the Emperour. Now the Parthians and ScithiansTamerlan his care of his sicke soldiers verie commendable and imitable. were the principall forces the Prince had in his armie: now the Emperour did nourish wisely emulation betweene them, which of them should best manifest his

faithfull affection. The Pince commanded that the sick and wounded should be viewed throughout all the armie, and that the Treasurer of the wars should distribute money among the companies, ouer and aboue the ordinarie pay due vnto euery souldier: so our armie departed, and in the auantguard with Axalla was placed Andronicus together with him, for to leade the head of the armie: and it was reported vnto the Emperour, that the Soldan of Egypt prepared forces from all parts, for to resist the power which came against him, but hee knew that he should haue much to doe, and that it was very hard to stoppe a victorious armie, wherein there were such a multitude of men, who had ouerthrowen the strongest and most warlike Monarch that was in all Asia. Insomuch as this gaue a great terror vnto the Mamelues. But the Soldan, who commanded ouer them at that present was a young Prince, who had bene chosen for the great vertue and courage which was in him, rather then for his great experience in war like affaires, insomuch as he had not as yet since his election shewed his affection, and as litle his valour vnto his subiects: he had indeede his courage puffed vp, by seeing himselfe through this choise Lord of many great cities well fortified,The Soldan his braue resolution. so as he resolued to be ouerthrowen brauely. In such sort as he put his hope in the winning of a battell, frō the which what chance soeuer did happen, he might retire himself at any time into a place of such aduātage, that he might haue the means to hazard again another, and hope thereby for a reuenge. Whereof the Emperor was aduertised, & after he had conferred with Axalla & Andronicus, for to be aduised whither he should direct the head of his army, for to constraine the enemie the sooner to come vnto battel: it was in the end concluded

that he should passe by Caramania, directly vnto Geuolache, the which was the first citie of the Mamelues Empire, being one of the Soldans frontier townes which did separate him from the Turke, euen there where the peace was sworne betwixt them, the which Baiazet had sought, to the end he might haue aide frō him to strēgthen himselfe thereby against the army which came vpon him. So this place was well defended by the Soldan, and it was well fortified: Axalla aduancing forward his auantgard did summon the same to yeeld, or else they shold receiue the iust reward of their rashnesse & folly. They made answere, that they were children of obedience, & had commandement to die therein. And that willingly they would there endure vntill death for their Prince & country. This wilfulnesse put the Prince into great choler (who since he departed from his kingdom, had not seene any one place which brought not to him their keies twentie leagues off before he came vnto thē) to see a meane citie dare to stay his comming, & for to prepare to let his army. The which the Emperour perceiuing, he commanded Axalla to march on, & to lodge neare Aleppo: the which he summoning, did yeeld it self, hauing no other then the inhabitants within the same. The Prince in the mean time, prepared himself vnto the siege, whereto hauing caused his footmen to march, & his artillery to bee planted, there was an assault giuen, which was brauely defēded by thē within, & there were of our men slaine to the nūber of 1200. The Emperour greatly stirred, determined to assault thē once againe, & hauing giuen a fresh assalt, wherin the Prince of Thanais was wounded, our men lodged vpon the wall, and leauing no respite vnto them within, they killed a great nūber of thē. The Prince vnderstanding that the Soldan
               
had promised thē aide, whereof he was well aduertised, and did certainely know that he marched forward, he supposed that he had committed a fault, in causing Axalla to aduance so farre, so as he determined to set forward to ouertake him, hoping by that meanes to surprise the enemie, who came directly towards Axalla for to fight with him. But the enemie did not looke for him so soone: so hauing left all his cariages behind at the siege, where the Prince of Thanais remained with thirtie thousand men only, the rest he caused to march with him without any baggage vnto Bogras; thither did Axalla send him word that the Soldan had passed the riuer at Confincan, and that he came for to aide the besieged: and it was reported that hee had 74000. horse, and an hundred thousand footmen. Now the Emperor being arriued at Aleppo, vnderstood where the enemie was, & determining with himselfe to surprise him, he caused Axalla to aduance forward with his auantgard, himselfe staying halfe a day, and then presently he followed his auantguard. Axalla hauing set forward some fifteene hundred horse, they were encountred and almost all slaine, he not being able to aide them as he desired, by reason of the vnfitnesse of the countrie, and iudging that they were compassed about, he did not assist them. Now the enemies thinking to deale with none but those which were at Aleppo led by Axalla, they came forward vnto the fight ill aduised: so as Axalla had them vpon him before he supposed; he aduertised the Emperor to come forward, & sent him word that he wēt vnto the battaile, but that he would dally with the enemie as long as hee could, to the end hee might haue leasure to draw neare and assist him, and that he would not faile to chuse his place of battel as much as he could

for his aduantage, whilest he looked for him, he set forward presently twenty thousand horse with speed vnder the leading of Calibes. In the meane time the enemie by reason of the place which was narrow, & a valley wherin his men could not march, but in single ranke, he aduanced not so soone: the which Axalla supposed, for otherwise he would haue retired, but in the best manner he might vnto the Emperor. So he determined to chuse a place for the battell, & to make his men for to fight in small troups, to entertaine the enemy in cōming down the mountaine, perceiuing that his purpose was to take his place for the battell at the foot of the same moūtain. This sport endured 2. or 3. houres, vntill Calibes came with 20000. horse for the assistance of Axalla, who had also full 30000. more, Andronicus betweene 8. and 10. thousand, the most part Albanois, who were good horsmen: he requested the first charge, the which Axalla did grant vnto him, being loath to discontent him; in the which hauing fought valiantly, & ouerthrowen & slaine many of the enemies, hee was one of the first that was slain, for want of being aided by his men. A Prince surely of such a courage, as did much grace him, and who verily in this his youth, did follow the honour & nobilitie of the bloud of them from whom he was descended. Axalla assisted him with all his power, who were in a manner all Parthians or Christians in the Princes pay, who gaue a great shocke vpon the Soldans troupes, and passing through them, he found directly before him all their footmen, he busied himselfe in fighting with thē: in the meane time a troupe of fiue & twentie thousandA battell betweene the Soldan of Egypt and the Emperor Tamerlan. horse did set vpon Prince Calibes, they say, that therein was the Soldan himselfe, who fought the one against the other very obstinately, and in this meane space

               Axalla fought with these footmen, which hee leauing halfe ouerthrowne sounded a retrait, and seeing Prince Calibes hardly beset, he went directly towards him, and perceiuing the place where the enemies had the greatest aduantage & his men the worst, he charged this maine power on the flanke; which 15000. horsemē seeing, who were behind these footmen, whom the Soldan had commanded that they should not fight but vpon need, they came vpon Axalla on that side he had giuen his charge, & setting furiously vpon him, they fought a lōg time, so as he was wounded, his horse slaine vnder him, & himself taken prisoner. Which being reportedAxalla taken prisoner. vnto the Emperor by one that fled; he cōming forward with as much speede as he could, was greatly vexed, hauing his chiefe confidence in this Captaine. This caused the Emperor to make the more hast, who if he had not come in so good time, that day had made an ende of his good fortune: but hauing commanded 10000. horse to aduance before him & giue an onset, he assisted thē with 25000. of his most faithfull horsemen, hauing vpon his wings 20000. horse of his aiders. The Soldan did not see this maine power, by reason of the valley they came in, & he was greatly astonished for to behold the rest, during the time that Prince Calibes & Axallas men did fight. Behold in an instant 10000 horse which set vpon the Mamelus, who were almost maisters of the field. The Prince also aduanced forward with all his footmen & horsemē. The Soldan not being able to resist so great a force, he soūded a retrait, finding the falt he had cōmitted, seeing all the whole army vpon him. Now Axalla, being ouerthrowne by him who held him prisoner, was on foot, &Tamerlan his victorie ouer the Soldan. he was moūted againe on horseback: his woūd was but a small matter: the Emperour followed the victory three

leagues. It is reported, that the Soldan had bene thrise mounted on horseback during the battell, so well did he performe the duty of a good souldier & captaine, but the fault he had committed was great, for he did not marke that all our army did not follow. We cōmited another fault also, in so much aduancing forward our auantgard, which was like to haue cost vs deare: for had it not bene for the art Axalla vsed, the Emperor had neuer come in time to assist him: but we may say that fortune the mistris of all did bring to passe, that our faults were often turned into stratagems of war, so great hap did accō
               pany our Prince: so his comming was the victory of his mē. Behold how this war was much shortned against the opinion of many: for it was knowne how the Soldan was counselled (& wisely) to draw this war into length, notwithstanding he could not shun his ill hap. Our Armie could not lie in one place for the great multitude, & especially the coūtry being also in many places vnfruitful. These newes being come to the Prince of Thanais at Goulach, and he making the same knowne vnto the enemies, they were greatly astonished, as soone had he cōmandement from the Prince to punish thē well for their rashnesse, and to put all vnto the sword, without any mercy, to giue terror vnto those which would wilfully resist his forces, and also he wold haue it to be an example vnto others: which was done, being won by assault, their courage failing them, by reason of the losse their men had receiued, as also for that the nūber of their souldiers was much diminished by the fight giuen vnto thē night & day. The Prince wold not returne back againe, but abode at Aleppo, where the Prince of Thanais came & ioyned with him, not hindring Axalla frō aduācing forward with the horsemen of the auantgard, to the end that the

               Soldan shold haue no respit to take breath, who was retired with 40000. horse. There died in the battel ful 80000. men, & no men of marke but Andronicus & three Parthiā
                Captaines of great estimatiō, the Soldans cariages were the next day taken, wherein was great riches. He made dispatches vnto all his allies, & also vnto the Greek Emperor, cōforting him for the losse of Prince Andronicus, as also for to receiue order frō him for a new cōmander ouer the Greekes. He sent also some for to carrie newes of his victory into all his kingdoms. In this meane space the Soldan withdrew himselfe into Egypt, & fortified all his cities, demāding aide of mē & mony of all his allies. He deuided the rest of his army, where he thought was need therof; he burnt & spoiled before our army, sparing nothing, to hinder vs from passing any further, a thing which brought vnto vs great discōmodity, & wāt began to be in our army, it was so great: in so much as it behoued the Prince to make a reuiew of all his army, to see what vnprofitable mēbers were therin, & to sēd thē from the same. He was aduised to deuide his army into three parts, the first vnder the Prince, the other vnder Axalla, and the third vnder Calibes, who shold cōduct the cariages with one part of the footmen, which should bend directly towards Persia, coasting the riuer Euphrates, and in that space put al the coūtry there vnder the Princes obedience, were he shold find nothing to stop him, our armyThe Emperour Tamerlan his army deuided into three seuerall parts marched sundry wayes. being aduanced forward, which ouer-ran the same. So the Emperour tooke the coast of the sea, Axalla the coast of Arabia. There was with the Prince 6000. horse and 100000. footmē, with Axalla 40000. horse & 50000 footmen. Calibes had thirtie thousand horse, and fiftie thousād footmē, insomuch as all the earth was couered with men: so as by means that good gouernmēt was obserued

in our Army, victuals for men was there in great plenty, & for the horses were many pastures. Now the Soldan had alwayes Axalla following him, but in the end he deuided his army, where the most part of his mē forsooke him: they say he retired into Arabia, where our great army could not lie. He often shewed himself with some 4000. horse for to hinder Axalla, who hauing the smallest troupe did follow him more neare then we. All the cities vpō the sea coast submitted themselues vnder the Emperors obedience, as Magata, Aman, Tortosa, Gibelleto,
               Certaine Citie
                     •
                   submit themselues vnto the Emperour Tamerlan. 
               Barut, Nephthalim. Damascus hauing receiued a garrison, refused to opē the gates, & the Lord layd siege thereto. This was a strong city, wherinto the Soldan had put the Prince Zamadzen, who indeuored to defend himselfe, but we hauing planted all sorts of engines, we ouerthrew much of the wal. The Prince of Thanais gaue th'assalt, & wan the city, there remaining only a castel of wonderful strēgth & inuincible, but there being a great multitude of mē retired into the same, they died for hū
               ger. In the end being willing to yeeld, the Prince wouldDamascus taken by assault. not receiue thē vnto mercy, for to make thē feele what it was to hold out against him: so that dying with famine they yeelded vnto his mercy, & were all taken prisoners or slaine, & so punished for their rashnesse. This caused that 30. leagues off, they brought vnto vs the keyes of their cities: for they which did so were not any waies molested, but only in paying the charges of the army. This city was no sooner tak
                  •
               , but we turned our head directly vnto I
                     •
                  rusalē, at such time as they did driue out the Soldans garrison. The like did almost all Iudea also, & came to submit themselues vnto the Emperor, who vsed them very graciously, restored vnto them their liberty, promised them for to visit the Sepulcher of Iesus Christ, according

to the holy customs of our law, & with this honour & reuerence he granted vnto them whatso euer they demanded. We came vnto Coracin, the which citie had receiued commandement to stand firme, & wherin the Soldan had left a garrison of 6000. men, who resolued to fight lustily: but at the length, the same was astonished, seeing the siege layd before it, & that we were determined to take it, & hauing approched the wals, theyCoracin yeelded vpon Composition. besought mercy, which was granted vnto them. The Prince left a garrison therein, for to stop the roades that certaine Mamelues made vpon our army, departing from Nasuia, from whence the Prince sent a commandement vnto Calibes to besiege Cities, and to set himselfe against those forces which ioyned thēselues together neare vnto him, the which kept the comming of victuals frō the army. In the meane time the Soldā
                hauing fained to draw towards Arabia, he went towards Caire in Egypt, opposing himselfe against vs only by small incursions, spoyling continually the corne before vs, endeuoring to keepe our Army from victuals; but our light horsemen did presse so neare vpon them, that he could not execute that hee would haue done: the people also who willingly submitted them selues, did hinder the waste. The Emperour being come vnto Miserill, he did forbid the Army to passe ouer the riuer of Iordan, for to preserue that countrie, from whence came great store of victuals vnto the Armie, and himselfe rode vnto Ierusalem with certaine horsemen for his guard, hee determined like a godly Prince to visit the SepurcherTamerlan his comming vnto Ierusalem, and his godly reuerent behauiour therei
                     •
                  . (the which is had in so great reuerence of al the natiōs) and there for to make his offerings; and being arriued into Ierusalem, there hee was receiued of the inhabitantes: he therein sought out all the antiquities

of the ancient Temple, & would be conducted into all the places wherin Iesus Christ had preached, euen as the Pilgrims do; & seeing the Sepulcher, he gaue thereunto great plēty of riches, & precious gifts; two things made him wōder; which was that he demāding of certaine religious men where the body of their Lord was, they answered, in heauen at the right hand of God; he asked of vs where our Prophet was placed: the Cherit who wasCherit. neare vnto him answered, it was true, and that he held the chiefest place in heauen, because he was there before him, and that as he was borne of heauen, vnto heauen he was returned, hauing there first taken the place. Then kneeled he downe, and euer after had his name in great reuerence; and when hee was returned vnto Samarcand hee builded a most rich Church vnto his honour, and wold be heard to speake dayly of his miracles. And as he did visit al, he came vnto the place, where Iesus Christ hauing left his desciples, went vp into heauen: in which place, there is a print of his foote, he greatly wondered thereat, and the story being recited vnto him of the Pilgrime, who had beene rauished in spirit, he accounted him very happie. Axalla came thither also, and all the Christians who did accompanie him, hauing conducted his army vnto Tema, for to set it forward into Egypt. There had the Emperour newes that the Soldan gathered forces on all sides, and was entred into Alexandria, which is one of the chiefest Cities of Egypt. All the people were verie glad to see our Prince honour the holy places, but the Iewes did greatly blame him for so doing, but they were a people whom the Prince misliked, and called them the accursedTamerlan called the Iews the accursed of God. of God. Axalla gaue great gifts and honour vnto the holy Sepulcher. Now the Prince did greatly honour

them that were deuout, and afterwards returned from thence with commandement that they should aduance forward the head of his army directly vnto Damieta, the wich was reported vnto the Emperour, to be in expugnable, as well in respect of the Castell, as for that the Soldan had put many souldiers into the same. Now this is a Citie vpon the sea coast, and one of the chiefest of Iudea, so as the same was in great reputation, for that it had held out many great sieges, in so much as many did disswade the Prince frō going thither, but rather for to cause his army to march higher, and not inclose himselfe within a corner. But the Emperour who thought nothing could hinder his good fortune, would needs go thither, and hauing commanded Axalla to set vpon it, he caused the rest of the army to march thither. Axalla hauing summoned them, and declared to the inhabitants, who were most of them Christians, the mildnesse, & curtesie of the Prince, who himself was, & what religion he held, causing many of the Greeke Emperours captaines to speake vnto them, and made them vnderstand the miserie wherein they were obeying barbarous Mores & Mamelus: they determined to venter their liues, for to put all the Mamelues out of the citie, and all those that fauored the Soldan.
               Damieta wo
                     •
                   by intelligence in the night. So as they hauing taken arms in the night, made themselues maisters of one quarter of the citie, and deliuering one gate to Axalla, all the Mamelues were either slaine or taken, and the citie put vnder the obedience of the Prince. These newes being come vnto the Emperour, who was alreadie marching forward, made him hope for a good ende of his affaires: for to leaue such a citie within the armes of the riuer Nilus, and himselfe to passe on further, would be the destruction of his

army. He trusted also that by this hauen victuals should come vnto him from all the parts of Greece, according as the Emperour Emanuell had promised him, and wherein he nothing failed him: vnto the which the Prince hauing made his entrie, there were left in garrison two thousand souldiers of the Emperour Emanuell his forces, and there he placed a Gouernour, and caused them to take an oth of obedience, the Prince desiring to become maister thereof, for to hold the Soldan thereby the more short. The Prince found this citie to be very faire; they of Arissa did the like, and he put garrisons into all the walled townes vpon the sea coast, for to make victuals come (as I haue sayd) conueniently vnto vs: for this was the Princes chiefest care, considering the multitude of his army, the which had felt no want thereof. The Prince hauing remained a space at Damieta, he caused his auantguard to march towards Alexandria, and hauing passed ouer the riuer, euen in an instant, he went directly vnto Caire, a thing which did greatly astonish the Soldan, who made prouision for the defence of Alexandria; as soone as he vnderstood these newes, he vsed so great diligence, that he entered thereinto euen as we approached the same, and he himselfe in person determined for to defend it, and for to keepe vs from passing ouer the riuer of Nilus for to go vnto Alexandria; they reported that the Soldan entred thereinto with fortie thousand horse, and threescore thousand foot-men. The Emperour couldPractise with 
                     •••
                  ues of Caire. not beleeue it: and then was our army at Buldac seuen leagues from Caire, at such time as the Soldan arriued there, who came thither in necessarie time: for the slaues (whereof there be an infinite number) began to settle themselues for to rebell, and had entered into

the same without doubt, the which was very euill newes for the aduancement of our affaires: for to remaineThe Sige of Caire. long time before it was impossible for▪ vs to do, by reasō of the want of victuals: yet the Prince notwithstanding all this did not leaue to draw neare vnto it, and encamped with all his army neare vnto the same, hauing caused a great trench to be made for to couer his horsemen, and thereby for to lodge his army the more safely. So the Prince during that time, caused diuerse onsets to be made, the which he did, both to know the enemies countenance, as also for to cause thereby slaues to issue out, who did bring vs newes in what estate they were, against whom we alwayes had the better, and shut thē into the city. Now it happened that the Emperor one day thought good to shew his army before the city, for to trie whether the enemiy had a desire to come vnto a day of battell, and to view what forces he had, and indeed to seeke occasion for to fight: he hoped also that if the enemies did put out all their army, some reuolt would happen within the citie, as well by the slaues vnto whom liberty was promised, as of many discontented with the insolencies of the Mamelus whom the Soldan had caused to enter with him. So the Emperour was betimes in battell array, but no body issued out, contrary to our expectation. The Emperour in the meane while viewed the situation of the city, and shewed vnto them his power, hauing certified the inhabitants that he sought not their destruction, but only of the Mamelus his enemies: so as the same being declared by certain slaues of the nation, who fained to fly from our army, he be thought thē of the meanes how to driue out the Mamelues: the which being made knowne vnto the Emperor by the slaues, he determined to aduance forward his foot-men within halfe a league of the city, and there to encampe the same

determining so thereby the more to fauour the Mores enemies vnto the Mamelues, who promised to take arms in his behalfe. The Emperour hauing sent for the principall leaders of his army, he propoūded vnto them that which he had determined for to do, the which he did as well for to haue their aduise, as also if the same were concluded vpon, for to make them know his pleasure, and the order wherein they should march: and he declared vnto his Captains how he was come on a sudden before this city, not imagining the Mamulus shold enter into the same, knowing there being none but the inhabitants he might easily haue takē it, & out of the same draw cōmodities for the maintenāce of his army: but the sudden arriual of such an army did put great difficulties before his eyes. The first was that he could not long remaine before the City, for the want of victuals, and the season by reason of the excessiue heat was very hurtfull vnto his men, for that they had not bene thereunto accustomed; that he doubted least he going about to famish others, mortality should ioyne it selfe vnto the famine, & so come into his army; that he had bounded his enterprises vpon that part betweene the Cities of Caire and Alexandria, and this being taken he would returne victorious into his countrie, and loaden with the spoyles of all Asia; that it were dishonourable for him to recoile before the enemies Armie with that victorie which he had obtained, a victorious ArmiePerswasiue reasons of Tamerlan for to 
                     •
                  oue his souldiers not to returne before they had won the City of Caire from the Soldan. before a conquered and flying Armie, the which had done nothing else but seeke the deserts and strong places since the time of the ouerthrow that the same had receiued, not daring for to shew it selfe before ours, very neare these three monethes; that at this present it was within a great Citie, acknowledging that

therin they had a great aduantage. But on the other side in number of souldiers he was much their superior, so as the forces being greater which he had, did counteruaile the enemies wals; and that he did not doubt but our victorious arms already ouer thē, wold be a terror to make them fly before vs, as soone as we came to hand-blowes with thē; that it was a thing whereon the enemy did not depend, in thinking himself inuincible by meanes of the trēches they had made within their streets, who do you thinke will arme themselues when as they shall see vs to set vpon them vnlooked for. I hold opinion we shall haue a happie ende: for it is a more honourable thing then shamefully to retire and shew our backes vnto the enemie, who haue so often seene our faces vnto their hurt. A thing which the great God hath granted vs, hauing bene these twentie years passed in cōtinual warres against so many warlike nations, notwithstanding by you euen the Parthian name hath bene victorious. To be short, in doing of this we must by that meanes bury our reputation and all our victories, if we should retire this day shamefully from before this Citie, the which will come out after vs, hindring vs from victuals on euerie side, and spreade a rumour of our disgrace, so as they which do now incline vnto vs, will make head against vs, and they which do obey wil rebell against vs: & if we hauing lost this occasion, wold bend our selues against them, they will presently run into their dennes, so as on euerie part we shall haue great difficulties. Aduise your selues herein, for there are but two waies; either to raise the siege and retire before their armie, or else to assault them. The Prince by his speech made all the Captaines astonished, not knowing well which of the matches for to take, considering the waightinesse of the matter. This was also a fight which they had not

tried for to force an army within their wals, notwithstanding they must preferre their reputation before death, and run into all hazardes. At the last the Prince seeing that none did speake, he commanded Axalla for to begin and to declare his aduise, who did rise vp, andConsultation. after he had taken leaue of the Emperour to shew hisAxalla his worthy speeche vnto Tamerlā thereupon. opinion, he sayd aloude. My Lord, what is this thou dost of vs demand, hast not thou alwayes tried the courages of thy Captaines and souldiers, prefering the honour of thy reputation, before their owne liues? What is it then thou requirest at our handes? leade vs against the Mamelues, & thou shalt see whether the loue and true affection to thy seruice, and desire of the immortality of thy name be any thing diminished? Dost thou thinke (according to thy speech vnto vs) that the wals do hinder our valour, & the force of our horses? The first horse of ours that shall put his head within Caire will giue entrance for all the Army Axalla had no sooner made an end of speaking, but all the Captaines cried that they might be led vnto the fight, & that they were ready to die for the greatnesse and glory of their Prince. The Emperor hauing thanked thē, began to declare the maner of the order he would his army should march in: he deuided his footmen into three parts, the Lieutenant generall of the footmen marched with 30000. mē. The Prince of Thanais had the head assisting him with 50000 footmen about his person, and all his horsemen after him, this day all the horsemen being reserued to attēd vpon his person, hauing giuen vnto Axalla in whom he had his chiefest trust, the charge of the whole army, who was on foot. Now the Princes determination was to take one of the Cities of Caire, & there to encampe himselfe, & so to aduance forward by litle and

litle fighting with the enemy. Now within the city the which was ouer against vs, was the Soldan encamped & all his forces: he had 60000. footmen & 50000. horse, wherof there were 30000 Mamelues, braue men, & exercised in warlike affaires, & of whose arms we made triall in the last war; as for the footmē, they were gathered together out of Arabia, Persia, & Libia, with many slauesThe siege of Caire in Egypt by Tamerlan. vnto whom he had giuen freedom, his experienced soldiers being ouerthrown in the last battell. The Emperor who had not declared any thing of the hope he had in the slaues & Mores, did now vtter the same vnto Axalla. So after this conclusion was taken, the Emperor determined to giue an assault, & hauing brought his footmen vnto the place where he would haue them giue the onset, euen vpon the face of their enemies, as soone as he did see that they had set lustily vpon their trenches, hee commanded the Prince of Thanais to assault them with 50000 men: this was a furious fight. In the meane time Axalla went along by certaine palme trees, for that he iudged the enemy had forsaken that place, to go & assist their owne men, as soone as they perceiued the Prince of Thanais to enter, wherein he was not deceiued: for hauing found but small resistance, he passed ouer the trē
               ches, and hauing receiued cōmandement frō the Prince that they should presently make rome for the horsemen to passe, whither (during the time he employed himself therein) the enemy sent 20000 men for to stop him; thē did Axalla aduance forward, leauing 3000. of his men to make an end of filling vp the ditches, & himself went to the fight; he found the Mamelues who fought on horseback, & had almost beaten backe the Prince of Thanais. As soone as the way was made plaine, the 10000 horse set forward, who charged the Mamelues behind, where. the Soldā
                himself was. Now the Emperor caused 10000

more to aduance forward, after them he followed with all his power: then did the enemies retire vnto a second trench the which they had made in another City. The fight had continued ful the space of seauen houres, and it could not be iudged to which side the victory enclined, for they did couragiously defend their aduantages. But the Prince hauing in the end caused a retraite to be sounded, contented himselfe in hauing driuen the enemies out of their trenches and won their lodging from them, hoping the next day to win all the rest: we possessed a third part of the Citie, all the footmen lodging vpon the enemies trench, and there were continuall assaults giuen, so desirous were our men to ouercome. There were slaine this day of the enemies, sixteene thousand men at the least, and of ours, betweene seuen and eight thousand. Draguen Lieutenant generall of the footmen was slaine with manie of his souldiers, for he sustained all the brunt of the fight, the stratageme of warre vsed by Axalla, and his iudgement was for vs a great aduantage. The Prince about night hauing aduertisment that the Soldan would retire, & passe ouer the riuer, he foorthwith commanded ten thousād horse to lodge themselues that night for garding of the riuer bankes. But the Soldan thinking those to be all, the horsemen durst not passe ouer, hauing bene informed that the whole army was there. The break of day being come, the Prince caused them to begin to fill vp the enemys trēches, & to set his army in batel aray. The Prince of Thanais did once againe begin it, & Axalla vpon an other side; but after they had fought, the Soldan determined for to make a retraite & so to go out of the city. For these footmē did so obstinatly presse on vnto the battell, and after he had performed his indeuor seeing our men

already maisters of the trenches, doubting lest he shold haue our horsemen vpō him likewise, he determined to go out and encamp himselfe all along the riuer, and to accomplish the purpose he had failed in the night. They determined to retire vnto Alexandria if he could passe ouer the water, and hauing withdrawne his men from the fight, as well as he could, he encamped him between the water and the City, for to passe ouer the same. As the Prince had passed ouer the trēches, the souldiers killed and sacked all the whole city as conquerers. TheGreat Caire won by Tamerlan▪
                Prince hauing present knowledge of the Soldans flight, setled himselfe to follow him with his horsemen, who onely were in order, and hauing knit together as he might, some of his footmen busied in the spoyle of the city, and being informed that the enemy passed the water with great diligence, he set forward directly towards him, for to stop him vpon a narrow cawsey, where were certaine marishes made for to stay the ouer flowing of Nilus: but the Soldan had opposed 12. of 15. thousād men whom he called his slaues, to fauour his passage, who were his best souldiers, & stood firmely, the place being greatly for their aduantage. Now our footmen with whom it be hooued vs to fight, were busied in pillage, and did come forward softly and vnwillingly, leauing the city the which others did spoile: so as the Prince was driuen to promise to regard especially and to acknowledge their good seruice. Now as soone as they were come, they forced the enemies, but not without greatThe courage of the Soldans men swimming euer the riuer of Nilus, with one hand, & their weapō in the other. losse, they seeing that they could not resist so gret a multitude and such a force, they cast themselues to swimming, and made an honourable retraite: for euery man had his weapons in one of his hands, and with the other hand swimming, did arriue vpon the other banke,

one part of the horsemen were cut in peeces, and the other drowned. This was the ende of the Soldan, who staying a long time (as it is reported) did busie himselfe in beholding from farre, how they did spoile this great city. Now when the night came vpon vs, hee thought our men should be sufficiently troubled in enioying of the victorie, without following of him. It is reported,The Soldan his speech vnto those about him after his ouer throw at Caire. he sayd vnto his souldiers, in comforting of them, that they were not men which had conquered them, but rather some God, so great wisedome, force, and valour, did hee obserue in our souldiers. There went away with him some eighteene thousand horse, the rest were fled sundrie wayes, and manie drowned. On the morrow hee withdrew himselfe directly vnto Alexandria, making much of those slaues which remained aliue, who had so well endeuored themselues for the safegard of their Maister, hauing resisted the force of all our Armie for the space of two long houres, yea euen after they had made such a glorious and memorable a retraite. The Prince caused diuerse of those which had bene taken in the battell to come before him, and gratified them in what hee might, hee gaue them presentes, and desired to be serued by them, but they all refused that offer: notwithstandingThe faithfulnesse of the Soldans men towards their Maister. the Emperor (seeing their fidelity towards their maister) did not forbeare to giue them libertie to go and find againe the Soldan: for the Emperour did make himselfe to be noted in his victories for some notable act of clemencie, a thing verie wellTamerlan mercifull. be seeming great men: for bountie is the part which maketh vs to beloued, and valour and force maketh vs to be feared and admired. The Emperour after he had beheld this spectable withdrew himselfe, and caused

his pauilion to be placed betweene the riuer of Nile andA wise foresight in Tamerlan after his victorie. the Citie, for to assure his armie, the which he did foresee was easie to be ouercome, during the sacking of so rich & wealthy a citie. That night he mounted on horsbacke, and accompanied with some of his most faithfull seruants, did ride thorough all his campe, visiting his guards himselfe, making much of his souldiers, and cō
               mending them for their endeuours: on the morrow he made his entry into the city, where there was speech of receiuing the Castell, wherein the Soldans had put their riches, for it was their ancient dwelling: the which the Prince did in his own person, and lodged himselfe with all his armie round about the same fortresse, the which is at one of the ends of the citie; hauing giuen cōmandement to cease the pillage, the same hauing continued the space of 24. houres, and euery souldier being also enioyned by the same proclamation to returne vnder their ensignes, and lodge in the armies quarter. The Prince commanded the next day, that they should set atThe bountie of Tamerlan. libertie all the inhabitants of the citie, and that he adiudged none vnto bondage. There was within this city an infinite quantity of riches and treasure 
                  •
               ound, the which they report the Soldan Princes haue of long time kept there, not being suffered to employ any part thereof, but vpon great necessitie. And this was in my opinion, one of the chiefest occasions, that made the Soldan come thither with such diligence as he did. They report also, that in the night time he had conueyed out of the same place much thereof: and some say, that he did not enter therinto, and that he tooke out nothing for feare of making his souldiers for to thinke that hee would retire, a thing which might bewray the retrait he meant for to make; others hold opinion, that all the treasure

was there, and that he did not thinke euer to be forced in such a citie, & with such forces as he had put into the same, referring such a deed of armes vnto the Diuinity, wherin his men had bin ouercome with such aduātage. Now the Prince after he had certified Calibes of this victory, who was all along by the riuer of Euphrates with his army, which daily increased, hauing taken many cities, it was a great astonishment vnto all Persia, & there rained at that present time ouer those Nations a multitude of small kings, some of them obseruing the law of the Prophet, the other being Christians. The Prince had a purpose in his returne to subiect all that vnder his obedience; he sent Calibes word of his victorie, and that he gaue him the gouernmēt of all Egypt. So the Prince hauing taken order for all that was necessarie for the keeping of such a citie, he caused his armie to passe ouer the riuer for to go and follow the Soldan vnto Alexandria, to the end he should not leaue his victorie vnperfect. And hauing caused his auantguard to passe ouer; and distributed vnto euery one before the passage, a reward according to their deserts, Axalla passed ouer with the auantguard to go with all speed into Alexandria, for to hinder the Soldan from ioyning of his forces together. The Emperour remaining with the maine forces of the armie, did make no longer abode at Caire: for all the people came and yec
                  •
               ded themselues vnto him, and after hee had taken the oath of fidelitie of the people and citie, and of all the neare adioyning cities, and hauing established as great securitie as hee could, he determined to stretch euen so farre the borders of Scithia: he left tenne thousand souldiers within that citie, and brought away those he thought might hurt him: he chaunged almost all the people therein,

hauing a great multitude of men within his armie, of whom he planted euery where as he passed new Colonies for to assure the places, and in a manner euen vnto Cana all yelded to his obedience: & Embassadors came from all partes, as well from Arabia the happy, as out of all Africa, for to submit thēselues vnder his obedience, so much was the terror of his name printed in the harts of all those people adioyning vnto his conquests. And referring the disposing of the affaires of Egypt vntil his returne from Alexandria vnto Caire, his owne person went vpon the riuer of Nilus for his pleasure, hauing caused all his armie to passe ouer vnder the conduct of the Prince of Thanais: and himselfe with a part of hisTamerlan went by the riuer of Nilus vnto Alexandria. souldiers determined to go by water, and causing an infinite number of boates to be prepared for himselfe, and those he caried with him, the Prince tooke great pleasure in beholding this faire riuer, and his swift course sometimes, and in an instant to become so calme. The newes being come vnto Alexandria of the marching forward of the army, made the people consult and thinke vppon their safetie: insomuch as going vnto the Soldan, they be sought him to haue compassion on their estate▪ and to withdraw himselfe into Libia, and for themselues they were determined for to doe as the time serued, and not to resist anie more so great a force▪ against the which they had so often in vaine opposed themselues: but now they knewe not what to doe, they must giue place vnto fortune, and that Tamerlan his Armie could not passe strong into Libia: and if weake, he might defende himselfe from the same, that they would obserue the faith promised vnto him at his comming thither, and vpon the first occasion offered, they would make the same appeare

vnto him, that he would only preserue his person. The Soldan who did see all things desperate, determined for to retire, hoping that time would bring vnto him some change, as also that our army would not remaine there, and that in the meane time he should haue oportunitie to attempt some thing, he went out of the citie of Alexandria,
               The Soldan
                     •
                   words when he fled from Alexandria. the teares in his eies, repeating oftē these words; That God was prouoked against his people, and that he must of necessitie suffer the fatall ouerthrow of so flourishing an estate; that himselfe had done as much as in him lay, according to the charge and choise they had made of him; that he hoped to returne with strong forces for to deliuer them from that bondage whereinto they must needes submit their heads, and beare the yoake. These words were declared vnto Axalla, being the most aduanced, who sent them vnto the Prince: he sent him word also, that vnto Alexandria came much people to obey his cōmandements, & that for the space of more then fiftie leagues, all came for to submit thē
               selues vnto his obedience. So the Prince, hauing receiued these newes, he was verie glad: and seeing his purposes so to prosper, he conceaued hope of a happie returne. But notwithstanding he was greatly vexed, that he could not get the Soldan into his hands: this caused the Prince for to vse crueltie towardes them which tooke his part, and caried them with him, doubting some alteration in his absence. Now as we approched within a dayes iourney vnto Alexandria, the Prince sent word vnto Axalla, that hee should bring with him the chiefest that came, promising vnto him obedience and fidelitie. The Prince hauing made his entrie into Alexandria with all his armie, hee encamped the same neare vnto the Citie, and for

the safety of his person caused to enter thereinto 6000. horse, and 20000. footmen, and hauing giuen cōmandemēt vnto Axalla, to pursue the Soldan with the auantguard, the Emperors person remained long time in Alexandria, staying vntill he might heare newes from Calibes, vnto whom he had sent Lochestan his great Chamberlaine, for to succeed in his place, a man of good desert, hauing alwayes commaunded ouer ten thousand horse in the army, who carying with him his regiment which was of ten thousand horse, Calibes tooke as many for to come forward towards vs with all his cariage. Behold how there needed no mediation with the Prince; he remembring in the absence of his seruants, their valor & deserts, and the honor wherof they were worthy; one of the parts that did so much recōmend the Emperour. Insomuch as no man did sue for anything, neither demanded any honors, or estates neare vnto his person▪ no not for the gouernmēt of his estate. As we departed frō 
               Alcaire the Emperor receiued newes that the Emperor his vnkle was very sicke, the which made him very sad: but he relyed vpon the wisedome of the Empresse his wife, who would so well gratifie the kings & princes his subiects, that there should happen no trouble when soeuer this ill hap should fall out. For his affaires being prosperous, & many victories daily obtained▪ who was he in all the world that durst so much as lift vp his head against him? much lesse within his own kingdomes. The Empresse also sent him word, that she looked for his cō
               ming home, vnto the circum
                  •
               ision of his eldest sonne, whō God had giuen vnto him, the which was well nourished, so as in Alcaire were the certaine limits of his conquests, & also of the prosperitie of his fathers in heritance. He had newes also that the Chinois wold haue

rebelled, and how the Viceroy Odmar had punished thē seuerely, and had won a battell wherein the kings brother was slaine, so as his borders were on that side most assured, and increased euen vnto Cauchechina, after that they went about for to rebell: notwithstanding, Odmar had a commādement from the old Emperor to pacifie and keepe that which he had couquered beyond the riuer of Flezan. Now Axalla hauing passed beyond Alexandria, had thereby giuen so great a fright vnto all Africa (they supposing that the Emperor did follow) that 22 kings of Libia sent their Embassadors vnto him, for to offer their obedience vnto the Emperour. The Soldan hauing passed further forsaken of al his men, who came daily to yeeld themselues vnto Axalla our Lieutenant generall, Arsanibei sent to demaund securitie of theArsanibei his 
                     •
                  reachery against Tamerlan. Emperour, who seeing all things desperate, beseeched him to accept of his seruice. The Emperour who was milde, receiued him courteously, graunting vnto him as much as he desired, and thereupon did sweare fidelitie vnto him: but he had notwithstanding another matter in his minde, for he had promised the Soldan to giue an attempt vpon the Emperors person: and there were full foure thousand Mamelues receiued into the Princes seruice, who should haue done this execution within Alexandria, where the Prince did cōtinue intending the establishing of his new conquests. Now the enterprise was appointed in the morning when the Prince shold giue audience to euerie one (according to his custom) hauing of his guard only 1200. souldiers, appointed euery day out of 10000. ordained for the preseruation of the Princes person: he had also imparted this enterprise vnto diuerse of the inhabitants, who shold haue taken armes as soone as the same should be executed.

Now as the enterprise was dangerous, so seemed it easie as he thereof perswaded himselfe, hauing caused all his men to enter one by one into the armie, whither they had yeelded themselues: and it was three weekes since he deuised this enterprise. So the day came when he should do this execution, the Prince hauing the day before made him a present of one of the most coragious horses of his stable, and hauing cōmanded his men to shew all curtesie and good entertainement vnto him and his company. Now in the morning he drew neare vnto the Emperour, who was in his tent, whither euerie one repaired that had any businesse with him. Now you must vnderstand, that Alexandria is builded in such a fashion, that they go vpon the tops of the houses, the which are in maner of vaultes, where the traitor had secretly placed those who should assist him after the mischief were cōmitted. He came then & shewed himselfe a far off; the Prince (full of gentlenesse) asked him what he desired, astonished notwithstāding that he came into that place which was not fit for his dignity, the Prince only ministring iustice for those which had not accesse vnto his persō, as were the poore people & soldiers: but he knew not yet that custome: so as the Prince perceiuing him change colour in holding some petition, the Prince had alwaies an eye to that he did; on a suddaine hee drew neare vnto the Prince, with his sword in hisTamerlan his great daunger and valiant defence of him selfe, to the mischiefe of the traitor. hand: the Prince hauing his ready assoone as he, missed not him as he had done; the Prince retired back one pase for to auoide the thrust he cast at him: the Emperor hauing striken him, did almost cut off one of his armes, the which he put forward for to strike him. In this instant they ran vnto the Princes succour, and one of his seruants comming, did giue him another blow vpon

the head: but a small matter wherewith he fell downe. The Prince hauing stayed them from killing of him, to the end he might know his companions, then cried he out, & with great lamentations bewailed his good maister, sending vnto him this his deed, as the last witnesse of his fidelitie. The Prince demanded of him, wherefore he did not kill him in the battell, but would traiterously at this present vnder the pretence of friendship and seruice take his life from him? The other answered onely; let me die, let me die. The chiefe Iudge of the Imperiall Iustice tooke and examined him, together with the Princes most priuie Councell. In the meane time they caused euery man to take armes, the Princes horsemen mounted on horsebacke, the gards were increased, they made the hauen sure, the Prince withdrew himself into his lodging, being happie that he had saued his life frō this blow. You might haue seene both Captains & souldiers run vnto the Emperors lodging, & wold haue forced the guards for to see whether the Prince were well, who was desirous to take rest: he was cōpelled to shew himselfe vnto his Captains & souldiers, for to assure thē of his health: yea he was constrained to mount on horsbacke, and to go euery where euen into the campe. And at such time as they did see the Prince, you would haue said, that the heauēs did breake with cries, through the ioy they made ouer all for the health of their Prince, so great Idolaters were the souldiers of their Emperour. The other was presently put to the torture, who couragiously confessed all the enterprise requiring death. Some wēt vnto the place where the named were; there were three hundred yet shut vp, who were all tyed and put in prison, the others sought out here and there. He missed not to accuse those of the citie, vnto whom he

had deliuered letters of credit from the Soldan. The Prince who was an enemie vnto crueltie, perceiuing that the end of this businesse would prooue long, hee went out of Alexandria, for that he knew the discouerie of all the partakers, & to the end execution might be made of those of the enterprise. It was a miserable spectacle to behold all these thinges thus perfourmed within the Citie, at such time as they apprehended the conspirators, who being conuinced, were put to death openly: and the game began at Arzambei, who beingArzambei beheaded for treason against Tamerla
                     •
                  , with diuers of his cōpanions at Alexandria strangled, his head was set vp for a memorie of that treason vpon the market place, and his body deuided into foure quarters. And the verie same punishment was taken of all the conspired inhabitants of the citie, or any others. Those which were suspected, and might anie wayes be detected, were led away prisoners, and made slaues, being changed from that place. Beholde the end of this conspiracie, the which the valorand maiestie of the Prince alone did defend, and no other force at all: but as I haue often heard the Prince say, he had an imagination, that this mad fellow wold do him some mischiefe, aud if it had not bene for feare of committing any thing vnworthy his greatnesse and faith giuen, he would haue caused him to be apprehended, but he had good regard vnto his practises. The Prince was often wont to say, that he did not feare such wickedA resolute saying of Tamerlā
                murtherers, for that he had a good keeper neere vnto him: and this hee meant (as I vnderstood afterwards) by a defending Angell, whom he called Meaniel, vnto whom it was enioyned (as he said) by God, for to defend him against all dangers, whose picture he caried as a mark in his ensignes & impreses, causing the croissant mark of the Ottomans to be blotted out of all

Asia, and his owne to be planted there. Now Axalla hauing passed further, and made the Princes armes to be felt ouer all, hauing also brought all the neather Libia to be subiect vnto Alexandria: the Prince finding this countrie to be verie faire and pleasant, he looked daily for the comming of Calibes, and he in the meane time ordered the affaires of his new estate, causing his Armie to refresh it selfe, the which was spread ouer all: he suffered none but Axalla to keepe the order of an armie before him. The heate was very great at that present, the which our souldiers did endure with great discommoditie: the Parthians especially whose temperate climate doth incline more vnto cold then heate. This being ended, the Emperour returned into Alexandria, whither diuers Embassadors from the kings of Libia and Barbary came vnto him, swearing obedienceObedience sw
                     ••
                  ne vnto Tamerlan by almost all the kings of Afri
                  
                     ••
                  
                of fidelitie between his hands. The nearest gaue hostages for the other further off: the Prince contented himselfe with their faith, and with the outward signes of their good willes. Behold how euery one came to acknowledge this new Lord, & he would haue the great enlargemēt of the bounds of his Empire appeare vnto the world. Now the Prince had a desire more then he vsed to haue, to see the sweetnes of his natiue country, age bringing vnto him a desire to rest himselfe. And he was wont to say, that he had heard the Emperor his father declare, that the fauor of fortune was at his period vnto a man of 45▪ years of age, for any increasing; that itA strange opi
                  
                     •
                  ion in Tamerlan of Fortu
                     •
                  es fauor. behooued after that time to study how to preserue it, & not any more to augment the same: because fortune doth often change her countenance, like vnto that of man, the which doth become wrinckled & old. He had moreouer, to perform the building of Samarcād, where

he meant to eternize his memorie, the which he greatly desired: so as he was curious to search in all parts artificers & skilfull men for to send thither, & all the faire people he could find in any place where he was the cō
               queror. In this very place he said that he would make his tombe, where he had receiued breath, weighing it in a iust & equall ballance, to deliuer vnto the earth the same which it had brought forth, without vsing any ingratitude vnto the same. And he being one day demanded by a Pagan (vnto whō he made this discourse, and who beheld his stately tombe) where hee would build one for his soule? The Prince shewed vnto him heauē, saying, that it should returne to heauen, from whence it did come: for this same (said he) is a parcel of the high God▪ And seeing we are come vnto this matter, I will speake a word therof by the way: which was, that being one day reprehēded by one of his great Priests, because he did not constraine with the sword, all religions to imbrace his. Ah my friend (said hee) I will neuer doThe Author saith, that this may be praised in a Pagan & infidel, not in a Christian Prince. it: for I cannot beleeue but God is delighted with the diuersity of religions, hating onely those which are without any religion; and my self would willingly haue root
                  •
               d out from the face of the earth such kind of people, but not the other. I beleeue the fashiō I vse in praying vnto God, is the most acceptable vnto him, & therfore I serue him in this maner. This is the cause wherfore I suffer within my dominiōs euery one to worship God in any maner whatsoeuer, so as his principall end be 
                  •
               o honor, and not to despise him. I haue said this by the way; seeing I write this history for you, it is verie cōuenient I declare vnto you what his religiō was. This was his maner also, that whensoeuer he did speake of God, it was with so great reuerēce, that he durst not almost

lift vp his eyes alo
                  •
               t, so fearfull was he of the soueraigne maiestie: & of all men I did neuer see any more fearfull of the diuinitie. He was also wont to say, that euerie one should continue in that wherin he was borne and first instructed, if it were of that religion as serued one only God. Our Prince had so good condicions & so agreeable vnto euerie one, that it shall bee hard for me to vtter and declare them vnto posteritie, neither can I sufficiently commend them, nor liuelie represent them in that perfection I desire, as I haue vndertaken for to do. Now for to returne againe vnto our historie, the Emperor receiued newes of Calibes marching forward, and of receiuing his great Chamberlain into his Armie. We looked for his comming with great deuotion, being daily desirous to return, after we had run so many forrtunes of all kinds, and the Prince hauing subdued and brought vnder his obediēce so many sundrie people. Axalla was commanded to march towards vs▪ and the whole Army was summoned from all parts for to assemble themselues together. The Prince carried away from Alexandria euen to the number of seuen or eight thousand men, and put thereinto for to inhabite other people, whom he had brought from sundry places: he left therein sixe thousand horsmen, and tenne thousand footmen: he appointed a sufficient Gouerner vnder Calibes, who arriued there presently. The Emperour after he had declared vnto him his pleasure, and appointed what he should doe, the Armie was commanded to set forward directlie towardes Caire: the Prince hauing left within Alexandria Zamolzan, a man of great reputation, to bee Lieutenant generall vnder Calibes. The number of forces left by the Prince vnto the said Gouerner, was fortie thousand horse, and fifty

thousand footmen, whereof part were dispersed into all the strong places and forts, and principallie all along the sea side: the rest were left in the plaine fieldes towards Alexandria, where Zamolzan commāded them. Staying vntill such time as the Prince were departed from Caire, whether he did go for to conduct Calibes, whom (as I haue said) the Emperour had appointed for to command ouer all Syria and Egipt, together withCalibe
                     •
                   made Gouernor of Siria with the rest conquered in Africa. the countries newly conquered in Libia and Barbary. Then the Emperour after he had taken order for all things belōging vnto the preseruation of his new conquest, perceiuing that euerie one of those countries did like well of his gouernment, acknowledging his great mildnesse and great Iustice obserued euerie where, it seemed that euerie one did like well of this change, & to be gouerned by so victorious a Prince, and whose power was so great for to de
                  •
               end them. So after hee had receiued the solemne oth of the people, as well of Alexandria, of Caire and other Cities, of all Syria and the bordering countries: we began to set forward our Auauntguard, and the Battaile with the Prince of Tha
                  
                     ••••
                  . So the Emperour dis
                  •
               issed Calibes, after hee had instructed him, after what fashion he would haue those kingdoms gouerned, ouer the which he had giuen him charge, and himself hauing friendly committed them vnto God, not as a maister, but like a companion, he seemed to be sorrie for to leaue them destitute of his presence. The Prince himselfe with few returned vntoTamerlan his deuotion 
                     〈◊〉
                   Ierusalem. 
               Ierusalem, where he remained eleuen dayes, for to visite daily the Sepulcher of Iesus Christ the God of the Christians: and was curious to bring away great quantitie of the earth from that place; saying that hee would honor therwith the places of deuotion within his new

Citie. He was also desi
                  •
               o
                  •
               s for to 
                  •
               ee the 
                  〈◊〉
                of Salomon his Temple; saying, that he wold cause one to be builded like vnto that at Sa
                     •
                  aroand▪
                In like sor
                  •
                did he wonder at Ierusalem the seate of D
                     •
                  uid
                     •
                  
                  ▪
                kingdome, and of that great Salomon: hee lamented the ruines thereof, for that he did not see them fullie in their former beautie, so greatly did the deuotion vnto all holinesse conduct him. He onlie despised the Iewes, which had committed so cruell a murther against him who came to saue them. The Emperour hauing this affectionTamerlan, granted great priuiledges vnto Ierusalem. vnto Ierusalem, did declare the same to be free from all subsidies, and garrisons of men of warre. He gaue great giftes vnto the Monasteries▪ and honoured them as long as he remained in that place. I will returne to declare how the great Chamberlaine, as soone as hee was come into his Armie, had besieged a City called Meleg vpon the riuer of Euphrates, staying for the Emperour, the which being brought vnto great necessity, and euen after he had greatlie battered the same, was constrained for to raise the siege from before it, being succoured by all the Lords of Quilean, of C
                     •
                  ld
                     •
                  r, and others assembled, beleeuing the Empero
                  •
               s was ouerthrowne, by one onelie report they had receiued from certaine false messengers; in so much as that which was peaceable before, presently was in armes, and he had vpon his arme all the forces thereabout. Hee in the meane time remained within his Campe, hauing no commādement frō the Prince to giue any battaile, and being retired himself all along the riuer of E
                     •
                  phrates,
               The great Chamberlaine his dis
                     •
                  r
                     ••
                  t cariag
                     •
                   of himselfe in Ass
                     •
                  ria and Persia▪
                the enemies pa
                  •
               sing ouer the riuer, began to presse vpon him for to fight: he which had no such commission, kept himselfe as well as he could within his trenches, hauing already aduertised the Emperour of all

that had passed, and not thinking of the enemies rashnesse, could not imagin they would come & assault him within his trenches; but being growne vainglorious by repulsing of him from before the Citie, they did attribute vnto themselues therefore a great glorie, and vnto vs a great disgrace: so as they desired when their souldiers had this aduātage, to win a greater for thē, if they could. So they determined to force our Campe, ouer the which commanded a Captaine, who was (as they supposed) more trained vp within the Court then in Armies. (And certainely the feare and reputation of Calibes was great, the which made him feared: for when they reckened vp the names of our chiefe Captaines, next after Axalla they put the name of Calibes for his valor and experience.) So farre foorth that despising this new head, they busied their heads in thinking the victorie to be on their sides most certaine, for lacke of experience in him which commaunded it, by reason of his youth. So in a morning they came and lodged their Campe neare vnto ours: the great Chamberlaine hauing cōmanded his soldiers not to issue out of the Campe, but for to defend thēselues with the aduantage they had by reason of their trenches, & set his army in order▪ disposing thereof for the better defence of the same; & hauing of that, as of other matters▪ taken the aduise of hi
                  •
                Captaines▪ he st
                  ••
               ed for the enemies with this resolutiō assuring himself by that means they wold not disobey the Prince
                  •
                cōmandement. The enemies failed not with all sorts of cries forceably to come and assault our Campe: they were in number 50000▪ footmē, who in two seueral places gaue the assalt▪ Now the campe was made in that fashio▪ that a certain place to issue out was left in the same▪ by the which the horsmen might go vnto the battaile, and fight vnder the

safegard of the trenches, of which cunning the enemies did nothing at all doubt. For they had sent their horsmen vnto the other side of a litle riuer, by the which they doubted that our men, not hauing the courage to sustaine the fight, and seeing themselues assalted, would flie away, to the end they might set vpon them in their retrait. Now our men were no more but eighteen thousand horse, and fortie thousand footmen: there was indeed therein a great multitude of cariages and prisoners, whom the great Chamberlaine had caused to worke so well in the intrenching▪ that they were stronger then the Citie they had besieged; and from whence they had raised their siege. So the 
                  •
               ight endured two or three houres, when as he perceiuing that our men did couragiouslie repulse them, and that an infinite number of the enemies were slaine, the Chamberlaine thought it a 
                  •
               it time to assalt them: soThe pollitick
                     •
                   & valiant seruice performed by the great Chamberlaine. he issued out of the Campe by the same place that I haue declared, with tenne thousand of the best horses within his Armie, and hauing first giuen order to busie them, he came and set vpon them on a suddaine; and sl
                  •
               e a great number of them, in so much as ou
                  •
                men became wearie with killing, their horsmen being aduertised oft his euill hap befallen vnto their 
                  •
               ootmen; thought good to repa
                  ••
               e againe this riuer▪ the which the great Chamberlaine perc
                  •••
               ing, foundēd the retraite, not willing to hazard any thing to no good purpose: for their horsmen were in n
                  ••
               erfull 
                  〈◊〉
                thousand. This day did they lose fiue and twentie thousand men, that were slaine as well in the field, as in the fight of the trenches. The 
                  〈◊〉
                of the faction was 
                  ••
               aine▪ who was called 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  
                king of A
                  ••
               e
                  ••
               ia. In this meane time the Prince who had receiued newes of his

Armies disgrace, had dispatched Axalla with speed, for to aduance himself forward with the Parthian horsmē, for the assistāce of the great Chamberlain. And Axalla hauing receiued newes of the victorie within two or three dayes iourney, he sent word of the same vnto the Emperour, during which time hee remained at Damasco, staying for the Princes commandement: who after he had receiued these newes did publish the same ouer all, and especially aduertised Calibes thereof, to the end the same should stay their troublesome spirits, who already did beleeue that the Armie of the great Chamberlaine was ouerthrowne. I will declare by the way, that I marked in the Prince a greater ioy for this victorie, then I did note in him for any other he had where his owne person commanded. And this he did in my opinion, for that he reioyced that he was not deceiued in the choise which hee had made of the great Chamberlaine, who was as yet too young for such a charge. For he thought this same would yeelde matter vnto some for to blame him, not to haue sufficiently weighed such a charge: but seeing the wisdom he had shewed in keeping his aduantage, and likewise the obedience and respect he had vnto the Princes commandement, this same did greatly content him. Some also report, that the Prince would not busie himselfe any longer, desiring to returne vnto his ancestors kingdomes, for to assure them, fearing least the long time of his absence should cause some 
                  •
               edicions, by reason of some disgrace his Armie might receiue at the length: and therfore he would returne and passe ouer the Mountaines of Ima
                     •
                  s before the rigor of winter came, the which drew neare. Prince Axalla was commanded to abide and attend the Emperours

comming who marched forward, putting garrisons in the strong forts of Iudea and Siria, and dispeopling all those places he thought were likely to reuolt in his absence. The which was not done without dismanteling of all those townes he meant not for to keepe; commanding the like to b
                  •
               e done throughout all Egipt. I haue forgotten to declare howe the Prince dismissed the aide sent vnto him from the Emperour of Greece, hauing first giuen great presents vnto the Captaines and also vnto the Lieutenant of the late Prince Ca
                     •
                  ta Cusni, so that the meanest souldier rested well contented, assuring you that our Prince was much renowmed, for knowing how to bound his ambition, who knew howe to stretch the same ouer all the world: for hauing with good successe ioyned thereunto the Empire of the Soldan, it had bene easie for him to haue made Constantinople the principall seate of his conquests, and by these meanes to ioyne all his countries together, whereof the Sea might haue bene his limits: the which being declared vnto him by one of his counsellers that kept the seale, whom they call Chanceller,An
                     •
                  table conference 
                     •
                  etwhen Tamerlan and his great Chāceller & whom the Prince did credit in many of his affaires, that such large bounds it was easie for him to haue at his returne, saying vnto him; that it behoued great men to vse their faith and friendship vnto their most aduantage; and that hee was a publike person, vnder whose gouernment so many people and seuerall nations did wholly repose themselues; and that he should not neglect so great a benefite, which would bring so much glorie and greatnesse vnto the Parthian nation. He answered, that he liked better to leaue their limits founded vpon his vertue, then increased to his dishonour by infidelitie. Whensoeuer the Greeke Emperor

shall giue me any other occasion, then as a friend and good neighbour, then shall he feele my power, & God will assist my good cause. I thinke (my friend) that I neuer did any thing more of the honour and glorie of my Empire, and vnto the Parthian nation, then for to leaue a memoriall vnto posteritie, that a Parthian Emperour did come so long a iourney, for to minister iustice vpon such a tyrant dogge as Baiazet: and for to set at libertie this worthie nobilitie, whom he would bring into bondage. And hauing power to performe it, I haue not done the same, but haue in such sort bounded my ambition, as to abstaine from commanding ouer the fairest and richest Empire, and for to gouerne the most beautifull Citie in the world. I will reason with you (my friend) and say, that I haue not obtained anie such victorie as that is, although I be the Conqueror of so manie seuerall people and nations so farre off, and that my Armes, euen vnto this present, through the almightie fauour of the great God my God, haue alwayes bene victorious. It is an ordinarie matter to winne battailes, to conquer kingdomes, and for to prescribe lawes vnto Empires, manie haue done the same: but there be fewe to be found amongst the great Princes and Potentates, who haue ballanced iustice and equitie with their ambition: but putting themselues by right or wrong into the middest of the worlde, haue held onely force for iustice, the which some haue vsed, not hauing regard either vnto equitie or faith. I will at the least wise leaue this example vnto posteritie. Do you not see how this faith which I keepe with mine enemies, maketh them become my faithfull friends? What force and vertue (think you) wil it haue with them which be my friends already? And

how greatly shall my honour and reputation bee increased? Commend me then I pray you, and leaue to blame me. The Chanceller being returned from him, who was verie wise, declared this discourse vnto mee, the which I would not omit, to make the good nature of my Prince the better knowne, whose historie I do set foorth. As also that his conditions should bee the better represented before the eyes of those which haue not diligently considered the same: or rather for such as heare speach of the blessing that God hath bestowed vpon him in so manie happie conquestes, to the end his goodnesse should bee acknowledged, and not attributed vnto fortune or blinde chaunce, the which raiseth vp the vicious as soone as the vertuous. So the Prince came vnto Damasco, where hee found Axalla, who stayed his comming with the Auaunt-guard, who had made an end of vtterly destroying it, for that heeDamasco destroyed by Tamerlan. knew the same to be euill affected. His Armie encamped eight dayes therein, Prince Axalla hauing receiued commandement to send sixe thousand horse vnto the great Chamberlaine, to the end that hee might passe ouer the riuer of Euphrates with safetie: and he went to besiege Mebeg againe, the which within three dayes he tooke, and Raflan also, and all the countrie yeelded vnto the Emperours obedience, and especially the Cities situated vpon the riuer of Euphrates. The Prince gaue vno him a commandement, to stay at the passage for to ioyne with him, and himselfe in person to come vno him: all the which hee performed accordingly. The Prince did giue him very good entertainment, greatly commending his valour and courage before all the Captaines of the Army, and afterwardes sent him backe vnto his charge, hauing

commandement to ioine a part of his forces with those of Axalla, and himselfe was appointed vnto theTamerlan▪ with his Army marched into Persia. Arier-guard, ouer the which Calibes had bene leader: although indeed our Armie marched all in a front: for the Prince marched in the middest, Axalla on the right hand, and the great Chamberlaine vpon the left: the Prince of Thanais was in the Battaile neare vnto the Prince. I do not here set downe by name so manie Princes and other great Captaines, the which commanded ouer troupes as well of horse as footmen. So the Emperor came vnto Mebeg, where he passed ouer the riuer of Euphrates, from the which place he sent other ten thousand horse vnto Calibes, vnder the cōduct of the Prince of Atacen, together with fifteene or sixteene thousand footmen for aide, he being commanded to take his way by Babylon, and to make the same subiect vnto the Prince; and he remained in the same place to vnderstand what successe Atacen had, he being also commanded to remaine in that same place to heare newes from Calibes, and to aduertise him what need he had of him, the Emperour hauing bene certified of some stirring of the Soldan. Notwithstanding Calibes sent word, that they came from all parts to submit themselues vnder the Princes obedience. In the end, after some abode, he caused the front of his army to march directly into Armenia, being desirous to passe by Diaberoth, and punish these litle kings, who had rebelled against his men, being also desirous to bring vnder the subiection of the Parthian Empire those countries which lie euen at the mouth of Euphrates, which the Prince of Atecen did happily bring to passe: & Embassadors came from all the kings which commanded to take the oth of fidelity for the same: for you must vnderstand,

that since the Empire of the Christians, which they call Romans, they were sometimes gouerned by the Ottomans, sometimes by the Soldans, sometimes by the Califes, & sometimes by the Lieutenants general of the Romans; so as these people were now at the strongest, but greatly destroyed by means of these warres. Now the Prince would assure himselfe of the passage ouer the riuer of Euphrates, for to succour frō thence the prouinces of Egipt, at such time as they should haue neede thereof: and being ready to drawe straight into Armenia, he receiued newes from Calibes, beseeching his Maiesty to dispatch aide vnto him. PresentlyAid sent vnto Calibes into Egipt. was the Prince of Atacen sent backe againe, and commanded to set forward into Egipt, and the Prince in person went vnto Babylon, leauing Axalla with the Auaunt-guard, not to leaue the iourny into Armenia. The Prince being aduised to go thither himselfe in person, to the end for to bring vnto them a great astonishment and assurance in his bountie, when they would trust to the same. We came in eleuen daies vnto Babylon: the Prince hauing receiued all those people vnder his obedience, he left the great Chamberlaine at Romedat for to fortifie it, and also for to command all the riuer of Euphrates, euen to the Armenians. He recōmended vnto him the inhabitants of Babylon, who had shewed themselues verie affectioned towardes him, and the which was almost wholly peopled by the Tartarians: for the late Prince of Sachetay his father hauing made an enterprise thither, did take the same, and for the better keeping thereof, he caused the Parthian Colonies to come thither; who in the end were so vexed by their neighbors, as well Mamelues as Persiās, that they were of necessitie compelled to submit themselues vnder

their Empire, the affection and remembrance of their ancient originall remaining alwayes with them. The Emperour for this consideration shewed them all mildnesse, and vpon this occasion desired to make himselfe Lord of this countrie, by this right, that the late Prince his father had once conquered it by a Lieutenant generall of his, called Sahali, whose remēbrance was yet verie fresh, for the seruices he had done vnto the Empire of Sachetay. From this place the Prince returned in great hast, being aduertised by Prince Axalla, how the Persian Guines came to visite him in peaceableGuines the holy Persian. maner, for to submit vnder his obedience whatsoeuer countries he held, the which were not many. The Emperour who did wonder at his holinesse, and honoured him, hauing vnderstode thus much, made haste to set forward for to honour him the more: for he held an opinion alwayes of him as of an holy personage, in so much as the Emperour was determined for to see him, for the estimation of his holinesse and religion. Now vnderstanding that he came in this maner towards him, he left his troupes to come softly vnder the charge of the Prince of Thanais, and himselfe aduanced forward vnto Axalla, who looked for the Persian Guines: who presently dispatched towards him the Prince of Liseauceu and the great Chanceller for to gratifie him, and to assure him of the great desire the Emperour had of his comming. The Prince wondring greatly at his holie life, determined to yeeld him all the honour hee could possiblie, and to deuise all meanes to pleasure him. So the Emperour set forward to meete with this Guines, who did come inThe strange comming of Guines vnto Tamerlan. verie humble manner, bringing also with him an infinite number of sundrie kinds of beasts, the which he

kept tame, and by the which he taught men. As soon as he did see the Emperout, he began to make his praiers towards the heauens, for the greatnesse of the health of the Emperour, for the greatnesse of the religion of the Prophet, excommunicating with all his power the Ottomans, as enemies vnto the faithfull beleeuers. The Emperor who came in great pompe, was greatly astonished, to see this man in such furniture as he was, and as he was by nature, a great wonderer at such kind of of people, there was he more then euer before: and being willing to gratifie him, he offered him part of the enemies spoyles hee had conquered, giuing vnto him fifteene or sixteene thousand prisoners, to the end they might be instructed in his religion, a present the which was verie acceptable vnto Guines, in as much as this same did greatly help to augment & also increase him, causing the most part of them to conforme themselues according to his manners and opinion. But as this deuout humour pleased the Emperour, so diuers on the other side did reprooue the strange fashions in this Prince, who through holinesse knew well how to bring so many countries vnder his obedience. Now diuers blamed the Emperor for making so great account of his holines: but whē I cōsider the honor & reuerēce which man oweth vnto religion, I am not of those, which will say, that a prince ought not to haue so much therof: for certainly it is a thing wherof any do seldome complaine. Now after all this great shewe of religion, he came not vnto the Emperor for nothing, but rather for two ends, whereof the one was, the feare he had ofGuines religiō abused for the increase of his greatnesse. this army, which he desired to be fauorable vnto him: & the other, to receiue by meanes thereof, increase of his affaires, vnder shew of deuotion, knowing the Emperor

to be enclined as much as might be to godlinesse, and also that he might be alwaies neare vnto the Emperors person, as protector of all the countries neare vnto him, the which by his meanes and intercession did submit themselues vnder the Princes greatnesse: and himselfe was the first that thereunto did willingly submit all the iurisdiction he had, although the Emperour made no request for the same. But this humility did serue him to good purpose, and to his successors also: for this was his preseruation, & the foundation of their greatnesse: so as the Prince, hauing subdued all Persia exceptingTauris. the citie of Tauris, the which is a very great and rich citie, and hauing made vnto it selfe a peculiar kind of gouernement, did hinder as much as in it lay, the greatnesse of Guines, and a great part of the country also that was obedient vnto him, and in the same was a Captaine who did commaund them, called Talismahar, whoTalismahar. was throughly aduertised of the credite Guines had with the Emperor, and who would not faile to solicite him for to enterprise and conquer this citie, and thereof change also the gouernment: and he hauing an opinion that the Emperour being desirous to returne, would not busie himselfe about him, if he set but a countenance of well defending of himself, and so hauing taken such order, he sent his Embassadors vnto the Emperour for to informe him of the vsurpations Guines had made, and his purposes vnder the pretence of a fained religiō. The Emperour would heare nothing of all that he sent him word. But he himselfe would declare his owne reasons, and would demand the auncient right his predecessors had vnto this countrie: or for want thereof, hee would make appeare how hurtfull the same would be vnto thē. The Emperour omitted not to here them, and noted

verie well the meanes he might haue to make himselfe greater through these diuisions: acknowledging and considering well therof, he found that euery where they did abuse the same, and especially that the cloake of religion is bigge and large enough for to couer all the world: but he dissembled it, and setting forward caried Guines with him, and receiued a new oath of all the people, and in the strong cities he planted new Colonies: to conclude, the Emperours determination was to bring all Persia vnder his subiection. Nowe Prince Guines hauing alreadie submitted himselfe vnder his obedience, had giuen an example vnto manie: but the Emperour who considered that Tauris was a great citie, and the chiefest of that countrie, he sought to haue practises vnder hand, hauing sent some of his men vnto this end, promising vnto this Captaine a gouernement within his owne countrie: but hee who was hated of Guines, could not assure himselfe, so as he perswaded the people to resolue vpon the extremitie of a siege, the which did greatly displease the Emperour, vnto whom it being declared, that the presence of Guines was very preiudiciall vnto him, for the bringing of this citie vnder his obedience, hee aduertised him thereof, and hauing presented him with all sortes of giftes and honours, hee returned from thence into his owne countrie, hauing remained with the Emperour some fifteene dayes: the borders of his dominion stretched from Saucausan on our side, and on theAxalla marched with his armie into the countrey of Tauris. other side, euen vnto the Caspian sea. Now Axalla was commanded to aduance forward with the auantgard: and as soone as he entred into the territory of Tauris, to put vnto fire and sword all them which should resist him. Behold how the Emperour could serue himselfe

with this occasion, for to put vnder his subiection all Glautere & Taperestan, the which vntill this present had maintained themselues against the often roades of the Tartarians. Now as soone as Talismahar vnderstood our armie approched vnto his territorie, he entred into opinion to aduance forward with all his horsemen, and some footmen for to furnish the strōg places, the which might busie the Emperors armie. He had with him full thirtie thousand good horse, hee being also a most famous Captaine, being able greatly to distresse our armie, the which was we arie with wants, and through the long time it had marched and encamped, euen vnto the beginning of winter. But the inhabitants of Tauris being very light & inconstant, he thought that the euents of warre are doubtfull, and oftentimes vncertaine, and that if there should happen any disgrace vnto his armie, he doubted least some change & alteration should happen within the citie, where hee hoped to find his chiefest safetie. He therefore sent his horsemen vnder the charge of one of his Lieutenants called Camares, whoCamares. was of very great experience, he being enioined to wearie our armie, and if he found oportunitie to fight with it, assuring himselfe that there would be sufficient to assault the same: but aboue all, that he shold fight by surprise, and not in open battell, knowing wel, that so great a multitude of men did take vp a great countrie, and lay strōgly being ioyned together. The Emperor being aduertised of this resolution, sent word therof vnto Axalla, to the end he should not be assaulted on a sudden, & hauing summoned a city the which they called Cafechion, Camares had put men thereinto when he did see our armie go that way, so as the same made a refusall. Now Axalla hauing inuested it, he began to assault the same,

hauing with the great number of pioners he had, raised vp a Caualier, the which did defend our men approching vnto the wall, and from whence likewise they did continually fight with them that were within, who did resolutely defend themselues. Axalla hauing assaulted them on euery side, in the end they were ouercome, their courages failing them, and also because they were almost all wounded, our souldiers entred thereinto, and so they were all cut in peeces. About the time that our men spoiled, and put all vnto fire and sword, the Emperour being as yet three leagues from the siege, Camares shewed himselfe with his horsemen, and beganne theEncounters betweene Axalla and Camares Lieutenant vnto Talismahar. fight vpō two thousand horse, the which some had caused to aduance forward on a sudden, doubting of the enemie, and they came euen where the maine battaile of Axalla was, driuing that troupe forward in fight, but wisely and like a Captaine, aduancing no more then foure thousand horse to performe this exploit, and him selfe comming after in very good order, & hauing caused the retrait for to sound, Prince Axalla commaunded sixe thousand Parthian horse for to follow them, and if they could mingle thēselues amongst them, the which being very well and diligently performed by the Captaine which did conduct thē, the auant-currers of these foure thousand horse, hauing perceiued Axallaes maine forces to aduance forward, following the lightnesse of these Parthians, began presently to turne themselues, and retire in very good order, leauing the foure thousand horse to make head against the sixe thousand Parthians, notwithstanding in retyring themselues in the end, at the passage of a riuer, Camares did stay, & put all his troupes in battell array, assisting of his men, who were somewhat pressed by the enemie, although the

fight was in a manner equall, and there were some sixe or seuen hundred men slaine of either side, Camares making a shew of lodging, was carefull for to send to defend all the passages. Axalla hauing aduanced forward the footemen with him, forced the passage, and found the enemie retired ten leagues beyond the same, who wisely had put into a citie neare adioyning, a sufficient garrison for to defend it, and hold out for the space of eight dayes: and Camares in the meane time did wearie our armie, and made great spoyle of all kind of victuals, hoping to draw things into length. But the example of those the which had beene handled so roughly, caused them not to bee so obstinate: for it is a Maxime toA Maxime. shorten the war, that by punishing wel the obstinate by their liues, the neighbours become wise through their example, not to play the fooles in the same manner: so did it fall out with Gorgechin, the which in steed of being obstinate, came to parley, and was receiued by composition, and well vsed. Axalla being aduertised that Camares was at Archiech, tenne leagues beyond that place, he made choise of tenne thousand Parthians, and of sixe thousand Scithians, and of tenne thousand choise Stradiots, determining for to surprise the enemie, and caused a rumor to be spread by some sent betweene, that they of Gorgechin looked for his succour, and had not yeelded themselues; & that they did greatly batter the same, the which Axalla hoping to accomplish,A stratageme. aduanced directly towards them, hauing cōmanded the rest of the armie to approch as neare as they could. By this meanes he surprised them in a morning, being encamped within a great village, & hauing found a thousand of their horsemen at their ease, he caused them to be pursued euen into the campe, and putting

himselfe into battell array, to the end they should not come foorth without fighting, hee encamped himselfe vppon the wayes into their campe, hoping verie soone either to famish them, or for to compell them to come vnto a battell. Now there was but one way to issue out in order: the Prince Axalla hauing caused the footemen hee had with him to aduance forward, he placed the same vpon the wayes vnto their campe. Now they had left their footemen behinde them, and had none but their horsemen, the which Prince Axalla perceiuing, he caused trenches to bee made for to hinder them, and hauing sent word vnto the Emperour of this deede, hee set forward with all diligence. Now Camares thought he had all the whole armie vpon him, therefore he beganne to thinke vpon his safetie, seeing himselfe compelled for to fight, hauing but one issuing place, the which was vppon the side of the enemies campe. Nowe hee had caused a counter-trench to be made, the which was along by a litle mountaine, wherewith he hoped to strengthen himselfe so well, as to set himselfe in battell array, and to force foure thousand horse which were his guard. I haue forgotten to declare, that the Emperour assoone as he had receiued these newes, caused the Prince of Thanais to march on forward, with twentie thousand horse that were alreadie arriued, the which caused our enemies to beleeue that our whole armie was encamped. Now the enemy was determined to make his retrait, & for to cut in peeces this standing watch of foure thousand horse, & this matter fell out about midnight, when as the Moone did shine bright. Prince Axalla by chance came to visite his watches, and had some 2000. horse which followed him, & he being aduertised that

the enemie caused fires to be kindled within the counter-trenches, the which we sought to force and win, he doubted of that the enemie did in deed: so as he secretly cōmanded all the army to mount on horsebacke, notwithstanding this could not be so soone performed, that the enemie had not first attempted forceably to execute his enterprise, and beganne to put two thousand horse before him, for to trie the hazard of fortune, who ranne cleane through the guards which were on foot. Now our men had alreadie begunne a counter-trench for to be opposite against that same which they had made. This did hinder them, and our souldiers hearing the noise, beganne to take armes, and to resist the enemies, who did strongly assault our men, and vpon their first comming being followed by certain footmen, they did winne our counter-trench, and beganne to labour for to leuell the same, for to passe ouer their horsmen, where happened a very great disorder: for our footmen being astonished, their horsemen hauing passed, the most part of them were cut in peeces, wherein the enemies busying themselues longer then they should haue done, our men were soone vpon them (the which were the sixe thousand horse that were in gard halfe a league from thence) who arriuing found the enemies in this disorder, and charged vppon them: but Camares was alreadie passed ouer the first trench. About the same time Prince Axalla (who was on horsebacke) beeing aduertised of this disorder, came vnto the allarum with two or three thousand horse, the whichThe 
                     •
                  aliantnesse of Axalla. were presently in a readinesse, and finding the danger of his men, did hazard himselfe into the fight: but the enemie made no head at all, but did continually retyre, Axalla alwayes ioyning together those of

the campe, who came vnto the allarum: but the enemy comming vnto a passage, the which place Axalla had commaunded sixe thousand men for to keepe, the enemie not thinking to find any hinderance there, was beaten backe: he busied himselfe in seeking for to force the passage. In the end he went lower for to passe ouer, resolued for to fight if they did vrge him to it. Now Axalla
               The battell betweene Axalla and Camares. following him very neare, the enemie turned his head, and like vnto a furious beast, hee came vnto the charge very couragiously as one desperate, and returning in good order, he foūd Axalla, who was in the forefront of seuen thousand horse that followed him: the other had yet also twelue or thirteene thousand horse with him. It behooued Axalla to shew his courage and valour at this present: for seeing himselfe engaged, he did runne thorough the thirteene thousand horse, and hauing his horse slaine vnderneath him with the blow of a launce, vpon the second charge he was mounted againe and succoured, at such time as behold eight or tenne thousand horse, led by Damascen (whom Axalla had commanded to assist and follow him, who did beare the brunt of all) arriuing, they found our men almost all ouerthrowen, notwithstāding maintaining the fight resolutely. Then was the enemie forced to forsake the place of fight, our men ouerthrowing them. Camares seeing such euill happe light vpon him, together withThe ouerthrow and death of Camares. them that were ioyned with him, threw himselfe headlong, and was slaine fighting, the fight was performed all by Moone light. The Prince of Thanais remained within the campe for to guard it. In the morning the Emperour in person arriued, who found this faire sight, and as he commended the valour of Axalla and his diligence, so he blamed the Captaines who were in gard,

because they had ill performed their indeuor in repulsing of the enemies first horsemen: the Emperor caused their inditement to be framed, and two were condemned, who according to the lawes for warre were punished about ten of the clocke in the morning. They of the City, wherein remained full two thousand horse whom they had gathered together, and about sixe thousand footmen, seeing their men ouerthrowne, and especially beholding the head of Camares, lost their courage, and entred into communication: and the Emperour hauing giuen them his word, they came out to treat, there was a composition made with them, vpponA composition with certaine of the inhabitants of Tauris. condition, that none of them should reteturne into Tauris, but might otherwise go whither they would: so they required to be conducted vnto Louan, promising to subiect themselues vnto whatsoeuer the inhabitants of Tauris would yeeld vnto, who were greatly astonished at the euill hap which did light vpon Camares, accusing him of the fault he had committed, to suffer himselfe to be shut vp in this maner. So as the Emperour at that verie instant caused his Armie to march as soone as it was ioyned together, and hee encamped within eight leagues of Tauris, his maine battell at Sedema, and caused his auantguard (wherein was Axalla) to lodge at Chiara, who hauing shewed vnto them of Tauris the head of him that was ouer their Armie, they were greatly astonished, and the Princes pleasure being sent vnto them by an Herald, they were in great trouble, as well by meanes of the part Prince Guines had within the City, who vpon this disgrace happening vnto the contrary partie, would make no doubt to be obeied, vpon which occasion they being all of them retired into one of the quarters of Tauris,
               
they determined openly to fauour the Emperour, assuring themselues of peace and mildnesse. Now you mustTalismahar chosen Prince of Tauris. vnderstand that the inhabitants of Tauris had chosen Thalismahar for their Prince, and sworne fealty between his hands after they had perceiued the approach of the Emperours Army▪ so as he was no longer acknowledged onely as Captaine generall, but for their Prince, and hauing receiued a solemne oth of them all, they had euery one sworne vnto him to dye, rather then obey the Tartarians, or to acknowledge anie thing that commeth from them: but seeing their affaires for to change, they repented themselues alreadie, so inconstant a thing is the election of a new Prince, who tooke vpon him to fight with the Tartarians in a raunged battel, and to driue thē fighting euen into their owne country. But now when they did see so great an Armie draw neare vnto them, being victorious ouer so manie sundrie nations, and especially the experience of their force and valour by the ouerthrow of Democares, it troubled them much to be shutvp, especially seeing he had made them promise, that the enemie should not approach within foure leagues of their walles. This murmuring was spoken aloude, and the most obstinate, who were their Priestes, and who did abhorre the chaunge of the religion they held, and which would not receiue the new reformation of Guines, nor his superstitions, they were the first which began to stirre vp the people, and to exhorte them to thinke vpon their safetie, declaring vnto them how vaine their Princes promise was, and that he deceiued them, their destruction being a thing most manifest; that they should remember them selues of Caire, and so many thousands of Cities, the which

this Tamerlan hath brought vnder his subiection, and peraduenture hee would not constraine them to obey Guines, but the Emperour onely: and that it was the best way to send vnto him. This opinion remained threeA great 
                     ••
                  
                  tin
                     •
                  e within the city of Tauris. dayes to bee considered of amongst the people, and euen the greatest fell into this opinion, although they did see that they were able to make resistance more then three moneths, but hoping for no other succour but the death of Tamerlan who was young, and that euen his Captaines would not leaue his glorie imperfect, before they had atchieued this glorious enterprise, that all this did bring vnto them small hope of safety. Axalla was aduertised of al this by the spies which went and came to and fro, being most aduanced, and thereof gaue intelligence vnto the Emperour. But in the end, feare together with the desire of change preuailedThe faction of Guines within the citie of Tauris sent vnto Tamer
                     ••
                  . so much with them, that they of Guines faction sent vnto the Emperour for to know his pleasure, and to take assurance for their safetie. But they were not the sixt part: notwithstanding a bodie cannot haue so small an euill in anie one of his parts, that it shall not greatly empaire the health of all the rest. This canker although it was litle at the begining, did dayly increase and went on augmenting. The Prince of Tauris being aduertised of these two factions, the one of Guines sent vnto the Emperour, knew not how to remidie the same; for the enemie being so neare, and thinges so disposed, he doubted a great reuolt, and did wisely beare all with patience vntill some extremitie, when as hee purposed to vse extreame remedies for his benefite. Now within the Citie of Guines faction were some thirtie thousand men, whereof they hauing assured the Emrour, and hauing bene comforted to assure themselues

of his assistance, they returned from thence, spreading ouer all, the courtesie they had found there with the Emperour, and they published the same aloude amongst the people and that there was no euill meant vnto anie, but to the new chosen Prince; and that the Emperour required nothing of them but their obedience; and that notwithstanding the folly which some seditious had committed in choosing this man for Prince, yet was it not fit to ouerthrow so flourishing a Citie and so manie honest men, for such a light matter; that the Emperour required but the life of this new elected, and of his confederates, and not of the inhabitants. In the ende matters came vnto this passe, that they of Guines faction had assembled the people, and caused the same Embassadours whom they had sent vnto Tamerlan, to declare aloude vnto the people, being assembled, what they had heard the Emperour say, the which was; that he directed his armes onely against the elected Prince, and not against the City. Presently thereupon some cried; let vs arme our selues against
                  
                     •••
                  mult within the City of Tauris. such as will gainsay this: & there was neither the maiesty of the senators, nor the arms of the soldiers, that could stay this sedition. The new Prince withdrew himselfe into his lodging, where being intrenched and desirous to entermeddle his authoritie, he was desired to retire vnto the Pallace, into some corner about his Castell, with those of his faction: and seeing himselfe weake, hee determined to forsake the Citie, and to withdraw himselfe vnto the Mountaines. The Emperor being aduertized of this happy successe by Axalla, who came vnto him, & declared vnto him this purpose, to the ende he might haue leaue to cut of the way vnto the Prince elected. But the Emperour hauing meditated

long thereupon wold not hazard anie thing rashly but let him go, and rather take that great city through their diuision then by his armes: he therefore commanded Axalla to suffer him to retire, and to send none vnto the warre, being vnwilling to enterprise any thing by armes, to the end they shold haue a greater confidence in his mercie. The night following the Prince elected departed away, together with those of his faction, whoThe Prince elected departeth out of Tauris. had bene onely fifteene dayes Prince of the common wealth, whereof he had bin Captaine the space of eight and twenty yeares with all prosperity, hauing stoutly resisted the supstitions of Guines, and the tyrannie the which he would vnder colour of this new godlinesse bring vpon the Persians: and surely if the ouer sight of Camares had not bene, his affaires had not receiued so bad successe, which doth teach vs that the matters of warre are so vncertaine, as it is necessary to haue alwayes regard vnto the most sure way, and preserue the principall matter. For if those forces had not departed out of Tauris nor hazarded them, there had bene worke for our Armie the space of sixe moneths. And you know what chaunces and nouelties do commonly happen in the estate of so great a monarkie as is ours, the which hauing so great a breadth of country, it is not possible but some new alteration must daylie needs happen within the same, especially seeing long sieges are oftentimes the destructiō of great armies, & principally in such an estate as ours was, which hauing bin out of his own country the space of two years, it drew neare home, so as it was hard to keepe them from seuering during so long abode. The Prince elected had many perfections, and was surely worthy to succeed in this monarchy before Guines: but the destiny had thus limited his glorie

That same hauing happened, all the Citie being ioyned together, sent vnto the Emperour, desiring eight dayes respite for to treate with him, and yeeld them selues vnder his obedience, the which the Emperour graunted them willingly. And this they did, to the end they might haue time to prouide the meanes to keepe them selues from the gouernement of Guines, & his superstition, or rather reformation in the Prophets law: for the faction of Guines which was smal in respect of the other parties could do very litle. So the time being come, they sent to treate with the Emperour: and the first article was, thatArticles of treatie sent by the inhabitants of Tau
                     •
                  is vnto Tamerlan. they did beseech that it would please him to cause them to be gouerned by one of his owne subiects, & that they might not be seuered frō his obedience; that they doubted not but that Guines would remember the resistance1 they had made against him; that they beseeched his imperiall Maiestie, he might haue no commandemēt ouer them; a thing verie acceptable vnto the Prince, what good answer soeuer he had giuen vnto Guines to bring them subiect vnder him. The other was, that they shold2 be maintained in their priuiledges, and acknowledged as subiects vnto the Tartarian Empire, and not any longer vnto that of the Persians. That they wished this great3 Monarchie that had so long time flourished, should be chaunged in the time, and vnder the raigne of so great and coragious an Emperour of the Tartarian nation, as our Prince Tamerlan was: to the end the reproch of their nation might be the lesse. That they desired not to be4 freed frō ordinarie tributes, although it might please the Emperour to consider the great warres they had lately maintained against Guines for preseruation of their libertie; and that it would please him to ease them of the same. The Emperor who was of a curteous nature, made

shew there of in good earnest towards this people, and made grant vnto them that they shold liue without any constraint in their religion, aswell after the reformatiō of Guines, as after the law of Mahomet according vnto the interpretation of Haly, and also the Christians and Iewes should be likewise free, as they had alwayes vsed and accustomed. All other demands being granted, they submitted themselues vnder his obedience, and the next day came from thence three hundred principall men of the city, who performed the oth of fealtie, in the name of all the people. The Emperour after this, determined of his entry: so Prince Axalla was commanded to enter the first thereinto with fifteene thousand horse, & thirty thousand footmen; they deliuered into his hands all the fortresses giuing commandement for honour and obedienceTamerlan his entrance into the city of Thanais. vnto the Emperour: he seised vpon the gates, and caused proclamation to be made, that all the Citizens should bring their weapons into his lodging, the which was done. So the Emperour arriued there in great magnificence, being receiued with the full reioycing of all the people, and he was almost worshipped of euery one, thinking thēselues happie to be saued from such a shipwracke. The next day the Emperour had newes of the death of the Emperour his vnkle, by the Empresse who had apprehended some great men that would haue raysed vp some tumult: he made great lamentation for him; yet it was the lesse grieuous vnto him, for that he knew his great sicknesse, which did threaten him with death of long time: & had not the kindnesse of the Empresse his daughter bin, who had such care of him as she ought for to haue, old age had made an end of him long before. The Emperour caused these newes to be concealed from the army, bewailing the same priuatly, he dispatched

Prince Axalla (in whom amongst all the rest ofPrince Axalla dispatched by Tamerlan into Tartaria after the death of the great Cham. his Captains he reposed greatest trust) for that he had chiefest authoritie with him, to the end he might assist and aide the Empresse with counsell, with full power of Lieutenāt generall vnder the Empresse: he caried thirty thousand horse with him, causing a rumour to be spread, that the Emperour aduaunced forward. Who in the meane time gaue order for the assuring of Persia and restraining Guines, of whom he had discouered manie practises, that tended vnto the Monarchie of the Persians. Axalla being also contrarie vnto him, and hauing as much as he could fauoured the contrarie faction, he had set downe as a Maxime vnto the Emperour the assuring of Persia, and that he should seeke the weakening of Guines faction. But he Emperour hauing sent him farre from him, being naturally religious, suffered him selfe to be caried away with the fained holinesse of Guines, which did great hurt, but not duringTamerlan abused through Guines holines. the Emperours time: for he durst not during his life, but yet vnto his posteritie: Monarkes deseruing no lesse blame for not prouiding for the quiet of their posteritie, as for seeking an assurance only during their raigne. For the Emperor hauing suffered Guines to come neare vnto him, he knew so cunningly to behaue him selfe, winning the Chancellor and the other Princes of the EmperoursGuines pra
                  
                     ••
                  ise with the Chancellor and other Princes about Tamerlan. counsell, that they brought him neare vnto the Emperour; and being there he knew so well to carry him selfe, that he made the Prince for to tast his manner of seruing God, as most answereable vnto the last will of the Prophet. Notwithstanding the Emperour knowing how much the change of his maner of seruing God, was acceptable vnto the people whō he gouerned, although he allowed it, he did not practise the same: but very secretly

he assembled together the principall men of the law, to make triall for to agree this controuersie: but he did see this to be impossible, so stiffely euery one held his interpretation to be according to the true meaning of the Prophet, wherein hauing spent some time in vaine, in the meane time hee receiued the oth of all the Persians, & gathered together great store of money, wherewith he had payed his armie, and gratified his men of warre, rewarding them after their desertes, he established the Prince of Thanais to commaund ouer them in his absence, with whom he left an hundred thousand feotemen of his armie, to the end for to suffer the same to winter in all the Cities, and through all the countrey, to keepe all in subiection, and refresh it selfe. The rest did the Emperour conduct with him, and all his prisoners of what qualitie soeuer, except those whom heThe cunning practises of Guines vnder the cloake of religion. gaue vnto Guines, for to instruct them in his reformation. But the matter fell out much otherwise, for hauing framed them well vnto the warre, as soone as the Princes death happened, he vsed their seruice for to assure his affaires amongst the Persians, vpon the first occasion should be offered, whereby he thought he might attaine vnto his purposes: for the Prince hauing led him with him, he made him beleeue that he had no kinde of ambition, but onely religion; in so much as he making profession of his religion neare vnto the Emperours person, many applied thēselues vnto the same. Now he perceiued well that the Prince had some iealousie of him: this was the occasion he desired to follow him, assuring him selfe the Tartarians would in short time cause thēselues to be hated of the Persians. The Emperour inuited all the greatest Lords of Persia to accompanie him vnto Samarcād, which they did vpō the cōmandemēt of the sayd

Emperour, being desirous to teach them for to serue him, the Persian gentlemen being so many litle kings, and also that during the time he was in his Court he made them for to know his courtesie and magnificence, and did win them by good deedes, aduancing them also vnto the honors of his Court, and vnto the charges of his kingdomes, wherein he employed them: so as Persia as long as he liued was much affected vnto him: which greatly serued him for the keeping as well of Siria as of the Soldans Empire, leauing cōtinually mē there, & drawing out colonies, the better to settle his affaires in those places. So the Emperour leauing the Prince of Thanais with his Army to attend his pleasure, he marched with the rest of his forces into his owne country, with all the ioyes and triumphes that might be possible, the chiefest prisoners marching before the Emperour, amongst the which was Baiazet Emperour of the Turkes all chained, and was a spectacle vnto all the world of fortunes inconstancy: he continued notwithstanding in the same fiercenesse was wont to be in him. So where soeuer the Emperor passed, the people assembled themselues by thousands, praising & singing his victories. We arriued at the last at Samarcand with all our spoyles, in very great magnificence:Tamerlan and his army came vnto Samercand with all their spoyles. where after we had bin the space of one moneth or two in feastings and magnificences, the Emperor with his accustomed deuotion, hauing in great solemnityTamerlan his 
                     〈◊〉
                   vnto God. vowed a Church and Hospitall vnto his God, the most magnificent that might be deuised. Whereuppō to perform the same, he began to search out all sorts of handicratfs men for to honour this city, the which he had a desire to make one of the stateliest Cities in the world. And in one of the corners thereof he began, and did build there his Temple and Hospitall, making

an accompt to increase yet this Citie, as largeTamerlan built a temple and hospitall at Samarcand. againe as it was, and to people the same, with so manie seuerall kindes of people and nations as hee had brought with wim, giuing libe
                  •
               tie vnto them all to frame and build their houses, causing money to be distributed to do the same, and giuing all kinds of priuiledges and freedomes vnto the prisoners, for to giue thē a greater desire to build and settle themselues there: and hauing caused the streets and places to be plotted, and hauing appointed a place for euerie one to build vpon, he tooke no other pleasure, neither had he anie other care, then the preseruing the good will of his most famous souldiers, whose names he hauing caused to be written in a generall muster booke, the which hee commaunded to be made, from day to day, they (not thinking thereof) receiued honours, and good turnes of the Prince, in recompence of their so great seruices. Now he declared the death of the Emperour his vnkle vnto his Counsell, and forgot no ceremony due vnto the honor of the said Emperour, outwardly shewing the grief he conceiued for his death; where after he had rested some eight dayes, he determined to go vnto Quinzai for to see the Empresse, and hauing left Baiazet in the custody of the gouernor of Zachetay, the EmperorTamerlan his ordinarie court of forty thousand horse and threescore thousand footmen. set forward with his ordinarie court, which was of fortie thousand horse, and threescore thousand footmen. I had forgotten to declare, that the Emperour sent backe the Mosciuites forces with rich presents, and dispatched Sinopes nephew of Prince Axalla, for to conduct them out of the country of his obedience, as also to the end for to confirme a new friendship with him: for to leaue nothing during his voiage that might be an occasion of nouelty, hauing for that time made an end of his

enterprises, hee was altogether bent to preserue the friendship of his allies, and for the maintenance of his conquestes. This was the cause that before he departedTamerlan his wise foresight. from Quinzai, he dispatched towards the Prince of Thanais, one of his most faithfull counsellers called Nobazes, to the end he should haue an eye vnto the factions of the Persians, and also for to succor all the places that should haue neede, as well on the side of Caire as towards the Mediterran sea, to the ende that nothing should be chaunged during his absence, giuing him charge moreouer that the pollicy and discipline should in his Armie be carefully obserued, and commanding him to credit Nobazes, verie expert in the art of warre. So the Emperour being come vnto Cambalu, he receiued newes of the battell Odmar had wonne against the king of Chinas Captaine generall, and how he pursued his victorie, hauing taken three or foure great and rich Cities, the which did yeelde themselues vnto him, and that againe the Chinois did desire peace. The EmperourArticles of a new agreement betweene Tamerlan and the king of China. sent the Articles he required, which were that before all other things the king of China should pay the arrerages of the tribute the which he had agreed with the Emperor. First he should come in person to do homage1 vnto his Maiesty, & acknowledge himselfe as vassall vnto his Empire. That the Army should withwraw2 it selfe during his voiage, and he should deliuer vp vnto him all his Cities, sauing three such as the Emperour should nominate; and that the things should be restored3 vnto the same estate they were in before the war, when the Emperor made the first peace; that he shold pay the4 army for sixe moneths, and shold also satisfie all the expences of the war, seeing he had begun it, & was author of the breach of peace. Then the Emperor gratified Odmar,
               
sending vnto him for wife one of his sisters with all magnificence that might be, for to make him the more affectioned vnto him. I will declare how the Emperour was receiued at Cambalu by his subiects with all the magnificence possible, the Emperour for to gratifie them hauing restored their priuiledges, the which hee had taken from them, for the rebellion they had committed with Calix: so as the Emperour went ouer all gratifying his subiects for this new succession that was lately fallen vnto him, all the companies coming vnto him: for in these countries they haue no certaine dwellings, they are alwayes wandring in troupes wheresoeuer they go: thither the Empresse (hauing left Prince Axalla to gouerne at Quinzai) came vnto him. The Prince remained there almost two moneths, hauing in this place giuen order for all the affaires he had. Cambalu
               Mount Althay the burying place of the Scithian Emperors called the great Cam. was also neare vnto mount Althay, where they vse to burie the Scithian Emperours, whom we do call the great Cham. The Emperour caused the bodie of the Emperour his vnkle to be brought thither, and him selfe wold conduct it with all pompe, honoring not only his body, but also al that he had loued in the world,The magnificent funerall of the great Cam of Tartaria. & although it was not the custome to cause women for to assist the funerals, yet would he affoord this honor vnto the Empresse, that she shold assist the bringing of the body, going neare vnto the same. This he did, the more to make appeare how much he honored the memory of the late Emperor in his wife, being his daughter, & also to the end that if God did take him away his childrē being small, she shold haue the greater authority, & be the better acknowledged worthy to gouerne in the minority of his children; and also for that she had bene brought vp alwayes in authority euen since she was married.

The Prince desiring thereby the more to acknowledge the honour the Emperour his vnkle had done him, by adopting him as his son, and in hauing left him so great and large an Empire, as that was, whereof he left vntoTamerlan his vertuous and cha
                     ••
                   loue vnto his good wife. him the possession. Now the Emperour loued her onely, hauing no other affection in such pleasure, but only the happinesse of a faire of-spring, the which he hoped for. Now the body of the late Emperour being come vnto Cambalu, he determined to conduct it vnto the buriall according vnto the accustomed ceremonie, and to put the body with the kings & Emperors his ancesters. After he had from point to point performed the last will and testament of the late Emperor, hee returned from thence vnto Cambalu, where he spent all winter in tilt & turneying, going a hunting, making his abode there, because he was in a place nearest vnto the kingdome of China, to know how matters passed there, hauing now brought thither his last affaires, purposing to go thither in person the next winter, if Odmar did not make an end of the wars already begun, and if the king of China did not submit himselfe wholly vnder his obedience, hauing determined not to depart from Cambalu vntill this country were pacified, the marke hee shot at being only to keepe that which his valour was able to conquer through his good fortune, being desirous to spend the rest of his life in enioying the frutes of his trauels, & for to publish his praises vnto his people, and with millions to maintaine them in peace. He had also a purpose to bring vnto an end that which he had determined to do at Samarcand. Now Axalla was at Quinzai, as well vnto the cōtentment of al the men of war, as the inhabitants, who desired much to see their Prince, and hauing caused Prince Axalla in their behalfe to beseech it, that it

wold please the Emperor to cause his son to be broughtThe young Prince made gouerner of Quinzai and ouer all the country. vp amongst them there, the which he did grant vnto thē in fauour of the sayd Prince Axalla, establishing him for to command in the absence of the Prince his sonne, whom he made gouernour of Quinzai, from Cambalu euen vnto the sea. This country was replenished with some three hundred cities, and was in largenesse more then foure hundred leagues, besides an finite number of villages. To make short, it was that the Emperour his vnkle gouerned, where this Prince Axalla was his Lieutenant general, vnder the authority of the yong Prince hisAxalla appointed the yong Princes gouernour, and authorised ouer all the kingdoms of Tamerlan, as gouerner generall. son, vnto whom he deliuered him in charge for to be his gouernour, authorising him vnto the gouernement generall of all his kingdoms: for the great wisedome that was in this knight, made him beloued in all the countries vnder the Emperours obedience: the seruices also and great victories the which he had caused the Emperour to obtaine by his stout courage, and good conduct, who for these occasions put his principall trust in him, and after himselfe he thought him onely worthy to preserue for his children his kingdome and Empresse. Now he receiued newes that the Prince of Thanais set forward for to go into Syria, and to ioyne with the gouernour, for that the Soldan had these three moneths besieged Caire with a great army, notwithstanding the inhabitāts had shewed great faithfulnesse: they were indeed allThe Prince of Thanais sent into Egypt to assist Calibes. new colonies, not trusting vnto the old Citizens: for had not that course bin taken, there should haue bin many reuolts seene, the gouerner not hauing sufficient forces to be able to assist it. The Emperor once againe had giuē cōmandement vnto the Prince of Thanais, to march thither in diligence with his army, wherin were the old soldiers ordained by the Emperor, & his cōpaniōs in all his

warres; there were of them an hundred thousand of this kinde of warfarre, amongst the which there were thirty thousand Parthian horse remaining continually in the armie. Now they lamented much the absence of Axalla: but next vnto him the Prince of Thanais was most beloued of them; this Prince was the Emperours cousin germaine, who as you haue heard, had serued him very well; he had bene continually in all the enterprises of warre vnder Axalla, whom the Emperour had commanded fo
                  •
                to leade him vnto all the seruices of warre, to the end he might be made fit for to do him seruice; so as the Prince of Thanais being in Syria, and Prince Axalla at Quinzai, they were established in the two furthermost partes of his kingdomes, Princes and Captaines who had alwayes assisted and serued him faithfully. So the Prince of Thanais being with Calibes, and hauing gathered together part of the Great Chamberlaines forces vpon the coast of Babilon, he marched directly vnto Aleppo, hauing their forces ioyned together, being two hundred thousand fighting men. The Soldan perceiuing the Prince of Thanais to draw neare, remembred well, that those were they which had ouercome him. But he encouraged him self, because this great Tamerlan & his fortune were not there present; that he had to deale with a yong Prince desirous of glory, & who peraduenture to get it would do something vnaduisedly; & to resolue him selfe for to fight, was a thing he had too much proued vnto his hurt, except the hot bloud of this yong Prince did moue him inconsiderately to seeke for to force his trenches and succour the necessitie of those of Caire, whose victuals failed thē. So he intrēched himself all along the riuer, by the which onely the inhabitans might be relieued: for so great a citie cānot be victualltd

by cartes, but verie hardly: he made his trenches euen at his pleasure, our armie aduancing forward slowly.Good foresight in the Prince of Thanais 
                     •
                  or the victualing of Caire and Egypt from the Grecian Ilands The counsell of ours was to send throughout all Siria to gather together store of corne, and to cause it to be brought vnto Alexandria by sea, for to victual therewith Caire, aswell from all the Isles of Greece, as from all the sea coasts. Being obedient vnto his cōmandemēt they shewed great diligence, so as within short time there was gotten together a great quātity of corne. Our army in the meane time marched continually forward, drawing neare vnto Caire, the enemy being retired at the same present, seeing our armie come along by the riuer side, hauing made great prouisiō of boats to passe ouer his armie, & for to keepe vs from the riuer. In theThe Prince of Thanais doth bring victuals into Caire. end, the Prince of Thanais, hauing approched his army, and marked the enemies countenance, who was intrenched within his campe, he entred into Caire, where hauing with good order distributed that which hee had brought in carts, & vpon Mules & Camels, by the hands of Cōmissioners whō he had appointed, seeing the people had victuals sufficient for 15. daies, hauing taken the aduise of the Captaines of his counsell, he was counselled to cut off victuals from the enemies, and to take from them the riuer, and therby the victuals which did come vnto them from three or foure cities they had taken,The Prince of Thanais actions in Egypt, and happy successe in the same. the which had put them in hope they should be able to famish this great citie; he resolued to take those from them. In the mean time they prepared in Alexandria the victualing againe thereof by the riuer, and whilest some rigged certaine armed boates for to fight with those of the Soldan, the Prince of Thanais marched directly aboue Caire, straight vnto Muiare, the which he summoned to yeeld it selfe vnto the great Emperour of

Asia his maister, the which they hauing refused were besieged, and hauing caused all his engines to be planted, and great hollow trenches to be made, to the end he might approch neare vnto a tower, the which he determined to winne by vndermining, because it did defend all the courtaine, so as our men as well by the height thereof, as for that there was an infinite quantitie of artificiall fire therein, were greatly endamaged.The siege of Muiare, with the taking of the same by 
                     •••
                  ce. The Prince of Thanais hauing caused it tobe viewed by him who had the charge of mynes in the Armie, he promised within foure dayes to ouerthrow it, the which hee hauing performed, our men did winne the courtaine. Now the Prince of Thanais hauing caused an engine to approch, they tryed the wall, and finding it weake, they brought foure more thereunto, the which did beate downe a great part of the wall vnto the ground. This being done, our men were commaunded to giue an assault, the which was giuen, and the citie wonne, all beeing cut in peeces which were within the same, the women and litle children onely excepted. The other cities seeing the diligence we had vsed, & the small succour they had receiued from the Soldan, yeelded themselues vpon the first summons, & were receiued vpon good cōposition. The Prince of Thanais hauing left two or three thousand horse and 4000. footmen within the places he had takē, he thought it not conuenient to stay any longer, considering the want of victuals, wherof he doubted: & surely the Soldan, who was a great Captaine, had with great wisdome prouided for the well fortifying of those cities which were aboue him: for it had bene our ouerthrow if they had obeied the cōmandement he gaue them, being certaine that within fifteene dayes, victuals would

haue failed vs. But it falleth out oftē times, that the Generals are blamed, & that their enterprises haue ill successe, not for that they haue prouided ill for that which shold be done, but rather because there was either feare or disobedience in thē which are commaunded, & who were credited in a matter of importance. As soone as the Soldan vnderstood these newes, he began new practises, especially knowing for certaine that our army by sea set forward frō 
               Alexandria. And hauing caused his storehouses to be reuiewed, & calling together the generals for victuals within his army, they did assure him that he might continue thirtie dayes without hauing any want, and to performe this, he droue out of his army all that were vnprofitable, and caused them to passe ouer the water, thrusting them out to trie their fortune,The vnmercifull act of the Soldan. to retire into Libia, or whither they would at the conquerors mercie. The Prince of Thanais whose resolution had taken good effect, the which seemed impossible vnto the old Captaines, got thereby amongest his souldiers great reputation, and euen verily iudging that the euent of the victorie, and of the deliberation of Caire proceeded from that part: but it behooued to end well, and this was the hardest to be performed, and it seemed vnto euery one that this was a prize for a master to execute, euerie one lamenting the Emperours absence for this purpose, one wishing his boldnesse, another his diligence, and another his reputation, the which onely made his enemies for to flie: others saide of the Prince of Thanais, that at such time as heThe speech of the souldiers in the Prince of Thanais camp
                     •
                  . did any thing brauely, or rather whensoeuer he had any good successe, that he remembred well the Emperours fashions, & that he was a good scholler, presently they wished for the liberality of Prince Axalla, & remēbred

the daungers whereinto he would put himselfe one of the first. This was the speech of the souldiers, when as they remembred those that had so often commaunded them. Now the Prince of Thanais encamped his armie vnder Echied and Sebeit, vpon a riuer which maketh an arme of Nilus, but to be passed ouer in many places. The Soldan was intrenched as I haue declared at Buldao, hauing made wonderfull trenches on euery side,The number of the Soldans armie. euen vnto the riuer of Nilus. There were in his armie threescore thousand footmen & fortie thousand horse: but all very good men, and the most part of them were his old souldiers. Now he had fed them much with the hope of taking Caire, whereupon he grounded the recouering of his kingdome: but the souldiers perceiuing there came no more any thing from aboue downe the riuer, beganne to despaire: notwithstanding the Soldan assured himselfe, that within fifteene dayes our armie should be driuen to retire, and that Caire would be consumed with famine, so as he kept himselfe close and secret, busying himselfe onely in keeping the riuer with a great number of boates. The Prince on the other side seeing his enemie intrenched, he exercised his souldiers in making a trench before the enemie, being a daungerous thing for to be encamped without a trench neare vnto an armie, although our armie was greater by one thirde part of footemen more then horsemen. Nowe wee made our abode staying for Calibes, who came forwarde with the victuall that was prouided. In the meane time wee forbare not to make dayly skirmishes, to the end for to discouer where wee might with greatest aduantage set vppon the enemies, thereby to make them keepe close within their trenches, and also to the end

they should not haue the means to hinder our men frō passing, in succouring their armie which was vpon the water, at such time as our men would passe along withCalibes comming downe the riuer of Nilus to victuall Caire. the victuals. So Calibes cōming forwards, forgot not to aduertise the Prince of Thanais of the meeting place, to the end he might receiue 20000. men frō his army, the which it was necessaire also to embarke & put vpon the water, the which he was desirous to doe without the enemies knowledge: for he made small reckening of the forces which were come from Alexandria. Calibes was determined to fight vpon the water, with hope to cause his victuals for to passe, or else to die himselfe and his companie. The Prince of Thanais earnestly desired to vndertake this charge: but some declared vnto him, that the importance of the fight was vpon the land, as also it belonged vnto Calibes to dispose of all within his gouernement, for to fight at the verie same time (according to the enemies countenance) with the whole armie, the enemies being within their trenches, if in case he did seuer himselfe from his footemen, to assist his armie vppon the water, or else if he went about to put fresh souldiers into his boates and Galliottes: for we were within two thousand paces the one from the other, so as euery one was assured that the day would not passe away, but they would set vppon the enemies within their trenches, especially they which knew the heate of this young Prince, the which had come to passe, but that the Emperour had placed two olde Counsellers neare about him, who knewe how to temper this his forwardnesse, who was notwithstanding greatly cōmended for animating of the souldiers, accustomed vnder the good fortune of the Emperor to attempt any thing, although very hard

and daungerous. So the Prince of Thanais hauing heard news of the army by water, he sent thither with all speed thirteene or fourteene thousand of the most expert souldiers within his armie, vnder the conduct of the Colonell of his footmen (who was his Lieutenant when as the Emperour himselfe commaunded in his armie) called Synopes, brought vp a Captaine vnder PrinceSynopes. 
               Axalla, at such time as he had the generall commandement ouer the footmen. The Prince at the same very time he supposed the fleete to drawe neare vnto that place the enemie had fortified with oakes, with botes, and galliots, caused all the armie to mount on horsebacke, & appointed fortie thousand souldiers to march directly vnto a place the which he had noted to be most easie & for his best aduantage, for that the enemie had as he thoght traueled least in that place, who (doubting the Prince would lodge betweene the citie of Caire and him) had there emploied the most of his time. There was also in this place a litle mountain, the which he d
                  •
               
               sired this day for to win, & which he had reserued vpon this occasion to force, the better to entertaine the enemies, & restraine them if they went about to succour their men that were assaulted by water. Now as he had determined, so did he force this place strongly, but the greatest matter was to stay the fury of those which had giuen the onset: for they would haue gone vnto the second trench, the which the Soldan did thinke: and the Prince of Thanais making shew to giue the onset, busied the Soldan so in the mean time, that he could not succour his men, hauing enough to do for to defend himselfe, so as during the time he was thus hindered, he did behold our Nauie fighting, & all his Gallies to be broken in peeces, and yet could not aide them: for our men

hauing landed in an Iland frō whence they were greatly annoyed, hauing assaulted it, they did force it, and whatsoeuer was intrenched within the same, and then this Ilād which was as a Caualier for the defēce of their mē, who defended the bridges of boats they had made, being takē, was a great disaduātage vnto thē: insomuchThe valour of Synopes, by meanes wherof he obtained 
                     •
                   notable victory of the Soldans men entre
                     •
                  
                  ched within an Iland in the riuer of Nilus. Calibes drowned. as this fight after it had cōtinued for the space of three houres, the victory inclined on our sides, by the valor of Synopes, who seeing Calibes drowned, & most part of his men in flight, he renued the fight, and being resolute, caried away the victory, and vtterly ouerthrew the enemies bridge, the which they had forsaken by the means of a currant of water full of artificiall fire, the which cō
               ming to rush against it, did burne the whole bridge, which was one of the principal causes of the victory. SoA stratageme. the victuals passed, and our victorious army encamped within this Iland, the which our men had wonne, for to giue passage vnto the rest of the victuals. The Prince of Thanais caused three engines of artillerie to be imbarked presently, for to shoot into the enemies campe vpō the riuers banke, at such time as they should shew thē
               selues for to hinder our victuals. It was a great losse of Calibes, because he was a person in whom the Emperor put great trust, and hee had done him great seruices. They busied thēselues in seking for his body, the which could not be found, by reason of the great multitude of bodies which were within the riuer. They hold opinion that there died twentie thousand men this day on both sides, few of Calibes men being saued, who had giuen the onset vpon the left wing of the enemies. Synopes obtayned great honour, and this day was the occasion of his good fortune. Also he had done a notable peece of seruice worthie to be remembred, there being no possible

meanes to succour Caire, but by that same place: for this great citie was so weakned, that it required a long time for to repaire it, the which could not be done by land, but only by the riuer, looking for the reuolt the which could not be sooner thē three moneths. Now after this victorie Synopes encamped himself within this Iland to hinder the Soldans men from passing, notwithstanding they passed ouer in the night from the one shoare vnto the other, & they iudged that the enemies were forced vnto the fight, or vnto a shamfull flight, the which could not be but by the other side of the water; for by land he had no retrait at all, but by the swords point, hauing no place but beyond the water, the which bred suspition that he would make his retrait by water. For he might wel thinke that Caire was not for him, & that his enterprise on that side was weake. As for those which fauoured him within Alexandria, all was changed there, & in a manner euery where. Therfore it behoued the Prince of Thanais, to haue a watchful eie vnto the enemies new practises, and to prouide well for the maintenance of his army, the which could not be done without difficultie, by reason of the scarcenesse of the victuals: for by feeding his armie he famished Caire. For there could not come victuals sufficient, neither by land nor water, for to victuall it being encamped so neare vnto the enemie: our army hauing made prouision for victuals but for 8. dayes, keeping thēselues encamped in one place, so as it was resolued by the Counsell to retire themselues assoone as they had deliuered Caire, & seene the same victualled. For they supposed the enemies had made great prouision of victuals to be able to continue in their campe, their armie not being so great as ours. Insomuch as it was resolued to passe ouer halfe our

Armie vnto the other side, and that Synopes should not remooue out of the Iland, our purpose being no other then to hinder that the enemies should not keepe the victuals from entring into Caire. This counsell was verie secret▪ in so much as the enemies perceiuing their victuals for to faile, had the same purpose that we had, the which was to retire themselues, the which they could not do but in the night. Hauing as yet many boates they rigged them, and the day before made a shewe to drawe towardes Syria, hauing caused part of their Armie to go out of their Campe, supposing that assoone as they should shew themselues to go out, our Armie would be on horsebacke, and by that meanes should deceiue our men, hoping that this would make them thinke they had a purpose to retire themselues on this part, the which they did: for hauing in the night made shew of assaulting our Armie, and hauing kindled fires, hee caused his men to passe ouer, and to lodge themselues along the riuer, what hindrance soeuer Synopes could do vnto them, for that the night was verie darke. The first that passed ouer was the Soldan, hauing left within his Campe his Lieutenant generall with all his footmen. In the morning we knewe that their Armie passed in part; the Prince of Thanais was of opiniō to assalt the enemies within their camp, and was verie stiffe in this resolution, but the old Captaines were not of this opinion, but rather to strengthen Synopes with men and engines, to the intent to endamage them therewith; & that three-score thousand men were not to be forced within their trenches. So all was deferred: they were yet of opinion, that if noise were heard, and that they passed ouer, to attempt for to force the Campe vpon their retrait. Nowe the

Soldan seeing his passage had good successe, he commāded his men to do the like that he had done: but he was not aduertised of the supply Synopes had receiued: so as he returning for to look his men, and guiding the formost vnto the passage along by the bank side, he was assaulted by Synopes, who began the fight, wherein the Soldan was wounded: notwithstanding he passed ouerThe Soldan wounded in passing the riuer. the water & came vnto his men, who had already passed. There were many of his men slaine, & diuers of his boats sunke, so as there remained about twentie thousand within the Campe, out of hope of being able to retire & ioyne themselues vnto the other Armie. OurThe Prince of Thanais ass
                     •
                  l
                  
                     •
                  ed the Soldans campe, wherin were twentie thousand footemen left, who vpon parley yeelded themselues. souldiers hauing assaulted the Campe, did win the first trenches: but the second being compassed with men, and well fortified, they were not of opinion to assault them, to the end we should not hazard that which w
                  •
               o held assured, in so much as our men being wisely conducted, remained encamped within the first trenches: and it is verie certaine, that if they had gone on further they had ouercome them, so much did feare & dispaire take frō them their courage: but it was better to set forward slowly, then to deliuer vnto changeable fortune, that which the eie of reason iudged certain, by the rules of war: for that had bene a deed of folly & rashnes. Now the enemy seeing our men so near thē, began to parley, and to cause their interpreters to speake, asking for the Prince of Thanais; amōgst the rest there was a Parthian Ensigne, who enquired for the said Prince, who at that time was visiting the guards of the trenches: he commāded that he should be brought vnto him, & hauing talked with the said Captain, who had bene long a soldier vnder his ensignes, and remaining sicke, had bene taken, and had giuen himself vnto the Soldans seruice,

who had made him Ensigne generall, whom we do call Colonel of all the footmen: he beseeched the Prince to receiue frō thē the victory without shedding the bloud of his soldiers, or of his own men. The which the Prince did grant vnto them, causing them to sweare to remain for euer slaues vnto the Emperour, and his subiectesThe Prince of Thanais notable victorie against the Soldan. for to make warre wheresoeuer it should please him: the which they did sweare vnto. The Soldans Lieutenant being in the night retired with some of the Captaines into a boate. Now the Soldan being hurt, retired himselfe with his horsmen some twentie leagues, vnto certaine places which he held, where hee died of his hurt. The Prince of Thanais pursuing the said Soldan, found him, being not yet buried within Palema, & wasThe death of the Soldan. carefull to giue an honorable buriall vnto the said Soldan, and entertained all his seruants curteouslie. There remained a sonne of his, with whom did ioyne themselues the most part of those which would not submit themselues vnder the Empire of the Parthians, and withdrew thēselues vnto the borders of Libia into certaine places, whither verie hardly (by reason of the deserts of Libia) any could come vnto them, in hope to reuenge their miserable fortune against the Parthian name. Thus ended this warre, the which had put the Emperour into a deliberation to go thither in person. When as he receiued perfect newes of our victorie, thē did he commend the valour and courage of the Prince of Thanais, & aboue all the noble mind of Synopes: but the losse of Calibes did hinder the ful reioycing for this happie victorie: for the Emperour did hold the losse of such a person to be great, who was greatly to bee commended for the experiēce he had in the art of war. The Prince of Thanais was appointed by the Emperour to

command ouer Calibes charge: but the Armie wasThe Prince of Thanais appointed gouernor of Siria & Egypt after the death of Calibes. commanded to returne from thence into Persia, for such assaires as might happen there. Synopes also was appointed Colonel general of the footmen in the Emperours armie. The Prince of Thanais remaining Gouerner ouer Syria and Egypt, with the same estate of the former Gouernor, the Armie was conducted back againe by the great Chamberlaine, who was come thither vpon the end of the affaires with new forces for to aide the Prince of Thanais, if he had any need of the same: the Emperour hauing this custome, to send out forces vpon forces, vnto such places as he thought had need thereof. This happie successe comming vnto the Prince, by the means of his Lieutenants generall, made him for to knowe how necessarie his presence is within his realme, for to giue aide in euerie place, where there were affaires. Now for to returne vnto the Emperours Court: the king of China came to visite him at his Court, according vnto the couenantes offeredThe king of China came vnto the Emperour Tamerlans court, & did sweare vnto him once againe obediēce. vnto him, the which he accepted: hee did sweare once againe obedience vnto the Emperor, who caused him to see all his greatest cities, for to make himselfe the more to be feared of this Barbarian, who kept no more promise then pleased himselfe. Hee was astonished to behold so many souldiers, and the countrie so well replenished with people; and aboue all, that they vsed so litle curiositie of riches in their apparell and garments, wondring that the Emperour was apparelled in meane cloath of one colour, without any other fashion: butThe meane apparell of Tamerlan▪
                to counteruaile that, he had about him men which seemed to be kings. At the same time when the king of China was at the court, the Emperour receiued newes of the victorie against the Soldan, for the which the

Emperour reioyced, making feastes and turnies in his Court in token of mirth, and this reioycing continued for the space of eight dayes. After the Emperor had giuen order for the double paying of his Armie that came into Persia, vnder the conduct of the great Chā
               berlaine, and Synopes Colonel generall in the imperial Armie, the Emperour went vnto Quinzay for to see his sonne, and visite the people of this countrie, who desired his presence, and also for the affaires which hee had not as yet established in these countries, as he had done in all the rest of his kingdomes, Prince Axalla not being willing to take so much authoritie vpon him, although the Emperor had sent vnto him a speciall commandement of the same: but hee doubting least this people would take some occasion to murmure, and the fault thereof might haue bene laide vpon him, being wont alwaies to say wisely, that these maner of affaires were the prises of a skilfull Maister, hauing alwayes referred thē vnto the Emperors comming. Then did the Prince with equitie cause all to vse the like lawes, the same waightes & measures, & he imposed certaine tributes throughout all his kingdoms, euerie one according to their abilitie, for to help his affaires, and lay the foundation of his reuenues, and store-houses for victuals, the which were dispersed as the want in his Armies required: for the Emperour was wont to say,An apt comparison. that an Armie must be made like vnto the shape of a man; he called the Captaines the head, the souldiers the armes, money the feet which made it for to march, and victuals the bellie that nourished the whole. In soA notable saying of Tamerlan. much as he often said, that an Armie was inuincible which had a perfect man: for (said he) it fighteth when it will, and neuer hazardeth any thing to ill purpose:

for the ouersights of warre do happen at such time as this body is lame of a leg, or maimed in an arme, or that the bellie is famished, or when the head is sicke. At such time as hee sent the Prince of Thanais against the Soldan, he doubted nothing but the head and the bellie; because the Prince of Thanais was a yong Prince: and for victuals, he had but bad prouision of them: for he was wont at such time as he was to begin any war, for to make a great collection of victuals the yeare before, the which was not done now, attributing this victorie vnto his good fortune, which would not turne her backe vpon him, and not vnto his wisdome. So the Emperour arriuing neare vnto Quinzay, Prince Axalla comming to meete him two dayes iourney off, with all the chiefe Lords of the countrie, together with the principall Citizens, who were preparing for the Emperour the most magnificent receiuing that might be, as well by water as by land. As this citie is one of the richestThe description of the citie of Quinzai with the wonderfull situation therof in the world, so is it one of the greatest, and of the most wonderfull situation, being all wholly diuided & ouerthwarted with chānels, vpon the which are framed wonderfull and stately buildings, accompanied with an infinite number of bridges, vpon the which they passe ouer channels: this citie aboundeth with all kind of spices & in great quantitie, likewise with al maner of marchandizes. The Emperour as soone as he was arriued,Tamerlan receiued with great magnificēce into Quinzai with rich & rare presents receiued presents of the Citizēs, the which were esteemed to be worth aboue two millions of golde, with a wonderfull varietie of all rare and singular things, the which they presented vnto him, for to testifie the loue and obedience they did owe vnto him. The Emperour was desirous to see his son, whom they brought vp with the accustomed greatnes of Princes: & hauing caused

the child to be brought before him, being of the ageThe order 
                     〈◊〉
                   tooke for his sons education. of seuen yeares: hee forbad from hence forward they should suffer him to weare any thing vpon his head, & himselfe did hang a bowe about his necke, saying aloud, that they which from their birth were called vnto soueraignties, should bee vsed both vnto cold and heate, and should be exercised in Armes betimes, and not brought vp delicately and easily, reprehending them which had the bringing of him vp, demanding of them, if they meant to make a woman of him? And they answering, that he was tender. If he be not borneTamerlan his notable saying of succession in his Empire. (said he) for to be strong in Armes, he will not be worthy to succeed me: for hee must not bee an effeminate Prince that shall preserue the Parthian Empire. Nowe he had sent the Empresse vnto Samarcand to be deliuered, where she was honorablie receiued, hauing neuer bene there since she was married. He receiued newes that she was there deliuered of another goodly sonne, aThe Empresse deliuered of an other son at Samarcand i
                     •
                   Parthia. thing which he caused to be published ouer all, & himself in token of ioy, made feasts 15. dayes, with all kinds of magnificent turneys: this he did for to shew his agility vnto this people, to the end, that as he excelled all his court in vertues, that they should also iudge him worthy to gouerne thē aboue all other men. After he continued there a moneth, and hauing visited all the seatownes neare vnto Quinzai, hunting all kinds of chases,Tamerlan his recreations, & notable saying thereof. neglecting nothing notwithstanding which belonged to his charge, saying often, that the recreations hee did take, were helps for to ease him in the pains of his pubpublike affairs wherunto God had called him. Hauing vpon his return called together all the people, he published his lawes, which were all reuerēced of this people, as though they had proceeded frō the diuinitie, so

much admiration had euerie one of the greatnesse of this Prince. The which I will trulie declare vnto you, that so long as the Emperour was there, this peopleThe admiration and exceeding loue the people of Quinz
                     •
                  i did did bear
                     •
                   vnto their Emperor. did almost nothing, being for the most part busied in beholding of him, not finding anie greater contentation then that. Some of his courtiers, and amongst the rest Prince Axalla said one day vnto him, that this was a Citie fit for his abode. O my friend, it is not so: if they should see me daylie, they would make no more account of me. It is a maxime, that the Lord of this great Citie must not go thither but once in ten yeares, andThe nature of the people of Quinzai towards their Emperor. when he is there, it behooueth him to temper his actions, as if he were vpon a scaffold readie for to play some Comedie, where grauitie and good grace is necessary for to content the beholders: for the people do easily receiue an euill impression of their Prince, as they also do a good, if you performe it well vnto them. Now I haue forgotten to tell you howe the Emperour sentPrince Axalla sent into China for to establish a peace there. Prince Axalla in his name from Quinzai into China, & his imperiall Maiestie did not depart out of the Prouince before he returned: hee went thither with great diligence for to establish peace there, and faithfully for to report vnto the Prince Odmar his cariage of himselfe with the king of China, and for to temper all things there. Also for that the Emperour, who loued his seruants, desired to see Odmar. This was a thing verie acceptable vnto Prince Axalla: for he was greatly honoured in those countries, and he was also verie desirous to shewe by all good offices his affection at his being with Prince Odmar. The Emperour hauing aA great vertue in Princes. vertue the which is seldom to be found amongst great Princes: for he kept his seruants in great loue and vnion together, giuing them often warning to loue one another,

to beare good will each vnto other, and faith and obedience vnto him, two flowers which raised him vp vnto his greatnesse. There was also another occasion, which was, that the Chinois would not by anie meanes sweare obedience vnto Odmar, as representing the Emperours person, by reason of certaine complaints he made against them. The Emperour who did temper all things with his mildnesse, did honor Axalla with this charge and commandement, for to end all these particular matters. Axalla found Prince Odmar vpon the entrance of the borders, who receiued him with all the magnificence that might be: and hauing honored and feasted him the space of three dayes with all the royaltie that might be, after he had imparted vnto him the affaires of the Emperour his Lord and master, he set forward towards him with all diligence, and Prince Axalla went forward towards Paguin, where he was receiued of the Gouernour with all possible honor. And hauing assembled all the Emperours forces, hee set forward towards the borders of China, to haue an enteruiew at Pochio, where the meeting place was agreed vpō. He passed by Quantou: there did he view this strong citie, which he had won against the hope euen of his maister, who supposed the same was able to resist him six moneths, he hauing taken it in three: so as euery one for his valour came to reuerence him, honoring & magnifying him, desiring his gouernment, because he was milde, curteous, and of easie accesse to them that had businesse with him. To be short, the Emperor who knew with wisdom and readinesse how to order his affaires, could not reforme them but by the changing of Odmar, who in truth was seuere and graue: but Axalla being milde & curteous, did knit again euery one vnto

the Emperours obedience: so Prince Axalla went forward vnto Pochio, whither the king came also to meete with him; & he entred full fiftie leagues into the countrie newlie conquered. It seemed vnto him a thing too much derogating from the greatnesse of the Emperor, the maiestie of whose person hee represented, if hee went any further to see this barbarous king, being more fit that he should come forward into the countrie conquered latelie from him by Odmar, after hee had obtained the victorie, then to go into his countries although he had subiected them vnto the Emperour, &The meeting of Prince Axalla with the king of China at Po
                     •
                  hio. did pay a verie great tribute. So the king of China arriued within a league of Pochio with all his Court: hee set forward vnto a plaine, where he and Prince Axalla did see each other, who was much better accompanied, from whom the king did as much differ as from the Emperors owne person. They met three seuerall times together: the king desired to be admitted into a Citie, which the Emperor had granted vnto him by the treatie. Prince Odmar declared that it was of great importance, therefore Prince Axalla was by the Emperor appointed for to be iudge of this controuersie. In the end they required another further within the countrie, the which the king accepted: so he was put into possession of that city, the situatiō wherof was very pleasant, being compassed about with a lake. Axalla hauing discouered that this barbarous king did earnestly desire it only for his pleasure, and not for any other euill intent, the city which hee deliuered being seated vpon a riuer further within his countrie, and that other within our countrie compassed about with our fortresses: but Odmar did not allow of that, and supposed it to be for an euill purpose, as for to contriue some new practises. Odmar being an

olde man, who knew the kings vnfaithfulnes, although he had made him know it well enough vnto his smart, hauing (as I haue said) won twenty or thirtie Cities frō him, and aboue four-score leagues of countrie, at such time as hee obtained the last battaile, during the time that the Emperour was in his last voyage against the Persians. So the enteruiewe continued yet betweene Prince Axalla and the king of China on the plaine, a tent being pitched, whither Prince Axalla did come vnto him, whom he continually honoured as much as the Emperours owne person, where after they had long time treated by interpreters, it was in the end agreed that the king of China should enter againe into Quinanci, not suffering him to put anie Garrison into it, nor to fortifie the same: but euen as a prisoner & subiect vnto the Emperour, he should enioy it, & it should be his owne, inioying all the reuenue thereof, neither should he carrie any kingly ensignes, without the expresseThe resolution of the meeting between Axalla and the king of China. leaue of the Gouernour for the Emperour: hee should notwithstanding haue a guard of three hundred men for his person; and should giue knowledge vnto the said Gouernour of his iourney, before he entred into the Emperours countries, the which hee must passe for to go thither. Now the Citie was situated in the middest of a verie great lake, in the which were manie Ilands, wherin there were an infinite number of houses of pleasure, and it had bene alwaies a very delicate place, where the kings of China were wont to recreate thēselues in alkinds of pleasures that were there to be found: in so much as this barbarous king did not respect the conditions propounded vnto him, so as he might make his abode there, as it were in an Hermitage. Hauing left vnto his brother the gouernement

of his whole kingdome, through the displeasure he had of his bondage whereunto he was brought; a courage certainly magnanimous, and worthie a nation made ciuill with the best learning, and vnworthy the name of a Barbarian wherewith wee called him. So Prince Axalla hauing visited all the cities newly conquered, and deliuered vp by the king of China, hauing brought all things into a peaceable estate, he sent vnto the Emperour to beseech that it would please him to grant vnto his returne, and also for to vnderstand, if he allowed of all things which he had done. The EmperorTamerlan his custome in placing gouerners ouer his prouinces. who vsed this custome, often to change the Gouerners of his Prouinces, would gladlie haue retained Prince Odmar neare vnto his person, and put another into his place, seeing him olde, and also for that he was not liked of the souldiers and people, by meanes of his age and frowardnesse, the which the Emperour perceiuing, did purpose for to bring him neare vnto his person▪ and for to send in his place the great Chamberlaine, who was young, and would bee more acceptable the he, and more able to sustaine all thinges, as well in respect of the vntemperatenesse of the aire, as also for the paines of warres; determining that if a verie necessary occasion did not happen, to haue him neare his person, for to serue him with counsell, and to ease him in the gouernment of his estate. So Axalla was called backe againe, being commaunded to come vnto the Emperour, who was at Cambalu, where hee stayed his returne, and to suffer in staying the great Chamberlaine to come thither. The Prince of Vauguefu, who had of long time verie faithfully serued the Emperour, and whose faithfulnesse was most especiallie acknowledged in all his warres hee had conducted,

wherewith both himselfe and a brother of his had serued verie well. Notwithstanding it was not conuenient to leaue him for to command absolutely, as wel for that often times honours doe change the affection vpon occasion, as also because the Parthians do verie vnwillinglie obey strangers. The Emperour had also a desire to honout him with another gouernment, where hee should doe him better seruice then there: for the Emperour had this custome, to make a note of those thatTamerlan his worthy custom were fit to doe him seruice, and hee remembred such, to imploy them in the gouernment of his estate, whether it were in peace or warre, without being importuned with demanding, there being no man in his court so bold as to demaund anie estates or honours of him: for money and goods it was permitted, but not for anie other thing, esteeming that they which doe ambitiouslie seeke for gouernments and charges, do it not to vse them well, neither for the Princes or peoples profite. He had also this Maxime, that hee did change them, and they for all that did not thinke themselues any thing disgraced, thinking it verily the destruction of an estate, how flourishing soeuer it be, to deliuer countries and places vnto Gouerners as heritages: for in the end they vsurpe them as their owne, and the estate how great and mightie souer it be (being knit together) comming to be seuered in peeces, is at the end of his power and authoritie, and becommeth nothing. And alwayes for the most part he did imploy them frō a lesse vnto a greater charge of countrie: sometimes he called them neare vnto his person, to leade his Armies, the which was the greatest honour within the Empire: and they were obeyed throughout all his countries euen as the Emperours owne person. I haue

seene two of them alone, after that foure, then seuen, as at this present; they are come vnto this number euen as the Empire increased vnto his greatnesse: none of the other hauing iurisdiction of all the Empire but they, and vpon whom as on seuen pillers, the Princes person doth relie his greatest affaires, of the which they do not speake but in the presence of the Prince, & as he propoundeth the matters, for to haue their aduise therein, whether it be of peace or warre. Now to return vnto the Prince, who was at Cambalu, accompanied with Odmar and Axalla, Odmar an olde man perswading the Emperor vnto peace, and Axalla who was warlike, an enemie vnto rest, and desirous of glorie, did prouoke him vnto warre. But the Princes borders were stretched out so farre from the Court, that he could not set downe any plot for that matter: so as seeing the countrie of Quinzay a countrie of quiet, he iudged this estate to be fit for Odmar, who was already olde, and allyed vnto the Emperour, who would bee fitter then hee to gouerne this countrie, as also this reuerent olde age which was in him, would bee verie conuenient for to traine vp the youth of the young Prince, who was brought vp in this place, and that there was none fitter then he: but the means how to set this forward was a thing he durst not vndertake, because he would not be noted to haue any other purpose then that which proceeded from the will of his maister. Now it fell out that after a certaine time the Emperour receiued newes that the ancient discipline of the Armie did degenerate, in so much that euerie souldier desired the Emperours presence, rebelling often against their heads which were there, for that they had not the accustomed authoritie for to suppresse

them. Nowe this Armie was the life of the estate, the terrour of the whole world, and that which maintained in obedience so many countries conquered with the sword. The Emperour being aduertised hereof by the Captaines, was troubled: for to go thithither in person, alwayes to remaine there, his pleasure and rest which he promised vnto himself did withholde him, so as hauing secretly sent for Odmar andConsultatio
                     •
                  . 
               Axalla about these affaires, and to know whether it were necessarie he should go thither: Axalla presentlie perswaded him vnto this voyage, and to leaue Odmar there in his countries where hee was, whose wisdome would prouide for all. But the Prince who did alreadie perceiue the sweetnesse that was in Cities, in comparison of the wilde life in Armies; as heretofore he had taken delight therein, so at this present apprehending this maner of liuing, hee determined to preserue his estate by his Lieutenants, and himselfe to rest, and enioy the fruits of his trauaile, being alreadie of the age of fiftie yeares, he thought before hee died to take his rest, and to content himselfe with the remembrance and contemplation of so many happie victories and worthie deedes, and to preserue in full peace his conquestes without enterprising or attempting any thing but in his owne defence: so as he turned himselfe towards Prince Axalla, and sayd vnto him, that surely hee would maintaine Odmar in quiet as long as hee could; and surelieResolution. hee should haue bene vngratefull vnto his seruices, if hee had not prouided for him a quiet life: that his opinion did greatly content him, for to giue vnto him this gouernement, that hee might end his dayes in those quiet and peaceable countries, in continuing

with honour the faithfulnesse of his seruice. That his own person wold make his abode at Sachetay, to be the nearer vnto the occasions his Armie might haue of his presence in Persia, where he would leaue the same, and would increase it with the number of thirtie thousand horse: but his pleasure was that hee should go and command ouer it, for that he knew him the only person in his Empire which could performe that seruice, hauing tried the affection that the souldiers did beare vnto him, together with the care hee alwayes had for the obseruation of militarie discipline: that hee trusted him with all his estate, trusting him with his Armie, whereupon onely depended the keeping of so manie great prouinces, and the terror vnto so many nations, differing both in language and manners, ouer whom he commanded, and of whom he was the conquerour; that he only should haue an eie vnto all that should be necessarie for the maintenance of his Armie; and that the first foundation of his reuenues & the best should be appointed thereunto, as well for the recompence of his souldiers, as for the ordinarie paymentes; that hee would haue them to be kept in the ancient disciplineThe discipline of the Parthians. of the Parthians, the which is, to lodge in the open fieldes, and to keepe within the Campe, and from three moneths vnto three moneths to diflodge, buying all, and paying for all; that he had alwayes bene brought vp within his Armie, for to consider the valour and deserts of euerie one; that hee had gouerned them; that the Captaines and souldiers should bee recompensed as hee should appoint according to their deserts; that Persia was the place where hee would keepe his Armie, for that their mindes are more stirring and impatient in bondage. Also that the borders

of Siria, were neare for to helpe the same vpon occasions offered, if there were any neede. And turning himselfe vnto Prince Odmar, he said, he would commit two parts of his estate vnto him, the bot
                  •
               ome of his riches, and his most precious treasure his sonne; that all things were in great quietnesse where hee would haue him for to gouerne; that he should be there honored in all peace, an estate fit for his old age, and for the recompence of his seruices. Calling (after that) his Chancellour vnto him▪ who was not at this discourse▪ he commaundedCommissions dispatched by the Chauncellor vnto Odmar and Axalla for their gouernements. him to dispatch out Commissions, the one for Odmar in the authoritie and gouernement of all the estate of Quinzai and Cambalu, euen vnto the sea, and vnto the mountaines, being the borders of China. Vnto Axalla the gouernement of Lieutenant generall ouer his armie▪ and the authoritie and commaundement in all the Prouinces, through the which the same did march, euen as the Emperours owne person. This rumor being spread touching Axalla for his gouernment ouer the armie, and come vnto the campe, there was neuer seene so much ioy amongst the Captaines and souldiers, euery one of them remembring the particular affection they did beare him, & his deserts towards euery mā
               
                  •
                Better newes co
                  •
               ld not be brought vnto Synopes, who was made by him, & a duanced by his hand. Odmar was left at Cambalu to make preparation for his iorney vnto Quinzai, very well satisfied with the choise the Emperour had made of him: and the Emperour hauing caused him to be instructed in his affaires, and particularly of his Prouinces, he himselfe did commaund him that as soone as his sonne should be tenne yeares old, he should be brought vp in the affaires, and that all shold be imparted vnto him, to the end he might learne

be times to serue the common wealth, not willing to trouble his head before that age, but for to suffer him to play with those of his owne yeares. Kam Tai
                     ••
                  hie
                     •
                  
                was the name of this young Prince, the which is as much as to say in the Parthian tongue, as, The loue of men; he had receiued his name of the Emperour his vnkle in the absence of his father, and in trueth, this name was verie conuenient for him: for manie men did loue him, and principally the Prouice wherein he was borne, the Emperour not beeing able to carrie him with himselfe vnto Samarcand, where the Empresse was, and it seemed vnto the people of Quinzai, that they were vtterly vndoone, if they should loose his presence, and if he should goe out of their citie. In the end they so earnestly be sought his Maiestie, that he graunted them the bringing of him vp in his youth amongst them. So the Emperour went vnto Samarcand, hauing taken such order as was conuenient throughout all his Empire: he determineth to make his ordinarie abode there, and to make this citie (the place of his birth) worthie to be the seate of his successors, so faire would he make it, large, and beautified with all manner of faire buildings. Deuotion did also drawe him vnto solitarinesse, where unto his nature inclined as much as was possible. Where had it not bene for a certaine desire of glory he had, which forced his nature of long time, he had plaied this part. It is also a great wisedome to knowe how to commaund his inclination, and also to be able to content himselfe with glorie, and to suppresse his ambition, and enioying it, to begin in good time to giue vnto himselfe a happie end, if it be possible, and that this is the will of fortune the enemie vnto mans quiet: for oftentimes that which

men purpose, God the chiefe gouernour of all things doth frame it after another manner: but the happe of the Emperour▪ the which I do attribute vnto the honor and reuerence he did beare vnto the Diuinitie, was the cause the same had care of him, and fauoured his purposes. Now returning backe againe vnto Prince Axalla, who after he had receiued this commaundement, was nothing sluggish: so as he gathered together from all partes the old souldiers which had bene discharged, it seeming vnto him they had enioyed sufficient rest: he sent also on the other side vnto the Moscouite, to draw from thence souldiers on horsebacke for his guard, trusting greatly in their valour and courage, and all the way he entertayned the Emperour about the order it would please him should be obserued in his armie. Axalla propounded vnto him that which was conuenient to be done: the Emperour then did either adde thereuntoTamerlan the most excellent man in the art of warre. or take away as it seemed good vnto him: for in the arte of warre he had so great knowledge and experience, that no man was equall vnto him. Prince Axalla was the next vnto him in this vertue for the faithfull & wittie executing of his commaundements. The Emperour going by small iourneyes, by reason of the Court which was great, and the traine of his cartes, the which were in great numbers, which did greatly vexe Prince Axalla: for his dispatch was referred vnto the cō
               ming to Samarcand, the Emperour continuing sometimesTamerlan loued hunting but as a good exercise. where he found good hunting: he greatly loued these honest exercises, the which kept him (as he said) in breath, that he should not finde the paines of armes straunge vnto him: but Axalla drew forward the Emperour as much as he could vnto Samarcand, where he arriued at the end of Sommer, where he found the

Empresse, who had a verie faire sonne readie for circū
               cision, for the which were made an infinite number of magnificences. In the meane time Axalla dispatched his affaires, and the estate of his armie: for the Emperour had in the middest of his greatest pleasures, certaine houres for the affaires of his estate, the which he neuer omitted. All matters thus dispatched, Prince Axalla hauing taken his leaue of the Imperiall Maiestie, he set forward, & had with him some twentie thousand horse, all the flourishing youth of the Court accōpanying him. The Emperor desiring they should be trayned vp in the paines of wars, rather then in the delicacies of a Court: for the Prince did aduance vnto charges those which were in his armie, and not such as remained in his Court, except they were by his expresse commaundement neare about his owne person. The Emperour whilest these matters passed thus, receiued newes from the Prince of Thanais, appointed Gouernor ouer Siria and Egypt; who sent him word, that all things in those parts were very quiet, a thing which brought great contentment vnto the Prince, who had his minde wholly bent vnto peace, busying himselfe in building of his citie of Samarcand, and in decking of a sumptuous TempleTamerlā built a Temple at Samarcand, and called it the Temple of Salomon. the which he had built; wherein he meant to make his Tombe, and for his successors, the which he caused to be named the Temple of Salomon. And there did he hang vp all the Trophes which he had conquered from his enemies: he caused also therein to be grauen all the battels he had fought, together with the diuersitie ofTamerlan his Zealous gratefulnesse towards God. Nations he had ouercome, and the countries hee had conquered. To the end he might (he said) shew vnto his great God, how greatly he did acknowledge his benefits & goodnesse. And because he had many Christians

of all kindes of artes and occupations, whom he had brought from all partes where they had giuen them vnto him: his pleasure was they should haue a Temple built for to pray in the same, the which hee called the Tēple of Iesus. This had Axalla obtained of the Prince, who liued according vnto this law, and many others also, of whom our armie was compounded, the Emperor seruing himselfe with them indifferently, hauing suffered thoroughout all his kingdomes the honour and reuerence of Iesus Christ, euen within the armie it selfe, and the sacrifices of the Christians were offered, the Christians being his best souldiers, and the chiefest in his Court: so had he also many countries vnder his obedience the which were all wholly Christians, whose seruice he vsed in his warres, who would not be forced nor helde for other then such as were of his religion, in as much as they worshipped one onely God, and not allowing (no more then he) the pluralitie of Gods, the which aboue all other things he had in detestation and horror, driuing away and destroying the Idolaters, declaring them slaues in all the countries of his obedience. And as this Emperor was religious, he would often heare holy men, as well of his owne religion, as of the Christians, whose austeritie he wondred at, being without ostentation as that of Guines was, and of others fayning holinesse for to get honour and praise amongst the people: but he did see one thing throughout all Egypt, whereat he greatly wondered, religious people who liued with dried things, refusing all moist things, which were in the deserts for the name of Iesus Christ, whom they account God, depriuing themselues of all delights for to follow his crosse & passion, things worthy admiration. He heard also recited the persecutions

of the Romaine Emperours against the Christians: this same caused in the Emperour (who was naturally religious) a respect towards them which were of this religion, recommending himselfe vnto their prayers, and putting as much trust in them as in his other subiects, maintaining them in the libertie and exercise of their conscience, as if they had beene his owne naturall subiects. And we must cōmend in the Emperour two actions, the which were without intermission exercised by him, that is to say, godlinesse & iustice: for three timesThe godlinesse and iustice of Tamerlan. in the weeke at Samarcand he ministred open iustice vnto the meanest, in his Imperiall Maiestie, a thing which made him beloued of the people ouer whom he cōmā
               ded. In the other dayes he gaue secret audience for the affaires of his estate, & tooke aduice for matters of importance, which were decided daily in his presence. He had such seuerity in his counsell, that they must needes deale truly before him, & without all passion in discoursing. Notwithstanding he alwaies shewed himself courteous in his cōuersation, & made himself both beloued & feared of his people: he neuer changed his seruāts exceptTamerlan his great liberality they cōmitted great falts against him: of all the seruants of the late Emperor his vnkle he did not change one of them, but he did withall encrease their estates, making thē in this change to feele his liberality, which he made strangers for to tast also, vnto whom he was accustomed to giue, to binde thē vnto him. He drew great store of money yearely for tribute of the Moscouite: but he distributed it within the same countrey for to maintaine his authoritie there, winning those for his which might haue hurt him, by meanes of giuing vnto thē. HeTamerlan his care of his re
                  
                     •
                  enue. had great care of his reuenues, and he had such a readinesse, that he did see his estate frō three monethes vnto

three monethes within one houre, both the ordinarie and extraordinarie expences, they presented it so well digested vnto him. His reuenue was not certaine, for he augmented or increased it according vnto his owne good pleasure, and one certaine day in the yeare he increased or deminished the same. His great Tresurer was very familiar with him, as one who made him continually an account of his doings, and also for to receiue at euery houre his commandements: the great Treasurer paied the estates of all the Princes and great officers with his owne handes, and all the reuenues by himselfe or by deputies for whom he was answerable, being administred generally in all the Prouinces by him for to distribute them according to the Princes will. These estates were verie daungerous: I haue seene two of them punished with death most cruelly, being found to abuse their offices. After the death of the old Emperor,Seuere punishment against deceitfull treasurers. all money was reduced vnder the image and armes of the Prince, and all other forbidden. During the time that the Emperour did remaine at Samarcand, he did greatly reforme the estate of his reuenues, & euerie one made account that he would make a great foundation therein, and they knew not wherefore he made so great a heape thereof: he was accounted to be very liberall, which is a point of no small commendation inTamerlan very liberall. the great; the same was verie ordinarie, and as it were borne with him, being wont to say, that on the day he had not giuen something, that hee had done nothing in all that day: saying, that giuing doth commende men, making them like vnto God. Often glorying that neuer anie had refused that which hee offered vnto them. Nowe let vs returne againe vnto Axalla, who as soone as he was come vnto the armie,

caused the old laws to be published, the which the Emperor did obserue when he did first begin his wars, the which had beene cancelled, and left in all the orders of warfare, many strange fashions being mingled therein, which did cause the decay of the militarie discipline. Prince Axalla assembled the Captaines of the armie, declaring vnto thē, the disorders which were amongst their companies, for the which he did not blame them, but the heads which had commaunded them these two or three yeares: but hee de
                  •
               ired them, together with himselfe to take the paines for to reduce all things into the first forme of the Parthian discipline; that he would not giue vnto them any new thing, but he was only desirous indeede for to cause the auncient discipline to be obserued. The which was, first to encampe euery where;The Parthian discipline. to entrench the campe, commanding that the souldier who was become daintie in the garrisons, should accustome himselfe againe from hence forward vnto the paines of the field, strengthening himselfe by trauelling with those which were appointed onely for the fortifying of the campe, the number of whom was alwayes fiue and twentie thousand in the Imperiall Armie▪ That he would haue the first number wherein there was anie commandement amongst the footmen, should be ten,The order of Tamerlan his standing cāpe. next an hundred, then a thousand, and afterwards ten thousand, ouer whom one should commaund alone vnderneath the Colonell generall: amongst the horsemen an hundred, next a thousand, then ten thousand, and after that the generall of the armie should commaund ouer all. He caused particular viewes to be made, for to settle this order. He had threescore thousand footmen within his armie, ouer whom commaunded sixe Colonels vnder the Colonell generall, there were 40000.

horse vnder foure heades, whereof there were ten thousand light horsemen. He had his particular gards beside these, which did amount vnto 2000 horse, and 4000 footmen, these encamped about the generals person. Behold the estate which the Emperour commaunded to be obserued within the Army, the which onely they called Imperiall, the others not hauing that name: for there is in Siria an army of thre-score thousand mē, twenty thousand horsemen, and forty thousand footmē, as many in China: as many towards Cambalu: as many towards Moscouie: as many towards Cherroneze, but not in the field, except then when neede required. But this army thus ordered was a sound body, the which was fit to strengthen the other bodies of his armies (the which were weake and ill ordered) vpon the first need. Prince Axalla trauelled also to search out the inuentions which the Christians had, and this caused he to be performed by meanes of the Iewes, who did traficke into all partes: and he spared no cost for to get all sorts of inuentions and engines, the which might serue in the art militarie, wherein was all his study, for to excell in the same. So as he obtained the inuention of artillerie, the which wasThe inuention of Artillery amongst the Christians. new amongst the Christians, and it was brought vnto him by a Greeke, who had serued him euer since the death of Prince Andronicus. The same did greatly astonish euery one, to behold the violence of the powder: that caused them also to study the more thereon, for to get the full perfection thereof, wherein the Emperour did spend greatly, in causing some of them to be made, after he had gotten people which had skill to make them, as also for to get some of them already made. For we had alwayes indeede this inuention, to thrust forward a bullet by a violent motion,

but with this powder it was a thing wonderfull, and of great astonishment. The Emperour would haue the prayse of this inuention to be giuen vnto Prince Axalla, the which he caused to be written within the historie of his raigne for an eternall memory, amongst the seruices he had done him for the increase of his Empire, euen as also he had acknowledged them in earnest, hauing giuen vnto him more then a million of reuenues, besides his ordinarie pensions, the which did amount vnto as much. Odmar had not much lesse, and also the Prince of Thanais had a great estate. I haue left vnspoken of an infinite number of other acknowledgements of seruices, the which he bestowed vpō them that serued him well: for the meanest souldier might hope for the greatest honours of the Empire: for the first notable seruice of the soldier was remembred, for to encourage him to do the better, so as the reward for the good, and punishment for the wicked, were distributed according vnto their desertes. That same held this great Empire linked together, in such sort, as it could not disseuer what onset soeuer he had, how great soeuer the same were; so as by that order, as soone as any warre was begun, it was as soone ended. And for his new conquests, they did order the same so well for him, that reuoltes did seldome happen in the same; and if any did chance, they were well punished, and but of small waight. Thus our estate was in his force, & at his period, & very hardly could be greater. Our Prince waxed old, & became heauy, his sonnes grew to be great, & mē began to worship the sonne rising. But the Emperour did beare such loue vnto them, that there was nothing did vexe him, nor any iealousie, but the feare he had that after his death they should not haue so much valor & wisdome,

as to preserue his estate together, fearing diuisiōs, often lamēting that he had not a third son for to agree them both whē as they should be at strife, as it is a thing which doth often happen; and he was therein a Prophet: for this great Monarchie through deuision of the brethren was ouerthrown and dispersed after his death, as we shall see in their historie. Now to returne vnto the affaires that passed there, Prince Axalla, who was desirous to be doing, being returned from Babilon, whither hee went vpon some reuolt, gaue the Emperour to vnderstand that the Ottamans hauing knowledge of the death of the Emperour Baiazet within the prison at Samarcand, had chosen his second sonne called Calepin, and that they gathered together, a great Armie for to conquer all Natolia againe. And that the Emperour who was troubled much with the inward warre against his bretheren in Greece, harkened not after the affaires of Asia. That this was of great importance for his greatnesse. That euen within Persia Democares had gathered forces together, and came towardes him. That he thought good to giue his Maiestie vnderstanding of these newes, to the ende it would please him to aduise himselfe therein; that he was most ready to receiue his commandements, and that he would set forward after hee had receiued the same; that hee did assure him, his army was wel disposed to do him seruice; that it was much better to go & meete thē, & to fortifie his borders, thē for to stay for the warres in Persia, where their minds were not as yet sufficiently confirmed in his friendship; that Lichibanes who was gouernour in Natolia, had retired his forces vpō this rumour out of Bursia, the which he had vnmāteled and destroyed, not hauing sufficiēt forces for to keepe it, and had retired thēselues

vnto the mountaines looking for the forces he hoped to receiue from his Maiesty, seeing there was no city of importance in the champion country. These newes being come vnto the Emperour, he assembled together hisConsultation. counsell, where these affaires were consuled of, whereupon it was in the end resolued, that Prince Axalla sholdR
                     •
                  solution. set forward with the Imperiall Army directly towards Natolia for to ioyne with Lichibanes; that the Emperor should send Odmar with the forces of Quinzai and Cambalu towardes the frontiers of the Muscouite, Zerisanes with twentie thousand horse, the which should be sent vnto the Moscouit and his allies, for to require of him the forces he oweth vnto the Emperour by his submission, the which was ten thousand horse; that the Prince of Thanais should also set forward with as many as hee could raise, with his horsmen; vnto the gouernour of Babilon also to raise euen to the number of twentie thousand horse, and fiftie thousand footmen; a commandement into Persia to leauie men euery where. And to this ende there was a commandement sent from the Emperor vnto all the Cities of his kingdomes, and Cō
               missioners wer appointed for to make choise of the mē, some for wars, the other for the workes▪ Victuals were commanded in all the Emperours countries for setting forward of the Armie. The great gouernour of Parthiae Zamai was dispatched vnto Deristan, to be there for to receiue all the troupes, and commandement was giuen vnto the Commissioners for victuals and munitions to conuey them thither. It was published ouer all that the Emperour went thither in proper person, for to punish once againe this proude race of the Ottomans. In the meane time Aralla marched directly towardes the borders, and he went like a ball of snow, his Armie

alwayes increasing, being glad of so good occasion. The Emperour hauing sent vnto him his resolution, with a commandement also to take and leaue all that should be necessarie for the maintenance of his Army, in all the places of the Emperours reuenues. Axalla marched with diligence, being desirous to come vnto the borders, and to ioyne with the forces that stayed for him, for to fight with and expulse the enemy, before the Emperour should come vnto him, whereof he had an expresse commandement, the Emperour for this occasion marching slowly, in such maner as he greatly desired to execute the same by Prince Axalla, this iourney being troublesome vnto him, by reason of his indisposition. Where to the end nothing shold be wanting vnto him, he sent a commandement vnto the Prince of Thanais to go and meete with Prince Axalla, as soone as he had setled his gouernment. He caused also two or three thousand horse to go one after another, who came vnto him with diligence. Passing also by Tauris, he drew from thence fiue thousand horsemen, and ten thousand footmen of ordinary garrison, ouer whom commanded a Lord called Aliren, greatly affectioned vnto the Emperors seruice, and principality of Prince Axalla. Arriuing also in Armenia hee drew out of the garrisons as many as amounted vnto twenty thousand horse, so as his army was very neare 80000 horsmen, and 160000 footmē: the Emperor making account to be accōpanied also with as many forces from Parthia, as also from the Moscouite. Now the Emperour could not come beforeTamarlan waxed sickly. it was neare sixe moneths and slowly as I haue sayd marched his owne person, not being wel at ease, hauing complanied these 3. moneths of a paine in his reines, in so much as some doubted greatly lest this sicknesse wold

bring some other accident; for he decayed greatly, and did eate nothing, notwithstanding this was only knowen amongst his familiars, who greatly feared the inconuenience that happened. Notwithstanding some report, that an Astrologian did say, that he should giue aAstrologians. battell vnto all the East, and that he should be victorious; another did aduertise him, to take heed of the third day of the Moone, of the ninth moneth of the yeare wherein he now was; so as the Emperour did thinke he should dye in some battell and not in his bed. For he often sayd amongst his men, that he did acknowledge him selfe to be mortall, and that he was subiect vnto the law of nature; that he did often thinke of paying his tribute. Now he looked for Odmar, who should bring the Prince his eldest sonne vnto him, prouiding wisely for his affaires before he would march any further, faining to be desirous to carrie him with him, and to teach him to know his subiectes, and the meanes to serue him selfe with them if any ill fortune happened vnto him. But I beleeue the Emperour was desirous for to see him before he departed, determining to leaue him at Samarcand with Odmar and the Empresse his mother; & what soeuer his destinie appointed for him, he determined to passe ouer Bosphorus vnto Constantinople, and enter into Greece to roote out for euer the Empire of the Ottomans; and that he must once againe do this violence for to assure his estate, and settle the foundation of his glory. Now during the time that the Emperour stayed the comming of the Prince his sonne, who by reason of his young age came slowly with Prince Odmar, Prince Axalla whose desire of reputation and glory did wakenTam
                     •
                  rlan his second iourney against the 
                     ••••
                  mans. him an hundred times in a night, went in great diligēce, and so well, that he came vnto Turcomanie, where the

               Georgian troupes which the Emperour did there intertaine came vnto him, and he drew out of them full fifteene thousand men, very gallant and well trained in the warres. At the length he arriued at Garga, whither the Gouernour of the Prouince did come vnto him for to receiue the Emperours commandements. Being come thither, he would not enterprise any thing before the Prince of Thanais were come, who made great hast; he brought but 15000. horse & 30000. footmen with him. As soone as he was come, he made him partaker of the Emperors cōmandemēts, & imparted vnto him the honor of leading the auātguard of the Imperiall armie, and vnto the gouernour of the countrey the arier-guard: for he was a man of great authoritie, and had bin long time honored of the Emperour; the end of his gouernement was limited on the one side with Persia, and on the other with Syria. Now the most part of the countreis which the Emperor had cōquered in Natolia, he had deliueredTribute payed by the Emperour of Greece vnto Tam
                     ••
                  lā for the most part of Nat
                     •
                  
                  lia. them vnto the obedience of the Grecian Prince, who should pay a certaine yearely tribute for the same vnto the Emperour, the which amounted vnto foure hundred thousand ducats of gold, and eight hundred thousand frankes of siluer. Axalla sent vnto the Emperor of Greece to giue him vnderstāding that he was come vnto Garga, in the which place he gathered together his forces, and that the Emperour his Lord had sent him to prepare his army there, and that his owne person did march thither in his old age, for to performe the same good office vnto him the which he had done vnto the late Emperour his father; that he desired him to pacifie the inward quarrels, for to remedie the euils abroad, the which increased; and that he would in the end put his estate into the same or greater daunger then it had bin, if he did not

thinke vpon quenching the ciuill and particular discordes, for to take care for publike matters. All this could preuaile nothing with these Princes, who had made diuision of the Empire, and were at debate euery one about his portion: but they considered not, that by this deuision they did build a portion for a third, the which was greatly for his aduantage, if they did not remedyDis
                     •
                  ord betweene the brethren for the Empire of Greece, being deuided amongst them. the same, whereunto hee perswaded them. At such time as the Embassador came, who was a very wise man, they thought Prince Axalla had only certaine troupes of ten of twelue thousand horse: but as soone as they vnderstood of the great army he had, they entred into suspition, that the same might be as well against them as Calepin, although he assured them of all maner of good will of the Emperors part, insomuch as presently it was negotiated to treat some argreement between the brethren, at the least a truce, but peruailed nothing: for they would not trust their elder brother. Vpon the Embassadours returne, we learned where Calepin was and his army, and of what quantity it was. After he had made a generall reuiew, and caused a muster to be had of all the souldiers, hee marched directly towards the enemie who was in Caramania. Calepin was greatly astonished to see the diligence this Armie had made, the which he had caused to be viewed by his spies; hee did thinke it had bene but of ten or twelue thousand men onely: but when he knew how great an Armie it was, he entred into a great feare, insomuch as hauing committed the whole charge of his Army vnto a Bassa, he retired towards the sea; hee remaining onely of the stocke of the Ottomans, they thought it not good hee should hazard his person vnto the euent of the battell, although his Armie were great. But the Persians and

the Mamelues had the principall forces, which made him doubt least any disgrace happening vnto him, they should make their agreement vnto his domage, the which was not ill aduised. He had also intelligence from Persia that the Emperour marched forward, for to assist his forces with another great Armie, insomuch as hee repented that he had stirred the sleeping dogge. The Greeke on the other side entred into a great suspition, of the great preperation the which was made in euery place, not thinking that it was onely for Calepin: but in respect of his estate hee began to seeke the meanesThe Greeke Emperour did seeke aide of the Turke his mortall enemy, against Tamerlan his approued friend. to assure the same, and also to demaund succour of Calepin, affirming that the plot of this warre was begun against them both, and that the Emperour would not content himselfe to haue the T
                     •
                  gean sea for his borders, but would certainely (if he could) stretch foorth his conquestes beyond Constantinople; that he did perceiue it was necessary for him to the assuring of his estate, to ioyne themselues together; that hee had especially heretofore very litle fauoured the gouernour the which the Emperour had left, after the death of the Greeke Emperour his father. Also hee had not desired the Parthian Emperour to vndertake this voyage, and much lesse had made anie countenance to fauour him, for feare of breaking with Calepin, with whom hee had made a certaine agreement, so faint hearted was hee. All these matters put him in a great doubt, and made him to thinke vpon ioyning himselfe with Calepin in good earnest, for to resist our forces if hee might. All these cogitations were good, but it was very late to aduise there of now, matters being very doubtfull in respect of Calepin, who was of the same mind, if he had had the leasure: but all remained now vpon the hazard

of a battell, the which he was constrained to aduenture, seeing that delay did bring more hurt then profit. Also the forces which he did hazard, were most of them Persians and Mamelues, banished men and fugitiues, who had taken the contrary part against the Emperour. I hold opinion that the Bassa had fifteen thousand Persian horsemen verie good, and thirtie thousand footmen, commandedThe Turke & the Sold an ioyned together against Tamerlan. by the Prince of Tauris a fugitiue: the Mamelues were in number twentie thousand horse, commanded by a Soldan whom they had chosen, and it is fiue yeares since he hath made war in Arabia, from whence he was driuen: in the ende, he had bin entised by Calepin, & had entred into this league vpon hope that if his affaires hadCalepin his forces. good successe, he would giue him aide for the recouering of Syria and Egypt, & of the principality of the Mamelues. The Bassa had fiue and twentie thousand horse, & thirty thousand footmen, Calepin hauing brought sixe thousand of them with him for his guard, so as the Bassa who was a great Captaine, did assure himselfe to ouercome our men, who he sayd were compounded of people nothing affected vnto the Parthian name (but he was greatly deceiued.) This same was the Bassa who was taken the day before the battell, wherein Baiazet was taken, vnto whom the Emperour did giue a horse: he sayd that he was assured that he knew our maner of fight, and had noted well the fault Baiazet had committed in the battell the which he had lost, the which did bring them more hurt by reason of the sayd Emperours presence, being a Captiue, then for any other losse, the same hauing bene much more bloudie on our side: and he sayd true. And this was the occasion wherefore he would not haue Calepin commit Baiazet his fault; behold the reasons of the Ottomans. Prince Axalla as I haue sayd,

had made a generall muster, hee had found to be in the Imperiall Armie an hundred thousand footmen, and foure-score thousand horsemen, there were of them threescore thousand most braue and resolute men, of the Princes trayned men and all of them old souldiers, there were foure score thousand very good men who where commanded by Sinopes, desirous of honour and glory. As soone as the enemie had turned his face towards vs, and that Prince Axalla had asked the aduise of the Princes and Captaines of the Army, he marched straight towards him vnto Goualache, the which was yet thirtie leagues from vs; who marched in small iourneyes, neuer going farre from the sea side, in respect of victuals, whereof they receiued with ease good quantitie, so as all thinges abounded within their Army, but we had some want thereof. Now in the end Prince Axalla commanded a Parthian Captaine called Stucan, who did leade the light horsemen of the Army, to haue an eye that the enemies did not surpirse the Army, and that we should not faile but haue word thereof, as soone as they drue neare vnto vs. Now he was a very wittie and vigilant Captaine and a man of enterprise, insomuch as hauing a souldier of the countrie with him vnto the place where their Armie was lodged, knowing the language, hee thought with himselfe that in an Armie of sundrie nations he might intermingle himselfe as it did march, and performe some braue peece of seruice: the which he hauing imparted vnto Prince Axalla, hee allowed well of the enterprise, and thought that it might bee performed. So Stucan aduaunced forward with three thousand horse within ten leagues of the Armie, and arriued at Regdin, where hee found a part of the Ottomans Armie aduaunced,

and hauing gotten vnderstanding by some prisoners, that the enemies marched towards the forefront of the Army, hauing viewed their Campe, he determined to enter into the same by the meanes of this souldier, who vnderstood the language, fayning that hee came from some seruice, whither he had bene sent for to be a guide vnto two thousand Persian horse, who returned from thence, and that at this very time he would mingle himselfe and surprise them vnawares, the which fell out: for hauing aduanced two hundred horse withA stratageme. these souldiers, they mingled themselues within theThe worthy exployt performen by St
                     ••
                  an with three thousand light horse in the Turkes Campe, in tho night. army, and being followed by Stucan, he made himselfe maister of that which was the safegard of the army, the which were their light horsemen, and there were slaine of them more then three thousand men of those which were aduanced forward: the rest of the army being on horsebacke, did not pursue our men in their retraite, thinking it had bene our whole army, the which caused them to hold the bridle with their footmen, chusing rather to loose their stradiots then the substance of the army. In the morning they were greatly astonished whē they vnderstood our Army was as yet ten leagues off, and that they were but three thousand horse, the which had put so great disorder in the campe. The Bassa was determined to stay for our army, and if it were possible to weary the same before he came vnto the battell, being aduertised that we had not victuals at our owne pleasure. Prince Axalla being come within fiue leagues of the enemies army, he intrenched his army, and made a shew of abiding there. Now he was very desirous to view the situation of the enemies Campe, and hauing one day aduanced all his Army in a playne within two leagues of the enemies Army, he would

set forward for to view their countenance, and the place where they were encamped: the which he hauing done, he perceiued the way by which their victuals did come vnto them, and raysing the Campe, he determided either to compell them for to fight, or else to lodge betweene them and the sea, for to cut off the way of their victuals: for he was well aduertised of the enemies purposes: and being vncamped, he marched in battell array directly towardes the enemy, as if he meant to haue assaulted him within his trenches. In the meane time he caused his Armie to be lodged within a league of him. Now the Bassa who had not stirred out of his Campe, knew not what was our purpose, our armie hauing bene in battell array, within the view of their Campe aboue eight houres, in the meane time our souldiers lodged. The enemie who did not thinke any such matter, was greatly astonished, when some of his men came and declared vnto him that we were lodged so neare vnto him, and did hinder their victuals, and hauing assembled the chiefe Captaines of his Army, to haue their aduise, hee determined to come vnto the fight, and giue a battell, if he did perceiue that our purpose was to hinder him from the sea, he would yet indeuor as much as he could to procure that his victuals might come, making triall by scoutes to do the same. So the day being come, the Bassa caused sixe thousand horse to issue out for to discouer our purposes, giuing cōmandement vnto thē whō he sent to hazard nothing, but to retire if they did see that any did stop the passage: so as it falling out that the Captaine of our side, the which had this charge, was this day on horseback, with x. thousand horse, who vpon the first alarum of his enemie, did beate them brauely into their Campe, the which the

               Bassa perceiuing, and that it was the purpose of our mē, he supposed hee could no longer shun the battell. And the same night he began to approach vnto the point of their campe neare vnto a mountaine, the which was nearer vnto them then vs, to lodge there in parcels, and also to the ende we should not lodge there at all, the which they did foresee might greatly preiudice them if we should win the same before them. So in the morning Prince Axalla had certaine newes that the enemies Army did dislodge, the which he desiring to descrie, mounted on horsebacke, and aduanced forward with some twentie thousand horse for to behold their dislodging, determining to set vpon them if hee saw cause, and followed them to take an occasion to do it vpon their lodging. But it fell out otherwise: for seeing their countenance, hee supposed presently what they would do, and hauing called vnto him the Prince of Thanais and Sinopes, hee sayd vnto them, that he thought it not conuenient to suffer the enemie for to intrench vpon this mountaine, for the discommodities we should receiue thereby. For this cause hee commaunded Sinopes to set vpon them with twentie thousand men, and to hinder them from this mountaine, assuring himselfe that if he did win it, hee should haue the victorie of the battell most assured. Now the place was such, as the horsemen could by no meanes do anie seruice there, by reason of a marrish that was at the foot of the same mountaine, the which did stretch a good league, but the footmen did easily march thither. Prince Axalla assured himselfe hee had good footmen, and that Sinopes who was desirous of honor, would not omit to giue a strong assault vpon the enemies vpon this occasion. So our army being wholly

ranged in battell arraie, Prince Axalla caused all his footmen to aduance forward: hee determined to fight on foot if the enemies did wilfully attempt the same mountaine, and hauing cōmanded the Prince of Thanais to keepe himselfe at the head of all the horsemen who were in battell array, he aduanced forward, for to succor Sinopes in good time, who aduanced lustily with twenty thousand men only. Prince Axalla hauing aduised with himselfe, as the best, to cause them to march along by a litle hill, and that by this way they shold do their endeuors by surprising of the enemy, who could not perceiue them: so as they should as soone feele their blowes and assault, as see their persons; this beingA Maxime. a Maxime that an enemy throughly viewed is halfe conquered: this was the cause that the same became so great an astonishmēt vnto the enemy, to see himself assaulted not knowing whether it were with all the footmen, or part of the same. The enemies Army was at the other end of the marrish, & we were within the view the one of the other: but euen as our men did giue this onset, you might haue seene their whole army stir, for to resist the strong force of our men, the which continued a good houre. The Bassa who was a discreet Captaine, commanded all the footmen he had to aide thē which where vpon this mountaine, and although our men vpon the first fury had won the top of the mountaine, so as then the enemies did fight on foot comming vp, the which was a great aduantage for our men. Axalla perceiuing this aide mount vp, commanded also 20000 of our men to oppose themselues against this new troupe which moū
               ted, and after them he sent 25000 more, and came to this point, that he himselfe alighted, determining for to leade the third succour, saying, that as soone as he

should perceiue another great troupe of footmen for to stirre, it was his turne to march. The Prince of Thanais vnderstanding that he would go thither in person, sent to beseech him for to suffer the Colonels of the footmen to performe that, and that it belonged vnto him only to command. Prince Axalla sent him word that this was a speciall match, and that if they did win the mountaine they should also win the battell; that he would this day obey him, and be his souldier. About this time he did see this great bodie moue, which was the remainder of the enemies footmen, the most part Ianizaries, who at their coming, performed a wonderfull act: but in the end Prince Axalla comming with many of the brauest men about him, he put the enemies to flight, and did win the mountaine, and remained Maister thereof before he departed, and lodged there, intrenching himselfe on the enemies side. He left Sinopes to commaund there, who had this day gotten great honour. There died of our men fifteene thousand, and aboue thirtie thousand of the enemies: the fight endured from eight of the clocke euen vntill night, our horsemen being lookers on, not any wayes able to helpe the footmen. The enemy hauing receiued this disgrace, marched ten good leagues that night, and forsooke his Campe as ouercome, but it was not without hauingThe discomfiture of the Bassa with his flight by night the Prince of Thanais & Stucan at their taile, with his light horsemen, Prince Axalla continually following them, encamped within two leagues of them, hauing alwayes the coast of the sea, and they bending towardes Caramania. Now the Bassa hauing receiued againe his spirits after this disgrace would encampe himselfe: but the Prince of Thanais discōtented for that he had not fought, aduāced in such sort, that euē as we were ready to lodge

had newes that it behoued to aide him with diligence, the which Prince Axalla vnderstanding, caused the signe of battell to be giuen speedily, and he himselfe with all the horsmen aduanced forward. Now it was a litle riuer he had passed ouer, not thinking the enemie had beene so neare vnto him: which the enemies perceiuing, they cōmanded 10000 Persian horse to giue the first charge, the which they hauing valiantly performed, our men being engaged, without any other delay, were constrained to come vnto the fight strong & resolutely, and defendedThe r
                     •
                  s
                     •
                  nesse of the Prince of Thanais. themselues: but the enemies were foorth with backed with 20000 horse after them, the first charge not hauing beene but for to engage them: the fight was very furious, and our men were almost ouerthrowne, when as behold tenne thousand Persian horse ledde by the Prince of Hallicen, who set forwarde with great diligence, and came for to assist the Prince of Thanais, who fought valiantly, and had two horses alreadie killed vnder him, and did fight vpon the third: Stucan wasStucan slaine. slaine, and all the light-horsemen ouerthrowne. Prince Axalla who perceiued the fault which the Prince of Thanais had committed, did bite his lip, saying, that God had giuen him a goodly victorie, and that he must loose the same through anothers folly, and turning him selfe vnto his companions, he said vnto them, that this was the day wherein they must fight, not for glorie, but for the safetie of all the Parthian people. Hauing sent forward with all diligence, tenne thousand horse more for to maintaine the fight, he came speedily vnto the order of fight, & aduanced forward with forty thousand horse, the which he put into three troupes: on front he followed the enemie, who had knit himself together, & put our men to flight, hauing had alwayes the better

in all the former charges they had giuen. The Prince of Thanais at the third charge was ouerthrowne to the ground as dead in the enemies power: but the 10000. horse whereof I did speake, compelled the enemie to make head against Prince Axalla, who would not sufferThe battaile b
                     •
                  tween Axalla & the Bassa this occasion to be lost without reuenging the ouerthrowe of his men. Now hee did perceiue there was but two houres left of the day, the which caused him to presse forward vnto the battaile, and to constraine and force the enemie to come vnto the same. Now the Bassa had not as yet fought at all, who aduanced forward with fifteene thousand fresh horse▪ strengthening this charge: but Prince Axalla comming vnto the fight, he could not resist so great a troup, & was ouerthrown. The Gouernour also of Natolia called Lenauen, who as yet had not fought, assisted Prince Axalla, and had yet ten thousand horse, who gathering our men together againe, they all ioyned with Axalla, & repulsed the horsmen within their footmen, who giuing themseluesAxalla his victorie against the Bassa. ouer to flight, did forsake them: they could not stay our horsmen from assaulting them, so as they were almost all slaine, hauing fought euen vntill night: notwithstanding there retired aboue twentie thousand in order of battaile, the most part of them Ianizaries, who passed ouer the water, and hindred our horsmen from hauing so large a victorie as they otherwise should haue had. Notwithstanding the next day we sent part of our horsmen vnder the Gouernour, for to keepe that none of the enemies should ioyne themselues together. They marched all that night led by their Captaine, whom they call Ag
                     •
                  , the Ianizaries went in verie good order, speaking reproches of their horsmen, who had thus forsaken them: they fortified

themselues, being resolued all of them to die for theThe braue resolution of the Ianizaries. preseruation of their Prince. After the dead were buri
                  •
               d, and care taken for the wounded, the Prince Axalla left the Prince of Thanais sore wounded vpon oneThe Prince of Thanais sore wounded. of his legges, and himselfe aduanced forward more then tenne leagues, the enemies horsemen being as yet knit together fourteene thousand horse strong. The Prince Axalla hauing left all his carriages, followed the enemies, who could not ioyne thēselues with their Ianizaries, for we had gotten betweene them. The Ianizaries in this order wherein they marched, came along by the sea, the which Prince Axalla vnderstanding, he sent ten thousand horse after them, and commaunded that all the footmen of the armie which had not yet fought, should march with diligence directly towardes them for to set vpon them: but they had goneThe Ianizaries passe ouer at Gallipoli into Europe to ioyne with Calepin. two great iournyes, and embarked themselues at Gallipoli, for to passe ouer into Europe, and ioyne with Calepin, who accused the Bassa for that hee had forsaken them, and was fled away from them. There were aboue fiue and fortie thousand of the enemies slaine in this last day: these were two battels happily atchieued; there were slaine of our men aboue twentie thousand, and Prince Stucan was found amongst the dead vnderneath his horse, his target being vpon his face, all the whole armie made great lamentation for his death; he had greatly ouershot himselfe, for he had like to haue ouerthrowen all the whole armie. There was great ioy made for the safetie of the Prince of Thanais, so preseruedAxalla greatly reprehended the Prince of Thanais for his rashnesse. amongest the dead. The Prince Axalla did greatly reprehend him for his rashnesse, hauing beene the occasion of the death of twentie thousand men, and to make the victorie vnto vs bloudie, the which

had not otherwise bene so, seeing we might haue had the same better cheape. The Prince of Thanais excused himselfe vpon Stucan and the light horsmen, who had aduanced themselues too farre, and also hee did not thinke to finde the maine forces of the enemies so neare at hand. Prince Axalla sayd vnto him, that hee was in great doubt least such a matter would fall out, and for this cause he had aduanced the armie as neare vnto the riuer as he could. But Prince Axalla notwithstanding all these great and happie victories, had not that which he desired, and shewing himselfe verie sad for that he knew the indisposition and sicknesse of theAxalla verie sad for the indisposition of the Emperour his master. Emperour as incurable, he purposed to returne vnto the Court, to the end he might win the good fauour of the young Prince, whom hee knewe the Emperour his father had sent for. And hauing assembled the Counsell, he caused the dispatch to be read, the which he did send vnto the Emperour of the happie successe of the victorie: and in the meane time he sent after the enemies, to the end they should haue no more leasure, but only to get the mountaines, and hauing giuen this cōmandement, very early in the morning he followed after with the rest of the army. The greatest part of the Persians sent to sue for their pardon, and did come and yeeld themselues, the Prince their chiefe hauing bene slaine; the head of the Bassa was brought by a souldier,The Bassaes head brought vnto Axalla. who had killed him in his retiring, at such time as he did see the Persians forsake him. This was the same Bassa, who had bene taken before in the battell wherein the Emperor Baiazet was taken prisoner. The prince Axalla followed continually the small remnant of the enemies Armie that remained: they made foule warre vppon the Mamelues, because the most part of them

had falsified their faith giuē vnto the Prince of Thanais, for the rest they made them faire warre. In lesse then fifteene dayes this armie was wholly ouerthowne, and Calepin retired into Europe, all the cities vpon the sea coast yeelded themselues. The winter drawing neare, the Armie demanded their pay, whereupon they tooke aduise, and hauing considered where the same might winter, it retired towardes Goualache. The Prince of Thanais was desirous to withdrawe himselfe into his gouernement, and leade backe his troupes, as also to preuent the nouelties the which the indisposition of the Emperour might bring foorth, and Prince Axalla
               A league of friendshippe sworn between Prince Axalla and the Prince of Thanais. and he, hauing sworne great friendship each vnto other, he went his way. The Prince hauing a determination to ouerthrow the Empire of Greece the next Sommet following, to the end hee might take from the Ottomans all oportunitie of waxing great, seeing the Greeke Emperour did fauour them, and hauing conquered againe all that which Calepin had wonne, without any great resistance. The Prince of Thanais was gone twentie leagues or thereabout, when as behold there came a post, who brought newes of the Emperours death, the which did happen two dayes afterThe death of the Emperour Tamerlan. he had receiued the newes of this victorie, hauing done nothing after the receipt of these news, but quietly end this life, speaking euen vnto the last gaspe, with sound and good sense, taking order for the affaires of his Empire, without any alteration in his accustomedAxalla lamented the death of the Emperor Tamerlan priuately, but bitterly. manner. The Prince Axalla hauing receiued these newes whereof he doubted, withdrew himselfe alone, and with all kinds of complaints, he bewailed the death of his good maister, he concealed his death certaine

dayes, and hauing with all diligence sent these newes vnto the Prince of Thanais, he desired that it would please him they might meete for to consult of their affaires. So they appointed a place to meete in about this accident. This post brought his dispatch signed with the name Sautochio our Emperour, by the which he was cō
               maunded to leaue 40000 men with the Gouernour of the borders, and himselfe to take his iourney thorough Persia with his army. This post was followed by a fauorite of the new Emperor, who came vnto Prince Axalla for to gratifie him, & to make him an affectioned seruāt vnto the Emperour, as a person whom he knew very necessarie for to maintaine the greatnesse of his Empire, holding in his power at this day, the principall forces, besides the great authority hee had of long time enioyed with the late Emperor: so as the quiet of the Empire depended more vpon Prince Axalla, then vpon any one, especially hauing had very lately so famous a victorie. This same did greatly procure him the good will, both of the Captaines and souldiers: but there was nothing but worthinesse in Prince Axallaes mind, whoThe worthie mind of Prince Axalla towards his new Prince. assured the new Prince of his faithfulnesse, and obedience vnto his commandements. I will not forget to declare, that during the time the armie did refresh it selfe, the Prince of Thanais came to meet with Prince Axalla, where interchangeably they did swere faith the one vnto the other, for the preseruation of their honours andThe meeting of the Prince of Thanais & Prince Axalla 
                     •
                  o what end. estates. They thought it best to cōceale the death of the late Emperour, the one of them in the armie, the other in his gouernement: but euen as euill newes doth disperse abrode sooner then good, so did Axalla vpon his returne find these newes spread ouer all, the which he

perceiuing, thought good to cause the armie to bee assembled together, and there for to giue them vnderstanding of the losse of their Emperour. You did neuerThe lamentation for the Emperours death by the whole armie. see so many cries, and so much shedding of teares: hee exhorted them vnto the same faithfulnesse and affection towards the young Prince his sonne, for the honour of the late Emperour: the which they promised, euenAxallaes faith fulnesse vnto the Prince. vnto the meanest souldier. Axalla caused the oath of fidelitie to be particularly taken by the chiefest of the Armie, and after he had couered all the standarts with mourning weede, according to our custome, and had made also a muster of all his souldiers, where he did againe exhort them to honour the memorie of their late Emperour, towards the Prince his sonne, saying vnto them, that he did not die at all, seeing he had a sonne, who deserued to be beloued of euerie one for his vertues, vnder whose good fortune they should henceforward fight, who would acknowledge their seruices. That it was conuenient to go vnto him for to receiue the recompence of their faithfulnesse; that he was young for to exercise the young, and liberall for to consider well of their trauels; that hee would neuer forsake them, but would be alwayes their Protector. After that was done, he seuered vnto the Gouernor those men as hee thought necessarie to remaine with him, for to keepe this countrie in peace, and to hinder the enemies from fortifying of thēselues: the which Prince Axalla hauing performed, he aduaunced two dayes iournies forward. Now for to recite that which passed at the Emperours death, this it is, that feeling himselfe ill disposed, hauing from all partes sought for health: in the end, seeing nature did decaye in him, he called for Sautochio his eldest sonne, vnto whom

in the presence of Odmar, and of all his Councell, he discoursedThe Emperour Tamerlan his discourse vnto his sonne before all his counsell lying vpon his death bed. of the course of his life euer since the death of his father Zachetay, who being giuen ouer to contemplation, had left vnto him three personages neare vnto his person, for to assist and counsell him, of whom (said he) there remaineth none aliue at this present but only Odmar, being the youngest of the three, the which had brought him vp as well in the actions of warre, as the affaires of peace, whereof you may iudge by the great enlargement he hath added vnto Zachetay, the which he had obtained as well through his great reputation, as by force; and that the hope euery one conceiued of his vertue in his youth, had called him vnto the full succession of the Tartarian Empire. For hauing by the coū
               sell of these three, as fathers, enterprised the warre against the Moscouite, whose armes were at that time the most to be feared of all Asia, this enterprise hauing had good successe, not onely all his neighbours, but all his kinsemen, desired to haue peace and friendship with his armes, and the Emperour his vnkle, whose purpose was to deuide his Empires amongst his Princes, whom he loued, for my valour chaunged his determination, hearing my reputation to resound, and that I had in this young age thorough my good conduct, ouercome the common enemie vnto our Nation: whereupon I was iudged by him worthie to commaund the same, and sending to offer his daughter vnto me in mariage, he made choise of me to succeed him in this monarchy, hoping that I would ease his old age, and that I would guide the yeares which remained vnto him in peace, thorough my trauell, and the reputation of my armes. He was not deceiued in me, hauing honoured him alwaies as my Lord, and loued him as another father,

carying my selfe so cunningly during his life, that at such time as his death happened, I kept this great Empire, without any cōmotion therin, but rather all subiection and obedience. I will tell thee my son, that I did not only succeed him in the Empire, but also in the loue of all his seruants, whom thou doest see about me, who haue serued me faithfully these twentie yeares, euer since I haue enioyed this great large countrie, vnto whom the late Emperour my vnkle did promise only recompence of their seruice, but my selfe haue bene so much acccompanied with good hap, that I haue bene able to giue vnto them. I leaue vnto thee then these seruants, who are worthy to be kings; honor them, and raigne with them: they will be faithfull vnto thee, and haue remembrance of me for to serue thee faithfully, and do know how to excuse thy youth and guide the same: beleeue their counsell. And taking Odmar by the hand, pulled him on the right side of the place where he was set, and looking vpon the other side, he turned vnto the young Prince his sonne, saying vnto him: This side and place here shall bee kept for Axalla, who is absent, whose faithfulnesse and affection he had prooued, the worthy acts of whom were so recommendable vnto all this Empire and himselfe, that he would speake no more vnto him of the same; that he commanded him to beleeue their counsell euen as he had done, wherein he had found great good; that the Prince of Thanais was his kinsman, that he should esteeme of his faithfulnesse, and serue himselfe therwith; that he might assure himselfe he would yeeld him obedience, euen to the spending of his owne life. In the end that hee recommended vnto him so manie worthy Lords and Captaines, who had serued him

faithfully in so many warres he had made for the greatnesse of the Parthian Empire, ouer the which hee had left him to commaund without anie desert but for a faire hope, and for that he was his son. And giuing his hand vnto all the Princes and Lords, which he had caused to come before him, hee presented them vnto his sonne, saying vnto him, that this was his Empire and good fortune, and demaunding his seale of the great Chanceller, hee put it into the handes of the young Prince, and caused the same to be redeliuered vnto him againe, and hauing continued a certaine space without speaking, he said vnto him: My sonne, loue iustice, minister it as well vnto the litle as vnto the great, this is your dutie, and he shall ease you therein sometimes. Remember your self, that the weapons which you haue in your hands, are but to make execution of the same: this is the cause therefore that it behooueth the warres you begin be iustly enterprised, and then will they haue happie successe. As his speech was directed vnto the young Prince, he had the Chanceller neare him; wherupon during the same, there was a great noise more then was accustomed in the Emperors outward chamber, and asking what the matter was, they caused a Lord to enter in, sent from Axalla (nowe the Emperour had nothing at all left the care of his affaires, as he was accustomed, although they were somwhat the more slowely dispatched,) who brought newes of the happie successe of two battailes wonne in Natolia, by the Armie led by Prince Axalla, victorious ouer Calepins
               Newes brought vnto the Emperour Tamerlan of Axallas victories in Natolia against Calepins forces forces; and declaring this happie successe in his affaires, the messenger of these newes said vnto him, that he hoped the next sommer his person marching forward, the Empire of Greece should be easie for him

to conquer, seeing the astonishment the enemies had.Tamerlan his speech vnto the messenger, and to the Prince his sonne. He answered him, that he neuer doubted of his souldiers affections, but that hee was called by a greater then himselfe, and vnto a more happie conquest, seated in a more high place, whither he must needs go. Tell Axalla (said he vnto the Lord which spake vnto him) that from hence forward hee must receiue my sonnes commandements. And drawing a ring from off his thombe, cōmanded that it should be carried vnto Prince Axalla, to signifie vnto him the contentment he had in his seruice, and in witnesse of his faithfulnesse. He demaunded in generall of the health of all those of his Armie, recommending them vnto his sonne, euerie one according to their vertues and desertes: amongst the rest he recommended the seruices of the Prince of Thanais, commaunding his sonne to honour him as his kinsman, and to continue him in the charges and honours the which he had put into his hands, for that he did deserue the same; that hee should be well serued by him. And returning againe to speake, he commanded his sonne, that if he committed his armies vnto any man to be cōmanded, it shold be vnto Prince Axalla, a thing notwithstanding which he did counsell him to do the latest he could, because it was so precious a thing, and that if it were possible, he should not trust it with anie man but himselfe; that it was fit for the Parthian Emperors to be in the middest of their armies, & amongst the soldiers, euen as householders are with their children, & that by this meanes he should preserue this great Empire, which he left to him by inheritance, hoping in time he would deserue it by his vertues. And as his last wordes he perswaded him to be gentle and curteous vnto his friendes, and

terrible vnto his enemies, and if they demaund peace of you, do not in any case refuse it, and forgiue your particular occasions, & do iustice for the loue of your people. This yong Prince had the tears in his eyes, and the Emperour contrariwise vttering these words, had a maiestie in his countenance more then accustomed, and causing his sonne to go out, he sent him vnto the Empresse for to comfort her. And hauing againe called for Odmar, he recommended vnto him the young yeares of his sonne, the loue and faithfulnesse vnto his seruice, willing that his yonger son should be brought vp to obey his elder brother: for of the loue and agreement of the two brethren dependeth (said he) the quiet and preseruation of this estate: and sending for them both, he was desirous to giue them his last blessing. And they being come before him, he commanded the younger to obey his elder brother, and both of themTamerlan his last speech & blessing vnto his sonnes. together to honour the Empresse: and beginning to giue them his blessing, touching the head of Sautochio, he pressed it downe, and touching the head of the yonger, hee raised it vp, lifting vp his chinne, a presage that Letrochio the younger should be lifted vp vnto the Empire, and should be the ouerthrowe of his elder brother, as it fell out afterwards through their diuisions, the which caused the destruction of the Empire. Night being come he slept verie sweetly, and about the breake of day, according to his custome, hee caused them to be called vnto him which had any businesse with him: and Axallas dispatch being presented vnto him for to signe, vpon this last victorie obtained, hee signed it without any change of countenance, & after turning himselfe, a slumbring tooke him againe, and they perceiued he passed away vnto another life, they

ran for to call the Emperour his sonne, who as sooneThe death of the Emperour Tamerlan. as he was come shut his eyes, powring out teares, as also did all his seruants. The Prince Sautochio his eldestPrince Santochio proclamed Emperour and signed dispatches. sonne within two houres after was proclamed Emperour throughouut all the whole Armie, and dispatches were made from all partes to aduertise the Gouernors of prouinces thereof, the letters being signed with the hand of the new Emperour, who hauing assembled all the Armie together, he made an oration vnto the Captaines and soldiers, and caused them to make a generall muster, gratifying all the ancient seruantes of the Emperour his father: he would not dispose of anie thing before he had seene Prince Axalla, and was ioyned with the imperiall Armie. This young Prince, when he came vnto this Empire was nineteene yeares olde,Prince Sautochio 19. yeares olde when he came vnto his Empire. he was faire, and had much of the Emperor his fathers naturall disposition. They hoped that he would wiselie (through the good counsell that was about him) maintaine this great Empire: but they feared greatlie the young Prince Letrochio his brother (whom his mother loued) would cause diuisions, as it happened in the times of their great grandfather betweene two brethren, who had bene occasion of the destruction of their estate, the which was relieued and lifted vp againe vnto his height by the valour of Tamerlan.
            
            FINIS.
         
      
   