
      
         
            
            
            FLOVVRES OF SION.
            BY WILLIAM DRVMMOND
of Hawthorne-denne.
            TO WHICH IS ADIOYNED HIS
CYPRESSE GROVE.
            
            Printed 1623.
         
      
      
         
            
            
FLOWRES OF SION:
OR
SPIRITVALL POEMS, BY
W. D.
         
            
               TRiumphant Arches, Statues crown'd with Bayes,
               Proud Obeliskes, Tombes of the vastest Frame,
               Colosses brasen Atlases of Fame,
               Phanes vainely builded to vaine Deities praise:
               States which vnsatiate Mindes in blood doe raise,
               From the Crosse-starres vnto the Articke Teame,
               Alas! and what wee write to keepe our Name,
               Like Spiders Caules are made the sport of Dayes;
               All onely constant is in constant Change,
               What done is, is vndone, and when vndone,
               Into some other figure doth it range,
               Thus rolles the restlesse World beneath the Moone:
               Wherefore (my Minde) aboue Time, Motion, Place,
               Thee raise, and Steppes not reach'd by Nature, trace.
            
         
         
            
               
               A Good that neuer satisfies the Minde,
               A Beautie fading like the Aprile flowres,
               A Sweete with floods of Gall that runnes combind,
               A Pleasure passing ere in thought made ours,
               A Honour that more fickle is than winde,
               A Glorie at Opinions frowne that lowres,
               A Treasurie which banckrupt Time deuoures,
               A Knowledge than graue Ignorance more blinde▪
               
               A vaine Delight our equalles to command,
               A Stile of greatnesse, in effect a Dreame,
               A fabling Thought of holding Sea and Land,
               A seruile Lot, deckt with a pompous Name:
               Are the strange Endes we toyle for heere below,
               Till wisest Death make vs our errores know.
            
         
         
            
               LIfe a right shadow is,
               For if it long appeare,
               Then is it spent, and Deathes long Night drawes neare;
               Shadowes are mouing, light,
               And is there ought so mouing as is this?
               When it is most in Sight,
               It steales away, and none can tell how, where,
               So neere our Cradles to our Coffines are.
            
         
         
            
               
               LOoke how the Flowre which lingringly doth fade,
               The Mornings Darling late, the Summers Queene,
               Spoyl'd of that Iuice which kept it fresh and greene,
               As high as it did raise bowes low the head:
               Right so my Life Contentments being dead,
               Or in their Contraries but onely seene,
               With swifter speed declines than earst it spred,
               And (blasted) scarce now showes what it hath beene.
               Therefore, as doth the Pilgrime, whom the Night
               Hastes darkely to imprison on his way,
               Thinke on thy Home (my Soule) and thinke aright,
               Of what yet restes thee of Lifes wasting Day,
               Thy Sunne postes Westward, passed is thy Morne,
               And twice it is not giuen thee to be borne.
            
         
         
            
               THe wearie Mariner so fast not flies
               An howling Tempest, Harbour to attaine,
               Nor Sheepheard hastes when frayes of Wolues arise
               So fast to Fold to saue his bleeting traine,
               As I (wing'd with Contempt and just Disdaine)
               Now flie the World, and what it most doth prize,
               And Sanctuarie seeke free to remaine
               From wounds of abject Times, and Enuies eyes;
               To mee this World did once seeme sweete and faire,
               Whiles Senses light, Mindes Prospectiue kept blinde,
               Now like imagin'd Landskip in the Aire,
               And weeping Raine-bowes, her best Ioyes I finde:
               Or if ought heere is had that praise should haue▪
               
               It is a Life obscure, and silent Graue▪
               
            
         
         
            
               
               TOo long I followed haue on fond Desire,
               And too long painted on deluding Streames,
               Too long refreshment sought midst burning Fire,
               Runne after Ioyes which to my Soule were Blames;
               Ah! when I had what most I did admire,
               And prou'd of Lifes Delights the last extreames,
               I found all but a Rose, hedg'd with a Bryer,
               A nought, a thought, a show of golden Dreames.
               Henceforth on thee (mine onely Good) I'll thinke,
               For onely thou canst grant what I doe craue;
               Thy Nailes my Pennes shall be, thy Blood my Inke,
               Thy Winding-sheet my Paper, Study Graue:
               And till that Soule from Body parted be,
               No Hope I'll haue but onely onely Thee.
            
         
         
            
               OF this faire Volumne which wee World doe name,
               If wee the sheetes and leaues could turne with care,
               Of him who it corrects, and did it frame,
               Wee cleare might read the Art and Wisedome 
                     •
                  are?
               Finde out his Power which wildest Pow'rs doth tame,
               His Prouidence extending euery-where,
               His Iustice which proud Rebels doth not spare,
               In euery Page, no, Period of the same:
               But 
                     •
                  illie wee like foolish Children rest,
               Well pleas'd with colour'd Velumne, Leaues of Gold,
               Faire dangling Ribbones, leauing what is best,
               On the great Writers sense nee'r taking hold;
               Or if by chance we stay our Mindes on ought,
               It is some Picture on the Margine wrought.
            
         
         
            
               
               THe Griefe was common, common were the Cryes,
               Teares, Sobbes, and Groanes of that afflicted Traine,
               Which of Gods chosen did the Summe containe,
               And Earth rebounded with them, pierc'd were Skies;
               All good had left the World, each Vice did raigne
               In the most monstrous sorts Hell could deuise,
               And all Degrees, and each Estate did staine,
               Nor further had to goe, whom to surprise;
               The World beneath, the Prince of Darknesse lay,
               In euerie Phan who had himselfe install'd,
               Was sacrifiz'd vnto, by Prayers call'd,
               Responses gaue, which (fooles) they did obey:
               When (pittying Man) God of a Virgines wombe
               Was borne, and those false Deities strooke dombe.
            
         
         
            
               RUnne (Sheepheards) run, where Bethleme blest appeares▪
               
               Wee bring the best of Newes, bee not dismay'd,
               A Sauiour there is borne, more olde than yeares,
               Amidst the rolling Heauen this Earth who stay'd;
               In a poore Cotage inn'd, a Virgine Maide,
               A weakeling did him beare who all vpbeares,
               There he is swadl'd in Cloathes▪ in Manger lay'd,
               To who
                     •
                   too narrow Swadlings are our Spheares.
               Runne (Sheepheards) runne and solemnize his Birth,
               This is that Night, no, Day growne great with Blisse,
               In which the Power of Satan broken is,
               In Heauen be Glorie, Peace vnto the Earth.
               Thus singing through the Aire the Angels swame,
               And Cope of Starres re-echood the same.
            
         
         
            
               
               O Than the fairest day, thrice fairer Night,
               Night to best Dayes▪ in which a Sunne doth rife,
               Of which that golden Eye which cleares the Skies,
               Is but a sparkling Ray, a Shadow light;
               And blessed yee (in sillie Pastors sight)
               Milde Creatures in whose warme Crib now lyes,
               That Heauen-sent Yongling, holy-Maide-borne Wight,
               Midst, end, beginning of our Prophesies:
               Blest Cotage that hath Flowres in Winter spred,
               Though withered blessed Gra
                     •
                  se, that hath the grace
               To decke and be a Carpet to that Place:
            
            
               Thus sang vnto the soundes of oa
                     •
                  en Reed
               Before the Babe, the Sheepheards bow'd on knees,
               And Springs ranne Nectar, Hony dropt from Trees.
            
         
         
            
               TO spread the azure Canopie of Heauen,
               And make it twinkle with those spangs of Gold,
               To stay the pondrous Globe of Earth so euen,
               That it should all, and nought should it vphold;
               To giue strange motions to the Planets seuen,
               Or Ioue to make so meeke, or Mars so bolde,
               To temper what is mo
                     •
                  st, dry, hote, and colde,
               Of all their Iarres that sweet accords are giuen:
               LORD, to thy Wisedome's nought▪ nought to thy Might,
               But that thou shouldst (thy Glorie laide aside)
               Come meanelie in mortalitie to bide,
               And die for those deseru'd eternall plight,
               A wonder is so farre aboue our wit,
               That Angels stand amaz'd to muse on it.
            
         
         
            
               
               THe last and greatest Herauld of Heauens King,
               Girt with rough Skinnes, hyes to the Desarts wilde,
               Among that sauage brood the Woods forth bring,
               Which he than Man more harmlesse found and milde;
               His food was Locusts, and what there doth spring,
               With Hony that from virgine Hi
                     •
                  es distill'd,
               Parcht Bodie, hollow Eyes, some vncouth thing
               Made him appeare, long since from Earth exilde,
               There burst he foorth, All yee whose Hopes relye
               On GOD, with mee amidst these Desarts 
                     〈◊〉
                  
               
               Repent, repent, and from olde errours tu
                     •
                  ne▪
               
            
            
               Who listned to his voyce, obey'd his cry?
               Onely the Ecchoes which hee made relent,
               Rung from their flintie Caues, repent repent▪
               
            
         
         
            
               THese Eyes (deare Lord) once Brandons of Desire,
               Fraile Scoutes betraying what they had to keepe,
               Which their owne heart, then others set on fire,
               Their traitrous blacke before thee heere out weepe;
               These Lockes of blushing deeds, the gilt attire,
               Waues curling, wrackefull shelfes to shadow deepe,
               Rings wedding Soules to Sinnes lethargicke sleepe,
               To touch thy sacred Feet doe now aspire.
               In Seas of care behold a sinking Barke,
               By windes of sharpe Remorse vnto thee driuen,
               O let me not expos'd be Ruines marke,
               My faults confest (LORD) say they are forgiuen.
               Thus sigh'd to TESVS the Bethanian faire,
               His teare-wet Feet still drying with her Haire.
            
         
         
            
               
               I Countries chang'd, new pleasures out to finde,
               But ah! for pleasure new I sound new paine,
               Enchanting Pleasure so did Reason blind,
               That Fathers loue and words I scorn'd as vaine:
               For Tables rich, for bed, for following traine
               Of carefull seruants to obserue my Minde,
               These Heards I keepe, my fellowes are assign'd,
               Rocke is my Bed, and Herbes my Life sustaine.
               Now while I famine feele, feare worser harmes,
               Father and Lord I turne, thy Loue (yet great)
               My faults will pardon, pittie mine estate.
            
            
               This where an aged Oake had spred its Armes
               Thought the lost Childe, while as the Heardes he led,
               Not farre off on the ackornes wilde them fed.
            
         
         
            
               IF that the World doth in amaze remaine,
               To heare in what a sad deploring mood,
               The Pelican powres from her brest her Blood,
               To bring to life her yonglings backe againe?
               How should wee wonder of that soueraigne Good,
               Who from that Serpents sting (that had vs slaine)
               To saue our lifes, shed his Lifes purple flood,
               And turn'd in endlesse Ioy our endlesse Paine?
               Vngratefull Soule, that charm'd with false Delight,
               Hast long long wander'd in Sinnes flowrie Path,
               And didst not thinke at all, or thoughtst not right
               On this thy Pelicanes great Loue and Death,
               Heere pause, and let (though Earth it scorne) Heauen see
               Thee powre foorth teares to him powr'd Blood for thee.
            
         
         
            
               
               IF vhen farre in the East yee doe behold,
               Forth from his Christall Bed the Sunne to rise,
               With rosie Robes and Crowne of flaming Gold?
               If gazing on that Empresse of the Skies
               That takes so many formes, and those faire Brands
               Which blaze in Heauens high Vault, Nights watchfull eyes?
               If seeing how the Seas tumultuous Bands
               Of bellowing Billowes haue their course confin'd?
               How vnsustain'd the Earth still steadfast stands?
               Poore mortall Wights, yee e're found in your Minde
               A thought, that some great King did sit aboue,
               Who had such Lawes and Rites to them assign'd?
               A King who fix'd the Poles, made Spheares to moue,
               All Wisedome, Purenesse, Excellencie, Might,
               All Goodnesse, Greatnesse, Iustice, Beautie, Loue;
               With feare and wonder hither turne your Sight,
               See, see (alas) Him now, not in that State
               Thought could fore-cast Him into Reasons light.
               Now Eyes with teares, now Hearts with griefe make great,
               Bemoane this cruell Death and drearie case,
               If euer Plaints iust W
                     •
                  e could aggrauate?
               From Sinne and Hell to saue vs humaine Race,
               See this great King naill'd to an abiect Tree,
               An obiect of reproach and sad disgrace.
               O vnheard Pittie! Loue in strange degree!
               Hee his owne Life doth giue, his Blood doth shed,
               
                  
                     •
                  or Wormelings base such Worthinesse to see.
               Poore Wights, behold His Visage pale as Lead,
               His Head bow'd to His Brest, Lockes sadlie rent,
               Like a cropt Rose that languishing doth fade.
               
                  
Weake Nature weepe, astonish'd World lament,
               Lam
                     •
                  nt, you Windes, you Heauen that all containes,
               And thou (my Soule) let nought thy Griefes relent.
               Those Hands, those sacred Hands which hold the r
                     •
                  ines
               Of this great All, and kept from mutuall warres
               The Elements, beare rent for thee their Vaines:
               Those Feete which once must trade on golden Starres,
               For thee with Nailes would bee pierc'd through and 
                     •
                  orne,
               For thee Heauens King from Heauen himselfe 
                     •
                  ebarres:
               This great heart-quaking Dolour waile and mourne,
               Yee that long since Him saw by might of Faith,
               Yee now that are, and yee yet to bee borne.
               Not to behold his great Creators Death,
               The Sunne from sinfull eyes hath vail'd his light,
               And faintlie
                     •
                  journeyes vp Hea
                     •
                  ens saphyre Path:
               And cutting from her Browes her Tresses bright,
               The Moone doth keepe her Lords sad Obseq
                     •
                  ies,
               Impearling with her Teares this Robe of Night.
               All staggering and lazie lowre the Skies,
               The Earth and elementall Stages quake,
               The long since dead from bursted Graues arise.
               And can things wanting sense yet sorrow take,
               And beare a Part with him who all them wrought?
               And Man (though borne with cryes) shall pittie lacke?
               Thinke what had beene your state, had hee not brought
               To these sharpe Pangs himselfe, and priz'd so hie
               Your Soules, that with his Life them life hee bought.
               What woes doe you attend? if still yee lye
               Plung'd in your wonted ordures? wre
                     •
                  ched Brood,
               Shall for your sake againe GOD euer die?
               O leaue deluding shewes, embrace true good,
               Hee on you calles, forgoe Sinnes shamefull trade,
               With Prayers now seeke Heauen, and not with Blood.
               
                  
Let not the Lambes more from their Dames bee had,
               Nor Al
                     ••
                  rs blush for sinne, liue euery thing,
               That long time long'd for sacrifice is made.
               All that is from you crau'd by this great King
               Is to beleeue, a pure Heart Incense is
               What gift (alas) can wee him meaner bring?
               Haste sinne-sicke Soules, this season doe doe not misse,
               Now while remorselesse Time doth grant you space,
               And GOD invites you to your onlie Blisse:
               Hee w
                     ••
                   you calles will not denie you Grace,
               But low-deepe burrie faults▪ so yee repent,
               His Armes (loe) stretched are you to embrace.
               When Dayes are done, and Lifes small sparke is spent,
               So yee accept what freelie heere is giuen,
               Like brood of Angels deathlesse, all-content,
               Yee shall for euer liue with him in Heauen.
            
         
         
            
               COme forth, come forth yee blest triumphing Bands,
               Faire Citizens of that immortall Towne,
               Come see that King which all this All commands,
               Now (ouercharg'd with Loue) die for his owne;
               Looke on those Nailes which pierce his Feete and Hands,
               What a sharpe Diademe his Browes doth crowne?
               Behold his pallid Face, his Eyes which sowne,
               And what a throng of Theeues him mocking stands.
               Come forth yee empyrean Troupes, come forth,
               Preserue this sacred Blood that Earth adornes,
               Gather those liquid Roses off his Thornes,
               O! to bee loost they bee of too much worth:
               For Streams1, Iuice2, Balm3 they are, which quēch1, kils2, charms3,
               Of GOD1, Death2, Hell3, the wrath1, the life2, the harmes3.
            
         
         
            
               
               SOule, which to Hell wast thrall,
               Hee, Hee for thine offence,
               Did suffer Death, who could not die at all▪
               
               O soueraigne Excellence,
               O life of all that liues,
               Eternall Bountie which each good thing giues,
               How could Death mounte so hie?
               No wit this Point can reach,
               Faith onely doth vs teach,
               For vs Hee dyed at all who could not dye▪
               
            
         
         
            
               LIfe to giue life, depriued is of Life,
               
               And Death display'd hath Ensigne against Death,
               
               So violent the Rigour was of Death,
               
               That nought could daunte it but the Life of Life:
               
               No Power had Pow'r to thrall Lifes Pow'rs to Death,
               
               But willinglie Life downe hath layed Life,
               
               Loue gaue the wound which wrought this worke of Death,
               
               His Bow and Shafts were of the Tree of Life.
               
               Now quakes the Author of eternall Death,
               
               To finde that they whom earst he re
                     •
                  t of Life,
               
               Shall fill his Roome aboue the listes of Death,
               
               Now all rejoyce in Death who hope for Life.
               
               Dead IESVS lyes who Death hath kill'd by Death,
               
               No Tombe his Tombe is, but new Source of Life.
               
            
         
         
            
               
               RIse from those fragrant Climes, thee now embrace,
               Vnto this World of ours O haste thy Race,
               Faire Sunne, and though contrarie wayes all yeare
               Thou hold thy course, now with the highest Spheare,
               Ioyne thy blew Wheeles to hasten Time that lowres,
               And lazie Minutes turne in perfect Houres;
               The Night and Death too long a league haue made,
               To stow the World in Horrors vglie shade:
               Shake from thy Lockes a Day with saffron rayes
               So faire, that it out-shine all other dayes;
               And yet doe not presume (great Eye of light)
               To be that which this Day must make so bright,
               See, an eternall Sunne hastes to arise,
               Not from the Easterne blushing Seas or Skies,
               Or any stranger Worlds Heauens Concaues haue,
               But from the Darknes of an hollow Graue:
               And this is that all-powerfull Sunne aboue,
               That crown'd thy Browes with Rayes, first made thee moue.
               Lights Trumpetters, yee need not from your Bowres
               Proclaime this Day, this the angelicke Powres
               Haue done for you; But now an opall hew
               Bepaintes Heauens Christall, to the longing view
               Earths late hid Colours glance, Light doth adorne
               The World, and (weeping Ioy) forth comes the Morne;
               And with her, as from a Lethargicke Transe
               Breath (com'd againe) that Bodie doth aduance,
               Which two sad Nights in rocke lay coffin'd dead,
               And with au iron Guard invironed,
               
                  
Life out of Death, Light out of Darkness
                     •
                   springs,
               From a base Iaile forth comes the King of kings;
               What late was mortall, thrall'd to euerie woe,
               That lackeyes life or vpon sense doth grow,
               Immortall is, of an eternall Stampe,
               Farre brighter beaming than the morning Lampe.
               So from a blacke Ecclipse out
                     •
                  peares the Sunne:
               Such [when a huge of Dayes haue on her runne,
               In a farre Forest in the pearlie East,
               And shee her selfe hath burnt and spicie Nest]
               The lonlie Bird with youthfull Pennes and Combe,
               Doth soare from out her Cradle and her Tombe:
               So a small seed that in the Earth lies hidde
               And dies, revi
                     •
                  ing burstes her cloddie Side,
               Adorn'd with yellow Lockes, of new is borne,
               And doth become a Mother great with Corne,
               Of Graines brings hundreths with it, which when old,
               Enrich the Furrowes with a Sea of Gold.
               Haile holie Victor, greatest Victor haile,
               That Hell dost ra
                     •
                  sacke, against Death preuaile,
               O how thou long'd for comes! with Iubeling cries
               The all-triumphing Palladines of Skies
               Salute thy rising, Earth would Ioyes no more
               Beare, if thou rising didst them not restore:
               A sillie Tombe should not his Flesh enclose,
               Who did Heauens trembling Tarasses dispose,
               No Monument should such a Iewell hold,
               No Rocke, though Rubye, Diamond, and Gold.
               Thou onelie pittie didst vs humane Race,
               Bestowing on vs of thy free
                     •
                  giuen Grace
               More than wee forfaited and loosed first,
               In Edens Rebell when wee were accurst.
               Then Earth our portion was, Earths Ioyes but giuen,
               
                  
Earth and Earths Blisse thou hast exchang'd with Heauen.
               O what a hight of good vpon vs streames
               From the great splendor of thy Bounties Beames?
               When we deseru'd shame, horrour, flames of wrath,
               Thou bled our wounds, and suffer didst our Death,
               But Fathers Iustice pleas'd, Hell, Death o'rcome,
               In triumph now thou risest from thy Tombe,
               With Glories which past Sorrowes contervaile,
               Haile holy Victor, greatest Victor haile.
               Hence humble sense, and hence yee Guides of sense,
               Wee now reach Heauen, your weake intelligence
               And searching Pow'rs, were in a flash made dim,
               To learne from all eternitie, that him
               The Father bred, then that hee heere did come
               (His Bearers Parent) in a Virgins Wombe;
               But then when sold, betray'd, crown'd, scourg'd with Thorne,
               Naill'd to a Tree, all breathlcsse, bloodlesse, torne,
               Entomb'd, him risen from a Graue to finde,
               Confounds your Cunning, turnes like Moles you blinde.
               Death, theu that heeretofore still barren wast,
               Nay, didst each other Birth eate vp and waste,
               Imperious, hatefull, pittilesse, vniust,
               Vnpartiall equaller of all with dust,
               Sterne Executioner of heau
                     •
                  nlie doome,
               Made fruitfull, now Lifes Mother art become,
               A sweete reliefe of Cares the Soule molest
               An Harbenger to Glorie, Peace and Rest,
               Put off thy mourning Weedes, yeeld all thy Gall
               To daylie sinning Life, proud of thy fall,
               Assemble thy Captiues, bide all haste to rise,
               And euerie Corse in earth-quakes where it lies,
               Sound from each flowrie Graue, and rockie Iaile,
               Haile holy Victor, greatest Victor haile.
               
                  
The World that wa
                     •
                  ning late and faint did lie,
               Applauding to our Ioyes, thy Victorie,
               To a yong Prime essayes to turne againe,
               And as ere soyl'd with Sinne yet to remaine,
               Her chilling Ag
                     •
                  es shee beginnes to misse,
               All Blisse returning with the LORD of Blisse.
               With greater light Heauens Temples opened shine,
               Mornes smiling rise, Euens blushing doe decline,
               Cloudes dappled glister, boistrous Windes are calme,
               Soft Zephyres doe the Fields with sighes embalme,
               In ammell blew the Sea hath 
                     •
                  usht his R
                     •
                  ares,
               And with enamour'd Curles doth kisse the Shoares:
               All-bearing Earth, like a new-married Queene,
               Her Beauties hightenes, in a Gowne of Greene
               Perfumes the Aire, her Meades are wrought with Flowres,
               In colours various, figures, smelling, powres,
               Trees wantone in the Groues with leauie Lockes▪
               
               Her Hilles empampred stand, The Vales, the Rockes
               Ring peales of Ioy, her Floods and pratling Brookes,
               (Starres liquid Mirrors) with serpinting Crookes,
               And whispering murmures, sound vnto the Maine,
               That Worlds pure Age returned is againe.
               The honnye People leaue their golden B
                     •
                  wres,
               And innocentlie pray on budding Flowres,
               In gloomie Shades pearcht on the tender Sprayes
               The painted Singers fill the Aire with Layes:
               Seas, Floods, Earth, Aire, all diuerslie doe sound,
               Yet all their diuerse Notes hath but one ground,
               Re-echoed heeredowne from Heauens azure Vaile,
               Haile holy Victor, greatest Victor haile.
               O Day on which Deathes Adamantine Chaine
               The LORD did breake, ransacking Satans Raigne,
               And in triumphing Pompe his Trophees rear'd,
               
                  
Be thou blest euer, henceforth still endear'd
               With Name of his owne Day, the Law to Grace,
               Types to their substance yeeld, to thee giue place
               The old New-Moones, with all festiuall Dayes,
               And what aboue the rest deserueth praise
               The reuerend Saboath, what could else they bee
               Than golden Heraulds, telling what by thee
               Wee should enjoy? shades past, now shine thou cleare,
               And henceforth be thou Empresse of the yeare,
               This Glorie of thy Sisters sexe to winne,
               From worke on thee, as other Dayes from Sinne,
               That Mankind shall forbeare, in euerie place
               The Prince of Planets warmeth in his race;
               And farre beyond his pathes in frozen Climes;
               And may thou be so blest to out
                     •
                  date Times,
               That when Heauens Quire shall balze in accents lowd
               The many Mercies of their soueraigne Good,
               How hee on thee did Sinne, Death, Hell destroy,
               It may bee aye the Burthen of their Ioy.
            
         
         
            
               
               BEneath a sable vaile, and Shadowes deepe,
               Of vnaccessible and dimming light,
               In Silence ebane cloudes more blacke than Night,
               The Worlds great Minde his secrets hidde doth keepe:
               Through those thicke Mists when any mortall Wight
               Aspires, with halting pace, and Eyes that weepe
               To prye, and in his Misteries to creepe,
               With Thunders hee and Lightnings blastes their Sight.
               O Sunne invisible, that dost abide
               Within thy bright abysmes, most faire, most darke,
               Where with thy proper Rayes thou dost thee hide,
               O euer-shining, neuer full seene marke,
               To guide mee in Lifes Night, thy light mee show,
               The more I search of thee, the lesse I know.
            
         
         
            
               IF with such passing Beautie, choise Delights,
               The Architect of this great Round did frame,
               This Pallace visible, short listes of Fame,
               And sillie Mansion but of dying Wights?
               How many Wonders, what amazing lights
               Must that triumphing Seat of Glorie clame?
               That doth transcend all this great Alls vaste hights,
               Of whose bright Sunne ours heere is but a beame.
               O blest abode! O happie dwelling place!
               Where visiblie th'Invisible doth raigne,
               Blest People which doe see true Beauties Face,
               With whose farre Shadowes scarce he Earth doth daigne:
               All Ioy is but Annoy, all Concord Strife,
               Match'd with your endlesse Blisse and happie life.
            
         
         
            
               
               LOue which is heere a care,
               That Wit and Will doth marre,
               Vncertaine Truce, and a most certaine Warre,
               A shrill tempestuous Winde,
               Which doth disturbe the Minde,
               And like wilde Waues our designes all commo
                     •
                  e;
               Among those Powres aboue,
               Which see their Makers Face,
               It a contentment is, a quiet Peace,
               A Pleasure voide of Griefe, a constant rest,
               Eternall Ioy, which nothing can molest.
            
         
         
            
               THat space where raging Waues doe now diuide
               From the great Continent our happie Isle,
               Was sometime Land, and now where Shippes doe glide,
               Once with laborious Art the Plough did tyle:
               Once those faire Bounds stretcht out so farre and wide,
               Where Townes, no, Shires enwall'd, endeare each mile,
               Were all ignoble Sea and marish vile,
               Where Proteus Flockes danc'd measures to the Tyde.
               So Age transforming all still forward runnes,
               No wonder though the Earth doth change her Face,
               New Manners, Pleasures new, turne with new Sunnes,
               Lockes now like Gold grow to an hoarie grace;
               Nay, Mindes rare shape doth change, that lies despis'd,
               Which was so deare of late and highlie pris'd.
            
         
         
            
               
               THis World a Hunting is,
               The Prey poore Man, the Nimrod fierce is Death,
               His speedie Gray
                     •
                  ounds are,
               Lust, Sicknesse, Enuie, Care,
               Strife that neere falles amisse,
               With all those ills which haunt vs while wee breath.
               Now, if by chance wee flie
               Of these the eager chase,
               Old Age with stealing pace
               Castes vp his Nets, and there wee panting die,
            
         
         
            
               WHy (Worldlings) do ye trust fraile Honours dreames?
               And leane to guilted Glories which decay?
               Why doe yee toyle to registrate your Names
               On ycie Pillars, which soone melt away?
               True Honour is not heere, that place it clames
               Where blacke-brow'd Night doth not exile the Day,
               Nor no farre-shining lamp diues in the Sea,
               But an eternall Sunne spreades lasting Beames:
               There, it attendeth you, where spotlesse Bands
               Of Sprits, stand gazing on their soueraigne Blisse,
               Where yeeres not hold it in their canckring hands,
               But who once noble euer noble is.
               Looke home, lest hee your weakned Wit make thrall,
               Who Edens foolish Gardner earst made fall.
            
         
         
            
               
               AS are those Apples, pleasant to the Eye,
               But full of smoake within, which vse to grow
               Neere that strange Lake where God powr'd from the Skie
               Huge showres of flames, worse flames to ouer-throw:
               Such are their workes that with a glaring Show
               Of humble holinesse, in Vertues dye
               Would coloure mischiefe, while within they glow
               With coales of Sinne, though none the Smoake descrie.
               Ill is that Angell that earst fell from Heauen,
               But not more ill than hee, nor in worse case
               Who hides a traitrous Minde with smiling face,
               And with a Doues white feathers maskes a Rauen:
               Each Sinne some colour hath it to adorne,
               Hypocrisie All-mightie God doth scorne.
            
         
         
            
               NEw doth the Sunne appeare,
               The Mountaines Snowes decay,
               Crown'd with fraile flowres forth comes the babye yeare,
               My Soule, Time postes away,
               And thou yet in that frost
               Which Flowre and fruite hath lost,
               As if all heere immortall were dost stay:
               For shame thy Powres awake
               Looke to that Heauen which neuer Night makes blacke,
               And there at that immortall Sunnes bright Rayes,
               Decke thee with Flowres which feare not rage of Dayes.
            
         
         
            
               
               THrice happie hee who by some shadie Groue,
               Farre from the clamorous World, doth liue his owne,
               Though solitarie, who is not alone,
               But doth, conuerse with that Eternall Loue:
               O how more sweet is Birdes harmonious Moane,
               Or the hoarse Sobbings of the widow'd Doue?
               Than those smooth whisperings neere a Princes Throne,
               Which Good make doubtfull do the euill approue?
               O how more sweet is Zephyres wholesome Breath,
               And Sighes embalm'd, which new-borne Flowres vnfold,
               Than that applause vaine Honour doth bequeath?
               How sweet are Streames to Poison drunke in Gold?
               The World is full of Horrours, Troubles, Slights,
               Woods harmlesse Shades haue only true Delights.
            
         
         
            
               SWeet Bird, that sing'st away the earlie Houres,
               Of Winters past or comming voide of Care,
               Well pleased with Delights which present are,
               Faire Seasones, budding Sprayes, sweet-smelling Flowres:
               To Rockes, to Springs, to Rills, from leauie Bowres:
               Thou thy Creators Goodnesse dost declare,
               And what deare Gifts on thee he did not spare,
               A Staine to humane sense in Sinne that lowres.
               What Soule can be so sicke, which by thy Songs
               (Attir'd in swee
                     •
                  nesse) sweetlie is not driuen
               Quite to forget Earthes turmoiles, spights, and wrongs?
               And lift a reuerend Eye and Thought to Heauen?
               Sweet Artlesse Songstarre, thou my Minde dost raise
               To Ayres of Spheares, yes, and to Angels Layes.
            
         
         
            
               
               AS when it hapneth that some louelie Towne
               Unto a barbarous Besieger falles,
               Who there by Sword and Flame himselfe enstalles,
               And (shamelesse) it in Teares and Blood doth drowne;
               Her Beautie spoil'd, her Citizens made Thralles,
               His spight yet can not so her all throw downe,
               But that some Statue, Arch, Phan of renowne,
               Yet lurkes vnmaym'd within her weeping walles:
               So after all the Spoyle, Disgrace and Wracke,
               That Time, the World, and Death could bring combind,
               Amidst that Masse of Ruines they did make,
               Safe and all scarre
                     •
                  lesse yet remaines my Minde:
               From this so high tran
                     •
                  cending Rapture springs,
               That I, all else defac'd, not enuie Kings.
            
         
         
            
               LEt vs each day enure our selues to dye,
               If this (and not our feares) be truelie Death,
               Aboue the Circles both of Hope and Faith
               With faire immortall Pinniones to flie?
               If this be Death our best Part to vntye
               (By ruining the Iaile) from Lust and Wrath,
               And euerie drowsie languor heere beneath,
               It turning deniz'd Citizen of Skie?
               To haue more knowledge than all Bookes containe,
               All Pleasures euen surmounting wishing Powre,
               The fellowship of Gods immortall Traine,
               And these that Time nor force shall e're deuoure?
               If this be Death? what Ioy, what golden care
               Of Life, can with Deathes ouglinesse compare?
            
         
         
            
               
               AMidst the azure cleare
               Of Iordans sacred Streames,
               
                  Iordan of Libanon the off-spring deare,
               When Zephires flowres vnclose,
               And Sunne shines with new Beames,
               With graue and statelie grace a Nymphe arose.
               Vpon her Head shee ware
               Of Amaranthes a Crowne,
               Her left hand Palmes, her right a Brand
                     •
                  n bare,
               Vnvail'd Skinnes whitenesse lay,
               Gold haires in Curles hang downe,
               Eyes sparkled Ioy, more bright than starre of Day.
               The Flood a Throne her rear'd
               Of Waues, most like that Heauen
               Where beaming Starres in Glorie turne ensphear'd,
               The Aire stood calme and cleare,
               No Sigh by Windes was giuen,
               Birdes left to sing, Heards feed, her voice to heare.
               World-wandring sorrie Wights,
               Whom no thing can content
               VVithin these varying li
                     •
                  ts of Dayes nad Nights,
               VVhose life (ere knowne amisse)
               In glittering Griefes is spent,
               Come learne (said shee) what is your choisest Blisse▪
               
               From Toyle and pressing Cares
               How yee may respit finde,
               A Sanctuarie from Soule-thralling Snares,
               A Port to harboure sure
               In spight of waues and winde,
               VVhich shall when Times Houre-glasse is runne endure.
               
                  
Not happie is that Life
               Which yee as happie hold,
               No, but a Sea of feares, a field of strife,
               Charg'd on a Throne to sit
               With Diademes of Gold,
               Preseru'd by Force, and still obseru'd by Wit;
               Huge Treasures to enjoy,
               Of all her Gemmes spoyle Inde,
               
               All Seres silke in Garments to imploy,
               Deliciouslie to feed,
               The Phoenix plumes to finde
               To rest vpon, or decke your purple Bed.
               Fraile Beautie to abuse,
               And (wanton Sybarites)
               On past or present touch of sense to muse;
               Neuer to heare of Noise
               But what the Eare delites,
               Sweet Musicks charmes, or charming flatterers voice.
               Nor can it Blisse you bring,
               Hidde Natures Depthes to know,
               Why matter changeth, whence each forme doth spring,
               Nor that your Fame should range,
               And after-Worlds it blow
               From Tānāis to Nile, from Nile to Gange.
               
               All these haue not the Powre
               To free the Minde from feares,
               Nor hiddeous horror can allay one howre,
               When Death in steale doth glance,
               In Sicknesse lurke or yeares,
               And wakes the Soule from out her mortall Trance.
               No, but blest life is this,
               With chaste and pure Desire▪
               
               To turne vnto the load-starre of all Blisse,
               
                  
On GOD the Minde to rest,
               Burnt vp with sacred Fire,
               Possessing him to bee by him possest.
               When to the baulmie East
               Sunne doth his light imparte,
               Or when hee diueth in the lowlie West,
               And rauisheth the Day,
               With spotlesse Hands and Hart
               Him chearefullie to praise and to him pray.
               To heed each action so,
               As euer in his sight,
               More fearing doing ill than passiue woe▪
               
               Not to seeme other thing
               Than what yee are aright,
               Neuer to doe what may Repentance bring:
               Not to bee blowne with Pride,
               Nor mou'd at Glories breath,
               Which Shadow-like on wings of Time doth glide;
               So Malice to disarme,
               And conquere hastie Wrath,
               As to doe good to those that worke your harme:
               To hatch no base Desires
               Or Gold or Land to gaine,
               Well pleas'd with what by Vertue one acquires,
               To haue the Wit and Will
               Consorting in one Straine,
               Than what is good to haue no higher skill.
               Neuer on Neighbours well,
               With Cocatrices Eye
               To looke, nor make an others Heauen your Hell;
               Not to be Beauties Thrall,
               All fruitlesse Loue to flie▪
               
               Yet louing still a Loue transcending all:
               
                  
A Loue which while it burnes
               The Soule with fairest Beames,
               In that vncreatde Sunne the Soule it turnes,
               And makes such Beautie proue,
               That (if Sense saw her Gleames?)
               All lookers on would pine and die for loue.
               VVho such a life doth liue,
               Yee happie euen may call
               Ere ruthlesse Death a whished end him giue,
               And after then when giuen,
               More happie by his fall,
               For Humanes, Earth, enioying Angels, Heauen.
               Swift is your mortall Race,
               And glassie is the Field,
               Vaste are Desires not limited by Grace,
               Life a weake Tapper is,
               Then while it light doth yeeld
               Leaue flying Ioyes, embrace this lasting Blisse,
               This when the Nymph had said,
               Shee diu'd within the Flood,
               VVhose Face with smyling Curles long after staid,
               Then Sighes did Zephyres presse,
               Birdes sang from euerie VVood,
               And Ecchoes rang, this was true Happinesse.
            
         
         
            
               
               AN HYMNE OF THE FAIREST FAIRE.
            
            
               
                  
                  I Feele my Bosome glow with wontlesse Fires,
                  Rais'd from the vulgar preasse my Mind aspires
                  (Wing'd with high Thoughis) vnto his praise to clime,
                  From deepe Eternitie who call'd forth Time,
                  That Essence which not mou'd makes each thing moue,
                  Vncreatde Beautie all-creating Loue;
                  But by so great an obiect, radiant light,
                  My Heart appall'd, enfeebled restes my Sight,
                  Thicke Cloudes benighte my labouring Ingine,
                  And at my high attempts my Wits repine:
                  If thou in mee this sacred Rapture wrought,
                  My Knowledge sharpen, Sarcells lend my Thought?
                  Grant mee (Times Father, world-containing King)
                  A Pow'r of thee in pow'rfull Layes to sing,
                  That as thy Beautie in Earth liues, Heauen shines,
                  It dawning may or shadow in my Lines.
                  As farre beyond the starrie walles of Heauen,
                  As is the loftiest of the Planets seuen
                  Sequestred from this Earth, in purest light
                  Out-shining ours, as ours doth sable Night,
                  Thou all-sufficient, Omnipotent,
                  Thou euer-glorious, most excellent,
                  GOD various in Names, in Essence one,
                  High art enstalled on a golden Throne,
                  Out-reaching, Heauens wide Vastes, the Bounds of nought,
                  Transcending all the Circles of our Thought,
                  With diamantine Scepter in thy Hand,
                  There thou giu'st Lawes, and dost this World command,
                  This World of Concords raisde vnliklie sweet,
                  Which like a Ball lies prostrate to thy Feet.
                  If so wee may well say (and what wee say
                  Heere wrapt in flesh, led by dimme Reasones ray,
                  To show by earthlie Beauties which wee see
                  
                     
That spirituall Excellence that shines in thee,
                  Good Lord forgiue) not farre from thy right Side,
                  With curled Lockes Youth euer doth abide,
                  Rose-checked Youth who garlanded with Flowres,
                  Still blooming, ceasleslie vnto thee powres
                  Immortall Nectar in a cuppe of Gold,
                  That by no darts of Ages thou grow old,
                  And as ends and beginnings thee not clame,
                  Successionlesse that thou be still the same.
                  Neare to thy other side resistlesse Might,
                  
                  From Head to Foot in burnisht Armour dight,
                  That ringes about him, with a wa
                        •
                     ing Brand,
                  And watchfull Eye, great Sentinell doth stand,
                  That neither Time nor force in ought impaire
                  Thy Workmanshippe, nor harme thine Empire faire,
                  Soone to giue Death to all againe that would
                  Sterne Discord raise which thou destroide of old,
                  
                     Discord that foe to order, Nurse of Warre,
                  By which the noblest things dimolisht are,
                  But (catife) shee no Treason doth deuise,
                  When Might to nought doth bring her enterprise,
                  Thy all-vpholding Might her Malice raines,
                  And her in Hell throwes bound in iron Chaines.
                  With Lockes in waues of Gold that ebbe and flow
                  On y
                        •
                     orie necke, in Robes more white than Snow,
                  
                     Truth steadfastlie before thee holdes a Glasse,
                  Indent'd with Gemmes, where shineth all that was,
                  That is, or shall bee, heere ere ought was wrought.
                  Thou knew all that thy Pow'r with time forth brought,
                  And more, things number lesse which thou couldst make,
                  That actuallie shall neuer being take,
                  Heere thou beholdst thy selfe, and (strange) dost proue
                  At once the Beautie, Louer and the Loue.
                  
                     
With Faces two (like Sisters) sweetlie faire,
                  VVhose Blossomes no rough Autumne can impaire,
                  Stands Prouidence, and doth her lookes disperse.
                  Through euerie Corner of this Vniuerse,
                  Thy Prouidence, at once which generall things
                  And singulare doth rule, as Empires Kings,
                  VVithout whose care this world (lost) would remaine,
                  As Shippe without a Maister in the Maine,
                  As Chariot alone, as Bodies proue
                  Depriu'd of Soules, whereby they be, li
                        •
                     e, moue.
                  But who are they which shine thy Throne so neare?
                  With sacred countenance, and looke seuere,
                  This in one hand a pondrous Sword doth hold,
                  Her left stayes charg'd with Ballances of Gold,
                  That with, Browes girt with Bayes, sweet-smiling Face,
                  Doth beare a Brandon, with a babish grace
                  Two milke-white VVings him easilie doe moue,
                  O shee thy Iustice is, and this thy Loue!
                  
                  By this thou brought this Engine great to light,
                  By that it fram'd in Number, Measure, VVeight,
                  That destine doth reward to ill and good;
                  But Sway of Iustice is by Loue with-stood,
                  VVhich did it not relent and mildlie stay,
                  This World ere now had had its funerall Day.
                  What Bands (enclustred) neare to these abide,
                  Which into vaste Infinitie them hide?
                  
                     Infinitie that neither doth admit,
                  Place, Time, nor Number to encroach on it:
                  Heere Bountie sparkleth, heere doth Beautie shine,
                  
                     Simplicitie, more white than Gelsomine,
                  
                     Mercie with open winges, ay-varied Blisse,
                  
                  
                     Glorie, and Ioy, that Blisses darling is.
                  Ineffable, all-pow'rfull GOD, all-free,
                  
                     
Thou onlie liu'st, and each thing liues by thee,
                  
                     No Ioy, no, nor Perfection to thee came
                  By the contriuing of this Worlds great Frame,
                  Ere Sunne, Moone, Starres beganne their restlesse race,
                  Ere paint'd with purple light was heauens round Face,
                  Ere Aire had Cloudes, ere Cloudes weept downe their showres,
                  Ere Sea embraced Earth, ere Earth bare Flowres,
                  Thou happie liu'd; World nought to thee supply'd,
                  All in thy selfe thy selfe thou satisfy'd:
                  Of Good no slender Shadow doth appeare,
                  No age-worne tracke, which shin'd in thee not cleare,
                  Perfestions Summe, prime
                        •
                     cause of euerie Cause,
                  Midst, end, beginning, where all good doth pa
                        •
                     se:
                  Hence of thy Substance, differing in nought
                  Thou in Eternitie thy Sonne forth brought,
                  The onlie Birth of thy vnchanging Minde,
                  Thine Image, Patterne-like that euer shin'd,
                  Light out of Light, begotten not by Will
                  But Nature, all and that same Essence still
                  Which thou thy selfe, for thou dost nought possesse
                  Which hee hath not, in ought nor is hee lesse
                  Than Thee his great Begetter; of this Light,
                  Eternall, double, kindled was thy Spright
                  Eternallie, who is with thee the same,
                  All-holie Gift, Embassadour, Knot, Flame:
                  Most sacred Triade, O most holie One,
                  Vnprocreatde Father, euer-procreatde Sonne,
                  Ghost breath'd from both, you were, are▪ aye shall be,
                  (Most blessed) Three in One, and One in Three,
                  Vncomprehensible by reachlesse Hight,
                  And vnperceaued by excessiae Light.
                  So in our Soules three and yet one are still,
                  The Vnderstanding, Memorie, and Will;
                  
                     
So (though vnlike) the Planet of the Dayes
                  So soone as hee was made begate his Rayes,
                  Which are his Off-spring, and from both was hurld,
                  The rosie Light which comforte doth the World,
                  And none fore-went an other: so the Spring,
                  The Well-head, and the Streame which they forth bring,
                  Are but one selfe-same Essence, nor in ought
                  Doe differ, saue in order, and our Thought
                  No chime of Time discernes in them to fall,
                  But Three distinctlie bide one Essence all.
                  But these expresse not Thee, who can declare
                  Thy being? Men and Angelles dazel'd are,
                  Who force this Eden would with wit or sense
                  A Cherubin shall finde to barre him thence.
                  Alls Architect, Lord of this Vniverse,
                  Ingulph'd is Wit would in thy Greatnesse pierce,
                  Ah! as a Pilgrime who the Alpes doth passe,
                  Or Atlas Temples crown'd with winter glasse,
                  The ayrie Caucasus, the Apennine,
                  
                  
                     Pyrenes clifts where Sunne doth neuer shine,
                  When hee some heapes of Hilles hath ouer-went,
                  Beginnes to thinke on rest, his Iourney spent,
                  Till mounting some tall Mountaine hee doe find,
                  More hights before him than hee left behinde:
                  With halting pace so while I would me raise
                  To the vnbounded Circuits of thy Praise,
                  Some part of way I thought to haue o're-runne,
                  But now I see how scarce I haue begunne,
                  With Wonders new my Spirits range possest,
                  And wandring waylesse in a maze them rest.
                  In these vaste Fields of Light, eth
                        •
                     riall Plaines,
                  Thou art attended by immortall Traines
                  Of Intellectuall Pow'rs, which thou brought forth
                  
                     
To praise thy Goodnesse, and admire thy Worth,
                  In numbers passing other Creatures farre,
                  Since Creatures 
                        ••
                     st noble maniest are,
                  Which doe in knowledge vs no lesse out-runne
                  Than Moone in light doth Starres, or Moone the Sunne,
                  Vnlike, in Orders rang'd and manie 
                        •
                      Band
                  (If Beautie in Disparitie doth stand?)
                  Arch-angells▪ Angells, Cherubes, Seraphines,
                  And what with name of Thrones amongst them shines,
                  Large-ruling Princes, Dominations, Po
                        •
                     res,
                  All-acting Vertues of those fl
                        •
                     ming To
                        •
                     res;
                  These fred of Vmbrage, these of Labour free,
                  Rest rauished with still beholding Thee,
                  Inflamde with Beames which sparkle from thy Face,
                  They can no more desire, farre lesse embrace.
                  Low vnder them, with slow and staggering pace
                  Thy Hand-maide Nature thy great Steppes doth trace,
                  The Source of second Causes, golden Chaine
                  That linkes this Frame as thou it doth ordaine,
                  Nature gaz'd on with such a curious Eye
                  That Earthlings oft her deem'd a Deitye.
                  By Nature led those Bodies faire and greate
                  Which faint not in their Course, nor change their State,
                  Vnintermixt, which no disorder proue,
                  Though aye and contrarie they alwayes moue,
                  The Organes of thy Prouidence diuine,
                  Bookes euer open, Signes that clearlie shine,
                  Times purpled Maskers, then doe them aduance,
                  As by sweet Musicke in a measur'd dance;
                  Starres, Hoste of Heauen, yee Firmaments bright Flowres,
                  Cleare Lampes which ouer-hang this Stage of ours,
                  Yee turne not there to decke the Weeds of Night,
                  Nor Pageant-like to please the vulgare Sight,
                  
                     
Great Causes sure yee must bring great Effects,
                  But who can discant right your graue Aspects?
                  Hee onlie who You made deciphere can
                  Your Notes, Heauens Eyes yee blinde the Eyes of Man.
                  Amidst these Saphire farre-extending Hights,
                  The neuer-twinkling euer-wondring Lights
                  Their fixed Motions keepe, one drye and cold,
                  Deep-Leaden colour'd, slowlie there is roll'd,
                  With Rule and Line for Times steppes meating euen
                  In twice three Lustres hee but turnes his Heauen.
                  With temperate qualities and Countenance faire,
                  Still mildlie smiling sweetlie debonnaire,
                  An other cheares the World, and way doth make
                  In twice sixe Autumnes through the Zodiacke.
                  But hote and drye with flaming Lockes and Browes
                  Enrag'd, this in his red Pauillion glowest:
                  Together running with like speed if space,
                  Two equallie in hands atchieue their race,
                  With blushing Face this oft doth bring the Day,
                  And vsheres oft to statelie Starres the way,
                  That various in vertue, changing, light,
                  With his small flame impearles the vaile of Night.
                  Prince of this Court, the Sunne in triumph rides,
                  With the Yeare Snake-like in her selfe that glides,
                  Times Dispensator, faire life-giuing Source,
                  Through Skies twelue Postes as he doth runne his course,
                  Heart of this All, of what is knowne to sence
                  The likest to his Makers excellence,
                  In whose diurnall motion doth appeare
                  A Shadow, no, true pourtrait of the Yeare.
                  The Moone moues lowest, siluer Sunne of Night,
                  Dispersing through the World her borrow'd light,
                  Who in three formes her head abroad doth range,
                  
                     
And onlie constant is in constant Change.
                  Sad Queene of Silence, I neere see thy Face,
                  To waxe, or waine, or shine with a full grace,
                  But straighi (amaz'd) on Man I thinke, each Day
                  His state who changeth, or if hee find Stay,
                  It is in drearie anguish, cares, and paines,
                  And of his Labours Death is all the Gaines?
                  Immortall Monarch, can so fond a Thought
                  Lodge in my Brest? as to trust thou first brought
                  Heere in Earths shadie Cloister wretched Man,
                  To sucke the Aire of Woe, to spend Lifes span
                  Midst Sighes and Plaints, a Stranger vnto Mirth,
                  To giue himselfe his Death rebucking Birth?
                  By sense and wit of Creatures made King,
                  By sense and wit to liue their Vnderling?
                  And what is worst, haue Eaglets eyes to see
                  His owne disgrace, and know an high degree
                  Of Blisse, the Place, if hee might thereto clime,
                  Aud not liue thralled to imperious Time?
                  Or (dotard) shall I so from Reason swerue,
                  To deeme those Lights which to our vse doe serue,
                  (For thou dost not them need) more noblie fram'd
                  Than vs, that know their course, and haue them nam'd?
                  No, I nee're thinke but wee did them surpasse
                  As farre, as they doe Asterismes of Glasse,
                  When thou vs made, by Treason high defil'd,
                  Thrust from our first estate we liue ex
                        ••
                     d
                  Wandring this Earth, which is of Death the Lot,
                  Where he doth vse the Pow'r which he hath got,
                  Indifferent Vmpire vnto Clownes and Kings,
                  The supreame Monarch of all mortall things.
                  When first this flowrie Orbe was to vs giuen,
                  It but in place disvalu'd was to Heauen,
                  
                     
These Creatures which now our Soueraignes are,
                  And as to Rebelles doe denounce vs warre,
                  Then were our Vasselles, no tumultuous Storme,
                  No Thunders, Quakings, did her Forme deforme,
                  The Seas in tumbling Mountaines did not roare,
                  But like moist Christall whispered on the Shoare,
                  No Snake did met her Meads, nor ambusht lowre
                  In azure Curles beneath the sweet-Spring Flowre;
                  The Night-shade, Henbane, Napell, Aconite,
                  Her Bowelles then not bare, with Death to smite
                  Her guiltlesse Brood; thy Messengers of Grace,
                  As their high Rounds did haunte this lower Place;
                  O Ioy of Ioyes! with our first Parents Thou
                  To commune then didst daigne, as Friends doe now:
                  Against thee wee rebell'd, and justlie thus,
                  Each Creature rebelled against vs,
                  Earth, reft of what did chiefe in her excell,
                  To all became a Iaile, to most a Hell,
                  In Times full Terme vntill thy Sonne was giuen,
                  Who Man with Thee, Earth reconcil'd with Heauen.
                  Whole and entiere all in thy Selfe thou art,
                  All-where diffusd, yet of this All no part,
                  For infinite, in making this faire Frame
                  (Great without quantitie) in all thou came,
                  And filling all, how can thy State admit,
                  Or Place or Substance to be voide of it?
                  Were Worlds as many, as the Rayes which streame
                  From Dayes bright lamp, or madding Wits do dreame,
                  They would not reele in nought, nor wandring stray,
                  But draw to Thee, who could their Centers stay;
                  Were but one houre this World disioyn'd from thee,
                  It in one houre to nought reduc'd should bee,
                  For it thy Shadow is, and can they last,
                  
                     
If seuer'd from the Substances them cast?
                  O onlie blest, and Author of all Blisse,
                  No, Blisse it selfe, that all-where wished is,
                  Efficient, exemplarie, finall Good,
                  Of thine owne Selfe but onlie vnderstood;
                  Light is thy Curtaine, thou art Light of Light,
                  An euer-waking Eye still shining bright,
                  In-looking all, exempt of passiue Powre,
                  And change, in change since Deaths pale shade doth lowre:
                  All Times to thee are one, that which hath runne,
                  And that which is not brought yet by the Sunne,
                  To thee are present, who dost alwayss see
                  In present act, what past is, or to bee;
                  Day-li
                        •
                     ers wee rememberance doe losse
                  Of Ages worne, so Miseries vs tosse
                  (Blinde and lethargicke of thy heauenlie Grace,
                  Which Sinne in our first Parents did deface,
                  And euen while Embryones curst by justest doome)
                  That wee neglect what gone is, or to come,
                  But thou in thy great Archiues scrolled hast
                  In partes and whole, what euer yet hath past,
                  Since first the marble Wheeles of Time were roll'd,
                  As euer liuing, neuer waxing old,
                  Still is the same thy Day and Yesterday,
                  An vndiuided Now, a constant Ay.
                  
                  O King whose Greatnesse none can comprehend,
                  Whose boundlesse Goodnesse doth to all extend,
                  Light of all Beautie, Ocean without ground,
                  That standing flowest, giuing dost abound,
                  Rich Pallace, and Endvveller euer blest,
                  Neuer not vvorking euer yet in Rest;
                  What vvit can not conceiue, words say of Thee,
                  Heere where wee as but in a Mirrour see,
                  
                     
Shadowes of shadowes, Atomes of thy Might,
                  Still owlie eyed when staring on thy Light,
                  Grant that released from this earthlie Iaile,
                  And fred of Cloudes which heere our Knowledge vaile,
                  In Heauens high Temples where thy Praises ring,
                  I may in sweeter Notes heare Angelles sing.
               
            
         
         
            
               
               GReat GOD, whom wee with humbled Thoughts adore,
               Eternall, Infinite, Almightie King,
               Whose Dwellings Heauen transcend, whose Throne before
               Archangells serue, and Seraphines doe sing;
               Of nought who wrought all that with wondring Eies
               Wee doe behold within this various Round,
               Who makes the Rockes to rocke, to stand the Skies,
               At whose command Cloudes peales of Thunder sound:
               Ah! spare vs Wormes, weigh not how wee alas
               
               (Euill to our selues) against thy Lawes rebell,
               Wash off those spots which still in Conscience Glasse
               (Though wee be loath to looke) wee see too well▪
               
               Deseru'd Reuenge of doe not doe not take,
               If thou reuenge vvhat shall abide thy Blovv?
               Passe shall this World, this VVorld vvhich tho
                     •
                   didst make,
               Which should not perish till thy Trumpet blovv,
               What Soule is found vvhom Parents Crime not staines?
               Or vvhat vvith its ovvne Sinnes defyl'd is not?
               Though Iustice Rigor threaten (ah) her Raines
               Let Mercie guide, and neuer bee forgot.
               Lesse are our Faults farre farre than is thy Loue,
               O vvhat can better seeme thy Grace diuine,
               Than they that plagues deserue thy Bounti
                     •
                   proue,
               And where thou shovvre mayst Vengeance, there to shine?
               Then looke and pittye, pittying forgiue
               Vs guiltie Slaues, or Seruants novv in thrall,
               Slaues, if alas thou looke hovv vve doe liue,
               Or doing ill, or doing nought at all?
               Of an vngratefull Minde a foule Effect,
               But if thy Giftes vvhich largelie heeretofore
               Thou hast vpon vs povvr'd thou doe respect,
               
                  
VVee are thy Seruants, nay, than Ser
                     •
                  ants more,
               Thy Children, yes, and Children de
                     •
                  relie bought,
               But vvhat strange Chance vs of this Lot 
                     〈◊〉
                  ?
               Po
                     •
                  re vvorthles VVights hovv lovvlie are vvee brought,
               VVhom Grace once Children made, Sinne hath made Slaues?
               Sinne hath made Slaues, but let those Bands Grace breake,
               That in our vvrongs thy Mercies may appeare,
               Thy VVisdome not so meane is, Povv'r so vveake,
               But thousand vvayes they can make VVorlds thee feare.
               O VVisdome boundlesse! O 
                     〈◊〉
                   Grace!
               Grace, VVisedome vvhich make 
                     〈◊〉
                   dimme Reasons Eye,
               And could Heauens King bring from his placelesse Place,
               On this ignoble Stage of Care to dye:
               To dye our Death, and vvith the sacred Strea
                     ••
                  e
               Of Bloud and VVater gushing from his Side,
               To make vs cleane of that contagio
                     ••
                   Blame,
               First on vs brought by our first Parents Pride.
               Thus thy great Loue and Pitye (heauenlie King)
               Loue, Pittye vvhich so vvell our Losse preuent,
               Of Euill it selfe (loe) could all Goodnesse bring,
               And sad beginning cheare vvith glad euent.
               O Loue and Pitye! ill knovvne of these Times,
               O Loue and Pitye! carefull of our need,
               O Bounties! vvhich our horride Acts and Crimes
               (Grovvne numberlesse) contend neare to exceed.
               Make this excessiue ardour of thy loue,
               So vvarme our Coldnesse, so our Lifes renevv,
               That vvee from Sinne, Sinne may from vs remoue,
               Wit may our Will, Faith may our Wit subdue.
               Let thy pure Loue burne vp all worldlie Lust,
               Hells candi'd Poison killing our best part,
               Which makes vs ioye in Toyes, adore fraile Dust
               In stead of Thee, in Temple of our Heart.
               
                  
Grant when at last our Soules these Bodies leaue,
               Their loathsome Shops of sinne and Mansions blinde,
               And Doome before thy royall Seat receaue,
               They may a Sauiour, not a Iudge thee finde.
            
         
         
            
               
               A CYPRESSE GROVE, BY W. D.
            
            
               
               
               A
CYPRESSE GROVE.
               
                  THough it hath beene doubted if there be in
the Soule such imperious and superexcellent
Power, as that it can by the vehement & earnest
working of it, deliuer knowledge to another
without bodily Organes, & by the onely Conceptions
and Ideas of it produce reall Effects; yet it hath
beene euer and of all held as infallible and most certaine,
that it often (either by outward inspiration, or some secret
motion in it selfe) is augure of its owne Misfortunes,
and hath Shadowes of approching dangers presented
vnto it before they fall forth. Hence so many
strange apparitions and signes, true Visions, vncouth heauinesse,
and causelesse vncomfortable languishings: of which
to seeke a reason, vnlesse from the sparkling of GOD in
the Soule, or from the God-like sparkles of the Soule,
were to make Reason vnreasonable, by reasoning of things
transcending her reach.
               Hauing often and diuerse times, when I had giuen my
selfe to rest in the quiet solitarinesse of the Night, found
my Imagination troubled with a confused feare, no, sorrow,
or horror, which interrupting Sleepe did astonish my
senses, and rowse me all appalled, and transported in a
suddaine agonie and amazednesse; of such an vnaccustomed
perturbation, not knowing, nor being able to diue into any
apparent Cause, carried away with the streame of my (then
doubting) Thoughts, I beganne to ascribe it to that secret
fore-knowledge and presaging Power of the Propheticke
Minde, and to interpret such an Agonie to be to the Spirit
as a faintnesse and vniversall wearinesse vseth to be to
the Body, a signe of following sicknesse, or as winter

Lightnings or Earth-quakes are to Commonwealthes and
great Cities-Herbingers of more wretched euents.
               Heereupon not thinking it strange if whatsoeuer is humaine
should befall mee, knowing how Prouidence ouercomes
Griefe, and discountenances Crosses; and that as we
should not despaire of Euils which may happen vs, wee
should not bee too confident, nor leane much to those
Goods wee enjoy: I beganne to turne ouer in my remembrance
all that could afflict miserable Mortalitie, and to forecast
euery thing that with a Maske of horror could show it
sel
                     •
                  e to humaine Eyes: Till in the end, as by Unities and
Points, Mathematicians are brought to great numbers, and
huge greatnesse, after many fantasticall glances of the VVoes
of Mankinde, and those incombrances which follow vpon
Life, I was brought to thinke, and with amazement, on
the last of humaine Terrors, or (as one termed it) the last
of all dreadfull and terrible Euils, Death. For to easie censure
it would appeare, that the Soule, if it fore-see that divorcement
which it is to haue from the Body, should not
without great reason be thus ouer-grieued, and plunged in
inconsolable and vnaccustomed Sorrow: considering their
neare Vnion, long familiaritie and loue, with the great
change, Paine, Vglinesse, which are apprehended to be the
inseparable attendants of Death.
               They had their being together, Parts they are of one reasonable
Creature, the harming of the one, is the weakning
of the working of the other; what sweete contentments
doth the Soule enjoy by the senses? They are the Gates
and VVindowes of its Knowledge, the Organes of its Delight.
If it be tedious to an excellent Player on the Lute, to
abide but a few Monthes the want of one, how much more
must the being without such noble Tooles and Engines bee
plaintfull to the Soule? And if two Pilgrimes which haue

wandred some few miles together, haue a hearts-griefe when
they are neare to part, what must the Sorrow be at the parting
of two so louing Friends and neuer-loathing Louers
as are the Body and Soule?
               Death is the violent estranger of acquaintance, the eternal
Diuorcer of Mariage, the Rauisher of the Children 
                     •
                  rom the
Parents, the Stealer of Parents from their Children, the interrer
of Fame, the sole cause of forgetfulnesse, by which the
Liuing talke of those gone away as of so many Shadowes or
age▪ worne Stories: all Strength by it is enfeebled, Beautie
turned into deformitie & rottennesse, Honor in contempt,
Glorie into basenesse. It is the reasonlesse breaker off of all
Actions, by which we enjoy no more the sweet Pleasures of
Earth, nor gaze vpon the 
                     ••
                  a
                     •
                  elie revolutions of the Heauens,
Sunne perpetuallie setteth; Star
                     •
                  es neuer rise vnto vs,
It in one moment robbeth vs of what with so great toyle and
care in many yeares wee haue heaped together: By this are
Successions of Linages cut short, Kingdomes left heirelesse,
and greatest States orphaned: it is not ouercome by Pride,
smoothed by Flatterie, diuerted by Time, Wisedome saue
this can preuent and helpe euery thing. By Death wee are
exiled from this faire Citty of the World, it is no more a
World vnto vs, nor we any more people into it. The ruines
of Phanes, Palaces, and other magnificent Frames, yeeld a
sad prospect to the Soule, and how should it without horrour
view the wracke of such a wonderfull Maister-piece as is the
Body?
               That Death naturally is torrible and to be abhorred, it can
not well and altogether be denied, it beeing a priuation of
Life, and a not-being, and euery priuation being abhorred of
Nature, and euill in it selfe, the feare of it too being ingenerate
vniversallie in all Creatures; yet I haue often thought
that euen naturally to a Minde by onely Nature resolued and

prepared, it is more terrible in Conceit than in Verity, and
at the first Glance, than when well pryed into, and that rather
by the weaknesse of our Fantasie, than by what is in it, and
that the marble colours, of Obsequies, Weeping, and funerall
Pompe (which wee our selues cast ouer it) did adde much
more Gastlinesse vnto it than otherwayes it hath. To averre
which conclusion, when I had gathered my wandring
Thoughts, I beganne thus with my Selfe.
               If on the great Theater of this Earth amongst the numberlesse
number of men, To die were onely proper to thee
and thine, then vndoubtedlie thou hadst reason to repine at
so seuere and partiall a Law? But since it is a necessitie,
from the which neuer an Age by-pa
                     ••
                   hath beene exempted,
and vnto which they which bee, and so many as are to come,
are thralled (no consequent of Life being more common and
familiar) Why shouldst thou with vnprofitable, and nought
availing stubbornnesse, oppose to so vneuitable and necessarie
a Condition? this is the high-way of Mortalitie, our generall
home, behold what Millions haue trod it before thee, what
Multitudes shall after thee, with them which at that same instant
runne. In so vniversall a calamitie (if Death be one)
priuate Complaints cannot bee heard, with so many royall
Palaces, it is no losse to see thy poore Caban burne. Shall
the Heauens stay their euer-rolling Wheeles (for what is the
motion of them, but the motion of a swift and euer-whirling
Wheele, which twineth forth, and againe vprolleth our life?)
and hold still time, to prolong thy miserable dayes, as if the
highest of their working were to doe homage vnto thee? Thy
death is a peece of the order of this All, a part of the Life of
this World, for while the World is the World, some Creatures
must dye, & others take life. Eternall things are raised far
aboue this Spheare of Generation & Corruption, where the
first Matter, like an euer-flowing & ebbing Sea, with diuerse

waues, but the same water, keepeth a restles and neuer-tyring
current; what is below, in the vniuersalitie of the kind, not in
it selfe doth abide, Man a long line of years hath continued,
This Man euerie hundreth is swept away. This Globe
enuironed with aire, is the sole Region of Death, the Graue
where euerie thing that taketh Life must rotte, the Stage of
Fortune and Change, onelie glorious in the vnconstancie
and varying alterations of it, which though manie seeme
yet to abide one, and being a certaine entire one, are euer
many. The neuer-agreeing bodies of the elementall Brethren
turne one in another, the Earth changeth her countenance
with the Seasons, some-times looking colde, and
naked, other times, hote and flowrie: Nay, I cannot tell
how, but euen the lowest of those celestiall bodies, that mother
of monthes, and Empresse of seas and moisture, as
if shee were a Mirror of our constant mutabiltie appeareth
(by her too great nearnesse vnto vs) to participate of our
changes, neuer seeing vs twice with that same Face, now looking
blacke, then pale and wanne, some-times againe in
the perfection and fulnesse of her beautie shining ouer vs.
Death no lesse than Life doth heere act a part, the taking
away of what is old, beeing the making a way for what
is young. They which fore-went vs did leaue a Roome
for vs, and should we grieue to doe the same to those which
should come after vs? who beeing suffered to see the exquisite
rarities of an Antiquaries Cabinet is grieued that
the curtaine bee drawne & to giue place to new Pilgrimes?
and when the Lord of this Vniuerse hath shewed vs the
amazing wonders of his various frame, should wee take
it to heart, when hee thinketh time, to dislodge? This is,
His vnalterable and vneuitable Decree, as wee had no part
of our will in our entrance into this Life, wee should not
persume of anie in our leauing it, but soberlie learne to

will that which hee wills, whose verie willing giueth beeing
to all that it wills, and reuerencing the Orderer, not repine
at the order and Lawes, which all-where and all-wayes are
so perfectlie establi
                     •
                  hed, that who would essay to correct
and amend any of them, should either make them worse,
or desire thinges beyond the Leuell of Possibilitie.
               If thou dost complaine that there shall bee a time in the
which thou shalt not bee, why dost thou not too grieue
that there was a time in the which thou wast not? and so
that thou are not as old, as that enlifening Planet of time?
for not to haue beene a thousand yeares before this moment,
is as much to bee deplored, as not to be a thousand
after it, the effect of them both beeing one: that will bee
after vs which long long ere wee were, was. Our childrens
children haue that same reason to murmure that they were
not yong men in our dayes, which wee haue to complaine
that wee shall not bee old in theirs. The Violets haue their
time, though they empurple not the Winter, and the Roses
keepe their season though they disclose not their beautie
in the Spring.
               Empires, States, Kingdomes, haue by the doome of the
supreame prouidence their fatall Periods, great Cities
lie 
                     •
                  adlie buried in their dust, Arts and Sciences haue not
onelie their Eclipses, but their wainings and deaths, the
gastlie wonders of the world, raised by the ambition of ages
are ouer-throwne and trampled, some Lights aboue, not
idlie intitled Starres, are loosed and neuer more seene of vs:
The excellent Fabrike of this Uniuerse it selfe shall one
day suffer ruine, or a change like a ruine, and poore Earthlings
thus to bee handled complaine.
               But is this Life so great a good, that the lose of it should
bee so deare vnto Man? if it bee? the meanest Creatures of
Nature thus bee happie, for they liue no lesse than hee;

If it bee so great a felicitie, how is it esteemed of Man
himselfe at so small a rate, that for so poore gaines, nay,
one disgracefull word, hee will not stand to loose it?
what excellencie is there in it, for the which hee should
desire it perpetuall, and repine to bee at rest, and returne
to his old Grand-mother Dust? of what moment are the
labours and actions of it, that the interruption and leauing
off of them should bee to him so distastfull, and with such
grudging lamentations receiued?
               Is not the entring into Life weaknesse? the continuing
sorrow? in the one hee is exposed to all the injuries of
the Elements, and like a condemned trespasser (as if it
were a fault to come to the light) no sooner borne than
manacled and bound; in the other hee is restlesly like a Ball
tossed in the Tenis-court of this world, when he is in the
brightest Meridian of his glorie, there mistereth nothing
to destroy him, but to let him fall his owne hight, a reflex
of the Sunne, a blast of wind, nay, the glance of an
eye, is sufficient to vndoe him: How can that bee any great
matter, which so small instruments and slender actions are
maisters of?
               His Bodie is but a masse of discording humors boyled
together by the conspiring influences of superior Lights▪
which though agreeing for a trace of time, yet can neuer
bee made vniforme, and keept in a just proportion. To
what sicknesse is it subject vnto, beyond those of the other
Creatures? No part of it beeing which is not particularlie
infected and afflicted by some one, nay, euerie part
with many? so that the Life of diuerse of the meanest creatures
of Nature hath with great reason, by the most wise,
beene preferred to the naturall life of man: And we should
rather wonder how so fragill a matter should so long endure,
than how so soone decay.
               
                  
Are the actions of the most part of men, much differing
from the exercise of the Spider? that pitcheth toyles
and is tapist, to pray on the smaller creatures, and for the
weauing of a scornfull web eviscerateth it selfe many dayes,
which when with much industrie finished, a tempestuous
puffe of wind carrieth away both the worke and the worker?
or are they not like the playes of Children? or (to
hold them at their highest rate) as is a May-Game, or
what is more earnest, some studie at Chesse? euerie day
wee rise and lie downe, apparell and disapparrell our selues,
wearie our bodies and refresh them, which is a circle
of idle trauells, and labours (like Penelopes taske) vnprofitablie
renewed. Some time wee are in a chase after a
fading Beautie, now wee seeke to enlarge our bounds, increase
our treasure, feeding poorelie, to purchase what wee
must leaue to those wee neuer saw, or (happilie) to a
Foole, or a Prodigall heire: raised with the wind of Ambition,
wee court that idle name of Honour, not considering
how they mounted aloft in the highest ascendant of
earthlie Glorie, are but like tortured Ghosts wandering with
golden fetters in glistring Prisons, hauing feare & danger their
vnseperable executioners, in the midst of multitudes rather
garded than regarded. They whom opake imaginations and
inward melancholie, haue made wearie of the worlds eye,
though they haue withdrawn themselues from the course of
vulgare affaires, by vaine contemplations, curious searches,
are more diquieted, and liue a life worse than others, their
wit beeing too sharpe to giue them a true taste of their
present infelicitie, and to increase their woes; while they
of a more shallow and simple conceit, haue want of knowledge,
and ignorance of themselues, for a remedie and antidote
against all the calamities of life.
               What Cameli
                        •
                     n, what E
                        •
                     ripe, what Moone doth change

so oft as man? hee seemeth not the same person, in one
and the same day, what pleaseth him in the morning is
in the euening vnto him distastfull. Young hee scornes his
childish Conceits, & wading deeper in yeares (for yeares are
a Sea into which hee wadeth vntill hee drowne) hee esteemeth
his Youth vnconstancie, Rashnesse, Follie; Old
he beginnes to pitie himselfe, plaining, because he is changed
that the world is changed, like those in a Ship, which
when they launch from the Shore, are brought to thinke
the Shore doth flie from them. When hee is fred of euill
in his owne estate, hee grudges and vexes him selfe at the
happinesse and fortunes of others, hee is pressed with care
for what is present, with sorrow for what is past, with feare
for what is to come, nay, for what will neuer come, and
as in the Eye one teare forceth out another, so makes he
one sorrow follow vpon a former, and euerie day laye
vp stuffe of griefe for the next.
               The Aire, the Sea, the Fire, the Beastes, bee cruell executioners
of Man, yet Beastes, Fire, Sea, and Aire, are
pitifull to Man in comparison of Man, for moe men are
destroyed by men, than by them all. What scornes, wrongs,
contumelies, imprisonments, torments, poysons, receiueth
man of man? What engynes and new workes of death are
daylie found forth by man against man? What Lawes to
thrall his libertie? fantasies and scarbugs, to inveigle his
reason? Amongst the Beastes is there anie that hath so seruile
a lot in anothers behalfe as Man? yet neither is content,
nor hee who raigneth, nor hee who serueth.
               The halfe of our life is spent in Sleepe, which hath such
a resemblance to Death, that often it seperats as it were the
Soule from the bodie, and teacheth it a sort of being aboue
it, making it soare beyond the Spheare of sensuall delights,
and attaine Knowledge vnto which while the body did

awake it could scarce aspire. And who would not, rather
than abide chained in his loathsome Galley of the world
sleepe euer (that is dye) hauing all thinges at one Stay
bee free from those vexations, misaduenters, contempts, indignities,
and many many anguishes, vnto which, this
life is inuasseled and subdued? and well looked vnto our
greatest contentment and happinesse heere, seemeth rather
to consist in the beeing released from miserie, than in the
enjoying of anie great good.
               What haue the most eminent of mortalls to glorie in?
Is it Greatnesse? Who can bee great on so small a Round
as is this Earth, and bounded with so short a course of
time? How like is that to Castells or imaginarie Cities raised
in the Skie by chance-meeting Cloudes? Or to Gyants
modelled (for a sport) of Snow, which at the hoter lookes
of the Sunne melt away, and lie drowned in their owne
moisture? such an impetuous vicissitude towseth the estates
of this World. Is it Knowledge? But wee haue not
yet attained to a perfect Vnderstanding of the smallest
Flower, and why the Grasse should rather bee greene
than red. The Element of Fire is quite put out, the
Aire is but Water rarified, the Earth moueth, and is no
more the Center of the Uniuerse, is turned into a Magnes;
Starres are not fixed, but swimme in the eth
                     •
                  riall spaces,
Comets are mounted aboue the Planets, some affirme
there is an other world of men and creatures, with Cities
and Towers in the Moone, the Sunne is lost, for it is but
a cleft in the lower heauens, through which the light of
the highest shines: Thus Sciences by the diuerse motions
of this Globe of the braine of man are become opinions.
What is all wee know, compared with what wee know not?
Wee haue not yet agreed about the chiefe good and felicitie.
It is (perhaps) artificiall Cunning, howe many

curiosities bee framed by the least Creatures of Nature,
vnto which the industrie of the most curious Artizanes
doth not attaine? Is it Riches? What are they but the
casting out of Friends, the snares of libertie, bands to
such as haue them, possessing rather, than possest, Mettalls
which Nature hath hidde (fore-seeing the great harme
they should occasion) and the onelie opinion of man
hath brought in estimation? like Thornes which laid on
an open hand, may bee blowne away, and on a closing
and hard gripping, wound it, Prodigalles misspend them,
Wretches miskeepe them: when wee haue gathered the
greatest aboundance, wee our selues can enjoye no more
thereof, than so much as belonges to one man: What great
and rich men doe by others, the meaner sort doe themselues.
Will some talke of our Pleasures? It is not (though
in the fables) told out of purpose, that Pleasure in hast
beeing called vp to Heauen, did heere forget her apparell,
which Sorrow thereafter finding (to deceiue the world)
attired her selfe with: And if wee would say the trueth
of most of our Ioyes, wee must confesse that they are but
disguised sorrowes; the drames of their Honney are sowred
in pounds of Gall, Remorse euer enseweth them,
and neuer doe they existe but by their opposite sadnesse,
nay, in some they haue no effect at all if some wakning
griefe hath not preceeded and forewent them. Will some
Ladies vaunt of their beautie? that is but skinne-deepe, of
two senses onelie knowne, short euen of Marble-Statues,
and Pictures, not the same to all eyes, dangerous to the
beholder, and hurtfull to the possessor, an enemie to
Chastitie, a thing made to delight others, more than those
which haue it, a superficiall luster hiding bones and the
braines, thinges fearfull to bee looked vpon: growth in
yeares doth blaste it, or Sicknesse, or Sorrow preuenting

them. Our strength matched with that of the vnreasonable
Creatures, is but weaknesse: all wee can set our eyes
on, in these intricate mazes of life, is but vaine perspectiue
and deceiuing shadowes, appearing farre other wayes a
farre off, than when enjoyed and gazed vpon in a neare
distance.
               If Death bee good, why should it bee feared? And if
it bee the worke of Nature, how should it not bee good?
For Nature is an ordinance and rule, which GOD hath
established in the creating this Vniuerse (as is the Law of
a King) which can not erre: For how should the Maker
of that ordinance erre? sith in him there is no impotencie
and weaknesse, by the which hee might bring forth
what is vnperfect, no peruersenesse of will, of which might
proceed any vicious action, no ignorance by the which he
might goe wrong in working, beeing most powerfull, most
good, most wise, nay, all-wise, all-good, all-powrefull;
He is the first orderer, and marshalleth euery other order, the
highest Essence, giuing essence to all other thinges; of all
causes the cause, Hee worketh powerfullie, bonteou
                     •
                  lie,
wiselie, and maketh (his artificiall Organ) Nature doe the
same. How is not Death of Nature? sith what is naturallie
generate, is subject to corruption, and such an harmonie
(which is Life) rising from the mixture of the foure
Elements, which are the Ingredients of our bodie, can
not euer endure; The contraritie of their qualities (as
a consuming Rust in the baser Metalles) beeing an inward
cause of a necessarie dissolution. Againe, how is not
Death good? sith it is the thaw of all those vanities which
the frost of Life bindeth together. If there bee a facietie
in Life, then must there bee a sweetnesse in Death? The
Earth were not ample enough to containe her of-spring
if none dyed: in two or three Ages (without Death) what

an vnpleasant and lamentable Spectacle, were the most
flourishing Cities? for what should there bee to bee seene
in them, saue bodies languishing and cou
                     •
                  bing againe
into the Earth? pale disfigured faces, Skelitons in stead of
men? and what to bee heard, but the exclamations of
the young, complaintes of the olde, with the pittifull
cryes of sicke and pining persons? there is almost no infirmitie
worse than age.
               If there bee any euill in death, it would appeare to bee
that paine and torment, which we apprehend to arise from
the breaking of those strait bands which keepe the Soule
and body together; which, sith not without great struggling
and motion, seemes to proue it selfe vehement and
most extreame. The senses are the onely cause of paine,
but before the last Trances of death, they are so brought vnder
that they haue no (or verie little) strength, and their
strength lessening, the strength of paine too must be lessened.
How should wee doubt, but the weaknesse of senselesseneth
paine, Sith we know that weakened and maimed parts
which receiue not nurishment, are a great deale lesse sensible,
than the other partes of the bodie; And see, that old
decrepit persons leaue this world almost without paine, as
in a sleepe? If bodies of the most sound and wholesome
constitution bee these which most vehemently feele paine?
it must then follow, that they of a distemperate and crasie
constitution, haue least feeling of paine, and by this reason,
all weake and sicke bodies should not much feele paine,
for if they were not distempered and euill complexioned,
they would not be sicke. That the Sight, Hearing, Taste,
Smelling leaue vs without paine, and vnawares, we are vndoubtedlie
assured, and why should wee not thinke the
same of the Feeling? That which is capable of feeling, are
the vitall spirits, which in a man in a perfite health are spred

and extended through the whole bodie, and hence is it
that the whole body is capable of paine: But in dying bodies
we see that by pauses and degrees the partes which are
furthest remoued from the heart, become cold, and being
depriued of naturall heat, all the paine which they feele, is
that they doe feele no paine. Now, euen as ere the sicke be
aware, the vitall spirits haue with drawne themselues from
the whole extension of the bodie, to succour the heart (like
distressed Citizens which finding their walls battered down,
flye to the defence of their Cittadell) so doe they abandone
the heart without any sensible touch: As the flame,
the oyle failing, leaueth the wicke, or as light the Aire which
it doeth inuest. As to the shrinking motions, and convulsions
of sinewes and members, which appeare to witnesse
great paine, let one represent to himselfe the strings of an
high-tuned Lut, which breaking, retire to their naturall windings,
or a piece of Yce, that without any out-ward violence,
cracketh at a Thawe: No otherwise doe the sinewes
of the bodie, finding themselues slacke and vnbended from
the braine, and their wonted labours and motions cease,
struggle, and seeme to stirre themselues, but without either,
paine or sense. Sowning is a true pourtrait of death, or rather
it is the same, beeing a cessation from all action, motion,
and function of sense and life: But in Sowning there
is no paine, but a silent rest, and so deepe and sound a sleepe
that the naturall is nothing in comparison of it; What
great paine then can there bee in Death, which is but a
continued Sowning, and a neuer againe returning to the
workes and dolorous felicitie of life?
               Now although Death were an extreame paine, sith it is
in an instant, what can it bee? why should wee feare it?
for while wee are, it commeth not, and it beeing come we
are no more. Nay, though it were most painfull, long continuing,

and terrible, vglie why should wee feare it? Sith
feare is a foolish passion but where it may preserue; but it
can not preserue vs from Death, yea rather the feare of it,
banishing the comfortes of present contentmentes, makes
Death to aduance and approach the more neare vnto vs.
That is euer terrible which is vnknowne, so doe litle children
feare to goe in the darke, and their feare is increased
with tales.
               But that (perhaps) which anguisheth thee most, is to
haue this glorious pageant of the World, remoued from
thee, in the Spring and most delicious season of thy life;
for, though to dye bee vsuall, to dye young may appeare
extraordinarie. If the present fruition of these things bee
vnprofitable and vaine, what can a long continuance of
them bee? Stranger and new Halcyon, why wouldst thou
longer nestle amidst these vnconstant and stormie waues?
Hast thou not alreddy suffred enough of this World, but
thou must yet endure more? To liue long, is it not to be
long troubled? But number thy yeares, which are now
() and thou shalt find, that where as ten haue ouer-liued
thee, thousands haue not attained this age. One yeare is
sufficient to behold all the magnificence of Nature, nay,
euen one day and night, for more is but the same brought
againe: This Sunne, that Moone, these Starres, the varying
dance of the Spring, Summer, Antumne, Winter, is that
verie same which the golden Age did see. They which
haue the longest time lent them to liue in, haue almost no
part of it at all, measuring it either by that space of time
which is past, when they were not, or by that which is to
come: Why shouldst thou then care, whether thy dayes be
manie or few, which when prolonged to the vttermost,
proue, paralel'd with eternitie, as a Teare is to the Oeea
                     •
                  ?
To dye young, is to doe that soone, and in some fewer

dayes, which once thou must doe; it is but the giuing
ouer of a Game that, after neuer so many hazardes, must be
lost. When thou hast liued to that age thou desirest, or
one of Platos yeares, so soone as the last of thy dayes riseth
aboue thy Horizon, thou wilt then as now, demand
longer respit, and exspect more to come: It is Hope of
long life, that maketh life seeme short. Who will behold,
and with the eyes of aduice behold, the many changes depending
on humane affaires, with the after-claps of Fortune,
shall neuer lament to dye young. Who knowes what
alterations and sudden disasters, in outward estate or inward
contentments, in this wildernesse of the world, might haue
befallen him who dyeth young, if hee had liued to be old?
Heauen fore-knowing imminent harmes, taketh those which
it loues to it selfe before they fall forth. Pure and (if we
may so say) Virgine Soules, carrie their bodies with no
small agonies, and delight not to remaine long in the dregs
of humane corruption, still burning with a desire to turne
backe to the place of their rest, for this world is their Inne
and not their Home. That which may fall foorth euerie
houre, cannot fall out of time. Life is a Iourney in a dustie
way, the furthest Rest is Death, in this some goe more
heauilie burthened, than others: swift and actiue Pilgrimes
come to the end of it in the Morning, or at Noone, which
Tortoyse-paced Wretches, clogged with the fragmentarie
rubbidge of this world, scarce with great trauell crawle
vnto at Midnight. Dayes are not to be esteemed after the
number of them, but after the goodnesse: more Compasse
maketh not a Spheare more compleat, but as round is a
little as a large Ring; nor is that Musician most praise worthie
who hath longest played, but hee in measured accents
who hath made sweetest Melodie, to liue long hath often
beene a let to liue well. Muse not how many yeares thou

mightst haue enjoyed life, but howe sooner thou mightst
haue lossed it, neither grudge so much that it is no better,
as comfort thy selfe that it hath beene no worse: let it suffice
that thou hast liued till this day, and (after the course of
this world) not for nought, thou hast had some smiles of
of Fortune, fauours of the worthiest, some friendes, and
thou hast neuer beene disfauoured of the Heauen.
               Though not for Life it selfe, yet that to after-worlds thou
mightst leaue some monument that once thou wast, happilie
in the cleare light of reason, it would appeare that life
were earnestlie to bee desired: for sith it is denyed vs to
liue euer (said one) let vs leaue some worthie Remembrance
of our once heere beeing, and draw out this Spanne
of life to the greatest length, and so farre as is possible. O
poore Ambition! to what I pray thee mayst thou concreded
it? Arches and statelie Temples, which one age doth
raise, doth not another raze, Tombes and adopted Pillars,
lye buried with those which were in them buried: Hath
not Auarice defaced, what Religion did make glorious?
all that the hand of man can vpreare, is either ouer-turned
by the hand of man, or at length by standing & continuing
consumed: as if there were a secret opposition in fate
(the vneuitable decree of the Eternall) to controule our in
dustrie, & conter-checke all our deuices & proposing. Possessions
are not enduring, Children lose their names, Families
glorying (like Marigolds in the Sun) on the highest top
of Wealth and Honour (no better than they which are not
yet borne) leauing off to bee: So doth Heauen confound
what wee endeuour by labour and art to distinguish. That
renowne by Papers, which is thought to make men immortall,
and which nearest doth approach the life of these eternall
Bodies aboue, how slender it is, the verie word of
Paper doth import, and what is it when obtained, but a

multitude of words, which comming Tymes may scorne;
How many millions neuer heare the names of the most famous
Writers, and amongst them to whom they are known
how few turne ouer their Pages, and of such as doe, how
many sport at their conceits, taking the veritie for a fable,
and oft a fable for veritie, or (as we doe pleasants) vse all for
recreation? Then the arising of more famous, doth darken,
and turne ignoble the glorie of the former, beeing held as
Garments worne out of fashion. Now, when thou hast attained
what praise thou couldst desire, and thy fame is emblazoned
in many Stories, it is but an Eccho, a meere Sound,
a Glow-worme, which seene a far, casteth some cold beames,
but approached is found nothing, an imaginarie happinesse,
whose good depends on the oppinion of others: Desert
and Vertue for the most part want Monuments and Memorie,
seldome are recorded in the Volummes of admiration,
while Statues & Torphees, are erected to those, whose
names should haue beene buried in their dust, and folded vp
in the darkest clowds of obliuion: So doe the rancke Weeds
in this Garden of the World choacke and ouer-runne the
swetest Flowres. Applause whilst thou liuest, serueth but to
make thee that faire marke against which Enuie and Malice
direct their Arrows, at the best is like that Syracusians Sphear
of Chirstall, as fraile as faire: and borne after thy death,
it may as well be ascribed, to some of those were in the Troj
                     •
                  n
Horse, or to such as are yet to bee borne an hundreth
yeares heereafter, as to thee, who nothing knowes, and is
of all vnknowne. What can it auaile thee to bee talked of,
whilst thou art not? Consider in what bounds our fame is
confined, how narrow the lists are of humane Glorie, and
the furthest she can stretch her winges. This Globe of the
Earth which seemeth huge to vs, in respect of the Vniuerse,
& compared with that wide wide pauillon of Heauen, is lesse

than little, of no sensible quantitie, and but as a point: for
the Horizon which boundeth our sight, diuideth the Heauen
as in two halfes, hauing alwayes sixe of the Zodiacke
Signes aboue, and as many vnder it, which if the Earth had
any quantitie compared to it, it could not doe. More if the
Earth were not as a point, the Starres could not still in all
parts of it appeare to vs of a like greatnesse; for where the
Earth raised it selfe in Mountaines, wee beeing more neare
to Heauen, they would appeare to vs of a greater quantitie,
and where it is humbled in Vallies, we being further
distant, they would seeme vnto vs l
                     •
                  sse: But the Star
                     ••
                  s
in all parts of the Earth appearing of a like greatnesse, and
to euery part of it the Heauen imparting to our sight the
halfe of its inside, we must auouch it to be but as a point.
Well did one compare it to an Ant-hill, and men (the
Inhabitants) to so manie Pismires, and Grashoppers, in the
toyle and varietie of their diuersified studies. Now of this
small indiuisible thing, thus compared, how much is couered
with Waters? how much not at all discouered? how
much vnhabited and desart? and how many millions of
millions are they, which share the remnant amongst them,
in languages, custumes, diuine rites differing, and all almost
to others vnknowne? But let it bee granted that
Glorie and Fame are some great matter, and can reach Heauen
it selfe, sith they are oft buried with the honoured, and
passe away in so fleet a reuolution of tyme, what great good
can they haue in them? How is not Glorie temporall, if it
increase with yeares and depend on time? Then imagine me
(for what cannot Imagination reach vnto?) one could be famous
in all times to come, and ouer the whole World present,
yet shall hee be for euer Obscure and ignoble to those
mightie Ones, which were onelie heeretofore esteemed famous
amongst the Assyrians, Persians, Romans. Againe

the vaine affectation of man is so suppressed, that though
his workes abide some space, the worker is vnknowne:
the huge Egyptian Pyramides, and that Grot in Pa
                        •
                     silipo,
though they haue wrestled with tyme, and worne vpon
the waste of dayes, yet are their authors no more knowne,
than it is knowne by what strange Earth-quackes, and
deluges, Yles were diuided from the Continent, or Hills
bursted forth of the Vallies. Dayes, Monthes, and Yeares,
are swallowed vp in the great Gulfe of Tyme (which puts
out the eyes of all their Glorie) and onely a fattall obliuion
remaines: of so many Ages past, wee may well figure to
our selues some liklie apparances, but can affirme litle certaintie.
               But (my Soule) what ailes thee, to bee thus backward
and astonished, at the remembrance of Death, sith it doth
not reach thee, more than darknesse doth those farre-shinning
Lampes aboue? Rowse thy selfe for shame, why shouldst
thou feare to bee without a bodie, 
                     •
                  ith thy maker and the
spirituall and supercelestiall Inhabitants haue no bodies?
Hast thou euer seene any Prisoner, who when the Iaile Gates
were broken vp, & he enfranchised & set loose, would rather
plaine and sit still on his Fetters, than seeke his freedome?
or any Mariner, who in the midst of Stormes arriuing neare
the Shore, would launch forth againe vnto the Maine,
rather than stricke Saile and joyfully enter the leas of a saue
Harbour? If thou rightlie know thy selfe, thou hast but
small cause of anguish; for if there be any resemblance, of
that which is infinite, in what is finit (which yet by an infinit
imperfection is from it distant) if thou be not an Image,
thou art a shadow of that vnsearchable Trinitie, in thy
three essentiall powers, Vnderstanding, Will, Memorie;
which though three, are in thee but one, and abiding one,
are distinctlie three: But in nothing more comest thou neare

that Soueraigne Good, than by thy perpetuitie, which
who striue to improue, by that same doe it proue: Like
those that by arguing themselues to bee without all reason,
by the verie arguing, shewe how they haue some.
For, how can what is wholly mortall, more know what
is immortall, than the eye can know sounds, or the eare
questione about colours; if none had eyes, who would
euer descant of light or shadow? To thee nothing in this
visible World is comparable; thou art so wonderfull a
beautie and so beautifull a wonder, that if but once thou
couldst bee gazed vpon by bodilie eyes, euery heart
would bee inflamed with thy loue, and rauished from
all seruile basenesse and earthly desires. Thy beeing depends
not on matter, hence by thine Vnderstanding, dost
thou dyue into the being of euery other thing; and therein
art so pregnant, that nothing by place, similitude, subject,
tyme, is so conjoyned, which thou canst not separate;
as what neither is, nor any wayes can exist, thou
canst faine, and giue an abstract beeing vnto. Thou seemest
a World in thy selfe, containing Heauen, Starres, Seas,
Earth, Floods, Mountaines, Forrests, and all that liueth:
Yet restes thou not satiate with what is in thy selfe, nor
with all in the wide Vniuerse, vntill thou raise thy selfe, to
the contemplation of that first illuminating Intelligence,
farre aboue Tyme, and euen reaching Eternitie it selfe, into
which thou art transformed, for, by receiuing thou (beyond
all other things) art made that which thou recceiuest.
The more thou knowest, the more apt thou art to know,
not beeing amated with any object that excelleth in predominance,
as Sense by objects sensible. Thy Will is vncompellable,
resisting force, daunting Necessitie, despising
Danger, triumphing ouer Afliction, vnmoued by Pittie,
and not constrained by all the toyles and disasters of Life.

What the Airts-master of this Vniuerse is in gouerning this
Vniuerse, thou art in the body; and as hee is whollie in
euerie part of it, so art thou whollie in euerie part of the
bodie. By thee man is that Hymen of eternall and mortall
things, that Chaine together binding vnbodied and bodily
substances, without which the goodlie Fabricke of this
World were vnperfect. Thou hast not thy beginning from
the fecunditie, power, nor action of the elementall qualities,
beeing an immediate maister-piece of that great Maker:
Hence hast thou the formes and figures of all thinges imprinted
in thee from thy first originall. Thou only at once
art capable of contraries, of the three parts of Tyme, thou
makest but one. Thou knowest thy selfe so separate, absol
                     ••
                  e
and diuerse an essence from thy bodie, that thou disposest
of it as it pleaseth thee, for in thee there is no passion
so weake which maistereth not the feare of leauing it. Thou
shouldst bee so farre from repining at this separation, that
it should bee the chiefe of thy desires; sith it is the passage
and meanes to attaine thy perfection and happinesse. Thou
art heere but as in an infected and leprous Inne, plunged
in a floud of humors, oppressed with cares, suppres
                     •
                  ed
with ignorance, defiled and destained with vice, retrograde
in the course of vertue; small things seeme heere great vnto
thee, and great things small, Follie appeareth Wisedome,
and Wisedome Follie. Fred of thy fleshlie care, thou shalt
rightlie discerne the beautie of thy selfe, and haue perfect
fruition of that all-sufficient and all-suffizing Happinesse,
which is GOD himselfe; to whom thou owest thy being,
to Him thou owest thy well being, He and Happinesse are
the same. For, if GOD had not Happinesse, Hee were
not GOD, because Happinesse is the highest and greatest
Good: If then GOD haue Happinesse, it can not bee a
a thing differing from Him; for, if there were any thing in
Him, differing from Him, Hee should bee an essence composed

and not simple, more what is differing in any thing,
is either an accident or a part of it selfe; In GOD Happinesse
can not bee an accident, because Hee is not subject
to anie accidents, if it were a part of Him (since the part
is before the whole) wee should bee forced to grant, that
some thing was before GOD. Bedded and bathed in these
earthlie ordures, thou canst not come neare this soueraigne
Good, nor haue any glimpse of the farre-off dawning of
his vncessable brightnesse, no, not so much as the eyes of
the Birds of the night haue of the Sunne. Thinke then
by Death, that thy shell is broken, and thou then but euen
hatched, that thou art a Pearle, raised from thy Mother,
to bee enchaced in Gold, and that the death-day of thy
body, is thy birth-day to Eternitie.
               Why shouldst thou bee feare-stroken, and discomforted▪
for thy parting from this mortall Bride thy bodie, sith it
is but for a tyme, and such a time, as shee shall not care
for, nor feele any thing in, nor thou haue much neede of
her? Nay, sith thou shalt receiue her againe, more goodly
and beautifull, than when in her fullest perfection thou enjoyed
her; beeing by her absence made like vnto that Indian
Christall, which after some reuolutions of Ages, is turned
into purest Diamond. If the Soule bee the forme of
the Bodie, and the forme separated from the matter of it,
can not euer so continue, but is inclined and disposed to
be reunited thereinto: What can let and hinder this desire,
but that some time it bee accomplished, and obtaining the
exspected end, rejoyne it selfe againe vnto the bodie? The
Soule separate hath a desire, because it hath a will, and
knowes it shall by this reunion receiue perfection: too,
as the matter is disposed, and inclineth to its forme when
it is without it, so would it seeme that the Forme should
be towards its matter in the absence of it. How, is not the

Soule the forme of the bodie, fith by it, it is, and is the
beginning and cause of all the actions and functions of it:
For, though in excellencie it passe euerie other forme, yet
doth not that excellencie take from it the nature of a forme?
If the abiding of the Soule from the bodie be violent, then
can it not bee euerlasting, but haue a regresse: How is not
such an estate of beeing and abiding not violent to the
Soule, if it bee naturall to it, to be in matter, and (separate)
after a strange manner, many of the powers and faculties
of it (which neuer leaue it) are not duelie exercised? This
Vnion seemeth not aboue the Horizon of naturall reason,
farre lesse imposible to bee done by GOD, and though Reason
can not euidentlie heere demonstrate, yet hath shee a
mistie and groping notice. If the bodie shall not arise,
how can the onelie & Soueraigne Good, be perfectlie and
infinitlie good? For, how shall hee bee just, nay, haue so
much justice as Man, if Hee suffer the euill and vicious, to
haue a more prosperous and happie life, than the followers
of Religion and Vertue; which ordinarlie vseth to fall forth
in this life? For, the most wicked are Lords and Gods of
this Earth, sleeping in the lee port of honour, as if the
spacious habitation of the World had beene made onelie
for them; and the Vertuous and good, are but forlorne
cast-awayes, floting in the surges of distresse, seeming heere
either of the eye of prouidence not pityed, or not regarded:
beeing subject to all dishonours, wronges, wrackes, in their
best estate, passing away their dayes (like the D
                     •
                  zies in the
Field) in silence and contempt. Sith then hee is most good,
must just, of necessitie, there must bee appointed by him
an other time and place of 
                     〈◊〉
                  , in the which there
shall bee a reward for leauing well, and a punishment for
doing euill, with a life whereinto both shall receiue their
due; and not onelie in their Soules di
                     •••
                  ted, for, 
                     •
                  ith both

the parts of man did act a part in the right or wrong, it
carrieth great reason with it, that they both bee araigned
before that high Iustice, to receiue their owne: Man is not
a Soule onelie, but a Soule and Bodie, to which either
guerdon or punishment is due. This seemeth to be the voice
of Nature in almost all the Religions of the World; this
is that generall testimonie, charactered in the minds of the
most barbarous and sauage people; for, all haue had some
rouing gesses at Ages to come, and a dimme du
                     •
                  kish light
of another life, all appealing to one generall Iudgement
Throne. To what else could serue so many expiations, sacrifices,
prayers, solemnities, and misticall ceremonies? To
what such sumptuous Temples, and care of the dead: to
what all Religion? If not to showe, that they expected
a more excellent manner of beeing, after the nauigation of
this life did take an end. And who doth denie it, must denie
that there is a Prouidence, a GOD, confesse that his worship,
and all studie and reason of vertue are vaine; and not
beleeue that there is a World, are creatures, and that Hee
Himselfe is not what Hee is.
               But it is not of Death (perhaps) that we complaine, but
of Tyme, vnder the fatall shadow of whose 
                     •
                  inges, all
things decay and wether: This is that Tyrant, which executing
against vs his diamantine lawes, altereth the harmonious
constitution of our bodies, benumning the Organes
of our knowledge, turneth our best Senses senslesse;
makes vs loathsome to others, and a burthen to our selues:
Of which euills Death releiueth vs. So that if wee could
bee transported (O happie colonie!) to a place exempted
from the lawes and conditions of Tyme, where neither
change, motion, nor other affection of materiall and corruptible
things were; but an immortall, vnchangeable, impassible,
all-sufficient kind of life, it were the last of things

wishible, the tearme and center of all our de
                     •
                  ires. Death
maketh this transplantation; for the last instant of corruption,
or leauing off of any thing to bee what it was, is
the first of generation, or beeing of that which succeedeth;
Death then beeing the end of this miserable transitory life,
of necessitie must bee the beginning of that other all excellent
and eternall: And so causleslie of a vertuous Soule
it is either feared or complained on.
               As those Images were pourtraited in my minde (the
morning Starre now almost arising in the East) I found my
thoughts in a mild and quiet calme; and not long after, my
Senses one by one forgetting their vses, beganne to giue
themselues ouer to rest, leauing mee in a still and peaceable
sleepe; if sleepe it may bee called, where the mind awaking
is carried with free wings from out fleshlie bondage? For,
heauie lids, had not long couered their lights, when I
thought, nay, sure I was where I might discerne all in this
great All; the large compasse of the rolling Circles, the
brightnesse and continuall motion of those Rubies of the
Night, which (by their distance) heere below can not be
perceiued; the 
                     •
                  iluer countenance of the wandring Moone,
shining by anothers light, the hanging of the Earth as (e
                     •
                  
                  uironed
with a girdle of Christall) the Sunne enthronized
in the midst of the Planets, eye of the Heauens, Gemme
of this precious Ring the World. But whilst with wonder
and amazement I gazed on those celestiall Splendors, and
the beaming Lampes of that glorious Temple (like a poore
Countrie-man brought from his solitarie mountaines and
flockes, to behold the magnificence of some great Citie)
There was presented to my fight a Man, as in the spring
of his yeares, with that selfe same grace, comely feature,
Majesticke looke which the late () was wont to haue:
on whom I had no sooner set mine eyes, when (like one

Planet-stroken) I became amazed: But hee with a 
                     •
                  ild
demeanour, and voyce surpassing all Humane sweetnesse,
appeared (mee thought) to say,
               What is it doth thus anguish and trouble thee?
Is it the remembrance of Death, the last Period of wretchednesse,
and entrie to these happie places; the Lanterne
which lightneth men to see the misterie of the blessednesse
of Spirites, and that glorie which transcendeth the Courtaine
of things visible? Is thy Fortune below on that darke
Globe (which scarce by the smalnes of it appeareth heere)
so great, that thou art heart-broken and dejected to leaue
it? What if thou wert to leaue behind thee a () so
glorious in the eye of the World (yet but a mote of dust
encircled with a Pond) as that of mine, so louing ()
such great hopes, these had beene apparant occasions of
lamenting, and but apparent? Dost thou thinke thou leauest
Life too soone? Death is best young; things faire and
excellent, are not of long endurance vpon Earth. Who
liueth well, liueth long; Soules most beloued of their Maker,
are soonest releeued from the bleeding cares of Life,
and most swiftlie wa
                     •
                  ted through the Surges of Humane
miseries. Opinion that great enchantresse and peiser of
things, not as they are, but as they seeme, hath not in any
thing more, than in the conceit of Death abused Man: Who
must not measure himselfe, and esteeme his estate, after his
earthlie being, which is but as a dreame: For, though hee
bee borne on the Earth, hee is not borne for the Earth,
more than the Embryon for the mothers wombe. It plaineth
to bee relieued of its bands, and to come to the light
of this World, and Man wailleth to bee loosed from the
Chaines with which he is fettered in that valey of vanities:
It nothing knoweth whither it is to goe, nor ought of the
beautie of the visible workes of GOD, neither doth Man

of the magnificence of the intellectuall World aboue, vnto
which (as by a Mid-wife) hee is directed by Death.
Fooles, which thinke that this faire and admirable Frame,
so variouslie disposed, so rightlie marshalled, so stronglie
maintained, enriched with so many excellencies, not only
for necessitie, but for ornament and delight, was by that
Supreame Wisedome brought forth, that all things in a circularie
course, should bee and not bee, arise and dissolue,
and thus continue: as if they were so many Shadowes cast
out and caused by the encountring of these Superior Celestiall
Bodies, changing onelie their fashion and shape, or
fantasticall Imageries, or printes of faces into Christall. No
no, the Eternall Wisedome hath made Man an excellent
Creature, though hee faine would vnma
                     ••
                  e himselfe, and
returne to nothing: And though he seeke his felicity among
the reasonlesse Wights, he hath fixed it aboue. Looke how
some Prince or great King on the Earth, when hee hath
raised any statelie Citie, the worke being atchi
                     ••
                  ed, is wont
to set his Image in the midst of it, to bee admired and gazed
vpon: No otherwise did the Soueraigne of this All,
the Fabricke of it perfected, place Man (a great Miracle)
formed to his owne patterne, in the midst of this spacious
and admirable Citie. GOD containeth all in Him as the
beginning of all, Man containeth all in him, as the midst
of all; inferiour thinges bee in Man more noble than they
exist, superiour thinges more meanlie, Celestiall things fauour
him, earthly things are vassaled vnto him, hee is the
band of both; neither is it possible but that both of them
haue peace with him, if he haue peace with him, who made
the Couenant betweene them and him? Hee was made
that hee might in the Glasse of the World behold the infinite
Goodnesse, Power, and glorie of his Maker, and beholding
know, and knowing Loue, and louing enjoye, and

to hold the Earth of him as of his Lord Paramount; neuer
ceasing to remember and praise Him. It exceedeth the
compasse of conceit, to thinke that that Wisedome which
made euerie thing so orderly in the parts, should make a
confusion in the whole, and the cheife Maister-peece; how
bringing forth so many excellencies for Man, it should bring
forth Man for basenesse and miserie. And no lesse strange
were it, that so long life should be giuen to Trees, Beastes,
and the Birds of the Aire, Creatures inferior to Man, which
haue lesse vse of it, and which can not judge of this goodlie
Fabricke, and that it should bee denyed to Man: Vnlesse
there were another manner of liuing prepared for
him, in a place more noble and excellent.
               But alas! (said I) had it not beene better that for
the good of his natiue Cou
                     •
                  trie a () endued with
so manie peerlesse gifts, had yet liued? How long will
yee (replyed hee) like the Ants, thinke there are no
fairer Palaces, than their Hills; or like to poreblind Moles,
no greater light, than that little which they shunne? As
if the maister of a Campe, knew when to remoue a Sentinell,
and Hee who placeth Man on the Earth, knew 
                     •
                  ot
how long he had need of Him? Euerie one commeth there
to act his part of this Tragicomedi
                     •
                   called Life, which
done, the Courtaine is drawne, and hee remouing is said
to dye. That Prouidence which prescriueth Causes to euerie
euent hath not onelie determined a definit and certaine
number of dayes, but of actions to all men, which they
cannot goe beyond.
               Most () then (answered I) Death is not such
an euill and paine, as it is of the Vulgare esteemed? Death
(said hee) nor painefull is, nor euill (except in contemplation
of the cause) beeing of it selfe as indifferent
as Birth: Yet can it not bee denyed, but amidst those

dreames of earthly pleasures, the vncouthnesse of it, with
the wrong apprehension of what is vnknowne in it, are
noysome, But the Soule sustained by its Maker, resolued,
and calmlie retired in it selfe, doth find that Death (
                     •
                  ith
it is in a moment of Time) is but a short, nay, sweete
sigh; and is not worthie the remembrance compared
with the smallest dramme of the infinite Felicitie of this
Place. Heere is the Palace Royall of the Almighty KING,
in which the vncomprehensible comprehensiblie manifesteth
Himselfe; in Place highest, in substance not subject
to any corruption or change, for it is aboue all motion,
and solid turneth not; in quantitie greatest, for, if one
Starre, one Spheare bee so vast, how large, how hudge in
exceeding demensions, must those bounds bee, which doe
them all containe? In quantitie most pure and orient, Heauen
heere is all but a Sunne, or the Sunne all but a Heauen.
If to Earthlings the Foote-stoole of GOD, and that
Stage which Hee raised for a small course of Time, seemeth
so Glorious and Magnificent; What estimation would
they make (if they could see) of His eternall Habitation
and Throne? and if these bee so wonderfull, what is the
sight of Him, for whom, and by whom all was created;
of whose Glorie to behold the thousand thousand part,
the most pure Intellegences are fullie satiate, and with wonder
and delight rest amazed; for the Beautie of His light
and the Light of His Beautie are vncomprehensible?
Heere doth that earnest appetite of the Vnderstanding content
it selfe, not seeking to know any more; For it seeth
before it, in the vision of the Diuine essence (a Miroi
                     •
                   in the
which not Images or shadowes, but the true and perfect
Essence of euerie thing created, is more cleare and conspicuous,
than in it selfe) all that may bee knowne or vnderstood.
Heere doth the Will pause it selfe, as in the center

of its Eternall rest, glowing with a firie affection of
that infinite and all-sufficient Good; which beeing fullie
knowne, cannnot (for the infinit motiues and causes of
loue which are in Him) but bee fullie and perfectlie
loued: As Hee is onelie true and essentiall Bountie, so
is Hee the onelie essentiall and true Beautie, deseruing
alone all loue and admiration, by which the Creatures
are onelie in so much faire and excellent, as they participate
of His Beautie and excelling Excellencies. Heere is a
blessed Companie, euerie one joying as much in anothers
Felicitie, as in that which is proper, because each seeth
another equ
                     •
                  llie loued of GOD; Thus their distinct joyes
are no fewer, than the copartners of the joye: And as the
Assemblie is in number answerable to the large capacitie
of the Place, so are the joyes answerable to the numberlesse
number of the Ass
                     •
                  mblie. No poore and pittifull
mortall, confined on the Globe of Earth, who hath neuer
seene but sorrow, or interchangeablie some painted superficiall
pleasures, can rightlie thinke on, or bee sufficient to
conceaue the tearmelesse Delightes of this Place. So manie
Feathers moue not on Birds, so many Birds dint
not the Aire, so manie leaues tremble not on Trees,
so manie Trees grow not in the solitarie Forests, so manie
Waues turne not in the Ocean, and so manie graines
of Sand limit not those Waues: As this triumphant Court
hath varietie of Delights, and Ioyes exempted from all
comparison. Happinesse at once heere is fullie knowne and
fullie enjoyed, and as infinit in continuance as extent. Heere
is flourishing and neuer-fading youth without Age, Strength
without Weaknesse, Beautie neuer blasting, Knowledge
without Learning, Aboundance without Lothing, Peace
without Disturbance, Participation without Enuy, Rest
without Labour, Light without rising or setting Sunne,

Perpetuitie without moments, for Time (which is the
measure of endurance) did neuer enter in this shining Eternitie.
Ambition, Disdaine, Malice, difference of Opinions,
can not approach this Place, resembling those foggie
mists, which couer those Lists of sublunarie thinges. All
Pleasure paragon'd with what is heere is paine, all Mirth
mourning, all Beautie deformitie: Heere one dayes abyding,
is aboue the continuing in the most fortunate estate on
the Earth manie yeeres, and sufficient to conteruaile the
extreamest torments of Life. But, although this Blisse of
Soules bee great, and their joyes many, yet shall they admit
addition, and bee more full and perfect, at that long
wished and generall meeting with their Bodies.
               Amongst all the wonders of the great Creator, not one
appeareth to bee more wonderfull (replyed I) than that
our Bodies should arise, hauing suffered so many changes,
and Nature denying a returne from Priuation to a Habit.
               Such power (said hee) beeing aboue all that the Vnderstanding
of Man can conceaue, may well worke such
wonders; For, if Mans Vnderstanding could comprehend
all the secretes and counsells of that Eternall Majestie, it
must of necessitie bee equall vnto it. The Author of Nature
is not thralled to the lawes of Nature, but worketh
with them, or contrarie to them, as it pleaseth Him: What
Hee hath a will to doe, Hee hath a power to performe.
To that power which brought all this All from nought,
to bring againe in one instant any substance which euer
was into it, vnto what it was once, should not be thought
impossible; For, who can doe more, can doe lesse, and His
power is no lesse, after that which was by Him brought
forth is decayed and vanished, than it was before it was
produced; beeing neither restrained to certaine limits, or
instruments, or to any determinate & definit manner of working:

where the power is without restraint, the workeadmitteth
no other limits, than the workers will. This World
is as a Cabinet to GOD, in which the small things (how
euer to vs hidde and secret) are nothing lesse keeped, than
the great. For, as Hee was wise and powerfull to create, so
doth His Knowledge comprehend His own Creation; yea,
euery change and varietie in it, of which it is the verie
Source. Not any Atome of the scattered Dust of mankind
though daylie flowing vnder new Formes, is to Him vnknowne:
and His Knowledge doth distinguish and discerne,
what once His power shall waken and raise vp. Why may
not the Arts-master of the World, like a Molder, what he
hath framed in diuerse shapes, confound in one masse, and
then seuerally fashion them out of the same? Can the Spargiricke
by his Arte restore for a space to the dry and withered
Rose, the naturall Purple and Blush: And can not the
Almightie raise and refine the bodie of Man, after neuer
so many alterations on the Earth? Reason her selfe finds
it more possible for infinit power to cast out from it selfe
a finit world, and restore any thing in it, though decayed
and dissolued, to what it was first; than for Man a finit
piece of reasonable miserie, to change the forme of matter
made to his hand: the power of GOD neuer brought
forth all that It can, for then were it bounded, and no more
infinit. That Time doth approach (O haste yee Times
away) in which the Dead shall liue, and the Liuing bee
changed, and of all actions the Guerdon is at hand; Then
shall there be an end without an end, Time shall finish, and
Place shall be altered, Motion yeelding vnto rest, and another
World of an Age eternall and vnchangable shall arise:
Which when Hee had said (me thought) He vanished▪ and
I
                     •
                   all astonished did awake.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            On the Report of the
Death of the Author.
            
               
                  IF that were true which whispered is by Fame,
               
               That Damōs light no more on Earth doth burne,
               His Patron Phoebus physicke would disclame,
               And cloth'd in clowds as earst for Phaetō
                   mourn▪
               
            
            
               Yea, Fame by this had got so deepe a Wound,
               That scarce shee could haue power to tell his Death,
               Her Wings cutt short; who could her Trumpet sound,
               Whose Blaze of late was nurc'd but by His Breath?
            
            
               That Spirit of His which most with mine was free,
               By mutuall trafficke enterchanging Store,
               If chac'd from Him it would haue com'd to mee,
               Where it so oft familiare was before.
            
            
               Some secret Griefe distempring first my Minde,
               Had (though not knowing) made mee feele this losse:
               A Sympathie had so our Soules combind,
               That such a parting both at once would: tosse.
            
            
               Though such Reports to others terrour giue,
               Thy heauenlie Vertues who did neuer spie,
               I know Thou, that canst make the dead to liue,
               Immortall art, and needes not feare to die.
            
            
               Sir WILLIAM ALEXANDER.
            
         
         
            
            To S. W. A.
            
               THough I haue twice beene at the Doores of Death,
               
               And twice found shoote those Gates which euer mourne,
               This but a lightning is, Truce tane to Breath,
               For late-borne Sorrowes augurre fleet returne.
            
            
               Amidst thy sacred Cares, and courtlie Toyles,
               
                  Alexis, when thou shalt heare wandring Fame
               Tell, Death hath triumph'd o're my mortall Spoiles,
               And that on Earth I am but a sad Name;
            
            
               If thou e're held mee deare? by all our Loue,
               By all that Blisse, those Ioyes Heauen heere vs gaue,
               I conju
                     •
                  e Thee, and by the Maides of Ioue,
               
               To graue this short Remembrance on my Graue.
               Heere Damon lyes, whose Songes did some time
                     •
                   grace
               The murmuring Eske, may Roses shade the place.
            
         
         
            
            To the Memorie of the most
excellent Ladie, IANE
Countesse of Perth.
            
               THis Beautie which pale Death in Dust did turne,
               And clos'd so soone within a Coffin sad,
               Did, passe like Lightning, like to Thunder burne;
               So little Life, so much of Worth it had.
            
            
               Heauens but to show their Might heere made it shine,
               And when admir'd, then in the Worlds Disdaine
               (O Teares, O Griefe!) did call it backe againe,
               Lest Earth should vaunt Shee kept what was Diuine.
            
            
               What can wee hope for more? what more enjoy?
               Sith fairest Things thus soonest haue their End,
               And, as on Bodies Shadowes doe attend,
               Sith all our Blisse is follow'd with Annoy?
               Yet She's not dead, She liues where She did loue,
               Her Memorie on Earth, Her Soule aboue.
            
            
         
      
   