
      
         
            
            
            A True Report of t
                  ••
               
Araignment, tryall, conuiction, and 
                  •••
               
               demnation,
of a Popiſh Prieſt, named 
                  ••
               
               bert
Drewrie, at the Sesſions houſe in the old 
                  •••
               
               lie,
on Friday and VVedneſday, the 20. and 24. o
                  •
                
               
                  ••
               
               bruary:
the extraordinary great grace and merc
                  ••
               
offered him, and his ſtubborne, traytorous,
and wilfull refuſall.
            Alſo the tryall and death of Humph
                  •••
               
Lloyd, for maliciouſlie murdering one of
the Guard.
            And laſtly the execution of the ſaid Robert Dr
                  ••••
               
drawne in his Prieſtly habit, and as he was a Benedictine 
                  〈◊〉
               
on Thurſdaie following to Tiborne, where he
was hanged and quartered.
            LONDON,
Printed for Iefferie Chorlton, and are to be ſold a
                  •
                
               
                  〈◊〉
               
ſhop adioyning to the great North doore
of Paules. 1607.
         
      
      
         
            
            
            A true Report of
the Apprehenſion, Examination,
Araignment, tryall, conuiction,
and condemnation of Robert
Drewrie, a Seminary prieſt,
& a Fryer, of the order of Saint
Benedict: at the Seſsions houſe
in the old Baily, on Friday and
Wedneſday, the 20. and 25. of
February. And laſtly, his execution
at Tyborne, on Thurſday
following, &c.
            
               IN a caſe deſeruing
ſo well to bee ſpoken
off, concerning iniury
to Gods glory, and
apparant wrong of
our Countrey (ouerrun
with too many
men of ſuch daungerous
quality:) I thought it the duty of an
honeſt Subiect, to ſay ſomewhat, ſo farre

as truth would warrant me, becauſe ſlaunder
and detraction are no meane enimies to
ſuch maner of proceedings.
            Robert Drewrie being apprehended by
his maieſties Meſſengers at the white Friers,
& afterward brought before the right
reuered Father in God, the Lord Biſhop of
London: declared himſelfe there, as Garnet
his Maiſter had done before, Multorum nominum,
to be a man of many names, but yet
no one of them being good. For as no leſſe
then ſixe ſeuerall names would ſerue Garnets
turne, ſo this man had three to ſhadow
him by, (Viz:) Drewrie, Browne, and Hamden,
but Drewry was the laſt in his owne
deliuering, and appearing to bee his true
name indeede.
            His aunſwers werr equiuocall,
and very confuſed, denying his Prieſt-hood,
and ſeeming ſo cunning, as if no hold
were to be taken of him. But he being better
known to the ſtate then himſelfe imagined,
and his many dangerous practiſes ſufficiently
diſcouered and ſcanned: after ſuch
priuate examinations as were thought
conuenient, time was appointed for his

publique tryall, which followed as heareafter
ſhallbe declared.
            On Friday, being the 20. day of February,
in the forenoone, my Lord Mayor, Maiſter
Recorder, and other of his Maieſties Iuſtices
of the peace, ſitting at the Seſſions
houſe in the old Baily, by vertue of his highneſſe
commiſſion of Oyre and Terminer, for
Goale deliuerie, for London, and the County
of Middleſexe: Robert Drewrie Prieſt,
and a Fryer of the Benedictine Order, was
brought before the Bench. His Enditement,
according to forme of Lawe in that
caſe made and prouided, was openly read
vnto him: whereunto he pleaded not guiltie,
but (for his tryall) did put himſelfe vpon
God and his Country, then was a verie
ſufficient Iurie impannelled for him, to
whom (in effect) theſe ſpeeches were deliuered.
            
               Robert Drewrie the Priſoner ſtanding at
the Barre, had traytorouſly, wilfully, and
in contempt of the Statute made to the

contrarie, departed our of this land, wherein
he was borne, and at Valcdolid in Spayne,
(where by Parſons meanes, a Seminary
for Engliſh Students was erected, as the
like were at Rome and Rhemes) hadde bin
kinde a Prieſt by the Biſhop of Leon, by authority
deriued from the Pope. Sithence
which time, he had returned back into this
land, to reconcsle, ſeduce, and withdraw
his maieſties ſubiects, from their naturall
dutie, loue, and allegeance, to a forraigne
ſeruice and obedience.
            Hauing libertie graunted to ſpeake, and
anſwere for himſelfe what he could, Robert
Drewrie very ſhallowly ſought to inſinuate,
that if it were treaſon in him to be a Prieſt,
then it was the like in Saint Auguſtine, S.
Bernard, and other reuerend Fathers of the
Church, who receiued their Prieſt-hood by
authority from God, and ſo did he preſume
to haue doone the like, for the ſaluation of
his owne Soule, and many others beſide,
which purpoſely he came hether to do, acording
to his office and function. His ſillie
ſuggeſtion was preſently reprooued, that
notwithſtanding the great difference beetweene
his Prieſt-hoode, and that of the
Fathers before named, yet Prieſt-hood ſolie
was not imputed to him for Treaſon,

for that profeſſion, (though neither liked nor 
                  ••
               
               lowed
by vs) he might vſe and exerciſe in the 
                  〈◊〉
               
beyond the Seas, keeping himſelfe there, but 
                  〈◊〉
               
heere within his maieſties Kingdome, where 
                  〈◊〉
               
he, and all other of his ranke, did very well kno
                  •
               
& therefore could not plead any ignorance there 
                  〈◊〉
               
that ſundry good and ſufficient lawes heeretof
                  ••
               
made, had enacted it to be treaſon, for any 
                  〈◊〉
               
borne to forſake his natiue dutie, and being 
                  〈◊〉
               
Prieſt by authority deriued from the Pope, to 
                  〈◊〉
               
home again into this land, and (in meere conten
                  •
               
of the King and his la
                  •
               es) to reconcile, ſeduce, 
                  〈◊〉
               
alienate loyall Subiects harts, from loue, iuſt 
                  ••
               
               gard
and dutie to their Soueraigne, and ſub
                  •••
               
               ting
them in obedience to a forraigne gouernme
                  ••
               
               Drewrie made anſwer, he could not, neither 
                  〈◊〉
               
he deny, but that he came hether to exerciſe the 
                  ••
               
               fice
of a Prieſt, according as he had alreadie do
                  ••
               
in winning of ſoules: but he would not admit, 
                  〈◊〉
               
he had ſeduced any, or in any ſort diſwaded th
                  ••
               
but only for the good of their ſoules. Being af
                  •••
               
               ward
vrged with his maieſties great mercy, 
                  〈◊〉
               
had to him and all other of his coate, granted 
                  〈◊〉
               
generall pardon, and why he did not (according 
                  〈◊〉
               
the Proclamation) depart the land when it wa
                  •
               
expreſly cōmaunded: he made anſwer, that he 
                  〈◊〉
               
meanes, when it was prooued to him: that
only did the King allow ſuch conuenient traſ
                  ••
               
               ting,
but alſo enabled them with mony, and th
                  •••
               
               fore
his ſtay, could not be otherwiſe, but meere
                  ••
               
traytorous contempt of the kings lawes: wh
                  •••
               
to he could make no reply.
            
               
Then diuers traitorous and dangerous
Papers were ſhewen, which had bin taken
in his cuſtody, and whereof he would gladly
haue acquitted himſelfe, but that they were
manifeſtly prooued to be his. One of them
ſeemed to bee Parſons opinion, concerning
the oath in the late made Statute, which he
vtterly diſalowed any Catholique to take,
appearing to haue vſed the Popes cenſure
therein, wherevppon the Bull or Breefe to
that purpoſe ſeemeth to take effect.
            The others were alſo of traytrous nature,
tending to the abuſe and corrupting
of poore ſimple ſoules, and ſtealing all duty
& allegeance from them. There were likewiſe
two Letters openly read, the one from
certaine Prieſtes, Priſoners ſometimes in
the Clinke, to the Arch-Prieſt maiſter Blackwell,
requiring his iudgement in matters,
when they laboured and hoped for tolleration
in Religion: The other was Maiſter
Blackwels anſwer therto, both which though
he would haue cunningly auoyded, yet it appeared
what reckoning he made of them.
            When he had anſwered for himſelfe ſo
much as he could, relying ſtill vppon his
Prieſthood, & vrging that to be the cheefeſt
matter of his offence, though many times
the contrary was deliuered to him: the Iurie

paſſed vppon him, founde him guilty of
high Treaſon, whereupon he was ſent away
till the time of Iudgement: which becauſe
it was not til Wedneſday following,
it ſhall not be much differing from our purpoſe,
to handle and ſay ſomewhat in the
meane while, concerning the tryall and conuiction
of Humphrey Lloyde, endicted there
vpon Wilfull Murder, hauing ſlaine Maſter
Thomas Morris, one of the ordinary yeamen
of his Maieſt Guarde, not long before
in Chauncery-Lane.
            Vpon Sunday in the afternoone being
the 18. of Ianuary, the forenamed Humphry
Lloyd and Thomas Morris, meeting together
in Alderſgate ſtreete, in the companie of certaine
other of theyr friendes, went into the
halfe Moone Tauerne to drink, where they
had no plenty of ſuch Wine, as to cauſe diſtemper,
or otherwiſe (that way) to procure
impatience.
            
               
But it was deliuered in euidence that ſome ſpeeches
concerning Religion paſſed beetweene them,
wherein Morris touched Lloyd to be a diſſembler, as
neither hot nor cold, but if any thing at all, it was
(indeed) beſt affected to Popery, as afterwarde it
plainely appeared. It happened that the lie was
retorted between them, which vrged Morris to caſt
a cuppe of Wine in Lloyds face, and Lloyd thereupon
threwe a Rowle of bread at the head of Morris.
A further and more dangerous ſtrife had preſently
enſued, but that honeſt frends on both ſides
beeing preſent, did ſo diſcreetely deale with them,
that they grew friends againe, drank to one another
and no hart-burning outwardly perceiued:
till at the length, Lloyd renewing remembrance
of the former ſpeeches, a more heauier falling out
had thereon hapned, but that the friendes, as before
pacified them again, but yet menacing words
paſſed from eyther, Morris threatning to bee 
                  •
               uen
wt 
               Lloyds bald pate, and Lloyd woulde try acquittance
with the others Cods-heade, ſo that they
parted with tearmes of enmity.
            On the Wedneſday next enſuing, Lloyde and a
Gentleman in a white coloured cloake, ſtanding
talking together at Lincolns Inn gate, it hapned
Morris and a friende of hys with him to paſſe by:
the friende ſaluted Lloyd, as Lloyd did the like by
him. And very ſoone after, the Gentleman in the
white cloke, that had ſtoode talking with Lloyd,
being ſent by him as it apeared, followed Morris,
as Lloyd likewiſe, and rounding him in the eare,
which the friend then with Morris could not heare.

hee perceiued an alteration in the countenauce
of Morris, and the like in Lloyd, wh
                  •••
               
by this time was come to them, which he being
deſirous to remooue, as ſtanding an equall
friend to them both, deſired them, if any
thing were amiſſe betweene them, to 
                  〈◊〉
               
him perſwade a friendly agreement, and no
to grow into any vnciuill behauiour in th
                  •
               
open ſtreet, to the wounding of their credit
and reputation, as alſo what danger migh
                  •
               
otherwiſe enſue, was doubtful to be gathred.
Lloyd made anſwere, that he was goo
                  •
               
friends with his Cozen Morris, & loued hi
                  •
               
as deerly as any in England. Whereto Mo
                     •
                  
                  ris
inſtantly replied: wilt thou neuer lead
thy diſſembling? Doſt thou pretend to lo
                  ••
               
me ſo deerely, and haſt euen now ſent mee
challenge by this man? Lloyd immediate
returned him this anſwere, that if he had 
                  〈◊〉
               
ſent him a challenge, he was come in perſo
                  •
               
to anſwere it, and would performe it, the
                  •
               
or any where els: thus his malicious inte
                  ••
               
very plainely appeared. What other word
paſſed betweene them, I know not, neith
                  ••
               
could they bee heard by any ſtanders by, 
                  〈◊〉
               
forthwith they drewe out both theyr We
                  •
               
               pons,
notwithſtanding all intreaty to ye co
                  •
               
               trary:
And indeede Lloyd did drawe to ſoo
                  •
               
to expreſſe his bloody and vnquencheab
                  ••
               
malice, for he ſoon gaue to Morris his death
wound: whereupon he fell downe preſentl
                  •
               
notſpeaking one word.
            
               
And to witneſſe the more his cruell and
bloodie hatred, hee ſtrake twice or thrice at
him when he was downe, cutting him ouer
the head, and otherwiſe wounding him, yet
he pleaded, that hee did all this, but in hys
owne defence.
            All this which hath bin breefelie reported
being much more circumſtantially deliuered
in euidence, and by oath approued to his
face: he ſought to extenuate his offence by
verie ſhalow ſpeeches, vtterly impertinent,
and moſt againſt himſelfe. in due conſideraon
of his friuolous allegations. For he had
bin a man of more dangerous quality, then
was conceined in his preſent tryall, hauing
taſted the Kings moſt gracious mercy, and
had beene borne withall beyond his deſeruing.
            It was alſo told him, how farre hee had
waded in VVatſons treaſon, and was alſo a
partaker in the Gunne-powder plotte, ſending
ſhot and powder alſo to them in wales,
in all which, the mercie of his Maieſty had
looked more mildly vpon him, then himſelf
coulde deſire, or any way deſerue. But the
Iuſtice of heauen very manifeſtly appeared,
that ſo falſe and hollow a hart, ſullied with
the deteſted guilt of treaſon, muſt now in a
wilful and malicious act of blood and murder,
declare it ſelfe to the whole worlde, and

the vpright cenſure of Lawe, this way depriue
him of life, that had felte mercy before
in a heauier offence. Heer is alſo to be noted
that as the quarel firſt hapned on talk of popiſh
Religion, ſo now Lloyd diſcouers him in
his colours. For thogh it was told him, that
he had very confidently deliuered himſelf to
be otherwiſe, and which himſelfe was not
able to denye: yet nowe Drewrie the Prieſte
(after his iudgement) paſſing away by him
in the Docket, gaue him a publicke noted
abſolution with his hand croſſing him, and
vſing ſome cloſe ſpeeches, whereupon, thinking
this ſufficient to waſh off his ſtayne o
                  •
               
Murder: he forthwith openly confeſt, tha
                  •
               
he is a Catholique, ſo he had bin alwayes
and ſo hee woulde die, as if that very nam
                  •
               
ſhould giue fame to his foule fact, & wher
                  •
               
he died a murderer, his owne ydle ſuppoſition
of Popiſhe abſolution ſhoulde make
him now to die in the caſe of a Martyr, and
for his conſcience.
            When he was drawne in the Carte (with
others toward execution, and all the Carts
beeing ſtayed before Saint Sepulchers
Church, where the moſt Chriſtian and charitable
deed of Maſter Dooue, at euery ſuch
time is worthily performed, to moue prayer
and compaſſion in mens harts, for ſuch 
                  〈…〉
               :
All the while that the man ſpake

               Lloyd ſtopte his eares, not willing to heare
any thing, but if any Romaine Catholicks
were neere, he deſired ſuch to pray for him.
And ſo at Tyborne he did in like manner,
calling to Romaine Catholickes to praye
with him and for him, but no other prayers
would he accept of. But the Lawe hauing
cenſured him, and Iuſtice likewiſe beeing
paſt vppon him: what elſe remaines to bee
thought or ſaid of him, let it be ſo charitably
as ſuch a caſe requireth, and as becommeth
all honeſt Chriſtians. Euermore remembring,
that fleſh & blood is ſubiect to frailty,
and he that boaſteth moſt of ſtrength, maye
ſooneſt fall and be deceiued: therefore let vs
meaſure other mens infirmities, by a conſiderate
care of whatour owne may be, and
committing all to him that is the onely iudg
of al, deſire his heauenly help and aſſiſtance
neuer to ſuffer vs to be led into the like temtations.
Let vs nowe remember where we
lefte before, and returne to the matter concerning
the Prieſt.
            In this time of reſpit ſince his condemnation,
bethinking himſelfe, (belike) of his
preſent dangerous condition: he ſolicited
ſundry great Perſons by his Letters, entreating
all poſſible fauour to bee allowed
him. Among the reſt, he wrote to Sir Henry
Montague, Recorder of London, requiring

to haue ſome priuate ſpeech with him. The
Gentleman being of a milce and mercifull
inclination, willing to do good to any, but
much more to one at the point of ſuch perill:
vpon Monday morning, ſent for Drewrie
downe into the Seſſions houſe garden to
him, where vrging to know, what fauour
he requeſted, and alleaging the kings great
and gratious mercy to any that expreſſed
themſelues to be his louing Subiects, and
would take the oath of duty and obedience
to him: Drewrie made voluntary tender of
himſelfe, that he would take the oath, acknowledging
the greatnes of his maieſties
mercy, and humbly required, that the like
grace might bee affoorded to his Brother
VVilliam Dauies the other Prieſt, that was
cōdemned with him. Maiſter Recorder conceiued
very well of this his ſubmiſſion, and
was in his minde perſwaded, that if he had
put him to the oath preſently, without any
refuſall he would haue taken it. But he (as
an vpright Iuſticer) very wiſely conſidering,
that his fact being openly knowne,
and the people acquainted with his dangerons
practiſes, his publike ſubmiſſion and
taking the oath would the better witneſſe
his obedience and ſubmiſſion, and proue
much more pleaſing then any thing done in
priuate, deferred it till the time of more conueniency,

ſo Drewrie departed vppe to his
Chamber againe, being vſed with all kind
and gentle reſpect.
            
               ¶ The extraordinary great grace
and mercy offered at the Seſſions-houſe, to Roberd
Drewrie and William Dauies Priſtes, on vvedneſday
the 25. of February, and laſtly the ſentence
of death pronounced againſt
them.
               
                  ACcording to the cuſtome
in ſuch caſes obſerued,
the tryall and
condemnation of Robert
Drewrie, paſſing
as hath beene already
declared on the Fryday
before: On Wedneſday
following, beyng
the fiue and twentieth day of February,
the Priſoner was brought to the
Barre againe. Where it being tolde him,
that he had beene already araigned vppon
high treaſon, and had pleaded thereto not
guiltie, but for his tryall, had put himſelfe
vpon GOD and his Countrey, the Country

had found and deliuered him vppe guilty:
it now remained to heare what he could
ſay for himſelfe, why iudgement of death
ſhould not be pronounced againſt him.
               He replyed as he had done before, that he
tooke himſelfe not to be conuicted of Treaſon,
but onely for his Prieſt-hoode, which
if the Law made treaſon, hee had nothing
to ſay, but appealed to the Kinges grace
and mercy.
               Heereupon his voluntarie offer, to take
Oath on the Monday before was rehearſed
to him. And it was further tolde him,
that now it was apparantly perceiued how
collorably hee cloaked his priuate and pernicious
dealing, anſwering by equiuocation,
and ſetting downe one thing vnder his
owne hand, then afterward ſpeaking dyrectly
againſt the ſame. For proofe whereof
his owne Letter written ſithence the time
of his condemnation, to a Perſon of great
honor was there read, and as much thereof
as concerned the preſent occaſion then in
hand, was the more inſiſted vppon. Wherin
(if my memory faile me not) it appeared,
that he had bin requyred, to ſet downe his
cenſure & opinion according as himſelfe did
beſt gather and conceiue therof, concerning

the Oath of legalty and alegiance mentioned
in the late tatute: whereunto (as I remember)
his anſwere was thus: I freelye
confeſſe, that (in my opinion) euery honeſt
and good Catholicke, may lawfully & ſafely
take it. Immediately, becauſe hee had
made ſuch a free confeſſion, of the Oathes
lawfulnes, and ſafety in taking, himſelfe
was willed to take the Oath, which he had
thus cenſured: to let ye world perceiue now
publickly, whether his hand and hart held
true correſpondence together, and whether
he were ſo honeſt and good a Catholick, as
but to expreſſe the loyalty of a Subiect, and
giue Caeſar his due. Now plainly appeared
both what he and ſuch of his profeſſion inwardly
are, for he plainly refuſed to take ye
Oath, hauing the Booke deliuered into his
owne hands, and willed to take and aledge
what exceptions he could againſt any part
or particle of the Oath, his anſwere was,
that hee did but deliuer his opinion of the
Oath, what any good or honeſt Catholick,
might do, excluding himſelf out of any ſuch
titles: neither (quoth he) can it be any waye
aduantageable to me, being condemned as
I am, & therefore I haue no reaſon to take
it. But then to meet iuſtly with ſuch cuning
diſſembling, and equiuocating, and to diſcouer
ſuch apparant falſhood: that no leſſe
admired, then moſt worthy Gentleman, ſir
Henry Mountague, Knight, Recorder of the

Citty of London, as he had many times before,
ſo ſtill he continued, in diſplaying the
ſubtil ſlights of ſo dangerous a perſon, and
what hurt enſued to the ſtate by ſuch as he
was. To driue him nowe from theſe ydle
ſuggeſtions, and to lay open the kings moſt
Royall Mercy, though not ſo much (as in
Truth it deſerued yet ſufficiently able to conuince
ſuch impudence: he told him, that he was a poore
Miniſter of Iuſtice vnder his Maieſty, and hadde
ſuch true acquaintance with his euer-royall and
mercifull inclination, that harty ſorrow or
repentance in an offender, no ſooner coulde
be diſcerned, but he was euen as readie to
giue pardon and forgiuenes, and rather did
ſuperabound in grace, then ſéek after blood,
and therefore willed him to let all the people
there perceiue, whether he would accept
of this proffered grace or no. Nay more, becauſe
euery one was not acquainted with
the Oath contained in the Statute, and
(perchance) might conceite otherwiſe thereof,
then in equity it deſerued, the Clearke
was commaunded to read it there publickly,
and himſelfe to except againſt it whatſoeuer
he could alledge. The Clerke accordingly
began as followeth, reading it deſtinctly,
as it is in the Booke.
               
                  
                  The Oath of euery true and honeſt
ſubiect.
                  I A.B. do truely and ſincerely acknowledge, profeſſe,
teſtifie and declare in my conſcience, beefore
God and the worlde; that our Soueraigne
Lorde king Iames, is lawfull and rightful king of
this realme, and of al other his Maieſties Domions
and Countries: And that the Pope, neither
of himſelfe, nor by any authority of the Church
or See of Rome, or by any other meanes, with
anie other, hath any power or authority to depoſe
the King, or to diſpoſe any of his Maieſties kingdomes,
or Dominions, or to authorize any forraigne
Prince to inuade or anoy him, or his countries,
or to diſcharge any of his ſubiects of their alegiance
and obedience to his Maieſty, or to giue
licenſe or leaue to any of them, to beare Armes,
raiſe tumult, or to offer violence or hurte to his
Maieſties royall Perſon, ſtate, or gouernment, or
to any of his Maieſties ſubiectes within his maieſties
Dominions.
                  Alſo, I do ſweare from my hart, that notwithſtanding
any declaration or ſentence of excommunication,
or depriuation made or graunted, or
to be made or graunted by the Pope or his ſucceſſors,
or by anie Authority deriued or pretended
to bee deriued from him or his See, againſte the
ſaid king, his heires or Succeſſors, or any abſolution
of the ſaide ſubiects from their obedience: I
will beare faith and true allegiance to his Maieſtie,

his heires & ſucceſſors, and him and them wil defend
to the vttermoſt of my power, againſt al conſpiracies
and attempts whatſoeuer, which ſhal be
made againſt his or their perſons, their crown and
dignity, by reaſon or colour of anie ſuch ſentence
or declaration, or otherwiſe, and wil doe my beſt
indeuour, to diſcloſe and make knowne vnto hys
Maieſty his heires and ſucceſſors, al Treaſons and
Traterous conſpiracies, which I ſhal know or hear
of to be againſt him or any of them.
                  And I doe further ſweare, that I doe from my
hart abhorre, deteſt and abiure, as impious and heretical,
this damnable doctrine and poſition, that
Princes which be Excommunicated, or depriued
by the Pope, may bee depoſed or murdered by
their ſubiects, or anie other whatſoeuer.
                  And I do beleeue, and in conſcience am reſolued,
that neither the Pope, nor any perſon whatſoeuer,
hath power to abſolue me of this Oath, or
any parte thereof, which I acknowledge by good
and faithful authority to be lawfully miniſtred to
me, and doe renounce all pardons and diſpenſations
to the cōtrary. And al theſe things I do plainly
and ſincerely acknowledge and ſweare, according
to theſe expreſſe wordes by me ſpoken, and
according to the plaine and common ſence, and
vnderſtanding to the ſame words, without Equiuocation,
or mentall euaſion, or ſecret reſeruation
whatſoeuer. And I do make this recognition
and acknowledgement hartily, willingly, and truly,
vpon the true faith of a Chriſtian, ſo helpe me
GOD.
               
               
                  
This Oath, which no good ſubiect will
refuſe to take, hauing beene very audibly
read, well neare in the perfect hearing of euery
one there preſent, hee was required to
alleadge or inferre againſt any part thereof
what he could. But he inſiſting vainely, as
he had done before, that hee had but giuen
his opinion thereof for others, and refuſing
vtterly to take it himſelfe, gaue euident and
manifeſt teſtimony, that ſuch Prieſtes as
himſelfe was, were not included in ye ranke
of honeſt or good Catholikes, but apparant
Traitors to the King and ſtate, in ſaying
one thing, and dooing the contrary, in making
an outward ſhew of duty & obedience
vnder hand writing, and reſeruing a traytorous
intentiō in their cloſe boſome Wherin
the groſſe deceiuing and abuſing of too
many ouer-credulous ſoules (being falſely
perſwaded of ſuch men, otherwiſe thē they
are indeede) is very much to be pittied and
lamented: for they do but iudge by ye exterious
habit of ſmooth ſanctitie and holines
and not by the cloſe ſeducing of them and
their ſoules. Religion is the Cloake caſt
ouer intended treaſon, and holy proteſtations
hide hollow harted practiſes, more deuilliſh
then (in plaine meaning) can eaſily
be doubted, and far more dangerous, then
weake capacities are able to diſcouer, as
very excellently and elegantly, was there
plainely approued.
               
                  
Another allegation alſo (as impertinent)
did Drewrie make, in ſaying: that a French
Prieſt, or a Spaniſh Prieſt, comming into
this land, to exerciſe their function at either
of their Lord Ambaſſadors, or otherwiſe,
they might in like manner be tearmed traitors:
whereat all the by-ſtanders were euen
ready to hiſſe him, Knowing very well, and
as it was with good diſcretion anſwered
him, that ſuch prieſts, neither were, or could
be reckoned ſubiects to this ſtate, nor were
they enabled to deale in ſuch daungerous
manner with our people, wanting our language,
and credit in ſuch a caſe to countenaunce
them, as (by their ſlye inſinuating)
they being borne ſubiects, & credited more
then beſeemed, did too much preuaile by.
And as freely might ſuch Ambaſſadours
haue men of ſpiritual office about them, being
of their owne country, as ours are allowed
the like, within their Maiſters Dominions.
So that ſtill he wold haue maintained
that Prieſthood, and not the trecherous
complotting and practiſes of Prieſts,
in his vnderſtanding, was to bee helde for
Treaſon. The ſame grace & fauor which
had beene before extended to Drewrie, in as
ample meaſure was offered to Dauies the other
Prieſt, and hee was demaunded whether
he would take the Oath or no. Hee replyed
that he was a poore ſimple ignorant
man, and could hardly cenſure what thereto

belonged. For there were many learned
Prieſts, whoſe iudgements (in this caſe) he
would firſt know, & then perhaps hee might
be otherwiſe altered. Wherein appeareth, yt
one onely Romiſh rule and obſeruation, is a
leſſon or direction to them all, and the Buls
or Breues of the Pope, are more regarded
and reſpected by them, then the natiue loyalty
and obedience, they owe to their King
and Country. But mercy hath beene ouermild
too long, and won no ſuch grace from,
as iuſtly was expected, but rather hath armed
them with more boldneſſe & inſolence,
then either is fit in them to offer, or ſtandes
with the wiſedome of ſo great a ſtate to endure:
For, Nunquid colligunt de ſpinis ruas, 
                        〈◊〉
                     
de tribulis ficus? Do o Men gather Grapes of
Thornes, or Figs of Thiſtles?
                  
               
               When no further good, either by teſtimonie
of their owne ſhame, or euen Father-like &
moſt kinde perſwaſions, could be wrought
vpon either of them: firſt a moſt graue, learned,
and indicious admonition was made
vnto them, containing breefely the many
& extraordinarie great graces of the kings
Maieſtie towarde menne of their condition,
and howe after graunting them firſt
his free and generall pardon, hee neuer left
off, but purſued them ſtill with all fauours
that could bee deuiſed, as not deſiring the
death of any one, but rather to liue quietly,
like a godly, peacefull, and religious King:

not enacting any new or ſeuere Lawes againſt
ſuch daungerous Perſons, but ratyfieng
and confirming them that he found
at his comming, which Queene Elizabeth (of
euer happy memory) compulſiuely was cō
                  pelled
and enforced to make againſt them.
And yet the Iuſtice of thoſe Lawes, which
had beene of ſeauen and twenty yeers continuance
before, his Maieſtie did forbeare
to execute: and finding manye, whoſe
liues lay vnder the forfeit of the law, not
onely did hee remitte them in grace, but
likewiſe gaue his free pardon to all: Sending
ſo manie as were in durance away at
his own coſt and charge, and publiſhing the
like offer to all other, that woulde except of
ſo kind a benifit: as loath to meddle with
their blood, that were enemies to his life,
and deſirous to win them by mercy, if they
were not too monſtrous. Nor hath he ſentenced
any Prieſt with death ſince his
comming to the Crowne, but ſuch as were
men of moſt dangerous qualitie, & had their
hands ouer deep in moſt barbarous & inhumaine
treaſons. But when neither perſwaſions,
ſufferances, nor Proclamations
will ſerue, to keepe ſuch dangerous men out
of the land, but euen in ſpight of the King
and his Lawes they will needs come ouer,
and put in practiſe their treacherous deuyſes:
mercy (of neceſſity) muſt giue way to
iuſtice, and pitty preuaile no longer, when
grace is diſpiſed.
               
                  
The many and excelent parts contained
in Maiſter Recorders learned and elegant
ſpeech, I am not able to ſet downe, and
therefore doe humbly craue fauour, for but
glauncing as theſe few: which thogh they
come farre ſhort of their iuſt merrite, yet let
my good will excuſe al imperfections. Being
come to the very iumpe of giuing iudgement,
Drewrie demanded, if (as yet) he might
haue fauour to ſpeak, and (moſt honorably)
it was anſwerd that he might, for ye kings
mercy was neuer too late: therefore he was
willed, not to trifle the time in friuolous
ſpeeches, but if he would yet take the Oath,
do it. and afterward ſpeak what further he
would, which made al the ſtanders by, euen
confounded with amazement, that Grace
ſhould be ſo aboundantly offered vnto ſuch
froward and wilfull refuſers. Drewrie wold
not yeeld to take the Oath, whereupon the
ſentence of death was pronounced againſt
them both. To bee conueyed thence to the
place from whence they came, and there to
be laid vpon an hurddle, and ſo drawne to
the place of execution, where they ſhoulde
hang til they were halfe deade, then to haue
their ſecrets cut off, and with their intrailes
throwne into the fire before their faces, their
heads to be ſeuerd from their bodies, which
ſeuerally ſhould be deuided into foure quarters,

and afterward diſpoſed at his Maieſties
pleaſure, in meane while, the Lorde to
take mercie vppon their ſoules, and ſo they
were ſent backe to priſon againe.
            
         
         
            A breefe Report of the execution
of Robert Drewrie, drawne on a Hurddle in his
Fryer-Benedictine habbet to Tyborne, on
Thurſday the 25. of Februarie.
            
            
               ON the next morning,
being Thurſday, an
hurdle being broght
to New-gate, Robert
Drewrie (hoping yet
for life) and not thinking
to die, as by the
ſequell it plainely appeard,
hauing put on after the maner of the
Benedictine Fryers beyond the Seas, a newe
ſute of aparrell, being made of black ſtuffe,
new ſhooes, ſtockings, and Garters, and a
blacke new ſtuffe Prieſts gown or Caſſock
being, buttond downe before by Loops and
buttons, two and two together to the verye
foote, a new cornerd cap on his heade, and
vnder it a faire wrought night cap: was in
this manner drawne alonge to Tyborne,

where beeing by the executioner prepared
for death, he was brought vp into the cart,
and vſing ſuch ydle ſpeeches, as he had don
often before, that he dyed not for Treaſon,
but for his Prieſt-hood, hee was willed to
deale more iuſtly, & not to abuſe the worlde
nowe at his death, in vttering that which
was a manifeſt lie and vntruth. He made
anſwere, that in all his life time, he had not
told a lie, and then after a ſhort pauſe, added,
not willingly. There were certain papers
ſhewn at Tyborn, which had bin foūd
about him, of very dangerous and Traitorous
nature. And amonge them alſo was
his Benedictine faculty vnder Seale, expreſſing
what power & authority hee had from
the Pope, to make men, women, and Children
heere, of his order: what Indulgences
and Pardons he coulde graunt them, both
in this life, and for multitude of yeares after
their death, preſeruing them both from
Purgatory, & warranting their entrance
(by the Popes keyes) into heauen. Hee confeſſed
himſelfe to be a Romaine Catholick,
and a Prieſt, and deſired all Romaine Catholickes
to praye with him, and for him.
And often looking about him, as hopinge
there was ſome mercy for him, for feare appeared
very plainely in him, when he felt the
Cart to goe 
                  〈◊〉
                vnder him, and his expectation

to be deceiued, he caught faſt holde
with his left hande on the 
                  •
               alter aboue hys
head, and very hardly was inforced to let it
goe, but held ſo for a pretty while. If this
were not an aparant hope of life, I refer it
to better Iudgements then mine owne. He
hung til he was quite dead, and afterward
his body was
quartered.
            FINIS.
         
      
   